Chapter 6 : Meeting 5 Causes For Weak Ahadith in the Books of Shi'a
===================================================================

Meeting 5: Causes for Weak Ahadith in the books of Shi'a Abstract

1. Different versions

Some of the problems of the Ahadith are due to different versions of
the manuscripts of the books. In the old days the publication of a book
was by writing many copies from the original manuscript. The books were
either dictated to a calligrapher or he would copy the contexts of the
book. It would be quite natural to make mistakes in either mishearing a
word or misspelling it. For instance, we mentioned a Hadith earlier from
Imam Baqir (a.s) concerning al-Jame'a in which the Imam (a.s) was
answering the questions of Hakam Ibn Oyayna. In one of the manuscripts
of 'al-Najashi' it is written that the Imam (a.s) answered him
'MOKREMAN' (respectfully), whereas in the other manuscript it is written
'MOKREHAN' (without any interest). As you can see the change of a letter
(H or M) changes the meaning significantly.

2. Perversions

Another reason for weak Ahadith is the deliberate perversions occurred
in their books of Hadith. Such perversions would usually occur at the
time of duplication of the secondary copies. The book of Solaim Ibn Qays
is an example of this type of perversion.

3. Political pressure

Although the law of Hadith prohibition was removed from the second
century, the followers of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) had no freedom to narrate or
compile their books of Hadith. Listening to a Hadith from the Imams of
Ahlu-Bait (a.s) was sometimes so hard that often they had to attend the
house of the Imam (a.s) as a fruit seller or the like.

Keeping books of Hadith for many Shi'a was an offence. Some Shi'a
narrators had hidden their books all their life until they died. Others
lost their books naturally during their imprisonment such as Ibn Abi
Omair.

4. Sectarianism

Tyrants have always been ruling people by dividing them into small
groups and creating disputes amongst them. The Abbasid rulers caused
some divisions amongst the Shi'a. Sects such as Kisaniyyah, Fatahiyyah,
Ismaeiliyyah, Zaidiyyah, Gholat [^47] and the like were created to divide
and pervert the path of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). The followers of such groups
often fabricated some Hadith to justify their sects. Sometimes naive
Shi'a narrated from them assuming that they are Shi'a. for instance,
Ammar Ibn Musa al-Saabaati was one of the companions of Imam Sadiq (a.s)
and Imam Kadhem (a.s). He then became one of the chiefs of the
Fatahiyyah sect. [^48] The Shi'a scholars argue about the authenticity of
Ammar. Sheikh Tousi (died in 460 A.H) asserted: "Narrations that are
narrated only by Ammar Ibn Musa can not be relied upon."[^49] Thus, one
of the sciences of Hadith is the study of different sects amongst the
Shi'a.

5. Defamation of narrators

Another reason for regarding some Ahadith as weak is defamation of some
narrators. Scholars of the sciences of Hadith rely on the testimony of
the early scholars about the narrators. For instance, if al-Najashi
(died in 450 A.H) testifies the justice of a narrator we consider him
just and rely on his narration. Unfortunately, however, some books were
fabricated and related to the early Shi'a scholars in which many Shi'a
narrators are regarded unjust.

An example of such books is the book of 'al-Dho'afa (the weak
narrators). This book is claimed to be compiled by al-Ghadha'eri;
al-Husain Ibn Abdullah; one of the Shi'a scholars died in 411 A.H, or by
his son; Ahmad Ibn al-Husain. If the book is truly related to them, then
many Ahadith become weak. The scholars however disagree as whether the
book is truly compiled by al-Ghada'eri or his son or it is a fabrication
to detest many Shi'a narrators.

6. Narrating from the Sunnis

The Hadith narrated from the unreliable Sunni sources [^50] are not
reliable. Sadly, often the Shi'a scholars have quoted some Ahadith form
the Sunni books without any comments on them or unknowingly have formed
an opinion based on the Sunni Ahadith. For instance, the eminent Shi'a
scholar of the 5th century; Sheikh Tousi in his interpretation of the
Quran; al-Tebyan under the Ayah 11-16 of Surah 24 narrated the myth
concerning the accusation of the hypocrites towards Aisha from the Sunni
sources without any comments.

Similarly, Sheikh Mahdi Naraqi (died in 1209 A.H) in his book 'Jame'
Sa'adat' quoted some Hadith from 'Ehya'o Oloome Din' written by
al-Ghazali; the famous Sunni Sufi (died in 505 A.H). Finally Mohaddeth
al-Noori (died in 1320 A.H) formed a wrong opinion concerning the
perversion of the Quran based on many unreliable Ahadith he quoted from
the Sunni books. [^51]

7. al-Taqiyyah (Protection(

Al-Taqiyyah (protection) is a Quranic principle that the Shi'a believe
in. There are quite a number of Ahadith that are expressed by the Imams
of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) with the intention of protecting the Shi'a. although
these Ahadith could have been the actual words of the Imams (a.s) the
Shi'a scholars do not act upon them for they Imams (a.s) had expressed
it for certain circumstances only.

8. Not every Authentic Hadith should be accepted and not every week
should be rejected.

We shall learn in the coming lessons that sometimes a Hadith is weak as
far the chain of the narrators are concerned, yet the scholars accept
its content. On the other hand, there may be an authentic Hadith as far
as the chain of its narrators is concerned. Yet the scholars do not rely
on it. For if a narrator is weak it does not mean he would never tell
the truth. Similarly, it could be that a Hadith is truly narrated from
one of the Imams (a.s), yet the Imam did not have a real intention in
expressing it such as the Ahadith of Taqiyyah. Finally according to the
absolute majority of the Shi'a scholars [^52] there is no book of Hadith
that all its Ahadith are authentic. Thus, every Hadith in every book is
subject to scholarly investigation.


**Chapter 7 : Meeting 6 The Science Of Knowing The Refferences (E'LM
MA'REFATUL-MASADER(**

Part I: A Glance at the Sunni Books of Hadith Abstract The first book
of Sunni Hadith Malik Ibn Anas (died in 179 A.H) the Imam of Maleki sect
is the scholar amongst the Sunnis who compiled a book of Hadith called
'al-Mowatta'.. Different opinions about al-Mowatta'

1. The Adorers

Naturally Malek is the first person who has exaggerated in admiring his
own work. In the introduction of his book he stated: "I presented this
book to seventy jurists from the jurists of Madina and all of them
agreed on it, and hence I called it al-Mowatta' ( agreed upon)." [^53]
Similarly, in the beginning of al-Mowatta' it is narrated from Muhammad
Ibn Edris (died in 204 A.H); the Imam of the Shafe'I sect: "No book has
appeared on the surface of the earth after the Quran to be more
authentic than the book of Malek!"

2. The Opponents

Laith Ibn Sa'd said: "I counted seventy issues on which Malek has given
his verdicts against the Sunna of the Prophet (P)." [^54] Al-Soyouti in
his commentary on 'Taqrib al-Nawawi' in response to why the author has
said: "The first author in purely authentic Hadith is al-Bukhari",
although the works of Malek and Ahmad (ibn Hanbal) were published before
the book of al-Bukhari? Al-Soyouti Said: Malek did not collect the
authentic Hadith only. Rather he compiled the Ahadith that their chians
of narrators are either cut or unknown." [^55]

The second Sunni book of Hadith

The 'Musnad' is the second Sunni book of Hadith. It is compiled by
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (died in 241 A.H) the Imam of the Hanbalis. Ahmad was
from Marv [^56]. The term 'Mosnad' is an expression for any book of
Hadith that its Ahadith are compiled according to the names of the
narrators. For instance, all the Ahadith narrated by Jabir Ibn Abdullah
from the Prophet (S.A) will be compiled together in one chapter.
Although Ahmad is one of the four Imams of Sunnis, the Sunni scholars
did not include his book among the 'Six Authentic Books of Hadith'.
Al-Bukhari and Muslim are more accepted by the Sunni scholars although
they were the students of Ahmad.

The Six Authentic Sunni Books of Hadith (al-Sehah al-Setta( Among all
the Sunni Hadith collections, there are six books that are more
recognized by the Sunni scholars. They refer to them as 'Sehah Settah'
which means 'the Six Authentic'. They are: Sahih Bukhari (died in 256
A.H), Sahih Muslim (died in 261 A.H), Sunan Abu-Dawood (died in 275
A.H), Sunan Termethi (died in 279 A.H), Sunan Nasaei (died in 303 A.H),
and Sunan Ibn Majah (died in 273 A.H). [^57]

As for the first five books there is no dispute that they are part of
the Six Authentic Books. However, as for the last one (Sunan Ibn Majah),
some scholars replace it with 'al-Mowatta', whilst others regarded
Mosnad (Sunan) al-Darami as the sixth authentic book. In general,
whenever they say 'the Five narrated it' they mean the authors of the
first five books, and when they say 'the Two authentic narrated it' or
'the Two Sheikhs narrated it' they mean Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih
Muslim.

**A Glance at the Sahihayn**

Muhammad Ibn Ismaeel al-Bukhari the author of Sahih Bukhari was born in
Bukhara [^58] in 194 A.H. and died in 256 A.H. [^59] Sahih Bukhari is nine
volumes in 3450 chapters. Its Ahadith including the ones repeated are
counted to 7275 Hadith and without repeated Ahadith are 4000 Hadith. We
should however remember the term Hadith amongst the Sunnis include the
words of the companions of the Prophet (S.A) and their companions too.

Bukhari is a Hadith collection in theology, interpretation of the
Quran, jurisprudence, history, ethics, etc. In his introduction Bukhari
asserted that he compiled his book in sixteen years and chose its
Ahadith from among 600 thousand Hadith to be the evidence between his
and his Lord. Many explanatory books are written on Sahih Bukhari. One
of the most famous ones is 'Fathul-Bari Fe Sharhe Sahih al-Bukhari'
wirttend by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani.

Muslim Ibn Hajjaj al-Naysabouri is the author of the second most
important book of Sunni Hadith. Muslim was from Nayshapour [Naysabour in
Arabic] one of the famous cities in Iran. He died in 261 A.H. Sahih
Muslim is published in five volumes and like Bukhari contains 7275
Hadith including the repeated Ahadith or 4000 Hadith excluding the
repeated ones.

**Scholarly Comments on Sahihayn**

Undoubtedly the Sahihayn are the two most accepted books of Hadith
amongst the Sunnis, thus Sahih (authentic) by default refers to them.
Al-Thahbi one of the famous Sunni scholars in the introduction of his
commentary on Bukhari says: "In the world of Islam, Sahih Bukhari is the
greatest book, nay after the Quran it is the best book." [^60] Nawawi;
the best celebrated interpreter of Sahih Muslim says: "The (Sunni)
scholars are unanimous that the best books after the holy Quran are
Sahihayn. The Islamic Ummah have accepted these two books and confirmed
their authenticity." [^61] In spite of many exaggerated praises some of
the Sunni scholars especially the contemporary ones have confirmed that
there are weak Ahadith in Sahihayn too. Ibn Hajar in the introduction of
his commentary on Sahih Bukhari asserted: "The experts in Hadith
criticised and rejected one hundred and ten Hadith narrated in Bukhari,
thrity two of which are also narrated by Muslim."

**Quoting from the weak narrators**

One of the serious comments on Bukhari is that on the one hand he
narrated from unjust sinners, Kharejis (rebels against Imam Ali's
government) and puppets of Bani-Omayyah such as Amr Ibn Aas, Marwan Ibn
Hakam, Mo'awiyah, Moghayrah Ibn Sho'ba, No'man Ibn Bashir, Abu-Horayrah,
Emran Ibn Hettan, Eremah and the like. On the other hand he only
narrated 19 Hadith from Imam Ali (a.s) who was with the Prophet (P) from
the first day of the advent of Islam to the last day of the life of the
Prophet (P).

He narrated only one Hadith from Fatima al-Zahra (a.s) the daughter of
the Prophet (P) and one of the Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). He did not narrate any
Hadith from Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s); the only grandsons of the
Prophet (P) and the Masters of the youth of the Paradise. Bukhari did
not narrate any Hadith from Imam Sadiq (a.s) not even as a narrator of
the Hadith of his grandfather! He was a contemporary to Imam Naqi, Imam
Hadi and Imam Askari (a.s) and yet did not narrate any single Hadith
through any of them!

Examples from Sahihayn

Sahihayn narrated fabricated Ahadith in which it is claimed that God
the Almighty will be seen in the hereafter in as clear as the full moon
will be seen in the world. [^62] People will see His shin! [^63] According
to narrations of Bukhari the Prophet (P) was bewitched. Prophet Moses
(p) hits the eyes of the Angel of Death Isreail and turns him blind and
many such fabricated and Israelite narrations.

Other Sunni Books of Hadith

The followings are some of the main examples:

1. al-Mustadrak al Sahihayn

Al-Mustadrak is the work of Muhammad Ibn Abdullah, known as Al-Hakim al
Maisabouri (died in 405AH) al-Hakim is one of the Sunni Imams of Hadith.
His book is a supplement to Sahihayn. He has compiled Ahadith that
Bukhari and Muslim missed in their books although according to the
principles of Bukhari and Muslim they are authentic. Some of the biased
Sunni scholars have accused al Hakim of being a Shi'a despite the fact
that al Sobkhi in his 'At-Tabaqat' asserted that he was a Shafei'i
scholar.

The reason for such accusations is because al Hakim has narrated many
Ahadith in virtues of Ahlul Bayt (P)in general and Imam Ali in
particular. Al Hakim asserts that these Ahadith are authentic according
to the principles accepted by Bukhari and Muslim but they did not
narrate it. For instance, al Hakim narrated the famous Hadith of Al
Ghadeer with the same Isnad that Muslim narrated from Zaid ibn Arqam.
However, unlike Muslim he quoted the important part of the Hadith in
which the Prophet (P) said, "Whoever I am his master, then Ali is his
master too."

Unfortunately this is not the first time that the biased Sunni scholars
have rejected a hadith or a narrator or a book for the crime of being a
Shi'a! To them whoever narrates any Hadith which is in conflict with
their assumptions should be rejected and paid no heed to.

Al Hakim is one of the eminent Sunni imams of Hadith about whom it is
said "He was the most learned scholar of his time in knowing the
authentic Hadith and distinguishing it from the weak ones." Al Mustadrak
is published with the footnotes of Dr Yusuf al Mar'ashli 2. Jame'ul
Usool Fi Ahadithe Rasool (Comprehensive Principles in Narrations of the
Messenger) Jame'ul-Usool is writtend by Mubarak Ibn Muhammad known as
Ibn-ul-Athir (died in 606 A.H). Ibn-ul Athir has compiled the six books
that to his conviction were authentic.

They are al-Mowatta' in addition to the first five authentic books of
Sunnis. Ibn-ul-Athir replaced Ibn Majah with al-Mowatta'. [^64] In order
not to bore the unprofessional readers he omitted the chain of
transmitters of the Ahadith and only mentioned the name of the one who
is narrating from the Prophet (P). He has also deleted most of the
narrations from other the Prophet (P). His work is a good source for a
quick access to the Ahadith mentioned in the Six Authentic Books of
Sunnis.

3. The Most Comprehensive Sunni book of Hadith

Historically the most comprehensive Sunni book of Hadith would be
'Jam'ul-Jawame' (Collecting of the Collections) or 'al-Jame'ul-Kabir'
(the Great Collector) written by al-Soyouti (died in 911 A.H.(
al-Soyouti intended to collect all the Prophetic narrations in one book.
To compile his book he referred to seventy one books of Hadith. He then
divided his work into two main sections: the words of the Prophet (P),
and the actions of the Prophet (P). Unfortunately, al-Soyouti died
before he finishes his work. Thus, his book was never published.

Less than half a century after the demise of al-Soyouti, one of the
famous narrators of the tenth century; Ali Ibn Hessam known as
al-Mottaqi al-Hindi (died in 975 A.H) completed the unfinished work of
al-Soyouti. His book is called 'Kanzul-Ommal Fi Sunanel-Aqwal Wal-Af'al
(The Treasury of the Workers in Verbal and Actions' Narrations). He
compiled his book from 93 Sunni books of Hadith. The main sources of
al-Hindi in compilation of his book were three books of Hadith compiled
by al-Soyouti; i.e. al-Jame'ul-Saghir, Ziadatul-Jame'ul-Saghir and
al-Jame'ul-Kabir.

Kanzul-Ommal is the most comprehensive Sunni book of Hadith. Al-Hindi
has collected 46624 Sunni Hadith in his book. He has compiled his work
in an alphabetical jurisprudential order, and thus a researcher can
easily find any Hadith under its subject.

Kanzul-Ommal is published in 16 volumes and is also available on the
internet.[^65] Narrative Interpretations of the Quran

I would like to bring this lesson into an end by introducing a couple
of most important Sunni books of Hadith on interpretation of the Quran.
1. Tafsir Ibn Jarir

Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari (died in 310 A.H) is one of the most
renowned ancient Sunni historian and exegesis of the Quran. He is well
known for his two works; his book on history known as 'Akhbarul Rosol
Wal-Molook' (The News of the Messengers and the Kings), and his book on
the interpretation of the Quran: Jame'ul-Bayan Fi Tafsir al-Quran
(Comprehensive explanation in the interpretation of the Quran) known as
Tafsir Ibn Jarir. His Tafsir is in 30 volumes and is one of the most
ancient and comprehensive books of Tafsir, thus, it has always been a
source for other compilations on the interpretation of the Quran.
Although Tafsir Ibn Jarir is not merely a narrative interpretation of
the Quran, a great portion of his book consists of the narrations that
he has collected for the interpretation of the Ayaat of the Quran.

2. al-Dorrol-Manthour

The most important Sunni book of Hadith on the interpretation of the
Quran is al-Dorrol Manthour Fil-Tafsir Bilma'thour (The Scattered Pearls
in the Narrated Interpretation) compiled by Abdul-Rahman Ibn Abi-Bakr
known as Jalalu-Din al-Soyouti (died in 911A.H(. Unfortunately, however,
his work similar to the Tafsir Ibn Jarir is very often stuffed with
Israelites and fabricated Ahadith. For instance, under the
interpretation of the first Ayah of Surah al-Nisa (Chapter 4) he
narrated some non-Prophetic narrations claiming that Eve was created
from back left rib of Adam.[^66]

The Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) have explicitly and without any ambiguity
denounced such Israelite fabrications. Zorarah asked Imam Sadiq (a.s):
Some of our people claim that the Almighty Allah created Eve from the
lower left rib of Adam! The Imam (a.s) replied:

<p dir="rtl">
سبحان الله و تعالي عن ذلک علوا كبيرا! يقول من يقول هذا: ان الله تبارک و
تعالي لم يکن له من القدرة ان يخلق لآدم زوجته من غير ضلعه! و جعل لمتکلم
من اهل التشنيع سبيلا الي الکلام، يقول: انّ آدم کان ينکح بعضه بعضا اذا
کانت من ضلعه، ما لهؤلاء، حکم الله بيننا وبينهم.
</p>

"Glory be to Allah and He is Exalted greatly from that! He who claims
that(in fact) says: Allah; the Almighty was unable to create a mate for
Adam from other than his rib! And thus he provides an opportunity for
those who wish to vilify (Islam) to say: "Adam married part of himself
if she was from his rib." What is wrong with those people (fabricators)!
May Allah judge between us and them."[^67] All praise belong to Allah for
the blessing of Welayah


