Chapter 8 : Meeting 7 the Science of Knowing the Refferences (e'lm Ma'refatel-masader(
======================================================================================

Part II: A Glance at the Main Shi'a Books of Hadith Abstract The Four
Books (al-Kotobul-Arba'a(

The first and the most reliable Shi'a books of Hadith are four books:
al-Kaafi, Man La Yahzorohul-Faqih, Tahzibul-Ahkam and al-Estebsar. In
short they are referred to as 'al-Kotobol-Arba'a: (the Four Books(.

1. Al-Kaafi (the sufficer(

Al-Kaafi is the first and the most ancient Shi'a Hadith collection. It
was compiled during the period of minor occultation. Al-Kaafi is written
by Muhammad Ibn Ya'qoub known as Sheikh Kolayni [^68]. He died in 328 or
according to Najashi in 329 A.H; i.e. the last year of minor
occultation. The numbers of its Ahadith according to the present
published copy- is 15176 Hadith which is more than the Ahadith of all
the Six Authentic Sunni books of Hadith.

Annotations and Commentaries

More than fifty commentaries and annotations are written on al-Kaafi.
The followings are some of the most famous ones:

1. Meraatul-Oqool (the mirror of intellects) written by the late
al-Allama al-Majlesi (died in 1111 A.H(.
2. Sharhe Osool al-Kaafi: written by the late Mulla Sadra (died in 1050
A.H(.
3. Sharhe Osool and Roudha al-Kaafi by the late Mulla Saleh
Mazandarani; the teacher of al-Allama al-Majlesi
4. al-Wafi (sufficient) by the late Faydh Kashani (died in 1091 A.H(.

Different views on al-Kaafi

1. al-Kaafi; the next book after the Quran The Shi'a Traditionalists
(al-Akhbariyyoun) and even many jurists hold an extra ordinary position
for al-Kaafi. They regard all its Ahadith authentic and assert that all
its words are the words of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). The followers
of this opinion supported their view by the following reasons:

Firstly, Kolaini was living in Baghdad during the time of the minor
occultation and hence, he should have been in communication with the
special ambassadors of Imam Mahdi (a.j). Surely the Ambassadors must
have approved his book. Secondly, al Kaafi was presented to Imam Mahdi
(a.j) and he was pleased with it and said about it, "al Kaafi is
sufficient for our followers." [^69] 2. al-Kaafi is not a significant
book

Unlike the first group a margin group of the Shia' scholars who have
perhaps been influenced by Sunni thoughts do not hold much value for
al-Kaafi. They regard most of its Ahadith non-authentic. Sheikh Muhammad
Baqir Behboudi, one of the contemporary writers limited the authentic
Ahadith of al-Kaafi to only 4428 Hadith and considered the rest which is
more than 11000 Hadith non-authentic! The followers of this opinion
refer to some Ahadith in al-Kaafi which seem to suggest that the number
of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt are 13 or indicate that the Quran is
distorted.

3. The Realistic View

Most of the contemporary Shia' scholars disagree with the above two
extreme views. In response to the first view they argue that Sheikh
Kolayni was one of the great scholars of the city of Rey-in Iran. He
only travelled to Baghdad in the last few years of his life where he
died. [^70] Further, historically there is no evidence to prove his
communication with the four ambassadors of Imam Mahdi (a.j). Moreover,
what is narrated from Imam Mahdi (a.j) that he had said: 'al-Kaafi would
suffice our followers' has no known narrator and hence, has no scholarly
value.

On the other hand, the Ahadith which seem to suggest the number of the
Imams are thirteen Imams, their manuscripts are perverted. And most of
the Ahadith that seem to suggest the Quran is distorted are either meant
for the distortion of the meaning of the Quran or they mean the real
interpretation of the Ayaat are distorted.

In short, we do not suggest that al-Kaafi is entirely authentic nor do
we agree that it is the same as any other book of Hadith. There are
unauthentic and incorrect Ahadith in it yet, in comparison to other
books of Hadith it is the most authentic Shia' book of Hadith.

2. Man La Yah-dhorohol-Faqih

Man la yah dhorohol-faqih is the second book of the four books of the
Shia' Hadith. It is compiled by Muhammad ibn Ali known as Sheikh Sadooq.
The late Sheikh Sadooq was born at the time of Husain ibn Ruh the third
special ambassador of Imam Mahdi (a.j) out of the prayer of Imam Mahdi
(a.j) for his birth and the birth of his brother. Sheikh Sadooq died in
381AH in Rey - Iran.

The book Man La Yah dhorohol-Faqih consists of 5963 Hadith that 2050 of
them are Mursal. Man La Yah dhorohol-Faqih is the compilation of
jurisprudential Hadith that its author regarded them as reliable and has
given his verdicts accordingly. Man La Yah dhorohol-Faqih is published
in four volumes. The late Sheikh Sadooq has compiled many other valuable
books of Hadith such as Elalul Shara'eh, Oyoon Akhbar al-Reda, Alkhisal,
Thawabul A'mal and Al-Tawhid etc.

3 and 4: Al Tahtheeb and Al Istibsaar

The third and the fourth books of the Four Books are, 'Tahtheebul
Ahkaam Fe Sharhil Moqniah' and 'Al-Istibsaar Fe Makhtolifa Minal
Akhbar'. These two books are compiled by Muhammad Ibnil Hassan, known as
Sheikh Tousi or Sheikhul Taefah. Died in 406 A.H. Like 'Man la yah
dhor', 'Al-Tahtheeb' is a collection of jurisprudential Hadith, the
number of its Ahadeeth according to the counting of Bahrani, are 12590
Hadith, in 93 chapters. This book has been published in 10 volumes.

One of the differences between 'Al-Tahtheeb' and 'Man la yah dhor' is
in that Sheikh Sadooq compiled only Ahadith that he could give verdicts
towards, whereas, Sheikh Tousi has compiled all the jurisprudential
Hadith, regardless of whether he agrees with them or not. Sheikh Tousi
compiled 'Al-Istibsaar' in reconciliation between the paradoxical
Ahadith. 'Al-Istibsaar' consists of 5531 Hadith, in 915 chapters.

**Nahjul Balagha**

Nahjul Balagha is the collection of the miraculous words of Imam Ali
(a.s) It is compiled by one of the most noble Shia' scholars of the
fourth century, known as Sayyed Al-Radhi (died in 406 A.H(. Nahjul
Balagha, consists of three main parts: 241 sermons, 79 letters and 480
words of wisdom, in addition to 9 Hadith that Sayyed Al-Radhi named them
the 'amazing words of wisdom of Imam Ali (a.s)

The eloquence of Nahjul Balagha is so miraculous and its meanings are
so profound that it is said "it is lower than the words of the creator,
and above the words of the creations." [^71]

Al-Jahez, died 255 A.H, was a leading Arabic linguist. His book
'Al-Bayaan Wal Tabyeen' is one of the four pillars of Arabic literature.
In his book he quoted the saying of Imam Ali (as) "the value of every
person is what he knows well" [^72]. He then praises the Hadith in few
paragraphs and then asserts "had there been no sentence in my book other
than this Hadith it would have been enough for the value of my book".
[^73]

The influence of the words of Imam Ali (as) was so profound to his
audience that when he delivered his sermon in description of the
characteristics of the pious, Hammam who was listening to the sermon,
was so captured by the words of Imam Ali (as), that he fainted and died!
[^74]

Different views on Nahjul Balagha

Some Sunni scholars have denied that Nahjul Balagha is the words of
Imam Ali (as). They sometimes wrongly relate it to Sayyed Radhi and
others [^75] even make a bigger mistake in relating Nahjul Balagha to
Sayyed Mortada; the brother of Sayyed Radhi. Had these people so much as
only read the introduction of Sayyed Radhi on Nahjul Balagha would have
realised that the book is collected by Sayyed Radhi and not his
brother.

Indeed how ignorant is the claim of those who relate Nahjul Balagha to
Sayyed Radhi or Sayyed Mortada not Imam Ali (as) despite many historians
and narrators had already quoted the sermons of Imam Ali (as) before
even Sayyed Radhi was born. For instance, Al-Jahez has narrated sermon
31 of Nahjul Balagha, in 'Al-bayaan wal tabyeen'. [^76] Similarly, Sayyed
Radhi stated in the beginning of sermon 231 that "Imam Ali (as)
delivered this sermon prior to his departure to Basra and Al-Waqidi in
al-Jomal has also narrated the sermon."

Al-Waqedi is a renowned historian died in 207 A.H. (200 years before
Radhi). He has narrated the sermon in page 75 of his book.

It seems one of the main motivations of those who rejected the book to
be the words of Imam Ali (a.s) is the third sermon of Nahjul Balagha in
which the Imam (a.s) has castigated Abu Bakr and Omar. Interestingly,
there are many ancient references for that sermon. For instance, Sheikh
Sadouq in his Esnad narrated the sermon from Ibn Abi Omair from Aban Ibn
Othman from Aban Ibn Taghleb from Ekrema from Ibn Abbas. [^77]

Overall, there is no doubt that Nahjul Balagha in general cannot be the
words of an ordinary human, even a linguist. The extraordinary eloquence
of Nahjul Balagha coupled with its profound meaning and variety of its
subjects are the most convincing evidences that this great book can only
be related to Imam Ali (a.s)

**Asnaad of Nahjul Balagha**

Does Nahjul Balagha need any reference or is there any reference to
connect Nahjul Balagha to Imam Ali (a.s)? One of the technical problems
concerning Nahjul Balagha, is that despite its extraordinary
significance, its Ahadith are technically Mursal. Unfortunately Sayyed
Radhi has never mentioned the chain of transmitters of Nahjul Balagha.

Had he mentioned the transmitters of Nahjul Balagha he would have
uprooted the most important technical problem of Nahjul Balagha. This
task would have been easier at his time as it was closer to the time of
the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s). It seems the words of Imam Ali (as) have
been so well known and its eloquence has been so miraculous that Sayyed
Radhi did not feel any need of mentioning the transmitters. The Shia'
scholars particularly in the last several decades have attempted to
collect references to Nahjul Balagha. The followings are some of such
efforts:

1) Madariko Nahjul Balagha, written by the late Al Alamah Sheikh Aal
Kashiful Ghita', died 1361 A.H. This was the first official attempt in
discovering the references of Nahjul Balagha. Unfortunately, however,
the learned author has not quoted the references of most of the sermons,
letters and words of wisdom. Moreover, very often the references that he
introduced are the books that are compiled after the time of Sayyed
Radhi, such as 'Nasikhul Tawaarikh'. Obviously such books cannot be used
as references for Nahjul Balagha.

2) Masadir Nahjul Balagha Wa Asaneedo, written by Sayyed Abdul Zahra al
Hossaini. This book was published in four volumes and indeed is the best
book for the references of Nahjul Balagha. The author has successfully
been able to quote references for most of the sermons, letters and the
words of wisdom of Nahjul Balagha. However, similar to the previous work
the references that he has introduced include post Sayyed Radhi time.

3) Bahsi Kootaah Peramooneh Madarik Nahjul Balagha, written by my
respected teacher, Ayatollah Reza Ostadi. The advantage of this book is
that he has limited the references only to the time prior to Sayyed
Radhi. Nonetheless, it is for this reason that most of the sermons,
letters and words of wisdom remained without a reference.

In conclusion the research concerning the references cof Nahjul Balagha
is yet to be completed. We may even further argue that by mere
quotations of previous historians, linguists and narrators who were
living earlier than the time of Sayyed Radhi we cannot prove the
authenticity of the narrations. Thus Nahjul Balagha technically remains
a Mursal book, that to prove the authenticity of its narrations needs
internal and external evidences.

To simplify matters, we should note that Nahjul Balagha hardly contains
any jurisprudential narrations and thus does not require much of the
technicality involved in jurisprudential narrations.

Other Shi'a Hadith Collections

1. al-Waafi (the Sufficient(

Al-Waafi is the work of Mulla Muhammad Mohsen Kashani known as Faydh
Kashani (died in 1091 A.H). Faydh is the author of more than 200 books.
Al-Waafi is the collection of all 'the Four Books' in a more systematic
and organised fashion. 2. Beharul-Anwaar (the Oceans of the Lights(

Beharul-Anwaar is the most comprehensive Hadith book in Shi'a. It is
collected and compiled by the late Muhammad Baqir Majlesi known as
Allamah Majlesi (died in 111 A.H(. Behar is a great Hadith collection in
various topics from theology, history, astronomy, natural sciences,
philosophy, interpretation of the Quran, jurisprudence, ethics, etc.

The main motivation of Majlesi in compilation of this encyclopaedia-as
he stated in his introduction- was to safeguard the Shi'a books of
Hadith at a time when they were exposed to annihilation and destruction
by the ruthless rulers. Naturally, amongst those books were weak and
unauthentic Ahadith that Majlesi would not vouch for. Nonetheless, as
the purpose of his work was to collect the books he did not pay much
heed to purification of the Ahadith. Thus, although Beharul-Anwaar is a
very useful reference, the usage of it requires scholarly skills.
Beharul-Anwaar is published in 110 volumes.

3. Wasa'elu-Shi'a

The actual name of this collection is 'Tafsil Wasa'elu-Shi'a Ela Tahsil
Masa'el-Shari'a' (explanation of the means of Shi'a to achieve the
Islamic issues). Wasa'el is compiled by Muhammad Ibn Hasan known as
Sheikh al-Horr al-'Ameli died in 1104 A.H. Wasa'el is a Hadith
collection in jurisprudence. In addition to the Four Books, the author
has referred to more than 90 other books of Hadith most of which are
reliable books.

Wasa'el consists of 35850 Hadith. This book is the most important
Hadith book in Shi'a jurisprudence. No jurist can deduct any issue
without referring to it, and mostly he does not need to refer to any
other Hadith book if Wasa'el is at his possession.

4. Mizanul-Hikma (The Scale of Wisdom(

Mizanul-Hikma is one of the contemporary Hadith collection written by
Sheikh Muhammad Rey-Shahri and is published in nine volumes.
Mizanul-Hikma is compiled in an alphabetical order and consists of 23030
Hadith.

Mizanul-Hikma is a Hadith collection in ethical, theological, social,
political and economic Islamic issues. The author has largely used
Beharul-Anwar and Kanzul-Ommal. Thus, it is a combination of the Shi'a
and the Sunni Ahadith in social and ethical issues.

Narrative Tafsir Some of the famous Shi'a interpretations of the Quran
according to the Ahadith are:

1. Tafsir Forat al-Kufi

Forat Ibn Ibrahim was one of the eminent Shi'a scholars and his Tafsir
is one of the most ancient interpretations of the Quran. Our information
about the author is very limited. We only know that he was a
contemporary of Sheikh Kolayni and hence was living during the minor
occultation (260-329 A.H).

2. Al-Borhan Fi Tafsir al-Quran (Clear Evidence in interpretation of
the Quran(

Al-Borhan is the best collection of Hadith in interpretation of the
Quran according to the teachings of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). It is written by
Seyyed Hashim al-Bahrani died in 1107 A.H. It sufficies us in
introduction of the author to quote the words of Sheikh Muhammad Hasan
al-Najafi; the author of al-Jawaher (died in 1266 A.H). In his
discussion about the jurisprudential meaning of 'justice' he asserted:
"Had the meaning of justice been a natural good character (Malaka) not a
good appearance, none would have been regarded 'just' other than people
like al-Moqaddas al-Ardebili and Seyyed Hashim al-Bahrani." [^78]

3. Tafsir Nooru-Thaqalayn (the light of the two precious things(

Tafsir Nooru-Thaqalayn is very similar to al-Borhan and the author
Sheikh Abd Ali Ibn Jom'a known as al-Howayzi was a contemporary of
al-Bahrani. Nooru-Thaqalayn is published in five volumes with the
annotations of Sheikh Mahallati. Hadith books related to the Imams
(a.s(

I would like to bring the lesson to an end by mentioning the names of
some Hadith books that are claimed to be written or dictated by the
Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). These books include:

1) Mesbahu-Shari'a (Lantern of the Path)' claimed to be dictated by
Imam Sadiq (a.s) to Fodhayl Ibn Eyadh.
2) Fiqhul-Redha: Related to Imam Redha (a.s) [^79]
3) Tafsir of the Quran related to Imam al-Askari (a.s(
In short, the authority of none of these books to the Imams (a.s) is
authentic and hence they remain like other books of Hadith that the
validity of their Hadith has to be examined.

We have ample evidences that none of the Imams of Ahul-Bayt (a.s)
including their special ambassadors left any literature behind that we
have access to, for the reasons discussed in the lesson four.


