Chapterr 9 : Meeting 8 the Science of Al-mostalaahat (science of Derayatul-hadith(
==================================================================================

Meeting 8: The Science of al-Mostalahaat (Science of Derayatul-Hadith(
Part I


In the next two lessons we shall learn about the third science of the
sciences of Hadith; i.e. the science of al-Mostalaat (terminologies)
which is also historically called 'science of Derayatul-Hadith
(understanding the Hadith(. The main topics in this science include:

o Definition of al-Mostalahat and its aim
o The difference between this science and the science of
Fiqhul-Hadith
o The difference between this science and the science of Rijal
o The main references on this science
o Common Hadith terminologies
o Types of Hadith
o Conditions of accreditation of a narrator
o Methodology of proving the justice of a narrator
o Etiquettes of writing and teaching the Hadith

**Definition and historical background**

Historically this science has been referred to as 'the science of
Derayatul-Hadith'. Derayah literally means to understand and reflect on
something. Derayatul-Hadith coupled with the science of Rijal (knowing
the biography of narrators) have been the only names for the sciences of
Hadith for several centuries.

Al-Shahid al-Thani (martyred in 966 A.H.) in defining the science of
Derayah said: "It is a science which deals with the body of the Hadith
and the chain of its narrators; whether they are just and true or weak,
and whatever is needed to know the accepted and unaccepted Hadith." [^80]
It seems the reason because of which the science of Hadith is
traditionally called the science of 'Derayah' is the number of Ahadith
in which the Imams (a.s) have encouraged their followers to understand
the Hadith more than mere narrating them. It is narrated from Imam Sadiq
(a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
حديث تدريه خير من الف ترويه.
</p>

"To understand (Derayah) a Hadith is better than one thousand Hadith
that you may narrate." [^81] The Science of Derayah in this sense
includes Fiqhul-Hadith (understanding the meaning of the body of the
Hadith) too. In the recent years the scholars of Hadith have opened a
separate science for understating the text of the Hadith called the
science of Fiqhul-Hadith. Thus, in order for them to avoid any confusion
between the science of Derayah and Fiqhul-Hadith, they changed the name
of Derayatul-Hadith to the science of al-Mostalahaat, i.e. the science
of Hadith terminologies.

Under the shadow of the above explanation we can conclude that the
expression of 'Derayatul-Hadith' has two meanings: 1) Acquaintance with
what involves in understanding a Hadith. Derayah in this sense is the
antonym to Rewayah (narration without reflection). Historically, Derayah
was the only main science of knowing the Hadith.

2) Acquaintance with different types of Hadith in terms of authentic,
weak, etc. and the conditions for accreditation of a narrator. In the
recent years the scholars of the Hadith use the term 'al-Mostalahaat'
rather than Derayah to refer to this science. For the main subject in
this science is acquaintance with various Hadith terminologies.

The main purpose of studying the science of al-Mostalahaat is to be
able to distinguish between the acceptable and unacceptable Hadith.
Difference between al-Mostalahaat and Rijal The science of Rijal is one
of the very important sciences of Hadith. It deals with studying the
biography of each and every narrator to find out whether or not he is a
reliable narrator. For instance, in that science we study about
'Abu-Baseer' to find out firstly who he was and then whether or not he
is a reliable narrator. [^82] Thus, the science of Rijal deals with
specific people, whereas the science of al-Mostalahaat teaches us the
definition of an authentic or unauthentic narrations and narrators.

Main References

The Shi'a scholars have compiled many useful books on the science of
al-Mostalahaat (Derayatul-Hadith). The followings are the most famous
ones:

1) al-Re'ayah Fe 'Elme-Derayah: written by Ali Ibn Ahmad al-Ameli,
known as al-Shahid al-Thani (martyred in 966 A.H(.

2) al-Wajiza Fe Derayah, written by Muhammad Ibn Husain al-Ameli known
as al-Sheikh al-Bahaei (died in 1031 A.H). al-Wajiza is a concise yet
very useful reference.

3) Meqbasul-Hedayah Fe Elme-Derayah, written by Abdullah Mamaqani;
known as al-Allamah Mamaqani (died in 1351 A.H(. Common Hadith
Terminologies

1) Sanad: The chain of transmitters of a Hadith is called Sanad of
Hadith.

2) Esnad: It means narrating a Hadith through a chain of transmitters.
For instance we say: Sheikh Sadooq in his Esnad narrated from Imam Baqir
(a.s)… It means Sheikh Sadooq has narrated the Hadith through a specific
chain of transmitters that he has either mentioned them before the
Hadith or he has introduced them elsewhere.

3) Matn: It means the body and the text of a Hadith which contains the
words of Ma'soom.

4) Sahaabi: Sahabi means companion and its plural is 'Ashaab'
(companions). This term is used to refer to those who had the privilege
of meeting the Holy Prophet of Islam (P) during his lifetime, believed
in him and died with Faith. It is said that the Prophet of Islam (P) had
114000 companions when he passed away. [^83] In the Shi'a terminology the
companions of the Imams (a.s) who had the privilege of meeting them and
dying with Faith are also called the companions of Imam Sadiq (a.s),
Imam Baqir (a.s) etc.

5) Taabe'i: It means the one who did not meet the Prophet (P) but met
the companions of the Prophet (P) even if he lived at the time of the
Prophet (P). Thus, Oways al-Qarani is regarded a Taabei not a
companion.

6) The Konyah (agnomens) of Ma'soomin:

1/6: Abul-Qasim: is the Konyah of the Prophet (P) as well as Imam Mahdi
(a.f). nontheless, usually it is referred to the Prophet (P) with the
Godly given title of 'the Messenger of Allah'.

2/6: Abul-Hasan or Abul-Hasanayn: it is the title of Imam Ali (a.s(.
3/6: Abu-Muhammad: it is a common title for Imam Hasan, Imam Sajjad and
Imam al-Askari (a.s). in most of the narrations it is meant for Imam
al-Askari (a.s).

4/6: Abu-Abdullah: It is a common title between Imam Husain and Imam
Sadiq (a.s). The narrators almost always use it to refer to Imam Sadiq
(a.s). 5/6: AbuJa'far: it is the title of Imam Baqir (a.s). Sometimes it
is referred to Imam Baqir (a.s) with 'Abu-Ja'far al-Awwal', and to Imam
Jawaad (a.s) with 'Abu-Ja'far al-Thani.

6/6: Abu-Ibrahim: It is a title for Imam Kadhem (a.s). 7/6: Abul-Hasan:
It is a common title for Imam Ali, Imam Sajjad, Imam Kadhem, Imam Redha
and Imam Hadi (a.s). It is, however, mostly-but not always- used for
Imam Kadhem (a.s). Similarly, Imam Kadhem (a.s) is sometimes referred to
with 'Abul-Hasan al-Awwal', Imam Redha (a.s) with 'ABul-Hasan al-Thani,
and Imam Hadi (a.s) with Abul-Hasan al-Thaleth. Abul-Hasan is also used
without any suffix to refer to Imam Kadhem, or Imam Redha, or Imam Hadi
(a.s). In such situations we can identify the Imam by considering the
narrator or other contexts.

8/6: al-Aalem, al-Sheikh, al-Faqih, al-Abdul-Saleh: These are the title
by which Imam Kadhem (a.s) is also referred to. The expression of these
titles reflect on the then sever insecurity of the Shi'a community.

9/6: Ahadohoma (one of the two): It is a title for either of Imam Baqir
or Imam Sadiq (a.s).

10/6: al-Askariyyan (the two Askari): It is a title for Imam Hadi and
Imam al-Askari (a.s).

11/6: Abu-Saleh is the respectful title of Imam Mahdi (a.f). The
narrators sometimes referred to the Imam (a.f) with al-Asl (the origin).
Types of Hadith


**Chapter 10: Meeting 9 The Science Of AL-Mostalahaat (SCIENCE OF
DERAYATUL-HADITH(**

Meeting 9: The Science of al-Mostalahaat (Science of
Derayatul-Hadith)

Part II: Types of Hadith

Abstract

1. Types of Hadith in terms of the number of narrators

A Hadith in terms of the number of people who have narrated it is
divided into four types:

1/1: Motawatir (recurrent): A Hadith is called Motawatir if the numbers
of narrator in every generation are so many that normally there is no
possibility of collusion among them. The Hadith of Motawatir is also
divided into Motawatir Lafzi (verbal recurrent), and Motawatir Ma'nawi
(meaning recurrent). Motawatir Lafzi is that one that the wordings of
Hadith in all different Asnad are the same. The examples of Motawatir
Lafzi are: Hadith al-Ghadir which is narrated by more than 110
companions of the Prophet (P) [^84] , and the Hadith of Thaqalayn which
is narrated in 39 Asnad in the Sunni books and 82 Asnad in the Shi'a
books [^85] . Similarly, the Prophetic Hadith "Whoever tell someone a lie
about me (intentionally), then his abode shall be in the Fire" which is
narrated by 62 companions of the Prophet (P) [^86] is counted as
Motawatir Lafzi.

Examples of Motawatir Ma'nawi are the bravery of Imam Ali (a.s),
obligation of Hijab, daily prayers and the like. In these examples
although the wordings of narrations are not exactly the same they
reflect the same concept.

There is no dispute on the validity of Hadith Motawatir. In fact, this
is the best type of Hadith.

1/2: Waahid (one): A Hadith is Waahid if it is narrated only by one or
a few narrators. Most of the Ahadith about the details of Shari'a law
are Hadith Waahid.

Hadith Waahid is valid if it meets other the criteria of the validity
of a Hadith.

1/3: Mostafidh (elaborate): A Hadith is Mostafidh if the numbers of
narrators in every generation is more than three-but less than
Motawatir-. Mostafidh is a strong example of Waahid.

The validity of Mostafidh is stronger than Waahid if it meets other
criteria of validity of a Hadith.

1/4: Mash-hoor (famous): A famous Hadith is the one that is well known
to the narrators whether it has any authentic origin or not. Scholars
disagree on the validity of the Mash-hoor.

2. Types of Hadith in terms of the characteristics of the narrators

2/1: Hadith Sahih (Authentic):

The late al-Allamah al-Hilli argued the ancient definition of Sahih. He
instead suggested that a Hadith is Sahih only if all the transmitters to
the Ma'soom are named and they are all the Twelver just Shi'a. They must
be also Dhabit, i.e. they should be learned enough to narrate a Hadith
accurately. Post-Hilli scholars have largely accepted his definition for
Sahih.

Useful notes on a Sahih Hadith:

1. The definition of the ancient scholars is more inclusive. That means
the number of authentic Hadith according to the pre-Hilli scholars were
far more that the post Hilli scholars.

2. Scholars of Hadith often consider a Mursal Hadith as authentic such
as the Mursals of Ibn Abi Omair. The reason being that a narrator such
as Ibn Abi Omair does not quote from unreliable people. We shall further
discuss the matter on the topic of 'Ashabul-Ejma' (People about whom
there is a scholarly consensus).

3. It may be that a Hadith is authentic yet most of the scholars do not
act upon it. When majority of scholars turn away from a Hadith it makes
it weak. For instance Abu-Baseer in an authentic Hadith narrated from
Imam Sadiq(a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
ان عرض للمرأة الطمث في شهر رمضان قبل الزوال فهي في سعة ان تأکل و تشرب؛
و ان عرض لها بعد زوال الشمس فلتغتسل و لتعتدّ بصوم ذلک اليوم ما لم تأکل و
تشرب.
</p>

"If a woman starts her menses before noon in the month of Ramadhan, she
may eat and drink (does not keep her fast); but if she starts her menses
in the afternoon then she has to perform her ritual shower and count on
the fasting of that day so long as she has not eaten or drank." [^87]

None of the jurists have given a verdict to the content of the above
Hadith. For once a woman starts her menses even five minutes before
sunset she has lost the fasting of that day. Further discussion on this
issue shall be sought in analytical Fiqh books.

On the other hand, a Hadith may be weak ?as long as the chain of its
transmitters is concerned- yet the Shi'a jurists have acted upon it.
This will compensate the weakness of the Hadith. For instance, one of
the conditions of washing a dead body is that the one who washes the
dead must be of the same sex (save in the case of husband and wife).
Children however are exempt form this condition. A man or a woman can
wash a dead baby. The question however remains on the age of the baby.
The majority of the Shi'a scholars view that the exception applies to
the babies that are not more than three years old. The reference for
this verdict is the following Hadith:

<p dir="rtl">
عن ابي نُمير قلت لابي عبدالله (ع): حدِّثني عن الصبي الي کم تغسله
النساء؟ فقال الي ثلاث سنين.
</p>

Abu Nomair said: I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s): Please tell me about the age
of a (dead) baby that women can perform his ritual bath? The Imam said:
up to three years of age. [^88]

The narrator Abu Nomair- is an unknown person and hence the above
Hadith is technically weak. Nonetheless, the verdict of the jurists on
it has compensated its weakness. [^89]

d. Sometimes a Hadith is weak due to its chain of transmitters. Yet,
the same Hadith has another chain of transmitters that is authentic.
Thus, the scholars endeavour to collect and examine all different chains
of transmitters. For instance, there is a consensus that the usage of
liquid enema voids the fast. [^90] The reference for this verdict is the
following Hadith that is narrated from Imam Redha (a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
الصائم لايجوز له ان يحتقن.
</p>

"It is not permissible for a faster to use enema." [^91]

The above Hadith is quoted in two different books with two different
chains of transmitters: 1) Kolayni narrated it through Sahl Ibn Ziad
from al-Bazanti from Imam Redha (a.s). [^92] This Hadith is weak for Sahl
Ibn Ziad is weak. 2) Sadooq in his Esnad from al-Bazanti from Imam Redha
(a.s). [^93] the Esnad of Sadooq to Bazanti is authentic, hence the
Hadith is authentic.

2/2: Hadith Hasan (Good Hadith): A Hadith is Hasan if the chain of its
transmitters is connected to a Ma'soom and they are all good
Shi'a-though not necessarily just- and nothing blameworthy is said about
them.

2/3: Hadith Mowathaq (consolidated Hadith): A Hadith is regarded
Mowathaq if its chain is connected to a Ma'soom and although some of its
transmitters are not the twelver Shi'a the Shi'a scholars have
consolidated them. Examples of such transmitters are Hafs Ibn Bokair and
Hasan Ibn Fadhal.

2/4: Hadith Dha'eef (weak Hadith): A Hadith is weak if none of the
conditions of Sahih, Hasan or Mowathaq is found in it. The narrators or
transmitters of a weak Hadith are known to be unjust, afflicted by
immoral characters or are known for fabricating the Hadith.

2/5: Hadith Mosalsal (A serial Hadith): A Hadith is called Mosalsal if
all its transmitters hold the same character or qualifications. For
instance, the name of all of them is 'Hasan'. The example of Hadith
Mosalsal is the following Hadith narrated from Imam Hasan (a.s) through
a chain of transmitters whose names were all Hasan!

<p dir="rtl">
قال الحسن (ع): انّ احسن الحسَن الخُلق الحسَن.
</p>

It is narrated from Imam Hasan (a.s): "Verily the best beauty is the
beauty of character." [^94]

2/6: Hadith Mo'tabar (authoritative Hadith): Sometimes a Hadith is
initially regarded weak. For instance, the narrator is unknown. Then the
scholars endeavour and discover that the narrator and that he is a
reliable person. They then announce the Hadith authoritative. An example
of an authoritative Hadith is Mo'tabara of al-Halabi. [^95]

2/7: Hadith Maqbool (Accepted Hadith): A Maqbool Hadith is the one that
the scholars considered it acceptable and acted upon it whether it is a
Sahih or Hasan or even a weak Hadith. The most famous Maqbool Hadith is
the one narrated by Omar Ibn al-Hanzalah. [^96]

3: Types of Hadith in terms of the belief of the narrators

A Hadith in terms of the belief of its narrators and the school of
though they belong to is divided into Mowathaq (consolidated) and
non-Mowathaq. As mentioned earlier if the narrator is not the twelver
Shi'a yet he is authenticated by the companions of the Imams (a.s), his
narration is called Mowathaq. For instance, although al-Sakoni was Sunni
the scholars have accepted his narrations. [^97] The distinction of the
non-twelver Shi'a narrators into consolidated and non-consolidated is
important for the narrators could have fabricated a Hadith in support of
their school of thought.

4: Types of Hadith in terms of its connection to the Ma'soom

A Hadith in terms of its connection or disconnection to the Ma'soom has
many types. The followings are the most important ones:

4/1: Mosnad (connected): A Hadith is Mosnad if the chain of its
narrators in all levels to the Ma'soom is connected to each other and no
narrator is omitted. A Mosnad Hadith is useful in that we can identify
whether it is authentic or not, but it does not warrant its
authenticity.

4/2: Mo'allaq (suspended): If the name of a narrator or more than one
from the beginning of the chain is not mentioned the Hadith is called
Mo'allaq. It is worthy to mention that Sheikh Sadooq in Man La Yahdhor
and Sheikh Tousi in al-Tahzib and al-Istibsar very often delete the
names of the narrators from the beginning of the chains. However, at the
end of their books or in their index they introduce their Esnad. Thus,
their Ahadith is not Mo'allaq.

4/3: Marfou' (uplifted): Marfou' is similar to Mo'allaq except the
name(s) of the narrator(s) is deleted from the middle or the end of the
chain of narrators. The last narrator in the Marfou' Hadith jumps from
one or more than one narrator uplifting (Rafa'a) the chain to the Imam
(a.s). The following is an example of a Marfou' Hadith:

<p dir="rtl">
محمد بن بعقوب عن علي بن ابراهيم عن ابيه رَفَعَه الي ابي عبدالله (ع)
</p>

4/4: Maqtoo' (broken): A Hadith is Maqtoo' if it is narrated from one
of the narrators who has not even met the Ma'soom. Obviously a Maqtoo'
Hadith is not valid by itself.

4/5: Mursal (transmitted): Mursal is a Hadith that the chain of its
transmitters- or some of it is not mentioned. Similarly, Mursal is an
expression for a narration that a Tabe'I (such as Sa'eed Ibn Mosayyeb)
who has not met the Prophet (P) narrated from the Prophet (P).

The scholars of Hadith disagree on the validity of the Mursal Hadith.
Most of the Shi'a scholars assert that if the transmitter of a Mursal is
a reliable person such as Muhammad Ibn Abi Omair who does not narrate
but from authentic people, then his Mursal is valid. On the contrary,
the Mursal of other narrators such as Dawood Ibn Farqad is invalid.
[^98]

The Sunni scholars are of the opinion that if a Mursal Hadith is
narrated by different narrators among whom there has been no collusion,
the Hadith is authentic. [^99] Most of the Sunni narration on
interpretation of the Quran, prophecies on future mischief and the wars
of the Prophet (P) are Mursal. It is therefore narrated from Imam Ahmad
who said: "There is no Esnad on three issues: Tafsir, Malahem
(prophecies on future mischief) and Maghazi (wars)."

4/6: Modhmar (Pronounced): A Hadith is Modhmar if the narrator has
referred to the speaker of the Hadith with a pronoun without mentioning
his name. For instance, the narrator says: He said: so and so.

A Modhmar Hadith is usually regarded invalid for the speaker is
unknown. However, if the narrator is one of the eminent companions of
the Imams (a.s) such as Zorarah and Muhammad Ibn Muslim their Modhmar is
valid for they do not narrate from other than a Ma'soom. [^100]

Moreover, sometimes a Hadith has become Modhmar because the author has
separated some narrations from each other. For instance, a narrator has
narrated two Hadith from Imam Sadiq (a.s) in two different subjects.
Naturally in the book of the narrator in the second Hadith it is
referred to Imam Sadiq (a.s) with the pronoun of 'from him' for it was
known to whom 'he' refers. However, when Kolayni, for instance,
separated the two Hadith and placed them into two different chapters the
second Hadith seems Modhmar.

5: Types of Hadith in terms of the words of a Hadith

5/1: Qodsi (Holy): The Hadith of Qodsi if the words of God narrated to
us by the Prophet of Islam (P) but it is not part of the Quran nor does
it contain the rhetorical miracle of the Quran. The Prophet (P) also
sometimes narrated the Hadith of Qodsi through some of the previous
Prophets (a.s) such as Prophet David (a.s) in his communication with
God. An example of Hadith Qodsi is the famous Hadith: "Fasting is Mine
and I am the reward of it (or I reward it)."

Unfortunately, most Ahadith Qodsi are Mursal. Among the Shi'a scholars,
the late Sheikh al-Horr al-Ameli (died in 1104 A.H) has collected the
Qodsi Hadith in his book "al-Jawaheru-Sanniyah Fil-Ahadith
al-Qodsiyah".

5/2: Nabawi (related to the Prophet (P)) : In order for a Hadith in the
matter of religion to be valid it must be expressed by the Prophet (P).
As mentioned earlier the narrations of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) are
in fact from the Prophet (P). They usually don't mention their chain to
the Prophet (P) for it is obvious.

5/3: Walawi (related to the Imams (a.s)): Any Hadith related to any
Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) is called Walawi. Most narrations in the
Hadith books of Shi'a are related to the Imams (a.s) especially Imam
Baqir and Imam Sadiq (a.s) due to the golden opportunity in their time
to announce the school of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s).

5/4: Bayani (Descriptive): The Ahadith that are related to the
interpretation of the Ayaat of the Quran particularly the
jurisprudential Ayaat are called Bayani for they elaborate and explain
the meanings of the Ayaat. An example of Hadith Bayani is the Ahadith
related to the Ayah 6 of Surah al-Ma'edah concerning the method of
performing the Wudhu.

5/5: Nasekh/Mansoukh (Abrogating/Abrogated): In lesson four we quoted
from Imam Ali (a.s) that like the Quran there are abrogating and
abrogated Ahadith, as well as Ahadith that their meanings are clear and
those that they don't have clear meanings. An example of an abrogating
Hadith is what is narrated from the Prophet (P) concerning the
visitation of the graveyards.

<p dir="rtl">
کنت نهيتکم عن زيارة القبور؛ فزوروها فانّها تزهّد في الدنيا و تذکّر
الآخرة.
</p>

"I used to prohibit you from visiting the graves, but now you may visit
them. For it detach you from the secular life and remind you of the
hereafter." [^101]

5/6: Mohkam/Motashabeh (Clear meaning/Ambiguous): Mohkam is a Hadith
that its text can accept only one meaning. Motashabeh on the other hand
is a Hadith that it does not have an established meaning. Examples of
ambiguous Ahadith are those concerning the signs prior to the
reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.f).

Imam Sadiq (a.s) with reference to the ambiguous Ahadith instructed the
Shi'a scholars:

<p dir="rtl">
رُدّوا الينا علمَه فنحن اولي بذلک و لاتقولوا فيه بآرائکم و عليکم بالکف
و التثبّت و الوقوف و انتم طالبون باحثون حتي يأتيکم البيان من عندنا.
</p>

"Return its knowledge to us, for we are preferred for (explaining) it.
Do not say about it with your assumption. You shall abstain, verify and
stop (from self interpretation) whilst you are searching (its meaning)
until an explanation from us comes to you." [^102]

5/7: Taqiyyah (protection): The Ahadith of Taqiyyah are usually
according to the famous Sunni schools of thought or jurisprudence, thus
their companions were aware that the Imam (a.s) did not mean the
contents of the Hadith.

5/8: Israelites: The Israelites are fabricated Ahadith imported to
Islam by some Christian and Jewish rabbis who pretended to have become
Muslims. These so called converts narrated their fabricated literatures
to the Muslims particularly on the stories of the previous Prophets
(a.s). Today Sunni narrative interpretations of the Quran are filled
with many Israelites. Tafsir Tabari is a classic example of such books.
For instance, on the interpretation of the first Ayah of Surah al-Nisa'
they narrated that Eve was created from the left bottom rib of Adam!
Similarly, they have accused Prophet David (a.s) to have caused Uriah
killed in the war to gain his wife; Bathsheba! [^103]

5/9: Modhtareb (confused and disordered): A Hadith is Modhtareb if
there is a discrepancy in its chain of narrators or the body of the
Hadith. For instance, a single event is narrated in contradictory
ways.

For instance, the Sunni scholars have narrated the story of divorce of
the son of Omar Ibn al-Khattab from Nafe' in three different ways.
Nafe'; the freed salve of Abdullah son of Omar narrated that Abdullah
divorced his wife whilst she was menstruating. Then in some of his
narrations he added that the Prophet (P) did not endorse his divorce for
the Almighty Allah states that women can be divorce only when they are
not menstruating (Surah 65: Ayah1). In another group of narrations he
claims that the Prophet (P) endorsed his divorced, and in the third
group he is indecisive as whether the divorce was indorsed or not.
[^104]

There is no doubt that there has been confusion from the narrator. The
remedy therefore is to accept the one that is in accordance with the
Quran (the first one) and leave the rest and if none of them are
compatible with the Quran or other authentic narrations then they should
be all discarded.

An example of Modhtareb Hadith in the Shi'a books is a Marfou' Hadith
narrated in distinguishing between the bleeding of menses and the
blessing of an injury. Kolayni narrated from Aban from Imam Sadiq (a.s)
that if the bleeding is from the right side of a woman's vulva then it
is menstruating blood but if the woman is bleeding from the left side of
her vulva it is an injury. [^105] Sheikh Tousi narrated the same Hadith
from the same narrator. However, instead in his narration if the
bleeding is from the right side it is introduced as the sign of menses
and if it is from the left side the sign of injury! [^106]

Undoubtedly none of the narrations are authentic for firstly they are
Marfou'. Secondly they are Modhtareb and thirdly they are against the
reality. [^107] Thus, none of our jurists have accepted the Hadith.

5/10: Modhou' (fabricated): A Modhou' is a fabricated Hadith to support
certain belief or school of thought. We had mentioned some examples of
fabricated narrations in lesson three. Modhou' is the worst type of
narration.

Conditions of accepting a narrator

The scholars of Hadith have set five conditions for a trustworthy
narrator:

1. Takleef: that means he/she must have reached the age of puberty
[^108] and be sane.

2. Islam: Thus, the narration of a non-Muslim is unacceptable.

3. Iman: That means the narrator ought to be a twelver Shi'a. However,
as discussed earlier the narrations of some exceptional Sunni or none 12
Imams would be accepted.

4. 'Edalat: That means the narrator must be just. Scholars disagree on
the definition of justice. Many suggest that justice is the nature of
preventing the mortal sins and not insisting on the minor ones. Sheikh
Tousi, however, differentiated between the justice required for
witnessing and the justice in narration of a Hadith. He asserted that as
long as a narrator is known to be truthful his narration is reliable,
even if he has sometimes committed a sin in his person life. [^109]

5. Dhabt and Hifz (accuracy and sharp memory). If the narrator is
narrating a Hadith by heart he should also enjoy a sharp memory and if
he is quoting it from a book he should be accurate. This condition
reduces the chance of wrong narrations.

Methodology of proving the justice of a narrator

The justice of a narrator is usually obtained by either living with him
or his fame among the just people or by the testimony of two or even one
just person. For instance, if the ancient eminent scholars such as
al-Kashi, or al-Najashi confirm the justice of a narrator the scholars
regard him just. Unfortunately, however, if there is a disagreement
about the justice of a narrator and there is no preference for his
justice then his narration is regarded invalid.

Etiquettes of writing and teaching the Hadith

I would like to bring this science into an end by touching upon some of
the etiquettes of writing and teaching the noble Hadith of the Ma'soomin
as mentioned by our scholars:

When we write a Hadith in a book or thesis we should make sure we write
it grammatically correct. When the name of the Almighty Allah is
mentioned we should couple it with one of His Attributes. Similarly when
the name of the holy Prophet (P) is mentioned we should use the prefix
of Sallalahu Alayhe Wa Aalehe Wasallam (May the blessing and greetings
of Allah be upon him and his pure progeny) and after the names of the
Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) we should write Alayhe Salam (peace be on
him). After the name of Fatima al-Zahra we should write Alayha Salam
(peace be on her). Moreover, it is recommended to exclude the Hadith
from the rest of the article by placing it between the quotation
marks.

The scholars of Hadith have recommended five issues for professional
teaching of a Hadith:

1. Discussing the chain of transmitters,

2. Teaching the vocabularies of the Hadith,

3. Explaining the conjugation (Sarf) of the verbs,

4. Clarifying the syntax (Nahw) of the Hadith.

Elucidating the text of the Hadith and its relevance to the subject.


