Chapter 11: Meeting 10 the Science of Al-rejaal I
=================================================

Meeting 10: The Science of al-Rejaal I [^110] Abstract Definition

'Rejaal' literally is the plural form of Rajol (man), thus Rejaal means
men. The Science of al-Rejaal is defined: "A science in which the
biography of narrators as to whether or not they meet the conditions of
accepting their narrations." [^111] The one who is an expert in the
science of Rejaal is called 'Rejaali'. The differences between Rejaal
and other similar sciences Muslim scholars study the life of narrators
from four different perspectives:

1. As narrators of Hadith: the science of Rejaal
2. As compilers of the original or secondary books: The science of
bibliography
3. As sheikhs and teachers who have given authority to others for
narrating a Hadith: the science of knowing the sheikhs and teachers.
4. As scholars who enjoyed a spiritual, social, political and scholarly
life: the science of biography

Significance The following are some of the proofs for the significance
of Rejaal:

1. Rational Proof

None of their authors have ever claimed that they have heard the
Ahadith from the holy lips of any of the Ma'soomin. They have narrated
the Ahadith through many narrators who have either heard the Ahadith
from other narrators or they have copied the Ahadith from their books.
The only natural method to gain confidence for the authenticity of the
narrations is to examine the truthfulness and justice of the narrators.
The science of Rejaal undertakes this responsibility.

2. Narrative Proofs

1/2: "O you who believe! If a liar (or evil person) comes to you with
any news, verify it, lest you should harm people in ignorance, and
afterwards you become regretful for what you have done." [al-Hojorat
49:6]

2/2: It is repeatedly narrated from the Prophet (P) and many scholars
have quoted it in the beginning of their books of Hadith: "Many people
have fabricated words in my name, so whoever fabricates any Hadith on me
(intentionally) then his seat shall be in the Fire." [^112] 3/2: Imam Ali
(a.s) in a very comprehensive Hadith divided the narrators into four
groups of which the narration of only one group can be accepted. [^113]
The categorisation of the Imam (a.s) forms the foundation of the science
of Rejaal.

4/2: Imam Baqir (a.s) said: "Whoever believes in the religion of Allah
without hearing it from a truthful person, Allah will afflict him with
perplexity and confusion until the Day of Judgment." [^114]

3. Practical life of the Ma'soomin

a. Imam Sadiq (a.s) concerning al-Moghira Ibn Sa'eed said: "Verily,
al-Moghira Ibn Sa'eed interpolated in the Hadith books of the companions
of my father. He added things that my father had not said. Thus, fear
Allah and do not accept anything (claimed to be) from us that
contradicts the Words of our Lord and the Tradition of our Prophet
Muhammad (P)." [^115]

b. Younus Ibn Abdul-Rahman said: "I met many people in Iraq who had met
Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (peace be upon them). I heard their narrations
and copied their books. Then when I met Imam Redha (a.s) I presented
them to him. He denied many of those narrations and said: 'Surely,
Abul-Khattab fabricated in the name of Imam Sadiq (a.s). May the curse
of Allah be upon Abul-Khattab and his followers who interpolated these
narrations to this day in the books of the companions of Imam Sadiq
(a.s). Do not accept anything (claimed to be) from us against the
Quran.'" [^116] The First Four Books of Rejaal

1. Ekhtiyar Ma'refat al-Rejaal (Selection of Knowing the science of
Rejaal) known as Rejaal al-Kashi:

Abu Amr Muhammad Ibn Omar al-Kashi [^117] was one of the contemporaries
of Kolayni; the author of al-Kaafi. Al-Kashi had written a book in the
science of Rejaal that according to Ibn Shahr Aashoub (died in 588 A.H)
was called "Ma'refatul-Naqelin Anel A'emmatu-Sadeqeen" (Knowing the
narrators from the truthful Imams). [^118]

The original copy of this book which apparently contained numerous
mistakes is lost. However, the late Sheikh Tousi (died in 460 A.H) had
had a copy of the book. He has revised the book and called it 'Ekhtiyar
Ma'refatul-Rejaal'. Thus 'Rejaal al-Kashi' which is available today is
in fact the revised version of the original book.

2. Al-Fahrast (bibliography)

As mentioned earlier in this chapter bibliography is one of the close
sciences to Rejaal. The most comprehensive ancient Shi'a book in
bibliography is al-Fahrast written by Sheikh Tousi (died in 460 A.H). He
collected the names of more than nine hundred narrators who had compiled
about two thousand books.

3. Al-Rejaal

The third most important book in Rejaal is also compiled by the late
Sheikh Tousi. In this book he has mentioned the life of more than 8900
narrators. He has classified them according to the Ma'soomin commencing
from the Prophet Muhammad (P).

4. Rejaal al-Najashi The author of this book is Abul-Abbas Ahmad Ibn
Ali al-Najashi a contemporary of Sheikh Tousi and the offspring of
Abdullah al-Najashi. [^119] a. Al-Najashi was indisputably one of the
most celebrated experts in Rejaal. His book is as respected -in the
science of Rejaal- as al-Kaafi is in Hadith.

**Methods of Authentications**

The main concern of a Rejaali (an expert in Rejaal) is to find out how
truthful a narrator is. There are two methods by which a narrator would
be authenticated; specific authentications and general
authentications.

1. Specific Authentications The following are the main specific
authentications:

1/1: Authentication by one of the Ma'soomin (a.s): For instance Ali Ibn
al-Mosayyeb said: "I said to Imam Redha (a.s): My residence is far away
(from you) and I cannot reach out to you for every matter. From whom
should I learn my religion? The Imam replied: 'From Zakariya Ibn Adam
al-Qomi who is trustworthy in the matter of this world and the
religion.'" [^120] 2/1: Authentication by one of the ancient eminent
scholars. For example Sheikh Tousi or Kashi or Najashi and the like
attest that a particular narrator is trustworthy.

3/1: Authentication by claiming unanimity. If any of the experts in
Rejaal claims that there is unanimity on the trustworthiness of a
narrator, others regard him trustworthy. For instance, the late Sayyed
ibn Tawous claimed unanimity on the authenticity of Ibrahim Ibn Hashim;
the father of Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qomi. [^121]

2. General Authentications

1/2: As-Hab Ejma' (the Unanimous Group) Obviously, the narrators and
the companions of the Imams (a.s) were not all in the same educational
and piety levels. Some were more learned and pious than others. Amongst
all the narrators there are 18 people [^122] who enjoyed the highest
level of knowledge and trustworthiness and hence the scholars-by and
large- accept their narrations without any verification. These eminent
narrators are called ' As-Habul-Ejma' which means those on whose
trustworthiness the scholars are unanimous.

The Late Kashi was the first scholar who claimed this authentication.
In three different chapters of his book (which was revised by Sheikh
Tousi) he attested this unanimity. According to Kashi they are:

a. From the companions of Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (a.s): Zorarah,
Ma'rouf Ibn Kharrbouz, Borayd, Abu-Baseer al-Asadi (or Moradi), Fodhayl
Ibn Yasaar, and Muhammad Ibn Muslim. The most learned of all of them was
Zorarah. b. From the companions of Imam Sadiq (a.s): Jamil Ibn Darraj,
Abdullah Ibn Moskan, Abdullah Ibn Bokair, Hammad Ibn Eisa, Hammad Ibn
Othman and Aban Ibn Othman. The most learned of this group was Jamil Ibn
Darraj.

c. From the companions of Imam Kadhem and Imam Redha (a.s): Younus Ibn
Abdul-Rahman, Safwan Ibn Yahya known as Bayya'u Saberi (the seller of
fine clothes), Muhammad Ibn Abi Omair, Abdullah Ibn al-Moghaira,
al-Hasan Ibn Mahboub, al-Hasan Ibn Ali Ibn Fadhaal and Fodhala Ibn
Ayyoub. The most learned of the group were Younus Ibn Abdul-Rahman and
Safwan Ibn Yahya.

Majority of scholars are of the opinion that if the narrators of a
Hadith to any of the above named people were all trustworthy, the rest
of the Esnad does not need any verification. 2/2: Mashayekh Theqat (the
certifying Sheikhs):

The title Sheikh in the old days was a highly respectable title used
only for senior scholars who were in the position of authorising their
chosen students to narrate a Hadith. Mashayekh Theqat means certain
Sheikhs who were authorised to authenticate others. Muhammad Ibn Omair,
Safwan Ibn Yahya and Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abi Nasr al-Bazanti are
amongst the best celebrated certifying sheikhs. In general, the scholars
accept their narrations even if they did not mention the names of those
from whom they have narrated.

3/2: The Narrators of Kamelu-Ziaraat (Complete Visitations( Another
example of general authentication is related to the narrators whose
names are mentioned in the book of Kamelu-Ziaraat compiled by the Late
Sheikh Jafar ibn Muhammad known as Ibn Qulawayh (died in 367 or 369 AH).
He was one of the most renowned and celebrated Shia jurists in the 4th
century. His book has always been considered one of the main sources of
hadith for the coming scholars after him. The author has testified in
the introduction of his book that he has compiled his book by quoting
"from those reliable narrators from among our narrators, may God include
his Mercy upon them." Similar to other methods of authentications
accepting or rejecting this principle would include or exclude hundreds
of Ahadith.


**Chapter 12: Meeting 11 : The Science Of AL-Rejjal II**

Meeting 11: The Science of al-Rejaal II Abstract Shi'a Sects

The name Shi'a was a title given by the Prophet (P) himself to the
sincere followers of his successor; i.e. Imam Ali (a.s). The Almighty
Allah states: "Verily, those who believe and do righteous good deeds,
they are the best of creatures." [98:7] al-Soyouti and other Mohaddethin
under the explanation of the above Ayah narrated from the Prophet (P)
concerning Imam Ali (a.s): و الذي نفسي بيده ان هذا و شيعته لهم الفائزون
يوم القيامة.

"By the One my life is in His Mighty Hand! Verily, this [Ali] and his
Shi'a are truly the prosperous ones on the Day of Judgment." [^123] In
the following we shall introduce some of the main Shi'a sects that
knowing them are necessary in the science of Rejaal.

1. Keesaniya

The Keesaniya were the followers of Mukhtar Ibn Abu-Obayda al-Thaqafi.
After the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s) they believed in Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiyah. Muhammad was one of the sons of Imam Ali (a.s) whose mother
was Khoula al-Hanafiyah. He was born during the reign of Omar (13-22
A.H) and died at the age of sixty five during the reign of Abdul-Malek
Ibn Marwan (65-86 A.H). Muhammad was buried in the Baqee' cemetery in
Madina. [^124] The Keesaniya denied the death of Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyah
claiming that he was the awaited Mahdi. This sect has no longer any
followers.

2. Zaidiyah

Zaidiyah are the followers of Zaid; one of the sons of Imam Sajjad
(a.s). The birth of Zaid is reported in 75 or 78 or 80 A.H. He was a
devout and God fearing person. Zaid revolted against the tyranny of
Umayyad. His intention if he were successful was to hand over the
leadership to his brother Imam Baqir (a.s). Unfortunately Zaid was
hanged in the year 121 A.H. in Koufa by the command of Hisham Ibn
Abdul-Malek; the fifth Umayyad king. Although Zaid never claimed to be
the Imam, his followers believed in his divine leadership and diverted
to him from Imam Baqir (a.s). To them one of the conditions of the Imam
was to call for a military war against tyrants. Thus, they even did not
believe in the leadership of Imam Sajjad (a.s) let alone the rest of the
Imams of Ahlul-bayt (a.s) for they did not call for the military war.

3. al-Nawousiyyah
The Nawousiyyah was a sect that was emerged after the demise of Imam
Sadiq (a.s). They believed that Imam Sadiq (a.s) did not die; he is the
awaited Mahdi and will return to the world. According to al-Shahrestani
this sect was named after their follower 'Nawous'. [^125]

4. Ismaili

The Ismailis were a group of Shi'a who after the demise of Imam Sadiq
(a.s) believed in his son Ismail instead of Imam Kazem (a.s). Ismail
died during the life of Imam Sadiq (a.s) and was buried by him.
Nonetheless, the Ismailis denied his death claiming that he was the
awaited Mahdi. Later one some of the Ismailis accepted his death but
claimed that Muhammad the son of Ismail was the awaited Mahdi. The
Ismailis due to their mystical interpretation of Islam are also known as
'Bateniyyah' (the mysterious group). Throughout the history the Ismaili
divided into some other sub-groups. Today the most famous Ismaili
community is Nizari who is the follower of Agha Khan.

5. al-Fatahiyyah or al-Aftahiyyah

The Fatahiyyah or al-Aftahiyyah was a Shi'a group who after the demise
of Imam Sadiq (a.s) believed in the Imamat of his oldest son Abdullah.
Abdullah had a wide nose or head and hence he was called Aftah. Abdullah
died 70 days after the demise of his father and hence most of the
Fatahis repented and returned to Imam Kazem (a.s).

6. al-Waqifiyyah

The Waqifiyyah were those who claimed that Imam Kazem (a.s) did not
die; he is the awaited Mahdi who is disappeared but will return. Since
they stopped (Waqf) at Imam Kazem (a.s) they were called Waqifi.

The motivation behind innovation of this sect was related to the lust
of its founders to the wealth of this world. Imam Kazem (a.s) during his
long imprisonment had appointed some representatives to collect the
Khoms from the Shi'a. Amongst his representatives Ali Ibn Abi Hamza
al-Bataeni, Ziad Ibn Marwan al-Qandi and Othman Ibn Eisa al-Ro'asi had
abused the collected Khoms to purchase houses and farms for themselves.
After the demise of Imam Kazem (a.s) they were expected to hand over the
trusts to Imam Redha (a.s).

Nonetheless, they refused to submit the trusts and they denied the
Imamat of Imam Redha (a.s) claiming that Imam Kazem (a.s) was the
awaited Mahdi and has not died. [^126] The Shi'a community realised their
fraudulence and turned away from them. It is claimed that some of the
Waqifis such as Ali ibn Abi Hamza later on repented and believed in Imam
Redha (a.s).

7. al-Gholat

The Gholat (extremists) were those who claimed divine status for the
Prophet (P) or the Imams (a.s), or believed in the prophecy of some of
the Imams. According to Nobakhati they were up to twenty different
groups. Al-Khattabiya was a famous extremist group after Imam Sadiq
(a.s) who believed in his divinity.

The Imams of Ahlul-bayt (a.s) have always explicitly and without any
ambiguity detested these groups. Negligence in the evidences of
Mostahabbat One of the discussions in the science of Rejaal is whether
the rules of approving or disapproving a narrator apply only to the
compulsory and forbidden acts or they include the Mostahabbat and
Makrouhat too?

The above discussion rotates around a principle known as 'al-Tasamoh Fi
Adelatu-Sonan' (Negligence in the evidences of Mostahabbat). The
principle is based on many [^127] Ahadith some of which are authentic and
good.

1. Kolayni in an authentic Hadith from Ibn Abi Omair from Hisham Ibn
Salem narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
من سمع شيئا من الثواب علي شيء فصنعه کان له و ان لم يکن علي ما بلغه.
</p>

"Whoever hears a certain rewards for something, so he performs the
action, he has the rewards of it even if it was not as he had heard it."
[^128] 2. Kolayni in his Isnad from Muhammad Ibn Marwan narrated:

<p dir="rtl">
سمعت اباجعفر (ع) يقول: من بلغه ثواب من الله علي عمل فعمل ذلک العمل
التماس ذلک الثواب اُوتيه و ان لم يکن الحديث کما بلغه.
</p>

"I heard Imam Baqir (a.s) saying: "Whoever comes to know about a reward
from Allah for a action, and then he acted upon it seeking the promised
reward, will be given (that reward) even if the Hadith was not as he
heard it." [^129]

**Possible Meanings of the Ahadith**

Most of the scholars of Hadith whether Shi'a or Sunni asserted that the
above Ahadith are with reference to the weak Ahadith in Mustahabat and
Makroohat that acting upon them will warrant the promised awards. On the
other hand, a few scholars suggested that those Ahadith are concerning
any hadith that has reached us in an authentic or reliable method on the
Islamic statutes whether obligatory or recommended acts. The message of
these Ahadith is that acting upon any authentic Hadith would warrant the
promised reward in it even though in reality, that narration was not
pronounced by a Ma'soom.

This interpretation is on the basis that there is no certainty that the
present Ahadith -although authentic- are really uttered by the
Ma'soomin. For, most of them are narrated to us by single narrators.
Ultimately, because the Almighty God and the common sense authenticate
the narrations of a just person, we rely on them as valid evidences
otherwise, we really don't know for sure if the Imams (a.s) have ever
uttered those narrations. Thus, the narrations of "Whoever comes to
know…" coupled by the authenticity of reliable single narrations assure
us that the Almighty God will reward us should we act according to those
reliable single narrations.

The third interpretation is to apply the above Ahadith to both of the
previous meanings without limiting them to either of them. Thus, the
narrations of "Whoever comes to know…" justify acting on the weak
Ahadith in the matter of Mustahabat as well as acting upon authentic
Ahadith on obligatory acts.

Problem & Answer

One of the most common comments on the principle of negligence in the
evidences of Mustahabat is the argument that recommendation or
not-recommendation like obligation and prohibition are religious laws
and thus, they cannot be proven by weak Ahadith. We may answer the above
comment in that the recommendation of an act is not proven merely by
those weak narrations rather, it is proven by the attachment of the
principle of negligence in the matter of recommendations which would
conclude permission to act upon those weak narrations insofar as they
are not contrary to any other Islamic principles or rules.

Common Names

Common names mean certain names or titles of people that are common
among more than person, some of whom are just and reliable while others
are not. In general, the scholars in many instances discover the person
by considering his teachers and students or his classification among the
narrators or by considering the Imam from whom he is narrating or
sometimes by considering the subject of the Hadith that he has narrated.
Nonetheless, if they failed to identify the person and his title is
common between authentic and non-authentic narrators then the Hadith
would be treated invalid. The following example is the most famous
example of the common names.

According to the Late Ayatullah Khoei, in the chain of 2275 Ahadith a
narrator is mentioned with the title of Abu Baseer. [^130] There is a big
controversy with regards to the identification of this narrator. Most of
the experts in Rejaal asserted that the above title was common among
four narrators i.e. Laith ibn al-Bokhtari, Yahya ibn (abi) Al Qasim,
Yusuf ibn Al-Harith al-Batari and Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Asadi.

If the above theory is correct then the title of Abu Baseer is common
among authentic and non-authentic narrators for the first two narrators
are reliable whereas the last two are not. Thus, any Hadith that we are
unable to identify as to who is meant by Abu Baseer will be treated
invalid. Unlike the above theory the Late Ayatullah Khoei and some other
experts in Rejaal after numerous investigations concluded that Abu
Baseer is a common title only between Laith and Yahya both of whom are
reliable.

Nay, Ayatullah Khoei furthers that wherever Abu Baseer is mentioned in
the chain of our narrations it means Yahya Ibn (abi) Al Qasim unless
otherwise specified. [^131] With regards to the third person, i.e. Yusuf
ibn Al-Harith who is the weakest of all, Ayatullah Khoei proves that his
actual title is Abu Naseer not Abu Baseer as mistakenly written by
Al-Kashi.

Anyway, Abu Baseer was one of the companions of Imam Baqir and Imam
Sadiq (peace be upon them). Since he was visually impaired, he was known
with the respectful title of Abu Baseer (literally meaning 'father of
the son who has sight'). Najashi in introducing Abu Baseer says, "He was
good and reliable." The problem however is that most of the narrations
of Abu Baseer are narrated by his guide i.e. Ali ibn Abi Hamzeh
al-Bataeni. As mentioned earlier, the man was one of the chiefs of the
Waqifi sect. This problem leads again to the invalidity of the
narrations of Abu Baseer.

Unless we rectify the problem that the narrations of Ali ibn abi Hamzeh
from Abu Baseer was prior to his conversion to the Waqifi sect for Abu
Baseer died very soon after the demise of Imam Sadiq (a.s). Moreover,
Ali ibn abi Hamzeh is in the list of the narrators of Kamel al Ziarat.
Thus, according to the theory of the authentication of all those who are
mentioned in Kamel al Ziarat, Ali ibn abi Hamzeh is justified to be
reliable. As you can see, the issues in the science of Rejaal are not
always straight forward and can carry the possibilities of different
interpretations thus require deduction and Ijtihad.


