Chapter 11: Meeting 10 the Science of Al-rejaal I
=================================================

Chapter 13 : Meeting 12: The Science Of Fiqhul-Hadith Meeting 12: The
Science of Fiqhul-Hadith Abstract Meaning and Significance

The science of Fiqhul-Hadith deals with the meanings of the words of a
Hadith, whether its meaning is real or figurative, general or specific
and whether there is any other Hadith or Ayah contrary to it or not,
etc. The name is driven from the many narrations in which the Imams of
Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) emphasised on understanding the Ahadith more than mere
narrating them.

Dawood Ibn Farqad said: I heard Imam Sadiq (a.s) saying: انتم افقه
الناس اذا عرفتم معاني کلامنا ان الکلمة لتتصرف علي وجوه فلو شاء انسان
لصرف کلامه کيف شاء و لا يکذب. "You are the most learned (Faqih) people
if you know the meanings of our words. Surely, a word may accept
different meanings, so if the speaker wishes he can change his words as
he wishes so that he doesn't lie." [^132] The term Afqah in the Hadith
means 'the most learned' not the most juristic although a jurist is an
example of those are learned on jurisprudential issues.

Mohammad Ibn Abi Omair through Ibrahim al-Karkhi narrated from Imam
Sadiq (a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
حديث تدريه خير من الف ترويه و لايکون الرجل منکم فقيها حتي يعرف معاريض
کلامنا و انّ الکلمة من کلامنا لتتصرف علي سبعين وجها لنا من جميعها
المخرج.
</p>

"To understand (Derayah) a Hadith is better than narrating one thousand
narrations. None of you will be a Faqih (learned) until he understands
the meanings of our words. Surely, sometimes a word from our speech may
accept seventy different meanings in all of which we have a
justification." [^133]

General Rules for Understanding (Fiqh) a Hadith

1. Confidence in its authenticity

The first step for understanding a Hadith is to find out whether or not
it is really the words of a Ma'soom. This rule will be obtained if the
Hadith is narrated in the famous books of Hadith via reliable narrators.
For instance, some people assume the famous saying: كل ارض كربلا و كل
يوم عاشورا (Every land is Karbala and every day is Ashura) is a Hadith.
However, this statement is not narrated from any of the Imams (a.s) in
any book of Hadith. Thus, one may just quote it as an expression to mean
every day and in every land we should pay tribute to Imam Husain
(a.s).

2. Compatibility with the Quran

To verify how genuine the narrations are we are instructed by the Imams
of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) to present them to the Quran. Any narration contrary
to the Quran is false and must be rejected. [^134] The Imams of
Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) have stated in many Ahadith that their words cannot
possibly be contrary to the Quran. The following are two examples of
narrations that seem [^135] incompatible with the teachings of the Quran:
1/2: The almighty Allah concerning the prohibition of usury states in
the Quran: "and if you do not stop it (usury) then take a notice of war
from Allah and His Messenger, and if you repent then for you is (only)
your capital (so that) you are not being unfair nor being unfair to
anyone else." [2:279]

According to the above Ayah the money lender does not deserve more than
the actual money he has lent. To receive more than his own money is
called usury and unless he repents, Allah and His Messenger are in war
against him.

In spite of the above Ayah there are a number of narrations-some of
which are narrated apparently by authentic narrators- teaching a trick
to escape the usury. These narrations are known in jurisprudence as 'the
narrations of tricks'! The following is an example of these narrations:
Kolayni and Sadooq in their authentic Esnad from Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn
Ammar asked Imam Kazem (a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
يکون لي علي الرجل دراهم فيقول: اخّرني بها و انا اربحک فابيعه جبة تقوّم
علي بالف درهم، بعشرة آلاف درهم، او قال: بعشرين الفا و اؤخره بالمال. قال
(ع): لا بأس.
</p>

"A man owes me some dollars. He asks me to delay his payment and in
return he would pay my money back with interest. I sell a Jubba (long
dress) that is valued for me one thousand dollars, (I sell it) to him
for ten thousand dollars or he even said: for twenty thousand dollars
and then I allow him to delay his payment. The Imam (a.s) said: 'It's
alright'." [^136]

2/2: The Almighty Allah concerning the penalty of killing someone by
mistake states: "And whoever kills a believer by mistake he should free
a salve and submit a (certain) blood-money to the family of the
deceased." [4:92] According to the above Ayah if a believer is killed by
mistake, there is no death penalty for the killer. However, there is a
group of narrations that apparently indicate the above rule does not
apply to children and women! Kolayni in his authentic Esnad through
Abu-Baseer narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s):

<p dir="rtl">
سئل عن غلام لم يدرک و امرأة قتلا رجلا خطأ؟ فقال (ع): انّ خطأ المرأة و
الغلام عمد. فان احبّ اولياء المقتول ان يقتلوهما قتلوهما..
</p>

The Imam (a.s) was asked concerning a young boy who did not attain the
age of puberty and a woman whom together had killed a man by mistake?
The Imam (a.s) said: Verily, the mistake of the woman and the young boy
is deliberate! Then if the family of the murdered one wish to kill both
of them they may kill them…" [^137]

3. Compatibility with facts

The third general rule concerning understanding a Hadith is to examine
if it is contrary to any established fact be it religious, scientific,
historic, etc. the following are some examples of such inconsistencies:
1/3: Inconsistency with the religious facts: For instance, it seems from
some of the narrations of al-Kaafi that the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s)
are thirteen Imams not twelve! [^138]

2/3: Inconsistency with scientific facts: An example of this type of
narration is the suggestion that the blood of menstruation is discharged
from the left (or right) side of the vulva whereas the blood from an
injury is from the right (or left). [^139] As explained in lesson nine
there are many faults in the narration including being against
scientific facts. Other examples of inconsistency with scientific facts
include the Israelites that suggest Eve was created from the left rib of
Adam [^140], or Adam was about 30 meters tall! [^141]

3/3: Inconsistency with historical facts: Sadooq in his Ekmalu-Din, and
'Oyoon Akhbar al-Redha narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s) that when Imam
Baqir (a.s) was on his dying bed, Zaid; the brother of the Imam was
present. Zaid pleaded to the Imam (a.s) that Imam Baqir (a.s) appoints
him as the next Imam. Zaid argued that as Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s) appointed
his brother Husain (a.s) you can also appoint me as the next Imam.
However, Imam Baqir (a.s) did not agree explaining that the trust of
Imamat is by the will of God not man's desire. He then called after
Jaber Ibn Abdullah to come and verify the names of the Imams (a.s) as
mentioned in the Sahifa (the Book). When Jaber confirmed the words of
Imam Baqir (a.s), Zaid gave up and accepted the Imamat of Imam Sadiq
(a.s). [^142]

The above narration is inconsistent with historical facts. Imam Baqir
(a.s) was martyred in the year 114 A.H. Jaber Ibn Abdullah died in 78
A.H. and Imam Sadiq (a.s) was born in the year 84 A.H. Thus, Jaber could
not be present at the time of the demise of Imam Baiqr (a.s). He had
died even 6 years before Imam Baqir (a.s) is born.

4. Understanding of the general public

In general the best understanding of jurisprudential Ahadith should be
based on the understanding of the general public. For, they are the
types of people who were usually the audience of the Imams (a.s).

5. Acquaintance with the methods of Hadith reconciliation Many
narrations are apparently contrary to each other. An expert in Hadith is
the one who firstly is aware of the various narrations in a particular
field and secondly knows how to reconcile between them. In the next
lesson we shall touch upon some of the methods of Hadith reconciliation.
6. Classification of Ahadith (Subject index)

To understand the Hadith it is extremely important to classify them
according to their subject. Wasaelu-Shi'a in Fiqh and Beharul-Anwaar in
all Islamic subjects are amongst the best subjective books of Hadith.

As useful as the subject classification of the narrations is, it is
sometimes a disadvantage. Very often the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) have
spoken on more than one subject in one speech. To classify the narration
one must cut a Hadith into various pieces placing each part in its own
category. This would often lead to missing the actual content of a
Hadith.

7. Deadlocking or opening the Ahadith

One of the controversial general rules for understanding Hadith is
whether experts are always bound by the wordings of the Hadith or they
can often expand the rule beyond the words of the Hadith? In other
words, are the Ahadith deadlocked or are they often open to the
deduction of an expert? The extreme example of deadlocking the Hadith is
what is related to some of the Tradionalists (Akhbariyoun) concerning
the recommended supplication on the shroud of the deceased.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s) that when his son Ismael died he
wrote on the margin of his shroud: "Ismael bears witness that there is
no deity but Allah." [^143]

It is related to some of the Tradionalists that it is recommended to
write on the shroud of any deceased person: "Ismael bears witness that
there is no deity but Allah"! They even insist on writing the term
'Ismael' -irrespective of the name of the deceased-with the excuse that
we are not allowed to expand the words of the Imam!

The argument on deadlocking the text of a Hadith is not always as
obvious as the above example. The following examples are some of the
most controversial contemporary cases:

1/7: Many narrations indicated that there is no obligatory Zakat but on
nine items; i.e. gold, silver, cow, sheep, camel, wheat, barely, date
and sultana. [^144]

The argument nowadays is whether the above items were mentioned solely
because they were commonly available at the time and the place of the
Imams (a.s) or there is a mysterious reason that the obligation of Zakat
is only on these items?

2/7: Many narrations exclusively permitted staking in a race only
(between the players) in horse riding and archery. [^145] According to
these narrations betting in other than specified examples seem to be
prohibited.

However, there is a jurisprudential debate as whether permissibility of
stakes in the above examples is because they were the means of war in
those days? Should this be the case then betting may be expanded in our
modern day to shooting too. One may even argue that horse riding is no
longer a means of transport and hence betting may no longer be
permissible in horse ridding. 3/7: Anfal in Islamic law includes rivers,
mountains, mines, forests and all public wealth. In many narrations the
Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) have permitted the Shi'a to use them. [^146]

The argument in our modern time is that if individuals are permitted to
exploit the mines, cut the trees of the forests, catch the fish of the
sea, etc. for their personal benefit or they belong to the states for
the benefit of their nations?

4/7: Sword is the only means of execution introduced in Ahadith.
[^147]

The argument again is whether the convicts should only be executed by
sword-as specified in the Ahadith or sword is mentioned because it was
only a common means of execution in those days? If the second is proven
then utilising modern methods of execution such as electrical chair,
guns and the like becomes also permissible.

5/7: Playing chess is prohibited according to many narrations. [^148]
The argument is however, if the prohibition of chess is because it was a
means of gambling or it is prohibited whether it is a means of gambling
or not. If a jurist is convinced the reason for prohibition of chess is
due to gambling, then if it is confirmed by the experts- as it is
confirmed- that chess is no longer a means of gambling, then-despite the
prohibiting narrations- he will not issue a verdict for its prohibition.
His argument would be that playing chess at the time of the Imams (a.s)
must have been a means of gambling whereas in our time it is a mental
game like other games. Thus, the prohibition or permission of playing
chess depends on whether or not it is used for gambling.

For over several centuries most of our jurists have restricted
themselves to the texts of narrations. The revolution of opening up the
deadlocks of narrations has just begun by the Late Imam Khomeini and his
students. Indeed, this great scholar has revived Islam in our modern
time in various ways.


**Chapter 14 : Meeting 13: Branches Of Fiqhul-Hadith**


Meeting 13: Branches of Fiqhul-Hadith

1. Different Manuscripts (Ekhtelaf al-Nosakh)

The first step in understanding a Hadith is to be confident about the
accuracy of the text available to us. Surely, all of the books of Hadith
were compiled before the invention of printing.

The methodology of finding the accuracy of the texts is to discover as
many manuscripts of a text as possible and cross examine them. Finally,
the most accurate copy will be selected.

The following examples can reflect the significance of the science of
different manuscripts.

a- Muslim in his Sahih narrated from the Prophet (s.a.w.w), Whoever
fasts the month of Ramadan and follows it by fasting six days ( settan )
of Shawwal it is as if he has fasted his whole life.[^149]

In some of the manuscripts it is written ?sheyan' (some days), instead
of ?settan' (six days). As you can see this slight difference can change
the meaning of the Hadith completely. In the narrations of Ahlul-Bayt
(a.s) however, the following Hadith is narrated precisely: It is
optional to fast six days of the month of Shawwal after the month of
Ramadan, thus he may or may not fast. [^150]

b- In lesson four we quoted a Hadith from Imam Baqir (a.s) in which he
was listening to Hakam while honouring him (Mokreman) or according to
some other manuscripts while disliking him (Mokrehan). Similarly this
slight difference changes the perception of the scholars of Hakam.

2. Gharibul Hadith (Strange Hadith)

The science of Gharibul Hadith is a science in which difficult words
and sentences will be explained. Undoubtedly, the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt
(a.s) were the most eloquent of speakers. They were always considerable
of the degree of understanding of their audiences. Thus, perception of
their narrations was not usually difficult for their audiences. However,
in rare cases once the audience would request further explanation the
Imams would verify their words in more detail.

Invention of the science of Gharibul Hadith is due to the fact that we
have inherited the educational heritage of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s)
after several centuries. Surely, the Arabic language similar to other
languages has had its own evolutions. Often a word at the time of the
Prophet (p) had a totally different meaning than that of today.
Moreover, lack of the contents in most of the narrations or their
mutilations and such similar causes have contributed to the complexity
of understanding the meanings of the Ahadith. In the following I shall
cite some examples of the strange narrations:

a. Many Shi'a and Sunni narrators have narrated from the Prophet of
Islam (P):

<p dir="rtl">
اختلاف امتي رحمة
</p>

The ekhtelaf of my community is a mercy.

The term Ekhtelaf is a homonym. Its common meaning is to dispute and
disunite. However, it also means to traffic' or travel'. Because of the
first common meaning many Muslims have been wondering as to how the
dispute and the disunity of Muslims are a mercy? Muhammad bin Abi Omair
from Abdul Mo'min al Ansari narrated, I said to Imam Sadiq (a.s) some
people narrated from the Prophet The ekhtelaf of my community is a
mercy.' Is this correct? The Imam confirmed that. I said if their
ekhtelaf is a mercy then their association and unity must be a
punishment! The Imam explained That is not how you as well as they
understood the Hadith. The Prophet (P) meant what the Almighty God has
said: Of every group of people, a party should only go forth, that they
may get instructions in the religion. (9:122). The Imam (a.s) further
explained: The Prophet (P) asked them to travel to the Messenger of God
and learn and then go back to their tribes to teach them. The Prophet
only meant their travelling (ekhtelaf) in the cities not their dispute
(ekhtelaf) in the matter of religion, for there is only one religion.
[^151]

b. Often it is referred to a person without naming him. In Arabic the
term used is folan' which is like Mr X in English. In such expressions
usually the audience would understand who the person is referring to.
However, after several centuries the term remains ambiguous and makes it
difficult to identify the person. For instance, in sermon 228 Imam Ali
(a.s) while praising someone says:

<p dir="rtl">
لله بلاء (بلاد: النسخة) فلانٍ فلقد قوّم الاود و داوي العمد و اقام السنة
و خلّف الفتنة
</p>

May Allah reward Mr. X. who straightened the curve, cured the disease,
established the Sunna and abandoned mischief. [^152]

The ambiguity of the term folan has provided an opportunity to some of
the Sunni scholars such as Ibn Abil Hadid to amazingly claim that the
Imam has used the term to refer to Omar ibn Khatab! Nothing can be said
farther from the truth for this claim does not match other speeches of
Imam Ali (a.s) about the person. It is obvious that the term is used to
refer to one of the companions of the Imam (a.s) who has died prior to
the mischief occurring after the demise of the Prophet (P).

Among the many useful references for the science of Gharibul Hadith the
following are the most famous ones:

o Al Nihayyeh Fi Gharib al-Hadith by Ibn Atheer al Jithri (died in 606
AH). This book is very useful for the interpretation of the difficult
words used in the Sunni books of Hadith.

o Majma'ul Bahrain by Sheikh Fakhrudin al Torayhi (died in 1085AH).
Majma'ul Bahrain is the most famous book for interpretation of the
difficult terms used in the Quran as well as the Shia books of Hadith.

3. Contexts of Issuing (Asbabu Sodour)

The following are some of the best examples for the significance of the
science of knowing the context of a Hadith.

a. It is narrated from the Prophet (s.a.w.w): Salman is from us
Ahlul-Bayt (a.s).[^153] Surely Salman was one of the most distinguished
companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.w). Yet, he was not a member of
Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). Thus, different suggestions are given to the meaning
of the above Hadith. Some suggested that the respected title is given to
him due to his extra-ordinary knowledge. Others proposed that the Hadith
means that the original nature of Salman is from the nature of
Ahlul-Bayt (a.s)

The best understanding of the Hadith lies under the circumstances of
the Hadith. Ibn Hisham [^154] and other historians narrated: Prior to the
battle of the Ditch (Khandaq) Muslims divided into groups to dig the
ditch. Salman was a strong man. Thus, the Migrants (Mohajereen)
requested that Salman joins their group saying: Salman is from us. On
the other hand the Helpers (Ansar) liked him to join their group saying:
Salman is from us. The Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.w) finalised the dispute
saying: Salman is from us Ahlul-Bayt (a.s). that means Salman will be
with the group of Ahlul-bayt (a.s).

b. Bukhari [^155] and Muslim [^156] narrated from Abu-Horayra who
narrated from the Prophet (s.a.w.w): Allah created Adam according to H
is image.

<p dir="rtl">
خلق الله آدم علي صورته .
</p>

Verse 27 of the first chapter of the book of Genesis reads: So God
created man in His image; in the image of God He created him; male and
female He created them.

Contrary to the above Hadith and the biblical record, the Quran denotes
any likeliness between God and his creation. The Almighty Allah states:
None is like unto Him. [42:11]

Thanks to God that through the teachings of Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s)
we know the real meaning of the above Hadith.

Husain ibn Khalid asked Imam Redha (a.s) about the meaning of the
Hadith. The Imam (a.s) explained:

<p dir="rtl">
قاتلهم الله! لقد حذفوا اوّل الحديث. انّ رسول الله (ص) مرّ برجلين
يتسابّان فسمع احدهما يقول لصاحبه: قبّح الله وجهک و وجه من يشبهک! فقال
(ص): يا عبدالله لاتقل هذا لاخيک فانّ الله خلق آدم علي صورته.
</p>

May God kill them! Indeed they deleted the beginning of the Hadith. The
Messenger of Allah ( s.a.w.w ) passed by two men who were swearing at
each other. He heard one of them saying to the other: May God make your
face and the face of whoever looks like you ugly! The Prophet ( s.a.w.w
) said: O servant of God! Do not say that to your brother for Allah
created Adam to h is image. [^157]

As you can see once the content of the Hadith is known the real meaning
becomes clear. The pronoun his image' in the Hadith refers to the image
of the man' not to the image of God'. Thus, in the English translation
the letter h' should not be capital.

c. Abu-Horayra narrated from the Prophet ( s.a.w.w ).

<p dir="rtl">
غيروا الشيب و لاتتشبهّوا باليهود و النصاري.
</p>

Change your aging and do not look like the Jews and the Christians.
[^158]

The above Hadith seems to suggest that dying the hair is mandatory for
elderly people. However, Imam Ali (a.s) was sometimes reluctant to dye
his beard. Some people commented on him that why despite the Prophetic
Hadith he did not dye his beard? He explained:

<p dir="rtl">
انما قال (ص) ذلک و الدين قُلّ فامّا الآن و قد اتّسع نطاقه و ضرب بجرانه
فامرء و ما اختار.
</p>

Surely he ( s.a.w.w ) said so when the Muslims were not many. But now
that the territory of Islam is expanded it is up to people as they
choose. [^159]

d. Understanding the context of a Hadith is imperative to distinguish
the narrations that are expressed with the intention of Taqiyyah [^160] .
The Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) often under political pressure in
protection of their followers answered the questions of people according
to the mainstream Sunni verdicts.

Zorarah said: I asked Imam Baqir (a.s) concerning an issue. His
holiness answered me. Before I leave a man visited the Imam and asked
him the same question but the Imam gave him a different answer. Soon
after a third person visited the Imam and asked the same question. To my
surprise the Imam gave him an answer different from the previous
answers! When they left I said: O son of the Prophet! Two men from Iraq
from among your followers asked you a question and you answered them
differently! The Imam replied: O Zorarah! Surely this is better for us
and more lasting for us and for you. If you are all united in one
verdict then people recognise you as our followers and that would
diminish your existence as well as ours. [^161]

e. I would like to bring the examples of the contents of the Hadith
with a rather hilarious example:

The Messenger of Allah was invited along with some of the companions to
a party. The host had cooked the meat of a camel. After dinner as
Muslims were sitting around the Prophet ( s.a.w.w ) asking him their
questions, one of the guests passed wind and its odour disturbed the
rest. In order for the Messenger of Allah not to get embarrassed the
offender said to every body:

<p dir="rtl">
من اکل لحم جَزور فليتوضّاء.
</p>

Whoever has eaten the meat of a camel shall make a Wudhu. [^162]

It is obvious that the consuming of food whether the meat of camel or
anything else does not void one's state of Wudhu. The noble Prophet (
s.a.w.w ) had said so to refresh the gathering without pointing at
anyone. Amazingly however, some of the Sunni scholars such as Ahman Ibn
Hanbal, Ishaq ibn Rahwiyah, and Shafe'ie in his old verdict claim that
consumption of camel meat breaks the Wudhu!

4. Paradoxical Narrations

There are quite a number of narrations of which their contexts seem to
contradict each other. Rhetorical expressions, abrogation, different
levels of answers, Taqiyyah, distortion and many other reasons cause
some narrations to differ from each other.

The science of reconciliation between paradoxical narrations is one of
the important branches of Fiqul-Hadith. One of the four most important
books of Hadith; i.e. ?al-Estebsar' by the late Sheikh Tousi was
compiled on this field. Today, one of the most technical subjects in
Usulul-Fiqh (the principles of jurisprudence) is ?Equality and
Preferences' (al-Ta'adul and al-Tarajeeh) [^163] which deals with
different techniques and criteria of reconciling between paradoxical
narrations.

5. The Faults of a Hadith

The fault or the problem of a Hadith is either in its chain of
narrators such as being Mursal or Marfou'a and the like or it is
concerning the body of the Hadith. For instance, the text of a Hadith is
narrated in contradicting words. An example of such contradictions is
what we mentioned in lesson nine concerning distinguishing between
menstrual blood and the blood from a wound. According to one narration,
it is claimed that the menstrual blood is discharged from the left side
of the vulva whereas according to another it is suggested that the blood
is discharged from the right side.

Anther example of a contradictory narration in the body of a Hadith is
narrations concerning the desire of men and women. A narration suggests
that men's desire is nine times of women. Whereas, another narration
suggests the opposite:

a. Men's desire is nine times of women:

<p dir="rtl">
محمد بن مسلم عن ابي جعفر (ع) قال: ان الله عز و جل خلق الشهوة عشرة اجزاء
تسعة في الرجال و واحدة في النساء و ذلک لبني هاشم و شيعتهم. و في نساء بني
امية و شيعتهم الشهوة عشرة اجزاء في النساء تسعة و في الرجال واحدة.
</p>

Muhammad ibn Muslim narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s): Surely the Almighty
Allah created a desire in ten parts, nine parts of it are in men and one
in women. That is for Bani Hashem and their followers. But as for the
women of Bani Ommayyeh and their followers the desire has ten parts nine
of which is in women and one in men.? [^164]

b. Women's desire is nine times of men:

<p dir="rtl">
عن اصبغ بن نباتة قال: قال امير المؤمنين (ع): خلق الله الشهوة عشرة اجزاء
فجعل تسعة اجزاء في النساء و جزءا واحدا في الرجال. و لو لا ما جعل الله
فيهن من الحياء علي قدر اجزاء الشهوة لکان لکل رجل تسعة متعلقات به.
</p>

Asbagh ibn Nubateh narrated from Imam Ali (a.s): Allah created the
desire in ten parts, so He made nine parts of it in women and one part
in men. Had not God made shyness in women in accordance with their
desire nine women would have been hanging on a man. [^165]

Geraldine Brooks the Australian writer named her inflammatory and
bigoted book Nine Parts of Desire' based on such faulty narrations.

6. Criticism of a Hadith

The criticism of a Hadith means necessary investigation about accuracy
or inaccuracy of the Hadith. The scholars of Hadith present the
narrations with the Holy Quran, confirm Sunnah, necessities of religion,
rational scientific and historical facts. Should a Hadith contradict any
of them its validity will be dropped. In the previous lessons we cited
many examples.

7. Difficult Ahadith

Difficult narrations are certain narrations of which their vocabulary
or their meanings are very complicated and unclear. An example of such
difficult narrations is what Yahya Ibn Aktham has narrated from Imam
al-Hadi (a.s) concerning the interpretation of the seven seas in the
Ayah: With seven seas behind it to add to its (supply), yet the Words of
Allah would not be exhausted. (31:27). The Imam said:

<p dir="rtl">
هي عين الکبريت و عين اليمن و عين البرهوت و عين الطبرية و حمّة ماسيدان و
جمّة افريقا و عين باحروان (ماجروان- النسخة) و نحن الکلمات التي لاتدرک
فضائلنا و لاتستقصي.
</p>

It is the spring of Al Kebrit, the spring of Yemen, the spring of Al
Barahoot, the spring of Al Tabariah, the hot spring of Masidaan, the
Jumma or hot spring of Africa and the spring of Bahuraan (Majerwaan: in
another manuscript). And we are the Words that our virtues could not be
understood or counted. [^166]

Some of the terms used in the above narration are narrated differently
in different manuscripts and yet we are unaware of any clear meaning for
them.

And our last words are All Praise Belongs to the Lord of the Worlds.

The humble servant of God.

Mansour Leghaei

9, Safar 1428 (27-02-2007)

Imam Husain Islamic Centre

Sydney Australia


