The Twenty-Third Greater Sin: Stealing
======================================

The twenty-third sin which is certainly a Greater one is stealing or
thievery. Imam Riďa (a.s.) has included stealing among the Greater sins
according to the tradition reported by Fazl Ibn Shazān. Amash says that
Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has related from the Holy Prophet (S) that
he said,

“A believer cannot commit fornication and a believer cannot steal.”[^1]

Thus one who fornicates or steals is not a believer. Such a person is
devoid of faith. Such a person lacks belief in Allah (S.w.T.) and the
Day of Judgement. If such a person dies without repenting for his sins,
he does not die a believer. Some of the ayats and traditions that are
critical of Khayanat also include stealing. Stealing is absolutely Harām
even if it is for a worthless object. To steal even a needle is Harām.
However, the hands of a thief are cut only, if in addition to all the
necessary conditions the value of the stolen goods exceeds a quarter
misqal of gold.

Muhammad Ibn Muslim says that he inquired from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.):

“What is the minimum amount, stealing of which can make one liable to
have his hands amputed?”

Imam (a.s.) replied, “A quarter of a dinar.”

“And on stealing two dirhams?”

“Even if it is a dirham more than a quarter of a Dinar. In all cases the
hands are severed.”

Muhammad Ibn Muslim further asked, “Then if one steals less than a
quarter of a dinar, is he called a thief?”

Imam (a.s.) told him,

“Every such person is a thief in the eyes of Allah who steals the
property of the Muslims and keeps it for himself.” (That is, Allah will
punish him with the punishment that is reserved for all those who
steal.)

“But (in this world) his hands are not cut off. However if he steals a
quarter dinar or more his hands are severed. If the hands of those who
steal less than a quarter dinar were also to be cut then we would find
most of the people with their hands severed.”

Punishment for theft
--------------------

The Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah al-Mā’ida:

***“And (as for) the man who steals and the woman who steals, cut off
their hands as a punishment for what they have earned, an exemplary
punishment from Allah, and Allah is Mighty. Wise. But whoever repents
after his inequity and reforms (himself), then surely Allah will turn to
him (mercifully), surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** ***(Surah
al-Mā’ida 5:38-39)***

The book Burhanul Qur’an mentions on page 170:

“The opponents of Islam have raised objection against the penal code of
Islam. They label such penalties to be primitive and inhuman and not
acceptable in the twentieth century. The criticism is especially severe
with regard to the punishment of theft and fornication. They trump up
their arguments saying that such crimes are a result of psychological
disorders and moral and psychological counselling can reform criminals.
We admit that moral advice is one of the ways of reforming individuals.
Certainly, moral lessons have a profound effect in guiding a society in
the right direction. We also do not reject the fact that most of the
crimes are due to psychological and moral ills.

Islam has not overlooked moral training as a factor in the development
of character but Islam also believes that inspite of such training if
the individual is inclined towards crime he should be punished
adequately. A breakdown in discipline and order begins if you ignore
crime, eventually leading to a corrupt society.

In non-Muslim countries also the criminals are not let off with a sermon
on moral values. Criminals are imprisoned and accorded various
punishments. We do not deny the fact that poverty causes many a crime to
be commited. We agree that destitution sometimes makes a man lose his
sense of moral values and he is more inclined to Khayanat and stealing
when he is in difficult economic conditions. But we cannot accept that
poverty and destitution are the sole causes of crime. We see quite a few
people who inspite of their straitened circumstances are not at all
inclined towards injustice and crime and prove their integrity by
fulfilling their obligations with sincerity. On the other hand crimes
and perversity are prevalent in affluent countries and also in communist
countries which claim to have eradicated inequality.

Those who are critical of Islam to be primitive and inhuman are unable
to assess their own selves. Those who proclaim independence and human
rights overlook their own crimes. Forty thousand people were butchered
in North Africa just because they were protesting for their basic
rights. Is this nor barbaric?

The newspaper Kahyan of 14th April 1960 reports: The valiant people of
Algeria have struggled for six years against the tyrannical rule of
France over their country. To date, around one million people from the
total population of ten million have laid down their lives in this
struggle.

Coming back to our discussion we would like to point out that Islam has
taken in to consideration all aspects of crimes and punishment. Islam
does lays down heavy penalties for crimes committed but Islamic law
takes into account, the circumstances under which the crime is
committed. A person who steals due to hunger and poverty is not liable
to have his hands cut off, nor is a person who has been coerced into
stealing, punished. Also Islamic laws are not applicable in non-Muslim
countries. So the objections raised are baseless.

As far as barbarism (of which Islam is accused) is concerned, the
progressive countries in the Second World War alone killed and maimed a
million people. The dropping of the atom bomb caused untold miseries of
devastation, death and diseases plagued millions of people and the
horrible effect of these continue to this day. It has come to light in
recent times that the dropping of the atom bomb was entirely
unneccessary. It was for an experiment. An experiment conducted at the
cost of human life and human masses. Compared to this shocking
perversity and savageness the fact that corporeal punishment in Islam is
given in only limited cases.

Besides Islam prescribes rules and regulations which if followed
faithfully not only improve morals, but eliminate poverty and enhance
economic development of the society as a whole, thus eliminates the very
cause of these crimes.

It is the duty of the Islamic government to provide every citizen with
suitable employment. If some people still remain unemployed they are to
be paid a stipend from the public treasury till they can secure a job.
Under these conditions there is no need for anyone to steal. Inspite of
this if someone steals, then surely he deserves to be punished.

It is a fallacy to think that these prescribed punishments are only
meant for old times when people were savage and incapable of being
controlled by any other means and that in the modern age people are
receptive and suggestive and can be reformed without punishment. It is a
foolish argument. If this argument had any substance we would not be
witnessing such an awsome crime rate in the “cultured” atmosphere of the
developed countries.

It is obvious that the Qur’anic ayat quoted earlier does not give any
details regarding the robbery or the punishment. These details have been
elaborated in numerous traditions that have come down to us from our Ahl
ul-Bayt (a.s.)

Conditions when corporeal punishment is accorded
------------------------------------------------

It should be mentioned here that as far as Shia faith is concerned
amputing of hand implies cutting four fingers of the right hand. The
palm and the thumb are left untouched.

Before amputing the hands of the thief the following conditions must be
fulfilled. Even if one of them is absent, the punishment is not carried
out:

1. The thief must be an adult. The signs of adulthood according to
Shari’a are the completion of fifteen lunar years for a boy and nine
lunar years for a girl. Another sign of maturity is the growth of pubic
hair. The third sign is the ejaculation of semen in boys and the
beginning of the menstrual cycle in the girl. Even if one of these signs
are present the concerned person is an adult. So if the thief is not an
adult his hands cannot be amputed. At the most the judge releases him
after issuing a stern warning so that he may not dare to repeat this
act.

Abdullah Ibn Sinan relates the following tradition from Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.):

“When a minor child steals for the first and the second time he is
forgiven. If he does it for the third time he is issued a strict warning
and beating. If he persists in his crime, the tips of his fingers are
slightly cut and if he repeats the act, some more of his fingers are cut
away.”

2. The thief must be sane. So if an insane person robs, his hand is not
amputed. He may be suitably warned and scolded.

3. The thief must not have resorted to stealing under duress, if he had
been compelled to do so, the penal code is not applied.

4. The stolen thing must be something that is worth owning. Hence, if
ones freedom is restricted it cannot be called a theft.

5. The value of the stolen object must not be less than one-fourth
misqal of pure gold. One misqal is equal to eighteen grams. One-fourth
misqal is four-and-a-half gram.

6. The son or the slave of the thief must not own the thing that is
stolen. So if a father steals from his son, he is not punished. On the
contrary if a son or a daughter steals from the father or mother their
hands are amputed. The same rule applies to the master and the slave. If
the master robs his slave he is not punished. On the other hand, there
exists a difference of opinion on the matter of whether the slave who
steals from his master is to be accorded the punishment of theft or not.
Some Mujtahids are of the opinion that if a servant steals from his
office or employer, he should not be given the full penalty. Other
Mujtahids have issued a decree that there is no difference between a
servant, a workman and other people. They shall be deserving of the
penalty. There is also a difference of opinion with regard to the theft
committed by a guest from his host. The most prevalent verdict is that
the guest must be punished.

7. Eatables stolen during the times of famine do not make the thief
liable for having his hands cut. It is narrated from Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“In the time of famine and draught the hands of a thief are not cut off
for stealing edible items like bread and meat etc.”

8. If a soldier participates in a raid and steals from the plundered
goods obtained in war before they are distributed, he is exempted from
the punishment.

9. If one of the parties to a transaction steals a property and claims
that it rightfully belongs to him, he is not liable to be punished.

10. If a person is accused of theft, but before his theft is proved to
the judge, he pays the owner the value of the goods, he is not
penalised. Similarly, if a son steals from his father but before the
verdict is issued the father dies, the son is not punished, as stolen
goods now comprise his inheritance.

11. If the use of the stolen things is Harām (e.g. wine or pork), there
is no penal action against the robber.

12. If the thief claims that he had not taken a particular thing with
the intention of stealing it, and the judge considers otherwise, there
shall be no punishment for it.

13. The object should have been stolen from a place where the owner’s
permission is required to enter. If a theft takes place in a public
mosque or public bath, the thief does not have his hand amputed.

14. The thing should have been stolen from a secure place. If something
is not kept in a safe place and left open, the theft of it does not
incur punishment. Hence valuables should be kept under lock and key. The
fruits should not have been stolen from the trees. They should have been
already picked and stored in the orchard. The four-footed animals have
to be stolen from the stables. Wares have to be stolen from inside the
shop. The pocket that is picked must be an inside one and not the one
that hangs outward. Money should be stolen from a safe etc. The shroud
should have been stolen from the grave.

15. The thief must himself take away the stolen goods from their proper
place. If one takes out the thing from its safe place and another one
takes it away, neither of the two can be punished for theft. Because,
the one who has taken out the thing from its safe place has not stolen
it and the one who has stolen it has not done so from its place of
safety. We have already mentioned that one who steals something from
other than its proper place is not given the punishment of theft. Only
that thief is punished who removes the thing from its proper place and
also takes it away. If more than one person are involved in stealing
something from its proper place and taking it away, then the value of
the stolen property is divided by the number of people involved. If the
share of each person is more than one-fourth misqal all their hands are
amputed but if their individual shares are less than this then none of
them are punished in this manner.

If a thief removes the stolen object and loads it on his animal, or
gives it to an insane man or a minor child for taking it away, he is
penalised. This is because the animal, the insane person and the child
are mere carriers of the goods.

16. Severing of the hand is a punishment for theft. Theft implies that
someone takes away something without the knowledge of others who later
realize that the thing is missing. Hence if a person forcibly loots some
goods from its owner, he is not punished for theft. He is beaten up and
issued a warning, so that he may not repeat the act. However if the
goods are looted using a weapon, the punishment is equal to that of
being at war against the Muslims. (This punishment is described in the
thirty-third ayat of Surah al-Mā’ida. Either the criminal is killed or
crucified, the left and the right foot is amputed, or he is to be
exiled; the judge can award one of these punishments.)

17. If before a theft can be proved, the thief goes to the judge and
repents and promises not to steal in future he is saved from the
punishment. Once the theft has been proved, repentance is of no
consequence and punishment will be implemented.

18. For a theft to be proved, two just witnesses should have seen the
thief stealing. It may also be that there is just one witness but the
owner also testifies that robbery has taken place. The thief may himself
confess twice of his theft and deserve to be penalised. If he confesses
only once, the stolen goods are taken away from him and restored to the
owner. He is not punished for theft.

19. If the owner takes back his goods or allows the thief to keep them
before the matter is reported to the Qazi and does not press for a
penalty, the thief is not punished. However if the crime is proved
before the judge even the owner cannot save the thief from punishment.

Some Mujtahids believe that if two just people have not witnessed the
theft and it is only proved by two confessions of the thief, the judge
has the prerogative to condone him. It is mentioned in the book Tahzīb
that a person came to Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) and confessed of
having stolen something. Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) asked him,

“Can you recite some portions of the Qur’an?”

He said, “Yes, Surah al-Baqarah.”

‘Ali (a.s.) said,

“I have respited your hand in exchange of Surah al-Baqarah.”

Ashath said, “O ‘Ali (a.s.)! Have you overlooked the Divine penalty?”

‘Ali (a.s.) replied,

“What do you know? Awarding the penalty is only necessary when two just
witnesses have testified. But if the crime is confessed by the thief
himself, the Imam can condone him.”

If the crime satisfies the above conditions, the amputing of the hands
could only be carried out by the just ruler or judge. No other person is
qualified to award the penalty or carry out the punishment. The Qazi is
responsible for recovering the stolen goods and restoring them to the
owner. If the goods are used up or lost, the thief has to make good the
loss. The order for the returning of stolen goods is the same, whether
the theft is proved according to Shari’a or not. If a thing belonging to
someone else is taken, it has to be returned.

In some cases the theft is not proved but the Qazi issues a warning for
taking the property belonging to someone else. The Qazi may scold or
beat the person so that he may not repeat the act. The extent of
scolding and beating is also left to the discretion of the judge. In
cases where the goods are stolen from an unsafe place, or a bandit has
looted the goods, or a forgerer has forged a signature and wrongfully
acquired someone’s money, the property is restored to the owner and the
accused is scolded and beaten. In the same way if someone digs up the
grave containing a corpse, but does not steal the shroud, he is also
scolded and beaten up. Even if he steals the shroud but its value is
less than one-fourth misqal of gold he is similarly beaten up and
scolded.

Protection of property and honour
---------------------------------

If the thief is seen stealing, he becomes a bandit. The owner can, with
the intention of protecting his property fight with him. If the thief
dies, his killing is condoned and no blood money is payable. Similarly
the attacker can be killed in defence of ones life and honour. But the
real aim has to be for defence, and if defence is possible without
killing, then killing is Harām. Only the least aggressive measures
necessary for defence are permitted.

The Islamic laws with regard to theft are numerous and there is a
difference of opinion among the Mujtahids upon many of the points.
Keeping in mind the scope of this book, we feel the discussion we have
had should suffice.

How is the punishment awarded?
------------------------------

After the crime is proved the judge cuts off the four fingers of the
right hand. He leaves the thumb and the palm untouched. The penalty is
the same if the thief is convicted of multiple thefts and has not been
punished before. If a thief has already had his four fingers cut and he
steals again and the theft is proved, his left foot is cut from the
front. The heel is left so that he can walk. If he steals for a third
time and again the theft is proved the robber is imprisoned for life. If
he steals in the prison too, he is put to death.

The hand which is supposed to be lifted up for prayers, the hand which
expresses the submission to Allah (S.w.T.), the hand which must be used
to solve the difficulties of people, to help the oppressed and the
orphans, to attack the enemies of faith, if the same hand is used to
steal the property of the Muslim brothers and it is proved with all its
necessary conditions, then there is no way except to dismember it.
Society is rendered safe due to this measure.

Diyat (penalty)
---------------

If someone’s hand is amputed without any fault of his, the one who cuts
the hand is made to pay five hundred misqal of gold to the victim.
Whereas if someone robs one fourth of a misqal of gold his hand is
amputed. It appears that one who steals a fourth of a misqal of gold is
worse than the one who cuts off the hand of an innocent person. Such is
the value of trust in Islam.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia


