The Twenty-Fourth Greater Sin: Short-Wheghing and Cheating (in Business)
========================================================================

The twenty-fourth Greater Sin is short weighing or cheating in business.
This is recorded in the Holy Qur’an and the tradition of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) as related by Amash and the tradition of Imam Riďa
(a.s.) as reported by Fazl Ibn Shazān. Imam (a.s.) says: "Decreasing
(fraudulently) in measure and weight.” (is also a Greater Sin). It is
Harām for a seller to give less than the specified quantity or for the
debtor to repay less than what is specified.

A terrible punishment awaits the doer of this grievous sin, according to
the book of Allah (S.w.T.). A complete chapter of the Holy Qur’an deals
with this topic. It says:

***“Woe to the defrauders. Who, when they take the measure (of their
dues) from men, take it fully, but when they measure out to others or
weigh out for them, they are deficient. Do not think that they shall be
raised again, for a mighty day, The day on which men shall stand before
the Lord of the worlds?”*** ***(Surah al-Muťaffifīn 83:1-6)***

Deed in Sijjin
--------------

***“Nay! Most surely the record of the wicked is in the sijjin. And what
will make you know what the sijjin is? It is a written book.”***
***(Surah al-Muťaffifīn 83:7-9)***

Sijjin is either the name of that register which contains the account of
deeds of disbelievers and transgressors. Or it is a special corner of
Hell where the disbelievers and sinners will be consigned. Hence the
translation of the ayats will be as follows:

“They should be fearful for it is written down that the transgressors
will go to sijjin. And what can explain to you what sijjin is? It has
already been written about it (And a decision has been taken which
cannot be changed).”

Hazrat Shoeb (a.s.) was preaching to his people:

***“O my people! Serve Allah, you have no god other than He, and do not
give short measure and weight. Surely I see you in prosperity and surely
I fear for you the punishment of an all-encompassing day. And O my
people! Give full measure and weight fairly, and defraud not men their
things, and do not act corruptly in the land, making mischief.”***
***(Surah Hūd 11: 84-85)***

A person who short-weighs is not a Mu’min
-----------------------------------------

According to the Qur’anic ayats, one who resorts to short weighing and
defrauding does not believe in the Day of Judgement and the Hereafter.
If the person had any belief in the Hereafter, he would know that, even
if he succeedes in fooling people, he would never be able to hide his
fraud from the Lord of the worlds; he would realize that on the Day of
Judgement he would have to account for whatever he has earned by
defrauding and make good the loss.

A butcher who was an idol-worshipper used to give more than the
prescribed weight. When people asked him the reason for this he pointed
up towards the top of the wall and said, “I give more because of him.”
When people looked up they saw an idol installed there. Another
idol-worshipping shopkeeper was well known for his habit of casting a
glance at the idol before he proceeded to weigh some goods.

When Hazrat Yūsuf (a.s.) and Zulekha were alone in the room, Zulekha
covered the idol with a cloth. Hazrat Yūsuf (a.s.) asked her,

“Why have you covered the idol?”

She said, “I feel ashamed before it!” Hazrat Yūsuf (a.s.) said,

“You feel ashamed before a lifeless idol created by men, when it has no
power of understanding. How can I not feel ashamed before the Almighty
Lord Who is ever present and all-seeing?”

Saying this he fled from that place and saved himself from fornication.

It is a great pity that idol worshippers are ashamed to commit sins in
view of their idols, which are lifeless objects, whereas Muslims have no
qualms in commiting sins before Allah (S.w.T.) for Whom nothing is
hidden in the heaven and the earth.

Five sins and their punishments
-------------------------------

The following tradition has been recorded from the Holy Prophet (S) in
the book Tafsīr Minhaj us-Sādiqīn According to this tradition there are
five types of sins which bring about five types of calamities.

“When the people of a community break promises and oaths, Allah makes
their enemies to reign upon them.

When people order against the revealed Divine commands, poverty
(certainly) is widespread.

When immorality is practised openly deadly diseases certainly increase.

When people short-weigh and short-measure then there is a decrease in
agricultural output. (Decrease in livelihood) and there is less
rainfall.”

Advice of Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) for the businessmen
----------------------------------------------------------

Whatever ‘Ali (a.s.) found himself free from the administrative work, he
used to go to the market place and announce,

“O people! Fear Allah! Weigh and measure with justice. Do not cheat
people (by giving less) and do not spread corruption in the earth.”

One day ‘Ali (a.s.) saw a saffron seller short-weighing. He had applied
oil to his hand and very cunningly he applied it to the pan of the
balance which held the saffron. ‘Ali (a.s.) picked up the saffron from
the balance and said,

“First rectify your balance, then if you like you can give more than
that.”

Between mountains of fire
-------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“One who does Khayanat in weighing and measuring is thrown into the
lowest section of Hell. There he shall be placed between two mountains
of fire. He will be told to weigh those mountains. He will be busy in
this forever.”

The following incident is recorded in the book Tafsīr Minhajus Sādeqaen:

A person by the name of Malik went to visit a friend who was sick. Malik
says, “I saw him in a deplorable condition. He was screaming, ‘Two
Mountains of fire are going to crash upon me.’ I told him, ‘It is only
an illusion!’ He said, ‘No, it is true! Because I have two different
balances. With one of them I used to short-weigh while selling and with
the other I weighed more while buying. I am punished for this so soon!’”

Short changing is also Harām
----------------------------

As it is Harām to short-weigh it is also Harām to short-measure like
measurement of cloth or land which are sold by measure, must not be
short measured. It is absolutely Harām. In the same way those items
which are sold by number, like eggs or fruits; if someone sells them to
a person and gives less than the specified quantity, he is counted among
those who short-weigh and short-measure. Shaykh Ansari has mentioned it
in his book Makasibul Muharrama.

The Seller who cheats is a debtor of the buyer
----------------------------------------------

The amount of goods given less by the seller is owed to the buyer. It is
obligatory to give the balance amount to the buyer. If the buyer is dead
he must give it to his heirs. If he does not know the buyer he must with
the permission of the Jurist pay a similar amount as sadqa on behalf of
the buyer.

If the seller does not know how much less he has given, he must give him
some amount that will satisfy the buyer. If the buyer is dead he must
satisfy his heir. If the buyer is unknown the Mujtahid must be
satisfied.

Defrauding is like selling short
--------------------------------

It is short weighing and short measuring when the seller gives less
without the knowledge of the buyer. The buyer does not realize that he
is being given less than the stipulated quantity but it is defrauding
when the seller sells some goods of an inferior quality and makes it out
to be of a good quality. In this case too the buyer is unaware of being
cheated.

The seller may also adulterate the goods. In this case there is no short
weighing but it is Harām all the same, because it is a kind of fraud.
For example a grainseller adulterates 95 kg of wheat with 5 Kg of mud
and sells it as a hundred Kg of wheat; or a milkman adulterates milk by
adding water. Similarly a shopkeeper sells a kilo of ghee but
surreptitiously puts a quarter kilo of stone beneath the layer of ghee.
A butcher commits a fraud if he adds more than a reasonable amount of
bones while selling meat. Vegetable sellers increase the weight of
vegetables more by pouring water over them than required. All these
types of frauds are included among the sin of underweighing, even if the
seller is weighing the adulterated goods accurately.

Adulteration is Harām
---------------------

To mix an inferior quality of wheat with one of a good quality or to
adulterate pure ghee is also Harām. Shaykh Ansari says in his book
Makasibul Muharrama, “The tradition prohibiting adulteration is
Mutawatir.”

Shaykh Sadūq has recorded the prophetic tradition:

“One who sells adulterated goods to Muslims is not from us. He will be
raised with the Jews on the Day of Qiyāma, because an adulterater is not
a Muslim.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“One who gives us adulterated goods is not from us.”

He repeated this sentence thrice then said,

“And Allah will remove barakat from the livelihood of the Muslim
brothers. (Allah) will destroy his economy and leave him upon his own
condition.”[^1]

An edifying incident is mentioned on page 309 of the book Dārus Salām by
Aqae Iraqui: The respected Aqae Abdul Husain Khawansari has related to
me the following incident: “An honest perfume seller of Karbala had
fallen sick. He tried the treatment of every doctor in the town but it
was of no use. He spent all his property for his treatment but he was
not cured. One day I went to pay him a visit. I saw him perturbed. He
was instructing his son to sell off the household items. He was saying,
‘Sell off everything! I do not want anything. Either I will die or be
cured!’ I asked him, ‘What do you mean?’ He sighed and answered, ‘At the
beginning of my career I was not so rich. During that time an epidemic
fever broke out in Karbala. The doctors prescribed lime juice as its
cure. Since the disease was widespread there was a great demand for
limejuice.

I began to adulterate limejuice by mixing yoghurt in it. I sold it at a
very high rate. Gradually the stocks of limejuice with the other
shopkeeper were finished. They began to direct their customers to me.
Soon the stock of limejuice in my shop was also sold out. Now I began to
sell only yoghurt by adding colour and a sour material to it. I sold
this concoction as limejuice. My coffers became full and I continued to
amass wealth. Today I find that all this property is of no use to me. My
disease is incurable. So I wish to get rid of all the things that I
obtained in this Harām manner, in the hope that after doing this, I may
be cured.’ Not much time had elapsed after this incident when the
perfume seller departed from this world. He was definitely indebted to
those whom he had sold the adulterated limejuice.”

Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says:

“One day the Holy Prophet (S) was passing through the bazār of Madinah.
He (S) told a wheat seller, ‘Your wheat is of a good quality.’ Then he
put his hands inside the pile and found inferior quality of wheat below
He said, ‘I see that you have gathered the provisions of Khayanat and
adulteration.’”[^2]

Allamah Hilli says that a man asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), “If a
person has two types of goods one is of a superior and expensive quality
and the other is of inferior and cheap quality, can he mix these two and
sell at a special rate?”

Imam (a.s.) replied,

“It is not correct for him to sell the adulterated goods to Muslims.
However (there is no harm) if he informs them (of the
adulteration).”[^3]

Dawūd Ibn Sujān asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.): “I had two varieties
of musk. One was wet, the other dry. I sold the wet and fresh musk but
no one was prepared to buy the dry one at the same rate. Is it permitted
for me to make it wet so that it is sold out?” Imam (a.s.) told him,

“It is not allowed. However if you inform the buyer that you have made
it wet, it is another matter.”

Giving less in the rights of Allah (S.w.T.) and Prophet (S)
-----------------------------------------------------------

People have been ordered not only to refrain from defrauding each other,
but they must also not cheat and defraud while fulfilling their
obligations towards Allah (S.w.T.), the Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Imams
(a.s.) and all the creatures.

Allah (S.w.T.) is not deficient while fulfilling the rights of people.
He has taken upon himself to give sustenance to one and all. He bestows
man with unlimited favours. He listens to his entreaties and fulfills
his wishes in keeping with his well being. So it is incumbent upon man
to be faithful in fulfilling his duties towards Allah (S.w.T.). Man can
do this by being thankful to Allah (S.w.T.) for His blessings, by
obeying His commands by carrying out all his obligations. Thus one who
succumbs to Satan and his own selfish desires, has disobeyed Allah
(S.w.T.) and he has not fulfilled Allah (S.w.T.)’s right. His prayers
are not answered immediately, he becomes impatient and does not realize
that he himself is deficient in fulfilling Allah (S.w.T.)’s rights.
Allah (S.w.T.) says in the Holy Qur’an.

***“...and be faithful to (your) covenant with Me, I will fulfill (My)
covenant with you.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:40)***

It is nothing but His Beneficence that inspite of our failings Allah
(S.w.T.) listens to our prayer.

Hazrat Imam Zainul Ābedīn (a.s.) says in Du’a Abu Hamza Thumali:

“All praise be to Allah Who responds to my call. Whereas when He calls
me, I am lazy in my response. All praise be to Allah Who gives me
whatever I ask Him. Though when He asks me for a loan I am stingy. (All
the good deeds are a loan to Allah. He shall repay men on the Day of
Qiyāma).

And all praise for that Allah who sees my infamies but acts
magnanimously (He does not send immediate punishment). He is so
forgiving as if I have not committed a single sin.”

What you desire for yourself
----------------------------

Sādi Shirazi says in a couplet,

“You usurp the property of Muslims but when someone usurps yours you
protest and claim that no one is a Muslim anymore.”

If one desires not to be cheated by others one must be honest in ones
dealings with others. Justice demands this. The traditions also state
that one must wish for others what one desires for oneself.

Justice and equity is best
--------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“Three actions are the best. People should receive complete justice from
you so much so that you desire for them what you desire for yourself.
You must co-operate monetarily with your brothers in faith. You must
remember Allah in every condition. That remembrance is not merely
Subhanallah (Glory be to Allah) or Alhamdu lil-Lah (Praise be to Allah),
(it is remembering Allah, always). When some duty comes upon you which
Allah has ordered, you must fulfill it, and when some prohibited act
comes before you; leave it.”[^4]

The scales of justice
---------------------

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) advises his son Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.)
in his will:

“O my child, make yourself the measure (for dealings) between you and
others. Thus, you should desire for others what you desire for yourself
and hate for others what you hate for yourself. Do not oppress, as you
do not like to be oppressed. Do well to others, as you would like good
to be done to you. Regard bad for yourself whatever you regard bad for
others. Accept that (treatment) from others which you would like others
to accept from you.”[^5]

Everything has a measure
------------------------

In Surah al-Hadid, Allah (S.w.T.), the Almighty says:

***“Certainly We sent Our apostles with clear arguments, and sent down
with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct themselves with
equity.”*** ***(Surah al-Hadid 57:25)***

By the word ‘balance’, Allah (S.w.T.) means justice and Allah (S.w.T.)
has appointed a ‘balance’ for everything. The belief of men and the
truth and falsehood is also tested on this basis. The good and bad
morals and qualities are also evaluated on the scales of justice. If men
conform to justice in their speech and actions and belief and deeds they
will be able to establish true justice in the world.

‘Ali (a.s.) is the scale of deeds
---------------------------------

In one of the Ziarat of Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) we read:

“Peace be upon the balance and the scales.”

Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) is the measure for distinguishing truth and
falsehood. He is the touchstone for differentiating between good and
evil. He is the scale for evaluating morals and deeds. After the demise
of the Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Qur’an and Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.),
especially ‘Ali (a.s.), is the channel for and the criterion of faith.
By comparing the deeds and faith with the speech and actions of Ahl
ul-Bayt (a.s.) we distinguish good from evil. If our belief and actions
conform to the standards of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) they are correct and if
not then they are of no use.

Justice demands that we must not go to the extremes. We should neither
exceed the limits nor remain deficient. The scales of justice are very
accurate and can detect even the weight of a single strand of hair.
After recognising the path of justice it is a formidable task to remain
firm upon it. One who is successful in recognising the true path and
wishes to follow it, is bestowed Divine help. It is this person who is
proved correct by the scales of justice on the Day of Judgement. He
crosses the difficult bridge of Sirat with ease and swiftness. One who
is not just in this world is proved wrong in the Hereafter. He will
stumble from the bridge of sirat and drop into hell. The noble Qur’an
says:

***“And there is not one of you but shall come to it, this is an
unavoidable decree of your Lord. And We will deliver those who guarded
(against evil) and We will leave the unjust therein on their knees.”***
***(Surah Maryam 19:71-72)***

May Allah (S.w.T.) guide us upon the way of justice and equity. May
Allah (S.w.T.) include us among the pious and enable us to be saved from
falling into Hell.

[^1]: Iqābul Āmāl

[^2]: Iqābul Āmāl

[^3]: Iqābul Āmāl

[^4]: al-Kāfi

[^5]: Nahjul Balagha


