The Twenty-Seventh Greater Sin: Avoiding Jihad
==============================================

According to the Qur’an and hadith, to flee from Jihad is a Greater Sin.
It is the twenty-seventh sin. The following verse of Surah Anfāl is
clear. It concerns running away from a confrontation with unbelievers
when they are less than twice the number of Muslims.

***“O you who believe! When you meet those who disbelieve marching for
war, then turn not your backs to them. And whoever shall turn his back
to them on that day- unless he turn aside for the sake of fighting or
withdraws to a company then he, indeed, becomes deserving of Allah’s
wrath and his abode is hell; and an evil destination shall it be.”***
***(Surah Anfāl 8:15-16)***

Hazrat Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

“Those who flee from the battlefield should know that they have angered
their Lord and have damned themselves to destruction because fleeing
from the battle causes Allah’s anger. And one who flees from the Holy
war will be certain to face calamities and eternal degradation and his
fleeing will not prevent death, and his life cannot be prolonged. That
is, if the time of his death has arrived, his fleeing will not delay it.
He will die due to some other reason. On the other hand, if the time of
his death has not yet arrived and he participates in Jihad he will not
die. Thus it is better for one to pledge his life to Allah rather than
live in Allah’s anger, degradation and dishonour.”

Initiated Jihad and Jihad in defence
------------------------------------

Jihad is of two types:

(1) Initiated Jihad

(2) Jihad in defence

The first kind is that when the Muslims undertake a war against the
unbelievers to invite them to Islam or for establishing justice.
However, the permission of the Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Imams (a.s.)
or their special representatives is a necessary prerequisite of this
type of Jihad. Since the present period is of Major occultation this
type of Jihad is forbidden.

Jihad in defence, as the name implies, pertains to circumstances when
unbelievers attack Muslim territories or areas for obliterating Islamic
heritage or for plundering the wealth and honour of Muslims. Under such
conditions it is Wajib al-Kifai[^1] to undertake Jihad and repel their
attack. For this type of Jihad the express permission of the Imam (a.s.)
or his special deputy is not necessary.

There is a difference of opinion regarding flight from the battlefield.
Some scholars are of the opinion that it pertains only to those wars
that have been waged against the unbelievers under the order of the Holy
Imam (a.s.) or his special deputy. (For example, exemption from Ghusl
and Shroud to the martyr also pertains to this Jihad). Other doctors of
religion maintain that the decree applies to both the kinds of Jihad.
Those who wish to study this problem in detail can refer to the books of
Jihad or the books of jurisprudence.

While discussing the prohibition of flight it would be most appropriate
to discuss the steadfastness of Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) on the
battlefield. Such incidents have been included in discussions extolling
the merits of ‘Ali (a.s.). Neither the Shia nor the Sunni historical
books mention even a single instance when ‘Ali (a.s.) turned his back to
a battle. Even in the battle of Ohud he was the only one who did not
flee. In the ninth volume of Bihār al-Anwār, under the chapter of
“Bravery” a narration has been recorded from Ibn Masud, concerning ‘Ali
(a.s.). Four of those who had run away from the battle of Ohud returned
and again came to the Holy Prophet (S). They were Abu Dajana, Miqdad,
Talha and Musayb. After this the rest of the Ansar came back. Thus it
were these people who had deserted the Holy Prophet (S). All the
companions had left the Holy Prophet (S) alone on the battlefield except
‘Ali (a.s.). ‘Ali (a.s.) was fighting in the midst of the polytheists to
defend Islam and the Prophet of Islam (S).

During the battle of Ahzāb, the Holy Prophet (S) bestowed ‘Ali (a.s.)
with the titles of “The vicious attacker” and “the non-receeder.” That
is, the one who attacks the enemies with vengeance and does not recede
an inch. There is no doubt that ‘Ali (a.s.) was imbued with all these
qualities. Whereas, history is a witness that other companions like Abu
Bakr, Umar and Uthman had fled from numerous battlefields like Ohud,
Khaibar, Hunain and Dhat-Salāsil. Ibn Abil al-Hadid the Mutazalite has
penned the following couplet in his famous book:

“It is not surprising that Abu Bakr fled from Hunain. He had also
deserted the battle in Khaibar and Ohud.”

[^1]: Wajib al-Kifai means that if some person undertakes to fulfill an
obligation, others need not.


