The Twenty-Eighth Greater Sin: Becoming A’Arāb after Hijrat
===========================================================

The twenty-eighth sin, which is labelled as a Greater Sin, is to become
A’arāb (Bedouin, gypsy etc) after Hijrat (migration).

It is recorded in *Usūl al-Kāfi* under the chapter of Greater Sins that
according to the *Sahih* of Ibn Mahbūb when he wrote a letter to Imam
Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) he (a.s.) replied and this sin was included among
the Greater Sins. Moreover, Muhammad bin Muslim has quoted Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) and stated that he (a.s.) has included this sin among
the greater ones. The book of ‘Ali (a.s.) also includes this sin in the
list of Greater Sins.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“Becoming A’arāb after Hijrat and polytheism is one and the same
(sin).”[^1]

What does ‘becoming A’arāb after Hijrat’ mean?
----------------------------------------------

A’arāb refers to the nomadic Arabs or Bedouins who are absolutely
ignorant of religion and rituals connected with faith. Hijrat signifies
the migration of these desert Arabs to the Muslim centre, their
acceptance of Islam at the hands of the Holy Prophet (S) or his rightful
successor, and their consequent adherence to faith, and adherence to
religious rules and regulations.

Becoming A’arāb after Hijrat is the condition when a desert Bedouin
before acquiring the necessary knowledge of religion turns back to his
ignorant ways.

In the early period of Islam it was incumbent upon them to migrate
towards the Holy Prophet (S) in order to learn whatever was necessary
for being a Muslim. Similarly it was prohibited for Muslims to stay in
an area populated mostly with unbelievers; where it was not possible for
them to pray and fast and perform other religious duties.

‘Why don’t you migrate?’
------------------------

It is recorded in Tafsīr Minhaj us-Sādiqīn that there were some people
among the Muslims like Qays bin Walīd, who were outwardly Muslims and
had recited the confession of La ilāha illallah but inspite of this and
their ability to do so, they did not accompany the Muslims in their
Hijrat from Mecca to Madinah, and when the Quraish of Mecca marched to
attack the Muslims in the battle of Badr these people joined them and
were ultimately killed at the hands of the Muslims. A Qur’anic verse was
revealed on this occasion:

***“Surely (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their souls, they shall say: In what state were you? They
shall say: We were weak in the earth. They shall say: Was not Allah’s
earth spacious, so that you could have migrated therein? So these it is
whose abode is Hell, and it is an evil resort.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’
4:97)***

The above verse makes clear the fact that it is the duty of a Muslim to
leave the place where he cannot adhere to his faith and rituals. In a
tradition, the Prophet Muhammad (S) says:

“One who migrates from a place to another for the sake of religion, even
if it is only as far as the distance of a span (of hand), Allah makes
Paradise incumbent upon him. (Wherein) his companions will be Hazrat
Ibrahīm (a.s.) and Prophet Muhammad (S).”[^2]

***“Except the weak from among the men and the children who have not in
their power the means nor can they find a way (to escape); so these, it
may be, Allah will pardon them, and Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.”***
***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:98-99)***

It is narrated from Akrama that many of the Meccans who had embraced
Islam were not capable of migrating to Madinah, but when the Qur’anic
verse deploring such people was revealed and they became aware of it;
one of them Junda bin Zumra told his sons:

“Even though I have become extremely old and sick, I am not among those
helpless people who have been deprived of migration by Allah (S.w.T.). I
have yet some strength left and I also know the way to Madinah. I fear
that if I were to die suddenly, my failure to migrate would be a blemish
on my perfect faith. So, you all lift up the bed on which I lie and
carry me outside towards Madinah.”

Thus, his sons lifted the bed and carried him outside, but they had
reached only a short distance when the signs of his death became
apparent. Junda bin Zumro kept his right hand on his left hand and said:
“O Allah! This hand is for You and this for Your Messenger. I pledge
allegiance to You for those things that Your Messenger had pledged.”

After this his soul escaped from his body. When the news of his death
reached Madinah, some companions remarked, “It would have been better if
Junda bin Zumro had reached Madinah. In this way he would have derived
the Tawāb of Hijrat.”

The Almighty Allah revealed the following ayat on this occasion:

***“And whoever flies in Allah’s way, he will find in the earth many a
place of refuge and abundant resources; and whoever goes forth from his
house flying to Allah and His Apostle, and then death overtakes him, his
reward is indeed with Allah and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***
***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:100)***

Becoming A’arāb after the passing of the Holy Prophet (S)
---------------------------------------------------------

During the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S) it was incumbent upon every
person to migrate towards him (S) to obtain instruction in religion and
faith. In case he lived in the midst of unbelievers where he could not
perform the obligatory acts of prayers and fasting, it was all the more
necessary to migrate.

Failure to migrate and returning to nomadism is decreed to be a Greater
Sin and the Almighty has promised Hell fire for such people.

After the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S) it became Wajib to turn
towards the Holy Imams (a.s.) and to obtain the compulsory knowledge of
faith and articles of Islamic acts. Also, it was most essential to
attain the Ma’refat of Imam (a.s.) i.e. it was incumbent to have
knowledge of one’s Imam and also to learn the matters of belief and
acts. It was also prohibited to turn back to paganism after the
acceptance of Islamic faith. To remain aloof from the Holy Imam (a.s.)
even after recognising their position is Harām. Thus, Shaykh Sadūq
narrates from Huzaifa bin Mansūr that he has reported from Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) who said:

“To become A’arāb after Hijrat is to recognise Imam (a.s.) and then be
aloof from him.”[^3]

Since the present age is the age of occultation of Imam az-Zaman (a.s.)
the same rules apply to us.

It is necessary to migrate towards the jurist
---------------------------------------------

Hijrat is incumbent on two types of people. The first type are those who
are absolutely ignorant of the rules of religion. If there is no
religious scholar in the area of their residence, whom they can refer to
for their religious problems, then, it is compulsory for them to shift
to a place where they have access to religious scholars for the solution
of their problems.

The second types are those Muslims who live in the midst of unbelievers,
and due to the oppression of these infidels, they are unable to perform
their religious duties. It is incumbent on these Muslims to migrate to
an area where there is freedom to practice their religion. The Shia
jurists have explained this matter clearly.

Order for migration is forever
------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) has told us:

“Hijrat is Wajib till the doors of repentance close. The doors of
repentance will not close till the sun rises from the west.” (i.e. the
order for migration will be in force till Qiyāma).[^4]

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

“The order for Hijrat will be in force till Allah demands obedience from
the inhabitants of the earth in the same way as the order was first
promulgated in the time of the Holy Prophet (S).”

It means that Hijrat will remain a compulsory duty till the time other
religious duties remain obligatory on the people.

‘They could not migrate from Mecca’
-----------------------------------

In the book of ‘Masalik’, the second martyr[^5] writes that the Holy
Prophet (S) has explained the meaning of the tradition of migration
saying that it is specifically concerned with the migration from Mecca.
Hence when Mecca was liberated from the domination of the unbelievers
there was no need for the Muslims to migrate elsewhere. The order
applies to only those Muslims who are unable to perform their religious
duties. According to some scholars after the conquest Mecca there was no
merit in migration from Mecca; just as there was a greater merit in
Jihad and struggle for Islam before the conquest.

***“...not alike among you are those who spent before the victory (of
Mecca) and fought (and those who did not): they are more exalted in rank
than those who spent and fought afterwards...”*** ***(Surah Hadīd
57:10)***

In order to understand the purport of this ayat let us study the
following points:

Wajib, mustahab and mubah hijrat
--------------------------------

The respected scholar Allamah Hilli writes in his book Mumtahi that
there are Three kinds of Hijrat (Migration), Wajib (obligatory),
Mustahab (recommended) and Mubah (permitted).

Wajib hijrat
------------

Hijrat is Wajib on a Muslim (not restrained by old age or disease) who
lives in the midst of infidels where he can neither reveal that he is a
Muslim, nor can he perform his religious duties.

Recommended hijrat
------------------

For those Muslims who live among infidels but who have complete freedom
to practice their faith, it is recommended (Mustahab) to migrate to
another area, if they are capable of doing so. However, if they have
some legal excuse, migration is Mubah (Permitted) for them; it is not
even Mustahab.

No migration from areas of Ahl ul-Sunnat
----------------------------------------

According to Sharhe Lumah and Jameal Maqasid, the first Martyr[^6] is
believed to have said: “It is incumbent for a Muslim to migrate if he is
living in the midst of infidels and is unable to follow Islam or perform
his religious duties. In the same way a Shia who is living among the Ahl
ul-Sunnat and is not able to perform the ritual acts of Shias is
similarly required to migrate to areas populated with Shia people.”

However this view which is attributed to Muhammad Ibn Makki is not
compatible with the general Islamic principle. Because if a Shia is
living among Sunnis he does not need to forgo his religious obligations.
He can follow Taqiyya (dissimulation) and fulfill his ritual acts. He
can perform the Islamic acts in the same manner as the Sunnis if he
fears for his life or property. We do not have any tradition exhorting
such people to migrate to another area. On the other hand the Holy Imams
(a.s.) have time and again emphasised upon the adherence to
dissimulation under such circumstances.

Support of the Martyr’s view
----------------------------

Some scholars have supported the view of Muhammad Ibn Makki who stated
the following tradition from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) as quoted by
Muhammad Ibn Muslim requested to explain the Islamic order for a person
who during travel reaches a place where there aren’t any stones or sand;
all the area is covered with snow and the person becomes “mujnib” (semen
has been discharged from him and he has to perform the Wajib Ghusl for
prayers). How can he do tayammum (substitute of Ghusl) in absence of mud
or stone? Imam (a.s.) replied,

“Let him do tayammum with this very snow and pray. I do not consider it
proper for him to again go to such a place where he might lose his
faith.”

According to those who support the view, since Imam (a.s.) has
prohibited his followers to go to a place where it is impossible to
perform ghusl and wuzu, the prohibition also applies to a place where it
is not possible to perform wuzu and ghusl according to Shia procedures.

However, this is not a sufficient argument because the tradition
prohibits going to a place where one is sure to be unable to perform
some obligatory acts. On the other hand it is only a possibility that in
areas of Ahl ul-Sunnat a Shia will be compelled to practise Taqiyya.
Besides, even if a Shia practices Taqiyya and performs the obligatory
acts like the Ahl ul-Sunnat, his acts are considered correct. Moreover,
if there is no constraint it may be recommended for him to migrate from
the area of Ahl ul-Sunnat. However, if he is unable to express his love
for Ahl ul-Bayt (.a.s.) it will certainly be Mustahab for him to
migrate.

Propagating Wilāyat in areas of Kuffar
--------------------------------------

Samād says that he told Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), that he was
travelling to an area populated by polytheists and that he would have to
stay there for some time. Some of the Mu’minīn had told him that it was
not advisable to travel there because if he were to die in that place he
would be counted among the polytheists. Imam (a.s.) asked him if he
would be able to propagate the Wilāyat of Ahl ul-Bayt and invite people
towards truth in that place? Samād said, “Yes, master, there is total
freedom of expression and religion. The people there, are receptive of
truth.” Then Imam (a.s.) asked whether such a freedom was possible in an
Islamic area. Samād said, “No! On the contrary we have to practise
extreme Taqiyya, and none of us can even dare to utter the names of one
of you (Imams).” Imam (a.s.) told him,

“If death overcomes you in such a place you would be counted as a
monotheist community.” [i.e. he will be equal to a whole community of
monotheists; like Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.)]. The light of belief will
emanate from your face.”[^7]

Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) writes in the Sharh of al-Kāfi that it is
possible that A’arāb means to become a nomad again or to forgo Hijrat
after the order of Hijrat has been revealed. Like the prohibition of
interest, which came into force only after the Divine command was
revealed. Nevertheless, since the early period, failure to migrate
without a valid reason or to migrate and then revert to nomadism, both
of these are Greater Sin and promised the fire of Hell by the Almighty
Allah.

Qur’anic view of nomadism and apostasy
--------------------------------------

We have already mentioned at the beginning of our discussion that nomad
specifically applies to the desert Arabs who were away from the centre
of Islam and could not learn the Islamic rules and regulations, nor
could they remember and follow the articles of faith. In this connection
the following verse was revealed in the Qur’an:

***“The dwellers of the desert are very hard in unbelief and hypocrisy,
and more disposed not to know the limits of what Allah has revealed to
His Apostles; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.”*** ***(Surah at-Tawba
9:97)***

The Almighty also says:

**“And of the dwellers of the desert are those who take what they spend
to be a fine, and they wait (the befalling of) calamities to you; on
them (will be) the evil calamity; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.”**
***(Surah at-Tawba 9:98)***

Also:

***“And of the dwellers of the desert are those who believe in Allah and
the latter day and take what they spend to be (means of) the nearness of
Allah and the Apostle’s prayers; surely it shall be means of nearness
for them; Allah will make them enter into His mercy; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.”*** ***(Surah at-Tawba 9:99)***

Ignorance of Islamic acts is a kind of nomadism
-----------------------------------------------

The above two verses which flay the infidel Bedouins are clear regarding
the fact that the nomads were deserving of criticism not because of
their being dwellers of desert. It was because of their ignorance of
articles of Islamic acts and belief. For those Bedouins who followed the
Islamic religion, the Holy book has praised them in the third verse.
They have been promised Divine Mercy.

On the basis of this, people who avoid learning Islamic rules and
regulations and those who keep away from the centres of religious
knowledge are in fact, nomads, and the verse denouncing the desert Arabs
also applies to them even though they are living in cities.

The respected Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) remarked:

“Learn the rules of religion. Those of you who do not learn about
religion are nomads. As the Almighty Allah says in His book,

*‘**Why does not a company from you goes to learn about religion so that
when they come back they can warn their people in order they may become
fearful (of disobeying Allah).’”*** ***(Surah at-Tawba 9:122)***[^8]

Thus one who does not try to learn about religion and articles of faith
is a desert dweller. The Imam (a.s.) also told his followers:

“Knowledge of the Divine religion is incumbent on you. And do not become
a nomad. Because if you fail to understand a religious act, Allah will
not look upon it with Mercy on the Day of Qiyāma and He will not purify
that deed.”[^9]

One who learns but does not act upon it is also a nomad
-------------------------------------------------------

Muhaddith Faiz writes in Wāfi that it is possible that the above
pronouncement may also apply to those who learn about the Islamic
rituals and practices but fail to act upon them. He also quotes a
tradition from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) to prove this point. Allamah
Majlisi (r.a.) states in the Sharh of al-Kāfi that some scholars are of
the opinion that being a nomad in the present time applies to those who
after acquiring religious instructions, do not act upon them and remain
aloof from Islamic knowledge.

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

“A man says that he has migrated, though in fact he has not. Because a
migrant is the one who abandons sins and does not even go near them. And
a person says that he has fought in the way of Allah but in reality he
has not, because Jihad is the leaving of sinful acts and a war against
enemy inside our own self. Whereas many people go out to fight not for
the obedience and satisfaction of the Lord. Their motive is only to gain
fame so that people may praise their bravery and fearlessness.”[^10]

Desert of ignorance and negligence
----------------------------------

From the Qur’anic verses, the traditions and writings of the Islamic
scholars we can conclude that nomadism implies the condition of a person
who is ignorant and unaware of Allah Almighty’s Nobility of which human
beings are capable and the eternal bliss which one can achieve, and
instead he is totally immersed in the desires of this transient world.
He is oblivious to righteousness and does not refrain from committing
any sin or evil. He does not care to acquire knowledge (Ma’refat), nor
does he pay attention to good deeds, that would fetch him eternal
rewards in the Hereafter. It would surely deprive a person of salvation
and eternal bliss.

Hijrat (migration) is the exact opposite of Nomadism. Nomadism after
Hijrat (migration) implies that a person migrates to Islam and obtains
knowledge of religion and then reverts to his former ways. It can be
said that performing some good actions for some time and then leaving
them is also a kind of reverting to nomadism. The denouncement is valid
only if the person does this due to laziness and sloth and not due to
some real hindrance or helplessness. It is necessary to continue to
perform good actions once we have begun them. As far as possible we
should not discontinue them.

Jabir Johfi quotes Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) to have said:

“I like to continue good actions so that I become habitual in them. If I
could not perform a particular deed in the day I make up for it during
the night and if I do not perform an action during the night I make up
the following day. Certainly the best of the deeds near Allah are those
which one continues. Hence all the deeds of the week are presented to
Imam (a.s.) every Thursday and the deeds of the month at the end of the
month and all the deeds of the year at the middle of Shabān. So if you
begin a good ritual, keep at it for the whole year.” (i.e. continue it
for at least a year).[^11]

Neglecting religious knowledge
------------------------------

If a person begins to acquire religious knowledge but later discontinues
the same it is considered reverting to nomandism by some. However, it is
*Harām* only if his religious education is obligatory (i.e. if he leaves
it, he will go astray). However, it is incumbent to continue acquiring
knowledge till the end of one’s life so that one can continue to perform
good deeds with sincerity and purity of intention. In this way a person
becomes righteous and deserving of the rewards of his good deeds, both
in this world and the hereafter.

As the Holy Prophet (S) has said:

“Acquire knowledge from the cradle to the grave.”

[^1]: Usūl al-Kāfi chapter of Greater sins

[^2]: Minhaj us-Sādiqīn

[^3]: Māni al-Akhbār

[^4]: Masalik

[^5]: Zainuddin Jebel Amili

[^6]: Muhammad Ibn Makki

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^8]: Bihār al-Anwār, Book of Aql

[^9]: Shahīd al-Thani

[^10]: Bihār al-Anwār vol.15

[^11]: Bihār al-Anwār


