The Thirtieth Greater Sin: Not Helping the Oppressed
====================================================

The thirtieth sin, which is mentioned as a Greater sin, is ‘not helping
the oppressed people’ and ‘not warding off oppression from them’. In the
tradition of Amash, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“…and not helping the oppressed (is a greater sin).”

To defend the oppressed is to help them ward off evil; not performing
such a task is shirking a great duty which Allah has made incumbent upon
us.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) says:

“If a person due to some difficulty takes refuge with his Muslim brother
but inspite of being capable of helping him does not do so then he has
for his own self cut off the Divine help.”[^1]

Allah (S.w.T.) does not help a believer who does not help his brother in
faith and leaves him on his own.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has mentioned that,

“A believer who inspite of being financially capable does not help
another believer will be degraded by Allah in this world as well as the
Hereafter.”

Similarly Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) says:

“None of you should go to a place where a tyrant ruler is oppressing,
and killing innocent people, if you are not capable of helping the
oppressed. Because in event of a believer being present in such a place
it would be his religious duty to help his believing brothers. But if he
is not present at that place the obligation will not exist.”[^2]

Umrū bin Qays says, “My cousin and I went to meet Imam Husain (a.s.)
when he was surrounded by the army of Yazid (l.a.). Imam (a.s.)
conversed with us briefly and then asked,

‘Would you like to help me?’

I replied, ‘I have a family to look after, besides I also have some
trusts of some people with me. I don’t know what my end would be and I
don’t want that the property of those people, which I have as trust
should be destroyed.’ My cousin also offered the same explanation.”

Imam Husain (a.s.) said,

“If you cannot offer your assistance to me you must go far away from
this desert so that you may not be able to hear my plaintive cry for
help. Because if anyone is to hear our cry for help and does not
respond, it would be incumbent upon Allah to throw him in the fire
(Hell).”[^3]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“A Jewish scholar was punished with fire maces in his grave with such
severity that the flames leapt out from inside. This was because he had
prayed without Wuzu and once he was passing by an oppressed person who
called for help but he did not respond.”[^4]

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“It is necessary to help a believer whether he is an oppressor or an
oppressed one. If he is an oppressor he should be restrained from
oppression and if he is oppressed he should be helped in obtaining his
rights. He should not be deserted and left on his own.”[^5]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“He is not a believer who inspite of being capable avoids helping his
brother in need; Allah also leaves him on his own and does not help him
in this world nor the Hereafter.”[^6]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) says:

“A person before whom the defects of his Muslim brother are mentioned;
and he does not try to remove those defects inspite of being able to do
also; then Allah will expose (his defects) in this world as well as the
Hereafter.”

From the above tradition and other similar narrations it seems that
oppression is not confined to physical harm or monetary difficulty. It
is also with regard to the injury to one’s honour and respect. For, the
honour of a believer is as precious as his life and wealth. Defiling the
honour of a believer is also Harām, like usurping his wealth or taking
his life. The traditions are emphatic that just as it is necessary to
defend the life and property of a believer, it is also incumbent to
protect his honour and respect. It is Wajib to assist him in defending
his honour.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“If a person tells something (misleading) to a believer by which he
intends to make him an evil man and due to this his respect and honour
will be destroyed and he will be degraded in the eyes of common people
and people will not trust him anymore nor respect him. Then such a
person is deprived from the Guardianship of Allah and left for the
Shaitan who also does not accept him.”[^7]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says:

“If a person hears of the defects of his believing brother in an
assembly and tries to defend him, Allah closes a thousand doors of evil
from him in the world and the Hereafter. But if inspite of being capable
he does not refrain the one who is speaking about the defects of a
believer; his sin will be equal to that of seventy backbiters.”[^8]

Shaykh Ansari says that this sin is equated to that of seventy
backbiters probably for the reason that if the one who is mentioning the
defects is not restrained he may repeat this act on several other
occassions. The Shaykh further says that preventing the backbiter is not
sufficient but one should also endeavour to defend the believer from all
such accusations and defects. For example if the defects pertain to some
worldly matter one should say, “After all he has not committed a sin.”
If the defects are with regard to some religious obligation he should
try to somehow prove that the accusation is false. As an example, if a
believer is said to have omitted prayers one can defend him by
suggesting, that may be he had forgotten to offer them. If a believer is
accused of being an alcoholic, one can suggest that he must have seen
him drinking something else, or as a last resort one can say, “He is
after all not a Masūm (infallible). A man is prone to sin sometimes, so
instead of back-biting about him you should try to reform him and help
him in his difficulties.”

Thus one should make every effort to defend his believing brother from
such dishonour. The details of this shall be discussed in the chapter of
backbiting.

It is not necessary that only those who request for help should be assisted
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

We should know that helping an oppressed does not become Wajib only when
they request for help. Every person who is capable of removing
difficulties of a believer must do so and if the needy person has
entreated for assistance it becomes all the more important. As the
Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“One who hears the entreaty of a man, ‘O Muslims! Come for my help,’ and
does not assist him, is not a Muslim.”[^9]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“If a person requests his Muslim brother to help him and the latter does
not do so inspite of being capable enough; the Almighty Allah installs a
huge snake from (the snakes of) Hell on his grave so that it can
continuously bite him.”[^10]

In another tradition it is reported that such a person will continue to
receive this punishment till Qiyāma even if he had been pardoned (for
other sins). Moreover, Imam (a.s.) also said,

“No person refrains from helping and pleasing his Muslim brother unless
there is some benefit in it.” (i.e. his helping would have been sinful
instead of rewarding).”

There are many traditions of this type from the Holy Imams (a.s.). Imam
Sajjad (a.s.) says:

“The sin which results in the descending of calamities is when one does
not respond to the call for help of the helpless people.”[^11]

Then the Imam (a.s.) invocated Allah (S.w.T.) saying,

“O Allah! I plead for forgiveness for the time when someone is oppressed
in my presence and I do not help him. I seek refuge in You for not
helping an oppressed and a needy person.”

(Sahīfa al-Sajjadia)

Traditions on this subject are numerous and widespread. Let us be
content with the ones we have discussed.

Helping the oppressed is not only for believers
-----------------------------------------------

Helping the oppressed is Wajib. This does not mean that it is Wajib only
to help the oppressed believers. The commands of helping the oppressed
in the light of Qur’an and traditions are only conditional as far as the
capability of the helper is concerned. Even if the oppressed people are
not Shias and they belong to other sects of Muslims, it is still Wajib
to help them. Even if a non-offensive infidel is being oppressed, the
command of enjoining good and forbidding evil dictates that he should be
helped and the evil must be eradicated.

There is an incident in Muntahiul Āmāl that Mansur Dawaniqi was in Mecca
when an expensive diamond was brought to him. It was for sale. When
Mansur saw the diamond he recognised that it had belonged to Hisham bin
Abdul Malik and should have been surrendered to him (Mansur). Since
Muhammad a son of Hisham was still alive he must have brought it for
sale. So he ordered his guards to close all the doors of the Holy Mosque
after morning prayers the next day, and allow the people to leave only
from a single door after careful scrutiny. When Muhammad bin Hisham was
found he should be arrested and brought to him.

When on the next day after morning congregational prayers all the doors
were shut and it was announced that people should leave from one
particular exit, Muhammad bin Hisham realized that it was a plot to
arrest him. He became fearful and looked here and there in confusion and
worry. He did not know what to do. Just then Muhammad bin Zaid bin ‘Ali
bin al-Husain (a.s.) came towards him and asked, “Who are you? And why
are you so frightened.”

“If I reveal my identity, would my life be safe?”

“Yes!” he replied, “I take an oath to remove this danger from you.”

“I am Muhammad, the son of Hisham Ibn Abdul Malik, Now tell who you
are?”

“I am Muhammad Ibn Zaid bin ‘Ali bin al-Husain (a.s.) and certainly your
great grandfather Marwan had killed my father unjustly, but do not
worry, you are safe. Taking your life will not avenge the innocent blood
of my father and you had not killed my father yourself. Now I will try
my best to save you from this danger. I have thought of a way out of
this. I want you to co-operate with me and promise me that you will be
absolutely fearless and repose your trust in me.”

Thus, Muhammad bin Zaid covered the head and face of Muhammad ibn Hisham
with his own robe and pulled him towards the exit beating him at every
step. When they reached the exit he told the guard loudly, “This
wretched man is a camel driver from Kufa. He had hired a camel from me
but he ran away and he gave it to someone else. I also have two just
witnesses to support my claim. You send your deputies with me and I will
take him to the Qazi for judgement. Rabi, the chief guard ordered two of
his deputies to accompany them and they came out of the Holy Mosque
together. When they had walked for some distance Muhammad ibn Zayd told
Muhammad bin Hisham, “There is still time for you to repent and promise
to return my money, I will not trouble these guards and the Qazi if you
assure me.”

Muhammad bin Hisham picked up the cue and said, “O son of the Holy
Prophet (S). I promise to do as you say.”

Muhammad bin Zayd told the guards that since the fellow has repented
there was no need for them to take more trouble. The guards left them.
Muhammad bin Hisham took off the robe from his face and kissed the face
and head of Muhammad bin Zayd and said, “Allah the Almighty knew well
where to put His message that He appointed the Prophet from your
family.”

Then he took out an expensive diamond from his pocket and requested
Muhammad bin Zayd to accept it as a reward for saving his life but
Muhammad bin Zayd declined saying, “I belong to a family that does not
accept anything in return of a good deed. When I had condoned the murder
of my father what value can this diamond have for me? I cannot take it.”

The worshipper sinks in the ground
----------------------------------

Shaykh Tusi has related from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), “There was an
old man of Bani Israel. He was praying when he saw that two children had
caught a fowl and were pulling its feather. The fowl was shrieking in
pain but he remained engrossed in prayers and did not help the poor bird
by having it released from the clutches of the naughty children. So the
Almighty ordered the earth to swallow this man and sucked him to the
lowest depths.”

The worldly and the heavenly rewards for those who help the believers
---------------------------------------------------------------------

A large number of traditions have reached us which emphasise the
necessity of helping and assisting the believer and the rewards that are
earned by those who do so. Let us study some of these traditions:

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“One who responds to the entreaties of his believing brother in
difficulties and makes him glad and helps him and fulfills his needs;
then seventy two bounties become incumbent for him from Allah. One of
these bounties is given to him in this world so that it can solve his
worldly problems and the other seventy one are stored for him to remove
the dread and difficulties of the Hereafter.”[^12]

He (a.s.) has also said:

“If a person tries to fulfill the need of a believer and he completes
it, the Almighty Allah writes in the scroll of deeds the rewards of a
Hajj and Umra and Ihtikāf of two months in Masjidul Harām and fasts of
two months. But if the need is not completely fulfilled the reward of
one Hajj and Umra is written.”[^13]

Imam (a.s.) has also mentioned that it was revealed upon Hazrat Dawūd
(a.s.) that,

“When one good deed of one of My servants reaches Me I shall grant him
Paradise.”

Dawūd (a.s.) asked, “O my Lord what deed is that?”

“Removing sorrow and difficulties of a believer, even if it is as little
as giving him a date (fruit)!”

Dawūd (a.s.) said, “It is only You O Allah! Who is of such greatness
that once a person recognises You, he must never despair of Your Mercy.”

It is quoted from Maimūn bin Mahram in the book Faqih, “I was sitting in
the assembly of Imam Hasan (a.s.) when a person entered and said, ‘O son
of the Messenger of Allah. I am indebted to such and such person and now
he wants to imprison me.’

Imam (a.s.) said,

‘I do not have any money to repay your debt.’

He said, ‘Maybe you can speak to him so that he will not put me in
prison.’

Imam (a.s.) arose and put on his shoes. I said, ‘O son of the Messenger
(S) did you forget that you are in Ihtikāf and cannot go out of the
mosque?’

Imam (a.s.) said,

‘I have not forgotten, but I have heard my father say that the Holy
Prophet (S) had said, “One who tries to fulfill the needs of his
believing brother is as if he has for 9000 years fasted during the days
and prayed during the nights.’”

Letter of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) to the ruler of Ahwaz
----------------------------------------------------

When Najjashi assumed the rulership of Ahwaz there was a person in his
service who requested Imam (a.s.) that, “I owe a certain amount to the
ruler and he is a Shia, if you feel proper, please write to him
regarding this matter.”

Imam (a.s.) wrote:

“In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful. Please your brother
so that Allah may please you.”[^14]

The narrator says that when the person went to Najjashi, he was busy in
some official matter. When he was free he handed Najjashi the letter
saying that it was from Imam (a.s.). He kissed the letter and touched it
to his eyes and asked, “What is the matter?” He told him that he owed
some taxes. “How much?” Najjashi asked, “Ten thousand Dirhams,” he
replied. Najjashi called his accountant and told him to note down his
debt as paid and close his account in the register. Then he went further
and said that for the following year too this amount of taxes should be
marked as paid. Then he turned towards him and asked, “Have I made you
happy?”

“Yes!” replied the man.

Then he called for a horse, and a slave brought it. He ordered for a
dress and gave to the man. At each step he kept asking, “Have I made you
happy? Have I made you happy? The man kept replying “Yes! Yes! May I be
sacrificed for you, Yes!” At last he told him to take even the carpet on
which he was sitting. Because, he said, “It was on this carpet that you
handed me this letter of my Master (a.s.), and if you have any other
need, tell me.” The man thanked him profusely, returned to Imam (a.s.)
and related the details. The Imam (a.s.) was extremely pleased at the
behaviour of Najjashi. The man asked, “O my Master are you pleased with
Najjashi’s response?”

Imam (a.s.) replied,

“By Allah! Najjashi has also pleased Allah, His Prophet (S) and his
Progeny.”

Yaqtīn the father of ‘Ali relates that one of the accountants of Yahya
bin Khalid was appointed to collect tax from their area. Yaqtīn says,
“At that time I was owing a considerable amount of tax and if all the
tax had to be cleared I would have had to sell off all my property. Some
people suggested that he was a Shia, but I was too fearful to approach
him in case he turned out to be a non-Shia and would force me to part
with all my wealth, as I was a follower of ‘Ali (a.s.). So I decided to
run away from that place and headed for Mecca. After completing
pilgrimage I decided to visit Madinah and presented myself before Imam
Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) and told him, ‘Such and such person has been
appointed as a tax collector but I was too scared to approach him for
the fear that he may not be one of your adherents.’ Imam (a.s.) told me
that there was no cause for me to worry and he wrote a brief note;

“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful, there are many
people in His shade whose guardians are only those who remove the grief
and difficulties of their brothers or give them opportunity or do some
good to them even if it is as little as half a dried date and this
person is your brother.”

Imam (a.s.) put his seal at the end and handed me the note saying, ‘Give
this to him.’ When I returned to my native town and went to his door, I
said, ‘I have been sent by Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.).’ He came running
to the door barefooted. When he saw me, he saluted me and kissed my
forehead and asked if his master has sent me. I replied in the
affirmative and he said, ‘If this is so, even my life is at your
disposal.’ He held my hands and implored me to tell him in what
condition Imam (a.s.) was when I had departed. I told him that Imam
(a.s.) was well. ‘By Allah? Yes, By Allah?’ he asked this Three times
and after that I handed him the hand-written note of Imam (a.s.). He
kissed it and touched it to his eyes. Then he asked me what I wanted
from him. I told him that I owed several thousand dirhams in taxes and I
would spend my whole life in paying them. He called for my file and
condoned the taxes payable by me and gave me a receipt. After this he
called for his money chest and gave half of the money to me. Then he
called for his horses and distributed them equally between us. After
this he sent for his clothes and distributed them in the same way. When
he had divided all his belongings and given me half he said ‘O Brother!
Have I pleased you?’ Yes, I replied, ‘By Allah!’

When it was the time for Hajj I said to myself that I could never repay
his kindness except for that which is most liked by Allah (S.w.T.) and
His Holy Prophet (S). So I decided to go for Hajj in order that I may
pray for him and after Hajj meet Imam (a.s.) and inform him of the
kindness and request him also to pray for this noble soul. When I met
Imam (a.s.) after Hajj he seemed very pleased and asked,

“O Yaqtīn how did that person behave with you?”

When I described his goodness the face of Imam (a.s.) beamed with
happiness. I asked whether Imam (a.s.) was pleased with his actions? (so
that Allah (S.w.T.) may please the noble man). Imam (a.s.) replied:

“By Allah he has pleased my ancestors! By Allah he has pleased Amir
ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) and the Holy Prophet (S) and he has pleased the
Almighty Allah at the High Heaven.”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) and ‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn
----------------------------------------------

Ibrahīm Jamāl wanted to meet ‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn, the Prime Minister of
Harūn the Caliph, but he was not granted an audience. The same year ‘Ali
Ibn Yaqtīn was honoured by Hajj and later went to Madinah and decided to
meet Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) but Imam (a.s.) did not permit him to
enter. Again the next day he presented himself and upon the refusal of
Imam (a.s.) asked as to what sin he had committed that Imam (a.s.) did
not want to meet him. Imam (a.s.) said that since he had refused to meet
his brother, the Almighty Allah would not allow his efforts to succeed,
till the time Ibrahīm Jamāl does not forgive him. ‘Ali ibn Yaqtīn said
that since he was in Madinah and Ibrahīm Jamāl in Kufa how was it
possible to obtain his forgiveness at that moment?

Imam (a.s.) said,

“When it is dark, go alone to Baqī, and do not let anyone know it. You
will find a thoroughbred horse there. Mount that horse.”

‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn did as instructed and in a short time found himself at
the door of Ibrahīm Jamāl. He knocked at the door and announced “I am
‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn.” Ibrahīm Jamāl said from inside, “What do I have to do
with ‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn?”

‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn said that he had some urgent work with him and begged
for the permission to enter. When he was allowed inside he said, “My
Master has refused to see me till you forgive me.”

Ibrahīm said, “May Allah forgive you.”

‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn fell down and implored him to put his foot on his
(‘Ali’s) face. Ibrahīm did not agree. ‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn again implored him
in the Name of Allah. Ibrahīm complied with his request. Then ‘Ali Ibn
Yaqtīn said, “O Allah be a witness,” and mounted the horse again. Within
a few minutes he found himself at the door of Imam (a.s.). He knocked
and Imam (a.s.) permitted him to enter.

By these traditions we can judge the importance of helping our believing
brothers. ‘Ali Ibn Yaqtīn was one of the closest companions of Imam
(a.s.) and has assumed the ministership by the order of Imam (a.s.). He
was also held in such high esteem that on the day of Eid-uz-Zuha Imam
(a.s.) said,

“I did not recall anyone else’s name. I just prayed for ‘Ali Ibn
Yaqtīn!”

Inspite of such an honourable position he was not able to satisfy Imam
(a.s.) till he had satisfied his believing brother. We must exercise
utmost caution in our daily lives that we may not cause any believer’s
rights to be trespassed; which may bring down the anger of Allah
(S.w.T.) and the Holy Prophet (S) upon us.

His own needs are fulfilled
---------------------------

It must be known that one who strives to fulfill the needs of a
believing brother or wards off oppression from an oppressed soul, apart
from the rewards of the Hereafter he is also bestowed honour in this
world and his own needs are fulfilled. We have many traditions to prove
this, however we shall mention only one such incident.

The esteemed scholar, Ahmed bin Muhammad bin Khalid Al Barqi who was
present in the life time of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and also during
the Minor Occultation, says in his book Mahasin:

I was under the patronage of the tax collector of the city of Pahencha
Kootkeen. His name was Abul Hasan Madarani. He had given me a yearly
endowment, which I used to collect as tax from an area at Kashān, but he
was so busy that he became inattentive towards me and my own taxes were
demanded from me. I was much worried, when one day a noble and pious man
came to me. He was very weak and it seemed as if he had no blood in his
body. He was like a walking corpse. He told me, “O Abu Abdillah! There
is a relation of common faith and purity between you and me and the
relation of devotion to the Pure Imams (a.s.). Please do something for
me for the sake of pleasing Allah (S.w.T.) and for the sake of the love
of Sādāt.” I asked him as to what he wished? He said, “People have
falsely spread the rumour that I have given some secret information
against Kūtani to the Sultan. Hence, they have confiscated all my
property.”

I promised to help him out and he went away. I thought to myself that if
I approached the collector with two requests at the same time I would
not be able to achieve them both. On the other hand if I presented the
problem of only the old man then what of my own difficulty? I went
inside my library and was in deep thought when a tradition of Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) came to my mind. It was to the effect that if a person strives,
sincerely, to solve the difficulty of a believer, his own difficulty is
solved by Allah.” I got up at once and went to Abul Hasan Madarani. When
I entered I saw that he was sitting on his chair with a pillow to rest
his back and he held a stick in his hand. He told me to sit. At that
very moment a Qur’anic verse came to my mind and I recited it loudly:

***“And seek by means of what Allah has given you the future abode, and
do not neglect your portion of this world, and do good (to others) as
Allah has done good to you, and do not seek to make mischief in the
land, surely Allah does not love the mischief-makers.”*** ***(Surah
al-Qaŝaŝ 28:77)***

Abul Hasan said that since I have recited this verse I must be in some
need? He told me to mention it clearly. I said that people have spread
false rumours against such and such person. He asked me if he was a Shia
and if he was acquainted with him. I said, “Yes”! He called for the
register and I saw that a large property had been seized from the old
man. Abul Hasan ordered all the seized property to be restored to its
owner. He also told his servants to give him a mule and a new dress and
accompany him to his family with respect. After this he said, “O Abu
Abdillah you have corrected my mistake.” Then he picked up a slip of
paper and wrote an order transferring the rights of the particular piece
of land in my name. Again he waited for sometime then ordered the old
man to be paid 10,000 dirhams extra, saying, “Because he had guided us
to the correct way!”

I requested him to let me kiss his hands but he said that if I kissed
his hands he would kiss my feet and said that he did not wish to waste
away his good deed. It was nothing much for him as he was holding the
rope of the Progeny of Muhammad (S).

[^1]: al-Kāfi

[^2]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^3]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^4]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^5]: Dārus Salām

[^6]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^7]: al-Kāfi

[^8]: Makasib

[^9]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^10]: Mustadrak

[^11]: Māni al Akhbār

[^12]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^13]: Al Amr bil Ma’rūf

[^14]: Usūl al-Kāfi


