The Thirty-First Greater Sin: Sorcery
=====================================

The thirty-first sin that is clearly stated to be a Greater Sin is
sorcery. A tradition from the Holy Prophet (S) has been recorded in
Wasa’il ul-Shia in which the Prophet (S) has mentioned that Magic is a
Greater Sin. The tradition of Abdul Azīm (r.a.) has also mentioned from
Imam Jawad (a.s.) who has related through his fore-fathers from Imam
Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said to the effect, “Sorcery is a Greater
Sin because the Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And they followed what the shaitans chanted of sorcery in the reign
of Sulaiman, and Sulaiman was not an unbeliever, but the shaitans
disbelieved, they taught men sorcery and that was sent down to the two
angels at Babel, Harut and Marut, Yet these two taught no man until they
had said, ‘Surely we are only a trial, therefore do not be a
disbeliever.’ Even then men learned from these two, magic by which they
might cause a separation between a man and his wife; and they cannot
hurt with it anyone except with Allah’s permission, and they learnt what
harmed them and did not profit them, and certainly they know that he who
brought it should have no share of good in the hereafter and evil was
the price for which they sold their souls; had they but known this.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:102)***

According to Tafsīr al-Mizan this ayat shows that sorcery was prevalent
among the Jews for a long time; and they used to ascribe it to Hazrat
Sulaiman (a.s.). They believed that Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) had mastered
the techniques of controlling the angels, jinns and wild animals through
magic, and some of these alleged methods had reached them. They also
implicated the two angels Harut and Marut for other magical rites.
Therefore, the Holy Qur’an has denounced their belief regarding Hazrat
Sulaiman (a.s.) because sorcery is the method of misusing the power of
human spirit in order to perform extraordinary acts. It is against the
Divine law because it negates the supremacy of Allah (S.w.T.). Since
Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) was a Prophet and undoubtedly infallible, he
cannot be blamed for such a violation of Divine Command. Therefore to
ascribe sorcery to Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) was absolutely wrong. As the
Almighty says,

***“...and Sulaiman was not an unbeliever, but the shaitans disbelieved,
they taught men sorcery...”***  
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:102)***

Regarding Harut and Marut the Holy Qur’an says:

***“...and that was sent down to the angels at Babel, Harut and Marut,
yet these two taught no man until they had said, “Surely we are only a
trial, therefore do not be a disbeliever.” Even then men learnt from
these two, magic by which they might cause a separation between a man
and his wife; and they cannot hurt with it anyone except with Allah’s
permission, and they learnt what harmed them and did not profit
them...”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:102)***

We should however know that some of the commentaries of the Holy Qur’an
by Ahle-Sunnat have recorded some lewd traditions on this subject; and
their lewdness itself proves their forged nature. For example they say
that the Jinns stole the ring of Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) and with the
help of its power ruled for forty days from his throne and during this
period the satans spread the practice of sorcery among the masses. They
have also written that Harut and Marut were two angels and when they
became seized with sensuality, they drank wine and murdered a man; later
they committed adultery with a woman. The woman then ascended to the
heavens; and the star Zahra on the sky is that same woman.

This is a false allegation because during his conversation on this
subject with Ma’mūn, as mentioned in Uyun al-Akhbar ar-Riďa, Imam Riďa
(a.s.) says that Harut and Marut were two angels who had taught people
the method of nullifying the magic of the sorcerers so as to enable them
to prevent the effect of magical rites practiced by the magicians. They
did not teach any magical spell before warning them that this was a
Divine test and they must not fall prey to infidelity but some people
became disbelievers by misusing the spells to cause discord between
husband and wife, though the proper utility of the spell was obstructing
black magic.

Even the Shia scholars differ in the explanation of this verse. Tafsīr
Majmaul Bayan has also recorded different views. Some thinkers have
opined that this is one of the Divine secrets and they further offer the
exegesis that Harut and Marut signify the intellect and soul of man.
These two entities changed their abstract form and assumed a physical
body. Therefore, they were examined in their material life. They became
engrossed in satisfying their carnal desires. Consequently they attached
themselves solely to the material world and continued to worship their
desires. In this way they committed gross injustice upon themselves and
deprived themselves from eternal bounties. They also made themselves
liable for a terrible punishment. Such traditions are unacceptable
according to their wordings and if they are reported to have been
uttered by the infallibles they should be understood in the light of
their sayings only.

The honourable scholar Shaykh Sadūq says that Zahra and Suhail are two
types of marine animals who are referred to in traditions by the name of
Harut and Marut. They are not two stars as the Ahle-Sunnat believe.
Moreover, the Qur’anic ayat mentioned above is clear that magic is
equivalent to disbelief and the sorcerer will not receive any benefit on
the Day of Qiyāma.

As the Holy Qur’an says,

***“And if they had believed and guarded themselves (against evil),
reward from Allah would certainly have been better; had they but known
(this).”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:103)***

The Holy Prophet (S) says,

“Three kinds of people will not enter Paradise, habitual alcoholics,
habitual sorcerers and those who severe relationships.”[^1]

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“The magician will enter hell like the disbeliever.”[^2]

Imam (a.s.) also says,

“If one learns magic, whether a little bit or more, he has become an
infidel. And his end result is that he does not receive Divine Mercy.
His punishment is that he be killed except if he repents.”[^3]

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says that a woman came to the Holy Prophet
(S) and said,

“My husband is very severe and misbehaves with me, so I have prepared
something for him that he may become kind to me.” (i.e. I have prepared
a magical potion to change his attitude).

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“Curse be upon you! You have darkened the realms of the seas and the
lands, the angels of the earth and the heavens curse you.”

After going from there the woman began to fast during the days and pray
during the night and she trimmed her hair and started wearing a leather
garment. When the Holy Prophet (S) learnt of this he remarked that her
fasting and prayers would not be accepted.[^4]

Muhaddith Faid mentions this hadith and comment that these actions will
not save her from death penalty. Sorcery is such a severe crime that her
repentance and worship will not bring her near Allah (S.w.T.). She has
done an injustice to her husband and unless he forgives her, she cannot
be forgiven.

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“If a person goes to a magician, a diviner or a liar and testifies to
the truth of whatever he says, he becomes an infidel according to all
the books revealed by Allah.”[^5]

Sorcery is punishable by death
------------------------------

A Muslim who indulges in magic and does not repent is punished by death.
An infidel guilty of sorcery must not be killed. He should be punished
according to the decree of a just jurist (Qazi) and his penalty is at
the discretion of the Qazi.

According to a tradition of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.):

“The sorcerer must be given a single blow of the sword on his head.”[^6]

“If two just witnesses testify, it is permissible to kill him.”[^7]

Imam (a.s.) also said, that the Holy Prophet (S) ordered,

“The Muslim sorcerer must be killed and the infidel magician must not be
killed.”

Someone asked, “O Messenger of Allah, why shouldn’t the disbelieving
sorcerer be killed too?”

The Messenger of Allah (S) replied,

“Because disbelief is a more serious sin than magic; and sorcery and
polytheism are the same.”

It means that when a zimmi infidel is not sentenced to death for his
infidelity he cannot be killed for the sin of practising magic because
infidelity is greater than sorcery. Whereas the Muslim magician is
killed because he has committed polytheism.

What is sorcery?
----------------

The late Sayyad writes in Wasila an Najāt that magic means the writing
and reciting of some special spells and charms and the burning of
particular objects so that its smoke can be used for some extraordinary
effects. Making a picture and blowing, or tying up knots, or buying
special objects in particular places so that the person for whom the
magic is intended may be affected physically or mentally. That is if he
is reported lost he can be located by it or he can be put to sleep or
made unconscious. It can also be used for creating love or discord
between two people; like husband and wife etc.

In the exegesis Tafsīr al-Mizan very interesting points are mentioned
under the explanation of the 104th verse of Surah al-Baqarah. We shall
present them for our readers.

A philosophical discussion
--------------------------

It is common knowledge that many unusual events do take place which are
beyond the established natural system. It is difficult to find someone
who has not seen, or heard about some abnormal or seemingly supernatural
event. But on close scrutiny it turns out that most of them are not
enigmatic and mysterious at all. They are the results of normal and
natural causes, like intensive practice and training, for example,
eating poison, lifting heavy loads, walking or dancing on a tight rope
etc. Some are based on natural causes that are not known to the general
public, for example, a man walks into flaming fire without coming to any
harm, (he applies some chemicals like talc to his body); or sends a
sheet of blank paper and the addressee understands the message it
contains. (He writes with an invisible ink that becomes visible if
heated by fire or treated with some chemicals). A third set depends on
the sleight of hand like juggling. All these seemingly abnormal feats
actually emanate from normal causes, although the causes are unknown to
the common man; they may even be beyond his ability.

Yet there are other strange happenings that cannot be attributed to any
normal physical cause. For example, giving information of the unseen,
and particularly foretelling future events; the charms for love and
hate, the harmful or beneficial spells affecting man’s virility,
hypnotism, mesmerism, spiritualism, telekinesis and so on. It is known
that such events do take place from time to time. We have seen some
demonstrations ourselves, and similar reports were brought to us by
reliable sources. At present there are many people in India, Iran and
the western countries, who demonstrate such extraordinary feats and
their authenticity is beyond doubt.

It appears from close investigation of their methods and regimen that
these feats spring from the will power of the doer, and from his
unshakable self-confidence. The will power arises from the special
knowledge which they have mastered. Sometimes the will acts
independently and sometimes it needs some boosting; for example, writing
a certain charm with a certain ink in a certain place at a certain time
(for the amulets of love or hate); or fixing a mirror before a certain
child (in the seances of spiritualism); or chanting a certain
incantation a certain number of times, and so on and so forth. When the
conditions are fulfilled the will is strengthened to bring the desired
effect into being. When the knowledge becomes one with the knower, it
influences his senses to such an extent that he sees the end product,
that is, the desired effect, with his eyes.

You may verify this statement yourself. Just tell yourself that a
certain person is present before you and that you are looking at him;
then put your imagination to work to bring his form before your eyes;
this should be raised to such a high level of certainty that you become
oblivious of all other thoughts and ideas and then you will actually see
him standing before you-as you had imagined. Many ancient doctors,
acting on this principle, restored to health their incurable
patients-simply by creating in them the confidence that they would soon
regain their health.

Taking this principle a step further, if someone’s will power is
extraordinarily strong, it might influence the psyche of another
individual and create the desired impression on him also. That
impression might, or might not depend on fulfillment of certain
conditions, as indicated earlier.

From the above discourse, we may deduce the following Three principles:

**First:** The appearance of such extraordinary events depends on the
firm “knowledge” and strong conviction of the doer but it is irrelevant
whether that “knowledge” is true to the fact or not. That explains why
the conjurations of the priests of the sun god and the moon-goddess etc.
seemed to work although they believed that the heavenly bodies had
souls, which they claimed to bring under by their magic. Probably the
same applies to the angels and satans whose names are “discovered” and
invoked by many practitioners of the magic art. The same is true for
spiritualism and its seance and spirit communication- and the
spiritualist belief that the spirits attend their sittings. Utmost that
may be claimed regarding those sessions, is that the spirit appears in
their imagination or, let us say, before their senses- and this
“perception” emanates from their firm belief in their art but it can
never be said that the spirit actually presents itself at the sittings-
otherwise all the participants in the sitting should have perceived its
presence, because everyone of them has the same senses as the medium
has.

But accepting this principle, we may solve many problems related to the
seance and spirit communication. For example:

1. Sometimes the spirit of a living man is called to present itself at a
seance, and supposedly it comes there but at that very moment, that man
is busy attending to his affairs and he never feels his spirit leaving
him even for an instant. The question is: As a man has only one spirit,
how was it possible that his spirit presented itself to that seance
without his being aware of it?

2. The spirit is an immaterial essence which has no relation whatsoever
with space and time. How can it present itself at a certain place at a
certain time?

3. Why is it that often a single spirit appears before different mediums
in different forms?

4. Why is it that sometimes when the spirits are called to a seance,
they tell lies and give wrong answers? And why do the various spirits
sometimes contradict each other?

All these problems will be solved if the principle is accepted that it
is not any spirit that presents itself to the seance; it is only the
firm belief and conviction of the spiritualists and his medium that is
at work, making the medium see, hear and feel the spirit. It is all a
play of his imagination and will; and nothing more.

**Second:** Some of the people, holding the strong and effective
will-power, rely on their own power and their own being, in bringing
about the desired effect, the intended supernatural events. Such events
are bound to be limited in strength, confined in their scope- in their
own imagination as well as in reality.

On the other side, there are some persons, like the Prophets and the
friends of Allah (S.w.T.) who, in spite of their most effective will
power, totally rely on their Lord. They truly worship Him and have full
trust in Him. They do not wish anything but from their Lord, and by His
permission. Theirs is a pure and clear will, untainted by any personal
feeling. It does not depend except on Allah (S.w.T.). This is a Divine
Will- not limited in anyway, nor restricted in any manner.

The supernatural events that are brought into being by the first group
may be of many kinds; If they are based on enquiry of, or help from, a
jinn or a spirit etc. then it is called “al-Kihanah” (divination,
sooth-saying, fortune-telling); and if it comes about by means of a
charm, amulet, talisman or other such instruments or potions, then it is
called magic.

The supernatural events shown by the prophets and saints are also of
various kinds. If it is produced as a challenge, in order to prove the
truth of the claim of prophethood, then it is called miracle, if it is
not offered as a challenge, then it is named “al-Karamah” which
literally means nobility, mark of honour; and in Islamic terminology is
used for a miraculous event shown without a challenge; and if it happens
as a result of the prayer to Allah (S.w.T.), then it is called, “answer
to the prayer.”

**Third**: As the whole thing depends on the will power of the doer, its
strength varies according to the strength (or weakness) of the will.
That is why some of them may nullify the others, as, for example, the
miracle annihilates sorcery. Also, a weak agent fails to impose his will
on a stronger psyche, as is often seen at the sessions of mesmerism,
hypnotism and seances.

Various Kinds of Magic
----------------------

There are many fields of study dealing with various awe-striking feats
and extraordinary deeds; and it is very difficult to classify them so as
not to leave anything out. However, we give here a list of the more
commonly used branches of this art.

**a) as-Simiya:** It deals with the ways of combining the will-power
with particular physical and material forces for manipulating the
natural order and, thus, producing extraordinary effects. Under this
head comes the manipulation of thought, also known as the
eye-enchantment.

It is the most deserving candidate for the title of magic

**b) al-Limiya:** It teaches how one may establish a connection between
his psyche and the higher and stronger spirits, in order that one may
bring them under one’s control, for example, the spirits of the stars,
or the jinn, etc.

It is also called the knowledge of subjugation of the spirits.

**c) al-Himiya:** It explains how the powers of the higher spiritual
world may be combined with the base elements of this world to produce
awe-inspiring effects. It is also called talisman. The stars and their
configuration have some relation to the material happenings of this
world, in the same way as the elements and compounds and their physical
qualities affect those phenomena. Supposedly if the heavenly forms,
pertaining to a certain event, for example, A’s life or B’s death, could
be combined with the relevant material forms, the desired effect would
take place without fail.

**d) ar-Rimiya:** It trains one how to control and manipulate the
qualities of various things, to produce seemingly super-natural effects.
It is also called “ash-Sha’badhah” (sleight of hand, jugglery, magic).

These four fields of knowledge, together with the fifth, called
“al-Kimiya” (alchemy, the forerunner of chemistry, primarily the attempt
to transmute base metals into gold or silver) formed what the ancients
called the five secrets, mysterious branches of knowledge.

Ash-Shaykh al-Bahai has said: “The best book written on these subjects
was the one I saw in Herat, ‘Kulah al-sar’ (the head’s cap) by name. Its
name was an acronym, made of the first letters of the five subjects,
that is, al-Kimiya, al-Limiya, al-Himiya, al-Simiya and ar-Rimiya.”

The standard books of these subjects are the epitome of the books of
Balinas, Rasa’il, al-Khusraw Shahi, adh-Dhakhirah, al-Iskandariyya,
as-Sirru’l makhtum (by ar-Razi), at-Taskhirat (by as-Sakkaki) and
A’malu’l-kawakib as-Sab’ah (by al-Hakim Tamtam al-Hindi).

Supplementary of the above are the following subjects:

- The knowledge of numbers (numerology): It shows the relation of
numbers and letters with the desired effect. The relevant letters or
numbers are filled in a magic square or triangle etc. in a particular
sequence.

**- al-Khafiyah** (the hidden knowledge): It breaks down the name of the
desired effect or other relevant names, and finds out the names of the
angels or the satans managing the said effect; and then composes the
invocations made of those names.

Divination or Kahanat, Soothsaying
----------------------------------

To predict future events is known as divining and when the prediction is
made on the knowledge obtained through some groups of Jinns it is known
as Kahanat. (However we shall use the word soothsaying as an equivalent
of Kahanat). Kahanat pertains to the prediction of future with the help
of special knowledge. For example, the soothsayer may be adept at
guessing the words of the enquirer or his private affairs etc. According
to the author of *Nihaya* this kind of soothsayer is known as ‘Ārāf’ but
according to the majority of scholars a soothsayer is the one who
predicts with the help of Jinns. The Jinns inform him of hidden matters.
For example, he might be able to find where a stolen thing is hidden or
who is the thief, or who is the murderer of a particular person. All the
jurists are unanimous in their opinion that ‘Kahanat’ or soothsaying is
Harām. Just as it is Harām to learn, teach, perform magic, in the same
way it is Harām to learn soothsaying, to act upon the advice of a
soothsayer and even to go for advice from a soothsayer. Some scholars
maintain that soothsaying is a kind of magic.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“One who divines or the one who goes to a soothsayer for divination,
(both) have renounced the religion of Muhammad (S).”[^8]

Janabe Haitham enquired from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), “There is a
person we know who informs about stolen property etc. Is it permitted
for us to seek his advice?”

The Holy Imam (a.s.) said,

“The Messenger of Allah (S) has mentioned that one who goes to a
sorcerer, a soothsayer or a liar and testifies to what he says has
become an infidel in the light of all the divine books revealed on
Allah’s Messengers.”[^9]

The Shaykh comments that according to this tradition, informing about
the hidden matters is Harām; whether through divination or otherwise.
However, if someone guesses and conjectures or doubts; it is allowed.
Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) considers soothsaying a prohibited
profession and also considers it earnings Harām. Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali
(a.s.) is also recorded to have mentioned a similar tradition.

Ignorance about future is better for the people
-----------------------------------------------

We must understand that prohibition of soothsaying is beneficial to us.
Allah the Almighty does not wish people to have knowledge of the future.
It is possible that a person may come to know of something of tremendous
importance which will take place is according to his wishes. But their
happening may be dependant on his giving Sadaqah or invoking Allah
(S.w.T.). Having this knowledge beforehand may prevent the person from
giving Sadaqah and invoking Allah (S.w.T.) with the result he will be
deprived of his wishes. Similaly he may come to know of some calamity is
to befall and this will cause him great anxiety when in reality this
happening may not occur at all because of change in Allah (S.w.T.)’s
ordinance (Badā). It is well known that many calamities are warded off
by invoking Allah (S.w.T.) or giving Sadaqah or due to some good actions
of the person or repentance. We can recall the people of Prophet Yūnus
(a.s.), who were to be subjected to a great disaster. But their Du’a and
repentance at the eleventh hour changed the course of their destiny. The
Qur’an has also mentioned this fact.

A tradition is quoted in the Ihtijaj of Tabarsi from the sixth Imam
(a.s.). The gist of the same is as follows:

After the birth of the Holy Prophet (S) the shaitans and the Jinns were
denied access to the heavens, hence they were unable to give information
about the heavenly affairs. Now they could only inform about the evil
magical matters. This information is unreliable because among the jinns
too there are liars as well as truthful jinns. Therefore the fortune
telling of a diviner is unreliable.

Sorcery and soothsaying are evil
--------------------------------

To understand the evil of magic and soothsaying it is enough to know the
numerous frauds, crimes, thefts and cheating committed through them. The
sorcerer discontinues all the good actions and concentrates only on
performing satanic rituals. He commits adultery with a married woman,
sometimes he kills a person or drinks human blood. He shows disrespect
to the things that Allah (S.w.T.) has made respectful. For example, he
desecrates the verses of the Holy Qur’an. He performs actions that bring
him closer to shaitans and eventually enters their company. Rather he
debases himself lower than the shaitans so that they may help him in
soothsaying and sorcery.

It is certainly a great pity that a human being who is capable of utmost
good and worthy of rising to a position equal to angels or even higher,
should so debase himself by his evil deeds that his position is degraded
below that of the Shaitan.

Shoabada, illusion
------------------

Fast movements of an object can create an optical illusion for the
beholder. For example if a ball of fire is moved in circles it seems to
be a circle of fire. In the same way a person who is travelling in a car
or train feels himself stationary and feels that his surroundings are
moving in the opposite direction. Some people are adept at creating
illusions of this type which audience perceives as real. To create such
an illusion is Shobada. All the fuqaha are unanimous that Shobada is
Harām; and that it is a type of magic. A tradition of Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
in Ihtijaj also mentions that creating illusions is a kind of sorcery.
Another form of this magic consists of the perceived effect being a
reality and not an illusion. The magicians of Fir’on used both the
methods with Hazrat Musa (a.s.). First they created an illusion, then
they switched over to actual sorcery. Apart from these there are many
other kinds of magics and tricks; but we need not go into details.

It has been narrated about Abu Hafs Hadād that when he was a young man
he had fallen in love with a lady. He was so enchanted by her that he
was prepared to do anything to acquire her. Someone told him that there
was a magician Jew in Nishapur and he would be able to fulfill his
wishes. He went to the Jew and told him about his desires. The magician
told him to abstain from prayers and other good deeds for forty days so
that he can make his magic work for him. Abu Hafs returned from there
and acted upon the instigation of the sorcerer.

After the forty days had elapsed Abu Hafs went to the Jew again and told
him that so far the magic had not worked. The magician was also
surprised and he told Abu Hafs that he must have done at least one good
deed in those forty days that has nullified the magic. Abu Hafs
pondered, and said that as far as he remembered he had not done a single
good action except that he had picked up a stone from the path so that
it may not hurt a traveller. “That was it!” The magician exclaimed,
“Though you disobeyed God these forty days and did not fulfill any
obligation, yet He is such a Merciful God that He accepted even such a
small deed from you and prevented the magic to work for you. So, it is
not appropriate for you to disobey such a generous God.”

The words of the magician had such effect on Abu Hafs that he repented
for his misdeeds and became absorbed in worship and sought forgiveness
from Allah (S.w.T.). He became so pious that eventually he was bestowed
miraculous power by the Almighty.

The powers of the magician are limited
--------------------------------------

When Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) had described the different varieties
of magic to the one who had posed a question, the person asked Imam
(a.s.) if it was possible for a magician to transform a human being into
a dog or a pig etc.? Imam (a.s.) said,

“The magician cannot do this, because if he can transform the creations
of Allah he will become a partner of Allah in His creation whereas no
one can be a partner to Allah.”

If the magician had such powers he would have got rid of his own
senility, difficulties and maladies and would not have allowed his hair
to gray and would have removed his own poverty.

Actually the most dangerous kind of magic is that which causes
differences between two friends. It creates hatred and malice between
those who love each other. Such discord and dissension can also be
created by instigating people against each other. The two are closely
inter-related.

Taskhirāt (controlling jinns etc.)
----------------------------------

Taskhirāt can be defined as the method of controlling Angels, Jinns,
souls or various wild animals. This is also Harām and considered a form
of sorcery. The Shaykh has also mentioned in Makasib that all the
characteristics of magic and sorcery are present in Taskhirāt. Although
Shahid al-Awwal and Shahid al-Thani consider magic Harām because it does
harm to others, they may have also considered that the fact the process
of controlling angels and jinns causes them much sufferings.

Qayafa (Guess)
--------------

Qayafa is the art of determining the lineage of an individual. A person
practicing Qayafa can decide whether a particular individual is the son
or brother of another. But this practice is against the doctrine of
Islam for establishing lineage and it is a kind of magic, therefore it
is Harām in view of all the jurists. On the other hand it is possible
for a knowledgeable and wise person to ascertain certain facts regarding
an individual on the basis of his physical characteristics. This
practice is not Harām. Many unusual episodes have been narrated on the
basis of such knowledge.

An interesting incident is mentioned in al-Kāfi as well as the eleventh
volume of Bihār. During the time of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Ali
bin Huraira was a governor of the Abbasid Caliph. He had a slave named
Rafīd. One day he was so angry with Rafīd that he decided to kill him.
Rafīd ran away and took refuge with Imam Sadiq (a.s.). Imam (a.s.) told
him to go back to his master and say that Imam (a.s.) has ordered him to
spare his life, as he has taken refuge with Imam (a.s.). Rafīd was
horrified but Imam (a.s.) insisted that he go back. So Rafīd obeyed and
when he was on his way he met an Arab, who said, “Where are you going?
Your face is that of a dead man.” Then he told Rafīd to show his hand.
Again he remarked that the hands were of a person who has been killed.
He looked at the legs and passed the same judgement. He said that his
complete body was that of a person who has been murdered. Then he asked
him to show his tongue. Upon seeing the tongue he remarked, “No harm
will come to you because your tongue is that of an envoy and it carries
such a message that if you were to go to huge mountains they would
become soft, and become obedient to you.”

Rafīd says that when he came to his master ‘Ali bin Huraira, he at once
gave the orders for his execution. His hands were tied and an
executioner moved towards him with a naked sword. Then he told his
master that it was not he who had got him arrested, but that he himself
had returned to him. He also requested him to listen to what he had to
say in privacy. He agreed to the request and Rafīd told him, “Ja’far bin
Muhammad (a.s.) the master of both of us has sent you salām and
requested you to spare my life.” When he heard this he could not believe
it. Rafīd repeated it to him under oath. He at once freed him and asked
his forgiveness. He insisted that his hands be tied in the same way by
Rafīd. Rafīd could not make himself do this; but upon insistence he tied
his hands and untied them quickly. Then he gave his seal ring to Rafīd
and set him free.

Similarly, Shaykh Sadūq has related from Hisham that he went with Imam
Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.) to a slave trader who had come from the west.
Imam (a.s.) selected a slave girl but the trader refused to sell her.
The next day Hisham went alone and bought the slave girl at a higher
price according to Imam’s instructions. The slave trader asked him who
was that man who had accompanied him the other day. Hisham acted under
Taqiyya and said he didn’t know much, but that he was from the Bani
Hashim. The slave trader said, “When I had purchased this slave-girl
from a far away place in the west and was carrying her with me, a woman
stopped me and asked where I was taking her. I said I had purchased her
for myself. She said the girl was not made for me. She was destined for
a man who was the best of the people in the world and in the near future
she will give birth to a son to whom the west and east will be
subservient.”

In keeping with the prediction, the slave girl gave birth to Imam Riďa
(a.s.).

Astronomy and Meteorology
-------------------------

Predictions regarding future events; i.e. price fluctuations of grain,
its shortage and abundance, the scarcity and intensity of rain and all
other types of good and bad happenings; based on the knowledge of the
effect of heavenly bodies on earth is known as meteorology. It is
permitted if the one who is predicting only considers them a possibility
but not a certainty because the final authority for all cause and effect
lies with Allah (S.w.T.). Thus there is no harm in predicting the solar
and lunar eclipses and the position of stars etc. because such
predictions are based on complicated calculations and such predictions
are usually true unless there is a mistake in calculation. The movement
of the heavenly bodies follows well-defined laws and principles, hence
there is hardly any chance of a wrong prediction.

On the other hand to predict future events with a belief that only the
stars and heavenly bodies (without any Divine will) govern them is Harām
and a kind of magic.

The Shaykh has concluded his discussion in Makasib by stating that
predictions are of four types:

1) It is not Harām to predict the future position of heavenly bodies and
other phenomena like the solar and the lunar eclipse etc.

2) It is also permitted to predict an occurrence if it is caused by the
influence of the movement of stars or by the heavenly bodies coming near
the earth but it must not be considered a phenomenon independent of the
Divine will. It should be looked upon as the will of Allah (S.w.T.). In
other words one should say that ‘when the comet etc. passes near Earth
such a thing will happen by the permission of Allah (S.w.T.).’ The stars
must not be considered the sole cause of the phenomena. Even if one
makes such predictions by experience and without any scientific
knowledge; it is allowed. One who has previous experience can predict
that it will rain at night when his pet dog comes down from the terrace
and comes inside the house, because this had happened before. Hence the
past experience enables some to predict a future event.

3) To attribute the future events solely to the influence of heavenly
bodies is considered Harām by all the jurists. Numerous traditions
denounce these kinds of predictions.

4) The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“One who believes an astrologer and soothsayer has disbelieved in
whatever was revealed upon Muhammad (S).”

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“Accursed is the astrologer and accursed is the soothsayer and accursed
is the magician.”

When Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) was proceeding for the battle of
Nahrawan one of his men who was an expert in astrology restrained him
saying, “If you go at this time, I fear that you will not succeed in
your aim.”

‘Ali (a.s.) told him that if he thought he could predict the auspicious
and the inauspicious times of departure with accuracy, he was in error
and said,

“Whoever believes your prediction has denied the Qur’an.” (Because
according to Qur’an success and defeat all are subservient to Divine
will). If a person has faith in the astrologer he will not seek Divine
help and assistance when the prediction is favourable for him. In this
way he will not give Sadqa nor pray for success and will eventually
conclude that Allah (S.w.T.) controls nothing; thus he would become a
disbeliever.

If an astronomer predicts with the belief that his predictions are
subject to the final will of Allah (S.w.T.) then there is no harm for
one to pray to the Almighty for success when the prediction is good; and
in case of an unfavourable prediction invoke Allah (S.w.T.) for safety.

5) Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi during one of his journeys stayed for the
night at a water mill. The water mill was situated outside the town.
Since it was a hot evening the Khwaja decided to sleep in the open. The
mill-owner told him that it would rain that night. The Khwaja looked at
the sky but could not make out any sign of rain. The mill-owner said, “I
have a pet dog who comes down to the house when it is to rain at night.”
Khwaja did not heed his advice and spent the rainy night in open but he
was much amused by the incident.

Four types of beliefs
---------------------

1) To believe that stars are the supreme controllers of the world is
Harām. A person who has such a belief is a Kafir whether he denies the
creator or not. All the jurists are unanimous in this regard.

2) To believe that the heavenly bodies have been bestowed by Allah
(S.w.T.) the power to control the world is not Kufr but it is a foolish
notion because we have no proof that the inanimate stars have any
intelligence or will to influence the world.

3) The third type of belief is when a person admits that the stars have
no intelligence and will power but says that Allah (S.w.T.) has decreed
that when the position of the stars will be such, the following event
will take place. It is the law of causation like when fire is brought
near something it burns it. Though such a belief is proved correct most
of the time, reason does not accept it to be unchangeable.

4) To predict future events on the basis of heavenly occurrences is not
Harām according to most of the scholars. For example if the moon and
Saturn come in a line there would be a good rainfall. To interpret such
heavenly phenomena is not Harām but such interpretations can be
accurately given only by the Infallibles (a.s.). What the meteorologists
predict is based on an incomplete part of this knowledge. Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) remarks:

“The complete knowledge of stars cannot be acquired and incomplete
knowledge is of no benefit.”[^10]

After enumerating the different types of astrological sciences, Shaykh
Ansari says, “All these traditions imply that whatever the astrologers
predict is based on deficient knowledge. They only conjecture and guess
on the basis of a little knowhow. People who consult them are rarely
satisfied by their predictions but it is possible that he may have
experience regarding a particular event and may make an accurate
prediction. Hence it is better to refrain from consulting such people
and if they make a prediction, one should say, ‘It is only a
possibility.’”

The prediction did not materialize
----------------------------------

The deficiency and inaccuracy of astrological predictions can be gauged
from the doubts and wrong predictions of the astrologers. The books of
history are replete with such examples. In the second volume of Tatmatal
Muntahi it is mentioned that in 582 A.H. seven stars came together in
one constellation. Abul Fazl Khwarizmi and other astronomers gave the
prediction that the whole world will be destroyed in a cyclone. The
people took shelter in the caves and protective spots and also stored
their rations to escape the fury of the cyclone. At last the predicted
date of 9th of Jamadi ul Ākhar arrived but there was no sign of any
cyclone. Not even a soft wind blew. People lit candles and they burnt
without even being blown out by a breeze. The poets jumped to the
amusing occasion and composed couplets on this incident.

A few years ago there was a similar threat that had the people of the
whole world worried. It was predicted that the whole earth would be
shaken due to the impact of the collision of a meteor. Some people dived
underwater to escape the shock but nothing happened at the appointed
time. (The meteor missed the earth by thousands of miles).

Magic and miracles are of two types
-----------------------------------

If a person is able to perform extraordinary acts due to his extreme
piety and abstinence it is known as Karamat but if the said person is a
Prophet or an Imam, he is bestowed with this high station by the
Almighty and subject to Three conditions his act will be construed as a
miracle (Mojiza).

1) His claim should be acceptable to reason but if his claim is
illogical, whatever action he performs is magic whether one can perceive
the mechanics of this act or not. For example it is an accepted fact by
every Muslim that prophethood came to an end with Hazrat Muhammad
Mustafa (S) and that his shariah will be in force till Qiyāma; there
will be no prophet after him. Hence if someone claims that he is a
prophet; his extraordinary acts to prove his claim will not be believed.
He would be a cunning magician. Or a person claims Imamat, when
according to the proven belief of Shias there are only twelve Imams. The
first being Hazrat ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), and the last Hazrat Hujjat
ibnil Hasan (a.s.), who will remain in occultation till the time of his
reappearance. Hence the claimant will be an imposter even if he exhibits
some mysterious act. Similarly is the position regarding the special
representatives of Imam (a.s.) who were four, the last being ‘Ali ibn
Muhammad Saymori. If someone comes and says that he is a special
representative (Naib al-Khās) he cannot be believed and whatever
‘miracles’ he shows will be considered magical tricks.

2) The person should possess the necessary qualification for being a
prophet or an Imam. For example one of the necessary quality of a
Prophet or Imam is infallibility (Ismat). That is, he must not commit
either a greater or a lesser sin before his declaration or after it. He
must be the most righteous and knowledgeable person of his time. One of
the signs of such a character is his indifference to material wealth.
Thus if there is a claimant who commits sins and lacks knowledge and
covets material wealth, then if he exhibits special acts, they are
merely magic.

3) It is necessary that the extraordinary act performed by the incumbent
should be through the might and power of the Almighty. If he uses some
tools and instruments or if he undertakes training for performing the
said acts it is obvious that they are not miracles. Miracles are
performed by the power of Allah (S.w.T.) and do not require prior
practice and training. This aspect has been analysed in great detail in
scholastic theology.

Countering magic
----------------

Many jurists are of the opinion that countering one magic spell by
another is permitted. If an imposter claims prophethood by performing
magical tricks; magic can be used to expose his falsehood. Or if a
sorcerer casts a spell on someone or binds him, it is permitted to break
this spell and unbind the victim with the help of magic.

It is related that Isa bin Shaqfi came to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
and said, “May my life be sacrificed for you, I am a magician and magic
is my occupation. With the earnings of magic I have even performed the
Hajj and now the Almighty has honoured me by your meeting but now I am
regretful of my deeds; is there any way I can achieve salvation? Imam
(a.s.) said, “Untie and do not tie.” The apparent meaning of Imam’s
remark is that he can use his powers to counteract the magical spells of
others magicians but he must not himself initiate sorcery. Some jurists
are of the opinion that magic can be used only under special
circumstances when there is no other alternative. Initially invocations
and amulets must be tried to nullify magical spells.

Let us look at a couple of such incidents in the book Bihār
al-Anwār[^11].

A person came to Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) and complained that a
spell has been cast on him. ‘Ali (a.s.) told him to write the following
Du’a on the skin of deer and keep it with him so that the spell may not
affect him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ ِبسْمِ الله وَما شَاءَ اَللهُ ِبسْمِ اللهِ لاَحَوْلَ
ولاَقُوَّةَ اِلاَّ بِااللهِ قًََالَ مُوْسٰ ماَ جئْتُمْ بِه السَّحْرَ
اِنَّ اللهَ سَيُبْطِلُة اِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُصْلحُ عَمَلَ الْمُفْسِدِيْنَ
فَوَقََعَ الْحَقُّ وَ بَطَلَ ماَ كَانُوْأ يَعْمَلُوْنَ فَغُلِبُوْا
هُنَالِكَ وَ انْقَلَبُوْا صَاغِرِيْنَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah and by Allah. In the Name of Allah and as Allah
willed. In the Name of Allah. There is no power or might except by
Allah. Musa (a.s.) said Allah shall soon falsify the magic of those who
have come with magic. Indeed Allah does not improve the affairs of
transgressors. Then the truth became manifested and falsified what they
had done. The truth triumphed and they were disgraced.

Moreover he advised reciting the following Du’a seven times to safeguard
against magic and the tyranny of the ruler. The same Du’a can be recited
seven times after Salāt al-Shab and before the morning prayers. It will
protect one from the evils of magic:

بِسْمِ اللهِ سَنَشُدُّ عَضُدَكَ بِاَخِيْكَ وَ نَجْعَلُ لَكُمَا
سُلُطَانًا فَلاَ يَصِلُوْنَ بِآيَاتِناَ اَنْتُماَ وَ مَنِ اتَّبعَكُمَا
الْغَالِبُوْنَ

In the Name of Allah and by the help of Allah. Soon We shall strengthen
your hand by your brother. And appoint for you a force. By which their
mischief would not harm you. Move ahead with our signs. You and your
followers shall triumph.

In the book Qasasul Ulama there is an anecdote of the period of Abbas
the Safawid. A Christian king sent a messenger to Abbas with the message
that he may be given a chance to debate with Muslim scholars and if he
defeats the Muslim scholars they must all accept Christianity. Now the
person sent by the Christian king had some powers by which he was able
to guess accurately what others held in their fists. The scholars were
invited to debate with him and they included Mulla Mohsin Faiz. When the
debate began Mulla Mohsin remarked that the Christian king has sent an
ordinary man instead of a religious scholar for debate. The envoy
brushed the remark aside and told him to hide something in his fist so
that he can prove his miraculous powers.

Mulla Mohsin kept the tasbih made of dust from Imam Husain (a.s.)’s
grave in his fist and challenged him to guess. The man thought for
sometime but kept quiet. When Mulla urged him to speak up he said,
“According to my knowledge there is a piece of Paradise soil in your
hand but I am astonished as to where it was and how it came into your
hands.”

Mulla Mohsin said, “You are correct! It is the dust from the grave of
Imam Husain (a.s.) who was the grandson of our Prophet (S). Your
statement itself proves that the Imam of Muslims was on the right.
Hence, you must accept Islam.”

The Christian followed his conscience and became a Muslim. A very
suitable method was employed by the late Mulla Faiz to guide the
Christian towards salvation. But it must be kept in mind that even under
circumstances like the one described, where the person proved superior
to the Christians who had extraordinary powers, it is necessary that the
person has the Three necessary qualifications described earlier,
otherwise he is nothing but a sorcerer.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^4]: Kitab Faqih

[^5]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^6]: al-Kāfi

[^7]: Tahzīb

[^8]: Khisāl

[^9]: Makasib Muharrama of Shaykh Ansari

[^10]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^11]: This paragraph, onwards to the end of this Chapter is not found
in the Arabic version of this work (Adh-Dhunab al-Kabirah) and may have
been translated from the Urdu version of the book. [ N. DILP team]


