The Nineteenth Greater Sin: False Testimony
===========================================

According to the corpus of traditions false testimony is a Greater sin.
It is also mentioned in the narration of Abdul Azīm quoted from Imam
Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.). Similarly the tradition of Fazl Ibn Shazān
includes it in the list of Greater sins as mentioned by Imam Riďa
(a.s.). That it is a Greater sin is also proved by the hadith of Imam
Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) as quoted by Amash. We have already mentioned in
the chapter on “lying” that falsehood is a Greater sin. False testimony
obivously is also a branch of falsehood.

In the tradition narrated by Hazrat Abdul Azīm, Imam (a.s.) has proved
the ‘greatness’ of not giving false testimony on the basis of the
following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

***“And they who do not bear witness to what is false....”*** ***(Surah
al-Furqān 25:72)***

***“...These shall be regarded with high places...”*** ***(Surah
al-Furqān 25:75)***

In this verse the word ‘false’ signifies the action of proving a
falsehood as though it were the truth.

Another verse says,

***“...therefore avoid the uncleanness of the idols and avoid false
words.”*** ***(Surah Hajj 22:30)***

The Holy Prophet (S) says,

“To testify falsely tantamounts to polytheism.”

It is mentioned in Tafsīr Abdul al-Fath Razi that the Holy Prophet (S)
repeated this statement thrice and then quoted the above ayat (Surah
Hajj 22:30)

A similar kind of tradition is recorded in Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il, from
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.).

“In the Qur’an Allah has compared false testimony to polytheism.”

Allah (S.w.T.) mentions the avoidance of ‘uncleanness of the idols’ and
‘false words’ in a single verse, one after the other.

‘False words’ imply sin and false testimony
-------------------------------------------

From the traditions quoted above it becomes clear that whenever the term
‘false words’ etc. occurs in Qur’an it implies ‘lying.’ Similar verses
have been quoted in the chapter of music and songs. Hence some
traditions state that ‘false words’ refers to music or songs. Actually
the word ‘false’ stands for every evil, wrong and undesirable thing.
Music, songs and lies head the list of these things.‘lying.’ Similar
verses have been quoted in the chapter of music and songs. Hence some
traditions state that ‘false words’ refers to music or songs. Actually
the word ‘false’ stands for every evil, wrong and undesirable thing.
Music, songs and lies head the list of these things.

Punishment of hell for the false witness
----------------------------------------

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) says,

“Whenever a person testifies falsely to usurp the property of a Muslim,
Allah writes at that very moment a punishment of the blazing fire for
this man.”[^1]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“The false witness may not even have moved from his place but that the
punishment of fire will have already become incumbent for him.”[^2]

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“False testimony before an oppressive ruler is not yet complete when a
place in the fire (Hell) is already decided (for the false
witness).”[^3]

The Messenger of Allah (S) has also said,

“One who testifies falsely against someone will be hung by his tongue
with the hypocrites in the lowest portion of Hell.

And if one usurps the property of his believing brother, Allah does not
give an increase in his sustenance till he repents for it.”[^4]

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) narrates from the Holy Prophet (S)
that he said,

“One who hides testimony before a just Islamic judge, or gives a false
testimony to shed the blood of Muslims or intends to usurp a Muslim’s
property by it, he shall be raised on the Day of the Judgment in such a
condition that there will be darkness before his eyes and his face will
be scratched. The people shall recognise him by these signs (that he had
testified falsely).”[^5]

The Holy Prophet (S) asked,

“Shall I inform you about the Greater of the Great sins?”

The companions said, “Why not, O! Prophet of Allah (S).” The Prophet (S)
said,

*“To make someone a partner of Allah, and disobedience to parents...”
The Prophet (S) was resting his back against the wall. Now he sat up
straight and continued in a more serious tone, “And beware! (Every)
Falsehood!”*

The narrators say that the Holy Prophet (S) has denounced falsehood so
many times that we wished he had not done so.[^6]

Since we have already explained that ‘falsehood’ includes every type of
lying it also includes false testimony. The Holy Prophet (S) has also
described ‘falsehood’ to be a Greater sin. False testimony is a manifold
sin. Firstly because it is a lie which is a greater sin, secondly
because it amounts to falsely accusing a Muslim which is also a greater
sin and thirdly because it is instrumental in oppressing an innocent
person which is still another greater sin. Also, through false testimony
a person tries to acquire something which does not rightfully belong to
him, thus making unlawful thing lawful, which is prohibited by Allah
(S.w.T.). Lastly usurping somebody else’s property is also a greater
sin. Thus we can say that many great sins constitute a single sin
called, ‘false testimony’.

One should testify only after knowing the facts
-----------------------------------------------

It does not make any difference whether one knowingly gives a false
testimony or one testifies without being certain of the facts. Both of
these are ‘Greater sins’. It is Wajib upon the witness not to testify
till he is sure of the facts.

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“Do not testify till you are as certain as you are about the palm (of
your hand).”[^7]

Someone inquired from the Holy Prophet (S) as to when it was allowed to
testify as a witness. The Prophet (S) told him:

“Can you see the sun?”

“Yes,” he said.

*“Testify like it or do not.”* (Meaning you should testify only if you
are absolutely certain, otherwise you must not do so).[^8]

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) says,

“The witness should testify only for that about which he is certain. He
must fear Allah. To testify without having certainty or to testify
against something without being certain is also falsehood. Allah says,

***Refrain from falsehood! And remain upright for (the sake of) Allah
and do not be among the polytheists.***

So, Allah has equated false testimony to polytheism.”[^9]

One who testifies falsely is soon exposed
-----------------------------------------

If a person testifies in an Islamic court and later regrets for his
testimony, then it is first determined whether he had knowingly and
intentionally testified wrongly. If it was so, then that person is
branded as a transgressor whose testimony is no more valid in the
Shari’a Court. But if he had been a victim of doubt and uncertainty he
is not disqualified from testifying in the future. However, if due to
the wrong testimony someone had to undergo undeserved punishment or
suffer harm, it is Wajib for this witness to make up the loss. The
details of such laws could be obtained from the books of Jurisprudence.

One of the methods of disproving a testimony is that the witness himself
confess it to be false. Another procedure for this is that two just
witnesses may testify against him. This is known as ‘Bayyana’. Finally,
the judges may on the basis of some firm evidence falsify the testimony
of a witness who had tried to mislead the court. Hence the judge is
empowered to reject a witness if he is himself certain. If someone has
suffered a loss the judge shall impose on the witness some exemplary
punishment of a few lashes so that he may not repeat such a crime in
future.

The judge should also announce in the city and the surrounding areas
that such and such person is a false witness so that people may not be
misled by him and may not rely upon his evidence. In this way, one who
testifies falsely becomes notorious for his falsehood in the society,
and the wellbeing of society is maintained. Both these actions i.e.
exemplary punishments and warning the people against a false witness,
are put into effect whether the judge has already passed his judgment
(based upon that false testimony) or not.

They do not qualify as a witness
--------------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said,

“The false witness must be lashed, and the number of lashes is
determined by the Imam (or the Islamic judge) and he should be paraded
(in the city) till people know him (and may not rely on him in the
future).”

The Imam (a.s.) recited the following verse of the Qur’an:

***“...and do not admit any evidence from them ever; and these it is
that are the transgressors, except those who repent after this and act
aright, for surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr
24:4-5)***

(It means that after he repents and reforms, his evidence again becomes
valid)

The narrator says that he asked Imam (a.s.), “How do we know that he has
repented?”

Imam (a.s.) replied,

“At the place where he is lashed, he must confess in public that he had
given a false testimony. And he must seek the forgiveness of Allah. In
this way it could be known that he has repented.”[^10]

Compensation for the loss
-------------------------

If, due to a false testimony a Muslim has had to suffer some monetary
loss or loss to one’s life or property, the witness has to make good the
loss. A narrator by the name of Jamil inquired from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) regarding the one who has testified falsely. Imam (a.s.) told
him:If, due to a false testimony a Muslim has had to suffer some
monetary loss or loss to one’s life or property, the witness has to make
good the loss. A narrator by the name of Jamil inquired from Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the one who has testified falsely. Imam (a.s.)
told him:

“If the disputed property is still intact it must be restored to the
rightful owner. If it is not then the false witness is responsible to
the extent of it’s loss.”[^11]

This means that if it is not possible to return the property, the false
witness will have to reimburse it by providing a thing similar to that
property or pay a price for it. Detailed laws are discussed in the books
of Islamic Jurisprudence.

Repentance for the sin
----------------------

The method of repenting for the sin of giving false testimony has
already been explained. The first important requirement is that the
sinner must feel a deep remorse for the act committed by him. He must
also seek the forgiveness of Allah (S.w.T.) for disobeying His command;
and compensate the Musilm who suffered the loss. As Allah (S.w.T.)
Himself says,

***“…except those who repent after this and act aright, for surely Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.”***
***(Surah an-Nūr 24:4-5)***

[^1]: al-Kāfi

[^2]: al-Kāfi

[^3]: al-Kāfi

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^5]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^6]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^8]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^9]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^10]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^11]: Masālik


