The Twentieth Greater Sin: Concealing Evidence
==============================================

To refrain from testifying in an Islamic Court is clearly classified
among the ‘Greater sins’ according to the authentic tradition narrated
by Hazrat Abdul Azīm. There are some situations when it is Wajib to
prove right what is right and to prove wrong that is wrong. In the
narration mentioned in the previous discussion, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(a.s.) states that to conceal evidence is a ‘Greater sin’. He presents
the following verse as the proof:

***“...and do not conceal testimony, and whoever conceals it, his heart
is surely sinful; and Allah knows what you do.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:283)***

This verse mentions the sinful heart (his heart is surely sinful). There
are two noteworthy points in this. One: That the concealing of testimony
is a sin of the heart. The heart alone commits it, and other organs are
not apparently involved in it. The person hides the reality in his heart
and does not speak out. Secondly, just as the heart is superior to all
the organs of the body the sin associated with the heart is also greater
than the sin performed with other organs. It is just like the obedience
of Allah (S.w.T.) through ones heart is much superior than obeying Him
in actions. It is this same heart that involves one in a great sin like
polytheism. These sins of the heart are definitely more than sins
associated with other organs. One of the sins of heart according to the
ayat of Qur’an is concealing evidence. In order to emphasise, Allah
(S.w.T.) says in the later portion of this ayat, ***“...Allah knows what
you do*****”**, so that the sinner may realize that even though people
may not be aware of Allah (S.w.T.) is aware of his sin and He will
certainly punish him for it.

Allah the Almighty also says,

***“...and the witnesses should not refuse when they are summoned.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:282)***

Similarly in another verse, Allah (S.w.T.) says,

***“And who is more unjust than he who conceals a testimony that he has
from Allah?”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:140)***

Such a person is like the Jews and the Christians, who had seen the
characteristics of the Holy Prophet (S) in the Torah and Injīl but
deliberately concealed them.

Testify for the truth even if it harms you
------------------------------------------

In Surah an-Nisā’, the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says,

***“O you who believe! Be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness for
Allah’s sake, though it may be against your own selves or (your) parents
or near relations; if he be rich or poor, Allah is nearer to them both
in compassion; therefore do not follow (your) low desires, lest you
deviate; and if you swerve or turn aside, then surely Allah is aware of
what you do.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:135)***

Thus one must not conceal testimony due to the fear of the rich or mercy
for the poor. One must not feel undue compassion for the accused who is
poor. One should neither pay heed to ones own interest nor care for any
other person while giving testimony. The Divine command should always be
respected in entirety.

Justice for the enemy
---------------------

The following verse of Surah al-Mā’ida states:

***“O you who believe! Be upright for Allah, bearers of witness with
justice, and let not hatred of a people invite you not to act equitably;
act equitably, that is nearer to piety, and be careful of (your duty to)
Allah; surely Allah is aware of what you do.”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida
5:8)***

According to this ayat testimony should be given only to seek the
pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.). No feeling of enmity should be allowed to
come in the way of stating the truth. Allah (S.w.T.) says in another
verse:

***“...and give upright testimony for Allah.”*** ***(Surah at-Talāq
65:2)***

Those who conceal evidence
--------------------------

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) remarks,

***“On the Day of Qiyāma, Allah shall cut off the flesh of one who
conceals evidence; then order him to eat it before all the
creatures.”***[^1]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) also says that those who conceal evidence
are described in the Qur’an as those whose hearts have sinned. ‘Hearts
have sinned’ actually implied that ‘hearts have disbelieved’,” according
to Imam (a.s.)

Another tradition recorded from Imam (a.s.) is thus:

“One who goes back upon his testimony or conceals it wholly, Allah shall
cut off his flesh and force him to eat it before everyone. And when he
will enter Hell he would be chewing at his own tongue.”[^2]

Hazrat Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) says,

“When you are asked to give evidence, give it. For Allah says:

***“Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners...”***
***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:58)***

Evidence is itself a trust. Allah (S.w.T.) also says,

***“And who is more unjust than he who conceals a testimony that he has
from Allah?”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:140)***

The following tradition of Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) is recorded in
Tafsīr ‘Ali Ibn Ibrahīm Qummi:

“One who possesses some evidence, has to make it known. And when he is
asked for it, he must give it. He should not fear anyone’s criticism. He
must fulfill his obligation of Amr bil Ma’rūf (enjoining good) and Nahi
Anil Munkar (forbidding evil).”[^3]

Is it Wajib to testify?
-----------------------

Is it Wajib to become a witness if one is requested to do so by a
believer brother, in order he may achieve some benefit from the case he
is pursuing in an Islamic Court? According to most of the Mujtahids it
is Wajib. Allah the Almighty Himself says:

***“.,.and call in to witness from among your men two witnesses; but if
there are not two men, then one man and two women from among those whom
you choose to be witnesses, so that if one of the two errs, the second
of the two may remind the other; and the witnesses should not refuse
when they are summoned.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:282)***

Hisham says that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said,

**“And the witnesses should not refuse when they are summoned.”**
**(Surah al-Baqarah 2:282)**

And in the succeeding ayat,

***“...and do not conceal testimony”, meaning concealing testimony from
a Shari’a judge.”***

Numerous traditions state that to be a witness is *Wajib* (obligatory).
For example, Muhammad Bin Fuzail asked Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) the
meaning of the above ayat (Surah al-Baqarah 2:282)

***“And the witnesses should not refuse when they are summoned.”***

Imam (a.s.) replied,

“When someone calls you to give evidence in a matter of some debts or
some right, then you do not have the choice to ignore it.”[^4]

Of course the Qur’anic command in the verse 282 of Surah al-Baqarah
asking the witness to testify before the Shari’a judge implies that the
person had in the first instance been a witness to the transaction etc.

The person who has witnessed the transaction etc. has to exercise
extreme care and caution in this regard. He must memorise all the
details or put them in writing, if necessary, so that there is no scope
for doubt or misunderstanding in future. If this person is called upon
to be a witness, it is Wajib on him to comply, even if he has to travel
some distance.

People whose supplications are not accepted
-------------------------------------------

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) says:

“Du’a of four types of people is not answered:

A Person who sits idle at home and prays to Allah to provide him with
sustenance is told, ‘Have We not ordered you to make effort for
obtaining your sustenance?’

The person who prays for some misfortune for his wife. He is told, ‘Have
We not given you the choice of giving her divorce if you do not want
such a wife?’

One who had squandered the money and spent it in evil ways. Now if he
prays for sustenance, he is told, ‘Did We not order you to spend in
moderation?’

One who gives a loan to someone but does not make anyone witness it.
Hence if the borrower refuses and the creditor prays, he is informed,
‘Had We not ordered you to have witnesses?’”[^5]

Testifying is Wajib and concealing evidence, Harām
--------------------------------------------------

There may be occasion when a person has not directly witnessed a
transaction but has some information for having heard or seen something
related to the issue. If the information he has can save a Muslim from
harm or enable him to secure his right, it is Wajib on this person to
testify if he is summoned. If he is not summoned, it is Wajib for him to
volunteer to testify by approaching the Shari’a judge with the
information he has. If by not disclosing what he knows, a Muslim is
harmed or loses his right, it is Harām to remain silent.

In short if a person is capable of helping the oppressed or prevent the
oppressor from oppressing, it is Wajib on him to do so.

It is not Wajib to give evidence in a situation where not testifying
does not cause any harm to a Muslim, nor does it deprive him of his
right. In this case a person can even refuse to testify even if he is
ordered to do so, because neither is he a direct witness to the dispute
nor is his silence harmful in anyway.

Muhammad Ibn Muslim says, quoting an authentic tradition from Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.): “If one hears an evidence (i.e. he becomes a
witness) but he had not been made a witness, then if he likes he can
testify or he can prefer to remain silent.”[^6]

Testify only if you are certain
-------------------------------

The witness is required to pay attention to all the aspects of the
matter that he has witnessed and when he is testifying, he must only say
that, about which he is certain. He must not mention those things, which
he himself has not heard, or seen. It should be clear as the Sun, as
mentioned in tradition.

When a true testimony will oppress someone
------------------------------------------

It should be known that a testimony should not endanger the life,
property or honour of a Muslim. It should also not pose a threat to the
life, property and honour of the witness. It is Wajib to give evidence
and Harām to conceal it so that justice is established in the society
and injustice is eradicated. The oppressor ought to be punished and the
right may be restored to its owner but if the testimony itself becomes
the cause of oppression it is not Wajib to testify. Rather it is Harām
to do so and it is Wajib to conceal evidence. For example if a person
knows that if he testifies against a particular oppressor, the oppressor
will take revenge on him or on his relatives or plunder his wealth, then
it is Wajib to conceal evidence. Similarly, there may be a situation
where a debtor deep in debts is unable to clear his dues because of his
poverty. At the same time he cannot prove his helplesness and the
creditor is not prepared to spare him. In this case also it is Wajib to
conceal evidence, if the evidence given by a witness will cause the poor
debtor to be oppressed.

The following traditions of our Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) emphasise the
justification of concealing evidence under special circumstances.

Hazrat Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) says:

“Give evidence for the sake of Allah even if you have to testify against
yourself, your parents or your own relatives - But you must not cause
harm to your believing brother by concealing evidence. However, if your
believing brother is going to be oppressed, then do not testify.”[^7]

Dawūd Ibn Hasan says that he heard Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) saying:

“Give evidence for the sake of Allah, even if you have to testify
against your parents or your own son. But do not give evidence to cause
harm (Zaīr) to your believing brother.”

The narrator says that, ‘I asked, “What is Zaīr?” He (a.s.) said,

“It is when someone who has a right, and in order to obtain it he
resorts to oppression, contrary to the order of Allah and the Holy
Prophet (S). For example, a man is indebted to another, but the debtor
is in straitened circumstances. In this situation, Allah has ordered
that he must be given respite till he becomes self-sufficient. And
(Allah) says,

***...then let there be postponement until (he is in) ease…***

Now if in spite of this the creditor summons you to testify, and you
know the poverty of the debtor, then it is not permitted for you to
testify (that he has taken the loan).”[^8]

A Tradition from Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------

Muhammad Ibn Qasim Ibn Fuzail narrates a tradition from Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (a.s.). He says, “I asked Imam (a.s.), ‘One of your devotees
has taken a loan from an enemy of yours. The creditor wants to oppress
him and have him imprisoned. Allah (S.w.T.) knows that he has no money
to repay the debt, neither is he capable to do so at present. He does
not even have al-Bayyina (two just witnesses) to prove his bankruptcy.
Then is it allowed for him to take an oath so that he can prove his
bankruptcy and obtain respite till the return of favourable conditions?
And if from your Shias there are some witnesses who can testify against
him, (that he has taken the loan) can they testify?’”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) replied,

“It is not permitted for them to testify. And it is not permitted for
the creditor to oppress the debtor.”[^9]

When testifying harms
---------------------

When we speak about Harām testimony that causes harm to a Muslim, we
mean a wrongful harm or unjustified oppression but if the person
deserves to be punished, it is Wajib to give the evidence. For example a
person commits a crime. The witness of this crime does not testify only
because if he does so the one against whom he testifies will demand the
debt which the witness owes him. This is not a valid excuse for
withholding evidence. The criminal must be punished according to Shari’a
even if the witness has to suffer a monetary loss. However, if the
hardship for the witness far outweighs the seriousness of the crime of
the accused then the witness has a valid excuse to refrain from
testifying.

Harm and being deprived of benefit
----------------------------------

It must be mentioned that to be harmed is different from being deprived
of some benefit. In the examples already mentioned, if a witness
refrains from testifying due to fear that the accused will deprive him
of some money, or that some benefit may not accrue to him; this does not
amount to him being ‘harmed’.

However if the accused is the employer of the witness and will fire him
from his job thus causing untold hardship, then it is allowed for the
witness to refrain from testifying as it could be regarded as ‘harm’ in
common parlance.

Hence we can conclude that false oath, false testimony and concealing
evidence, each of these are Greater sins if there is no risk of any
harm. If there is any chance of any harm to a Muslim or an innocent
witness, then they do not remain sins - they are permitted. Rather in
some circumstances these actions become Wajib as we have seen from the
traditions of Ma’sūmīn (a.s.). However as far as possible one must give
priority to the more important alternative.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^5]: Iddatud Dai

[^6]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^8]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^9]: al-Kāfi


