The Second Special Deputy Muhammad B. ‘Uthman B. Sa’eed Amri (r.a.)
===================================================================

Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْعَمْرِىّ وَابْنُه ثِقَتَانِ فَمَا اَدَّيَا اِلَيْكَ فَعَنِّى
يُوَدِّيَانِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Amri (‘Uthman b. Sa’eed (r.a.)) and his son (Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(r.a.)) are both reliable* *and trustworthy (in narration). Whatever
they both convey to you they convey from us.’*[^1]

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) reiterates,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَزَلْ ثِقَتُنَا فِى حَيَاةِ الْاَبِ- رضى الله عنه-
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘He is for us, trustworthy and reliable, from the time of his father
(‘Uthman b. Sa’eed (r.a.))’*[^2]

Our salutations to that great personality, who is considered as
trustworthy and reliable by two infallible Imams (a.s.).

We bear witness, O Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) (during the period of
Minor Occultation (**غيبت صغري**)) you were the door to reach Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and that you accomplished this responsibility in the
most excellent manner, and that you were a trustworthy representative.
And we bear witness that Allah chose you for this deputyship with His
Light.

In the backdrop of this information, we shall now learn more about this
esteemed personality.

Name, Title And Agnomen
-----------------------

His name is Muhammad and his father’s name is ‘Uthman and his
grandfather’s name is Sa’eed. His grandfather was from Amr, hence Amri
is added to his name and he is known as Muhammad b. ‘Uthman b. Sa’eed
Amri. His agnomen (Kuniyyat) is Abu Ja’far and no other agnomen is found
in the books other than this. His titles are Amri, Asadi, Kufi, Sammaan
and al-Askari.

Opinions of Scholars
--------------------

We have already gauged his importance in the beginning through the
sayings of the guided Imams (a.s.). Hereunder are the opinions of some
scholars:

Shaykh at-Tusi (r.a.) writes in his book of Rejaal, ‘’Muhammad b.
‘Uthman b. Sa’eed Amri (r.a.), his agnomen is Abu Ja’far and that of his
father is Abu Amr. Both of them were the representatives of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and had an esteemed position among the Imamite
Shiites.”[^3]

A similar narration is recorded by Allama al-Hilli (r.a.) in his book on
Rejaal, Part 1, under the alphabet of meem, no 57.

Marhoom Maamqaani (r.a.) records in his book Tanqeehul Maqaal - ‘The
great position and high status of this man (Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.))
is renowned and does not warrant any explanation and proof. While
studying the conditions of the life of his father it becomes evident
that he (Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)) during the life of his father
itself had received the testimonial of being the representative of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) after his father.’

Marhoom Maamqaani (r.a.) has narrated the above with references from
Bihar al-Anwar of Allama Majlisi (r.a.) Ayatullah al-Uzma Sayyid Abul
Qasim Al-Khu’i (r.a.) writes in his book Mojamul Rejaal

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالرِّوَايَاتُ فِى جَلَالَتِه وَعَظَمَةِ مَقَامِه مُتَاظَفَرةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The traditions that have been narrated regarding the majesty and
greatness of his position are numerous.’

Some scholars of Rejaal have also called him as a compiler and author.
Hence a famous saying is narrated as follows:

Ibn Nuh (Abul Abbas Ahmad b. Ali b. Nuh Sairafi) says: Abu Nasr
Hebatullah, maternal grandson of Umm Kulthum, daughter of Abu Ja’far
(Umm Kulthum was the daughter of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman and Abu Nasr
Hebatullah was the maternal grandson of Umm Kulthum) says that Abu
Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Uthman has written books on Fiqh in which he has
collected all the traditions from Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), Imam
az-Zaman (a.s.) and from his father ‘Uthman b. Sa’eed (r.a.) who in turn
has narrated from Imam Ali an-Naqi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.). Among these books is one titled Al Ashrebah. Umm Kulthum
daughter of Abu Ja’far (r.a.) narrates, ‘This book as per the will of
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) had reached to the third deputy Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.). Abu Nasr says, ‘I assume that after Husain b. Rauh (r.a.),
it must have been passed on to the fourth deputy Abul Hasan Ali Ibn
Muhammad Samari (r.a.).[^4]

The late Ayatullah Uzma Aqae Al Khu’i (r.a.) in his book Mojamur Rejaal
writes after this narration, ‘This narration proves two things,

i) Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) is an author of books.

ii) He has narrated traditions from Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

Refuge of Shias
---------------

When we look at the conditions of the life of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)
and study the traditions and Imam’s (a.t.f.s.) letters (tawqeeaat) that
have reached us through him, it is evident that his representatives
across several cities were referring to him for matters related to
jurisprudence, theology (kalaam) and society and he used to solve them.
We narrate an incident in this regard:

Abul Hasan Ali b. Ahmad al-Dallal al-Qummi narrates: ‘Among the Shias
there was a difference of opinion on whether Allah has delegated
creation and distribution of sustenance to the Imams (a.s.).

One group argued that this is impossible because no one can create the
bodies except Allah, while the other group believed that Allah has
delegated the power of creation and distribution of sustenance to the
Imams (a.s.) and therefore they can create and provide sustenance. This
disparity intensified with every passing day.

Finally someone suggested: ‘Why don’t you refer the matter to Abu Ja’far
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman Amri (r.a.) so that he clarifies the truth for you?
He is the representative of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).’ Everybody agreed.
The query was written and delivered to Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). He
referred the matter to Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). In reply, he received a
Tawqee wherein Imam (a.t.f.s.) had written:

*‘Undoubtedly only Allah creates the bodies and distributes the
sustenance. He neither has a body nor does He assume any form and there
is none like Him. He is the All-Hearing and All-Knowing and the
infallible Imams (a.s.) seek from Him and He Himself creates. They
request Him and He accepts their request and to honour and elevate them
He delegates to them the power to create and sustain’.*

The period of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman’s (r.a.) deputyship was quite lengthy
and as we have already mentioned that in this period, he served as a
sanctuary for the Shias. He solved numerous issues related to
jurisprudence, society and belief. During his deputyship all that has
been received by him from Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in the form of
Tawqeeaat is present in different books under different topics. However,
there are some books dedicated to the Tawqeeaat and one can find them
all in one place.

We have reproduced below a part of an important Tawqee received by
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) from Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) which was
addressed to Ishaq b. Yaqub in reply to various questions put forth by
him:

Ishaq b. Yaqub says that this Tawqee has been written by the blessed
hand of my master Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and is as follows:

*‘May Allah guide you and keep you steadfast upon the true beliefs. As
for your concern that some of my relatives and paternal uncles and
cousins have denied my existence, know that Allah does not recognise
relations with anyone (when it comes to believing in us) and the one who
denies us is not from us. The path that he is treading is the path of
the son of Nuh (a.s.). And my paternal uncle Ja’far and his sons have
chosen the path of the brothers of Yusuf (a.s.).’*

Other Topics in this Tawqee Include
-----------------------------------

*‘As for fuqaa’ (alcohol from barley) it is prohibited but there is no
harm in drinking shalmaab (shalmaab is made from sheelam which resembles
barley).’*

*‘And as for that wealth which you send us as gifts, we accept them in
order that your sins are forgiven. Therefore there are those who wish to
send us gifts while others don’t know that whatever Allah has given us
is better than what you give.’*

*‘None knows the time of reappearance.’* In the same Tauqee’ Imam
(a.t.f.s.) adds: *‘The time of my reappearance is linked to Allah’s
wish. Whoever fixes a time for reappearance is a liar.’*

Guidance
--------

*‘And when you come across any new issues then refer to the narrators of
our traditions because they are our proofs upon you and I am the Proof
of Allah.’*

Thereafter, Imam (a.s.) has emphasised on numerous issues like the
reliability of Muhammad Ibn ‘Uthman Amri (r.a.), a supplication for the
hearts satisfaction and dispelling the doubts of Ali Ibn Mahziyaar
Ahwaazi, the illegitimacy of wealth of singing women, enumeration of
Muhammad Ibn Shazaan Ibn Naeem Neshapuri among the lovers of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), cursing Abul Khattab Muhammad Ibn Abi Zainab and his followers,
etc.

Improper Use of Sihm ul-Imam
----------------------------

On this topic Imam (a.t.f.s.) warns,

*‘And as for those who keep our wealth with them, and if they consider
some part of it permissible for themselves and they spend it, then it is
as if they have taken fire into their bellies...’*

Reason for Occultation
----------------------

*‘And as for the reason for occultation Allah, the Almighty, cautions in
the Holy Quran:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٰاَيُّهَا الَّذِيْنَ اٰمَنُوْا لاَ تَسْئَلُوْا عَنْ اَشْيَآءَ اِنْ
تُبْدَلَكُمْ تَسُوٴْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘*****O you who believe! Do not question about things which if
declared to you, may trouble you.*****’**[^5]

Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) Will not pay Allegiance to Anyone
----------------------------------------------------------

In the same Tawqee’ Imam (a.t.f.s.) informs:

*‘My forefathers (a.s.) have lived their lives under the tyrannical
reign of despots. However, I shall reappear at a time when there shall
be no allegiance upon me...’*

He further explains that people can benefit from his existence in
occultation just as they benefit from the sun when it goes behind the
clouds.

This Tawqee’ has been recorded by Shaikh Sadooq (r.a.) in his book
Kamaaluddin vol. 2 p. 483, tradition 4 and by Allama al-Majlisi (r.a.)
in Bihar al-Anwar vol 53 p. 180 tradition 10.

Similarly there are many such Tawqee’aat that have been conveyed by Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) for his Shias through Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.).
Some other personalities who have been sent Tauqee’aat by Imam
(a.t.f.s.) as are follows:

Abul Hasan Muhammad b. Ja’far Asadi
-----------------------------------

He was the representative of Janab Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) in the
city of Rayy (near Tehran). He expired in Rabius Saani 312 A.H. It was
about him that it was said in the Tauqee’, “Keep up prayer (Namaz) as
you are the one who asked about the timing of Namaz during the rising
and setting of the sun.

It is as the people say that the sun rises from between the two horns of
Satan and also sets between his two horns. That is why there is nothing
better than Namaz if one wants to rub Satan’s nose in dust. So keep up
prayer and put Satan’s nose in dust (i.e. humiliate him).”[^6]

End of Dispute Between Husband and Wife
---------------------------------------

Before mentioning this Tawqee’ it will be in order to first review its
practical aspect. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the infallible Imams
(a.s.) are the fathers of the Islamic nation. In this regard we have
outlined earlier that Allah, the Almighty, due to their honour and
respect has blessed them with great powers.

They have been delegated the task of distributing sustenance to the
creation. This implies that whatever they desire from Allah, He grants
them. They are the ones through whom difficulties are relieved and
calamities are repelled. In this Tauqee’, this particular point has been
highlighted.

Abu Ghalib Ahmed b. Muhammad Zorari says: ‘There arose serious
differences between me and my wife. This resulted in a lot of hostility
between us and reconciliation was almost ruled out. Due to the nature of
this problem, I was under a lot of stress. So I wrote a letter and gave
it to Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) to present it in the service of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). In this letter I had requested Imam (a.t.f.s.) to
pray for me. It was quite some time since I had sent the letter and
there was no reply.

One day when I met Abu Ja’far (Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)) he told me,
‘The reply of your letter has come.’ I went to his house. He took out a
register and flipped through its pages and finally took out a letter
from it. He gave it to me. In it was written: And as for the query
regarding the problem between the husband and wife, know that Allah has
decreed peace and reconciliation between them.

Abu Ghalib Zorari says, “Earlier my wife always behaved harshly with me.
But after this event there were no problems and differences. In fact
sometimes I intentionally did certain things just to irritate her but
she did not react.”[^7]

Note
----

In all problems and difficulties we should approach the door of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.). In this era, that door of access is Imam az-Zaman (a.s.).
He is Allah’s Gate (Babullah) and hence we send salutation upon him in
the Ziyarat:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بَابَ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon you O Allah’s Door*

Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) and False Claimants
----------------------------------------------

Due to the restrictive and sensitive conditions prevalent in their
times, Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) attended
public gatherings sparingly and cautiously. Therefore, they had
appointed special representatives so that they could maintain contact
with the general people through them.

Another rationale behind the practice of representation was to acquaint
the Shias with this method and prepare the ground for the minor
occultation (غيبت صغري) when this practice was to gain prominence.
Finally the people were accustomed to this method and after the onset of
Minor Occultation (غيبت صغري); they regularly sent their letters to Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) through the special deputies and got their replies
in the same way.

During this period some selfish and opportunistic people tried to take
advantage of this and claimed to be the deputy of Sahib ul-‘Amr (Master
Of the Affair), Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). We mention below the names of
those imposters who advanced such claims during the deputyship of
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.):

1. Abu Muhammad Hasan Shariee.

2. Muhammad b. Naseer Numairy.

3. Ahmad b. Halal Abartaee.

4. Abu Tahir Muhammad b. Ali b. Bilal.

5. Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmed b. ‘Uthman popular as Abu Bakr Baghdadi.
He was the nephew of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)

6. Ishaq b. Ahmed.  
 7. Baaqataani  
 8. Husain b. Mansoor al-Hallaj.

It is noteworthy that all of them rivaled Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) and
refuted his deputyship. Their beliefs were distorted and their faith was
weak. They were declared as fanatical and wretched during the period of
Imam Hadi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) itself.

By this we can easily gauge the extent of their jealousy towards
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) and the problems they posed in his working.
But Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) dealt with them all with the help of Imam
(a.t.f.s.) and fulfilled all his duties.

Why Did People trust Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)?
------------------------------------------------

During Muhammad b. ‘Uthman’s (r.a.) period, the false claimants wanted
to deceive the people and desired to usurp the religious dues (Khums,
Zakaat) from them. They nearly injured Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). It
was a difficult trial for the people in that era to recognise the true
deputy of Imam (a.t.f.s.). Under such circumstances to win the
confidence of the people and overcome the enemies was a gigantic task.

The people reposed their confidence in Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) due to
various reasons. The most important among them were those Tawqeeaat,
which were sent by Imam (a.t.f.s.) to him. Not only did they contain the
replies to various social and religious problems, but also information
about some hidden affairs which acted as a compelling argument for the
people to accept his deputyship. There are many incidents wherein news
of hidden affairs was given by Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). We narrate
one such incident hereunder:

News of the Unseen
------------------

Ja’far b. Muhammad Matteel narrates that Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
Samman (r.a.), who was famous as Amr, called me and gave me some pieces
of cloth and a purse containing some dinars.

He told me that it is necessary that I immediately go to Wasit (a place
between Kufa and Basra) and hand over this property to the first person
I meet proceeding towards Shatta. I felt aggrieved at the thought that a
(honourable) person like me has been chosen for this petty assignment.

Anyway, I mounted my horse and proceeded towards Wasit. I asked the
first person I met about the conditions of Hasan b. Muhammad Quttat
Saidalaani who was the representative in Wasit. He replied, ‘I am Hasan
b. Muhammad, who are you?’ I replied, ‘I am Ja’far b. Muhammad b.
Matteel.’ He recognised me and we exchanged salutations. I told him that
Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) has conveyed salutations to you
and sent these pieces of cloth and purse for you.

He said, ‘All Praise is for Allah! Since Muhammad b. Abdullah Aameri has
died, I am on my way to arrange for his shroud (kafan). When we opened
the purse there was money in it for the burial expenses. I took part in
the burial and returned home.”[^8]

If Imam az-Zaman (a.s.) had not informed Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)
about such incidents, he would not have had knowledge about them.

When we read the life sketches of the deputies, we find many such
episodes wherein Imam (a.t.f.s.) has informed them about future events
of which none else had the faintest inkling.

For details, readers may refer to the book of Kamaaluddin of Shaikh
Sadooq (r.a.) and Bihar al-Anwar of Allamah Majlisi (r.a.).

Traditions Narrated by Muhammad B. ‘Uthman (r.a.)
-------------------------------------------------

The Tauqee’aat addressed by Imam (a.t.f.s.) to Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(r.a.) are still found among the people in the form of traditions.
However, we have taken this opportunity to narrate some traditions in
this regard.

The reason being that some scholars of Rejaal have not included him
among the narrators of traditions from Imams (a.s.) and some of our
scholars have also objected to the fact that he was not considered as a
narrator of traditions. Without delving too much on this dispute, we
shall proceed to narrate some traditions narrated by him:

1) Muhammad b. Hammam says, “I heard from Muhammad b. ‘Uthman Amri, ‘I
have received a Tauqee’ from the pure personality (Imam (a.t.f.s.)) in a
script (handwriting) which I recognise i.e. in the writing of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and it was written in that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَمّٰانِى فِىْ مَجْمَعٍِ مِنَ النَّاسِ بِاِسْمِى فَعَلَيْهِ
لَعْنَةُ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘May Allah curse the one who calls me by my name in any assembly or
gathering.’*

Abu Ali Muhammad b. Hammam says that I wrote a letter to Imam (a.t.f.s.)
enquiring about the time of his reappearance. He (a.t.f.s.) informed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذِبَ الوَقََّاتُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Those who fix the time of my reappearance are liars.’*[^9]

Note
----

Imam (a.t.f.s.) himself has explained the rationale behind the
prohibition of uttering his (a.t.f.s.) name in public:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِمَّا السُّكُوْتَ وَالجَنَّةَ، وَاِمَّا الْكَلَامَ وَالنَّارَ،
فَاِنَّهُمْ اِنْ وَقَفُوْا عَلَى الْاِسْمِ اَذَاعُوهُ وَاِنْ وَقَفُوْا
عَلَى الْمَكانِ دَلُّوْ عَلَيْهِ-
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘...or one should refrain from taking the name so that he may become
deserving of heaven or he should talk (about him) so that he is put in
hell because those who are aware of his name will spread it and if they
become aware of his residence, then they will inform the people.’*[^10]

The author of Wasa’il ush-Shia (Shaikh Hurr al-Ameli (r.a.)) has
mentioned in vol. 16, p. 240, chap. 33, tradition 21,460 that the reason
for prohibition of taking the name was due to dissimulation (taqayyah)
and fear of enemies.

2) Abdullah b. Ja’far Himyari says that I told Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(r.a.), ‘I wish to ask you the same question that Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.)
asked Allah and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاِذْ قَالَ اِبْرَاهِيْمُ رَبِّ اَرِنِىْ كَيْفَ تُحْيِى الْمَوْتَى
قَالَ اَوَلَمْ تُوٴْمِنْ قَالَ : بَلٰى وَلٰكِنْ لِيَطْمَئِنَّ
قَلْبِىْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when Ibrahim said: My Lord! Show me how You give life to the
dead. He said, ‘What! And do you not believe?’ He replied, ‘Yes (I
believe), but (I ask) that my heart may be at ease*****.’**[^11]

*‘Please inform me whether you have seen Sahib ul-‘Amr (Master of the
Affair)? Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) replied, ‘Yes and his neck is like
this and he pointed towards his own neck with his hand.’*[^12]

3) Abdullah b. Ja’far Himyari narrates that I heard from Muhammad b.
‘Uthman (r.a.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ اِنَّ صَاحِبَ هٰذَا الاَمرِ لَيَحْضُرُ الْمُوسِمَ كُلَّ سَنَةٍ
فَيَرَى النَّاسَ وَيَعْرِفُهُمْ وَيَرَوْنَهُ وَلَا يَعْرِفُوْنَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘I swear by Allah that Sahib ul-’Amr (a.t.f.s.) visits Mecca every year
(at the time of Hajj). He sees the people and recognises them and the
people also see him but do not recognise him.’*

Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) witnessed Imam (a.t.f.s.) in Masjidul Haram
near the Ka’ba praying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ اَنْجِزْلى مَا وَعَدْتَنِى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘O Allah! Fulfill the promise that You have made unto me.’*[^13]

He also narrates the following tradition: I saw Imam (a.t.f.s.) near
Babul Mustajaar clutching the cloth of Kaaba, beseeching Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّٰهُمَّ انتَقِمْ لِى مِنْ اَعْدَائى [اَوْ اَعْدَائِكَ]
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘O my Lord, let me take revenge from my enemies (or Your
enemies).’*[^14]

Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is awaiting Allah’s permission for his
reappearance and is vehemently praying for it. We too should always pray
for his reappearance, especially at those sanctified places where
supplications are accepted like at the time of Hajj at Al Mustajaar.

Dua as-Samaat
-------------

The famous Dua as-Samaat has been communicated to the Shias through
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) This supplication is recorded in Mafaateehul
Jinaan. It is also called as Dua al-Shabboor and is recommended to be
recited in the late evening (Asr) of Friday.

Shaikh Abbas Qummi (r.a.) has reported this supplication from old,
authentic and reliable sources. This supplication has also been narrated
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.). Allama
Majlisi (r.a.) has narrated this supplication in Bihar al-Anwar along
with its interpretation.

Caliphs of Bani Abbas
---------------------

Following is the list of Bani Abbas caliphs who ruled during the
deputyship of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.):

1. Mu‘tamid Billah (256 A.H. - 279 A.H.)  
 2. Mu‘tazid Billah (279 A.H. - 289 A.H.)  
 3. Muktafi Billah (289 A.H. - 295 A.H.)  
 4. Muqtadir Billah (295 A.H. - 320 A.H.)

Duration of Representation
--------------------------

It is famous among the scholars of Rejaal that the period of Muhammad b.
‘Uthman’s (r.a.) representation lasted for approximately 50 years,
although this seems improbable. The reason being that Muhammad b.
‘Uthman (r.a.) died in 305 A.H., 45 years after the martyrdom of Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).

The period of the minor occultation begins after the demise of Imam
Hasan Askair (a.s.) i.e. 260 A.H. After Imam Hasan al-Askari’s (a.s.)
martyrdom, ‘Uthman b. Sa’eed (r.a.) assumed deputyship for 5 years,
until his expiry. Therefore the actual period of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman’s
(r.a.) deputyship works out to forty (40) years.

Death
-----

As per the available records, Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) died in
Jamadiul Ulaa 305 A.H. Some writers have also mentioned it in 304 A.H.
Abu Ghalib Zorari, who was the representative of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)
in Kufa and was also very close to Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) has
recorded his death in 305 A.H. The scholars of research have given
precedence to this narration.

Muhammad b. ‘Uthman had himself informed about his death two months in
advance. Abul Hasan Ali b. Ahmed al-Dallal Qummi narrates, ‘One day I
was with Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) and saw a slate in front of him, on
which he was making some sketches and writing the verses of the Holy
Quran. And in the margins of that tablet, he was writing the names of
the Holy Imams (a.s.). I asked him about it. He replied, ‘This is for my
grave and I will be kept on this” or according to another report, he
said, “This will be my pillow”.

Then he revealed, ‘Everyday I enter my grave, pray one part of the Quran
and then I come out.’ In another tradition, it is narrated that after
this Abul Hasan Ali b. Ahmed says that Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) caught
my hand and took me near his grave. After looking at it he said, ‘On
such and such date of such and such month of such and such year, I will
die and be laid in this grave and this tablet will be with me.’ I
remembered his words and waited for that time. Just after a few days he
became sick and finally expired on the same day, month and year which he
had prophesied to me and was buried in the same grave which he had
shown.’[^15]

A similar tradition has also been narrated by Muhammad b. Ali b. Aswadi
Qummi. For details, please refer Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 351;
Kamaaluddin, vol. 2, p. 502, tradition 29.

Visitation of His Grave
-----------------------

Those whose hearts have been sealed will not recognise Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.), much less his deputies. In order to break open the seal of
the hearts, one should go to the grave of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) and
see that even today this grave is informing us of his representation and
deputyship. His grave is situated in East Baghdad in a very clean, posh
and populated area in a mosque, famous as Khallani. Till date Shias
visit his shrine and recite his Ziarat:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَشَهَدُ اَنَّكَ بَابُ الْمَوْلٰى …جِئتُكَ عَارِفًا بِالْحَقّ الَّذِىْ
اَنْتَ عَلَيْهِ وَاَنَّكَ مٰا خُنْتَ فِى التّٰاديَةِ وَالسِّفَارةِ-
اَلسَّلَامُ عَلَيْكَ مِنْ بَابٍ مٰا اَوْسَعَهُ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘I bear witness that you are the door of mercy of my Master .... I have
come to you after recognising your right on which you remained firmly
established and I know that you have not breached the trust reposed in
your deputyship or in conveying the news. Peace be upon you O* *the most
expansive door of mercy!*[^16]

[^1]: Tarikhe Minor Occultation (غيبت صغري) by Syed Muhammad al-Sadr p.
403

[^2]: Tarikhe Minor Occultation (غيبت صغري) by Syed Muhammad Sadr p. 403

[^3]: Rejaal at-Tusi, No. 101 p. 509

[^4]: Al Ghaibat of Shaikhe at-at-Tusi p. 363

[^5]: Surah al-Maidah 5: 102

[^6]: Kamaaluddin vol. 2 p. 520, tradition 49

[^7]: Pazohashi Payramune Zindagaaniye Nawwaabe Khaase Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) p. 176

[^8]: Kamaaluddin p. 504, chap of Tauqee’aat, Bihar al-Anwar vol. 51 p.
336

[^9]: Kamaaluddin vol. 2 p. 486 tradition no 3, Bihar al-Anwar vol. 51
p.33

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 51 p. 351

[^11]: Surah Baqarah : 260

[^12]: Kamaaluddin, Chapter 1 - Those who have witnessed Qaem (a.t.f.s.)
tradition 3

[^13]: Ibid. tradition 9

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 2, p. 30

[^15]: Tarikhe Siyaasie Ghaibate Imam al-Dawaazdahum, p.170

[^16]: Mafatihul Jinaan translated by Allama Jawadi (r.a.), p. 897


