Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) During the Period of the 2nd  Special Deputy
==================================================================

According to popular narrations, he was amongst the companions of Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and was considered amongst the close companions
and supporters of the 2nd special deputy Janabe Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(r.a.). Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) enjoyed the unequivocal confidence of the
second deputy so much so that the latter divided the chiefs of the
Imamia sects into various levels and grades and appointed Husain b Rauh
(r.a.) at the highest and the foremost group. He was the first amongst
the chiefs who was permitted to directly meet him (2nd deputy).

Note
----

A critical aspect of the lives of the deputies of Imam (a.t.f.s.) is
underscored in the above discussion. They were special Shias who
performed their administrative duties in an extraordinary manner.
Although they were in close contact with Imam (a.t.f.s.) and knew his
residence, they ensured that it remained a secret from the prying eyes
of others around them.

This trait is even commendable when we consider that the period of short
occultation was not a period of 1 or 2 years, but a long era spanning
more than 7 decades. Over this prolonged duration, to keep constant
touch and contact with Imam (a.s.) and at the same time to regularly
communicate the problems of the people to Imam (a.s.) and seek a
solution from him (a.t.f.s.) underlines their capabilities.

They had to deal with constant requests and pressures from the people
for being allowed to meet Imam (a.t.f.s.) and they had to all along be
careful never to disclose Imam’s (a.t.f.s.) location to the people.

The readers will appreciate the fact that if we try to conceal
something, while the people are aware that we are trying to hide
something from them, and we are also aware that people are trying to
discover the hidden thing, then it is indeed a difficult task to conceal
that hidden object from the inquisitive eyes of the people. It may be
possible to divert their attention and delay the matter for a few days,
but certainly not for a year or years or decades. These points will help
us appreciate how well Imam (a.t.f.s.) must have trained the deputies.

Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (a.r.) had made Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) a link between
himself and the agents around Baghdad. During this period, Husain b Rauh
(r.a.) came to establish an influential presence in the court of the
Bani Abbas rulers by virtue of a pre-determined plan. Consequently he
even succeeded in solving some problems prevailing in the government.
Readers are requested to read the following incident carefully:

1. Shaikh Sadooq (a.r.) has narrated from Abu Muhammad Hasan b. Hasan b.
Yahya Alawi that Abul Hasan Ali b. Ahmed b. Ali Aqiqi in the year 298
A.H. came to meet Ali b. Esa b. Jarrah who was the vizier at that time,
so that he could advise him regarding his government and to advance his
needs to him.

The vizier replied, ‘You have many relatives in this city and if all of
them start asking their needs and if we decide to entertain all of them,
then it will become a huge task and we will never be able to resolve
this matter.’ Aqiqi replied, ‘Therefore I am asking my need from the One
through whom difficulties are solved.’

Ali b. Esa queried, ‘Who is he?’ He replied, ‘Allah, the Almighty.’ With
this he went out of the room angrily. Aqiqi used to say, ‘I came out
angrily and was saying, ‘Allah, the Lord of the Universe, gives patience
on every destruction and solves every difficulty.’ Uttering this
statement I left from there.

Then a messenger from Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) came to me with a message
from him. I complained to him about the vizier and he in turn narrated
my complaint about the vizier to Husain b. Rauh (r.a.). That messenger
returned and gave me 100 dirhams. I counted all of them and weighed
them. He also gave me a handkerchief and some quantity of Hunoot
(camphor) and a few shrouds and declared, ‘Your master has conveyed
salutations to you and said that whenever any difficulty or sorrow
befalls you then at that time wipe this handkerchief over your face.

This is your master’s handkerchief. Take this money, camphor and shroud
along with you and know that tonight your wishes will be fulfilled’ He
also said, ‘When you reach Egypt, Muhammad b. Ismail will die 10 days
before you and then after 10 days, even you will leave this world. This
shroud and camphor are for you.’

I took it from the messenger and he left. At that moment, all of a
sudden, I saw myself at the doorsteps of my house. At that moment a
voice called out. I asked my servant ‘Is everything alright? Go and see,
who is there.’ He went to see and replied, ‘Everything is fine. The
vizier’s paternal cousin Hamid b. Muhammad Kaatib’s servant has come.’

He brought him to me. The servant said to me, ‘The vizier and my master
Hamid have called you.’ I mounted my horse and went ahead till I reached
the lane of ‘Vazzaneen’ and saw that Hamid was sitting and waiting for
me. When he saw me, he advanced towards me and shook hands with me and
both of us headed for the vizier’s house. The vizier said to me, ‘O old
man! Allah has fulfilled your wish.’ Then he apologised to me (for his
past behaviour) and gave me some official papers bearing his seal. I
took them and came out.[^1]

Reminder
--------

From the above incident we can gauge the degree of influence that Husain
b. Rauh (r.a.) exerted in the court. We can also conclude that Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.) was the beneficiary of Imam’s (a.t.f.s.) special care and
attention, while he had not yet become a special deputy as this incident
occurred in 298 AH - 7 years before Muhammad b. ‘Uthman’s (r.a.) demise,
after which Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) assumed special deputyship.

Selection of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)
----------------------------------

More than 3 years before his own death, Muhammad b. ‘Uthman had started
directing some of the Shias who were bringing Khums and other monies for
Imam (a.t.f.s.) to Husain b. Rauh (r.a.). In this manner he was
preparing the ground for the appointment of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) to the
position of special deputyship.

If someone raised any doubt or objection to this practice, Muhammad b.
‘Uthman (r.a.) would affirm that this was on the order of Imam
(a.t.f.s.) himself. In this regard, there are several traditions, of
which, we narrate just one:

Muhammad b Ali Aswad narrates, ‘When some financial donations (waqf)
used to be brought to me, I would surrender the same to Muhammad b.
‘Uthman (r.a.) and he used to accept it from me.  
 Once, during the last days of his life, I took some monies and went to
him, but Muhammad b. ‘Uthman ordered me to hand over the wealth to
Husain b. Rauh (r.a.).

I went to Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) and handed the money to him and asked
him for a receipt. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) complained about this to
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman, so Muhammad b. ‘Uthman ordered me not to demand a
receipt from Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) in future. He stressed, “Whatever
wealth you deposit with Abul Qasim Husain b. Rauh (r.a.), it is as if
you have deposited the same with me.” After this incident, I never
sought a receipt for any amount deposited with Husain b. Rauh (r.a.).

A similar incident has been narrated by Abu Abdillah Ja’far b. Muhammad
Madai famous as ‘Ibn Qazooda’. Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.) has narrated it in
his book ‘Al Ghaibah’, pg 367.

Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) took particular care in appointing Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.) as his successor. He endorsed his successorship while he was
alone with him, at times in the assemblies of sincere Shias and at other
times in front of his representatives.

The reason for adopting such an approach was because there were no clear
narrations from the holy Imams (a.s.) about the reliability and the
trustworthiness of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.). Neither the representatives of
Baghdad nor the special and common Shias expected the deputyship of Imam
(a.t.f.s.) to fall on the relatively unknown and unfamiliar shoulders of
Husain b. Rauh (r.a.). Hence Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) took advantage
of every opportunity to impress upon the Shias the deputyship of Husain
b. Rauh (r.a.).

Ja’far b. Muhammad b. Qoolwyah relates: ‘Our teachers used to say that
we had no doubt that after the demise of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.),
none other than Ja’far b. Ahmad b. Muttayal or his father would succeed
him. This was because he possessed characteristics similar to Muhammad
b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). Also, we were aware that he stayed frequently in his
house. In addition to that, in his last days, Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.)
ate food, which was prepared in the house of Ja’far b. Muttayal and his
father or personally visited their house for food.’

There was no doubt whatsoever in the minds of the special Shias that in
the case of any eventuality, Ja’far b. Muttayal would succeed Muhammad
b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). However, when Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) appointed
Abul Qasim Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) as his successor, everyone submitted to
him and accepted him and their conduct towards him was like their
conduct towards Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). Ja’far b. Muttayal worked in
a similar manner (with Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)) as he had worked during
the deputyship of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.).

‘This is a characteristic of Imam’s (a.t.f.s.) chosen servants, whose
actions do not alter with the change in personality.’

Ja’far b. Muhammad b. Qoolwayh Qummi says:

*‘Then whoever speaks evil of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) has in fact maligned
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). Whoever maligns Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.),
in reality he has spoken ill about Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and has
criticized him (a.t.f.s.).*[^2]

The abovementioned chronicles underline the fact that some of Muhammad
b. ‘Uthman’s (r.a.) deputies were closer to him than Husain b. Rauh
(r.a.). Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) spent more time meeting these
deputies than he did in meeting Husain b. Rauh (r.a.). This led the
Shias to believe that one of these proximate deputies would eventually
succeed Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.). Also, it is clear from the previous
quotes, that although Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) was subtly appointing
Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) as his successor, this fact was not well-known
among the general Shia populace.

Abu Ali Muhammad b. Hamala says that before his demise, Muhammad b.
‘Uthman (r.a.) gathered the leaders and chiefs of the Shias and
announced, ‘After my demise, Husain b. Rauh al-Nawbakhti (r.a.) will be
my successor. I have been ordered to appoint him in my place. Therefore,
turn towards him and have faith in him regarding your works.’[^3]

First Tawqee (A Signed Letter) to Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)
-------------------------------------------------------

Abul Abbas b. Nuh states that Muhammad b. Nafees wrote a letter from
Ahwaz. I read the very first tawqee concerning Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)
from Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). In it was written:

*‘We know (Husain b. Rauh), may Allah confer all His Goodness and
Pleasure on him and bestow His Bounties on him. We are aware of his
letter, which is the cause of our reliance and certainty (upon him). We
deem him meritorious, which makes him happy. May Allah increase His
Favours and Goodness on him.’*[^4]

This tawqee reached Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) on Sunday, 6th of Shawwal, 305
A.H.

The rationale behind the appointment of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) as deputy
of Imam Zaman (a.t.f.s.) can be enumerated as follows:

1. He was appointed as the deputy largely due to his faith,
intelligence, patience, generosity and sincerity. These qualities were
to prove very useful in that political environment so as to stifle
jealousy and enmity. There were numerous jurisprudents and theologians
in that period and the people had their eyes fixed on them.

2. He was the wisest among Shias and Sunnis. Also, he had placated the
enemies and also pleased his friends. In the last tawqee received by
Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.) through Husain b. Rauh (r.a.), Imam (a.t.f.s.)
asserted,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَانَ اَبُوْ الْقَاسِمِ رحمة اللهِ عليه مِنْ اَعْقَلِ النَّاسِ
عِنْدَ الْمُخَالِف وَ الْمَوَافِقِ وَ يَسْتَعْمِلُ الْتقَيَّةَ-
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Abul Qasim (r.a.) is the wisest of the people, for foes and friends
and his practises dissimulation (Taqaiyyah).’*[^5]

There are numerous incidents of his Taqaiyyah. Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.) in
his book ‘Al Ghaibah’ narrates from Abu Nasr Hebatullah b. Muhammad that
in the house of Abu Yasaar, the vizier of Muqtadirbillah Abbasi, in the
presence of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.), there were five Ahle Sunnah scholars
discussing the most superior Muslim after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

One of them said: The superior one after Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was Abu
Bakr, then Umar, then Ali (a.s.). The other claimed this superiority for
Ali (a.s.). Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) solved the problem in a manner
placating the Sunnis and also safeguarding the Shias in the process. The
people present in that gathering became the adherents of Husain b. Rauh
(r.a.).

3. Another reason for Husain b. Rauh’s (r.a.) selection was the
possibility of people accusing Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) of appointing
his close relatives according to his own whims and Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) not being involved in the decision. (We have mentioned
earlier that Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) was very close to Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(r.a.) but apparently it seemed that Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) was
closer to other people)[^6]

Commencement of his Deputyship
------------------------------

After the demise of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.), as per his will, a
gathering was organised at Daarul Niyaabah in Baghdad where along with
the leaders of Shias, Abul Qasim Husain b. Rauh Nawbhakti (r.a.) was
present. This incident has been narrated by Sayyid b. Taoos (r.a.) in
his book ‘Mohajud Daawaat’. After the expiry of Shaikh Abu Ja’far
Muhammad b. ‘Uthman b. Sa’eed Amri (r.a.), Shaikh Abul Qasim Husain b.
Rauh b. Abi Bahr (r.a.) went to the house of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.).
A servant named Zuka of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.) handed over him the
following:

1. Some documents that were wrapped together and a scroll.

2. A staff.

3. A painted wooden trunk.

He took them and said to the inheritors of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman (r.a.),
‘In this scroll are narrated the sayings of Holy Imams (a.s.).’ He
opened it and showed them the same. It contained supplications and
Qunoot of the Infallible (a.s.).

The inheritors left it and said, ‘Certainly the trunk contains gold and
jewelry.’ Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) asked them whether they would like to
sell the trunk to him. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) signaled Abul Hasan i.e.
Ibn Shabeeb al-Kooshari to give them 10 dirhams in exchange for the
wooden trunk. They were not satisfied with it. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)
increased it till it reached 100 dirhams.

Yet, they were not satisfied with the amount. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.)
warned them that if they do not close the deal at that rate they would
regret later. On his insistence, they finalised the deal at 100 dirhams.

Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) put aside the staff and scroll and picked up the
trunk. When the matter of the trunk was resolved he explained: This
staff belongs to Abu Muhammad Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). He had given
it to Shaikh ‘Uthman b. Sa’eed (r.a.) as his will at the time of his
death. The staff is still present and regarding the trunk, it contains
the rings of the Holy Imams (a.s.). The rings have special
characteristics and then he showed it to the people.’[^7]

It is clear from the aforementioned incident that the period of Husain
b. Rauh’s (r.a.) deputyship was more prominent among the common Shias
than the period of the first and the second deputies. Due to this, many
Shias directly contacted Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) instead of his deputies
in their areas. In his period of deputyship, he witnessed lesser
opposition compared to the previous deputies.

Deniers of Deputyship
---------------------

In the year 307 A.H., Muhammad b. Fazl Mosuli denied the deputyship of
Husain b. Rauh (r.a.). However, with the guidance of Hasan b. Ali Wajnaa
and after witnessing some of the affairs of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.), he
repented.

It is necessary to point out over here that some people have written
that Hasan b. Wajnaa rejected the deputyship of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.).
Some have written his name as Hasan b. Ali Wajnaa and some have recorded
it as Husain.

In this regard, Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Khu’i (r.a.) in his book
‘Mojam-o-Rejaalel-Hadees’ vol. 5, pg. 130 has recorded his name as Abu
Muhammad Hasan b. Muhammad Wajnaa Nasibi. He has narrated traditions
from Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and he had met Imam az-Zaman (a.s.).

Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.) has included him as the supporter of Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.). Hasan Wajnaa was deputy of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) in the
area of Nasibeen. He was also writing letters for the people of Egypt.
Similarly, Qasim b. Alaa and his two friends Abu Hamid Imran b. Mufleen,
Abu Ali Hajdar in Azerbaijan and Muhammad b. Ja’far Asadi were deputies
till 312 A.H. in the city of Rayy (Teheran). Muhammad b. Hasan Sairafi
was in Balkh. They all were the media between the people and Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.).[^8]

Political Aspect (295 - 320 A.H.)
---------------------------------

In Muqtadir Abbas’s reign, Husain b. Rauh was highly respected by the
ministers (Viziers). But he was subsequently arrested in the reign of
Muqtadir. Muqtadir donned the mantle of Caliphate at a very young age.

Till the time the post of Vizier was in the family of Furat, Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.) had a say in the government’s decision-making. But this
changed when Hamid b. Abbas, an evil person who thought nothing of
abusing people when he was angry, became the Vizier. He harassed the
family of Furat and the Shias were imprisoned. At that time Husain b.
Rauh (r.a.) had to face increased difficulties under very hostile
conditions.

The hostility persisted for approximately five years i.e. from Jamaadiul
Aakhar 306 A.H. till Rabiul Aakhar, 311 A.H. During this period, Husain
b. Rauh (r.a.) lived a secluded life and his activities were largely
clandestine. After the difficult era of Hamid b. Abbas, the conditions
of the Shias improved. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) recommenced his activities
openly. In the year 314 A.H., the government arrested him. The
historians have cited the following reasons for his arrest:

1. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) was blamed of promoting links with the
Qaraameta. He had written a letter to Abu Tahir Qarameta and invited him
to Baghdad so as to lay siege to it. Abu Tahir had attacked pilgrims
(Hajis) of Baghdad and imprisoned them. Among the Hajis were the
relatives of Caliph Muqtadir.

2. Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) was accused of accepting money from the people.
Some have written that the government had demanded wealth from him,
which he refused to pay.

Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) was once again imprisoned in Zilhajj 312 A.H. till
Mohaaram 317 A.H. After being released from prison, he got engrossed in
his activities. The conditions improved for him because people from the
family of Nawbakht viz. Abu Yaqub Ishaq b. Ismail (killed in 322 A.H.),
Abu Ali Nawbakhti (244 - 324 A.H.) and Abu Abdullah Husain b. Ali
Nawabakhti (d. 326 A.H.) were appointed at senior positions in the
government.

His Knowledge
-------------

Indeed what can be said about the knowledge of the one who had
unrestricted access to the Proof of Allah (i.e. Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.)) and his bestowals, attention, care and respect!

Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. Ishaq Talaqi asked the questions of Ali b. Esa
Qasri to Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) that whether Imam Husain (a.s.) was Wali
(appointee) of Allah? And whether his killer was enemy of Allah? Husain
b. Rauh (r.a.) replied in the affirmative.

Then he was asked whether Allah allows His enemy to overpower His
appointee? After receiving the replies, Muhammad b. Ibrahim fell in
doubt as he could not digest this subtle point. The next day when he
went in the presence of Husain b. Rauh (r.a.), before he could utter
anything, Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) exclaimed: ‘O Muhammad b. Ibrahim! It
would have been better had I fallen from the sky and became a morsel for
birds than advance my views concerning Allah’s Religion. Whatever I had
replied, its source was the Proof of Allah (i.e. Imam (a.t.f.s.)) and I
myself heard this from him.’[^9]

Husain b. Rauh’s (r.a.) discussion with Muhammad b. Ibrahim on Allah’s
Enemy and His Wali can be summarised in a simple manner. Allah does not
converse with the people openly like we do.

Rather, He converses through the Prophets (a.s.), who are mortals. He
bestows miracles upon them, which are beyond all others in their
respective nations. Despite evident miracles, few people from their
nations testified to their claims, while others rejected them outright.
So, sometimes Prophets (a.s.) overpower the enemies and sometimes they
were vanquished and confronted with calamities.

If Allah made the Prophets (a.s.) defeat all their adversaries in all
matters, then the people would have taken them as Allahs and patience,
calamities and examination would have no meaning and purpose.

Hence, Allah has conferred characteristics on these mortals that they
should be patient at all times be it in comfort or difficulties. In
times of ease and triumph (over the enemy) they should thank Allah. They
should be humble in all situations and abstain from rebellion and
disobedience. In this way, people may understand that Allah is the
Creator and in all affairs, He has some purpose and wisdom.[^10]

For more details on Husain b. Rauh’s (r.a.) knowledge, the following
books of traditions may be referred to:

1. Al Ghaibah of Shaikh at-Tusi (a.r.) - pg. 390 tradition 356, pg. 378,
tradition 346 and pg 373, tradition 345

2. Kamaluddin of Shaikh Saduq (a.r.) - Vol. 2, pg. 519, tradition 48

3. Bihar al-Anwar of Allama Majlisi (a.r.) - Vol. 53, pg. 192, tradition
20

The aforementioned volumes of Kamaluddin and Behaarul Anwar have been
translated into Urdu.

Miracles and Manifestations
---------------------------

There are many incidents that highlight the abovementioned traits of
which we are narrating only two:

1. Husain b. Ali Babawayah (r.a.) (brother of Shaikh Saduq (r.a.))
narrates:

*Some people from the city of Qum (in 311 A.H.), prepared to go for
Hajj, when the Qaraamatah attacked the Hajis. My father (Ali b.
Babawayah (r.a.)) wrote a letter to Shaikh Abul Qasim Husain b. Rauh
Nawbakhti (r.a.) to present it to Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and seek
permission for Hajj that year. Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) ordered him not
to go for Hajj. My father wrote another letter saying that the Hajj was
obligatory and whether it is permissible to stay away from it? Imam
(a.t.f.s.) replied: ‘If you cannot avoid it, then travel with the last
caravan.’*

As my father left for Hajj with the last caravan, he was saved while the
people with the earlier caravan were killed.[^11]

2. When Ahmed b. Ishaq Qummi requested for permission to go for Hajj,
Husain b. Rauh (r.a.) granted him permission and gave him a cloth. When
Ahmed b. Ishaq saw the cloth, he exclaimed, “This is the news of my
death.” On his return from Hajj, he expired at a place called
Halwaan.[^12]

His Demise
----------

He was appointed as a deputy in the year 305 A.H. and departed from this
transitory world in the year 326 A.H. He served as a direct deputy of
Imam (a.t.f.s.) for 21 years. If we add another 2-3 years, during which
he served as a deputy during the deputyship of Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(r.a.), it adds upto 23 years.

His grave is situated in Baghdad in Nawbakhtia, near the door of the
house of Ali b. Ahmad Nawbhakti. He expired on Wednesday, 18 Shabaan,
326 A.H. His grave is still there. However, the place is now known as
Suq Al-Attaareen.

Visitors should not forsake the visitation of this great deputy of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) when they visit Kazimain for Ziarat. Nowadays, the
caravan of visitors do not visit his grave due to the stringent traffic
system of Baghdad. However, his Ziarat can be done on Fridays, which is
a holiday in Baghdad.

[^1]: Kamaluddin; chapter of Tawqee’aat; pg. 32

[^2]: Zindagaani al-Nawwab al-Khaas, pg. 243

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, pg. 355

[^4]: Al Ghaibah of Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.), pg. 372, tradition 344

[^5]: Al Ghaibah, pg. 384

[^6]: Zindagaani al-Nuwwab al-Khaas, pg. 252

[^7]: Zindagaani Nuwwab al-Khaas, pg. 252-254

[^8]: Tarikh al-Siyaasi al-Ghaibat al-Imam al-Devazdahum, pg. 196-198

[^9]: Isbaatul Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 117, tradition 168

[^10]: Zindagaani al-Nuwwab al-Khaas, pg. 265

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, pg. 293, tradition 1

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.51, pg. 306, tradition 21


