The Fourth Special Deputy: Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.)
=========================================================

Name : Ali

Agnomen (Kuniyyat): Abul Hasan

Father : Muhammad

The fourth deputy of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) Abul Hasan Ali Ibn
Muhammad (r.a.) attained this special position after Husain Ibn Rauh
Naubakhti (r.a.). Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) himself ordered Abul Qasim
Ibn Rauh Naubakhti (r.a.) to appoint him to this post.

The Samaris were among those Shia families that were highly respected
for their services to Islam in general and the Shiite cause in
particular. Hence, his appointment as the fourth deputy was undisputed.
Many individuals from this family like Hasan, the son of Ismail Ibn
Saleh and Muhammad, the son of Ali Ibn Ziyad were owners of large
estates. They had gifted the income from their estates to the eleventh
Imam Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).[^1]

Apart from this, some members of Samari family were amongst the
supporters of Imam Reza (a.s.). In this way, some of the companions of
other Imams (a.s.) also belonged to this family. For example, Ali Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Ziyad served as a representative of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.)
and Imam Hasan Al-al-Askari (a.s.).

He also wrote a book ‘Al-Awsiyaa’ in which he clarified doubts on the
Imamate of the twelfth Imam (a.s.). The respected Sayyid Ibn Taawoos
(r.a.) has made a mention of this book on page number 427 of his highly
acclaimed work, ‘Mohaj al-Da’waat’ (p. 428 of the new edition with
Persian translation).

Sayyid Ibn Taawoos (r.a.) has brought two incidents from the book
‘Al-Awsiyaa’ that describe the end of the Abbaside Caliphs Mo’tasim and
Motazid, the murderers of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).  
 In the same manner, we find that Ali Ibn Ziyad wrote a letter to Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) seeking a shroud from him (a.f.t.s.). Imam (a.s.)
replied,

*‘You will require this only at the age of 80 (i.e. in 270 AH).’*  
 Ali Ibn Ziyad passed away in the year 270 AH and a few days prior to
his demise, Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) fulfilled his request.[^2]

These few incidents are sufficient to exemplify the importance, nobility
and dignity of the members of Samari family. Their illustrious position
does not come as a surprise given that over the years, they were active
supporters and helpers of the cause of the holy Imams (a.s.).

The Title of the Fourth Deputy
------------------------------

There exists a difference of opinion in the title of the fourth deputy
from the aspects of pronunciation and writing. The respected Ali
Ghaffarzaadeh, while providing references from learned scholars, has
concluded his research on this topic as follows. He says, “His title was
سَمَرِى (Samari) or **سَيْمُرى** (Saimori) or **سَمُرِى** (Samori).”

In this regard, he records that in Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.),
Kamaaluddin of Shaikh Sadooq (r.a.), Al-Kharaaej of Qutbuddin
al-Raawandi (r.a.) and other authentic books, the title has come with
**سَمَرِى.** There is little doubt in the fact that in books of
traditions and narrators, references to **سَيْمُرِىْ** or **سَيْمَرِىْ**
are few and far between.

Some of the fourth deputy’s contemporaries while recording the events of
his life have written his title as **سَمُرى**, while some have recorded
it as **سَمَرى.** The title **سَمَرى** is more acceptable and appears
more likely vis-vis other titles. This is because between Basraa and
Waasit, there is a place called **سَمَر** and Aqa Buzurg al-Tehrani
(r.a.) has recorded the name with **سَمَرِى**.[^3]  
 In short, the title of the fourth deputy was **سَمَرِىْ.**

The Period of the Fourth Deputy
-------------------------------

The period of Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.) is remembered as one in
which the oppressions and tyrannies of the ruling Abbaside government
were at its peak. Consequently, like his predecessors, socially he was
not very active and had deliberately limited his interaction with his
representatives.

However, despite these constraints, he maintained contact with the
Shias. In fact, he continued to enjoy the same respect and position
amongst the Shias as the preceding three special deputies. It was for
this reason that the Shias continued to send their religious financial
taxes to him through his representatives.

The details of his date of birth and life history are few and far in
books of history. Nonetheless, the relatively short span of his
appointment as special deputy of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has been
reported with regular frequency in books.

Ali Ibn Muhammad, A Companion of Imam Hasan al-Askari (A.S.)
------------------------------------------------------------

The venerated Shaikh at-Tusi (a.r.) in his book ‘Al-Rejaal’ (p. 432) has
regarded Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.) amongst the companions of Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).  
 Apparently, Imam Hasan Al-al-Askari (a.s.) also corresponded with him
through letters. For example, Ali Ibn Muhammad says that on one
occasion, Imam Hasan Al-al-Askari (a.s.) wrote to him,

*‘A dispute will soon arise which will trouble you such that you will
lose your hands and feet. Remain alert of this corruption and safeguard
yourself from it.’*

After three days, Bani Hashim were involved in an incident due to which
they were engulfed with hardships and sufferings. I wrote to Imam Hasan
Al-al-Askari (a.s.) enquiring whether this was the same incident which
he had referred to in his letter. He replied,

*‘No, there is yet another incident. You protect yourself completely
from it.’*

After a few days, we were informed of the murder of the Abbside caliph
Mo’taz. [^4]

This letter shows that he was in contact with Imam Hasan Al-al-Askari
(a.s.).

News of The Unseen: Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.)
--------------------------------------------------

Like his predecessors, many incidents of nobility are reported about Ali
Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.). These incidents served a dual purpose.
Firstly, they established the strong relationship between him and Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and secondly, the Shias who witnessed these noble
actions never harboured any doubt about his designation as the special
deputy of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.) based on reports from his teachers, narrates an
incident from Husain Ibn Ali Ibn Babwayh Qummi (r.a.) - brother of
Shaikh Sadooq (r.a.). He reports, ‘Some members of Qum which included
Imran Saffaar, Alawiyyah Saffaar and Husain Ibn Ahmad Ibn Idrees (may
Allah have mercy upon them) reported to me that in the year in which my
father Ali Ibn Husain Ibn Musa Ibn Babwayh (the father of Shaikh Sadooq-
r.a.) passed away, they were present in Baghdad.

They report that Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.) asked each one of us
about the health of Ali Ibn Babwayh and we replied to him that we have
received a letter from him that he is fine. Till the time of his death,
he kept enquiring about Ali Ibn Babwayh and we kept replying that he was
well. One day, he (Ali Ibn ‘Muhammad Samari) asked us the same question
and we replied that we had not received the reply to our letter from
him. To this, he said, ‘May Allah grant you patience on his demise!’

We noted the day, month and time of his statement. After about seventeen
or eighteen days, we received the news of the death of Ali Ibn Muhammad
Babwayh and it was at exactly the same day and time when Abul Hasan
Samari (r.a.) had paid condolence to us.[^5]

Shaikh Sadooq (r.a.) heard this incident about his father 10 years after
his demise through reports from Abul Hasan Saleh Ibn Shu’aib Taleqani.
Taleqani reported this incident from Ahmed Ibn Ibrahim Mukhallad who
heard Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.) say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللهُ عَلِىَّ بْنَ الْحُسَيْنِ بنِ مُوسىٰ بنِ بَابوَيه القمى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘May Allah have mercy upon Ali Ibn Husain Ibn Musa Ibn Babwayh
Qummi.’*[^6]

The Last Tawqee’
----------------

The last Tauqee’ that was issued during the Minor Occultation (Minor
Occultation (غيبتِ صغري)) bore tremendous historical import. Not only
did this letter declare the conclusion of the era of special deputies
and herald the onset of Major Occultation (Ghaibat al-Kubra), but it
also carried with it a profound and deep rooted message.

This letter was issued by Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) six days before the
demise of the fourth deputy and can be found with minor variations in
the books of traditions. Prior to his death, Janab Ali bin Muhammad
Samari (r.a.) was asked about his successor. In reply to this question,
he placed the following letter before the people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِىَّ بْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ السَّمرىّ، اَعْظَمَ اللهُ اَجْرَ
اِخْوَانِكَ فِيْكَ فَاِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ مَا بَيْنَكَ وَ بَيْنَ سِتَّةِ
اَيَّامٍ، فَاجْمَعْ اَمْرَكَ وَلاَ تُوصِ اِلىٰ اَحَدٍ فَيَقُوْمَ
مَقَامَكَ بَعْدَ وَفَاتِكَ فَقَدْ وَقَعَتِ الْغَيْبَةُ التَّامَّةُ
فَلاَ ظُهُوْرَ اِلاَّ بَعْدَ اِذْنِ اللهِ تَعَالىٰ ذِكْرُهُ وَ ذَالِكَ
بَعْدَ طُوْلِ الْاَمَدِ وَ قَسْوَةِ الْقُلُوْبِ وَامْتِلاَءِ الْاَرْضِ
جَوْراً وَ سَيَأتِى شِيْعَتِىْ مَنْ يَدَّعِى الْمُشَاهَدَةَ اَلاَ
فَمَنِ ادَّعىَ الْمُشَاهَدَةَ قَبْلَ خُرُوْجِ السُّفْيَانِىّ وَ
الصَّيْحَةِ فَهُوَ كَذَّابٌ مُفْتَرٌ وَ لاَ حَوْلَ وَ لاَ قُوَّةَ
اِلاَّ بِاللهِ الْعَلِىِّ الْعَظِيْمِ-
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘O Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari! May Allah increase the reward of your
brothers concerning you (i.e. your demise)! Death will come to you
within the next six days. So you complete your works and do not nominate
any person after you. The sequence of special deputies will come to an
end and the Major Occultation (**غيبت كبرى**) will commence with your
demise.*

*Now the reappearance will occur only with the permission of Allah,
after a prolonged period and after the hearts of people are hardened.
And such a period will emerge on my Shias when people will claim that
they have seen me. Whoever makes such a claim before the advent of
Sufyani and the heavenly voice, is a liar, an impostor. There is no
strength and power save that of Allah, the High, the Great.”*

As stated above, when the people enquired from Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari
(r.a.) about his successor, he advanced this letter unto them. Shaikh
Tabarsi (r.a.) narrates that some of these people noted down the
contents of the letter and left. They returned on the sixth day and
found Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari in a state of illness, grappling with
death pangs. They enquired once again,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ وَصِيُّكَ مِنْ بَعْدِكَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Who is your successor?’ He replied,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّهِ اَمْرٌ هُوَ بَالِغُه
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘To Allah belongs the affair (of succession), He will fulfill it.’

These were the last words of his life.

One can refer to the following books for this Tawqee’:

Al Ghaybah by Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.), p. 593; Kamaaluddin vol. 2, p. 615;
Al Ehtejaaj, vol. 2, p. 874; Bihar al-Anwar vol. 51, p. 63, vol. 25, p.
151 and vol. 35, p. 813; E’laamul Waraa’ p. 714; Yaumul Khalaas (Persian
tr.) vol. 1, p. 403; Ayanush Shiah (Persian tr.) p. 55; Muntakhabul Asar
(Old Edn.) p. 993; Yanaabiul Mawaddah (Urdu) p. 517.

Analysis of The Tawqee’
-----------------------

A meaningful investigation of the above Tauqee’ indicates that Imam
(a.t.f.s.) has drawn the attention of Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.)
towards various important aspects. Apart from this, this Tauqee’ is also
a conclusive proof of the existence of the Imam (a.t.f.s.) for those who
deny it and ridicule the Shias for it.

Some of these aspects are noted here:

1. The prophecy made by Imam (a.t.f.s.) about the demise of Ali Ibn
Muhammad Samari (r.a.) within six days. The accuracy of the prophecy
proved that the Tauqee’ was issued from none other than Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.).

2. Imam (a.t.f.s.) ordered Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.) not to appoint
any person as his successor. With this decree, Imam (a.t.f.s.) sealed
the only door for all to meet him directly. The decree was a pointer to
the fact that in the future (during the Major Occultation), none would
be able to meet Imam (a.t.f.s.) as and when he pleased. It also implies
that there would be no ‘designated’ special deputy during the Major
Occultation, thus falsifying any claimant to that position.

3. The Tawqee’ marked the commencement of the Major Occultation.

4. Imam (a.t.f.s.) will not reappear but with the permission of Allah.

5. It made it abundantly clear that any person who claimed to meet or to
be able to meet Imam (a.t.f.s.) at will would be a liar, an impostor.

An Objection
------------

There is a seeming contradiction in the Tawqee’. On one hand we see that
if a person claims to meet Imam az-Zaman (a.s.), he is a liar. However,
on the other hand, there are numerous incidents and events reported in
books where not only scholars, but also ordinary people have met Imam
(a.t.f.s.) and have reported such meetings.

Reply
-----

Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) has replied to the above objection at two places
in his book, Bihar al-Anwar. His reply is beneficial even to the
scholars after him. We clarify his position on the above issue as
follows:

1. As reported by illustrious scholars, one reason could be that the one
who claims to have met Imam (a.t.f.s.) would use this claim to place
himself as a special deputy and cheat the people. Since there are
several incidents of people having met Imam (a.t.f.s.), it is clear that
the scholars believe that the Tawqee’ does not reject the possibility of
meeting and seeing Imam (a.t.f.s.), it only rejects the appointment of a
special deputy after Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari (r.a.).

2. It is also possible that the one who contends to be able to see Imam
(a.t.f.s.) is a liar and an impostor if he maintains that he can get a
meeting with Imam (a.t.f.s.) at will. Anyone who makes such a
preposterous claim in the Major Occultation is a pretender and deserves
to be snubbed.

So, meeting Imam (a.t.f.s.) is not rejected outright in the Tawqee’. It
is just that in the Major Occultation, meeting Imam (a.t.f.s.)
voluntarily is not possible. Rather Imam (a.t.f.s.) will meet whosoever
he wants and hence, the choice of the meeting lies with Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) and not with the people.

The Conclusion of the Chain of Special Deputies
-----------------------------------------------

Ayatullah Baqar Al-Sadr (r.a.), writes, “The transformation of the Minor
Occultation into the Major Occultation signifies that the objectives and
aims of the Minor Occultation had been adequately fulfilled.

This elaborate programme protected the Shias from the difficulties
arising from the occultation of Imam (a.t.f.s.) and gradually, they made
a mental shift from the special deputies and accustomed themselves to
referring their religious matters to the scholars.

Thus the responsibility to represent the Imam (a.t.f.s.) in the Major
Occultation fell upon the just, religious jurisprudents and it became
obligatory for the people to follow their rulings in worldly as well as
religious matters.”

This viewpoint is endorsed by the famous tradition of Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) which is regularly quoted,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَمَّا الْحَوَادِثُ الْوَاقِعَةُ فَارْجِعُوْا فِيْهَا اِلٰى رُوَاةِ
حَدِيْثِنَا فاِنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِىْ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ اَنا حُجَّةُ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘If any fresh incident occurs (in matters of religious issues), then
refer them to the narrators of our traditions. For surely, they are my
proofs upon you and I am Allah’s Proof.’*[^7]

This tradition is attributed to a Tawqee’ issued to the second special
deputy Muhammad Ibn ‘Uthman Al Amri (r.a.) and many traditionalists have
quoted it as such. However, the author of ‘Yaumul Khalaas’, Kaamel
Sulaymani has credited this tradition to the last days of the Minor
Occultation and has attributed it to the fourth deputy Ali Ibn Muhammad
Samari (r.a.).[^8]

Note
----

It is possible that the tradition may have been reported twice and there
is nothing wrong with that. We can understand clearly that the
unmistakable message in the tradition is towards the solution of issues
and dilemmas that would arise during the Major Occultation.

The Conclusion of the Chain of Special Deputies
-----------------------------------------------

The fourth special deputy passed away on 15th Shabaan, 329 AH. His
demise was accurately prophesied by Imam (a.t.f.s.) in his Tauqee’
wherein he informed him of his death within six days.  
 The period of his deputyship lasted for approximately 3 years from 326
AH to 329 AH. His age coincided with the reign of two Abbaside caliphs -
Al-Raazi Billah and Muttaqi.

His Grave
---------

Shaikh Abbas Qummi (r.a.) writes in vol. 6, p. 234 of his renowned book
‘Safinatul Behaar’, ‘The illustrious Shaikh Ali Ibn Muhammad Samari
(r.a.) was the successor to Husain Ibn Rauh (r.a.) and shouldered the
responsibilities of deputyship for a period of 3 years. He passed away
in the year 329 A.H., marking the onset of the Major Occultation. His
grave is in Baghdad near the tomb of Shaikh Kulaini (r.a.).’  
 Shaikh at-Tusi (r.a.) records that his grave is in Baghdad at the
Khalatji Road off the Abu Etaab river. Nowadays this area is more
popular as Sooqul Kutub which is on the eastern bank of the river
Dajlah.  
 For centuries, lovers of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) have been visiting
his grave and reciting salutations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَم عَلَيكَ ياَ عَلىَّ بْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ اَشْهَدُ اَنَّكَ بَابُ
الْمَوْلىٰ اَدَّيْتَ عَنْهُ وَ اَدَّيْتَ اِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Peace be upon you, O Ali Ibn Muhammad. I bear witness that you are the
door to our Master (Imam (a.t.f.s.)). Certainly you fulfilled the trust
presented to you by Imam (a.t.f.s.) and returned the trust to him
(a.t.f.s.).’*

[^1]: Pazoohash al-Peiramoon al-Zindegaani al-Nuwwaab al-Khaas al-Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), p. 304

[^2]: Kamaaluddin, vol. 2, pp. 501-2

[^3]: Pazoohash al-Peiramoon al-Zindagaani al-Nuwwaab al-Khaas al-Imam
al- Zamana (a.t.f.s.), p. 305

[^4]: Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 3, p. 207, Pazoohash al-Peiramoon
al-Zindagaani al-Nuwwaab al-Khaas al-Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), p. 304

[^5]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 163, tradition 8, from Al-Ghaibah of
Shaikh at-at-Tusi (r.a.)

[^6]: Kamaaluddin, vol. 2, p. 305, tradition 23

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 180 narrating from al-Ehtejaaj

[^8]: Yaumul Khalaas (Persian tr.) vol.1, p. 303


