Principal Factors For the Movement's Success
============================================

In conclusion it is intended to study what factors contributed to
accelerate the progress of Islam as a world wide movement:

**a) Unshakable Faith**

The leading consideration relates to the starter of the movement,
namely the holy Prophet of Islam. He held unshakable faith in his
mission; for without such strong intrinsic faith success would have been
quite uncertain. This is particularly true of a movement where success
is in any case fairly risky.

**b) Competence and Efficiency**

The leader of the movement, namely the holy Prophet himself, possessed
remarkable competence, efficiency and sagacity in discharging his tasks,
and knew exactly what steps to take in every case. As recorded by
numerous non-Muslim writers, his approach was methodical as of a highly
experienced, capable and knowledgeable person. He handled his affairs
with the expertise of a specialist.

**c) Decisiveness**

Owing to the two above mentioned personal qualities, namely unshakable
faith and competence, the Prophet was never at a loss while faced with
the events and crises in his life. The Prophet led the movement of Islam
for 23 years, during all this period one does not come across even a
single incident where he was uncertain or at a loss for a decision.

On the contrary, he displayed utmost patience, coolness and
decisiveness on every occasion. Among the various events in the course
of the movement of Islam, some are related to the period before his
migration to Medina where these qualities are evident and also certain
events following the migration which reflect his decisiveness and
explicitness.

As an example, after his migration to Medina in the "Hudaibiya" peace
negotiations which occurred in the eighth year of Hijra, an unforeseen
crisis arose for the Muslims. The Prophet had told them that they could
proceed as the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in that year, consequently they
left Medina prepared for the pilgrimage unarmed and unprepared for a
fight.

When they approached Mecca, the infidels of Mecca refused their entry
saying all but the Prophet and the Muslims could enter Mecca. This
refusal greatly displeased the Muslims, especially as at the time a
state of peace existed between the infidels of Mecca and the Muslims. In
response to the infidels refusal, most of the Muslims declared that they
would fight their way into Mecca.

The holy Prophet was faced with a predicament, since firstly they were
not armed for battle, and secondly a battle during the Hajj season would
not have been good publicity for the Muslims, since it would be said
that the Muslims showed no regard for Hajj. Moreover the outcome of the
battle was uncertain. On the other hand the refusal to adverse effect on
the Muslims.

What could the Prophet do in such a situation? With extraordinary
finality he declared that he would renew the peace with the infidels
despite their having revoked the earlier treaty and abstain from the
exercise of force.

It was such a strange decision for the followers of the Prophet, that
'Umar bin Khattab, one close follower, expressed that he had never
doubted the Prophet's words to the extent of the day of the "Hudaibiya
Peace Accord" -because he had said they would visit Mecca that year.

The matter of Hudaibiya Peace Accord is one of the most instructive
episodes in the history of Islam, showing how the crisis was handled so
adroitly by the Prophet. The Muslims turned back from the journey, but
after a short time even those who had been opposed to the peace, came to
realise how politically favourable that peace had been for the Islamic
ummah.

**d) Peculiarities of Prevailing Political Environment**

Another issue which is directly related to the foregoing problems is
that the Prophet's actions throughout the progress of the Islamic
movement were appropriate to every stage under the prevalent conditions.
During his 13 years of stay in Mecca, with the exception of one or two
minor incidents, no armed clashes ever took place between Muslims and
non-Muslims.

One case was that occurred in those early years when the Muslims'
numbers were small and at prayer time had no security, neither in their
homes nor beside the Ka'aba or elsewhere. At home if the husband was a
Muslim and his wife and children were idol worshippers, they would make
fun of him whenever he stood up to pray, and a quarrel ensued. In the
Ka'aba the idolaters would jeer at and often molest the Muslims. Thus
they were forced to seek privacy for prayers in the mountains where
numerous passes afforded seclusion.

One day while a number of Muslims including Sa'd bin-Abi Waqas. had
proceeded to such a secluded place and were busy offering their prayers,
when a number of infidels who were passing by, noticed them and began to
jeer at them. The Muslims paid no head and continued with their prayers,
but when the infidels resorted to molest some physically, Sa'd got
annoyed and attacked them with a stick or a camel's bone which he found
there, and broke one person's head.

This was the first blood shed in defence of the Muslims, by a man who
was later to become one of the commanders of the Army of Islam. However,
this was an incident not war. During all those 13 years in Mecca, the
Prophet prudently paid heed to the political conditions. This point
merits attention and understanding, since in those conditions prevailing
in Arabia a lone man would be subjected to molestation and even his life
would be in danger.

But a person who had a family to rely on, or belonged to a tribe that
supported him, no one dared hurt him. This was a particular condition
then existing. With regard to the prophet, so long as Abu-Talib lived,
he had his support and of the Bani-Hashim tribe and those of the tribe
of Quraish with whom mutual relations existed.

When Abu-Talib died, in the tenth or eleventh year of his prophethood,
the conditions became difficult for the Prophet. Abu-Lahab became the
head of the family of Bani-Hashim and he was from the first opposed to
the Prophet,

and thus the Prophet was left without any political support. What could
he do? He went here and there and contacted various groups to secure
political support for himself.

However, by that time the number of Muslims had risen to between 60 to
80, even more including these who had migrated to Abyssinia. The
infidels regarded the Prophet and his followers as a tribe in their own
right political and military potential but the Prophet himself did not
consider this situation satisfactory and sought stronger support
elsewhere[^72] to make up for the lost support of the Bani-Hashim.

When his contacts with a number of tribes produced, he began to prepare
himself for migrating to Medina, and after some negotiations with the
tribes of Aus and Khazraj of Medina during Hajj, he finally decided to
undertake this epic journey. Thus so long as the Prophet had not
succeeded in creating a new political institution as well as a strong
political base that could sustain itself in Arabia, he sought support
from other dependable sources.

In the interval between the demise of Abu-Talib and the migration to
Medina, which was not a long one, he was still protected by his
relatives. For instance if Abu-Lahab was his opponent, then 'Abass was a
person of high status in the Bani-Hashim clan who dearly loved the
Prophet, and Abu-Lahab, too, had to pay some regard to family
relations.

Accordingly it shows that the Prophet paid due heed to the political
conditions then prevalent conformity which was another factor towards
his success. When he arrived in Medina, contrary to the records of
certain historians that there was no house where the Qur'an was not
recited, there were many houses where not even one had yet embraced
Islam. Although there was at least one Muslim in a number of houses, the
Prophet initially practised his former way in the movement.

For instance, in the battle of Badr when he left Medina with the
Muslims, he said to them: "We are going to attack a caravan." There was
no mention of a war, but when they were out of Medina and the subject of
war came up, he formed a council and asked them whether they were
prepared for a war. Historians write that the reason for this question
was that in the terms of his accord with the tribes of Aus and Khazraj,
they had undertaken to defend him in Medina, whereas, then the question
of a war outside Medina was proposed, and this matter, was outside the
agreement.

Therefore he wished to know that apart from their accord whether they
would agree to join him in a war or not? Such observance of established
social traditions served as a factor for his success.

**e) Decisive Response**

Throughout the entire period of his invitation to Islam the Prophet
gave a clear answer to all matters which were put forth. During his stay
of 13 years in Mecca, one does not come across holy verses or topics
related to administration, taxes, Friday and 'Id prayers and the like,
since the main problems then were social conduct and related with
divinity such as the manner of performance of devotional acts, prayers,
fasting, ethics and the combat with polytheistic practices, selfishness
and moral corruption.

There was then little of political aspects. Of course, equality was
practised within the group, and from the very beginning, the Prophet
himself, lived like a brother with other Muslims. But when he came to
Medina, fresh problems arose, and he showed full preparedness to deal
with each one of them, and his decisive approach proved to be a factor
for his success in promoting the movement.

**f) As a Herald of Freedom**

From the very beginning the Prophet declared himself to be the herald
of freedom, the herald of equality, justice and equity, and this proved
to be a very effective factor in the success of Islam. He explicitly
declared that an Abyssian slave and a Quraish Sayid of a noble house
were equal before him. Equality justice and fraternity were without
doubt his winning qualities which were related particularly to the
Prophet and Islam.

**g) Filling the Existing Socio-political Vacuum**

Another important point which served as a factor in the Prophet's
success was that he commenced the Islamic movement in the environment of
Hejaz where the great powers of that time did not have an important
base, and where in fact a relative social and political vacuum
prevailed. It is true that the Prophet's power as compared with the
strength of the infidels of Hejaz was at the beginning quite weak, but,
as we have said, he enjoyed the full support of Abu-Talib, and no one
dared make an attempt on his life.

Even in the night of his emigration they could not attack him singly or
a clan. They decided to pick a young man from each of the tribes so that
all the tribes would share the guilt in the attempt on the Prophet's
life, and they thought of this plot only as the Prophet had departed for
Medina. In Mecca, therefore, it would appear there existed small and
scattered power-groups that the Prophet could deal with and such great
powers as Rome, Iran, Abyssinia and Egypt had no strong foothold in
Hejaz to take any steps.

The extent to which the influence of these powers in Hejaz was still in
the hands of the infidels and had not till then been captured by the
Prophet and a peace treaty existed between them, and the Prophet felt
easy in his mind that after the battle of Khandaq (Ahzab) they would be
too afraid to resort to a fresh assault, the Prophet began writing
letters to the rulers of neighbouring countries as we have earlier
mentioned.

He dispatched letters to the rulers of Hira, Ghassan, Jordan, the
Governor of Yemen, the King of Abyssinia, King of Egypt, Emperor of Rome
and to Khusrow Parviz, Emperor of Iran.

This universal invitation to Islam was initiated in the sixth year of
migration.[^73] Those who presume that the Prophet had brought Islam
primarily as a faith meant exclusively for Arabia and the Arabs, do not
appear to know in what year he sent this invitation to all the regions
neighbouring Arabia. He would dispatch one Muslim as his courier bearing
his message.

In the case of Iran, when his letter reached Khusrow Parviz and he saw
that the letter began with the words: "From Muhammad, prophet of Allah,
to Khusrow, King of Fars", he became very angry to see his name appear
after that of the Prophet[^74] and tore the letter up. He directed
Badhan, his Governor in Yemen[^75] to send a couple of his soldiers to
Yathrib and arrest the man who had dared write such a letter to him and
had made such claims, and have then bring him to the royal court.

This goes to show how little did Khusrow Parviz know of Muhammad (a.s.)
in Arabia and that he was completely ignorant about his the prophet's
wars, a number of battles, victorious in all except one. Muhammad (a.s.)
was poised for further actions abroad, and he was not the one to be
simply arrested by sending a pair of soldiers.

This story shows the existence of a vacuum in the birthplace of Islam
as regards the awareness of the great political powers of the time-which
merits detailed study.

It was not only Khusrow Parviz who was ignorant about Muhammad (a.s.);
Heraclius, Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, despite his closer links
with Arabia, was in a similar situation; when he received the Prophet's
letter, he said: "Go and see if there are any Arab traders in Syria who
can give me some information about Muhammad(a.s)." As it happened, Abu
Sufiyan, a sown enemy of the prophet right to the end, and till then did
not even pretend to have embraced Islam, was in Shaam.

He came and speaking diplomatically began his criticism of the prophet
but unintentionally mentioned some thing which interested Heraclius.
Heraclius asked him what kind of a person he was in their community? Abu
Sufiyan said that he was honest and had a good name. The main point is
that Heraclius, too, had no knowledge of Muhammad (a.s.), and even his
courtiers had never heard anything about the Prophet.

The persons who were better informed about the Islamic movement were
firstly, Negus who had received two Muslim missions earlier, and
Maquqass, king of Egypt. The powerful rulers round about Mecca and
Medina and Hejaz region had no interests in that land since it neither
yielded revenue nor was it suited to exploitation and colonisation. The
region was also remote from them and was nothing but a burning hot
desert.

Perhaps any new movement has the possibility of growing in a place
where a relative political vacuum exists. This is, of course, not the
sole condition for the growth of a movement, since there have been other
movements which have grown in places devoid of such political vacuum and
even under local pressure, however the possibilities of success grow
more favourable in a state of a political vacuum so that dominant forces
do not crush it is the offing.

In short the movement of Islam was a perfectly comprehensive movement
from an ideological viewpoint which could provide decisive response to
all the questions, realistic response, useful and practical in every
way.

It was led by someone who had profound faith indomitable spirit
forebearance and perseverance, a leader who had participated in every
phase of the movement, and had fully shared all the difficulties with
the rest, and was not the kind of a leader who would sit in a corner and
issue orders to others. In addition, all this took place in a
socio-political vacuum.

These thus were the original factors leading to the success of the
movement, but naturally behind all these were the divine will and His
aid from which the Muslims benefited repeatedly. But Divine pleasure is
not a gift freely bestowed on everyone; as the holy Qur'an proclaims
repeatedly in various verses that there is victory sent by God, but one
should also make an endeavour,[^76] they made the endeavour and victory
was theirs, as promised.


