How To Come To Believe in Religion?
===================================

The next issue is related to one's desire to accept a religion, or when
someone sincerely wishes to follow a certain religion and be convinced
of his choice. How should one proceed in such a case? In my opinion, in
this case there is but one way and that is that once one out of
conviction declares,

"I believe firmly that so and so is a Prophet of God and what he
proclaims is based on divine revelation, and he quotes the words of God.
I believe in the sayings and teachings of this Prophet, I affirm that
all these are true."

The point that merits attention is that when a person accepts a
religion, the basis of his conviction in that he regards the Prophet to
be a true Prophet and that his source is incontrovertible and certain.
He knows that the Prophet speaks the truth. No scientific reason is
needed to substantiate the Prophet's proclamation since the fact of his
being a prophet is in itself sufficient reason.

The Prophet's being righteous or that someone believes in him may not
be scientific reasons but support his being a prophet. If one should
accept the words of a prophet on the basis of sufficient scientific
reasoning, it is fine and there is no harm in it, but this is not faith
and we cannot call it religious conviction. Religious conviction means
accepting the words of the prophet because he is a prophet.

If I declare that Islam is a true religion and base this assertion on
certain wise and ingenuous laws of Islam, it is fine there being no harm
in it, indeed it is highly desirable, but yet it cannot be termed
religious conviction.

If, for example, on the basis of this Islamic law that ablution and
taking a bath is necessary after sexual intercourse, I should enumerate
a number of advantages and benefits for this bathing from the hygienic,
medical and spiritual points of view, it would be fine and there is no
harm in it.

But should a polluted person resort to bathing because of those
benefits, his action would not be approved as a religious obligation,
since his washing would resemble washing the hand when it is dirty. Bath
after a sexual intercourse is obligatory for every Muslim because
Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) ordered it and all Muslims follow it because
Muhammad (a.s.) is the Prophet.

Principally this is the proper religious attitude and belief; nothing
else would be called a religious attitude whether a religion is true or
not, and whether Islam be a true faith or otherwise. Therefore a
religious attitude with regard to this matter for a Muslim is that
wherever he performs a sexual intercourse, he is obliged to take a bath
and he does so because the Prophet said so.

But if he resorted to reasoning, saying that pollution held many
disadvantages on account of exudations from the root of every single
hair and hence bathing was a wise and advisable thing to do and then
added a number of other benefits for his action, no harm is done but
then what is the real motive behind cleansing the body for a Muslim?

Is it on account of these benefits and qualities, or because the
prophet said so? What motivates a Jew to stop work on Saturdays? If you
ask him why he doesn't work on Saturdays, he answers that Moses (a.s.)
has said so. It would not be right to call the Jew ignorant or stupid
from a scientific viewpoint. Or should we then expect him to ponder
philosophically about this matter in search of an answer.

With regard to the second point which is related to the belief in
religion, the proper course is that as the first step using deep
reflection and reasoning one should discover convincing reasons as to
the existence of a God and then believe that Abraham (a.s.) or Moses
(a.s.), or Jesus (a.s.) or Muhammad (a.s.) is the Prophet of God. These
two steps should be taken with the aid of intelligence and reflection.

It is these two stages which warrant the application of our
intelligence. If a person's reflection, intelligence, wisdom and
knowledge fail him in securing a belief in God and in a prophet of God
such as Moses (a.s.) or Jesus (a.s.) or Muhammad (a.s.) or Abraham
(a.s.) or Noah (a.s.) or in Buddha as a prophet, or in Zoroaster as a
prophet, it would mean failure in his first step.

But if after reflection, reasoning and applying his intelligence he
developed a belief in one God and in a prophet of God, then the steps
that follow would require no intellectual, or scientific reasoning,
since thenceforth every word of the prophet would have validity for him
and he would act accordingly. On the other hand whosoever, inspite of
convincing reasons, fails to comprehend that these are indeed the
Prophet of God has lost in the first step.

Thus the proper methodology suited to theological discussion is that
while discussing belief in God, in a prophet and prophethood, we can
apply intellectual and the so-called scientific reasoning.[^1] But as we
descend from the level of God and prophet, and come to discuss such
problems as the reason why pork was forbidden, our answer is: Because it
is forbidden in accordance with such and such a verse of the Qur'an.

This is sufficient reason and nothing more remains to be said. When
they ask what is the reason for such and such a form of government in
Islam, we answer: Because such and such a tradition, or such a
historical record or such a verse of the holy Qur'an say so. Or we may
say that according to such and such a verse of the Qur'an, such form of
Government is wrong in Islam.

There is no room for such discussions as are normal for social issues.
Of course it would be valid to say that we ought to understand each of
these injunctions of Islam, since many of them have been misunderstood,
or wrongly interpreted or not understood at all. This would be another
approach. For instance, all of us accept the question of slaughter (of
animals to food), but it is another matter to ask about its underlying
philosophy and what has Islam ordained about it.

Let us choose a better example to make the subject clearer, namely the
question of pronouncing the marriage vows or the marriage rites. Why is
it that the marriage vows make a man and a woman lawful for each other?
The answer is: Because this verse and that tradition say so. This is an
sufficient reason. But then: What are the marriage vows?

To comprehend this matter fully, it needs to be explained. In Hamburg a
man and woman came to be married, both of them were Iranian Muslims.
When I spoke to them about the matrimonial vows and explained the term
and recited it to make their marriage legal. When the rites were over,
they said: "we wish someone had explained these things to us in Iran".

I asked how was that? They said, "what we have seen in Iran is that a
number of men and women get together and a priest comes along and
recites a number of Arabic phrases which no one understands, and then
they declare that the concerned pair had become lawful to each other.
This we do not understand".

Naturally it is necessary to understand the meaning of the marriage
vows, apart from the reason for it. Whenever the subject of marriage
comes under discussion, does it mean merely the recitation of a number
of Arabic phrases for half an hour or does it imply something different,
if so what is it? For a proper comprehension of these matters the field
for free discussion is wide open to attempt to understand what Islam had
said on the basis of the divine Book, traditions and history.

The third question is related to our desire to understand the benefits;
virtues and or occasionally even disadvantages in Islamic injunctions.
Should someone say that Islam has created a problem in forbidding the
use of alcoholic beverages, here too, the matter is open to debate. Even
if we were to make up a thousand and one advantages for the ban on
alcohol, those still would not constitute a reason for the ban on
alcohol in Islam, since the only real reason for it is the verse of the
holy Qur'an or a tradition.

Let us recapitulate the main points of the discussion thus far:

For a proper understanding of a religion, the basis is its original
sources which should be studied in the manner of historical research and
not experimental investigation nor philosophical inquiry.

To believe in a religion one should first acquire a belief in God and
prophet through sufficient intellectual reasoning. Then in the next
stage, whatever the prophet has said becomes religion for the believer;
no other approach is of any consequence.

For a proper understanding of Islam and the spirit of its teachings or
any other religion it is necessary to verify those subjects with one's
personal and social life and then evaluate them in close interrelation.
This is another field open for discussion for understanding the
commandments of Islam or of any other religion.

One can freely discuss all the good or bad points of any precept of
Islam or any religion which come to the mind. One is free to examine
them. Should one count thousand and one defects, it still would not
constitute a reason for its invalidity, nor would a thousand and one
virtues be a reason for its validity. In this manner, I believe we could
proceed to discuss. Any other approach to evaluate Islam, Judaism or
Zoroastrianism would mean a deviation from the right path.

For instance if we begin to discuss the importance of fire from a
physical and practical viewpoint or problems of life and such matters
and thereby conclude that Zoroastianism is a true faith, or vice versa,
prove it to be a false religion, either approach would be a deviation
from the right course.


**A Supplementary to the Method**

The question that arises here is, if a person in his choice of a
religion wishes to know whether Islam was better or Christianity or
Judaism and has not yet reached a decision, what should he do? As a
supplementary to complete the method, we can add that at this stage all
blasphemy is permissible and nothing is forbidden.

Now if a total nonbeliever says that he has no faith, what should he do
in his choice of a faith, should we tell him to go and make a survey of
all the religions, and compare them and then decide which one is better
and then make his choice? And if this procedure were necessary, would a
person's lifetime and his capabilities suffice?

In this regard my answer concerning the choice of a religion is that
this approach is not feasible What he should do is to follow the phased
method which I have indicated earlier.

First step: Is the person who is to be accepted as a prophet by the
seeker as truly a prophet and a prophet of God, and is there really a
God who has this man as his prophet? This is common to all religions,
namely those which profess belief in one God. Here the word religion is
used in a general sense to include those faiths which profess a belief
in God and a prophet.

If this seeker found adequate evidence that God exists then a
comparison and survey of various religions would be to no avail or not
of much use at the least not essential. What is important is the
conviction that God exists and He has a prophet and it is essential that
the teachings of that prophet be strictly followed.

And should that prophet be followed by another prophet who I may
believe has been sent by God, then it would be necessary to study this
new faith and if it proved to be true then the new prophet takes
precedence.

As for those whose prophet was the last prophet, no verification about
subsequent claimants to prophethood is required. If sufficient evidence
was provided by the acknowledged Prophet that he would have no
successor, further verification is not necessary since our belief in him
and in his declaration that he would not be succeeded by another prophet
would be sufficient reason to believe in him.

But had he predicted a successor to himself, the task before his
followers would be easier and shorter. Therefore a study and comparison
of all religions is neither necessary, nor practicable and nor is it
likely to produce any effect.

**In Answer to Another Question**

**Question:**

For a proper recognition of a religious school, as you said, faith in
God is a simpler method, but each divine religion explains God in its
own peculiar way. So in order to identify which one is the true God, we
must have recourse to the original prophet. In the present age it is no
easy task to gain access to that prophet and verify his actual
sayings.

**Answer:**

Every person who wishes to acquire belief in a faith, must follow this
process, whether it is a simple task or a hard one. Each person must
study and confirm that a prophet called Jesus did actually exist or not
and whether he was a prophet or not. If it was confirmed that Jesus
(a.s.) was a prophet, it would be enough, since you would be a reliable
source.

Having recognised that Jesus (a.s.), Moses (a.s.), or Muhammad (a.s.)
is a prophet, you must acknowledge his teachings and act upon them. Of
course which of his sayings we should act upon is the next stage, not
our primary objective. However, what proof is there that Muhammad was a
prophet? Our investigations in this case should proceed as for
historical research with an extensive study of historical sources in
order to acknowledge the fact that fourteen centuries ago, one Muhammad,
had indeed existed who was a prophet of God. Other than this there is no
way.


