Method Suitable For Theological Research
========================================

The topic under discussion is understanding Islam and the world
Muslims. But what I wish to discuss first is what research methodology
is suitable for theological discussion; or, in other words the approach
is research in religious matters.

Discussion of any subject itself dictates when that the method should
be appropriate to that subject. For example, today, when a researcher
wishes to discuss and carry out research of a particular disease, he
selects a particular methodology, makes a survey of the symptoms and
effects of the disease and its treatment, and recommends that a number
of patients suffering from that particular disease should be placed
under observation and subjected to various clinical tests of their
tissues, blood, urine etc. and analysed to prepare a scientific table in
order to diagnose the peculiarities of that disease and the manner of
its treatment, and identify the bacterial factors and establish the
cause of infection.

Today if someone wishing to establish the symptomology of the disease
and arrive at a diagnosis, instead of employing the necessary means such
as well-equipped laboratories and hospitals, statistical data, and
experiments on animals and human beings, declared that for the diagnosis
he has decided to proceed by conducting a nightly study of the stars for
forty nights past midnight to discover the symptoms and cause of illness
and the procedure for treatment of that disease, he will be made fun of
in the scientific circles. He would be told that in choosing this
course, even if he went to a well-equipped observatory to study the
movement of the stars, their form, and how they rise and set, such
activities and thoughts would not bear even the slightest effect on the
patient, or the cause of his disease, on an its effects nor its
treatment. Or if he were to declare that for the purpose of studying
this matter he had decided to place an astrolabe in front of him and in
accordance with special signs and calculations provided by the astrolabe
and even computing by the art of arithmetical numbers, he will discover
the cause and effects of that disease and its cure, again science would
laugh at him, and say to him: To identify a disease as far as human
intellect has been able to establish requires that a study of the
patients be made and laboratory tests and experiments be conducted and
their results compared in order to diagnose that disease.

If someone declares in a session how nice it would be to secure some
information about the way the people lived in Indonesia three thousand
years ago, and if the interest of those present in the session was
aroused in studying the precise details about the life and beliefs of
those people scientifically and thus undertake a scientific project,
naturally we would ask them about their approach to this research. If
they answer that they have decided to confine a number of Indonesians in
a hospital and give them blood tests in order to analyse these people's
life three thousand. years ago, this, too, would provoke laughter. For
such proceedings as the blood and tissue tests, no matter how useful
those might be for the diagnosis of a disease or its treatment, yet it
would not be of the slightest value for learning about the life of
Indonesians who lived three thousand years ago.

Let us take a step further. Among the various political systems which
is the best system for organising and administering a society, the
communist or socialist or the capitalist one; which is more valuable and
beneficial from an economic point of view. Either democratic or
dictatorial forms among the existing political systems are more
suitable? How should a researcher set about this task? Someone might
suggest that observation would be the best way to clarify this problem.
If we were to ask how could observation be applied, they would answer by
carrying out calculations about the 'physics' of the society and see
what form the society and its organism should take. But the research
methodology used by an atomic scientist for atomic research would hardly
be practicable for a study of various social systems, and its
conclusions would be irrelevant. Thus it is quite evident that the
method chosen for the study and research in any subject must be
appropriate for that subject.

**A Methodology for Research in Theological Topics**

The foremost issue in our discussion is what method without any
prejudice, is suitable for gaining an understanding of a religion? In my
opinion the proper method for an understanding of a religion is to get
hold of the original source material of that religion, and work on it in
the way of research in narratives and traditions - neither experimental
nor intellectual approach - but rather as in the study of history which
in modern methodology is called 'Historical Research Methodology'.
Working on the reliable sources of that faith we can gain an
understanding of it whether we believe in that religion or not.

Let us take the example of a religion which we do not believe is. For
instance, wish to study Buddhism and know what Buddhism is. Neither
intellectual, mathematical or scientific discussions, nor physical or
chemical arguments would produce any result. Astrological or celestial
discussions would equally be of no value. The correct way to understand
Buddha's laws would be to refer to reliable historical sources, and
evaluate them from the viewpoint of authenticity and validity, and then
compare them, and gather all that has been for and against the Buddhist
faith, and through a comparative study draw scholarly conclusions about
what Buddhism really is, whether we believe in it or not. This is the
first consideration about understanding any religion.

Suppose we wish to know what Judaism is, and what is the religion of
the Jews. Here exist two aspects: either the object is to know what the
present day Jews believe in and what are their actions and beliefs, or
the purpose may be to know what the original Jewish faith was at the
time of its appearance, and what had (Moses) Musa (a.s.) delivered to
the Israelites as a religion. There are two different methods for these
two aspects.

The research into the religion Moses brought for the Israelites, has no
relation with physics, chemistry, mathematics, celestial aspects and the
rest. Research in this aspect requires close study of the Old Testament,
the interpretation of the Old Testament, and the books written about
this faith by the contemporary Greek and Egyptian historians because
unfortunately no other sources are available. To proceed with our study
we collect these sources make a comparative study taking into account
all pros and cons about this faith to be able to conclude, in a
scholarly manner, what had Musa (a.s.) really delivered.

But if the object were to understand the Jewish faith in the
contemporary world, we should send a number of investigators to various
parts of the world to see how the Jews practise their religion in their
every day lives. We should study their publications in various
languages, interview their religious leaders, and collate all the
information gathered to reach conclusions about the Jewish ideology and
their practice in the present day world.

Similarly with regards to Islam, if we wish to study it, irrespective
of being Muslims, there are two approaches: firstly, when we wish to
know what the Muslims believe in and how they practise it, and, secondly
when our purpose is to study the Islamic faith, namely the nature of
Islam which was delivered by Muhammad (a.s.) bin-Abdullah. If we wish to
study the Muslims of to-day, or those of one, two or five centuries ago
the approach is the same. To study their state to-day, we should travel
to various countries. In this respect the Europeans adopt the proper
method, and thus most of their writings are accurate, since they travel
to various places, and observe things closely, make personal contact,
ask questions, take pictures and make films, and so they declare that
the Muslims of certain regions live in such and such a manner. Of course
sometimes they make hasty judgment after visiting only a few towns and
villages and announce their views, whereas such a conclusion does not
conform to a scientific methodology. what they can conclude after such
insufficient visits and observation is that in such and such villages
and towns Muslims live in such a manner and not generalise it to include
the entire Muslim population of the world, since such a generalisation
would be incorrect and contrary to the scientific method.

If we wish to say what kind of Islam was brought by Muhammad (a.s.) for
mankind from Allah, we should first gather all the reliable sources
including the Qur'an, traditions, contemporary history and writings of
the Prophet's time, even those opposed to the Prophet, and after a
thorough study, comparative research and evaluation conclude that this
is what Muhammad (a.s.) introduced as Islam. There is no other way,
since none of the other scientific or investigative research methods
bear any relation this topic which deals with the original form of a
religion and its present day practice.

**How to Come to Believe in Religion?**

The next issue is related to one's desire to accept a religion, or when
someone sincerely wishes to follow a certain religion and be convinced
of his choice. How should one proceed in such a case? In my opinion, in
this case there is but one way and that is that once one out of
conviction declares, "I believe firmly that so and so is a Prophet of
God and what he proclaims is based on divine revelation, and he quotes
the words of God. I believe in the sayings and teachings of this
Prophet, I affirm that all these are true."

The point that merits attention is that when a person accepts a
religion, the basis of his conviction in that he regards the Prophet to
be a true Prophet and that his source is incontrovertible and certain.
He knows that the Prophet speaks the truth. No scientific reason is
needed to substantiate the Prophet's proclamation since the fact of his
being a prophet is in itself sufficient reason. The Prophet's being
righteous or that someone believes in him may not be scientific reasons
but support his being a prophet. If one should accept the words of a
prophet on the basis of sufficient scientific reasoning, it is fine and
there is no harm in it, but this is not faith and we cannot call it
religious conviction. Religious conviction means accepting the words of
the prophet because he is a prophet. If I declare that Islam is a true
religion and base this assertion on certain wise and ingenuous laws of
Islam, it is fine there being no harm in it, indeed it is highly
desirable, but yet it cannot be termed religious conviction. If, for
example, on the basis of this Islamic law that ablution and taking a
bath is necessary after sexual intercourse, I should enumerate a number
of advantages and benefits for this bathing from the hygienic, medical
and spiritual points of view, it would be fine and there is no harm in
it. But should a polluted person resort to bathing because of those
benefits, his action would not be approved as a religious obligation,
since his washing would resemble washing the hand when it is dirty. Bath
after a sexual intercourse is obligatory for every Muslim because
Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) ordered it and all Muslims follow it because
Muhammad (a.s.) is the Prophet.

Principally this is the proper religious attitude and belief; nothing
else would be called a religious attitude whether a religion is true or
not, and whether Islam be a true faith or otherwise. Therefore a
religious attitude with regard to this matter for a Muslim is that
wherever he performs a sexual intercourse, he is obliged to take a bath
and he does so because the Prophet said so. But if he resorted to
reasoning, saying that pollution held many disadvantages on account of
exudations from the root of every single hair and hence bathing was a
wise and advisable thing to do and then added a number of other benefits
for his action, no harm is done but then what is the real motive behind
cleansing the body for a Muslim? Is it on account of these benefits and
qualities, or because the prophet said so? What motivates a Jew to stop
work on Saturdays? If you ask him why he doesn't work on Saturdays, he
answers that Moses (a.s.) has said so. It would not be right to call the
Jew ignorant or stupid from a scientific viewpoint. Or should we then
expect him to ponder philosophically about this matter in search of an
answer.

With regard to the second point which is related to the belief in
religion, the proper course is that as the first step using deep
reflection and reasoning one should discover convincing reasons as to
the existence of a God and then believe that Abraham (a.s.) or Moses
(a.s.), or Jesus (a.s.) or Muhammad (a.s.) is the Prophet of God. These
two steps should be taken with the aid of intelligence and reflection.
It is these two stages which warrant the application of our
intelligence. If a person's reflection, intelligence, wisdom and
knowledge fail him in securing a belief in God and in a prophet of God
such as Moses (a.s.) or Jesus (a.s.) or Muhammad (a.s.) or Abraham
(a.s.) or Noah (a.s.) or in Buddha as a prophet, or in Zoroaster as a
prophet, it would mean failure in his first step. But if after
reflection, reasoning and applying his intelligence he developed a
belief in one God and in a prophet of God, then the steps that follow
would require no intellectual, or scientific reasoning, since
thenceforth every word of the prophet would have validity for him and he
would act accordingly. On the other hand whosoever, inspite of
convincing reasons, fails to comprehend that these are indeed the
Prophet of God has lost in the first step.

Thus the proper methodology suited to theological discussion is that
while discussing belief in God, in a prophet and prophethood, we can
apply intellectual and the so-called scientific reasoning.[^1] But as we
descend from the level of God and prophet, and come to discuss such
problems as the reason why pork was forbidden, our answer is: Because it
is forbidden in accordance with such and such a verse of the Qur'an.
This is sufficient reason and nothing more remains to be said. When they
ask what is the reason for such and such a form of government in Islam,
we answer: Because such and such a tradition, or such a historical
record or such a verse of the holy Qur'an say so. Or we may say that
according to such and such a verse of the Qur'an, such form of
Government is wrong in Islam.

There is no room for such discussions as are normal for social issues.
Of course it would be valid to say that we ought to understand each of
these injunctions of Islam, since many of them have been misunderstood,
or wrongly interpreted or not understood at all. This would be another
approach. For instance, all of us accept the question of slaughter (of
animals to food), but it is another matter to ask about its underlying
philosophy and what has Islam ordained about it.

Let us choose a better example to make the subject clearer, namely the
question of pronouncing the marriage vows or the marriage rites. Why is
it that the marriage vows make a man and a woman lawful for each other?
The answer is: Because this verse and that tradition say so. This is an
sufficient reason. But then: What are the marriage vows? To comprehend
this matter fully, it needs to be explained. In Hamburg a man and woman
came to be married, both of them were Iranian Muslims. When I spoke to
them about the matrimonial vows and explained the term and recited it to
make their marriage legal. When the rites were over, they said: "we wish
someone had explained these things to us in Iran". I asked how was that?
They said, "what we have seen in Iran is that a number of men and women
get together and a priest comes along and recites a number of Arabic
phrases which no one understands, and then they declare that the
concerned pair had become lawful to each other. This we do not
understand".

Naturally it is necessary to understand the meaning of the marriage
vows, apart from the reason for it. Whenever the subject of marriage
comes under discussion, does it mean merely the recitation of a number
of Arabic phrases for half an hour or does it imply something different,
if so what is it? For a proper comprehension of these matters the field
for free discussion is wide open to attempt to understand what Islam had
said on the basis of the divine Book, traditions and history.

The third question is related to our desire to understand the benefits;
virtues and or occasionally even disadvantages in Islamic injunctions.
Should someone say that Islam has created a problem in forbidding the
use of alcoholic beverages, here too, the matter is open to debate. Even
if we were to make up a thousand and one advantages for the ban on
alcohol, those still would not constitute a reason for the ban on
alcohol in Islam, since the only real reason for it is the verse of the
holy Qur'an or a tradition.

Let us recapitulate the main points of the discussion thus far:

1. For a proper understanding of a religion, the basis is its original
sources which should be studied in the manner of historical research and
not experimental investigation nor philosophical inquiry.

2. To believe in a religion one should first acquire a belief in God
and prophet through sufficient intellectual reasoning. Then in the next
stage, whatever the prophet has said becomes religion for the believer;
no other approach is of any consequence.

3. For a proper understanding of Islam and the spirit of its teachings
or any other religion it is necessary to verify those subjects with
one's personal and social life and then evaluate them in close
interrelation. This is another field open for discussion for
understanding the commandments of Islam or of any other religion.

4. One can freely discuss all the good or bad points of any precept of
Islam or any religion which come to the mind. One is free to examine
them. Should one count thousand and one defects, it still would not
constitute a reason for its invalidity, nor would a thousand and one
virtues be a reason for its validity. In this manner, I believe we could
proceed to discuss. Any other approach to evaluate Islam, Judaism or
Zoroastrianism would mean a deviation from the right path. For instance
if we begin to discuss the importance of fire from a physical and
practical viewpoint or problems of life and such matters and thereby
conclude that Zoroastianism is a true faith, or vice versa, prove it to
be a false religion, either approach would be a deviation from the right
course.

**A Supplementary to the Method**

The question that arises here is, if a person in his choice of a
religion wishes to know whether Islam was better or Christianity or
Judaism and has not yet reached a decision, what should he do? As a
supplementary to complete the method, we can add that at this stage all
blasphemy is permissible and nothing is forbidden. Now if a total
nonbeliever says that he has no faith, what should he do in his choice
of a faith, should we tell him to go and make a survey of all the
religions, and compare them and then decide which one is better and then
make his choice? And if this procedure were necessary, would a person's
lifetime and his capabilities suffice?

In this regard my answer concerning the choice of a religion is that
this approach is not feasible What he should do is to follow the phased
method which I have indicated earlier.

First step: Is the person who is to be accepted as a prophet by the
seeker as truly a prophet and a prophet of God, and is there really a
God who has this man as his prophet? This is common to all religions,
namely those which profess belief in one God. Here the word religion is
used in a general sense to include those faiths which profess a belief
in God and a prophet. If this seeker found adequate evidence that God
exists then a comparison and survey of various religions would be to no
avail or not of much use at the least not essential. What is important
is the conviction that God exists and He has a prophet and it is
essential that the teachings of that prophet be strictly followed. And
should that prophet be followed by another prophet who I may believe has
been sent by God, then it would be necessary to study this new faith and
if it proved to be true then the new prophet takes precedence.

As for those whose prophet was the last prophet, no verification about
subsequent claimants to prophethood is required. If sufficient evidence
was provided by the acknowledged Prophet that he would have no
successor, further verification is not necessary since our belief in him
and in his declaration that he would not be succeeded by another prophet
would be sufficient reason to believe in him. But had he predicted a
successor to himself, the task before his followers would be easier and
shorter. Therefore a study and comparison of all religions is neither
necessary, nor practicable and nor is it likely to produce any effect.

**In Answer to Another Question**

Question: For a proper recognition of a religious school, as you said,
faith in God is a simpler method, but each divine religion explains God
in its own peculiar way. So in order to identify which one is the true
God, we must have recourse to the original prophet. In the present age
it is no easy task to gain access to that prophet and verify his actual
sayings.

Answer: Every person who wishes to acquire belief in a faith, must
follow this process, whether it is a simple task or a hard one. Each
person must study and confirm that a prophet called Jesus did actually
exist or not and whether he was a prophet or not. If it was confirmed
that Jesus (a.s.) was a prophet, it would be enough, since you would be
a reliable source. Having recognised that Jesus (a.s.), Moses (a.s.), or
Muhammad (a.s.) is a prophet, you must acknowledge his teachings and act
upon them. Of course which of his sayings we should act upon is the next
stage, not our primary objective. However, what proof is there that
Muhammad was a prophet? Our investigations in this case should proceed
as for historical research with an extensive study of historical sources
in order to acknowledge the fact that fourteen centuries ago, one
Muhammad, had indeed existed who was a prophet of God. Other than this
there is no way.

**Where do We Begin?**

Concerning the fundamentals of religion, one can commence at two
starting points: one of them is God, and the other the Prophet. Most
people begin with the Prophet. In the case of Islam they begin with
Muhammad (a.s.) as a man endowed with extraordinary powers and is in
communication with a supernatural being. Thus they come to believe in
him. From here they deduce that the force that Muhammad (a.s.)
represents is God, and thus most of them acquire faith. In the times of
the Prophet himself a number of persons were seized with a belief about
God Salman (Farsi) was one of those who reflected about God, and then
followed up this research. They realised that the teachings about God
that prevailed around them were nothing but a set of illusions and
superstitions When such individuals heard that a prophet had risen in
Mecca who talked about God, they went there and saw that indeed he
possessed both the merit to be God's representative as judged by his
words, and also manifested the signs which proved that he was truly the
Prophet of God. In this case their faith in God existed prior to their
faith in His prophet, and even prior to their contact with the
Prophet.

Then there were others who had no faith in God. They were materialists
or naturalists, and did not believe in the existence of God at all.
However their contact with the Prophet altogether transformed them, and
through the Prophet they acquired faith in God Of course, later they
turned directly to God, but the foundation of their faith was initially
laid by the Prophet. Thus the principle of faith in God as well as
disbelief in Him both co-exist among the Prophet's contemporaries.
Through a comparative study of recognition of God as it appears in
various religions we can conclude that a certain religion conforms more
appropriately with our intellect and reasoning yet it is not proof
enough for believing such and such a person is a prophet. Likewise the
prophethood of a prophet cannot be proved only through his sublime
teachings pertaining to recognition of God. Let us suppose that a priest
comes along and through theological discourse delivers excellent
instruction about God, would he then be a prophet, and would his
teachings be adopted as the way of faith? Certain great philosophers who
had no belief in religion, made noteworthy statements about God. Would
you then regard them to be prophets? Although they did not claim to be
prophets, but what if they did? Therefore this is no ground. To
acknowledge someone as a prophet, we should study his life, his
antecedents and his education, and when we observe that his mental, and
spiritual personality is not an acquired one, only then we conclude that
he has gained that exalted personality from an extraordinary source, and
that proves him to be a prophet.

That is why the Qur'an reiterates the fact that the prophet was
unlettered. Therefore, we acknowledge our faith in God and the Prophet
simultaneously without placing one before the other and declare one
faith in God and the prophet at the same time. Then the words of that
Prophet would have validity for us, and to reach this conclusion a prior
study of comparative religions was never needed.

With this brief introduction, we can proceed to the main topic of
discussion which is recognizing Islam and Muslims of the world under the
title of "Islam and world Muslims".


