Where To We Begin?
==================

Concerning the fundamentals of religion, one can commence at two
starting points: one of them is God, and the other the Prophet. Most
people begin with the Prophet. In the case of Islam they begin with
Muhammad (a.s.) as a man endowed with extraordinary powers and is in
communication with a supernatural being. Thus they come to believe in
him.

From here they deduce that the force that Muhammad (a.s.) represents is
God, and thus most of them acquire faith. In the times of the Prophet
himself a number of persons were seized with a belief about God Salman
(Farsi) was one of those who reflected about God, and then followed up
this research.

They realised that the teachings about God that prevailed around them
were nothing but a set of illusions and superstitions When such
individuals heard that a prophet had risen in Mecca who talked about
God, they went there and saw that indeed he possessed both the merit to
be God's representative as judged by his words, and also manifested the
signs which proved that he was truly the Prophet of God. In this case
their faith in God existed prior to their faith in His prophet, and even
prior to their contact with the Prophet.

Then there were others who had no faith in God. They were materialists
or naturalists, and did not believe in the existence of God at all.
However their contact with the Prophet altogether transformed them, and
through the Prophet they acquired faith in God Of course, later they
turned directly to God, but the foundation of their faith was initially
laid by the Prophet.

Thus the principle of faith in God as well as disbelief in Him both
co-exist among the Prophet's contemporaries. Through a comparative study
of recognition of God as it appears in various religions we can conclude
that a certain religion conforms more appropriately with our intellect
and reasoning yet it is not proof enough for believing such and such a
person is a prophet. Likewise the prophethood of a prophet cannot be
proved only through his sublime teachings pertaining to recognition of
God.

Let us suppose that a priest comes along and through theological
discourse delivers excellent instruction about God, would he then be a
prophet, and would his teachings be adopted as the way of faith? Certain
great philosophers who had no belief in religion, made noteworthy
statements about God.

Would you then regard them to be prophets? Although they did not claim
to be prophets, but what if they did? Therefore this is no ground. To
acknowledge someone as a prophet, we should study his life, his
antecedents and his education, and when we observe that his mental, and
spiritual personality is not an acquired one, only then we conclude that
he has gained that exalted personality from an extraordinary source, and
that proves him to be a prophet.

That is why the Qur'an reiterates the fact that the prophet was
unlettered. Therefore, we acknowledge our faith in God and the Prophet
simultaneously without placing one before the other and declare one
faith in God and the prophet at the same time. Then the words of that
Prophet would have validity for us, and to reach this conclusion a prior
study of comparative religions was never needed.

With this brief introduction, we can proceed to the main topic of
discussion which is recognizing Islam and Muslims of the world under the
title of "Islam and world Muslims".


**Birthplace of Islam**

In order to acquire a close familiarization with Islam it is necessary
to know the environment in which Islam took birth and started to spread
since such an understanding greatly aids the recognition of that
entity.

It is possible to have a superficial knowledge of certain matters
without being familiar with their knowing their background or the
conditions of their origin. But a profound understanding of a certain
being or phenomenon depends wholly on a thorough familiarization of the
background of that being or phenomenon.

This applies equally to individuals or technical , artistic or social
phenomena. For this reason, a deep understanding of the environments of
Islam at the time of its birth is essential. The environments at the
time of the birth of Islam may be misconstrued to mean the region
including Mecca, or Mecca and Medina, or Mecca, Medina and Ta'if, or
Hejaz or Arabia.

It should be noted though that the noble Prophet of Islam from the very
outset as he began his call to Islam while he was still at Mecca and
Islam had not yet spread to Medina, began his call in the following
manner:

"Come and embrace a faith the light of which will spread over Iran,
Rome, Abyssinia and all other places." Thus from beginning the Prophet's
call was a universal one addressing the civilised world of that time.
Moreover, in the 6th year of (Hijra) migration, namely six years after
the prophet's immigration to Medina, he wrote letters all of which are
found in historical records namely .

to Khusrow Parviz King of Persia, Heraclius[^2] ruler of a part of the
Roman Empire, Mequqass ruler of Egypt,[^3] Najashi (or Negus) ruler of
Abyssinia,[^4] Ruler of Ghassan as a deputy of Rome,[^5] and to the ruler
of Hira of the tribe of AI-e-Mundir and a vice regent of the throne of
Iran, inviting all of them to accept Islam.

Thus it becomes apparent that in order to know the background of the
rise of Islam, we cannot con fine ourselves to Mecca, Medina and Ta'if,
or to the Arab Lands but expand our view to at least include all such
regions as the Prophet himself called to accept Islam in his own time.


**A brief description of Arabia**

The name Arabia is applied to a land populated by Arabic-speaking
people. At the time of the birth of the Prophet, the Arabic-speaking
region was not so vast as it is to-day; on one side it was bounded by
the Persian Gulf much as it is to-day,

since at that time, too, the southern borders of the Persian Gulf were
inhabited by Arabs In Iraq the boundary was almost along the Tigris and
the Euphrates namely that side of the Tigris where Arabic is now the
main language In the region between Iran and the Tigris the main
language was not Arabic, but Kurdish, Persian and some local dialects
with Arabic as the main language that side of River Tigris.

In fact the Arabs now inhabiting Khuzestan are not the original
inhabitants but migrated to this region after Islam. In the north were
the present countries of Shaam or Syria and Jordan where a number of
Arab migrant tribes lived in the time of Islam, the period of that
migration will be explained later.

In the north, too, Arabic was not, unlike to-day, the main language,
though a considerable Arab migrants had settled in the valley of the
Jordan River. It may be observed that at present the Arab land, have
extended as far as Turkey, whereas at that time it was limited more to
the south towards Jordan. The present Lebanon and Syria were not Arabic
speaking. In Jordan, too, Arabic was not the main language, and only the
Arab migrants spoke Arabic. In this respect Jordan resembled the present
Khuzestan where a group speak Arabic and another speak Persian.

In the west, in a significant part of Africa where Arabic is now
spoken, the main language at the time was not Arabic. Egypt, Sudan,
Somalia, Libya, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia and even Abyssinia and other
parts where Arabic is now spoken, Arabic was not the main language at
that time.

Thus we see that at the time of the birth of Islam the region of Arabia
and the Arab land from the viewpoint of the Arabic language was located
in the south of the Persian Gulf and the Sea of Oman extending in the
west up to the Red Sea - beyond which Arabic was not prevalent - and in
the north till the Jordan River valley beyond which Arabic was not
prevalent, and in the east to the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. This,
then was the extent of Arabia at the time of the birth of Islam.

Here it should be pointed out that the language spoken in the regions
beyond these frontiers, namely in a part of Africa, Shaam, Syria,
Lebanon, Jordan and to the east of the Tigris and Euphrates in Iraq, had
been branches of Semitic languages, having a common root with Arabic -
in the same way that Persian has a common root with German, Indian
Sanskrit and Indo-European languages.

The local languages of Somalia, Abyssinia, Egypt and a part of Jordan
(which was Hebrew) and those of the present Lebanon and Syria (which had
been Phoenician), and those of other parts (which had been Chaldean,
Assyrian etc.) were all like the Arabic language Semitic in origin and
are recognised as Semitic languages and both from the viewpoint of
script as well as vocabulary linked together.

Georgie Zeydan, in his book, 'History of Civilisation,[^6] narrates that
at that time if someone went from Arabia to Abyssinai, or from Jordan or
the Lebanon to Hejaz, he did not feel like an alien, the languages were
so much alike that he could understand the local language without the
aid of an interpreter, and if he stayed there for a little while, he
could learn the local language - the same way that a Persian-speaking
person visiting Kurdestan can learn the local language within a short
time.

Thus the Arabic speaking region of to-day used to be the region of
Semitic languages, which have common roots with Arabic, and is thus
easily understood by their neighbours, while the Arabian peninsula was
the home to Arabs who spoke pure unmixed Arabic.

**Origin of Arab Tribes**

The inhabitants of the Arabian peninsula who were generally called
Arabs, were in two groups: Qahtani Arabs' and 'Adnani Arabs.' Qahtani
Arabs were those whose original abode was Yemen. The Yeminis and Yemen
of that time included the present Aden, the Sheikhdoms of the Persian
Gulf littoral and the Sea of Oman.

The Adnani Arabs were centered around Najd and Hejaz that is to say
around Mecca stretching as far as the Hejaz Desert. Both the Qahtani and
Adnani Arabs share a common historical root, originating from the same
ancestors. You can imagine an Arab family of three thousand years ago
steadily multiplying in numbers, then branching into two sections The
descendants of Ya'rib Ibn Qahtan went to Yemen. Others who went to
Mecca - and founded Mecca - the descendants of Ismail, because they had
an ancestor named Adnan, came to be called Adnani.

Arabs who went to Yemen, the Qahtani Arab, had come to the land of good
fortune, because Yemen was a better land compared with Mecca, Najd and
the Arabian Desert from the viewpoint of natural potential climate and
water. Accordingly in the lands of Yemen, civilisation and industry and
urban development began much sooner. The history of urban development
and civilisation in Yemen, the home of the Qahtani Arabs, dates several
centuries before Hejaz and Najd, the home of the 'Adnani Arabs.

It would be pertinent at this stage to consider how the factor of
environment influenced the development of two branches of a common stock
who shared common language as well as many other characteristics.
According to historians, not only from the viewpoint of urbanisation and
development, but also from the viewpoint of political organisations and
government, Yemen and Qahtani Arabs were centuries ahead of Najd and
Hejaz and the Adnani Arabs. Further explanations will follow about this
aspect.

In Yemen the Hemyari Kings ruled as the crowned monarchs at the time
when in Hejaz social organisations had not developed beyond tribal ways.
Ya'qubi, the great Islamic historian narrates that the crown worn by
Hemyar, founder of the Hemyari dynasty was made of silver with a large
ruby set in the middle and such was the situation prevailing in Yemen
several centuries before the establishment of a government in Hejaz,
Najd and Arabia.

From the viewpoint of technology and civilisation, long before the
appearance of such developments over the ordinary tribal life in Najd
and Hejaz, the historical 'Mareb Dam' had been constructed. In this
regard a historian narrates that this dam was six kilometers in length
situated between two mountains so that the winter rains and torrents
would collect in the form of a lake.

It had a number of sluice gates through which passed seventy irrigation
channels passed for irrigating seventy agricultural sectors. Mareb Dam
had been built eight centuries before Islam and as it happened two
centuries before Christ, the object is to show the background of the
birth place of Islam, as also to compare Yemen with Hejaz which was the
location of the advent of Islam.

**Mareb Dam**

Mareb Dam played an effective role in the development of Yemen which
flourished alongside of it. Strabon, the famous Greek geographer and
traveller (about 63 B.C. to 26 A.D ) whose name is mentioned frequently
in the annals of history, has written many strange accounts about the
city of Mareb and its wonders and fine palaces which have been quoted in
various books of history. This city had attracted travellers from many
parts of the world and flourished until the second century A.D. From the
beginning of the second century A.D.

it started to deteriorate. The interesting point which historians have
recorded is that since individuals were unable to maintain the Dam, this
task had to be performed by their governments, but as public authorities
had become inefficient and were too busy feasting and drinking, they
neglected their responsibility of preserving the Dam. Consequently it
fell into disrepair. This shows that in those times the people of Yemen
expected their government to undertake such tasks.

Mareb Dam began to deteriorate in the beginning of second country A.D.
so that all realised that it would collapse within the next ten or
twenty years So the Qahtani Arabs of Yemen began to abandon their homes
fearing that with the collapse of the Dam no water would be available
for irrigation or farming.

They were also alarmed that when the Dam collapsed it would release a
torrent which would destroy their homes and fields and everything else
that came in its way Consequently such fears caused the Qahtani tribes
to begin emigrating One group emigrated towards Hira and the land of
Iraq and settled along the banks of the Tigris, and founded the
government of Munadherah or Al-e-Mundher.

The people & Munadherah on account of their proximity to Iran, became
tributaries of the Iranian governments possibly maintaining political
relations with them. Another group migrated to the territory near the
present day Jordan, and settled in the flourishing Jordan Valley. They
were the earliest Arabs to settle there and set up the Ghassani dynasty
which normally had relations with Rome.

A third group of them in their migration came to Yathrib (the present
Medina) which was at that time home to the Jews, however this subject
will be discussed later in the chapter related to Judaism. These last
Arabs formed the twin tribes of 'Aus' and 'Khazraj' whose names appear
frequently in the course of the history of Islam. These two tribes
settled in Yathrib where some farming land and water were available.

Another group, namely Bani Khuza'a moved to Mecca and fought the Adnani
Arabs of Mecca, drove them out and took control of Mecca themselves. Yet
another group called Bani 'Addi went to Najd and became the rulers of
the greater part of the desert.

What is note worthy here is that a civilised people accustomed to
urbanisation and well developed social existence should as a result of
an anticipated catastrophe, migrate from their home land, and then
organise their communities wherever they set foot.

Those who went to Shaam, established the Ghassani rule; those who went
to Hira, founded the dynasty of Al-e-Mundher, No'manian and Munadherah;
whose who settled in Medina, namely the tribes of Aus and Khazraj, will
be discussed in subsequent chapters; and the group that went to Mecca,
pushed away the Adnanis who were the least developed.

These were the ones who went to the desert, dominated the waste lands
of the Arabian Desert. The remaining Arabs who stayed back in Yemen,
either on account of laziness or hoping that no calamity such as the
collapse of the Dam would occur, were annihilated by the well-known
flood of 'Arem in the end of the second century A.D. which has been
mentioned in the Chapter of Saba of the holy Qur'an, where a brief
history of Yemen is narrated.

Thus the structure of Arabia in the second century A.D. consisted of
the government of one group of Arabs in the present day Jordan
neighbouring ancient Rome; another group building a city state in the
present Iraq and Hira set up a state neighbouring Iran; another group
settled in Yathrib as neighbours of the Jews, and lastly another group
of Qahtani Arabs settled in Mecca and its suburbs. This then was the
situation four centuries before the birth of Islam.


