Economic Situation
==================

The leading aspect of the Arabs economy of that time from the viewpoint
of production was animal husbandry and agriculture wherever it was
possible. As far as trade and exchange were concerned, their main trade
was with foreign lands. Both the Arabs of Yemen and Hejaz were engaged
in this activity, but since foreign trade must have links with home
trade in order to exchange home-made products with foreign goods, the
Arabs of that age resorted to the same practice in keeping with the
level of their civilisation as they do in modern times. In the developed
world of today one of the most significant essential and effective of
economic practices is the organising of commercial and industrial fairs.
The Arabs, too, at that time arranged fairs in the form of seasonal
bazaars In the same way that today in each season a fair is held in a
city or locality in relation to local conditions, the Arabs, too,
followed the same practice at different times and in particular places.
A few examples of the extensive and famous exhibitions which were held
in Hejaz and Najd were as follows:

1. The 'Dumatul-Jandal Fair', held in the month of Rabial-Awwal under
the auspices of two local tribes of Ghassan and Kalb near Shaam.

2. The Mashqar Fair' held in the month of Jamadi-al-'Ula in a place of
the same name, under the auspices of Banu-Tim tribe.[^8]

3. The 'Sahar Fair', held on the first of the month of Rajab.[^9]

4. The 'Ria Fair' following their Sahar Fair' in the same month of
Rajab, under the patronage of the Jalandi tribc and its ruler.[^10]

5. The 'Aden Fair', held at the beginning of the month of Ramadhan,
According to historians since this fair dealt exclusively with perfumes
and scents, it was the great market of perfumers.[^11]

6. The 'San'a Fair', held in the middle of Ramadhan

7. The 'Rabia Fair', held in the present Hadamut.

8. The 'Ukaz Fair', held in the month of Dhil-Qa'dah near Ta'if

9. The 'Dhil Majaz Fair', held when all other fairs had concluded and
the merchants who had been busy making a round of these fairs during
those months, finally headed to Mecca, making a pilgrimage to the Ka'aba
in the month of Dhil Hajjah, and dispersed after performing the Hajj
ceremonies.

These fairs and seasonal bazaars were the most valuable and cherished
commercial events in Arabia of those days. The merchant class who
profited from those fairs did their best not to let them become mere
exhibitions. They organised colourful ceremonies and musical shows and
other celebrations as well as exhibits of literary works, poetry and
arts. Thus these exhibitions were show places worth a visit both for
those who intended to buy new and fineries and goods, or listen to the
latest and the finest pieces of verse, or fine music. Thus the poets,
too, were drawn to these exhibitions to recite their poems before judges
who judged their poems. In this manner the fairs served both as
commercial shows and literary societies.

**Form of Government in Pagan Times**

Sociologists say that in those days when man lived alone (if indeed
there were such days!) he had no need of a master, since he was his own
master and servant; his own ruler, his own government and his own
nation. But as soon as he emerged from this solitary state and formed a
family, and as soon as their number rose to four, there rose the
question of who headed the family and who was the chief. Sociologists
claim that in most parts of the world headship belonged to the men while
in certain parts to the women, that is to say the father acting as the
head in the former case, and the mother in the latter. As the family
grew larger, several families formed a group, called tribe, the family
then acquired a tribal form. Thereby the question of the chief, the
elder, the senior and the 'grey-beard' of the tribe came up who should
settle the affairs of the group.

When several tribes took form, the issue became more extensive and
there came into existence national government, and the issues in turn
became international though yet such a government has not appeared.

With the rise of several tribes, these tribes that lived alongside each
other neither knew their common ancestors nor did they regard each other
as kith and kin. As they coexisted in one area and shared common
interests, they found that they had need for a government in order to
preserve their social system. Thus the formation of a government from
the viewpoints of history and sociology began with the tribes'
realisation of a need for a guardian to safeguard their common interests
and social system. This guardian then became their government.

From the viewpoint of political process, this was the most critical
phase, namely the transfer of power from the tribal system and tribal
chief to a central government. This critical phase had been accomplished
in Yemen many centuries before Islam where a central government in its
true sense had been formed and this was also the case in Ghassan and
Hira where governments ruled. On the other hand in the interior of
Arabia such a governments did not exist except in very rare instances.

Ya'qubi says in his book of history: "The tribal disputes or problems
between individuals were usually settled by a number of persons known to
be wise and far-sighted as well as unprejudiced and impartial. They
settled the disputes through elderly intervention and arbitration. Such
arbitrators were called magistrates. Ya'qubi mentions in his book of
history (Vol. 1, p. 337) the names of a large number of such
magistrates, who were not heads of a government but only arbitrators who
adjudicated in the matters of disputes. In the history of the
corresponding period in Arabia we come across only one or two cases when
government is mentioned in connection with the interior of Arabia,
namely in Hejaz and Najd. Among these accounts a Jewish historian writes
that in the fifth century A.D., that is one century before Islam, Abu
Karab, king of Yemen had assigned his son as the regent of Median. Since
this governor had been installed by the ruler of Yemen, it could hardly
be called the government of Medina.

Thus at that time while there existed governments along the borders
outside of Arabia, such as the Chassanis and Mundherian, and those who
had remained in Yemen and in the coastal regions of the Persian Gulf, no
progress had been made from a tribal society towards a central
government in the central parts of Arabia.

**Role of Judaism and Christianity**

In order to make a thorough study of the history of Islam, we should
also make a survey of the part played by Judaism and Christianity in
side Arabia. We are not altogether certain of the date of the Jews
migration to Arabia, however the writer of the 'History of Judaism'
writes in this connection: "There are different views concerning the
migration of the Jews to Arabia and its causes and factors, but there is
little doubt that most of the Jews abandoned their homes owing to the
oppression of Roman rulers and sought refuge in Arabia. If the Jews had
been denied peace and tranquility in Palestine, Europe and in the Roman
holdings, in Arabia on the contrary their living conditions were
satisfactory, since there they were no longer subjected to threats and
persecution by Christian priests, being treated kindly by their
neighbours.

What is certain is that owing to the remoteness of the Hejaz and Najd
regions, a number of Jews had migrated to Arabia centuries before the
birth of Islam, and in all probability concurrent with the appearance of
Jesus (a s.) Christ or in the second and third centuries A.D.

According to the existing books of history, their migrations to the
Hejaz must have begun at least about five centuries before Islam, that
is to say by the end of the first century A.D. The Jews had realised
that in that region they could live freely far removed from the
oppression of Roman governors. The most important center of Jewish
settlements was Yathrib, the present Medina. The Jews who came to
Arabia, found that there was land and water in the Yathrib region, so
they built a fort for themselves and settled down. In Mecca, too, the
Jews were present but in small numbers. Those who migrated from the
north to the south found their way to Yemen, where the number of the
Jews was not so great, but there occurred an event as a result of which
Judaism became the official religion of Yemen. It so happened that Abu
Karab's son was the governor of Yathrib, when his father was king of
Yemen in the fifth century A.D. The inhabitants of Medina rose in revolt
against this governor and killed him.

Abu Karab, despite being engaged in a war with the kings of Iran over
Yemen, on his way came to Yathrib and in order to punish the Jews and
Arabs of Yathrib who had risen against him, and thereafter to proceed to
the war with Iran. When he reached Yathrib, the inhabitants went inside
their forts and shut the gates and took refuge within: Abu Karab
besieged the forts, and as the siege drew on, the people in the forts
were faced with acute shortage of food. At this time a number of Jewish
rabbis came out of the forts and approached Abu Karab and declared that
only four foolish men had killed his son, and begged the king for his
forgiveness. In this meeting they started reciting some Jewish teachings
for Abu Karab who was a heathen; their ardor so influenced him that he
embraced Judaism and at once returned to Yemen. When Abu Karab and his
courtiers accepted Judaism as their religion, they began to propagate
that faith. After Abu Karab died some time later, one of his sons, named
'Dhunavas' or 'Dhunuvas' became the king of Yemen and formally and
zealously propagated the Jewish faith in Yemen and so it became the
official religion of Yemen where they set about building a number of
synagogues for the Jews. This happened about eighty or a hundred years
before the rise of Islam.

Thus we witness that in the Arabia of that time, in the north existed
the Jews and Christians, in the east the Zoroastrians and followers of
Mazdak, the Iranians' religion, in the south and in a part of Yathrib
the Jews, and in other parts were idolaters and Sabeans and followers of
numerous other religions.

**Judaism in Arabia**

The author of the 'History of Judaism' has recorded that the Arabs
treated the Jews kindly and associated with them treaty resulting in
frequent intermarriages among them. On the whole the Jews exerted a
great influence upon the Arabs since, firstly, they were well versed in
economics and could hence manage the economy of those regions and,
secondly, compared to the Arabs lettered and a people of the Book and
consequently possessed higher learning than the Arabs who were quite
illiterate. They could narrate tales and talk about many topics with the
Arabs and hence gained considerable respect. While the Arabs could
neither read nor write, most of the Jews were familiar with reading and
even writing to some extent. Judaism exerted such a strong influence
that a group of the Quraish tribe, namely Banu Kunanah had embraced
Judaism.

**Christianity in Arabia**

The position of Christianity was a special one in Hejaz and in the
Arabian peninsula. This religion had not made any inroads into Arabia
till about the time of the Prophet of Islam, that is to say about a
century and a half before the birth of Islam. Just as today the
Christian missionaries go to African and South American lands and
penetrate into the forests to propagate their faith, at that time, too,
they went to the dry deserts of Arabia with the object of spreading
their religion. The first group of Christian missionaries went to the
Najran area. They so greatly influenced the people there that the first
Christian sector took shape in Arabia. The Christians of Najran
commenced their missionary work, and alongwith other missionaries who
arrived from outside, founded a center of propagation in the interior of
Arabia. At this time, as it has already been stated, Dhunuvas, the King
of Yemen had embraced Judaism. Then there occurred a collision between
this Jewish king who applied much pressure to spread Judaism in Arabia
and the Christians of Najran.

This clash had a political background in that the Emperor of Abyssinia
coveted Yemen, the neighbour across the sea. To retaliate this clash,
Dhunuvas came to Najran to wipe out the Christians of Najran. Thhis
episode has been narrated in the holy Qur'an under the title of "the
story of Ukhdood"[^12] where this deed has been condemned. Dhunuvas
killed many of the Najran Christians and burnt a number of them alive.
This roused the Christian Emperor of Abyssinia as well as the Roman
Emperor to come to the aid of the Najran Christians. But as the Emperor
of Rome was too far from Yemen he asked the Emperor of Abyssinia for
help and asked him to take the revenge of this massacre from Dhunuvas
and the people of Yemen. That is how the episode of Abraha and the
Abyssinian campaign to Yemen occurred. Abyssinian troops reached Yemen
and captured it. Dhunuvas and a large number of Yemenese were killed,
and thus Christianity replaced Judaism in Yemen By the order of the
Abyssinian governor officially churches were built there, eventually
resulting in the story of Abraha and 'Amul-Feel.'

In this way, in Arabia at the time of the rise of Islam, Judaism took
the first place, Christianity the second, Zoroastrianism third, Sabeans,
who followed a kind of idol worship reaching as far back as the creeds
of the time of the Prophet Abraham (a.s.) came fourth and some local
faiths followed fifth in place as mentioned in the holy Qur'an.[^13] Thus
from the viewpoint of religion, the Arabian peninsula of that time was
under of influence of multiple faiths.

To get better acquainted with the peculiar conditions prevailing in
Mecca, Medina and Ta'if, the three cities closest to the birthplace of
Islam, further explanations are in order As already stated, in the
second and third centuries A.D. the Qahtani Arabs migrated to various
parts of Arabia, and a group of them named Banu Khuza'ah went to Mecca
and seized the reins of affairs there however, before the arrival of
Banu Khuza'ah group, various Isma'ili tribes of the 'Adnani Arabs had
dominated that region, the most important of whom were the Quraish
tribe. Till that time however, this tribe had not assumed the importance
it gained later on. When Banu Khuza'ah gained predominance in Mecca and
secured control over the affairs of the Ka'aba, a child was born in the
house of Quraish named Qussi bin-kalab, whose mother was of Banu
Khuza'ah and father from belonged a branch of the Quraish tribe. As
Qussi grew up, he decided to take back from the non-Quraish all the
positions which had been taken away from the Quraish family at whatever
the cost. This included the custody of the keys and coverings of the
holy Ka'aba, positions that were highly esteemed and which position
should have been inhabited by his uncle on the mother's side. Qussi's
uncle was a drunkard and a libertine.[^14] Qussi as it happened, bought
this position from his own uncle for a wine skin and one camel to
barbecue and this idiotic deal became proverbial in the history of
Arabia,[^15] thus the phrase 'Qussi Deal' implying an infamous and a
stupid deal.

Qussi was a competent youth who gradually came to dominate Mecca
completely and took control over all its affairs. From the time of Qussi
bin Kalab onward, although no government had been formed, however a set
up in Mecca takes shape as a result of his policies and ideas. According
to his views the various tribes of Mecca, especially the branches of the
Quraish tribe were involved into creating a central organisation and
establishing a relative order in the society.

**Situation of the Heading Tribes of the Quraish**

The Quraish tribe had many sub-tribes, however the leading ones were:
The Hashemis, Umavis, Nufelis, Abduddaris, Asadis, Timis, Makhzumis,
'Adavis, Jamhis and the Sahmis.

There were the prominent sub-tribes' branches, but there were also
others, less significant clans. At that time there existed only two or
three positions in connection with the Ka'aba. To make these clans to
co-operate with one another, Qussi bin Kalab created a number of new
positions, giving each of the clans a position to be content with, and
so abstain from internecine fighting. Thus it would appeal that the
creation of designations had a long precedent! Concurrent with the birth
of the Prophet of Islam there existed about 15 positions in Mecca, each
of which pertained to one of the prominent clans of the Quraish as
follows:

1. Position of the Keeper and custodian of the Ka'aba was the top most
in first-rate precedence.

2. Position of the provider of water to the pilgrims. During the
pre-Islamic pilgrimage those who visited Mecca were not familiar with
the water wells, and as they all needed water, the task of bringing
water from the neighbouring wells and offering it to pilgrims was
assigned to a branch of the Quraish to act as wardens over water Georgie
Zeydan narrates that they devised open tanks of hides and filled them
with water for the pilgrims to take.

3. Position of reception and hospitality. To attract more visitors to
Mecca and make their market brisk, as well as to preserve the Arab
custom of acting as lordly hosts, they laid out feasts for the pilgrims
as their guests, and this task was assigned to a particular branch of
the Quraish tribe For this purpose they collected contributions to
provide free meals to the pilgrims.

4. Position of flag-bearer. Mecca had a flag called the Eagle banner
which was used in the time of war. This flag was kept in the family
whose chief would bring it out in the event of war. In the time of the
Prophet this banner was in the hands of the Bani Umayya.

5. Position of Dar-un-Nadwa or Dar-u-Showra. One of Qussi's initiatives
was to build a house near the Ka'aba, called Dar-en-Nadwa.[^16]
Dar-ul-Nadwa means a meeting place or assembly for consultation.
Whenever an issue of importance rose for the Quraish in general, their
chiefs and elders who were truly the people's representative assembled
in that place, discussed the matter and came to a decision about it and
whatever the majority's decision carried it out. What is noteworthy
however is that according to the laws of elections of Qussi bin kalab,
one of the pre-conditions was that the tribes and clans representatives
should not be less than forty years of age. Today young people could
well protest against such a law on the plea that it meant favouring the
old people as they accepted only over forty years old. In those days,
however, they wished to have well tried and experienced peoples'
representatives, though at the same time we read in the biography of the
holy Prophet of Islam that Abdul-Mutallib took Muhammad (a s.) as a
child along with him to Dar-un-Nadwa, even though the admission of a
person below the age of forty was forbidden. The first time Muhammad
(a.s.) was taken there, they were displeased, but after that they agreed
that he could enter - but that is another story.

6. The charge and leadership of trade caravans was held by the
Bani-Umayya.

7. The institution for the payment of blood-money and compensation.
Sometimes when a member of a tribe was killed by someone from another
tribe, in the first place was a demand for compensation and indemnity or
a fight would ensue. Thus the fine had to be collected, and one of these
families was responsible for this task of determining the share,
collecting them, and handing them over to the claimants. This was in
fact a kind of office for public funds related of course to blood-money
and reparations.

8. Administration of the arsenal. This was a large tent where arms and
weapons were collected in the event of war and distributed judicially
among the soldiers.

9. Management of army stables: a task given to a branch of Quraish
tribe to take care of the remounts such as horses and camels necessary
far the war effort.

10. Assigning of envoys or ambassadors: Sometimes it became necessary
to dispatch envoys abroad. As we shall see later, envoys were required
to travel to Abyssinia to pursue the question of Muslim emigrants to
that country.

11. Position of administering justice was given to a special committee
of Arabs.

12. Position of the Key Bearer of the Ka'aba, as distinct from the
position of the custodian. As you may be aware, pilgrims to the holy
shrines often made offerings of gold coins in the holy shrines. The
pilgrims who visited the Ka'aba often brought vowed offering for
dropping them within the sacred grille. Once a year or every six months
the custodian would open the door of the Ka'aba, collect whatever had
been offered and then divide that amongst the various clans.

13. Position of the repairs and maintenance of the holy Ka'aba and
other buildings of Mecca which were entrusted to one particular clan

14. Position of "Ansab and Azlam", which could be called the office of
lottery. There was a custom among the Arabs called "Isar" (from "Yusr"
meaning ease and plenty) incidentally the Arabic word is also related to
'gambling and lottery' At present, too, in winter there comes a time
when a villager has consumed whatever he has in store, is left with
nothing, and is in dire need Such conditions often occurred in Arabia
during winters particularly when rainfall was scanty in spring and
summer Such a custom also exists in remote parts of Iran near the annual
spring festival. So to provide relief the Arabs resorted to a measure by
which a part of the wealth of the rich would be contributed to help the
needy. Such practices are common among people who have not developed a
secure economic system and are faced with straitened circumstances.

The Arabs invented a lottery as a game of chance This game of luck was
played as follows: They took ten wooden shafts, on seven of which they
wrote a number of shares from one to seven serially and the remaining
three were left blank. These shafts were then handed over to a
trustworthy man. Then a camel was bought, and the price of it was paid
by drawing lots with these wooden beams which determined the share of
the money to be paid by the participants. With this money the camel was
bought and slaughtered, and the meat was distributed on the basis of
lottery members again. These wooden shafts were called 'Ansab' which in
from 'Naseeb' meaning destiny. They also had another form of lottery
called 'Azlam' which served for divining whether a step should be taken
in a matter or not.

Here they prepared seven small wooden shafts on each of which either a
positive load as 'do it', or negative indication such as 'don't do it'
or 'to your advantage' or 'to the advantage of the other side' etc. were
written and one of them was left blank. Whenever a person was undecided
about what he should do in a matter, he would go to a diviner who
employed these shafts for fortune-telling, and drew a lot from under a
cloth, and that shaft indicated to him what he should do.

The above systems of 'Ansab' and 'Azlam' were entrusted to another clan
of the Quraish tribe. Thus the allocation of the said positions was
intended to prevent disputes and war, but clashes nonetheless occurred
from time to time. However, sometimes disputes would rise and through
the application of this organisation, albeit defective, they managed to
prevent wars.

After Qussi bin-kalab no armed clashes occurred between the branches of
the Quraish tribe, except an old one and that too a minor one. The
period following Qussi in Mecca was a period of transition between the
tribal and control government's establishment. For, as you can see, in
this period discussions regarding types of organisation, positions,
division of responsibilities and political order were taking place in
Mecca. That was the situation as it prevailed in Mecca.

Ta'if, on the other hand, was more or less under the influence of a
single tribe named Bani Thaqif It was a small but a flourishing city
controlled by that tribe. However Medina offered an interesting
perspective. As already stated, it has been predicted at the beginning
of the second century A.D. that the Mareb Dam would collapse,
consequently a large number of the Qahtani Arabs of Yemen migrated to
the north and north-east. Two of these clans namely the Aus and Khazraj
having reached Yathrib, found it to be a suitable place and decided to
settle down there. But before the arrival of the Arabs, the Jews had
chosen it to be their home, and thus they were its original residents.
The new-comers, namely the Aus and the Khazraj were delighted at the
beginning to pay tribute to the Jews because they were weak, alien and
emigre guests. Meanwhile the Jews, too, were politically astute and for
a long time coexisted with the newcomers.

After a time the Jews found a rather powerful and despotic ruler who
encroached upon the Aus and Khazraj, giving rise to continued fighting
between the Jews and the Aus and Khazraj tribes. The latter, owing to
their relations with the neighbouring Arabs who had a common race and
spoke the same language, grow in numbers and enhanced their influence,
as well as received assistance from their Arab allies in their conflicts
with the Jews. Gradually therefore the power of the Arabs went on the
increase while that of the Jews diminished in Medina. So long as the Aus
and Khazraj remained united, everything was in their favour. But an
incident occurred that caused a rift between them resulting in a war.
The sly Jews made the utmost use of this difference, and did their best
to intensify this dispute.

Close to the time of the Prophet's ordainment, this dispute between the
Khazraj who were the larger tribe and the Aus who were the smaller,
carried on. The Khmazraj who were sub-divided into several clans,
decided to choose a king for themselves. As you are aware, Mecca was
then passing through a transition phase between the tribal and
centralised governmental systems, and Medina, too, was passing through a
similar process trying to pass from the tribal phase to a governmental
stage.

Thus for the first time in the history of the Arabs in Medina, this
became the common topic and ground was prepared that all should swear
allegiance to Abdullah bin Abi, a respected man among the Khazraj tribe,
and make him the king and make ready a throne and crown for him This
matter had a lasting effect from various aspects on the future history
of Islam. This subject which might appear small and trifling, was really
quite consequential and will be discussed further. It was under such
socio-economic and political conditions and the state of religious
beliefs that the Prophet of Islam declared his mission in Mecca inviting
people to the new faith.

This was the brief situation in Arabia concurrent with the rise of
Islam with reference to its historical background which bears relation
with our subsequent discussions.


