Iran Before Islam
=================

The starting point for our discussions has been chosen from an aspect
which in fact marks the origins of Islam, and from another viewpoint, is
inseparably linked to the study of ideological, social and practical
problems. This approach is also more compatible with the natural course
for pursuing these studies. In order to study Islam in its correct,
historical perspective, for obtaining a clearer understanding, it was
appropriate to have begun with a familiarisation with the region of its
birth, namely the Arabian peninsula incorporating Saudi Arabia (Hejaz
and Najd), Yemen, the sheikhdoms along the Persian Gulf littoral and the
Sea of Oman. We also generally commented on the geographic, social,
racial, lingual, religious and economic conditions of that region.

Henceforth our discussion will be related to those civilised regions
which bounded the Arabian peninsula of the time.

These civilised regions could basically be divided into two parts: in
one part consisting of small free status , linked with the Arabian
peninsula and possessing small local governments, which should however
be regarded Arab settlements though most of them were installed by great
powers. One of these which had parts of Iraq under its influence was the
government of Hira (or the Nu'manis and Munadherah) under the hegemony
of Iran. Another was Yemen which, being within the Arabian peninsula,
had an independent government. For about 150 or 200 years this
government had been installed either by Iran or Abyssinia till about the
time of the rise of Islam. In the other part were the states in the
western part which included the present day Jordan and Israel. This was
the Ghassani government which was under the hegemony of Rome. We will
have a short and brief discussion about these three small governments in
their proper place, since these three states happened to have a
significant role in the contemporary history of the rise of Islam which
merits particular attention.

**A) Ancient Iran**

The Arabian peninsula of that time was bounded by four powerful, strong
and civilised nations with rather well established governments. Of these
four countries, two could be rated as first class and the other two as
second class powers. One of the first group was Iran which extended on
one side as far as the Tigris and Euphrates and Shatt-al-Arab, namely
upto the middle of the present day Iraq and included the Caucasus and
the present Iran itself; and on another flank included Turkestan,
Afghanistan, a part of Pakistan as far as the Hindus (Sind) River
valley. In these regions there lived a people with a long and civilised
past which had undergone many tribulations and change, and were regarded
as the great neighbours of the Arabian peninsula. The fact is that if we
wish to speak on the basis of common usage, Arabian peninsula was just a
stretch of desert to which no one paid any attention, and the use of the
word 'neighbour' could hardly apply to Iran with its immense size and
grandeur as compared with Arabia. But here the discussion is not about
great or small but only to become familiar with the geographic
neighbours of Arabia.

The second great neighbour was Rome which also neighboured Iran. It was
a great power including northern Iraq, present day Turkey and the
Balkans, and was known as Eastern Rome. When we mention Rome in this
discussion it implies the Eastern Roman empire, since western Rome with
its seat in Italy neither remained a great power at that time, nor had
any relation with Islam. Of course western Rome of that time included
Italy, a portion of Yugoslavia, Albania, some part of Spain and even a
part of France, thus Europe of that time was only one country under
Rome. Other peoples living beyond its limits were called Berbers.[^17]
Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire possessed such greatness at that time
that it was far above comparison with the other Rome. Western Rome rose
to greatness after the Muslims had overthrown Eastern Rome, and the
caliphs, namely the Ottoman rulers and kings, had captured the city of
Islambol or Constantinople. It was then that in the 15th century A.D.
learned men of Eastern Rome fled to Western Rome and became instrumental
in causing the Renaissance and provided the base for the present
civilisation of Europe and the western world, because during the period
which we are discussing, Western Rome was hardly great and indeed was
regarded as a second rate power.

These were the great neighbours of the Arabian peninsula. The other two
second-rate neighbours were, firstly, Egypt which included the present
day Egypt, Libya, Tunis and some part of Sudan. Although this country
held some importance from Islam's viewpoint, yet it was not considered a
great power such as Iran and Rome.

The next neighbouring country was Abyssinia which included the present
day Abyssinia and some part of the Sudan, In this region, too, there was
no powerful government, though in Islam's times it was an empire with a
considerable past having a civilisation and characterised by noteworthy
social and religious freedom.[^18]

As is evident while surveying these countries, only two other regions
remained in the entire civilised world, namely China and India, and
beyond these two we do not find any other place in the world which could
be termed civilised, This detail has been mentioned here because certain
people, especially among the educated class whether in Iran or here in
Germany raise the question whether the prophet brought Islam as a
universal religion, and if so, how much did he know about the world
outside the Arabian peninsula? The answer is: firstly, that we do not
call a person 'prophet' on account of his having been formally educated
or having studied books and maps etc.

A prophet to us is a person who acquires all the necessary knowledge
through divine revelation, and this is without bounds or limits.
Secondly, the Prophet (a.s.) in his own time, had sent communications to
the rulers of these regions and hence the question whether the Prophet
was aware of the other non Arab nations and their basic needs would seem
to be a childish question. History has recorded that the Prophet (a.s.),
in the third year of his ordainment, was commanded by God to make his
call to Islam public and declare it to all his neighbours, relatives and
the Quraish. For this purpose he issued an open invitation inviting all
to his house, and declared that they would soon have a religious code
which would open the gates of the palaces of (Khusrow, the Emperor of
Iran) and of caesar and other rulers. Also in the sixth year of his
ordainment, he sent letters to the rulers of the three small regions of
Hira, Ghassan and Yemen; first to Bazan king of Yemen, then to Khusrow
Parviz emperor of Iran, then to the emperor of Eastern Rome, then to the
ruler of Egypt (Maquqass), and next to Najashi (Negus) king of
Abyssinia. All these letters have been recorded in history, and there is
no doubt or question about them. What remains to be said is whether the
Prophet of Islam knew of such places as India and China or not. Anyone
who has the slightest acquaintance with Arab's history would know that
one of the principal occupations of life for Arab merchants was the
transportation of goods. There they carried from China and India via the
Sea of Oman and Hejaz to Europe, i.e. Rome. Thus, not only the prophet
but Arab traders as well were familiar with India and China and even
their products such as spices, perfumes, handicrafts and China ware
which were the industrial and agricultural products of India and China
at that time.

Trade in such commodities was a part of the commercial pre-occupation
of the Arabs of that time. Therefore in discussions should someone raise
the question whether the Prophet of Islam was aware of human
civilisations existing in the world or not, becomes quite irrelevant. It
is likely someone may ask Prophet knew of the inhabited regions of the
earth, though we could not possibly answer this question, since we do
not believe that he know everything but rather that whatever he needed
to know was provided to him through revelation. I really cannot imagine
if the Prophet (a.s.) needed to know about all these places in those
times.

**Geographical Situation**

The reason we brought up Iran for discussion is firstly, there are
certain pertinent points about the Sassanid period such as the rise of
the Mazdaki code of life that needs be studied and emphasised. It is an
interesting discussion which will be pursued for a comparative analysis
subsequently. From the point of view of natural environments, if we were
to compare Iran with Arabia, it could be said that Arabia as the
birthplace of Islam was a poverty stricken, dry and deprived region
whereas Iran or at least some parts of Iran were populated, flourishing
and affluent. Incidentally, the areas of the great Iranian plateau which
were contiguous to Arabia were all green and included the western slopes
of the Zagross mountain range and parts of Lorestan, Bakhtaran, Hamadan
and present Kurdestan, as well as part of Mesopotamia along the banks of
the Tigris and Euphrates, all of which are green and full of palm
groves, so that in those times the Arabs called these lands the Black
Land's. This was so because as of the dry, sandy deserts came to this
part, they would notice a dark horizon which in fact was the palm groves
and other trees, whereas in their own dwelling places there were only
old trees in the rarely found oases.

During one journey which I happened to have undertaken I noticed how
poverty stricken the region was. Concerning the region along the east
coast of the Red Sea, one comes to realise how unprivileged it is since
despite its proximity to the Red Sea, no habitation or even a tree could
be seen from Jordan right down to Jedda. The seashore, too, totally
barren, has nothing more to offer than sand and ground. I don't know
whether it is the soil that is bad or the wind which blows in the
direction of Africa and carries the vapours of the Red Sea towards
Africa because if there were no winds, some of this vapour might have
remained to produce rain fall. However, all the vapour is carried
towards the opposite side of the sea, namely to Somalia and Abyssinia
which derive full benefit. In any case if we were to make a relative
study of the area, it will be seen that the region which is adjacent to
Arabia in the east is the best part of Iran from the viewpoint of
natural environment next of course to the Caspian Sea littoral shores
which is a thriving and populous region. It is interesting to know that
the average population density in the regions of Gilan and Mazandaran is
100 persons per square kilometer, whereas for the whole of Iran the
average is 16. The approximate area of these two provinces is 30,000
square kilometers, and they are so flourishing and populous that about
three million people live.[^19]

Aside from this prosperous region which was not contiguous to Arabia,
the western regions of Iran and eastern part of Iraq which neighboured
Arabia, were comparatively prosperous and utilizable from the aspects of
climate, vegetation and other environmental factors.

From the viewpoint of area, the border of Iran reached the Sind River
valley including the greater part of Afghanistan as far as the Oxus and
Jaxartes Rivers and above the Araxes River which included the present
Caucasia upto and including the Shatt-al-Arab. There were the boundaries
of Iran then and hence Arabia stands no comparison with Iran. At the
time of the rise of Islam and even before that, the eastern regions of
Iran were called Khorassan in general, a name which is derived from
'Khor-Assa' meaning the region of sun rise, owing to its being situated
in the east of Iran. Thus the eastern part of Iran of those days
included Khorassan, soutlhern Turkestan, Afghanistan, Baluchestan and
Sistan, all ofthem together bearing the name Khorassan.

**Civilisation**

The Iranian civilisation is considered to be an Aryan civilisation,
having a precedent of eleven and even twelve centuries prior to the rise
of Islam, after having evolved from a nomadic and tribal society to a
central authority, whereas Hejaz had not till then reached the stage of
a central government. The first government established in Hejaz was
under Islam, whereas the government of media (Ecbatan) had been set up
twelve centuries before that of Islam, in Hejaz. It will be an
interesting example to quote from an inscription by Darius at a public
works project. This inscription is naturally composed in a royal and a
pompous style usual in that imperial age, however the content of it is
rather interesting. Darius ruled in the years 550 to 529 B.C. The first
Iranian inscription dates back to his reign, that is to say prior to him
there were no such inscriptions. After a short period of chaos and
disorder, Darius was able to establish a vast empire in Iran extending
as far as Egypt including the entire region of Shaam, Syria and Egypt,
and had thus become a neighbour of Greece. At that time the Eastern
Roman had not risen, but there was the Roman Empire in the west which
had not till then gained any importance. In the time of Darius the two
countries of importance were Greece and Egypt. When Iran conquered
Egypt, it also brought Greece under pressure. In the wars of that time,
Darius frequently waged against the Greeks, he had to employ the sea
route since the Greek territory consisted of a number of islands and
land campaign would not have been feasible. As the Iranian ships had no
access to the Mediterranean, Darius decided to open a sea way for the
Iranian warships to reach the Greek shores. Thus he ordered a canal dug
which was the precursor of the Suez Canal linking the Mediterranean Sea
via the Nile River to the Red Sea. Darius describes the history of this
canal in an inscription as follows:

"Ahura-Mazda, the great lord who created the lofty sky, created Man,
created Man's good fortune, raised Darius to kingship, has assigned to
King Darius this great empire with all these precious horses and
multitudes of people.[^20] I am King Darius, great king, king over many
varied races, king over extensive and remote domains, son of Vishtasb of
the Achaemnids; so declares King Darius: I am a Parsi. I govern Egypt
from Pars. I decreed this canal be dug to link the between a river
called Nile which flows in Egypt to the sea which reaches Iran.[^21] This
canal has been dug by my command and the ships have sailed via this
canal from Egypt to Iran as I had desired."

Thus we see that twelve centuries before the rise of Islam in Arabia, a
great and powerful government existed as its eastern neighbour. There is
little doubt that amongst the past rulers of Iran Darius was an
outstanding figure from the standpoint of ideas, capabilities and
policies. This is especially true in connection with his attitude
towards the conquered lands since, unlike other great conquerors of the
world, he gave more importance to the administration of his domains than
merely to conquer them. After retrieving his ancestral territories i.e.
the domain of his ancestor Kurosh, he had no inclination to add further
territory to his realm, and only wished to create to an extent a welfare
administration for his subjects in the extensive realm of Iran of those
days. This is a notable aspect of the life of Darius, and thus,
according to the writings of orientalists, his accomplishments in that
age are definitely outstanding, though this point is not relevant to the
present discussion.

**Class Structure and Social Divisions**

Briefly then, such a government existed in the region, in the eastern
neighbour of Arabia, about twelve centuries before the rise of Islam,
however the basis and nature of those civilised governments were quite
different from the Islamic government that followed. In fact these two
were essentially unlike each other, since that civilised realm was
charaterised by a deep class system.[^22] In the extended period of human
life, vestiges of which can still be observed in backward societies,
people were since birth divided into various classes or castes so that
the children of the lower class were naturally condemned to remain
inferior and had no right to ascend do a higher class. Such was the
class structure then existing.

This class structure existed in Iran, too. As far as I can recall from
my studies in history, the seat and center of this caste system was in
India, and since the civilisations of Iran, Greece and Rome have been
Indo-European in origin, this Indian concept of class society travelled
wherever Indian civilisation asserted an influence. But the cruelty and
severity which were observed and are still to some extent prevalent in
India in enforcing this system, have not been observed else where or in
Iran.

In Iran of that time, class system and social attitudes and perceptions
took the form that the king was absolute and the concept of 'Shahinshah'
or king of kings was introduced in the time of the Medes well before
Kurosh and Darius.

The royal class was considered super-human, and other classes were
related to common people who were divided into several classes: In the
time of Darius the upper most class were those on whose shoulders rested
the pillars of the ruling monarehy, namely soldiers who were held above
all others in being given social privileges. The second class comprised
the farmers[^23] and in the third class were included the artisans. Thus
there were three classes in the Achaemenid time. History does not
mention any organised group named clergy as such in that period, but of
course there have been priests in the same way that there had been a
faith and religion.[^24] The clergy as a class made its appearance in the
Sassanid time, and as it will be explained later, this class of priests
came to be regarded as the first class, warriors and soldiers as the
second class, clerks and civil servants as the third class with the
farmers artisans and craftsmen falling in the fourth class.

In his epic 'Shahnameh', Ferdowsi, has this to say about these
classes:

There was a group called Katuzis (priests) who were engaged in
worshipping,
The next in rank were the Neissaris (military) who were warriors, lions
of battle, honour of the army and country;
Then came the Nassoudi (farmers) to whom all are indebted; for, they
plough, sow and reap that they may not be blamed;

The fourth group were the Ahyu-Khashi (artisans) who used their hand to
shape unruly substances, and employed their ideas and
intelligence.[^25]

The above were what Ferdowsi has described in his Shahnameh, but
according to Tho'alebi[^26] there were the following classes: 1.
warriors, 2. priests and physicians, 3. clerks and government employees,
4. farmers, craftsmen and artisans,. Tho'alebi's description appears to
be historically more reliable, since Ferdowsi's Shahnameh is mostly
based on hearsay.

In a letter written by one of the governors of northern Iran to the
king of Tabarestan, priests have been accorded the first class, warriors
the second, clerks the third, and labourers the fourth class; a
classification which differs from Ferdowsi's. In any case the Priests
and soldiers constituted the first and the second classes or vice versa;
clerks and government employees the third class, and farmers and
artisans made up the fourth class.

In such a society the class implied that the child of a farmer, or
artisan or tradesman could when grown up become a good farmer, or
artisan or tradesman, but he could never entertain the thought of
raising his social status to that of a clergyman, a warrior, a clerk or
a government servant; he did not belong there and he did not have the
right to hope, except in very exceptional cases when a person could be
elevated by the king' s special decree to a higher class. This of course
meant an upgrading limited only to that person's lifetime for the
education of special talents and skills.

This social system with such limitation was quite contrary to what
Islam introduced later on. The class system has purposely been discussed
here because in the discussion of various faiths and creeds especially
in the Sassanid period of time, this subject will gain importance and
deserves particular attention.

**Progress in Learning**

We will deal later with the state of learning and progress in this
field during the Sassanids period as concerning scientific and
industrial progress in the Achaeminid period in Iran, no substantial
evidence is available. However, what is certain is that Darius could not
have succeeded in administering such an extensive realm, without a stock
of knowledge and learning. However, are particular aspect which occurs
in historical evidence is that the sovereigns of Iran seemed to have
cherished the idea that all the civilised lands of that time would
eventually become part of Iran even though two other states existed.[^27]
Thus we witness that the great physician of that time is a Greek, and
the renowned geographer who was sent to the Sind valley by Darius to
.survey that land, and prepare a report, was, too, a Greek.

Even the best and the finest of warriors of that time were Greek, the
reason being that in Darius' mind these subjects were not non-Iranians,
but were regarded as citizens of the greater Iran. Therefore, it did not
occure to Darius and other kings that the people of central region who
lived close to the seat of the government should remain among the
artisans and tradesmen of the fourth class, while physician, clerks, and
warriors should be from Greece, Egypt and outlying regions! So the
scholars were brought from the outer regions of the empire while locals
comprised the artisans and craftsmen. It is for this reason that the
history of that time fails to indicate any outstanding Iranian scholar
who was not of Greek, Egyptian or Indian stock. That does not mean of
course that such individuals did not exist. Very little historical
evidence is available and addedly, most of the available sources are of
Greek origin, and the Greeks were not behind others in holding
nationalistic prejudice - if anything, they were well ahead in this
respect. Therefore, it becomes difficult to reach a verdict in this
matter. Anyhow from the point of view of academic learning, no
distinguished scholars in particular fields appear in Iran or in India
or in Ionia, in the south of Turkey near the Mediterranean, who could
equal the personalities from Phoenicia, Chaldea, Assyria, Greece and
Egypt. In Phoenicia, which included a part of Lebanon, Syria, Palestine
and a small portion of Jordan as well, we come across such individuals
who were superior to Iran in learning. From the economic aspect, too,
they enjoyed better conditions, and were richer and more prosperous than
Arabia.


