Situation of the Heading Tribes of the Quraish
==============================================

The Quraish tribe had many sub-tribes, however the leading ones were:
The Hashemis, Umavis, Nufelis, Abduddaris, Asadis, Timis, Makhzumis,
'Adavis, Jamhis and the Sahmis.

There were the prominent sub-tribes' branches, but there were also
others, less significant clans. At that time there existed only two or
three positions in connection with the Ka'aba. To make these clans to
co-operate with one another, Qussi bin Kalab created a number of new
positions, giving each of the clans a position to be content with,

and so abstain from internecine fighting. Thus it would appeal that the
creation of designations had a long precedent! Concurrent with the birth
of the Prophet of Islam there existed about 15 positions in Mecca, each
of which pertained to one of the prominent clans of the Quraish as
follows:

**Position of the Keeper and custodian of the Ka'aba was the top most
in first-rate precedence**

Position of the provider of water to the pilgrims. During the
pre-Islamic pilgrimage those who visited Mecca were not familiar with
the water wells, and as they all needed water, the task of bringing
water from the neighbouring wells and offering it to pilgrims was
assigned to a branch of the Quraish to act as wardens over water Georgie
Zeydan narrates that they devised open tanks of hides and filled them
with water for the pilgrims to take.

Position of reception and hospitality. To attract more visitors to
Mecca and make their market brisk, as well as to preserve the Arab
custom of acting as lordly hosts, they laid out feasts for the pilgrims
as their guests, and this task was assigned to a particular branch of
the Quraish tribe For this purpose they collected contributions to
provide free meals to the pilgrims.

Position of flag-bearer. Mecca had a flag called the Eagle banner which
was used in the time of war. This flag was kept in the family whose
chief would bring it out in the event of war. In the time of the Prophet
this banner was in the hands of the Bani Umayya.

Position of Dar-un-Nadwa or Dar-u-Showra. One of Qussi's initiatives
was to build a house near the Ka'aba, called Dar-en-Nadwa.[^16]
Dar-ul-Nadwa means a meeting place or assembly for consultation.
Whenever an issue of importance rose for the Quraish in general, their
chiefs and elders who were truly the people's representative assembled
in that place, discussed the matter and came to a decision about it and
whatever the majority's decision carried it out.

What is noteworthy however is that according to the laws of elections
of Qussi bin kalab, one of the pre-conditions was that the tribes and
clans representatives should not be less than forty years of age. Today
young people could well protest against such a law on the plea that it
meant favouring the old people as they accepted only over forty years
old.

In those days, however, they wished to have well tried and experienced
peoples' representatives, though at the same time we read in the
biography of the holy Prophet of Islam that Abdul-Mutallib took Muhammad
(a s.) as a child along with him to Dar-un-Nadwa, even though the
admission of a person below the age of forty was forbidden.

The first time Muhammad (a.s.) was taken there, they were displeased,
but after that they agreed that he could enter - but that is another
story.

The charge and leadership of trade caravans was held by the
Bani-Umayya.

The institution for the payment of blood-money and compensation.
Sometimes when a member of a tribe was killed by someone from another
tribe, in the first place was a demand for compensation and indemnity or
a fight would ensue. Thus the fine had to be collected, and one of these
families was responsible for this task of determining the share,
collecting them, and handing them over to the claimants. This was in
fact a kind of office for public funds related of course to blood-money
and reparations.

Administration of the arsenal. This was a large tent where arms and
weapons were collected in the event of war and distributed judicially
among the soldiers.

Management of army stables: a task given to a branch of Quraish tribe
to take care of the remounts such as horses and camels necessary far the
war effort.

Assigning of envoys or ambassadors: Sometimes it became necessary to
dispatch envoys abroad. As we shall see later, envoys were required to
travel to Abyssinia to pursue the question of Muslim emigrants to that
country.

Position of administering justice was given to a special committee of
Arabs.

Position of the Key Bearer of the Ka'aba, as distinct from the position
of the custodian. As you may be aware, pilgrims to the holy shrines
often made offerings of gold coins in the holy shrines. The pilgrims who
visited the Ka'aba often brought vowed offering for dropping them within
the sacred grille. Once a year or every six months the custodian would
open the door of the Ka'aba, collect whatever had been offered and then
divide that amongst the various clans.

Position of the repairs and maintenance of the holy Ka'aba and other
buildings of Mecca which were entrusted to one particular clan Position
of "Ansab and Azlam", which could be called the office of lottery.

There was a custom among the Arabs called "Isar" (from "Yusr" meaning
ease and plenty) incidentally the Arabic word is also related to
'gambling and lottery' At present, too, in winter there comes a time
when a villager has consumed whatever he has in store, is left with
nothing, and is in dire need Such conditions often occurred in Arabia
during winters particularly when rainfall was scanty in spring and
summer Such a custom also exists in remote parts of Iran near the annual
spring festival.

So to provide relief the Arabs resorted to a measure by which a part of
the wealth of the rich would be contributed to help the needy. Such
practices are common among people who have not developed a secure
economic system and are faced with straitened circumstances.

The Arabs invented a lottery as a game of chance This game of luck was
played as follows: They took ten wooden shafts, on seven of which they
wrote a number of shares from one to seven serially and the remaining
three were left blank. These shafts were then handed over to a
trustworthy man. Then a camel was bought, and the price of it was paid
by drawing lots with these wooden beams which determined the share of
the money to be paid by the participants. With this money the camel was
bought and slaughtered, and the meat was distributed on the basis of
lottery members again.

These wooden shafts were called 'Ansab' which in from 'Naseeb' meaning
destiny. They also had another form of lottery called 'Azlam' which
served for divining whether a step should be taken in a matter or not.

Here they prepared seven small wooden shafts on each of which either a
positive load as 'do it', or negative indication such as 'don't do it'
or 'to your advantage' or 'to the advantage of the other side' etc. were
written and one of them was left blank. Whenever a person was undecided
about what he should do in a matter, he would go to a diviner who
employed these shafts for fortune-telling, and drew a lot from under a
cloth, and that shaft indicated to him what he should do.

The above systems of 'Ansab' and 'Azlam' were entrusted to another clan
of the Quraish tribe. Thus the allocation of the said positions was
intended to prevent disputes and war, but clashes nonetheless occurred
from time to time. However, sometimes disputes would rise and through
the application of this organisation, albeit defective, they managed to
prevent wars.

After Qussi bin-kalab no armed clashes occurred between the branches of
the Quraish tribe, except an old one and that too a minor one. The
period following Qussi in Mecca was a period of transition between the
tribal and control government's establishment. For, as you can see, in
this period discussions regarding types of organisation, positions,
division of responsibilities and political order were taking place in
Mecca. That was the situation as it prevailed in Mecca.

Ta'if, on the other hand, was more or less under the influence of a
single tribe named Bani Thaqif It was a small but a flourishing city
controlled by that tribe. However Medina offered an interesting
perspective. As already stated, it has been predicted at the beginning
of the second century A.D. that the Mareb Dam would collapse,
consequently a large number of the Qahtani Arabs of Yemen migrated to
the north and north-east. Two of these clans namely the Aus and Khazraj
having reached Yathrib, found it to be a suitable place and decided to
settle down there.

But before the arrival of the Arabs, the Jews had chosen it to be their
home, and thus they were its original residents. The new-comers, namely
the Aus and the Khazraj were delighted at the beginning to pay tribute
to the Jews because they were weak, alien and emigre guests. Meanwhile
the Jews, too, were politically astute and for a long time coexisted
with the newcomers.

After a time the Jews found a rather powerful and despotic ruler who
encroached upon the Aus and Khazraj, giving rise to continued fighting
between the Jews and the Aus and Khazraj tribes. The latter, owing to
their relations with the neighbouring Arabs who had a common race and
spoke the same language, grow in numbers and enhanced their influence,
as well as received assistance from their Arab allies in their conflicts
with the Jews. Gradually therefore the power of the Arabs went on the
increase while that of the Jews diminished in Medina.

So long as the Aus and Khazraj remained united, everything was in their
favour. But an incident occurred that caused a rift between them
resulting in a war. The sly Jews made the utmost use of this difference,
and did their best to intensify this dispute.

Close to the time of the Prophet's ordainment, this dispute between the
Khazraj who were the larger tribe and the Aus who were the smaller,
carried on. The Khmazraj who were sub-divided into several clans,
decided to choose a king for themselves. As you are aware, Mecca was
then passing through a transition phase between the tribal and
centralised governmental systems, and Medina, too, was passing through a
similar process trying to pass from the tribal phase to a governmental
stage.

Thus for the first time in the history of the Arabs in Medina, this
became the common topic and ground was prepared that all should swear
allegiance to Abdullah bin Abi, a respected man among the Khazraj tribe,
and make him the king and make ready a throne and crown for him This
matter had a lasting effect from various aspects on the future history
of Islam.

This subject which might appear small and trifling, was really quite
consequential and will be discussed further. It was under such
socio-economic and political conditions and the state of religious
beliefs that the Prophet of Islam declared his mission in Mecca inviting
people to the new faith.

This was the brief situation in Arabia concurrent with the rise of
Islam with reference to its historical background which bears relation
with our subsequent discussions.


**Iran Before Islam**

The starting point for our discussions has been chosen from an aspect
which in fact marks the origins of Islam, and from another viewpoint, is
inseparably linked to the study of ideological, social and practical
problems. This approach is also more compatible with the natural course
for pursuing these studies.

In order to study Islam in its correct, historical perspective, for
obtaining a clearer understanding, it was appropriate to have begun with
a familiarisation with the region of its birth, namely the Arabian
peninsula incorporating Saudi Arabia (Hejaz and Najd), Yemen, the
sheikhdoms along the Persian Gulf littoral and the Sea of Oman. We also
generally commented on the geographic, social, racial, lingual,
religious and economic conditions of that region.

Henceforth our discussion will be related to those civilised regions
which bounded the Arabian peninsula of the time.

These civilised regions could basically be divided into two parts: in
one part consisting of small free status , linked with the Arabian
peninsula and possessing small local governments, which should however
be regarded Arab settlements though most of them were installed by great
powers. One of these which had parts of Iraq under its influence was the
government of Hira (or the Nu'manis and Munadherah) under the hegemony
of Iran. Another was Yemen which, being within the Arabian peninsula,
had an independent government.

For about 150 or 200 years this government had been installed either by
Iran or Abyssinia till about the time of the rise of Islam. In the other
part were the states in the western part which included the present day
Jordan and Israel. This was the Ghassani government which was under the
hegemony of Rome.

We will have a short and brief discussion about these three small
governments in their proper place, since these three states happened to
have a significant role in the contemporary history of the rise of Islam
which merits particular attention.

**A) Ancient Iran**

The Arabian peninsula of that time was bounded by four powerful, strong
and civilised nations with rather well established governments. Of these
four countries, two could be rated as first class and the other two as
second class powers. One of the first group was Iran which extended on
one side as far as the Tigris and Euphrates and Shatt-al-Arab, namely
upto the middle of the present day Iraq and included the Caucasus and
the present Iran itself; and on another flank included Turkestan,
Afghanistan, a part of Pakistan as far as the Hindus (Sind) River
valley.

In these regions there lived a people with a long and civilised past
which had undergone many tribulations and change, and were regarded as
the great neighbours of the Arabian peninsula.

The fact is that if we wish to speak on the basis of common usage,
Arabian peninsula was just a stretch of desert to which no one paid any
attention, and the use of the word 'neighbour' could hardly apply to
Iran with its immense size and grandeur as compared with Arabia. But
here the discussion is not about great or small but only to become
familiar with the geographic neighbours of Arabia.

The second great neighbour was Rome which also neighboured Iran. It was
a great power including northern Iraq, present day Turkey and the
Balkans, and was known as Eastern Rome. When we mention Rome in this
discussion it implies the Eastern Roman empire, since western Rome with
its seat in Italy neither remained a great power at that time, nor had
any relation with Islam. Of course western Rome of that time included
Italy, a portion of Yugoslavia, Albania, some part of Spain and even a
part of France, thus Europe of that time was only one country under
Rome.

Other peoples living beyond its limits were called Berbers.[^17]
Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire possessed such greatness at that time
that it was far above comparison with the other Rome. Western Rome rose
to greatness after the Muslims had overthrown Eastern Rome, and the
caliphs, namely the Ottoman rulers and kings, had captured the city of
Islambol or Constantinople.

It was then that in the 15th century A.D. learned men of Eastern Rome
fled to Western Rome and became instrumental in causing the Renaissance
and provided the base for the present civilisation of Europe and the
western world, because during the period which we are discussing,
Western Rome was hardly great and indeed was regarded as a second rate
power.

These were the great neighbours of the Arabian peninsula. The other two
second-rate neighbours were, firstly, Egypt which included the present
day Egypt, Libya, Tunis and some part of Sudan. Although this country
held some importance from Islam's viewpoint, yet it was not considered a
great power such as Iran and Rome.

The next neighbouring country was Abyssinia which included the present
day Abyssinia and some part of the Sudan, In this region, too, there was
no powerful government, though in Islam's times it was an empire with a
considerable past having a civilisation and characterised by noteworthy
social and religious freedom.[^18]

As is evident while surveying these countries, only two other regions
remained in the entire civilised world, namely China and India, and
beyond these two we do not find any other place in the world which could
be termed civilised, This detail has been mentioned here because certain
people, especially among the educated class whether in Iran or here in
Germany raise the question whether the prophet brought Islam as a
universal religion, and if so, how much did he know about the world
outside the Arabian peninsula?

The answer is: firstly, that we do not call a person 'prophet' on
account of his having been formally educated or having studied books and
maps etc. A prophet to us is a person who acquires all the necessary
knowledge through divine revelation, and this is without bounds or
limits. Secondly, the Prophet (a.s.) in his own time, had sent
communications to the rulers of these regions and hence the question
whether the Prophet was aware of the other non Arab nations and their
basic needs would seem to be a childish question.

History has recorded that the Prophet (a.s.), in the third year of his
ordainment, was commanded by God to make his call to Islam public and
declare it to all his neighbours, relatives and the Quraish. For this
purpose he issued an open invitation inviting all to his house, and
declared that they would soon have a religious code which would open the
gates of the palaces of (Khusrow, the Emperor of Iran) and of caesar and
other rulers. Also in the sixth year of his ordainment,

he sent letters to the rulers of the three small regions of Hira,
Ghassan and Yemen; first to Bazan king of Yemen, then to Khusrow Parviz
emperor of Iran, then to the emperor of Eastern Rome, then to the ruler
of Egypt (Maquqass), and next to Najashi (Negus) king of Abyssinia. All
these letters have been recorded in history, and there is no doubt or
question about them.

What remains to be said is whether the Prophet of Islam knew of such
places as India and China or not. Anyone who has the slightest
acquaintance with Arab's history would know that one of the principal
occupations of life for Arab merchants was the transportation of goods.
There they carried from China and India via the Sea of Oman and Hejaz to
Europe, i.e. Rome.

Thus, not only the prophet but Arab traders as well were familiar with
India and China and even their products such as spices, perfumes,
handicrafts and China ware which were the industrial and agricultural
products of India and China at that time.

Trade in such commodities was a part of the commercial pre-occupation
of the Arabs of that time. Therefore in discussions should someone raise
the question whether the Prophet of Islam was aware of human
civilisations existing in the world or not,

becomes quite irrelevant. It is likely someone may ask Prophet knew of
the inhabited regions of the earth, though we could not possibly answer
this question, since we do not believe that he know everything but
rather that whatever he needed to know was provided to him through
revelation. I really cannot imagine if the Prophet (a.s.) needed to know
about all these places in those times.


