Religion in the Achaemenid Period
=================================

In Iran, according to available sources, there existed a faith called
Mizda'i which professed faith in one god named Ahura-Mizda, a name,
having a root which is similar to a Greek word, meaning 'great and
possessor of wisdom', hence Ahur-Mizda would mean the great god of
wisdom and reason. This faith professed belief in god as the unique
creator of the world, and a belief in a number of secondary and tertiary
gods, and in angels, in the resurrection which is all very significant,
and also in good deeds as something very essential. Thus it is a highly
interesting point of note that as a result of such basic religious
education in ancient Iran, Islam spread so swiftly eastward.

The Mizda'i religion during subsequent periods became corrupted with
superstitions so that a man called Zoroaster appeared to reform the
Mizda'i religion. His place of appearance has been a subject of
controversy in history.[^28]

Of course Zoroaster is not a prophet but a reformer of the Mizda'i
code. As to the appearance of Zoroaster quite odd accounts are related
in history about the place and the date of his appearance, though
generally historical indications place his appearance about six
centuries B.C. simultaneously in regions which had a common origin and
similar conditions, namely India and Iran. In Iran Mizda'i faith is an
ancient religion, and in India Brahmanism is an ancient faith, but no
evidence is available about the date of origin of either of them.
Mizda'i faith was later on corrupted by superstitions, and Zoroaster as
the reformer makes his appearance in Iran. In India Brahmanism, too,
gets mixed with superstitions, and a man named Buddha appears to reform
it. There is a great resemblance between the life of Zoroaster and
Buddha in all the phases from the beginning to the end.

In the Semitic regions, too, six centuries later, namely concurrent
with the rise of Jesus[^29] Christ (a.s.) the main faith had been the
monotheistic religion of Judaism. This religion to faith was spoilt by
superstitions, and a man named Jesus rose to fight those superstitions.
In this way the life of Jesus Christ (a.s.) resembles those of Zoroaster
and Buddha. I do truly wish that I could have delved in deeper study in
the similarity present, especially in the case of Zoroaster and Buddha,
as both of them have a fifty percent resemblance with the lire of Jesus.
There is another common characteristic between the lives of Jesus and
Zoroaster; the history of Christianity shows that Jesus was ordained as
a prophet at the age of thirty. It is said that Zoroaster, too, rose at
the same age as a reformer to correct the Mizda'i code by the order of
Ahura-Mizda.

Before the rise of Zoroaster, according to the available testimonials
of history a class named the Magi held responsibility for religious
practices in Iran especially in Azarbayjan, as keepers of the fires. It
is has been said that Zoroaster himself was at first either of the Magi
class or in contact with them and had even wished to become a Magus.
There is a frequent mention of Magus and Magi in the Achaemenid
inscriptions, but no mention is made of Zororaster. In Zororaster's
hymns, called 'Gathas', no mention has been made of the Magi except in
one place, and no mention is made of Darius and Achaemenids at all. Thus
it is not clear for us whether the religion in the time of the
Achaemenids and Darius' era had been Mizda'i faith or zoroastrianism or
different schools of Budaism. What is certain, however, is that Judaism
had existed as a religion and then had been patronised by Darius.[^30]
This point is mentioned in the Jewish holy books as well as historical
records.[^31] What also appears certain is that in those days in 'he
realm of Iran various faiths had been prevalent, and there may not have
been a formal or a state religion as such especially since no mention is
made of Zoroaster in the inscriptions of Darius, nor has there been a
mention of the Achaemenids in the 'Gathas'. This could lead us to deduce
that state and religion had separate existence, allowing people to
practice their own religion and letting the government proceed with its
own function. It is in the Sassanid period that religion gains the
government' s support and there is a state it became the religion of the
country. This aspect warrants an exclusive and objective study of the
Sassanid period since it is closely related to the age of the rise of
Islam.

To sum up, this eastern neighbour of Arabia was twelve centuries ahead
of Arabia, the birthplace of Islam, in extent, greatness, power, natural
resources, social, technical and administrative progress and attainment
of central governmental organisation and also historical precedence.
How, then, did it happen that such an advanced country should succumb so
easily to a newly-risen movement originating in Hejaz, is the topic for
our further discussion.

**Iran in the Sassanid Period**

Iran under the Sassanids went through a glorious age distinct in its
history. Observations related from this period reveal why Islam spread
so rapidly in Iran. Also to be kept in mind, there had existed their
natural propensity, dating back three or four centuries for the
acceptance of such a faith as Islam. This subject, too, will be
discussed briefly. In the year 224 A.D. almost four centuries before the
rise of Islam in, Iran the Sassanids succeeded the Ashkanian
dynasty.[^32] The Achaemenid rule had its root in Fars, but the Ashkanis
were not from that region. The Sassanids once again rose from Fars, and
a chief named Ardshir Babakan who was a descendant of Sassan and a
governor of Ardavan V, the last Ashkani king, decided to set up a
central government modelled after the Achaemenid dynasty with greater
Fars as its base including the present Khuzestan.

Within a short time Ardshir managed to gather forces and mobilise them
and seize the control and then, after much struggle, establish the
government of Iran on the same model and the same extent as the
Achaemenid realm.

**Supremacy of Religion and Political Power**

Ardshir was a descendant of Sassan who was a priest, and as such in his
psychological, hereditary and personality make up, it asserted decisive
influence so that at the assumption of power he decided to establish a
government on the basis of religion, and make that religion the state
religion of the country so that the two pillars of power,
politico-military administration and religion should form as the
foundation of his rule. Whether this concept originated from a personal
inspiration of Ardshir attributable to descent from a priest, or whether
it was a social dictate of the time which his observations led him to
believe and which would make his rule smoother, is not an easy question
to answer. What is certain, however, is that, though in the Achaemenid
period a religion existed, yet a religious freedom existed in the whole
of the Achaemenid empire, each group practising its own religion. Though
the prevalent religion was Zoroastrianism, yet alongside of it Judaism
and some other local faiths also existed. Christianity had not till then
made its appearance. It we were to regard Sabean as an ancient faith,
it, too, existed in the region of Syria and Phoenicia. During the
Achaemenid period there was no religion as the state religion, although
the priests were regarded as a distinguished class, yet they had no
official recognition. During the Ashkani period, too, the position was
the same.

**Zoroastrianism as the State Religion**

Ardshir got the idea of giving a state religion to the country and that
the government should have an official religion, and this religion was
Zoroastrianism. There may have existed some evidence to show that this
matter was based on a social necessity in the sense that Ardshir
intended to revive a kind of Iranian nationality based on past history,
and link his lineage to the Achaemenids and so prove himself as a kin
and descendant of Kurosh; also as Zoroastrianism was an Iranian religion
with a considerable following, he figured that by reviving that
religion, he could exploit both the lines of propaganda to expand and
reinforce his rule. If this was the case, then by establishing a state
religion and linking religion with politics was a dictate of his time.
Or perhaps these considerations were never relevant and the matter was
wholly personal. In any case with the assumption of power by the
Sassanids, a new factor entered the social life of the Iranians, namely
that the government recognised a state religion that is Zoroastrianism.
During the Achaemenid period, Greece was a powerful rival of Iran on its
western frontiers, a Greece which frequently included parts of Turkey
and Syria.

Although until the rise of Alexander no strong government existed in
Greece, yet even those small governments asserted some weight. For
instance even though Athens was much smaller in area and population as
compared with Iran, still it held a high position from the viewpoint of
philosophy, civilisation, political concepts and naval power and
military potential. Thus they were always a source of trouble for Iran.
In the Achaemenid time other antagonists on the western borders were
Chaldea, Babylon and Assyria in the region of Iraq, and Syria and a part
of Turkey, but the Achaemenids removed these obstacles and conquered
them, leaving Greece as a strong opponent. In the Sassanid period there
was no powerful Greece any more. In the Achaemenid period although there
were governments in Rome and Italy, yet they were not of much
importance. But during the Sassanid period that is for eight centuries,
there rose a powerful government and a great empire in that part of the
world with its center in Rome. This empire, too, had a state religion
which was Christianity In north Africa, Egypt still retained its
position as an ancient civilisation, and the islands of Crete[^33] and
Sicily,[^34] too, possessed an ancient history and civilisation.

On the whole southern Europe was under the control of a strong
government with its center in Rome and Christianity as its state
religion. But whether the wide influence of Christianity at that time or
thereabouts and its recognition as the state religion had been a
pressing necessity and an effective factor in influencing Ardshir in
adopting an official religion for his government, is a question that
requires further study. But anyhow the Sassanid empire had as its
western neighbour a vast and powerful government in the Roman Empire
where Christianity was the state religion.

Between the Persian and the Roman empires were situated the remains of
Chaldea, Assyria and Babylon which kept on changing hands between these
two. The middle east as far as history can recall, has never been a
quiet region, especially at the time when the empires of Iran and Rome
were engaged in playing vital rules in the world. What is known for
certain, however, is that the Sassanid government began its work on a
new basis, namely the recognising of a state religion, a religion which
was patronised by the ruling class and was attended by elaborate
ceremonies by the Zoroastrian priests and their organisation which was
able to exert pressure upon religious minorities and followers of other
religions. This was actually the case in many of the Sassanid years when
non-Zoroastrian minorities remained under duress.

In the discussions related to religion tolerance in Islam and before
Islam, it is worth remembering that during the 427 years' rule of the
Sassanids in Iran,[^35] almost no tolerance was shown. The Iranian
government recognised a state religion dominated by a powerful
organisation of Zoroastrian priests which kept the religious minorities
under duress. This of course was the situation for most of the time.

Meanwhile during the period when Iran was formally recognised as a
Zoroastrian state, there appeared signs of influence of different views
and faiths, namely the influence of Buddhism, certain Indian creeds,
Christianity and Judaism upon the thoughts and beliefs of Iranians. This
is the first characteristic of the Sassanid rule which lasted four
centuries before the advent of Islam.

**Administration of the State**

The second characteristic of the Sassanid rule was its administration,
possessing a developed organisation with official bureaus,
correspondence, decrees, accounts and records to a greater extent than
before. It could be said that with the arrival of Alexander in Iran and
afterwards, Iran went through an evolutionary period in this respect.
Thus in this period the influence of tribes who were called 'clerks' or
'secretaries' and worked in government offices, grew much greater during
the Sassanid role than before, and they played a significant role. The
art of writing in the Sassanid time was not only limited to government
business, but was also important in religion. In the early years of this
dynasty's rule 'Avesta' which had till then not been compiled and
existed only in memorised form that was transferred verbatim from person
to person, was compiled with the endeavours of the Zoroastrian priests
and even commentaries were added in the form of 'Zand' and 'Pazand'. In
this way the principles of faith became defined and organised. Here we
quote from a text by the head priest and religious authority of the time
of Ardshir Babakan, the first Sassanid king, to show the influence of
religion and ecclesiastical organisation in the Sassanid system of
government. It says:

"The Mazdai faith was strengthened by my hand, the learned men were
rightfully elevated to high placer. Those of the 'Magi' who were seized
with doubts and uncertainties, were punished by me, or were pardoned
after they had confessed their errors and sins.[^36] Fire-temples were
built by me and the Magi were assigned to them. God, the King and I
confirmed their appointments.[^37] Numerous fire-temples were built
throughout Iran. Intermarriage between kinsmen and near relatives was
once more forbidden.[^38] Under my guidance those had worshiped demons,
turned back to God. Crowns were removed from the heads of many a
sovereign.[^39] Faith and religion found glory and splendour, and God's
command overshadowed everything. If I were to write down all the tasks
which have been accomplished, it would prove a lengthy process. Wherever
our army stepped, a fire-temple was set up. In Antioch, Talis, Armenia,
Georgia ... everywhere we set up fire-temples."[^40]

Thus it would appear that in these conditions the Sassanids assumed
power in Iran and the influence of clerks, secretaries and government
recorders as well as clergymen was paramount. To show the influence of
the scribes and clerks, we will quote from Henri Masse, a well-known
European Orientalist:[^41]

"At the head of the government was the Grand Vazir who, under the
direct command of the King, administered the country and acted as his
deputy when the king was away on travel or engaged in the battlefield.
Next to him was the Zoroastrian high priest. This shows that in those
days ministerial position and chancellorship served the king and acted
for him, whereas previous to this, the Army commander came next to the
king in precedence. At this time, although the field commanders and
generals held importance, the highest authority in the administration of
the country was vested in the Grand Vazir and Chief of scribes and
secretaries."

In order to further illustrate extent to which the people's political
life was mixed with religion, we will quote another part from Henri
Masse's writing: "A large number of clergymen intervened in the affairs
of the people and controlled their daily life, thereby gaining much
wealth, and extending the sphere of their influence, and becoming an
independent state within the state. Occasionally they would even form a
front against the king in collaboration with the nobility, and such,
confrontation weakened the Sassanid rule."

The purpose of quoting these points is to show the degree of influence
religion exerted in the social life and in governmental affairs and
administration of the country. All this paved the way both positively
and negatively, for the spread of Islam into Iran. Generally speaking
the two characteristics of the Sassanid period were: the mingling of
politics and the government, with religion and the extraordinary degree
of influence of the clergy and their religious organisations to such an
extent that it would be interesting to note at that time a seminary and
a college of logic existed alongside in the city of Rey, for the
training of religious students for various positions. Another important
point was the high degree of influence the clerks and government
employees and keepers of records had in the society.

As it has been noted earlier, the social life of people was always
divided into various clans and in this period the order of classes was
undergoing a change.

**Social Class Structure**

In the Sassanid time the division of the population into the 'haves'
and 'have not' became more apparent. The distinguished classes were made
up of the clerks, clergy, military and nobles, while the ordinary
classes included artisans, farmers and tradesmen. These upper classes
during the most famous and brilliant period, namely in the time of king
Khusrow Anushiravan I, enjoyed the most privileged life and were
exempted from the payment of taxes and from conscription in wars; all
these burdens were placed upon the class of artisans and tradesmen and
especially upon the villagers, The artisans and tradesmen class paid
taxes only, while the villagers had to give both money and their lives
in return for a meagre livelihood. In this manner there existed a great
class difference during the Sassanid rule, especially among the ordinary
classes which were made up of rural population and the tradesmen and
artisans.

**1) Foreign Policy**

During the four centuries of the Sassanid rule, from the viewpoint of
foreign relations, wars between Iran and Rome were the most significant
events in the pages of history. In these wars there were several points
worthy of attention, the foremost being the intervention of religion in
the conduct of wars.

At the beginning of the 5th century A.D. under the leadership of a
priest named Nestorius[^42] a sect called Nestorians came into being
among the Christians in the region of Syria. This sect differed from the
other Christians in their beliefs, and for that reason they were
condemned for heresy and excommunicated by the powerful church of that
time in Constantinope, whereas the sect had a large following in the
Middle East. Although Zoroastrianism was at that time the state religion
of Iran, the government gave asylum to the Nestorians in order to gather
a group of supporters between its own realm and Rome, its powerful
neighbour. This support enabled the Nestorians to build churches in the
realm of Iran and engage in propagating their religion.

The other point is that when the Roman Emperors saw that the powerful
and centralised government in Iran had become a source of trouble for
them, after revealing its intentions of conquering all of the Roman
empire and moreover, owing to its distance from the territories of Iran
and its inability to maintain watch over its distant frontiers, a
powerful emperor of Rome named Constantine[^43] decided to establish an
eastern capital for himself. This coincided with the time when the
Iranian emperor, too, had determined to establish a western capital at
Tysphon in the territory of Iraq, while the Romans chose the city of
Byzantine which later on became known as Constantinople. This change of
capital from Rome to Constantinople produced many changes in the past
history, the main factor of which was the vicinity of the two powerful
neighbours who were engaged in constant dispute, not about any ideology,
but about expanding their respective realms and conquering the world,
namely personal motives. Thus the foreign policy of Iran in this period
was firstly dominated by religion, and secondly by the continued wars
lasting four centuries. For one hundred years, there existed a peace
pact between them, but for the rest of the period, namely for three
centuries they were continuously in a state of war which became quite
intense at the end of the sixth century A.D. That is in the time of
Khosrow Parviz when intense wars raged between him and Heraclius, the
Roman emperor. Both these emperors were contemporaries of the holy
Prophet of Islam who sent written communications inviting them to
embrace Islam. The war between the Emperors of Iran and Rome continued
so long that they were losing their last ounce of strength. We will
discuss these wars in more details later on when the subject of the
birth of Islam comes up.

**The Appearance of Manichaeus**

As mentioned earlier, the rule of Ardshir, began with the recognition
of the Zoroastrian faith. After his death, Shapoor the 1st, his son,
became king who after further expanding the realm of his father,
dominated the situation. He learnt that a man named Manichaeus[^44] had
risen claiming to be a prophet. Shapoor 1 received Manichaeus in court
and after a few sessions fell deeply under his influence. Manichaeus was
an Iranian who was bom in Iraq in a village by the Tigris. He was
familiar with Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Buddhism, and by mingling
these three faiths created a special creed and declared himself its
prophet. After meeting Shapoor in Khuzistan and influencing him in favor
of his religion, he obtained from Shapoor a directive to all his
governors to allow Manichaeus and his missionaries freedom to propagate
their religion.

Manichaeus rose as a reformer of the Zoroastrian religion, but he
offered a set of teachings which were a combination of the ideas of
Zoroaster, Christ and Buddha. For thirty years Manichaeus and his
missionaries carried out their mission, winning numerous followers until
in the time of Bahram II in the year 277 Manichaeus was arrested and in
a court held by the Zoroastrian high priest he was charged with heresy
in religion. He was thrown in prison and after 26 days he was killed
there in an atrocious manner. His skin was then filled with straw and
hung in front of Bahram's court as a warning to anyone who committed
heresy in religion. The question is what led Shapoor to favor
Manichaeus' religion? Historians explain that Shapoor had realised that
the Zoroastrian faith did not fulfill the needs and spiritual
expectations of the people, and was inadequate in satisfying their
religious spirit, and for this reason he gave Manichaeus a free hand as
a religious reformer. This shows that zoroastrianism, which some people
wish to revive now and make it replace Islam in some parts of Islamic
lands, was as early as so many centuries before the advent of Islam, as
ineffective a creed that it could not satisfy the people, and thus the
king allowed a religious reformer like Manichaeus to become active. It
should be remembered that at that time a religious vacuum existed in the
realm of Iran. Manichaean faith has had a strange fate and has had many
ups and downs, not as much as a religion, but as a philosophy it sent
ripples as far as China on the one side, and as far as Europe including
England and France in the other direction but that in itself is a long
story.

**The Rise of Mazdak**

Another interesting development from that religious viewpoint in the
Sassanid period is the rise of Mazdak. In the time of Qubad, father of
Anushiravan, a man named Mazdak rose with a new religion. In Mazdak's
faith a new aspect of faith is discernible that did not exist in the
former religions. In Zoroastrianism attention was paid to moral aspects
such as truth and honesty and spiritual matters and worship of God, and
sacrifice etc., but it did not deal with rights and social problems, and
not only accepted class divisions but also supported it. Thhe Manichaean
faith, too, despite proposing reforms in religious matters, introduced
no social changes. But Mazdak dealt with both religious and social
matters. On the one hand with its inclinations towards Zoroastrianism,
Buddhism and Christianity, namely towards asceticism, abandonment of
carnal desires, and isolation from worldly affairs by leading an ascetic
life, and with such views about social matters, Mazdak threatened the
social order of the time. About his philosophy and religion, Mazdak used
to say "True bliss for human beings lies in a peaceful environment free
from rancour and enmity. But the disputes and wars which occur among
people are either over wealth and enjoyment of affluence, property,
water, trade, capital, luxuries or over women. In order to remove these
disputes altogether, wealth and women should be commonly shared.[^45]

This creed threatened the system of social class structure and quite
naturally, it found numerous followers among the deprived classes.
Qubad, too, as a young ruler who was opposed to the influence of
priests, nobles and upper classes, and felt that their influence would
hinder the proper administration of the country, supported Mazdak faith,
and patronised Mazdak very strongly. In this way about the year 484 A.D.
that is about 125 years before the advent of Islam, a revolutionary
religious fervour governed under which the deprived masses tore up the
former bonds of class life and formalities and adopted to an extreme
extent the ideas of communal sharing of everything including women and
abolition of family and marriage and proprietorship, with the result
that chaos and disorder reigned everywhere, since such ideas both from
the viewpoint of religion and social rights and internal politics were
not acceptable to the people of that time, even though Qubad supported
Mazdak to diminish the deep influence of the ecclesiastical
organisation.

However, the clergy's influence succeeded in rousing people to revolt.
On the other hand Mazdak's ideas, too, about family and wealth sharing
were so extremist that they shook the foundations of the existing system
since they were contrary to human nature. Therefore they could not
endure for long, and when Anushirvan assumed power in the year 531 A.D.
Mazdak was executed. His followers were scattered or destroyed, and once
more the Zoroastrian faith and its priests gained dominance over the
situation.[^46]

**P) Conditions Prevailing in Iran at the Time of the Rise of Islam**

At the time of advent of Islam the government of Iran had become
strangely weak, and after Khosrow Parviz within a few years he was
succeeded by several male and female rulers until Yazdgerd the 3rd
assumed power.[^47]

In brief, to the east of the region of the birth of Islam there existed
a vast realm with an ancient civilisation spread over twelve centuries.
In Iran the central government had existed a long time and several
religions appearing during this period which had exerted profound
influence and found many followers had not survived for long. Neither
Zoroastrianism, nor the religions of Manichaeus nor Mazdak could stand
against Islam. In that environment there was a kind of readiness and
thirst for destroying the existing order both socially and spiritually,
and thus Islam entered Iran in an environment that was all set to accept
the new faith. Those who attribute the rapid spread of Islam to the use
of the sword are not sufficiently familiar with the history of that
period. The fact of the matter is as the historians write: In most cases
before the soldiers of Islam reached the cities which they had
conquered, the populace would throw open the gates for them from within
and welcomed them. What is certain is that Iran had fallen into a state
of deterioration in all respects whether political social or religious
at the time of the rise of Islam.

**2) Questions and Answers**

Question: You said in your discourse that in t he present world
environment there are no societies based on classes, but classes exist
in a modified form. Answer: Not in that form. In the class system
certain people are explicitly told that they have not the right to even
think of entering a class of an upper status. The hardest and ugliest
obstacles that could be imagined exist in such systems which to put
limitations on the thinking of a group. It is true that indirect
pressure has considerable effect, but the very existence of indirect
pressure shows that the worth of those placed under pressure has gone up
to some extent. If they tell you that you cannot directly and openly
strike a person, it means that the said person's personality has grown
in relation to you so that you cannot directly strike him. Of course
even today there exist indirect restrictions in the world, though term,
class could not be applied to them; they might be called communities.
Communities under indirect pressure do exist although these could not be
compared with their previous form. You could never think of what a class
society actually meant.

Unfortunately among the aristocrats in Iran, sometimes you would see
the son of a farmer or villager who, despite his education and worth, is
not given the chance to raise his status, simply because of his lineage.
This is a vestige of those old class divisions which is a system based
on man's inherent selfishness. Therefore you can never uproot it fully,
even though it's effect might diminish. Now can you imagine if such a
system found legal support, how comical it would be. The existence of
such a law which would prevent a farmer or tradesman from rising up to
the class of warriors and that he would be punished even for
entertaining such a thought, would seem ridiculous and incredible to us.
They say that in India there still exists a class system. I cannot bring
myself to believe it until I saw it for myself. For us, Muslims such a
situation is unthinkable; for, since our birth and growing up we have
been accustomed to the concept of Islamic brotherhood and equality. But
there is no doubt that there exist groups that always seek to preserve
their interests in one way or another.

Question: How did the holy Prophet write his letters? The Qur'an says
that he was unlettered and untaught. Did he remain like that till the
end? Answer: The letters were not in the holy Prophet' s own
handwriting; they were written by his scribes. According to historical
sources the Prophet was able to write during the last years of his life,
therefore those letters which were written in the sixth year of his
migration, namely three or four years before his demise, are said to
have been written in his own handwriting. But we cannot claim that all
of them were written by him, since we know whose handwriting they been.
Maybe the writers of the other letters would be also discovered.[^48]
Question: W ere China and India. protectorates or independent at the
time of the rise of Islam? Has there been a mention of dispatch of
letters to these lands by the prophet?

Answer: China and India were independent, and the holy prophet sent no
letters there. According to some historical sources, the Prophet in the
last days of his life sent, not a political but a religious delegation
whose members were also merchants. These men entered Tibet after the
Prophet's demise in the time of Abu Bakr and began to deal in
commodities. This is mentioned occasionally in notes and obscure sources
of history, and need much hard work. Of course India and China have both
passed through tempestuous times, and their governments were not local
like those of Iran and Rome except in China for short periods. But I
cannot be sure that this has been the case in the time of the Prophet.
However, it may be said that even if they resembled Iran and Rome in
having a well-established government, the holy Prophet would most likely
not have written to them. He was concerned first with Mecca and then
with Medina, and it took him six years to establish order in these two
places. Therefore the idea of writing letters to China or India would
not appear likely, since as a Prophet who claimed to have power, he had
to dominate his near regions first, though a remark is attributed to him
saying: "Seek knowledge even if it is found in China."

Attention to the entire civilised world of that time is obvious in the
teachings of Islam but not in the form of writing letters, since firstly
it is not clear whether a central government had existed there at that
time, and secondly, even if such a government did exist, it would not
have been of much use for the Prophet to take such a step before
bringing his surrounding regions under central. On the whole, the time
of writing letters is related to the years when Egypt, Abyssinia, Rome
and Iran became the political neighbours of Islam, and it was then that
the Prophet wrote to them and to several other smaller rulers in Yemen,
Ghassan and Hira which were dependencies.

Question: How were the original inscriptions of Iran deciphered?

Answer: Three European scholars who were Orientalists worked jointly
and completed each other's tasks.[^49] This is how they proceeded: the
first orientalist who was not familiar with the topic of the
inscription, succeeded in reading only the proper nouns by means of
distinguishing the signs, such as the word 'Darius' and 'Pars' and
gradually some letters such as P, A, R, S, I, D, V were deciphered. What
was fortunate was that in these inscriptions the Greek and Babylonian
translations occurred side by side, thereby providing three texts and
this made deciphering much easier than if there had been no translation
accompanying the inscription. Thus the expert was able, with the aid of
those translation, to read the proper names since they have a similar
sound in both languages, and then gradually decipher the letters. One of
these scholars spent much of his life collecting this information. Then
after the stage of proper names, the subsequent stages were not so
difficult, and the next two scholars completed the task. About three
experts devoted their whole lifetime in extracting the meaning and
finally translating the texts.


