Religion in the Achaemenid Period
=================================

In Iran, according to available sources, there existed a faith called
Mizda'i which professed faith in one god named Ahura-Mizda, a name,
having a root which is similar to a Greek word, meaning ,

great and possessor of wisdom', hence Ahur-Mizda would mean the great
god of wisdom and reason. This faith professed belief in god as the
unique creator of the world, and a belief in a number of secondary and
tertiary gods, and in angels, in the resurrection which is all very
significant, and also in good deeds as something very essential. Thus it
is a highly interesting point of note that as a result of such basic
religious education in ancient Iran, Islam spread so swiftly eastward.

The Mizda'i religion during subsequent periods became corrupted with
superstitions so that a man called Zoroaster appeared to reform the
Mizda'i religion. His place of appearance has been a subject of
controversy in history.[^28]

Of course Zoroaster is not a prophet but a reformer of the Mizda'i
code. As to the appearance of Zoroaster quite odd accounts are related
in history about the place and the date of his appearance, though
generally historical indications place his appearance about six
centuries B.C. simultaneously in regions which had a common origin and
similar conditions, namely India and Iran.

In Iran Mizda'i faith is an ancient religion, and in India Brahmanism
is an ancient faith, but no evidence is available about the date of
origin of either of them. Mizda'i faith was later on corrupted by
superstitions, and Zoroaster as the reformer makes his appearance in
Iran. In India Brahmanism, too, gets mixed with superstitions, and a man
named Buddha appears to reform it.

There is a great resemblance between the life of Zoroaster and Buddha
in all the phases from the beginning to the end. In the Semitic regions,
too, six centuries later, namely concurrent with the rise of Jesus[^29]
Christ (a.s.) the main faith had been the monotheistic religion of
Judaism. This religion to faith was spoilt by superstitions, and a man
named Jesus rose to fight those superstitions.

In this way the life of Jesus Christ (a.s.) resembles those of
Zoroaster and Buddha. I do truly wish that I could have delved in deeper
study in the similarity present, especially in the case of Zoroaster and
Buddha, as both of them have a fifty percent resemblance with the lire
of Jesus. There is another common characteristic between the lives of
Jesus and Zoroaster;

the history of Christianity shows that Jesus was ordained as a prophet
at the age of thirty. It is said that Zoroaster, too, rose at the same
age as a reformer to correct the Mizda'i code by the order of
Ahura-Mizda.

Before the rise of Zoroaster, according to the available testimonials
of history a class named the Magi held responsibility for religious
practices in Iran especially in Azarbayjan, as keepers of the fires. It
is has been said that Zoroaster himself was at first either of the Magi
class or in contact with them and had even wished to become a Magus.
There is a frequent mention of Magus and Magi in the Achaemenid
inscriptions, but no mention is made of Zororaster.

In Zororaster's hymns, called 'Gathas', no mention has been made of the
Magi except in one place, and no mention is made of Darius and
Achaemenids at all. Thus it is not clear for us whether the religion in
the time of the Achaemenids and Darius' era had been Mizda'i faith or
zoroastrianism or different schools of Budaism.

What is certain, however, is that Judaism had existed as a religion and
then had been patronised by Darius.[^30] This point is mentioned in the
Jewish holy books as well as historical records.[^31]
What also appears certain is that in those days in 'he realm of Iran
various faiths had been prevalent, and there may not have been a formal
or a state religion as such especially since no mention is made of
Zoroaster in the inscriptions of Darius, nor has there been a mention of
the Achaemenids in the 'Gathas'.

This could lead us to deduce that state and religion had separate
existence, allowing people to practice their own religion and letting
the government proceed with its own function. It is in the Sassanid
period that religion gains the government' s support and there is a
state it became the religion of the country. This aspect warrants an
exclusive and objective study of the Sassanid period since it is closely
related to the age of the rise of Islam.

To sum up, this eastern neighbour of Arabia was twelve centuries ahead
of Arabia, the birthplace of Islam, in extent, greatness, power, natural
resources, social, technical and administrative progress and attainment
of central governmental organisation and also historical precedence.
How, then, did it happen that such an advanced country should succumb so
easily to a newly-risen movement originating in Hejaz, is the topic for
our further discussion.


**Iran in the Sassanid Period**

Iran under the Sassanids went through a glorious age distinct in its
history. Observations related from this period reveal why Islam spread
so rapidly in Iran. Also to be kept in mind, there had existed their
natural propensity, dating back three or four centuries for the
acceptance of such a faith as Islam. This subject, too, will be
discussed briefly.

In the year 224 A.D. almost four centuries before the rise of Islam in,
Iran the Sassanids succeeded the Ashkanian dynasty.[^32] The Achaemenid
rule had its root in Fars, but the Ashkanis were not from that region.
The Sassanids once again rose from Fars, and a chief named Ardshir
Babakan who was a descendant of Sassan and a governor of Ardavan V, the
last Ashkani king, decided to set up a central government modelled after
the Achaemenid dynasty with greater Fars as its base including the
present Khuzestan.

Within a short time Ardshir managed to gather forces and mobilise them
and seize the control and then, after much struggle, establish the
government of Iran on the same model and the same extent as the
Achaemenid realm.


**Supremacy of Religion and Political Power**

Ardshir was a descendant of Sassan who was a priest, and as such in his
psychological, hereditary and personality make up, it asserted decisive
influence so that at the assumption of power he decided to establish a
government on the basis of religion, and make that religion the state
religion of the country so that the two pillars of power,
politico-military administration and religion should form as the
foundation of his rule.

Whether this concept originated from a personal inspiration of Ardshir
attributable to descent from a priest, or whether it was a social
dictate of the time which his observations led him to believe and which
would make his rule smoother, is not an easy question to answer. What is
certain, however, is that, though in the Achaemenid period a religion
existed, yet a religious freedom existed in the whole of the Achaemenid
empire, each group practising its own religion.

Though the prevalent religion was Zoroastrianism, yet alongside of it
Judaism and some other local faiths also existed. Christianity had not
till then made its appearance. It we were to regard Sabean as an ancient
faith, it, too, existed in the region of Syria and Phoenicia. During the
Achaemenid period there was no religion as the state religion, although
the priests were regarded as a distinguished class, yet they had no
official recognition. During the Ashkani period, too, the position was
the same.


**Zoroastrianism as the State Religion**

Ardshir got the idea of giving a state religion to the country and that
the government should have an official religion, and this religion was
Zoroastrianism. There may have existed some evidence to show that this
matter was based on a social necessity in the sense that Ardshir
intended to revive a kind of Iranian nationality based on past history,
and link his lineage to the Achaemenids and so prove himself as a kin
and descendant of Kurosh; also as Zoroastrianism was an Iranian religion
with a considerable following,

he figured that by reviving that religion, he could exploit both the
lines of propaganda to expand and reinforce his rule. If this was the
case, then by establishing a state religion and linking religion with
politics was a dictate of his time. Or perhaps these considerations were
never relevant and the matter was wholly personal. In any case with the
assumption of power by the Sassanids, a new factor entered the social
life of the Iranians,

namely that the government recognised a state religion that is
Zoroastrianism. During the Achaemenid period, Greece was a powerful
rival of Iran on its western frontiers, a Greece which frequently
included parts of Turkey and Syria. Although until the rise of Alexander
no strong government existed in Greece,

yet even those small governments asserted some weight. For instance
even though Athens was much smaller in area and population as compared
with Iran, still it held a high position from the viewpoint of
philosophy, civilisation, political concepts and naval power and
military potential. Thus they were always a source of trouble for
Iran.

In the Achaemenid time other antagonists on the western borders were
Chaldea, Babylon and Assyria in the region of Iraq, and Syria and a part
of Turkey, but the Achaemenids removed these obstacles and conquered
them, leaving Greece as a strong opponent. In the Sassanid period there
was no powerful Greece any more.

In the Achaemenid period although there were governments in Rome and
Italy, yet they were not of much importance. But during the Sassanid
period that is for eight centuries,

there rose a powerful government and a great empire in that part of the
world with its center in Rome. This empire, too, had a state religion
which was Christianity In north Africa, Egypt still retained its
position as an ancient civilisation, and the islands of Crete[^33] and
Sicily,[^34] too, possessed an ancient history and civilisation.

On the whole southern Europe was under the control of a strong
government with its center in Rome and Christianity as its state
religion. But whether the wide influence of Christianity at that time or
thereabouts and its recognition as the state religion had been a
pressing necessity and an effective factor in influencing Ardshir in
adopting an official religion for his government, is a question that
requires further study. But anyhow the Sassanid empire had as its
western neighbour a vast and powerful government in the Roman Empire
where Christianity was the state religion.

Between the Persian and the Roman empires were situated the remains of
Chaldea, Assyria and Babylon which kept on changing hands between these
two. The middle east as far as history can recall, has never been a
quiet region, especially at the time when the empires of Iran and Rome
were engaged in playing vital rules in the world.

What is known for certain, however, is that the Sassanid government
began its work on a new basis, namely the recognising of a state
religion, a religion which was patronised by the ruling class and was
attended by elaborate ceremonies by the Zoroastrian priests and their
organisation which was able to exert pressure upon religious minorities
and followers of other religions. This was actually the case in many of
the Sassanid years when non-Zoroastrian minorities remained under
duress.

In the discussions related to religion tolerance in Islam and before
Islam, it is worth remembering that during the 427 years' rule of the
Sassanids in Iran,[^35] almost no tolerance was shown. The Iranian
government recognised a state religion dominated by a powerful
organisation of Zoroastrian priests which kept the religious minorities
under duress. This of course was the situation for most of the time.

Meanwhile during the period when Iran was formally recognised as a
Zoroastrian state, there appeared signs of influence of different views
and faiths, namely the influence of Buddhism, certain Indian creeds,
Christianity and Judaism upon the thoughts and beliefs of Iranians. This
is the first characteristic of the Sassanid rule which lasted four
centuries before the advent of Islam.


**Administration of the State**

The second characteristic of the Sassanid rule was its administration,
possessing a developed organisation with official bureaus,
correspondence, decrees, accounts and records to a greater extent than
before. It could be said that with the arrival of Alexander in Iran and
afterwards, Iran went through an evolutionary period in this respect.

Thus in this period the influence of tribes who were called 'clerks' or
'secretaries' and worked in government offices, grew much greater during
the Sassanid role than before, and they played a significant role. The
art of writing in the Sassanid time was not only limited to government
business, but was also important in religion.

In the early years of this dynasty's rule 'Avesta' which had till then
not been compiled and existed only in memorised form that was
transferred verbatim from person to person, was compiled with the
endeavours of the Zoroastrian priests and even commentaries were added
in the form of 'Zand' and 'Pazand'. In this way the principles of faith
became defined and organised.

Here we quote from a text by the head priest and religious authority of
the time of Ardshir Babakan, the first Sassanid king, to show the
influence of religion and ecclesiastical organisation in the Sassanid
system of government. It says:

"The Mazdai faith was strengthened by my hand, the learned men were
rightfully elevated to high placer. Those of the 'Magi' who were seized
with doubts and uncertainties, were punished by me, or were pardoned
after they had confessed their errors and sins.[^36] Fire-temples were
built by me and the Magi were assigned to them. God, the King and I
confirmed their appointments.[^37] Numerous fire-temples were built
throughout Iran.

Intermarriage between kinsmen and near relatives was once more
forbidden.[^38] Under my guidance those had worshiped demons, turned back
to God. Crowns were removed from the heads of many a sovereign.[^39]
Faith and religion found glory and splendour, and God's command
overshadowed everything.

If I were to write down all the tasks which have been accomplished, it
would prove a lengthy process. Wherever our army stepped, a fire-temple
was set up. In Antioch, Talis, Armenia, Georgia ... everywhere we set up
fire-temples."[^40]

Thus it would appear that in these conditions the Sassanids assumed
power in Iran and the influence of clerks, secretaries and government
recorders as well as clergymen was paramount. To show the influence of
the scribes and clerks, we will quote from Henri Masse, a well-known
European Orientalist:[^41]

"At the head of the government was the Grand Vazir who, under the
direct command of the King, administered the country and acted as his
deputy when the king was away on travel or engaged in the battlefield.
Next to him was the Zoroastrian high priest. This shows that in those
days ministerial position and chancellorship served the king and acted
for him, whereas previous to this, the Army commander came next to the
king in precedence. At this time, although the field commanders and
generals held importance, the highest authority in the administration of
the country was vested in the Grand Vazir and Chief of scribes and
secretaries."

In order to further illustrate extent to which the people's political
life was mixed with religion, we will quote another part from Henri
Masse's writing: "A large number of clergymen intervened in the affairs
of the people and controlled their daily life, thereby gaining much
wealth, and extending the sphere of their influence, and becoming an
independent state within the state.

Occasionally they would even form a front against the king in
collaboration with the nobility, and such, confrontation weakened the
Sassanid rule." The purpose of quoting these points is to show the
degree of influence religion exerted in the social life and in
governmental affairs and administration of the country. All this paved
the way both positively and negatively, for the spread of Islam into
Iran.

Generally speaking the two characteristics of the Sassanid period were:
the mingling of politics and the government, with religion and the
extraordinary degree of influence of the clergy and their religious
organisations to such an extent that it would be interesting to note at
that time a seminary and a college of logic existed alongside in the
city of Rey, for the training of religious students for various
positions. Another important point was the high degree of influence the
clerks and government employees and keepers of records had in the
society.

As it has been noted earlier, the social life of people was always
divided into various clans and in this period the order of classes was
undergoing a change.


**Social Class Structure**

In the Sassanid time the division of the population into the 'haves'
and 'have not' became more apparent. The distinguished classes were made
up of the clerks, clergy, military and nobles, while the ordinary
classes included artisans, farmers and tradesmen.

These upper classes during the most famous and brilliant period, namely
in the time of king Khusrow Anushiravan I, enjoyed the most privileged
life and were exempted from the payment of taxes and from conscription
in wars;

all these burdens were placed upon the class of artisans and tradesmen
and especially upon the villagers, The artisans and tradesmen class paid
taxes only, while the villagers had to give both money and their lives
in return for a meagre livelihood. In this manner there existed a great
class difference during the Sassanid rule, especially among the ordinary
classes which were made up of rural population and the tradesmen and
artisans.

**1) Foreign Policy**

During the four centuries of the Sassanid rule, from the viewpoint of
foreign relations, wars between Iran and Rome were the most significant
events in the pages of history. In these wars there were several points
worthy of attention, the foremost being the intervention of religion in
the conduct of wars.

At the beginning of the 5th century A.D. under the leadership of a
priest named Nestorius[^42] a sect called Nestorians came into being
among the Christians in the region of Syria. This sect differed from the
other Christians in their beliefs, and for that reason they were
condemned for heresy and excommunicated by the powerful church of that
time in Constantinope,

whereas the sect had a large following in the Middle East. Although
Zoroastrianism was at that time the state religion of Iran, the
government gave asylum to the Nestorians in order to gather a group of
supporters between its own realm and Rome, its powerful neighbour. This
support enabled the Nestorians to build churches in the realm of Iran
and engage in propagating their religion.

The other point is that when the Roman Emperors saw that the powerful
and centralised government in Iran had become a source of trouble for
them, after revealing its intentions of conquering all of the Roman
empire and moreover, owing to its distance from the territories of Iran
and its inability to maintain watch over its distant frontiers, a
powerful emperor of Rome named Constantine[^43] decided to establish an
eastern capital for himself.

This coincided with the time when the Iranian emperor, too, had
determined to establish a western capital at Tysphon in the territory of
Iraq, while the Romans chose the city of Byzantine which later on became
known as Constantinople. This change of capital from Rome to
Constantinople produced many changes in the past history, the main
factor of which was the vicinity of the two powerful neighbours who were
engaged in constant dispute, not about any ideology, but about expanding
their respective realms and conquering the world, namely personal
motives.

Thus the foreign policy of Iran in this period was firstly dominated by
religion, and secondly by the continued wars lasting four centuries. For
one hundred years, there existed a peace pact between them, but for the
rest of the period, namely for three centuries they were continuously in
a state of war which became quite intense at the end of the sixth
century A.D.

That is in the time of Khosrow Parviz when intense wars raged between
him and Heraclius, the Roman emperor. Both these emperors were
contemporaries of the holy Prophet of Islam who sent written
communications inviting them to embrace Islam.

The war between the Emperors of Iran and Rome continued so long that
they were losing their last ounce of strength. We will discuss these
wars in more details later on when the subject of the birth of Islam
comes up.


