Abyssinia Before the Birth of Islam
===================================

Following the study of the close neighbours of Arabia, namely Iran and
Egypt, our discussion turns to Abyssinia which has an important role in
the history of Islam in comparison with other neighbours.

**a) General Conditions**

Geographically there has been only a minor variation between the
Abyssinia of the past and the present; it included the Eritrean coast on
the Red Sea as well as British Sumalia and French Sumalia which have now
become independent, a well as a part of the Sudan. Abyssinia of that
time was an extensive realm with an old history, but its civilisation
did not even equal the level of the other neighbours of Arabia, and was
at par with Yemen. The rulers and people of Abyssinia belonged to a race
south and west of the Red Sea, who were called the 'Habish' and
'Habash'. In early Islam the word 'Habish' was applied to those who came
to Mecca from this region, and from that word the word Abyssinia is
derived, a word which is closer to its root than Ethiopia which is now
used for that country in European languages and papers and other
publications. It was applied to those who migrated from the shores of
the Red Sea to this land, and settled there.

Abyssinia itself is an extensive land having various natural divisions.
A considerable part of it is desert with little agriculture and parse
population; the other part has high mountains and mountainous land with
abundant water and trees, with gold, silver and copper mines and
flourishing agriculture. About one thousand years B.C. Abyssinia had a
central government. I mention this point to show that all the neighbours
of Arabia including Hira and Ghassan had a central government, while
Hejaz, the birthplace of Islam, lacked an organised government and was
socially well behind all the countries surrounding it. Yet it made a
sudden leap forward to establish a central government and its own
special quality of democracy and freedom. What I would like to do is to
see how did all this take place in such a short span of time, and what
caused this quick change? And to what extent does it influence our life
today?

In Abyssinia numerous races existed in a scattered way, with their
local governments. At the same time Abyssinia had central monarchy which
was strong and powerful enough to be obeyed by the neighbouring rulers,
and here and there also existed autonomous governments. Yaqubi, in his
book of history which was written in the third century Hijri has
recorded that there were many independent governments existing, while
the central government of the Najashies (Neguses) exercised some control
over them, and received tributes from these small local governments.[^59]
The present population of Abyssinia is about 21,000,000[^60] according to
the last (1960) statistics, of which 12.5 million are Muslims and the
rest are either Christians or idolaters, but in the present situation
the government is in the hands of the Christians.[^61] This population
consists of different branches to one of which belongs the Najashi group
who ruled as emperors. They have emigrated from Yemen.

The lineage of the emperors of Abyssinia reached Prophet Solomon (a.s.)
through his marriage with the Queen of Shiba. Thus this family regarded
themselves as descendants of Prophet Solomon, the son of Prophet Dawood
(David). In the constitution of 1932 of Abyssinia it is stated that
kingship belongs permanently to this family, each branch of which
possesses a different name. However, it is not clear to what extent this
claim is a fable or based on historical fact. My study of the Abyssinian
history did not confirm the correctness of this claim, even a detailed
source uses the phrase "It is said", showing that the writer is doubtful
about its authenticity. I must narrate an hlistorical account which is
quite interesting and also disturbing. Until the fourth century A.D.
Abyssinia was a land of idolatry and idolaters, having some local jungle
beliefs, and the Jews, too, seem to have asserted some influence, though
this matter is never publicly admitted or discussed in detail. In those
days a good deal of traffic existed between Yemen and Abyssinia and some
kind of historical relations, showing that Judaism had been more or less
recognised there, though the number of its followers had been rather
small.[^62] However, the common religion of the Abyssinians was idolatry
In the fourth century, namely in 340 A.D. a Bishop of Syria - a Syrian
was dispatched from the church of Alexandria to Abyssinia as a
missionary.[^63] This industrious bishop succeeded in converting a group
to Christianity in the 4th century A.D., about 240 or 250 years before
the birth of Islam.

Thus it would show that in Abyssinia did not have a precedence of more
than two and a half centuries before the rise of Islam. Churches were
built there, and thus Abyssinia became a Christian base. According to
the description by one bishop of the church, Abyssinia is an island of
Christianity in a sea of polytheism, since at that time no other
religion existed there. The influence of Christianity spread so far that
the emperor himself embraced that faith, and Negus who was a
contemporary of the prophet of Islam was a Christian. According to one
European writer, with the rise of Islam the connection between Abyssinia
and the Christian world was severed, and this separation continued for
nine centuries so that the Christian world knew nothing of Abyssinia and
of their being Christians.

**b) Re-discovery of Abyssinia**

When we say that the Christian world knew nothing about a place called
Abyssinia, it is due to the fact that it is so recorded in a document
that in 1520 A.D. John II,[^64] Emperor of Portugal, heard that on the
other side of the world there existed a country with Christian religion
and a wealthy emperor. The Portuguese emperor was overcome with a desire
to find out who this Christian emperor was on the other side of the
world, without being aware of his geographical whereabouts. He ordered a
number of adventurers and seafarers to proceed to discover that land for
him. Eventually two navigators departed for that country, and found it
and sent a report to the emperor. In Abyssinia the ruler welcomed these
envoys of Portugal and told them about his helplessness in confronting
the Muslims there, and asked the king of Portugal to dispatch some
troops to aid him against the Muslims. Thus the first military
negotiations took place between the two countries, and the emperor of
Portugal sent a fleet in aid of the Abyssinians. This fleet reached
Abyssinia and remained there for six years. Another present from the
Portuguese emperor was a religious mission that organised a base in
Abyssinia and engaged in religious propagation.

The head of this mission was a priest and a writer who wrote a long
book about Abyssinia which, according to current European writers, is
the most valuable source of information.[^65] This mission returned, and
once again after some years the Abyssinian emperor asked for further
military assistance. A large Portuguese fleet based in India was
dispatched to help the Abyssinians. This fleet had 450 riflemen, a
significant force at that time. It also had several old guns. With their
aid, the Abyssinians attacked their Muslim neighbours and vanquished
them in battle then drove them back to the waste lands near the
seashores. From this time on other European countries, too, began to
regard Abyssinia with interest thus the way was opened for relations
between England and Abyssinia, and then between Italy and Abyssinia. An
agreement was reached first that a port on the Red Sea coast should be
given by Abyssinia to England to be used as a base like Aden in latter
years, for dispatching naval forces to India.[^66] By the beginning of
the 19th century colonialism found its way into Abyssinia, and during
19th century several wars occurred between Abyssinia and England and
sometimes with Portugal. Later, Italy, formally declared Abyssinia its
own colony, and this condition lasted until recent times when Abyssinia
found its independence.

The Abyssinian language has a Sabaean root which is mingled with local
dialects. Today seventy languages are spoken in Abyssinia, and this
number reaches 200 if local dialects are included. But the official
state language which is the tongue of the family of the emperors, is
Amharic.[^67]

**c) Abyssinia Before the Birth of Islam,**

About one century before the birth of Islam, Abyssinia played a
significant role in the region of Arabia, more influencing than that of
the other neighbours. Two centuries before Islam, namely at the end of
the fourth century A.D., the king of Yemen embraced Judaism, and thereby
Judaism became the state religion of that land. Then a man named
Dhunuvas in Yemen decided to put pressure upon everyone who did not
follow the Jewish faith. Then reports reached him that in Najran, a city
in neighbouring Hejaz Christianity was spreading. Dhunuvas launched a
campaign against Najran, and started persecuting and killing people. He
had trenches filled with fire and cast the Christians of Najran into
those. One of the Christians of Najran fled to the court of the Roman
emperor, and said to him "You call yourself the emperor of Christians,
see what are they doing to us Christians there." The Emperor answered
that he was too far from that land, but "We have a coreligionist in the
Emperor of Abyssinia to whom I will write to come to your assistance."
This incident has been recorded in Islamic as well as European sources
in an identical manner. The Emperor of Abyssinia dispatched an army to
Yemen under a commander named Eryat. among whose officers was a man
called Abraha. The army entered Yemen and Dhunuvas was defeated, who in
his flight jumped into the sea with his horse and met his end. In this
way Yemen became a colony of Abyssinia, and Eryat. its governor. They
tried to propagate Christianity in Yemen which led to an incident
between Eryat. and Abraha which we will proceed to recount in the
following.

**d) The Story of Abraha**

Abraha was a competent officer in Eryat's army who did not think much
of his commander, and so he decided to wrest power from him, and with
the aid of his subordinates rose against Eryat.

The Abyssinians got divided into two groups: one group supported
Abraha, while the other favourcd Eryat, and got ready to fight. On the
day of battle Abraha sent a message for Eryat, saying that it was futile
for the Abyssinians to kill each other, and added: "As the dispute is
between you and me, let the two of us have a man-to-man fight, and let
the victor take the command of the army " Eryat w agreed and in the
fight he was killed and Abraha took the reins of power in his hands.
Negus, emperor of Abyssinia, was enraged on hearing that the second in
command has killed his appointed supreme commander, and swore that he
would not rest until he had trampled upon the soil of Yemen and pulled
off the hairs of Abraha. The report reached Abraha that the Emperor was
greatly annoyed with him. He filled a box with the soil of Yemen and
ordered the hair of his head be shaved off and sent it to the Emperor
along with a number of gifts and presents. He sent an accompanying
message that he was sorry that the Emperor had become annoyed with him
whereas he remained his loyal servant. He added that two of the
Emperor's officers had a fight and one overcame the other and that the
honour of the Emperor was in no way involved. He appealed that in order
to honour the Emperor's oath, he was sending both his hairs and Yemeni
soil for. the Emperor to trample on. The emperor was so pleased at this
cleverness that he confrrmed him in his appointment as commander in
Yemen, and Abraha proceeded to impose Christianity upon the
people.[^68]

He decided to spread Christianity in Yemen and uproot Judaism and every
other faith in the land. Abraha's close associates told him that all his
efforts were just confined to Yemen whereas the people of the Arabian
peninsula were devoted to another place, namely the Kaaba in Mecca,
owing to its age old standing and high prestige and that he should take
steps in that direction. Incidentally Abraha had built a very fine
church in the capital of Yemen and has adorned it with the most
beautiful stones, including the stones remaining from the ancient palace
of the Queen of Shiba. But when he noticed that his beautiful church had
little attraction for the people against the simple stone structure in
Mecca, he decided to do whatever possible to end the influence of the
Ka'aba.

**e) The Event of Aam-ul-Feel**

Meanwhile a rumour spread among the people that Abraha had decided to
demolish the Ka'aba. This caused a commotion among certain Arab people,
and one Arab, hearing of Abraha's intention, went to Yemen, entered the
church at night and polluted it with- his urine. This incident enraged
Abraha and the Christians. They told him that, that was how much the
Arabs respected his Church! Abraha asked what was the reason for that?
They replied because they were devoted to Ka'aba in their heart of
hearts and the news that you intended to destroy the Ka'aba had reached
them. Abraha said that if that was the way it was, when it was no more
than a rumour, then he was decided to destroy Ka'aba. He mobilised his
forces and proceeded towards Mecca, and on his way vanquished all the
Arab tribes that offered any resistance. On approaching Mecca he sent a
messenger to find out whoever was the chief of Mecca and to summon him.
He was informed that the chief of Mecca was an old man named
Abdul-Mutallib. But before he could be contacted, Abraha's soldiers
plundered all the sheep, cows and camels around Mecca including two
hundred camels belonging to Abdul-Mutallib. After consulting his friends
Abdul-Mut.allib decided to pay a visit to Abraha. The latter arranged a
formal audience, sitting upon a throne and surrounded by his officers.
It is said that when Abdul-Mutallib entered, Abraha was so impressed by
his dignity and bearing that he descended from his throne, sat down on a
mattress and asked Abdul-Mutallib to sit beside him. This dignified
carriage is what the historians call the radiance of prophethood in the
bodies of the prophet's ancestors.

Abraha said to him: "I have no issue with the people of Mecca. I have
only come to destroy the Ka'aba, and if you do not confront me, I will
carry out this task and turn back, without shedding any blood."
Abdul-Mutallib advised him against his intention, but he refused to
change his mind. Abdul-Mutallib then asked him why had he been summoned
there, Abraha said that he had come to see him, did he want anything of
him. He had thought that Abdul-Mut.allib might come up with some
bargaining to save Ka'aba. Abdul-Mutallib said that he had no request to
make except to demand the return of his two hundred camels which had
been seized. Abraha expressed surprise at this trifling request, and
said that he had expected him to intercede for the city and its people
and Ka'aba. Abdul-Mutallib answered the reason why he did not intercede
for the Ka'aba was that he realised that the people of Mecca had no
power to resist Abraha's forces, and Ka'aba had its owner who is Allah
and He would take care of His own house. Abraha was moved at these
words, but he felt that he had come to carry out a mission.

So he ordered the return of Abdul-Mutallib's camels to him, and warned
the people of Mecca to evacuate the city and take refuge in the
neighbouring hills. The people evacuated the city at once to prevent the
loss of life, and Abraha prepared to demolish the Ka'aba with the aid of
his army and the elephants which he had brought with him. This story has
been narrated differently by Arab and European historians. The Greek and
European version is that an epidemic of typhoid and smallpox at that
time so annihilated Abraha's army that they could not carry out the
attack. But the Islamic historian's version which is based on the Qur'an
and what eye-witnesses had reported, is, according to the Arab captives
in Abraha's army, that a vast flock of small birds like swallows,
carrying pebbles in their beaks darkened the sky and pelted them down
upon the heads of Abraha's army causing deep puncture-like wounds
killing many It is also said that at the same time for the first time in
Arabia, the diseases of typhoid and smallpox appeared in Arabia
affecting the whole army. Abraha himself suffered from smallpox, and
remained alive only until he reached Yemen and died there. This is the
theme mentioned in the holy Qur'an, Chapter 105 'Feel' (Elephant) as
follows:

"Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with the possessors of the
elephant? Did He not cause their war to end in confusion, and send down
(to prey) upon them birds in flocks, casting stones of baked clay, so He
rendered them like straw eaten up?"

There is a perfect harmony between what the Greek historian who is the
original source of European version, and Islamic historians who have
narrated this episode except that the Greek historian makes no mention
of the birds. It needs no emphasis however, that the report of
eye-witnesses would be far more reliable than the narration of a
historian sitting hundreds of miles away from the scene of occurrence
and above all the text of the holy Qur'an itself leaves no room for
doubt. Anyhow, Abraha and his Abyssinian army returned to Yemen, and
this part of Arabia, namely Mecca and Medina, remained as before.[^69]
But despite the strained relations between the Abyssinian government and
the people of Mecca and Medina, trade relations continued between them
until the birth of Islam.

**f) Migration to Abyssinia**

In the fifth or sixth year of the Prophethood, pressure upon the
Muslims of Mecca intensified. The Prophet said to the Muslims: "Now that
the enemies of Islam have begun to torture you all. They are sparing me
and my family on account of Abu-Talib's (Prophets' Uncle) support, I
deem it advisable for you to migrate to Abyssinia." This emigration of
early Muslims to Abyssinia is a very important event in the history of
Islam, and although the prophet's migration to Medina was adopted as the
commencement of the Islamic calendar, yet the Muslim emigration to
Abyssinia had an extraordinary result. The prophet remained in Mecca
actively propagating Islam. He sent twelve Muslims to Abyssinia, not to
seek assistance, since history makes no such mention. As he spoke to
them: "I have hear.d that the Emperor of Abyssinia is a liberal man. You
should go there to find temporary refuge as defenceless Muslims and live
in peace and above all preserve your faith".

Thus the Prophet sent them there to relieve them from the pressure in
the center of Islamic faith, namely Mecca, to live in the Christian land
of Abyssinia. With just twelve refugees there was never a question of
starting a movement with this step. The next time when the pressure upon
the Muslims increased, the Prophet ordered a larger emigration, and it
is said that the time there were seventy men together with their wives
and children. In the second emigration about two-thirds of the emigrants
belonged to the Prophet family who went to Abyssinia. In view of the
manner adopted by the Prophet to direct the Islamic movement, the second
emigration may seem to have been an attempt to find a quarter other than
Medina as a base for Islam. The first emigration was a simple change of
home, but the second emigration included persons such as the sister of
Mu'awiah, daughter of Abu Sufyan (Umm-e-Habiba) who had embraced Islam
and was a very devout Muslim, and was later to become a consort of the
Prophet.

Also Uthman bin Affan and Ja'far bin-Abi Talib went among the
emigrants. So this emigration seemed to have been based on a plan,
especially since the Prophet's trip to Ta'if proved of no avail for the
founding of an Islamic center, and in Mecca, too, he was faced with
failure, and he did not entertain much hope about Medina as such a
center. The spread of Islam in Medina is related to a hater time,
subsequent to the Abyssinian emigration. The Prophet had also contacted
a number of tribes for a place of refuge to propagate his faith, but no
positive response was g given to him. Thus when those twelve of the
first group of emigrants found Abyssinia a suitable place to live in and
keep their faith there, a few of them returned to Mecca and described
the favourable situation to the Prophet. They encouraged him to order a
larger emigration. The Prophet, appreciating the dangers in Hejaz and
the probability of a closed door there, saw little hope for Islam, and
considered the second emigration a necessary step. As we see this
decision had far-reaching effects on the progress of Islam.

This migration of the Muslims so demoralised the enemies of Islam that
they became anxious that the emigrants may not gather strength and
return to cause serious trouble. They worried that, since the emigrants
were like Abraha's horde but Meccans like themselves, they might
overcome them. Therefore they took immediate steps to check them. Thus
the infidels of Mecca dispatched 'Amru, As with another bearing numerous
presents for the Emperor of Abyssinia to request him to extradite the
Muslim refugees by force. These envoys reached Abyssinia, presented
themselves in the court of Negus, and levelled many charges against the
Muslims. Ja'far bin Abi-Talib acquitted himself magnificently during
this audience and successfully countered their charges, and the envoys
returned to Mecca disappointed. The Muslims remained there for a number
of years in peace and security. The prophet did not allow them to return
until some years after his own migration to Medina and setting down
there. These events reveal what a significant roll was played by this
neibour, otherwise weaker of the great neighbours of Arabia, in the
history of Islam.

**g) Questions and Answers**

Question: concerning the outbreak of epidemic of smallpox as narrated
in the episode of Abraha, has any mention been made about the Arab
inhabitants of Mecca and its suburbs? Answer: This statement of Arab
historians about the first appearance of smallpox in Mecca seemed
somewhat dubious to me, too. But at that time, no Meccan died of small
pox. And there is sufficient historical evidence to show that signs of
typhoid and smallpox occurred only in the dead of the Abyssinian
invaders. Even the Greek historians have made no mention of an epidemic
in Mecca itself even though it is affirmed that in that hot weather the
invaders came so close to Mecca that they stole the camels of
Abdul-Mutallib from the pastures of Mecca.

Question: Were that group of refugees who had emigrated from Mecca to
Abyssinia, able to establish a center there? Answer: No. The migration
to Abyssinia is an interesting event which took place in peculiar
conditions. When the prophet dispatched individuals to Medina, he would
tell them to propagate Islam, but in the case of Abyssinia, there is no
evidence of propagation. It seems that the purpose of this migration had
been solely to seek a refuge so that if Islam lost all its strongholds
in Hejaz, at least one shelter would remain. But the manner of using
that refuge was a matter that would be seen to later on. Basically, they
had been expected to go and live there and continue to practice their
faith and that was all.

Question: During those years of the Muslims' stay in Abyssinia did they
convert anyone to Islam? Is there any mention of this in history?
Answer: The possibility is there, that some might have become Muslims
but I do not recall it. However, this is quite different from having a
religious mission. The absence of religious mission is interesting in
view of the fact that the Prophet calculated everything as a leader, and
here I am opposed to the idea that all the progress made by Islam was
due only to a divine design of the prophet. Of course there is not the
slightest doubt according to explicit verses of the holy Qur'an that the
Prophet and Muslims enjoyed divine support, as without any doubt he was
the Prophet of God. But a great deal of the progress was due to his
wisdom and prudence, an asset that even now the Muslims can utilise. The
concept of migration to Abyssinia had been a very beneficial measure,
since in view of the danger which existed for the Muslims and even for
the Prophet and his household, despite Abu-Talib's protection, the
Prophet wished to do something to enable his group of helpless Muslims
to gain some social security and to have a place as a refuge. In this
respect the prophet 's action was very wise and effective indeed.

Question: As the Ka'aba at that time was the home of idols and totally
defiled by their presence, would it not have been better to let Abraha
destroy that house? What reason existed that that bastion of polytheism
be preserved?

Answer: Yes, but who should have destroyed it? Should it have been
destroyed by Abraha? Or should it have remained till a man come and
revive its original sanctity cleansing it of desecration. This is a
matter of historical importance. The house could be rebuilt, but what
would be the implication of Abraha' s victory over Mecca? It would have
meant the victory of impurity over purity, a mixing with impurity. It is
true that he was a Christian, but his faith was polytheistic
Christianity, a Christianity which Islam was to combat to cleanse it of
polytheism. What would be the good of letting one form of polytheism
replace another form of polytheism? It may be said that had Abraha
demolished that place, one base of idolatry would have been eliminated
but what would have been its consequences in the minds of the people of
that time? What we are talking about is ideas and beliefs; otherwise a
house itself could not be guilty of an offence to justify it
destruction. The general effect would have been that evil had been
replaced with evil. But as it happened, after this event the house of
Ka'aba suffered ruin in an accident, and it was in the time of the
Prophet himself that it was rebuilt.

The demolishing of the Ka'aba was not important. What was of
consequence was by whose hands and to what purpose. The way adopted by
Abdul-Mutallib in dealing with Abraha is significant, as he said: "Since
we have not the power to protect the Ka'aba, we will evacuate Mecca."
Thus he set aside the question of idols, and said that the house
belonged to the One God. In a branch of the Arabs, monotheism was still
in vogue and the family of Hashem followed this belief and
Abdul-Mutallib and some others were indifferent to the idols.

Muslims and even Sunni historians narrate that when the people had
evacuated Mecca, Abdul-Mutallib and a few others stood beside the
Ka'aba, he raised his hands in prayer, saying: "O God: Here is your
House and there be Your enemies. If we had the force, we would have
protected it, but You are aware of their numbers and of ours. We leave
the House to you, and beg You to defend it in such a way that no
falsehood would ever vanquish the truth in people's minds." Historians
have also narrated poetry recited by Abdul-Mutallib.[^70] However it is
not my concern whether this is true or not, what is significant is that
in the intellectual milieu of those days what mattered was what stood
against what? Abraha, the overly ambitious, wanted to spread
Christianity by force in Yemen. It is true, the Ka'aba suffered a ruin
some years later as a result of a natural disaster. But its forcible
destruction at the hands of Abraha would be a different matter. If it
were to be destroyed as a bastion of idolatry by someone who was against
idolatry, it would make it logical. But there would have been no logic
in a destruction at the hands of a despot who for the sake of protecting
his church wished to raze it to ground.

Question: Why was the Ka'aba built originally in Mecca?

Answer: No special reason can be given for it, since it could have been
built any where in the world for a given reason. But according to our
traditions, and even in the Nahjul Balagha[^71] it is stated that this
House was built in a land which would offer no pleasure and amusement
for anyone to visit it, but only for the sake of spiritual beliefs. It
was built in a land that was poor and waterless and lacked all
recreational attractions so that it would draw people of the faith as
the foremost factor. Even now a pilgrimage to this land as compared to
other recreational and tourist places is quite different from the
viewpoint of expense and endurance of hardships.


