The Appearance of Manichaeus
============================

As mentioned earlier, the rule of Ardshir, began with the recognition
of the Zoroastrian faith. After his death, Shapoor the 1st, his son,
became king who after further expanding the realm of his father,
dominated the situation. He learnt that a man named Manichaeus[^44] had
risen claiming to be a prophet. Shapoor 1 received Manichaeus in court
and after a few sessions fell deeply under his influence.

Manichaeus was an Iranian who was bom in Iraq in a village by the
Tigris. He was familiar with Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Buddhism,
and by mingling these three faiths created a special creed and declared
himself its prophet. After meeting Shapoor in Khuzistan and influencing
him in favor of his religion, he obtained from Shapoor a directive to
all his governors to allow Manichaeus and his missionaries freedom to
propagate their religion.

Manichaeus rose as a reformer of the Zoroastrian religion, but he
offered a set of teachings which were a combination of the ideas of
Zoroaster, Christ and Buddha.

For thirty years Manichaeus and his missionaries carried out their
mission, winning numerous followers until in the time of Bahram II in
the year 277 Manichaeus was arrested and in a court held by the
Zoroastrian high priest he was charged with heresy in religion. He was
thrown in prison and after 26 days he was killed there in an atrocious
manner. His skin was then filled with straw and hung in front of
Bahram's court as a warning to anyone who committed heresy in
religion.

The question is what led Shapoor to favor Manichaeus' religion?
Historians explain that Shapoor had realised that the Zoroastrian faith
did not fulfill the needs and spiritual expectations of the people, and
was inadequate in satisfying their religious spirit, and for this reason
he gave Manichaeus a free hand as a religious reformer.

This shows that zoroastrianism, which some people wish to revive now
and make it replace Islam in some parts of Islamic lands, was as early
as so many centuries before the advent of Islam, as ineffective a creed
that it could not satisfy the people, and thus the king allowed a
religious reformer like Manichaeus to become active.

It should be remembered that at that time a religious vacuum existed in
the realm of Iran. Manichaean faith has had a strange fate and has had
many ups and downs, not as much as a religion, but as a philosophy it
sent ripples as far as China on the one side, and as far as Europe
including England and France in the other direction but that in itself
is a long story.

**The Rise of Mazdak**

Another interesting development from that religious viewpoint in the
Sassanid period is the rise of Mazdak. In the time of Qubad, father of
Anushiravan, a man named Mazdak rose with a new religion. In Mazdak's
faith a new aspect of faith is discernible that did not exist in the
former religions.

In Zoroastrianism attention was paid to moral aspects such as truth and
honesty and spiritual matters and worship of God, and sacrifice etc.,
but it did not deal with rights and social problems, and not only
accepted class divisions but also supported it

Thhe Manichaean faith, too, despite proposing reforms in religious
matters, introduced no social changes. But Mazdak dealt with both
religious and social matters. On the one hand with its inclinations
towards Zoroastrianism, Buddhism and Christianity, namely towards
asceticism, abandonment of carnal desires, and isolation from worldly
affairs by leading an ascetic life, and with such views about social
matters, Mazdak threatened the social order of the time.

About his philosophy and religion, Mazdak used to say "True bliss for
human beings lies in a peaceful environment free from rancour and
enmity. But the disputes and wars which occur among people are either
over wealth and enjoyment of affluence, property, water, trade, capital,
luxuries or over women. In order to remove these disputes altogether,
wealth and women should be commonly shared.[^45]

This creed threatened the system of social class structure and quite
naturally, it found numerous followers among the deprived classes.
Qubad, too, as a young ruler who was opposed to the influence of
priests, nobles and upper classes, and felt that their influence would
hinder the proper administration of the country, supported Mazdak faith,
and patronised Mazdak very strongly. In this way about the year 484
A.D.

that is about 125 years before the advent of Islam, a revolutionary
religious fervour governed under which the deprived masses tore up the
former bonds of class life and formalities and adopted to an extreme
extent the ideas of communal sharing of everything including women and
abolition of family and marriage and proprietorship,

with the result that chaos and disorder reigned everywhere, since such
ideas both from the viewpoint of religion and social rights and internal
politics were not acceptable to the people of that time, even though
Qubad supported Mazdak to diminish the deep influence of the
ecclesiastical organisation.
However, the clergy's influence succeeded in rousing people to revolt.
On the other hand Mazdak's ideas, too, about family and wealth sharing
were so extremist that they shook the foundations of the existing system
since they were contrary to human nature. Therefore they could not
endure for long, and when Anushirvan assumed power in the year 531 A.D.
Mazdak was executed. His followers were scattered or destroyed, and once
more the Zoroastrian faith and its priests gained dominance over the
situation.[^46]

**P) Conditions Prevailing in Iran at the Time of the Rise of Islam**

At the time of advent of Islam the government of Iran had become
strangely weak, and after Khosrow Parviz within a few years he was
succeeded by several male and female rulers until Yazdgerd the 3rd
assumed power.[^47]

In brief, to the east of the region of the birth of Islam there existed
a vast realm with an ancient civilisation spread over twelve centuries.
In Iran the central government had existed a long time and several
religions appearing during this period which had exerted profound
influence and found many followers had not survived for long. Neither
Zoroastrianism, nor the religions of Manichaeus nor Mazdak could stand
against Islam.

In that environment there was a kind of readiness and thirst for
destroying the existing order both socially and spiritually, and thus
Islam entered Iran in an environment that was all set to accept the new
faith. Those who attribute the rapid spread of Islam to the use of the
sword are not sufficiently familiar with the history of that period.

The fact of the matter is as the historians write: In most cases before
the soldiers of Islam reached the cities which they had conquered, the
populace would throw open the gates for them from within and welcomed
them. What is certain is that Iran had fallen into a state of
deterioration in all respects whether political social or religious at
the time of the rise of Islam.

**2) Questions and Answers

Question:**

You said in your discourse that in t he present world environment there
are no societies based on classes, but classes exist in a modified form.
Answer:

Not in that form. In the class system certain people are explicitly
told that they have not the right to even think of entering a class of
an upper status. The hardest and ugliest obstacles that could be
imagined exist in such systems which to put limitations on the thinking
of a group.

It is true that indirect pressure has considerable effect, but the very
existence of indirect pressure shows that the worth of those placed
under pressure has gone up to some extent. If they tell you that you
cannot directly and openly strike a person, it means that the said
person's personality has grown in relation to you so that you cannot
directly strike him.

Of course even today there exist indirect restrictions in the world,
though term, class could not be applied to them; they might be called
communities. Communities under indirect pressure do exist although these
could not be compared with their previous form. You could never think of
what a class society actually meant.

Unfortunately among the aristocrats in Iran, sometimes you would see
the son of a farmer or villager who, despite his education and worth, is
not given the chance to raise his status, simply because of his lineage.
This is a vestige of those old class divisions which is a system based
on man's inherent selfishness.

Therefore you can never uproot it fully, even though it's effect might
diminish. Now can you imagine if such a system found legal support, how
comical it would be. The existence of such a law which would prevent a
farmer or tradesman from rising up to the class of warriors and that he
would be punished even for entertaining such a thought, would seem
ridiculous and incredible to us. They say that in India there still
exists a class system.

I cannot bring myself to believe it until I saw it for myself. For us,
Muslims such a situation is unthinkable; for, since our birth and
growing up we have been accustomed to the concept of Islamic brotherhood
and equality. But there is no doubt that there exist groups that always
seek to preserve their interests in one way or another.

**Question:**

How did the holy Prophet write his letters? The Qur'an says that
Ancient Egypt

As regards the environment attending the birth of Islam we have already
discussed brightly about the Arabian peninsula, making a survey of the
particular conditions prevalent in the Hejaz and Najd region. Also
discussed were the eastern neighbour of Arabia, Iran and the northern
neighbour, Rome. It is now intended to deal with its western neighbours,
one of them being Egypt which will be discussed in this chapter.

**a. Civilisation**

Egypt is an ancient land about which abundant scientific research has
been carried out owing to its wealth of ancient monuments and
archaeological treasures that have survived intact and much has been
written about them. Among the many countries engaged in such studies,
Egyptology has become a leading branch in archaeology.

The monuments existing in Egypt reveals to a considerable extent, the
Egyptian history for about 6500 years, a condition which is hard to find
in any other part of the world. Some of the relies which are found in
the tombs and pyramids (which, too, are really tombs) belong to 2000 to
4000 B.C. For instance it would suffice to mention that the first
calendar found in Egypt belongs to the years 4241 to 4238 B.C. Such a
find elsewhere is unlikely.

The main point of this matter is related to the tombs and the pyramids
and the belief and desire of those ancient people in Egypt for building
massive tombs which should remain undisturbed. The original name of this
land was not 'Egypt'. Likewise the name, Egypt, and 'Aegypten' used in
Persian, Arabic and European languages are not the original names of
this land. Its original name of this land in local language had been
'Kemt' or 'Kemte' which meant 'black land.[^50]

The name Egypt has a Hebrew origin, and the Hebrews, namely the
Israelis, gave it a name which stuck and later on took the form of
'Egypt' in Arabic. The name given to it by Europeans has a Greek root
from the word Aigyptos, given to it by the Greeks after the name of one
of the local kings.

In the territory of Egypt, as far as history reveals, there had existed
social units since ancient times, and this condition prevailed in Egypt
even in pre-historic times since the beginning of history. Villages had
existed in pre-historic times as a unit of civilisation in the Nile
River valley.

What should be considered is the existence of higher levels of social
communities in Egypt. The central government, according to available
sources, had existed for about 6500 years in Egypt, and these sources
are mainly the royal tombs. Thus 6500 ago Egypt was a state having
kings, rulers and a central government. Obviously where ever a central
government is formed, such thins as architecture, large buildings,
communications, writings, script, industry, art etc. follow.

All these things existed in ancient Egypt, since ages ago so that even
a kind of medical science of a type existed in Egypt comparable with the
level of Greek medicine during the years 2600 to 2400 B.C.; this
information has been discovered by historians from the scripts which
have been found. Chemistry, embalming and mummifying of bodies around
which the science of chemistry had developed, as well as armoury, glazed
tiles, ship-building and evidence of arts' industry and technical trades
have been the other aspects of life about four or five thousand year's
ago in Egypt.

The central government of Egypt of that time possessed a regular army,
so that king Ramses II who ruled about one thousand years B.C.[^51] had a
regular army and legions that he dispatched to various parts, and even
hired soldiers from such countries as Libya, Turkey and Syria. It is
interesting that in that age ministers managed the affairs under a
central government and the king.

The king was regarded as God, a god incarnated in human body who
appeared amongst the people, who regarded themselves as his servants.
The priests and ministers were intermediaries between that god, or
god-king and his subjects. Accordingly the 'vizier' was the contact
between man and god. Of course the king was not the only god, and there
were numerous other gods in Egypt, such as the god of man, god of life
etc. to the extent that the god-king himself was expected to repose his
faith in those gods.

Some of these gods were human, and others were non-human, the king
belonging to the first group. Non-human gods had idol-temples where a
number of priests served them. The priests possessed special powers;
they were regarded as the greatest power in Egypt, the power of god-king
included. Usually some rivalry existed between these two power
centers.

In the following discussions ('elated to the manner of spread of Islam
in this region, we will examine how Islam succeeded in sweeping all
these away, and replace them with entirely new concepts.

b. Laws, Traditions and

Religion Laws and traditions that existed in Egypt accorded the king a
divine position, but no laws about justice and equity Courts did exist
which were however held by the representatives of the minister and the
feudal lords to see to the claim of the subject. According to Iranian
writers at that time in Egypt no laws existed even to compare with the
'Code in Chaldea and Assyria.[^52]

Among the traditions existing in ancient Egypt which seem odd to us was
the legitimacy of marriage with close relatives, and even marriage
between a brother and sister. This was particularly in vogue in the
royal houses.

The religion prevalent in Egypt was idolatry, and, like the present day
India, there seems to have existed a predisposition to idolatry which
gave no ground to any other beliefs to make headway. The deviational
education of the Egyptians had prepared them for receiving the religion
of idolatry. In the time of the pharaohs two of these rulers who
belonged to priestly families and believed in the One God, wished to
propagate this faith in Egypt. This God was called 'Aton.[^53] But they
were not successful in this task, and when the second pharaoh died, the
people and priests joined hands and revived idolatry, and burnt the body
of the second pharaoh for heresy against their formal religion.

This idol worship persisted until the third century A.D. It is
noteworthy that in the third century as Christianity found its way into
Egypt, in the same century the concept of Christian trinity took shape
in the school of Alexandria. Thus the best and the most comprehensive
and scholarly[^54] analyses and definitions of trinity were formulated in
the third century A.D. in the scholarly and philosophical seminary of
Neo-Platonics of Alexandria.[^55] Thus it becomes apparent that even as
Christianity spread into Egypt, it accepted the form of plurality and
trinity already existent in that country.

**C) Government in Ancient Egypt**

Egypt had passed through various periods of government, most of which
had been of local rulers. Certain points here merit attention: For about
one century Egypt was ruled over by Iran and since Darius and Xerxes
conquered Egypt, Egypt was administered by a governor appointed by
Darius to represent the Iranian government. After a time local
governments took control there. Next Egypt was conquered by the Greeks
and Alexander of Macedonia who built the port of Alexandria. After
Alexander's death, the Ptolemies who were his followers governed Egypt
for several centuries.[^56]

Then once again local governments Greek ruler exchanged power, and this
struggle continued for a long time. In the time of Anushirvan, Egypt was
ruled for a period of ten years by Iran. During all these periods that
the imperialist powers of the age, Iran, Greece and Rome conquered
Egypt, none of them were able to assert any influence there to the
extent that Islam and the Arab Muslims did.

In this historical survey, one of the essential aspects is to show the
degree of influence that Islam succeeded in asserting in various regions
including Egypt; for, firstly the natural conditions for the acceptance
of the faith of monotheism were not favourable in Egypt,

and secondly in the different periods that Egypt had been under the
Iranian, Greek and Roman rule Egypt had not accepted foreign domination
and nor did those foreign rulers find much stability in that land, or
influence it to any extent. How did it happen, then, that for the first
time when Omar dispatched only four thousand soldiers Egypt succumbed
readily in 641 A.D.

when the Muslims entered Egypt the prevalent religions was mainly
Christianity in the north, and idolatry with a small mix of Christianity
and Judaism in the south. Since Judaism was a nationalistic faith, it
did not easily spread into non-Jewish regions. Thus at the time of the
rise of Islam, Egypt did not have a single faith. This was the general
state of affairs in Egypt, a neighbour of the birth place of Islam.

When the prophet of Islam began to propagate his faith in Arabia,
governors were ruling in Egypt whose names are mentioned in our history
books. One of them was Maquqas to whom the prophet addressed a letter in
the sixth year of his migration; this point will be discussed later in
connection with the Prophet's letters to various kings and rulers.

In brief, Egypt had an ancient civilisation and was far ahead of Arabia
from the viewpoint of science and arts etc.

It should be borne in mind that, that part of Arabia, namely Hejaz, was
then at a tribal stage prior to the birth of the prophet, and had not
till then attained an organised form of government, whereas Egypt had
had such a government for several centuries in addition to a regular
army, science, industry and was familiar with different schools of
philosophy It should be added that Alexandria had been a great center of
learning for nine centuries before the rise of Islam, and how did a
country with such a background fell so easily to the army of Islam will
be discussed later.

**d) Questions and Answers

Question:**

It was stated that Judaism was a nationalistic faith. What does that
imply?

**Answer:**

You know that the Jews themselves claim that Judaism was a faith
brought by Moses (a.s.) to save the Israelis and they don't normally say
that he came to save the people of the world. But we, Muslims, never
declare that Muhammad (a.s.) came to save the Arabs. We never think like
that. The Jews consider themselves as one nation, and the word 'Jew' is
a tribal word meaning the nation of Jews.

**Question:**

What was the social environment within Egypt from the viewpoint of
class divisions before the birth of Islam and during the rise of
Islam?

**Answer:**

As it was explained briefly, the roots of idolatry still dominated the
life of the people. It might appear that Idolatry had no effects on
everyday life, but in reality it plays an important role in shaping
social conditions. As one reads in history of Egypt the Pharaohs who
were named god-kings and their high priests resisted so tenaciously
against the concept of monotheism.

What was the motive behind this resistance? They resisted because their
vital interests were threatened, since monotheism is not just a simple
idea but a new concept leading the way of human life. Thus Egypt was
typical idol-worshipping country in its social life in which the rulers
enjoyed absolute power and besides them were the high priests and
clergy, the military and the feudal lords who exercised a relative
degree of power. Egypt was wholly feudal, and even till recent times
some of the towns were governed by local lords.

Slavery that existed there had the most inhuman form which has even
existed in the history of the world. For every one of the stone blacks
placed in the pyramids, fifty slaves lost their lives. It has been
narrated about ancient Egypt bow earth works and pathways were laid out
and how huge blocks of stones were pulled by a thousand slaves
altogether under command of an overseer by means of ropes and pulleys
and beams.

Why was all this trouble taken? Only to build a tomb for the mummified
corps of a god-king and his accompaniments for the life in the
hereafter, so that the Pharaoh would face no problems in his eternal
life, and also to protect the tombs intact from interference of times.
So many lives were wasted for the sake of a futile wish, while those
slaves did not even get enough food to perform such hard labour,

just enough to keep their bodies and souls together for the performance
of the labour as if so many flies had been killed off Of course the
social environment in Egypt was not so severe during the last few
centuries before the rise of Islam, but anyhow these were the situations
the like of which, in so far as history can show,

did not exist in ancient Iran, even though exploitation of deprived
classes did exist there. Slavery had its most inhuman manifestation in
Egypt, whereas in Greece or Rome it never reached such a cruel and
violent degree.

At the time of the rise of Islam, the internal situation in Egypt was
chaotic with political unrest. The social order was shaking, though this
was not the first time that Egypt was seized by such turmoil and
instability. Such periods in the history of the world are discernible.
We see this in the case of Iran which fell under foreign domination
several times. How far did Alexander penetrate Iran?

Was the influence of Greek civilisation similar to the spread of
Islamic civilisation in Iran? Are they comparable at all? Is the
comparison conceivable? In the periods when Iran come under the Turks
and later the Mongols, it was weakened socially and politically. From
one side came the Qur'an while from the other side came the code of
Chengiz.

But has anything remained of the code of Chengiz? In this context a
small book has been written entitled "The Rapid Spread of Islam"[^57] is
a highly readable book by an Italian lady who is a university
professor.

Though the subject has not been discussed at length in this short work,
yet the writer is a researcher of history who has been impressed by the
rapid expansion of Islam. This point will come up for discussing later,
but no other factor but the universal nature of the teachings of Islam
could be the cause for its rapid spread. Even the compilers of
encyclopedia of Egypt have stated that the Christians of Egypt welcomed
the soldiers of Islam with open arms.

**Question:**

Following the rise of Islam and its movement, Christianity organised
centralized authority which had no precedence, and as Islam spread with
such unparalleled rapidity, was Christianity's centralisation and
mobilisation intended to be used as a check?

**Answer:**

The system of centralisation of Christianity in the prevailing form
dates back to the period before Islam and is related to Constantine. The
councils held by the cardinals in our time are a reminder of the great
conventions which were held at that time by religious leaders in order
to propagate Christianity in the world.

They reached decisions and amended procedures and all these activities
were related to the days of Emperor Constantine, several centuries
before Islam.[^58]

Of course as you have observed, Christianity organised itself against
the influence of Islam assuming a more aggressive form. In the history
of Egypt it has been recorded about ancient Rome, that the Roman
Emperors during their domination of Egypt for several centuries, used
Egypt as the granary for the empire.

Of course Europe of that period was a different Europe altogether.
Today Europe lives in very odd conditions: it is a continent which
cannot provide subsistence for all its inhabitants at the level they are
used to.

If the doors of Europe were to be closed so that its own inhabitants
would have to provide for themselves by the strength of their own
scientific and technological efforts, and could not estimate how far
their standard of living would be lowered. They employ all means fair
and foul, to maintain and raise their standards of living.

In my view, a realistic view about them is that they are an active and
a determined people equipped with the weapons of science and technology
for raising their standards of living and protecting their position in
the world by using all fair or foul means. They employ their
perseverance and initiative in the most profitable manner. This is my
view of Europe, a picture that you can see reflected in the past history
of Europe in different shapes.

For example, the Greek were a people equipped with science and
technology who invaded other lands in order to secure what they could
not find in their own country to suffice their needs. Rome had a
different aspect, but there, too, a similar situation existed. I have
not studied the east extensively to be able to express my views about
aggressive tendencies from that quarter. On the face of it the Mongol
invasions would appear to be of this type, but a superficial view is not
enough, especially as historians have ascribed other causes for the
Mongol invasions.


