Factors of Success
==================

In the previous chapters the main topics of our discussion comprised of
a survey of the political and social conditions attending upon the birth
of Islam and the situation at its commencement. Detailed description
covering the environments prevailing in Arabia and the Hejaz region as
the birth-place of Islam followed by pertinent information about Yemen,
Omman and Iraq which at that time was under the government of Hira, and
then about the regions of Shaam, Lebanon and Jordan a part of which was
ruled by the Ghassanis having an Arab government. This was followed by a
description of the empire of Iran as the eastern neighbour comprising
present Iran, a part of Uzbekistan, Azarbaijan, Russia and even a part
of modern Turkey. Then followed the description of Roman empire
comprising Syria, the Lebanon, Turkey, Bulgaria and present Greece. This
was followed by a survey of Egypt which had only sparse population in
the south, which too developed after Islam. Then we dealt with Abyssinia
comprising the present Abyssinia and a part of Sudan.

Outside this circle of neighbouring territories, there remained two
relatively civilised regions, namely India and China which were remote
from the land of Islam and had almost no connection with the Islamic
movement. For this reason no details have been discussed even though in
the Prophet's time certain groups were sent to China specifically as
missionaries to Tibet to invite people to Islam where they reached Tibet
in the time of Abu Bakr.

In this part of the discussion it is intended to reach certain from the
preceding discussion.

**Conclusion**

The leading conclusion from the preceding discussion is that the
movement of Islam began in centrally located region which is now the
geographic heart of the Islamic world, and was at that time completely
backward civilisation. Scientific and technical resources were nor
existent, nor did it have wealth or any form of a government. Its people
led a tribal life. The original base of the Islamic movement was
surrounded by neighbours all of whom were well ahead in their
civilisation and paid scant attention to this area because of their
historical precedence. The king of Persia Khusrow Parviz, had written to
his envoy to go and see who was the one to have dared to write to him
asking him "to accept monotheism in order to enter the garden of bliss".
He wanted to know who was it that had the courage to address him at all!
And ever if he had something to communicate he should have given due
consideration to established protocol. He upbraided his governor in
Yemen desiring him to chastise the writer for having addressed the
Emperor of Iran!

The neighbouring countries regarded this region (Arabia) too worthless
to maintain any contact with it. Even today no communications exist with
neighbours and if one was to come out of Mecca and Medina, one would
come across no habitation or water for a radius of several hundred
kilometers, and although it borders onto the Red Sea, this sea is to no
avail as it affords no source of irrigation. It was too backward
culturally and economically and even politically to have been able to
influence any of its neighbours. In view of these conditions, what was
it in the Islamic movement that enabled it to spread so rapidly and
extensively in less than a quarter of a century and overcome all the
neighbouring lands?

The causative factor may be considered from two angles, firstly about
its effects on the people of Arabia itself and the deep transformation
which resulted among them. What was it that made them undergo such a
radical change? How did the movement give them the competence and the
ability to promote the mission of Islam? How could they so suddenly
change from a tribal society into an organised central government, so
that within two or three decades it came to be regarded as the model of
a powerful state in the world? Whichever history one read one would
witness mention of 'Umar bin-Khattab as a powerful and intelligent
ruler.

Secondly, what attraction did the movement of Islam possess that it
spread so rapidly over all the neighbouring lands? In a previous
discussion it was stated by one of the participants that possibly the
reason for such rapid progress was that heralded freedom and its
breaking of social bonds and any movement which declared these goals,
would have spread just as rapidly as Islam. I postponed my reply to that
question until now and I had purposely delved into the details of early
history to show that had 70 or 80 years before the movement of the
Prophet of Islam, the Mazdaki faith made its appearance in Iran al
lowing a good deal of freedom and even license, but it failed to make
any headway. The faith of Manichaeus which gave an ideological code and
which had appeared two or three (in one doubtful version about five)
centuries before Islam in Iran, also gained no success. How was it,
then, that this alien movement coming from a remote and strange land
made such an overwhelming entry and so easily overcame all lands
including almost the entire civilised world of the time?

To illustrate the importance of this matter, let us quote from a
European subscriber to the Encyclopedia Britannica, also in order to
know the point of view of an opposing source concerning the movement of
Islam: "Had a small Christian contingent been maintained in Arabia, that
same emperor of Abyssinia alongwith the Christian government of that
country would have been able to crush Muhammad (a.s.) in his cradle and
destroy him, and Abyssinia would have succeeded in checking a movement
which was to change the social, political and religious conditions of
the world and cause a revolution in the political, social and religious
conditions of the world."

This is the view of a Christian adversary whose observation "Muhammad
would have been crushed in his cradle" reveals the degree of his
animosity and rancour. It is therefore worth considering what spirit and
moral power was inherent in this revolution that according to this
Christian historian, even a small Christian contingent in Hejaz could
have contained its progress in the initial stage.

**Principal Factors for the Movement's Success**

In conclusion it is intended to study what factors contributed to
accelerate the progress of Islam as a world wide movement:

**a) Unshakable Faith**

The leading consideration relates to the starter of the movement,
namely the holy Prophet of Islam. He held unshakable faith in his
mission; for without such strong intrinsic faith success would have been
quite uncertain. This is particularly true of a movement where success
is in any case fairly risky.

**b) Competence and Efficiency**

The leader of the movement, namely the holy Prophet himself, possessed
remarkable competence, efficiency and sagacity in discharging his tasks,
and knew exactly what steps to take in every case. As recorded by
numerous non-Muslim writers, his approach was methodical as of a highly
experienced, capable and knowledgeable person. He handled his affairs
with the expertise of a specialist.

**c) Decisiveness**

Owing to the two above mentioned personal qualities, namely unshakable
faith and competence, the Prophet was never at a loss while faced with
the events and crises in his life. The Prophet led the movement of Islam
for 23 years, during all this period one does not come across even a
single incident where he was uncertain or at a loss for a decision. On
the contrary, he displayed utmost patience, coolness and decisiveness on
every occasion. Among the various events in the course of the movement
of Islam, some are related to the period before his migration to Medina
where these qualities are evident and also certain events following the
migration which reflect his decisiveness and explicitness. As an
example, after his migration to Medina in the "Hudaibiya" peace
negotiations which occurred in the eighth year of Hijra, an unforeseen
crisis arose for the Muslims. The Prophet had told them that they could
proceed as the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in that year, consequently they
left Medina prepared for the pilgrimage unarmed and unprepared for a
fight. When they approached Mecca, the infidels of Mecca refused their
entry saying all but the Prophet and the Muslims could enter Mecca.

This refusal greatly displeased the Muslims, especially as at the time
a state of peace existed between the infidels of Mecca and the Muslims.
In response to the infidels refusal, most of the Muslims declared that
they would fight their way into Mecca. The holy Prophet was faced with a
predicament, since firstly they were not armed for battle, and secondly
a battle during the Hajj season would not have been good publicity for
the Muslims, since it would be said that the Muslims showed no regard
for Hajj. Moreover the outcome of the battle was uncertain. On the other
hand the refusal to adverse effect on the Muslims. What could the
Prophet do in such a situation? With extraordinary finality he declared
that he would renew the peace with the infidels despite their having
revoked the earlier treaty and abstain from the exercise of force. It
was such a strange decision for the followers of the Prophet, that 'Umar
bin Khattab, one close follower, expressed that he had never doubted the
Prophet's words to the extent of the day of the "Hudaibiya Peace
Accord" -because he had said they would visit Mecca that year.

The matter of Hudaibiya Peace Accord is one of the most instructive
episodes in the history of Islam, showing how the crisis was handled so
adroitly by the Prophet. The Muslims turned back from the journey, but
after a short time even those who had been opposed to the peace, came to
realise how politically favourable that peace had been for the Islamic
ummah.

**d) Peculiarities of Prevailing Political Environment**

Another issue which is directly related to the foregoing problems is
that the Prophet's actions throughout the progress of the Islamic
movement were appropriate to every stage under the prevalent conditions.
During his 13 years of stay in Mecca, with the exception of one or two
minor incidents, no armed clashes ever took place between Muslims and
non-Muslims. One case was that occurred in those early years when the
Muslims' numbers were small and at prayer time had no security, neither
in their homes nor beside the Ka'aba or elsewhere. At home if the
husband was a Muslim and his wife and children were idol worshippers,
they would make fun of him whenever he stood up to pray, and a quarrel
ensued. In the Ka'aba the idolaters would jeer at and often molest the
Muslims. Thus they were forced to seek privacy for prayers in the
mountains where numerous passes afforded seclusion.

One day while a number of Muslims including Sa'd bin-Abi Waqas. had
proceeded to such a secluded place and were busy offering their prayers,
when a number of infidels who were passing by, noticed them and began to
jeer at them. The Muslims paid no head and continued with their prayers,
but when the infidels resorted to molest some physically, Sa'd got
annoyed and attacked them with a stick or a camel's bone which he found
there, and broke one person's head. This was the first blood shed in
defence of the Muslims, by a man who was later to become one of the
commanders of the Army of Islam. However, this was an incident not war.
During all those 13 years in Mecca, the Prophet prudently paid heed to
the political conditions. This point merits attention and understanding,
since in those conditions prevailing in Arabia a lone man would be
subjected to molestation and even his life would be in danger. But a
person who had a family to rely on, or belonged to a tribe that
supported him, no one dared hurt him. This was a particular condition
then existing. With regard to the prophet, so long as Abu-Talib lived,
he had his support and of the Bani-Hashim tribe and those of the tribe
of Quraish with whom mutual relations existed. When Abu-Talib died, in
the tenth or eleventh year of his prophethood, the conditions became
difficult for the Prophet. Abu-Lahab became the head of the family of
Bani-Hashim and he was from the first opposed to the Prophet, and thus
the Prophet was left without any political support. What could he do? He
went here and there and contacted various groups to secure political
support for himself.

However, by that time the number of Muslims had risen to between 60 to
80, even more including these who had migrated to Abyssinia. The
infidels regarded the Prophet and his followers as a tribe in their own
right political and military potential but the Prophet himself did not
consider this situation satisfactory and sought stronger support
elsewhere[^72] to make up for the lost support of the Bani-Hashim.

When his contacts with a number of tribes produced, he began to prepare
himself for migrating to Medina, and after some negotiations with the
tribes of Aus and Khazraj of Medina during Hajj, he finally decided to
undertake this epic journey. Thus so long as the Prophet had not
succeeded in creating a new political institution as well as a strong
political base that could sustain itself in Arabia, he sought support
from other dependable sources. In the interval between the demise of
Abu-Talib and the migration to Medina, which was not a long one, he was
still protected by his relatives. For instance if Abu-Lahab was his
opponent, then 'Abass was a person of high status in the Bani-Hashim
clan who dearly loved the Prophet, and Abu-Lahab, too, had to pay some
regard to family relations.

Accordingly it shows that the Prophet paid due heed to the political
conditions then prevalent conformity which was another factor towards
his success. When he arrived in Medina, contrary to the records of
certain historians that there was no house where the Qur'an was not
recited, there were many houses where not even one had yet embraced
Islam. Although there was at least one Muslim in a number of houses, the
Prophet initially practised his former way in the movement. For
instance, in the battle of Badr when he left Medina with the Muslims, he
said to them: "We are going to attack a caravan." There was no mention
of a war, but when they were out of Medina and the subject of war came
up, he formed a council and asked them whether they were prepared for a
war. Historians write that the reason for this question was that in the
terms of his accord with the tribes of Aus and Khazraj, they had
undertaken to defend him in Medina, whereas, then the question of a war
outside Medina was proposed, and this matter, was outside the agreement.
Therefore he wished to know that apart from their accord whether they
would agree to join him in a war or not? Such observance of established
social traditions served as a factor for his success.

**e) Decisive Response**

Throughout the entire period of his invitation to Islam the Prophet
gave a clear answer to all matters which were put forth. During his stay
of 13 years in Mecca, one does not come across holy verses or topics
related to administration, taxes, Friday and 'Id prayers and the like,
since the main problems then were social conduct and related with
divinity such as the manner of performance of devotional acts, prayers,
fasting, ethics and the combat with polytheistic practices, selfishness
and moral corruption. There was then little of political aspects. Of
course, equality was practised within the group, and from the very
beginning, the Prophet himself, lived like a brother with other Muslims.
But when he came to Medina, fresh problems arose, and he showed full
preparedness to deal with each one of them, and his decisive approach
proved to be a factor for his success in promoting the movement.

**f) As a Herald of Freedom**

From the very beginning the Prophet declared himself to be the herald
of freedom, the herald of equality, justice and equity, and this proved
to be a very effective factor in the success of Islam. He explicitly
declared that an Abyssian slave and a Quraish Sayid of a noble house
were equal before him. Equality justice and fraternity were without
doubt his winning qualities which were related particularly to the
Prophet and Islam.

**g) Filling the Existing Socio-political Vacuum**

Another important point which served as a factor in the Prophet's
success was that he commenced the Islamic movement in the environment of
Hejaz where the great powers of that time did not have an important
base, and where in fact a relative social and political vacuum
prevailed. It is true that the Prophet's power as compared with the
strength of the infidels of Hejaz was at the beginning quite weak, but,
as we have said, he enjoyed the full support of Abu-Talib, and no one
dared make an attempt on his life. Even in the night of his emigration
they could not attack him singly or a clan. They decided to pick a young
man from each of the tribes so that all the tribes would share the guilt
in the attempt on the Prophet's life, and they thought of this plot only
as the Prophet had departed for Medina.

In Mecca, therefore, it would appear there existed small and scattered
power-groups that the Prophet could deal with and such great powers as
Rome, Iran, Abyssinia and Egypt had no strong foothold in Hejaz to take
any steps. The extent to which the influence of these powers in Hejaz
was still in the hands of the infidels and had not till then been
captured by the Prophet and a peace treaty existed between them, and the
Prophet felt easy in his mind that after the battle of Khandaq (Ahzab)
they would be too afraid to resort to a fresh assault, the Prophet began
writing letters to the rulers of neighbouring countries as we have
earlier mentioned. He dispatched letters to the rulers of Hira, Ghassan,
Jordan, the Governor of Yemen, the King of Abyssinia, King of Egypt,
Emperor of Rome and to Khusrow Parviz, Emperor of Iran. This universal
invitation to Islam was initiated in the sixth year of migration.[^73]
Those who presume that the Prophet had brought Islam primarily as a
faith meant exclusively for Arabia and the Arabs, do not appear to know
in what year he sent this invitation to all the regions neighbouring
Arabia. He would dispatch one Muslim as his courier bearing his message.
In the case of Iran, when his letter reached Khusrow Parviz and he saw
that the letter began with the words: "From Muhammad, prophet of Allah,
to Khusrow, King of Fars", he became very angry to see his name appear
after that of the Prophet[^74] and tore the letter up. He directed
Badhan, his Governor in Yemen[^75] to send a couple of his soldiers to
Yathrib and arrest the man who had dared write such a letter to him and
had made such claims, and have then bring him to the royal court.

This goes to show how little did Khusrow Parviz know of Muhammad (a.s.)
in Arabia and that he was completely ignorant about his the prophet's
wars, a number of battles, victorious in all except one. Muhammad (a.s.)
was poised for further actions abroad, and he was not the one to be
simply arrested by sending a pair of soldiers. This story shows the
existence of a vacuum in the birthplace of Islam as regards the
awareness of the great political powers of the time-which merits
detailed study.

It was not only Khusrow Parviz who was ignorant about Muhammad (a.s.);
Heraclius, Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, despite his closer links
with Arabia, was in a similar situation; when he received the Prophet's
letter, he said: "Go and see if there are any Arab traders in Syria who
can give me some information about Muhammad(a.s)." As it happened, Abu
Sufiyan, a sown enemy of the prophet right to the end, and till then did
not even pretend to have embraced Islam, was in Shaam. He came and
speaking diplomatically began his criticism of the prophet but
unintentionally mentioned some thing which interested Heraclius.
Heraclius asked him what kind of a person he was in their community? Abu
Sufiyan said that he was honest and had a good name. The main point is
that Heraclius, too, had no knowledge of Muhammad (a.s.), and even his
courtiers had never heard anything about the Prophet. The persons who
were better informed about the Islamic movement were firstly, Negus who
had received two Muslim missions earlier, and Maquqass, king of Egypt.
The powerful rulers round about Mecca and Medina and Hejaz region had no
interests in that land since it neither yielded revenue nor was it
suited to exploitation and colonisation. The region was also remote from
them and was nothing but a burning hot desert. Perhaps any new movement
has the possibility of growing in a place where a relative political
vacuum exists. This is, of course, not the sole condition for the growth
of a movement, since there have been other movements which have grown in
places devoid of such political vacuum and even under local pressure,
however the possibilities of success grow more favourable in a state of
a political vacuum so that dominant forces do not crush it is the
offing.

In short the movement of Islam was a perfectly comprehensive movement
from an ideological viewpoint which could provide decisive response to
all the questions, realistic response, useful and practical in every
way. It was led by someone who had profound faith indomitable spirit
forebearance and perseverance, a leader who had participated in every
phase of the movement, and had fully shared all the difficulties with
the rest, and was not the kind of a leader who would sit in a corner and
issue orders to others. In addition, all this took place in a
socio-political vacuum.

These thus were the original factors leading to the success of the
movement, but naturally behind all these were the divine will and His
aid from which the Muslims benefited repeatedly. But Divine pleasure is
not a gift freely bestowed on everyone; as the holy Qur'an proclaims
repeatedly in various verses that there is victory sent by God, but one
should also make an endeavour,[^76] they made the endeavour and victory
was theirs, as promised.


