What Is History?
================

History may be defined in three ways. In fact, there are three closely
connected disciplines related to history.

1. Knowledge of the incidents, events, circumstances, and condi­tions
of people living in the past in relation to the present conditions and
circumstances. All situations, conditions, events, and episodes which
take place belong to the present, that is, the time during which they
take shape, are judged, reported, and recorded as matters of the day by
daily newspapers. However, as soon as their time elapses, they are
merged with the past and become a part of history. Hence, history, in
this sense, is the knowledge of the bygone incidents, events, conditions
and circumstances of the people in the past. Biographies, records of
battles and conquests, and all such chronicles compiled in the past, or
at the present, by all nations, come under this category.

History in this sense is, firstly, the knowledge of the particular;
that is, it is the knowledge of a sequence of personal and individual
episodes, not the knowledge of a series of general laws and
relation­ships. Secondly, it is a study of narratives and traditions,
not a rational discipline. Thirdly, it is the knowledge of \`being,' not
that of \`becom­ing.' Fourthly, it is related to the past, not to the
present. This type of history we shall term as \`traditional history'
(tdrthh naqlt).

2. History is the knowledge of laws that appear to govern the life of
the past, obtained through investigation and analysis of the past
events.

The stuff with which the traditional history is concerned, i.e. the
events and incidents of the past, provides the rudimentary and basic
material for this study. For the study of history in this sense, such
events and incidents are similar to the material gathered by a natural
scientist for his laboratory analysis and investigation to discover
certain general laws, through induction, regarding the nature and
properties of his material and the causal relations governing its
changes. The historian,in this analytical endeavour, wishes to uncover
the true nature of historical events and their causal relationship, and
to discover the general and universal laws applicable to all similar
events of the past and the present. We shall call history in this sense
\`scientific history'.

Although the object of research and the subject matter of scienti­fic
history are the events and episodes of the past, the laws which it
deduces are not specifically confined to the past. They have the ability
of being generalized in order to be applied to the present and the
future also. This aspect of history makes it very useful, making it one
of the sources of man's knowledge regarding himself, and enables him to
exercise control over his own future.

The difference between the task of a researcher in the field of
scientific history and a researcher in the natural sciences is notable.
The material of research for the natural scientist is a chain of real
and verifi­able occurrences that are present. Hence, necessarily, all
his investiga­tions, analyses, and results are empirical and verifiable.
But the material on which a historian works belongs to the past and does
not exist in the present. What is accessible to a historian now is only
a bundle of chronicles about the past. A historian is like a judge in a
court of law who decides on the basis of circumstantial evidence and
indications on record in his files, not on the basis of the testimony of
any eye-witness. In this way, the analysis of a historian is logical,
rational, and mental, not one based upon verifiable external evidence. A
historian makes his analysis in the laboratory of his mind and
intellect, with the instru­ments of logic and inference, not in the
external physical laboratory with instruments of observation and
measurement. Hence, the job of a historian is more akin to that of a
philosopher than of a scientist. Scientific history, like traditional
history, is concerned with the past, not with the present. It is the
knowledge of \`being' not of \`becoming.' But unlike traditional history
it is general, not particular; it is rational, not based upon
tradition.

Scientific history is actually a branch of sociology; i.e. it is a
socio­logical study of the societies of the past. The subject of
sociology includes the study of the past and the present societies.
However, if we restrict sociology to the study of contemporary
societies, then scientific history and sociology should be considered as
two disciplines, separate but closely related, complementary, and
dependent upon each other.

3. Philosophy of history is based upon the knowledge of gradual changes
and transformations which lead societies from one stage to another. It
deals with the laws governing these transformations and changes. In
other words, it is the science of \`becoming' of societies, not of their
\`being' only.

Perhaps this question might have arisen in the mind of the honoured
reader, whether it is possible for societies to have simul­taneously
\`being' as well as \`becoming,' and that being should be the subject of
one discipline, viz. scientific history, and \`becoming' of societies
the subject of another discipline, viz. philosophy of history. Isn't any
synthesis between the two impossible, as \`being' implies rest and
\`becoming' movement? Only one of the two should be chosen. Our picture
of the societies of the past should be either a picture of \`being' or a
picture of \`becoming'.

Probably the honourable reader may pose this problem in more general
and comprehensive terms: Our picture of the universe as a whole-and of
society as a part of it-is either a static or a dynamic one. If the
universe or society is static then it has \`being,' not becoming; and if
it is changing and dynamic, it has \`becoming' and not \`being.' From
this point of view, the most significant division of the schools of
philosophy is made. It has been said that philosophical systems are
divided into two main groups: the philosophies of \`being' and the
philo­sophies of \`becoming.' The philosophies of \`being' are those
which hold that being and non-being are incompatible with each other,
and they. regard contradictions as impossible. It is supposed that if
there is \`being' there cannot be \`non-being' and if there is
\`non-being' there is no \`being.' Hence one has to choose one of these
two alternatives. As being is necessary and there is nothing except
being in the world and society, the world is governed by rest and
stillness. But the philo­sophies of becoming, on the other hand, hold
that being and non-being co-exist in each and every single moment, and
this is what we call motion. Motion is nothing except that a thing \`is'
and at the same time it \`is not.'

Hence, the philosophy of being and the philosophy of becoming are two
opposite views regarding existence, and one has to choose any one of the
two. If we associate ourselves with the first view, we should hold that
societies have \`being' not \`becoming,' and, contrarily, if we
associate ourselves with the second view, it should be assumed that
societies have \`becoming' and not \`being.' Either we can have
scientific history, in the light of the above discussion, without having
any philosophy of history, or we can have philosophy of history without
a scientific history. The answer to these questions lies in the fact
that such thinking about being and nothingness, about motion and rest,
and about incompatibility of opposites, is a characteristic feature of
the Western though and originates in the West's ignorance of the
philosophical problems o: being (problems concerning existence) and
specially the profound problem of principality of existence (asalat
al-wujud) and a number o: other problems related to it.

Firstly, take the statements that \`being' is synonymous with rest, or,
in other words, rest is being, and that motion is a synthesis between
being and non-being and means unity of two opposites. These notion. are
some of the gross errors made by some schools of Western philoso­phy.

Secondly, what is maintained here has nothing to do with the
above-mentioned philosophical problem. The positions taken here are
based upon the hypothesis that society, like all other living beings,
follows two different sets of laws: one set of laws which is confined to
a particular species, and the other set of laws which deals with changes
of species and their transformation into one another. We shall term the
first kind of laws, \`the laws of being', and the other, \`the laws of
becoming.'

Incidentally, this point has been realized by some sociologists.
Auguste Comte is one of them. Raymond Aron says about him:

Statics and dynamics are two basic categories of Auguste Comte's
sociology... Statics consists essentially in examining, in analyzing
what Comte calls the social consensus (social unanimity). A society is
comparable to a living orga­nism. It is impossible to study the
functioning of an organ without placing it in the context of living
creature. By the same token it is impossible to study politics of the
state without placing them in the context of the society at a given
moment ....As for dynamics at the outset it consists merely of the
des­cription of the successive stages through which human societies
pass. [^1]

If we take into consideration any species from among the species of
living beings, like mammals, reptiles, birds etc., we shall see that
they have a group of particular laws specific to their kind, which
govern them as long as they are related to that particular species. (For
example, the laws related to. an animal's embryonic stages, its health
and survival, its conditions of sickness and disease, its food habits
and nourishment, reproduction and growth, or the laws related to the
patterns of its habitation or migration, and its mating habits.) But
according to the theory of evolution and development of species, in
addition to certain specific laws that operate within the species, there
is another set of laws which are concerned with the process of evolution
and transformation of .the lower species into the higher ones. These
laws are formulated philosophically, and sometimes termed as the
\`philosophy of evolution' as distinct from the science of biology.

As society is considered to be a living organism, it is also governed
by two types of laws: biological laws and evolutionary laws. The laws
which are concerned with the causes of birth and decline of
civiliza­tions, and the conditions which determine social existence, are
laws which are universally applicable to all the varying forms and
changes taking place in various societies. We shall call them the \`laws
of being' of societies. And those laws which are concerned with the
causes of evolution of societies from one epoch to another and from one
system to another system, would be termed as the \`laws of becoming' of
societies. The difference between them will become clearer when we
discuss each of the two types of problems. Hence history, according to
its third meaning, is the study of evolution of societies from one stage
to another. It is not merely the knowledge of the existence of the
society at a particular stage or at all stages. For the sake of avoiding
any possibility of confusion, these problems should not be mixed with
the problems of scientific history. We shall call the study of these
problems the \`philosophy of history.' Very often the problems related
with scientific history, which deals with the non-evolutionary movement
of society, are not clearly differentiated from the problems of
philosophy of history, which deals with the evolutionary movement of
society. This is what gives rise to misunderstandings and errors.

Philosophy of history, like scientific history deals with the general
not with the particular. It is rational (\`aqli), not traditional
(naqli). It is the knowledge of becoming of societies, not of their
being. And also, contrary to the case of scientific history, the use of
the word \`history' ir. the term \`philosophy of history' should not
lead us to think that philosophy of history is related to the past;
rather it means that philo­sophy of history is the study of a continuous
stream which originated in the past and continues to flow towards the
future. Time, for the sake of study of these types of problems, cannot
be assumed to be merely a container [occupied by historical reality],
but it is to be regarded as one of the dimensions of this reality.

The study of history is useful in all of its three senses. Even the
descriptive traditional history, which deals with the lives and
characters of individuals, may be useful, moving, directive, educative
and constructive. But it depends upon who the individuals whose life
histories are discussed are, and what conclusions we infer from their
lives. Men are made, according to the law of imitation, under the
influence of the behaviour, treatment, resolutions, moral habits, and
companionship of their fellowmen. As the lives of contemporaries serve
as a lesson and example for man, and he learns manners and customs from
his fellow beings-or, according to Luqman, learns good manners even from
the ill-mannered, so that he does not commit their mistakes-the same
principle is applicable to the biographies of the men belonging to the
past. History, like a film, transforms the past into the present. The
Quran itself refers to the beneficial aspects of the lives of such
worthy people whom it considers as fit and imitable models. About the
Prophet (S), the Quran says:

Verily, in the Messenger of Allah you have a good example for whosoever
hopes for God and the Last Day, and remembers God much. (33:21)

About Abraham (A), the Quran says:

You have a good example in Abraham, and those with him .... (60:4)

Whenever the Quran refers to the characters of persons as examples for
others, it does not give importance to their worldly positions, but
always emphasizes the moral and humanistic aspects of their
personali­ties. It is from this viewpoint that the Quran remembers
Luqman, a negro slave, as a wise man, although he was neither a king,
nor a weal­thy man, nor a famous philosopher. He is introduced to the
world as a paragon of wisdom. The examples cited in the Quran of the
true believers-one belonging to the Pharaoh's tribe and another
mentioned in Surat Yasin-also belong to the same category.

In this book, where we intend to discuss sociology and history from the
Islamic point of view, we will confine our attention solely to
scientific history and philosophy of history because of their relevance
to the world outlook of Islam, Accordingly, we will discuss these two
topics somewhat elaborately, starting with the nature of scientific
history.

**Notes:**

[^1]. Raymond Aron, Main Currents in Sociological Thought, vol. I. pp.
85,86.

