Scientific History
==================

To begin with, I would like to remind that scientific history is to in
the light of the view discussed earlier that the society has a reality
,and personality independent of the individual. If society does- not
have a reality independent of its members, there may not be any laws
except those governing individuals,' and, consequently, scientific
history, which is the science of the laws and principles that govern
societies, would be pointless. That history is governed by laws is a
necessary corollary of the proposition that history has its own nature,
which again follows from the proposition that society has its own nature
and reality. In the context of scientific history, the following
problems should be studied.

1. As has been pointed out earlier, scientific history is based on
traditional history. Traditional history provides the material for the
laboratory of scientific history. Hence, firstly, it should be
thoroughly investigated whether the contents of traditional history are
authentic and reliable. If the material is not reliable, all research
and scientific inference regarding the laws governing the societies of
the past would be futile and pointless.

2. If we proceed with the supposition that traditional history is
reliable, and that society has an essence and personality independent of
individuals, then deduction of general laws from historical events and
episodes would depend upon the hypothesis that the law of causation, or
causal determinism, governs the sphere of human activities-that is the
sphere of problems associated with human freedom and will, which are
expressed in historical events. Without accepting it; the laws of
history can neither be generalized or universalized, nor can there be
any orderly system of such laws. The question is whether the law of
causation governs the course of history, and if it does, what are we to
think of human freedom and responsibility?

3. Is history materialistic in nature and governed by materialistic
forces? Is the principal force dominating human history a material
force? Are intellectual and spiritual forces secondary, subordinate, and
dependent upon the material forces that shape history? Contrarily, is it
true that history is essentially spiritual,and the dominating force of
history a spiritual force, the material forces being secondary,
subsidiary, and subservient to it? In other words, is history in itself
\`idealistic' ? Or do we have a third alternative, i.e. history
possesses essentially a composite character, governed by two or more
forces? Is it true that a number of material and spiritual forces-more
or less harmonious and occasionally conflicting, depending on a
system-govern history?

1. Authenticity and Inauthenticity of Traditional History:

There are some who severely criticize traditional history, considering
it as a series of fabrications of the narrators based on the
histo­rian's personal interests and objectives, his social affiliations,
or on national, communal or religious prejudices-all of which have more
or less led to fabrications or distortions. The historians have compiled
history according to their own wishes, and even those who, from a moral
point of view, refrained from deliberate fabrication and distortion of
facts, were selective in their choice while recording incidents. That
is, they have invariably related only those incidents which did not go
against their objectives and beliefs. They avoided giving accounts of
such events which happened to be against their beliefs and feelings. In
this way, though they might not have added anything of their own, or
recorded any fabricated material, yet through their choice they gave
history their desired form. A significant event or an impor­tant
personality can be studied and analysed only when all the relevant
material is accessible to the researcher.

If only a fraction of the required material essential for the study is
available and the rest is not, the true face of reality is hidden and,
replaced by a radically different face.

The pessimism of these critics of traditional history is similar to the
attitude of some sceptics among Islamic jurisprudents (fuqaha' or
mujtahidun) about Islamic tradition (hadith) and narrations (riwayat)­an
attitude which has been termed "insidad bab al-\`ilm" ("closure of the
door of knowledge"). Some have made such ironic statements about history
as, "History means, a series of events that never occurred, recorded by
a person who was not at all present at the time." A journalist is quoted
to have said that "realities are sacred, but one has freedom of faith [
to believe or disbelieve them]." Some are not so pessimistic, but they,
too, prefer to be sceptical regarding history.

In the book What is History?, the following statement has been quoted
from Sir George Clark:

... Knowledge of the past that has come down through one or more human
minds, and has been processed by them, and therefore cannot consist of
elemental and impersonal atoms which nothing can alter ....The
exploration seems to be endless, and some impatient scholars take refuge
in scepticism, or at least in the doctrine that, since all historical
judgements involve persons and points of view, one is as good as another
and there is no \`objective' historical truth. [^2]

The fact is that though we may not entirely trust even the records of
the most reliable historians, but there are, firstly, a series of
definite indubitables in history, similar to the self-evident postulates
accepted in other disciplines. These can form the subject of the
historian's study, analysis, and research. Secondly, the researcher can
exercise his discre­tion in reaching a conclusion regarding the truth or
falsehood of some narrations by subjecting them to critical scrutiny.
Today we see that researchers have conclusively proved the unreliability
of certain matters which were exaggerated out of proportion and were
held in reverence for several centuries. The story of burning of the
library at Alexandria, which began to be circulated since the seventh
century of Hijrah, gradually found its way into several books of
history. But the findings of the last century researchers have proved it
absolutely base­less, only a fabrication of some prejudiced Christians.
In the same fashion, sometimes certain truths are obscured and hidden,
but after sometime they are somehow uncovered. Therefore, it is not
justifiable to be totally sceptical of the historical records.

**2. Causation in History:**

Does absolute causation govern history? If the law of causality
dominates history, it would be essential to accept that occurrence of
every incident in itself should be certain and inevitable, and that some
type of determinism prevails over history. If determinism governs
history, then, where is the place for the individual's freedom and
choice? If in reality occurrence of events is deterministic, then no one
has any responsibility, and no one may deserve any praise or reproach
for his deeds. If the law of causation does not govern history, there
can be no universality, and if there is no possibility of generalization
or universalization, history cannot have any law because law is
dependent upon universality, and universality is a corollary of the
principle of causality.

This is the main difficulty with regard to scientific history and
philosophy of history. There are some who, on the basis of the
prin­ciple of causation and the principle of universality, negate
freedom and choice. They maintain that whatever is accepted in the name
of freedom is not actually freedom. Contrarily, there are others who
approve the principle of freedom and negate the view that history
follows certain laws. Many sociologists accept the incompatibility of
causality and freedom, and, therefore, they accept causality and negate
freedom.

Hegel, and Marx following him, accept historical determinism. According
to Hegel and Marx, freedom is nothing but consciousness of historical
necessity. In the book Marx and Marxism, the following passage of Engels
is quoted from his work Anti-Duhring:

Hegel was the first to state correctly the relation between freedom and
necessity. To him freedom is the appreciation of necessity. Necessity is
blind only in so far as it is not understood. Freedom does not consist
in the dream of independence from natural laws, but in the knowledge of
these laws and in the possibility this gives of systematically making
them work towards definite ends. This holds good in relation both to the
laws of external nature and those which govern the bodily and mental
existence of men themselves. [^3]

And also in the same book, after a brief discussion of the view that
man can and should act according to his particular historical conditions
and in the direction determined by those conditions, Engels says:

Identifying and understanding these given conditions, render human
action more effective. Every act in the opposite direction amounts to
resisting and obstructing the historic course. To act in the direction
determined by the historic course means moving within the course of
history and participating in the process. But the question, as to what
is meant by freedom, still remains to be answered. The Marxist school
answers that freedom of the individual lies in his appreciation of the
historical necessity, and the social movement towards which the whole
course of history is directed. [^4]

It is evident that these remarks do not solve the difficulty. The real
problem regarding man's relationship with historical conditions is as
follows: Does man control historical conditions? Can he give history his
preferred direction? Is he able to change the course of history?

If man is unable to direct the course of history, or change it, he is
forced to follow the course of history. This is the only way through
which he can not only survive but also continue to evolve. If he goes in
a direction opposite to that of the historic course, he will definitely
perish. Now the question arises whether man is free or determined to
participate in the course of history. If we accept the principle of
pri­ority of society over the individual and that the consciousness and
awareness of the individual and his feelings are moulded by historical
and social conditions-especially economic conditions-does there remain
any room for individual freedom? Moreover, what is meant by the
statement that \`freedom is the consciousness of necessity'? Does it
mean that an individual whose life is threatened by a storm and who has
the full consciousness of the fact that after some time the tide would
take him down into the depths of the sea, or an individual falling from
a high cliff who is conscious that according to the law of gravity his
bones would be crushed into pieces within a short time, is \`free' to
drown into the sea or fall into the valley? According to the
materialistic theory of historical determinism, social conditions act as
restraining factors for man, which determine his direction and mould his
personality, his consciousness, his determination and choice. Man is
nothing but an empty pot, merely a raw material in the hands of social
conditions. Man is the product of the conditions, which are not created
by him. Pre­ceding conditions determine the future course for man. It is
not man who determines the future course of historical conditions. On
the basis of these notions, freedom has no sense and meaning.

In reality, human freedom cannot be conceived apart from the theory of
(specific human) nature. According to this theory, in the general course
of the essential movement of the universe, man enters into the world
with a certain dimension that is over and above the physical universe,
and this extra dimension is the essence and core of human existence.
Afterwards, under the influence of the environ­mental factors, man's
personality develops and matures. It is this existential dimension that
gives man a unique human personality, so that he may rule over the tide
of history and determine its course. I have already discussed this
problem under the heading "Determinism or Freedom," and I shall discuss
this issue further under the title, "The Role of Personality in
History," when discussing the historical role of heroic figures of
history.

Human freedom, in the sense pointed out, is neither inconsistent with
the law of causation, nor is it incompatible with the universality of
the laws of history. That man, in spite of his freedom of choice, his
will and his thought, should have to adopt a predetermined, specific,
and an inviolable course in social life-a freedom loaded with
necessity-does not imply anything but the rule of blind necessity over
man and his will.

The problem regarding history being subject to laws and their
universality poses another difficulty. It is revealed through the study
of historical events and incidents that sometimes a sequence of trivial
accidents change the course of history. Of course, the accidents­
contrary to the belief of some people-do not occur without any cause;
such events are called \`accidents' because they cannot be explained by
a general and universal system of causal laws. If accidents do not
follow any universal law and have played an effective role in the
movement of history, then history would be regarded as devoid of any
kind of specific laws. Among the accidents which have been effective in
deter­mining the course of history, the nose of Cleopatra, the
well-known queen of Egypt, has become proverbial. Many times there have
been in history where, according to the well-known saying, "A waft has
ruffled the pages of history."

In his book What is History? Edward Hallett Carr writes:

The other source of the attack is the famous crux of Cleopatra's nose.
This is the theory that history is, by and large, a chapter of
accidents, a series of events determined by chance coincidences, and
attributable only to the most casual causes. The result of the Battle of
Actum was due not to the sort of causes commonly postulated by
historians, but to Antony's infatuation with Cleopatra. When Bajazet was
deterred by an attack of gout from marching into central Europe, Gibbon
observed that "an acrimonious honour falling on. a single fibre of a man
may prevent or suspend the misery of nations." When King Alexander of
Greece died in the autumn of 1920 from the bite of a pet monkey, this
accident touched off a train of events which led Sir Winston Churchill
to remark that "a quarter of a million persons died of this monkey's
bite." Or take again Trotsky's comment on the fever contracted while
shooting ducks which put him out of action at a critical point of his
quarrel with Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Stalin in the autumn of 1923: "One
can foresee a revolution or a war, but it is impossible to foresee the
consequences of an autumn shooting -trip for wild ducks." [^5]

In the Islamic world the instance of the defeat of Marwan ibn Muhammad,
the last Umayyad caliph, is an evidence of the role of accident deciding
the fate of history. During his last battle with the \`Abbasids, Marwan,
feeling the necessity to answer the call of nature, went aside to ease
himself.

Accidentally, a person from the enemy's camp happened to pass by, he
saw and killed him immediately. The news of his death spread among the
soldiers of his army. As such an accident was never antici­pated, his
soldiers became panicky and fled from the battlefield. The Umayyad
dynasty was thus overthrown. It was on this occasion that it was said:
("a dynasty was swept away by urine.").

Carr, after explaining that every accident,far from being without
cause, is governed by a chain of causes and effects, which terminates
another causal chain, says:

...How can one discover in history a coherent sequence of cause and
effect, how can we find any meaning in history, when our sequence is
liable to be broken or deflected at any moment by some other, and from
our point of view, irrelevant sequence? [^6]

The solution to this difficulty is dependent upon the question whether
society and history have a particular direction. If history in itself
has direction, the role of accidents would be insignificant, which means
although certain accidents may change the position of some pawns on the
chess-board of history, they do not exercise any signifi­cant influence
on the course of history as a whole. At the most, they can accelerate or
arrest it for a moment. But if history is devoid of nature and
personality and does not follow a path determined by its own nature, it
would be without any particular direction, and also it would be
impossible to formulate any universal laws and to forecast the future.

In my view, history has a specific nature and personality which is a
composite product of the individual human beings who make it, and who
have a natural urge for perfection. I believe that the role of
accidental events does not affect historical necessity and universality
of history.

Montesquieu has beautifully explained the role of accidents in history,
a part of which I have quoted earlier. He says:

...if the outcome of a single battle, i.e. a particular cause, was the
ruin of a state, there was a general cause which decreed that, that
state was destined to perish through a single battle. [^7]

He further says:

It was not the affair of Poltava that ruined Charles. Had he not been
destroyed at that place, he would have been in another. The casualties
of the fortune are easily repaired; but who can be guarded against
events that incessantly arise from the nature of things? [^8]

**3. Is History Materialistic in Nature?**

What is the nature of history? Is the real nature of history cultural,
political, economic, religious, or moral? Is history materialistic or
non­materialistic, or a combination of both? This is one of the main
questions related with history. Unless this question is not answered,
our understanding of history would not be correct and sound.

It is evident that all the above-mentioned intellectual and material
factors have participated in the fabric of history. But the question
arises, which of them is the determining factor that plays the most
important role and is prior to all others. There has been controversy as
to which of the factors represents the real spirit of history and its
essence, and which of the factors is able to subordinate and explain the
subsidiary role of other factors. Which of them is the base, to which
others serve as superstructure?

Usually, history is compared to a machine with many motors, in which
every motor is independent of the others. In fact, history is considered
to have a complex not a simple nature. But if we regard it as having
many motors, then what are we to think of its evolution and its course
of development? It is not possible that many motors, each of them having
a specific momentum pushing history in its own direction, could carry
history on a specific course of evolution, unless we consider the
above-mentioned factors as the moving forces subordinate to a
super-force, the spirit of history. This spirit, by employing various
historical forces,. drives it towards a predetermined evolutionary goal.
It is this spirit which actually represents the essence of history. But
this interpretation is different from the doctrine of monistic view of
his­tory. The nature of history is synonymous with the spirit of
history, and it cannot be derived from, what are called, the moving
forces of history.

In our age, a theory which has attracted many supporters is that of
\`historical materialism' or the \`dialectical materialistic theory of
his­tory.' Historical materialism, which is an economic interpretation
of history and an economic-historical view of man-not a humanistic
interpretation of economy or history-explains every human activity from
the economic point of view. In other words, according to historical
materialism, history is materialistic in nature and essence and follows
a dialectical process. This means that the basis of all historical
move­ments, revolutions, and historical manifestations of every society,
is its economic structure.

They are the material forces of production of society and its relations
of production which fashion history and give direction to all
intellectual manifestations of a society like morality, science,
philosophy, religion, law, and culture. These manifestations change with
changes in the mode of production and relations of pro­duction.

The expression that history is dialectical in nature means that the
evolutionary movements of history are dialectical movements caused by a
series of dialectical contradictions, which are concomitant with those
contradictions. Dialectical contradictions are different from
non­dialectical ones in the sense that every phenomenon is compelled to
give rise to its own negation from within. As a result of a series of
changes caused by this inner contradiction, the phenomenon under­goes a
radical qualitative change at a higher level, wherein the two lower
stages attain perfection through synthesis.

Thus historical materialism is comprised of two basic stands: first­ly,
that the nature of history is materialistic; secondly, its movements are
dialectical movements. Here we shall study the first problem. The second
shall be taken up while dealing with the evolution and develop­ment of
history.

The theory of materialistic nature of history is based on a series of
certain philosophical, psychological, and sociological principles that
logically lead to other theories of ideological significance. I would
like to throw some light on this subject, especially because some Muslim
writers claim that although Islam does not approve of the philosophical
materialism, it accepts historical materialism. Consequent­ly they have
based their own historical and sociological views on this theory. It is,
therefore, essential to discuss this problem in some detail, first
expounding the foundations and principles on which this theory is based
and then the conclusions which are derived from them. After this
exposition we shall evaluate the basis of this theory from the Islamic
and scientific points of view.

**Basic Principles of Historical Materialism**

**1. Priority of matter over spirit**

Man has body as well as spirit. Human body and its functionings are the
subject of biological, physical, and physiological studies. But the
spirit and processes related with the soul are the subject of
philosophi­cal and psychological studies. Thoughts, beliefs, feelings,
desires, concepts, and ideologies represent spiritual processes. The
principle of priority of matter over spirit implies that spiritual
processes are not independent, but they are only a sequence of
reflections of material processes; i.e., they are caused by the
influence of the conscious matter on the nerves and the brain.

These processes are significant only to the extent that they form a
connecting link between the internal physical forces and the external
world, but they can never dominate human existence in the manner in
which its opposite forces, i.e. the material forces, do. For example,
the psychical processes may be compared to the headlights of an
automobile. An automobile cannot move about without its headlights in
the dark hours of night. It finds its way in the light of its headlamp.
But what drives it is not the headlamp but its engine.

If these psychical processes, such as thoughts, beliefs, theories and
ideologies, participate in the drama of material forces of history, they
assist the movement of history, but they in themselves are unable to
generate any movement. They can never be compared to the material
forces. Psychical processes are not independent; they depend for their
existence on matter. The real forces are those which signify human
existence and are identified with material forces, and which are
measur­able in material terms.

In this way, the psychical processes are not capable of generating
movement and directing the course of history, and cannot be considered
as a \`lever' for the movement of society. The spiritual values have
absolutely no chance to become the motivating force, the source, and the
goal of a social movement, unless they serve to support and explain the
material values of history and society.

Accordingly, one has to be very careful in interpreting history. This
theory emphasizes that we should be cautious not to be deceived by the
appearances. Occasionally, at some point in history, it may appear that
a thought, belief, or a faith has brought about change in a society, and
stimulated it at a particular stage of development. But if we analyse
history correctly, we shall see that such beliefs do not have an
independent existence; they are only the mirror-image or reflection of
material forces of society. There were actually material forces, which
in the guise of those beliefs, moved and changed the society. Material
forces are the progressive, leading force of history. They are
repre­sented, technically, by the society's system of production, and,
from the humanistic point of view, by the deprived and exploited class
of society.

Feuerbach, the famous materialist philosopher, from whom Marx himself
has borrowed many of his ideas, raises the following questions:

What is theory? What is praxis? What is the difference between the
two?

He himself answers that:

Everything which is confined to the mind is theoretical. Whatever moves
the minds of many is practical necessity. It is action which unites many
minds together and organizes the masses,and in this manner finds a place
for itself in the world. [^9]

And Marx, his faithful pupil, writes:

It is obvious that the weapon of criticism cannot replace criticism of
weap­ons. Only the material forces can defeat other material forces.

Marx does not believe in the independence of non-material forces. He,
at the most, recognizes their value in relation to material existence:
He says: "Theory also, only by taking roots into the lives of the
masses, can be transformed into a material force." [^10]

Priority of matter over spirit, priority of the body over the mind,
inessentiality of spiritual forces; and rejection of intellectual and
spiritual values as fundamental, are among the basic principles of the
philosophy of materialism.

Quite contrary to this philosophy is the other philosophy which is
based on the essentiality of spirit, according to which all the
fundamen­tal dimensions of human existence cannot be interpreted by
means of matter or its modes. In the domain of human existence, spirit
is a fundamental reality, and the spiritual energies are independent of
the material energies. In this way, the spiritual forces, i.e. the
intellectual forces, faith, belief and emotions, are regarded as
independent factors for some movements at the individual level and at
the level of society. They serve as \`levers' which can be used for the
movement of history. Many of historical movements have ultimately arisen
because of these \`levers,' especially those which belong to a higher
human plane. The higher individual and collective movements are
independently origina­ted by these forces, and derive their sublimity
from these very forces.

Psychic forces sometimes strongly influence physical and material
powers, not only at the level of voluntary activity, but also at the
level of mechanical, involuntary, and physiological activity, and employ
them for attaining their own specific purpose. The effects of psychical
suggestions for curing physical ailments and the miraculous effects of
hypnotism, which belong to the same category, cannot be overlooked.

Knowledge and faith, particularly faith, and specifically whenever
these two psychic forces are harmonized, a great and useful force is
generated which can create wonders by playing an extraordinarily
prog­ressive and revolutionary role in transforming the course of
history.

Independence of mind and spiritual powers is one of the funda­mental
principles of "epistemological realism.""

**2. Primacy and priority of material needs over intellectual needs**

Man has at least two types of needs for his social existence. First­ly,
there are the material needs, such as the need for bread, water,
shelter, dress, medicine, and other such needs. Secondly, there are the
intellectual needs, such as the needs for education, knowledge,
litera­ture, art, philosophical speculation, faith, ideology, prayer,
morality, and other such things. These two types of needs accompany man
in all situations and conditions. But which of them precedes the other?
material needs or intellectual needs? or none of them? The theory of
priority of material needs is based on the notion that material needs
are more important and preferable. Their importance is not because of
the fact that at the initial stage man is in pursuit of material needs,
and when these needs are satisfied, he can divert his attention and
energies towards the attainment of intellectual pursuits, but because
material needs are also the basis and the source of intellectual needs.
It is not that man is created with two types of needs and two types of
instincts: material needs and material instincts, intellectual needs and
intellectual instincts; rather man has been created with only one type
of needs and one type of instincts. Intellectual needs are only
secondary needs, which serve the sole purpose of gratifying the material
needs in a better manner.

This is the reason why the intellectual needs, from the point of view
of form, quality, and also essence, are subordinated to the mate­rial
needs. In every age, man has given a specific form, character, and mode
to his material needs, according to the stage of development of the
means of production. His intellectual requirements, which originate in
his material requirements, correspond in form, mode, and quality to his
material necessities. Hence, there is a twofold relationship of
prio­rity between the material needs and the intellectual needs:
priority of existence, i.e. intellectual needs are the by-products of
the material needs; and the priority of essence, i.e. the form, quality,
and nature of the intellectual needs remain subordinated to that of the
material needs. In his book Historical Materialism P. Royan quotes from
page 92 of Hymen Louis' book Philosophical Ideas:

Man's material course of existence led him to propound theories
correspond­ing to the material needs of the time about his world,
society, art, and morality; all intellectual manifestations are the
resultant products of material conditions and the mode of production.
[^12]

Accordingly, scientific judgement, philosophical thought, artistic and
aesthetic sensibility, moral values, and religious propensities of every
human being are subject to his way of .life. Applying this maxim,"Tell
me what you eat and I will tell you what you think," which refers to
individuals, to the society, it may be said: "Tell me what is the degree
of development of the means of production, and what are the economic
relations among the members of a society, and I will tell you what
ideology, which philosophy and what ethics and religion the members of
that society follow."

Radically opposed to this theory is the theory of independence of
intellectual needs. According to it, although in the individual human
being the material needs sprout up early in life-as soon as a child is
born he gropes for his mother's breast--the intellectual needs which are
hidden inside the human nature, blossom gradually. During the later .
stages of his development and maturity, man sacrifices his material
needs for the sake of intellectual. needs. Or, in other words, the urge
of intellectual enjoyment is stronger and more indigenous to human
nature than the physical enjoyments and attractions. [^13] The greater an
individual's education and training, the more he considers his material
needs, material enjoyments, and material existence as subordinate to his
intellectual needs, intellectual enjoyments-and intellectual existence.
Society also follows the same principle. In primitive societies material
needs are more dominant than intellectual needs; but as society advances
and becomes more refined, intellectual needs assume more important
position and become the goal of human life, while material needs,
becoming secondary, are demoted to a lower place as mere means to attain
higher ends. [^14]

**3. Priority of action over thought**

Man is a being who thinks, understands, and acts. Is action prior to
thought or vice versa? Is the essence of man action or thought? Does
human nobility depend upon action, or does it depend upon thought? Is
man the product of action or thought?

Historical materialism is based on the idea of independence of action
and its priority over thought. It considers action as the base, and
thought as its offshoot. Ancient logic and philosophy considered thought
as the key to action. According to that logic, thought is divided into
concepts and judgements, each of which may be further divided into a
priori (self-evident) and theoretic. A priori ideas are acknow­ledged as
the key to theoretical ideas. In that logic and philosophy, the essence
of man (the self) is regarded as pure thought. Human perfection and
nobility is seen as lying in wisdom. The \`perfect man' is synony­mous
with the \`man of wisdom." [^15]

But historical materialism is established on the principle that action
is the key to thought and the criterion of thought. The essence of man
is his productive activity. Action is the source of man's identity and
it moulds him also. Marx says, "The entire so-called history of the
world is nothing but the begetting of man through human labour. [^16]

And Engels says, "Man himself is the creation of action.” [^17] From the
very beginning, man, instead of contemplating over natural calamities,
conquered the external environment by means of his hard labour, and in
the same way (through revolutionary action) he overpowered the powerful
aggressors to establish a society according to his own desires. In the
book Marx and Marxism, the author says:

Whereas in the philosophy of being (a philosophy that interprets the
world in terms of "being" as opposed to the philosophy of "becoming,"
which interprets the world in terms of motion. Marxism belongs to the
group of the philosophies of "becoming") it was customary at first to
set forth the ideas and the principles from which practical conclusions
are derived; praxis (practical philosophy), on the other hand, regards
action as the origin and basis of all thought. It replaces the faith in
thought by the philosophy of power. In agreement with Hegel, it asserts:
"The real being of man, in the first instance, is his own action." In
this belief he joins the German thinker who reversed the famous phrase,
"In the beginning there was the Word"-in which the Word signifies
spirit, for it is through the word that the spirit expresses itself-and
declared "In the beginning there was the Act." [^18]

This is one of the principles of the materialistic philosophy of
Marxism. This principle is known as "praxis" in the Marxist
termino­logy, and is borrowed by Marx from his materialist predecessor,
Feuer­bach, and his another master, Hegel.

Opposed to this principle is the principle of the philosophy of
ontological realism [idealism ] that believes in the priority of thought
over action and reciprocal interaction of thought and action. In this
philosophy, thought is the essence of man (e.g. the self's \`knowledge
by presence' of itself). Man has a reciprocal relation with action and
work: he creates work and his work in turn moulds him. Man, through his
action upon the external world, acquires the data of his knowledge from
the external world; until the mind becomes enriched with these primary
data, it remains incapable of any intelligent activity. After collecting
this data, the mind reciprocally exercises its powers on the data in
various fashions, as by generalization, abstraction, and inference
(ratiocination). In this way, it prepares the grounds for the correct
understanding of objects. Understanding is not merely the reflection of
external matter in the mind. It is only after the reflection of external
matter is transformed inside the mind through a series of mental
processes, which originate in the nonmaterial substance of the soul,
that understanding becomes possible. Hence, action is the origin of
thought and thought is the origin of action. Action is the test of
thought and at the same time thought is the test of action. This is not
a vicious circle. Man's nobility lies in his wisdom, faith, and dignity,
and in turn his work is valuable because through it he acquires these
virtues. Man is the creator of his work, and, at the same time, he is
also its product. This is the distinguishing characteristic of man,
which is not found in any other being, and which is derived from a mode
of Divine creation special to his species. [^19]

Mans' creativity in relation to work is inventive and positive, while
work's formative power in relation to man is only quantitative. It means
that man actually creates his own work, but work does not really create
a man. It is work, exercise, and repetitive practice, which provide the
grounds for the making of man from within. Whenever there is a
reciprocal relationship between two things which is inventive and
positive from one side and quantitative and numerical from the other,
the former is prior to the latter.

Hence man, whose essence is consciousness (\`knowledge by presence' of
his own self), has reciprocal relationship with work. Man creates work
and work moulds man. Considering the fact that man is the necessary
creative cause of work and work is merely a potential or quantitative
cause of man, it may be said that man is prior to work, and work is not
prior to him.

**4. Priority o f the Social Existence o f Man Over His Individual
Existence, or the Principle of Priority of Sociology Over Psychology**

From the biological point of view, man is the most perfect of all
animals. He has a kind of capacity for self-improvement which is
specific to his kind. Man is endowed with a specific personality whose
dimen­sions form his human Dasein (existence). As a result of continued
experiences and learning, the philosophical and intellectual dimension
of man's existence is shaped. And due to the influence of some other
factors his existence gains another dimension which is the ethical
dimension. It is this dimension which is the source of all values, and
basis of all the moral \`musts' and \`must nots'. The artistic and
religious dimensions are also evolved in a similar manner. Man himself
styles a system of intellectual principles which serve as the basis of
his thinking within the framework of his philosophical and intellectual
dimensions. In the course of his judgments, he arrives at a set of
absolute and semi­-absolute (comparatively relative) values in the moral
and social spheres of life. All these dimensions combined together
constitute human existence.

Human dimensions are entirely effects of social factors. At the time of
birth, man is devoid of all these dimensions; he is actually like a raw
material ready to acquire any form, ideological or emotional, depending
upon the factors that exercise influence upon him. He is like an empty
pot that has to be filled from outside, like a blank recording tape on
which any sound can be recorded. Whatever is recorded on it is
retrievable. To sum up, the actual maker of human personality, and
whatever that transforms man from a \`thing' into a \`person,' is
nothing but the external social factors, which combined together
constitute that which is called social process. Man in himself is purely
a \`thing;' which is transformed into a \`person' as a result of the
impact of social factors. P. Royan in his Historical Materialism quotes
from page 42 of Plekhanov's Fundamental Problems of Marxism:

The characteristics of a social system are determined by the current
level of development of the means of production of society. It means
that when the stage of development of the means of production is
determined, the charac­teristics of the social order and the psychology
(of the people) related to it, and all the other corresponding relations
within the system, on the one hand, and the ideas and the pace of
progress, on the other; are also (of their own accord) determined.

