Scientific History Supplement / 1
=================================

When psychology, through the means of production, is determined,
ideology too, which is deeply rooted in the psychology of the people, is
also conse­quently determined. But as the ideology at a particular
historical stage is the product of social requirements, and as it always
continues to protect the interests of the ruling class, it necessarily
strengthens and perfects the existing social structure. Hence the social
structure in class-societies, which comes into existence for protecting
the ruling class and propagating its ideology, is in reality the result
of the social order and its requirements, and, in the last analysis, is
the product of the character of the modes and the means of production.
For instance, the church and the mosque are for preaching of the
religious beliefs, which in all the religions are based upon the faith
in the final judgement or resurrection. The belief in resurrection is
the logical outcome of the particular social order that is based upon
the division of society into classes, which in its turn is the product
of a particular stage of development of the means of production. Hence,
belief in resurrection is the product of the means of production (at a
particular stage of social development).

In contrast to this principle is another anthropological principle
which is based upon the view that the foundation of human persona­lity,
from which man's intellect and higher ideals arise, is itself inherent
in human nature, ingrained in him by the agents which are responsible
for his creation. It is correct that man, contrary to the well-­known
theory of Plato, is not born with a ready-made and finished
per­sonality, but the real foundation of his personality is inborn, not
acquired from the society. If we want to interpret this idea in
philoso­phical terms, we shall have to say that the real source of the
human dimensions of man's existence-including the moral, religious,
philoso­phical, artistic, scientific, literary, and emotional
dimensions- have their origin in his rational self, which is man's
distinguishing characteristic, and is bestowed upon him by the process
of creation itself. Society fosters man, nurtures him, or distorts him
according to his individual aptitudes. At first the rational self is
potential, then it gradually attains actuality. In this way, man,
according to the basic principles of thought, and also according to the
principle governing his material and intellectual inclinations and
aptitudes, is like all the other living beings, whose all faculties are
potential in the beginning, and as a result of a series of mutational
movements (harakat jawhariyyah) gradually actualize, develop, and attain
perfection. Man, under the influence of external factors, nourishes and
cultivates his innate personality and attains perfection, or sometimes
he deviates from the normal course and distorts it. This is the same
principle which in Islamic writings is called the "principle of nature,"
and is regarded as the mother principle in Islamic teachings.

On the basis of the principle of nature, human psychology is prior to
human sociology. Sociology itself originates in human psychology.
According to this principle of nature, although at the time of birth man
possesses neither perception nor imagination, neither the power of
judgement nor human aptitudes, he however is born with some existential
dimensions besides his animal dimensions. It is because of the same
dimensions that he gradually evolves a sequence of abstract ideas and
judgements (in philosophical and logical terms, the \`secondary
concepts') which form the real foundation of human thought, and without
which any kind of logical reasoning is impossible. The same dimensions
develop a series of sublime aspirations in man, and are considered to.
be the foundation of human personality.

According to the theory of priority of human sociology over human
psychology, man is merely a passive receiver, not an active seeker. He
is a raw material which is indifferent to any form given to him, a blank
tape on which any song can be recorded. In it there is no kind of
inherent movement towards any fixed preordained form. Whatever form is
given to it is accepted without causing any distortion; because it
neither has any form of its own, nor is any form alien to it. The tape
does not require any particular song, because of its ability to receive
any song without being alienated or estranged from its own essence or
nature. The relation of this raw material to all forms, the relation of
the tape to all songs, and the relation of the pot to whatever fills it,
are similar and of the same kind.

But according to the principle of nature and the principle of prio­rity
of human psychology over human sociology, although in the begin­ning man
lacks actual understanding and actual inclinations, from within he moves
in a dynamic way towards a series of primary judge­ments, which are
called a priori or primary principles. He also moves towards a series of
higher, sublime values which constitute his ideals of humanity. After
that a set of simple ideas, which are the primary elements of thought
(and are called in philosophical term \`primary concepts'), enters into
his mind from outside; those principles emerge in the form of a system
of theoretical or practical judgements, and the innate human
inclinations gradually assume definite form in the course of time.

According to the first theory, man, under the existing conditions,
believes for example, that the arithmetical formula, 2 x 2 = 4, as being
absolutely true for all times and places. But actually this belief is a
product of specific conditions; which means that it is due to the
prevailing conditions which make it true, and it is just possible that
under different conditions and a different environment the judgement
would be quite different, such as 2 x 2 = 26.

But according to the second theory, although the external conditions
help man to arrive at the idea of numbers 2, 4, 8, 10 and so on, but the
calculations like 2 x 2 = 4 or 5 x 5 = 25 are essential pro­ducts of the
human mind, and it is impossible for them to have different forms:
Similarly the perfectionist tendencies of human nature are also
inseparably essential characteristics of man's mind or soul. [^20]

**5. Priority of Material Aspect of Society Over its Intellectual
Aspect**

Society is comprised of different strata, classes, and structures:
economic, cultural, administrative, political, religious, legal, etc.
From this angle, a society seems to be quite similar to a complete house
where a family dwells and which consists of a drawing room, bedroom,
kitchen, toilet etc.

One of the different social structures is that which serves the purpose
of the base or the foundation of the whole structure, upon which stands
the system and the superstructure. If it is disturbed or collapses, the
whole structure is necessarily bound to fall. It is the economic
structure of the society. The social structure of the society consists
of whatsoever is related with its system of material produc­tion, such
as tools and means of production, sources and relations of production.

Tools of production, which comprise the most important part of the
social structure, are themselves always changing and developing. Every
stage in the development of the tools of production, necessitates a
specific system of relations of production which negates all that
existed prior to it in the society.

The type of relations of production existing in a society depends upon
particular laws and conditions concerning the institution of ownership,
which really means the laws and conditions that govern the members of
society and their conventional relationship with the sum. total of the
product of society. With inevitable changes in the relations of
production, the basis of all legal, intellectual, moral, religious,
philosophical, and scientific principles is bound to change. In one
sentence: economy is the foundation of society.

In the book Marx and Marxism, a passage from Marx's preface to his work
The Critique of Political Economy is quoted:

In the social production of their life, men enter into specific
relations that are indispensible and independent of their will,
relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of
development of their material productive forces. The sum total of these
relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society,
the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure
and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode
of production of material life conditions the social, political, and
intellectual life-process in general. It is not the consciousness of man
that determines their being, but on the contrary, their social being
that determines their consciousness. [^21]

In the same book Marx's letter to Annenkov is also quoted:

Assume a particular state of development in the productive facilities
of man and you will get a corresponding form of commerce and
consumption. Assume particular degrees of development of production,
commerce, and consumption and you will have a corresponding organization
of the family, or orders or of classes, in a word a corresponding civil
society. [^22]

Peter explains Marx's view in the following words:

In this fashion Marx has compared the society to a building, the base
and foundation of which are the economic institutions, whose
superstructure (the building itself) is comprised of political,
religious, and legal patterns, customs and norms. As in the case of a
building, it depends upon the position of its base and foundation, the
economic forms (relations of production) and technical modes are also
dependent upon and associated with the modes of thinking, the political
system and the customs, and each of them is subject to economic
conditions. [^23]

The same book quotes from Lenin's Marx-Engels Marxism a passage
reproduced from the third volume of The Capital:

The mode of production manifests itself in the human activity in
relation to nature and, followini that, in social conditions and
intellectual patterns resulting from them. [^24]

The same book quotes further from the Preface to a Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy:

My investigations led to the result that the legal relations as well as
forms of the state are to be grasped neither from themselves nor from
the so-called-general development of the human mind, but rather have
their roots in the material conditions of life ....the anatomy of civil
society is to be sought in political economy. [^25]

Marx, in his book The Poverty of Philosophy, has written:

Social relations are closely bound up with productive forces. In
acquiring new productive forces, men change their mode of production;
and in changing their mode of production, in changing the way of earning
their living, they change all their social relations. The hand mill
gives you a society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, a society with
the industrial capitalist. [^26]

The theory of the primacy of material structure of society in relation
to other social formations corresponds to the theory of priority of
action over thought. The theory of priority of action over thought is
applicable to the individual level, and the theory of priority of
material aspect over other social aspects is actually based upon the
theory of priority of action over thought but at the level of society.
Since the advocates of this view also advocate the theory of priority of
human sociology over human psychology, hence the priority of individual
action over individual thought is a form and result of the theory of
priority of material aspect over other social aspects. Contrarily, if
human sociology is considered to be prior to human psychology, the
priority of material aspect of society over its other aspects would be
considered as the effect and result of the priority of individual action
over individual thought.

The material aspect of society, which may be also termed as the
economic structure or economic base, consists of two constituents:
firstly, the tools of production, which are the product of man's
relation with nature; and, secondly, the economic relations of the
members of society on the grounds of distribution of wealth, which are
sometimes termed as the "relations of production." Often both of them
are referred to as "the means of production" or "the mode of
produc­tion." [^27] It should be noted that these terms used by the
founders of historical materialism are not free from ambiguity, and are
not well­ defined and specific. [^28] When they say that economy is the
base and the material aspect of society is prior to other social
aspects, they mean the whole system of production, but generally refer
to the-tools of production and relations of production.

Special attention should be paid to an important point fully expli­cit
in the writings of the founders of historical materialism that the base
itself is two-tiered; a part of it acts as the base for the other part,
which is built upon it. The basis, the real foundation at the bottom of
the structure consists of the tools of production, i.e. the physical
labour materialized. It is the physical labour which creates and posits
particular economic relations according to the distribution of wealth.
These relations, which reflect the degree of the development of the
tools of production, are not only in harmony with the tools of
production, but are also considered to be their incentive and motivating
force. It means that the specific economic relations in a society are
the means of deriving the greatest benefit from the tools of production.
They are like a garment tailored to fit the body, i.e. the means of
production. But the tools of production in themselves are subject to
development. .Any . change in the tools of production can disturb the
harmony between the two constituent parts of the system of production.
The productive and economic relations, i.e. those laws which were
evolved to suit the earlier tools of production, become outdated in the
same manner as a child's dress does not fit the fully grown-up man, and
hinders his free movement. Similarly the primitive tools do not suit a
more developed society and obstruct its growth by creating contradiction
between the two tiers of production structure. The new tools of
production are inevitably estab­lished and the base, i.e. the economic
structure of society, is totally transformed and, in consequence of this
change, the legal, moral, philosophical, and religious superstructure is
also overthrown.

Keeping in mind the primacy of collective labour, i.e. labour
materialized which is represented by the tools of production, and also
considering the fact that Marx is one of those sociologists who regard
sociology as being prior to psychology, who also considers man qua man
as a social being or in his own words "sui generic", the philo­sophical
role of labour according to Marxism-which is the essence of the Marxist
philosophy and to which little attention has been paid­ becomes clear.

Marx gives the same importance to human labour in the context of human
existence that Descartes gives to the rational being of man, Bergson to
the dynamic aspect of human existence, and Jean Paul Sartre to man's
feeling of guilt.

Descartes says, "I think, therefore I am" (Cogito ergo sum). Bergson
says, "I have continuity, therefore I exist." Sartre says, "I
feel-guilty, therefore I exist." Marx would have said, "I work,
therefore I exist."

Apart from these diverse modes of existence (thought, continuity, guilt
etc.), none of these thinkers tries to posit human existence or \`ego'
in absolute terms. Some of them even maintain that man's existence
cannot be conceived beyond and apart from one of these specific modes.
Moreover, everyone of them wants to define man's essence and reality of
human existence in these terms only.

For instance, Descartes intends to say, "My existence is synonymous
with the existence of my thought; eliminate thought, and I am nothing."
Bergson intends to say, "Human existence is identical with continuity
and time (duration)." Sartre also intends to say that "man's essence and
actuality of his existence lies in the sense of guilt; take away guilt
from human nature, and man is nothing." Marx also in his turn intends to
say, "The whole of man's existence and his actual being is work. Work is
the essence of humanity; I labour, there­fore I am. It is not in this
sense that work is the proof of the existence of my self, but in the
sense that work itself is identical with the existence of my self; work
is my actual existence."

Marx says, "For a socialist person the entire so-called history of the
world is nothing but begetting of man through human labour." [^29] He
distinguishes human consciousness from man's real existence, and says,
"It is not the consciousness of man that determines his being, but his
social being that determines his consciousness. "' [^30] He further says
that the premises with which we start are not self-willed or absolute,
but are derived from real individuals, their actions, and from material
conditions of existence. He explains the term "real individual" in the
following words: "But the real individuals act not according to the
whims which cross their imagination... but according to what they
materially produce and make; i.e. they act on the basis of definite
material conditions and certain limitations- conditions which are
independent of their will." [^31]

Engels says: "Labour is the source of all wealth, the political
economists assert... but it is infinitely more than this. It is the
prime basic condition for all human existence, and this is true to such
an extent that, in a way, we should say that it is labour which has
created man himself." [^32] All these extracts from the writings of the
founders of Marxism indicate their emphasis on the role of labour.
However, Marx and Engels have borrowed this idea regarding the role of
labour from Hegel, who said, "The real being of man, in the first
instance, is his action." [^33]

Hence, according to Marxism, existence of man is primarily social and
not individual. Secondly, the social existence of man is synony­mous
with his materialized labour, i.e. collective labour. All individual
modes like feelings and emotions, or all social modes such as morality,
philosophy, art, religion etc. are only expressions and manifestations
of man's real being; they are not identical with his being itself:
According­ly, the actual evolution of man is identical with the
development of collective labour. But intellectual, emotional, and
spiritual development or evolution of the social system is only a
manifestation and reflec­tion of the real development and not the
development itself. The mater­ial development of a society is the
criterion of its intellectual develop­ment. As action is the criterion
for judging thought, truth or falsity of an idea is also judged through
action and not by intellectual or logical standards. In the same way,
the measure of intellectual development also is material development.
Hence, if the question arises as to which school of philosophy,
morality, religion or art is more progressive, the intellectual and
logical standards cannot provide the answer to this question. The only
criterion should be to see what are the conditions of which that
particular school of thought is the product and manifesta­tion, and at
which stage of development of social labour or tools of production it
has emerged.

This type of thinking is, of course, very strange to people like us who
consider the real existence of man as his own \`self' and this \`self,'
too, an immaterial substance and a product of mutational movements of
nature and not the product of society. But for one like Marx, who thinks
in material terms and does not believe in the immaterial sub­stance, is
bound to interpret the essence of man and his a6tuality from a
biological point of view, and say that the essence of man is identical
with the physical constitution of his body, as the ancient materialists,
like the materialists of the eighteenth century, believed. But Marx has
rejected the mechanistic view of life and has claimed that the being of
man is grounded in society not in nature. Whatever has been formed by
nature is the potential human being, not the actual one.

Furthermore, either Marx should regard thought as the essence of
humanity, and work as the manifestation and expression of thought or, on
the con­trary, he should consider labour as the essence of humanity and
thought as the manifestation and expression of labour. Marx, being a
materialist, not only does approve of the primacy of matter in the
individual, but also rejects the idea of any supra material essence
besides the individual's material existence. In the context of society
and history also, he accedes to the priority of matter. As a result he
has to adopt the second alternative.

Here a basic difference between the point of view of Marx and that of
other materialists concerning the nature of history comes to light.
Every materialist, since he considers man and other manifesta­tions of
his existence as material, inevitably tends to regard history also as
materialistic. But what Marx says is more than this. Marx tries to say
that history is essentially economic in character, and in economics,
too, the economic relations of production occupy the most important
place. Since he considers the economic and production relations, i.e.
the relation of workers with the products of their labour, as essential
and necessary, derived from the stage of development of the tools of
pro­duction, Marx's viewpoint is- that history is determined by the
tools or instruments of production. Merely to say that history is
materialistic in nature, or to say that history is economic in nature,
is not enough to define the Marxian viewpoint. We should notice that
according to Marx the essence and nature of history is
"instrumentalistic." I, in some of my works , [^34] have termed Marx's
historical materialism as an "instru­mentalist theory," which is opposed
to my own "humanistic theory" of history.

Actually, the manner in which Marx is absorbed in his philosophy of
labour and conceives the idea of \`social labour,' shows that human
beings as he conceives them are not the same as those who walk in the
streets and think and resolve, but as if they are, in fact, like tools
and machines in factories. Human beings who walk, talk, and think are
seen as images of the \`real' human beings conceived by Marx. Marx's
view of social labour and tools of production seems to advance a view
according to which man is a being who acts blindly and mechanically
without any resolution and will. He is merely a shadow of man, not man
himself, whose development and progress is determined strictly
externally and who has no will or purpose of his own, and is forced to
follow a predetermined path blindly.

It may be said that whatever Marx has said regarding the priority of
collective labour over the conscious mind and human will sounds to be
quite similar to the views expressed by some of the religious thinkers
about the unconscious functionings of human organs, such as the
functioning of digestive system, heart, liver etc., which are
consi­dered to operate under the influence of a hidden single will.
According to these thinkers, desires, wishes, 'oughts' and \`ought
nots,' and consequently the matters which are related to the practical
aspect of the mind, i.e. the lower, functional, and physiological sides
of the human self, which appear on the surface of the conscious mind and
without its knowing their origin, are reflections of a series of
compulsive natural needs originating from the subconscious. It is
similar to what has been termed by Freud as the subconscious or the
unconscious, which dominates the conscious mind.

The views of those ancient thinkers and that of Freud, however, relate
to a part of the conscious mind and to the influence of a con­cealed
consciousness. Besides, whatever they talk about is not external to
human existence; but what Marx says is external to human existence.

Careful observation shows that Marx's theory is quite astonishing from
the philosophical point of view.

Marx compares his own discovery with the well-known biological
discovery of Darwin. Darwin has proved that a process quite external to
the animal's will and consciousness gradually and unconsciously causes
biological changes in the course of time. Marx also claims that a blind
process (identical with the real existence of man) gradually and
unconsciously causes the formation of the social structure, i.e. all the
things named by Marx as superstructure, and even a part of the base
also, i.e. the socio-economic relations. He says, "Darwin has called the
attention of scientists towards the history of natural selection, the
formation of organs in plants and animals corresponding to the means of
production necessary for their survival. Isn't the history of
genera­tion and formation of organs producing the social human being,
i.e. the material basis of all types of social organizations, worthy of
such a treatment? ...Natural selection lays bare the modes of human
action vis-a-vis nature; the mode of production lays bare man's material
exis­tence, and as a result, the source of social relations, thought,
and intellectual products that spring from it." [^35]

