Conclusions
===========

The theory of historical materialism itself leads to a series of
conclusions which are influential in practical social strategy.
Historical materialism is not merely a theoretical and intellectual
approach with­out relevance to social behaviour and social choice. Now
we have to see what sort of conclusions can be drawn from it.

1. The first conclusion is related to the problem of study of society
and history. On the basis of historical materialism, the best and the
most reliable way to study and analyse historical and social events is
to investigate their economic basis. Without studying the economic
foundation of historical events, their correct understanding is
impos­sible; because it is presumed that all social changes are
materialistic in essence, even-though they may appear to have an
independent cultural, religious, or moral essence. It means that all
these changes are reflec­tions of the economic and material conditions
of society, being their effects. Ancient thinkers also claimed that
knowledge of objects by means of identification of their causes is the
most reliable and the best way of understanding them. Hence, if we
assume that the root cause of all social changes is the economic
structure of society, the best way of studying history is socio-economic
analysis. In other words, as the cause has priority over its effects, at
the stage of study, also, priority lies with it. Hence, the priority of
economic base exists not only at the level of external reality, but it
is also to be observed at the level of intellectual inquiry and study.

In the book Revisionism from Marx to Mao, this problem has been
discussed as follows:

For analysing social revolutions, one must not judge social conflicts
in political, legal, or ideological terms; on the contrary, they are to
be interpreted in terms of the contradiction between the productive
forces and relations of production. Marx has seriously warned us of the
dangers of such a judgement, firstly because such a judgement is not
realistic, for it replaces the cause, which economic changes and
contradictions are, by the effect, i.e.

political, legal, and ideological forms, which are the effects.
Secondly, such an interpretation is superficial; as instead of probing
deeply into the real causes, it only touches upon the surface, and what
is apparent reality is considered to be sufficient for explanation.
Thirdly, it is illusory; because the superstruc­tures, which are on the
whole ideological, are nothing but inaccurate images of the reality.
Depending on inaccurate images instead of a realistic analysis of the
problem under study, will no doubt lead us into confusion and error.
[^36]

Here the author quotes from the selected works of Marx and Engels:

As in the case of an individual mere self-introspection does not help
us to make any judgement, in the same way, during the period of
disturbance and chaos, the ideas of that period should not be treated as
helpful for judging its character. [^37]

Marx makes an attempt to reject the role of consciousness, thought, and
innovation, which is generally considered to be a basic agent of
development. For instance, Saint Simon, from whom Marx has borrowed a
number of ideas, writing about the role of creativity in the process of
evolution, says:

Societies are governed by two moral forces which are equally strong and
operate alternately. One is the force of habit or custom, and the other
is inclination towards innovation and creativity. After some time
customs necessarily become evil ....At such times, the need for
something new begins to be felt. It is this need which really
constitutes the revolutionary situation. [^38]

Proudhon, another of Marx's teachers, says about the role of ideas and
beliefs in the evolution of societies:

Political forms of nations have been the manifestations of their
beliefs. Movement of the forms, their transformation and annihilation
are the tests which reveal the value of the underlying ideas, through
which an absolute and unchangeable reality is revealed to us gradually.
But we see that all political institutions necessarily seek adjustment
with the existing social conditions in order to be saved from inevitable
death. [^39]

Despite all this, Marx claims that every social revolution, more than
anything else, is a socio-economic necessity. It is caused by the
process of polarization of civil social structure, the forces of
production and social relations. [^40]

Marx tries to say that it is neither inventiveness and creativity nor
revolutionarv ideas and beliefs that are instrumental in the process of
social change, but it is socio-economic necessity that makes men develop
and embrace new revolutionary beliefs and ideologies. Hence if we try to
apply the conclusions of historical materialism for analys­ing certain
historical events such as the wars of Persia and Greece, or the
Crusades, or the Islamic conquests, or the Renaissance in the West, or
the constitutional movement in Iran, it would be a mistake to study and
evaluate them from the viewpoint of superficial forms of these events,
which are occasionally political, religious, or cultural. It would not
be right to accept even the views of the revolutionaries, who might have
regarded those movements as religious, cultural, or political as a
­criterion. We should concentrate our attention on the real substance of
those movements, which is economic and material in essence, in order to
arrive at correct conclusions.

Nowadays we see that the contemporary Marxists, while trying to explain
any historical movement, snatch some rudimentary facts from here and
there, and without having any authentic and conclusive infor­mation
about it discuss the economic conditions of the past events and
movements.

2. The law governing history is deterministic, inviolable, and external
to human will.

In previous chapters, I have already discussed whether a series of
binding causal laws rules history. I have also explained that some
people in the name of accidents, and others on account of the freedom of
human will, have rejected the law of causation and consequently nega­ted
the existence of certain necessary permanent laws for society and
history. But I have proved that such a theory is baseless. The law of
causation, and consequently the necessary relation between cause and
effect, governs history in the same manner as it governs other natural
phenomena. In addition to it I have also proved that society and history
have an organic unity and objective existence, and, therefore, possess a
specific nature, whose laws are necessary and universal. Hence
accord­ing to the previous statement, a series of general and necessary
laws govern history and society. We shall term this type of necessity as
\`philosophical necessity.' This necessity is responsible for directing
the course of history according to a series of definite and necessary
laws.

But the Marxist notion of historical determinism means economic
determinism. It is a. unique interpretation of philosophical necessity.
This theory synthesizes two different theories. The first one is the
conception of philosophical necessity, which holds that no accident can
occur without a cause. Occurrence of every historical phenomenon is made
inevitable and certain due to presence of particular causes respon­sible
for bringing it into existence. No accident can occur in absence of its
causes. The second theory is that of the primacy of material founda­tion
of society as against other foundations. This theory has already been
discussed earlier. The necessary corollary of these theories is
materialistic determinism of history, i.e. dependence of the
superstruc­ture on the base is necessary and inevitable. Any change in
the base necessarily brings about change in the superstructure. Without
a change in the base, any change in the superstructure is absolutely
impossible.

That which, according to the Marxist claim, makes Marxist socialism
\`scientific,' and makes it assume the garb of a natural law like other
natural laws, is the very principle of historical determinism. According
to this principle the tools of production, which are the most
fundamental part of the economic structure, continue to develop
according to a system of natural laws. Their development is similar to
the evolution of animals and plants which in the course of several
hundred million years continued their gradual development, attaining new
forms at every stage. As changes in species and evolution in animals and
plants are independent of their own will and desire, the process of
development and evolution of the tools of production also takes place
automatically.

In the course of their gradual development, the tools of produc­tion
pass through certain stages. At every stage they cause irresistible
transformation in all social modes, and this process is irresistible.
Before it reaches a specific stage of development, the possibility of
initiative changes in the superstructure of the society does not exist.
The socialists, and in general the advocates of a just social order, who
do not pay much attention to the possibilities realized through the
development of the tools of production, and merely cherish the desire
for social justice and socialism on sentimental grounds, cannot achieve
anything; they waste their time and energy in futile daydreaming. Karl
Marx, in his preface to the first German edition of The Capital, says:

The country that is more developed industrially only shows to the less
developed the image of its own future. [^41]... And even when a society
has got upon the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of
its movement ultimately ...it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor
remove by legal enact­ments, the obstacles offered by the successive
phases of its normal develop­ment. But it can shorten and lessen the
birth pangs.

Marx himself has expounded certain points in the latter part of his
statement, which either have been ignored or underestimated. He is
actually trying to answer a possible question and objection. Someone
might have said: "The step-by-step development of society follows
irresistibly the orderly step-by-step development in nature only, as
long as man does not understand this process and fails to discover it.
But as soon as man understands it, it comes under his control and
domination. It is said that as long as man does not understand nature,
it dominates him, but as soon as he understands it, nature becomes his
obedient servant. For example, a disease remains uncured as long as its
causes and cures are unknown, but as soon as it is understood, it
becomes curable and is eradicated. In the same manner cyclones and other
natural calamities may be prevented."

To elaborate the above-quoted statement, what 'Marx wants to say is
this: The orderly step by step movement of society is a kind of organic
change. It is the type of automatic internal movement of things, like
the growth of animals and plants. It is a kind of motion which is not
mechanical. But changes brought about in things by means of external
factors, like all technical and industrial changes, and other­ changes
imposed on nature by applying external pressures, such as killing of
insects by insecticides or elimination of bacteria by means of drugs,
are mechanistic. When the knowledge of natural laws is employed by man
to subjugate nature, the relation between man and nature is
mechanical.

In the case of organic transformations and internal and essential
movements of things, the utmost role that human knowledge and
consciousness can play is to act in accordance with them, and to apply
his knowledge for extracting the greatest benefit from them.

Man, by discovering the laws governing the growth and evolution of
plants and animals-and of these are the laws governing the growth of
embryo inside the animal's womb-also discovers the necessity and
unchangeability of those irresistible laws.

Marx means to say that, social development of man, which is subject to
development in the tools of production, is a kind of organic,
autogenetic, essential, and spontaneous evolution from within, that
cannot be controlled by knowledge or consciousness. Man is compelled to
pass through the specific stages of a determined social evolution, just
as an embryo has to undergo a definite course of development inside the
womb. Any idea of changing that course is nothing but futile. It is not
possible for society to reach the highest stage without passing through
certain intermediate stages. It is also impossible for a society to
reach the highest stage by adopting a course different from the paths
determined by history.

The Marxist conception of social evolution as a spontaneous,
un­conscious, or involuntary, natural, and necessary process resembles
the Socratic conception of human mind, according to which ideas are
inborn. Socrates used the dialectical method in his teachings. He
believed that if the questions were asked step-by-step in a systematic
way with an accurate knowledge of the workings of the mind, it finds the
answers automatically and naturally without any external guidance.
Socrates was the son of a midwife. He used to say that he performed the
same duty with minds as his mother performed in regard to preg­nant
women. A midwife does not give birth to a child. It is nature which
makes mother deliver the child at a certain time. In spite of this she
needs the services of the midwife, who takes care that any untoward
incident does not happen which may endanger the life of the mother or
the child.

From the Marxist point of view, though the knowledge of the laws of
sociology and philosophy of history does not cause a social change, yet
the knowledge of sociology and philosophy of history is valuable. And
scientific socialism is nothing but the discovery of these laws. The
least service it can render is to liberate minds from the influence of
utopian socialism and sentimental advocacy of justice. The laws of
dynamics, on the contrary, although they are unchangeable and permanent,
their knowledge offers an advantage, i.e. they are useful in predicting
the future course. In the light of scientific sociology and scientific
socialism the pattern of every society can be investigated. We can
discover its present stage of development and predict its future course.
Consequently, one can know in which stage of embryonic development is
the baby of socialism in the womb of society. At every stage one must
expect only what it is right to expect of that stage, avoiding all undue
expectations. A society which is still in the stage of feudalism should
not be expected to enter into the phase of socialism; because, a
four-month-old embryo cannot be expected to be born immediately as a
fully developed baby.

Marxism makes an attempt to identify the natural-dynamic stages of
society, and discover such inviolable laws of evolution of societies
which are applicable to the transition of society from one epoch to
another.

According to Marxism, all societies have to pass through four phases of
development in order to reach the stage of socialism, viz. the period of
primitive communism, the period of slavery, the period of capitalism,
and the period of socialism. Sometimes instead of four periods five,
six, or even seven, periods are enumerated, which means that the periods
of slavery, capitalism, and socialism may be further divided into two
sub-periods.

3: Each historical period is quite different from the other period in
character and nature. As the process of evolution changes one species
into another, in case of historical epochs the same thing happens. Every
period of history has its own specific laws; the laws belonging to an
earlier period or any of the latter periods can never be applied to a
certain period of history. Water, as long as it is water, follows the
laws governing liquids; but when the same water is converted into steam,
it does not follow those laws but becomes subject to the laws of gases.
Society also follows this principle; for example, as long as it is in
the stage of feudalism it has to follow the laws peculiar to feudalism,
but as soon as it leaves back that stage and reaches the stage of
capitalism, any effort to retain the laws belonging to feudalism would
be absurd. Accordingly, a society cannot have any eternal and absolute
laws. According to the theory of historical materialism and the doctrine
that economy is the base, all the laws that are claimed to be \`eternal'
are actually dependent upon the base and so transient. One of the basic
differences between historical materialism and religion, specially
Islam, is that religion firmly believes in the eternity of a set of
(Divine) laws. The book Revisionism from Marx to Mao, quotes from an
appendix to the second edition of The Capital:

Every period of history has laws of its own... accordingly as life
passes from one stage to another stage, it evolves and is governed by a
new set of laws. Economic life, in the course of its historical
development, brings forth a phenomenon that we come across in various
branches of biology... social organisms are distinguished from one
another in the same way as animal and plant organisms are
differentiated. [^42]

4. From the dawn of history, it is development in the tools of
production that is responsible for giving rise to private ownership and
dividing society into the two classes of the exploiters and the
exploited. These two main classes have represented the two basic poles
of society from the beginning of history to the present day. There has
been, and always there shall be, a struggle and antagonism between these
two poles of society. But bipolarization of society does not mean that
all groups are either exploiters or exploited. Possibly there may be
certain groups who are neither exploiters nor exploited. What is meant
is that the important groups that influence the fate of society are
these two groups which form the two basic poles of society. Other groups
are dependent on one of these two main groups.

In Revisionism from Marx to Mao, the author writes:

We find two different patterns of division of society according to
classes and their conflicts; according to Marx and Engels: one is
bipolar, and the other is multipolar. Definition of class also differs
in both the patterns. [^43] In the first pattern it is an imaginary
class, while in the other it is a real class. The rules regarding the
divisions of classes are also different. Engels, in his preface to The
Peasants' War in Germany tries to reconcile these two patterns by
evolving a uniform standard for class division. He distinguishes various
classes in society, and, within each class, he differentiates various
subgroups. But according to his belief, there are only two classes who
accomplish a definite historic mission: the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat; because they form the really opposite poles of society.
[^44]

According to the philosophy of Marxism, as it is impossible for the
superstructure of a society to precede its infrastructure, similarly it
is also impossible for society to be considered as unified whole at the
level of superstructure despite its being divided at the level of the
base (social and economic relations, and property relations) into two
poles of the exploiters and the exploited. Social consciousness. itself
is also, in its turn, to be analysed into two types, i.e. the
consciousness of the exploiters and the consciousness of the exploited.
Thus two types of world outlooks, two ideologies, two moral systems, and
two types of philosophy emerge in society. Social and economic
conditions of each class inspire a specific type of thinking, a specific
social point of view, a particular taste, and a particular social
attitude and approach in each class. It is not possible that a class's
consciousness, taste, and manner of thinking should precede its economic
situation. The only things that are not bipolar and which are specific
to the class of exploiters are religion and state. Religion and state
are invented by the exploiting class for the surrender and subjugation
of the exploited. As the exploiting class is the owner of all material
resources of society, they impose their own culture and their religion
on the oppressed. In this manner the culture of the ruling class, i.e.
the world outlook of the ruling class, their ideology, their morality,
their tastes, their sensibility, and more than everything, the religion
of the rulers, is predominant; and the culture belonging to the
oppressed remains always dominated like themselves, obstructing their
progress. In German Ideology Marx says:

The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas; i.e.
the class which is the ruling material force of society is at the same
time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of
material production at its disposal ....The ruling ideas are nothing
more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relations, the
dominant material relations grasped as ideas, hence of the relations
which make the one class the ruling one, therefore, the ideas of its
dominance.. The individuals composing the ruling class possess among
other things consciousness, and therefore think. In so far, as they rule
as a class and determine the extent and compass of an historical epoch,
it is self-evident that they do this in its whole range; hence among
other things they rule also as thinkers, as producers of ideas, and
regulate the production and distribution of ideas of their age: thus
their ideas are the ruling ideas of epoch. [^45]

The class of the rulers and exploiters is by nature reactionary,
conservative, traditionalist and obscurantist. Its culture, which is
imposed by force is also reactionary, traditionalist, and obscurantist.
But the oppressed and the victimized class is by nature revolutionary,
anti-traditionalist, progressive, and futurist. Their culture, which is
oppressed like them, is a revolutionary, rebellious, and progressive
culture. The condition of being- oppressed is the essential condition
for being revolutionary, i.e. this is the only class which is capable of
being revolutionary.

In the book Revisionism from Marx to Mao, after the passage which I
have quoted from Engel's prefatory note to The Peasants' War in Germany
is written:

One year after the publication of this prefatory note, (prefatory note
to ThePeasants' War in Germany) the Congress of the German Socialists
has written in its Gotha Program that all classes form a reactionary
front against the labour class. Marx severely criticized this statement.
But if we are logical, we should admit the fact that since these
miserable socialists could not possibly differentiate between his
bipolar or multipolar patterns after what Marx had written in the
Manifesto. In the Manifesto (Manifesto of the Communist Party), Marx
presents the class conflicts of those days as the war between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie. He writes: "Of all the classes that
stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is
a revolutionary class." [^46]

In some of his remarks, Marx has himself said that the only class that
fulfils all conditions and qualifications of being a revolutionary class
is the proletariat,and these conditions mean:

1. The condition of being oppressed; they should be productive also.
2. The condition of being propertyless (the peasants also fulfil this
and the first condition).
3. Organisation, which requires centralization and solidarity (the
class of proletariat, who work together inside the factories, alone
fulfil this condition, while peasants, who work on fields scattered in
different lands, do not).

Regarding the second characteristic Marx says: "The worker is free in
two ways: free to sell his labour, and free of every kind of property."
And regarding the third characteristic he says in the Manifesto, "With
the development of industry the proletariat not only increases in
number, but it also becomes concentrated in greater masses. Its power
increases, and it becomes conscious of that power." [^47]

The above-mentioned doctrine can be termed as \`the doctrine of
correspondence between the ideological foundation and the class and
social foundation.' On the basis of this doctrine, every class produces
a certain type of thought, ideas, morality, philosophy, art, and poetry
which fulfil the requirements of its life-style, economic conditions and
interests. We can also name it \`the doctrine of correspondence between
the source of every thought and its direction.' It means that all types
of thought and all kinds of moral and religious systems originating from
a particular class will suit the interests of that class only. It is not
possible that a system of thought originating from a certain class
should aim to serve the interests of the other class, or a system of
thought evolved by a particular class may serve the interests of
humani­ty without having a particular class orientation. Thought can
become humanistic and can transcend the class only when the development
in the tools of production reaches a stage which affirms the abolition
of all classes. It means that by negating class contradictions,
ideological contradictions are also negated, and by negating the basis
of ideological contradictions, the contradictions between different
currents of thought are also negated.

Marx, in some of his earlier works written in young age (Contribu­tion
to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right), was more inter­ested in
the political aspect of classes (the rulers and the ruled) than the
economic aspect (exploitation and the exploited). He considered class
conflicts as wars for independence and freedom from bondage. He
suggested two stages of these wars: the first as the partial and
political stage, and the second as the total and humanistic stage. He
stated that the proletarian revolution is the last stage of the
revolution of the enslaved of history. A revolution is the basis of
total emancipa­tion of man from all sorts and forms of domination and
servitude. Marx has tried to solve the problem as to how a class
transcends its class character and proceeds forward to attain a goal
which is universal and human, and at the same time to reconcile this
notion with the laws of historical materialism. He explains that as
subordination of this class is a fundamental fact, its revolution also
is of basic significance. This class has not been subjected to any
particular injustice, but the very essence of injustice itself is
imposed upon it, thus stimulating it to aspire for the ideals of justice
and human freedom.

This explanation, if poetic, is by no means scientific. What does Marx
mean by the "essence of injustice" itself being imposed upon a class? Is
it so that the exploiting class before assuming that role had to adopt
this course according to a different logic and indulged in the acts of
tyranny for the sake of tyranny, not for exploitation, and pursued the
acts of injustice for the sake of injustice, not with the purpose of
exploitation, as a consequence of which the proletariat reacted to
obtain justice for itself? Moreover, the assumption that the exploiting
class reaches this position during the period of capitalism, is quite
con­trary to the doctrine of historical materialism, and a kind of
idealism.

The doctrine of correspondence between the ideological and class bases
requires that there should be correspondence between the source of a
thought and its orientation. It also requires that there should be a
relation between the inclination of an individual and the particular
school of thought which is the product of his own class; i.e. the
natural propensity of every individual is towards the ideology which
originates in his own class and is useful for the interests of his own
class.

From the viewpoint of Marxist logic, this principle is of
extra­ordinary sociological usefulness in understanding the nature of
ideologies and the aspirations of social classes.

5. The fifth conclusion is about the limited role of ideology,
guidance, propaganda, exhortation and other such things, as they are
matters associated with the superstructure in directing the society or
social classes. Ordinarily it is presumed that ideology, propaganda,
logical argument, education and upbringing, indoctrination and
exhortation are capable of moulding and changing human thinking in
accordance with preferred ends. Keeping in mind the fact that the
consciousness of every individual and every group is the product of
their social and class character and is necessarily bound to reflect it,
it is also impossible for them to take a lead over or lag behind their
class consciousness. The notion that the superstructure, and various
phenomena related to it, is a\_ source of social change is an idealistic
conception of society and history. It means that the movement of the
forces of the intelligentsia, reformers and revolutionaries is
self-propelling. In fact, it is frustra­tion and deprivation of the
class which from within inspires the intelli­gentsia and motivates the
spirit of reform and revolution, not any external factors like
education, training, etc., or at least it is the class character which
is responsible for preparing ground for these matters automatically. The
maximum role of ideology, leadership, and other enlightening activities
is only to the extent that they help in awakening the consciousness of
contradiction between classes, giving rise to self­consciousness in the
oppressed class; or it helps in transforming a \`class­in-itself,' into
a \`class-for-itself;' i.e. a class unconscious of its class character
into a class possessing class consciousness. Hence the sole intellectual
factor that can mobilize a particular .class in a class society is
awakening of consciousness to its condition of being ex­ploited But
other so-called universal humanitarian approaches such as love of
justice and mankind cannot play any role in a class society divided into
two groups of the exploiters and the exploited who are alienated from
their own selves, and in which social consciousness has been split into
two parts. It is true that with the development in the tools of
production a proletarian government is established, abolishing
class-distinctions, and man is restored to his original classless
existence. Human consciousness divided on the basis of ownership is
again unified. At that time the approach of universal humanitarianism,
reflecting the communistic pattern of ownership of the tools
of-production, can play an effective role. Socialism, which is in fact a
superstructure for a specific period of history, cannot be arbitrarily
produced beforehand in any earlier period (as the Utopian Socialists
desired.) Also, in any particular historical epoch in which society is
divided into two classes, the consciousness of a specific class can in
no way be imposed on the other class, there is nothing like common human
consciousness.

In class societies, therefore, any general and universal ideology
without a class alignment cannot emerge. Every ideology that appears in
class societies, inevitably possesses a specific class character.

Even if such an impossibility should occur, it could not play any
prac­tical role. Accordingly, all the claims of religion, or at least
that which in the form of guidance, preaching, moral advice, and
exhortation addresses the whole humanity in the name of universal
iustice and equality for all, if not entirely deceptive, should at least
be considered utopian.

6. The other conclusion we should infer is that all revolutionary
figures, leaders, guides, and heroes essentially arise from the
exploited class.

After demonstrating that it is only the exploited class that has the
aptitude for enlightenment, reform, and revolution-only the condition of
being oppressed and exploited can produce this aptitude, and at the most
the superstructural factors may be credited for awakening class
antagonism and self-consciousness-it becomes obvious that those
prominent individuals who come forward to make the ideas of
enlightenment instrumental in awakening class consciousness should
themselves be fellow sufferers belonging to the same class and sharing
its class consciousness. As it is historically impossible for a
super­structural pattern to precede its base, and for a class to have a
social consciousness that precedes its class character; in the same way
it is not possible that a person as a \`leader' may precede his class,
demanding more than what is required by his own class. Similarly, it is
also impossible for a person belonging to the exploiting class of
society to stand against his own class in the interests of the exploited
class.

In the book, Revisionism from Marx to Mao, the author says:

Another original contribution of The German Ideology is analysis of
class consciousness. Here Marx, contrary to his earlier works, [^48]
regards class consciousness as the product of the class itself; it does
not come from without. The real consciousness is nothing but an
ideology, because it is bound to give a generalized form to the
interests of a particular class. But it does not exclude the fact that
this consciousness, which is based upon the awareness of its own
conditions, strengthens the interests of the class. In any case, the
class cannot attain maturity without producing its specific class
consciousness.

Marx's view affirms the division of labour within the working class
itself, i.e. the intellectual work (the ideological work, leadership)
and manual work. Some individuals become thinkers or ideologues of the
class, while others rather passively accept and act upon the ideas and
concepts provided for them. [^49]

In the same book, while discussing Marx's philosophy with refe­rence to
the Manifesto and Poverty of philosophy, the author says:

In this way, awakening class consciousness and organizing it in the
form of a \`class-for-itself' is the task of the proletariat and also
the result. of its self-fuelled economic battle. This upheaval is
neither brought about by any intellectual theory which is alien to the
workers' movement, nor by any political party. Marx condemns Utopian
socialists who despite their prole­tarian inclination do not see the
historical self-propulsion of the proletariat and their specific
political movement ...and try to replace with their fancies the gradual
and self-motivated organization of the proletariat into a class. [^50]

This principle is particularly important for understanding the Marxist
viewpoint about society and social inclinations, and the Marxist
criteria for evaluating individuals, especially leaders and social
reformers.

From whatever has been said above, it is obvious that Marx and­ Engels
did not believe in any independent groups of intellectuals free of and
above classes. That is, there is no room in the principles of Marxism to
allow for the existence of such a class of intellectuals. If Marx
occa­sionally makes statements contrary to this, it is because hey
himself does not remain a Marxist. And such occasions, as we shall
discuss later, when Marx has contradicted himself, are not rare. Now,
the question arises as to how Marx and Engels explain their own position
with regard to intellectuals in the light of the principles of Marxism.
None of them belonged to the proletariat class. Both of them were
philosophers, not workers, yet they have produced the greatest theory of
labour and working class.
Marx's answer to this question is interesting. In the book Revisionism
from Marx to Mao, the author says:

Marx has spoken little about the intellectuals. He apparently does not
regard them as a special stratum of society, but a part of certain other
classes, particularly the bourgeoisie. In The Eighteenth Brumaire of
Louis Bonaparte, Marx considers academics, journalists, university
teachers, and lawyers as the part of the bourgeois class, like priests
and army men. In the Manifesto, when he wants to mention the names of
the theorists of the working class who by origin do not belong to
it-like Engels and himself- he does not call them intellectuals, but
regards them as \`groups of people from the ruling class..., who have
embedded themselves amongst the proletariat,' and \`have brought many
elements for the education and training of that class. [^51]

Marx does not offer any explanation as to how he and Engels tumbled
down from the skies of the ruling class to the depths of the subject
class, and how they could manage to bring with them those precious gifts
for the teaching and training of the downtrodden and the "dha matrabah"
(the destitute), as the Quran calls them (90:17). In reality, whatever
Marx and Engels could attain-and through them the lower and the
downtrodden class of the proletariat could not be attained by Adam, the
father of mankind, who according to the religious tradition, fell from
heaven to earth. Adam could not bring such a gift along with him.

Marx does not explain as to how the ideology which can liberate the
proletariat takes shape in the minds of the ruling class. In addition to
this, he offers no explanation as to whether this descent or de­classing
is especially reserved for only these two persons, or if it is possible
for others too. He also does not throw any light on the matter that if
sometimes, though in exceptional cases, the doors of heaven are opened
to earth, whether it is the \`descent' alone that takes place and the
members of the heavenly class come down to the level of the. earthly
class, or if it is possible the other way round too? Is the \`ascension'
also sometimes possible in which the members of the downtrodden class
attain the lofty heights of the ruling class? Perhaps, even if that were
possible, they could hardly carry with them such gifts as. may suit the
heavenly ones.

Basically, it is meaningless to carry gifts from the earth to the
heaven; but if one were blessed with the opportunity of ascension and
were not merged into the heavenly class, he might return to earth, like
Mr. Marx and Mr. Engels, with heavenly gifts for the earthly.

**Notes:**

[^2]. E. H. Carr, What is History?, p. 8.
[^3]. Andre Peter , Marx and Marxism, Persian translation by Shuja\`
al-Din Diya'iyan, p. 249, Appendix V.
[^4].Ibid., pp. 37,38.
[^5]. E.H. Carr, op. cit. pp. 144, 145.
[^6]. Ibid., p. 146.
[^7]. Raymond Aron, op. cit., p. 27.
[^8]. Ibid.
[^9]. Andre Peter , op. cit., p. 39.
[^10]. Ibid.
[^12]. P. Royan, Historical Materialism, p. 37.
[^13]. Ibn Sina, in part 8 of his al-'Isharat, has discussed this
subject with great insight.
[^14]. Murtada Mutahhari, Qiyam wa inqilab-a Mahdi, "The Uprising and
Revolution of al-Mahdi."
[^15]. The following definition of the purpose and end of philosophy has
been given

(The purpose of philosophy) is to transform man into a rational
microcosm analogous to the external macrocosm.

[^16]. Andre Peter, op. cit. pp. 40,41.
[^17]. Ibid.
[^18]. Ibid., p. 39.
[^19]. See Murtada Mutahhari, Shinakht, "Epistemology."
[^20]. For further elaboration see \`Allamah Tabitaba'i, Usul-a falsafeh
wa rawish-a riydlism, particularly Chapter V, ("The Source of Plurality
in Impres­sions"). Also refer to \`Allamah Tabataba'i, al-Mizan, vol.
XVI, (Persian Translation), p. 190, for discussion on \`the Divine
Covenant'; also see vol. XXXI, p. 303, for the discussion on the meaning
of natural religion. Also refer to other brief comments scattered
through this exegesis.
[^21]. Andre Peter, op. cit. p. 246, Appendix III- See also Raymond
Aron, op. cit., p. 163. See also Anwar Khameh'i , Tajdid-e nazar talabi
az Marz ta Mao, "Revisionism from Marx to Mao," p. 153.
[^22]. Andre Peter, op. cit., p. 247, Appendix III.
[^23]. Ibid., p. 33.
[^24]. Ibid., p. 248.
[^25]. Ibid., p. 32.
[^26]. Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, (Moscow), p. 122.
[^27]. See P. Niketin, Elements of Economics, Persian translation by
Nasir Zarafshan, page iii, P. Royan, Historical Materialism, (chapter
on-production).
[^28]. Anwar Khameh'i , Tajdid-e nazar talabi az Marz ta Mao,
"Revisionism from Marx to Mao," p. 253.
[^29]. Marx, Engels, Selected Works, "Preface to the Critique of
Political Economy."
[^30]. Ibid.
[^31]. Anwar Khameh'i , op. cit., p. 167.
[^32]. Fredrik Engels, Labour in Transition from Ape to Man.
[^33]. A. Peter, op. cit,, 39.
[^34]. Murtada Mutahhari, Qiyam wa inqilab-e Mahdi.
[^35]. Anwar Khameh'e, op. cit., p. 223, quoted from Marx and Engels,
Selected Works.
[^36]. Ibid., p. 155.
[^37]. Ibid.
[^38]. Ibid., p. 181.
[^39]. Ibid., p. 198.
[^40]. Ibid., p. 183.
[^41]. That is, technology and industry and as a result the social
superstructure of the industrialized countries advance on a fixed and
determined course. The course of movement of societies is a
one-dimensional movement. The industrialized countries in every aspect
represent the models of what the underdeveloped countries will become at
some time in the future, and have not yet reached that stage. The
possibility that the underdeveloped countries may reach this stage of
development without passing through the stages covered by the
industrialized countries of today, is non-existent.
[^42]. Anwar Khameh'i , op.cit., p. 225.
[^43]. By a \`real class' what is meant is a group of people whose
economic life, and profits and losses are common. An imaginary class on
the other hand is supposed to consist of people leading diverse types of
social existence but following a single ideology.
[^44]. Anwar Khameh i , op. cit., p..345.
[^45]. Karl Marx, German Ideology, p. 67.
[^46]. Anwar Khameh'i -, op. cit., p. 347.
[^47]. Ibid., p. 357.
[^48]. Karl Marx, German Ideology, pp. 308-309.
[^49]. Anwar Khameh'e, op. cit,, p. 314.
[^50]. Ibid. pp. 319-320.
[^51]. Ibid., p. 340.

