Criticism of Historical Materialism
===================================

Now that we have dealt with the fundamentals and the conclu­sions of
the theory of historical materialism, the time has come to make a
critical appraisal of it.

First of all, I would like to point out that my aim is neither to
criticize Marx's views scattered in all of his works, nor to appraise
Marxism in its entirety. I only intend to evaluate his materialistic
interpretation of history or historical materialism, which is one of the
basic tenets of Marxism. Basically, the criticism of Marx's views or
Marxism as a whole is a different thing from the criticism of one of its
elements such as historical materialism.

The criticism of Marx's theories, i.e. the study of his views in
totality based upon the entire bulk of his writings belonging to the
different periods of his life, and which are full of many
contradictions, is a work that has been done by several individuals in
the West. In Iran, as far as I know, the book Revisionism from Marx to
Mao, from which I have drawn abundantly and quoted extensively in this
chapter, is the best book on this topic."

Our purpose here is criticism of historical materialism by analyzing
one or more of the fundamental principles of Marxism which in Marx's own
view were considered indubitable, and by critically examining one or
more principles which Marx himself does not consider as definite, and
has occasionally contradicted them in some of his works, but are
nevertheless the necessary part of Marxism; since Marx's own
contradic­tion is to be regarded as a kind of deviation from Marxism.

Here I have critically examined certain definite and generally accepted
principles of Marxism and the conclusions which necessarily follow from
them. Our purpose is not to point out all the occasions when Marx has
expressed views contrary to his own principles in his writings, which
are replete with contradictions. The real target of my criticism is
historical materialism and not the theories of Marx in general.

It is one of the wonders of history that in his philosophical,
socio­logical, and economic writings Marx is more or less preoccupied
with the idea of historical materialism, but while analysing and
evaluating certain contemporary historical events, he pays little
attention to the principles of historical materialism. Why does he do
so? This question has been answered variously. Furthermore, this
attitude is not confined to this issue alone; on several problems of
Marxism, Marx's attitude is one of self-contradiction. Theoretically or
practically a sort of departure and deviation from Marxism in Marx
himself can often be observed. Accordingly, we have to find a
comprehensive answer to this question.

Some writers attribute this inconsistency to immaturity and
short­comings which he showed in different periods of his life. But this
explanation is indefensible at least from the Marxist point of view; the
major part of Marxism which is considered today as constituting the
Marxist dogma is related to Marx's youth and the middle years of his
life, and the most part of what are considered his deviations, including
his analysis of contemporary events, belongs to the later period of his
life.

Some other writers attribute this difference to his split personali­ty.
They claim that on the one hand he was a philosopher and an ideo­logue,
which naturally requires of him to be inflexible in his dogmas, trying
occasionally to interpret actual events, either by hook or by crook,
according to his own ideas. On the other hand, he had a scien­tific
temperament and spirit, which always necessitates total acceptance of
reality and absence of adherence to any fixed dogma.

Certain other writers make a distinction between Marx and Marxism. They
consider Marx and his thinking as only a stage of Marxism. Marxism in
itself is considered to be a school of thought in the process of
development. There is nothing wrong if Marxism left behind Marx in the
course of its development. In other words, the view that the Marxism of
Marx represents the primary stage of Marxism, does not violate the
credibility of Marxism as a school. But this group does not explain what
in their view is the essence of Marxism. The main condition for the
development of a school is that its basic principles should remain
permanent; changes occurring only in secondary matters without affecting
the basic principles; otherwise there would be no difference between
total rejection and development of a theory. If we do not consider the
permanence of fundamental principles as a condition for its
developmental process, then, why not pre-Marxian thinkers, Viz. Hegel,
Saint Simon, Proudhon or any other thinker of this type, should be
considered as stages in the evolution of this school? Why should not
Marxism be regarded as a stage in the development of one of these
schools?

In my view, the cause of contradictions in Marx is due to the fact that
he himself was lesser of a Marxist than the majority of Marxists. It is
said that once in a gathering of ardent Marxists where Marx was trying
to defend his position which contradicted his earlier position, he said:
"I am not so much of a Marxist as you are." It is also said that in his
later years Marx said: "I am Marx, not a Marxist."

Marx's departure from Marxism in some of his views is because of the
fact that Marx was too intelligent and ingenious to be a hundred percent
Marxist. It needs some measure of stupidity in order to be a staunch
Marxist. Historical materialism, which is a part of Marxism and the
subject of our present study, as explained earlier, consists of certain
fundamentals and corollaries, which neither Marx the scholar could
impose upon himself for ever, nor Marx the philosopher and the thinker
could accept to be permanently saddled with. Now we propose to
critically evaluate this theory.

**1. Baselessness**

The first objection is that this view is not more than a mere \`theory'
without any proofs. A philosophical theory of history ought to be based
upon observation of contemporary events and historical facts, and should
be applicable to other times also. Either it should be formulated on the
basis of historical evidence, being in addition applicable to events of
the present and the future, or it should have been deduced and inferred
from a priori premises based upon a series of scientific, philosophical,
and logical principles.

The theory of historical materialism does not fulfil the conditions of
any of the above mentioned methods. Neither the historical events of the
times of Marx and Engels can be explained on its basis ( as Engels
himself has admitted. Engels says that he and Marx made a mistake in
emphasizing the importance of the economic factor in some of their
works. But, he adds, they were saved from this error in case of their
analysis of contemporary events where they were confronted with
historical reality itself ), nor the historical events that occurred
during thousands of years of human history confirm this theory. It ,is
amazing to read the writings of some followers of Marxism who
dogmatically try to explain the past history in the light of historical
materialism, and read their master's opinions into the pages of history.
For instance in the book History of the Ancient world. [^53]

**2. Revision of Views by Its Founders**

I have repeatedly mentioned that Marx terms economic founda­tion of
society the \`infrastructure; and other of its constituents as the
\`superstructure.' This interpretation is evidently enough to show
one­-sided dependence of all the other structures on the economic base.
Moreover, Marx explains in many of his writings quoted earlier, that the
influence in this relationship is unilateral; i.e. the economic factors
are always the influencing factors, while all other social modes are
passively influenced. The economic factors act independently and other
factors are dependent on them.

No matter in whatever way Marx interprets his basic thesis, his
theories always affirm the priority of matter over soul, ,the priority
of material needs over intellectual needs, the priority of human
sociology over human psychology, and the priority of action over
thought.

But Marx, in many of his writings, has raised another issue on the
basis of dialectical logic, which may be regarded as a revision of his
view and also a kind of departure from absolute historical materialism.
That issue is related to the problem of reciprocal causation. According
to the principle of reciprocal causation, the cause-effect relationship
should not be regarded as a one-sided process. If \`A' is the cause of
change in \`B', in the same way \`B' also in its turn becomes the cause
of \`A'. According to this principle, there is a kind of reciprocal
causal relation between all parts of nature and all parts of society.

For the time being I am not concerned here with the validity or
invalidity of this dialectical principle interpreted in this form. But
we may say that, according to this principle, the suggestion of priority
of one thing over the other is meaningless with regard to causal
relation between two things like matter and spirit, or action and
thought, or economic base and all other social institutions. Because if
two things are interrelated and dependent upon each other for their
existence, and the existence of one is conditioned by that of the other,
the question as to which is prior or fundamental, is meaningless.

Marx, in some of his statements, considers all social processes,
essential or nonessential, as based upon economic factors, and has not
suggested the effect of superstructure on the infrastructure, as
referred to earlier. However, in some of his statements he accepts a
reciprocal cause-and-effect relationship between the infrastructure and
the super­structure, but maintains that the basic and ultimate role is
played by the base. In the book Revisionism from Marx to Mao, two works
of Marx, The Capital and The Critique of Political Economy, are
compared. The author, while stating that in both the works Marx regards
the economic base as unilaterally determining the entire social
structure, says:

In spite of this, Marx, consciously or unconsciously, has added a new
dimen­sion to this definition by stating that superstructures, despite
primacy of the base over superstructures, can play an essential role in
society. [^54]

The author further asks: What is the difference between the
pre­dominant function or \`determining role' that the economic
infrastruc­ture always plays and the \`essential role' played by the
superstructures? It means that if the superstructure occasionally plays
the essential role, it becomes the main determining and governing
factor. In such cases, it may even be said that what we call the
superstructure is not a super­structure but is really the infrastructure
or the base, and what we call the infrastructure is the
superstructure.

Engels, in a letter written in his later years to one Joseph Bloch,
writes:

....According to the materialist conception of history, ultimately
determining element in history is the production and reproduction of
real life. [^55] More than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted.
Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is
the only determining one, he trans­forms that proposition into a
meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. [^56] The economic situation is
the basis, but the various elements of the superstruc­ture: political
forms of the class struggle and its results, to wit: constitutions
established by the victorious class after a successful battle, etc.,
juridical forms, and then even the reflexes of all these actual
struggles in the brains of the participants, political, juristic,
philosophical theories, religious views and their further development
into systems of dogmas, also exercise their influence upon the course of
historical struggles and in many cases prepon­derate in determining
their form. There is an interaction of all these elements in which, amid
all the endless host of accidents the economic movement finally asserts
itself as necessary. [^57]

Strangely enough, if the view that "the economic element is the only
determining one" is a meaningless, abstract, and senseless phrase, this
phrase has been uttered by no other person than Marx himself. Moreover,
if the elements of superstructure "in many cases prepon­derate in
determining historical struggles," it means that the determin­ing and
decisive element is not the economic one. After saying this, there is no
need to believe that "the economic movement, amid all the host of
accidents, asserts itself as necessary."

It is more amazing that Engels, in the later part of the same letter,
accepts that he himself and Marx may be held responsible for this
mistake (or in his own words, twist). He says:

Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger
people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it.
We had to emphasize the main principle vis-a-vis our adversaries, who
denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or opportunity to
allow the other elements involved in the interaction to come into light.
[^58]

But some other people offer quite the opposite explanation of this
excessive emphasis by Marx and Engels on the economic elements. They
say, this overemphasis is not meant for their opponents in the other
camp, but aimed at disarming the rival supporters of this view in their
own camp.

In the book Revisionism from Marx to Mao, the author, after-­pointing
out that in the Critique of Political Economy Marx has empha­sized the
unilateral role of the economic factors more than in any other work-and
I have already quoted the well-known passage from the preface to that
book-explains Marx's reasons for compiling the Critique:

Another cause of writing the Critique of Political Economy, was the
publica­tion of a book by Proudhon, Manuel du speculateur d la Bourse,
and another book by Darimon, the follower of Proudhon, .... When Marx
saw that his rivals in the camp of Proudhon from one side, and the
followers of Lassalle from the other side were relying upon the economic
element in a reformative (not revolutionary) way, he endeavoured to
seize this weapon from their hands and used it for the purpose of
revolution. This necessitated a rigidity suited to the purpose of
popularizing his b'eliefs. [^59]

Mao has reinterpreted the, meanings of historical materialism and
economic base according to the requirements of Chinese conditions. His
new interpretation was aimed to explain his own role as the leader of
the Chinese Revolution also. His interpretation of historical
mater­ialism reaches a point that one finds this theory and its emphasis
on the economic base, and as a consequence the so-called scientific
socialism whose basis is historical materialism, reduced to mere play of
words and nothing else.

Mao, in his treatise on contradiction, under the title, "The Prin­cipal
Contradiction and the Principal Aspect of Contradiction," says:

....The principal and the non-principal aspects of a contradiction
transform themselves into each other and quality of a thing changes
accordingly. In a certain process or at a certain stage in the
development of a contradiction, the principal aspect is A and the
non-principal aspect is B, at another stage of development or in another
process of development, the roles are reversed change determined by the
extent of the increase or decrease in the strength with which each of
the two aspects struggle against the other in the develop­ment of a
thing. [^60]

He further says:

Some people think that this is not the case with certain
contradictions. For example in the contradiction between productive
forces and the relations of production, the productive forces are the
principal aspect; ... in the contradiction between the economic
foundation arid its superstructure, the economic foundation is the
principal aspect and there is no change in their respective positions.
This is the view of mechanistic materialism. True, the productive
forces, practice, and the economic foundation generally manifest
themselves in the principal and decisive roles; whoever denies this is
not a materialist. But under certain conditions, such aspects as the
relations of production, theory, and superstructure in turn manifest
themselves in the principal and decisive role; this must also be
admitted. When the productive forces cannot be developed unless the
relations of production are changed, the change in the relations of
production [^61] plays the principal and decisive role. As Lenin put it,
without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolu­tionary movement.
The creation and advocacy of the revolutionary theory plays the
principal and decisive role .... When the superstructure (politics,
culture and so on) hinders the development of economic foundation,
political and cultural reforms become the principal and decisive
factors. By saying this, are we running counter to materialism? No. The
reason is that while we recognize that in the development of history as
a whole it is the material essence of things that determines spiritual
things, and social existence that determines social consciousness, at
the same time we also recognize and must recognize the reaction of
spiritual things and social consciousness on social existence, and the
reaction of superstructure on economic foundation. This is not running
counter to materialism; this is precisely avoiding mechanistic
materialism and firmly upholding dialectical materialism. [^62]

Whatever Mao says contradicts historical materialism. When he says, "if
the relations of production hinder development and progress of the
productive force," or when he says "a revolutionary movement requires a
revolutionary theory," or when he says, "the superstructure hinders the
development of economic foundation," he asserts some­thing which can and
should occur always. But according to historical materialism, the
development of the productive force necessarily transforms the relations
of production, and revolutionary theory necessarily emerges
spontaneously. As a result, the superstructure is necessarily
transformed with change in the base.

But Marx has emphatically stated in his preface to the Critique of
Political Economy:

At a certain stage of their development, the material productive forces
of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production,
or-what is but a legal expression for the same thing-with the property
relations within which they have been at work hitherto. From forms of
development of the productive forces, these relations turn into their
fetters. Then begins an epoch of social revolution. With the change of
economic foundation, the entire immense superstructure is more or less
rapidly transformed. [^63]

