The Holy City of Qum
====================

4.1 - Introduction
------------------

Qum is the smallest province in Iran. It was previously a district
belonging to the state of Arāk, then it was attached to Tehran until it
was finally certified as an independent province.  
 The province has an area of approximately 12,000 square kilometres. It
is bounded by Tehran and Sāweh to the north, Delījān and Kāshān to the
south, and the Salt Lake and Tafresh to the east. The province includes
one city, four regions, nine rural districts and 256 villages. Since it
adjoins the central desert, Qum has a semi-desert climate.

In 1947 C.E, its population was no more than 150,000 but by the time of
the Islamic Revolution in 1979 CE, the population of Qum had reached
about 400,000. After the revolution, the city underwent rapid growth and
its current population approaches 1,000,000, a large number of whom are
religious students coming from all over the world to study in this great
centre of Islamic Learning, under the holy patronage and in the blessed
presence of Lady Fatima Masuma (A).  
 Aside from being a world-renowned centre of Islamic knowledge, Qum is
also:  
 • an agricultural city, producing wheat, cotton, pomegranate, fig,
pistachio and melon.

• an industrial city, manufacturing carpets, pottery, plastic products
and building materials.

• a commercial city, due to its location at the crossroads that connects
northern Iran to its south, and the vast number of pilgrims.

A slight disadvantage of Qum’s location is that its main water supply is
through the salty rivers that come from the mountains around it.

4.2 - The history of Qum
------------------------

In the period just before the advent of Islam, Qum was populated by
Zoroastrians. The city was conquered by the Muslims in 23 A.H, under the
command of Abū Mūsā Ash\`arī, and has remained Muslim since.[^1]

In 66 A.H, after the uprising of Mukhtār (who was seeking revenge for
the murder of Imam Husain (A) in Karbalā), a group of his Shi\`a
followers from the Banī Asad tribe travelled from Kufa to Qum, and took
refuge in the area of Jamkarān.[^2]

In the year 83 A.H, a large number of Arabs belonging to the Ash\`arī
tribe of Yemen, migrated and settled in this region and repopulated the
city.

From the beginning of its Islamic history, the city of Qum became the
centre of the Shi\`a in the area, and by the end of the first Islamic
century, more than 6000 Shi\`a had settled in the city.  
 The Shi\`a of this city revolted against the Umayyad caliphs and after
the inception of the Abbasid caliphate in 132 A.H, they also remained at
odds with the Abbasid caliphs.

In the year 200 A.H, when Imam al-Ridā (A) was on his way from Madina to
Khurāsān, he passed through Qum, and the house where he stayed was later
converted into a Madrasah (an Islamic seminary).[^3]

In the year 201 A.H, Lady Fatima Masuma (A) came to the city, and after
a brief illness, she died and was buried there. Her sacred grave became
a pilgrimage site for the Shi\`a, and the city of Qum was thereafter
popularly called “Qum-e Muqaddas” (the Holy Qum).

Over the centuries, Qum emerged as a Shi\`a learning centre. The Islamic
Seminaries (*al-Hawzah al-\`Ilmīyah*) in Qum became particularly popular
after the Islamic Revolution in Iran and also due to the decline of the
seminaries in Najaf, following the persecution of the hostile regime in
Iraq.

4.3 - The Islamic Seminaries of Qum
-----------------------------------

Qum is well known for its many religious seminaries and institutes that
offer advanced religious studies. These collectively make up the Hawzah
(a short form of *al-Hawzah al-\`Ilmīyah*), which presently consists of
over 200 education and research centres and organisations, catering for
over 40,000 scholars and students from over 80 countries of the world.

From the earliest arrival of the Shi\`a in the first Islamic century,
schools and Madrasahs were set up for learning and propagating the
teachings of the Prophet (S) and his household (A).  
 The first of these Madrasahs is attributed to the Ash\`arī family, who
settled in Qum towards the end of the first century and set up a Hawzah.
When Imam al-Sādiq (A) heard about this establishment, he gave the good
tidings of the future greatness of Qum.[^4]

The Hawzah gained strength and was further blessed with a visit by Imam
al-Ridā (A) at the beginning of the third century. The house in which
Imam (A) resided was later converted to a Madrasah, known as
“*al-Radawīyah*”.[^5]

However, it was after Lady Fatima Masuma (A) was buried in Qum, that
Shi\`a scholars began to gather around her shrine and Qum gained a
reputation as a centre of higher religious learning.  
 During this period there were many great Shi\`a scholars, including
Ahmad ibn Ishāq Ash\`arī Qummī, who was the deputy of Imam al-\`Askarī
(A) in Qum and who was privileged to have been shown the infant Imam
al-Mahdī (A).  
 Under the orders of Imam al-\`Askarī (A), Ahmad ibn Ishāq built the
oldest mosque in Qum today, the *Masjid-e Imam*.[^6]

Probably the greatest Qummi scholar of the fourth century was Shaykh Abū
Ja\`far Muhammad ibn Ali Bābawayh Qummī, popularly known as Shaykh Sadūq
(d. 381 A.H). It is famously reported that he was born as a result of
the prayer of Imam al-Mahdī (A).

The Hawzah continued to gain strength and the sixth century writer,
Shaykh \`Abd al-Jalīl Rāzī, reported over ten active Madrasahs in Qum at
his time.  
 The Safavids, who ruled Iran from 905 A.H until 1135 A.H, were great
patrons of the Hawzah and provided financial assistance for the
construction of new Madrasahs and for improving the facilities for the
students.  
 It was at this time that the Madrasah Faydīyah was built.

Great scholars of Qum of this era include, Mullā Sadrā Shīrāzī, (the
author of *Asfār*), and his two illustrious sons-in-law, Mullā Muhsin
Fayd and Mullā \`Abd al-Razzāq Fayyād. Shaykh Bahā’ī is also reported to
have spent some time in Madrasah Faydīyah during this period.[^7]  
 The presence of these great scholars in Qum was a great boost for the
Hawzah and their influence persisted in the rule of the Qājārs, who
ruled Iran between 1200 A.H and 1339 A.H. During this time, the Hawzah
was under the guardianship of great scholars such as, Grand Ayatollah
Mīrzā Abū al-Qāsim Qummī, Grand Ayatollah Mīrzā Muhammad Fayd and Grand
Ayatollah Shaykh \`Abd al-Karīm Hā’irī.

Grand Ayatollah Hā’irī (d. 1355 A.H) is credited with reviving the
Hawzah of Qum and setting the foundation of the present day
organisation. He organised the classes and syllabi, devised a system of
examinations, arranged the stipends for the students and brought
uniformity to the formal dress of the scholars. During his time, the
Hawzah gained world-wide fame and over 3,000 students flocked to Qum to
study. Some of the well known scholars who studied under him were Grand
Ayatollah Shaykh Muhammad Ali Arākī, Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad
Ridā Gulpaygānī and Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Ruhullāh Khomeini.  
 After the passing away of Grand Ayatollah Hā’irī, the running of the
Hawzah fell to the responsibility of Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad
Hujjat, then Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Sadr al-Dīn Sadr and then Grand
Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad Taqī Khānsārī.

Then came the era of the eminent scholar, Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Husain
Burūjerdī (d. 1380 A.H), under whom the Hawzah gained new heights. He
built a great mosque next to the shrine of the Lady Fatima Masuma,
called “Masjid-e A\`đam”.

After the victory of Islamic Revolution in Iran, the political pressure
on the Hawzah and religious scholars and students was removed and the
activities of the Hawzah were expanded.  
 At present, a high council of scholars (*Shurā-ye \`Ālī-ye* *Hawze-ye
\`Ilmīyeh-ye Qum)* appointed by the Supreme Leader and Grand Ayatollahs
(*marāji\`*) supervise the Hawzah. Under this council, there is an
administrative body that runs the religious training of over 40,000
students in Qum.

4.4 - Other places of interest in Qum
-------------------------------------

### Museum of the holy shrine

The museum, which is called “the Āstāne Museum”, is attached to the
Madrasah Faydīyah, abutting the new courtyard. It contains the gifts and
bequests that have made to Lady Fatima Masuma (A) over the years by
various well-wishers.

Prior to the establishment of the museum in 1314 A.H./1925 C.E, the
endowed treasures of the sanctuary which are now on display were stored
in what was termed "the treasury". The treasury was deemed necessary by
the custodians of the sanctuary after a spate of thefts at the end of
the Safavid period.

In 1992 C.E, as a result of the extra acquisitions of the museum, the
basement level of the building was refashioned and annexed to the
museum. The result was a museum complex, including administrative rooms,
display areas and restoration facilities in some 1000 square metres. The
displays are on two floors and include costly carpets, coinage, artwork
and rare manuscripts of the Holy Qur’an.

### Masjid-e Jamkarān

This mosque was built in 293 A.H, during the Minor Occultation
(al-Ghaybat al-Sughrā) of Imam Mahdī (A), and according to his
recommendation.

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image017.jpg)

**The Mosque of Jamkaran**

-

Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Shahāb al-Dīn Mar\`ashī Najafī (d. 1411 A.H)
writes, “This mosque was established from the earliest days of the
Ghaybah…[^8] Imam al-Mahdi (A) has been continuously seen at this mosque
since that time...Shaykh Sadūq enlarged the mosque and during the
Safavid era it was repaired several times...I personally have witnessed
numerous miraculous events at this mosque...In short, there is no doubt
that this mosque is one of the frequenting places of Imam Mahdi (A),
and, after Masjid-e Sahlah in Kufa, it is the most probable site for a
viewing of the Imam (A).”[^9]

The mosque is situated six kilometres to the south-east of Qum, and
draws large crowds of pilgrims, especially on Tuesday nights. According
to many reports, this is the night on which the Imam (A) visits this
mosque.

### Musallā-ye Quds

This is a large mosque situated near Safā’īyeh Square in Qum and is the
location for the weekly Friday prayers. Presently, the three Imams of
Friday prayers are, Ayatollah Ali Meshkīnī, Ayatollah Ibrāhīm Amīnī and
Ayatollah Jawādī Āmulī.

The huge silver-coloured dome of this beautiful mosque, which is
currently under construction, is a familiar landmark in Qum.

### Various shrines of children of the Imams (A)

Various members of the family of  (A) migrated to Iran after
Imam al-Ridā (A) moved to Khurāsān. After the martyrdom of the Imam (A),
many of them came to settle in Qum, the major Shi\`i centre at the time.
It is estimated that there are over 400 graves of these members of the
family of the Imams (*Imāmzādehs*) in Qum. [^10]  
 Some of these graves are within the holy shrine of Lady Fatima Masuma
(A). They are situated at different locations in the shrine, some with
small domes of their own. These days, the chambers in which their graves
are situated also serve as administrative offices for the various
departments in charge of the shrine.  
 Other graves are scattered around the city, for example:  
 • Mūsā Mubarqa\`, son of Imam Taqī (A) is buried in Āzar Square, where
there is also a large burial site called “Chehel Akhtarān” which was
reserved as a burial area for the descendants of the Prophet (S).

• Imāmzādeh Ahmad, the grandson of Imam al-Sādiq (A), is buried at
“Darvāzeh Qal\`eh” in the southern side of Qum.

• Ali ibn Ja\`far (A) is buried in “Chahār Mardān.”

There is a narration that whenever one visits these graves of the pious
descendants of the Prophet (S), one should recite the following
salutation:[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ اَيُّها السِّيِّدُ الزَّكِيُّ، اَلطّاهِرُ
الْوَلِيُّ، الدّاعِي الْحَفِيُّ، اَشْهَدُ اَنَّكَ قُلْتَ حَقًّا
وَنَطَقْتَ حَقًّا وَصِدْقًا وَدَعَوْتَ اِلَى مَوْلايَ وَمَوْلاكَ
عَلانِيَةً وَسِرًّا، فازَ مُتَّبِعُكَ وَنَجَى مُصَدِّقُكَ وَخابَ
وَخَسِرَمُكَذِّبُكَ وَالْمُتَخَلِّفُ عَنْكَ، اِشْهَدْ لِي بِهِذهِ
الشَّهادَةِ لاَِكُونَ مِنَ الْفائِزينَ بِمَعْرِفَتِكَ وَطاعَتِكَ
وَتَصْدِيقِكَ وَاتِّباعِكَ، وَاَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يا سَيِّدِي؛ اَنْتَ
بابُ اللهِ الْمُؤْتَى مِنْهُ وَالْمَأْخُودُ عَنْهُ، اَتَيْتُكَ زائِرًا
وَحاجاتِي لَكَ مُسْتَوْدِعًا، وَها اَنَا ذا اَسْتَوْدِعُكَ دينِي
وَاَمانَتِي وَخَواتِيمَ عَمَِلي وَجَوامِعَ اَمَلِي اِلى مُنْتَهى
اَجَلِى، وَاَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكاتُه
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.5 - Traditions about the virtues of Qum
-----------------------------------------

There are many traditions narrated from the Prophet (S) and the Imams
(A) about the virtues of Qum, and a few are narrated below:  
 1. \`Affān Basrī narrates that Imam al-Sādiq (A) asked him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَدْري لِمَ سُمِّيَتْ قُمّ قُمّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Do you know why Qum has been named ‘Qum’?”**

I answered: ‘God, the Prophet (S) and you are more knowledgeable.’ Imam
(A) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّما سُمِّيَتْ قُمّ، لأَِنَّ أَهْلَها يَجْتَمِعُونَ مَعَ قائِمِ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَيَقُومُونَ مَعَهُ، وَيَسْتَقيمُونَ عَلَيْهِ
وَيَنْصُرُونَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Qum has been so named because the people of Qum will gather around
the Steadfast Imam of the household of the Prophet (S)** **[*****Qā’im-e
Āl-e Muhammad*****; Imam Mahdī (A)]; they will make a stand
(*****Qīyām*****) under his banner, stay loyal to him and be helpers for
him.”**[^12]

2. The Prophet (S) narrates that at the time of his Mi\`rāj [Ascension
to the Heavens], his attention was drawn to a land which stood out
[Qum]. He asked Jibrā’īl about it and Jibrā’īl answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُقْعَةُ شيعَتِكَ وَشيعَةِ وَصِيِّكَ عَلِيٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“This is the land of your Shi\`a and the Shi\`a of your successor,
Ali.”**

In the beginning of this tradition, it is narrated that the Prophet (S)
banished Satan from this area, saying to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُمْ يا مَلْعُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Get away, Oh cursed one!”**

And this is how the name of Qum came about.[^13]

3. Imam al-Kāđim (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُمّ عُشُّ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَمَأْوى شيعَتِهِمْ، وَلكِنْ سَيُهْلَكُ
جَماعَةٌ مِنْ شَبابِهِمْ بِمَعْصِيَةِ آبائِهِمْ وَالإِسْتِخْفافِ
وَالسُّخْرِيَّةِ بِكُبَرائِهِمْ وَمَشايِخِهِمْ، وَمَعَ ذالِكَ يَدْفَعُ
اللهُ عَنْهُمْ شَرَّ الأَعادي وَكُلَّ سُوءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Qum is the home of the family of the Prophet (S) and a sanctuary for
their Shi\`a. However, a group from their youth will be destroyed due to
their disobedience to their fathers and their belittling and insulting
of their great figures and elders. However, Allah will defend them [the
people of Qum] from the evil intent of their enemies and from any
unpleasant event.”**[^14]

4. Imam al-Kāđim (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجُلٌ مِنْ أَهْلِ قُمّ يَدْعُو النَّاسَ إِلَى الْحَقِّ، يَجْتَمِعُ
مَعَهُ قَوْمٌ كَزُبُرِ الْحَديدِ، لا تُزِلُّهُمُ الرِّياحُ
الْعَواصِفُ، وَلايَمَلُّونَ مِنَ الْحَرْبِ، وَلا يَجْبُنُونَ، وَعَلَى
اللهِ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ، وَالْعاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“A man from the people of Qum will call the people towards the truth.
A group of men will be attracted to him like pieces of iron to a magnet.
Strong winds will not shake them. They will not flinch from war and they
will not be afraid; they will trust in Allah; and the [good] end belongs
to the pious.”**[^15]

5. Imam al-Sādiq (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَتَخْلُو كُوفَةُ مِنَ الْمُؤمِنينَ وَيَأْزَرُ عَنَهَا الْعِلْمُ كَما
تأزَرُ الحَيَّةُ فى جُحْرِها، ثُمَّ يَظْهَرُ الْعِلْمُ بِبَلْدَةٍ
يُقالُ لَها قُمُّ، وَيَصيرُ مَعْدِناً لِلْعِلْمِ وَالفَضْلِ حَتَّى لا
يَبْقى فِى الأرْضِ مُسْتَضْعَفٌ فى الدّينِ حَتَّى الْمُخَدَّراتِ في
الْحِجالِ، وَذلِكَ عِنْدَ قُرْبِ ظُهُورِ قائِمِنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Soon Kufa will become empty of the faithful, and knowledge will go
out of Kufa as a snake goes out of its lair. Then the knowledge will
appear in a land called Qum. It will become the centre of knowledge and
merits. No-one, not even the women at home, will be unaware of the
religion of God. This will be close to the time of the reappearance of
our Qā’im (Imam Mahdī).”**[^16]

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image018.jpg)

**Islamic Republic of Iran**

[^1]: Fath al-Buldān, Balādharī, p. 384; Tārīkh-e Qadīm-e Qum, pp. 25 &
26.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 38.

[^3]: Farhat al-Qārī, Sayyid ibn Tāwūs, p. 105.

[^4]: See hadith no. 5 below, under traditions about the virtues of Qum.

[^5]: Farhat al-Qārī, p. 105.

[^6]: A\`yān al-Shī\`a, vol. 2, p. 478.

[^7]: Tārīkh-e Madhhabī-ye Qum, p. 131.

[^8]: For details on how the mosque came to be constructed, see Bihār
al-Anwār, vol. 3, p. 175.

[^9]: Bar Setīgh-e Nūr, The life of Grand Ayatollah Shahāb al-Dīn
Mar\`ashī Najafī, p. 94.

[^10]: Hadrat-e Ma\`sūma – Fātima-ye Duvvum, p. 272.

[^11]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 102, p. 272.

[^12]: Ibid., vol. 60, p. 216; Tārīkh-e Qadīm-e Qum, p. 100.

[^13]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 18, p. 407; Shaykh adūq, \`Ilal
al-Sharā-\`i, p. 572.

[^14]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 60, p. 214; Tārīkh-e Qadīm-e Qum, p. 98.

[^15]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 60, p. 216; Tārīkh-e Qadīm-e Qum, p. 100.

[^16]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 60, p. 213; Tārīkh-e Qadīm-e Qum, p. 95.


