The Pilgrimage of Lady Fatima Masuma (A)
========================================

5.1 - The merits of the pilgrimage of Lady Fatima Masuma (A)
------------------------------------------------------------

There have been many traditions from the Imams (A) about the rewards
awarded to those who perform the pilgrimage of this noble lady, some of
which are mentioned below:

1. Imam al-Sādiq (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَتُدْفَنُ فيها امْرَأةٌ مِنْ اَوْلادي تُسَمّى فاطِمَةَ، فَمَنْ
زارَها وَجَبَتْ لَهُ الجنّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“A lady from my children, by the name of Fatima will be buried in Qum.
Whoever visits her [shrine], will certainly be admitted to
Heaven.”**[^1]

2. Imam al-Sādiq (A) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ زِيارَتََََها تََََعْدِلُ الجَنَّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Visiting her earns Heaven.”**[^2]

3. Sa\`d ibn Sa\`d al-Ash\`arī narrates, “I asked Imam al-Ridā (A) about
the reward awarded for performing the pilgrimage of Lady Fatima Masuma
(A) and the Imam (A) replied:”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زارَها فَلَهُ الجنّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Whoever visits her [shrine], his reward will be Heaven.”**[^3]

4. Imam al-Ridā (A) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زارَها عارِفاً بِحَقِّها فَلَهُ الجنّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Whoever visits her [shrine], while knowing and being aware** **of her
high status, the reward for him will be Heaven.”**[^4]

5. Imam al-Ridā (A) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زارالْمَعْصومَةَ بِقُمّ كَمَنْ زارَني
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Whoever visits Masuma in Qum, it is like he has visited me.”**[^5]

And Imam al-Ridā (A) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلا فَمَنْ زارَني وَهُوَ عَلى غُسْلٍ، خَرَجَ مِن ْذنوبِهِ كَيومٍ
وَلَدَتْهُ اُمُّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Be aware, whoever visits me in a state of purity [after doing**
***ghusl*****], he will come out of sin and become cleansed [purified of
sin], as if he has just been born from his mother.”**[^6]

Therefore, it follows that that same purity is obtained from performing
the pilgrimage of Lady Fatima Masuma (A).

6. A Shi\`a went to perform the pilgrimage of Imam al-Ridā (A) and after
the pilgrimage he decided to go to Karbalā. On his way, he saw Imam
al-Ridā (A) in a dream. Imam (A) said to him, “Why did you not also pass
through Qum and perform the pilgrimage at the grave of my sister?”[^7]

7. Mullā Haydar Khānsārī narrates a tradition from Imam al-Ridā (A):
“Whoever is unable to perform my pilgrimage, he should perform the
pilgrimage of my brother in Ray [Hadrat Hamzah, buried near Hadrat \`Abd
al-\`Ađīm] or my sister [Lady Fatima Masuma (A)] in Qum. He will get the
same reward as he would for performing my pilgrimage.”[^8]

1. Imam Muhammad Taqī al-Jawād (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زارَ عَمَّتي بِقُمّ فَلَهُ الجَنَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Whoever visits my aunt [Lady Fatima Masuma (A)] in Qum, will enter
Heaven.”**[^9]

From the foregoing traditions we can see the immense reward, narrated
from three Imams (A), of performing the pilgrimage of this noble lady.

An interesting point is that, in tradition no. 5 above, Imam al-Ridā (A)
has made the reward of performing the pilgrimage of Lady Fatima Masuma
(A) equal to that of performing pilgrimage at his own grave.

It is also interesting to compare this tradition with the following:
Imam al-Sādiq (A) was asked, “what is the reward of someone who performs
the pilgrimage of one of the Imams (A)?” Imam (A) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَنْ زارَ رَسولَ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“It is like he has visited the Prophet (S) of Allah.”**[^10]

5.2 - Etiquettes of the pilgrimage
----------------------------------

The following points should be borne in mind at the time of going to the
holy shrine for Ziyārat:  
 Before going to the shrine, purify yourself by performing the ritual
bath (*ghusl*).

Then with clean, perfumed clothes go to the shrine. Before entering the
hall of the burial chamber, one must recite the short request of
permission to enter (*idhn-e dukhūl*).

Then enter with the right foot, with humility and reverence, face the
Qiblah and recite:  
 Allāhu Akbar (الله اكبر - Allah is Greater) 34 times;  
 Subhān Allāh (سبحان الله - Glory be to Allah) 33 times;  
 Allhamdu Lillāh (الحمد لله - All praise is for Allah) 33 times.  
 On first seeing the tomb, recite the Salawāt, then recite the Ziyārat
facing her shrine, with full concentration and awareness of the meaning
of the words you are saying and of the personality you are addressing.

After completing the Ziyārat, recite two units of prayer (*salāt*),
which is recommended after every Ziyārat. This prayer demonstrates the
fact that while we revere the personalities that we have addressed in
the Ziyārat, it is only Allah Whom we worship. All prostrations are for
Allah only, and prostration for anyone else is forbidden.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتقرّب إلى الله بحبّكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“[O Ahl al-Bayt!] I seek nearness to Allah through my love for you.*

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 48, p. 317; vol. 60, p. 216 & vol. 102, p.
266.

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 60, p. 219.

[^3]: \`Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 267.

[^4]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 48, p. 317.

[^5]: Nāsikh al-Tawārīkh, vol. 3, p. 68; Rayāhīn al-Sharī\`a, vol. 5, p.
35.

[^6]: \`Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridāa, vol. 2, p. 260.

[^7]: Anwār al-Masha\`sha\`īn, vol. 1, p. 212.

[^8]: Mullā Haydar Khwānsārī, Zubdat al-Tasānīf, vol. 6, p. 159.

[^9]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 102, p. 265.

[^10]: \`Uyūn Akhbār al-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 262.


