Foreword
========

al-'Allamah as-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba'i (1321/1904 -
1402/1981) - may Allah have mercy upon him - was a famous scholar,
thinker and the most celebrated con-temporary Islamic philosopher. We
have introduced him briefly in the first volume of the English
translation of *al-Mizan.*

al-'Allamah at-Tabataba'i is well-known for a number of his works of
which the most important is his great exegesis *al Mizan fi Tafsiri
‘l-Qur’an* which is rightly counted as the funda­mental pillar of
scholarly work which the 'Allamah has achieved in the Islamic world.

We felt the necessity of publishing an exegesis of the Holy Qur'an in
English. After a thorough consultation, we came to choose *al-Mizan*
because we found that it contained in itself, to a considerable extent,
the points which should necessarily be expounded in a perfect exegesis
of the Holy Qur'an and the points which appeal to the mind of the
contemporary Muslim reader.

Therefore, we proposed to al-tistadh al-'Allamah as-Sayyid Sa’id Akhtar
ar-Radawi to undertake this task because we were familiar with his
intellectual ability to understand the Arabic text of *al-Mizan* and his
literary capability in expression and translation. So we relied on him
for this work and consider him responsible for the English translation
as al-'Allamah at-Taba­taba'i was responsible for the Arabic text of
*al-Mizan* and its discussions.

We have now undertaken the publication of the second volume of the
English translation of *al-Mizan.* This volume corre­sponds with the
second half of the first volume of the Arabic text. With the help of
Allah, the Exalted, we hope to provide the com­plete translation and
publication of this voluminous work.

In the first volume, the reader will find two more appendixes included
apart from the two which are to appear in all volumes of the English
translation of *al-Mizan:* One for the authors and the other for the
books cited throughout this work.

We implore upon Allah to effect our work purely for His pleasure, and to
help us to complete this work which we have started. May Allah guide us
in this step which we have taken and in the future steps, for He is the
best Master and the best Helper.

World Organization For Islamic Services
(Board of Writing, Translation and Publication)
20/6/1404 24/3/1984
Tehran - IRAN.


