Suratul Baqarah: Verses 120 − 123
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٠) وَلَن تَرۡضَىٰ عَنكَ ٱليهُودُ وَلَا ٱلنَّصَـٰرَىٰ حَتَّىٰ
تَتَّبِعَ مِلَّتُهمۡ‌ۗ قُلۡ إِنَّ هُدَى ٱللَّهِ هُوَ ٱلهُدَىٰ‌ۗ وَلئنِ
ٱتَّبَعتَ أَهوَآءَهُم بَعدَ ٱلَّذِى جَآءَكَ مِنَ ٱلعِلمِ‌ۙ مَا لَكَ
مِنَ ٱللَّهِ مِن وَلِىٍّ۬ وَلَا نَصِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢١) ٱلَّذِينَ ءَاتَينَـٰهُمُ ٱلكِتَـٰبَ يَتلُونَهُ ۥ حَقَّ
تِلَاوَتِهِۦۤ أُوْلَـئِكَ يُؤۡمِنُونَ بِهِۦ‌ۗ وَمَن يَكفُرۡ بِهِۦ
فَأُوْلَـٰئكَ هُمُ ٱلخَـٰسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٢) يَـٰبَنِىٓ إِسرَٲٓءيلَ ٱذۡكُرُواْ نِعمَتِىَ ٱلَّتِىٓ أَنعَمتُ
عَلَيكُمۡ وَأَنِّى فَضَّلتُكُمۡ عَلَى ٱلعَـٰلَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٣) وَٱتَّقُواْ يَوۡمًا لَّا تَجزِى نَفسٌ عَن نَّفسٍ۬ شَيـئا وَلَا
يُقبَلُ مِنَا عَدۡلٌ۬ وَلَا تَنفَعُهَا شَفَـٰعَةٌ۬ وَلَا هُمۡ
يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor the Christians until
you follow their religion. Say; “Surely Allah's guidance, that is the***
(***true***) ***guidance”. And if you follow their desires after the
knowledge that has come to you, you shall have no guardian from Allah,
nor any helper*** (120)***.***

***Those to whom We have given the Book read it as it aught to be read.
These*** (***it is who***) ***believe in it; and whoever disbelieves in
it, these it is that are the losers*** (121)***.***

***O Children of Israel, call to mind My*** ***bounty which I bestowed
on you and that I made you excel the nations*** (122)***.***

***And be on your guard against a day when no soul shall avail another
in the least neither shall any compensation be accepted from it, nor
shall intercession profit it nor shall they be helped*** (123).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And*** ***the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor the
Christians...**:* The Speaker turns again to the two groups, after a
cursory glance at the others. These two verses give the sum and
substance of the foregoing talk.

After all those admoni­tions and reprimands of the Jews and the
Christians, Allah turns to His Apostle and says: They will never be
pleased with you until you follow their religion which they have
invented according to their desires, composed of their own opinions.

Then He orders him to confute their views and tell them: “Surely Allah's
guid­ance, that is the (true) guidance”. Why should a man follow the
other for guidance? And the only guidance is the guidance of Allah; that
is the truth which must be followed.

There is no guidance in any thing else; and certainly not in your
religion. And what is that religion? Just an amalgam of your desires
glorified as religion.

“Allah's guidance” stands for the Qur'an - revealed by Allah and,
therefore, attributed to Him. The sentence, “Surely Allah's guidance is
the (true) guidance”, restricts the guidance to that of Allah.
Conversely, it means' that their religion is devoid of guidance; in
other words, it is just a set of their desires.

It follows that what the Prophet has got is knowledge, and what they
hold in their hands is ignorance. Therefore, Allah says to the Prophet:
“And if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to
you, you shall have no guardian from Allah, nor any helper.”  
 One cannot help admiring this verse:

How logical, solid and well-grounded is the argument it offers; how many
fine points of eloquence it holds, in spite of its brevity; how lovely
is the language and how clear is the style!!

**Qur’an:** ***Those to whom We have given the Book...**:* The
restriction of the clause, “These (it is who) believe in it”, gives rise
to the belief that this verse is a reply to an unspoken question. The
preceding words, “And the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor the
Christians...”, gave an indication that there was no hope of their
believing in the Prophet.

If so, then how any of them could be expected to believe? Was it not in
vain to invite them to Islam? This verse clears the air, and says: Those
to whom We have given the Book (i.e., the Torah or the Injil) and who
read it as it aught to be read, these it is who truly believe in their
Book and as such they shall believe in you.[^1]

Or that, they believe in a revealed book; and therefore shall believe in
any other book revealed by Allah. Or that, these it is who shall believe
in the Qur'an. (According to some of the above interpretations, the
pro-noun, 'it', in the phrase, “believe in it”, would stand for more
than one noun by turns.)

The phrase, “Those to whom We have given the Book”, refers to a group of
the Jews and the Christians, who did not follow their desires, who
wanted to follow the truth. “the Book” refers to the Torah and the
Injil.

Another possible explanation: “the Book” might be re­ferring to the
Qur'an, and, “Those to whom We have given the Book”, to the believers.
In that case the meaning would be as follows: Those to whom We have
given the Qur'an and who read it as it should be read, these it is who
believe in the Qur'an, and not the Jews and the Christians who follow
their desires. The restriction, in this case, would give a converted
pro-position.

**Qur’an:** ***O*** ***Children of Israel!... nor shall they be
helped:*** These two verses are almost similar to the verses 47 and 48.
Here the present talk with the Children of Israel comes to its end. The
Qur'an, by repeating the prologue in the epilogue neatly ties the two
ends together.

Traditions
----------

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, explaining the word of Allah, ***Those to whom We
have given the Book read it as it aught to be read:*** “They recite its
verses slowly, and understand it, and act accord­ing to its orders, and
hope for its promise, and are afraid of its threat, and take lesson from
its stories, and obey its command­ments, and desist from what it
prohibits. By God, it does not mean memorizing its verses, and studying
its letters, and reciting its chapters, and learning its one-tenths and
one-fifths.

They remembered its words and neglected its boundaries. And what it
means is meditating on its verses and acting according to its orders.
Allah, the High, has said**:**

(It is) ***a Book We have sent down to you abounding in good, so that
they may ponder over its verses”*** (38:29)***.***

(*Irshadu 'l-qulub,* ad-Daylami). as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about the word of
Allah, *read it as it aught to be read,* that: ”(It is) stopping at (the
description of) the Garden and the Fire.” (al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: What the Imam means is the meditation on the Qur'an.  
 The same Imam said about the verse, ***Those to whom We have given the
Book...**,* that: “They are the Imams.” (*al-Kafi* )

The author says: This explanation is based on the principle of the “flow
of the Qur'an”, and gives the best example of those to whom Allah has
given the Book.

[^1]: Because their books foretell of the Apostle's coming. (tr.)


