Suratul Baqarah: Verse 124
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)١٢٤ ( وَإِذِ ٱبتَلَىٰٓ إِبرَٲهِـمَ رَبُّهُ ۥ بِكَلِمَـٰتٍ۬
فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ‌ۖ قَالَ إِنِّى جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَاما‌ۖ قَالَ
وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِى‌ۖ قَالَ لَا يَنَالُ عَهدِى ٱلظَّـٰلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (remember) when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, then
he fulfilled them: He said: “Surely I am going to make you an Imam for
men.” (Ibrahim) said: “And of my offspring?” He said: ”My covenant will
not include the unjust” (124).***

Commentary
----------

Beginning with this verse, the Qur'an throws light on some aspects of
the life of Ibrahim (a.s.); these verses prepare the minds for the ones
promulgating the change of *al-qiblah* (**اَلقِبْلـَة** **ُ** =
direction of prayer) as well as the rules of the *hajj.*

These stories also explain the reality of the pure Islamic religion -
with its dif­ferent grades and levels - looking at its fundamental
beliefs, moral teachings and some rules of the *shari'ah;* among other
things they show how Allah bestowed on him *al-Imamah* (**اَلإمـَامَة**
ُ = leadership) of the people, how he built the Ka'bah, and how he
prayed to Allah to send an Apostle among them.

**Qur’an:** ***And*** **(remember)** ***when his Lord tried Ibrahim with
certain words, then he fulfilled them**:* It refers to the occasion when
Ibrahim (a.s.) was given the *Imamah.* It had happened during the end
period of his life; it was the time when he had become very old, after
Isma'il and Ishaq both had been born, and he had brought Isma'il and his
mother to reside in Mecca, as some other exegetes also have taken note
of this fact.

This timing is clearly pointed at by his words, “And of my offspring? ”,
when Allah told him: “I am going to make you an Imam for men.” Obviously
he did not know, nor did he even expect, that he would get any
offspring, until the angels brought to him the good tidings of Isma'il
and Ishaq.

Even when the angels told him that he was to get children, he responded
to those tidings in such words as could apparently be construed to have
sprung from despair and pessimism. Allah says:

***And inform them of the guests of Ibrahim: When they entered upon him,
they said: “Peace” He said: “Surely we are afraid of you.”; They said:
“Be not afraid, surely we give you the good news of a boy, possessing
knowledge. “He said:” Do you give me good news*** (of a son) ***when old
age has come upon me? - of what then do you give me good news!” They
said:*** ***”We give you good news with truth; therefore, be not of the
despairing”*** (15:51-55)***.***

The same was the reaction of his wife when she was given that good news,
as Allah says:

***And his wife was standing*** (***by***)***, so she laughed; then We
gave her the good news of Ishaq, and after Ishaq, of*** (a son's son)
***Ya'qub. She said: “O woe to me! Shall I bear a son when I am an***
(extremely) ***old*** (woman) ***and this my husband an*** (extremely)
***old*** (man)? ***Most surely this is an amazing thing.” They said:***
***”Do you wonder at the decree of Allah? The mercy of Allah and His
blessings be on you, O people of the house, surely He is Praised,
Glorious”*** (11:71-73).

As you see, the talks of both Ibrahim and his wife show that by that
time they had lost all hope of getting any child. That is why the angels
replied to them in those words to give them hope and make them happy.

Clearly neither he nor his wife knew before that time that they would be
given any off-spring. But on this occasion, we see that as soon as Allah
told him, “I am going to make you an Imam for men”, he pleaded, ”And of
my offspring?”

This prayer brings before our eyes the image of a man who is sure of
having an offspring. How can a man, and particularly one like Ibrahim,
the friend of Allah (who very well knew the nuances of the language),
speak before his Lord about a thing he knew nothing about?

If he had uttered these words before getting any children, it would have
been necessary for him to add some proviso, like “if Thou givest me any
offspring”. This event, therefore, must have taken place in the end
period of Ibrahim's life some time after he had been given the good
news.

Moreover, the words, “And (remember) when his Lord tried Ibrahim with
certain words, then he fulfilled them. He said: 'Surely I am going to
make you an Imam for men' ”, show that his *Imamah* was bestowed to him
after Allah had tried him with certain trials.

These consisted of various sufferings and tests which Ibrahim (a.s.)
underwent in his life. And according to the Qur'an, the clearest and
hardest of all was the trial of the sacrifice of Isma'il. Allah says:

***And when he reached*** (the age of) ***working with him, he said: “O
my son! surely I am seeing in dream that I am sacrificing you; consider
then what you see.” He said: “O my father! do what you are commanded; if
Allah please, you will surely find me of the patient ones.” So when they
both submitted and he threw him down upon his forehead, and We called
out to him*** (saying): ***“O Ibrahim! You have indeed proved the vision
true; surely thus We reward the doers of good. Most surely this is a
manifest trial”*** (37:102-106).

This manifest trial had taken place in the extreme old age of Ibrahim,
because even the birth of Isma'il had taken place when Ibrahim had
become very old, as Allah quotes him as saying:

***“Praise be to Allah, Who gave me in old age Isma'il and Ishaq; most
surely my Lord is the Hearer of prayer”*** (14:39).

And the *imamah* was given to him after these trials.

Now we come back to the verse under discussion:

“And (remember) when his Lord tried Ibrahim”: *“al-Ibtila'”* (
**اَلإبْتـِلآء** **ُُ** ) and *“al-bala'”* ( **البَلآءُ** ) both have
the same meaning: to try, to put to test. You give someone an order, or
put him in a difficult situation, in order to find out his inner
strength, his spiritual sublimity; thus you bring out his hidden
qualities like obedience, bravery, generosity, chastity, knowledge,
faithfulness (or their opposite traits); it is only then that you may
say, “I have tested him”, “I have put him to trial”.

One cannot be tested except through action; it is the action which
brings out the hidden qualities of a man, and not the word; words may
lie but not the actions. Allah says:

***Surely We have tried them as We tried the owners of the garden...***
(68:17);

... ***Surely Allah will try you with a stream...*** (2:249).

Now Allah says that He tried Ibrahim with certain words. This sentence
looks at the “words” inasmuch as they are re­lated to actions - they are
the vehicles to carry the commands of the speaker to the listerner. For
example, Allah says:

... ***and speak to men good*** (words)... (2:83),

that is, behave with them properly.

“With certain words, then he fulfilled them”: *“al-Kalimat”*
(**اَلكـَلِماتُُ**) is plural of *al-kalimah* **اَلكـَلِمَةُ**) = word).
Of course, the word, “word”, has sometimes been used in the Qur'an for a
substance, a corporeal being (instead of a talk or speech) as Allah
says:

... ***a Word from Him whose name is the Messiah, 'Isa son of
Maryam...*** (3:45).

But this usage is based on the fact that 'Isa, like Adam, was created by
a word from Allah as the Qur'an says:

***Surely the likeness of 'Isa is with Allah as the likeness of Adam; He
created him from dust, then said to him: “Be”, and he was***
(3:59)***.***

Otherwise, whenever the Qur'an attributes the “word” to Allah, it means
speech and saying. For example:

***and there is none to change the words of Allah*** (6:34)***.***

***there is no changing the words of Allah*** (10:64).

***and Allah desired to manifest the truth of what was true by His
words*** (8:7)***.***

***Surely those against whom the word of your Lord has proved true will
not believe*** (10:96).

***But the word of punishment proved true against the un­believers***
(39:71).

***And thus did the word of your Lord prove true against those who
disbelieved that they are the inmates of the Fire*** (40:6)***.***

***and had not a word gone forth from your Lord till an ap­pointed time,
certainly affair would have been decided between them*** (42:14).

***and the word of Allah, that is the highest*** (9:41)***.***

***He said: “The truth then*** (it) ***is and the truth do I speak”***
(38:84).

***Our word for a thing when We intend it, is only that We say to it:
“Be”, and it is*** (16:40).

These and similar verses use “word” in the meaning of “talk” because the
talk conveys to the hearer the proposition which the speaker intends to
communicate, or the command which he wants him to obey. It is for this
reason that sometimes the Qur'an describes the “word” as being complete!
It is as though a “word” emanating from the speaker remains incomplete
until it is implemented, and then it becomes complete, is proved true.
Allah says:

***And the word of your Lord has been accom­plished*** (completed)
***truly and justly; there is none to change His words*** (6:115);
***and the good word of your Lord was fulfilled*** (completed) ***in the
Children of Israel*** (7:137).

The above explanation does not go against the fact that Allah's word is
Allah's action. His word and His action are not two different things,
they are one and the same. Realities and facts have their own rules, and
literary demands and semantic values are governed by other rules.

Whatever realities Allah wishes to disclose to one of His prophets or
other servants, and whatever command He wants to impose on someone, it
is His talk and speech, inasmuch as it fulfils the same purpose which a
talk or speech does - it conveys information, and proposition as well as
His order and prohibition.

Not frequently, the word, “word”, is used for ideas, intentions and
actions if they have the same import as “word” has. We say: “I will
surely do this because I have already said so, and have given my word.”

In fact, you have never before uttered a single word about it; all that
your “given word” actually means is that you do have a firm intention to
do it, without any wavering will, without listening to any intercessor.

The Arab poet, 'Antarah, said: “And (it was) my word (to my soul)
whenever it was in turmoil or excitement: Be at ease; you will either
earn the accol­ade or will go to (final) rest.” Obviously, he had not
talked with his soul or spirit; what he means by “word” is that he had
made up his mind to fight bravely, and to face the enemy without
retreating from his stand; because if he was victorious, his people
would sing his praise, and if he was killed, he would get the rest and
tranquility.

In this light it is easy to see that the phrase, “when his Lord tried
Ibrahim with certain words”, refers to the difficult situations he had
to face, and the Divine covenants he had entered into, for example, his
conflict with his people regarding the stars and the idols, his test by
fire and emigration, his supreme trial of sacrificing his son, and other
such things.

Allah has not specified which tests those “certain words” refer to,
because this information had no-thing to do with the theme of the verse.
But one thing is certain: As it was only after the fulfillment of those
words that Allah said to him, “Surely I am going to make you an Imam for
men”, the words must have been such as to prove his capability for the
status of the *Imamah.*

This much about the “words”. Now comes the next phrase: “then he
fulfilled them”. If the pronoun “he” refers to Ibrahim (a.s.), then it
would mean that he fulfilled the task which was expected of him, he
obediently did what he was told to do.

If on the other hand the pronoun refers to the Lord (as it obviously
does) then it would mean that his Lord helped him to do what was
expected of him.

Somebody has said that the phrase, “certain words”, refers to the Divine
Speech, “Surely I am going to make you an Imam for men... My covenant
will not include the unjust.” But it is an explanation which does not
carry any weight, because nowhere in the Qur'an the word “words” has
been used for “sentences”.

**Qur’an:** ***“Surely I am going to make you an Imam for men”**:* That
is, I am going to make you a leader for men; they will adhere to you and
follow in your footsteps, in words and deeds. *al-Imam* **اَلإمـَام**
**ُ** ) = leader) is the one whom the people follow.

That is why many exegetes have said that *al-Imamah* **اَلإمـَامَة**
**ُ** ) = leadership) in this verse means prophethood, because a prophet
is followed and obeyed by his *ummah* in their religion; Allah has said:

***And We did not send any apostle but that he should be obeyed by
Allah's permission*** (4:64)***.***

But this interpretation has no leg to stand upon. Because:‑

**First:** The word *Imaman* (**اِمـَامـاً** = Imam, leader) is the
second accusative of the causative *ja'iluka* (**جَاعِلـُكَ** =
literally, maker of you; translated here as “going to make you”), which
is a nomen agentis; and a nomen agentis is never used in place of a past
tense; if used in place of a verb it always gives the mean­ing of
present or future tense.

When Allah used these words in His talk with Ibrahim (a.s.), He in
effect gave him a promise to make him an Imam in future - in other
words, to give him a status which he did not have at that time. And
Ibrahim (a.s.) was already a prophet: Remember that this talk itself was
a revelation sent to him in his capacity as a prophet.

He was a prophet long before he was given the status of the *Imamah.*
There-fore, the *Imamah* in this verse cannot mean prophethood. (This
reply is given by another exegete.)

**Second:** We have described earlier that Ibrahim (a.s.) was given the
*Imamah* in his later days after setting the good news that he would be
given offspring, Ishaq and Isma'il; and the angels had given him that
news while they were on their way to destroy the *ummah* of Lilt; and
Ibrahim at that time was a prophet and an apostle. He was a prophet and
apostle before he got the *Imamah;* therefore, his *Imamah* was
different from his prophethood and apostleship.

Why are such interpretations offered by exegetes from time to time? The
reason lies in the banality - because of repeated use during all these
centuries - which has degraded the sublime meanings of the Qur'anic
words in people's minds.

The word, *Imamah,* has been debased in similar way. Some people say
that it means prophethood, precedence, being in authority; others
interpret it as *al-khilafah* ( **اَلخِلافَة** = successorship),
*al-wisayah* (**اَلوصَايَة** = regency) or headship in spiritual and
temporal affairs.

But all this is wrong. “Prophethood” means receiving news from Allah;
“messengership” means conveying that message to people; “authority”
implies that others have to follow one's example and obey one's orders.

Now this authority is a concomitant of prophethood and messengership;
*khilafah* and *wisayah* both mean successorship to a prophet; likewise,
headship in spiritual and temporal affairs is a sort of the
above-mentioned authority; and all of it is different from the correct
meaning of the *Imamah.*

The *imamah* implies that a man has an intrinsic quality because of
which people should follow him faithfully, making their words and deeds
to conform with his words and deeds; but none of the above-mentioned
interpretations brings out this meaning.

Ibrahim (a.s.) was already a prophet whose obedience was obligatory for
all men. What would be the sense in telling him that Allah was going to
make him a prophet for men?

Or, to make his obedience compulsory in all that he said and did? Or, a
head of his *ummah* to order or forbid in matters of religion? Or, a
successor? Or, *a khalifah* in the earth to decide between the people by
the order of Allah?

The difference between the *Imamah* and all the above-mentioned words is
not only verbal; it is the realities behind those words that differ from
one another. When a man is given prophethood, it becomes obligatory for
the people to obey him.

Therefore, it would be wrong to say to that prophet, “I am going to make
your obedience compulsory for men although I have already made it
compulsory”. Nor will it be correct to convey the same idea in other
words, because the same problem will arise again.

When Allah gives someone some status, he does not get merely a new title
or name; bounties of Allah are not empty words; there are real things
behind those words. Therefore, the *imamah* has its own reality,
different from other words' realities.

We find in the Qur'an that whenever it mentions *Imamah* it puts
guidance side by side - it looks as though Allah was using the latter to
explain the former. Allah says in the story of Ibrahim:

***And We gave him Ishaq and Ya'qub as a further gift; and We made***
(them) ***all righteous ones; and We made them Imams, to guide***
(people) ***by Our command...*** (21:72 - 73);

and He says in another place:

***And We made of them Imams to guide by Our com­mand as they were
patient, and they were certain of Our signs*** (32:24).

Here the *imamah is* explained, or rather defined, in terms of guidance,
and then further qualified with the proviso, “by Our command”. Clearly,
the *Imamah* does not mean any type of guidance; it is a guidance which
emanates from the command of Allah.

And the reality of that command is described in these words:

***His command, when He intends anything, is only that He says to it:
“Be”, and it is. Therefore glory be to Him in Whose hand is the kingdom
of every thing...*** (36:82-83);

***And Our command is but one, as the twinkling of an eye***
(54:50)***.***

We shall explain, when writing about these verses, that the Divine
Command (which the former verse also calls “the Kingdom”) is the sublime
side of the creation, with which they face towards Allah; it is pure,
free from fetters of time and space, and un­touched by change and
variation. It is also the real meaning of the word “Be”, because the
Divine Command “Be”, is nothing other than the actual existence of the
thing concerned.

This “command” is in contrast to *al-khalq* **اَلخَلـْق** **ُُ** ) =
creation) which is the other side of the things - it is subject to
changes and vari­ations; it grows by and by and deteriorates in the same
way; it works within the framework of time and space. (We shall fully
explain this theme in its proper place, Allah willing.)

To sum it up, *Imam is* a leader who guides by a Divine Command which is
closely associated with him. The *Imamah,* in its esoteric sense, is
*al-wilayah* = **اَلوِلايَـة** **ُُ** ) guardianship, auth-ority) over
the people in their actions and activities; and its guid­ance entails
conveying them to the final destination by the com­mand of Allah.

It is different from that guidance which only shows the way - and which
is usually done by the prophets and messen­gers of Allah as well as by
other believers who guide the people towards Allah with sincere
exhortation and good advice. This second type of guidance is mentioned
in the following verses:

***And We did not send any apostle but with the language of his people,
so that he might explain to them clearly; then Allah makes whom He***
***pleases err and He guides whom He pleases...*** (14:4)***.***

***And he who believed*** (***i.e.,*** the believer from the family of
Pharaoh) ***said: “O my people! follow me, I will guide you to the right
course”*** (40:38)***.***

***Why should not then a company from every party from among them go
forth that they may acquire*** (proper) ***understanding in religion,
and that they may warn their people when they come back to them, so that
they may be cautious?*** (9:122)

(We shall further explain it later on.)

Then Allah describes the reason why He gave them the *Imamah,* in these
words, ***as they were patient, and they were certain of Our signs.***
(See 32:24, quoted above.) The criteria, therefore, are patience and
absolute certainty. They were steadfast and patient in the cause of
Allah. Patience, in this verse, is uncondi­tional; therefore it means
remaining patient and steadfast in all matters and all conditions with
which Allah may choose to test the submission and servitude of a
servant.

And they possessed highest degree of certainty. Going through the
stories of Ibrahim (a.s.), we find the following words of Allah in the
Qur'an:

***And thus did We show Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
and so that he might be of those who are sure*** (6:75).

The verse clearly indicates that showing of the kingdom to Ibrahim was
the prelude to the bestowal of absolute certainty on him. It proves that
certainty is an inseparable concomitant of looking at the kingdom. This
is also the theme of the following verses:

***Nay! if you had known with a knowledge of certainty, you should most
certainly have seen the hell*** (102:5 - 6)***.***

***Nay! rather, what they used to do has become*** (like) ***rust upon
their hearts. Nay! most surely they shall on that day be shut out away
from their Lord.... Nay! most surely the record of the righteous shall
be in the 'Illiyyin. And what will make you know what 'illiyyin is? It
is a written book; see it those who are near*** (to Allah) (83:14 - 15;
18-21).

These verses prove that the “near ones” are those who are not shut out
away from their Lord; on their hearts there are no rust or coverings of
sin, ignorance and doubt; they are the ones who have absolute certainty
about Allah, and they see the *'illiyyin* as they see the hell.

In short, it is essential for an Imam to be a man of absolute certainty,
who sees the world of the “kingdom” of Allah which is based on the
“words” of Allah. And we have explained earlier that the kingdom is the
command of Allah, which, in its turn, is the esoteric side of the
universe.

Now let us have a fresh look at the verse 21:73 (and 32:24) quoted
earlier. “And We made them Imams, to guide (people) by Our command:” it
very clearly proves that whatever is the subject of guidance (i.e., the
hearts and the deeds), the Imam has its inner reality; he is constantly
in touch with its another side - the side of the command, which is never
hidden from him.

It is known that the hearts and the deeds, like any other thing, have
two sides, one of the “command” and the other of the “creation”;
therefore, the reality of the deeds of the men - both good and bad - is
always within the vision of the Imam, always under his observation; and
he has authority over both ways - the one of happiness and bliss and the
other of unhappiness and distress. Also, Allah has said:

(Remember) ***the day when We will call every people with their Imam***
(17:71).

(We shall explain when writing about this verse that the “Imam” here
means the true leader, and not the scroll of deeds, as some people
think.) There-fore, the Imam is the one who shall lead the people to
Allah ***on the day when hidden things shall be tried**,* as he leads
them to Him in the manifest and esoteric lives of this world.

The last quoted verse also shows that there cannot be a single period, a
single moment, without an Imam, because Allah says, “every people”. (The
detailed proof of this statement will be given under that verse.)

The *Imamah is* such an exalted and sublime position that it cannot be
given except to one who is extremely virtuous by his own self. If
someone's soul is polluted, even in a minute degree, by any injustice or
sin, then he needs someone else to guide him back to the right way. And
Allah has said:

***Is he then who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he
who himself does not go right unless he is guided?*** (10:35).

Here Allah puts two groups opposite to each other: one is that which
guides to the truth; and the other, that which does not go right unless
guided by someone else, in other words, the one which needs a helping
hand to be guided aright. This contrast means that the one who guides to
the truth, is rightly guided by himself; conversely, the one rightly
guided by another person cannot guide to the truth.

It follows from the above discourse that:‑

**First:** The Imam must be *al-ma'sum* **اَلمَعْصُوْم** ) *=* sinless;
protected from error and sin). Otherwise, he would not be rightly guided
by himself, as explained above. Also, the following verse
proves their *al-'ismah* **اَلعِصْمَة** ) *=* sinlessness):

***And We made them Imams to guide*** (people) ***by Our command, and We
revealed to them the doing of good*** (deeds) ***and the establishing of
prayer and the giving of*** zakat, ***and Us*** (alone) ***did they
worship*** (21:73).

According to this verse, all the deeds of the Imam are good, he is
guided to them, not by any other person, but on his own by Divine help.
The phrase translated above as “the doing of good (deeds)” is *fi'la
'l-khayrat* **فِعْلَ الخَيْراتِ** ) = to do good deeds); it is
*al-masdar* **اَلمَصْدَر** ) = roughly translated as infinitive verb),
used as the first construct of a genitive construction; and such *a
masdar* proves that the action has surely taken place. Let us explain it
in another way:

If Allah would have said, 'We revealed to them: Do good deeds', it would
not have shown that they actually obeyed the command and did good; but
when He says, *We revealed to them the doing of good,* it means that
whatever they did was good and it was by Divine inspiration and heavenly
help.

**Second:** Conversely, whoever is not *ma'sum,* can never be an Imam, a
guide to the truth.
Now, it is clear that the adjective, “the unjust”, (in the Divine
declaration, “My covenant will not include the unjust”) covers everyone
who might have done any injustice, for example, polytheism, idol-worship
or any other sin, in any period of his life, even if he may have
repented and been good afterwards.

One of our teachers (may Allah have mercy on him!) was asked as to how
this verse could prove that the Imam must be *ma'sum.* He replied:

Logically, we may divide mankind into four groups: (1) One who remains
unjust throughout his life; (2) One who was never unjust in any period
of his life; (3) One who was unjust
in the beginning, but became just later on; and (4) One who was just in
the beginning, but became unjust afterwards, Ibrahim was too sublime in
position to ask for the *Imamah* for the first or the fourth group.

This leaves two groups (the second and the third) which could be
included in his prayer. And Allah rejected one of them - the one who was
unjust in the beginning but became just later on. Now, there remains
only one group who could be given the *Imamah -* the one who was never
unjust in any period of his life; that is, who was *ma'sum.*[^1]

To sum it up, the verse shows that:

**First:** *Imamah is* a Divinely-made status.

**Second:** The Imam must be *ma'sum,* by Divine *'ismah;* in other
words, he must be protected by Allah from sins and errors.

Third: The earth cannot remain without a rightful Imam, as long as there
is a man on it.

Fourth: It is essential for an Imam to be supported by the Divine help.

Fifth: The deeds of the people are not hidden from the Imam.

Sixth: The Imam must have knowledge of all that is needed by the people
for their good in this world and the next.

Seventh: It is impossible for any other person to surpass the Imam in
any virtue.
These seven are among the basic factors of the *Imamah,* and this
verse, read with other relevant verses, leads us to them, and Allah is
our Guide.

**Objection:** As the *Imamah* means to guide by the command of Allah,
and as that guiding to the truth is concomitant with the Imam's being
rightly guided by Allah (as has been inferred from the verse: ***Is he
then who guides to truth more worthy to be followed.*****..**), then all
the prophets should certainly be called Imams.

Obviously, prophethood of a prophet comes into being only when he is
rightly guided by Allah through revelation; a prophet is not guided by
any other person through teaching or advice etc.

Therefore, bestowal of prophethood would be synony­mous with that of the
*Imamah.* And the objection you had put against the interpretation of
the *Imamah* with prophethood would be turned *in toto* against your
explanation.

Reply: What we have inferred from the foregoing description is that if
one guides to Allah by His command, he must be guided aright not by any
other person but by Allah Himself. But the Qur'anic verses have not
shown that its contrary proposition is also true, that is, it has not
been proved that whoever is rightly guided by Allah should also be a
guide to Allah. Therefore, it is not necessary that every prophet should
be called an Imam. In one place, Allah declares about various prophets
that they were rightly guided by Him, and yet does not join it with the
statement that they guided their people to the truth.

He says:

***And We gave to him*** (***i.e.,*** Ibrahim) ***Ishaq and Ya'qub; each
did We guide, and Nuh did We guide before, and of his descendants, Dawud
and Sulayman and Ayyub and Yusuf and Harun; and thus do We reward those
who do good; and Zakariyya and Yahya and 'Isa and Ryas; every one was of
the righteous*** (ones) ***and Isma'il and Ilyasa ' and Yunus and Lut;
and every one We did exalt over the worlds; and from among their fathers
and their descendants and their brethren; and We chose them and guided
them to the straight path. This is Allah's guidance, He guides thereby
whom He pleases of His servants; and if they had set up others*** (with
Him), ***certainly what they did would have become ineffectual for them.
These are they to whom We gave the book and the wisdom and the
prophethood; therefore if these disbelieve in it, We have*** (already)
***entrusted with it a people who are not disbelievers in it. These are
they whom Allah guided, therefore follow their guidance. Say: “I do not
ask you for any reward for it; it is but a reminder to the worlds”***
(6:86 -90)*.*[^2]

The context of the above verses shows that this Divine Guidance is an
unalterable firm decree; it will continue in this *ummah* even after the
Messenger of Allah (S), and will remain confined within the progeny of
Ibrahim (a.s.), as the verses 43:26 - 28 prove:

***And when Ibrahim said to his father and his people: “Surely, I am
clear of what you worship;*** (***I*** wor­ship) ***but*** (only) ***Him
Who created me, for surely He will guide me.” And He made it a word to
continue in his posterity, so that they may return*** (to God).

When Ibrahim (a.s.) declared to his people that he was clear of what
they worshipped and that he worshipped only Him Who had created him, he
had already achieved that guidance which contemplation and logical
reasoning can produce.

Then he told them of his expectation that Allah would surely guide him.
This subsequent guidance was obviously different from the earlier one;
it was a guidance by the command of Allah.

Thereafter, Allah says that He made this Divine Guidance ”a word to
continue” in Ibrahim's posterity. This is one of those verses in which
“word” has been used not for speech but for a substance - it refers to
the guidance as “a word”. The same is the interpretation of “word of
piety” in the verse:

***and made them keep the word of piety, and well were they entitled to
it and worthy of it*** (48:26).

The above explanation makes it clear that the *Imamah* after Ibrahim
(a.s.), is confined to his descendants. The sentences, ”(Ibrahim) said:
'And of my offspring?' He said: 'My covenant will not include unjust'”,
point to this fact.

Obviously, Ibrahim (a.s.) had asked for the *imamah* not for all but
only for some of his descendants, and he was told that it would not be
given to the unjust of his descendants. Needless to say that not all of
his de­scendants were unjust; therefore, this reply disqualifies only
one group and not all. In other words, it grants the request for a
se­lected group of his offspring and further sanctifies it as a
covenant, and on that basis it says that the covenant of Allah will not
in­clude the unjust ones.

**Qur’an:** ***“My covenant will not include the unjust”**:* This
ex­pression shows how far removed are the unjust from the circle of the
Divine Covenant [^3]; therefore, it is an example of *isti'arah bi
'l-kinayah.*

Traditions
----------

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Verily Allah (to Whom belong Might and
Majesty) accepted Ibrahim as a servant before making him a prophet; and
verily Allah made him a prophet before appointing him as a messenger;
and verily Allah appointed him as a messenger before taking him as a
friend; and verily Allah took him as a friend before making him an Imam.

When He combined for him all (the above-mentioned) things, ***He said,
'Surely I am going to make you an Imam for men.'**”* The Imam further
said: “It was because of the greatness of it (i.e., *Imamah*) in the
eyes of Ibrahim (a.s.) that he said: ***'And of my offspring?' He***
***said: 'My covenant will not include the unjust.'”*** The Imam
explained: “A fool will not be Imam of a pious.” (*al-Kafi* )

The author says: The same meaning has been narrated from the same Imam
through another chain of narrators, and from al-Baqir (a.s.) through yet
other chain; and al-Mufid has narrated it from as- Sadiq (a.s.).

The Imam has said that Allah accepted Ibrahim as a servant before making
him a prophet. This theme is inferred from the Qur'anic verse:

***And certainly We gave to Ibrahim his rectitude before, and We knew
him fully well. When he said to his father and his people: “What are
these images to which you*** (as devotees) ***cleave?” They said: “We
found our fathers worshipping them.” He*** ***said: “Certainly you have
been*** (both) ***you and your fathers, in manifest error.” They said:
“Have you brought to us the truth, or are you one of the triflers?” He
said: “Nay! your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who
brought them into exist­ence, and I am of those who bear witness to
this”*** (21:51 - 56).

This story shows how Allah took Ibrahim (a.s.) as a servant in the
beginning of his spiritual journey.

It is one thing that someone is a slave or servant of Allah, and a quite
different thing that he is taken or accepted by Allah as His slave.
Being a slave of Allah is a concomitant of existence and creation;
anyone who is created and has perceiving faculties is inescapably a
slave of Allah; this servitude does not depend on Divine acceptance.

Man, for example, owes his existence to his Lord, is created and made by
Him; he may behave in his personal life according to this servitude's
dictates by surrendering himself to his Lord the Almighty, or he may act
rebelliously, but his submission or rebellion does not alter the fact
that he is a born slave of Allah. Allah says in the Qur'an:

***There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come to the
Beneficent Allah as a servant*** (19:93)***.***

But if he does not act as a slave should do, if he behaves in the earth
with arrogance and rebellion, then he does not deserve to be called a
slave or servant of Allah, because he does not fulfill the conditions of
servitude.

A servant surrenders himself to his Lord, and leaves all his affairs in
his Master's hands. Therefore, only he deserves to be called a servant
of Allah who is His slave in his person as well as in his action - only
such a man can truly be called a slave of Allah.

Allah says: ***And the servants of the Beneficent God are they who walk
on the earth in humbleness...*** (25:63).

Accordingly, when Allah accepts a.man as His servant, He takes masterly
interest in that servant's affairs; in other words, Allah becomes his
*waliyy* and guardian, and takes all his affairs in His Own hands. Such
a servitude is the key to *al-wilayah* **اَلوِلايَـة ُُ** ) =
guardianship).

The verse 7:196 points to this reality:

***“Surely my guardian is Allah, Who revealed the Book, and He takes in
hand*** (the affairs of) ***the good.”***

The adjective “good”, refers to those who are worthy of Divine
guardianship and friendship. Allah has referred to the Prophet in
several places in the Qur'an as His servant, for example,

... ***Who revealed the Book to His servant...*** (18:1);

***... Who sends down clear signs upon His servant...*** (57: 9);

... ***when the servant of Allah stood up calling upon Him...***
(72:19).

In short, to say that Allah accepted someone as His servant, is another
way of saying that Allah took him under His *wilayah* and guardianship.

The Imam said: ”... and verily Allah made him a prophet before
appointing him as a messenger”. The difference between a prophet and a
messenger, as shown by the traditions narrated from the Imams of the
*Ahlu 'l-bayt, is* as follows:

A prophet sees in his dream what Allah intends to reveal to him; and a
messenger sees the angel and talks to him.

The same gradual progress is seen in the history of Ibrahim (a.s.).
Allah says:

***And mention Ibrahim in the Book; surely he was a truthful*** (man),
***a prophet, when he said to his father: “O my father! why do you
worship what neither hears nor sees, nor does it avail you in the
least”*** (19:41 - 42).

The verse shows that he was a prophet when he said this to his father.
It was a confirmation of what he had told his people as soon as he
arrived among them:

“***Surely I am clear of what you worship;*** (I wor­ship) ***but***
(only) ***Him Who created me, for surely He will guide me”*** (43:26 -
27).

Then we read the verse 11:69 which says:

***And certainly Our messengers*** (***i.e.,*** angels) ***came to
Ibrahim with good news. They said: “Peace.” “Peace,” said he.***

This event, in which Ibrahim saw the angels and talked to them, had
taken place in his old age long after he had left his father and his
nation.

The Imam said: “And verily Allah appointed him as a mess­enger before
taking him as a friend.” It is inferred from the words of Allah:

***And who is better in religion than he who... follows the faith of
Ibrahim, the upright one? And Allah took Ibrahimas a friend*** (4:125).

Apparently it shows that Allah took him as a friend because of the same
upright faith and religion which he had promulgated by the command of
his Lord; the theme of this verse is to describe the distinction and
excellence of that upright religion which so much raised the status of
Ibrahim that he was taken as a friend of Allah.

*al-Khalil* ( **اَلخَليْلُ** ) is more exclusive than *as-Sadiq* (
**اَلصَّديْقُ** )*,* although both are generally translated as “friend”.
When a friend is sincere and truthful (*as-Sadiq*) in his dealings with
the other friend, he is called *as-Sadiq;* thereafter, if he turns away
from all else, confining his needs and requirements to that friend only,
he is called *al-khalil,* because *al-khullah* ( اَلخُلـَّةُ ) means
need and requirement.

The meaning of the Imam's sentence, “and verily Allah took him as a
friend before making him an Imam,” may be understood from the foregoing
commentary. The words of the Imam: “A fool will not be Imam of a pious,”
point to the verse 2:130 - 131:

***And who forsakes the religion of Ibrahim but he who makes himself a
fool, and most certainly We chose him in this world, and in the
hereafter he is most surely among the righteous. When his Lord said to
him, Submit*** (yourself), ***he said: “I submit myself to the Lord of
the worlds.”***

In this verse Allah says that whoever turns away from the religion of
Ibrahim - in other words, whoever is unjust - is a fool; then he
contrasts this foolishness with Divine selection - a selection which has
been explained in the next sentences as “Islam” or submission to God.
(Ponder on the clause, ***When his Lord said to him, Submit
yourself***)*.*

Then we see that *al-Islam* ( **اَلإسْلامُُ** ) = submission) and
*at-taqwa* ( **اَلتَّقْوی**) *=* piety, fear of Allah) have been made
one, or applicable to one meaning, in the verse:

***O you who believe! fear Allah as is due to Him, and do not die but as
Muslims*** (3:102).

(Think deeply on it.)

al-Mufid has narrated from Durust and Hisham from the Imams (of the
*Ahlu 'l-bayt*)*:* “Ibrahim was a prophet, and he was not an Imam until
Allah, Blessed and High is He, said (to him): ***“Surely I am going to
make you an Imam for men.”*** (Ibrahim) said: ***“And of my
offspirng?”*** Then Allah, Blessed and High is He, said: **“My**
***covenant will not include the unjust.”*** Whoever had (ever)
worshipped an idol or a sculpture or an image, cannot be an Imam.”

The author says: Its meaning is clear from the above explanations.
It is narrated in *al-Amali of* at-Tusi (with complete chain of
narrators) and in *al-Manaqib* of Ibn al-Maghazili (as *a marfu'*
tradition) from Ibn Mas'ud from the Prophet that he said (ex­plaining
the words of Allah to Ibrahim in this verse):

“Whoever prostrated before an idol, leaving me, I will not make him an
Imam.” Then the Prophet said: “And that prayer was fulfilled in me and
my brother Ali; neither of us ever prostrated before any idol.”

Waki' and Ibn Marduwayh have narrated from 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
that the Prophet said (in explanation of the words of Allah, ***My
covenant will not include the unjust***)*:* “There is no obedience
except in good.” (*ad-Durru 'l-manthur*)

'Abd ibn Hamid narrated from 'Imran ibn Husayn that he said: “I heard
the Prophet saying: 'There is no obedience of a creature in disobedience
of Allah (i.e., a man should not be obeyed if he tells you to disobey
Allah).'” (*ibid.*)

**The author says:** The meanings *of* those traditions are easily
understood from the earlier explanations. al-'Ayyashi has narrated in
his *Tafsir,* through several chains, from Safwan the camel-driver, that
he said:

“We were at Mecca; and the talk gradually reached the words of Allah,
***And*** **(remem­ber)** ***when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain
words, then he fulfilled them.”*** (The Imam) said: “That is, he
completed them with Muhammad and 'Ali and the Imams from the descendants
*of* 'Ali, as Allah says: ***Offspring, one from the other”*** (3:34).

**The authour says:** This tradition takes the “word” in the meaning
*of* the *Imamah;* a similar explanation is given to “word” in the
verses:... ***for surely He will guide me. And He made it a word to
continue in his posterity...*** (43: 27 - 28)*.*

According to this tradition, the verse would mean as follows: And
remember when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, that is, his
own *imamah,* and that of Ishaq and his progeny; then He completed it
with the *imamah* of Muhammad and of the Imams from his family members,
who were from the progeny of Isma'il; then Allah made it known to
Ibrahim telling him:

“***Surely lam going to make you an Imam for men.”*** Ibrahim said:
“***And of my offspirng?”*** Allah said: “My ***covenant will not
include the unjust.”***

[^1]: It is a simplified version of the argument given by al-Qadi
Nurullah Tustari (ash-Shahid ath-Thalith) in his Ihgaqu 'l-haqq. (Vide
the new ed. with footnotes by Ayatullah Sayyid Shahabuddin Mar'ashi
Najafi, Mat­ba'ah Islamiyyah, Tehran, vol. II, pp. 367 - 369.) (tr.)

[^2]: This reply does not seem to meet the objection. The verse clearly
says that these prophets were guided by Allah. Also, it is accepted that
all the prophets, including those mentioned in this verse, guided their
people aright, and that they did so by the command of Allah. Thus, all
the characteristics of the Imamah were found in every prophet who called
his people to the right path. (tr.)

[^3]: Its literal translation: My covenant will not reach the unjust.
Note that Allah did not say: The unjust will not reach My covenant,
because it would have implied that it was within the power of man -
albeit a just one - to reach the status of the Imamah. The present
sentences does not leave room for any such misunderstanding; it clearly
shows that getting the imamah is not within human jurisdiction, it is
exclusively in the hand of Allah and He gives to whom He pleases. (tr.)


