Suratul Baqarah: Verses 125 − 129
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٥) وَإِذۡ جَعَلنَا ٱلبَيتَ مَثَابَةً۬ لِّلنَّاسِ وَأَمنًا
وَٱتَّخِذُواْ مِن مَّقَامِ إِبرَٲهِـمَ مُصَلّى‌ۖ وَعَهِدۡنَآ إِلَىٰٓ
إِبرَٲهِـمَ وَإِسمَـٰعِيلَ أَن طَهِّرَا بَيتِىَ لِلطَّائِفِينَ
وَٱلعَـٰكِفِينَ وَٱلرُّكعِ ٱلسُّجُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٦) وَإِذۡ قَالَ إِبرَٲهِـمُ رَبِّ ٱجعَلۡ هَـٰذَا بَلَدًا ءَامِنًا
وَٱرۡزُقۡ أهلَهُ ۥ مِنَ ٱلثَّمَرَٲتِ مَنۡ ءَامَنَ مِنُهم بِٱللَّهِ
وَٱليَوۡمِ ٱلأَخِرِ‌ۖ قَالَ وَمَن كَفَرَ فَأُمَتِّعُهُ ۥ قَلِيلاً۬
ثُمَّ أَضطَرُّهُ ۥۤ إِلَىٰ عَذَابِ ٱلنَّارِ‌ۖ وَبِئسَ ٱلمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٧) وَإِذۡ يَرۡفَعُ إِبرَٲهِـمُ ٱلقَوَاعِدَ مِنَ ٱلبَيتِ
وَإِسمَـٰعِيلُ رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلۡ مِنَّآ‌ۖ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ ٱلسَّمِيعُ
ٱلعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٨) رَبَّنَا وَٱجعَلنَا مُسلِمَينِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَآ
أُمَّةً۬ مُّسلِمَةً۬ لَّكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبۡ عَلَينَآ‌ۖ
إِنَّكَ أَنتَ ٱلتَّوَّابُ ٱلرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢٩) رَبَّنَا وَٱبعَثۡ فِيهِمۡ رَسُولاً۬ مِّنُهمۡ يَتلُواْ عَلَيهِمۡ
ءَايَـٰتِكَ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ ٱلكِتَـٰبَ وَٱلحِكمَةَ وَيُزَكِّيِهمۡ‌ۚ
إِنَّكَ أَنتَ ٱلعَزِيزُ ٱلحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And*** (remember) ***when We made the House a rendezvous for men and
a*** (place of) ***security, and take*** (for yourselves) ***a place of
prayer on the standing-place of Ibrahim. And We enjoined Ibrahim and
Isma'il*** (saying): ***“Purify*** (***you*** two) My ***House for those
who make circuit and those who abide*** (in it for devotion) ***and
those who bow down*** (and) ***those who prostrate themselves”*** (125).

***And*** (remember) ***when Ibrahim said. “My Lord! make it a secure
town and provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in
Allah and the last day” He*** ***said: “And whoever disbelieves, I will
grant him enjoyment for a short while, then I will drive him to the
chastisement of the Fire; and it is an evil desti­nation”*** (126).

***And*** (remember) ***when Ibrahim and Isma'il were raising the
foundations of the House: “Our Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the
Hearing, the Knowing*** (127).

***Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and*** (raise) ***from
our offspring a group submitting to Thee, and show us our ways of
devotion and turn to us*** (merci­fully), ***surely Thou art the
Oft-returning*** (with mercy), ***the Merciful*** (128).

***Our Lord! and raise up in them an Apostle from among themselves who
shall recite to them Thy com­munications and teach them the Book and the
wisdom, and purify them; surely Thou art the Mighty, the Wise”*** (129).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an**: ***And*** **(remember)** ***when We made the House a
rendez­vous for men and a*** **(place of)** ***security:*** It refers to
the legislation of the *hajj* and the sanctuary offered by the House.
”*al-Mathabah**”*** **اَلمَثابََـة ُُ** ) = rendezvous; a place to which
one returns) is derived from *thaba, yathubu* **ثـَابَ ، يَثــُوبَُ** )
= he returned, he will return).

**Qur’an:** *and* ***take*** **(for yourselves)** ***a place of prayer
on the standing-place of Ibrahim:*** The conjunctive “and” joins this
order with the preceding sentence turning that also into order.

In that case the complete sentence would have the following
con-notation: And when We told the people, return to, and do the *hajj*
of the House and take (for yourself) a place of prayer... Other
alternative, suggested by some exegetes, is to imply a deleted word “We
said”.

Accordingly, the meaning would be: and We said, take (for yourselves) a
place of prayer... *al-Musalla* ( **اَلمُصَلـّی** ) is deverbal noun of
place, derived from *as-salah* (( **اَلصَّلوةُ** ) = to pray, to
invoke); the sentence means: take (for yourselves) a place of prayer and
invocation at the place where Ibrahim (a.s.) had stood.

Apparently, the preceding sentence is a sort of introduction, pointing
to the reason why prayer in that place was prescribed; that is why this
sentence does not put emphasis on “prayer” - in other words, it does not
say, and pray in the standing-place of Ibrahim; it literally says, and
take on the standing-place of Ibrahim (a.s.) a place of prayer.

**Qur’an:** ***And We enjoined Ibrahim and Isma'il*** **(saying):**
***“Purify*** **(you two)** ***My House...”**: al-'Ahd* **اَلعَهْدُ** )
*=* to enjoin, to obli­gate). The order to purify the House may mean to
keep it exclu­sively reserved for the worship by those who go around it
making circuits, those who abide in it for devotion, and those who pray
in it.

In this sense, it would be an *isti'arah bi 'l-kinaya,* and would imply:
keep My House exclusively reserved for My wor­ship. Alternatively, the
order may be to keep it clean; to be on guard lest it is dirtied by
careless people.

*ar-Rukka'*( **اَلرُّكَّعُ** ) and *as-sujud* ( **اَلسُّجُودُ** ) are
plurals of *ar-raki'* ( **اَلرَّاكِعُ** ) *=* one who bows down) and
*as-sajid* ( **اَلسَّّاجـِدُُ** ) = one who prostrates, one who does
*sajdah*) respectively, the phrase refers to those who pray.

**Qur’an:** *And* **(remember)** ***when Ibrahim said: “My Lord! make it
a secure town... ”**:* In this way Ibrahim (a. s.) called on his Lord to
bestow security and safety as well as sustenance on the residents of
Mecca; and the prayer was granted.

Far be it from Allah to quote in His speech an unaccepted prayer without
hint­ing at its rejection; if He were to do so, His talk would amount to
a vain ridicule - far beneath the sublime dignity of His truth­ful
speech. He says:

... ***and the truth do I speak*** (***38:83***)***;***

***Most surely it is a decisive word, and it is no a jest*** (86:13 -
14).

The Qur'an has quoted numerous prayers which this great prophet had
pleaded before his Lord for; for example, his prayer for himself in the
beginning of his life; his prayer at the time of his emigration to
Syria; his invocation to keep his good name alive; his prayer for
himself, for his progeny and parents, and for the believing men and
women; his invocation, after building the House, for the residents of
Mecca; his prayer and pleading for a Prophet to be sent from among his
progeny.

His prayers and the favours he asked from Allah are a canvas which
graphi­cally shows his hopes and expectations, creates before our eyes a
clear picture of his endeavours and efforts in the way of Allah, and
provides a glimpse of his sublime spiritual virtues.

In short, these prayers show his status before Allah and his nearness to
Him. One may write a detailed history of his life, basing it on his
stories and the laudatory phrases used for him in the Qur'an; and we
shall write something on these lines in Chapter 6 (The Cattle).

**Qur’an:** ***such of them as believe**:* Ibrahim (a. s.) asked his
Lord to give the residents of Mecca security and provide them with
fruits. At the same time he realized that not all of the residents would
be believers, that some of them would be unbelievers; also he understood
that his prayer for their sustenance was general - it covered the
believers as well as the unbelievers; and he was aware that he had
already declared himself to be separate from the unbelievers and their
idols (as Allah says about him:

***But when it became clear to him that he, that is, his father, was an
enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him*** [9:114].

Here Allah bears witness that Ibrahim [a.s.] had declared his separation
from every enemy of Allah, not expecting even his father). In this
background, as soon as he realized that his prayer included both the
believers and the unbelievers, he added the proviso, “such of them as
believe...”, although he was well aware that, according to the social
structure of this world, sustenance could not be given only to the
believing group, to the exclusion of the unbelievers; yet he qualified
his prayer.

Even so, Allah knows better how He should decide about His creatures and
what He should decree concerning them. Therefore, Ibrahim's prayer was
granted for the believers, and was extended to cover the unbelievers
also.

The reply given to Ibrahim (a.s.) implies that Allah would give them
sustenance according to the system He has created in this world; in
other words, believers and unbelievers both would be given their
livelihood, because restricting it to the believers would entail
unnecessarily breaking the usual and established system.

Ibrahim (a.s.) could have said: and provide the believers of this town
with fruits; but he did not, because what he wanted to ask was an
attraction, a dignity, for the town which would be centred around the
Sacred House of Allah.

That House was built in a valley devoid of every agricultural produce;
and if it were not provided with fruits and food-stuff, nobody would
settle in it, and the place would remain uninhabited.

**Qur’an:** ***“And whoever disbelieves, I will grant him enjoy­ment for
a short while**:* The word translated, “I will grant him enjoyment”, has
been read *umti'uhu* ( **اُمْتِعُهُُُ** ) and *umatti'uhu* (
**اُمَتـِِّعُهُُُ** ) from the verbal noun's paradigms *al-if'al* (
**اَلإفعْالُُ** ) and *at-taf-'il*(**اَلتَّفْعِيلُ**) respectively.
Meaning of both readings is the same.

**Qur’an:** ***then I will drive him to the chastisement...*** *”:* It
further shows the great dignity of the House and is meant to give even
more pleasure to Ibrahim (a.s.). The import of the verse is as follows:

I have granted your prayer (to increase this House's honour by giving
sustenance to its believing residents) and have decided to include even
the unbelievers in that livelihood; but the unbelievers should not be
deluded by that; they should not think that the sustenance comes to them
because they have got any honour in the eyes of Allah; it is actually in
honour of this town, because I have accepted your prayer and given you
more than you had asked. As for the unbeliever, I will surely drive him
to the chastisement of the Fire and it is an evil destination.

**Qur’an:** ***And*** **(remember)** ***when Ibrahim and Isma'il were
raising the foundations of the House:*** *al-Qawa'id* ((**اَلقَوَاعِدُ**
is plural of *al-ga'idah* (**اَلقَاعِدَةُ**) which literally means that
part of building which “sits” in the earth'; hence it has been
translated as foun­dation, upon which the rest of the building is
raised.

“Raising the foundations” is an allegorical expression, it counts the
walls (which were raised upon foundations) as a part of the foundation;
another allegorical aspect is to ascribe the rise to the foundations
alone without mentioning the walls, although it were the walls which
were raised. The words “of the House”, point to the intended allegory.

**Qur’an:** **“*****Our. Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the
Hearing, the Knowing**:* The prayer comes direct from Ibrahim and
Isma'il, without any introductory clause like “They said” or “They
prayed”; such a clause is not even implied here.

When we read the words, “when Ibrahim and Isma'il were raising the
foundations of the House”, the scene is flashed before our eyes; it is
as though we see them busy building the walls, and then we dramatically
hear their voices and their prayer directly from them - there is no need
of any intermediary to report to us what they said or did.

Such dramatic presentation is often used in the Qur'an, and it is among
its most beautiful styles - and all its styles are beautiful. It
presents the story in the most effective way, bringing it within the
purview of our senses. It is a style which surpasses all manners of
narration and reporting.

Ibrahim and Isma'il did not mention the thing or action which they
prayed to Allah to accept, that is, they did not say, accept from us
this construction' of Thy House. It shows their humbleness and humility
before their Lord; they thought that it was a very insignificant work on
their part and was not worthy of their Lord.

This omission of the object has given the following connotation to their
prayer: Our Lord! accept from us this in-significant deed, although it
is not worthy of Thy name; surely Thou art hearing our prayers, knowing
our intentions.

**Qur’an:** ***Our Lord! And make us both submissive to thee and***
**(raise)** ***from our offspring a group submitting to Thee.*** The
words translated here as submissive and submitting are *muslim*
(مُسْلِم) and its feminine *muslimah* (**مُسْلِمَة**)*,* respectively.

Obviously, the definition of Islam, with which we are familiar, and
which comes to our minds as soon as we hear the word, Islam, is just the
elementary grade of servitude; it distinguishes a professed convert from
the one who openly rejects the faith. This elemen­tary Islam means
professing the matters of faith and doing necessary deeds, no matter
whether it is done with true belief or hypo-critically.

Now, Ibrahim (a.s.) was a prophet, a messenger and one of the five *ulu
'l-'azm* apostles, who gave us the upright faith. It is unthinkable that
such a great prophet had not attained, at the time when he was praying,
this most elementary grade of Islam.

Likewise, his son, Isma'il (a.s.), was a messenger of Allah and had been
offered as sacrifice in His way. Can it be said that they had got that
much Islam but were unaware of it? Or that, although they were aware of
having attained to that Islam but wanted to continue on it?

Just look at the context of the prayer: Those who prayed were so near to
Allah; they were praying while build­ing His Sacred House; they knew
whom they were praying to, and who He was and how great His splendour
is.

Could they, in that position, ask for such a trivial grade from the Lord
Almighty? Moreover, this grade of Islam is among those things which are
within the power of man himself; and that is why man can be ordered to
accept it; as Allah says:

***When his Lord said to him: “Be a Muslim”, he said: “I submit myself
to the Lord of the worlds”*** (2:131).

Obviously, such a quality or action cannot be attributed to Allah;
likewise, it is meaningless to ask from Allah to do a work which has
been placed within the power of the man himself. (Of course, it may be
done if there is some special condition which makes Divine interference
justifiable.)

Therefore, the Islam they had asked for was not that Islam whose
definition we are familiar with. Islam has many grades, as may be see in
the verse quoted above:

***When his Lord said to him*** (***i.e.,*** Ibrahim): ***“Be a Muslim”,
he said: “I submit myself to the Lord of the worlds”*** (2:131).

Ibrahim (a.s.) was ordered to be a Muslim at a time when he was already
a Muslim. Clearly, the Islam which he was told to attain was other than
the Islam he had already attained. There are many such examples in the
Qur'an.

This sublime grade of Islam - which we shall explain in detail later
on - means total servitude, unconditional surrender of all a servant has
got to his Master. No doubt it is within a man's power to prepare the
conditions facilitating its attainment.

Yet, when we look at an average man and the usual condition of his heart
and mind, such a high standard seems beyond his power to attain. In
other words, it is not possible for him - in the con­ditions surrounding
him - to get to that sublime Islam.

From this point of view, that Islam is not different from other
positions of *al-wilayah* **اَلوِلايَةُ**) *=* friendship of Allah) and
its lofty stages, or from other grades of perfection - all of them are
beyond the reach of an average man, because he cannot fulfil their
necessary conditions.

In this sense, it is possible to count that Islam as a Divine gift which
is beyond a man's power to attain by himself. Consequently, it is
perfectly right for a man to pray to Allah to bestow on him that sublime
quality and make him a Muslim of that high rank.

Moreover, there is another deeper connotations: It is only actions which
are attributed to man and emanate from his free will and power; as for
his attributes and deep-rooted traits (which are etched on his psyche by
repeated actions), they are in fact beyond his power.

Therefore, they may be - or let us say, should be - attributed to Allah,
especially if they are good and virtuous attributes which should better
be attributed to Allah rather than to man. This observation is based on
the style used in the Qur'an. For example:

“My ***Lord! make me keep up prayer, and from my off-spring*** (too) ”
(14:40);

“... ***and join me with the good ones”*** (26:83);

“My ***Lord! grant me that I should be grateful for Thy bounty which
Thou has bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I should do good
such as Thou art pleased with, and make me enter, by Thy mercy, into Thy
servants, the good ones”*** (27:19);

***“Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and*** (raise) ***from
our offspring a group submitting to Thee*** (2:128).

It is now clear that the Islam which Ibrahim and Isma'il had asked for
was something different from the Islam to which the verse 49:14 refers:

***The dwellers of the desert say: “We believe.” Say: “You do not
believe but say: 'We submit*** (we accept Islam)'; ***and faith has not
yet entered into your hearts.”***

The Islam they prayed for was of a high rank and sublime grade which we
shall explain later on.

**Qur’an:** ***and show us our ways of devotion and turn to us***
(mercifully), ***surely Thou art the Oft-returning*** (with mercy),
***the Merciful**:* This also points to the sublime meaning of Islam,
just referred to *al-manasik* **اَلمَناسِكُ**) = translated here as ways
of devotion) is plural of *al-mansak* (**اَلمَنسَكُ**) which means
“wor­ship” or “act of worship”, as Allah says:

***And to every nation We appointed*** (acts of) ***worship...***
(22:34).

It is *a masdar* used as the first construct of a genitive case. We have
explained earlier that *a masdar* used in this way proves the existence
of that work or action. Therefore, the phrase, “our ways of devotion”,
refers to those acts of worship which they were doing or had already
done; it does not refer to any action which they intended to do in
future.

In this context, the phrase “show us” does not mean “teach us” or “help
us to do”; rather it means “strengthen us by showing us the realities of
our acts of worship”, as we pointed out earlier while writing the verse:

***and We revealed to them the doing of good*** (deeds) ***and the
establishing of prayer and the giving of zakat*** (21:73).

And later on we shall explain that the revelation mentioned in this
verse means to strengthen the doer of that deed; it does not mean
teaching them their responsibilities and obligations. Probably, it is to
this reality that the verses 38: 45 - 46 refer:

***And remember Our servants, Ibrahim and Ishaq and Ya'qub, men of
strength and insight. Surely We purified them by a pure quality, the
remembering of the*** (final) ***abode.***

The above explanation makes it clear that this prayer was for an Islam
and an insight into worship completely different from ordinary meanings
of these terms. The same is the case with their prayer, *tub 'alayna*
**تُبْ عَلَيْنا**) = usually translated as, forgive us);

Ibrahim and Isma'il both were prophets, protected by Allah from every
error and sin; they could not make any mistake or error; they did not
need Allah's forgiveness and pardon as we do when we commit sins, (that
is why we have translated it in literal way: *turn to us* mercifully).

Question: It is all right to interpret Islam, showing the ways of
devotion and forgiveness in the way you have done maintaining the
dignity of Ibrahim and Isma'il (peace be on them both). But it is not
necessary to apply the same meanings when these words are used for their
offspring. Ibrahim (a.s.) did not include his offspring with himself and
Isma'il, except in the prayer for Islam, and that also in a separate
sentence.

They did not say: Make us and a group of our offspring submissive to
Thee; instead they prayed for themselves, and after that separately
pleaded for their offspring, saying, ”and (raise) from our offspring a
group sub­mitting to Thee”.

There should be no difficulty in believing that what they had in mind
was Islam in its general meaning covering all its ranks and grades -
even the most elementary one. Even this elementary grade of Islam gives
good results and is instrumental in creating good environment in the
society.

It would not be wrong if Ibrahim (a.s.) asked his Lord for this Islam;
even the Prophet invited people to just that type of Islam - if they
testified that there was none to be worshipped except Allah and Muhammad
(S) was His Messenger, they were accepted as Muslims, their lives were
protected, marriage with them was allowed and they became entitled to
inherit from their Muslim relatives.

Therefore, it should be perfectly right to say that the two sentences
refer to two separate ranks of Islam: “Our Lord! and make us both
submissive to Thee”, would mean the highest rank of Islam in conformity
with the prestige of Ibrahim and Isma'il;

“and (raise) from our offspring a group submitting to Thee”, would refer
to the elementary grade of Islam befitting a nation which included
hypocrites and people of weak faith as well as those with firm belief -
and all are called Muslims.

**Reply:** Position of legislation for the guidance of people is totally
different from the position of praying to Allah, and each has its own
rules; what is valid on one plane is not necess­arily good on the other.

The Prophet prescribed a minimum stan­dard for his *ummah,* that is, to
utter the two testimonies of the Oneness of Allah, and his own
prophethood; it was done with a view to widen the circle of Islam and to
protect the healthy religious system - that manifest Islam protected the
essence of Islam as a shell protects the kernel.

But the plane of invocation and prayer to Allah is much higher than
that. At this level, appearances loose their value; it is the reality
that matters here; the objective here is actuality and truth, and the
desire is for nearness to Allah. At this level, the prophets are not
influenced by appearance. It was not because of any worldly love of his
offspring that Ibrahim (a.s.) prayed for his progeny.

Had it been so, he would have prayed first of all for his father and
would not have declared his separation from him as soon as he came to
know that he was an enemy of Allah. Also, if he would have been
concerned with appearances, he would not have prayed in the following
words:

***And disgrace me not on the day when they are raised, the day on which
neither property will avail, nor sons, except him who comes to Allah
with a heart submissive*** (26:87 - 89);

nor would have he said: ***And make for me a truthful tongue among the
posterity*** (26:84),

instead he would have said, make for me a remembering tongue among the
posterity.

Keeping all this in view, it is easy to understand that when he asked
from his Lord to raise a Muslim group from among his offspring, he did
not mean the elementary rank of Islam; he wanted for them the reality of
Islam.

The Qur'anic words, “a group submitting to Thee”, support this
interpretation. If he wanted only the appearance of Islam and not its
essence, it was enough to say, “a group submitting”, there was no need
to add, “to Thee”. (Ponder on this point.)

**Qur’an:** ***Our Lord! and raise up in them an Apostle from among
themselves...**:* He was praying for the Prophet; and the Prophet used
to say: “I am the prayer of Ibrahim”.

Traditions
----------

al-Kattani said: “I asked Abu Abdillah (a.s.) about a man who forgot to
pray two *rak'ahs* near the standing-place of Ibrahim, in *at-tawaf*
**اَلطـَّوَافُ**) *=* circuit, circumambulation) of the *hajj* and
'*umrah.* He (a.s.) said:

'If he is still in the town (Mecca), he should pray the two *rak'ahs*
near the standing-place of Ibrahim, because verily Allah says: *and
take* (for yourselves) *a place of prayer on the standing-place of
Ibrahim;* and if he has departed (from it) then I will not order him to
return.' ” (*al-Kafi*)

**The author says:** Almost similar traditions have been nar­rated by
ash-Shaykh in *at-Tahdhib* and by al-'Ayyashi in his *at-Tafsir* with
several *asnad* (*i.e.,* chains of narrators). Particulars of this rule
(i.e., prayer should be offered near or behind the standing-place - as
is narrated in some traditions that:

“No-one should pray the two *rak'ahs* of *at-tawaf* except behind the
stand­ing-place...”) are inferred from the word *min* (**مِنَْ** *=*
from; here translated as *on*) used in the order, ***and take... a place
of prayer on*** **(or, from)** ***the standing-place...***

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said explaining the words of Allah: ***Purify***
**(you** **two)** ***My House...**:* “Keep the polytheists away from
it.” (*at-Tafsir,* al-Qummi)

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: ” Verily Allah, Mighty and Great is He! says in
His Book:

***'Purify*** (you two) My ***House for those who make circuit and those
who abide*** (in it for devotion) ***and those who bow down*** (and)
***those who prostrate themselves.'***

Therefore, it is proper for a servant not to enter Mecca except that he
is clean, (and) has washed away his sweat and dirt and has purified
himself.”

**The author says:** This meaning has been narrated in other traditions
also. The idea, that if the place of arrival is clean then the one who
arrives should make himself clean, may be inferred from other verses
too. See, for example, the verse:

***and the good things are for good ones and the good ones are for good
things*** (24:26).

Ibn ''Abbas said: “When Ibrahim brought Isma'il and Hajar, he settled
them at Mecca; and a time passed; and the people of (the tribe of)
Jurhum came to settle there and Isma'il married a woman from that tribe;
and Hajar died; and Ibrahim asked per-mission of Sarah (to visit
Isma'il); so she allowed him but imposed a condition on him that he
would not come down (from his riding animal).

Thus Ibrahim arrived (at Mecca) and Hajar had died, so he went to the
house of Isma'il; and he asked his wife: 'Where is your husband?' She
told him: 'He is not here, he has gone hunting.' And Isma'il used to go
outside al-Haram (**اَلحَرَم** = the bound­ary) to hunt and then return.
Ibrahim said to her: 'Do you have anything to entertain a guest?'

She said: 'I have nothing and there is nobody with me.' Then Ibrahim
said to her: 'When your husband comes, tell him (my) *salam* and tell
him to change the threshold of his door.' And Ibrahim went away. Then
Isma'il came and felt the scent of his father.

So he asked his wife: 'Had anyone come to you?' She said: 'An old man
had come to me with such and such features (describing him scornfully).'
(Isma'il) said: 'Then what did he say to you?' She said: 'He said to me
to give you (his) *salam* and to tell you to change the threshold of
your door.' So, Isma'il divorced her and married another (woman).

Thereafter, Ibrahim remained (at his place) as long as Allah wished him
to remain (there). Then he asked permission of Sarah to visit Isma'il;
and she allowed him, but (again) imposed the (same) condition that he
should not come down (from his riding animal). Then Ibrahim came until
he reached the door of Isma'il.

And he asked his wife: 'Where is your husband?' She said: 'He has gone
for hunting and, Allah willing, he will come back just now; you come
down, may Allah have mercy upon you!' He asked her: 'Do you have anyting
to entertain a guest?'

She said: 'Yes.' Then she brought milk and meat. (Ibrahim) thereupon
prayed and blessed her. Had she brought on that day bread, wheat, barley
or date, (Mecca) would have become the most plentiful of all the world
in wheat, barley or date. Then she said to him: '(Please) come down so
that I may wash your head.'

But he did not come down. So she brought (the stone which thereafter was
known as) the standing-place (of Ibrahim) and put it on his (right)
side, and he put his foot on it, and his footmark was impressed on it;
(in this way) she washed the right side of his head; then she shifted
the stone to his left side and washed the left side of his head, and
(again) his footmark was imprinted on it.

Thereupon (Ibrahim) said to her: 'When your husband comes, give him (my)
*salam* and tell him that the threshold of his door is now in order.'

When Isma'il (a.s.) came back, he felt the scent of his father, and
asked his wife: 'Had anyone come to you?' She replied: 'Yes, a venerable
(old) man, of loveliest features and most pleasant fra­grance; he said
to me this and this and I told him this and this; and I washed his head
and this is the imprint of his feet on (his) standing-place.' (Hearing
this), Isma'il said to her: 'That was Ibrahim.'' *”*(*Majma'u 'l-bayan*
)

**The author says:** al-Qummi has narrated in his *at-Tafsir a* nearly
similar tradition.  
 as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Verily, Ibrahim settled in a valley of Syria.
When he got his son Isma'il from Hajar, Sarah was extreme­ly grieved
because she hereself had no child. And she used to hurt Ibrahim and make
him unhappy with respect to Hajar.

So Ibrahim complained to Allah about it, and Allah sent a revelation to
him: 'The likeness of woman is like the curved rib; if you leave it (as
it is), you will benefit from it, but if you (try to) make it straight,
you will break it.' Thereafter, (Allah) ordered him to remove Isma'il
and his mother (from that place).

He said: 'O Lord! to which place?' (Allah) said: 'To My holy place, and
My sanctuary, and the part of the earth which I created first (of all
the earth); and it is Mecca.' Then Allah sent Jibril down to him with
*al-Buraq*[^1]*;* and (Jibril) made Hajar, Isma'il and Ibrahim ride on
it.

And whenever Ibrahim passed a good place with trees, cultivation and
date-palms, he used to say: 'O Jibril! here? here?' And Jibril used to
reply: 'No, go on, go on.' (It continued) until they reached Mecca and
(Jibril) made them alight in the place where the House is.

And Ibrahim had given Sarah a promise that he would not come down until
he came back to her. When they alighted in that place, there was a tree
there; Hajar spread on that tree a sheet she had with her, and thus they
found a shade under it.

When Ibrahim arranged their affairs and settled them there, he wished to
leave them to return to Sarah. Hajar said to him: 'O Ibrahim! Are you
leaving us in a place where there is neither human being to keep company
nor water nor cultivation?' Ibrahim said: 'Allah, Who has ordered me to
settle you in this place, will suffice you.'

Then he took leave of them. When he reached Kada' (a mountain in Dhu
Tuwa), Ibrahim turned around and said:

“O ***our Lord! surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
uncultivable near Thy Sacred House, our Lord!, that they may establish
prayer; therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards them and
provide them with fruits, haply they may be grateful”*** (14:37)***.***

Then he went away, and Hajar remained (there). When the sun rose high,
Isma'il became thirsty; Hajar stood at the running-place[^2], and she
ascended the Safa, and mirage glittered before her in the valley and she
thought that it was water; so she descended to the valley and ran (to
it).

When she reached Marwah, she could not see Isma'il, therefore, she
returned until she reached Safa and again she looked (around, with the
same effect); until she did likewise seven times. When she was on
Marwah, in the seventh round, she looked at Isma'il and lo! water had
appeared from under his feet.

She returned and gathered sand around the water - the water was flowing
and she “reined” (Arabic: **زَمَّتَْْ** = *zammat*) it with (the sand)
which she put around it, and that is why it was called *zamzam.*

And the (tribe of) Jurhum had come down at *Dhu 'l-majaz* and *Arafat.*
When water appeared at Mecca, the birds and wild animals gathered around
it; the Jurhum saw this gathering of the birds and animals at that place
and followed them until they found a woman and a child settled there -
they were sitting in the shade of the tree and the water had appeared
for them.

They said to Hajar: 'Who are you? And what is the matter with you and
this child?' She said: 'I am the mother of the son of Ibrahim, the
friend of Allah, and this is his son; Allah has ordered him to settle us
here.'

They asked her: 'Would you allow us to remain near you?' She told them:
'Until Ibrahim comes.' When Ibrahim came to visit them the third day,
Hajar said: 'O friend of Allah! there are some people of Jurhum here;
they request you to allow them to settle near us; so will you allow
them?' Ibrahim said: 'Yes.'

Then Hajar allowed them and they settled near them, and erected their
tents. In this way Hajar and Isma'il got on friendly terms with them.
When Ibrahim came to see them the second time, he looked at the large
number of people around them, and he was extremely happy.

When Isma'il grew up - and each one of the Jurhum had presented one or
two goats to Isma'il - so Hajar and Isma'il supported themselves with
them. When Isma'il came of age, Allah ordered Ibrahim to build the
House... When Allah ordered Ibrahim to build the House, he did not know
where to build it; so Allah sent Jibril and he drew a line at the site
of the House...

So, Ibrahim built the House and shifted Isma'il from Dhu Tuwa. And he
raised (the House) nine hands in height. Then (Jibril) led him to the
place of the (Black) Stone, and Ibrahim took it out and fixed it in the
place where it is at present.

When he built it, he made two doors for it, one in the east and the
other in the west; and the door that was in the west is (now) called
al-Mustajar. Then he put on it tree (-trunks) and *al-adhkhar*
**اَلأذْخَرْ** ) = a sweet smelling grass) (as roof). And Hajar put on
the door a sheet she had with her and under which they used to sit. When
he built and completed it, Ibrahim and Isma'il performed their *hajj.*

Jibril came to them on the day of *at-tarwiyah,* that is, 8th *Dhu
'l-hijjah,* and said: 'O Ibrahim! stand up and quench your thirst from
water' (because there was no water in Mina or 'Arafat); that is why it
was named the day of *at-tarwiyah* **اَلتـَّروِيَةُ**) = to quench
thirst).

Then (Jibril) took him out to Mina and he stayed there in the night, and
Jibril did with Ibrahim what he had done with Adam. Thus, when Ibrahim
completed the construction of the House, he said: ***'*****My** ***Lord!
make it a secure town and provide its people with fruits, such of themas
believe in Allah...'*** *”*

The Imam explained the fruits as the fruits of the hearts, that is, make
people love them, so that they may befriend them and return to them
(year after year). (*at-Tafsir,* al-Qummi)

The author says: This is the gist of this story, and it covers many of
the traditions narrated about this subject. Some other traditions say
that there had happened many miraculous things in the history of the
House.

For example, some traditions say that the House in the very beginning
was a dome of light; it had descended on Adam and settled in the place
where in later days Ibrahim built the Ka'bah; and that dome remained in
the place till the deluge of Nuh; when the earth was submerged in water,
Allah took that dome up; and its site was not submerged, that is why the
Ka'bah is called the Ancient House.

Other traditions say that Allah sent the foundation of the House down
from the Garden.  
 Yet others say that the Black Stone came down from the Garden - and it
was whiter than snow - then it turned black when it was touched by the
unbelievers.

Also it is narrated from al-Baqir or as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:
“Verily Allah ordered Ibrahim to build the Ka'bah and to raise its walls
and to show the people their ways of devotion (i.e., *hajj*)*.*

Thereupon, Ibrahim and Isma'il built the House, every day (the height
of) a knee until it reached the place of the Black Stone.” And al-Baqir
(a.s.) said: “Then the (mountain) Abu Qubays called to him: 'I have
something in trust for you;' and it gave him the (Black) Stone, and he
put it in its place.” (*al-Kafi*)

ath-Thawri says: “I asked Abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the Stone. He said:
'Three stones came down from the Garden: the Black Stone which was put
in place by Ibrahim, and the Standing-place of Ibrahim, and the stone of
the Israelites.' ” (al-'Ayyashi)

And a tradition says that the Black Stone was an angel.

**The author says:** There are very many such traditions nar­rated by
both the Shi'ah and the Sunni narrators; and although these traditions
are *ahad* and do not reach, in words or meanings, the standard required
for *a mutawatir* narration, still they are not unique in the field of
religious descriptions, nor is there any reason to discard them
altogether.

As for the narration that the dome was sent down to Adam or that Ibrahim
rode *al-Buraq* for his journey to Mecca and other such miraculous
happenings which have a super-natural character, there is no reason to
say that they were impossible. Moreover, Allah had given His prophets
many such miracles and super-natural signs, and the Qur'an mentions many
such events.

So far as the coming down of the foundations of the House, the Black
Stone and the Standing Stone (which is said to be fixed in the structure
now known as the Standing-place of Ibrahim) and other such things are
concerned, there are many such ex­amples found in the Qur'an and
*hadith.* Many vegetables and fruits etc. are said to be from the
Garden, or from the Fire and its out-burst.

Of the same genre are the traditions of “substance” saying that the
substance of the good people is from the Garden and that of the evil
ones is from the Fire; or that they are from *al-'illiyyin*
**اَلعِلـِّيِينُ**) = lofty place; the Book of the deeds of the
virtuous) and *as-sijjin* **اَلسِـّجِِينُ**) *=*prison; the Book of the
deeds of the evil ones), respecttively.

Of similar nature are the traditions to the effect that the Garden of
*al-barzakh* (the period between death and the Day of Judgment) is in
some specified place on this earth, and the Fire of *al-barzakh* in some
other place in it; and that the grave is either a section of the
Garden's or a pit of the Fire's.

There are many such informations which one is sure to come upon while
studying the traditions. And, as we said earlier, they are so huge in
number that the whole lot cannot be discarded, nor is it possible to
question its authenticity.

They are parts of the Divine realities expounded by the Qur'an and
followed by the traditions. The fact is that all the things seen in this
material world have been sent down by Allah; whatsoever is good and
lovely, or is a means to or a receptacle of good, has come down from the
Garden and will return to it; and whatsoever is bad and evil, or is a
means to or a receptacle of evil, has come down from the Fire and will
return to it.

Allah says:

***And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We
do not send it down but in a known measure*** (15:21).

It shows that everything exists with Allah, and it is an existence
without any limit or measure; when it is sent down - a gradual descent -
then it becomes subject to limits and measures.

This verse describes the descent of all things in general. But there are
also in the Qur'an specific examples of this descent. Allah says:

... ***and He has sent down for you eight of the cattle in pairs...***
(39:6)***;***

***... and We have sent down the iron...*** (57:25)***;***

***And in the heaven is your sustenance, and what you are promised***
(51:22).

We shall further explain the meanings of these verses in their proper
places, Allah willing. They however prove that every thing descends to
this world from Allah. Other verses show that they are also to return to
him, as He says:

***And that to your Lord is the end goal*** (53:42)***;***

***Surely to your Lord is the return*** (96:8)***;***

***... to Him is the eventual coming*** (40:3)***;***

***... now surely to Allah do all affairs eventually come***
(42:53)***.***

There are many verses in the Qur'an of the same connotation.

Also, Allah has made it clear that every thing - and all things
presently are in middle of their journey - follows a course demanded by
its origin, and that origin has some effect on its suc­cess and failure,
its good and evil, as the Qur'an says:

***Say: “Every one acts according to his own manner...”*** (17:84);

***And every one has a direction to which he should turn...***
(2:148)***.***

We shall explain all these verses in their places; here they have been
quoted just to complete the picture, and make the subject of our
dis­cussion clearer.

What these verses prove is this: There is reason to believe that the
traditions which say about a material thing that it came down from the
Garden or from the Fire (when that thing has some connection with the
next life's happiness or un­happiness) are on the whole correct, because
they are, generally speaking, in conformity with the Qur'anic
principles - although it does not mean that each and every such
tradition is correct or trustworthy. Ponder on this point.

Someone has said: “The Divine words: ***And*** **(*****remember*****)**
***when Ibrahim and Isma'il were raising the foundations of the
House...**,* manifestly show that the two prophets built this House for
the worship of Allah in that country of the idol-wor­shippers.

But the story-tellers and those exegetes who followed them have
embroidered what Allah had said. They have added a lot of fanciful
details, as, for example, that the House was from the very beginning and
Adam did its *hajj;* that it was taken to the heaven during Null's
flood; that the Black Stone was one of the stones of the Garden.

Their main purpose was to present the religion in an attractive garment,
adorning it with fascinating narratives. Such myths may impress the
masses; but the people who have knowledge and wisdom know that spiritual
excellence depends on Divine bestowal - it is Allah Who makes one thing
to excel the others.

The Ka'bah has excellence because it is the House of Allah, that is,
attributed to Him; the Black Stone is excellent because people have been
ordered to kiss it - in this respect it represents the hand of Allah. It
has no bearing on its excellence whether originally it was a ruby or a
pearl or some other rock; nor do such tales add to its real glory.

In reality it makes no difference in the eyes of Allah whether a stone
is black or white. The Ka'bah has got its distinction and honour because
Allah has called it His House, and has appointed it as the centre for
various acts of worship which cannot be performed in any other place -
its glory does not lie in the fact that its stones are more valuable
than other stones, or that its site is the most attractive of all, or
that it was sent down from the lofty heavens.

Likewise, the excellence of the prophets is not based on any distinctive
feature of their bodies nor on the quality of their apparel. They got
excellence because Allah chose them especially, and selected them for
His prophethood which is a spiritual thing; otherwise many people in the
world were far superior to them in their adornments and enjoyed greater
worldly bounties.”

He continues to say: “These traditions are untrustworthy because they
contradict each other and some are self-contradic­tory; they are
unauthentic because their chains of narrators are not correct; they are
unacceptable because they go against the apparent meaning of the
Qur'an.”

He further says: “These traditions are Israelite myths, propa­gated
among the Muslims by unbelieving Jews to make Islam look ridiculous, in
order to keep the People of the Book away from it.”

The author says: There is a grain of truth in some things he has said:
But he has gone far beyond the limit in disputation, and consequently
has lost his bearings and arrived at a hypothesis much more atrocious
and repugnant, Let us have a critical look at his arguments:

Objection: “These traditions are untrustworthy and unacceptable because
they contradict each other and are against the Qur'an.”

Reply: The fact that some of them contradict the others could be a
matter of worry if we were to accept them one by one as separate
independent units. But when we accept the whole in their collective
capacity (i.e., when we say that the whole lot should not be discarded
because, taken all together, they do not tell us anything that is
against reason or against the Qur'an or accepted traditions), then it is
of no importance if there some minor discrepancies between individual
traditions.

But one point must be made clear here: What we have said just now,
con­cerns the traditions narrated from the infallible sources like the
Prophet and his sinless family members. So far as other exegetes among
the Companions and their disciples are concerned, they, in this respect,
are just like any other people; for us it makes no difference whether
their talk is free from contradiction or riddled with it.

In short, there is no justification to discard a tradition, or a group
of traditions, unless it goes against the Qur'an or other authentic
traditions, or the marks of forgery and lie are stamped on it. (However,
when it comes to the basic religious knowledge and fundamental beliefs,
the only thing accepted as proof is the Book of Allah and the authentic
traditions of the Prophet and his sinless progeny; nothing else counts
in this area.)

It is now clear that there are some things which must be accepted, that
is, the Qur'an and the authentic traditions; and there are others which
must be rejected, that is, all that goes against the Qur'an and the
authentic traditions.

Then there is a third group: the traditions concerning which there is
neither any proof compelling us to reject it, nor forcing us to accept
it. These are the traditions which are neither impossible in reason nor
un­acceptable according to the Qur'an and authentic traditions - and
there is no reason why they should be discarded altogether.

Objection: These traditions are unauthentic according to their chains of
narrators.

Reply: The above given explanation also dispels this doubt, because
weakness of the chains of narrators does not oblige us to reject the
whole group, unless it is against the reason, the Qur'an or the
authentic traditions.

**Objection:** They are against the words of Allah; ***And*** (remember)
***when Ibrahim and Isma'il were raising the foun­dation of the
House...***

Reply: I wish I knew how this verse proves that the Black Stone was not
from the Garden! Or, that the dome did not come down to that place in
Adam's time (and there was, therefore, no question of its being taken up
at the time of the flood)! The only thing the verse says is that this
construction, made of stone and mud, was built by Ibrahim.

What has this got to do - either for or against - the traditions
mentioned earlier. The only difficulty with those traditions is that the
objector does not like them. And this dislike is based, not on the
principles of religion, but on his biased views.

He does not believe that the prophets had any spiritual realities within
them; he does not think that the exoteric side of religion is based on
its esoteric aspect; he unconsciously is so much over-awed by today's
natural sciences that he tries to find a material cause not only for
material happenings but even for spiritual things - if they have even a
slight connection with matter. For him, the matter rules over all
happenings, not excepting the sociological principles.

This man should have pondered on this point: The natural sciences deal
with the matter; its properties and its various compounds; they look at
the relationship of a natural effect with its cause. Likewise, the
various sociological disciplines study the social relationships among
various event taking place in society.

But the natural and sociological sciences have no concern at all with
the realities which are beyond the sphere of matter, outside its field
of action; they have no jurisdiction even over immaterial connections
existing between a material thing and an event taking place in the
visible world.

The natural sciences and disciplines have no authority or right to
confirm or reject these immaterial realities. It is within the
jurisdiction of natural science to say that construction of a house
depends on things like mud, stone and mason; it may explain how black
stones may take the shape of a room.

Likewise, sociological disciplines may describe the factors which led to
the building of the Ka'bah - it may explain a part of Ibrahim's
biography, Hajar's life, Isma'il's story, history of Tahamah, arrival of
the tribe of Jur­hum and things like that.

But these sciences and disciplines have no right to discuss what was the
relation between a certain stone on one hand and the Garden or the Fire
on the other; nor have these branches of knowledge any right to express
any affirmative or negative opinion about such narratives.

And you have seen that the Qur'an clearly says that even material and
physical things have been sent down from the trea­sure which is with
Allah, and that they would ultimately return to Him - either to the
Garden or to the Fire.

Also, the Qur'an says that the deeds and actions - which are but
physical move­ments and positions - ascend to Allah acid arrive at His
presence:

***To Him do ascend the good words, and the good deed lifts them up***
(35:10);

again it says:

***to Him reaches the piety on your part*** (22:37),

and piety is but action or a characteristic acquired through repeated
actions. It is essential for a student of religion to meditate on these
verses and to understand that the religious realities do not have any
relationship with material or sociological matters *per se;* they depend
on the facts which are beyond the reach of material disciplines.

Objection: The excellence of the prophets, and the things attributed to
them like the Ka'bah or the Black Stone, is not based on a material
quality; it is a spiritual excellence bestowed by the Divine Grace.

Reply: What he says is right. But he should understand what is the real
meaning of what he says. What is that spiritual reality which creates
excellence? Is it a mentally posited abstract idea created by social
needs, like the designations and offices found in every nation, for
example, presidency, leadership of the party, the high price of gold and
silver, respect of the parents, sanctity of the laws of the land?

All these are subjective and imaginative abstract forms which the
societies have laid down to meet their own needs; but they have no
existence outside the imagination, beyond subjective consideration.

Such honours and distinctions cannot be found outside the social life
which created them to fulfil its needs; and Allah is too sublime for
such needs to reach His presence. Therefore, such social distinc­tions
have no relevance to an excellence given by Allah to any of His
creatures.

If the objector thinks that the excellence of the prophets is just like
the above-mentioned imaginary and unreal honours, then why should a
house or a stone be denied a similar excel­lence? And if he believes
that an excellence given by Allah is the real one, as is found in light
*vis-à-vis* darkness, in knowledge *vis-à-vis* ignorance, and in wisdom
*vis-à-vis* idiocy, then of course it would be a real and actual
excellence.

In that case, the quiddity of the existence of a prophet would be
different from the quiddity of other human beings - even if our senses
are unable to grasp it.

And such real excellence and distinction is in keeping with the
sublimity and sanctity of the Divine actions and wisdom. Allah says:

***And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between
them in sport. We did not create them both but with the truth, but most
of them do not know*** (44:38 - ***39***)***.***

Such a distinction is real, spiritual, metaphysical and beyond the reach
of physical nature. And if such real excellence may be given to the
prophets, why can it not be bestowed on some other things, like the
Ka'bah and the Black Stone etc.? And, may be, it is this real immaterial
excellence which has been described in such words that the people could
easily understand.

Would that I knew what would such people do about those Qur'anic verses
which say that the people of the Garden will be given cups, ornaments
and dresses of gold and silver. These two metals have no inherent
excellence except that their price remains high because of their
scarcity.

If so, then why should they be used for exalting the people of the
Garden? What wealth will they represent in the Garden? After all, the
economics of this world will not be valid there!

These and other such Divine words and exoteric expressions are the
curtains which hide the esoteric realities; they are the veils covering
Divine secrets. And if such expressions are accept-able for the
realities of the next world, they can as easily be used for some facts
of this one.

az-Zubayri says: “I said to Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.): 'Tell me about the
*ummah* of Muhammad (S), who are they?' He said: 'The *ummah* of
Muhammad (S) are the Children of Hashim in particular.' I said: 'And
what is the proof that the *ummah* of Muhammad are his family members
you have men­tioned, to the exclusion of the others?'

He said: '(It is) the words of Allah: ***And*** (remember) ***when
Ibrahim and Isma'il were raising the foundations of the House: “Our
Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing. Our
Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and*** (raise) ***from our
offspring a*** ***group*** (um­mah) ***submitting to Thee, and show us
our ways of devotion and turn to us*** (mercifully), ***surely Thou art
the Oft-returning*** (with mercy), ***the Merciful.”***

When Allah answered the prayer of Ibrahim and Isma'il and did (promise
to) raise from their offspring a submissive *ummah* and raised up in
them an Apostle from among themselves, that is, from among that *ummah*
itself, to recite to them His communications, and to teach them the Book
and the wisdom, Ibrahim beseeched Allah for another bounty; and asked
for that *ummah* purity from polytheism and idol-worship in order that
the affair of that Apostle might remain firm and strong among them and
they might not need to follow anyone other than themselves.

That is why Ibrahim said:

***“and save me and my sons from worshipping idols:*** My ***Lord!
Surely they have led many men astray; then whoever follows me, he is
surely of me, and whoever disobeys me, Thou surely art Forgiving,
Merciful”*** (14:35 - 36).

It proves that the Imams, and the submissive *ummah* in which Muhammad
(s. a. w. a.) was raised, cannot be except from the offspring of Ibrahim
(a.s.), because he had said: ***“save me and my sons from worshipping
idols”*** *' ”.* (al-'Ayyashi )

**The author says:** The argument of the Imam is absolutely clear.
Ibrahim (a. s.) had asked this submissive *ummah* to be from his
offspring in particular; and the next sentence, ***“Our Lord! and raise
up in them an Apostle from among themselves...”**,* show that the same
submissive group is the *ummah* of Muhammad (S) - and the word, *ummah,*
as used here, does not refer to the people whom Muhammad (S) was sent
to; nor to those who answered his call and believed in his prophethood,
because that *ummah is* not confined to the offspring of Ibrahim and
Isma'il; the word in the present context refers to a particular
submissive *ummah* from the offspring of Ibrahim (a.s.).

Thereafter, Ibrahim (a.s.) prayed to his Lord to protect him and his
sons from idol-worship, to keep them away from polytheism and error -
and this Divine protection is *'ismah* (infallibility; sinlessness).

Also we know that there were a lot of people among the offspring of
Ibrahim and Isma'il - the Arabs of the Mudar, or particularly the
Quraysh - who had gone astray and worshipped idols. It proves that when
Ibrahim (a.s.) prayed for his ”sons” to be protected from idol-worship,
he did not mean all his sons; he was praying only for his infallible
offspring, that is, the Prophet and his purified progeny.

These, then, are the *ummah* of Muham­mad (S) in the prayer of Ibrahim
(a.s.). Probably, it was for this fine distinction that Ibrahim (a.s.)
changed the word, “offspring”, to “sons”; this view is strengthened by
the phrases following this prayer,

***“then whoever follows me, he is surely of me, and whoever disobeys
me, Thou surely art Forgiving, Merciful”.***

Note the opening word, “then”, which shows that what follows is based on
what has preceded; thereafter, he confirms that those who would follow
him would be from him, a part of him; but then he stops and does not say
anything about the opposite group, as though he does not recognize them,
they are strangers to him. (Think it over.)

The Imam said that Ibrahim (a.s.) “asked for that *ummah* purity from
polytheism and idol-worship”. Actually, he had asked protection only
from worshipping the idols; but then he mentioned why he had asked for
that protection: surely the idols have led many men astray.

In this way, the original prayer for protection from idol-worship became
an all-encompassing prayer for protection from all types of straying and
error, ranging from idol-worship to small sins - because every sin is a
sort of polytheism, as we have already explained under the verse:

***The path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed favours...*** (1:7).

The Imam said: “It proves that the Imams, and the sub-missive *ummah* in
which Muhammad (s. a. w. a.) was raised, cannot be except from \_ the
offspring of Ibrahim (a.s.).” That is the Imams are the submissive
*ummah,* and they are from the off-spring of Ibrahim (a.s.), as
explained above.

**Objection:** You say that the word, *ummah,* in this verse refers to a
small group of the Muslims, and not to the whole nation; you use the
same interpretation in some other verses, for example, ***You are the
best nation raised up for*** **(the benefit of)** ***men...***
**(3:110).**

But this obliges us to interpret the word in a metaphorical way -
without any justifiable reason. Moreover, the Qur'an addresses itself to
the whole *ummah* who believed in the Prophet; it is a self-evident fact
which does not need any proof.

**Reply:** It was long after the revelation of the Qur'an and the spread
of Islam that the phrase, *ummah* of Muhammad, was popularly used for
“all those who believe in his prophethood”. It is a later usage.

The original meaning of this word is “people”, “nation”, “group”, as
Allah says: ***and blessing on you and the people*** (***umam =***
plural of ***ummah***) ***from among those who are with you; and there
shall be people*** (***umam***)***...*** (11:48). This word is sometimes
used even for one person;

***Surely Ibrahim was a “people”*** (devoutly) ***obedient to Allah***
(16:120).

Therefore, it is the context or the intention of the speaker which
decides how big or small a circle this word describes in a sentence. Now
the words, ***Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and***
**(raise)** ***from our offspring a group submitting to Thee**,* were
spoken in prayer, and as explained earlier, they could refer to only a
selected group out of the multitude who believe in the Prophet.

Likewise, the verse, ***You are the best nation raised up for*** **(the
benefit of)** ***men**,* was revealed to show the favour of Allah on the
people thus addressed; its import is to increase their prestige and
enhance their dignity.

Surely, these words could be addressed to the whole *ummah* who call
themselves Muslims. How could it apply to the Pharaohs and Dajjals of
this *ummah* who did not leave any vestige of the religion without
destroying, and who did not come across any religious virtue without
crushing it?

(We shall explain it in detail when writing on this verse.) In short,
this verse is like the talk of Allah with the Children of Israel:

***and that I made you excel the nations*** (2:47);

we should not forget that a man like Qarun was one of them, and surely
this talk does not include him.

Likewise, the complaint of the Prophet, “O ***my Lord! surely my people
treated this Qur'an as a forsaken thing”*** (***25:*** 30), cannot cover
all his *ummah -* there are among them the lovers of the Qur'an, ***the
men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance of
Allah.***

On the other hand, there is the verse 2:134, which is addressed to the
whole *ummah,* and covers all those who believed in the Prophet and even
those to whom he was sent:

***This is a people that have passed away; they shall have what they
earned and you shall have what you earn, and you shall not be called
upon to answer for what they did.***

An Academic Discourse
---------------------

Ponder on the story of Ibrahim (a.s.); study his life; see how he took
his son and wife to the land where now Mecca stands, and settled them
there; how their lives progressed until finally the “sacrifice” of
Isma'il took place and, in the last moment, he was ransomed by Allah;
read how they together built the Ka'bah.

You will find that it is a complete cycle of devotional journey. It
shows how a servant proceeds from his “self” to his Lord, from a far
away station to the centre of “Divine Nearness”; how the journey is
accomplished avoiding the vanities of this world, shunning its
protection, keeping away from its desires - prestige, wealth, women and
children - freeing oneself from the intrigues of satans, not letting
them pollute the purity of intention, and turning with total surrender
and progressing with complete devotion to the Lord, the Great, the High.

These apparently unrelated events are in fact of an unbroken series.
They are historical narratives, but they describe the stages of the
spiritual journey of a servant from self to the Lord.

They teach us the discipline of that journey, instruct us in the rules
and manners of seeking nearness to Allah, of reaching His presence. The
more you meditate on his story, the deeper will be your spiritual
understanding - you will come to know the demands of Divine love and
sincere devotion.

Allah ordered His friend, Ibrahim, to promulgate the *hajj* for the
people, and He says:

***And proclaim among men the hajj; they will come to you on foot and on
every lean camel, coming from every remote path...*** (22:27).

We do not know the details of the laws of the *hajj* as promulgated by
Ibrahim (a.s.). But we know that the *hajj* continued as an event of
great religious import­ance even among the Arabs of the days of
ignorance.

Then Allah sent the Prophet and he gave us the rules of the *hajj* as we
know them. One thing is certain: He did not go against the rules laid
down by Ibrahim (a.s.); what he did was to complete and perfect them.

This fact may be inferred from the words of Allah:

***Say: “Surely,*** (as for) ***me, my Lord has guided me to the
straight path;*** (to) ***a most right religion, the faith of Ibrahim,
the upright one”...*** (6:161);

***He has prescribed for you of the religion what He enjoined upon Nuh
and that which We have revealed unto you, and that which We enjoined
upon Ibrahim and Musa and*** 'Isa***...*** (42:13).

In any case, all the devotional acts of the *hajj -* the *ihram,*
staying at 'Arafat, staying overnight at Mash'ar, sacrificing an animal,
throwing pebbles at the pillars, running between the Safa and the
Marwah, going around Ka'bah, praying near the Standing-place - all these
acts commemorate the events that had happened to Ibrahim, and represent
the stands taken by him and his family; and how admirable stands they
were - the pure and sublime Divine stands to which they were led by
Divine mercy and urged on by the humility of servitude.

The prescribed acts of worship - on their promulgator be the best of
*salams! -* are the symbols of the stands of the perfect ones, the
prophets, *vis-à-vis* their Lord; every act of worship is a photo which
shows to us a stage in their spiritual journey to the station of
nearness to Allah, as Allah says:

***Certainly*** (there) ***is for you in the Messenger of Allah an
excellent example...*** (33: 21).

This is a basic reality. And there is much evidence pointing to this
theme in the traditions which have come down to us regarding the
philosophy of various acts of worship and the esoteric aspects of their
legislation and prescription, as any diligent scholar may find out.

[^1]: al-Buraq is the name of the animal which was also sent to the
Prophet (S) to ride during al-Mi'raj اَلمِعْراج) = Ascension). (tr.)

[^2]: The place between Safa and Marwah where the hajis (pilgrims to
Mecca) run seven times. (tr.)


