Suratul Baqarah: Verses 130 − 134
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٠) وَمَن يَرۡغَبُ عَن مِّلَّةِ إِبرَٲهِـمَ إِلَّا مَن سَفِهَ
نَفسَهُ ۥ‌ۚ وَلَقَدِ ٱصطَفَينَـٰهُ فِى ٱلدُّنيَا‌ۖ وَإِنَّهُ ۥ فِى
ٱلأَخِرَةِ لَمِنَ ٱلصَّـٰلِحِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣١) إِذۡ قَالَ لَهُ ۥ رَبُّهُ ۥۤ أَسلِمۡ‌ۖ قَالَ أَسلَمتُ لِرَبِّ
ٱلعَـٰلَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٢) وَوَصَّىٰ بهَآ إِبرَٲهِـمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعقُوبُ يَـٰبَنِىَّ إِنَّ
ٱللَّهَ ٱصطَفَىٰ لَكُمُ ٱلدِّينَ فَلَا تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنتُم
مُّسلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٣) أَمۡ كُنتُمۡ شُهَدَآءَ إِذۡ حَضَرَ يَعقُوبَ ٱلمَوۡتُ إِذۡ قَالَ
لِبَنِيهِ مَا تَعبُدُونَ مِنۢ بَعدِى قَالُواْ نَعبُدُ إِلَـٰهَكَ
وَإِلَـٰهَ ءَابَآئكَ إِبرَٲهِـمَ وَإِسمَـٰعِيلَ وَإِسحَـٰقَ إِلَـٰهًا
وَٲحِدً۬ا وَنَحنُ لَهُ ۥ مُسلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٤) تِلكَ أُمَّةٌ۬ قَدۡ خَلَتۡ‌ۖ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتۡ وَلَكُم مَّا
كَسَبتُمۡ‌ۖ وَلَا تُسـئَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُواْ يَعمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim but he who makes
himself a fool; and most certainly We chose him in this world, and in
the hereafter, he is most surely among the good ones*** (130).

***When his Lord said to him, Submit*** (yourself) ***he said: “I submit
myself to the Lord of the worlds”*** (131).

***And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons and*** (***so*** did)
***Ya'qub: “O my sons! surely Allah has chosen for you*** (***this***)
***faith, therefore die not unless you are Muslims”*** (132).

***Or, were you witnesses when death approached Ya'qub, when he said to
his sons: “What will you worship after me?” They said:*** ***”We will
worship your God and the God of your fathers, Ibrahim and Isma'il and
Ishaq, one God only, and to Him do we submit”*** (133).

***This is a people that have passed away; they shall have what they
earned and you shall have what you earn, and you shall not be called
upon to answer for what they did*** (134).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim but he
who makes himself a fool:*** *“ar-Raghbah”* ( **اَلرَّغْبََةُ** )
followed by the preposition *'an* **عَنَْْ** ) *=* away from; off) means
“to turn away”, “to dislike”; when followed by *fi* فِيَْْ ) = in), it
denotes “to incline towards”, “to desire”.

The verb, *safiha* **سَـفِهَ**) = made a fool; became a fool) is used
both as transitive and intransi­tive. Some exegetes have taken this word
here as a transitive verb - according to them, the word *nafsahu*
**نَفْسَهَُ** ) = himself; his self) is its object; others have taken
the verb in the intransitive sense and in that case *nafsahu* will be
*at-tamyiz* **اَلتِـَّمْيِيزُ**) *=* a specification), not an object.

In any case, the meaning will remain the same: Whoever turns away from
the religion of Ibrahim is a fool; he does not recognize what is
beneficial to him from that which is harmful. From this verse we may
infer what we have been told in the *hadith:* “Surely wisdom is that by
which the Beneficient (God) is worshipped.”

**Qur’an:** ***and most certainly We chose him in this world:***
*“al‑Istifa' ”* ( **اَلإصْطِفاءُُ** ) means to choose, to separate best
parts of a thing from other parts (if they were mixed together). Looking
at the positions of *al-wilayah* **اَلولايََةُ** ) = love of Allah),
this choosing, this selection fits the sincerity of servitude.

A person so chosen behaves in all his affairs as a sincere slave and
servant, totally surrendering himself to his Lord. In other words,
religion is embodied in all his affairs. After all, what is religion if
not total servitude to Allah in all matters whether of this world or of
the hereafter, accepting gladly whatever the Lord decides for His
servant in any given situation, as He says:

***Surely the religion with Allah is Islam*** (3:19)*.*

Clearly it shows that the position

of “selection” is not different from that of “Islam”, that is,
surrender. As a further proof, look at the next verse: “When his Lord
said to him, Submit (yourself) he said: 'I submit my-self to the Lord of
the worlds' ”.

Obviously, the adverb “when” is related to the preceding verb “We chose
him”. It means that Ibrahim was chosen when his Lord said to him to
submit and he responded by submitting himself to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.

In other words, the verse 131 (***When his Lord said to him, Submit, he
said. “I submit myself to the Lord of the worlds”**,*) *is* like an
explanation of the words, “most surely We chose him”.

In these verses pronouns have been changed from the first person to the
third, and again from the second to the third. After saying, “We chose
him”, it would have been more usual to say: “When We said to him”; but
Allah says,

“When his Lord said to him, Submit (yourself)”; then in reply, Ibrahim
(a.s.) should have said: “I submit myself to Thee”; instead he said: “I
submit myself to the Lord of the worlds”. The reason is a follows:

“When his Lord said to him”: It points to the fact that the talk was a
secret between Ibrahim and his Lord, at a level where there was no one
else to listen to that confidential conver­sation. Had Allah said, “When
We said to him”, it would have implied that the hearers of this verse
were present at that sublime station and could be addressed to by
Allah - after all, the audi­ence has a direct relationship with the
speaker.

Therefore, Allah referred to Himself in the third person, cutting the
connection between Himself and the hearers of the verse, showing that at
the level where He spoke with Ibrahim, no one else was present; the
conversation between Allah and Ibrahim was a confidential matter veiled
in secrecy. In short, it was a talk between two close friends which
others were excluded from.

“I submit myself to the Lord of the worlds”. As mentioned above, the
preceding phrase shows that Allah bestowed His grace exclusively on
Ibrahim and enhanced his rank by this friendly confidential
conversation. But Ibrahim knew how to speak in Divine presence; he was a
servant of Allah; he should not forget the dictates of humility; it was
a sign of his excellence, of his humbleness, that he did not start
talking with Allah in a friendly

way, did not consider himself as worthy of that exclusive proxim­ity, of
that sublime friendship. He continued to see in himself a humble and
powerless servant who is sustained by his Master's grace. That is why he
submitted to the Lord to Whom all the worlds surrender, and said: “I
submit myself to the Lord of the worlds”.

*“al-Islam”* ( **اَلإسـْلامُُ** ), *“at-taslim”* ( **اَلتِـَّسْلِيمُ** )
and ”*al-isti­slam* ( **اَلإسـْتِسْلامُُ** )*,* all are from the same
root *s-l-m* ( س-ل-م ) and have the same meaning, that is, to submit, to
surrender. These verbs are used when a man or a thing submits to another
thing, in such a way that the first never disobeys the second, never
goes against it.

Allah says:

***Yes! whoever submits himself entirely to Allah...*** (2:112);

***Surely I have turned my face, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth...*** (6:79)***.***

It is with the face that one turns towards someone. So far as Allah is
concerned, the whole being, the whole existence, of the thing turns to
Him. When a man surrenders to Allah, he obeys and accepts whatever comes
to him from Allah - the creative matters like the measure and the
decree, as well as the legislative ones like order and prohibition.

As men differ in degrees of their submission to Divine Decrees or
legislations, so does their Islam.
The first stage of Islam is to accept and obey the exoteric
commandments, orders and prohibitions, by reciting *ash-shahada­tayn* (
**اَلشَّهَادَتَيْنِ** ) = the two testimonies, that is, testifying to
the Oneness of God and Messengership of Muhammad, (S), no matter whether
the belief has entered into the heart or not.

Allah says:

***The dwellers of the desert say: “We believe”. Say: “You do not
believe but say, 'We submit'; and faith has not yet entered into your
hearts”...*** (49:14)

This Islam is followed by the first stage of *al-iman* (
**اَلإيْمَانُُ** ) = faith, belief); and that is the sincere belief in
the above-menioned *shahadatayn*; such a believer faithfully obeys most
of the rules of the shari'ah.

This first stage of *al-iman* is followed by the second stage of Islam.
It is the sincere acceptance of all true beliefs in detail, with its
necessary concomitant, that is, good deeds – although occasional slips
are not impossible. Allah says praising the pious ones:

***Those who believed in Our signs and were submissive*** (43: 69).

Also, He says:

***O*** ***you who believe! enter into submission one and all***
(2:208).

These verses show that there is an Islam which comes after *al-iman;*
obviously this Islam is other than the previously mentioned one.

This Islam is followed by the second stage of *al-iman;* and it is the
believing, with full details and reasoning, in the realities of the
religion. Allah says:

***The believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger
then they doubt not and struggle hard with their wealth and their lives
in the way of Allah; they are the truthful ones*** (49:15).

Again, He says:

***O you who believe! shall I lead you to a merchandise which may
deliver you from a painful chastisement? You shall believe in Allah and
His Messenger, and struggle hard in Allah's way with your properties and
your lives*** (61:10-11).

This verse directs the believers to believe; obviously the second *Iman*
is other than the first one.

This second stage of *al-iman* paves the way for the third stage of
Islam. When the soul is sufficiently imbued with the above-mentioned
iman*,* and acquires its characteristics, then man's all animalistic and
beastly faculties are subdued to the sublime powers of his intellect and
spirituality. He keeps all his desires - pulling him to the material
attractions and transient trinkets of this world - under firm control.

Thereupon, he reaches a stage where he worships Allah as though he was
seeing Him - and if he was not seeing Allah, then Allah was seeing him.
There is nothing in his hidden life and inner-self, that is not
submissive to Allah's orders and prohibitions; he is never annoyed with
any decree or measure of Allah. Allah says:

***But no! by your Lord! they do not believe until they make you a judge
of that which has become a matter of disagreement among them, and then
do not find any straitness in their selves as to what you have decided,
and submit with total submission*** (4:65).

This Islam is followed by the third stage of *al-iman.* Allah says:

***Successful indeed are the believers, who are humble in their prayers
and who keep aloof from what is vain...*** (23:1-3).

It is this stage that the words of Allah refer to: “When his Lord said
to him, Submit (yourself), he said: 'I submit myself to the Lord of the
worlds.' ”

Sometimes the second and the third stages are counted as one. The
sublime virtues, for example, being pleased with Divine Decree,
submitting to the commands of Allah, forbear­ance and patience for the
love of Allah, self-denial, piety, and love and hate for the sake of
Allah are concomitants of this stage of *al-iman.*

The fourth stage of Islam follows the third stage of *al-iman.* In the
above-mentioned stage of *al-iman* the condition of a man *vis-à-vis*
his Lord is like that of a slave with his master when a slave faithfully
follows the dictates of his bondage - when he totally surrenders to the
will of his master and accepts his likes and dislikes.

Obviously there is no comparison between the ownership and authority a
master has over his slave and the ownership and authority the Lord of
the worlds has over His creatures. His is the real possession, the real
ownership; nothing else has any independent existence - neither in
person or char­acteristics nor in actions.

Sometimes, when a man reaches the third stage of surrender and
submission, the Divine Grace takes him under its wing; he is shown the
reality, and sees with his heart's eyes that the Kingdom belongs to
Allah, nothing else owns anything at all - except when Allah bestows it
to someone; there is no Lord other than He.

This realization, this unveiling of reality, is a Divine Gift, a
bestowal by Allah, to whom He pleases; a man cannot reach this sublime
stage by his own will or effort. Probably it is to this Islam that the
prayer of Ibrahim and Isma'il refers:

***Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and*** (raise) ***from
our off-spring a group submissive to Thee, and show us our ways of
devotion...*** (2:128).

Compare this to the verse: “When his Lord said to him, Submit
(yourself), he said: 'I submit myself to the Lord of the worlds' ”.

Obviously the latter is a legislative, not a creative, order. Ibrahim
was Muslim by his own will and choice, responding to the Divine
Invitation, obeying the orders of Allah. It was an order he received in
his early life.

Now the former verse shows him, in the twilight of his life, praying
with his son, Isma'il, for Islam and for being shown their ways of
devotion. Undoubtedly, he was asking for something which was not in his
hand; or was praying to be kept firm on something which was not in his
power. In short, the Islam, which Ibrahim and Isma'il prayed for, was of
this fourth and sublime stage.

This Islam is followed by the fourth stage of *al-iman.* It happens when
the above-mentioned conditions permeates the believer's whole being, and
submerges all his conditions and actions. Allah says:

***Now surely the friends of Allah - they have no fear nor do they
grieve; those who believed and were pious*** (10:62 -63).

The believers mentioned here must be having the certainty that nothing
is independent of Allah, and no “cause” has any causative power except
by His permission. It is this certainty which insulates them from grief
when a tragedy strikes them, and protects them from fear if a danger
looms ahead.

It is only because of this factor that they have been praised in these
terms. This iman comes after the above-mentioned Divine Gift of Islam.
Ponder on this point.

**Qur’an:** ***and in the hereafter he is most surely among the good
ones:*** *“as-Salah”* ( **اَلصَّلاحُ** ) literally means: capability,
ability. In the Divine Speech, this word and its derivatives, have been
used sometimes for the man himself, and, at other times, for his actions
and deeds. Allah says:

... ***he should do good deeds...*** (18:110);

also, He says:

***And marry those among you who are single and those who are good***
(***i.e.,*** fit) ***among your male slaves and your female slaves...***
(24:32)

No clear explanation is found in the Book of Allah as to what
constitutes goodness of deeds. But the Book attributes to it some
effects, which may be helpful in understanding its meaning. For example:

A good deed is good for the pleasure of Allah:

***And those who are patient, seeking the pleasure of their Lord...***
(13:22);

***and you do not spend but to seek Allah's pleasure...*** (2:272)

It is good for the reward of Allah:

***Allah's reward is better for him who believes and does good...***
(28:80)

It lifts up the good words which ascend to Allah:

***To Him do ascend the good words; and the good deed lifts them
up...*** (35:10)

These descriptions show that, so far as actions are con­cerned, a “good
deed” means an action that is fit to receive honour from God, is capable
of lifting the good words to Allah. Allah says:

... ***but to Him reaches the piety on your part...*** (22:37)***;***

***All do We aid - these as well as those - out of the bounty of your
Lord; and the bounty of your Lord is not confined*** (17:20).

As for the persons, the following verses show what consti­tutes their
goodness:

***And whoever obeys Allah and the Messen­ger, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favours from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good ones; and excellent are these as
companions!*** (***4:69***)***;***

***And We caused them to enter into Our mercy; surely they were of the
good ones*** (21:86)***.***

Again Allah quotes Sulayman (a.s.) as saying:

... ***and make me enter, by Thy mercy, into Thy ser­vants, the good
ones*** (27:19).

Also, He says:

***And*** (as for) ***Lut, We gave him wisdom and knowledge... and We
took him into Our mercy; surely he was of the good ones*** (21:74 -
***75***)***.***

The mercy referred to in these verses is not the general Divine Mercy
which encompasses everything; nor does it mean that mercy which is
ordained for the pious believers, as Allah says:

... ***and*** My ***mercy encompasses all things; so I will ordain it***
(especially) ***for those who are pious...*** (7:156).

The great personalities men­tioned in the verses earlier referred to
were “the good ones”, and they were a selected group from among the
pious believers; they were “fit” for the exclusive mercy mentioned in
those verses. We know that some of the mercies of Allah are reserved for
some especial groups to the exclusion of others. Allah says:

***and Allah chooses especially whom He pleases for His mercy***
(2:105).

Also, this expression does not refer to the general honour of
*al-wilayah* in other words, it does not say that Allah man-aged or
manages their affairs for them. Of course, the good ones had that honour
too; certainly they were among the honoured *al-awliya'***(**
**اَلأوْلِياءُ** = friends of Allah), as we have explained in the
exegesis of the verse 1:5 (***Guide us to the straight path***)*;* but
this *wilayah* is an attribute which is also shared by the prophets, the
truthful ones and the martyrs.

If they had only this honour to their credit they could not be counted
as a separate group distinguished from the other three.

So, what is the distinctive feature of the “goodness”? The answer is
that Allah takes a “good one” into His especial mercy and grants him
comprehensive protection from chastisement. These two effects are
mentioned in the Qur'an:

***Then as to those who believed and did good, their Lord will make them
enter into His mercy*** (***i.e.,*** into the Garden) (45:30);

***They shall call therein*** (***i.e.,*** in the Garden) ***every fruit
in security*** (44:55).

Now ponder on the following verses:

***And We took him into Our mercy*** (21:75);

***and We made*** (them) ***all good ones*** (21:72).

Note how Allah attributes these actions to Himself, not to the people
concerned. Also look at the fact that according to the Divine
declarations, reward is always given in lieu of actions and efforts.
Keeping all this in view, you will realize that the “personal goodness”
is a especial honour which cannot be earned as a reward of good deeds or
by one's own will.

Probably, it is to this reality that the verse refers:

***They have therein what they wish and with Us is more yet*** (50:35):

Possibly, the first clause (***They have therein what they wish***)
refers to the reward of their deeds; and the second one (***and with Us
is more yet***) concerns what they shall be given not in lieu of action,
but purely by Divine Mercy. We shall elaborate it, Allah willing, in the
exegesis of this verse.

Now look at the life of Ibrahim (a.s.). He was a prophet, a messenger of
God, one of the *ulu 'l azm* prophets and an Imam; many of the prophets
and messengers coming after him were his followers; and he was of the
good ones, as the words of Allah clearly say:

***and We made*** (them) ***all good ones*** (21:72).

This verse also shows that he was made, in this very world, one of the
good ones. Consider also the fact that many prophets of lesser rank were
made, in this very world, among the good ones. Then why does he pray to
Allah to join him to the good ones?

It is clear from this prayer that there was a group of the “good ones”
who had gone ahead of him, and now he was praying to Allah to join him
to them. Allah granted him his prayer “in the hereafter”, as is
mentioned in the Qur'an in three places - one of which is the verse
under discussion:

***and most certainly We chose him in this world, and in the hereafter
he is most surely among the good ones*** (2:130).

Other two verses are:

... ***and We gave him his reward in this world, and in the hereafter he
is most surely among the good ones*** (29:27).

***And We gave him good in this world, and in the hereafter he will most
surely be among the good*** (16:122).

If you ponder on the foregoing details, you will know that “goodness”
has many ranks, one above the other. Therefore you should not be
astonished if you are told that Ibrahim (a.s.) had asked to be joined to
Muhammad (S) and his purified pro­geny (a.s.), and that Allah granted
him his prayer in the here-after, not in this world.

Ibrahim (a.s.) had prayed to Allah to join him with the good ones, while
Muhammad (S) un­ambiguously claims this honour for himself:

***Surely my guardian is Allah, Who revealed the Book, and He takes in
hand*** (the affairs of) ***the good ones*** (7:196).

It is obvious that Muhammad (S) claims the *wilayah* for himself. In
other words, the Prophet, according to his claim mentioned in the verse,
had already got the “goodness”; and Ibrahim (a.s.) was praying to be
joined to a group of “good ones” who had already been given that rank,
and that group was Muhammad (S) and his progeny.

**Qur’an:** ***And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons**:* that is,
the same religion.

**Qur’an:...** *therefore die not unless you are Muslims:* Death is
something beyond one's control; and *“at-taklif”* **اَلتَّكْليْفُ** ) =
commandments of the *shari'ah*) covers only those things which are under
one's control.

Then why did Ibrahim and Ya'qub (peace be on them!) tell their progeny
not to die unless they were Muslims? The fact is that this admonition
concerned a matter which was fully under their power. The real meaning
is like this:

Beware lest the death comes to you and you are not Muslims; always
remain Muslims; keep on Islam, so that whenever death comes to you, you
are Muslims.
The verse gives a hint that the religion means Islam, as Allah says:

***Surely the religion with Allah is Islam*** (3:19)***.***

**Qur’an:** ***“We will worship your God and the God of your fathers,
Ibrahim and Isma'il and Ishaq”**:* The verse uses the word “father” for
the grandfather, the uncle and the father - and it has been used without
any reason of *“at-taghlib”* ( **اَلتَّغْْليْبُُ** ) that is, all groups
are equal in number; there were not more “fathers” than the grandfather
and the uncle to justify the use of this word for the whole group.

It proves that the word “father” may cor­rectly be used for uncle, as we
shall show, Allah willing, that Ibrahim (a.s.) addressed his uncle Azar,
as “father”.

**Qur’an:** *“**one God only**”:* This sums up the preceding detailed
description, “your God and the God of your fathers...”; it serves to
remove any possible misunderstanding that his God was other than the God
of his fathers - as the idol-worshippers thought that there were many
gods. '

**Qur’an:** *“**and to Him do we submit**”;* It refers to the subject of
their talk, that is, worship. They made it clear that their wor­ship of
Allah would be totally in accordance with the dictates of Islam. The
reply shows that the religion of Ibrahim was Islam.

Accordingly, the religion which was inherited by his offspring, for
example, Ishaq, Ya'qub and Isma'il, and which continued in the Children
of Israel and Isma'il, was Islam, and nothing else. It was this religion
which Ibrahim (a.s.) brought from his Lord; and nobody had any right to
turn away from it or to call to any other religion.

Traditions
----------

Sama'ah narrates from as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: “The position of
iman (faith) *vis-à-vis* Islam is like that of the Sacred Ka'bah
*vis-à-vis* the Sanctuary; sometimes one may be in the Sanctuary without
being in the Ka'bah, but he cannot be in the Ka'bah without being in the
Sanctuary.” (*al-Kafi* )

Also he narrates from the same Imam that he said: ”Islam is to bear
witness that there is no god except Allah, and to accept the truth of
the Messenger of Allah; it is by this that the bloods are spared (i.e.,
lives are protected) and marriages and inheritance are validated; and
the multitude of people are on its apparent (meaning); and the iman
(*i.e.,* faith and belief) is the guidance, and (it is) that
characteristic of Islam which is firmly placed in the hearts.” (*ibid.*)

**The author says:** There are other traditions of the same meaning; and
they explain the above-mentioned first stage of the Islam and Iman*.*
al-Barqi has narrated from 'Ali (a.s.) that he said: “Islam is
submission and submission is conviction.” (*ibid.*)

Kahil said that as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “If a people worshipped Allah -
the One, there is no partner to Him - and established prayer, and paid
the *zakat* and did the *hajj* of the House, and kept the fast of the
month of *Ramadan,* and then said about-something done by Allah or done
by the Messenger of Allah, 'Why did he not do it in another way?', or
(even if) they felt (like) it in their hearts, they would become
polytheists because of it...” (*ibid.*)

**The author says:** The foregoing two traditions refer to the third
stages of the Islam and iman*.*
Ad-Daylami narrates in his *al-Irshad -* and he gives two *sanads* for
this *hadith* which is one of the traditions of Ascension - that Allah
said:

“O Ahmad! Do you know which way of living is happier and which life more
durable?” (The Messenger of Allah) said: “No, O Allah!” (He) said: “As
for the happy way of living, it is that in which the (living) person is
not tired of remembering Me, and does not forget My bounties, and does
not ignore My rights (on him); he seeks My pleasure day and night.

And as for the ever-lasting life, it is (realized) when (the person)
works for his (spiritual) benefit until the world looses its
signifi­cance for him, and looks small in his eyes; and the hereafter
becomes great for him; and he gives preference to My pleasure over his
own desire, and seeks My pleasures, and thinks the right of My bounty
(as) great (on him); and keeps in mind what I have done for him (i.e.,
for his benefit); and watches Me day and night whenever he is tempted to
commit any wrong or sin; and keeps his heart clean from all that I
dislike; and hates Satan and his whisperings, and does not let Satan
establish a hold over, or a passage to, his heart.

When he acts (like) this, then I put (My) love into his heart until I
make his heart, as well as his leisure and engagement, and his thought
and speech, a part of (My) favours which I have bestowed on those of My
creatures who love Me; and I open his heart's eye and ear, so that he
hears with his heart, and looks with his heart to My Majesty and
Great­ness; and I make the world straitened for him; and make him hate
it with all its pleasures; and I caution him of the world and all that
it contains, as a shepherd protects his sheep from dangerous pasture
lands.

When it happens, then he flees from people, and transfers from the house
of termination to the abode of eternity, and from the house of Satan to
the seat of the Beneficent (God), O Ahmad! and I adorn him with dignity
and majesty.

So, this is the good way of living and the eternal life; and it is the
station of those who are pleased (with Me). So, whoever acts for My
pleasure, I give him three characteristics: I teach him gratitude which
is not polluted by ignorance, and remembrance that is not adulterated
with forgetfulness, and love - so that he does not prefer the love of
creatures to My love.

Then when he loves Me, I love him, and I open the eye of his heart to My
Majesty, and do not keep My (very) special creatures hidden from him.
And I converse with him secretly in the dark of night and the light of
day, until he ceases talking with the creatures and sitting with them;
and I make him hear My talk and the speech of My angels; and I make My
secret known to him - which I have kept hidden from (all) My creation.
And I dress him in modesty, until all the creation is awed of him. And
he walks on the earth (and all his sins are) forgiven.

And I make his heart hearing and seeing; and do not hide from him
anything of the Garden or the Fire; and I make known to him what terror
and affliction are going to happen to the people on the Day of
Resurrection, and the things I will question the rich and the poor, as
well as the learned and the ignorant, about.

And I will make him sleep (in peace) in his grave, and I will send
Munkar and Nakir to him for questioning him; and he will not see the
sorrow of death, nor the fright of the prelude (of the next world).

Then I will erect his weighing scale for him, and will unroll his book
(of deeds), then I will put his books in his right hand, and he shall
read it unfolded; then I will not keep any interpreter between Me and
him. So these are the attributes of the lovers.

O Ahmad! make your concern one concern, and make your tongue one tongue,
and make your body (i.e., your person) alive that is never oblivi­ous
(of Me). Whoever is oblivious of Me, I do not care in which valley he
perishes.” (*Biharu 'l-anwar*)

Al-Majlisi quotes the following tradition from *al-Kafi, Ma'ani
'l-akhbar* and *an Nawadir* of ar-Rawandi, with various chains of
narrators, from as-Sadiq and al-Kazim (a.s.) - and the text given here
is from *al-Kafi -* that the Imam said:

“The Messenger of Allah met Harithah ibn Malik ibn an-Nu'man al-Ansari,
and said to him: 'How are you? O Harithah ibn Malik an-Nu'mani!' He
said: 'A believer in reality, O Messenger of Allah!' The Messenger of
Allah then said to him: 'There is a reality for everything; so what is
the reality of your word?'

He said: 'O Messenger of Allah! I turned myself away from the world, so
I kept my night awake (in worship) and my days thirsty (in fast); and
(it is) as though I am looking at the throne of my Lord which has been
set up for (taking) the (people's) account; and as though I see the
people of the Garden visiting one another in the Garden, and as if I
hear the howling of the people of the Fire in the Fire.'

Thereupon, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'A servant that Allah has
enlightened his heart. You have seen, so be firm.'” (*ibid.*)

**The author says:** The two traditions describe the fourth stage of the
Islam and iman mentioned above. There are many traditions explaining
particulars of these two; and, Allah willing, we shall quote some of
them in various places of this book; and they are supported by the
Qur'anic verses.

Also it should be kept in mind that for each stage of the Islam and
iman*,* there is an opposite stage of *al-kufr* **اَلكُفْرُ** ) =
disbelief) and *ash-shirk* **اَلشـِّركُ** ) = polytheism). And it is
known that the higher and subtler the meaning of the Islam and iman*,*
the more difficult it is to protect oneself from its opposite *kufr* or
*shirk.*

Obviously, a lower stage of the Islam or iman does not exclude the
possibility of a subtler *kufr* or *shirk.*
These two principles should be kept in mind. It follows that the verses
of the Qur'an have some esoteric meanings which are applied to the
situations which its exoteric meanings cannot be applied to. Please keep
this hint in mind until we explain to you its details.

Al-Qummi writes about the words of Allah, ***and with Us is more**,*
that the Imam said: “Looking towards the mercy of Allah.” (*at-Tafsir*)

The Prophet said: “Allah says: 'I have prepared for My good servants
that which no eye has ever seen, nor any ear ever heard, nor has it ever
passed from the heart of any man.' ” (*Majma'u 'l-bayan*)

The author says: The meaning of the two traditions may easily be
understood from what we have written about the mean­ing of “good ones”;
and Allah is the Guide.

al-Baqir (a.s.) said about the words of Allah, ***Or, were you witnesses
when death approached Ya'qub...**:* “It is applied to *al-Qa'im*
**اَلقـَآئِمُ** ) = the one who stands - i.e., with sword to establish
the way of Allah). (al 'Ayyashi)

**The author says:** The author of *as-Safi* writes: “Perhaps the Imam
meant that it was about the Qa'im from the progeny of Muhammad, because
every Qa'im of them asks his children the same question at the time of
his death, and they reply him as the children of Ya'qub had replied.”


