Suratul Baqarah: Verses 135 − 141
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٥) وَقَالُواْ كُونُواْ هُودًا أَوۡ نَصَـٰرَىٰ تَهتَدُواْ‌ۗ قُلۡ
بَلۡ مِلَّةَ إِبرَٲهِـمَ حَنِيفًا‌ۖ وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ ٱلمُشرِكِينَ
قُولُوٓاْ ءَامَنَّا بِٱللَّهِ وَمَآ أُنزِلَ إِلَينَا وَمَآ أُنزِلَ
إِلَىٰٓ إِبرَٲهِـمَ وَإِسمَـٰعِيلَ وَإِسحَـٰقَ وَيَعقُوبَ وَٱلأَسبَاطِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٦) وَمَآ أُوتِىَ مُوسَىٰ وَعِيسَىٰ وَمَآ أُوتِىَ ٱلنَّبِيُّونَ
مِن رَّبِّهِمۡ لَا نُفَرِّقُ بَينَ أَحَدٍ۬ مِّنهُمۡ وَنَحنُ لَهُ ۥ
مُسلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٧) فَإِنۡ ءَامَنُواْ بِمِثلِ مَآ ءَامَنتُم بِهِۦ فَقَدِ
ٱهتَدَواْ‌ۖ وَّإِن تَوَلَّوۡاْ فَإِنَّمَا هُمۡ فِى شِقَاقٍ۬‌ۖ
فَسَيَكفِيَكهُمُ ٱللَّهُ‌ۚ وَهُوَ ٱلسَّمِيعُ ٱلعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٨) صِبغَةَ ٱللَّهِ‌ۖ وَمَنۡ أَحسَنُ مِنَ ٱللَّهِ صِبغَةً۬‌ۖ وَنَحنُ
لَهُ ۥ عَـٰبِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣٩) قُلۡ أَتُحَآجُّونَنَا فِى ٱللَّهِ وَهُوَ رَبُّنَا وَرَبُّكُمۡ
وَلَنَآ أَعمَـٰلُنَا وَلَكُمۡ أَعمَـٰلُكُمۡ وَنَحنُ لَهُ ۥ مُخلِصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمۡ تَقُولُونَ إِنَّ إِبرَٲهِـمَ وَإِسمَـٰعِيلَ وَإِسحَـٰقَ
وَيَعقُوبَ وَٱلأَسبَاطَ كَانُواْ هُودًا أَوۡ نَصَـٰرَىٰ‌ۗ قُلۡ
ءَأَنتُمۡ أَعلَمُ أَمِ ٱللَّهُ‌ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٤٠) وَمَنۡ أَظلَمُ مِمَّن كَتَمَ شَهَـٰدَةً عِندَهُ ۥ مِنَ ٱللَّهِ‌ۗ
وَمَا ٱللَّهُ بِغَـٰفِلٍ عَمَّا تَعمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٤١) تِلكَ أُمَّةٌ۬ قَدۡ خَلَتۡ‌ۖ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتۡ وَلَكُم مَّا
كَسَبتُمۡ‌ۖ وَلَا تُسـئَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُواْ يَعمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say: 'Be Jews or Christians, you will be rightly guided”
Say: “Nay!*** (we follow) ***the religion of Ibrahim, the upright one,
and he was not of the polytheist”*** (135).

***Say: “We believe in Allah and*** (in) ***that which has been revealed
to us, and*** (in) ***that which was revealed to Ibrahim and Isma'il and
Ishaq and Ya'qub and the tribes, and*** (in) ***that which was given to
Musa and Isa, and*** (in) ***that which was given to the prophets from
their Lord, we do not make any distinction between any of them, and to
Him do we submit”*** (136).

***If then they believe in like of what you believe in, they are indeed
on the right course, and if they turn back, then they are only in great
dissension; so Allah will suffice you against them, and He is the
Hearing, the Knowing*** (137)***.***

(We have received) ***the dyeing of Allah, and who is better than Allah
in dyeing? and Him do we worship*** (138)***.***

***Say: “Do you dispute with us about Allah? and He is our Lord and your
Lord; and for us our deeds and for you are your deeds; and we are
sincere to Him*** (139).

***Or, do you say that Ibrahim and Isma'il and Ya'qiib and the tribes
were Jews or Christians?” Say: “Are you better knowing or Allah? And who
is more unjust than he who conceals a testimony that he has from Allah?
And Allah is not at all heedless of what you do”*** (140).

***This is a people that have passed away; they shall have what they
earned and you shall have what you earn, and you shall not be called
upon to answer for what they did*** (141).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And they say: “Be Jews and Christians, you will be
rightly guided”**:* The preceding verses made it clear that the true
religion followed by the children of Ibrahim - Isma'il and Ishaq as well
as Ya'qub and his descendants - was the same Islam which was the
religion of Ibrahim, the upright one.

It means that the differences and divisions, the schisms and sects,
which the proponents of Judaism and Christianity call to, have actually
originated from their own desires; they are just a few toys
manu­factured by them.

They are in great disputations, schisms and disagreements, they are
divided into numerous sects and religious groups, they have dyed the
religion of Allah - the religion of Unity, the religion of Oneness -
with colours of their bias and prejudice, their desires and ambitions.

But the religion is not divided; it is one, in the same way as God, Who
is to be wor­shipped, is One; it is the religion of Ibrahim; the Muslims
should firmly keep hold of this original religion, discarding the
differences and dissensions of the People of the Book aside.

Although the life in this world looks like a constant phe­nomenon, in
reality it is continuously changing. The same applies to all the natural
world. Even the rites, customs and manners of various nations and groups
are not immune from this propensity to change.

More often than not, it causes changes and deviations even in religious
matters. Sometimes extraneous things are inserted in religion; at other
times, an essential part is declared anathema; worldly goals and ideals
replace the Divine and religious goals and aims. What a tragedy is it
for religion!

When it happens, the religion is dyed in national or tribal colour, and
starts calling to a goal other than the original one; it focuses its
sight on innova­tions, forgetting its original purpose. In a short
while, the evil (i.e., the innovation) becomes virtue.

People support and defend it, because it agrees with their desires and
cravings. And the virtue is treated as evil; it has no protector or
defender to stand for it. Ultimately, the things deteriorate to
unbelievable extent, as we are seeing with our own eyes today.

However, the sentence: “***And they say: 'Be Jews or Chris­tians'*** ”,
stands for the sentences, “The Jews say: 'Be Jews, you will be guided
aright'; and the Christians say: 'Be Christians, you will be rightly
guided.' ” They make such divergent claims because of their divergences
and differences.

**Qur’an:** ***Say: “Nay!*** **(we follow)** ***the religion of
Ibrahim,*** ***the upright one, and he was not of the polytheists”**:*
It is the reply of their claims. The Prophet should tell them: Nay! we
follow the religion of Ibrahim, the upright one; because it is the one
religion which was followed by all your prophets - Ibrahim and all those
who came after him. Ibrahim, who brought this religion,

was not a polytheist. Had there been so many divisions in his religion -
the divisions which were attached to it by the inno­vators - he would
have become a polytheist: That which is not a part of Allah's religion
cannot invite towards Allah, it will surely call to something other than
Allah - and this is what polytheism means. The religion of Ibrahim is
the religion of unity; it does not contain anything that is not from
Allah.

**Qur’an:** ***Say: “We believe in Allah and*** (in) ***that which has
been revealed to us, and*** (in) ***that which was revealed to
Ibrahim...”**:* After mentioning the claim of the Jews and the
Christians, Allah describes the truth - and He always tells the truth.

The truth consists of the testimony of belief in One God and belief in
all that was brought by the prophets - without making any distinc­tion
between them. This is what is called the Islam. Belief in Allah was the
fundamental part of that which was revealed to the prophets; yet it has
been mentioned here separately. The reason is that the belief in the
Creator is a natural instinct, it does not depend on prophetic proofs
and arguments.

After that fundamental belief, Allah mentions “that which has been
revealed to us”, that is, the Qur'an or the knowledge contained in it.
Then He mentions “that which was revealed to Ibrahim and Isma'il and
Ishaq and Ya'qub”.

Thereafter is de-scribed “that which was given to Musa and 'Isa”; these
two have been especially mentioned because the speech is addressed to
the Jews and the Christians who call only to these two prophets,
respectively.

Finally the testimony includes “that which was given to the prophets”.
This sentence covers all the prophets and thus paves the way for the
next declaration: “we do not make any distinction between any of them”.

Note the variation in style: That which is with us and that which was
with Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq and Ya'qub, is listed as “revealed” to us
and them, respectively; while that which was with Musa, 'Isa and other
prophets is referred to as “given” to them.

Probably the reason is this: The basic idea may be con­veyed by the
word, “giving”, as Allah says after mentioning Ibrahim and other
prophets who came before or after him:

***These are they to whom We gave the book and the wisdom and the
prophethood*** (6:89)***.***

But this word does not clearly and necess­arily mean “revelation”; for
example, Allah says:

***And certainly We gave wisdom to Luqman*** (31:12);

***And certainly We gave the book and the wisdom and the prophecy to the
Children of Israel...*** (45:16).

Now both the Jews and the Christians counted Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq,
Ya'qub and the tribes as following their religions respectively - the
Jews claimed that those prophets were Jews; the Christians claimed that
they were Christians.

They believed that the true religion was the Judaism or the Christianity
that was given to Musa or 'Isa respectively. In this background, if
Allah had said, 'that which was given to Ibrahim..., it would not have
clearly shown that those prophets themselves had brought a religion,
which was revealed to them by Allah.

The Jews or the Christians could have claimed that what was given to
them was the same thing which was given to Musa or 'Isa - peace be on
them all - and that their names have been mentioned, like that of the
Children of Israel, just because they followed the self-same religion!

It was to remove this possible misunderstanding that Ibrahim and those
named prophets (peace be on them all) were separately mentioned and it
was clearly said that they had got that religion by Divine revelation.

As for the prophets who came before Ibrahim (a.s.), the Jews and the
Christians did not lay claim on their religion, and there was no chance
of any mis­understanding; therefore, their religion was referred to as
“given” to them.

**Qur’an:** *and the tribes: 'al-Asbat”* ( **اَلأسْباطُ** ) of the
Israelites has the same meaning as *“al-qaba'il”* ( **اَلقـَبَائِلُ** )
of the Isma'ilites, and that is, the tribes. *Sibt,* like *qabilah,*
refers to the descendants of one forefathers. There were twelve tribes
in the Israelites, each one descended from one of the twelve children of
Ya'qub; thus each became a distinct group in itself.

If the word “tribes” refers to the whole groups, then it is used
metaphorically, because the prophets who received the revelation were
from those tribes. On the other hand, it may refer to the individuals,
that is, the prophets themselves. In any case, it does not include the
brothers of Yusuf (a.s.) because they were not prophets.

A similar verse is found in the Chapter of 'The Women':

***and We revealed to Ibrahim and Isma'il and Ishaq and Ya'qub and the
tribes, and 'Isa and Ayyub and Yunus and Harun and Sulayman...***
(4:163)***.***

**Qur’an:** ***If then they believe in like of what you believe in, they
are indeed on the right course:*** What Allah actually means is this: If
they believe in what you believe in, then they are on the right course.
But He has added here the word “like” (***If then they believe in like
of what you believe in...***)*,* to cut the root of disputation and
argumentation.

Had they been invited to believe hi what the Muslims believed in, they
could have replied - as they used to say - No, we believe in that which
has been revealed to us and we reject what is besides that.

Therefore, this verse teaches the Muslims a different way of
expressions: We believe in that which contains nothing but pristine
truth; therefore, you too should believe in that which contains only
pristine truth like it.

Addressed in this way, they will not find any loop-hole, nor will they
be able to resort to their obstinate wrangles. And then they will
realize that what they have had is not the unadulterated truth.

**Qur’an:** ***in great dissension**: “ash-Shiqaq”* ( **اَلشـِّقاقُ** )
means hypocricy, disputation, dissension.

**Qur’an:** ***so Allah will suffice you against them**:* It was a
promise to the Messenger of Allah to help him against them; and Allah
fulfilled this promise. And the same favour shall be completed for the
Muslim nation when Allah wills. This verse is a parenthetic statement
between the preceding and the following verses.

**Qur’an:** ***the dyeing of Allah, and who is better than Allah in
dyeing?**: “as-Sibghah”* ( اَلصـِّبْغـَة ) means a kind of dyeing. The
verse means: The above-mentioned belief is a Divine colour in which
Allah has dyed us; and it is the best of the colours - it is not a dye
of the Judaism nor of the Christianity, which ema­nate from dissensions
in religion, when people fail to keep on the right track.

**Qur’an:** ***and Him*** ***do we worship**:* Grammatically the
sentence describes the condition; it gives the reason of the preceding
phrase: “the dyeing of Allah...”

**Qur’an:** ***Say: “Do you dispute with us about Allah?”**:* It is a
rebuke to the People of the Book regarding their disputation with the
Muslims. The next sentences show how and why their argumentations were
wrong and in vain:

“and He is our Lord and your Lord; and for us are our deeds and for you
are your deeds; and we are sincere to Him”. When the followers dispute
with each other concerning their leader, the dispute may emanate from
one or more of the three causes:

First: They follow different leaders; and each wants to show the
superiority of his leader over the other's, for example, a dis­pute
between an idol-worshipper and a Muslim.

Second: They follow the same leader, but each claims a close
relationship with the leader, denying a like privilege to the other.

Third: One party wants to show that the other party, because of his
unbecoming behaviour and immoral character, has lost the right to be
counted among the followers of the leader; his claim of being a follower
of the leader is an insult to the latter.

Now, why should the Muslims and the People of the Book dispute with each
other? The first reason does not apply, because both worship the same
God. The same goes for the second reason, because one group's deeds do
not clash with those of the other - “for us are our deeds and for you
are your deeds”.

Coming to the third cause, the Muslims are sincere in their devotion to
Allah. So why should the People of the Book dispute with them, when they
have got no reason at all.
In this way, Allah first rebuked them for their disputation with the
Muslims, and then dismisses all three causes of dispu­tation one by one.

**Qur’an:** ***“Or, do you say that Ibrahim... were Jews or
Chris­tians?”***: Both groups say that Ibrahim and the other prophets
named in the verse were from them; implying that they were Jews or
Christians.

Or, they clearly claimed that they were Jews or Christians, as may be
understood from the words of Allah:

***O People of the Book! why do you dispute about Ibrahim, when the
Torah and the Injil were not revealed till after him? Do you not then
understand?*** (3:65)

**Qur’an:** ***Say: 'Are you better knowing or Allah?”**:* Because Allah
has informed us and you in the Book that Musa and 'Isa and their books
came after Ibrahim and the prophets mentioned in this verse.

**Qur’an:** ***“And who is more unjust than he who conceals a tes­timony
that he has from Allah?”**:* That is, he who conceals a testimony, a
fact known to him, that Allah has informed in His Books that the
*shari'ah* of Judaism and Christianity were sent after Ibrahim and the
other named prophets. The “testimony”, thus, refers to a fact known to
one.

The verse may alternatively refer to him who conceals the tes­timony of
Allah that Ibrahim and those prophets had passed away long before the
Torah and the Injil were revealed. In this case, the ”testimony” would
refer to giving evidence, to bearing witness. But the first meaning is
more appropriate in the context of this verse.

**Qur’an:** ***This is a people that has passed away...**:* It will do
you no good to dispute about other people as to which group they
belonged to; nor will silence on this matter do you any harm. You must
spend your time in those things which you will be asked about tomorrow.

This verse has been repeated here because the Jews and the Christians
talked (and they still do) too much on this subject - which would be of
no avail to them on the Day of Judgment; especially when they knew very
well that Ibrahim had passed away long before Judaism and Christianity
came into being.

In other contexts, discussion about the prophets and mess­engers is a
very beneficial thing; the Qur'an exhorts us to look into, and learn
about, their teachings and their spiritual virtues; and it is with this
aim that it repeatedly narrates their stories and orders us to meditate
on them.

Traditions
----------

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about the verse: ***Say: Nay!*** **(we
follow)** ***the religion of Ibrahim...**:* “Verily, the upright
religion is the Islam.” (al- 'Ayyashi )

al-Baqir (a.s.) said: “The upright religion (of Ibrahim, a.s.) did not
leave anything (unguided), so much so that it includes the trimming of
the moustache, and cutting of nails, and circum­cision.” (*ibid.*)

“Allah revealed the upright (religion) to Ibrahim, and it is
cleanliness; and it is (made up of) ten (things), five (of them) in the
head and (the other) five in the (rest of the) body. As for those which
are in the head, they are:

Trimming of the moustache, and letting the beard grow, and dressing the
hair, and brushing the teeth, and (using) the tooth-pick; and as for
those which are in the (rest of the) body, they are: removing the hair
from the body, and circumcision, and cutting the nails, and the bath of
*al - janabah* (*a:.* = the ritual uncleanliness resulting from sexual
intercourse or ejaculation), and cleansing (the body) with water.

And this is the pure upright (religion) which Ibrahim (a.s.) brought; it
was never abrogated, nor will it ever be abrogated until the Day of
Resurrection.” (*at-Tafsir,* al-Qummi)

The author says: Dressing the hair means to trim it and grow it. There
are a lot of traditions of the same or similar mean­ing, narrated by
both sects in their books.

al-Baqir (a.s.) said about the words of Allah: ***Say: We believe in
Allah...:*** “Allah has meant Ali, and Fatimah, and al-Hasan, and
al-Husayn, in this verse; and after them it has continued in the
Imams...” (*al-Kafi;* al-'Ayyashi)

**The author says:** This theme may be inferred from the words,
***and*** **(raise)** ***from our offspring a group submitting to
Thee*** **(2:128)**, which were used in the invocation of Ibrahim
(a.s.). There is no contradiction between this tradition and the fact
that the verse is addressed to all the Muslims and obliges all of them
to believe in the things mentioned therein; because the circle of such
verses may be widened or shortened in different contexts, according to
various stages of application - as we have explained with reference to
various stages of the Islam and *iman.*

al-Qummi narrates in his *at-Tafsir* from al-Baqir or as-Sadiq (a.s.),
and as-Saduq narrates in *Ma'ani 'l-akhbar* from as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said explaining the words of Allah, ***the dyeing of Allah...**:* “The
dyeing is the Islam**.”**

The author says: It is clear from the context of the verses.
as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: ”(Allah) dyed the believers with *al­wilayah*
**اَلوِلايـَةُ** ) = love and obedience of the Prophet and his *Ahlu
'1-bayt*) in (i.e., at the time of) *al-mithaq* **اَلميْثاقُ**) = the
covenant taken from the souls).” (*al-Kafi; Ma'ani 'l-akhbar*)

**The author says:** It refers to the esoteric meaning of this verse, as
we shall explain later on; we shall then also explain the meaning of
*al-wilayah* and *al-mithaq,* Allah willing.


