Suratul Baqarah: Verses 153 − 157
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٣) يَـٰأَيُّهَا ٱلَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ ٱستَعِينُواْ بِٱلصَّبرِ
وَٱلصَّلَوٰةِ‌ۚ إِنَّ ٱللَّهَ مَعَ ٱلصَّـٰبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٤) وَلَا تَقُولُواْ لِمَن يُقتَلُ فِى سَبِيلِ ٱللَّهِ أَموَٲتُۢ‌ۚ
بَلۡ أَحيَآءٌ۬ وَلَـٰكِن لَّا تَشعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٥) وَلَنَبلُوَنَّكُم بِشَىۡءٍ۬ مِّنَ ٱلخَوۡفِ وَٱلجُوعِ وَنَقصٍ۬
مِّنَ ٱلأَموَٲلِ وَٱلأَنفُسِ وَٱلثَّمَرَٲتِ‌ۗ وَبَشِّرِ ٱلصَّـٰبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٦) ٱلَّذِينَ إِذَآ أَصَـٰبَتهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ۬ قَالُوٓاْ إِنَّا
لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّآ إِلَيهِ رَٲجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٧) أُوْلَـٰئكَ عَلَيهِمۡ صَلَوَٲتٌ۬ مِّن رَّبِّهِمۡ وَرَحمَةٌ۬‌ۖ
وَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ ٱلمُهتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! seek assistance through patience and prayer;
surely Allah is with the patient ones*** (153).

***And do not speak of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead;
nay,*** (they are) ***alive, but you do not perceive*** (154).

***And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient ones*** (155),

***who, when a misfor­tune befalls them, say: “Surely we are Allah's and
to Him we shall surely return”*** (156).

***Those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their Lord, and
those are the followers of the right course*** (157).

General Comment
---------------

A single theme joins the five verses like a pearl-string; the sen­tences
form a sequence and the topic is developed harmoniously; the beginning
leads to the end, and the points to the begin­ning. It shows that they
were revealed together, not separately.

The context indicates that they must have been revealed shortly before
the law of *al-jihad* **اَلجِهَادُ** ) = war in the way of Allah) was
promulgated and the Muslims were ordered to fight in the cause of
religion.

The verses prepare the believers for some trials which they will have to
undergo, some misfortunes which will befall them. Not the usual type of
trial and hardship, but some extraordinary misfortunes which will
afflict the whole community and will continue, recurring every now and
then.

Man, like any other creature in this world, always faces some hardships
and troubles which disturb and disrupt the pattern of his personal life.

Death, sickness, fear, hunger, grief, poverty and deprivation are but a
few examples of such personal misfortunes. It is the course which Allah
has laid down for His servants. This world is a place of struggle and
competition; the life is a chain of never ending changes and
transformations.

***And you shall not find any alter­ation in the course of Allah; and
you shall not find any change in the course of Allah*** (35:43)***.***

Although personal afflictions and misfortunes are hard to bear for the
man so affected, yet they are not as crushing, bewil­dering and
frightening as those which affect the whole commun­ity. When an
individual is afflicted by a misfortune, he seeks help of others,
complementing his own wisdom, determination and steadiness with those of
his relatives, friends and compatriots.

But when a misfortune or hardship afflicts the whole community, it stuns
them all; it numbs their minds, and clouds their vision; it looks as if
the whole society has lost its collective wisdom. It disrupts not only
the individual, but even the collective life.

Fear terrorizes, panic overwhelms, and minds boggle down; courage
deserts and dread reigns supreme. A collective misfortune is, in short,
much more harder to bear and much more bitter in taste. And it is these
that the verse point to.

But not every collective affliction, like epidemic or femine. What the
verses describe is in all-encompassing affliction which shall be brought
about as a consequence of the believers' faith itself. They have
accepted the belief of monotheism; they have answered the call of the
truth.

The whole world and especially their own kith and kin are united against
them. The enemies are trying, with all the forces at their command, to
extinguish the light of Allah, to erase the word of justice, to nullify
the call of truth.

The conflict has reached a stage where both parties realize that
fighting is the only way out. Both parties have exhausted all other
resources they had. The unbelievers first had tried to achieve their
goal by arguments and mischief mongering, by whispering campaigns and
unsettling rumours.

But all was in vain. All their endeavours failed to give them any
satisfaction - they did not harm the Muslims in the way they wanted.
Now, from their point of view, nothing was left but to wage war against
the Muslims and to annihilate them. Only then, the path of truth could
be blocked and the bright light of Islam extinguished.

As from the believers' point of view, only the fighting could now help
there in their endeavour to propagate the creed of mono-theism, to
spread the true religion and just rule, to cut at the root of falsehood.
The past experience has proved that truth gains strength only when
falsehood is removed - and now it cannot be removed except by force.

In short, the verses indicate that the great trial is near at hand - it
mentions martyrdom in the way of Allah, and praises it laudably, saying
that it is not a death, it is life - and what a life indeed! Accordingly
death in the way of Allah is a distinction which is desirable - not a
thing to dislike or fear.

The verses encourage the believers to fight for Islam. They are told
that there is coming to them a trial, a hardship. Only if they bear it
patiently, they shall reach the high ranks of spiri­tual perfection,
receiving the blessings and mercy of Allah, and being guided aright by
Divine Guidance.

Also, it tells them how they may get help in bearing those burdens -
they should seek assistance through patience and prayer. Patience will
protect them from fear and anguish, and will save their plans from
dis­ruption. As for prayer, it will turn their attention to their Lord,
and will help them in putting all their affairs in the hands of the
Almighty Allah, because all power belongs to Him.

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***O you who believe! seek assistance through patience and
prayer; surely Allah is with the patient ones:*** We have ex­plained
briefly about patience and prayer, under the verse:

***And seek assistance through patience and prayer; and most surely it
is a hard thing except for the humble ones*** (2:45)***.***

Patience is one of the most important characteristics, which the Qur'an
praises very highly. It repeatedly tells the believers to be patient -
there are about seventy verses on this theme. It praises it in such
laud-able ways as:

... ***and bear patiently that which befalls you; surely it is of the
acts which require determination*** (31:17);

***And none are made to receive it but those who are patient, and none
are made to receive it but those who have a mighty good fortune*** (41:
35)***;***

***only the patient will be paid back their reward in full without
measure*** (39:10).

Likewise, prayer is one of the greatest acts of worship and devotion
which the Qur'an always exhorts the believers to do. It has been praised
in these words:

***surely prayer keeps*** (one) ***away from indecency and evil***
(29:45)***.***

Wherever Allah exhorts the people to some good deeds, prayer is always
placed at the head of the list.

Then Allah praises patience that Allah is with those who have got this
virtue: In this respect this verse differs from the verse *2:45* which
had focused attention on prayer; ***and most surely it is a hard thing
except for the humble ones.***

But this verse singles out the patience, because here the talk is about
facing the difficulties and fighting against the enemies; and in this
context patience acquires a greater importance. Surely Allah is with the
patient ones.

It is a special proximity unlike the com­pany mentioned in the verse:

***and He is with you wherever you are*** (13:4).

This latter verse says that Allah controls your affairs and His
knowledge encompasses you; while the verse under dis­cussion means that
Allah helps and aids the patient ones. Patience, therefore, is the key
to get relief from distress.

**Qur’an:** ***And do not speak of those who are slain in Allah's***
***way as dead; nay,*** **(they are)** ***alive, but you do not
perceive:*** Some exegetes have said that when the verse says that the
martyrs are alive, it actually means that their good names will continue
for ever and their heroism will always be remembered with gratitude.
Their argument is as follows:

“The verse is addressed to the Muslims, who already believe in Allah,
His Messenger and the Day of Judgment; they are also sure of the life
hereafter. They have accepted the call of truth, and have already heard
a lot of verses which speak of the Resur­rection.

They know that a man's life does not end with death. How could they
speak of the martyrs as dead? Moreover, this verse affirms only about
the martyrs that they are alive; and describes it as their especial
excellence *vis-à-vis* other believers and the unbelievers.

But we know that life after death is not confined to one group, it is a
general phenomenon, which covers the whole mankind. Therefore, the life
mentioned here must be something special, which is reserved for those
who are slain in the way of Allah - and that is their eternal name and
ever-lasting fame.”

But this interpretation is unacceptable, because of the following
reasons:

**First:** The life which they have mentioned is not real life; it is an
imaginary thing, which has no relation with reality. Such unreal and
imaginary things do not deserve to be included in Divine Speech. Allah
calls to reality, to truth; and says:

***and what is there after the truth but error?*** (10:32).

Of course, Ibrahim (a.s.) had prayed to Allah:

***And make for me a truthful tongue among the posterity***
(26:84)***.***

But what he meant by “a truthful tongue” was continuation of his true
mission after him; he did not mean only that his good name be remembered
and his praise be sung by coming generations.

Of course, such imaginary exegesis, such false interpreta­tion is more
in line with materialists' thinking. They believe that soul is a
material thing, life,is a development of matter; once a man dies the
life comes to an end, there is nothing to continue after death; as such,
there is no life hereafter. But ap­plying that idea to sociology, they
encountered a great difficulty:

The fact is that man by nature believes in continuation of life after
death, his instinct tells him that there is happiness and un­happiness
in the other world where he goes after death; and if he wants to enjoy
happiness there, he will have to sacrifice many comforts of this life.

This is specially true about great affairs and ideals which cannot be
established except when their supporters and adherents are willing to
die for them, to sacrifice their lives for the cause. They have to die
so that others may live.

Now, the dilemma of the atheists and materialists was this: If death is
the end of life, if man, after his death, is lost for ever, then why
should he sacrifice his life so that others may live? Why should he
deprive himself of the comforts and enjoyments which he can easily get
through injustice and tyranny? Just to let others live in peace?

What has he got to gain by his sacrifice? Nothing. No sensible man gives
something if he is not getting something in return. Human nature rejects
the concept of giving without receiving, of leaving something without
getting something in exchange. It rejects the idea of dying to enable
others to live, the notion of denying oneself the enjoyment of this
short life so that others may enjoy it.

When the materialists realized the trouble they were in, they tried to
make up this shortcoming by inventing these imaginary gains which had no
existence except in their own minds. They said:

A man, emancipated from fetters of superstitions and myths, must
sacrifice his life for his country and for other noble goals; this
sacrifice will make him immortal because his good name and widespread
fame will remain alive for ever.

Likewise, he should deny himself some enjoyments of life so that others
may benefit from those things. In this way, society and civilization
will remain on right track and the social justice will reign supreme.
And that man, because of his sacrifice, will get a noble and sublime
life.

Would that I knew who will enjoy that noble life when the man himself is
dead, when his physical body has perished, and with it have gone all
traces of life including perceptions and feelings? Who will then feel
and enjoy that “noble life”? Isn't it just a delirious raving?

Second: The last phrase of the verse, ” but you do not per­ceive,” does
not agree with that explanation. If that was the meaning of “life”,
Allah should have said: nay, they are alive because their good name will
remain for ever, and people will always sing their praises generation
after generation. Obviously, such description would have proved much
more satisfying and encouraging, and would have cheered them up to a
greater degree than the phrase, “but you do not perceive”.

**Third:** A similar verse - which in a way also explains it - describes
the promised life in such a way as not to allow that interpretation:

***And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead; nay, they
are alive*** (and) ***are provided sustenance from their Lord; Rejoicing
in what Allah has given them out of His grace, and they rejoice for the
sake of those who,*** (being left) ***behind them have not yet joined
them, that they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve. They rejoice
on account of favour from Allah and*** (***His***) ***grace, and that
Allah will not waste the reward of the believers*** (3:169-171).

Clearly, it is a description of a real, not imaginary, life.

**Fourth:** It is not difficult to accept that some Muslims, in the
middle of the Prophet's era, were unaware of the life after death. What
was very clearly mentioned in the Qur'an was the Resurrection on the Day
of Judgment. But so far as the life of *al-barzakh* **اَلبَرْزَخُ** ) =
the period between death and the Day of Judgment) is concerned, it has
been described in the Qur'an, but not so clearly as not to leave any
room for ambiguity.

That is why not all the Muslims are agreed on this subject - even today
some of them do not accept it. (These are those who believe that soul is
not immaterial; that man perishes on death; and Allah will raise him
again for judging him on the Day of Judgment.)

This verse, therefore, could have been revealed to affirm that the
martyrs were alive in *al-barzakh.* May be, there were some believers
who were not aware of it, even if others knew it.

In short, the verse speaks of a real, not imaginary, life. Allah, in
several places, has counted the life of an unbeliever after his death as
a destruction and perdition. For example:

... ***and*** (they) ***made their people to alight into the abode of
perdition*** (14:28).

So, it is the life of bliss that is true life, and it is only the
believers who will live that life, as Allah says:

***and as for the next abode, that most surely is the life - did they
but know*** (29:64).

They did not know it because their senses could perceive only the
material aspects of this world's life. As they did not perceive what was
beyond their limited perception, they could not differentiate between
extinction and life after death.

They thought that there was nothing after death but extinction. That
delusion, that conjecture was common to believers and unbelievers alike.
That is why Allah said: “nay, (they are) alive, but you do not
perceive,” that is, by your senses.

The same is the import of the last phrase in the verse:

***that most surely is the life - did they but know*** (29:64),

that is, with certainty, as He says in the verse:

***Nay! if you had known with a knowledge of certainty, you should most
certainly have seen the hell*** (102:5-6).

The meaning of the verse, then, is as follows - and Allah knows better!
And do not say about those who are slain in the way of Allah that they
are dead. You should not think that they have become extinct, have
perished.

Of course, you generally think that death is extinction; in your
language death is used as opposite of life; and this delusion is
supported by your senses. But it is not correct. The martyrs are not
dead, in that they are not extinct; they are alive although you do not
perceive that life by your senses, by your perceptions.

This talk was addressed to the believers, although majority of them - if
not all - knew that man's life continues after his death. It was done to
draw their attention to a fact known to them. The aim was to cheer them
up by reminding them of this reality, in order that they should not
grieve, should not be per­turbed, should not loose their hearts, when
death faces them or their dear ones in the way of Allah.

The only thing that the rela­tives would be afflicted with, in such
cases, is separation from their martyr for a few days, as long as they
themselves are alive in this world.

And this temporary separation is not a big problem - especially if
compared to the pleasure of Allah, and to the bounties bestowed on the
martyr, like the pleasant life and everlasting grace. And the pleasure
of Allah is the greatest bounty and bliss.

In this respect, the verse is not unlike the previously ex­plained one
where Allah tells His Prophet:

***The truth is from your Lord, therefore you should not be of the
doubters*** (2:147).

We know that the Prophet was the first and foremost of those who were
sure of the Divine signs and communications. Yet he was told not to be
of the doubters. This mode is generally used to show that the subject is
so clear, so well-known and so well established that there is no room
for any conflicting thought to come into mind.

The Life of al-Barzakh
----------------------

This verse clearly proves that man remains alive in *al-barzakh* (
**اَلبَرْزَخُ** = the period between one's death and the Day of
Resur­rection). The same is the import of the other verse on this
subject:

***And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead; nay, they
are alive*** (and) ***are provided sustenance from their Lord***
(3:169).

Many other verses prove this reality and we shall men­tion some of them
at the end of this essay.

A very strange interpretation has been given to this verse by some
people. They say that it was revealed about the martyrs of Badr, and
therefore it is reserved exclusively for those martyrs; it cannot be
applied to others who are slain in the way of Allah.

A scholar has made an interesting comment on this explana­tion. Writing
about the preceding verse, “seek assistance through patience and
prayer,” he prays to Allah to give him patience and forbearance to
suffer such interpretations!

Would that I knew what do they mean by that explanation. On one hand,
they say that man perishes after death or murder; when his body
disintegrates, he becomes extinct. If so, then how could the martyrs of
Badr remain alive after being slain?

Was it as a miracle? Was it because Allah had given them a distinction
and excellence, which was denied to all the prophets, messengers and
friends of Allah, not expecting even the Holy Prophet of Islam? If there
is no life after death, then keeping them alive after their martyrdom is
not a miracle - it is an impossibility.

And a miracle does not cover an impossible thing. If it is asserted that
such a self-evident preposition was negated for those martyrs, then no
confidence can be put in any self-evident truth - let alone other
principles.

Or, do they mean that people's perceptions were mistaken about the
condition of those martyrs? The martyrs were alive, were getting
sustenance from their Lord, were eating, drinking and enjoying all the
comforts of life - far away from the range of people's perceptions.

And what the people had seen and perceived with their senses - that the
martyrs were killed, their bodies mutilated, their senses gone, and
their physique disin­tegrated - was just a delusion, and nothing of this
sort had happened in reality.

If this is what they mean, if people's senses could be so deluded -
perceiving correctly in one case and wrongly in another, without any
differentiating cause - then no trust can be put in any of the senses at
all. Then, may be, we will perceive a non-existent as existing and an
existing thing as non-existent. How can a sensible person speak like
that? It is nothing but sophistry.

However, that explanation somewhat follows the line adopted by a large
group of the scholars of traditions. The latter believe that the things
mentioned in the Qur'an and traditions, which are beyond our
perception - like angels and souls of believers and other such things -
are material and physical.

They are ethereal bodies which may enter and penetrate dense and solid
bodies, appearing thus in the form of man, for example, doing all that
humans do; they possess powers and properties like ours, except that
they are not governed by physical laws: they do not suffer any change or
alteration, nor any composition or disintegration; they are not subject
to natural life and death.

When Allah wants them to appear, they manifest themselves to our senses;
and when He does not want so, or wants them not to appear, they do not
appear. It depends entirely on a special will of Allah; there is nothing
in their senses, or in their “bodies”, to tip the scale on this side or
that.

Such an idea is based on rejection of the system of cause ­and effect in
the world. If such assertions were true, then all the intellectual
realities, all the academic principles, will be null and void - not to
speak of the fundamentals of religion. Even those “sublime ethereal
bodies” (which are supposedly beyond the reach of cause-and-effect) will
be negated.

The above description, however, proves that the verse speaks about the
life of *al-barzakh;* it is also called the world of the grave, the
period between one's death and the Day of Resur­rection; it is the world
where the dead person is rewarded or punished until the Day of
Resurrection.

Some other verses speaking about *al-barzakh* are as follows:

There are the three verses already quoted:

***And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead; nay, they
are alive*** (and) ***are provided sustenance from their Lord; Rejoicing
in what Allah has given them out of His grace, and they rejoice for the
sake of those who,*** (being left) ***behind them, have not yet joined
them, that they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve. They rejoice
on account of favour from Allah and*** (***His***) ***grace, and that
Allah will not waste the reward of the believers*** (3:169 - 171).

We have already shown how these verses, being similar to the one under
discussion, prove the life of *al-barzakh.* Those who think that these
verses were revealed exclusively for the martyrs of Badr, should ponder
on the wordings of these three, because they indicate that not only the
martyrs but also other believers enjoy the life after death, and rejoice
by favour and grace of Allah bestowed on them.

***Until when death overtakes one of them, he says: “Send me back, my
Lord, send me back: Haply I may do good in that which I have left.” By
no means! it is a*** (mere) ***word that he speaks; and before them is
al-barzakh until the day they are reaised*** (23:99 ***-*** 100).

It very clearly shows that there is an intermediate life between this
world's and the one which they will live after the Resurrection. Further
explanation will be given when we shall write about this verse, Allah
willing.

***And those who do not hope for Our meeting, say: “Why have not angels
been sent down upon us, or*** (***why***) ***do we not see our Lord?”
Now certainly they are too proud of themselves and have revolted a great
revolt. On the day when they shall see the angels;***

(clearly it refers to the time when they will see the angels for the
first time, that is, the time of death - as is described in many other
verses;)

***there shall be no joy on that day for the guilty, and they shall say:
“It is a forbidden thing totally pro­hibited; And We shall proceed to
what they have done of deeds, so We shall render them as scattered
floating dust. The dwellers of the garden shall on that day be in a
better abiding place and a better resting place. And on the day when the
heaven shall burst asunder with the clouds;*** (now it speaks about the
Day of Resurrection;) ***and the angels shall be sent down a sending.
The kingdom on that day shall rightly belong to the Beneficent God, and
a hard day shall it be for the unbelievers*** (25:21-26).

It very clearly proves the life of *al-barzakh.* Further details will be
given in its proper place, Allah willing.

***They shall say: “Our Lord! twice didst Thou give us death, and twice
hast Thou given us life, so we do confess our faults; is there then a
way to get out?”*** (40:11).

They will say it on the Day of Resurrection. It means that by that time
there would be two deaths and two lives. It can be explained only if we
accept the life and death of *al-barzakh.* Otherwise, there shall be
only one death between this life and that of the Day of Resurrection. We
have explained it to some extent under the verse:

***How do you deny Allah and you were dead and He gave you life? Again
He*** ***will cause you to die and again bring you to life; then you
shall be brought back to Him*** (2:28)***.***

***... and the most evil punishment overtook Pharaoh's people: The Fire,
they are brought before it*** (every) ***morning and evening; and on the
day when the hour shall come to pass: Make Pharaoh's people enter the
severest chastisement*** (40:46).

It is known that the Day of Resurrection shall have no morning or
evening. Clearly, ***the day when the hour shall come to pass,*** that
is, the Day of Resurrection is other than the day of *al-barzakh* which
has the mornings and evenings.

There are many other verses which indicate, or from which we may infer,
this reality. For example:

***By Allah, most cer­tainly We sent*** (messengers) ***to nations
before, but the Satan made their deeds fair-seeming to them, so he is
their guardian today, and they shall have a painful punishment***
(16:63).

The Immateriality of the Soul
-----------------------------

The verse under discussion, as well as those quoted above, points to
another more comprehensive reality and that is the im­materiality of the
soul. The soul is something other than matter and body; it is beyond the
jurisdiction of the rules governing matter and body, or those affecting
various material compounds and mixtures.

Yet, it has a special relationship with the body - keeping it alive,
managing its multifarious functions and activities and enabling it to
perceive and feel. Ponder on the earlier quoted verses and you will see
this reality.

The verses imply that man, *per se, is* not the body; he does not die
when the body dies, he does not perish when the body perishes. The body
disintegrates, its parts are scattered, but the “man” continues.

Even after the death of his body, he continues to live, either in
eternal bliss and everlasting felicity and grace, or in never ending
misery and painful chastisement. That bliss or misery is based on his
traits, trends, characteristics and actions, which he had acquired and
done in this world's life - not in his bodily accomplishments or social
achievements.

These themes are understood from the above-mentioned verses. Obviously,
these traits are totally different from those of the body, and are
diametrically opposed to worldly and material characteristics. Thus, the
human soul is different from his body.

Also, the verse 39:42 points to this fact:

***Allah takes com­pletely the souls at the time of their death, and
those that die not during their sleep; then He withholds those on whom
He has passed the decree of death and sends the other back till an
appointed term.***

*“at-Tawaffiyy”* ( **اَلتـَّوَفـِّيّ** ) and *“al-istifa'*
(**اَلإصْطِفَآءُ ُ** ) both have the same meaning - to take and realize
one's right fully and completely. The words used here in refer­ence to
the soul - “takes”, “withholds” and “sends back” - clearly prove that
the soul is something different from the body.

Another verse:

***And they say:*** ***“What! when we have become lost in the earth,
shall we then indeed be in a new creation?” Nay! they are disbelievers
in the meeting of their Lord. Say: “The angel of death who is given
charge of you shall take you com­pletely, then to your Lord you shall be
brought back”*** (32:10 - 11).

In this verse, Allah mentions one of the misgivings of those who do not
believe in the Resurrection; and then tells His Mess­enger how to clear
their doubt. They said: When we die, our body disintegrates, our limbs
and organs are destroyed, nothing remains of our original form, and all
our parts are scattered here and there in the earth. No one can then
perceive us nor can anyone feel us. How is it possible for us, after
such a total destruction, to be created a second time?

This doubt is based on a feeling of im­probability. Allah shows the
Messenger (S) how to remove that misgiving: ***Say: “The angel of
death... be brought back.”***

There is an angel who has been given charge of you; he shall take you
completely; he will not let you be lost, as you shall be under his
protection, his control; what is lost in the earth is your body, not
your soul or person (the reality which is referred to by the word
“you”), because the angel of death shall take “you” completely.

One more verse: Allah says, mentioning the creation of man:

***Then He made him complete and breathed into him of His spirit...***
(32:9)***.***

Read it in conjunction with the verse:

***And they ask you about the soul. Say: “The soul is from the command
of my Lord”*** (17:85).

The soul, therefore, is from the command of Allah, and that command has
been explained and defined in these words:

***His command, when He intends anything is only that He says to it:
“Be”, and it is. Therefore, glory be to Him in Whose hand is the kingdom
of everything...*** (36:82 - 83)***.***

The soul is from the kingdom and it is the word, “Be”. In another place,
the command is further explained in these words:

***And Our command is but one, as the twinkling of an eye***
(54:50)***.***

The phrase, ***as the twinkling of an eye,*** shows that the command,
that is, the word “Be”, is an instantaneous, not a gradual, being. It
comes into being at once, and is not bound with the chain of time and
space.

It is thus evident that the command including the soul - is different
from body, is something immaterial. We know that the material things
come into being gradually and are fettered with time and space.
Obviously, the human soul is not a material thing and is different from
the body, although it has a special relationship with the body.

There are some verses which show the nature of that relation-ship. Allah
says:

***From it*** (the earth) ***We created you...*** (20:55);

***He created man from dry clay like earthen vessels...*** (55:14);

... ***and He began the creation of man from dust, then He made his***
***progeny from an extract of water held in light estimation*** (32:7 -
8);

***And certainly We created man of an extract of clay, then We made him
a small life-germ in a firm resting place, then We made the life-germ a
clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh, then We made*** (in) ***the
lump of flesh bones, then We clothed the bones with flesh, then We
caused it to grow into another creation; so blessed be Allah, the best
of creators*** (23:12 - 14).

The verses show that man, in the beginning was but a ma­terial body,
changing into various forms; then Allah made that body into another
creation - a creation that has got perception and feeling; now he
perceives and wills, thinks and acts according to his thoughts and
ideas; he manages and manipulates the things around him as he likes.

These activities and authority are beyond the power of body and matter.
Obviously, neither of these activ­ities emanate from body and matter nor
does their doer.

We may say that the soul has the same relation to the body - from which
it emanates - as a fruit has to its tree, or a lamp flame has to its
oil. But these similes are a bit far-fetched. How-ever, these
illustrations serve to show the nature of the relation between the soul
and the body - how it is attached to the body in the beginning and how
that connection is severed on death.

In short, the soul, in the beginning, is the body itself, then it grows
into another creation, and lastly it becomes completely independent and
separate from the body on death. These facts are understood from the
above-mentioned Qur'anic verses; there are many other verses which
allude to and imply this reality, and one may find them on reading the
Qur'an with open eyes. And Allah is the Guide.

**Qur’an:** ***And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear
and hunger and loss of property and lives and fruits:*** Allah told them
to seek assistance through patience and prayer and forbade them to say
about those who are slain in His way that they are dead because those
martyrs were in fact alive.

Now, He explains why He has informed them of these realities. It is
because the believers were soon to be tried and tested by fighting in
the way of Allah.

It was by *al-jihad* that they would reach the pin­nacle of their
virtues; their noble lives would not be worth living except with
*al-jihad.* The upright religion could not gain strength but with
fighting.

And while engaged in fighting, their efforts would not be crowned with
success unless they were helped by those two helpers, that is, patience
and prayer, and were further strengthened by a third factor, that is,
the belief that their martyr is neither dead nor lost, and that their
endeavours with their wealth and souls is neither forfeited nor
fruitless.

If they kill their enemy, they will remain alive while their enemy is
destroyed; in this way they would be safe from the rule of injustice and
false-hood which the enemy wanted to impose on them. And if they are
killed in this endeavour, again they will remain alive for ever and
equally safe from that unjust and wrong rule. In either case, they shall
enjoy one of the two most excellent things.

Generally, the afflictions consist of fear, hunger and loss of
properties and lives. As for the loss of fruits, apparently it means
loss of children. When fighting occurs, its most telling result is not
the loss of fruits but that of progeny, as the men and especially the
youths are killed.

Some exegetes have said that the word “fruits” refers to the dates, and
the “property” to other possessions, for example, camels, goats and
sheep.

**Qur’an:** ***and give good news to the patient ones who, when a
misfortunate befalls them, say: “Surely we are Allah's and to Him we
shall surely return”. Those are they on whom are bless­ings and mercy
from their Lord, and those are the followers of the right course:***

The patient ones are again mentioned in these verses so that Allah may
give them good news to begin with, and then may teach them the way of
good patience, and thirdly, may explain to them why patience is
essential - it is because Allah owns the man - and fourthly, may declare
what is its overall recompense, that is, blessing, mercy and being
guided aright.

Allah first told His Prophet to give them good news; but did not
disclose what was that good news about. This was to show the greatness
of the subject matter - it is from Allah, therefore, it must be about
something specially good, great and beautiful. Moreover, it is something
which Allah Himself has guaranteed.

Thereafter, He said that the patient ones are those who say these words
when misfortune befalls them. *“al-Musibah”* (**اَلمُصِيْـبَة ُ**) =
translated here as misfortune) is any happening that occurs to a man;
but it is always used for a distressing happening.

“Who... say: 'Surely we are Allah's...' ”: The word “say” as used here
does not mean mere utterance of the sentence with-out keeping its
meaning in mind.

Even understanding its meaning is not sufficient, unless one penetrates
to the depth of its reality. And that is that man is owned by Allah - in
real ownership - and that he is surely to return to Allah, his Master.

If this feeling takes deep root in his heart, the man will observe the
highest degree of patience; sorrow, fear and anguish will be totally
eradicated, and the rust of heedlessness will be removed from the heart.
How?

Man and all his faculties, actions and other concomitants of existence,
are there because of Allah. He is his Creator and Originator. Man exists
because of Allah, and is dependent on Him in all his affairs and
conditions. He does not have any exist­ence or continuity independent of
Allah.

The Master has the right to manage His slave's affairs in any way He
likes; the slave has no authority whatsoever in his own affairs, because
he has no independence at all. Allah owns him; He is the real Owner of
man's existence, faculties and actions.

Then Allah allowed man to ascribe his “self” to himself as a property is
ascribed to its owner. That is why it is said that “man has existence”.
In the same way, He permitted him to ascribe his faculties and actions
to himself.

Accordingly, it is said that “man has faculties like hearing and sight”,
or “he does some actions like: walking, speaking, eating and hearing”.
With-out the Divine permission neither man nor anything else could “own”
any such ascription or attribution, because nothing exists without the
Divine permission, or independent of Allah's will.

Allah has also informed us that ultimately all things will revert to
their original status - the state before Allah allowed them to be
attributed to one or the other creature - and then no ownership will
remain there except that of Allah, as He says:

***To whom belongs the kingdom this day? To Allah, the One, the
Subduer*** (of all) (40:16).

It shows that man - together with all that “belongs” to him or is with
him - is to return to Allah.

In short, there is a “real” ownership; it is reserved for Allah,
nobody - be he a man or something else - shares it with Him. And there
is an “apparent” ownership, for example, man “owns” his own “self” as
well as his children and properties etc.

But the real ownership is of Allah, and man owns them in form and
appear­ance only - and that also because Allah has allowed such
attribu­tion. Thus, when man rememebers the reality of Divine ownership,
and then looks at his own “self”, he knows that he is wholly and totally
owned by Allah.

Then, he realizes that his “apparent” ownership - of his “self” as well
as of his children and properties, etc. - will soon cease to exist, will
become null and void; it will return to his Lord. Then, he will
understand that ultimately he owns nothing, either in reality or in
appearance.

In this back-ground, there is no reason why he should grieve if he is
afflicted with some misfortune. One may be affected only by something
which one owns - feeling happiness when it is found or sorrow if it is
lost.

But when he believes that he owns nothing, he shall not be affected by
finding it or losing it. How can he be afflicted by any loss when he
believes that Allah is the real Owner of every-thing, and He may manage
His property in any way He likes?

The Ethics
----------

The ethics entail betterment of morals and psychic traits - both in
theory and practice. Man acquires the good morals and removes the evil
traits by repeatedly doing good - and relevant - deeds, and their
continuous observance. Repeated and continuous performance of an action
etches its particular knowledge on the psyche.

Gradually, a picture is engraved on the mind which becomes impossible -
or extremely difficult - to erase. Habits become second nature. For
example, if a man wants to remove the trait of cowardice and acquire
that of bravery, he should repeatedly plunge himself into difficulties
and dangers.

When-ever he would rush into a perilous and hazardous situation and
finds himself coming out unscathed, he would acquire the taste of
boldness and courage; and would understand the ignominy of flight, of
taking to one's heels.

Every such bold step would leave its mark on his psyche and ultimately
bravery and courage would become an integral part of his character. Man
has no power to acquire such traits by his own will; yet it may be
counted as within his power inasmuch as its preliminary steps - those
re­peatedly performed deeds - emanate from his will and power.

There are two universally recognized systems to acquire high moral
standards and noble manners.

**First System:** Many people base their moral science on good worldly
foundations, that is, the knowledge, ideas and ideals which are thought
praiseworthy and laudable in the society. They acquire a good trait
because it is commendable in the eyes of the people.

Chastity, contentedness with what is in one's hand and not looking at
what others have - all these virtues create respect and honour in the
people's eyes, and one's standing is enhanced in public.

Avarice results in poverty and privation. Greed destroys one's prestige.
Knowledge attracts people and bestows respect and dignity in the eyes of
elite; it opens the eyes of the knowledgeable person, and protects him
from unpleasant things. Ignorance, on the other hand, is blindness.
Knowledge protects you while riches need your protection.

Bravery makes you stead-fast and saves you from fickleness; this in its
turn makes people sing your praise - no matter whether you win or lose.
Coward­ness and rashness both cause opposite effect. Justice gives peace
of mind, and keep man alive even after his death inasmuch as his good
name continues and his love pulsates in people's hearts generation after
generation.

This is the well-known basis on which the moral science is founded.
Ancients like Greek philosophers followed this very system.

The Qur'an does not endorse this system, because it depends on the like
and the dislike of the public. It looks at what is good in the eyes of
the people and what is bad - and accepts the former and rejects the
latter. Even in a few verses where the Qur'an appears to use this
method, it really refers to the next world's reward or punishment.
Ponder, for example, on the following verses:-

... ***and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it, so that people
shall have no argument against you...*** (2:150).

Here Allah exhorts the Muslims to remain steadfast and firm, and for its
reason, He says: “so that people shall have no argument against you”.

... ***and do not quarrel, for then you will be weak in hearts and your
power will depart, and be patient...*** (8:46)***.***

Allah tells the believers to be patient, as impatience and quarrelling
among themselves would weaken their hearts, dilute their power and
embolden their enemy.

***And whoever is patient and forgiving, that most surely is an act of
great resolution*** (42:43).

Here Allah invites the believers to patience and forgiveness and
explains its reason in terms of determination and resolution.

Second System: The second system is to keep in sight the other worldly
goals. Allah has used it in many verses of the Qur'an:

***Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
properties for this, that they shall have the garden...*** (9:111)

... ***only the patient ones will be paid back their reward in full
without measure.*** (39:10)

... ***surely it is the unjust that shall have a painful punish­ment.***
(14:22)

***Allah is the Guardian of those who believe; He brings them out of the
darkness into the light; and*** (as to) ***those who disbelieve, their
guardians are the rebels, they take them out of the light into the
darkness...*** (2:257)

There are many verses, on different subjects, which imply the same
theme.

We may add here another set of the verses. For example,

***No misfortune befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is
in a book before We bring it into existence; surely that is easy to
Allah*** (57:22).

This verse exhorts man not to feel any sorrow (or joy) on whatever
misfortune (or good thing) comes to him; what has come to him, could not
be averted, and what-ever has been lost could not be obtained, because
all happenings occur by a firm Divine Decree which is unavoidable.

Sorrow and joy both seem, in this background, meaningless - a believer
should not indulge in these vain practices because he believes in Allah
and knows that all affairs are in His hands. Allah says:

***No affliction comes about but by Allah's permission; and whoever
believes in Allah, He guides aright his heart*** (64:11).

Such verses, like the earlier quoted ones, create high morals by
pointing to the sublime goals of the next world. These other worldly
goals are real, not imaginary, perfections. T

hese verses reform the human character by fixing man's attention to the
real already existing causes like the Divine measure and decree,
adoptation of the Divine characteristics and remembrance of the good
names of Allah and His sublime attributes.

**Question:** Belief in causality of such things as the Divine measure
and decree negates the rules governing this life in which we have been
given freedom of will and power. This, in its turn, nullifies the noble
morals and disturbs the system of this physical world.

If man may rely, in acquiring such good traits as patience and
steadfastness, and in refraining from sorrow and joy, on the fact that
all things to happen are already firmly decreed and written in the
“preserved tablet”, then the same argument may be used if one does not
endeavour to earn one's livelihood, to acquire good characteristics, or
to refrain from bad habits.

He will sit idle not caring to do any work, and not striving to defend
the truth and right. His only reply to all exhortations will be that
whatever was happening was already written and decreed. In this way he
will neglect acquiring noble characteristics and discarding evil traits.
It will be a negation of every perfection.

Reply: What we have written on the subject of “Decree”, is sufficient to
clear this misunderstanding. We have explained there that man's actions
are integral parts of the causes of the events and effects. Effects
cannot happen without their causes.

It would be a manifest error to say: Satiation of hunger is either
decreed to happen or decreed not to happen; and in either case, it is
useless to eat. We know that satiation of hunger cannot occur unless one
takes one's food - and eating is an action with-in one's power, and is a
part of the causes of satiation. It is fool­ishness to expect an effect
to appear when one has neglected or negated all or part of its causes.

It is wrong for a man to neglect and negate the principles of “free will
and power”, which is the king-pin of this worldly life, and to which are
attributed its felicity and infelicity. It is a part of the causes of
the events which happen to a man through his actions (or through the
conditions and traits resulting from his actions). He cannot say that
his will and power are not a part of the causes of events happening to
him, or that they have no effect on those happenings.

In the same way, it is wrong to claim that his power is the complete, or
the only, cause of the events and that nothing else has any influence on
those events. One should not forget that there are countless things
happening in the world which have influence on one's circumstances,
conditions and the related events, and that the Divine Will is the
foremost among them.

If one were to forget this reality, one would be entrapped in many evil
traits, like: conceit, pride, miserliness, joy, sorrow and grief, etc.

The ignorant man says: “I did this; I left that.” Thus, he falls victim
of conceit, shows arrogance to others or does not spend his money on
necessary things. He is heedless to the fact that there are thousands
and thousands of other causes - apart from his imperfect “power” -
absence of any one of which would nul­lify the effects of his “power”.
He says: “Had I done this, I would have avoided this loss; had I done
so, I would have gained that.”

He does not realize that prevention of loss or death depends on
thousands and thousands of causes, and even if one of them is absent,
the dreaded loss or death is bound to occur, man's own power
notwithstanding. Moreover, man's power itself depends on numerous causes
which are beyond his power. In short, man's power is not by his power.

The above explanation is a Qur'anic reality, and, as men­tioned earlier,
it is derived from the Divine teachings. When you know this fact and
ponder on the relevant verses, you will see that the Qur'an attributes
only some of the good characteristics to the firm decree and the
preserved tablet, while it does not attribute other traits to the
above-mentioned Divine Decree.

There are some actions, conditions and traits which, if attributed to
the Divine Decree and Measure, would nullify the principle of free will;
and accordingly the Qur'an never attributes them to the Divine Decree;
rather, it refutes it with full force. For example:

***And when they commit an indecency they say: “We found our fathers
doing this, and Allah has enjoined it on us.” Say: “Surely, Allah does
not enjoin indecency; do you say against Allah what you do not know?”***
(7:28)

On the other hand there are some actions, etc. which, if not attributed
to the Divine Decree, would imply that man had com­plete freedom, that
his will and power were the sufficient cause of his actions, etc. and
were independent of every outside cause.

The Qur'an, therefore, pointedly ascribes them to the Divine Decree, and
thus guides the man to the straight path - a path which does not confuse
the walker. In this way, the Qur'an removes from him the base
characteristics which would have resulted from that wrong ideas.

For example, it attributes the happenings to the Divine Decree, in order
that man should not ignorantly feel joy for what he gets or sorrow for
what he loses. Allah says:

***and give them of the wealth of Allah which He*** ***has given you***
(24:33);

note that Allah exhorts man to be generous, by reminding him that his
wealth has come to him from Allah.

Also, He says:

... ***and spend*** (benevolently) ***out of what We have given them***
(2:3)***;***

the verse calls him to spend by attributing the wealth to the sustenance
given by Allah. Again, He says:

***Then may be you kill yourself with grief, sorrowing after them, if
they do not believe in this announcement. Surely, We have made whatever
is on the earth an embellishment for it, so that We may try them*** (as
to) ***which of them is best in deed*** (18:6-7)***.***

In these verses Allah tells His Prophet not to grieve because of the
un­believers' disbelief, reminding him that their disbelief does not
mean that they have overpowered Allah; the fact is that what-ever is on
the earth has been made and put there by Allah for the purpose of test
and trial.

This system of ethics is the one used by the prophets, and a lot of its
examples may be found in the Holy Qur'an and other Divine Books.

There is a third system, which is found exclusively in the Qur'an; it is
neither seen in the Divine Books which have been transmitted to us, nor
in the teachings of the previous prophets (peace of Allah be on them!);
nor is it seen in the knowledge which has come to us from divine
scholars.

In this system, man is trained in character and knowledge, and the
knowledge is used in a way that does not leave room for base and low
traits. In other words, this system removes the vile characteristics,
not by repulsing them, but by eliminating all motives other than Allah.

Let us explain it in this way: What is the motive of a work done for
other than Allah? It may be honour and might of the 'other than Allah',
which the doer of that work longs for. Or his power which he is afraid
of. But Allah says:

***Surely might is wholly Allah's*** (10:65);

***that the power is wholly Allah's*** (2:165).

And when one is imbued with this true knowledge, there will remain no
question of doing any deed for letting others see, or hear about it; nor
will there be any reason why he should fear, or look forward to, or rely
on anyone other than Allah.

Once these two realities are firmly known to a man, his psyche will be
cleansed from evils of theory and practice. It will rather be adorned by
the positive traits, that is, good character and Divine characteristics;
for example, fear of and reliance on Allah, strength, self-respect,
self-sufficiency and other such virtues.

The Qur'an has repeatedly said that the kingdom belongs to Allah, that
the kingdom of the heavens and the earth is His, that to Him belongs all
that is in the heavens and the earth, as we have explained several
times.

Evidently, this kingdom does not leave any independence to anything, nor
does it allow the creatures any freedom from want - except through
Allah. Look at anything; you will see that Allah is the Owner of its
person and of all its concomitants.

When a man believes in that owner-ship and this belief becomes
firmly-rooted in his heart, he does not admit that anything has got any
independence at all - in its person, characteristics or activities. Such
a man cannot look except at the face of Allah, nor can he bow down
before, hope for, or have fear of, anything other than Allah. He will
not enjoy or be pleased with any other thing, nor will he rely on, or
surren­der to, anyone but Allah.

In short, he will not desire or wish for anything except Allah - the
Eternal One Who will remain when everything will perish; he will surely
turn away from all the false-hood, that is, from everything other than
Allah; he will not attach any importance to his own existence nor will
he care for himself in face of the Absolute Truth, that is, the eternal
existence of his Creator - Great is His Glory. The same is the import of
the following verses:

***Allah is He besides Whom there is no god; His are the very best
names*** (20:8);

***That is Allah, your Lord, there is no god but He; the Creator of all
things*** (6:102);

... ***Who made good everything that He has created*** (32:7)***;***

***And the faces shall be humbled before the Living, the Self-subsistent
God*** (20:111);

... ***all are obedient to Him*** (2:116);

***And your Lord has commanded that you shall not worship*** (any)
***but Him*** (17:23);

... ***is it not sufficient as regards your Lord that He is a witness
over all things?*** (41:53);

... ***now surely He encompasses all things*** (41:54);

***And that to your Lord is the end goal*** (53:42).

And the same is the import of the verses under discussion, that is, “and
give good news to the patient ones, who when a misfortune befalls them,
say: 'Surely we are Allah's and to Him we shall return.' Those are they
on whom are blessings and mercy from their Lord, and those are the
followers of the right course.”

These and similar other verses contain a unique Divine Know-ledge, and
produce some real and especial results. Their system is not like any
other which a moralist might employ, nor even like that used by previous
prophets in their teachings.

According to the moralists, virtue and evil are based on the public's
likes and dislikes; and the prophets based their teachings on the
general religious beliefs concerning the rules of the *shari'ah* and
their recompense. But this third system is based on pure and perfect
monotheism and it has been used exclusively by Islam - the best of
blessings be on its Prophet and his progeny!

A western orientalist has expressed a really strange and astonishing
idea in his History where he discusses the Islamic civilization. A gist
of his observation is as follows:

“A scholar should concern himself only with various aspects of
civilization which were developed by Islam among its followers, and the
excellence and superiority which were its legacy to the Muslims in the
form of a developed society and high culture.

As for the religious precepts which Islam teaches, they are merely the
moral teachings which are common to all religions and which were
popularized by all the prophets.”

Comment: The explanation given by us shows how unfounded his opinion is
and how confused his views are. The result emerges from its premises;
the effects of training emanate from the knowledge acquired by the
trainee.

As mentioned earlier, there are three types of the teachers of ethics:
one invites to a real­ity of a low grade, another to an average
perfection and the third to the pristine reality and highest perfection.

Can it be said that the results of all three will be the same? In other
words, the scholars of ethics call the people to the sociological truth;
the prophets call mankind to the actual truth and real perfection by
which it may get the eternal bliss in the life hereafter; but the Islam
invites the people to the Absolute Reality, that is, Allah Himself, and
teaches them ethical values by reminding them that
Allah is One, and there is no partner in His divinity; this belief
produces in man the purest servitude.

Now you see how dis­similar are the systems employed by the three
groups, and how different are the results.

This Islamic system created an admirable social structure, and produced
a multitude of good servants, divine scholars and Allah's friends - men
and women alike. And this single factor is sufficient to ensure the
distinguished position of Islam.

Moreover, this stystem sometimes differ from the other two in its result
also. It is based on the love a servant has for his Lord;.it teaches him
to give preference to his Lord's wishes over his own. We know that love
and enthralment sometimes lure the lover to do things which are not
approved by social wisdom (which is the basis of the social ethics), nor
are they commended by common sense on which is founded the general
religious commandments. Reason has its own rules and love its own. We
shall further explain it in some other place, Allah willing.

**Qur’an:** ***Those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their
Lord, and those are the followers of the right course.*** It ap­pears
from meditation on these words that blessings is to a certain extent
different from mercy - look how “blessings” has been used in plural and
“mercy” in singular. Allah says:

***He it is Who sends His blessings on you, and*** (***so*** do) ***His
angels, that He may bring you forth out of utter darkness into the
light; and He is Merciful to the believers*** (33:43).

The context shows that the sen­tence, “and He is Merciful to the
believers”, gives the reason of the preceding phrases, “He it is Who
sends His blessings on you.” The meaning therefore, is as follows: Allah
sends His blessings on you; and it is as it should be, because He is
Merciful to the believers, and you are believers; therefore, He sends
His blessings on you, to show His mercy to you.

The position of blessing *vis-à-vis* mercy is like that of a premise in
relation to its result, or of a glance in comparison to seeing, or of
throwing into fire *vis-à-vis* burning. It is in con­formity with the
explanation, given by some writers of *as-salah* **(** **اَلصَّلٰوةُ** =
the blessing), that it really means turning towards, inclination.

Blessing from Allah means that He turns towards the servant with mercy;
when attributed to angels it connotes their turning towards a man and
becoming a medium to convey Allah's mercy to him; and when ascribed to
man, it means turning to the Lord calling Him with humility. However, it
does not mean that blessing itself is not mercy or an example of mercy.

Pondering on the usage of “mercy” in the Qur'an, we find that it is the
comprehensive gift of Allah, the All-encompassing Divine Bounty. Allah
says:

***and*** My ***mercy encompasses all things*** (7:156);

also, He says:

***And your Lord is the self-sufficient one, the Lord of mercy; if He
pleases, He may take you off, and make whom He pleases successors after
you, even as He raised you up from the seed of another people***
(6:133).

He may take you off because He is Self-sufficient, He does not need you;
and He may make others succeed you, as He had raised you up, because He
is Merciful. Even then both aspects are attributed to His mercy, and at
the same time they may be attributed to His Self-sufficiency. Every
creation - be it from matter or without matter - is a mercy, and also a
gift and bounty emanating from His Self-sufficiency.

Allah says:

***and the bounty of your Lord is not confined*** (17:20).

And one of His bounties is *as-salah* (the blessing); this too is a
mercy, but of a especial type. Probably this is the reason why in the
verse under discussion, “blessings” has been used in plural and “mercy”
in singular.

**Qur’an:** ***and they are the followers of the right course.*** It
looks like the result of the preceding clause, “Those are they on whom
are blessings and mercy from their Lord”. That is why Allah did not say,
'on whom are blessing and mercy from their Lord and guidance'; instead
He described it in a separate sentence.

Also, He did not say, 'and they are *al-mahdiyyun* **اَلمَهْدِيّـُونَ**
) *=* the rightly guided ones)'; instead their acceptance of guidance
has been denoted with the word *al-muhtadun* **اَلمُهْتـَدُونَ** ) =
followers of the right course), because ”following” describes the next
stage, coming after and resulting from “guidance”.

Evidently, the mercy of Allah consisted of guiding them to Himself; the
blessings were like the preliminaries of that guidance, and their
following that right course was the result of that guidance. Thus, the
blessings, the mercy and the following of the right course, all are
different from one another, although looking from another angle all
three were but Divine Mercy.

Allah gives good news to these believers of His bestowal of honours to
them. To clearly understand the whole sequence, look at the following
example: You see in the way a friend of yours who wants to come to your
house to be your guest, and is making enquiries as to how to reach your
home.

You meet him with smiling face, take him to the proper path, walking
with him, not leaving him alone lest he loses the way; this continues
until you bring him to your house; while on the way, you tend to his
needs and look after his meals and transport, and protect him from every
hardship and trouble.

All these things taken together are called “hospitality” accorded to
him; and every care taken of him is a particular care and hospitality;
for example, showing him the way is separate from hospitality and care -
and even then it is a hospitality. Each of the above acts is a care, and
each is a guidance and each is a particular hospitality - and all
together come under one word, “hospitality”.

Applying this example to this verse, the one comprehensive hospitality
is like the mercy, and every attention paid to the friend is like the
blessings and his being your guest in your house is like the “following
the right course”.

Many syntactical devices of this sentence point to the pres­tige and
rank of those believers: First, it is a nominal clause; second, it
begins with a demonstrative pronoun used for distant objects; third,
that pronoun has been reinforced with a separate personal pronoun; and
fourth, the predicate begins with the definite article.

Traditions
----------

### About al-Barzakh and the Soul's Life after Death

Suwayd ibn Ghaflah narrates from the Commander of the faithfuls ( 'Ali,
a.s.) that he said: “Surely, when the son of Adam comes to (his) last
day of this world and the first of the next, his property, his children
and his actions are portrayed before him. So he turns to his property
and says:

'By God! I was covetous of you (and) avaricious; so what have you (now)
got for me?' (The property) says: 'Take your shroud from me'. Then he
turns to his children and says: 'By God! Surely I was your loving
(father), and I was your protector; now what have you got for me?' They
say: 'We shall convey you to your pit (i.e., grave) and bury you in it.'

Then he turns to his deeds and says: 'By God! I was indif­ferent to you,
and you were distasteful to me; (now) what is with you (for me)?' So it
says: 'I am your companion in your grave as well as on the Day of your
gathering - until I am presented with you before your Lord.'

Then (after his death), if he is a friend of Allah, there comes to him
(a visitor), the most sweet-scented of all people, of the most beautiful
appearance and (wearing) the most adorned apparel, and says to him:
'Rejoice with refreshment from Allah, and flowers and the garden of
bounties; you arrived a good arrival' (i.e., welcome to you).

Thereupon, he says: 'Who are you?' (The visitor) says: 'I am your good
deed. Proceed from the world to the garden.' And he recognizes the one
who washes his body, and earnestly appeals to his carrier (the
bier-bearer) to hasten him (to the grave).

Then when he enters his grave, two angels come to him - and they are the
examiners of the grave - with elegantly-dressed hairs, writing on the
earth with their teeth; their voices are like roaring thunder and their
eyes like streaking lightening.

They ask him: 'Who is your Lord? And who is your prophet? And what is
your religion?' And he says: 'Allah is my Lord; and Muhammad is my
prophet; and Islam is my religion.'

So they say: 'May Allah confirm you in what you like and are pleased
with!' And this is (the meaning of) the word of Allah:

***Allah confirms those who believe with the sure word in this world's
life and in the hereafter...*** (14:27).

Then they make his grave spacious for him as far as his eye can see, and
open for him a gate to the garden, and say to him: 'Sleep happily the
sleep of a fine-looking youth.' And it is the word of Allah:

***The dwellers of the garden shall on that day be in a better abiding
place and a better resting place.*** (25:24).

“And if he is an enemy of his Lord, then comes to him a (visitor), the
ugliest of the creatures of Allah in attires and the foulest-smelling.
And he tells him: 'Welcome to the entertain­ment of boiling water and
roasting in Hell.'

And he (the dead person) recognizes the one who washes his body, and
earnestly appeals to his carrier (the bier-bearer) to hold him back. And
when he is buried in his grave, the examiners of the grave come to him
and remove his shroud from him.

Then they ask him: 'Who is your Lord? And what is your religion? And who
is your prophet? And he says: 'I do not know.' So they say to him: 'You
did not know, nor were you on the right path.'

Then they hit him with an iron-rod, a hitting which frightens every
creature of Allah - except the *jinn* and the men. Thereafter they open
for him a door to the Hell and tell him: 'Sleep in the worst condition.'

So he is squeezed in a narrow space like a shaft in an arrow-head, until
his brain comes out from between his nails and flesh; and Allah sets on
him the serpents of the earth and its scorpions and insects which go on
biting him until Allah will raise him from his grave - and he will long
for the advent of the Hour, because of the trouble in which he finds
himself.” (*at-Tafsir,* al-Qummi)

Abu Bakr al-Hadrami narrates from Abu Ja'far (a.s.) that he said: “No
one shall be questioned in the grave except he who shall be of pure
belief or of total disbelief.” I told him: “And (what about) the rest of
the men?” He said: “They will be kept in oblivion.” (*Muntakhab Basa'iri
'd-darajat*)

Ibn Zubyan says: “I was with Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.), and he said: 'What do
the people say about the souls of the believers after they die?' I said:
'They say (that the souls are placed) in the craws of green birds.' He
said: 'Glory be to Allah! The believer is far more honourable near Allah
than this!

When it happens (i.e., when the believer dies) there come to him the
Messenger of Allah and Ali and Fatimah and Hasan and Husayn (peace be on
them), and with them (come) the angels of the Mighty and Glorious Allah
(who are near to him).

So, if Allah lets his tongue speak the wit­ness of His Oneness and the
prophethood of the Prophet and the (*al-walayah* **اَلوِلاَيَة ُ** ) =
love, obedience of the *Ahlu* ***'**l-bayt,* then the Messenger of Allah
(S) and 'Ali and Fatimah and Hasan and Husayn (peace be on them) and
with them the near angels become his witnesses for it.

And if his tongue is tied, Allah confers on His Prophet the knowledge of
what is in his (i.e., that believer's) heart of that (belief); so he
(i.e., the Prophet) becomes his witness; and then bear testimony of Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn - because of the testimony of the Prophet - on
their group be the best peace from Allah! and (so do) those angels who
are present with them.

When Allah takes him to Himself, He sends that soul to the garden, in a
shape similar to his (worldly) shape. They eat (there) and drink. When a
new-corner comes to them, he recognizes them by that shape which they
had in the world.” (*al-Amali,* ash-Shaykh at-Tusi)

Hammad ibn 'Uthman narrates from Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) that he described
the souls of the believers and said: “They meet each other.” I said:
“They meet each other?” He said: “Yes! They ask each other and recognize
each other, so that if you see one you will say, '(He is) so-and-so'.”
(*al-Mahasin*)

Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: “Verily, the believer visits his family and
he sees what he likes; and what he dislikes is hidden from him. And
verily the unbeliever visits his family and he sees what he dislikes;
and what he likes is hidden from him.” And he said: “There are some of
them who visit (their families) every Friday; and there are others who
visit according to their deeds.” (*al-Kafi* )

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Verily, the souls are, with the char­acteristic
features of (their) bodies, in a tree of the garden; they know each
other and enquire about each other. When a (new) soul comes to (those)
souls, they say: 'Let it be, because it is coming from a great
terrifying (experience).'

Thereafter, they ask him: 'What has happened to so-and-so? What has
so-and-so done?' If the soul tells them, 'I have left him alive', they
hope for his (future arrival); and if it tells them, 'He had died', they
say: 'He fell down (to Hell); he perished.' ” (*al-Kafi* )

**The author says:** There are numerous traditions on the subject of
*al-barzakh.* We have quoted above some comprehensive ones. There is a
huge lot of nearly *mutawatir* traditions describing the above-mentioned
meanings. These traditions prove that the life of *al-barzakh is* an
immaterial one.

A Philosophical Discussion on Immateriality of the Soul
-------------------------------------------------------

Is the soul immaterial? The word “soul” in this discussion means that
thing which every man refers to when he says “I”. Its “immateriality”
refers to the fact that it is not a material thing, it is neither
divisible nor governed by time or space.

No doubt, I conceive in myself a concept which I refer to as “I”; and it
is equally certain that every man has similar conception about himself.
It is a conception which we are never oblivious of - as long As we are
alive and conscious. It is not a limb of ours; nor is it a part of our
body which we perceive by one of our senses or even through reason.

In short, it is not like our external limbs which we feel with our
senses of sight or touch, etc., nor is it like our internal organs which
we know by senses or experiment. Sometimes we become oblivious of one or
another of those limbs or organs - or even of the whole body. But we are
never oblivious of the “I”. It proves that the “I” is other than the
body and its parts.

One thing more. Body and its limbs and parts as well as the faculties
and characteristics found in it, are all material. One of the
characteristics of matter is gradual change, dissolution and
divisibility. If soul were body or a part thereof, it would have been
material and subject to change and division - but it is not so.

If a man looks at this vision of his “self ” and then compares it with
that which he used to look at since the beginning of his gnosis of the
“self ”, he will find that it is the same vision, the same notion,
without the least change or plurality.

It is un­like his body or its parts and characteristics which all
undergo continuous change, in substance and form as well as in their
conditions and positions. Also, he will realize that it is a notion,
simple, indivisible and non-compound, unlike the body or its parts and
characteristics.

And matter and every material thing is a compound and divisible.
Obviously, the soul is not body, nor is it a part of the body; it is
neither a development of the body nor one of its characteristics.

Coming to matter again, it makes no difference whether we perceived it
with a sense of ours or by reasoning, or did not perceive it at all - it
is matter and material in any case. And matter is subject to change and
divisibility. But we have seen that the vision which we call “soul” is
not subject to any of the above characteristics of matter. Therefore,
soul is neither matter nor material.

Also, this vision of “I” is a notion, simple and one; there is no
plurality of parts therein, nor is there any extraneous item mixed with
it; it is an absolute one. Every man finds it in him-self that he is he
and not someone else.

Therefore, this vision is a concept subsistent by itself, and distinct;
it is beyond the definition of matter and is not subject to its
characteristics and properties. It is *a al-jawhar* **اَلجَوْهَرُ** )
*=* lit. “jewel”; technically, a thing that exists in reality and which
is the bearer of the accidents), separate from matter; it has a
connection with the body which makes it identifiable with the body - and
it is the connection of management.

The above discourse proves our claims in this respect.

All the materialists and a group of Muslim theologians as well as the
Zahiristic traditionalists do not accept the immaterial­ity of the soul.
But what they have written in support of their view stretches the
credulity too far. Let us have a look at the arguments of the
materialists. They say:

1. The science has nowadays advanced to a pre­viously-undreamt-of extent
in its in-depth and minute researches of natural phenomena. It has found
and pin-pointed a natural and material cause for every characteristic of
the body.

It has not found any psychological effect which could not be explained
according to the material laws. This being the case, why should we
believe in the existence of an immaterial soul?

2. The nervous system continuously conveys the perceptions to its centre
(i.e., brain) with extreme rapidity. The vision thus perceived is a
unified series, having a single position. The pictures formed in mind
are substituted with such rapidity that one frame is not distinguishable
from another; that is, mind does not realize that the preceding frame
has gone and been replaced by another.

It is this composite “one”, this illusory ”unit”, which we see and call
our soul, and which we refer to as “I”.

It is true that it is other than all our limbs and organs; but it does
not necessarily mean that it is other than body and its characteristics.
The fact is that it is a composite series which appears to be one,
because of continuous and rapid substitutions - and we are never
oblivious of it, because such an oblivion would result in nullity of the
nervous system - in other words, death.

Also, it is true that my vision of my “I” is constant. But it is not
because there is a thing which is constant and unchanged. In fact, it is
only an illusion resulting from a series of constantly and rapidly
changing visions.

Suppose there is a water-tank with an inlet and an outlet of the same
diameter; water comes in from one side and goes out from the other, with
exactly the same speed - and the tank seems always full.

Our sense perceives the water as one, constant and unchanged unit, but
in reality it is neither the same water nor is it constant and
unchanged. Even if there is a reflection in the water, of a man, tree or
some other object, it will look as unchanged, steady and constant, but
actually it is not so - it is not one, it is gradually changing with the
gradual change of the water.

The same is the case of the apparent one­ness, constancy and
unchangeability which we see in our soul, self or “I”.

3. The soul, for whose immateriality arguments have been offered, based
on the inner vision, is in fact a composite of natural faculties and
characteristics. It is the sum-total of nervous per­ceptions, which in
their turn emanate from mutual action and reaction between external
matter and nervous system. It is a composite unity, not the real one.

### Comment

1. It is true that the science, based on senses and experiments, with
all its minute, delicate and in-depth researches, has not come across a
“soul”. Also, it is correct that it has not found any phenomenon which
irresistibly led one to the soul as its cause.

But these two premises do not prove that there is not an immaterial
soul - after all, we have written earlier the proofs of its existence.
The natural sciences, which discuss the laws of nature and the
properties of matter, are by definition limited to the researches
concerning matter only, which is its subject.

The apparatus and chemicals, etc. which sciences use to conduct and
complete their tests and experiments, may throw light on matter and
material affairs only. But by the same token these, sciences and their
apparatus, etc. cannot pass any judg­ment - for or against - on
metaphysical and immaterial concept and beings.

Utmost that a natural science can say is that it did not find a soul.
But “not finding” is not “non-existence”. The natural sciences, by their
definition, are not expected to find within their subject (i.e., within
matter and its properties and characteristics) something beyond the
limit of matter and physi­cal nature.

In fact, their above-mentioned assertion emanates from a gross
misunderstanding. They think that those who believed in the existence of
soul, did so because they look at some biological functions of their
limbs which they could not explain within the framework of their
incomplete knowledge, and so they said that there was something
immaterial, that is, the soul, that was the source of those functions.

But now the science has developed by leaps and bounds and has
pin-pointed the natural causes of all such functions. Therefore, there
is no need now to believe in the putative soul. (It is the same trend of
thought which they have followed while denying the existence of the
Creator.)

Obviously, it is a wrong assumption. Those who believe in the existence
of soul, do not do so because of that supposed difficulty; they do not
ascribe some bodily function (of known causes) to the body, and some
others (of unknown causes) to the soul. Rather, they ascribe all bodily
functions to the body - directly - and to the soul - indirectly, through
the body. They ascribe to the soul only one function which cannot be
ascribed to the body in any way - man's gnosis of self and his vision of
his person or “I”.

2. They have said that the reality seen by man as one is, in fact, a
series of nervous perceptions coming to the central nervous system one
after another with extreme rapidity but their oneness is only composite.

But this assertion is quite irrelevant, and it has nothing to do with
the vision of the self. We have argued on the strength of the vision of
the self; they are talking about arrival of the sensual visions from the
peripheral sense-organs to the central nervous system, and its results.

Well, let us suppose, as they say, that actually there are many things,
that is, perceptions which have no real oneness; and those perceptions
are all material, there is nothing behind them except their own reality;
and that the vision which is 'one soul' is in fact the sum-total of
these numer­ous perceptions.

If so, then where did this “one” come from - the one which is our only
vision, whose “other” has never been perceived by us? Where did this
perceived oneness come from?

The talk about “composite oneness” is more like a jest than a serious
proposition. A “composite one” is in reality a collection of numerous
things without any oneness at all. Its oneness is imaginary, as we may
say one house or one line, which is not one in fact.

What they say amounts to this: The perceptions and sensations which are
pluralistic and manifold in themselves are one perceptions in itself.

It means that these perceptions are numerous in reality, having no
oneness at all, and at the same time they are actually only one
perception; there is nothing beyond these sensual per­ceptions to
perceive them as one perception - unlike a sense or imagination which
consecutively and collectively receives manifold sensory or imaginary
perceptions, and perceives them as one.

They claim that those manifold perceptions are in themselves one
perception - there is no other faculty beyond them which treats this
collective vision as a composite one.

Also, it is not possible to say that that perceiving is done by a part
of brain which perceives the pluralistic picture as “one” - because it
will not remove our objection: The perception of that part of brain is
itself a part of those consecutively and rapidly-perceived pic­ture, and
our objection covers that perception too.

That part of brain does not possess a separate perception-power which
would deal with these perceptions - as an external sense deals with the
external matters and acquires through them sensory pictures. (Ponder on
this point.)

Exactly the same arguments (as we have offered above against ”oneness”
of the sensual perceptions) apply with equal force against firmness and
indivisibility of this vision which is always changing and divisible by
its very nature.

Apart from that, the premises - that these manifold, con­sequently (and
with extreme rapidity) perceived pictures are perceived by mental vision
as one - is wrong in itself. What is brain or its faculties? What is
perception and the perceived pic­ture?

All these things are material - and matter and material are in their
quiddity manifold, changeable and divisible. But the gnosis of “self” is
not subject to these material defects. Is it not strange that even then
they claim that there is nothing beyond matter and material?

3. They have said that the senses or the perceiving faculties become
confused and consequently perceive manifold, divisible and changing
things as one indivisible and unchanging thing. But this assertion is
manifestly wrong.

Error or confusion is a relative - and not an absolute - effect which
occurs when one thing is compared with another. For example, we perceive
the celestial bodies as small bright dots.

Of course, this perception is wrong as we know from academic proofs and
our other perceptions. But this error is found out when we compare our
sensory perception with the reality of these perceived luminous bodies.

As far as that sensory perception itself is concerned, it is a reality -
we are actually perceiving small bright dots. And to that extent there
is no question of any error or confusion.

The subject under discussion is not different from the above-given
example. When our senses and faculties look at numerous divisible and
changing things and perceive them as one indivisible and unchanging
thing, their confusion and error is found out only when that picture is
compared with the real thing existing outside.

But so far as the perceived picture found in that faculty or sense is
concerned, it is undoubtedly one, unchanging and in-divisible - and such
a thing cannot be material because it lacks the properties of matter and
material.

In short, the above discourse shows that the argument offered by
materialists on the basis of senses and experiment, only proves that
they could not find the soul. The fallacy is that they have proved 'not
finding' and think that it proves 'non-existence'.

Also, the picture painted by them to illustrate the vision of self or
soul - the vision that is a single, simple and unchangeable reality - is
irrelevant and wrong; that picture is in accord neither with established
principles of materialism nor with the actual fact.

Now, we should have a look at the definition of soul or psyche as given
by the psychologists. According to them, it is the unified condition
resulting from the actions and reactions of various psychological
activities - like perception, will, pleasure, love, etc. - which give
rise to that unified condition.

We have no-thing to say about this definition, because scholars of every
branch of knowledge have right to postulate a subject for their
scholarly pursuit and deliberation. And so have the psychologists.

Our concern is about the existence (or inexistence) of the soul in
reality, quite independent of the assumptions of the thinkers. And it is
a question within the domain of philosophy, not psychology.

There are some scholars of theology who believe that the soul is not
immortal. They say: It has been established by the disciplines related
to human life, like anatomy and physiology, that man's spiritual and
biological characteristics emanate from live cells; those cells are the
foundations of human and animal lives. Spirit or soul, therefore, is a
characteristics and especial effect of those countless cells - each of
which contains a life of its own.

What the man calls his soul - and to which he refers as “I” - is a
composite entity made up of countless souls. We know that these life
conditions and spiritual characteristics cease to exist when the
life-giving germs and cells die.

In this back-ground, there is no question of a single immaterial soul or
spirit which is supposed to continue even after the body dies. True that
the principles of materialism, established after scientific researches,
are yet unable to unravel the mysteries of life.

There-fore, we may say that the physical causes are unable to create the
soul, and accordingly, it may have been brought into being by a
metaphysical being. The attempt to prove the immateriality of the soul
by purely rationalistic argument is unacceptable in the world of modern
knowledge, which does not rely on anything other than the senses and
experiments.

The author says: On meditation you will see that all the objections
written against the materialists' arguments apply with equal force to
this argument too. The following two objections are over and above that:

**First:** If the scientific research is uptil now unable to unravel the
mysteries of soul and realities of life, it does not necessarily mean
that it cannot do so even in future; nor that these spiritual
characteristics are in fact not based on material causes - although we
may not know it. Therefore, the theologians' argument is no-thing but a
fallacy by which they have equalized inexistence of knowledge with
knowledge of inexistence.

Second: They seem to ascribe some worldly affairs - that is, the
physical phenomena - to matter, and some others - that is, spiritual
affairs - to a metaphysical cause, that is, the Creator. But it implies
that there are two creators in the world. It is a proposition which is
neither acceptable to the materialists nor the theists. And all the
arguments of monotheism rebut such assumption.

There are some other objections against immateriality of soul, described
in books of philosophy and theology; all of them show that the writers
concerned have not pondered on the proof given by us, nor have they
understood its main theme. That is why we have refrained from quoting
and commenting on them here. Anyone desirous to know them should look
into the books concerned. And Allah is the Guide.

A Discourse on Ethics
---------------------

Ethics is the science which looks into human traits, related to man's
vegetable, animal and human characteristics, and differ­entiates the
good traits from the bad ones, in order that man may complete his
practical happiness by acquiring the good traits; and thus emanate from
him such actions as attract to him general praise from the human
society.

Ethics shows that human morality finally belongs to three comprehensive
faculties of man. These faculties lead the psyche to acquire practical
knowledge, from which emanate all actions of the human species.

These are the desire, anger and rational faculty. Human actions are
divided into three categories: Either they are intended to gain some
benefit, for example: eating, drinking and wearing clothes, etc.

They issue forth from the faculty of desire; or they are aimed at
protecting, or repulsing harmful effects from, one's person, honour or
property, etc. These actions emanate from the faculty of anger. Or they
are related to mental conception and proposition, for example, arranging
syllogism, preparation of argument, etc.

Such mental activities are caused by rational faculty. Man's personality
is composed of these three faculties, and they, by joining together,
emerge as a composite unit and become the source of all human activities
and actions. In this way, man attains his felicity and happiness, which
is the final cause of this composition.

It is therefore necessary for man not to let any of these three
faculties deviate from the middle path to either the right or the left,
not to allow any of these to exceed the limit or to be deficient - as it
would disturb the ratio of that particular ingredient, which would
result in changing the entire nature of the composite unit, that is, man
himself. This would negate the reason for which the man was created,
that is, the felicity of the whole species.

The middle course for any of the faculties is to use it as it should
be - both in quantity and quality. The middle course for the faculty of
desire is called continence, and its two sides of ex­cess and deficiency
are greed and undue quiescence, respectively.

The middle course for the faculty of anger is bravery, and the two sides
are rashness and cowardice. The middle course of the faculty of
rationality is called wisdom, and the two sides are deception and
dull-mindedness.

When the three good characteristics - continence, bravery and wisdom -
combine in a man, a fourth characteristic is born, just as a new quality
emerges when different ingredients of a medicine or mixture are blended
together. And that quality is called justice. Justice gives each faculty
its due right and puts it in its proper place.

Its two undesirable sides are inflicting injustice and surrendering to
it.

These four - continence, bravery, wisdom and justice - are the roots of
all virtuous characteristics, of good morality. Each of them has
numerous branches which issue forth from it and belong to it. They have
the same relationship with the above-mentioned roots as a species has
with its genus.

Examples of these branches are generosity and magnanimity, contentedness
and gratitude, patience and gallantry, courage and modesty, sense of
honour and sincerity, nobility and humility, and so on. These are the
branches of virtuous characteristics, which are given in detail in the
books of the Ethics. The following is a 'family-tree' showing its roots
and branches[^1].

And the Ethics defines each of them and distinguishes the middle course
from its two sides of excess and deficiency; then it explains why a
virtue is virtue, then shows how it can be acquired, until it becomes a
firm trait, that is, by firm belief that it is good and virtuous trait
and by repeatedly practising it until it becomes a firmly-rooted
characteristic of the soul.

For example: We say to a coward: Cowardice is born when the psyche is
gripped by fear; and fear emanates from something which may happen or
may not happen - in future; and such a thing, whose existence and
inexistence both are equally possible, cannot be tipped to either side
without a cause; a man of reason should not indulge in such fantasies;
therefore, a man should not allow himself to be gripped by fear.

When a man teaches himself this theoretical aspect, and then repeatedly
enters into dangerous situations and resolutely proceeds towards
alarming perils, he soon gets rid of the bad trait of fear. The same is
the case with all the virtues and evils.

The above description is based on the first system, as was explained in
the Commentary. That system tries to reform the character and to create
a balance, a moderation, in moral traits, in order that the man may be
praised and his virtues lauded by the society.

Somewhat similar is the approach of the second system brought by the
prophets and the divine legislators. The only difference is in the aims
and objects of the two systems.

While the first system aims at acquiring a perfect trait because it is
approved by the society and attracts praise from the people, the second
one aims at achieving by it the genuine happiness for the man, that is,
perfection of belief in Allah and His signs, and the felicity of the
next world, which is the real happiness and perfection. Yet, both
systems are similar in that, the ultimate goal of both is the
per­fection of man in his character and morals.

As for the third system (which was explained earlier), it differs from
the above two, in that it aims at seeking the pleasure of Allah, not at
achieving human perfection. Consequently, its goals sometimes differ
from that of the earlier two systems. It is quite possible that what
appears as the middle way from this point of view, may not look so from
the other two angles.

When the faith of a servant proceeds on this path of perfection, when it
goes on from strength to strength, his soul is attracted towards
meditation about his Lord; he keeps the beautiful Divine Names before
his vision, and constantly looks at His lovely attributes which are free
from every defect and deficiency; his soul is relent­lessly attracted to
Allah going higher and higher in his meditation, until there comes a
stage where he worships Allah as though he (man) were looking at Allah,
and Allah were looking towards him. At this stage he feels the Divine
Presence in his attraction, meditation and love.

The love increases from strength to strength, because man by nature
loves beauty. Allah has said:

***and those who believe are stronger in*** (their) ***love for Allah***
(2:165).

Such a man begins following the Messenger of Allah in all his doings, in
every situation, because love of a thing results in the love of its
signs, and the Messenger of Allah (S) is the wonderful sign of Allah.
(In fact, the whole universe is a sign and token of Allah.)

This love becomes stronger and stronger until a time comes when the
servant cuts himself from every thing, in devotion of Allah; he loves
nothing except his Lord, he bows before none other than Allah. Whenever
such a man looks at a thing which has some beauty and attraction, he
finds in it a sample - although imperfect - of the Divine Beauty.

He knows that it is but a reflection of the inexhaustible perfection,
the unending beauty and incomprehensible splendour of Allah. Allah's is
the beauty, grace, perfection and magnificence; every beauty and
perfection found in other things, in reality belongs to Him, because
every thing is a sign of Allah - it is its only reality, it is nothing
more than that; it has no other disposition; it is but a reflection
showing the image of the original.

This man is, and remains, overwhelmed by love; and he does not look at
anything but only because it is a sign of his Lord. In short, all
strings connecting his heart to other things are snipped off, leaving it
attached only to the love of Allah. Whatever he loves, it is only for
the sake of Allah and in the cause of Allah.

At this stage, the mode of his perceptions and actions under-goes a
drastic change. When he looks at a thing, he sees Allah before it and
with it, every thing loses its independence and ident­ity in his eyes.
What he sees and perceives is different from what other people see and
perceive; the people look at things from be-hind a curtain, while he
sees them in their true form.

This shows the difference in perception, and similar is the case of
actions. As he does not love anything except Allah, he does not want
any-thing except for Allah, seeking His Sublime Majesty.

He neither seeks nor intends, neither hopes no fears, neither chooses
nor abandons, becomes neither despaired nor depressed, is neither
pleased nor displeased - except for Allah and in the cause of Allah.
Thus, his aims and goals differ totally from those of other people; his
motive is diametrically opposed to that of his fellow beings.

Previously, he acquired a virtue because it was a human perfection, and
discarded an evil because it was a defect. But now his only interest is
in seeking the Sublime Majesty of Allah; he does not care about any
perfection or defect, nor is he attracted to any worldly praise or
cherished remembrance; he rises above this world as well as the next; he
takes into consideration neither the Paradise nor the Hell - he discards
every thing and rises above them. Now, his destination is his Lord; his
provision, his humility of servitude; and his guide, his love. As a poet
has said:

***Love narrated to me the traditions of amour,***
***Through its chain of narrators, from neighbourhood***
***of a distinguished personality,***
***And narrated to me the breath of fresh breeze,***
***From the branching trees, from the valley of euphorbia***
***from the heights of Najd,***
***From the tear, from my sour eye, from passion,***
***From sorrow, from my wounded heart, from ecstasy of love,***
***That my ardor and love have sworn together,***
***To my destruction till I am laid down in my grave.***

This discourse, although short and concise, explains our theme (if you
study it carefully). It shows that in this third system of the Ethics
the question of human perfection or defect becomes irrelevant; and the
aim is changed from human perfec­tion to the Sublime Majesty of Allah.

As a result, the outlook is changed from those of the other two systems;
and it may happen sometimes that what is counted as a virtue in other
systems becomes evil in this one, and vice versa.

Now, we should turn our attention to one remaining topic. There is
another theory of Ethics which differs from the above-mentioned three
systems; and probably it may be counted as a separate system.

They say: Ethics and morality changes in its roots and shoots with the
changes occurring in the society, because virtue and vice change with
the changing society, they are not based on any permanent, unalterable,
firm foundation. Allegedly it emanates from the theory of evolution of
matter.

They say: Human society has come into being because of various needs and
requirements of life, which man wants to fulfil through the agency of
society. He tries to keep the society alive which, he thinks, preserves
his own existence. The nature is gov­erned by the law of evolution and
gradual perfection.

Conse­quently, society too undergoes constant changes and proceeds to a
more perfect and more developed goal. If an action conforms with the aim
of society - that is, perfection - it is called virtue; otherwise, it is
vice.

Therefore, virtue and vice cannot remain unchanged, they are not static
or permanent. There is nothing like absolute virtue or absolute vice;
they are relative ideas, which change with the changing societies,
according to regions and times.

As the virtue and vice - being relative factors - under-go changes, so
do the ethical and moral values. In other words, Ethics is not absolute;
its views on good and bad characteristics are liable to change with
circumstances.

From the above, we may infer that Ethics follows the nation-al or social
aspirations - the aspirations which are a means of achieving the social
perfection (which is the goal of the society); and virtue and vice are
governed by it.

Whatever promotes develop­ment, whatever helps the society in reaching
its goal and achieving its aspiration, is good and virtue; and whatever
hinders from that goal, whatever keeps the society backward, is evil and
vice.

Accordingly, lie, false allegation, indecency, hard-heartedness, robbery
and shamelessness may become good and virtuous, if they promote the
aspiration of the society. And truth, chastity and mercy may become bad
and evil - if they hinder it from achieving its goal.

This is a gist of this strange theory which has been adopted by the
materialist communists. This theory is not a new one, contrary to their
claims. In ancient Greece, the Cynics reportedly had the same idea.

Likewise, Mazdakites (the followers of Maz­dak, who lived in Iran during
the reign of Kisra and was the first to call to communism) were
practising it; and even today some primitive tribes in Africa and
elsewhere follow this tenet.

However, it is a false theory, and the proof offered in its support is
wrong both in its foundation and structure. Before exposing its
falsehood, a few points should be made clear:

Every being - that which has external existence - has an inseparable
personality of its own. Consequently, one being cannot be another being.
For example, existence of Zayd has a personality and a sort of unity
which prevents it from becoming the personality of 'Amr.

Zayd is one person and 'Amr is another; they are two persons, two human
beings, not one. It is a premise whose truth cannot be doubted.

(There is a totally different prop­osition which says: “The physical
universe is a being having one individual reality.” This proposition
should not be confused with the above-mentioned premise.)

It follows that the external existence is one and the same with
personality.' But mental ideas are different from exter­nal beings and
their existence is not their personality. Reason admits that an idea -
whatever it may be - may be applied to more than one individual, for
example, the idea of man, or that of a tall man, or that of the man
standing before us.

The logicians divide idea into general and particular. Also, they divide
the particular into two categories of relative and real. But these
divisions are done when an idea is seen *vis-à-vis* another idea, when
it is put at the side of the other; or when it is seen in relation to
external existence.

This property of the ideas - their applicability to more than one
individual - is also sometimes called “generality”; its opposite being
“individuality” or “unity”.

An external physical being is governed by the law of change and general
movement. Therefore, it has an expanse and that expanse is divisible
into boundaries and pieces, each piece being different from other
preceding or following ones.

Yet, it is connected with them in its existence. Otherwise, without that
connection, it could not be said to be changing or evolving. (If a thing
is removed completely and is replaced by an entirely new thing, it
cannot be said that the first evolved and changed into the second. If
one thing is to change into another, there must be a common factor
joining them together.)

It follows that that movement is a single thing having its own identity
and personality. It looks numerous when it is seen in relation to the
boundaries of a thing (as mentioned above). That relation distinguishes
one piece from the others. But as for the movement itself, it is a
single uninterrupted flow.

This char­acteristic of the movement - this constant flow - is also
called a ”generality” in contrast to the relations it has with each
bound­ary; we say “general movement”, meaning a movement free of its
relations with the boundaries and pieces.

This “generality” is a thing existing in reality, unlike the “generality
of the ideas” mentioned in (2) above, which is mental attribute of
idea - an imaginary attribute of an imaginary being.

Undoubtedly, man is a physical being; humanity has many members, as well
as its own laws and characteristics. What is created by nature is one
individual, singly and separately. It does not create the collection of
people which we call human society. Of course, the nature was aware that
man needs somethings to perfect his existence which he could not obtain
on his own.

Therefore, the nature equipped him with organs, faculties and powers
which would be useful in his endeavours to make up his defi­ciencies
within the framework of society. Obviously, the single man is the goal
of creation, primarily and principally, while society is a secondary
goal, just a by-product.

The human nature demands a society and proceeds towards it, (if we can
use the words of demand, causality and movement - in their real sense -
about the society!). What is the real relation between man and this
society?

An individual man is a single and personal being (in the sense we have
described above). At the same time, he is constantly on move, changing,
evolving, proceeding to his perfection.

That is why every piece of his changing being is different from other
pieces. Yet his is a nature, flowing, “general”, preserved in all the
stages of the changes; in short, his nature is a single personality.

This nature found in this individual man is preserved by the means of
procreation, by branching out of one individual into other in­dividuals.
It is this factor which is called “nature of the species”.

It is preserved through the individuals, even if they are changed, even
if they undergo creation and destruction (in the same way as was
explained about the individual's nature). Individual's nature exists and
proceeds towards personal perfection.

Likewise, nature of species exists and proceeds towards the perfection
of the species. There is no doubt that this endeavour for perfection of
species exists in the natural system.

That is what we mean when we say, for example, that the human species
proceeds towards perfection; or that today's man is a more perfect being
than the primitive man. The same demand for perfection of species is in
the minds of those scientists who speak about the evolution of species.

Had there not been a nature of species, existing in reality, preserved
in the individuals.(or in species), such talks would not have had any
value - it would have been just a metaphorical speech.As with the
individuals, so with the society.

There is an individual, or let us say particular, society, which is
found amongst the people of a nation, of a time or of a region. Also,
there is a general society found in the human species, continuing with
its continuation, evolving with its evolution (if it be correct that
society, like a social man, is an externally existing condition of an
externally existing nature!).

Society moves and evolves with the movements and changes of man. This
society is a single entity from the initial stage of the movement to
wherever it proceeds to, with a general existence. This ”one” (which
changes because of its relation with each and every boundary) becomes
divided into numerous pieces. And every “piece” is a part of the
society, that is, a “man”.

The parts or members of the society rely in their being on the persons
of mankind. In the same way the general civilization - in the sense
described above - depends on the general human nature. The law governing
a unit is a unit of the law; and the law governing a ”general” is the
general rule. (”General rule” does not mean an abstract rule, because we
are not talking about ”general ideas”.)

Undoubtedly an individual man, being a single entity, is governed by a
rule, which continues with his continuation. Yet that rule undergoes
partial changes, following the changes occurring in the man himself. For
example, there is the rule that the physical man takes food, acts by his
will, has feelings and imagination, thinks and perceives.

These rules exist and continue as long as the man himself exists. Of
course, minor changes may occur in those general rules consequent to the
changes occurring in the man. The same principle applies to the humanity
in general, the general mankind, which exists with the existence of its
individuals.

As establishment of society is a law of human nature and one of its
characteristics, so the general society is a characteristic of the
general human species. (By general society we mean the society, *per
se,* the society established by human nature and which is continuing
uninterruptedly from the day man came into being to this time.)

This general society exists and continues with the humanity. And the
laws of society which it has brought into being will remain intact as
long as the general society exists. Of course, some minor changes may
occur in it but the main principles will remain unchanged, like the
mankind itself, which continues although its individual members go on
changing.

Now it is clear that there are some ethical principles which are
unchangeable and are valid for ever - like general virtue and vice - as
the general society is firm, constant and unalterable from the
beginning.

Society cannot turn into non-society (i.e., individuality) - although a
particular civilization may give way to another particular civilization.
Likewise, general virtue (and vice) cannot turn into non-virtue (or
non-vice) - although a particular virtue may evolve into some other
particular virtue.

An individual man needs - for his existence and continu­ation - some
perfections and benefits which he must achieve and acquire for his own
self. That is why nature has equipped him with organs and faculties to
help him in this compulsory quest, for example, alimentary canal for
food intake and digestion, and sexual organs for reproduction and
continuation of the species. It is obligatory for man to use these
systems for the pur­pose they have been created for.

He should not completely ignore them by leaving them unused, because it
would be against the dictate of nature. Likewise, he should not
over-indulge in these activities, he should not eat or cohabit more than
necessary; for example, he should not go on eating until he becomes
sick, or dies, or becomes unable to use his other faculties. He must
keep to the middle course in achieving all his requirements, perfections
and benefits.

This middle course is called continence; and its two undesirable sides
are greed and undue quiescence. Likewise, we see that every individual,
in his existence and continuation, is faced with many such things which
are harmful to him and which he is obliged to resist, and repulse from
him-self. And this “obligation” is proved by the fact that nature has
equipped him with the organs and powers to defend himself with.

Therefore, it is obligatory for him to defend himself and resist the
harmful things - keeping himself on the middle course. He should not
neglect and crush these powers nor should he overuse them. This middle
course is called bravery, and the other two sides are rashness and
cowardice.

The same is the case with wisdom and its two sides, decep­tion and
dull-mindedness; as well as with justice and its two sides, injustice
and surrender to injustice.

These are, thus, the four faculties and virtues which are demanded by
the nature of an individual man - the nature which is equipped with its
necessary tools: continence, bravery, wisdom and justice. And all of
them are good and virtues. Good is that which is in conformity with the
ultimate goal of a thing and promotes its perfection and felicity; and,
as explained above, all the four are in conformity with the felicity of
the individual. And their eight opposites are bad and evil.

When an individual, by his nature and in himself, has this attribute,
then he would be having it also within the framework of the society.
Society, being a product of nature, cannot negate nature's rules;
otherwise, it would be a contradiction in terms. After all, what is
society if not the co-operation of the individ­uals to facilitate the
perfection of their natures and achievement of their aspirations.

Human species in framework of the “general” society has the same
characteristics as an individual has in his particular society, as
mentioned above.

Human species in its civilization tries to achieve its perfection by
repulsing what is harmful and acquiring what is beneficial to it; by
learning as much as is good for it and practising justice - that is,
giving everyone his due right, without indulging into injustice and
without surrendering to injustice.

And all these four characteristics are virtues. The civilization, *per
se,* decrees that they are absolute virtues and their opposites are
absolute vices.

The above discourse clearly shows that in the constant and perpetual
human society, there are absolute virtues and absolute vices - society
cannot “be” without them. It also shows that the four fundamental
ethical values are absolutely good and virtuous and their opposites
absolutely bad and evils; as has been decreed by the social nature of
humanity. And the case of their branches is not different from that of
the roots.

They too are absolute and unchanging - although there may occur some
differences sometimes in their applications, as we shall mention
afterwards.
Now it is clear that what they have said concerning relativity in
morality is not correct:

They said: “Absolute virtue and vice do not exist. What exists is the
relative virtue and relative vice; and it is a changing thing which
varies with regions, times and societies.”

Reply: It is a fallacy, because they have confused the “gen­erality of
idea” with “generality (i.e., continuation) of exist­ence”. It is true
that absolute good and vice - in the meaning of general ideas - do not
have external (i.e., real) existence.

But here we are not concerned with them. What we are concerned with are
absolute virtue and vice - in the meaning of lasting social factors
which continue as long as the society exists, by decree of nature.

The aim of the society is the happiness of the species. And it is
impossible to think that all happenings and possible events and actions
would always be good for the society. Surely some would conform with its
needs and some would not.

Accordingly there would always be good and evil in the society. How can
we suppose existence of a society - of any type - in which the members
do not believe that every one should be given his due right, or that it
is necessary to gain benefit to its proper limit, or that they must
protect and defend the cause of the society as and when needed, or that
the knowledge - by which man differentiates what is beneficial from what
is harmful - is a good attribute?

These four beliefs are the above-mentioned justice, continence, bravery
and wisdom. As was said, every society, of any description whatsoever,
decrees that these four characteristics are good and virtuous. Moreover,
how can we think of a society that does not ordain that one must refrain
from indecencies? And that feeling is modesty, a branch of continence.

Or a society that does not exhort one to be enraged when rights are
usurped or the sanctity of sacred things violated? And it is the earnest
sense of honour which is a branch of bravery. Or that one should be
happy with his due social rights? And it is contentedness.

Or that one should preserve one's social status without snubbing other
people, without putting them out of countenance by one's arrogance? And
it is modesty and humil­ity. We may go on enumerating in the same way
each and every branch of the ethics and morality.

They say: “The views often differ from society to society on what virtue
is. One thing is considered as virtue in one society, while another
society treats it as vice.”

Reply: Of course, there are some minor examples of this phenomenon. But
it is not because one society believed in ac­quiring good traits while
the other dismissed it as unnecessary. Whatever the difference, it only
occurs because one society believes that trait to be good, while the
other thinks it is evil. So the difference is not about the principle,
it is only in its application.

For example: The societies ruled by autocratic rulers used to believe
that the sovereign had total authority over his subjects, and absolute
power to do whatever he wished and order whatever he liked. But that
belief was not based on any negative attitude towards justice.

It actually emanated from their belief that that absolute power was the
due right of the ruler; they thought that what the ruler was doing was
not injustice, he was only exercising his due authority and taking his
just right.

Likewise, some societies thought that it was a shame if their kings
studied to acquire knowledge, as is reported about French kings of the
medieval ages. But it was not because they looked down at the virtue of
knowledge; it was only because they thought that acquiring knowledge of
politics and studying the ways of managing various government
departments would conflict with the king's rightful royal activities and
engagements.

In the same way, some societies do not acknowledge any excellence in
chastity of women (i.e., not establishing sexual relation with any man
other than their husbands), and their modesty. Nor do they believe that
their men should feel enraged if their women indulged in licentiousness.
The same is the case with some other virtues like contentedness and
humbleness etc.

But it is only because those societies do not think that these things
fall under continence, modesty, self-respect, contentedness and
humbleness. It is not that they do not accept these main vir­tues as
virtues. After all, they praise a judge or a ruler if he practices
continence in his rule and judgment.

They appreciate it if one is ashamed of breaking a law; they laud a man
who, overcome by national zeal, defends the nation's independence, the
cause of civilization, or the sanctity of other sacred values. They
praise a man who remains content with what the law has allotted to him;
and applaud the loyalty and obedience shown by the public to their
leaders and rulers.

They say: “Whether a characteristic is good depends on its conformity
with the goals of social aspirations.” Then they come to the conclusion
that the said characteristic's excellence depends on its conformity with
the society's goals. But it is a clear fallacy. Society is an
institution which comes into being when its members enforce, and act
upon, all the laws decreed by nature.

This society is bound to take them to their happiness and felicity
(provided there is no disturbance in its arrangement and flow); and the
society is bound to have some rules and regulations like virtue and
vice, good and evil. On the other hand “society's aspiration” is just a
set of some imaginary ideas, invented for creating a society on
prescribed lines by imposing it on its members.

In other words, society and society's aspirations are two completely
different things: Society is an established fact, society's aspiration
is only a potential which is yet to come into being; the former is an
actual fact while the latter is only a plan yet to be imple­mented.

How could one be equated with the other? The virtue and vice are brought
into being by the general society on the demands of the human nature;
how could such an actual fact be brought under the domain of some
aspirations - the aspirations which are nothing but some imaginary
notions?

Question: The general civilization, brought into being by nature, has no
authority of its own; whatever authority there is, it belongs to its
goals and aspirations - especially if it is a theory conforming to the
happiness of the society's individuals.

Reply: The preceding discussion about virtue and vice and good and evil,
shall be repeated in this case again - until the talk stops at a
permanent, perpetual and unchanging decree of nature.

Apart from that, there is another difficulty. Let us suppose that virtue
and vice as well as all the rules of civilization depend on the goals
and aspirations of the society. And it is those aspir­ations on which
the arguments of these people are based.

But it is possible - nay a fact - that there may be different
conflicting goals and aspirations within one society, or between
different societies. Which aspiration would then prevail? Which one the
people should give preference to?

Which would be acceptable to the general society? The fact is that in
this situation there will only be one criterion, and that is the power
and domination; in other words, might is right. How can it be believed
that the human nature led the human beings to a social structure whose
parts are in conflict with one another? Can the society be gov­erned by
a rule which would negate the society itself? Is it not an ignominious
contradiction in the rule of nature and the demands of its existence?

### A Few Traditions on some Related Topics

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said: “A man came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and
said: 'I am keen (and) enthusiastic for *jihad.*' (The Messenger of
Allah) said: 'Then do *jihad* in the way of Allah, because if you are
killed, you shall remain alive near Allah and sustained, if you die
(before that), then your reward is indeed with Allah...'

**The author says:** The Prophet's words, “and if you die...”, point to
the word of Allah:

***and whoever goes forth from his house emigrating to Allah and His
Messenger, and then death overtakes him, his reward is indeed with
Allah...*** (4:100).

It also shows that proceeding to *jihad is* emigration to Allah and His
Messenger.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about the prophet Isma'i1, whom Allah has
named “Truthful in promise”: “He was named 'Truthful in promise' because
he had promised a man (to wait for him) in a place.

So he remained waiting for that man for one year. There-fore, Allah
named him 'True of promise'. Then that man came to him after that (long)
time and Isma'il said to him, 'I have been waiting for you...' ”
(*al-Kafi* )

**The author says:** It is a thing which average wisdom would probably
say was a deviation from middle course, while Allah has counted it as an
excellent virtue of the said prophet, increasing thereby his prestige
and raising his status, as He has said:

***And mention Isma'il in the Book, surely he was truthful in*** (his)
***prom­ise, and he was a messenger, a prophet. And he enjoined on his
family prayer and alms-giving, and was one in whom his Lord was well
pleased*** (19:54-5).

The fact is that the criterion by which this action was judged is
different from the one used by common wisdom. The average wisdom, the
common sense, looks at the things according to its own views, and Allah
looks after His friends by His Own help and support; and the word of
Allah is the High. Many similar events have been narrated about the
Prophet, the Imams and other friends of Allah.

**Question:** How can rules of the *shari'ah* go against the dictates of
reason, in situations where reason may have a say?

Reply: True that reason may judge the virtue or vice of an action
wherever it is possible for it to do so. But that thing or action should
first come within its jurisdiction before it can pro­nounce its judgment
on it.

And we have explained earlier that such actions (as described in the
above tradition) are governed by the third system, and that system takes
such actions out of the jurisdiction of human intellect and reason -
reason does not have any say against or about them. It is the way of the
Divine Knowledge.

Apparently the prophet Isma'il (a.s.) had given that man unconditional
promise by saying, 'I shall wait for you here until you come back to
me.' Therefore, he stuck to that unconditional wording, to save himself
from breaking the promise, and to fulfil what Allah had put in his mind
and made his tongue utter.

Of the same import is an event related about the Prophet that he was
near the Sacred Mosque when one of his companions told him that he would
come back to him, and the Prophet promised to wait for him until he
would return.

That man went away and did not return, and the Prophet remained there
three days waiting for him in the same place which he had promised. That
man passed by that place after three days and found the Prophet sitting
there waiting for him and he himself had forgotten the promise.

As-Sayyid ar-Radi has narrated from the Leader of the faithfuls ( 'Ali -
a.s.) that he heard someone saying: **“*****Surely we are Allah's and to
Him shall we surely return.*****”** Thereupon, he ('Ali - a.s.) said: “O
man! Verily our word, ***Surely we are Allah's**,* is acknowledgment by
us that we belong to Him, and, ***to Him shall we surely return**,* is
acknowledgment by us that we are to die.” (*al-Khasa'is*)

**The author says:** Its meaning is clear in the light of the earlier
given explanation. The tradition has been narrated in detail in
*al-Kafi.*

Ishaq ibn 'Ammar and 'Abdullah ibn Sinan have narrated from as-Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said: “The Messenger of Allah (s.a. w.a.) has said:
'Allah, the Mighty, the Great, has said: “I have given the world as loan
to My servants. T

hen whoever gives Me a loan from it, I give him ten times to
seven-hundred times in lieu of one. And whoever does not give Me a loan
and I take something from him by force, then I give him three things
that if I gave one of them to My angels they would be pleased of Me.” '
” Then Abu 'Abdillah said: ”(It is) the words of Allah:

***Who, when a misfortune befalls them, say: 'Surely we are Allah's and
to Him we shall surely return.***' ***Those are they on whom are
blessings and mercy from their Lord, and those are the fol­lowers of the
right course.***”

Then Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: “It is for the man from whom Allah takes
something forcibly.” (*al-Kafi*)

The author says: This tradition is narrated by other chains, all having
nearly the same theme.
Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: ”*as-Salah* ( **اَلصَّلٰوةُ** ) from Allah
is mercy, and from the angels is purification, and from the people is
prayer.” (*Ma'ani* ***'**1-akhbar*)

The author says: There are other traditions of the same meaning.

At first glance, there appears to be a conflict between this and the
preceding tradition. This tradition explains *as-salah* as mercy, while
the preceding one counts *as-salah* as other than mercy; and this view
is further strengthened by the wording of the verse itself which
mentions *as-salah* and mercy separately, “blessings and mercy from
Allah”. But in fact there is no contradiction as we have explained in
detail in the Commentary.

[^1]: since the author has described the branches of virtuous
characteristics in the text in tree form, and in the explanatory figure
(of the original work) he has also chosen the tree form representation,
we therefore have duplicated the explanatory figure in the same manner
(pub.)


