Suratul Baqarah: Verse 158
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٨) إِنَّ ٱلصَّفَا وَٱلمَرۡوَةَ مِن شَعَآئرِ ٱللَّهِ‌ۖ فَمَنۡ حَجَّ
ٱلبَيتَ أَوِ ٱعتَمَرَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا‌ۚ
وَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيرً۬ا فَإِنَّ ٱللَّهَ شَاكِرٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs of Allah; so
whoever makes a pilgrimage to the House or per-forms*** **'umrah**
***thereof, there is no blame on him to go round them both; and whoever
on his own accord does good, then surely Allah is Grateful,
All-knowing*** **(158).**

General Comment
---------------

The Safa and the Marwah are two places in Mecca between which a pilgrim
has to perform *as-sa'y* **اَلسـَّعْيُ** ) = the ceremony of walking
quickly seven times between the Safa and the Mar­wah, during the *hajj*
and the *'umrah;* literally to move quickly, to run).

These are two hills, the distance between them reportedly being 760½
arm. *as-Safa* **الصَّفَا** )= hard smooth rock); *al-Marwah*
(**اَلمَرْوَة ُ** = hard stone). *ash-Sha'a'ir* ( **اَلشـَّعَائـِرُُ** )
is the plural of *ash-sha'irah* **اَلشـَّعِيرَةُُ** ) = sign); from it
is derived the word *al-mash'ar* **المَشْعَرُ** ) = the *hajj* station,
east of Mecca); also they say, *ash'ara '1-hady* **أشْعَرَ الهَدْيَ** )
= he marked or branded the sacrifical animal).

*Al-Hajj* ( **الحَـجُّ** ) literally means repeated intention; in
Islamic terminology it refers to the special rites collectively known as
Pilgrimage of Mecca. *al-I'timar* ( **اَلإعْتِمَارُُ** ) means to visit;
it is derived from *al- 'imarah* العِمَارَةُ ) = building) because
buildings thrive by visits; in Islamic language it refers to the
so-called “lesser pilgrimage” to the Ka'bah, which unlike the *hajj,*
need not be performed at a particular time and whose performance
involves fewer ceremonies.

*al-Junah* ( **الجُنَاحُ** ) is deviation from truth and justice; it is
used for sin and misdemeanour; thus, negation of sin or blame implies
permission. *at-Tatawwuf* ( **اَلتـَّطـَوُّفُُ** ) is derived from
*at-tawf* ( **اَلطـََّوْفُُ** ), that is, to make the rounds.

It denotes a round trip, that is, a journey or walk that ends at its
starting point; it need not necessarily be a circumambulation around
something (although circumambulation is more obvious ap­plication of the
word); it is the former meaning in which it has been used in this
verse - it refers to *as-sa'y,* that is, walking between the Safa and
the Marwah seven times consecutively.

*At-Tatawwu'*( **اَلتَّطـَوُّعُُ** ) is derived from *at-taw'*
**اَلطَّوْعُ** ) *=* to do a walk willingly and gladly). Some people
differentiate between *at-tatawwu'* and *al-ita'ah* ( **اَلإطـَاعَة ُُ**
) and say that the former, unlike the latter, is exclusively used for
voluntarily done good deeds.

If correct, this assertion might be based on the view that the
obligatory deeds - because of their obligatoriness - are probably not
done willingly, unlike the voluntary and recom­mended actions which are
done willingly by one's own accord.

But it is a far-fetched interpretation. In fact, *at-taw'*(
**اَلطَّوْعُ** ) is opposite of *al-kurh* **اَلكـُرْهُ** ) = dislike),
and is not irreconcilable with obligatory deeds. Allah says:

... ***so He said to it*** (***i.e.,*** the heaven) ***and to the earth:
“Come both, willingly or unwillingly”*** (41:11).

The characteristic meaning of the paradigm *at-tafa''ul* (
**اَلتّفـَعُّلُُ** ) is to take to oneself, for example, *tamayyaza*
**تـَمَيَّزََ** ) *=* he took on distin-guishing), *ta'allama*
**تـَعَلـَّمَ** ) = he took on learning); in the same way *tatawwa'a* (
**تـَطَوَّعََ** ) means, he took on doing good willingly.

In short, *at-tatawwu' is* not reserved, from the linguistic point of
view, for voluntary, non-obligatory good deed - unless credit is given
to the usage of the common people.

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs of
Allah... to go round them both:*** The two hills are marked by the signs
of Allah; they lead accordingly to Him and remind one of Him.

They have been especially counted “among the signs of Allah” to the
exclusion of other things; it shows that the word, “the signs” has not
been used here in the sense in which every created thing is a sign of
the Creator.

They are the Divine Signs because Allah has made them so, by appointing
them as the places of His worship; thus they remind one of Allah, the
Creator. They are the signs for which Allah has prescribed especial
rites of worship.

Then comes the next sentence: “so whoever makes a pil­grimage to the
House or performs *'umrah* thereof, there is no blame on him to go round
them both. The word “so” in the beginning shows that it is an offshoot
of the preceding sentence.

Its import is to show that walking quickly between these two hills is a
part of the Islamic *shari'ah -* it does not imply that the said walking
is voluntary or non-obligatory.

If Allah had wanted to declare its voluntariness, it would have been
more appropriate to praise and extol *as-sa'y,* rather than saying that
there was no blame in it. The gist of the meaning is that - because the
Safa and the Marwah were among the places of the worship of Allah - it
would do you no harm to worship Him therein.

And it is the language of legislation. If Allah had wanted to show only
its desirability, He would have said that, because the two hills were
among the signs of Allah, He likes you to go round them.

Frequently, when the Qur'an wants to ordain an obligatory law, it uses
such expressions which by themselves do not show obligatoriness. For
example, Allah says regarding *jihad;*

***that is better for you*** (61:11);

regarding fast:

***and that you fast is better for you*** (2:184),

and regarding shortening of prayer:

***And when you journey in the earth, there is no blame on you if you
shorten the prayer*** (4:101).

**Qur’an:** ***and whoever on his own accord does good, then surely
Allah is Grateful, All-knowing:*** The conjunctive “and” may be joining
this sentence to any of the three phrases in the preceding one:‑

It may connect it with “so whoever makes a pilgrimage... ”. In that case
it would show a more general reason for the legislation of the walking
between the two hills, after giving the particular reason, that is,
“Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs of Allah.”

According to this interpretation, “doing good on one's own accord” would
mean “obedience” in general term, and not a voluntary deed.

It may be starting a new sentence, joining it to the words in the
beginning of the verse. In that case, “doing good on one's own accord”
would refer to the “going round the two hills”. Thus it would show only
the desirability of *as-sa'y* (walking quickly seven times between Safa
and the Marwah).

Alternatively, the phrase “doing good on one's own according” may be
referring to the *hajj* and the *'umrah,* and the phrase would show the
desirability of these two rites of worship.

*Ash-Shakir* **اَلشَّاكِرُ** ) = Grateful) and *al-'Alim* **اَلعَليْمُ**
) *=* All-knowing) are two of the beautiful names of Allah. *ash-Shukr*
ا**َلشُّكْرُ** ) = gratefulness, thankfulness). When a beneficiary
returns the benevolence of the benefactor by announcing it in words and/
or deeds, it is called gratefulness.

Someone gives you a property, and in return you praise him mentioning
his benevolence, or use that property in a way he likes - and thus you
show your gratefulness to him.

Now, Allah is the Beneficent; His beneficence is eternal and all
beneficence begins from Him; none can oblige Him in any way so that He
would be grateful to that person. Yet, He, in His benevolence, looks at
His creatures' good deeds as though the creatures have been beneficent
to Him by doing those deeds (although, in reality the case is
diametrically different; the crea­tures' good deeds are actually His
benefaction to them).

And thus he repays those good deeds with gratefulness and benevolence,
which in fact is a double benevolence. Allah says:

***Is the reward of goodness aught but goodness?*** (55:60)***;***

***Surely this is a reward for you, and your striving shall be
recompensed*** (76:22)***.***

Thus, the name “Grateful” is used for Allah in its real, not allegorical
sense.

Traditions
----------

One of our companions has narrated this tradition from as-Sadiq (a.s.).
He says: “I asked him about walking between the Safa and the Marwah
whether it was obligatory or voluntary. He said: 'Obligatory.' I said:
'Does not Allah say: ***so whoever makes a pilgrimage to the House or
performs*** **'umrah** ***thereof, there is no blame on him to go round
them both?'***

He said: 'It was in the *'umrah* of *Qada'*[^1]*;* that is, the
Messenger of Allah (S) had stipulated with them (i.e., the pagans of
Mecca) that they would remove the idols (for the period of *'umrah*)*;*
and one of his companions was engaged otherwise until the idols were
returned (to their places): (The Imam) said:

'Then Allah revealed: ***Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the
signs of Allah; so whoever makes a pilgrimage to the House or
performs*** 'umrah ***thereof, there is no blame on him to go round them
both**, i.e.,* even when there were idols on them.' ” (al-'Ayyashi)

**The author says:** A nearly similar tradition is found in *al-Kafi.*

as-Sadiq (a.s.) says describing the *hajj* of the Prophet: “After
circumambulating around the House and praying its two *rak'ahs,* (the
Prophet) recited: ***Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs
of Allah.*** (Then he said:)

'So I shall begin with that which Allah, the Mighty, the Great, has
begun with (i.e., from the Safa).' And verily the Muslims used to think
that walking between the Said and the Marwah was something invented by
the polytheists; so Allah revealed:

***Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs of Allah; so
whoever makes a pilgrimage or performs*** 'umrah ***thereof, there is no
blame on him to go round them both.”*** (*al-Kafi* )

**The author says:** Obviously, there is no contradiction between the
two traditions regarding the reason of the revelation of the verse. The
words of the Prophet, “I shall begin with that which Allah, the Mighty,
the Great, has begun with”, show the basis of legislation.

We have narrated, in the story of Hajar and her running seven times
between the Safa and the Marwah, that the ritual of *as-sa'y* started
from that.

'Amir ash-Sha'bi said: “There was an idol, called *Asaf,* on the Safa,
and another, called *Na'ilah,* on the Marwah. The people of (the days
of) ignorance, after circumambulating the House, used to walk between
the two (hills) and touch and wipe the two idols.

When the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) arrived at Mecca, they
(i.e., the Muslims) said: 'O Messenger of Allah! (As for) the Safa and
the Marwah, surely the walking around them was done because of the two
idols, and walking around them is not among the signs (of Allah).'

Then Allah revealed: ***Surely the Safa and the Marwah...*** Thus, He
(especially) mentioned the Safa because of the idol that was on it, and
affirmed the Marwah because of the idol that rose from it.” (*ad-Durru
'1-manthur*)

**The author says:** Both sects have narrated numerous tradi­tions
having the above-mentioned themes. Their impli-cation is that the verse
was revealed in the year when the Mus-lims performed the *hajj,* while
the Chapter of the Cow is the first one re­vealed at Medina.

It may therefore be inferred that the verses are unconnected with the
preceding verses (of the *qiblah*) which were revealed, as described
earlier, in the second year of *hijrah;* nor are they related to the
verses in the beginning of the chapter which were revealed in the first
year of *hijrah.* It shows that the verses were revealed in various
contexts, not in one.

[^1]: In the 7th year of hijrah. (tr.)


