Suratul Baqarah: Verses 159 − 162
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥٩) إِنَّ ٱلَّذِينَ يَكتُمُونَ مَآ أَنزَلنَا مِنَ ٱلبَيِّنَـٰتِ
وَٱلهُدَىٰ مِنۢ بَعدِ مَا بَيَّنَّـٰهُ لِلنَّاسِ فِى ٱلكِتَـٰبِ‌ۙ
أُوْلَـٰئِكَ يَلۡعَنُُهمُ ٱللَّهُ وَيَلعَنُهمُ ٱللَّـٰعِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٠) إِلَّا ٱلَّذِينَ تَابُواْ وَأَصلَحُواْ وَبَيَّنُواْ
فَأُوْلَـٰئِكَ أَتُوبُ عَلَيهِمۡ‌ۚ وَأَنَا ٱلتَّوَّابُ ٱلرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦١) إِنَّ ٱلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَمَاتُواْ وَهُمۡ كُفَّارٌ أُوْلَـئِكَ
عَلَيِهمۡ لَعنَةُ ٱللَّهِ وَٱلمَلَـٰئِكَةِ وَٱلنَّاسِ أَجمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٢) خَـٰلِدِينَ فِيَها‌ۖ لَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنُهمُ ٱلعَذَابُ وَلَا هُمۡ
يُنظَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that We
revealed after We made it clear for men in the Book, these it is whom
Allah does curse, and those who curse do curse them*** (too) (159),

***Except those who repent and amend and make manifest*** (the truth),
***these it is to whom I turn*** (mercifully), ***and I am the
Oft-returning*** (to mercy), ***the Merciful*** (160).

***Surely those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers,
these it is on whom is the curse of Allah and the angels and men all***
(161);

***Abiding in it; their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall
they be given respite*** (162).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the
guidance that We revealed:*** Obviously “the guidance” means that
knowledge and *shari'ah* which the Divine Religion contains, and which
lead the followers to the eternal bliss; and “the clear proofs” means
the verses, signs and the arguments which are the clear evidence, proofs
and attestations for the truth - the truth that is guidance.

“The clear proofs”, as used in the Divine Speech, is a special
description for the revealed verses.

Therefore, con­cealing the clear proofs may mean hiding the verses
themselves from the people; or concealing their true meaning through
mis­interpretation and misapplication - as the leaders of the Jews did
with the verses prophesying the advent of the Prophet. What the people
did not know, they concealed; and what they knew, they misinterpreted
and diverted it from the Prophet.

**Qur’an:** ***after We made it clear for men:*** It shows that they
con­cealed the truth after Allah made it clear for all the mankind, not
only for the Jews. It is not feasible, in the prevalent world system, to
explain a thing to each and every person individually - not only in
revelation but in every general announcement.

As a general rule, only a few persons are informed of the matter
directly, and it is through them that the rest of the people get the
information; he who is present conveys the message to the absent
persons; the learned one explains it to the ignorant. The knowledgeable
man is counted as one of the links to convey the message, like the
tongue and speech.

When a learned man, bound by the pledge taken from him, explains the
message to others, he makes the truth clear to the people. If he hides
his knowledge, he keeps the truth concealed from the people, after it
was made clear to them.

And, as Allah has said, it is the only thing which has made people
differ in matters of religion, and has diverted them from the path of
guidance to that of misguidance. Otherwise, religion conforms with
nature; human nature agrees with it and discerning mind surrenders to it
when it is properly explained.

Allah says:

***Then set your face uprightly for the*** (right) ***religion in
natural devotion*** (to the truth); ***the nature made by Allah in which
He has made men; there is no alteration*** (by anyone else) ***in the
creation of Allah; that is the right*** (established) ***religion, but
most people do not know*** (30:30).

So, the religion is natural; nature can never resist it, if it appears
before it with some clarity, either because of the purity of the
recipient's heart, as is the case of the prophets, or because it is
explained properly - the latter method invariable always depends on the
former.

That is why the above-quoted verse combines the two premises: the
naturalness of religion and lack of its knowledge. It says: ***the
nature made by Allah in which He has made men**;* and then says: ***but
most people do not know.***

Again Allah says:

***Mankind was but one people, so Allah sent the prophets as bearers of
good news and as warners, and He sent down with them the book with
truth, so that it might judge between the people in that in which they
had differed. And none differed about it but the very people who were
given it, after clear signs had come to them, revolting among
themselves...*** (2:213).

It shows that difference about the contents of the book emanates from
the revolt of the scholars who already have its knowledge. Religious
differences and deviations from the right path are caused by the revolt
of the religious scholars as they conceal the revealed truth,
misinterpret it and alter it; and because of their injustice.

That is how “injustice” will be defined on the Day of Resurrection.
Allah says:

***Then a crier will cry out among them that the curse of Allah is on
the unjust, who hinder*** (people) ***from Allah's way and seek to make
it crooked...*** (7:44 - 5).

There are many verses of the same theme.

Clearly, the verse under discussion (***Surely those who con­ceal the
clear proofs...***) *is* based on the above-quoted verse:

***Mankind was but one people, so Allah sent the prophets as bearers of
good news and as warners, and He sent down with them the book with
truth, so that it might judge between the people in that in which they
differed. And none differed about it but the very people who were given
it, after clear signs had come to them, revolting among themselves...***
(2:213).

And it points to the recompense of that revolt in the next sentence,
“these it is whom Allah does curse...”

**Qur’an:** ***these it is whom Allah does curse, and those who curse do
curse them*** **(too)**. It describes the punishment of those who revolt
against truth and hide the Book and the guidance which Allah has sent
down.

The punishment is the curse by Allah and the curse by those who curse.
The word “curse” has been re­peated because the curse of Allah is
different from the curse of those who curse. The curse by Allah is
removal from mercy and bliss, and that by those who curse is praying to
Allah to remove the cursed one from that mercy and bliss.

There is no restriction at all on the curse of Allah or the curse of
those who curse, nor is there any limitation on “those who curse”. This
generality shows that every curse by anyone who curses is actually
directed to those revolters and concealers of the Divine Proof and
Guidance. And reason supports this view: The aim of the curse is to
remove the cursed one from happiness and bliss; and there is no real
happiness and bliss except the religious one.

As this real religious bliss is fully explained by Allah and accepted by
nature, no one can be deprived of it except the one who rejects and
denies it. This deprivation is confined to him who knows it and then
knowingly rejects it.

It does not affect him who did not know the said religious bliss and to
whom it was not clarified. Allah has taken pledge from learned people to
spread their knowledge and to publish whatever Divine proofs and
guidance they had received.

If they conceal it and hold it back, then in effect they have rejected
it. Therefore, “these it is whom Allah does curse, and those who curse
do curse them (too)”. This explanation is further supported by the
following verse: “Surely those who disbelieve and die while they are
dis­believers, these it is on whom is the curse of Allah and the angels
and men all.”

Apparently, the particle *inna* **إنَّ** ) = surely) coming at the
beginning of the verse gives the reason, or intensifies the theme, of
the verse under discussion, by repeating its meaning in other words,
“Surely those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers...”

**Qur’an:** ***Except those who repent... the Merciful:*** It is the
ex­ception from the preceding verse. It qualifies their repentance with
amending and making manifest the truth. They must make their previous
behaviour known; they must announce their repentance.

In other words, they must announce to the people what they were
concealing of the truth, and also make it known that pre­viously they
had concealed it. Otherwise, it will be as though they have not repented
yet - because they are still hiding the fact of their previous
concealment of the truth.

**Qur’an:** ***Surely those who disbelieve and die while they are
dis­believers, these it is on whom is the curse of Allah and the angels
and men all.*** It alludes to their persistence in disbelief and their
obstinate and stubborn refusal to accept the truth.

(If a man does not accept the true religion, not because of obstinacy
and arrogance, but because it was not made clear to him, then in
real­ity he is not a disbeliever, he is *al-mustad'af*
**المُسْتـَضْعَفُ** ) *=* weak; according to Islamic terminology, a man
who does not have true faith, but is not inimical to it]; his judgment
is in the hand of Allah.)

This theme is supported by the fact that most of the verses describing
the disbelief qualify it with “belying”. Look especially at the verses
of the descent of Adam, containing the first law legislated for the
mankind:

***We said: “Get down you therefrom all together; and if there comes to
you a guidance from Me***, ***then whoever follows My guidance, no fear
shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve. And*** (as to) ***those who
disbelieve in and belie Our signs, they are the inmates of fire, in it
they shall abide.”*** (2:39-40)

Likewise, in this verse the words, “Those who disbelieve and die while
they are disbelievers,” refer to those who obsti­nately belie the signs
and guidance of Allah - those who conceal what Allah has revealed. And
Allah describes their recompense in these words: “these it is on whom is
the curse of Allah and the angels and men all”.

It is a Divine Decree that every curse by anyone from among the angels
or men, without any exception, shall be attached to them only. In this
respect they are like the Satan, when Allah told him:

***And surely on you is curse until the Day of Judgment*** (15:35).

Thus, Allah made him the target of every curse from whatever source it
may emanate. Likewise, these learned persons who conceal their knowledge
are partners of Satan in this general and unrestricted curse.

See how hard is the tone of this verse, and how formidable its theme! We
shall write something related to it, Allah willing, under the verse:

***That Allah may separate the impure from the pure, and put the impure,
some of it upon the other, and pile it up together, then cast it into
the hell; these it is that are the losers.*** (8:37)***.***

**Qur’an:** ***Abiding in it*** **(*****i.e.,*** **in the curse),**
***their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall they be given
respite.*** The word “curse”, has been changed here to “chastisement”;
it shows that the curse shall be converted into their chastisement on
that Day.

In these verses, the references to Allah have been changed several times
from the first person to the third and vice versa. The verse begins with
the first person pronouns: ”We revealed”, “We made it clear”; then the
style changes, mentioning Allah by name, “Allah does curse”.

The change was affected because the theme demands show of intense
displeasure, and the greater the name of the displeased person, the more
severe the effect of the dis­pleasure - and none is greater than Allah.

Therefore, the action of the curse was attributed to Him by name, to
give it the most vehement force. Then the reference was again changed to
the first person pronouns, “I turn (mercifully); and I am the
Oft-returning (to mercy)...” It was done to show the highest mercy and
benevolence of Allah - every adjective is discarded, all attri­butes are
set aside and “I Myself return to them mercifully”.

You will appreciate the difference if you read this sentence thus: These
it is to whom Allah turns mercifully; or thus: These it is to whom their
Lord turns mercifully. Obviously, these sentences do not show that high
degree of mercy that reflects from this sentence, “these it is to whom I
turn (mercifully)”.

The next verse again discards the pronoun for the Divine Name, “these it
is on whom is the curse of Allah”; and the reason is the same as was
explained for the change in the first verse.

Traditions
----------

One of our companions has narrated from as-Sadiq (a.s.). He says: “I
said to him: 'Tell me about the word of Allah, the Mighty, the High:
***Surely those who conceal...*****'**. He said: 'We are meant by it -
and to Allah is the resort for help.

When (*Imamah*) comes to one of us (i.e., the Imams), he has no
authority (or, choice) but to make it clear for the men who will be
(Imam) after him.' ” (al- 'Ayyashi)

Al-Baqir (a.s.) said about this verse: ”(Allah) means us by it, and to
Allah is the resort for help.”
Muhammad ibn Muslim said: ”(The Imam) said: 'These are the People of
the Book.' ”

The author says: All these traditions are based on the prin­ciple of the
flow of the Qur'an and its application. Otherwise, the verse is general.

Some traditions quote 'Ali (a.s.) as saying: “Its interpreta­tion is the
learned people when they are depraved.”

The Prophet said about this verse: “Whoever is asked about knowledge
which he has got, and he conceals it, he shall be reined on the Day of
Resurrection with a bridle of fire; and it is (the import of) His words,
***these it is whom Allah does curse and those who curse do curse
them*** **(too)**.” (*Majma'u 'l-bayan*)

The author says: These two traditions confirm what we have written in
the $$SUB[-Commentary] Commentary.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said explaining the words of Allah, *and those who
curse do curse them* (too): “We are those (who curse); and they say that
it means the vermins of the earth.” (al-'Ayyashi )

**The author says:** The explanation given by the Imam reminds one of
the import of the verse:

... ***and the witnesses shall say: “These are they who lied against
their Lord.” Now surely the curse of Allah is on the unjust*** (11:18).

The Imams are the wit­nesses, allowed by Allah to speak on the Day of
Judgment, who speak the right thing. The Imam also mentioned some
people's explanation that ***those who curse*** refers to the vermins of
the earth. This interpretation is attributed to the exegetes like
Mujahid, 'Ikri­mah and others; and some traditions ascribe it to the
Prophet.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: about the verse, ***Surely those who con­ceal
the clear proofs and the guidance,*** (that it means the proofs and
guidance) “regarding 'Ali.” (*ibid.*)


