Suratul Baqarah: Verses 94 − 99
===============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩٤) قُلۡ إِن كَانَتۡ لكُمُ ٱلدَّارُ ٱلأَخِرَةُ عِندَ ٱللَّهِ
خَالِصَةً۬ مِّن دُونِ ٱلنَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُاْ ٱلمَوۡتَ إِن كنتُمۡ
صَـٰدِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩٥) وَلَن يَتَمَنَّوۡهُ أَبَدَۢا بِمَا قَدَّمَتۡ أَيدِيهِمۡ‌ۗ
وَٱللَّهُ عَلِيمُۢ بِٱلظَّـٰلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩٦) وَلَتَجِدَنّهمۡ أَحرَصَ ٱلنَّاسِ عَلَىٰ حَيَوٰةٍ۬ وَمِنَ
ٱلَّذِينَ أَشرَكُواْ‌ۚ يَوَدُّ أَحَدُهُمۡ لَوۡ يُعَمَّرُ أَلفَ سَنَةٍ۬
وَمَا هُوَ بِمُزَحزِحِهِۦ مِنَ ٱلۡعَذَابِ أَن يُعَمَّرَ‌ۗ وَٱللَّهُ
بَصِيرُۢ بِمَا يَعمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩٧) قُلۡ مَن كَانَ عَدُوًّ۬ا لِّجِبرِيلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَىٰ
قَلبِكَ بِإِذۡنِ ٱللَّهِ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَينَ يَدَيهِ وَهُدً۬ى
وَبُشرَىٰ لِلمُؤۡمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩٨) مَن كَانَ عَدُوًّ۬ا لِّلَّهِ وَمَلَـْٰئْكَتِهِۦ وَرُسُلِهِۦ
وَجِبرِيلَ وَمِيكَٰالَ فَإِنَّ ٱللَّهَ عَدُوٌّ۬ لِّلكَـٰفِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩٩) وَلَقَدۡ أَنزَلنَآ إِلَيكَ ءَايَـٰتِۭ بَيِّنَـٰتٍ۬‌ۖ وَمَا
يَكفُرُ بِهَآ إِلَّا ٱلفَـٰسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: “If the future abode with Allah is purely for you to the
exclusion of the people then invoke death if you are truthful”***
(94)***.***

***And they will never invoke it on account of what their hands have
sent before, and Allah knows the unjust ones*** (95)***.***

***And you will most certainly find them the greediest of men for life,
and*** (greedier) ***than even those who are polytheists; every one of
them loves that he should be granted a life of a thousand years, and his
being granted a long life will in no way remove him further off from the
chastisement, and Allah sees what they do*** (96)***.***

***Say: “Whoever is the enemy of Gabriel - for surely he revealed it to
your heart by Allah's Com­mand, verifying that which is before it, and
guidance and good news for the believers*** (97)***.***

***Whoever is the enemy of Allah and His angels and His apostles and
Gabriel and Michael - so surely Allah is the enemy of the
unbelievers”*** (98)***.***

***And certainly We have revealed to you clear signs, and none
disbelieve in them except the transgressors*** (99)***.***

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***Say: “If the future abode... ”:*** The Jews claimed,
***“Fire shall not touch us but for a few days”*** **(2:80)***.* When
they were told to believe in what Allah had revealed, they declared:

***“We believe in that which was revealed to us”*** (2:91)***.***

All this implied that only they would be saved on the Day of
Resurrection to the exclusion of all the others; that their deliverance
and hap­piness in the next world would be unmarred by any unpleasant
experience as the Fire shall not touch them but for a few days - equal
in number to the day they worshipped the calf. To remove that
self-delusion and conceit, Allah put a challenge to them, to show them
their true face, to make them realize that their claims were without any
substance.

He (Allah) told His Apostle to say to them: “If the future abode... is
for you...” The “future abode” points to the felicity and happiness of
that abode; the owner of a house arranges and manages it in the best
possible way, and decorates it according to his taste and liking “with
Allah”, that is, firmly established with Allah, by His order and His
permission; the phrase has the same import here as in the verse:

***Surely the religion with Allah is Islam*** (3:19)***.***

“purely”, that is, unmixed with punishment or humiliation - utmost that
you think possible is a punishment of just a few days. “to the exclusion
of the people”, because you presume that all religions, except your own,
are false. If you really think so, “then invoke death if you are
truthful”.

This challenge is similar to the one given in verse:

***Say: “O you who are Jews, if you think that you are the friends of
Allah to the exclusion of other people, then invoke death if you are
truthful”*** (62:6)***.***

The argument is very clear about which nobody can have any doubt
whatsoever. Any man (nay! even an animal having a limited perception and
sensitivity), if given total freedom to choose between comfort and
discomfort, will at once opt for the comfort, without any hesitation,
without any contemplation.

Put before him a life polluted with trouble and turmoil and another
clean and pure, and tell him to take hold of any one; naturally, and
without any doubt, he will grab at the pure one. If for any reason he is
prevented from the life of his choice, he will always dream of it, and
will remain looking for any opportunity to lay his hands upon it.

If the Jews are truthful in their claim that the other world's pure
happiness belongs to them to the exclusion of others, then they must
yearn for it with their hearts, words and deeds.

“And they will never invoke it on account of what their hands have sent
before”, for example, the killings of the prophets, the disbelief in
Musa (a.s.) and breaking of the covenants, “and Allah knows the unjust
ones”.

**Qur’an:** ***on account of what their hands have sent before:*** It is
a metaphorical reference to the “deeds”. Most of the external deeds are
done by hands; then the finished product is sent to the one who wants it
or may benefit from it.

The sentence has two allegorical allusions: it counts every deed as
having been done by hands; and it ascribes the action of “sending” to
the hands while in fact it is the man who sends his deeds before.

Actions of a man, and especially those done regularly, are a clear
mirror of his unconscious and sub-conscious personality. Evil deeds
expose the evil nature of the doer - and such a nature does not like
meeting its Lord or staying in the abode of His friends.

**Qur’an:** *And* ***you will most certainly find them the greediest of
men for life:*** It is an explanation of the divine word, “And they will
never invoke it...” They do not yearn for death because they are
greediest of all men for the life of this world. It is this greed and
avid craving to remain in this world which prevents them from looking
forward to the next abode.

The word, “life”, is used in this verse as a common noun - it is to show
how insignificant and trifling this life is; Allah has said:

***And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play, and as
for the next abode, that most surely is life - did they but know***
(29:64).

**Qur’an:** ***and*** **(greedier)** ***that even those who are
polytheists:*** Apparently the conjunctive, “and”, joins this clause to
the word, “men”, that is, you will find them greedier than even the
polytheists for life.

**Qur’an:** ***and his being granted a long life will in no way remove
him further off from the chastisement:*** The verse's literal
translation: and it is not a remover of him from the chastisement his
being granted a long life.

*“ma”* (**ما** *=* not, no, particle of negation); the pronoun “it” is
that of *sha'n*[^1] and *qissah* (**ضَميرُ الشّأن و القصّة**) “his being
granted a long life” is the subject preceded by the predicate, that is,
“is not a remover of him...”

The sentence may also be syntactically analysed in another way: the
pronoun, “it”, may refer to the love each of them had of being granted a
life of a thousand years. It would accordingly mean that that love of
theirs would not ward off the Divine Chastisement from them; in this
case, the clause, “his being granted a long life” will be a description
of that love.

Anyhow, what the verse says is this: They shall never invoke the death,
and I swear that you will most certainly find them the greediest of men
for this base and insignificant life which prevents them from the happy
and good life of the next abode; you will find them greedier than even
the polytheists for this life, although the latter do not believe in the
Resurrection and the Day of Judg­ment, and consequently their love for
this life should be un­paralleled; every one of them loves that he
should be granted the longest life, but even the longest life cannot
remove him further off from the Divine Chastisement, because life, no
matter how long it is, is limited and has to come to an end.

**Qur’an:** *every* ***one of them loves that he should be granted a
life of a thousand years:*** that is, the longest life. “a thousand” is
used to denote numerousness. In Arabic, it is the highest de-nomination
which is described by a single word. Higher denomi­nations are shown by
repetition and combination, for example, ten thousand, a hundred
thousand, a thousand thousand (i.e., a million).

**Qur’an:** ***And Allah sees what you do:*** *“al-Basir”* (**البَصيرُ**
) is one of the beautiful names of Allah; it signifies that although He
does not have a body or an eye, He is fully cognizant of all things
which we perceive with our eyes. It shows a facet of the name,
*al-'Alim* (**العَليْمُ** = the Knowing).

**Qur’an:** ***Say: “Whoever is the enemy of Gabriel - for surely he
revealed it to your heart by Allah's Command:*** Apparently the verse
was revealed as a reply to something the Jews had said - they arrogantly
refused to believe in what was revealed to the Apostle of Allah (S), on
the pretext that they were enemies of Gabriel who had the charge of
bringing the revelation to Muhammad (S).

Allah replied to them in two verses - concerning the Qur'an and Gabriel
both. Also the traditions giving the background of the verses confirm
it. The verses contain four replies to their arrogance in denial of the
Qur'an.

First: Gabriel has revealed the Qur'an to your heart by Allah's Command,
not by his own wish. Therefore, even if they feel enmity towards
Gabriel, it should not prevent them from believing in a revelation sent
down by Allah's Command.

Second: The Qur'an verifies the Divine Book which was revealed before it
and which they have in their hands. How can they believe in a book and
deny another which verifies it?

Third: The Qur'an is a guidance for those who believe in it.

Fourth: It is also a good news for the believers. How can a sane person
turn his face away from guidance and good news, even if it is brought to
him by a supposed enemy of his?
So far as their professed enmity towards Gabriel was con­cerned, they
were replied as follows:

Gabriel is one of the angels of Allah; he has no authority except to
follow and obey the Divine Command - just like Michael and other angels.
They are honoured servants of Allah; they do not disobey His command,
and they do as they are told.

Likewise, the apostles of Allah have no authority except by Allah and
from Allah. To have enmity towards them, to harbour hatred for them is
enmity and hatred towards Allah Himself. Therefore, whoever is the enemy
of Allah and His angels and His apostles and Gabriel and Michael, so
surely Allah is his enemy.

All these replies are clearly given in these two verses.

**Qur’an:** ***for surely he revealed it to your heart by Allah's
Command:*** Apparently, it should have been “to my heart”; instead, it
says, “to your heart”. The pronoun has been changed from the first to
the second person to draw attention to an im­portant factor:

So far as the revelation of the Qur'an is concerned, neither Gabriel has
any choice or authority of his own in bringing it down (he is subject to
the Divine command, which he faith-fully carries out) nor the Apostle of
Allah (s. a.w. a.) has any choice or authority of his own in receiving
it and conveying it to his *ummah;* his heart is the receptacle of
revelation, on which he has no control at all and which he is bound to
convey to his people.

The Jews have been mentioned in these verses sometimes in the second
person, and sometimes in the third. Their admoni­tion and condemnation
has continued for a long time; and the Speaker wants to show that they
do not deserve the honour of being addressed by Him.

That is why He frequently changes the styles, again and again going from
the second to the third person pronouns. The audience gets the
impression that the Speaker does not like to speak to them - because of
their heedlessness and depravity, but at the same time does not like to
leave them as they are without pronouncing His judgment against them.

**Qur’an:** ***the enemy of the unbelievers**:* Instead of saying,
“their enemy”, the verse uses the word, “enemy of the un­believers”; it
serves to show also the reason of that enmity. Allah is their enemy,
because they are unbelievers, and Allah is the enemy of the unbelievers.

**Qur’an:** ***and none disbelieve in them except the transgressors**:*
It explains the cause of their disbelief; they disbelieve because they
are transgressors. Or, may be the definite article ”the”, in “the
transgressors” refers to the group mentioned in the beginning of the
chapter:

***But He does not cause to err by it*** (any) ***except the
transgressors, who break the covenant of Allah after its
confirmation...*** (2:26-27)

As for Gabriel and how he brought the revelation to the heart of the
Apostle of Allah (s. a.w. a.), we shall explain it, God willing, in
another place; the same applies to Michael and other angels.

Traditions
----------

Ibn ''Abbas explained the reason of the revelation of the verse, ***Say:
“Whoever is the enemy of Gabriel...”**,* in these words: “When the
Prophet came to Medina, Ibn Suriya and some Jews of Fadak asked him
(some questions). They said: 'O Muhammad! How do you sleep? Because we
have been told about the sleep of the Prophet who would come in the last
days?'

He said: 'My eyes sleep while my heart is awake.' They said: 'You are
right, O Muhammad! Now tell us about the child whether it is from the
man or from the woman?' He said: 'As for the bones, the nerves and the
veins, they are from the man; and as for the flesh, the blood, the nails
and the hairs, they are from the woman.'

They said: 'You are right, O Muhammad! Then why is it that sometimes the
child resembles his paternal uncles, without having a least likeness of
his maternal uncles? And sometimes he resembles his maternal uncles
without having any likeness at all to his paternal uncles?' He replied:
'He resembles to that parent's (side) whose fluid dominates the
other's.' They said: 'You spoke the truth, O Muhammad! Now, tell us
about your Lord, what is He?' Then Allah revealed (the Chapter 112):

***Say: “He, Allah is One...”***

Then Ibn Suriya said: 'One (more) thing; if you tell (us) about it, I
shall believe in you and follow you. Which angel is it that brings to
you that which Allah reveals to you?' He said: 'Gabriel.' (Ibn Suriya)
said:

'He is our enemy; he brings the (order of) fighting, hard-ship and war.
And Michael brings comfort and happiness. Had it been Michael who came
to you (with revelation) we would have believed in you.' ”

**The author says:** Very many traditions (nearly *mutawatir* in number)
have been narrated by both Sunni and Shi'ah narrators, that (when) the
Apostle of Allah (s. a.w. a.) (slept) his eyes used to sleep but his
heart kept awake.

Sleep did not make him unaware of himself; when asleep, he was well
aware that he was asleep; when he dreamt he knew that he was dreaming.
Not too often, this happens to some other good persons too when their
souls are clean and they keep in touch with the Divine sublimity.

When the soul rises to that level, it can never be oblivious of the
various changes occurring to itself in its worldly life, nor can it
forget its relation to its Lord. At this stage, it may look at the world
and its life taking the whole spectrum at one glance, as a man looks at
a tree and perceives it all at once. In this detached manner, it
observes that all human beings are asleep - not only those who are
manifestly asleep, but those too who are thought to be awake.

Almost all men have taken shelter under sensual perception; have bound
themselves to the fetters of materialism. They are in fact asleep, even
when they think they are awake. 'Ali (a.s.) has said: “The people are
asleep; when they die they will wake up...”
This topic will be further explained in other place; other sentences of
this tradition too will be explained later

[^1]: Sha'n (ضَميرُ الشّأن ) is a personal pronoun (third person,
masculine) which is used to begin a sentence. That of feminine gender is
called the pronoun of qissah (ضَمير القصّة ). The nearest thing to it in
the English grammer is the indefinite demonstrative pronoun. (tr.)


