Suratul Baqarah: Verses 163 – 167
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٣)وَإِلَـٰهُكُمۡ إِلَـٰهٌ۬ وَٲحِدٌ۬‌ۖ لَّآ إِلَـٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ
ٱلرَّحمَـٰنُ ٱلرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٤)إِنَّ فِى خَلقِ ٱلسَّمَـٰوَٲتِ وَٱلأَرۡضِ وَٱختِلَـٰفِ ٱلَّيلِ
وَٱلنَّهَارِ وَٱلفُلكِ ٱلَّتِى تَجرِى فِى ٱلبَحرِ بِمَا يَنفَعُ
ٱلنَّاسَ وَمَآ أَنزَلَ ٱللَّهُ مِنَ ٱلسَّمَآءِ مِن مَّآءٍ۬ فَأَحيَا
بِهِ ٱلأَرۡضَ بَعدَ مَوۡتَِها وَبَثَّ فِيَها مِن كلِّ دَآبَّةٍ۬
وَتَصرِيفِ ٱلرِّيَـٰحِ وَٱلسَّحَابِ ٱلمُسَخَّرِ بَينَ ٱلسَّمَآءِ
وَٱلأَرۡضِ لَأَيَـٰتٍ۬ لِّقَوۡمٍ۬ يَعقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٥) وَمِنَ ٱلنَّاسِ مَن يَتَّخِذُ مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ أَندَادً۬ا
يُحِبُّونَُهمۡ كَحُبِّ ٱللَّهِ‌ۖ وَٱلَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوٓاْ أَشَدُّ
حُبًّا لِّلَّهِ‌ۗ وَلَوۡ يَرَى ٱلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوٓاْ إِذۡ يَرَوۡنَ
ٱلعَذَابَ أَنَّ ٱلقُوَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَأَنَّ ٱللَّهَ شَدِيدُ
ٱلعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٦)إِذۡ تَبَرَّأَ ٱلَّذِينَ ٱتُّبِعُواْ مِنَ ٱلَّذِينَ ٱتَّبَعُواْ
وَرَأَوُاْ ٱلعَذَابَ وَتَقَطَّعَتۡ بِهِمُ ٱلأَسبَابُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦٧) َقَالَ ٱلَّذِينَ ٱتَّبَعُواْ لَوۡ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً۬
فَنَتَبَرَّأَ مِنُهمۡ كَمَا تَبَرَّءُواْ مِنَّا‌ۗ كَذَٲلِكَ يُرِيهِمُ
ٱللَّهُ أَعمَـٰلَهُمۡ حَسَرَٲتٍ عَلَيِهمۡ‌ۖ وَمَا هُم بِخَـٰرِجِينَ
مِنَ ٱلنَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And your God is one God! there is no god but** ***He; He is the
Beneficent***, ***the Merciful*** (163)***.***

***Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
alternation of the night and the day, and the ships that run in the sea
with that which profits men, and the water that Allah sends down from
the cloud, then gives life with it to the earth after its death and
spreads in it all*** (kinds of) ***animals, and the changing of the
winds, and the clouds made subservient between the heaven and the earth,
there are signs for a people who understand*** (164)***.***

***And there are some among men who take for them-selves equals to God
besides Allah, whom they love as the love for Allah, and those who
believe are stronger in*** (their) ***love for Allah, and O that those
who are unjust could see, when they see the chastisement, that the power
is wholly Allah's and that Allah is severe in chastisement***
(165)***.***

***When those who were followed shall renounce those who followed***
(them), ***and they see the chastisement and their ties are cut
asunder*** (166).

***And those who followed shall say: “O were there for us a return, then
we would renounce them as they have renounced us.” Thus will Allah show
them their deeds to be intense regret to them, and they shall not come
forth from the fire*** (167).

Commentary
----------

These verses are connected together in one context, with a single theme.
They remind the audience about the belief of mono-theism offering proofs
to support it, and describe polytheism and its ultimate result.

**Qur’an:** ***And your God is one God:*** We have explained the
mean­ing of *al-ilah* ( **الاِلٰـهُ** *=* god) in the Commentary of the
first verse of the first chapter, the Opening. Oneness is a self-evident
idea, which needs no explanation.

A thing is called one in view of one of its attributes, for example, one
man, one scholar or one poet. These words show that the related
attribute is indivisible, and not subject to plurality.

For example, the manhood of one man, Zayd, is not shared between him and
someone else. It is in con­trast with manhood of two men - Zayd and
'Amr, for exam-ple - which is shared by the two, and is therefore
numerous.

Thus Zayd, in context of his attribute of manhood, is one and
indivisible and not subject to plurality. But when he is looked at in
this very context combined with his other attributes - like his
knowledge, power, life, etc. - then he is not one; he is a multiple in
reality.

Allah is One, in view of His attribute, like His divinity, which is not
shared by anyone else. He is one in His divinity as well as in His
knowledge, power and life. He has knowledge, unlike other knowledges,
and power and life unlike others' powers and lives.

Also, He is one because His attributes are not multiple, they are not
separate from one another except in their verbal meanings; His
knowledge, His power and His life, all is one thing, all is His very
person; none of them is separate from the other.

Allah knows by His power, and has power by His life, and is alive by His
know-ledge. He is not like other things where attributes are multiple
and numerous not only in meanings but in reality also.

Sometimes a thing possesses the characteristic of oneness in its
personality, that is, by its very nature and essence, it cannot accept
multiplication or division in its self; it cannot be divided into
various parts or into its person and name etc.

This oneness is called oneness of person, and it is referred to with the
word *al-ahad* **اَلأحَدُ** ) = one); this word is never used except as
a first construct of a genitive construction or in a negative,
prohibitive or similar sentences, in the meaning of no one, any one,
etc. For example, we say: No one came to me.

This sentence negates the personality itself, irrespective of its
oneness or plural­ity, because this oneness is related to its nature and
essence, and not to its attribute. This connotation will be lost if we
were to say, one man did not come to me. This sentence does not imply
that two or more men did not come; it is because “oneness” in this
sentence is an attribute of the corner, not of his person.

The reader should keep in mind this short explanation until we write
about it in detail. Allah willing, under the verse:

***Say: “He, Allah, is One.”*** (112:1)

The words, “And your God is one God,” imply that divinity, godhead, is
exclusively reserved for Allah, and that His oneness in divinity is such
as becomes His sublime status.

The word *al-wahid* **اَلوَاحِدُ** ) *=* the one), as understood by the
audience of the Qur'an, gives the idea of oneness, of a general type.
That meaning may be applied to various kinds of oneness. But only a few
of those connotations may be applied for Allah.

The word “one”, may show oneness of number, of species, or of genes,
etc. And the people were bound to take it in the meaning best suited to
their beliefs and ideas. That is why the Qur'an did not say: And Allah
is one God. Because this sentence does not establish monotheism; even
the polytheists say that He is one God, in the same way as each of their
deities is one god.

Nor would have the sentence, And your God is one, estab­lished
monotheism. Because it could be imagined that He is one in the species -
of divinity. People say, when they enumerate the species of animals:
Horse is one; mule is one - although horse and mule are manifold in
number.

That is why the Qur'an said: “And your God is one God.” “One God” (in
contrast to two or more gods) is made predicate of “Your God”. In this
form the sentence clearly establishes the belief of monotheism, by
restricting the godhead to one of the gods in which they believed.

**Qur’an:** ***there is no god but He:*** It further emphasizes the
clear declaration of the preceding sentence about monotheism and negates
every possible misinterpretation or superstition.

The negative particle ”*la*” **لا** ) = no) is used here to negate the
genes; *ilah* (**اِلٰـهَ** *=* god) denotes here real and actual God.
The sentence has an implied predicate “existent”, and the meaning will
be as follows: There is no real and actual god existing “but He”.

The pronoun “He”, used in place of the proper name, Allah, is in
nominative, not subjunctive case. Therefore, the word “but” is not used
here as particle of exception; rather it is an adjective in the sense of
“other than”. The complete sentence, thus, means: There is no real god,
other than Allah, existing.

The sentence therefore aims at repudiation of gods, other than Allah -
the deities which had no real existence outside the imagination of their
worshippers. It does not aim at refuting other deities and proving the
existence of Allah, as many scholars have thought. Our explanation is
supported by the fact that the sentence needs only a negative mode, and
not a negative followed by affirmative.

Only repudiation of other imaginary deities is enough to confirm the
Oneness of Allah in His godhead. More-over, the Qur'an treats the
existence of Allah as a self-evident truth which needs no proof or
argument. The Qur'an only cares to affirm and prove His attributes; for
example, it only proves that Allah is One; that He is the Creator, the
Knower, the Power­ful and so on.

**Question:** You say that the sentence has an implied predicate
existent (or some other word of the same meaning). If so, then it would
only negate the actual existence of other deities - but not the
“possibility” of their existence.

Reply:

1. It is meaningless to suppose that there could be a “possible” or
transient being (having equal relation with exist­ence and
non-existence), which would be the ultimate cause of all the existing
things and their affairs.

2. We could change the predicate to “true” or “actual”; then the meaning
would be: There is no god in reality other than He.

**Qur’an:** ***the Beneficent, the Merciful:*** We have explained its
meaning in the exegesis of the first verse of the first Chapter, the
Opening. With these two names, the meaning of Allah's Lordship becomes
complete. From Him emanates every general bounty - pursuant to His
Beneficence - and every special favour, in the way of guidance and the
next world's bliss - pursuant to His Mercy.

**Qur’an:** ***Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the
earth...**:* As mentioned in the beginning, the verse aims at proving
what the preceding verse has established: “And your God is one God:
there is no god but He; He is the Beneficent, the Merciful.”

The verse under discussion may be analyzed as follows: There is a god
for each of these phenomena; there is only one God for all of them; and
that one God is your God too; He is the Beneficent who bestows general
bounties; and the Merciful, who leads to the ultimate happiness - the
blessings of the next world.

These are the established facts; and in the creation of the heavens and
the earth, and the alternation of the night and the day, and all the
phenomena mentioned in this verse, there are signs to prove these facts
for a people who understand.

The verse offers arguments to prove that there is a god, and He is one -
the God of this magnificent universe is One, and He Himself is the God
of man. It is not the import of this verse to prove the existence of the
God of man, or His oneness.

Otherwise, all the phenomena mentioned in it would have all together
constituted only one sign - by showing that the manage­ment of all is
inter-related and forms a single system. If so, then the preceding verse
should have been restyled in this way: And your God is one, there is no
god but He. The proofs in short run are as follows:

First Proof: These heavens, the canopy high above us with all these
awe-inspiring luminous stars, constellations and galaxies shining
therein; this earth, our shelter and refuge, with all its wonderful
natural systems; all these regular changes and alter-nations occurring
in this world - the alternation of the day and the night, the running
ships and boats, the pouring rains, the changing winds, the suspended
clouds - all these things need by their very nature, a Creator. There
is, therefore, a Creator God for all of them.

**Second Proof:** Look at these heavenly bodies, varying in mass from
the minutest to the largest. There is one so small that the scientists
have found its volume to be equal to: 0.000000000 0000000000000033 cubic
cm.; while there are others so huge as to be equal to millions of our
earth - which in itself has a diam­eter of about 9,000 miles.

They have found the distance between some celestial bodies to be
3,000,000 light years. A light year is approximately 365 x 24 x 60 x 60
x 300,000 kilometres.[^1]

Ponder on these figures which boggle the mind and stupefy the brain.
Then decide, as you wish to decide, about this unique and wonderful
system. Keep in mind that each of these untold billions of the suns and
planets act on, and react to,. the others, no matter where and how
distant they are from each other.

This goes on by the law of gravity, which permeates the whole universe,
and through light and heat. In this way, the established system
continues without any impediment.

And it is an all-pervasive never stopping system, run according to an
established law. Even the theory of relativity (which says that the
directions of move­ments in the physical world are subject to
deviations) affirms that that deviation itself is governed by another
inviolable law.

This movement, this general rotation, appears in every part of the
universe in a uniform way; look for example at the move­ment of the sun
with its planets and satellites.

Now look nearer at hand at our own earth, with its own moon and various
systems (the day and the night, the winds, the clouds and the rains).
Reduce your circle of vision once more, to ponder on earthly matters and
creatures - minerals, vegetables, animals and various other things.

Find out about countless species one after another; then go on reducing
the circle until you come to the elements, then to the atoms; then the
particles of the atoms; finally you shall come to what is today the last
stage of the scientific dis­covery, that is, the electron and the
proton.

Even there you will find a miniature solar system at work; a nucleus
around which these smallest particles revolve, exactly like the movement
of the planets around their suns, and the endless journey of the suns
(with their families) towards an unknown destination.

Stop at any stage in this scientific journey and you will find an
amazing system - a system whose wonders will never cease and whose
marvels will never stop. There is no exception in its flow, not even
one; nor is there any question of chance in its intricately-woven
design, not even a rare one. Man cannot reach its shore, nor does he
fully comprehend all the signs on this path.

Proceed from the smallest to the largest heavenly body. You will find it
a single universe with one and unified system and inter-related
arrangement. Look through the most powerful far-reaching telescope and
use the most advanced observatory, you will find the same law governing
all celestial bodies.

Now, reverse your journey, until you reach again to the smallest unit.
Break it down to its parts, reaching to molecule. You will find in it a
miniature universe, with the same design and the same inter-related
arrangement - although the two vastly differ in their natures and
identities.

In short, the universe is one, and its arrangement and man­agement
inter-related; all its parts - no matter how diverse and multiple they
may be - are managed under a single system;

***and the faces are humbled before the Living, the Self-subsistent
God*** (20:111).

Therefore, the God of the universe, is one; He alone created and He
alone manages it.

**Third Proof:** Man is an earthly creature. He lives on the earth and
after his death returns to it. His existence and life needs nothing more
than the above-mentioned system that governs the whole universe - a
unified and inter-related system.

The heavenly bodies with the light and heat they generate, the earth
with its alternated days and nights, the winds, the clouds and the
rains, the beneficial goods it produces and which are transported from
region to region - these are the things man requires for his physi­cal
needs, for his existence and continuation of life.

***And Allah en-compasses them on every side*** (85:20).

It proves that the God who created the universe and manages its affairs
is the same God who also created man and manages his affairs. God of the
universe is the God of man.

Again, it is God who bestows on every thing what it needs for happiness
of this world and for bliss of the next (if he is qualified for the
bliss of the next life) - because the next world is the ultimate
destination of this abode. How can anyone man-age the end of any affair
other than he who manages the affair itself?

This is the proof given by the two names, ***The Beneficent, the
Merciful.*** And in this way is perfected the rational argument offered
by this verse for the preceding one. This view is strengthened by the
fact that this verse begins with the particle *inna* **إنَّ** ) =
surely) which is also used for offering arguments. And Allah knows
better.

In short, the words, “Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the
earth”, point to the heavens with all their lumin­ary bodies, and the
earth with all the wonderful creations and astounding products it
contains; the forms which give each species its name, the matter which
constitutes its body; their transform­ation from one form to the other,
their recurring additions and subtractions, their joining together and
breaking apart. As Allah says:

***Do they not see that We come into the land curtailing it of its
sides?*** (13:41);

***Do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were
closed up, so We have opened them: and We have made of water every thing
living...*** ? (21:30)

**Qur’an:** ***and the alternation of the night and the day:*** It
refers to the changes in durations of the nights and the days which are
caused by a combination of two factors:

First is the daily rotation of the earth on its axis. This always keeps
a little more than half of the earth's sphere facing towards the sun,
which sends light and heat to the earth's surface - and that is called
the day. The opposite side of the sphere is dark, throwing a conical
shade in the space - and it is the night. The day and the night are
continu­ously rotating on the face of the earth.

The second factor is the revolution of the earth on its orbit around the
sun. The earth's axis does not form a right angle with the orbit; it has
a tilt (of 23½° [*tr.*] ); and because of that tilt the earth's
north-south position *vis-à-vis* the sun changes at different times of
the year; when the northern hemisphere is inclined to the sun, it is
summer in the north and winter in the south; when the southern
hemisphere is inclined to the sun, the north experiences winter and the
south, summer.

Also, it is because of this tilt that the equator and the North and the
South Poles always have days and nights of equal length: The two Poles
have only one day and one night in a year - each night and each day
being six months long.

When it is day on the North Pole, the South Pole has its night, and vice
versa. As for the equator, it has about 365 days and 365 nights in a
solar year - all of equal length. As for the other regions, the days and
the nights differ - in number as well as in length, depending on their
distance from the equator and the two Poles. Full description of this
phenomenon may be found in the sciences concerned.

It is because of this difference that the sun's life-giving light and
heat reach various regions of the earth with varying intensity. This in
its turn creates diversity in various factors governing the earth and
its environment. And man profits from that diversity in numerous ways.

**Qur’an:** ***And the ships that run in the sea with that which profits
men**: al-Fulk* ( **الفُلْكُ** ) is boat, ship; it is used for singular
and plural both. *al-Fulk* and *al-fulkah* ( **الفُلْكـَة ُُ** ) have
the same mean­ing; as *at-tamr* and *at-tamrah* **اَلتَّمْرُ،
التَّمْرَةُ** ) = date) are synony­mous.

“that which profits men”, refers to various types of cargoes and food
items which are transported by ship from coast to coast, from region to
region.

The verse counts the ships (which are made by man) side by side with
those things and natural phenomena which are beyond human power, like
the heavens, the earth and the alternation of the day and the night. It
shows that ultimately the ships too, like those natural phenomena, are
the handiwork of Allah.

On deep consideration, when we ascribe a work to a man, it has no more
significance than ascribing it to a natural cause. Of course, man has a
free will and power. But he is not a sufficient or total cause; nor does
that freedom make him independent of Allah.

He is as much in need of Allah's will and permission as any other
natural cause. A natural cause acts on, and reacts with, a matter and
through a process of combination and break up gives it a form - let us
say, turns it into a rock.

A man cuts, breaks up and joins some matters giving them a form - let us
say, turn them into a boat. Is there any difference between the two
makers? Both ultimately draw their strength and ability from Divine
creation and invention; nothing is independent of Allah either in its
person or in its activities.

Boat too, like all physical creations, depends on Allah in its
existence, as well as in management of its affairs. Allah has pointed to
this fact in the verse, where Ibrahim (a.s.) is quoted as telling his
people about the idols which they worshipped as god:

***And Allah has created you and what you make*** (37:96)***.***

Admittedly, an idol is but a thing made by man, and Ibrahim (a.s.)
ascribes its making to Allah. The same applies to the boats and ships.

Also, Allah says:

***And His are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains***
(55:24)***.***

According to this verse, the ships belong to Allah. Again, He says:

***and He has made the ships sub­servient to you, that they might run
their course in the sea by His command...*** (14:32).

This verse declares that also the ships' affairs is in Allah's hands.

### Can Man-made Things be Attributed to Allah

How heedless are those who think that the things made and manufactured
by man are exclusively his creation and can-not be attributed to Allah
at all - just because they are made by man's will and choice!

First, in this group are the materialists who do not believe in a
Creator. They say: The theists believed in a Creator because they found
in the nature many things and happenings whose material cause they did
not know. As they knew that nothing could happen without a cause, they
had to admit that there was a cause for such things and happenings,
which was not known to them yet.

In this way they came to believe that there was, for those things of
unknown cause, a cause whose reality was hidden from them and which was
beyond the natural world - and that cause was God.

According to the materialists, the belief in the existence of a Creator
was a hypothesis which emanated from the ignorance of the primitive man:
that man was surrounded by so many phenomena of unknown causes; for
example, atmos­pheric changes and many happenings on the earth.

Likewise, there were many psychological factors (whose natural causes
are un­known to the science even today). And this resulted in the belief
in a super-natural Creator.

They say: Now the sciences have succeeded in unravelling many mysteries
of natural phenomena, and in identifying their natural causes. Thus, one
of the two pillars of the above-men­tioned hypothesis has been pulled
down - that is, the need of some natural phenomena for a super-natural
cause. Now remains the other pillar - that is, the need of some
psychological factors for an immaterial cause.

The recent advances in the field of the organic chemistry, give us hope
that man will soon understand the mysteries of the soul; then he will be
able to manufacture the life-giving cells and germs.

This will enable him to create any living being and bring about any
psychological effect. Then the second pillar of this hypothesis will go
down - and there will remain no basis for believing in a super-natural
Creator.

Man will create whatever he wishes of spiritual and psychological
effects, as he is making today whatever he likes of the physical and
material things - although just yesterday he was insisting that there
was a hypothetical super-natural cause for these things. Now we know why
he held that belief - it was just because he did not know the real cause
of these phenomena.

### Comments

First: If these fat-heads were to wake up from their conceit, they would
see that the theists from the very begin­ning of their belief in a
Creator (and there never was a beginning for it) affirmed that creative
cause for the whole universe - those things having known physical causes
as well as those having un­known causes. According to them this whole
lot, in its entirety, needs a cause, separate from the universe. Clearly
what the ma­terialists reject is not what the theists believe in.

The theists - and the history and the research has not been able to
pin-point a starting point for the belief in the Creator, in the history
of humanity - have believed in the existence of one or more creators for
the whole universe, although the Qur'an has shown that the religion of
monotheism appeared before poly-theism; and the orientalist, Max Muller,
the pioneer in the studies of Sanskrit, also has thrown light upon it.

Obviously, the theists, even the primitive man among them, used to see
and recognize physical causes of many physical phenomena.

Yet, they affirmed that there was a God for the whole universe (not
excluding those phenomena of known causes). Evidently, when they
believed in the existence of the Creator, basing their argument on the
all-pervasive system of cause-and-effect, it was not to solve the
prob­lem of some phenomena of which they could not find a cause.

After all, they did not say that some parts of the universe needed a
Creator, while others (having some known causes) did not need that.

What they believed was this: The universe is made up of a series of
natural causes and effects. This whole universe, taken as a composite
unit, needs and requires a Cause, above all other causes; all actions
and reactions, all causes and effects, interacting amongst its countless
components, rely and depend on that Cause of the causes. The belief in
that Supreme Cause does not negate the general law of causality which
permeates all components of the universe.

In the same way, the existence of material causes for the material
effects does not make this whole chain of the causes and effects
independent of the Supreme Cause, who is out of this universe and
separate from it.

(When we say 'out of this universe', we do not mean that the Supreme
Cause is placed on the summit of the pyramid of the causes and effects.
We mean that the Supreme Cause encompasses the whole universe with all
its causes and effects, from every possible side.)

The materialists have fallen in an amusing contradiction. They believe
that there is a general all-pervasive compulsion in all happenings in
the world - including human actions. According to them, every action,
every happening, is a compulsory, inescap­able effect of various causes.

And at the same time they say that if a man created another man, it
would not finally end at the Cause of the universe - if there is such a
cause.

This fine and deep theme is always present in the subcon­scious mind of
common people (even if a simple man is unable to express it in so many
words). That is why they say that the whole universe - together with all
its causes and effects - is the creation of a Creator God.

Second: When the theist philosophers furnish the rational proofs to
prove the existence of the Creator, they do so after establishing that
there is an all-pervasive system of causality in the world. Then they
proceed to prove that all these “possible”, transient causes must end at
an essential, self-existent cause.

This method has been used by them for thousands of years, from the
earliest age of philosophy to this day. There was never any doubt in
their minds that the effects - including the natural tran­sient causes -
need an essential Cause. In other words, when they attribute the effects
to an essential cause, it is not done because they do not know some
thing's natural cause.

Third: The Qur'an proves the oneness of the Creator. It does so by
showing that all components of the universe are governed by the general
law of causality; it accepts the attribution of each happening to its
particular cause, and confirms what normal wisdom says about it.

It ascribes natural phenomena to their natural causes, and attributes to
man the actions done by his own free will. There is no need to quote
here numerous verses based on this theme.

And then it ascribes all these things and happenings - without any
exception - to Allah. For example,

***Allah is the Creator of every thing*** (39:62);

***That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of every thing; there is no god
but He*** (40:62);

***His is the creation and command*** (7:54);

***His is what is in the*** ***heaven and what is in the earth and what
is between them two and what is beneath the ground*** (20:6)***.***

Whatever may be called a “thing”, it is created by Allah, and may be
attributed to Him in a way befitting His Majesty.

There are other verses which attri­bute an action to its doer and at the
same time ascribe it to Allah. For example,

***And Allah has created you and what you make*** (37:96).

The verse attributes the actions of men to them and then attributes
their creation and that of their actions to Allah. Also, it says:

***and you did not smite when you smote*** (the enemy), ***but it was
Allah Who smote*** (8:17)***.***

This verse admits that the act of throwing arrow was done by the
Messenger of Allah, and then negates it, ascribing it to Allah Himself.
There are other verses of the same connotation.

There are some other verses which combine the two attri­butions in a
general way. For example,

... ***and Who created every thing, then ordained for it a measure***
(25:2)***;***

***Surely We have created every thing according to a measure... And
every thing small and great is written down*** (54:49 - 53);

***Allah indeed has made a measure for every thing*** (65:3);

***And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We
do not send it down but in a known measure*** (15:21).

Making or appoint­ing a measure for every thing means that Allah has
confined it within the limits of the material causes and the boundaries
of time and space.

In short, it can never be doubted that the Qur'an proves the existence
of the One and Only God basing its arguments on the system of causality
found in all the components of the universe; and then it attributes the
whole universe to Allah, Who created and made all of it. It is not that
we ascribe some things to Allah and some others to their material
causes - as the materialists allege.

Why could not the materialists understand this clear fact? They were
misled by the Church in the medieval ages, whose pseudo-philosophers
tackled this and similar problems in the manner quoted by the
materialists; writers of other religions too rely on similar arguments.

The fact is that their discourses were distorted, and their arguments
lacked precision. They wanted to explain their true claim (which, their
reason told them in general terms, was correct).

They tried to go into details of that general idea. But their weak
understanding and unripe reasoning led them away from the right method;
consequently, they generalized their claim and misdirected their
argument.

It were they who attributed every thing or effect of unknown cause
directly to Allah, and said that voluntary actions did not need any
outside cause, and that consequently man's voluntary actions did not
belong to Allah; man was independent of Allah in such actions.

We have written on this topic in detail under the verse:

***but He does not cause to err by it*** (any) ***except the
transgressors*** (2:26);

here something more has been added to complete the discourse.

Another group is that of some Muslim traditionalists and theologians
(and some others) whose vision does not penetrate to the inner core of a
subject. They did not understand how could the voluntary actions of man
be attributed to Allah in a manner that would conform with His Sublime
Majesty.

Consequently, they thought that man-made things could not be said to
have been made by Allah, and especially those things which were made
exclusively for sins, for example, liquor, and instruments of music and
gambling etc.

Allah says:

... ***intoxicants and games of chance and*** (sacrificing to) ***stones
set up and*** (dividing by) ***arrows are only an abomination of Satan's
handiwork...*** (5:90)***.***

And evidently what Allah counts as handiwork of Satan should not be
ascribed to Allah Himself.

Comment: The discourse written earlier is enough to show the invalidity
of this erroneous surmise- both from the Qur'an and traditions and the
rational point of view. The fact is that man's voluntary actions may be
attributed to Allah in a befitting man­ner, and likewise man-made
things, being the result of those actions, may be attributed to Allah.

Moreover, “the stones”, mentioned in the verse 5:90 above, refers to the
idols and images which are set for worship, and the verse 37:96 (***And
Allah has created you and what you make***) says that those idols too
are creation of Allah.

Obviously, an idol may be looked at from different perspectives. From
one point of view it may be ascribed to Allah, for example, looking at
the nature of its existence, disregarding the fact of its being used for
sin of polytheism.

What is an idol? It is just a stone or metal with a particular shape;
and as such there is no reason why it should not be attributed to the
Creator of all things.

Of course, from another angle it is a thing that is worshipped besides
Allah; and from this perspective it cannot be attributed to Allah; it
should rather be ascribed to the Satan or man. The same principle may be
applied for other man-made things.

It clearly shows that man-made things may be attributed to Allah just
like any other natural phenomenon, without any difference. Of course, it
all depends on the degree of existence the said things enjoy. (Think on
it.)

**Qur’an:** ***and the water that Allah sends down from the cloud, then
gives you life with it to the earth after its death and spreads in it
all*** (kinds of) ***animals:*** What is rain? There are various
elements mixed in the water of rivers and other water sources. Then it
turns into steam, going up and carrying heat. The steam continues to
ascend until it reaches extremely cold strata of the atmosphere.

Then the steam changes into water coming down as rain. Some times the
steam is frozen into snow or hail. In what-ever form, it comes down to
us, which drinks it in and becomes alive again. Also, the earth stores a
major part of the rain, etc., above or below its surface, and that water
comes out and flows as streams and rivers, etc., on the face of earth.

Water is the source of life for every living thing. The rain coming down
from the clouds is a phenomenon of life, which takes place according to
a well regulated and intricately laid down system - without any break
down or exception. The genesis of vegetables and animals - of all
types - depends on water.

The rain - being inter-woven with so many phenomena of the universe,
horizontally and vertically - becomes an inseparable part of the
universe. It needs a Creator to create it, a cause to bring it into
existence. In other words, there is a God for it.

And man's genesis and life depend on the rain and water. Therefore, the
same God who has created water and the intricate system of rain, is the
God who has created man. The God of rain is the God of man.

**Qur’an:** ***and the changing of the wind:*** It refers to the changes
in directions of the wind, because of various natural factors, the most
important of them being the sun's rays. The sun raises the temperature
of the air, making it lighter and less dense.

This lighter air is unable to carry the load of the surrounding air
which is cooler and heavier. Therefore, the heavier air glides down,
forcibly displacing the lighter one.

The lighter air travels in a direction opposite to that of the heavier
one. And the resulting current is called wind. The wind helps in
pollination of trees, shrubs and flowers, removes atmospheric
pollutions, carries rain clouds from one place to another, besides
rendering many other services. Blowing of wind is a most important
factor in the genesis and life of vegetable, animal and man.

Wind, by itself, proves that there is a Creator God; by its inter-woven
relation with other terrestrial and extra terrestrial phenomena, proves
that there is only one Creator for the whole universe; and by being a
very important factor for the genesis and life of man, proves that the
God of man and the God of the uni­verse is one and the same.

**Qur’an:** ***and the clouds made subservient between the heaven and
the earth:*** *as-Sahab* ( **اَلسَّّحَابُُ** ) is condensed watery
vapour floating in air at some distance; it is the source of rain.

As long as the steam remains on or near the earth, it is called
*ad-dabab* **اَلضَّّبََابُُ** ) = fog; mist); when it leaves the earth
and floats in the air at a distance, it is called *as-sahab, al-ghaym* (
**اَلغـَيْمُ** ) and *al­ghamam* ( **اَلغـَمَامُ**), etc., all having
the same meaning: cloud. *at-Taskhir* **التَّسْخِيْرُ** ) = to subjugate
a thing, to make it subservient in its activities).

The cloud is made subservient, in its flow and rain, to the winds and
atmospheric temperature and other relevant factors, by the permission of
Allah.

The cloud is a sign of Allah in the same way as other things mentioned
with it.

The alternation of the day and the night, the rain coming down from the
clouds, the blowing of wind and the subservient clouds are the main
natural phenomena, which together make up the system of creation in the
terrestrial world, like the vegetable, the animal and the man.

This verse may therefore be taken to be a detail of the general
statement contained in the verse:

... ***and He blessed therein and made therein its foods, in four
periods: alike for the seekers*** (41:10).

**Qur’an:** ***there are signs for a people who understand.*** *al-'Aql*
( ( **اَلعَقـْل ُ**) is *masdar* of *'aqala, ya'qilu* **عَقـَلَ،
يَعْقِلُ** ) = he understood, he understands). It denotes perfect
comprehension and understanding.

*al-'Aql is* that by which man differentiates be­tween good and bad,
distinguishes fact from fiction, and discerns truth and falsehood. It is
the self same man who perceives; it is not one of his faculties and
characteristics which are like branches of the soul, for example, the
memory, and the eye-sight, etc.

**Qur’an:** ***And there are some among men who take for them-selves
equals*** (***i.e.,*** objects of worship) ***besides Allah:***
*an-Nidd* ( **اَلنـِّدُّ**) is on the paradigm of *al-mithl* (
**اَلمِثـْلُُ** ) and has the same meaning: equal, alike, etc. In some
other verses Allah has used a slightly different phrase; for example,

***therefore do not set up equals to Allah*** (2:22)***;***

***and they set up equals with Allah*** (14:30).

The style has been changed here to “besides Allah” because it is
preceded by the exclusive statement: “And your God is one God! there is
no god but He;...”

Thus anyone taking any object of worship besides Allah would violate
that exclusiveness without any justifi­cation; he would take as god
something which, he is well aware, is not god; he would do so just in
pursuit of his base desire, and in complete disregard to the decree of
his reason.

That is why Allah has used the word “equals” as common noun, to show
their degradation: “And there are some among men who take for themselves
equals besides Allah.”

**Qur’an:** ***Whom they love as the love for Allah, and those who
believe are stronger in*** **(their)** ***love for Allah:*** The word
used is *yuhibbunahum* **يُحِبُّونـَهُمََْ** ) = they love them); the
objective pronoun used here is reserved for rational beings. It means
that the word “equals” does not refer to idols only, it includes also
the angels and those men who were worshipped besides Allah.

Rather, it covers all those who were obeyed by people without any
authority from Allah. This interpretation gets support from the verse
following it:

***When those who were followed shall re­nounce those who followed***
(them) (2:166).

Also, Allah says:

... ***and*** (that) ***some of us shall not take others for lords
besides Allah*** (3:64)***;***

***They have taken their doctors of law and their monks for lords
besides*** ***Allah*** (9:31)***.***

The verse shows that love may be attributed to Allah in real­ity,
contrary to the claims of those who say that love, being a branch of the
faculty of desire, is related in reality to the body and the matters
concerning the body only; and cannot be attributed as such to Allah.

According to them, love of God means obedience to Him, doing what He
commands us to do and refraining from what He forbids; thus love may be
attributed to Allah only in a meta­phorical sense, as Allah says:

***Say: “If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and
forgive you your sins”*** (3:31)***.***

But the verse under discussion goes against their claim. The phrase
“stronger in (their) love for Allah”, shows that love of Allah may vary
in intensity; it is stronger in the believers than in those who take
others as equals to Allah. On the other hand, if love is taken to mean
obedience, the meaning would be: “and those who believe are more
obedient to Allah”.

Obviously, there could be no question here of any comparative degree of
obedi­ence, because the obedience of others is no obedience at all in
the eyes of Allah. The-refore, “love” here has been used in its real,
not metaphorical, sense.

It is supported also by the verse which says:

***Say: “If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates
and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the trade
slackness of which you fear and dwellings*** ***which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger and striving in His way...
”*** (9:24).

The word translated here as 'dearer' is *ahabb*(**اَحَبُُّ** = more
loved). Evidently the love ascribed to Allah, and that ascribed to His
Messenger, and the love attributed to the fathers, the sons, and the
property, etc., is all of the same quiddity, all of it has the same
reality.

Otherwise, the phrase 'dearer to you' could not be used. The comparative
degree signifies that both sides - the preferred one and the preferred
against - share in the basic quality, although they differ in its
degree, one being stronger, the other weaker.

The verse condemns those who take others as equals to Allah, saying:
“whom they love as the love for Allah”; then it praises the believers,
saying that they, “are stronger in (their) love for Allah.”

This comparison between the two groups ap­parently shows that the former
has been condemned because they have divided their love between Allah
and those whom they have taken as equals to Allah. There was possibility
of a misunderstanding that if they had loved Allah more, they would not
have been blamed.

But the next sentences leave no room for such erroneous surmises. “O
that those who are unjust could see when they see the chastisement that
the power is wholly Allah's... When those who were followed shall
renounce those who followed (them), and they see the chastisement and
their ties are cut asunder...

Thus will Allah show them their deeds to be intense regret to them...”
These verses make it clear that they have been condemned not because of
the love, *per se,* but because of its concomitant, that is, following.
They followed false deities thinking that those deities had power which
would help the followers to fulfil their desires or to ward off some
undesirable situation.

Thus, they discarded the truth either wholly or in some aspects - and
the one who follows Allah in some aspects only, is not a follower at
all. Thus, there is no room for the above-mentioned misunderstanding. It
is now clear that man should not take any partner for Allah in this
love, otherwise, it will be polytheism.

However, when the love for Allah becomes stronger, the lover does not
follow anyone other than Allah; he exclusively obeys the commands of
Allah. That is why the believers have been praised that they “are
stronger in (their) love for Allah”.

Now we know that the love has been praised and condemned because of its
concomitant, that is, following and obedience. If a man loves someone
other than Allah in obedience to the com­mands of Allah, when that
someone calls to the obedience of Allah only, then such a love cannot be
censured at all. As Allah says:

***Say: ”If your fathers and your sons... are dearer to you than Allah
and His Messenger...”*** (9:24)***.***

This verse assigns to the Messenger (S) a love as it assigns it to Allah
Himself; it is so because love of the Messenger of Allah (S) is one with
the love of Allah. Why? Because the effect of this love, that is,
following of the Messenger (S) is exactly the obedience of Allah. Allah
Himself calls to the obedience of His Messenger, as He says:

***And We did not send any messenger but that he should be obeyed by
Allah's permission*** (4:64)***;***

***Say: “If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you”***
(3:31)***.***

In the same category comes the love of any one whose obedience leads to
the obedience of Allah, for example, a religious scholar who guides
people by his knowledge, a sign that points to Allah, the Qur'an which
brings the reciter nearer to Allah, and things like that. All these are
loved because of the love of Allah, and by following them one obeys
Allah and comes nearer to Him.

In short, whoever loves any one besides Allah, thinking that he has a
power, and follows him in order to fulfil some of his needs, or obeys
him in a matter which Allah has not allowed, then he has indeed taken
other objects of worship besides Allah, and surely Allah will show them
their deeds to be intense regret to them.

On the other hand, the believers are those who love nothing except
Allah, do not seek power except from Allah, and do not follow except
that which is from the commands and prohibitions of Allah. They are
those who are sincere to Allah in religion.

Also, it is clear that the love of those whose love is Allah's love, and
whose obedience Allah's obedience (like the Prophet and his progeny; the
divine scholars, the Book of Allah and the traditions of His Prophet; in
short, every thing that leads one to Allah's remembrance in a sincere
way) is diametrically opposed to polytheism. Indeed, one proceeds nearer
to Allah by loving and following the above-mentioned personalities and
things.

To honour and respect them is a part of piety, and love and fear of
Allah. As Allah says:

***and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this surely is*** (the
outcome) ***of the piety of hearts*** (22:32).

*ash-Sha'a'ir* ( **الشـَّعَآئِرُ** ) means the signs that lead or point
to some-thing; the phrase, 'the signs of Allah' is general, not
restricted to any particular thing like the Safa and the Marwah, etc.

It means that one must respect every sign of Allah, every divinely
approved symbol which reminds one of Allah; because it is an outcome of
piety, a reflection of the love and fear of Allah. And this principle
applies to all the signs which lead one to piety.

Of course, it is clear as day that one should not think that those signs
and symbols are in any way independent of Allah, or that they control
for themselves or for others any harm or profit, or that they have any
independent authority over their own or others' life, death or
resurrection.

Evidently, if one had such a belief, then these things would not remain
signs of Allah, they would become equals of Allah - and it would be
*ash-shirk* **الشـِّرْكُ** ) = ascribing partners to Allah); may He
protect you from such polytheism.

**Qur’an:** ***O*** ***that those who are unjust could see, when they
see the chastisement, that the power is wholly Allah's and that Allah is
severe in chastisement**:* Apparently, “when they see the chastisement”
is the object of the verb, “could see”; and “that the power is wholly
Allah's and that Allah is severe in chastise­ment” are the explanatory
phrases describing “the chastisement” (in the phrase “when they see the
chastisement”.

(*Wa-law* **وَلـَوْ** ) = would that; O that; if only; I wish) is an
optative particle, used to express wish. The verse therefore means:
Would that those who are unjust could see in this world the day when
they would see the chastisement; then they would see that the power
belongs wholly to Allah, and that they had committed the greatest
blunder when they ascribed some of that power to their false deities,
and that Allah is severe in chastisement and in punishing those who are
guilty of this unforgiveable sin.

As the next verses show, the chastisement would contain of their seeing
their blunder in taking other objects of worship besides Allah, and in
their wrong assumption that those objects had any power, and then seeing
the punishment of their polytheism and misdeed.

The next two verses support this interpretation: “When those who were
fol­lowed shall renounce those who followed (them).” The followers will
not get any hoped-for benefit from their leaders; “and they see the
chastisement and their ties are cut asunder”.

Nothing shall have any power or effect besides Allah. “And those who
followed shall say: 'O were there for us a return:' ” they shall
ardently wish to return to this world. “then we would renounce” these
objects of worship whom we took as equals to Allah, and whom we
followed, in this world, “as they have renounced us” in the next world.

“Thus will Allah show” those who were unjust and took others as equals
to Allah, “their deeds” (i.e., their love and obedience to those leaders
whom they took as equals to Allah) “to be intense regret to them, and
they shall not come forth from the fire”.

**Qur’an:** ***and they shall not come forth from the fire:*** It is a
proof against those who say that the chastisement of the fire shall one
day come to an end.

Traditions
----------

Shurayh ibn Hani said: “A Bedouin went on the day of the Camel to the
Leader of the faithful ('Ali, a.s.) and said: 'O Leader of the faithful!
Do you say that Allah is one?' ” (Shurayh) said: “Then the people bore
down on him and said:

'O Arab! Don't you see how preoccupied the Leader of the faithful is?'
But the Leader of the faithful said: 'Let him be. Because what (this)
Bedouin wants (i.e., gnosis of Allah) is the very thing which we want
from these people (i.e., the enemies):

Then he (Ali, a.s.) said: 'O Arab! The sentence, “Allah is one”, may be
interpreted in four ways, two of them are not permissible for Allah and
two are allowed.

The two meanings which are not permissible for Allah are:

(1) The saying of a sayer “one”, when he uses it as a number: It is not
permissible, because that which has no second (i.e., is unique) does not
come within the domain of number. Do you not see that (Allah) has
declared him an unbeliever who said that God was the third of the three?

(2) And the saying of a sayer that “He is one of the people”, in the
same sense as a species is one of (its) genes. This (also) is not
allowed because it likens Allah (to other things), and our Lord is too
great for, and far above of, this (likening).

And as for the two meanings which are applicable to Him, they are:

(1) The saying of a sayer, “He is one, there is nothing like unto Him”;
such (indeed) is our Lord.

(2) And the saying of a sayer that, He, the Mighty, the Great, is unique
in significance, that is, He is not divisible - neither in existence,
nor in thought or imagination; such (indeed) is our Lord.' ”
(*al-Khisal; at-Tawhid; Ma'ani 'l-akhbar*)

**The author says:** The two meanings confirmed by him ( 'Ali, a.s.)
conform with what we have written in the explanation of the verse:
***And your God is one God...***

The lectures narrated from 'Ali (a.s.), ar-Rida (a.s.) and other Imams
of the *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (*a.s.*) repeatedly say that 'He is one not by
number'. It refers to His pristine person which does not accept
counting.

There is in a prayer of *as-Sahifah as-Sajjadiyyah,* the sen­tence,
“Thine is the oneness of number”. It is interpreted as to refer to
“ownership”, that is, 'Thou art the owner of the oneness of number'; it
does not meant that

'Thou art one in number', because reason as well as the Qur'an and the
traditions firmly prove that His existence is Unique and pure, it is not
duplicable nor can it be repeated - according to His person and reality.

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said in a tradition, *inter alia,* about the words
of Allah, ***And there are some among men who take for them-selves
equals besides Allah...**:* “O Jabir! They are, by Allah!, the leaders
of the unjust ones and their followers” (*al-Kafi; al-Ikhtisas;*
al-'Ayyashi). In the last-named book the wording is: “O Jabir! By Allah!
They are the leaders of the injustice and their followers.”

**The author says:** Its meaning is clear in the light of the
explanation given above. Why did the Imam refer to them as “the leaders
of injustice”? It is because Allah has said: *O that those who are
unjust could see...* Thus, the followers who took for themselves equals
besides Allah were “unjust”; therefore, their leaders must be “the
leaders of the unjust ones” and “the leaders of injustice”.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about the words of Allah, ***Thus will Allah show
them their deeds to be intense regret to them:*** “He is a man who
leaves (untouched) his wealth and because of avarice does not spend it
in the obedience of Allah; then he dies and leaves it to someone who
uses it in the obedience of Allah, or in His dis­obedience.

If he (the heir) used it in the obedience of Allah, (the legator) shall
see it in the “balance” of another man, and he shall look at it in
intense regret, as the wealth had (originally) belonged to him. And if
he (the heir) used it in disobedience of Allah, then it was he (the
legator) who strengthened him with that wealth so that he used it in the
disobedience of Allah.” (*al-Kafi* )

The author says: This meaning has been narrated by al-'Ayyashi,
as-Saduq, al-Mufid and at-Tabrasi, from al-Baqir and as-Sadiq (a.s.). It
has used the word, equals, in a wider sense; and as we have explained
earlier, this expanded meaning is with-out any doubt, quite in place.

A Philosophical Discourse on Love
---------------------------------

Love is one of our emotional feelings; we apply it for the love of food,
love of women, love of wealth, love of honour and love of knowledge. We
have no doubt that we have these five loves.

Also, there is no doubt that when we use the word, love, in the above
contexts, we intend the same meaning everywhere; and not only the word,
but the meaning also is the same in all the five phrases. At the same
time, we know that these contexts are different. The question is: Is
this a difference of categories, or of some other type?

Let us look at the love of food. We love an edible thing, like a fruit,
because it is related to the activity of our faculty of nutrition. If
there were no such faculty, if there were not that nourishment which
perfects our body, we would not have loved that fruit, and there would
have been no such love.

Therefore, the love exists, in reality, between the faculty of nutrition
and its activity, on one side, and the satisfaction which that faculty
gets from that activity, on the other side. When we say,
“satisfac­tion”, we do not mean the satisfying taste which one feels
when eating - because the sense of taste is a functionary of the faculty
of nutrition, and not the faculty itself. We actually mean that
particular pleasure which the faculty gets from its activity.

Likewise, if we look at the love of women, we find that that love is
related in reality and primarily to cohabitation, and only secondarily
to the women, as its concomitant - in the same way as the love of food
was related to a particular food just secondarily and only as a
concomitant.

Cohabitation is the effect of a faculty given to animals, in the same
way as eating food is the effect of a faculty given to them. Evidently,
these two loves belong to the same root, that is, a subsistent
relationship between these two faculties and their activities - in other
words their active perfection.

At this stage, it might possibly be thought that love was an attachment
exclusively reserved for the above two faculties, that it was not found
in other contexts. But experiment (through various effects) removes this
misunderstanding.

This attachment, known as love, has an effect on the lover. The lover
moves towards the object of his/its love, and yearns for the loved
action if he/it is separated from it, and does not like to leave it,
after he/it has found it.

This particular effect of love is found in all our powers of conception
and their actions. All our powers and faculties like eye-sight, hearing,
memory and imagination - in short all our internal and external senses -
have this very effect, this very attribute, no matter whether they are
acting or reacting. Each of these faculties loves its activity and is
attracted to it.

And it is only because its activity is its perfection, makes up its
deficiency, and fulfils its natural need. In this way, we know the
significance of the love of wealth, love of power and love of knowledge.
Man seeks his perfection through his wealth, honour and knowledge.

It may be inferred from it that love is a special emotional attachment,
a particular conscious attraction between man and his perfection.
Detailed researches have shown that it is found in animals too.

And it is because the lover acts upon, and reacts to, his loved
activity; then that love extends to the things related to that activity,
as the love of eating was extended to that of fruit. This principle
would apply also to other things besides animals, provided they could
consciously seek or bestow perfection.

From another point of view, as love is a subsistent relation-ship
between the lover and the loved, there exists a positive con­nection
between them. Now, if an effect (which has the relation of love with its
cause) is a conscious being and has got sense and feeling, it would find
that love within its soul - if it has a soul and independent
existence.  
 The above discourse leads us to the following conclusions:-

First: Love is a subsistent relationship, a special attraction between
perfecting cause (or things like that) and perfection-seeking effect (or
things like that). That is why we love our actions, because through them
we seek perfection.

And as its extension, we love the things related to our activities; for
example, food which we take, mate with whom we cohabit, wealth which we
use, honour from which we gain benefit, a benefactor who bestows
something on us, a teacher who teaches us, a leader who guides us, a
helper who helps us, a student who learns from us, a servant who serves
us, a follower who obeys and follows us. All these are various
manifestations of love, some of them are physical, some imaginary and
some others intellectual.

Second: Love has different degrees of strength and weakness, because it
is a subsistent attraction, an existing attachment - and there are such
degrees even in existence itself. Obviously, the attachment between a
sufficient cause and its effect cannot be like the one existing between
an insufficient cause and its effect.

Also, the perfection (because of which the attachment of love comes into
being) is itself of various categories, some of it essen­tial, some
others inessential, some of it material (like nourish­ment), others
immaterial (like knowledge).

It shows the invalid­ity of the theory which says that love is
exclusively reserved for material things. (Some of them said that love
was basically related to food only, and other loves issued forth from
it; some others gave that central place to the love of sexual
intercourse; accord­ing to them all other loves branched out from it.)

Third: Allah deserves to be loved - from whatever angle you look at it.
Allah is Self-subsistent, exists by Himself; His perfection is limitless
while all other perfections are but limited. A limited thing attaches
itself to the limitless one in existence.

This attachment, this love, is a part of existence, a part of
person­ality; it can never diminish or go away. Moreover, Allah has
created us, and bestows on us countless and limitless favours; that is
why we love Him, as every bestower of bounties is loved for his favours.

Fourth: As mentioned in the beginning, love is subsistent and existing
relationship. Such relations are not separate from the very existence of
their subjects. It follows that every thing loves its own person. Also,
it was mentioned that by its extension, we love the things related to
the loved - therefore, every thing loves the effects of its own
existence.

It is clear from the above that Allah loves His creation because of His
love of His Own Self; and He loves His creation because they are
recipients of His fa­vours; and He loves His creation because they
accept His guidance.

**Fifth:** We said earlier that sense, consciousness and know-ledge are
concomitants of love. But it is necessary in practice only, Otherwise,
the subsistent attachment - which is the reality of love - does not
depend, *per se,* on these factors. It appears from this that even the
natural powers and faculties - which have no sense or feeling - love
their own actions and effects.

Sixth: It follows that love is a reality which permeates all the
existing things.

Another Philosophical Discourse on Perpetuity of Punishment
-----------------------------------------------------------

The question arises: Will the chastisement of the Hell come to its end
at some time, or will it continue endlessly? Both the­ories have their
adherents and both groups support their views with intellectual
reasoning and apparent meanings of the Qur'an and traditions.

As for the Qur'an, it unambiguously declares that many groups shall
abide for ever - endlessly and perpetually - in the Hell. As Allah says:

***and they shall not come forth from the fire*** (2:167).

And nearly *mutawatir* traditions narrated from the Imams of the *Ahlu
'l-bayt* (*a.s.*) clearly say the same thing. Of course, there are some
traditions emanating from other sources which support the view that the
chastisement will end. But these tradi­tions must be rejected outright
because they are against the clear declarations of the Qur'an.

Now, we come to intellectual reasons. As we said under the verse:

***And be on your guard against the day when one soul shall not avail
another...*** (2:48)*,*

it is not possible to explain the details concerning the Resurrection
and the Judgment with the help of intellectual deductions, because our
reason lacks the premises necessary to lead to a conclusion.

The only way is to believe in what the Truthful Prophet (S) has brought
to us through Divine Revelation - because his truth has been proved
without any doubt.

As for the spiritual bliss and chastisement, they happen to the
immaterial soul as it acquires good or bad characteristics and traits
and is thus wrapped in beautiful or ugly conditions. We have mentioned
there[^2]\* that these conditions and characteristics appear to the
psyche in their respective good or ugly shapes, and the psyche enjoys
the beautiful and good shapes, if it is itself good; and is tormented by
what is bad and ugly, whether it is itself good or bad.

If these resulting shapes are not deeply imprinted on the psyche, and
are not agreeable to its person, they are bound to disappear sooner or
later, because their appearance is a matter of constraint; and we know
that constraint does not continue for ever.

Suppose there is a true believer who has committed some sins. This man
is good and happy in his person, but his psyche has been polluted by,
and wrapped in, ugly unhappy shapes. Obviously this ugly shape, not
being deeply imprinted will certainly get removed.

But if these ugly shapes have been deeply imprinted on the psyche, then
it reshapes the psyche in its own mould. The soul acquires a new shape
and becomes almost a new species. Suppose there is a “niggard man”; now
niggardliness gives a new form to his humanity, in the same way as
“rationality” gives a new form to “animality ”, and “rational animal”
(i.e., man) becomes a new species under the genes, “animal”. Likewise
“niggard man” becomes a new species under the genes “man”.

This species has an eternal existence of its own. The man, before the
characteristics of niggardliness were firmly ingrained in his psyche,
did practise niggardliness under constraint and felt unhappy. But now he
does it, by permission of Allah, naturally without any constraint. And
as it is done by this new species without constraint, it is eternal,
endless and perpetual - contrary to the former condition when it was
done under constraint and could therefore be got rid of. This man gets
punished because of the concomitants of his characteristics and traits.

We may compare his case with that of a man suffering from chronic
melancholia or hallucination. His mind perceives frightening nightmares
and he is always tortured by it - although it is he himself who produces
these fantasies without any extraneous constraint or compulsion.

The pictures appearing in his mind are not agreeable to his sick psyche,
and he is tortured by it, although it is he himself who has created
them.

Yet, as we know, he suffers because of it. What is punishment? It is
that from which man runs away (if not inflicted by it yet) and longs to
extricate himself (if already suffering from it).

And this definition applies to the ugly shapes and frightening
conditions which an “unhappy” man suffers in his next abode. It proves
that the chastisement of the next world is perpetual and never-ending -
for a man whose unhappiness has become an integral part of his
personality.

Many objections have been raised against perpetuity of chastisement, all
of them clearly without a leg to stand upon:

First Objection: Allah's mercy is limitless, all-encompassing. How can
He, in His mercy, create someone whose destination would be a perpetual
chastisement which no one could bear?

Second Objection: Punishment is punishment when it is not agreeable to
the nature of the convicted person. In other words when it is a
compulsion, a constraint. And perpetual constraint is unthinkable.
Therefore, it is wrong to say that there would be perpetual punishment.

Third Objection: The man had committed sins which were not perpetual;
they came to their end after a short or long dur­ation. How can he be
requited with a perpetual never-ending punishment?

Fourth Objection: Even the evil-doers serve the system of creation no
less than the good-doers. If they were not there, the virtue of good
people could not come about. This being the case, why should they be
thrown into perpetual punishment?

Fifth Objection: It is a revenge to punish someone who dis­obeys the
commandments of Allah. As a rule revenge is taken be-cause the unjust
and disobedient person makes the wronged party  
 suffer some loss; and that party, if powerful enough, avenges itself to
make up that loss.

But this rule cannot apply to Allah, because He is Self-sufficient and
nobody can inflict any harm or loss upon Him. In this background, how
can He punish anyone - and especially with a perpetual punishment?

There are other similar objections against the perpetuity of punishment.
If you ponder on what we have written earlier ex­plaining the meaning of
the perpetuity of punishment, you will realize that these objections are
completely wide of mark:

General Reply: Perpetual punishment is the effect of the form of
infelicity and unhappiness when it becomes an insepar­able
characteristic of the “unhappy” man. It happens after the man acquires
full capability for it - through relevant conditions of the psyche - and
exercises his free choice by choosing evil, instead of good.

That capability creates in the psyche the shape commensurate with it.

We do not ask why a man does human actions, once the matter has acquired
the human form - because the human form itself is sufficient cause of
human activities. Like-wise, we cannot ask why the effects of the
inseparable unhappi­ness and infelicity (including perpetual punishment)
are appearing, after the psyche has acquired the form of inseparable
unhappiness and infelicity.

Because it is its inseparable characteristic and effect. This general
reply sufficiently refutes all the objections. Now let us look at each
objection separately:‑

Reply to the First Objection: When we say “mercy of Allah” we do not
refer to any softness of heart, mildness of temper or other such
psychological effects, because such mercy presupposes material
existence, and Allah is far above such insinuations.

Divine Mercy means bestowing on the recipient all things which he is
fully qualified for. A fully qualified person longs for the things he is
qualified for; and his qualification itself becomes a constant demand
for it as if it had a tongue of its own. And Allah gives him what he
thus demands and asks for.

His Mercy is of two kinds: general and particular. The general mercy
gives whatever a person is qualified for in the framework of existence.
The particular mercy bestows whatever a person is qualified for in the
highway that leads towards monotheism and bliss of Allah's Nearness.

When Allah gives the form of inseparable “unhappiness” to a person who
is fully qualified for it, it is not against the general mercy; it is
rather a part of that mercy. And perpetual punishment is a compulsory
result of that form. As for the particular mercy, it does not cover the
person who is not proceeding on the highway of guidance.

Now let us look at the claim that perpetual punish­ment is against the
Divine Mercy. If by “mercy” they refer to the general mercy, then surely
it is not against it - it is rather a part of the general mercy. And if
they mean the particular mercy, then the claim is untenable, because
this case is out of the juris­diction of the particular mercy.

Moreover, this objection, if sustainable, could also be laid against
intermittent punishment. Nay, it would invalidate punish­ments of this
world too.

Reply to the Second Objection: First we should decide why a thing is
disagreeable to the nature. A thing or condition may be disagreeable to
a man because there is no common factor between the man and that thing
or condition. This indeed is a constraint, and it happens because of
compulsion by an extraneous agent; and goes away as soon as that
constraint is removed.

There is, on the other hand, an action or condition which emanates from
the very nature of the man, when that nature is thoroughly polluted,
when it is moulded in ugly mould and ac-quires a shape other than the
original one.

Man, in that existence, demands terrifying punishment; his transformed
psyche, by its very nature, longs for chastisement - although at the
same time he does not like it. We have earlier given the example of the
man suffering from melancholia:

Doubtlessly, the terrifying pictures emanating from his mind are
“agreeable” to his psyche, because they are the products of that
distorted psyche itself, and such effects are surely agreeable to the
related psyche or nature.

But at the same time they are indeed torture and punishment, because the
definition of “punishment” applies thereto. In short, the eternal
punishment is disagreeable from the viewpoint of sensi­tivity, and at
the same time it is agreeable because it emanates from the psyche
itself.

Reply to the Third Objection: The punishment is not the result of the
sin and disobedience which were limited and came to an end. It is the
effect of the perpetual ugly shape to which the man's psyche was moulded
as a result of those limited and counted sins.

There is no question here of a limited cause bringing about an unlimited
effect - which, of course, is impossible. As an example, look at the man
himself; there were a lot of limited causes which ultimately moulded the
matter into human form; now he acts and reacts as a human being, because
of that human form.

And that humanity continues for ever, even after his death. We cannot
ask about this man, as to how did a set of limited causes bring into
being those unlimited and unending effects - because their efficient
cause exists with them for ever. Likewise, it cannot be asked how can a
set of limited sins bring about perpetual limitless chastisement.

Reply to the Fourth Objection: Service and worship, like mercy, is of
two kinds: general and particular. General service is to submit to the
Source of existence, that is, God, in the affairs and conditions of
existence.

Particular service is to submit to God and obey Him, in the path that
leads to monotheism. Each type of service and obedience has a reward of
its own, a mercy most suitable to it.

Obviously, the general service in the system of creation is rewarded by
general mercy - and as explained earlier, eternal bliss and eternal
chastisement both are parts of that mercy. And the particular service is
rewarded by the particular mercy, that is, bounties of the Paradise.

Moreover, if this objection is recognized as valid, then it would also
negate the limited chastisement of the Hell and even punishments of this
world too.

Reply to the Fifth Objection: As you have seen, the perpet­ual
chastisement is ascribed to the shape of unhappiness acquired by man;
and to Allah in the sense in which every existing thing is attributed to
Him. That punishment is not attributed to Him in the meaning of revenge
and satisfaction of the feeling of rage and anger, because such thing is
impossible for Allah.

Of course, one of the names used for Allah is “the Avenger”. But it is
used in the sense that Allah requites severely His servant when he (the
servant) transgresses the limits of servitude and crosses the boundary
of obedience going into that of revolt and disobedience.

“Revenge” in this meaning is not impossible for Allah; and the perpetual
punishment may be called “revenge” in this sense, without any
difficulty.

Moreover, this objection, if tenable, may be laid against terminable
punishment also; and even against the worldly punish­ments.

A Qur’anic Note on the Above Subject
------------------------------------

It should be noted here that this method of argument, which we have used
against the above-mentioned objections, has been used also in the Qur'an
and traditions. Allah says:

***Whoever desires this present life, We hasten to him therein what We
please for whomsoever We desire, then We assign to him the hell; he
shall enter it despised, driven away. And whoever desires the hereafter
and strives for it as he ought to strive and he is a believer;*** (as
for) ***these, their striving shall be thanked. All do we aid - these as
well as those - out of the bounty of your Lord, and the bounty of your
Lord is not confined*** (17:18-20).

As you see, the verses count both chastisement and good recompense as
parts of the bounty and mercy of Allah; and it is made clear that
whatever happens, it is related to the will, desire and striving of the
servant himself.

It is this very method that we have used in explaining the main topic
and replying to the objections. There are many other verses of this
connotation; and we shall write on them in their proper places, Allah
willing.

[^1]: A light year is equal to 5,880,000 million miles. With tremendous
advance in astronomy, it is now more usual to reckon distances in the
parsec, which is equal to 3.258 light years, or 19,150,000 million
miles. (tr.)

[^2]: See al-Mizan ( Eng. transl.), vol.1, pp.261-2. (tr.)


