Suratul Baqarah: Verse 177
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٧٧) لَّيسَ ٱلبِرَّ أَن تُوَلُّواْ وُجُوهَكُمۡ قِبَلَ ٱلمَشرِقِ
وَٱلمَغرِبِ وَلَـٰكِنَّ ٱلبِرَّ مَنۡ ءَامَنَ بِٱللَّهِ وَٱليَوۡمِ
ٱلأَخِرِ وَٱلمَلَـٰئكَةِ وَٱلكِتَـٰبِ وَٱلنَّبِيِّـنَ وَءَاتَى ٱلمَالَ
عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِۦ ذَوِى ٱلقُرۡبَىٰ وَٱليَتَـٰمَىٰ وَٱلمَسَـٰكِينَ وَٱبنَ
ٱلسَّبِيلِ وَٱلسَّآئلينَ وَفِى ٱلرِّقَابِ وَأَقَامَ ٱلصَّلَوٰةَ
وَءَاتَى ٱلزَّكوٰةَ وَٱلمُوفُونَ بِعَهدِهِمۡ إِذَا عَـٰهَدُواْ‌ۖ
وَٱلصَّـٰبِرِينَ فِى ٱلبَأۡسَآءِ وَٱلضَّرَّآءِ وَحِينَ ٱلبَأۡسِ‌ۗ
أُوْلَـَٰئك ٱلَّذِينَ صَدَقُواْ‌ۖ وَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ ٱلمُتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East and
the West, but righteousness is the one who believes in Allah and the
last day and the angels and the Book and the prophets, and gives away
wealth out of love for Him to the near of kin and the orphans and the
needy and the way­farer and the beggars and for*** (the emancipation of)
***the captives, and keeps up prayer and*** ***pays the*** zakat, ***and
the performers of their promise when they make a promise, and the
patient in distress and affliction and in time of conflict - these are
they who are true and these are they who are the pious*** (177).

Commentary
----------

It is said that when the *qiblah* was changed from Baytu '1-Maqdis to
the Ka'bah, there ensued a long drawn out controversy and conflict in
the public. It was then that this verse was revealed.

**Qur’an:** ***It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards
the East and the West**: al-Birr* ( **اَلبـِرُّ** *=* righteousness);
*al-barr* **اَلبـَرُ**ّ ) = righteous), it is a perpetual adjective.
*Qibal* **قِبَل** ) *=* towards, in the direction of), *al-qiblah*
**اَلقِبْلـَة ُ** ) = a certain direction) is derived from it.

*Dhul-qurba* **ذو القُرْبی** ) *=* relative ); *al-yatama* (
**اَليَتَامی** ) is plural of *al- yatim* **اَليَتِيْمُ** ) = orphan; he
who has lost his father); *al-masakin* ( **اَلمَسَاكِيْنُُ** ) is plural
of *al-miskin* **اَلمِسْكِيْنُُ**) = miserably poor, one who suffers a
worse condition than *al-faqir* **اَلفـَقِيْرُ**) = poor).

*Ibnu* ***'**s-sabil* **اِبْنُ السَّبِيْل ِ** ) = one stranded in
jour­ney); *ar-riqab* ( **اَلرِّقـَابُ** ) is plural of *ar-raqabah*
**اَلرَّقـَبَة ُُ** ) = neck; it refers to slave). *al-Ba'sa'* (
**البَأسـَآءُُُ** ) is *a masdar* like *al-bu's* ( **اَلبُؤْسُُ** )*,*
both having the same meaning: hardship, poverty.

*ad-Darra'* ( **الضَّرَّآءُُُ** ) too is *a masdar* like *ad-darr* (
**الضَّرُُُّ** ) and both mean affliction with injury or loss, for
example, when a man is afflicted with a disease, injury, or loss of
property or child. *al-Ba**'**s* **اَلبأسُُ** ) = intensity of war).

**Qur’an:** ***but righteousness is the one who believes in Allah:***
Instead of defining righteousness, the verse turns to describing the
righteous ones; thus it introduces the people in the light of their
attributes. In this way, it points to the fact that abstract ideals and
abstruse ideas have no value in Islam unless they appear in concrete
shape in the character of a man.

It is a well-known style of the Qur'an that it explains and defines a
condition and a rank by introducing the people having that rank and
condition; it is never satisfied with mere theoretical explanations of
good and bad, virtue and vice.

The words, “the one who believes in Allah and the last day...,” define
the righteous ones, and explain their real state. The verse introduces
them with all three aspects of belief, deeds and morals, in three
stages. the first stage begins with the words, “the one who believes in
Allah;” the second is the sentence, “these are they who are true;” and
the third is, ”and these are they who are the pious.”

Allah begins the first stage, saying: “the one who believes in Allah and
the last day and the angels and the Book and the prophets”. It is a
comprehensive description of all the true gnosis which Allah wants His
servants to believe in. The belief referred to in this verse is the
perfect belief which can never fail to produce its effect.

When a believer attains to this stage of faith, his heart is never
assailed by any doubt or confusion; he does not take a dim view of
whatever befalls him, nor is he offended if afflicted with a misfortune.

Likewise, his morals and actions are safe from adverse influences. This
interpretation is further supported by the phrase, “these are they who
are true”. Truth, in this verse, is general and unconditional; it is not
restricted to any condition of man's heart or any activity of his limbs.
It means, they are real believers, true in their belief; as Allah says:

***But no! by your Lord! they do not believe until they make you a judge
of that which has become a matter of disagreement among them, and then
do not find any straitness in their hearts as to what you have decided
and submit with total submission*** (4:65)***.***

Thus, their condition fits the fourth stage of the belief, described
under the verse:

***When his Lord said to him, Submit*** (yourself), ***he said:***
”***I*** ***submit myself to the Lord of the worlds”*** (2:131).

After description of belief, Allah mentions some of their deeds: “and
gives away wealth out of love for Him to the near of kin and the orphans
and the needy and the wayfarer and the beggars and for (the emancipation
of) the captives, and keeps up prayer and pays the *zakat”.*

Here their prayer is mentioned, and it concerns the Divine Worship.
Allah says:

... ***surely prayer keeps*** (one) ***away from indecency and
evil...*** (29:45);

also, He says:

... ***and keep up prayer for My remembrance*** (20:14).

It is followed by mention of *zakat;* and it is a financial obligation
promulgated for economic good of the society. And before it all, the
verse refers to their giving away wealth to various groups; this habit
of theirs spreads the good and enlarges the circle of non-obligatory
munificence, in order that the need of the poor may be fulfilled and
their condition improved.

Lastly, the verse cites some of their excellent moral char­acteristics:
“and the performers of their promise when they make a promise, and the
patient in distress and affliction and in time of conflict”. *al-'Ahd*
**العَهْدُ** ) *=* to promise; to commit oneself to something). The
verse mentions “their promise” unconditionally.

Yet, it does not cover the belief and the resulting obligation of
following the laws of the *shari'ah* (as some people have said). Why?
Because on going further we find the proviso, “when they make a
promise”; and clearly acceptance of true faith and sub-mission to its
concomitants is an unconditional obligation; and is obligatory on all
the people at all the times.

It does not depend on one's commitment. However, the “promise”, by its
generality, covers every commitment made by man. For example, when he
says: I'll surely do it; or, I'll never do it. It includes every deal
made in business transactions, every word spoken in social and family
circles.

Patience is steadfastness in face of hardship, be it a series of
benumbing misfortunes or a fight against formidable adversaries.

These two excellent virtues - fulfilment of promise and patience - do
not cover all the necessary virtues; but when they are found somewhere,
the other virtues invariably always follow suit. One of these two
virtues (patience in hardships) has a passive quality, while the other
(fulfilling the promise) has an active role.

By mentioning them, Allah in effect says that when they say something
they surely proceed to do it, and do not withdraw from it even if they
have to face difficulties.

The second stage of introduction is contained in the phrase, “these are
they who are true”. Truth is a comprehensive virtue, encompassing all
attributes of knowledge and action. Truth is an inseparable concomitant
of all basic virtues - continence, bravery, wisdom and justice - and of
their branches., Man's life is made up of his belief, words and actions.

When he is true, all the three aspects conform with each other. He does
not do except what he says, and does not say except**.** that which he
believes.

Man by instinct accepts the right and truth; and even if he pretends
otherwise, he submits to it in his heart. When he believes in the right
truthfully, his word conforms with his belief, and his action with his
word. It is then that he reaches the perfection in all three aspects of
belief, morality and deeds. His faith becomes pure, his character
virtuous and his deeds good.

Allah says:

O ***You who believe! fear Allah and be with the true ones*** (9:119).

The restrictive style, “these are they who are true”, puts emphasis on
the description of the righteous. It means - and Allah knows better -
that if you want to find the true ones, then these are the righteous.

The third and final stage of their introduction is the phrase, “and
these are they who are the pious”: This restrictive style looks at the
level of perfection. Piety cannot be complete and perfect, unless
righteousness and truth have attained their com­pletion and perfection.

The attributes ascribed here to the righteous are the same which Allah
has described in other places. Allah says:

***Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of which is
camphor. A fountain from which the servants of Allah shall drink; they
shall make it to flow a*** (goodly) ***flowing forth. They fulfil***
vows ***and fear a day the evil of which shall be spreading far and
wide. And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan
and the captive. We only feed you for Allah's sake; we desire from you
neither reward nor thanks; surely we fear from our Lord a stern,
distressful day. Therefore Allah will guard them from the evil of that
day and cause them to meet with radiance and happiness; and reward them,
because they were patient, with garden and silk*** (76:5-12)***.***

These verses, about some righteous personalities, describe their
attributes of belief in Allah and the last day, their spending for the
sake of Allah, their ful­filling the vows and their patience. Again,
Allah says:

***Nay! Most surely the record of the righteous shall be in the***
'Illiyyin. ***And what will make you know what the*** 'Illiyyin ***is?
It is a written book; see it those who are near*** (to Allah). ***Most
surely the right­eous shall be in bliss, on thrones, they shall gaze.
You will recog­nize in*** ***their faces the radiance of bliss. They are
made to quaff of a pure drink that is sealed. The sealing of it is***
(with) ***musk; and for that let the aspirers aspire. And the admixture
of it is a water of Tasnim, a fountain from which drink they who are
drawn nearer*** (to Allah) (83:18 -28).

If you meditate on these verses in conjunction with those quoted above,
you will see the reality of their attributes and their final
destination. These verses praise the righteous that they are servants of
Allah, and are drawn near to Him.

Now, Allah describes His servants in these words:

***Surely as regards*** My ***ser­vants, thou hast no authority over
them*** (15:42);

and He says about those drawn near to Him:

***And the foremost are the fore-most; these are they who are drawn
near*** (to Allah), ***in the gardens of bliss*** (56:10-12).

It is now clear that the righteous are the foremost in this world in
reaching nearer to Allah, as they are foremost in the next world in
attaining to the bounties of the garden.

If you continue looking at the condition of the righteous in the light
of these verses you will unearth many hidden nuggets of spiritual
reality.

The above discourse shows that the righteous are in the highest, that
is, the fourth, stage of belief, as we have explained earlier. Allah
says:

***Those who believe and do not mix their faith with iniquity, those are
they who have the security and they are those who go aright***
(6:82)***.***

**Qur’an:** ***and the patient in distress:*** The word “patient” in the
Arabic text is in accusative case while the other attributes are in
indicative. This change has been effected to point out its excel­lence,
to show its importance.

Also, it has been said that when a speech becomes a bit lengthy, several
adjectives following each other, then the Arabs break the monotony by
interposing negatives between the posi­tives, or by exchanging
accusative and indicative cases.

Traditions
----------

The Prophet said: “Whosoever acted in accordance with this verse, he
surely perfected (his) faith.”

The author says: Its reason is clear from the explanation written above.
az-Zajjaj and al-Farra' are reported to have said: “This verse is
reserved for the sinless prophets, because nobody, except the prophets,
can perform these things as they should be.”

But this comment shows that they had not pondered on it proper­ly. They
seem confused regarding spiritual ranks. The verses of the Chapter of
the Man (76:5-12) quoted above, were revealed about the family members
of the Messenger of Allah (S); Allah in those verses has named them “the
righteous”, although they were not prophets.

Of course, the rank of the righteous is very high, and their position is
of very great importance. Allah praises the men of understanding saying
that they: ***remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on their
sides and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth:***

Then He quotes their prayer, which shows that their highest aspiration
was that their Lord should join them to the righteous:

***and make us die with the righteous*** (3:190-3).

Al-Hakim at-Tirmidhi narrates from Abu 'Amir ash-Sha'bi that he said: “I
said: 'O Messenger of Allah! What is the comple­tion of righteousness?'
He said: 'That you should do in private what you do in public.' ”
(*ad-Durru 'l-manthur*)

Abu Ja'far and Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: “The near of kin are the
relatives of the Prophet.” (*Majma 'u 'l-bayan* )

**The author says:** It is an application of this verse, keeping in view
the verses of *near relatives* (42:23).

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: *“al-Faqir* (poor) is he who does not ask
from the people; and *al-miskin is* of more straitened circumstances
than the “poor”; and *al-ba's* ( **اَلبآئِسُُ** ) is the most wretched
of all.” (*al-kafi*)

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said: “The wayfarer is the one stranded in the way.”
(*Majma 'u 'l-bayan*)

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about an al-mukatib ( **المُكـَاتِب ُُ**
) [^1]who, after making a partial payment was unable to pay (the balance
of the stipulated money of) his al-mukatabah ( **المُكـَاتـَبَة ُُ** ).
He (a.s.) said:

“It will be paid on his behalf from the money of *as-sadaqah*
**الصَدَقـََة ُُ** ) = charity money; also *zakat*)*,* because Allah,
the Mighty, the Great, says: *and for* (the emancipation of) *the
captives.”* (*at-Tahdhib*)

The same Imam said about the words of Allah, ***and the patient in
distress and affliction**:* “In hunger, and thirst and fear.” And he
(a.s.) said about the word, ***and in time of con­flict**:* “In the
fighting.” (*at-Tafsir,* al-Qummi)

[^1]: In Islam a slave was allowed to enter into an agreement with his
master. This agreement, called al-mukatabah, entitled him to gain his
freedom on payment of stipulated amount. Such a slave was called
al-mukatib. (tr.)


