Suratul Baqarah: Verses 180 − 182
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٨٠) كُتِبَ عَلَيكُمۡ إِذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَكُمُ ٱلمَوۡتُ إِن تَرَكَ
خَيرًا ٱلوَصِيَّةُ لِلوَٲلِدَينِ وَٱلأَقرَبِينَ بِٱلمَعرُوفِ‌ۖ حَقًّا
عَلَى ٱلمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٨١) فَمَنۢ بَدَّلَهُ ۥ بَعدَمَا سَمِعَهُ ۥ فَإِنَّمَآ إِثمُهُ ۥ
عَلَى ٱلَّذِينَ يُبَدِّلُونَهُ ۥۤ‌ۚ إِنَّ ٱللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ۬
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٨٢) فَمَنۡ خَافَ مِن مُّوصٍ۬ جَنَفًا أَوۡ إِثمًا فَأَصلَحَ بَينَُهمۡ
فَلَآ إِثمَ عَلَيهِ‌ۚ إِنَّ ٱللَّهَ غَفُورٌ۬ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Bequest is prescribed for you when death approaches one of you, if he
leaves behind wealth, for parents and near relatives, according to
usage, a duty*** (incumbent) ***upon those who guard*** (against evil)
(180).

***Whoever then alters it after he has heard it, the sin of it then is
only upon those who alter it; surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing*** (181).

***But he who fears an inclination*** (to a wrong course) ***or an act
of disobedience on the part of the testator, and effects an agreement
between the parties, there is no blame on him. Surely Allah is
Forgiving,. Merciful*** (182).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***Bequest is prescribed for you when death approaches one
of you, if he leaves behind wealth:*** The language is that of an
obligatory rule, because *al-kitabah* **اَلكِتـاَبَة ُ** ) = to write;
trans­lated here as “prescribed”) is used in the Qur'an always for
definitely obligatory laws. It is further strengthened by the word “a
duty” coming at the end of the verse, because duty too is used, like
writing and prescription, for compulsory orders.

But the word ”a duty” is qualified by ”upon those who guard (against
evil)”; this somewhat weakens the sense of obligatoriness; it would have
been more appropriate, in case of obligatoriness, to say, 'a duty upon
the believers'.

In any case, it is said that the verse was later abrogated by the verse
of inheritance. If so, then it would only be its “obligatoriness” which
was abrogated, not its being liked, recommended. Perhaps, the phrase
qualifying “a duty” was used for this very purpose.

*al-Khayr* ( **الخَيْرُ** ) is wealth; it probably denotes considerable
wealth, not an insignificant amount. *al-Ma'ruf* **المَعْرُوُف ُُ**) =
known; common usage of good deed and favour).

**Qur’an:** ***Whoever then alters it after he has heard it, the sin of
it then is only upon those who alter it:*** The pronoun in “the sin of
it” refers to the alteration; all the rest refer to the bequest
according to usage; bequest is *a masdar* and is used both as mas­culine
and feminine.

(That is why the pronouns used in the verse are of masculine gender.)
“upon those who alter it”: Allah did not say 'upon them', because the
wording used clearly indicates the nature of sin, that is, alteration of
a will; also it paves the way for the next verse.

**Qur’an:** ***But he who fears an inclination*** (to a wrong course)
***or an act of disobedience on the part of the testator, and effects an
agreement between the parties, there is no blame on him:*** *al-Janaf*
**اَلجَنـَفُُ** ) = inclination; deviation); it is said that it
indicates outward inclination of the feet, and *al-hanaf* (
**اَلحََنـَفُُ** ) shows their inward inclination. In any case, it is
used here to denote an incli­nation towards sin and disobedience, as it
is followed by “or an act of disobedience”.

The verse branches out from the preceding one. Its meaning is as follows
(and Allah knows better): The sin of alteration is only upon those who
alter the bequest (which was made according to usage).

Of course, if someone fears that the bequest of the testator is, or
shall be, an act of disobedience or inclined towards a wrong course, and
then effects an agreement between the parties, free from error and sin,
then there is no blame on him; because he has not changed a bequest made
according to usage; rather he has altered only the wrong and sin found
in it.

Traditions
----------

Muhammad ibn Muslim says that he asked as-Sadiq (a.s.) whether a bequest
was allowed in favour of an heir. The Imam said: “Yes”. Then he recited
this verse, “Bequest is prescribed... if he leave behind wealth, for
parents and near relatives...” (al-'Ayyashi). This tradition is also
narrated, with a slight change in wording, in *al-Kafi* and
*at-Tahdhib.*

as- Sadiq (a.s.) narrates through his father from 'Ali (a.s.) that he
said: “He who did not bequesth at the time of his death for those of his
near relatives who were not his heirs, surely ended his deeds with
disobedience.” (al-'Ayyashi)

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about this verse: ”(It is) a right which Allah
has given in the properties of men to the Master of this affair (i.e. to
the Imam).” The narrator says: “I said: 'Is there a prescribed limit for
it?' He said: 'Yes'. I said: 'How much?' He said: 'Its lower limit is
one-sixth; and the higher, one-third.' ” (al-'Ayyashi)

**The author says:** This theme has been narrated also by as-Saduq in
his *al-Faqih* from the same Imam. It is a fine inference from this
verse read in conjunction with the verse:

***The Prophet has a greater claim on the believers than they have on
themselves, and his wives are their mothers; and the possessors of
relationship have the better claim in the ordinance of Allah to
inheritance, one with respect to another, than*** (other) ***believers,
and*** (than) ***those who have fled*** (their homes), ***except that
you do some good to your*** awliya'; ***this is written in the Book***
(33:6)***.***

This verse abrogated the system prevalent in early days of Islam by
which *a “muhajir* brother” inherited from his *“ansar* brother”; and
initiated inheritance between the relatives; then it made an exception
(from this rule of inheritance by relationship), and that was about
doing *some good to your* awliya'[^1].

Now Allah has made the Prophet *al-waliyy* and his pure progeny
*al-awliya'* of the believers. And this exception of doing good to the
*awliya'* brings it within the jurisdiction of the verse under
discussion: ***Bequest... for parents and near relative**.* And the
Imams are also the “near relatives” (of the Prophet). Understand it.

The Fifth or the Sixth Imam said about the verse, ***Bequest is
prescribed for you...**:* “It is abrogated. The verses of inheritance
abrogated it.” (al- 'Ayyashi )

**The author says:** This tradition may be reconciled with the preceding
ones if we say that it was only its obligatoriness which was abrogated;
thus the order will continue as *al-mustahabb* **المُسْتـَحَبّ ُ**ُ ) =
liked, recommended) even after that.

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said about the verse, ***But he who fears an
inclination*** **(to a wrong course)** ***or an act of
disobedience...**:* ”*al-Janaf* is inclination to the side of error
without knowing that it is allowed (or not).” (*Majma'ul-bayan*)

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “When a man has made his will, then it is not
allowed to the executor to alter the bequest made; he should enforce it
as (the testator) has bequeathed; except when (the testator) has made
his will against the command of Allah, and done injustice (to an heir).
Then it is allowed to the executor to bring the will to the truth (i.e.
the right course).

Let us say, there is a man who has got some heirs; and he bequeaths all
(his) property to some of the heirs, depriving the others. In such
cases, it is allowed to the executor to bring the will to the right
(course). And this is (the meaning of) the word of Allah, ***an
inclination*** **(to a wrong course)** ***or an act of disobedience.***

And *al-Janaf* is inclination to some of his heirs, leaving the others
aside; and *al-ithm* **اَلإثـْمُُ** ) *=* sin**;** act of disobedience)
is that he directs to build fire-temples, and to take intoxicant. Then
the executor is allowed not to do any such thing.” (*at-Tafsir,*
al-Qummi)

**The author says:** The explanation of *al-janaf* given in this
tradition, makes clear the meaning of the word of Allah: ***and effects
an agreement between the parties.*** The words refer to effecting
reconciliation and settlement between the heirs, when there is conflict
and quarrel among them because the testator was inclined to wrong
course, and favoured one heir at the cost of the others.

Muhammad ibn Suqah said: “I asked Abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the word of
Allah: ***Whoever then alters it after he has heard it, the sin of it
then is only upon those who alter it.*** He said: 'It has been abrogated
by the next verse; ***But he who fears an inclination*** **(to a wrong
course)** ***or an act of disobedience on the part of the testator, and
effects an agreement between the parties, there is no blame on him.**'*

He said: 'It means that if the executor fears that the testator is
inclined to a wrong course concerning his children in the bequest he has
entrusted the executor with, in a way Allah is not pleased with, (and
which is) against the truth, then there is no blame on him, (i.e. on the
executor of the will) if he changes it to the truth, and to the way of
right that Allah is pleased with.' ” (*al-Kafi* )

**The author says:** This tradition explains one verse with the help of
another. Therefore, the word, “abrogated”, is not used here in its
terminological meaning. And we have earlier mentioned that the word,
“abrogation”, is sometimes used in the speech of *Ahlu 'I-bayt,* in a
meaning different from the language of the Principles of Jurisprudence.

[^1]: al-Awliya' (اَلأوْلِيَاءُ) is plural of al-waliyy ( الوَلِيُّ ),
which has several meanings, important among them being: friend,
guardian, relative, a person close to Allah, and master. In the
explanation given in the text, it has been taken to mean master and
guardian. (tr.)


