Suratul Baqarah: Verses 104 - 105
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٠٤) يَـٰٓأَيُّهَا ٱلَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ لَا تَقُولُواْ رَٲعِنَا
وَقُولُواْ ٱنظُرۡنَا وَٱسمَعُواْ‌ۗ وَلِلكـٰفِرِينَ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٠٥) مَّا يَوَدُّ ٱلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ مِنۡ أَهلِ ٱلكِتَـٰبِ وَلَا
ٱلمُشرِكِينَ أَن يُنَزَّلَ عَلَيكُم مِّنۡ خَيرٍ۬ مِّن رَّبِّكُمۡ‌ۗ
وَٱللَّهُ يَختَصُّ بِرَحمَتِهِۦ مَن يَشَآءُ‌ۚ وَٱللَّهُ ذُو ٱلفَضلِ
ٱلعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! do not say,*** ***“Have regard for us”, and say,
“Wait for us”; and listen; and for the unbelievers there is a painful
chastisement*** (104).

***Those who disbelieve from among the People of the Book do not like,
nor do the poly-theists, that any good should be sent down to you from
your Lord; and Allah chooses especially whom He pleases for His mercy,
and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace*** (105).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***O you who believe!:*** It is the first place in the
Qur'an where the believers have been addressed in this way, “O you who
believe!” This mode of address has been used in some eighty-five places
in the Qur'an.[^1]

Addressing the believers as “O you who believe!”, or describing them as
“those who believe”, is a special distinction accorded to this *ummah.*
Otherwise, the previous nations are variously described as “the people”
(e.g., ***“the People of Nuh,*** and, ***“the People of Hud”;*** ***'He
said: 'O my people! have you considered if I have*** ***a clear proof
from my Lord... ' ”*** **[11: 88]**); and ***“the dwellers”*** (*e.g.,*
**“*****the dwellers of Madyan”**,* ***“the dwellers of the Rass”***)*;*
and ***“the children”*** (*e.g.,* ***“the Children of Israel”, ''O
Children of Israel!”***)*.* The epithet, “those who believe”, is,
therefore, a mark of honour awarded to the believers of this *ummah.*

It appears from deep meditation of the Qur'an that the import of the
words, “those who believe”, is somewhat differ­ent from that of the
words, “the believers”. (For an example of the latter, see the verse:  
***and turn to Allah all of you, O be­lievers!*** **[24:31]**).

Allah says in the Qur'an:

***Those who bear the throne and those around it celebrate the praise of
their Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those who believe:
“Our Lord! Thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge, therefore
grant forgiveness to those who turn*** (to Thee) ***and follow Thy way,
and save them from the punishment of the hell. Our Lord! and make them
enter the gardens of perpetuity which Thou hast promised to them and
those who do good of their fathers and their wives and their offsprings,
surely Thou are the Mighty, the Wise”*** (40:7-8)***.***

It shows that the angels and the bearers of the throne ask forgiveness
for “those who believe”; then the same group has been referred to as
“those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy way”. (“turn” actually means,
return.) The prayer continues to “make them (i.e., those who believe)
enter the garden” and then joins to them the doers of good from among
“their fathers and their wives and their offspring.”

If the epithet, “those who believe”, were to include all those who
believed in the Apostle of Allah (S) irrespective of the quality of
their belief, then it would have covered their fathers, wives and
children as well (who do good); and there would have been no need to
mention  
 them separately; all would have equally benefited from the prayer for
those who believe.

Also, have a look at the verse:

***And*** (as for) ***those who believe and their offspring follow them
in faith, We will unite with them their offspring and We will not
diminish to them aught of their work; every man is responsible for what
he has wrought*** (52:21):

If the offspring who followed them in faith, were included in the
epithet, “those who believe”, there would be no sense in saying that the
offspring would be united with them.

Even if we were to say that the verse refers to the generation after
generation of the believers, that every succeeding generation will be
united to the preceding one (provided both believed in the Apostle of
Allah - S), the meaning would not seem very proper in the context. If
that were the import of the verse, then why this “uniting”?

Also, what purpose would be served by the sentence, “and We will not
diminish to them aught of their work”? Such an inter­pretation may prove
correct for one generation only, that is, the last one before the Day of
Resurrection - that they would be united with the preceding generation.
But nobody has suggested this meaning as it goes clearly against the
context. What such an interpretation would boil down to is as follows:

All the believers are united, one of them being from another; all of
them are of one rank; none has any excellence over the others; nor has
an earlier believer any superiority over the later ones; their main
qualification is the true belief, and all of them are equal in it.

Such a meaning would not fit the word­ing of the verse which clearly
shows that the preceding believers have a sort of superiority over their
offspring, who would be raised to the rank of their progenitor as a
token of honour to the latter.

The phrase, “and their offspring follow them in faith”, proves that the
preceding word, “those who believe” refers to a particular group of the
believers - the foremost and the first of the Emigrants and the Helpers
who followed the Apostle in the hour of straitness. The epithet, those
who believe, is a title of honour bestowed on that distinguished group.

Other two verses too point to this fact:

(It is) ***for the poor who fled... and those who made their abode in
the city and in the faith before them... and those who came after them
say: “Our Lord! forgive us and those of our brethren who had precedence
of us in faith, and do not create any spite in our hearts towards those
who believe; our Lord! surely Thou art Kind, Merciful”*** (59:8-10).

This verse uses two phrases, “who had precedence of us in faith”, and
“those who believe”. If the import of both were the same, a pronoun
would have looked better in place of the second phrase. By not using a
pronoun, Allah has made it clear that each phrase has its own
significance.

***Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah; and those with him are severe
against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves, you will see
them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace from Allah and
pleasure;... Allah has promised those among them who believe and do
good, forgiveness and a great reward*** (48:29).

All this shows that the phrase, “those who believe”, is a title of
honour, reserved for the first and foremost of the believers. Most
probably, the opposite phrase, “those who disbelieve”, has the
contrasting significance, and refers to the polytheists of Mecca and
others who were the first and foremost of those who disbelieved in the
Apostle of Allah (S). For example,

***Surely those who disbelieve alike is to them whether you warn them or
do not warn them, they will not believe.*** (2:6)

Objection: This interpretation means that when the Qur'an says, “O you
who believe! ”, it addresses a special group that was present in the
Prophet's time, to the exclusion of all other believers. But all the
Muslims agree that such verses are general in their import and that what
is said therein applies to all the believers, whether they were present
in the Prophet's days or not; and that this mode of address includes all
the believers - in reality, not metaphorically.

**Reply:** Yes! It is a title of honour, reserved for a selected few.
But it does not mean that what is said in those verses is in any way
restricted to those few. Whatever order or prohibition is given in such
verses is general and applies to all the believers. The matter of
legislation - whether a given order is general or exclusive - is quite
different from that of a speech - whether it is addressed to all the
believers or to a few of them.

Also, it makes no difference whether a verse ordaining a law is
addressed to the believers (***O*** ***you who believe!***) or to the
Prophet in person (***O Prophet!; O Apostle!***)*,* or is revealed
without any address at all.

The ordained law in all these cases is applicable to all the Muslims,
and covers all the believers; although the verse may be addressed to the
Prophet or to those who believe as a mark of respect to him or them.

Nevertheless, one should not indiscriminately interpret the phrase, “O
you who believe!” and “those who believe”, as referring to the first and
foremost believers of the Prophet's time; rather one should look at the
context, before deciding the true connotation of these phrases in a
given verse.

For example, look at the verse:

***Surely*** (as for) ***those who believe then disbelieve, again
believe and disbelieve, then increase in disbelief, Allah will not
forgive them nor guide them in the*** (right) ***path*** (4:137);

and the verse which quotes Nuh (a. s.) as saying:

***and I am not going to drive away those who believe; surely they shall
meet their Lord*** (11:129).

Obviously, the phrase, those who believe, used in the above verses
cannot refer to the above-mentioned group.

**Qur’an:** ***do not say, “Have regard for us”, and say, “Wait for us”;
and listen:*** That is, use the phrase, Wait for us, instead of saying,
Have regard for us. And if you failed to comply with this command, it
would be tantamount to disbelief, and for the disbelievers there is a
painful chastisement. It is a very strong admonition against saying,
*“ra'ina”* ( **راعـِنا** ) = Have regard for us).

This phrase has also been mentioned in another verse, which gives an
indication of its connotation:

***Of those who are Jews*** (there are those who) ***alter words from
their places and say: “We have heard and we disobey”; and: “Hear, may
you not be made to hear!” and*** ”***ra'ina”***, ***distorting*** (the
word) ***with their tongues and taunting about religion*** (4:46)***.***

Obviously, the Jews used the phrase, *“Ra'ina”* for something similar to
the phrase, “Hear, may you not be made to hear!” And that is why such a
mode of addressing the Prophet was prohibited. This explanation agrees
with what the tradition says: When the Prophet talked with the Muslims,
they used to tell him: *“Ra'ina* (have *regard for us*)

O Apostle of Allah!” - that is, wait for us, so that we may properly
understand what you are saying.[^2]  
 But this word carried a connotation of abuse in the Jews' language. The
Jews seized upon this opportunity, addressing the Prophet with this
phrase, pretending to show respect to him while their intention was
nothing short of abuse. And in their usage it meant, “Hear, may you not
be made to hear”.

Thereupon, Allah revealed:

***Of those who are Jews*** (there are those who) ***alter words from
their places and say: “We have heard and we disobey”; and: “Hear, may
you not be made to hear!” and: “ra'ina ”, distorting*** (the word)
***with their tongues and taunting about religion; and if they had
said*** (instead): ***“We have heard and we obey”, and “hearken”, and
“onzurna”*** (wait for us), ***it would have been better for them and
more upright*** (4:46)***.***

The believers too were told not to use this phrase and say instead,
*“onzurna ”;* the Qur'an guided them: “do not say, 'Have regard for us',
and say, 'Wait for us' ”.

**Qur’an:** ***and for the unbelievers there is a painful
chastisement***: that is, for those who disobey this rule. It is one of
the occasions when disobedience of a law of religion has been termed as
disbelief.

**Qur’an:** ***Those who disbelieve from among the People of the
Book...**:* Obviously, the phrase, “the People of the Book”, refers here
exclusively to the Jews, because the preceding verses too dealt with
them. If so, then the phrase would serve as a pointer to the cause why
they did not like that any good should be sent down to the believers
from their Lord.

The Jews were given a Book before and they were not happy when the
Qur'an was sent down to the Muslims, as it deprived them of their
dis­tinction as being the People of the Book. They showed avarice about
a thing they did not own; they wanted to stand against Allah when He
bestowed His mercy and grace on His servants; “and Allah chooses
especially whom He pleases for His mercy; and Allah is the Lord of
mighty grace”.

On the other hand the phrase, as used in this verse, may include all the
People of the Book - the Jews and the Christians both. If so, then the
verse would serve to widen the scope of the admonition; it would be a
generalization after exclusiveness. Both groups shared many
characteristics - and especially their enmity to Islam. Some verses
coming afterwards strengthen this interpretation. For example:

***And they say: “None shall enter the garden except he who is a Jew or
a Christian”*** (2:111);

***And the Jews say,*** ”***The Christians do not follow anything***
(good)”, ***and the Christians say,*** ”***The Jews do not follow
any-thing*** (good)”... (2:113)

Traditions
----------

Abu Nu'aym has narrated in *Hilyatu 'l-awliya**'*** from Ibn 'Abbas that
he said: “The Apostle of Allah (S) said: 'Allah has not revealed any
verse (beginning) with, “O you who believe!” but that 'Ali is its head
and leader.' ” **(ad-Durru 'l-manthur)**

**The author says:** This tradition supports what we shall be quoting in
various places that a certain verse was revealed about 'Ali (a.s.) or
*Ahlu 'l-bayt;* for example:

***You are the best of the nations raised for*** (the benefit of)
***men*** (3:110);

... ***that you may be witnesses over the people...*** (2:143);

... ***and be with the true ones*** (9:119).

[^1]: Eighty-eight, to. be exact. Vide al-Mu'jam al-Mufahras, (by
Muham­mad Fu'ad 'Abdul '1-Baqi). (tr.)

[^2]: It is more or less equivalent to the English idiom “I beg your
pardon”. But with a slight change of accent it may come to mean, stupid
or cattle tenderer. (tr.)


