Suratul Baqarah: Verses 118 − 119
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١١٨)وَقَالَ ٱلَّذِينَ لَا يَعلَمُونَ لَوۡلَا يُكَلِّمُنَا ٱللَّهُ
أَوۡ تَأۡتِينَآ ءَايَةٌ۬‌ۗ كَذَٲلِكَ قَالَ ٱلَّذِينَ مِن قَبلِهِم
مِّثلَ قَوۡلِهِمۡ‌ۘ تَشَـٰبَهَتۡ قُلُوبُهُمۡ‌ۗ قَدۡ بَيَّنَّا
ٱلأَيَـٰتِ لِقَوۡمٍ۬ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١١٩) إِنَّآ أَرۡسَلنَـٰكَ بِٱلحَقِّ بَشِيرً۬ا وَنَذِيرً۬ا‌ۖ وَلَا
تُسـأَلُ عَنۡ أَصحَـٰبِ ٱلجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who have no knowledge say: “Why does not Allah speak to us
or a sign come to us?” Even thus said those before them, the like of
what they say; their hearts are all alike. Indeed We have made the signs
clear for a people who are sure*** (118).

***Surely, We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and
as a warner, and you shall not be questioned as to the companions of the
flaming fire*** (119).

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And those who have no knowledge say:*** It refers to the
polytheists and the unbelievers other than the People of the Book. It is
set in contrast with the verse 113:

***And the Jews say, “The Christians do not follow anything*** (good)”,
***and the Christians say, “The Jews do not follow anything*** (good)',
***while they recite the Book. Even thus say those who have no
knowledge, like to what they say.***

In this verse, the People of the Book were joined to the polytheists and
unbelievers of Arabia; and the verse under discussion joins those
polytheists and unbelievers to the People of the Book: “And those who
have no knowledge say: '

Why does not Allah speak to us or a sign come to us?' Even thus said
those before them (i.e., the People of the Book, including the Jews) the
like of what they say”, because the Jews had disputed with their
prophet, Musa (a.s.) and demanded from him the like of what these pagans
say.

The People of the Book and the pagans of Arabia are alike in their way
of thinking; the former say the like of what the latter say, and vice
versa: *their hearts are all alike.*

**Qur’an:** ***Indeed We have made the signs clear for a people who are
sure:*** It is the rebuttal of the demand of those who have no
knowledge. The signs they are demanding have already come to them,
already been made clear to them. But they cannot benefit from them
because only those who are sure of those signs may get their benefit.

As for these people who have no knowledge, their hearts are submerged
into ignorance, sick with the disease of prejudice and envy. That is why
they have lost the ability to benefit from the signs sent by Allah.

The above explanation makes it clear why they have been described as
“those who have no knowledge”.

After exposing the falsity of their demand, Allah directs His speech to
the Apostle, declaring in clear terms that he has surely been sent by
Allah “with the truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner”. The
verse was meant to bring comfort to the Prophet's heart and to make him
realize that these adver­saries were the people of the Fire, and they
would not come to the path of guidance.

**Qur’an:** ***and you shall not be questioned as the companions of the
flaming fire:*** Its import is similar to that of the verse: ***Surely
those who disbelieve alike is to them whether you warn them or do not
warn them, they will not believe*** (2:6)***.***


