Translator's Introduction
=========================

I was first introduced to the Masa'il Fiqhiyya when I was a student in
Qumm, Iran. Sayyid 'Ali Asgher Milani, the grandson of the late
Ayatullah Milani, gave me a copy of the book, and urged me to translate
it so as "...to let the world know the truth of the Twelver Shi'i
practices."

When I read the book, I was impressed by the author's erudite and
academic approach. Although he was dealing with very delicate and
sensitive issues regarding Muslim liturgies, he approached them in a
non-polemical, non-rhetorical and non-provocative manner. I was also
impressed by his copious citations of his sources, in virtually every
issue he dealt with.

I decided to translate this book as it deals with questions on ritual
issues which Muslims frequently ask about. I believe that both Muslim,
and non-Muslim scholars of Islam will benefit immensely from the
translation of this work especially as many of them are not aware of the
genesis of the Twelver Shi'i practices.

Translating a text on Islamic jurisprudence is fraught with
difficulties. I have remained as faithful as possible to the original
Arabic version. However, where necessary, I have used square brackets to
insert words in a sentence so as to elaborate through paraphrase. The
normal brackets have been used to translate, or, explain Arabic terms.

The translation of this work would not have been possible without the
help by many people. I am indebted to Sayyid Fadhil Milani, Sayyid
Muhammad Hussein Jalali, and Dr. Mahmud Ayoub for their help in dealing
with some difficult parts of the text.

Shaheen Lakhani helped by typing the parts of the text. Hasanain Kara
was instrumental in designing the cover of the book. Taha Jaffer and
Tehsin Takim both made invaluable contributions towards compiling the
final text.

In the end, I am indebted to my wife, Fatima, and our two children for
their sacrifices so that I could devote time to the translation.
Needless to say, I am entirely responsible for any errors that may have
occurred in this work.

Liyakatali Takim  
 Toronto, Canada.  
 May 1996  
 Dhu'l Hijja 1416


