About the Author
================

Sayyid 'Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi was born in Kadhimiyya,
Iraq, in the year 1290 A.H./1872 A.D. He left Lebanon to pursue his
studies in Iraq at the age of 17.

Sayyid Sharaf al-Din attained the level of ‘ijtihad’ (independent
reasoning on legal issues) at the age of 32 in the year 1322 A.H.,
returning to his home in Jabal 'Amil after having been away for fifteen
years. He based himself in the city of Sur, and became known to his
people in a short period of time. Later, the highest ranking religious
authority in Lebanon, Sayyid 'Ali al-Amin, authorized him to issue
‘fatawa’ (juridical rulings).

In addition to his engagement in social work in Sur, and Jabal 'Amil,
Sayyid Sharaf al-Din continued his efforts writing and publishing his
works. Also, he struggled for the unity of the Muslims all the while. In
the year 1327 A.H. he published al-Fusul al-Muhimah fi Ta'lif al-Ummah,
a book which emphasized the necessity for the Muslims to unite. In this
text, he addressed the disputes, and differences between the Shi'is, and
the Sunnis.

In 1331 A.H., he had the opportunity to implement his views on Muslim
unity. He visited Egypt and met Shaykh Salim al-Bishri, the head of
al-Azhar University. The outcome of their discussions, and long
deliberation was the book ‘al-Muraja'at’, which is highly recognized and
circulated in the Muslim world, having been translated into twenty
languages.

Al-Muraja'at is one of the best known books in Islamic studies due to
its objective approach, depth, concise language, and the indisputable
rationality of its arguments.

One of the steps he took to unite the Muslim umma was choosing the 12th
of Rabi' al-Awal to celebrate the birthday of the Prophet Muhammad
rather than 17th of Rabi' al-Awal. He deliberately chose this date
because it was the one recognized by the Sunni Muslims [as opposed to
Shi’is celeberating on 17th Rabi’ al-Awal], and he wished to bring all
the Muslims, Shi'is and Sunnis, closer to each other. After observing
this event in his mosque, Sayyid Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi went to the
Sunni’s congregation to celebrate this occasion with them.

Sayyid Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi died in the year 1377 A.H or 1957 A.D.


