Chapter Two: Is The Basmala A Qur'anic Verse? Is It To Be Recited In The Prayer?
================================================================================

The opinions of the Muslims who emphasize personal opinions (ahl
al-ra'y) have differed on this. Malik and al-Awza\`i have said that the
verse is not a part of the Qur'an and have unanimously forbidden its
recitation in the obligatory [prayers] whether it be at the beginning of
‘surah’ (a section of Holy Quran) al-Hamd, or, the ‘surah’ after it, or,
whether it (the prayer) is recited loudly, or, silently. Yes, they have
allowed it's recitation in the supererogatory (non-obligatory) prayers.

As for Abu Hanifa, al-Thawri and their followers, they recited it at the
beginning of the mother of the Qur\`an (surah al-fatiha); but, they made
it compulsory to recite it silently even when the prayers are recited
loudly. This shows their agreement with Malik and al-Awza\`i; maybe it
proves that since we do not know the reason for reciting it silently in
the prayers recited loudly except if it (the basmala) is not a part of
the mother of the book.

But, al-Shafi\`i recited it (the basmala) loudly in the loud prayers,
and in the silent prayers he recited it silently. He counted it as a
verse in the opening [chapter] of the book. This is [also] the opinion
of Ahmad b. Hanbal, Abu Thawr and Abu \`Ubayd. Differing reports have
been reported from al-Shafi\`i as to whether it is a verse in every
chapter except for surah al-Bara'a (chapter 9), or, whether it is not a
verse except for the mother of the book. Both reports have been
transmitted from him. But, the researchers amongst his companions have
agreed that the basmala is a part of all the chapters. They have
interpreted away the two sayings reported from their Imam, al-Shafi\`i.

As for us, the Imami (Shi’i) community, we have agreed, in following the
teachings of the Imams of guidance from the family of the Prophethood,
that it is a complete verse in the sab' al-mathani (the seven most
repeated verses) and of every chapter in the great Qur\`an except for
[the chapter of] Surah al-Bara'a (chapter 9) and that one who omits it
intentionally in the prayer, his prayer becomes invalid whether it be an
obligatory, or, recommended (non-obligatory) prayer.

[We have also agreed that] it is essential to recite it loudly when the
prayer is offered loudly, and it is recommended to recite it loudly in
the silent prayers, and it is part of a verse of surah al-Naml (chapter
27). The textual proofs of our Imams in all of this are overwhelming and
it's meaning successively transmitted .The contents are clear to refute
their opposition to it (the basmala) like the saying of Imam Abu 'Abd
Allah al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, "What is it with them? They depend on
the greatest verse in the book of God, the Almighty, the most Glorious,
and they claim it is an innovation if they declare \`In the name of God
the most merciful, the most beneficent' openly."

Our argument is based on the path of the masses, and its authentic
traditions which are many:

First: What has been established from Ibn Jurayj from his father from
Sa\`id b. Jubayr from Ibn \`Abbas on the saying of the most High: "We
have given you the seven most repeated verses." He said: "The opening
[chapter] of the book, in the name of God most beneficent, most
compassionate; Praise be to the Lord of the Universe and he recited the
chapter." Ibn Jurayj said: "I said to my father: \`Did Sa'id tell you
from Ibn \`Abbas that he said: \`In the name of God most merciful, most
beneficent' is a verse?' He replied: \`Yes.'" This hadith has been
reported by al-Hakim in his al-Mustadrak and al-Dhahabi in his
al-Talkhis; they have both declared that its chain of transmission
(isnad) is intact.

Second: What has been correctly reported from Ibn \`Abbas. He said:
"When Gabriel used to come to the Prophet (S), and would recite \`In the
name of God most merciful, most beneficent' he would know that it was a
chapter [to be revealed]."

Third: What has also been correctly reported from Ibn \`Abbas who said:
"The Prophet did not use to know the end of a chapter until \`In the
name of God most merciful, most beneficent' was revealed."

Fourth: What has also been correctly reported from him: "The Muslims did
not know the end of a chapter until \`In the name of God most merciful,
most beneficent' was revealed. When \`In the name of God most merciful,
most beneficent' was revealed they realized that the chapter had ended."

Fifth: What has been correctly reported from Umm Salama: She said: "The
Prophet (S) used to recite \`In the name of God most merciful, most
beneficent, Praise be to God the Lord of the Universe' to the end of the
chapter, he would recite it word by word." It is also reported from Umm
Salama by another chain that she said: "Indeed the Prophet of God (S)
would recite in the prayer \`In the name of God most merciful, most
beneficent' and would count it as a verse. Praise be to God, the Lord of
the Universe [would be] two verses, the most beneficent, most merciful,
three verses, the master of the day of judgement, the fourth, You alone
do we worship and from You alone we seek help, and he gathered five
fingers."

Sixth: What has been correctly reported from Na'im al-Mijmar. He said:
"I was behind Abu Hurayra, and he recited \`In the name of God most
merciful, most beneficent' that he recited the mother of the Qur'an
until he reached ‘and amongst those who have gone astray', and he said:
\`amin' and the people said: \`amin' When he recited the greetings
(salam) he said: \`By Him in whose hand is my soul, I am portraying the
prayer of the Prophet of God (S).'"

Also, from Abu Hurayra who said: "The Prophet of God (S) would recite
\`In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent' loudly in the
prayer."

Seven: What has been correctly reported from Anas b. Malik: He said:
"Mu\`awiya led the prayer in Medina, he recited it loudly, and he
recited in it \`In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent' at
the beginning of the mother of the Qur'an; but, he did not recite \`In
the name of God most merciful, most beneficent' for the sura after it
until he completed that recitation. When he recited the salam, the
Muhajirun and Ansar who had heard [the recitation] yelled from all
sides: \`O Mu\`awiya, did you steal [something] from the prayer, or, did
you forget?'

After that, whenever he prayed, he would recite ‘In the name of God most
merciful, most beneficent' in the sura after the mother of the Qur'an.'"
This hadith has been reported by al-Hakim in his al-Mustadrak and has
met the conditions stipulated by [Sahih] Muslim. More than one author of
the Musnad works have reported it like Imam al-Shafi\`i in his Musnad.
He added his comments to it which are interesting for us to cite. He
said: "Mu'awiya was a ruler of great power, and might. If the loud
recitation of the tasmiya (basmala) had not been established amongst all
the Muhajirun and Ansar companions, they would not have been able to
exhibit their disapproval when he omitted the tasmiya."

We have a comment on this tradition which every researcher should take
note of: One who examines this hadith will find proofs in it for our
rulings on reciting the basmala and on not allowing the division of the
surah which is recited in the prayer after the mother of the Qur'an
since there was no reason for their refuting it except based on our
ruling on the two issues.

Eight: What has been correctly reported from Anas and from another chain
of transmission: He (Anas) said: "I heard the Prophet (S) reciting in
the prayer ‘In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent' loudly.’"

Ninth: What has been correctly reported from Muhammad b. al-Sirri
al-\`Asqalani: He said: "I prayed behind al-Mu\`tamir b. Sulayman the
morning and evening prayers an amount which I cannot [even] count; he
used to recite ‘In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent'
loudly before the opening [chapter] of the book and after it [at the
opening] of the surah. I heard al-Mu\`tamir saying: \`I will not desist
from following the prayer of my father.'

And, my father said: \`I will not desist from following the prayer of
Anas b. Malik.' And, Anas said: \`I will not desist from following the
prayer of the Prophet of God (S).'" I figure from this and other
traditions that they used to recite, after the mother of the book (surah
al-Fatiha), the complete surah [starting] with the basmala upto its end,
as is our ruling, and is proven by many [other] traditions.

From al-Qatada: He said: "Anas b. Malik was asked: \`How was the
recitation of the Prophet of God (S)'? He replied: \`It was elongated,
then he recited \`In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent',
and he elongated the rahman, he [also] elongated the rahim.'"

From Hamid al-Tawil from Anas b. Malik, he said: "I prayed behind the
Prophet (S) and behind Abu Bakr, \`Umar, \`Uthman and \`Ali (as); and,
all of them would recite ‘In the name of God most merciful, most
beneficent' loudly."

All these traditions, and those before them have been reported by the
leader of the muhaddithun (hadith reporters) Abu \`Abd Allah Muhammad b.
\`Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Nisaburi in his al-Mustadrak. He says at the end
[of these traditions] "I have cited this tradition as a testimony to
what preceded it. These traditions, which we have cited, are opposed to
the tradition of Qatada from whom our Imams report, and the words are
from Anas. He said: "I prayed behind the Prophet (S), and behind Abu
Bakr, \`Umar and \`Uthman, and I did not hear any of them recite ‘In the
name of God most merciful, most beneficent.'"

Al-Hakim then said: "This chapter has [traditions] from the Commander of
the faithful, \`Uthman and \`Ali (as), Talha, Ibn \`Ubayd Allah, Jabir
b. \`Abd Allah, \`Abd Allah b. \`Umar, al-Hakam b. 'Umayr al-Thamali,
al-Nu\`man b. Bashir, Samura b. Jundab, Burayda al-Aslami and \`A'isha,
the daughter of the truthful one (may God be pleased with them) all of
them are reports I have in a chapter which I have left out for the sake
of brevity; I have abridged from them what is germane to this chapter.
Similarly, I have mentioned [them] in the chapter on the companions, the
successors, and their followers (may God be pleased with them) who
recite ‘In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent' loudly."

I say: Al-Razi mentions in his Tafsir al-Kabir that al-Bayhaqi narrated
[traditions] on reciting ‘In the name of God most merciful, most
beneficent’ loudly in his Sunan from \`Umar b. al-Khattab, Ibn \`Abbas,
Ibn \`Umar and Ibn al-Zubayr. Then al-Razi says in these words: "As for
\`Ali b. Abu Talib's (may God be pleased with him) reciting the tasmiya
loudly, this has been established by mutawatir [traditions], one who
follows \`Ali b. Abu Talib in his religion is properly guided." (Al-Razi
said): "The proof of it is the saying of the Prophet of God (S): ‘O God
let the truth revolve where Ali goes.'"

Sufficient for our proof that the basmala is a Qur'anic verse at the
beginning of every chapter except for al-Bara'a is the fact that since
the coming of the Qur'an to this day all the companions, the successors,
and all the followers and the followers of their followers in all the
generations of this umma are agreed on this by a consensus which they
implement by writing the basmala at the opening of every chapter except
for al-Bara'a.

They wrote it (the basmala) just as they wrote all the other verses
without any distinctive mark [distinguishing it] even though they all
agreed that they would not write anything but the Qur'an in it.
Otherwise [they would have] a clear distinctive mark [separating it from
the Qur'an] thus ensuring that nothing which is not a part of it (the
Qur'an) could be mixed with it.

Do you not see how they separated from it (the Qur'an) the names of its
chapters, and the symbols of its thirtieth (ajza') and sixtieth part and
its quarters, fifths, tenth parts? They put these outside the chapters
in such a way that it can be known that they are outside the Qur'an,
thus preserving it and being cautious of it.

Maybe you are aware that the umma is hardly united on an issue as
completely as it is united on this. This in itself is a proof that ‘In
the name of God most merciful, most beneficent’ is an independent verse
at the beginning of every chapter, the previous, and later generation
have written it at its beginning, thanks be to God for [showing] the
correct [way].

Also, amongst the famous transmissions of the Prophet of God (S) is his
saying: "Every matter of importance which does not begin with ‘In the
name of God most merciful, most beneficent' will fail and every
important matter which doesn't begin with \`In the name of God most
merciful, most beneficent' is incomplete, or, deficient."

It is well known that the Qur'an is the best that Allah has revealed to
His Last Prophet (S) and [other books to his preceding] Messengers and
that every chapter in it is important and great. Allah (S.W.T.) has
challenged human beings in it but they failed to bring forth something
like it. Is it then possible for the Qur'an to be incomplete? God is
most HIGH and His wise criterion (the Qur'an) is most great, His
chapters are above all of that completely.

Prayer is [the path to] success, it is the best act as is recited from
the highest minarets and pulpits, those in deserts, and cities know
this. Nothing can equal, or, compare with it (the prayer) after faith in
God, the most High, and in His books, and Messengers, and the last day.
Is it allowable for God, the most High, to legislate it incomplete and
deficient? No pious, or, corrupt person will dare say this but the pious
Imams Malik and al-Awza\`i and Abu Hanifa, may God be pleased with them,
were negligent of this obligation. Every one who strives to derive
rulings from the shari'a proofs is excused, and rewarded whether he is
right, or, he errs.

The Argument of our Opponents on the Issue
------------------------------------------

They have argued in [several] ways:

One: If the basmala was a verse of surah al-fatiha, it would mean the
repetition of the [words] "most merciful, most compassionate" in the
surah al-fatiha (since they also occur in the surah al-fatiha).
Moreover, if it (the basmala) was a part of every chapter, this would
mean it would be repeated in the Qur'an 113 times.

The answer to the above argument: Circumstances may require due to the
great importance of the issue, and to accentuate it. There is a lot of
this [type of repetition] in the wise book. It is sufficient for you [to
note] the chapters of al-Rahman (55), al-Mursalat (77) and al-Kafirun
(109). What is more important in this world and the hereafter, and
deserves more stress, and consideration than the name of God most
beneficent, most compassionate?

Were the Prophets sent, and angels descended, and heavenly books
revealed except by the name of God (Allah) most beneficent, most
compassionate? Guidance is by HIM, the most High and Glorious. Were the
heavens and earth and those who live in them established except by the
name of God most beneficent, most compassionate? "O human beings,
remember the blessings of God upon you, is there a creator apart from
God, who sustains you from the heavens and earth, there is no god but
Him, so how come you fabricate [things]?"

Second: What has been reported from Abu Hurayra as a marfu\`u tradition
from the Prophet, who said: "God the most High says: \`I apportioned the
prayer between ME, and MY slave into two halves. When the slave says:
\`Praise be to the Lord of the Universe', the most High says: \`MY slave
has praised Me.' And, when he (worshipper) says: \`The most merciful,
beneficent', God the most High says: \`MY slave has lauded me.' And,
when he (worshipper) says: \`The master of the day of judgement', God
the most High says: \`My slave has glorified ME.' And, when he says: \`I
worship YOU alone and from YOU I seek help', God the most High says:
\`This is between ME and MY slave.'" The reason for it being used as
proof is that "In the name of God most merciful, most beneficent" is not
mentioned amongst the verses of the surah al-fatiha. If it was a verse,
the tradition would have mentioned it.

The answer: This is contrary to the narration of Ibn \`Abbas, also
attributed, with an incomplete chain of transmission, to the Prophet
(A.S) in which it is stated: "I have apportioned the prayer between ME
and MY slave; when the slave says: \`In the name of God most beneficent,
most compassionate' God the most High states: \`MY slave has invoked
ME.'" The tradition is long; but, we see from it that it includes the
basmala so the tradition of Abu Hurayra is refuted. Moreover, Abu
Hurayra reported from the Prophet of God (S) that he recited ‘In the
name of God most merciful, most beneficent’ loudly in the prayer. He
(Abu Hurayra) would recite it loudly and would say: "I am showing you
the prayer of the Prophet of God (S)." His two traditions on this have
been presented to you.

Third: What has been reported from \`A'isha: "The Prophet (S) would
start the prayer with the takbir (glorifying God) and the recitation of
\`Praise be to God, the Lord of the Universe." There is no argument for
them based on this [tradition] because \`Praise be to God, the Lord of
the Universe' has been made to be the name of this chapter just as you
would say: "I recited: \`Say! He is the One Lord'" and, so, and so
recited ‘WE have given you a clear victory’ etc. So, the meaning of the
hadith is that he (A.S) would begin the prayer with the takbir, and by
the recitation of this surah the beginning of which is ‘In the name of
God most merciful, most beneficent.’”

Fourth: The tradition of Ibn Mughfil in which he states: "My father
heard me when I was reciting \`In the name of God most merciful, most
beneficent', and he said: \`O my son, be careful of innovation, for I
have prayed behind the Prophet of God (S), Abu Bakr, \`Umar and
\`Uthman, and I did not hear even one of them recite it."

The answer: The Imams of the [science of] wounding and authenticating
(al-jarh wa'l-ta\`dil) do not know of Ibn Mughfil, nor, is there any
trace of his tradition amongst them. Ibn Rushd has mentioned him when
discussing the basmala in his book Bidaya al-Mujtahid but he omitted [to
mention] what has been reported from Abu \`Umar b. \`Abd al-Barr in the
text that Ibn Mughfil is an unknown person.

Fifth: The report of Shu\`ba from Qatada from Anas b. Malik. He said: "I
prayed with the Prophet of God (S), Abu Bakr, \`Umar and \`Uthman and I
did not hear anyone of them recite ‘In the name of God most merciful,
most beneficent.'" Similar to this is the hadith of Hamid al-Tawil, also
reported from Anas. He said: "I stood behind Abu Bakr, \`Umar and
\`Uthman and not one of them would recite ‘In the name of God most
merciful, most beneficent.'"

The answer: You have read our arguments on what has been correctly
reported from Anas. It contradicts these two reports, so examine what we
have mentioned before. Imam al-Razi has mentioned this report of Anas in
the argument with his opponents. Then he says: "The answer to this is
from several dimensions.

Firstly, Shaykh Abu Hamid al-Asfarayani says: Six reports have been
reported from Anas on this topic. As for the Hanafis, they have reported
three narrations from him one of which states: “I prayed behind the
Prophet of God (S), and behind Abu Bakr, \`Umar and \`Uthman and they
would start the prayer with ‘Praise be to God, the Lord of the
Universe.'” The second one states: \`They did not use to recite ‘In the
name of God most merciful, most beneficent'.

And, the third one states: \`I did not hear any one of them recite \`In
the name of God most merciful, most beneficent.'" These three narrations
are in agreement with the view of the Hanafis. He (al-Asfarayani) said:
"Another three [reports] contradict these [three reports]. The first one
is his (Anas') report that when Mu\`awiya omitted ‘In the name of God
most merciful, most beneficent' in the prayer, the Muhajirun and Ansar
rebuked him and this shows that [reciting] the basmala loudly was like a
common practice, well established amongst them."

And, he said: "The second of them (the report) is reported by Abu Qalaba
from Anas that the Prophet of God (S), peace be upon him and his family,
and Abu Bakr and \`Umar would recite ‘In the name of God most merciful,
most beneficent' loudly", and the third of them (the reports) says that
he (Anas) was asked about [reciting] ‘In the name of God most merciful,
most beneficent’ loudly, and persisting in it and he said: "I do not
know this issue." Al-Razi said: "It is clear that the reports from Anas
on this issue are greatly confused, and haphazard; they are
contradictory, so it is essential to refer to all the other proofs."

Imam al-Razi says: "Also, there is another accusation in this that \`Ali
(as) would recite the tasmiya with a loud pronunciation. When the Banu
Umayya came to power they went to extreme lengths in prohibiting the
loud recitation [of the basmala], striving to obliterate the memories of
\`Ali (as), peace be upon him." Al-Razi said: "Perhaps Anas was scared
of them (the Umayyads) so for this reason his verdicts were confused."

And, he said: "Whenever we are uncertain of something, [one thing] we do
not doubt is that when there is a contradiction between the likes of
Anas, and Ibn Mughfil, and the verdict of \`Ali b. Abu Talib, peace be
upon him, who remained [on the verdict] all his life, it is more
appropriate to accept the saying of \`Ali." He said: "This is the
decisive answer to the question." Then al-Razi said: "One who takes
\`Ali (as) as the Imam of his religion has surely clung firmly to his
religion and his self." I say: Thanks be to God who has guided us to
this, but for His guidance we would not have been guided.

Recitation (of Surah Al-Fatiha) in the Prayer
---------------------------------------------

The jurists have differed on [the question of] the recitation [of the
surah al-fatiha] in the prayer. Abu Bakr al-Asam, Isma'il b. \`Aliyya,
Sufyan b. \`Uyayna and al-Hasan b. Salih have claimed that it is not
obligatory in any prayer. It is merely recommended.

This is a rare verdict; it is contrary to the proofs, and goes against
the consensus of the community. They have argued based on what Abu
Salama, and Muhammad b. \`Ali have reported from \`Umar b. al-Khattab
when he prayed the maghrib prayer without reciting [the surah al-fatiha]
in it. He was asked about that and he said: "How was the bowing (ruku')
and the prostration?" They said: "It was fine." He said: "Then there is
no problem."

The answer: If he (\`Umar) did not attribute it [to the Prophet (S)]
then it was his opinion. Perhaps he was amongst those who believed that
omitting the recitation unintentionally does not invalidate the prayer,
and God knows best.

Al-Hasan al-Basri and others have stated that the recitation is
obligatory in one cycle [of prayer]. Like the previous case, this is a
rare verdict and goes against the consensus reached by the ‘ummah’
(society). They have argued based on his (S) saying: "There is no prayer
except with the surah al-fatiha of the book" adhering [to the view] that
an exception to a negative [statement] is a positive one, so they say
that even if one surah al-fatiha is recited in the prayer it is
essential to maintain that this is correct due to the rule based on [the
concept of] 'exception.'”

The answer: According to the custom (\`urf), this hadith is not
applicable to the case of the prayer when it is offered with the
[complete] surah al-fatiha neither is the hadith a specific rule which
nullifies a general rule. It is by no means applicable in this case. The
tradition is applicable for the prayer which is devoid of the surah
al-fatiha, and in that case it (the prayer) is not a [valid] prayer. It
is like his (S) saying: "There is no prayer except by purification."

[This shows] his stressing the surah al-fatiha for it is a part of the
prayer and [stressing] the purification for it is a condition for it
(the prayer). There are many [examples] of this [kind of] speech. Don't
you see, if it was said "there is no oxymel except with vinegar," for
example, no one would understand that what is called vinegar, even if it
be a drop, or, less than that, is sufficient, or, not sufficient [to
make oxymel]. They merely understand that oxymel is composed [of things]
and that vinegar is one of the most important parts of it. If the
vinegar is removed then the oxymel is nonexistent.

If, as they claim, the proof they derive from this hadith is proper,
then the proof could lead [to the view] that no act or speech in the
prayer is obligatory as long as the surah al-fatiha is recited, as is
clear to one who examines it.

Imam Abu Hanifa and his companions said: "It is not obligatory to recite
the surah al-fatiha itself in any prayer, what is essential in the
prayers is any [form] of recitation. Abu Hanifa saw it sufficient to
recite any Qur'anic verse even if it be just one word like "Madhamatani"
(two green gardens). But, his two companions Abu Yusuf and Muhammad b.
al-Hasan al-Shaybani deemed it sufficient [to recite] three short verses
like "thumma nazara" then "'abasa wa basara" then "adbara wa istakbara",
or, [it was sufficient to recite] one verse which was equivalent to
three short verses, or, more than them. The Hanafis have acted according
to this.

Abu Hanifa also allowed the translation of what is recited in the prayer
from the Qur'an in any foreign language even if one knows Arabic well.
He deemed it sufficient to recite "do balk sabz" the translation of
madhamatani (two green gardens) in Persian instead of the surah
al-fatiha, and the surah, but his two companions allowed the translation
only for those unable [to recite] it in Arabic, not for those able to
recite it in Arabic; the Hanafis have acted according to this.

The recitation [of surah al-fatiha] is obligatory for them in the first
two cycles in every prayer of two cycles like the Friday, and morning
prayers, or, the zuhr and \`asr and \`isha' for a traveler. As for the
prayer of more than two cycles, like the maghrib and \`isha' for one
praying at home, and the zuhr and \`asr, the recitation is obligatory
for them in [any] unspecified two cycles. Thus one praying can choose to
recite it in the first two cycles, or, the last two, or, the first and
the third cycles, or, the first and the fourth, or, the second and the
third cycles, or, the second and the fourth. If he recites [surah
al-fatiha] it in the first two cycles, for example, he can choose in the
last two; if he wishes, he can recite [the surah al-fatiha], or, he can
glorify God (Allah S.W.T.), or, if he wishes, he can remain silent
spanning the time of the glorification. This is their [Hanafi] school of
thought which is common to their jurisprudence.

They have argued that any form of recitation is sufficient based on the
hadith of Abu Hurayra which is present in the two Sahihs (two Books of
Hadiths – sayings of Prophet Muhammad A.S. compiled by al-Bukhari and
al-Muslim). He said: "The Prophet of God (S) entered the mosque. Then a
man entered, and prayed. Then he came to greet the Prophet of God (S).
After the Prophet of God (S) returned his greetings, he said to him:
\`Go back and pray, for you have not prayed.' The man went back and
prayed the way he would [normally] pray then he came to the Prophet (S),
he greeted him and the Prophet of God (S) said: “And peace be unto you,
go back and pray for you have not prayed.”

And, he did this three times. The man said: “I swear by the one who has
sent you with the truth, this has not pleased me, so teach me.” He
(Prophet A.S.) said: \`When you stand up to pray, first glorify God,
then recite what is easy for you from the Qur'an then bow down until you
are at ease whilst bowing, then stand straight and then prostrate until
you are at ease in prostration, then sit up until you are at ease whilst
sitting, then do all that in your whole prayer.'"

The point from which they derive their proof is his saying: "Then recite
what is easy for you from the Qur'an" as it apparently supports their
claim.

The answer: Abu Hurayra is amongst those whose traditions we (Shi’i) do
not value as we have explained at length [elsewhere]. We have presented
rational, and scriptural indubitable proofs in a published book[^1]
which we have devoted to him, so any one who is fond of researching the
clear truths should refer to it.

It is not possible for the Prophet of God (S) to have acted according to
this tradition as it occurs in a situation in which it was essential
[for him A.S.] to explicate the issue. We examined [the tradition], and
we did not find a trace of explanation which is worthy of the Prophets
(S); since, it lacks much of what the ‘ummah’ have concurred of what is
essential in prayer like the intention, and sitting when bearing the
last testimony, and the essential parts of prayer following each other
in proper sequence; similarly, the last testimony, and sending greetings
to the Prophet (S), and the greetings etc. Moreover, leaving him to
offer an incorrect prayer three times is [something which] does not
concur with the character of the Prophet (S), this [act] is not
permissible for him (S).

Abu Dawud has reported this anecdote in his Sunan in the chapter on the
prayers of one whose backbone cannot be straight in the bowing and
prostration, with a chain of transmission to Rifa\`a b. Rafi' al-Ansari,
He was amongst those present at Badr that the Prophet (S) said to the
man whose prayer was not proper. "When you stand up and face the qibla,
and glorify God (Allah S.W.T.), then recite the mother of the Qur'an
(Surah al-fatiha), and recite what Allah (S.W.T.) wishes you to recite."

This anecdote is also reported by Ahmad b. Hanbal and Ibn Hibban with a
chain of transmission ending with Rifa\`a b. Rafi\`i. It states that the
Prophet (S) said to that man whose prayer was improper: "Then recite the
mother of the book [surah al-fatiha] and then recite what you wish."

It is well known that Abu Hurayra cannot be compared with Rifa\`a,
neither is he equal to Rifa\`a in his speech, or, action. Without doubt,
when the two are in conflict, Rifa\`a's traditions are to be given
preference over the traditions of Abu Hurayra. Therefore, you see that
in Fath al-Bari, al-Qastalani interprets what is reported in the hadith
of Abu Hurayra to accord with what is reported in the hadith of Rifa\`a.

One who studies the views of the past, and later [scholars] on the
hadith of Abu Hurayra and his saying: "Recite what is easy for you from
the Qur'an" will find all of them (apart from the Hanafis) either
refuting, or, interpreting it. If you wish, refer to their views on this
hadith of Abu Hurayra in all the commentaries on the two Sahihs.

Moreover, Abu Hurayra himself contradicted this hadith of his by what
has been correctly reported from him when he said: "I heard the Prophet
(S) say: \`The prayer in which the opening [chapter] of the book is not
recited is not complete.'" And, he (S) [also] said: "Indeed, the Prophet
of God (S) commanded me to go out, and announce in Medina that there can
be no prayer without the recitation of the Qur'an, even if it be with
the opening [chapter] of the book, or, more [than that]." And, he said:
"I heard the Prophet of God (S) say: \`One who prays without reciting
the [surah al-] fatiha of the book then it (the prayer) is incomplete,
it is incomplete, it is incomplete'"

There is another outstanding issue which they ask about. I mean the
reason why the Hanafi jurists accepted the apparent [meaning] in the
hadith of Abu Hurayra: "Recite what is easy for you from the Qur'an."
[They did this] without [quoting] the clear text, that is, it is
essential to be calm when standing, sitting, whilst bowing and in
prostration. Moreover, what they accept is against the clear ‘sahih’
traditions, and opposed to [the views of] most of the Muslims. What they
did not accept is supported by the ‘Sihah’ and by the masses.

Perhaps the Hanafis can cite as proof for their view on this issue by
[citing] the saying of Almighty Allah (S.W.T.): "Recite what is easy for
you in the Qur'an."

The answer: This verse is certainly not connected with what is being
discussed concerning the recitation in the prayer. This is clear from
the context in surah al-Muzammil (chapter 73), whosoever so wishes, let
him refer to it and examine what the commentators have said about it so
that the truth may become clear for him.

Furthermore, the [School of] Hanafis have argued for the permissibility
of translating into foreign languages what is recited in the prayer from
the Qur'an by several arguments:

1) That Ibn Mas\`ud made some foreigners recite: "The tree of Zaqqum is
a food for the sinners (ta'am al-athim)." A foreigner recited it as the
food for the orphans (ta'am al-yatim). He (Ibn Mas\`ud) said to him:
"Say the food of the corrupt one (ta'am al-fajir)." Then he (Ibn
Mas\`ud) said to him: "It is not a mistake to recite in the Qur'an
al-hakim instead of al-alim, to insert a verse of mercy in the place of
a verse of chastisement."

Answer: This is not connected to that we discuss, it doesn't prove
anything to what the claimant is claiming. Even if it is correct, the
view of Ibn Mas\`ud is restricted to him, it does not prove anything.

Two: The saying of the Almighty: "It is in the previous books,"
similarly: "This is in the previous scriptures, the scriptures of
Abraham, and Moses."

The reason for deriving proofs by these verses is that the community
agreed that the recitation was not in Arabic letters in previous books,
nor, were the scriptures of Abraham and Moses in Arabic; rather, they
were in Hebrew, or, Aramaic.

Answer: This, like the previous case, does not constitute proof for the
claimant, rather, it is further remote [from the truth].

Third: The Almighty said: "And, He revealed this Qur'an to me so that I
may warn you thereby." The non-Arabs do not understand the Arabic
letters unless the meaning is mentioned to them in their language so
that they may be warned by it.

Answer: This would only be proper proof for allowing the commentary of
the Qur'an in their language so that they may benefit from its wisdom,
etiquettes, commands and prohibitions. This is one thing; [while to
talk] gibberish in the prayer in which one is commanded to recite the
Qur'an, is another issue.

When the surah al-fatiha is recited, to what Arab, or, non-Arab do the
letters of the mother of the book, [which are] recorded in the
scriptures, not come into his mind? What person of taste would negate
the enunciation of the recitation of the surah al-fatiha, and the
recitation of the Qur'an for gibberish in Persian, or, other foreign
eastern, or, western languages?

Imam al-Razi has refuted these views, for he has transmitted them from
the [School of] Hanafis, and has other views, so refer to them. I hold
Imam Abu Hanifa above this, he failed completely in his derivation of
proofs. I feel sorry for him that he fell to this low level. In deriving
secondary shar'i rulings, he depended on analogy and seeking that which
is good (istihsan). He arrived at the decision based on this basis of
personal views.

As if he deemed it to be in the interests of non-Arabs to translate for
them the recitation in the prayer in their languages; he saw this to be
the best [way] for their understanding its meaning and for their
humility in it (the prayer). It is as if he drew an analogy of the
recitation [of the surah al-fatiha] of a non-Arab in his language with
listening to an exhortation and his hearing academic lessons in his
language.

This is the theory of Ataturk regarding the prayer which he did not take
it from Abu Hanifa. It is merely a personal thought. What helped Ataturk
in holding the theory is that he did not respect shar'i proofs, he did
not know, or, learn them in the reforms that appeared good for him to
undertake. If there was in the shar'i proofs something which would allow
him to have recourse to [personal choice of good] ‘istihsan’, there
would have been some justification for his views; but, how wrong he was!

Al-Shafi\`i, Malik, Ahmad b. Hanbal and others have made it compulsory
to recite the surah al-fatiha in Arabic in all the cycles of the
obligatory, and supererogatory prayers. Their proof for that is the
hadith of Abu Hurayra in the anecdote of an Arab whose prayer was not
proper due to the statement of the Prophet of God (S) whereby he taught
him the prayer, and instructed him to recite [the surah al-fatiha], and
then told him: "Do that in every [standings] prayer." You already know
our view on this tradition for we have said that we do not accord any
value to it.

The ‘Imamiyya’ (Shi’i), in following the Imams of the purified family,
maintain that the recitation of the surah al-fatiha in correct Arabic is
obligatory in the first two cycles in every obligatory, and recommended
prayer, whether the prayer [is offered] alone, or, with the Imam. As for
one following [in congregational prayer], the Imam recites on his
behalf. As for the last two cycles, it is obligatory to recite either
the surah al-fatiha, or, the tasbih (glorification), one can choose
between the two. The Imam cannot recite the surah al-fatiha, or, tasbih
on behalf of those following him.

Our proofs for all of this lies in the traditions of our Imams, upon
whom be peace, they are the other half of the book. Moreover, the
recitation [of the surah al-fatiha] by the Prophet (S) in the first two
cycles is proven in all the ‘Sihah’ and ‘Masanid’ works in the hadith of
Abu Qatada al-Hirth b. Rab\`I, and others.

The rule is, what the Prophet (S) used to do is obligatory due to his
saying: "Pray as you see me pray." If it is proven from him that [he
would recite] the surah al-fatiha in the last two cycles, it has also
been proven from him that he would [also] recite the dhikr in them. The
form [of the dhikr] "Glory be to Allah, praise be to Allah, there is no
god but Allah, Allah is the greatest" has been transmitted from the
Imams of his pure family.

This is attested to by the hadith of Sa\`d b. Abi al-Waqqas available in
the Sahih of al-Bukhari and other Sahih and Musnad works. The people of
Kufa complained of him to \`Umar to the point that they mentioned that
he could not pray correctly. Sa\`d said: "By God, I used to lead them in
prayer the [way] of the Prophet of God (S), I did not distort it, I
stand still and lengthen the standing by reciting the [surah al-] fatiha
and the surah in the first two cycles.

Then I would reduce it in the last two cycles." That is, he hastened
through them (the last two cycles) by shortening them to either the
tasbih, or, the [surah al-] fatiha alone to [the exclusion of]
everything else, and the Almighty God knows [best].

Takbirat al-Ihram
-----------------

Following [the footsteps of] the Imams of the purified family, the
‘Imamiyya’ agree that the takbirat al-ihram is a pillar in ever
obligatory, or, recommended [prayer]. Without it, no prayer can be
offered. Its form, Allah is the greatest, is innate to it. So, if one
begins his prayer by glorifying God (tasbih), or, by uttering there is
no god, but God, or, by saying God is great (Allahu kabir), or, only God
is the greatest (Allahu al-Akbar), or, God is most powerful etc., then
the prayer is not valid. [Neither is] gibberish in any one of the
foreign languages [allowed].

The proof that it is obligatory is adequately provided [by the fact]
that the Prophet of God (S) never started any of his prayers except by
this form. You have read recently that the original [form] which he used
to perform his (S) prayer is the obligatory [way] as he said: "Pray the
way you see me pray."

Moreover, its incumbency is established in the book, and the sunna, and
the consensus of the community. The Almighty Allah has said: "And, Your
Lord, so glorify Him." A consensus (‘ijma') has been reached that this
refers to the takbirat al-ihram since the command [of God] indicates
incumbency. The ‘ijma' also states that anything other than that is not
compulsory.

The Prophet (S) has said: "The opening of the prayer [lies in]
purification, its sacredness (tahrim) in the takbirat, and its
dissolution in the sending of greetings." Abu Dawud has narrated this in
his Sunan. The [School of] Hanafis have said that the tahrim is not a
pillar of the prayer, rather, it is connected to the act of standing
which, in fact, is the pillar. It is obligatory to face the qibla, and
to hide the private parts and to be in the state of purity not due to it
(the takbirat al-ihram); but, because of its connection with the pillar.

They have [also] said that Arabic language is not a stipulation in it.
They have deemed that a translation in any language which the one who
offers the prayer wishes would suffice, whether he is able to recite it
in Arabic, or, not. For them, the prayer can [also] be offered by
saying, for example: Khuda buzurg (God is greatest in Persian) instead
of Allahu Akbar.

They have [also] said that the ihram can be done by [reciting] the
tasbih, or, tahlil (the utterance that there is no god but God), and by
any name of the Almighty (Allah S.W.T.) even without anything else being
added to it like starting [the prayer] by "Allah", or, "al-Rahman" or,
[reciting] other such of His beautiful names by themselves, although
this act is detested. This is their accord, and they agree on this.
Their proof is based on ‘istihsan’ (doing that which is best) as you
have read. “The answer” is the answer, and Allah is the guide to that
which is correct.

[^1]: The author refers to “Abu Hurayra”, published in English by
ANsariyan Pubblications and also available on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/abu-hurayra-abdul-husayn-sharafiddin-al-musawi
[D.I.L.P.]


