Chapter Three: The Taqsir of the Traveller and his Iftar
========================================================

The Legislation of the Taqsir
-----------------------------

The four cycles (individual standings ‘rakahs’) in a prayer are
shortened to two when traveling whether [the one undertaking the
journey] is in [a state of] fear, or, safety, or not, as per the
consensus of the Muslim community. The ruling is unanimous. The Almighty
Allah (S.W.T.) says:

***"When you travel on earth there is no blame on you if you shorten
your prayer if you are scared that those who disbelieve will trouble
you" (4:101).***

On the authority of Ya'la b. Umayya: He said: "I said to \`Umar b.
al-Khattab: ‘There is no blame on you if you shorten the prayer if you
fear that those who disbelieve will trouble you, but the people are
[now] safe.' He (Umar) said: ‘I was wondering about that just as you are
wondering so I asked the Prophet of God (S) about it. He (S) said: \`It
is a charity which Allah (S.W.T.) has granted you so accept it.'" Muslim
has reported [the hadith] in his Sahih.

From Ibn \`Umar (this has also been reported by Muslim in his Sahih): He
said: "I accompanied the Prophet of God (S) on a journey. He did not
pray more than two cycles until Allah took him away (death). And, I
accompanied Abu Bakr and he did not pray more than two cycles until
Allah took him away (death). And, I accompanied \`Umar and he did not
pray more than two cycles until Allah took him away (death). Then, I
accompanied \`Uthman, and he did not pray more than two cycles until
Allah took him away (death)." The Almighty God has said:

***"Indeed, there is an exemplary model for you in the [figure] of the
Prophet of God." (33:21)***

From Anas b. Malik, according to what the two Shaykhs have reported in
their Sahihs, he said: "We travelled from Medina to Mecca with the
Prophet (S). He used to offer two cycles until we returned to Medina."

From Ibn \`Abbas, according to what al-Bukhari has reported in his
Sahih, he said: "The Prophet (S) stayed in Mecca for 19 [days] and he
used to shorten [the prayer]." I say: He used to shorten even though he
stayed for 19 days as he had not made the intention to stay [for more
than 10 days].

It has been proven from the Prophet of God (S) that he used to lead the
people of Mecca in prayer after the emigration. In the prayer of four
cycles, he would offer the greetings after finishing the first two
cycles. He would tell the people to complete their four cycle prayer
[alone], he excused himself, and those who had come with him since they
were travelers.

Ibn Abi Shayba has narrated with a chain of authority from the Prophet
of God (S) that he said: "The best of my community are those who bear
witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Prophet
of God and those who, when good is done to them, they rejoice and when
evil is done to them they forgive, and when they travel they shorten
[their prayers]."

From Anas: According to what Muslim has reported from two sources in his
Sahih: He said: "I prayed the zuhr in four cycles in Medina with the
Prophet of God (S), then I prayed two cycles of the \`asr with him at
Dhu'l-Hulayfa as a traveller." Many authentic traditions clearly
indicate that Allah, the most Mighty and Glorious, has legislated the
taqsir when traveling.

The Legislation of ‘Iftar’ (breaking of the fast)
-------------------------------------------------

There is no dispute that Allah, the Almighty and Glorious, legislated
the iftar in the month of Ramadhan for anyone who travels [a distance]
for which he had to shorten the prayer. This much the Muslim community
has agreed upon (across the board of different schools of
jurisprudence). The book (Holy Quran), and the ‘sunnah’ (modus operandi
of Prophet A.S.) have established it clearly. The Almighty Allah
(S.W.T.) says:

***"The month of Ramadhan is the one in which the Qur'an has been
revealed as a guide for the people, and an explanation of guidance, and
the furqan (criterion); whoever amongst you who witnesses it (at home)
should observe the fast. One who is sick or on a journey then [he will
fast] a number of other days, Allah wishes ease for you, he does not
wish difficulty, so complete the prescribed days." (2:185)***

When the Prophet of God (S) travelled in the month of Ramadhan he would
break the fast, and would tell the people of his ‘iftar’. He would deem
observing the fast when travelling to be a sin. He emphasized this by
saying: "It is not virtuous that you fast when traveling," you will read
all of that by his (S) words.

It is reported in the hadith of Abu Qalaba, and this is in the Sihah,
that the Prophet (S) told a man from the Banu \`Amir: "The Almighty
Allah (S.W.T.) has lifted the [burden of] fasting from the traveler, and
[the difficulty of] separating the prayers."

One who studies the Sunan, and the sayings of the Imams about the
prayer, and fast of a traveler will find documented sources, religious
edicts and the consensus of the community [maintaining that], that the
shortening of the prayer, and iftar when traveling have been legislated
by Allah, the Almighty, in the religion of Islam. When traveling, what
is required to be performed for one of the two (prayer and fast) is
necessarily required for the other, without doubt.

The Ruling of Shortening The Prayer (Qasr)
------------------------------------------

The Imams (leader of congregational prayer) of the Muslim community have
different views on the ruling of shortening the prayer when on a
journey. Amongst them are those who see the qasr to be a fixed
obligation on a traveler, this is the view of the ‘Imamis’ (Shi’i) in
following their Imams. Abu Hanifa, and his companions, and all the
Kufans have ruled likewise. Amongst them are those who rule that the
‘qasr’ (shortened prayers) and ‘itmam’ (offering the full prayers) are
both obligatory when on a journey although the traveler has a choice
between the two like the choice in paying an obligatory expiation. Such
is the view of some of the companions of [School of] al-Shafi\`i.

Amongst them are those who have said that the ‘qasr’ is a highly
recommended [act], this is the view of [School of] Malik according to
the most famous reports from him. Amongst them are those who see the
‘qasr’ as a ‘rukhsa’ (deviation) and that the complete [prayer] is
better. This is what [School of] al-Shafi\`i ruled according to the most
famous reports narrated from him. This is reflected in his companions.
The [School of] Hanbalis have permitted the ‘qasr’ [prayers], it is
better than the ‘itmam’ although offering the full prayers is not
detested.

### Our proofs

The Imamis (Shi’i) have argued that the ‘qasr’ is obligatory based on
the ‘Sihah’ (authentic traditions) which have been related by the masses
and [based on] proven texts from the Imams of guidance from the ‘Ahlul
Bayt’ (Holy household of Prophet A.S.), peace be upon them.

Amongst the ‘Sihah’ of the masses is what Muslim has reported in his
‘Sahih’ in the book of the prayer of the travelers and shortening it,
[reported] from Ibn \`Abbas from two chains of transmission. He said:
"Allah (S.w.T.) has fixed the prayer through the tongue of your Prophet
(S), [when] in town at four cycles [‘rakahs’ –standings], and when
traveling at two [cycles]."

This clearly shows that the traveler has been commanded to offer the
‘zuhr’, ‘asr’ and ‘isha’ at two cycles [‘fajr’ (dawn) prayer and
‘magrib’ (sunset) prayer unaltered]. Similarly, one who is in his home
town has been commanded to offer them at four cycles.

Therefore, it is not proper for a traveler that he should offer
anything; but, two cycles according to what has been prescribed for him,
just as it not proper for one living at his home town to offer anything;
but, four cycles according to what has been fixed for him since the true
[form of] worship is to follow what has been prescribed.

Similarly, it is reported in the ‘Sahih’ of Muslim narrating from Musa
b. Salama al-Hadhli. He said: "I asked Ibn \`Abbas: ‘How do I pray in
Mecca when travelling?'" He said: "Two cycles is the sunna of
Abu'l-Qasim [Prophet Muhammad] (S)."

He answered categorically that it was two cycles, and that [it was] a
sunnah of Abu'l-Qasim (S), this is clear in fixing the mode of the
‘qasr’, it is evident for the masses.

[Sahih] Muslim has also narrated in his ‘Sahih’ reporting from al-Zuhri
from \`Urwa from \`A'isha: "The prayer was initially fixed at two
cycles. The prayer of traveling remained [where it was], the prayer at
home was fixed at tamam." Al-Zuhri said: "I said to \`Urwa: \`What has
happened to \`A'isha that she offers the complete prayer when
traveling?' He said: \`She interpreted it (the matter) as \`Uthman
did.'"

Muslim has reported in his ‘Sahih’ from \`A'isha from another chain of
transmission. She said: "When Allah fixed the prayer He did so at two
[cycles], then He prescribed the prayer at home at the complete rate
(four cycles) whereas the prayer of traveling remained at the previous
rate."

I say: It is clear that if this is true, then it is not correct for a
traveler to offer the four [cycles] since the lawgiver (al-Shari') has
not commanded him to do so. From the beginning, He [Allah S.W.T.] has
told him to offer it at two [cycles], and Allah (S.W.T.) has fixed it at
that. If a traveler offers four cycles, he has innovated [‘bid’a’] just
as if he were to offer four cycles in the morning prayers, or, if one
praying at home offers his four cycles at the rate of two a piece.

From the reports of the Imams of guidance (Ahl-al-bayt, progeny of
Prophet), that has been correctly reported from Zurara b. A\`yan and
Muhammad b. Muslim when they asked Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as). They
said: "What do you say regarding the prayer of a traveler? How is it
offered, and how many cycles?" He said: "The Almighty Allah says:
\`***When you travel on the earth there is no blame on you if you
shorten your prayer.***' so the ‘qasr’ is obligatory when traveling just
as the tamam is obligatory at home."

They said: "We said to him: \`He (God) said: \`There is no blame on you
if you shorten the prayer', He did not say \`shorten the prayer' [not an
order, but a choice is the point], so how can He make it compulsory just
as He made the tamam compulsory?' He said: \`Did the Almighty not say
regarding the Safa and Marwa, one who performs the pilgrimage, or, the
‘umra’ there is no blame on him that he should walk between them,' don't
you see that walking between them is obligatory, legislated, because
Allah the Almighty has mentioned it in His book and His Prophet
performed it?

Similarly, the shortening [of prayers] on a journey is something which
the Prophet of God (S) performed, and Allah has mentioned it in the
book.'" They said: "One who offers four cycles when travelling, does he
repeat the prayer, or, not?" He said: "If the verse of ‘taqsir’ has been
recited and explained to him and he [still] offers four cycles then he
repeats it. If it has not been recited to him and he does not know of it
then he does not have to repeat the prayer." (He, peace be upon him,
said): "Every obligatory prayer on a journey is of two cycles except the
‘maghrib’ for it has three cycles, there is no shortening of it, the
Prophet (S) left it at three cycles [whether] on a journey or at home."

Imam al-Tabarsi says after he mentioned this report: "In this there is
proof to show that the obligation of a traveler is different from one
who is at home." (He said): "The group has agreed on that, and has also
agreed that there is no ‘qasr’. It has been reported from the Prophet
(S) that he said: \`The obligation of a traveler is two cycles, not
shortened.'"

In al-Kashshaf, on the verse of shortening the prayer, the author
writes: "Abu Hanifa says that the ‘qasr’ when traveling is fixed, it is
not a dispensation, nothing apart from it is allowed." (He said): From
\`Umar b. al-Khattab: "The prayer of a traveler is at two cycles, it is
complete, not shortened, according to the tongue of your Prophet."

### The argument of School of Shafi'i and those who do not impose the ‘qasr’

They have argued by several ways; the first one being the apparent
[meaning] of the Almighty's words: "There is no blame on you if you
shorten the prayer." In itself, blameworthiness (which is a sin)
indicates permissibility, not an obligation [to perform the ‘qasr’].

You know the answer by the report of Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (as),
peace be upon him. Apparently the people at the time [of the Prophet
(S)] were inclined towards [offering] the complete [prayer] and they
were, as indicated by al-Zamakhshari in his al-Kashshaf, expecting to
pray full. It appeared to them that they were at fault by praying the
‘qasr’. The blame [for offering the ‘qasr’] was removed from them so
that they could feel good about their [offering] the ‘qasr’ and they
could be contented by it.

Secondly: \`Uthman and \`A'isha used to complete the prayer when
traveling:

The answer is that they wrongly interpreted the proofs for [performing]
the ‘qasr’. Some of the scholars of masses have explained this
interpretation of theirs by claiming that \`Uthman was the Commander of
the faithful, and that \`A'isha was their (the faithfuls') mother. Even
in their journey they were continuously at home since wherever they were
traveling they were with the people at home and in their land. This
thinking is strange; we see the reason for it being strange by seeing
the Prophet of God's (S) absence from the world of the believers. Did
they not see him perform the ‘qasr’ whilst traveling? Similarly, on this
basis Abu Bakr, Umar and Ali (as), were all strangers to them.

Thirdly: Famous traditions clearly reported by Muslim in his ‘Sahih’
that when the companions would travel with the Prophet of God (S) some
of them would perform the ‘qasr’, some would do the ‘tamam’, some would
fast in the month of Ramadhan, and others would not, they would not find
fault with each other.

The answer is that these traditions do not prove anything based on our
chain of transmission since they contradict our ‘sahih’ traditions
reported from our Imams who are the second half of the book;
furthermore, they contradict each other too, one who examines them knows
it as you will read soon, God willing.

There is no doubt that the traditions of the trustees from the family of
Muhammad (S) are to be given preference when there is a contradiction,
especially after they are supported by a group of the Sihah [traditions]
of the masses.

The Ruling on Breaking the Fast (Iftar)
---------------------------------------

The Muslim jurists have differed on the ruling of ‘iftar’ whilst
traveling. The masses have stated that it (fasting) is allowed, and that
if a traveler fasts then his fast is valid, and he will be rewarded.
They have deemed it permissible basing their proofs on traditions which
Muslim has reported in his ‘Sahih’.

Amongst them is what is reported from Abu Sa\`id al-Khudri who said: "We
went on an expedition with the Prophet of God (S) when sixteen days of
the month of Ramadhan had elapsed. There were those amongst us who
fasted, others who broke their fasts. Those who fasted did not taunt
those who did not, nor, did those who broke their fasts find fault with
those who had fasted."

On his authority from another chain, he said: "We used to travel with
the Prophet of God (S) in Ramadhan. The one who fasted would not be
taunted for his fast, nor, was one who did the ‘iftar’ [blamed] for his
‘iftar’."

The answer is that these traditions, assuming they are authentic, are
abrogated without doubt by the ‘sahih’ [traditions] reported by the
masses, by other authentic traditions reported by our chains of
authority from the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt, peace be upon them.

I present to you what has been authentically reported on this topic by
others. Jabir b. \`Abd Allah said, as stated in Muslim's Sahih, that
"the Prophet of God (S) went in the year of the conquest to Mecca in
Ramadhan, and he fasted until he reached Kira' al-Ghamim, and the people
[also] fasted. Then he asked for a glass of water, and he raised it
until the people saw it then he drank it. After that it was said to him:
\`Some of the people have fasted'; he (S) said: \`They are sinners, they
are sinners.'"

It has also been reported from Jabir: He said: "The Prophet of God (S)
was on a journey and he saw the people had gathered around a man, and
had cast a shadow over him. He said: ‘What is the matter with him?' They
said: \`He has fasted.' He said: ‘It is not virtuous that you fast on a
journey.'"

We said that these ‘sunnah’ abrogated those [reported before] as they
were, by the admission of the masses, issued later. That is proven by
what has been reported in the ‘Sahih’ of Muslim and by others from
\`Ubayd Allah b. \`Abd Allah b. \`Utba from Ibn \`Abbas that he informed
him that the Prophet of God (S) went out in the year of the conquest and
he fasted until he reached al-Kadid then he broke his fast. He said:
"The companions of the Prophet of God (S) used to follow the most recent
of his commands."

On the authority of al-Zuhri, as reported in the ‘Sahih’ of Muslim and
other sources, by the same ‘isnad’: "The [ruling] of breaking the fast
was the later of the [two] commands, the later commands of the Prophet
of God are to be followed."

A look at the similar narration on the authority of Ibn Shihab, as
reported in the ‘Sahih’ of Muslim, and in other sources with the same
‘isnad’: Ibn Shihab said: "They used to follow the latest of his
commands and would see it as an abrogating and a fixed [command]." In
short, if it is assumed that it was correct for some of the companions
to fast when traveling with him, that was before the imposition of [the
ruling of] breaking the fast, and before his (S) saying: "It is not
virtuous that you fast when you are traveling," and before his (S)
saying about those fasting: "They are sinners, they are sinners."

As for the Imamis (Shi’i), they are agreed that ‘iftar’ when traveling
is compulsory, this is [also] the edict of Dawud b. \`Ali al-Isfahani
and his companions. Many companions like \`Umar b. al-Khattab and his
son \`Abd Allah and \`Abd Allah b. \`Abbas, \`Abd al-Rahman b. \`Awf,
Abu Hurayra and \`Urwa b. al-Zubayr have followed [this ruling].

This has also been successively transmitted from the Imams of guidance,
from the pure family of Prophet Muhammad (S). It has been narrated that
\`Umar b. al-Khattab commanded a man who had fasted when traveling to
repeat his fast, just as is our ruling and the ruling of Dawud. Yusuf b.
al-Hakam has narrated saying: "I asked Ibn \`Umar on fasting when
travelling."

He said: "How would you feel if you give a person [something] in charity
then he returned it to you, wouldn't you be angry? This is a ‘sadaqa’
(charity) from Allah (S.W.T.) which He has granted you, so do not reject
it." \`Abd al-Rahman b. \`Awf reported saying: "The Prophet of God (S)
said: \`One who fasts on a journey is like one who has broken his fast
when staying at his home town.'"

On the authority of Ibn 'Abbas [who said]: "Iftar when traveling is
compulsory." On the authority of Abu 'Abd Allah al-Sadiq (S) who said:
"The one who fasts in the month of Ramadhan whilst traveling is like one
who has broken his fast whilst at home." And [it is reported] from him
(S) also: "If a man who is fasting on a journey dies then I would not
pray over him." And, [it is reported] from him (S) also: "One who
travels must break his fast and shorten the prayers unless his journey
is a sin against Allah the Almighty, the most Glorious."

Al-\`Ayyashi has reported with a chain of transmission connected to
Muhammad b. Muslim from Abu \`Abd Allah al-Sadiq (S) who said: "This
verse ‘Whoever of you is sick or on a journey' was revealed at Kira'a
al-Ghamim at the prayer [time] of the midday heat. The Prophet of God
asked for a glass which contained water and he drank it and he commanded
the people to break their fasts. The people said: \`The noon [time] has
passed, if only we were to complete this day's [fast].' The Prophet of
God (S) called them sinners and they were called sinners up to the time
when the Prophet of God (S) passed away [died]."

Our argument for the obligation of breaking the fast when traveling is
sufficiently proved by the saying of the Almighty, most Glorious: "Those
of you who witness the month of Ramadhan (at home) should fast, those
who are sick, or, on a journey should fast a number of other days, God
wishes ease for you, he does not wish difficulty." The verse contains
proofs for the obligation to break the fast due to several reasons:

1) The command to fast in the verse is directed at those at home, not at
those traveling. The words are as you see them: "Those of you who
witness the month - that is when they are at home in the month, let them
fast." Therefore, the traveler is not commanded, so his fast is
[tantamount to] inserting in religion what is not a part of it, it is a
burden and an innovation [‘bid’a’].

2) What is understood from the saying of the Almighty: "Those of you who
witness the month of fasting should observe the fast" means that one who
is not at home in the month it is not obligatory for him to fast. That
which is [ordinarily] understood from a conditional statement is binding
as has been established in ‘usul al-fiqh’ (principles of jurisprudence).
Therefore, the verse indicates that it is not obligatory to fast when
traveling by the literal, and implied meaning of the text.

3) The saying of the most Glorious, Almighty: "Those of you who are
sick, or, travelling then [they should fast] a number of other days."
This implies they should fast a number of other days. This applies if
you recite the verse with the words "a number" in the nominative case.
If you recite it in the accusative then it would [also] mean let him
fast a number of other days. In both cases, the verse indicates the
obligation to fast on other days and this requires the obligation to
break the fast when traveling since there is no one who says it is
necessary to keep both, the fast and recompense for the kept fast.
Moreover combining [the two acts of keeping the fast while traveling and
keeping and extra fast on another day] refutes the ease indicated in the
verse.

4) The saying of the most High: "Allah wishes ease for you, He does not
wish hardship." Ease here means ‘iftar’ just as hardship here means
nothing else but to fast. Therefore the meaning of the verse is that God
wishes you to break the fast, He does not wish you to fast.

The amount of traveling which necessitates the shortening of the prayer
and breaking of the fast:

The Imams of the Muslims have differed regarding its (traveling)
duration. Abu Hanifa and his Kufan companions have stated: "The minimum
for which the prayers have to be shortened and the fast to be broken is
the journey of three days, and that the ‘qasr’ and ‘iftar’ are only for
those who travel from a horizon to [a different] horizon."

[School of] Al-Shafi'i, Malik and Ahmad and many other people have
stated: "The prayer is shortened, and the fast is broken in the month of
Ramadhan by traveling a distance of 16 farsakhs whilst going [away from
home] only."

The people who depend on the apparent meaning of the Qur'an (ahl
al-zahir) say: "The ‘qasr’ and ‘iftar’ are [obligatory] for every
journey even if it be a short one." Ibn Rushd said in "On the prayer of
traveling from the beginning and the end": "The reason for their
differences is due to the difference between the meaning which is
rationally understood from ‘al-taqsir’ and ‘al-iftar’ on a journey and
the narrations [reported] on this topic. That is because what is
[rationally] understood by the affects of a journey which necessitates
the observation of ‘qasr’ and ‘iftar’ are the difficulties [involved] in
it (the traveling).

If that is the matter, then they (‘taqsir’ and ‘iftar’) apply wherever
there is any difficulty. For [School of] Abu Hanifa, there is no
difficulty encountered except after having crossed three stations. For
[School of] al-Shafi\`i, Malik and Ahmad, it will be after traveling 16
farsakh." He said: "As for those who pay attention to the letter only
like the Zahiris, they said: "The Prophet (S) said that Allah has
removed the fasting and separating the prayer from the traveler. For
whoever can be called a traveller it is permissible for him to observe
the ‘qasr’ and ‘iftar’." He (Ibn Rushd) said: "They are supported by
what Muslim has narrated from \`Umar b. al-Khattab that the Prophet (S)
would shorten the prayer when he reached about 17 miles."

Based on this, the Imams of the four schools of law [Hanafi, Maliki,
Shafi’I, and Hanbali], when defining the distance, did not depend on
what has been narrated from the Prophet, or, on his acts (S). They
depended on a philosophy to which they applied the term "what is
rationally understood." That is not something which would please the
Imams of the Ahlul Bayt. Nor, would the Imami’s (Shi’i) be contented
with it in the derivation of juridical principles.

The people of Mecca, in the times of the Prophet (S) and Abu Bakr and
\`Umar, when they traveled from Mecca to Arafa would shorten the prayer
at Arafa, al-Muzdalifa, and Mina. This is proven without doubt.

The two Shaykhs have reported in their Sahihs that the Prophet (S), when
he would leave Mecca to go to Arafa, would shorten the prayer, and that
Abu Bakr and \`Umar did likewise after him. [They also report] that
Uthman also shortened his prayer. Then he performed the complete prayer
after six years had passed of his Caliphate. The people objected to it.

This is what Imam Malik [School of Maliki] depended upon in his ruling
that the ‘taqsir’ of the pilgrims in these places is highly recommended
whether they are the people of Mecca, or, distant places, so refer to
the [School of] Maliki jurisprudence. This is what we depend on in
shortening the prayer when traveling, the distance of 8 ‘farsakhs’
whether it be prolonged in one direction, or, joined by four (farsakh)
going and four coming back like the distance between Mecca and \`Arafa.
This is the minimum distance at which the Prophet of God (S) would
shorten the prayer, and this is the decisive proof, thanks be to God.


