Chapter Four: ‘Mut'a’, Temporary Marriage
=========================================

The Essence of this Marriage
----------------------------

The essence of this type of marriage is that a woman who is completely
free, a Muslim, or, from the people of the book [Bible, Torah, (New and
Old Testaments respectively), and the Book of Prophet Daw’ud (David)????
I don’t know if its only Bible???], marries you, provided there is no
impediment of her marriage [to you] according to the religion of Islam,
whether [this impediment be] due to kinship (prohibited to marry brother
with sister), relationship (marry a mother or father), through foster
relationship (half-sister or half-brother is prohibited), or, marriage.

She should not be in her waiting period ('idda) [two menstrual periods
until a woman marries another man], nor, have other religious obstacles
like her being married to one of your fathers even if he has divorced
her, or, he died before the consummation of marriage, or, her being your
sister in law for example, etc.

This woman marries you with an agreed dowry for an agreed fixed time by
performing an ‘aqd’ (intentional consent) encompassing the conditions
which make it proper according to the shari\`a, [thus] it has no shar\`i
impediments as you have read. So, she says to you after the mutual
permission, and agreement between the two of you: "I marry you, or,
perform ‘mut'a’ with you for a dowry whose amount shall be so much for
one, or, two days, or, a month, or, two months, or, a year, or, two
years"; for example, or, she mentions another precisely defined period,
and you say to her immediately: "I accept."

Like other contracts, deputyship is also allowed in this type of
marriage from both parties. When completed, she becomes your wife and
you become her husband until the time period in the agreement expires.

By its expiration, she is separated [from you] without a divorce. The
husband has the right to separate from her before the expiration time by
acquitting her [remaining part] of the specified period, not by a
divorce according to the special texts governing over it. If the
marriage is consummated (copulation), it is obligatory for her to
observe the ‘idda’. She observes the ‘idda’ of two months if she
menstruates after being granted the period, or, after its expiration. If
she does not observe ‘idda’, [the idda] of 45 days like a slave girl,
according to the special proofs governing the case.

If he acquits her [the remaining part] of the period, or, it expires
before he touches her then, like one who is divorced before being
touched, there is no ‘idda’ for her. [As for] those who become pregnant
in a temporary marriage, their ‘idda’ period, like that of divorced
women, is upto when they give birth (cannot marry until they deliver the
baby). As for the ‘idda’ of one whose husband dies in a temporary
marriage it is always the same as the ‘idda’ of a woman whose husband
dies in a permanent marriage.

The child born in a ‘mut'a’, whether male, or, female, is joined to the
father. He is claimed by him (the father) like other sons and daughters.
He has the right to inherit as prescribed to us by Allah (S.W.T.), the
most Majestic, by His saying: "Allah prescribes for your children the
male should get the portion of two females."

There is no difference between two children of yours, one of whom is
born out of temporary marriage and the other out of a permanent one. All
the shari'a principles [of inheritance] applicable to the children, the
fathers and the mothers are [also] applicable to the children, and their
fathers and mothers of a ‘mut'a’ marriage. Similarly, the principles are
applicable to brothers and sisters, and their children, and the maternal
uncles and aunts, and paternal uncles and aunts, and their children (and
the people of the wombs take preference over each other in the book of
God) always.

Yes, the marriage of ‘mut'a’ in itself does not lead to inheritance
between the spouses, nor, sharing the number of conjugal nights, or,
expenditure for the wife. The husband has the right to isolate himself
from her according to the special proofs which are applicable to this
matter of the rulings of wives.

This is the essence, and truth of the marriage of ‘mut'a’ with women and
this is the point of dispute between us, and the masses.

The Consensus of the Community on its Legislation
-------------------------------------------------

All the people of the ‘qibla’ [means following same qibla but different
schools???] have reached a consensus, that the Almighty Allah (S.W.T.)
legislated this type of marriage in the religion of Islam. There is no
doubt about it amongst any of the scholars of the Islamic schools
regardless of the differences in their inclinations, schools, and views.

Perhaps this is appended, for the scholars, to the essential teachings,
according to what has been ascertained from the seal of the Prophets
(S). None of the 'ulama’ of his community can deny it. What all the
people of Islamic schools say in their ruling on this marriage (which
has been established in their jurisprudence) is unfortunate. They know
that they are all agreed on it being originally legislated, but they
claim that it has been abrogated as you will realize soon, God willing.

Proof from the Book on its Legislation
--------------------------------------

It is sufficient for us to cite proof for its legislation the saying of
the Almighty in chapter four:

***"And, what you enjoy from them then give them their prescribed
dowries (4:24)."***

The Imams from the Ahlul Bayt and their devoted friends have agreed that
this verse was revealed concerning the marriage of ‘mut'a’. Abu Ibn
Ka\`b, Ibn \`Abbas, Sa\`id b. Jubayr and al-Sadi used to recite it as
"whatever you enjoy of them to the agreed term."

The companion [of the Prophet (S)] \`Imran b. Husayn clearly stated that
this verse was revealed concerning the ‘mut'a’ and that it was not
abrogated until a man said according to his own views what he wished."
Mujahid has also stated that the verse was revealed for the ‘mut'a’
according to what al-Tabari has reported from him in his Tafsir
al-Kabir.

This is also attested to by the fact that the Almighty Allah, at the
beginning of the chapter, has clarified the ruling on the permanent
marriage by His saying:

***"Marry what pleases you amongst the women, two, three, or, four"***
***(4:3)***

then Allah said:

***"Give the women their dowry as a gift (4:4)."***

If the verse [on mut\`a] was also clarifying the permanent marriage, it
would have meant repeating [the same ruling] in one chapter. But, if it
was to explain the mut'a, then it was explaining a new concept.

The people of understanding who contemplate on the wise Qur'an know that
the chapter on the women (chapter 4) includes the explanation of all
[types of] Islamic marriages, so the permanent marriage and the
possession of the right hand are explained by the saying of the
Almighty:

***"And, marry what pleases you of the women, two, three, or, four, and
if you fear that you will not be able to deal justly with them, then one
only, or, whatever your right hand possesses."(4:3)***

The marriage of the slave girl is clarified by the saying of the
Almighty:

***"And if it is not possible for any of you to marry the pure believing
women, then marry the believing girls amongst those whom your right hand
possesses (4:25),"***

until He said

***"then marry them with the permission of their guardians and give them
their dowries according to what is proper.” (4:25)***

The ‘mut'a’ is explained by this verse

***"And, what you enjoy from them then give them their
dowries."(4:25)***

Its legislation according to the Text of the ‘Sunnah’
-----------------------------------------------------

On this issue, sufficient proof from the ‘sunnah’ is provided for us by
the authentic mutawatir traditions reported from the Imams of the pure
family. The two Shaykhs, al-Bukhari and Muslim, have reported many
authentic traditions on the legislation of this type of marriage from
Salma b. al-Aqwa, Jabir b. \`Abd Allah, \`Abd Allah b. Mas\`ud, Ibn
\`Abbas, Abu Dharr al-Ghaffari, \`Imran b. Husayn, al-Aqwa b. \`Abd
Allah al-Aslami and Sabra b. Ma\`bad. The traditions of all of these
people are reported by Ahmad b. Hanbal in his Musnad. He also reported
the hadith of \`Umar and of his son, \`Abd Allah.

Muslim, in the chapter on the ‘mut'a’ marriage, in the book of marriage,
in the first volume of his ‘Sahih’ has reported from Jabir b. \`Abd
Allah and Salma b. al-Aqwa, the two said: "The caller of the Prophet of
God (S) came to us, and said: \`The Prophet of God has permitted you to
perform ‘mut'a’, that is the ‘mut'a’ with women.'" The authentic
traditions of this purport are more than can be examined in this
treatise.

Those Who Claim the Abrogation and their Proofs and a Discussion on it
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The people of the four schools of thought and other jurists of the
masses have claimed that this type of marriage has been abrogated and
forbidden. They claim that there are traditions reported by the two
Shaykhs in their ‘Sahih’ books; so, we examined them impartially and
free from prejudices. In them we found [so many] contradictions
concerning the time of the issuance of the abrogation that we cannot
have confidence in it (the abrogation).

Indeed some of them are clear that the abrogation was on the day of
Khaybar, some claim that the abrogation was on the day of the conquest
(of Mecca); some of them maintain that it occurred at the battle of
Tabuk, while some claim that it happened at the time of the final
pilgrimage. Some of them maintain it happened at the time of the ‘umra
al-Qaza’ whilst some of them say it happened in the year of Awtas
(battle of Hunayn).

Moreover, these are opposed by what you will read from the Sihahs of
al-Bukhari and Muslim which prove that there was no abrogation and that
the prohibition and interdiction were issued by the second Caliph (Umar
b. al-Khattab) due to an unforeseen act of \`Amr b. Harith which
occurred in his time.

Before it, the companions were performing the ‘mut'a’ at the time of the
two Caliphs, just as they were performing the ‘mut'a’ at the time of the
Prophet of God (S). You will read the speech of \`Imran b. Husayn, \`Abd
Allah b. Mas\`ud, \`Abd Allah b. \`Umar, and \`Abd Allah b. \`Abbas and
the Commander of the Faithful. You will see it clearly that the
prohibition was not from the Almighty Allah (S.W.T.), nor, from His
Prophet, peace be upon him; rather, it was from \`Umar.

It is impossible that there would be an abrogation which [all] these
people would be ignorant about. The status of their knowledge and
position in front of Prophet of God (S), and their close attachment to
him (S) are known. If there was an abrogation, those who were aware of
it would have informed them of it (the abrogation).

However, since no one opposed them in their attributing the prohibition
to \`Umar himself, we realize that they all acknowledged it, and they
accepted that there was no abrogation from God, the Almighty, nor, from
His Prophet (S).

Moreover, the second Caliph himself did not claim abrogation [of the
verse on ‘mut'a’], as you will read from his clear speech in his
attributing the prohibition, and interdiction to himself. If there was
an abrogating verse from the Almighty Lord, or, from His Prophet (S), he
would have attributed the prohibition to the Almighty Lord, or, to the
Prophet (S), that is the most effective [way] of preventing
[accusations], and most appropriate [thing] to mention.

I believe that those who came after the time of the companions forged
the traditions on abrogation to justify the opinion of the Caliph, for
he interpreted the proofs and he prohibited and forbade [‘mut'a’]
promising punishment, saying: "I am prohibiting the two ‘mut'as’ which
were at the time of the Prophet of God (S), and will punish those who
undertake them, the ‘mut'a’ of hajj and ‘mut'a’ of women."

Amongst the strange claims of some later scholars is that the marriage
of ‘mut'a’ has been abrogated by the saying of the Almighty:

***"As for those who guard their private parts except from their
spouses, or, what their right hand possess (23:5)."***

They claim that the woman with whom you do the ‘mut'a’ is not your
spouse, nor, one whom your right hand possesses. They said: "As for
their not being amongst whom your right hand possess, that [point] is
certain; as for their not being your wives it is because there is no
expenditure for them, nor, do they inherit; moreover, one does not have
to spend a night with them."

The answer: She is a legal wife contracted by a ‘shar\`i’ marriage as
you have read; the fact that there is no maintenance, nor, inheritance,
nor, night to be spent is due to the special proofs which have been
mentioned in the rulings of wives as we have explained before.
Furthermore, this is a Meccan verse which was revealed before the
emigration as agreed by all; so, it is not possible for it to abrogate
the verse which allows, and legalizes the ‘mut'a’ [revealed in] Medina
after the emigration as agreed by all.

A surprising thing from these [people] who burden themselves is that
they claim that the verse of believers (23:5) abrogates the ‘mut'a’ of
women since they are not [considered to be] wives, nor, those whom the
right hand possesses. We say to them: "Why does it [also] not abrogate
the marriage of the slave girls to one who doesn't own them since they
[also] are not considered wives of the one marrying them, nor, are they
owned by them?

They say at this point that the chapter of believers (chapter 23) is
Meccan and the marriage to the slave girls mentioned has been legislated
by the saying of the Almighty in the chapter of women which is Medinan:

"***And, if it is not possible for any of you to marry the pure
believing women, then marry amongst the believing girls whom your right
hand possesses,"(4:25);***

so, the Meccan ‘surah’ cannot abrogate the Medinan as the abrogated
verse must come before the abrogating.

They say this and they forget that the ‘mut'a’ was [also] legislated in
Medina, and that its verse is in the chapter of women [Surah an-Nisa],
also. We have been afflicted with a community which does not
contemplate; from God we come and to him we shall return.

Muslim has reported in the chapter of ‘mut'a of hajj’ and 'umra’ in his
Sahih with a chain of authority to Abu Nazra who said: "Ibn \`Abbas used
to order the ‘mut'a’ and Ibn al-Zubayr used to forbid it." This was
mentioned to Jabir, he said: "In my hands the tradition revolved, we
used to perform the ‘mut'a’ while in company of the Prophet of God
(S.A.W) and when \`Umar became the Caliph he said: \`Indeed, Allah used
to make ‘halal’ for his Prophet what he wished as he wished. Complete
the ‘hajj’ and 'umra’, and sever the marriage with these women; no man
will come to me with a marriage to a woman for a specific period except
that I will stone him.'"

This is what [School of] Ahmad b. Hanbal has reported about the
tradition of \`Umar in his Musnad. Reporting also from Abu Nazra, the
words he uses are as follows: "Abu Nazra said: \`I said to Jabir that
Ibn al-Zubayr forbade the ‘mut'a’ while Ibn \`Abbas used to command it.'
He said to me: ‘The tradition has come from me, we used to perform the
‘mut'a’ at the time of the Prophet of God (S), and Abu Bakr.

When \`Umar became the Caliph he delivered a sermon to the people
saying: \`The Qur'an is the Qur'an, and the Prophet of God is the
Prophet, there were two mut'as at the time of the Prophet of God (S),
one of them was the ‘mut'a of hajj’ and the other was the ‘mut'a of
women.'"

It is clear and evident that the prohibition came from him after his
becoming Caliph. Similar to this is the tradition of \`Ata' reported by
Muslim in the chapter of the ‘mut'a’ marriage in his ‘Sahih’, he said:
"Jabir b. \`Abd Allah went for pilgrimage of ‘mut'a’ so we came to him
at his house. A group of people asked him a few things, and they
mentioned the mut'a to him. He said: \`Yes, we performed the ‘mut'a’ at
the time of the Prophet of God (S), and Abu Bakr, and \`Umar.'"

According to the hadith of Abu al-Zubayr, as in the afore-mentioned
chapter in the ‘Sahih’ of Muslim, he said: "I heard Jabir b. \`Abd Allah
saying: \`We used to perform the ‘mut'a’ with a handful of dates and
flour (as dowries) at the time of the Prophet of God (S), and Abu Bakr
until \`Umar prohibited it because of the matter of \`Amr b. Harith.'"

Also, in the aforementioned chapter of the ‘Sahih’ of Muslim, he
reported from Abu Nazra who said: "I was with Jabir and somebody came to
him and he said: \`Ibn \`Abbas and Ibn al-Zubayr have differed regarding
the two ‘mut'as’.' Jabir said: \`We used to perform them at the time of
the Prophet of God (A.S), and then \`Umar forbade them.'"

The statement of \`Umar whilst he was on the minbar spread (to the
masses). "I am prohibiting the two mut'as which were at the time of the
Prophet of God and I will punish anyone who performs them, the ‘mut'a’
of hajj and the ‘mut'a’ of women." Al-Razi has transmitted this saying
from him (\`Umar) arguing by it on the prohibition of the ‘mut'a’ of
women, so refer to this verse in his Tafsir al-Kabir.

The Ash'ari theologian, and their Imam in what is rationally, and
traditionally reported "al-Qushji" says in the later parts of the
discussion on the Imamate in his great book called "Sharh al-Tajrid"
that 'Umar said whilst he was on the minbar: "O people, there were three
things at the time of the Prophet of God (S), and I forbid them and make
them ‘haram’. I will punish anyone who commits them, the ‘mut'a’ of
women, the ‘mut'a’ of hajj and [the saying of] "hayya 'ala khayril
al-'\`amal" (hasten to the best of acts)." He justified it claiming that
this was his personal reasoning and interpretation. The traditions on
this and others like it are many and could fill the pages.

Rabi\`a b. Ummaya b. Khalf al-Thaqafi, the brother of Safwan, performed
the ‘mut'a’ at the time of \`Umar, according to what Malik has reported
in the chapter of the marriage of ‘mut'a’ in his Muwatta' from \`Urwa
al-Zubayr who said: "Indeed Khawla, the daughter of Hakim al-Silmiyya,
entered to see \`Umar and she said to him: \`Rabi\`a b. Ummaya has
performed the ‘mut'a’ with a lady who has become pregnant,' so \`Umar
went out pulling his robe, saying: \`this ‘mut'a’, had I preceded it, I
would have stoned for it,'" i.e., had I forbidden it and warned one who
undertakes it with stoning before this time, I would have stoned
Rabi\`a, and the lady who performed the ‘mut'a’.

This was his stand before prohibiting it as has been documented by Ibn
\`Abd al-Barr according to what al-Ruzqani reports from him in his
commentary on the ‘Muwatta'. There is no doubt that this speech shows
that the discarding of the permissibility of ‘mut'a’ came from him, not
from anybody else

Those who deny It
-----------------

According to al-Tha\`labi and al-Tabari, \`Ali (as), the Commander of
the Faithful, repudiated him. When these two authors reached the verse
of ‘mut'a’ in their major tafsir works, they reported with a chain of
transmission to him saying: "Had \`Umar not prohibited the ‘mut'a’,
nobody would have fornicated, apart from those on the verge [of death]."

Ibn \`Abbas also repudiated him saying: "The ‘mut'a’ was nothing but a
mercy which Allah showered on the umma of Muhammad (S), had he (\`Umar)
not prohibited it, no one apart from those on the brink of death would
have needed to fornicate," that is, apart from a few people as explained
by Ibn al-Athir [when discussing] the source of the word shafi'i in his
Nihaya. Ibn \`Abbas used to declare openly that it was permissible, and
he had with Ibn al-Zubayr, even in the time of his rulership, many
discussions, too lengthy to mention here. Jabir also repudiated him
(\`Umar) as you have read in his traditions.

Similarly, his own son \`Abd Allah repudiated him as is proven from him.
Imam Ahmad has reported on page 95 in the second volume of his ‘Musnad’
from the tradition of \`Abd Allah b. \`Umar. He said he was asked on the
‘mut'a’ of women: "By God, at the time of the Prophet of God (A.S), we
did not use to fornicate, or, perform adultery." Then he said: "I swear
by God I heard the Prophet of God (S) say there will be, before the day
of Judgement, Jesus, the anti-Christ and thirty, or, more liars."

Then he was asked again about the ‘mut'a’ of women and he said,
according to the ‘Sahih’ of al-Tirmidhi: "It is allowed." It was said to
him that "your father prohibited it." He said: "Don't you see that if my
father prohibited it while the Prophet performed it will you then leave
the ‘sunnah’ and follow my [Abd Allah son of Umar b. al-Khattab] father
[Umar b. al-Khattab]?"

\`Abd Allah b. Mas\`ud also repudiated him as is well known from him.
The two Shaykhs have reported in their ‘Sahihs’, and the words are being
from al-Bukhari, from \`Abd Allah b. Mas\`ud who said: "We were on an
expedition with the Prophet of God (S), and we had nothing. So, we said:
\`Shall we not castrate [ourselves]?' He prohibited us from that, and he
allowed us to perform the ‘mut'a’ marriage to an appointed time. Then he
read for us the verse:

***\`O you who believe, do not prohibit the good things which Allah has
allowed for you, and do not transgress for Allah does not love those who
transgress (5:87).'"***

You know from the recitation of the verse of the severe repudiation of
prohibiting it as has been clearly explained by the commentators of the
two ‘Sahihs’.

According to what has been widely reported, \`Imran b. Husayn repudiated
him. Al-Razi reported from him that he said: "Allah (S.W.T.) revealed a
verse concerning the ‘mut'a’ and He did not abrogate it by another
verse. The Prophet of God (S) commanded us to perform the ‘mut'a’, and
he did not prohibit us from it. Then a man said something according his
opinion as he wished." Al-Razi said he meant \`Umar.

Al-Bukhari has reported in his Sahih from \`Imran b. Husayn who said:
"The verse on the ‘mut'a’ was revealed in the book of God (Holy Quran)
and we performed it at the time of the Prophet of God (S). No verse was
revealed to prohibit it, and he did not prohibit it until he died, then
a man said according to his opinion what he wished."

Ahmad has reported in his ‘Musnad’ from Abu Raja' from \`Imran b. Husayn
who said: "The verse of ‘mut'a’ was revealed in the book of God (S), and
we acted according to it with the Prophet of God (S); no verse was
revealed to abrogate it and the Prophet (S) did not prohibit it."

During the time of his Caliphate, al-Ma\`mun ordered that it be
proclaimed that the ‘mut'a’ was allowed. Muhammad b. Mansur and Abu
Ayna' entered to see him and they found him brushing [his teeth] and he
was saying, according to what Ibn Khallikan has reported, while he was
in a furious state (quoting \`Umar): "I have prohibited you from the two
‘mut'as’ which were at the time at the Prophet of God (S) and Abu Bakr."

He (al-Ma\`mun) said: "Who are you, O dung beetle, that you prohibit
what the Prophet of God (S) and Abu Bakr used to do?" Muhammad b. Mansur
wanted to talk to him (al-Ma\`mun), but Abu Ayna' signaled to him. He
said: "The man is speaking against \`Umar Ibn Khattab, shall we talk to
him?"

They did not talk to him and Yahya b. Aktham entered to see him. He
(Yahya) talked to him (al-Ma\`mun) confidentially and scared him of
sedition. He mentioned to him (al-Ma\`mun) that the people thought that
he was introducing a major innovation [bid’a] in Islam by this
proclamation which would affect all the masses since, for them, there
was no difference between the call to permit the ‘mut'a’ and the call to
allow fornication. He was on that course until his resolution was
dissolved as he had compassion on his kingdom and on himself.

Amongst those who rejected the prohibition of ‘mut'a’ and allowed, and
practiced it was \`Abd al-Malik b. \`Abd al-\`Aziz b. Jurayh Abu Khaliq
al-Makki. He was born in the year 80 and died in 149 A.H. He was amongst
the foremost of the successors. Ibn Khallikan has profiled him in his
Wafayat and Ibn Sa'd on p. 361 in the fifth volume of his Tabaqat.

The people of the ‘Sihah’ have used him in their arguments. In his book
"al-Jam' bayn rijal al-Sahihayn," Ibn al-Qaysarani profiled him on
p.314. Al-Dhahabi mentioned him in his Mizan, and said that he married
about ninety women by ‘mut'a’ and he saw it admissible to do that. He
said: "He was a jurist amongst the people of Mecca in his time."

The View of the Imamis (Shi’i) on ‘mut'a’
-----------------------------------------

The Imamis have agreed, following their twelve Imams, on its continued
permissibility in accordance with the proofs, some of which you have
read i.e., the consensus of the people of ‘qibla’ that the Almighty
Allah legislated it in His true religion, and allowed it's proclamation
by a caller of His great Prophet (S), and that no abrogation of it has
been proven from Allah, the Almighty, nor, from His Prophet (S) until
the revelation was severed by the Almighty by His taking His Prophet (S)
to the abode of His nobility.

On the contrary, it has been proven that it was not abrogated by the
texts of our authentic traditions successively transmitted from the
Imams of the pure families; so, refer to its contents in the
‘Wasa'il-ash-Shi'a ila ahkam al-Shari'a’ [book of sayings revered as
keystone for Shi’i].

Moreover, the ‘Sihah’ of the ‘ahl al-sunnah’ and all their ‘Musnad’
works are clear in documenting that it remained permitted and was
practised in the time of Abu Bakr and for a little while in the time of
\`Umar until the prohibition against it was issued by him concerning the
matter of \`Amr b. Harith. What we have mentioned in this quickly
compiled report is sufficient for you [to start somewhere]. Indeed, in
this is a reminder for those who have a consciousness, or, who lend an
ear and witness it.


