History of the Shrine of Imam Musa Al-Kadhim & Imam Muhammad Al-Jawad
=====================================================================

Anyone approaching Baghdad from the north or the west will be impressed
by the sight of the four golden minarets at Kadhmayn, the Shrine of the
Two Imams, Imam Musa Al-Kadhim and Imam Muhammad Taqi Al-Jawad, peace be
upon them. They are respectively the Seventh and the Ninth of the Twelve
Imams, at whose tombs we are accustomed to seek healing and to invoke
their intercession for the forgiveness of our sins and the fulfillment
of our needs.

The present building dates back only to the beginning of the sixteenth
century and has been kept in excellent repair. This building represents
the restoration of Shah lsmail I (1502 - 24), though when the Turkish
Sultan, Suleman the Great, captured Baghdad and remained there for four
months in 1534, he visited this sacred place, and is said to have
contributed to the further ornamentation of the Shrine at Kadhmayn.

The tiles for the double cupola, however, were provided in 1796 by Shah
Agha Muhammad Khan, who was the first of the Persian Kadjar dynasty. In
1870, Nasr-al-Din Shah had these golden tiles repaired on one of the
domes and on the minarets. It is interesting that the dates of all these
alterations are clearly indicated by inscriptions.

If we bear in mind that the Two Imams who are buried here died in the
beginning of the eighth century, it will be evident that there are seven
hundred years of the history of their tomb to account for, previous to
the comparatively modern restoration of Shah Ismail I. The Imams lived
in the early days of Baghdad, while the walls of Mansur's round city on
the western side of the Tigris were still standing. There were
cemeteries to the north-west that went by various names - that at the
Syrian Gate, that of the Abbasids, and that of the Straw Gate.[^1]

The Two Imams were buried immediately to the west of this latter
cemetery, but by the time Yakubi wrote, the whole northern district was
designated in a general way as the cemetery of the Kuraish.[^2] Both of
these Imams were poisoned at the instigation of the reigning Caliphs,
but it is significant that in the case of Imam Muhammad Taqi, the
funeral service was read by a representative of the royal family,[^3]
which undoubtedly distinguished the Imam as an important person, at
whose grave some sort of a mausoleum would be built.

But as to the importance attached in the early times to the visit to
this tomb, the only information available is on the authority of
traditions that have been attributed to the Eighth and Tenth Imams.
These traditions are answers they are said to have given when they were
asked by their followers concerning the merit of pilgrimage to Kadhmayn.
It is related that the Imam Ali Reza, whose life in Baghdad was during
the caliphate of Haroon al-Rashid, told his Shia followers to say their
prayers of salutation to his father, the Imam Musa Al-Kadhim, “Outside
the walls of the Shrine, or in the nearby mosques,” if the Sunni
authority and prejudice in Baghdad was too great for them to do so at
the tomb itself.

From this we infer that a building of some sort was recognised at that
early date as marking the tomb of the Imam Musa and that it was
surrounded by a wall. Further statements are said to have been made a
few years later by the Imam Ali Naqi, whose period in the Imamat began
during the later part of the Caliphate of Mu'tasim, and who enjoyed
greater indulgence that was shown to the Shias until the period of
reaction against them and the Mu'tazalites under the Caliph Mutawakkil.
The following particular instructions for visiting this Shrine have been
given by Majlisi.

When you wish to visit the tomb of Musa ibn Jafar and the tomb of
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa, first you must bathe and make yourself clean,
then anoint yourself with perfume and put on two clean garments, after
which you are to say at the tomb of the Imam Musa: -

*Peace be upon thee, O Friend of God!*

*Peace be upon thee, O Proof of God!*

*Peace be upon thee, O Light of God!*

*O Light in the dark place of the earth!*

*Peace be upon him whom God advances in thy regard,*

*Behold I come as a pilgrim, who acknowledges your right,*

*Who hates your enemies and befriends your friends,*

*So intercede for me therefore with your Lord.*

“You are then free,” said the Imam Ali Naqi, “to ask for your personal
needs, after which you should offer a prayer in salutation to the Imam
Muhammad Taqi, using these same words.”

Majlisi, who has included these traditions in his instructions for
modern pilgrims to this Shrine, makes the observation in explanation of
the unusual - brevity of the prescribed prayer, “that it was necessary
in those times to take great care in dissimulation (taqiyah) that the
Shias should not suffer injury.”[^4]

Another tradition that dates from the same century in which these two
Imams died is attributed to a certain Hasan ibn Jamhur, who said:

“In the year 296 A.H., when Ali ibn Ahmad al-Frat was Vizier, I saw
Ahmad ibn Rabi”, who was one of the Caliph's writers, when his hand had
gotten infected so that it had bad odour and turned black.

Everyone who saw him had no doubt but that he would die. In a dream,
however, he saw Hazrat Ali, and said to him: “O Amiru'l Momineen, will
you not ask God to give me my hand?” Hazrat Ali answered, \`go to Musa
ibn Jafar and he will ask this for you from God.' In the morning they
got a litter and carpeted it, gave him a bath and anointed him with
perfume. They had him lie down in the litter and covered him with a
robe.

Then they carried him to the tomb of Imam Musa, whose intercession he
sought in prayer. The afflicted man took some of the earth from the tomb
and rubbed it on his arm up to the shoulder and then bound the arm up
again. The next day, when he opened the bandage, he saw that all the
skin and flesh of the arm had fallen off, and that only the bones and
veins and ligaments remained, and the bad odour had also ceased, When
the vizier heard of this he took the men to testify as what had
happened. In a short time the healthy flesh and skin grew back again,
and he was able to resume his work of writing.”.

Majlisi adds the comment that “in every period there have been so many
miracles (mu'jizaat) and demonstrations of power (karamat) at the tomb
of these two saints that there is no need to describe cases of the past.
In our own times there are so many instances occurring and recurring
that to recount them would be a lengthy process.”[^5]

After the Abbasid caliphs had fallen more under the authority of the
commanders of their armies of Turkish mercenaries, there was a rising of
the Buyids (or Buwaihids) in Persia; and in A.D. 946 the Caliph Mustakfi
was blinded by the Buyid Prince, Mu'izzu'd Dawla, who set up the blinded
Caliph's son, al-Muktaddir, as a nominal ruler while he exercised the
actual authority himself. Ibn Athir has related that “the Buyids were
fanatical adherents of Ali and firmly convinced that the Abbasids were
usurpers of a throne that rightfully belonged to others.”[^6]

They did not take over the Caliphate, but in addition to retaining for
themselves the authority and perquisites of the government of the
provinces, they proclaimed the first ten days of the month of Muharram
as a period of public mourning for Husayn,[^7] and they frequently
enriched the sanctuary at Kadhmayn with their gifts. The Caliph Tai' is
reported to have led the Friday prayers in the Kadhmayn mosque,[^8] so
that in the period of the revival of the Shia influence under the
protection of the Buyids, we are certain that the Kadhmayn Shrine was
regularly visited by pilgrims and served as “the rallying place of the
Shia party.”

It was during this period that the four great works of the Shia
tradition were compiled. Kulaini died in Baghdad in A.D. 939, after
completing his monumental work, the Compendium of the Science of
Religion (al-Kafi fi Ilm ad-din), which is perhaps the most highly
esteemed of all the Shia source books. Ibn Babuwaihi had come to Baghdad
from Khorasan in 966 A.D., where he devoted himself to teaching and
writing.

His \`Every Man His Own Lawyer' (Kitab man la yadhuruhu' l-Faqih), is
also one of the four most authoritative books on Shia law and tradition.
And sixteen years after the death of Ibn Babuwaihi, Al-Tusi also came
from Khorasan to teach in Baghdad, where he wrote the remaining two of
the four great books of traditions that lie at the basis of Shia
theology and jurisprudence, \`The Correcting of judgments' (Tahzhib
al-Ahkam) and the \`Examination of Differences in Traditions'
(Al-Istibsar).

At this time of greater boldness on the part of the Shias, riots with
the Sunnis were not infrequent in Baghdad. In one of these disturbances
in 1051 A.D. the Sunni leader was killed in a fight that had ensued when
the Shias ventured to put an inscription laudatory of Ali above one of
the city gates. The indignation of the Sunnis was so great that in the
tension of the situation after their leader's funeral, they went as a
mob into the Shrine of Kadhmayn and plundered the tombs of the two
Imams.

After carrying off the gold and silver lamps and the curtains which
adorned these sanctuaries, the rioters on the following day completed
their work by setting fire to the buildings. The great teak-wood domes
above the shrines of the Imams Musa and Muhammad were entirely
burnt.[^9] This fact that the domes were at first of teak-wood has
something to do doubtless with the number of times they were burned.

It was shortly after the burning of the Shrine in 1051 A.D. that the
Seljuk Sultans displaced the Buwaihids as military dictators in Persia
and “Protectors” of the Caliphs in Baghdad. They learned what they knew
of Islam in the distinctively Sunni atmosphere of Bukhara. Nevertheless,
when they came to Baghdad, no injury was done to the Shrine at Kadhmayn.
And when Sultan Malik Shah visited it in 1086, it had apparently been
repaired from the damages of the fire of thirty-five years before.[^10]

Ibn Jubayr, who gives a detailed description of Baghdad in 1184, A.D. in
his Travels,[^11] mentions the tomb of Musa ibn Jafar, but he does not
speak of it as Kadhmayn, and he makes no reference to the tomb of the
Imam Muhammad Taqi, which would suggest that Shia influence was at that
time at such low ebb that this shrine, so close to the city of Baghdad
had, been abandoned as a place of regular pilgrimage.

Notwithstanding, before another hundred years had passed when the domes
of the Shrines had again been destroyed by fire, we find that its repair
was regarded as of sufficient importance to be the one and only
enterprise that the short lived Caliph Zahir had been able to undertake.
And Ibn Tiktaka who mentions this repair of the domes in his Kitab
al-Fakhri,[^12] is known to have succeeded his father as supervisor of
the sacred towns of the Shias in the vicinity of Baghdad, so that it is
possible that the minority community, while by no means free, may have
enjoyed certain prescribed and restricted rights.  
 Their headquarters however, were no longer in Baghdad but in Hilla, and
greater importance was given to Najaf and Kerbala as places of
pilgrimage. When the Mongols came with their overwhelming force in 1258,
they wrought almost complete devastation in and around Baghdad. There is
said to have been an understanding, however, that the holy cities of the
Shias should be spared, and in fact Kadhmayn was the only one of these
shrines that suffered. This was perhaps to the destruction of the
western part of the city first. It may have been during the subsequent
siege of the fortress on the eastern side of the Tigris that the
deputation of Shias from Hilla arrived and arranged with Khulagu Khan
for the special protection of Najaf and Kerbala.

However that may be, we know that the city of Baghdad was utterly ruined
by the Mongols, and that the tombs of Kadhmayn were burned. “Nearly all
the inhabitants, to the number, according to Rashid ad-Din, of 800,000
(Makrizi says 2,000,000) perished, and thus passed away one of the
noblest cities that had ever graced the East - the Cynocure of the
Muhammadan world, where the luxury, wealth and culture of five centuries
had been concentrated.

The booty captured, we are told, was so great that Georgians and Tartars
succumbed under the load of gold and silver, precious stones and pearls,
rich stuffs, gold and silver vessels, etc., while as to the vases from
China and Rashan (i.e., procelain), and those made in the country of
iron and copper, they were deemed scarcely of any value, and were broken
and thrown away. The soldiers were so rich that the saddles of their
horses and mules and their most ordinary utensils were inlaid with
stones, pearls and gold. Some of them broke off their swords at the hilt
and filled up the scabbards with gold, while others emptied the body of
a Baghdadian, refilled it with gold, precious stones and pearls, and
carried it off from the city.”[^13]

The death of the last of the Abbasid Caliphs, Mustasim, has been so
celebrated in literature that what actually happened is obscure.

There are numerous accounts of how Khulagu Khan was disgusted when he
saw that in his avarice the Caliph had gathered gold which he had been
unwilling to spend either in defence of the city or to effect favorable
terms of capitulation. Marco Polo relates the story that when Khulagu
Khan entered Baghdad he found to his astonishment a town that was filled
with gold and silver, and in his indignation he gave orders that the
avaricious Caliph should be “shut up in this same town, without
sustenance; and there, in the midst of his wealth, he soon finished a
miserable existence.”[^14]

This story is based on the narrative of Mirkhond, of joinville, and of
Makakia, the Armenian historian, and as Howarth remarks it has provided
“one of those grim episodes which Longfellow delighted to put into
verse”:-

*I said to the Caliph, “Thou art old,*

*Thou hast no need of so much gold;*

*Thou should'st not have heaped and hidden it here,*

*Till the breath of battle was hot and near,*

*But have sown through the land these useless hoards,*

*To spring into shining blades of swords,*

*And keep thine honour sweet and clear.”*

*Then into his dungeon I locked the drone,*

*And left him there to feed all alone,*

*In the honey cells of his golden hive;*

*Never a prayer, nor a cry, nor a groan,*

*Was heard from those massive walls of stone,*

*Nor again was the Caliph seen alive.*

One notable fact in this connection is that the life of the Caliph's
vizier in Baghdad was spared. He was Muayid-ud-din Alkamiya who was
known to have been favorable to the Shias, and who was also reported to
have sent his submission to Khulagu, and had invited him to invade the
country. However, this may be, the Caliph was put to death on the 21st
February, 1258. Wassaf and Novairi say he was rolled up in carpets and,
then trodden under by horses so that his blood should not be spilt. This
was in accordance with the \`yasa' of Jingis Khan, which forbade the
shedding of the blood of royal persons.

But the Caliph's vizier, whose life was spared, “retained his post as
vizier, the reward doubtless of his dubious loyalty.” Various prominent
Persians, as distinguished from Arabs or Turks were appointed to
important positions in the new administration of affairs, and among the
first buildings to be rebuilt was the Shrine of the two Imams, at
Kadhmayn.[^15]

After the fall of the last of the Abbasid Caliph, Baghdad was never
rebuilt on its former scale of grandeur. The Il-Khans, Who were the
descendants of Khulagu, held the city for 82 years, not as a capital,
however, but merely as the chief town of the province of Iraq. It was
near the close of their period of authority that the traveller Mustawfi
visited Baghdad (1339) A.D., and at that time he mentioned seeing the
Shrines of Al-Kadhim and of his grandson, Taqi, the seventh and ninth
Imams. He observed that Kadhmayn was a suburb by itself, about six
thousand paces in circumference.[^16]

About that time the Mongol tribe of Julayr wrested the power from the
Il-Khans, and their chief, Shaikh Hasan Buzurg, made his residence in
Baghdad in 1340, as the town best suited for his tribal headquarters.

Fifty odd years later, in connection with his widespread conquests,
Timur spent three months in Baghdad.  
 It happened to be in the summer that he besieged and captured the city,
and the Persian chronicler in the Zafar Nameh remarks that “the heat was
so intense, that as for the fish in the water, the saliva boiled in
their mounts: and as for the birds in the air, from the fever heat their
livers were cooked and they fell senseless.”The horrors of the taking of
the city are described in graphic detail. So thoroughly had all avenue
of escape been closed that when the wind accelerated the flames that
filled the air, there were many people who threw themselves into the
water, to escape the fire or sword.  
 It was a time when the slave market was such that an old man of eighty
and a child of twelve sold for the same price and the fire of hate waxed
to such a heat that the garment of the wealthy merchant and the rags of
the sick beggar burned the same way. Individual soldiers in bands of the
troops had been each commissioned to each get a head, but some who were
not content with one head got all they could tie to their belts. It is
mentioned, however, that some of the men of learning and rank as were
granted his protection and shared his bounty, but the general carnage
was hideous. When the inhabitants had been thus almost annihilated,
their habitations were dealt with. Only the mosques, the schools, and
the dormitories were spared. Accordingly, we read that Timur left
Baghdad on account of “vile odour of the carcases of the dead.”[^17]

Nevertheless, when Timur took his departure, we are told that he ordered
that the city should be rebuilt. The shrine at Kadhmayn, however, was
not restored. After the death of Timur, there was a brief reoccupation
of Baghdad by the Julayrs, who were displaced by the “Black Sheep”
Turkomans, who held the city from 1411-1469. They in turn were driven
out by their rivals, the “White Sheep” Turkomans.

It was therefore after a long period of neglect, when the city had been
held by successive generations of half savage tribes, that Shah Ismail
I, of the Safawi dynasty captured Baghdad in 1508, and it was in 1519
that he completed the rebuilding of the Shrine at Kadhmayn much as it
stands today. With the rise of Shah Ismail there is an interesting and
significant story of the revival of Persian Shia Power, which belongs in
the history of Ardebil in Azerbaijan rather than in a description of the
Shrine of the “Two Kadhims” in Baghdad.

We are told that frequently from twenty-five, to thirty thousand
pilgrims visit the Shrine in one day. If viewed from a point of vantage,
this Shrine with its twin domes of gleaming gold is one of the most
beautiful sights in Baghdad; and if studied in its historical
associations throughout the last eleven hundred years, it affords a
thrilling resume of the changing fortunes of the far-famed city of
Arabian Nights.

[^1]: . Ibn Sa'd, Tabakat, VII, ii, pp. 68, I. 18; 99, I. 21; & 80, I.
II.

[^2]: . Yakubi, Tarikh, edit, Houtsma, Vol. 11, P. 499.

[^3]: . Kulaini, Usul al-Kafi P. 203.

[^4]: . Majlisi, Toafatu's- Za'irin, pp. 308 fi.

[^5]: . Majiisi, op. cit., p. 309.

[^6]: . Ibn al-Athir, Kamil, viii, p. 177.

[^7]: . Browne, Persian Literature in Modern Times, p. 31.

[^8]: . Le Strange, Baghdad during the Abbasid Caliphate, p. 162.

[^9]: . Le Strange, Op. cit., p. 164.

[^10]: . Le Strange, Op. cit., p. 163.

[^11]: . Ibn Jubayr, Travels, Wright's text revised by de Goeje, P. 226.

[^12]: . lbn Tiktaka, Kitab al- Fakhri, p. 163.

[^13]: . Howarth, History of the Mongols, iii, pp. 126, 127.

[^14]: . Travels of Marco Polo the Venitian, ch. viii.

[^15]: . Howarth, Op. cit. pp. 127-131.

[^16]: . Mustawfi, Nuzhatu'l-Qulub, Eng. trans. Gibb Mem. series, vol.
XXIII, ii, p. 42.

[^17]: . Zafar Nameh, by Sharifu'd-din Ali Yazdi, edt. Calcutta 1887-8,
vol. II pp. 363-369.


