History of the Shrine of Imam Ali Al-Naqi & Imam Hasan Al-Askari, Peace Be Upon Them
====================================================================================

The modern city of Samarra is situated on the bank of the river Tigris
some sixty miles from the city of Baghdad. The city is of outstanding
importance because of its two shrines. The golden dome on one shrine was
presented by Nasr al-Din Shah and completed under Muzaffar al-Din Shah
in the year 1905 A.D. Beneath the golden dome are four graves, those of
Imam Ali Al-Naqi (10th Imam) and his son, Imam Hasan Al-Askari (11th
Imam).

The other two are of Hakimah Khatoon, the sister of Imam Ali Al-Naqi who
has related at length the circumstances of the birth of Imam Al-Mahdi
and the fourth grave is of Nargis Khatoon, the mother of Imam Al-Mahdi,
peace be upon him. The second shrine marks the place where Imam Al-Mahdi
went into concealment. It has a dome that is distinguished for the soft
delicate design that is worked in blue tiles, and beneath it is the
Sardab (cellar) where the Imam is said to have disappeared. Visitors may
enter this Sardab by a flight of stairs.

In the year A.D. 836, after two years experience with factional strife
in Baghdad, the Caliph Mu'tasim departed with his Turkish army to
Samarra, “Which he founded and made his residence and military camp.”
[^1] There eight caliphs lived in the short period of fifty-six
years.[^2] The distance of Samarra from Baghdad is sixty miles. This
name, Surra man ra'a (He who sees it, rejoices), is said to have been
given by Mu'tasim himself, when, for approximately £2,000, he purchased
as a site for his new city a garden that had been developed by a
Christian monastery.

The Caliph's happy Arabic pun was based on the Aramaic name, Samarra,
which was a town in the immediate vicinity from the times before the
Arab conquest. The general district, however, was known as Tirhan.[^3]
Thus the site chosen was an attractive garden spot in a fertile valley
of the Tigris, and there the Caliph built his new capital, which became
known as “the second city of the Caliphs of the Bani Hashim.” A main
avenue, with many residences, ran along the river bank. In the garden of
the monastery he built his royal palace, known as the Daru'l Amma, and
the monastery itself became his treasury.

A Friday Mosque, was built by Mu'tasim very close to the quarter of the
city that was set aside for the army.

Mustawfi informs us further that “he built a Minaret for the Mosque.
17=ells (about 19 metres) in height, with a gangway (to ascend it, that
went up) outside, and no Minaret after this fashion was ever built by
anyone before his time.”[^4] This Minaret, was so large that a man on
horseback is said to be able to ascend its so-called gangway. The same
thing is claimed for the similar minaret in the Mosque of Tulun, which
may have been modeled after it.[^5]

But the Turkish mercenaries, on whom Mu'tasim and his sons and grandsons
relied, soon became the true masters of the situation. While they
cherished their position as guardians of the caliphs, whom they
permitted to live in luxury and security, nevertheless they so exploited
their own opportunities - for gain, through cruelty and oppression, that
in matters of internal administration the authority of the Muslim Empire
sank to a low ebb. This was at a time, however, according to Dinawari,
when there were more victories, for the troops than during any preceding
caliphate.[^6]

In Samarra the caliphs busied themselves building palace after palace,
on both sides of the river, and at a cost that Yakut estimated as 204
million Dinars, which would not be less than eight million sterling.[^7]
A great cypress tree is celebrated in the Shah Nameh as having sprung
from a branch brought by Zoroaster from Paradise. It is said to have
stood at the village of Kishmar, near Turshiz, and to have been planted
by Zoroaster in memory of the conversion of King Gushtasp to the Magian
religion.

Such too was its power that earthquakes, which frequently devastated all
the neighbouring districts, never did any harm in Kishmar. According to
Kazvini, the caliph Mutawakkil in 247 A.H. (861 A.D.) caused this mighty
cypress to be felled, and then transported it across all Persia, in
places carried on camels, to be used for beams in his new palace at
Samarra. This was done inspite of the grief and the protests of all the
Guebres, but when the cypress arrived on the banks of the Tigris,
Mutawakkil was dead, having been murdered by his son.[^8]

Mustawfi who wrote in the fourteenth century, takes pain to mention with
sympathy how the Caliph Mutawakkil enlarged Samarra, and in particular,
how “he built a magnificent Kiosk, greater than which never existed in
the lands of Iran, and gave it the title of the Ja'fariyyah (his name
being Ja'far). But evil fortune brought down on him in that he had laid
in ruins the tomb of Imam Husain, at Karbala, and furthermore he had
prevented people from making their visitation to the same - decreed.
that, shortly after his death, his Kiosk should be demolished, so that
no trace of it now remains. Indeed, of Samarra itself, at the present
time, only a restricted portion is inhabited.”[^9]

The restricted portion that was still occupied in the fourteenth century
was approximately the same as the modern Samarra, and was part of the
“Camp of Mu'tasim.” Here the Imams, Ali Al-Naqi and his son, Hasan
Al-Askari were imprisoned and poisoned and hence they were called the
Askariyan, or the “Dwellers in the Camp.” It was here also that both of
them were buried. The modern Samarra is only a few paces removed from
the walls of the old Friday Mosque, which agrees with Mustawfi's
observation that “in front of the mosque stands the tomb of the Imam Ali
Al-Naqi, grandson of the Imam Ali Al-Ridha; and also of his son, the
Imam Hasan Al-Askari.”

That the city of the Caliphs was much more extensive is indicated by the
modern observation that “the ground plan of the many barracks, palaces
and gardens can be very plainly seen by anyone flying over the site in
an aeroplane.”[^10] The historical topography of the ephemeral capitol
of the Caliphs as outlined by the Arab geographers, Ya'kubi and Yakut,
has been investigated recently by archaeologists, so that the location
of the principal streets and of the many of the palaces has been
determined. Also the findings have proved to be of special value to
students of Muslim art, for they are representatives of the period when
the civilization of the Abbasid caliphate was “shedding its lustre over
the world.”[^11]

It was in this part of Samarra that still remains that the Imam Muhammad
ibn Hasan Al-Askari disappeared from human sight. Mustawfi says this
happened in 264 A.H. (878 A.D.) at Samarra.[^12] The fact that the Shia
community was permitted to have its headquarters after the fall of the
Buyids in the nearby city of Hilla, from which place they conducted
their negotiations at the time of the invasion of Khulagu Khan, gave
rise to the tradition that the Hidden Imam would reappear in that town.
This accounts for the confusion of the traveller, Ibn Batuta (A.D.
1355), who found shrines dedicated to the last Imam, both in Hilla and
Samarra.

The mosque of the last Imam in Hilla marks the place of his expected
reappearance, but the place of his disappearance is at Samarra. At
Hilla, Ibn Batuta found that the mosque had an extended veil of silk
stretched across its entrance, and it was a practice for the people “to
come daily, armed to the number of a hundred, to the door of this
mosque, bringing with them a beast saddled and bridled. \`Come forth,
Lord of the Age, for tyranny and baseness now abounds; this then is the
time for thy egress, that, by thy means, God may divide between truth
and falsehood.'

They wait till night and then return to their homes.” Samarra itself was
at that time in ruins, though Ibn Batuta mentions that “there had been a
Mashhad in it, dedicated to the last Imam by the Shias.”[^13] It may
have been owing to the fact that the place was in ruins that pains were
not taken to ascertain that the Mashhad was the “place of witness” in
memory of the Imams, Ali Al-Naqi and Hasan Al-Askari, and that a
different spot nearby was highly regarded as the place where the last
Imam disappeared.

[^1]: . Dinawari, Akhbar at-Tiwal, et. Guirgass, p. 396.

[^2]: . Ya'kubi (A.D. 891), Kitab al-Buldan, cd. de Goeje, p. 255, &
Mustawfi, Nuzhatu'l-Qulab, Eng. trans. Le Strange, p. 40.

[^3]: . Ya'kubi, op. cit., p. 255; and Le Strange, Lands of the Eastern
Caliphate, pp. 53-54.

[^4]: . Mustawfi, op. cit., p. 49.

[^5]: . Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th edit., Vol. II, p. 424.

[^6]: . Dinawari, op., cit, 396.

[^7]: . Le Strange, op., cit., p. 55.

[^8]: . Ibid., p. 355.

[^9]: . Mustawfi, op. Cit., p. 49.

[^10]: . Historical Mesopotamia, A Guide Book published by Baghdad
Times, Baghdad, 1922, p. 51.

[^11]: . Ency. Islam, art. “Samarra”, with references to the
investigations of E. Herzfeld.

[^12]: . Mustawfi, op. cit., p. 47.

[^13]: . Ibn Batuta, cd. Paris, ii, p. 98; ibid., - trans. Lee, ch.
VIII, p. 48; De Herbelot, Ann. Mosl., tom. iii, p. 716 and the
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, art. “Mahdi”, vol. III, p. 338.


