Ailment and Remedy
==================

**1-Ailment**

Intense fanaticism, blind following, undue respect shown to so-called
pious individuals of the nation and lack of courage in investigating the
life history, morals and mentality accompanied by a careful survey and
discussion of all aspects of the period in which they lived, have been
major factors for the Muslims' indigence, and the reason for the
dispersion and retardation of the Islamic society.

Fourteen centuries of Islamic history have gone by, but not all the
Muslims have heard of this history which is related to them, nor of the
critical and important events which have been the main factor in the
course of such a history for Islam. Various political factors, too, have
had a significant role in Today all are cognizant of the fact that in
every society and nation, employment of self-interest and influence, and
promotion of personal motives through religion facilitate the attainment
of a decisive result for this reason, alteration of facts, fabrication
and propagation of false stories and non-factual matters and creation of
false subjects are the factors which have been employed in every period
and country in order to promote personal motives and political aims. In
this way, the basis of differences and dispersion among the Muslims has
been greatly, reinforced and those who have held position and power have
spared no effort in employing all methods to intensify these differences
in order to attain their political designs.

With the passage of years and centuries, and concentration of
misinterpreted and altered subjects and stories in minds, their
penetration into the beliefs and thoughts and their transfer from one
generation to another have eventually led to such conditions which have
been faced by nations for many centuries. Hence there has come about a
history which has perplexed all sound minds, wondering how to have
access to true facts in this regard.

**2-Remedy**

This deviation from truth is not only in the history of Islam. Every
nation and religion too has a similar history. But it is certain that
truth does not perish, and however strong the means of deviation may be,
it cannot generally be eliminated. But what is meanwhile important is
the endeavor to discover and bring the truth out of thousands of false
statements and announcing it decisively with acceptable arguments. What
has been achieved by the lofty scholar Sayyid Murtada 'Askari in his
famous book "Ahadith of 'Umm al- Mu'minin 'A'ishah" has shown a new way
for seekers of truth. The author has written the present book which
describes the facts and events of early Islam, by means of perusing many
books of history and tradition about the validity of which all world
Muslims are unanimous, and he has set forth clear and decisive arguments
and evidence about which no doubt or ambiguity remains and he has left
it all for the public to judge.

On the suggestion of the author, I translated the said book entitled
"The Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam" when I was on an official
mission to Baghdad. But its printing was postponed for some years; this
delay, however, proved to be fortunate, since the present book secured
some advantages over the original text in several ways, and after a
recent meeting with the author in Tehran, the following points were
agreed to:

1-It contains the accounts and introduction written by scholar Hamid
Hafni Dawud in praise of the book, together with its translation. 2-The
reason for the plurality of the Prophet's wives, described by the
author, has been added to the present book.

3-A more detailed account has been given of the personalities who were
dealt with briefly earlier in the notes.

4-A more detailed account has been given of the great men of learning
who played a significant role in the course of Islamic history, and this
account has been transferred from the notes to the main text.

5-The Quranic chapter "at-Tahrim" and the cause of its descent have
been wholly included after the brief story of Mariyah.

In following up the admirable way adopted by the author, the
translation into Persian has been carried out impartially and free from
any prejudice and personal feelings, and without any alteration or
expression of likes and dislikes. May this minor contribution succeed in
revealing the true facts and causes of the course taken by the present
history of Islam, and be acceptable to Unique God, and approved by men
of learning and research.

Now that the first volume of this book is offered for the general
public for judgment, it is hoped that men of enlightenment, knowledge
and discernment will offer their views, criticisms and suggestions
impartially and without taking side with any particular sect, and thus
guide and help the writer to remove any deficiencies, which may exist
now, in his effort to produce a faultless edition in future. In this
way, they may render a worthy service to the world of Islam. In
conclusion, I must express thanks to my learned friend Mr. Muhammad
Husayn Mujahid for encouraging me to translate this book and for
undertaking the labor of its collation.

**A part of the introduction by Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawud**

Professor of Arabic Literature at the Cairo University Language Faculty
Facts

**Ibn Mas'ud's method of guidance**

"The truest of words is the Book of God, and the way of salvation is
the one shown by our lord Muhammad (p.b.u.h.). The worst of deeds is
innovation which causes deviation that ends with the fire of hell." Thus
spoke 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud (May God be pleased with him) to his
companion peers and to his pupils and followers, describing the signs of
the ways of religion.

When he spoke of knowledge, he meant the highest goal, which has been
sought by religious scholars and seekers of truth in discovering the
truth alone and avoiding deviation and wrong words. He said: Attainment
of truth is not possible except through two fundamental principles of
the noble religion of Islam, namely the Book of God and the utterances
of His prophet, the former being the highest and noblest truth ever
uttered in the past and present, which cannot be excelled in future, and
whose validity will never be diminished.

Why should it not be so? The reason is that it has descended from God
Almighty, and mankind has confessed his own weakness and inability
before the eloquence of its phrases and its brilliant truth. It is the
most decisive evidence for the prophethood of Muhammad. Next are the
utterances of an untaught and unlettered Prophet, an exalted personality
through whom the heavenly Book has been communicated to the people all
over the world; a person who has not offered anything on his own behalf,
nor has he added anything on his own behalf, nor has he added anything
of his own, nor given any instructions except for the inspirations
received from the source of divine revelation.

His words rose from the heart, and they were nothing but heavenly
inspirations sent to him by Great God. In the Qur'an God has praised him
and spoken well of his character, and said:

"And most surely you conform yourself to sublime morality."1 Therefore
what has come from these two valid sources must be a clear and 1.The
Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Qalam, Verse 4.

absolute truth into which doubt or ambiguity cannot find its way,
whereas anything that has not been derived from those two sources is
exposed to evaluation and criticism, and is subject to changes and
modifications, and also to the estimation of its beauty and ugliness.

An alert and clear-sighted reader may have understood our purpose in
quoting the words of that exalted companion of the Prophet who began his
remarks with such wise phrases. In his description of the ways of
religion and the sacred laws of Islam, he draws the attention of the
listener directly to the Book of God and His prophet's tradition, and
advises him to follow those two principles, namely a book about whose
words, phrases, and apparent form and arrangement all are unanimous and
have no differences, and a tradition and lifestyle which have been
handed down by the Prophet to chaste and virtuous individuals namely men
who had no intention of attributing any falsehood or misconduct to the
Prophet of Islam.

**Let us know the truth and its supporters**

Another point that we deduce from that sincere and wise utterance is
that these two sources are immune from any questioning and safe from any
criticism and alteration, whereas everything else is subject to
evaluation, and about which a verdict is issued with the aid of
intellect and knowledge, and is subject to analysis and criticism, in
order to distinguish the difference between jewels and shells, and right
and wrong.

On this course, we have no fear in facing other sources and their
authors even if they may possess a high rank in the Islamic society and
dignity among the people and may be among the Prophet's companions. The
reason is that our purpose is to seek truth and right, and also because
the Prophet's companions have not all possessed the same level of
justice, knowledge and accuracy in preserving the exact words and
phrases of the Prophet of God, and like many other human beings they may
have been subject to forgetfulness, error and blunder. Some of them have
followed the path of truth in elaborating on the Prophet's tradition,
while others may have erred in it. Some of them possessed a strong
memory, while some others had been forgetful; a number may have been
steadfast in faith, while others were fickle and perplexed; some were
sincere devotees, while others were hypocrites!

The Qur'an itself confirms this point where it says: "And from among
those who are round about you of the dwellers of the desert there are
hypocrites, and from among the people of Medina also; they are stubborn
in hypocrisy; you do not know them; We know them; We will chastise them
twice, then shall they be turned back to a grievous chastisement."2

**2.The Holy Qur'an, Chapter at-Tawbah, Verse 101.**

With this state of affairs in early days of Islam, we cannot consider
all the companions to be on an equal footing and regard all the
standard-bearers of Islam as being wholly chaste; for, since the
appearance of man on the earth and formation of society, he has always
shown his various aspects including the highest degrees of integrity and
justice as well as the lowest level of hypocrisy and hindrance.
Historical evidence and statistics, gained from the study of various
peoples and societies since the creation of Adam, confirm this view.

But the principle of change in religious communities and the manner of
invitation towards the path of truth reached the height of perfection in
the person of Muhammad and his friends, for, no other Prophet has
brought such an exalted and steadfast law, and no friends of any other
Prophet have equaled the friends of our Prophet in devotion to religion
and immensity of number.

But the honor of companionship with the Prophet which have given a
particular rank and dignity to his friends, have not checked some of
them from causing derangement m his injunctions through self-interest
and showing lack of devotion to his laws and commands. Consequently,
there is no reason why we should exempt the leaders and pioneers of
Islam from the general law of investigation and criticism solely owing
to their companionship with the Prophet; for, they have not been of
equal weight from the viewpoint of justice. For instance, despite
intense insistence and desire of the Prophet for the guidance of all
human beings towards the path to perfection, there were some individuals
in whose heart Islam did not easily find its way, and also there were
some who had hidden infidelity and hypocrisy behind the mask of Islam.

The Qur'an clearly describes the lofty ideas of the Prophet and his
deep and sincere interest in guiding people on to the path of truth, and
it has, on several occasions, spoken of his attitude and sacred ideals.
It says at one place: "Therefore do remind, for, you are only a
reminder. You are not a watcher over them."3

And elsewhere it says:

"Surely you cannot guide whom you love but Allah guides whom He
pleases."4 And at another place it says:

"Therefore do remind, surely reminding does profit."5 There are also
many such verses in the Qur'an which confirm the insistence of this
great reformer of mankind, and his deep desire to guide all people, and
especially his sympathy and kindness upon the order of God, towards
those persons who are still wayward and have not had the privilege of
finding the true path, having been separated from the followers of the
divine path.

3.The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Ghashiyah, Verse 21-22.

4.The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Qasas, Verse 56.

5.The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-A'la, Verse 9.


