Events Which Befell Ibn Mas'ud
==============================

I appoint 'Ammar ibn Yasir as your governor; and 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud
as minister of state for your religious affairs, and remember especially
that with the dispatch of 'Abd Allah Mas'ud I have given the people of
Kufah preference over myself. 'Umar, in a Lear to the people of Kufah
Abu 'Abd ar-Rahman 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud al-Hadhali was the son of
Mas'ud who was allied with the Banu Zuhrah tribe, and was a Muslim of
early Islam. At that time no one dared to recite the Qur'an aloud, but
he did so and with an audible voice he carried the divine words to the
negligent ears of the infidels. The Quraysh did not leave Ibn Mas'ud's
insolence without retaliation, and beat him so severely that he got
badly hurt and was covered with blood. The Prophet took care of him, and
Ibn Mas'ud willingly accepted to serve him. He was so privileged as to
be allowed to hear the Prophet's voice.

Ibn Mas'ud always served the Prophet and never left him. He placed the
Prophet's shoes before him and helped him put them on. He walked with
the Prophet, sometimes in front of him, to shield him against any
probable danger. When the Prophet washed himself, he held up a sheet to
screen him from others' eyes. When the Prophet slept, Ibn Mas'ud kept
watch, and also awakened him from sleep when necessary.

Ibn Mas'ud emigrated to Abyssinia and Medina and took part in the
battle of Badr and also in the subsequent combats. The account of his
life after the Prophet's death is as follows:134 'Umar sent him and
'Ammar ibn Yasir to Kufah and dispatched the following letter to the
people of that city: "I have appointed and sent 'Ammar ibn Yasir to you
as your governor and 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud as your adviser and teacher
in religious matters. They are two of the select companions of the
Prophet and participants in the battle of Badr. Follow and obey them
heartily, and remember especially that in sending Ibn Mas'ud I have
given you preference over myself."

In Kufah, Ibn Mas'ud taught the Qur'an to people, acquainted them with
religious matters and also acted as treasurer of the public fund. In
'Uthman's rule, al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah, his foster brother, was appointed
as governor of Kufah When he arrived and assumed control of affairs, he
came finally in direct contact with Ibn Mas'ud.

In the past, it had been customary for a governor, during his mission
to borrow money for a fixed period from the public fund and repay it in
due time. al-Walid, too, applied for such a loan, and Ibn Mas'ud
extended it to him. On the due date he asked al-Walid for repayment and
insisted upon it. But al- Walid, unable to tolerate this impudence on
the part of Ibn Mas'ud, wrote to 'Uthman and asked his aid in this
involvement with Ibn Mas'ud. 'Uthman wrote the following note to Ibn
Mas'ud: "Your job is to act as our treasurer, but you have no authority
to interfere and call al-Walid to account for any sum that he draws on
the public fund!" When Ibn Mas'ud received this note and realized that
he could no longer accept such an important responsibility, and
harmonize himself with 'Uthman's methods, he threw down the keys of the
treasury before al-Walid and said: "I had supposed till now that I was a
keeper of Muslims' assets. But I have no wish to be your treasurer and I
resign from this post." 135 After his resignation as treasurer, he
stayed in Kufah for some time.

Concerning the same story the book "al-'Iqd al-farid" says that Ibn
Mas'ud addressed the Muslims in the Kufah mosque, in these words: "O
people of Kufah! Know that tonight your public fund is reduced by
100,000 and gone, without any instruction being issued by the commander
of the Faithful to divest me of the responsibility." al-Walid reported
these words to 'Uthman and he dismissed Ibn Mas'ud.136 al-Baladhuri
writes in Ansab al-ashraf137: When Ibn 134. Musnad of Ahmad 5/389,
al-Mustadrak 3/315 and 320, Hilyat of Abu Nu'aym 1/126 and 127, Kanz
7/55, al-Bukhari and Usd al-ghabah 3/258.

135. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/36.

136. al-'Iqd al-farid 2/272.

137. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/36. Mas'ud threw down the keys
of the treasury before al-Walid, he exclaimed angrily: Whoever changes
God's command at his own wish, will lose his hereafter, and whoever does
so at his own whim, will be faced with God's wrath. I see that 'Uthman
has done so. Is it right to remove such a governor as Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas from Kufah and replace him with al-Walid?' Ibn Mas'ud often used
to say: "The best words are those of the Qur'an, the best path is the
one shown by the Prophet, and the worst deed is heresy since every
heresy is deviation that ends in hell."138

al-Walid also reported these stinging words of Ibn Mas'ud, to 'Uthman
and added that he slandered the caliph and abused him. 'Uthman summoned
Ibn Mas'ud to Medina. When the people of Kufah learnt of his recall to
the capital, they gathered round him asking him not to go but to stay
with them to remain immune from any possible injury. Ibn Mas'ud said:
'He has the right of being obeyed, and I have no wish to be the first
person to open the door to riot and sedition upon him and disobey
him.139

al-Isti'ab gives Ibn Mas'ud's answer to the people of Kufah as follows:
"These conditions are bound to produce riot and sedition, and I have no
desire to start a riot." The people of Kufah saw him off and he advised
them to be chaste and act upon God's injunctions and then asked them to
return home before his departure. The people praised him for his
goodness, and on his leaving for Medina, they thanked him for his
efforts and services, saying: "May God reward you! You familiarized our
ignorant ones with religion, and made our wise ones more steadfast in
faith. You taught us the Qur'an, informed us of the Islamic faith and
made us clear-sighted about religion. You were indeed a good Muslim, a
fine friend and a kind brother." Then saying farewell, they returned
home.140

When Ibn Mas'ud arrived at Medina, he went straight to the Prophet's
mosque where 'Uthman was at that moment giving a sermon while standing
on the Prophet's pulpit. When he saw Ibn Mas'ud he changed his words and
said: "Just now a mean and worthless quadruped has entered upon you, a
fellow who on people's stretching their hands for bread, will vomit what
he has eaten and throw it out of his belly."

In answer to this abuse, Ibn Mas'ud said: "No, 'Uthman, I am not such a
man! I am one of the Prophet's companions with the honor of being
present in the battle of Badr and Pledge of ar-Ridwan (Good
pleasure)."141 'A'ishah, too, exclaimed: "O 'Uthman! Are you using such
words about Ibn 138. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/36.

139. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/36.

140. al-Isti'ab on Ibn Mas'ud.

141. Ibn Mas'ud, in his answer, is directly reproaching 'Uthman who was
not present on the above two occasions and thus he did not have the
honour of participation in those events.

Mas'ud who has been an intimate companion of the Prophet?" In answer to
her, 'Uthman shouted: "Be silent", and then ordered to expel Ibn Mas'ud
from the mosque. They carried out the caliph's order with Shocking
insults to Ibn Mas'ud. 'Abd Allah ibn Zam'ah knocked him down, and it is
said that Yahmun, 'Uthman's slave, got between Ibn Mas'ud's legs, lifted
him and threw him down so violently that his ribs were broken. At this
time, 'Ali who was witnessing this scene, turned to 'Uthman and said: "O
'Uthman! Do you act in this way only on the words and reports of
al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah towards a companion of the Prophet?"

'Uthman answered: "No! It is not only because of al-Walid's words! I
had also sent Zubayd ibn as-Salt Kindi to Kufah for investigation." Ibn
Mas'ud, who was twisting with agony, cried out: " 'Uthman's blood is
lawful" and 'Ali said in answer to 'Uthman: "And you have relied on
Zubayd's words who is not trustworthy!" Then he rose to aid Ibn Mas'ud
and took him home for treatment.

After this incident, Ibn Mas'ud stayed in Medina and 'Uthman did not
permit him to leave that city. Even when he was cured from his injury,
he asked leave to participate in the holy war against the Romans, but
'Uthman refused permission. It is also narrated that before 'Uthman
could give a positive or negative answer, Marwan anticipated it and said
to 'Uthman: "He has roused Iraq against you and made them suspicious of
you. Now it is ash-Sham's turn and he intends to rouse the people there
against you!" Thus to the end of his life, Ibn Mas'ud was unable to
leave Medina and a watch was kept over him until his death two years
before 'Uthman's assassination. On this occasion Ibn Mas'ud's stay in
Medina lasted three years. The final conversation between 'Uthman and
Ibn Mas'ud is worthy of attention. When Ibn Mas'ud was ill in bed and
passing through the last moments of his life, 'Uthman came to visit his
sick-bed and said: -What are you suffering from?

-From my sins.

-What would you like?

-God's favor and forgiveness. -Shall I call a doctor for you?

-The doctor himself has made me sick. -Shall I order to pay your salary
and pension?142 -You did not pay it when I needed it Do you want to do
so today when I have no need for it?

-It will remain for your children. -God will provide for their
livelihood. -Beg God to forgive me for what I have done. 142. His
pension and salary had not been paid for two years. History of Ibn
Kathir 7/163, al-Ya'qubi 2/197, al- Mustadrak 3/13.

-I beg God to seize my right from you. Ibn Mas'ud had willed that
'Ammar ibn Yasir should perform his burial prayer, and that 'Uthman
should not attend his burial. His will was carried out and he was buried
in al-Baqi' without 'Uthman's knowledge.143 When 'Uthman heard of it, he
got very angry and asked why he was buried without his knowledge. 'Ammar
said: "He had willed that you should not perform his burial prayer."
'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr composed a couplet on this occasion, meaning:
"I know that you will lament my death whereas you had cut off my bread
and food."

This was an account of Ibn Mas'ud.144 But al-Walid's rule did not
result in the story of Ibn Mas'ud alone. During his rule he committed
many mischievous and seditious acts such as his ill-treatment of Abu
Zubayd, a Christian poet, and of a Jewish magician.

**Playing with fire**

al-Walid arranged for his Christian companion a monthly share of the
Muslims' public fund, including wine and pork. Ansab al-ashraf of
al-Baladhuri Protecting a winebibbing companion Abu al-Faraj narrates in
the book "al-Aghani", quoting Ibn al-A'rabi as follows: When al-Walid
was appointed by his brother, 'Uthman, as governor of Kufah, Abu Zubayd,
a Christian poet, joined him. al-Walid provided him with a house
belonging to 'Aqil ibn Abi Talib and granted it to him. This offer of
the house to a Christian, addicted to wine, prompted the Muslims of
Kufah for the first time ever to speak ill of and criticize al-Walid,
since this Christian entered the mosque in order to meet al-Walid and
accompany him to his house to engage in nightly revelry and drinking,
and while tottering and drunken, he passed through the mosque to return
home.

al-Walid's conduct clearly showed his carelessness towards religious
affairs and his indifference towards the people's feelings and beliefs.
At a time when he was expected to abandon wine drinking and check the
acts of Abu Zubayd, his companion, which were against religious laws and
common usage, he on the contrary granted this Christian the vast lands
situated between the red 143. His death occurred in the year 32 after
Hijrah. az-Zubayr buried him at night without informing 'Uthman. At
death his age was about 60 or a little more.

144. From Tabaqat, al-Baladhuri 5/36, al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah,
al-Mustadrak 3/13, Kanz 7/54, History of al- Ya'qubi 2/147, History of
al-Khamis 2/268, and Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/236-237. palaces of ash-Sham and
Hira and made those lands a pasture for his flock and cattle, forbidding
others to use them. In return, for this favour, Abu Zubayd composed a
poem in his praise.145

al-Baladhuri writes: al-Walid arranged for his Christian companion a
monthly allowance from the Muslims' public fund including wine and pork.
His intimate friends reminded him that such an act would antagonize
people towards him. Consequently, he stopped the allowance of wine and
pork and instead ordered to pay him their price every month in addition
to his salary. This governor of Kufah allowed a Christian to enter a
Muslims' mosque.146 Another wrong act of al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah resulted in
making people cynical about 'Uthman's government and his protégé, since
he had allowed his Jewish clown to engage in jugglery in the mosque of
Kufah in order to amuse the governor and his cavaliers.

One of his shows in a dark night was to exhibit a big elephant sitting
on horseback. Another item was that the juggler turned himself into a
camel walking on a rope. Next time he showed a donkey through whose
mouth he entered and emerged through arsehole. In conclusion, he
summoned a spectator and fearlessly cut off his head with a sword, and
to the people's amazement he once more drew the sword across him with
the man rising again safe and sound.

Jundab, son of Ka'b, was present among the spectators in the mosque
watching these scenes and acts of the Jewish juggler. He constantly
prayed for God's protection from Satan and perversion and such acts
which make a human being forget Allah. He knew that all this amounted to
dexterity and sleight of hand which are strongly forbidden in Islam. So
he could bear it no longer and drawing his sword cut off the Jew's head
with one blow and shouted: "Right has prevailed over wrong; for, wrong
is undoubtedly destructible!" It is also said that all this happened in
day time, and Jundab who had no sword with him, went to a shop and got a
sword from a sword-maker to return and kill the juggler, saying: "Now,
if you are truthful, bring yourself back to life!" Anyhow it was
al-Walid who turned the chaste and holy site of the Kufah mosque, which
was a place of worship and benediction, into a scene of juggling by a
Jew, and it was Jundab who by killing the same juggler ruined the means
amusement of the debauchee governor, the protege' of 'Uthman.

al-Walid who was extremely enraged by Jundab's action, ordered to kill
him in revenge for the death of Zurarah, the Jew. But his family, from
al-Azd tribe, rose in support of him to prevent his death. But al-Walid
in slyness condoned the death order into imprisonment, hoping to kill
him secretly. Jundab was sent to prison and Dinar was placed as warden
over him. When Dinar learnt of the reason for his imprisonment and
noticed his religious devotion and faith, and 145. al-Aghani 4/182 and
183.

146. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/29 and 30.

that he was engaged in prayer all night, he had no wish to shed his
blood, so he said to him: -I will open the door and you can save your
skin by escaping. -If I do so, al-Walid will kill you instead. -My blood
is no worth if it is shed in the way of God and in' saving one of the
devotees. At last on the insistence of the warden, Jundab left the
prison and took to flight.

In the morning when al-Walid found himself free from the meddlesome
tribe of al-Azd and others, he prepared himself for killing Jundab and
summoned him. His servants came back to report his escape. Dinar, too
confirmed this report. al-Walid who was greatly enraged at Jundab's
flight and laxity of the warden, ordered to behead him147 and hang his
body at the sewer of Kufah.148 After his escape from prison, Jundab
secretly left Kufah and reached Medina where he settled down until 'Ali
ibn Abi Talib mediated for him with 'Uthman. 'Uthman accepted his
intercession and wrote to al-Walid telling him not to harass Jundab.
Thus Jundab was once more able to return to Kufah.149

**The first sparks of revolution**

As al-Walid's wicked and unlawful deeds as governor of Kufah reached
their peak, 'Uthman's wrong conduct and reactions, which had caused
discontent among the people, were mentioned and reported by everyone.
'Amr ibn Zurarah, son of Qays an-Nakha'i and Kumayl ibn Ziyad an-Nakha'i
who were two of the well-known men of Kufah, were among the first of
those who brought up the subject of overthrow of 'Uthman and election of
'Ali ibn Abi Talib as caliph. 'Amr gathered the people and said to them:
"O people! Though 'Uthman knows well the difference between right and
wrong, he has deliberately ignored this matter, and placed low and
unworthy individuals as guardian over the life and property of your good
people and given them power and authority."

147. Muruj adh-dhahab of al-Mas'udi 1/437 and al-Aghani 4/186. 148. The
author has used various sources for the story of Jundab and the juggler.
But as the subject is the same, I have confirmed myself to the
translation of one of them only. (Sardar-Niya) 149. Jundab was one of
the Prophet's companions. Four men of the al-Azd tribe were called
Jundab, namely Jundab al-Khayr ibn 'Abd Allah, Jundab ibn Zuhayr, Jundab
ibn Ka'b and Jundab ibn 'Afif. But the story of the Jew's death is
mostly attributed to Jundab ibn Ka'b. Ibn al-Athir writes: With one blow
of the knife he killed the Jew and said: "Now bring yourself back to
life", and after reciting a relevant verse of the Qur'an, he gazed
straight at al-Walid, and said: "A magician's punishment is a blow of
the sword", and al-Walid imprisoned him. His nephew composed a poem,
meaning: "For the death of a Jewish magician they imprison on Jundab and
kill the companion of the first Prophet of God." At the end of his life,
Jundab went to ash-Sham and fought the infidels, and at last died in the
10th year of Mu'awiyah's rule. Refer to Usd al-ghabah 1/303 to 360. Also
to al- Aghani 4/185 and 186 and Ansab al-ashraf 5/29 and 31.

Khalid ibn 'Arfatah, who was present among the audience, hurriedly went
to al-Walid and reported the gathering of people and 'Amr's inciting
words. al- Walid was enraged and rode to face the people and disperse
them. But this companions stopped him and pointed out that the matter
was more serious than he supposed; for, the people were angry and ready
to riot and rise, warning him not to fan up the flame of sedition.
Meanwhile, Malik, son of al-Harith, suggested that with al-Walid's
approval he would make the people quiet. al- Walid agreed and Malik went
to the crowd, warned them of riot and rebellion and dispersed them
peacefully. al-Walid immediately wrote a letter to 'Uthman about Amr ibn
Zurarah's action and words and asked for instructions to get rid of him.
'Uthman wrote in answer:

"This Ibn Zurarah is a mischievous Bedouin and you must exile him to
ash-Sham." al-Walid carried out the order and exiled 'Amr to
ash-Sham.150 On Amr's forced departure from Kufah on the charge of
seeking justice and truth, he was seen off by Malik al-Ashtar, al-Aswad
ibn Yazid, 'Alqamah ibn Qays and Qays ibn Fahdan, Qays composed this
poem to show his sympathy towards 'Amr: "I swear to God, to the God of
Ka'bah that in all my deeds whether secret or open I seek God's consent.
We will indeed overthrow al-Walid and his master, 'Uthman, who is a
shelter for deviation, from their positions as governor and caliph."

**'Uthman's inspector in Kufah**

When 'Uthman received numerous complaints from various sections of
Kufans about al-Walid's conduct, he was forced, at least in appearance,
to show some reaction to these protests. So he sent Hamran, his freed
slave, as inspector to Kufah to survey the situation there and report on
al-Walid's treatment of people. But al-Walid bought this top official of
the government with money, and by offering him bribes sent him back to
Medina empty-handed. Hamran returned, and in harmony with the real wish
of 'Uthman, prepared a report in praise of al-Walid's conduct. So
'Uthman was relieved and felt no more anxiety.

After some time Marwan151 met Hamran and asked him the truth about al-
Walid. Hamran answered: "The situation is very critical." Marwan
reported the facts to 'Uthman, who exiled Hamran to Basra for his false
report and treason, 150. For an account of 'Amr ibn Zurarah's life refer
to Usd al-ghabah 2/201-202 and 4/104. 151. The reader will become
familiar with Marwan in due course and learn about his character and
basic beliefs. But here we must mention that since Marwan expected a big
share in the plunder of public fund for himself and his children, and
knew that the stability of the Umayyad rule which was founded prior to
'Uthman in Islam, depended wholly on stable conditions, a tranquil
environment and general ignorance. He was also more or less aware of the
approaching riot and rebellion owing to the conditions created by the
irregular acts and offences of al-Walid, 'Uthman's favorite, and his
support for him and his other agents. So, in order to uproot the
revolution, and nip public incitements and intrigues in the bud, he
decided to inform the caliph of facts and seriousness of the situation.
Otherwise it was not his sympathy for Islam or for the endeavors of the
Prophet, nor was he motivated by humanitarian feelings or Islamic
brother-hood in informing 'Uthman of the chaotic conditions of Kufah and
its people. (Sardar-Niya).

and gave him a house to live in there.152 The winebibber ruler of
Muslims al-Walid spent the whole night drinking wine with his
companions, minstrels and musicians.

**History of al-Mas'udi**

al-Walid's rule in Kufah lasted five years during which he fought the
pagans in the region of Azerbaijan. But as he was not a true believer,
in that critical situation he committed an act, which deserved religious
punishment. The leaders came together to see to the execution of
punishment in his case, but Hudhayfah opposed this, saying that as a
commander of the Islamic army this would not be right, and so they
desisted from such an action.153 I do not know why al-Walid deserved the
punishment, whether it was because of drinking wine or any other
offense. But it is certain that he constantly drank wine, and went so
far in it that according to all the historians, the related punishment
was eventually carried out in his case.

Abu al-Faraj writes in al-Aghani: "al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah was a
winebibbing adulterer. One morning he came drunken to the mosque to
offer prayer along with the people and instead of offering two units, he
performed four. During the prayer he sang out this phrase: "The heart is
mortgaged to the ringlets of Rubab, while no trace remains of the
youthfulness of either of them." When the prayer was over, he turned to
the congregation and said: "Do you wish me to add some more units to the
morning prayer?" And at the same time he vomited what he had eaten.154

al-Mas'udi writes in the same connection: al-Walid spent the whole
night drinking wine with his companions, minstrels and musicians.

One day when the muezzin called for prayer, al-Walid, dressed in his
underwear and drunken, came to the mosque and stood at the altar to pray
with the people. He offered four units of prayer instead of the usual
two and prolonged the act of prostration, during which, instead of
praising God, he kept on saying: "Drink and give me a drink!" When he
supposed the prayer to be over, he returned to the people and said: "Do
you wish to offer more than four units of prayer?" 'Attab ath-Thaqafi,
who was sitting in the first row behind al- Walid, shouted at him,
saying: "May God favour you! What has happened to you? I swear to God
that I am amazed at none but the caliph of the Muslims who has made a
person like you governor over us!" The people, too, threw 152. Ansab
al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/31.

153. al-Baladhuri 5/31.

154. al-Aghani 4/178-179.

pebbles at him. When this brother of caliph 'Uthman saw himself in such
an awkward position, he staggeringly betook himself to the palace while
murmur- ing a song meaning: "I never turn away from wine and a pretty
slave-girl, and do not deprive myself of their blessing and pleasure. I
keep on drinking so much wine as to quench my brain, and then pass
staggering through the crowd!"

**The event about witnesses**

At last the people of Kufah got wearied of the unlawful and obscene
acts of al- Walid, and when they saw that their protests and complaints
to 'Uthman were of no avail, they decided to secure decisive evidence
about al-Walid's laxity and addiction, go to the caliph and inform him
of the problem and confusion faced by their worldly and religious
affairs, so as to convince him of these matters and compel him to turn
his attention to their complaints and meet their requests. To carry out
this plan, the leaders of the people thought of removing, from
al-Walid's finger in his state of drunkenness, the signet ring with
which he sealed official documents and which 'Uthman knew well, and show
it to the caliph as a definite evidence.

al-Baladhuri writes in this connection155: On the day al-Walid
performed in drunkenness the prayer along with the people, Abu Zaynab;
Zuhayr ibn 'Awf al-Azdi asked for the help of al-Muwarra' of the Banu
Asad tribe in this plan. The latter agreed and declared his readiness.

On that day they were watching to find al-Walid drunk, but as it
happened, he did not leave his residence even for the afternoon prayer.
So they went to the door of his house, but the porter did not allow them
to enter. Abu Zaynab placed a dinar in the porter's hand, which on
seeing the gold coin stood aside and opened the way for them. Both Abu
Zaynab and al-Muwarra' entered and came across a strange and despicable
scene. They saw al-Walid fallen in a corner in total drunkenness. They
laid him on his bed, but at that moment al- Walid vomited. Abu Zaynab
without hesitation removed the signet ring from al-Walid's finger, and
both of them left the house.

**In 'Uthman's presence**

Abu Zaynab, accompanied by three other dignitaries of Kufah departed
via Basra for Medina, in order to meet the caliph and present to him
their complaint about al-Walid. On coming to his presence they began by
saying to the caliph: "Though we have no hope of winning your attention
to our suffering, we consider it our duty to inform you of certain
matters." 'Uthman asked what it was. They explained their complaints
about al-Walid and 155. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/33, al-Aghani
4/180 and Muruj adh-dhahab 1/435.

described the details of the incidents and events from which the
complaint arose, as well as the confusion and disorders which existed in
Kufah. 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Awf who was present in this meeting, enquired
about complainants: "What does this mean? What do you think has happened
to al- Walid? Has he gone mad?" They said: "No He gets drunk and loses
all control due to excessive drinking." 'Uthman turned to Jundab and
asked: "Have you yourself observed my brother's drinking spree?" Jundab
said: "No. Never!" , But Abu Zaynab said: "I testify that I have seen
him drunk, vomiting wine and polluting Himself. I myself removed ring
from his finger while he was wholly intoxicated." 'Uthman asked: "How
did you know he had taken wine?" They answered: "How could we not know?
He drank the kind of wine we used in pagan times ourselves." Then they
showed al-Walid's ring to the caliph and offered it as evidence. 'Uthman
who had become very angry by this time threatened the complainants and
witnesses, and promised punishment, and then placing his hand on their
chests, dismissed them.

**The caliph's reward to the witnesses**

Abu Zaynab and his companions had with great hopes reached Medina, went
to the caliph, informed him of the true situation and presented their
evidence. But 'Uthman not only ignored their report and testimony about
al-Walid's addiction to wine and his obscene acts during prayer, but
also abused them and ordered to beat some of them. Those of the
witnesses who had been maltreated went to 'Ali and begged for a
solution. 'Ali went to 'Uthman, spoke in their favour and protested
saying: "You are neglecting divine limits and insulting and maltreating
the witnesses who have testified against your brother, and you are thus
altering God's law!"156

'A'ishah, too, whose help had been sought by the witnesses, shouted at
'Uthman, saying: "You have failed to carry out religious laws and
insulted the witnesses."157 The complainants had stated before 'Uthman
that al-Walid drank wine of the kind used in pagan times.158

Their testimony was that al-Walid in his intoxication, had performed
four units of morning prayers instead of the usual two, and then he had
turned to the people offering to perform more units, and had then
vomited. They said also that during the prayer, instead of reciting
Quranic verse, he had sung a song about wine and women. They also
exhibited the signet ring which they had removed from his finger while
he was drunk, and handed it over to 'Uthman as final evidence.

Nevertheless, they saw no sign of attention to their complaint and
testimony, 156. Muruj adh-dhahab of al-Mas'udi 2/336 published by Dar
al-Andulus.

157. al-Baladhuri 5/33.

158. Muruj adh-dhahab 2/336.

but were insulted beaten and whipped instead, and also threatened with
death. 'A'ishah opposing 'Uthman Abu al-Faraj writes in al-Aghani:
'Uthman said in answer to their objections: "Is it not so that in taking
umbrage to one's emir and ruler, one should level accusation against
him? Now that this is the case I will order to punish you in the
morning!"159 This group, fearing punishment by 'Uthman, took refuge in
'A'ishah's house, and when in the morning 'Uthman was sharply rebuked by
'A'ishah, he shouted: "Do Iraqi rebels and debauchees find no asylum but
'A'ishah's house?!"

When 'A'ishah heard these insulting and unforgivable words of 'Uthman,
she picked up a shoe of the Prophet and raising it high cried out
loudly: "How soon you have abandoned the way and tradition of God's
prophet, the owner of this shoe!" These words of 'A'ishah were soon
reported to all the people of Medina, and they rushed to the mosque. The
crowd became so dense that no room was left for newcomers. The words of
'Uthman and 'A'ishah were commented upon so excitedly that these
produced a difference and division among the crowd. A number began to
praise 'A'ishah for her reaction, and others frowned and said in
reproach: "Why should women meddle with such matters?" The
demonstrations of the two opposite groups reached a point where they
fell upon one another, using stones and shoes in these attacks within
the mosque.

al-Baladhuri adds and says: 'Uthman did not remain silent against
'A'ishah's protest, and shouted angrily: "What right have you to
interfere in the affairs? You have been ordered to keep quiet in your
house!" The people were divided in their opinion about this protest and
reproach. Some supported 'Uthman's attitude while others backed 'A'ishah
and exclaimed: "Who deserves more than 'A'ishah to interfere in the
affairs?" Arguments soared high to the point where the two groups fell
upon one another with shoes. This was the first quarrel to occur among
the Muslims after the departure of the Prophet.

This story is mentioned by al-Ya'qubi in his history, and by 'Abd
al-Barr in al-Isti'ab in a similar way, showing clearly the effect of
'A'ishah's action and interference. After this incident, Talhah and
az-Zubayr went to 'Uthman and said in reproach: "We told you at the
beginning not to let al-Walid take charge of any Muslims' affairs. But
you paid no attention to our words, and rejected 159. al-Aghani 4/181.

them. It is not late yet. Now that a group has testified to his
addiction to wine and his intoxication, it would be advisable to remove
him." 'Ali, too, said: "Remove al-Walid from his post, and if the
witnesses give testimony in front of him, then you could sentence him to
the religious punishment."

**al-Walid's dismissal and purification of the pulpit at the Kufah
Mosque**

'Uthman was compelled to dismiss al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah from the
governorship of Kufah recall him to Medina, and appoint a new governor
for Kufah. So he chose Sa'id ibn al-'As160 as a governor of Kufah,
ordering him to send al-Walid back to Medina.161 When Sa'id arrived in
Kufah, he sent a message to al-Walid that he had been summoned to Medina
by the caliph. But al-Walid postponed the order for a few days and
ignored it. So Sa'id said to him: "Hasten to your brother, for, he has
instructed me to send you to him." Then he ordered him to vacate and
surrender the governor's house.

al-Walid was forced to obey, surrendered the governor's house and moved
to the house of 'Amrah ibn 'Uqbah. Then Sa'id ordered to purify the
pulpit of the Kufah mosque, and he did not ascend it until it was done.
Some of the Umayyad chiefs who had accompanied Sa'id to Kufah, requested
him to desist from such a purification, and reminded him that if anyone
else resorted to this act, it was his duty to check him, since such an
act would disgrace al-Walid for ever (for, both of them belonged to the
Umayyads and the same tribe). But Sa'id refused and the pulpit and the
governor's house were eventually washed and purified.162

al-Aghani says: 'Uthman ordered al-Walid to go back to Medina. When he
was about to leave Kufah for Medina, a group of people including 'Adi
ibn Hatam accompanied him in order to offer excuses for al-Walid's
actions to the caliph. During the journey one day al-Walid, according to
the Arab custom, sang a song for the camels163 and164. 'Adi exclaimed:
"Let me see, where are 160. Sa'id ibn al-'As was the son of al-'As ibn
Umayyah. His mother was Umm Kulthum daughter of 'Amr 'Amiri. He was born
in the first year of the Hijrah or one year later. His father al-'As was
killed by 'Ali in the battle of Badr. 'Umar narrates: "I myself saw
al-'As roaring like a lion in the battle of Badr, but 'Ali killed him
with one blow." Sa'id was a chivalrous aristocrat and a famous orator of
the Quraysh and one of those ordered by 'Uthman to write down the
Qur'an. After al-Walid, 'Uthman appointed him governor of Kufah, and
during this time he conquered Tabaristan and other parts of Iran. After
'Uthman's death, he retired to his house and took no part in the battles
of al-Jamal and Siffin. When Mu'awiyah became caliph, he summoned Sa'id
and asked why he had not participated in the battle and reproached him
for not helping him against 'Ali. Sa'id offered some excuses. Then
Mu'awiyah sent him to Medina as governor and whenever he dismissed him
from that post, he put Marwan in his place, and when he dismissed
Marwan, he replaced him by Sa'id. Sa'id died in 59 after the Hijrah.
Refer to Usd al-ghabah 2/310, al-Isti'ab and al-Isabah.

161. al-Baladhuri 5/35.

162. al-Aghani 4/181.

163. It had long been a customary among the Arabs that while on a
journey, especially a long one, to sing rhythmical songs for the camels
to make them joyful and not feel the fatigue of the journey, and thus to
muse

you taking us like this?" When al-Walid came to 'Uthman's presence in
Medina and the witnesses testified to his face about his addiction to
wine, 'Uthman was compelled to administer on him the legal punishment
with the lash. But he let him wear a thick cloak so that he would not
feel the strokes of the lash and sent him into the room where the
punishment was to be carried out.


