Part Four : Revolution 'a'ishah Assumes the Leadership of the Revolution
========================================================================

In the riot and uprising against 'Uthman, members of 'A'ishah's family
from the tribe of Taym too rose up.

**Text of the book**

What we have so far described constituted the most important factors
used by 'A'ishah for people's opposition to and uprising against
'Uthman. But the improper and wrong acts of 'Uthman and those godless
ones around him were so abundant that each of them had its share in
sowing the seeds of rebellion and revolution against him and his
administration in the people's hearts. Obviously all these factors had
their influence in people's uprising against him and in scattering most
of the companions away from him.

But those same people (probably due to the same fabricated traditions)
could gather enough courage and boldness to protest to the caliph and
successor of the Prophet, let alone draw sword upon him! But they were
given this courage and boldness by the daring and violent reproaches to
'Uthman by Ibn Mas'ud, 'Ammar ibn Yasir, Abu Dharr al- Ghifari, Jundab
and other top companions. Therefore the excuse needed only a spark to
start the people's uprising and revolution, and this spark came with the
historical verdict of 'A'ishah which eventually overthrew 'Uthman
despite all his power and position, leading to his assassination.

With her intelligence in sight, 'A'ishah made utmost use of people's
readiness to rise against 'Uthman to her own favour, since she saw that
the people had reached the limit of their patience due to his chaotic
rule and could no longer tolerate the injustice of the careless
administrators around him. Thus, she decided to preserve her position
and domination, assume the role of a leader in rousing public antagonism
against the caliph, and lead them in the direction she desired.

The people who were thirsty for revolution against the oppressive
government of 'Uthman were given a fresh exhilaration and impetus by the
words and actions of 'A'ishah against 'Uthman, and were made more
optimistic of victory. Her name words and actions were carried to all
parts of Medina, Hejaz and the whole extensive realm of Islam,
especially when the members of the Taym tribe rose in support of
'A'ishah and assumed a significant role in this uprising.

al-Baladhuri who has a high position among the followers of the school
of caliphs, writes in his book of "Ansab al-ashraf": "The members of the
Taym household in the uprising against 'Uthman rose to aid Muhammad, son
of Abu Bakr, and Talhah, his cousin. The rise of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
and 'A'ishah's brother supported by the Taym tribe began in Egypt, for
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr and Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah made preparations
for a rebellion in Egypt against 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh who
had been appointed as its governor by 'Uthman, and at last took control
of that land.

Now before describing this event, we should introduce three historical
figures who played a significant role in these events. Three figures
'Uthman gave a governmental post to 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd shedding of
whose blood had been declared lawful by the Prophet.

**Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr**

1-'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh 'Abd Allah, son of Sa'd, was the
grandson of Abi Sarh of the 'Amir al- Qurayshi tribe. His mother had
given suck to 'Uthman, and thus 'Uthman and 'Abd Allah were foster
brothers. 'Abd Allah embraced Islam before the capture of Mecca and
emigrated to Medina to join the Prophet's scribes. But he turned
apostate after some time and returned to Mecca. He said to the Quraysh
chiefs: "Muhammad was subservient to my will and carried out whatever I
told him, for example when he wanted me to write "Dear Sir" and I asked
him whether I could write "Learned Sir", he said: 'It makes no
difference both of them are correct." God has sent the following verse
about 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd:

"And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, or
says: It has been revealed to me; while nothing has been revealed to
him, and he who says: I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed
and if you had seen when the unjust had been in the agonies of death and
the angels shall spread forth their hands: Give up your souls; today
shall you be recompensed with an ignominious chastisement because you
spoke against Allah other than the truth and because you showed your
pride against His communications." 175 When the Muslims captured Mecca
the Prophet issued a decree for 'Abd Allah's death, even if he may have
clung on to the cloth of the Ka'bah for refuge. 'Abd Allah, in fear,
took refuge with 'Uthman who concealed him somewhere, until he was
brought to the Prophet asking him for clemency. The Prophet remained
silent for some time without looking up and at last he granted it. When
'Uthman returned, the Prophet turned to those present and said: "I
remained silent to see if one of you would rise and cut off his head."
They said: "You could have made a sign to us to do so." The Prophet
said: "It is not worthy of a prophet to give a signal with his eye."176
When 'Uthman became caliph, he appointed such a notorious fellow as
governor of Egypt in the year 25 AH because of being his brother, and
dismissed 'Amr ibn al-'As from that post.

'Abd Allah conquered some parts of Africa, and 'Uthman rewarded him
with one-fifth of the spoils of war. He remained governor of Egypt until
the year 34 AH, and after the uprising staged by Muhammad ibn Abi
Hudhayfah he fled to 'Asqalan to stay there until 'Uthman's death. He
died in the year 57 or 59 AH. 2-Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr

Muhammad was the son of Abu Bakr, the first caliph, and his mother was
Asma', daughter of 'Umays from the al-Khath'am tribe, who was at first
the consort of Ja'far ibn Abi Talib, and after his martyrdom, she
married Abu Bakr. Muhammad was born on the way to Mecca in the last Hajj
pilgrimage of the Prophet.

When Abu Bakr died, 'Ali married Asma' and thus Muhammad grew up in
'Ali's house and was brought up by him. So he became one of his
steadfast devotees.

Muhammad took part under 'Ali in the battles of al-Jamal (against his
own sister 'A'ishah) and Siffin, and was then appointed by the Imam as
governor of Egypt. He arrived there on 15th of Ramadan in the year 37 AH
and held the rein of affairs. But when in the year 38 AH, Mu'awiyah ibn
Abi Sufyan sent 'Amr ibn al-'As with an army to conquer Egypt 'Amr
defeated Muhammad and captured him, and Mu'awiyah ibn Khudayj killed
upon the order of 'Amr, his dead body was placed in the belly of a dead
donkey and burnt.177

**3-Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah
**
Abu al-Qasim Muhammad was the son of Abu Hudhayfah ibn 'Utbah of the
175. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-An'am, Verse 93.

176. al-Isti'ab 2/367 to 370, al-Isabah 2/309 to 310 and 1/11 to 12,
Usd al-ghabah 3/173 to 174, Ansab al-ashraf 5/49, al-Mustadrak 3/100 and
concerning the commentary of the verse 93 of Chapter al-An'am refer to
such commentaries as al-Qurtubi and others, and Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/68.

177. al-Isti'ab 3/328-329, al-Isabah 3/451 and other histories about
the events of the years 37 and 38 of Hijrah. 'Abd Shams al-Qurayshi
tribe, and his mother was Sahlah, daughter of Suhayl ibn 'Amr of the
'Amir tribe. His parents were among the emigrants to Abyssinia where
Muhammad was born. Abu Hudhayfah was martyred in al- Yamamah in the
combat with Musaylamah, the False (Kadhdhab). 'Uthman adopted Muhammad
as a son and brought him up so he grew up under 'Uthman's care.

When 'Uthman became caliph, Muhammad asked his leave to go to Egypt to
fight the infidels, and 'Uthman gave him permission to do so. So
Muhammad went there and when the people rose in rebellion against
'Uthman, he too took a significant role in inciting the people and
eventually attacked 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh and defeating him
drove him out of Egypt and held the rein of affairs.

The Egyptians willingly accepted his rule and swore allegiance to him
and thus he became governor there.

When 'Ali became caliph, he retained Muhammad in his position and
Muhammad continued to rule until Mu'awiyah who was on his way to Siffin
to fight 'Ali, but turned course to fight Muhammad. But Muhammad in this
confrontation prevented him from entering al-Fustat, the first Egyptian
city on the ash-Sham side, but when he found himself unable to make a
stand against Mu'awiyah he proposed peace to him.

In peace negotiations Mu'awiyah agreed that Muhammad and his companions
should be secure and leave Egypt. But when he departed with thirty of
his friends from Egypt, Mu'awiyah contrary to his promise and in an
unmanly manner, took captive and imprisoned him in Damascus and he was
eventually killed by Rushdayn, Mu'awiyah's slave. Muhammad had had the
benefit of association with the Prophet.178 Now before dealing with the
story of the uprising of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr and Muhammad ibn Abi
Hudhayfah, we must say that 'Amr ibn al-'As who conquered Egypt had held
its governorship since 'Umar's time and a part of his duty was to
collect taxes and act as the imam of the congregation. But this manner
of governing did not last long in 'Uthman's time, and soon enough he was
relieved of the task of collecting taxes, and 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn
Abi Sarh was entrusted with this duty. 'Amr ibn al-'As was commissioned
to deal only with the people's religious matters and lead the
congregation prayer. But soon after, he was relieved of this duty, too,
and it was given to 'Abd Allah, thus allowing his foster brother to
perform both duties, and in this way 'Amr ibn al-'As was removed from
the governorship of Egypt.179 178. History of at-Tabari 5/108.

179. al-Isti'ab 3/321, Usd al-ghabah 4/315, al-Isabah 3/54, History of
at-Tabari and Ibn al-Athir concerning the events of the years 30 to 36
of the Hijrah.

**The uprising of the Egyptians**

O 'Uthman! We have come to you in protest of your deeds and the conduct
of your governor.

People of Egypt

al-Baladhuri writes: After the peoples in various parts of the
extensive realm of Islam joined together in their protests against
'Uthman, and when 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh held the governorship
of Egypt on 'Uthman's behalf, Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah and Muhammad
ibn Abi Bakr arrived in Egypt and became united with Muhammad ibn
Talhah180 in their purpose.

On the morning of their arrival to Egypt, owing to his delay for the
congregation prayer Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah was compelled to perform
it all by himself and recite aloud. When 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi
Sarh, who was present, heard his voice, he ordered to bring him to his
presence after the completion of his prayer. When they took him to 'Abd
Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh he asked Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah: -Why
have you come here?

-To participate in the combat with infidels. -Who is with you?

-Muhammad, son of Abu Bakr. -I swear that this is not so. You have come
to start a riot and rebellion. Then he ordered to imprison both of them.
So they had to ask the aid of Muhammad ibn Talhah to intercede for them
with the governor so as not to prevent them from taking part in the
combat against infidels. Thus 'Abd Allah set them free and took part in
the war himself. But as he was apprehensive of those two, he arranged to
provide a separate ship for them and checked them from contact with the
people.

But Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr fell ill and was unable to leave with the
governor of Egypt. So Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah too was compelled to
stay until his friend recovered, and when he got well, both of them
accompanied by a number of Muslims went to war.

During this time, owing to their constant contact and talk with the
soldiers of Islam, they informed them of the caliph's unjust
administration, so that on their return from the war against enemies,
they had enlightened the people's hearts with hatred and rage against
'Uthman and his misdeeds.181 180. Muhammad was the son of Talhah, and
his mother was Himnah, daughter of Jahsh. He was born in the Prophet's
time, and he took part in the battle of al-Jamal under the leadership of
'A'ishah against 'Ali and was killed then. When 'Ali saw his body, he
said: "It was his father who brought him this fate. If it had not been
for his father, he would not have met such a day." Refer to Tabaqat of
Ibn Sa'd 5/37 to 39. 181. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/50, and
at-Tabari on the battle of Dhat as-Sawari in the year 31, Vol. 5/70 to
71.

al-Baladhuri elsewhere writes: "While the governor of Egypt was
severely reproaching Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah and Muhammad ibn Abi
Bakr, the son of Abu Hudhayfah turned to the people and said: The
Egyptians should realize that we have left behind the holy war in the
way of God, namely the combat with 'Uthman."

at-Tabari writes in his history: "In the same year that 'Abd Allah went
to war with infidels, the sons of Abu Hudhayfah and Abu Bakr, too,
accompanied him, and at the same time these two kept on reminding the
people of 'Uthman's misdeeds and unlawful actions and how he had even
seen the traditions and ways of 'Umar and Abu Bakr changed. They cited
as an example the fact that he had appointed as governor (over the life
and property of the Muslims) a man like 'Abd Allah whose blood has been
declared legitimate by the Prophet, and he has given asylum to those who
had been driven away by the Prophet and has recalled them from their
exile. Thus spilling 'Uthman's blood would be lawful. They harped so
much on this topic that they turned the warriors of Islam against the
government of the time."

It is also said that Muhammad son of Abu Hudhayfah said to the people:
"I swear to God that we have ignored the true jihad." They asked: "Which
jihad are you speaking of?" He said: "The combat and jihad against
'Uthman." Then he described the misdeeds of 'Uthman to such an extent
that he turned everyone against the government and when they returned to
their cities and homelands, the people spoke protestingly about 'Uthman
in an unprecedented manner.182

What was effective in promoting the propaganda's of the sons of Abu
Hudhayfah and Abu Bakr, was the people's dissatisfaction of the
Egyptians and with the ways of 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, their
governor, who abstained from no injustice towards them. He even went so
far as to beat to death some of the chiefs who had complained of him to
'Uthman.

at-Tabari and others have fully described the story of the Egyptians'
complaints of 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh in 'Uthman's presence,
asking Ibn 'Udays to act as their spokesman. He reported all the
misdeeds of 'Abd Allah to 'Uthman and stated how harshly he treats the
Muslims and followers of other religions who live under Islam's
protection and oppresses them, and disregards the principle of right and
fairness, and does whatever he himself wants, and when he is criticized
for his deeds, he shows the caliph's letter telling him what to do.183

182. History of at-Tabari 5/70 to 71.

183. History of at-Tabari 5/118 and Ibn al-Athir 3/70.

**Imam 'Ali's endeavors for quenching the fire of sedition**

The emigrants and Ansar (helpers) gathered round Imam asking him to
speak with 'Uthman, advising him in order to quench the fire of
sedition.

al-Baladhuri

Ibn A'tham writes his book of history184: Some distinguished Egyptians
came to Medina to complain of 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, and went
straight to the Prophet's mosque, where they met a group of the
Prophet's companions including both the emigrants and helpers. When they
were asked the purpose of their journey to Medina, they answered: "We
have come to complain of the injustice of our governor."

'Ali said to them: "Do not be hasty in your actions and judgment. State
your complaint to the caliph and inform him of the matter. The governor
of Egypt may have acted towards you according to the caliph's
instructions. Go to the caliph and explain your difficulties. If 'Uthman
is strict to him and removes him from his position, you will have
attained your goal, and if he does nothing, and approves of his deeds,
then you can decide what to do." The Egyptians thanked and blessed 'Ali
and added: "What you said is quite true, but we beg you to accompany us
in our meeting with the caliph." 'Ali said: "You do not need my
presence. It would be enough for you to see him and state your case."

They said: "This is our purpose but we wish you to be present, too, and
act as our witness." 'Ali said: "Your witness will be He who is stronger
than me, more dominant over all people, and more sympathetic to His
servants." The Egyptian nobles went to 'Uthman's house and asked
permission to enter. When they were admitted, the caliph received them
respectfully, and let them sit by him. Then he asked: "What have you
come for? What has made you leave Egypt without my personal permission
or my governors?" They said: "We have come to complain of you and your
deeds, and of what your governor does."

Then Ibn A'tham describes the evidence and reasons which that group
presented to the caliph against 'Abd Allah; Abi Sarh, and reports the
conversation between them and 'Uthman.

184. History of Ibn A'tham 46-47.

**The Uprising of the people of Medina against 'Uthman**

The wrong acts of 'Uthman, his administrators and governors increased,
and the people's complaints and protests produced no result. A wave of
objections and dissatisfaction spread over the whole of the Islamic
realm and at last shook Medina, the capital of the government, too.
al-Baladhuri narrates these events as follows: When 'Uthman became
caliph, a number of the Prophet's companions were not pleased with his
rule since he had a special attachment for his relatives. During his
twelve years of caliphate, he gave governmental posts to the Umayyads
who had not been associated with the Prophet, and they committed many
unexpected acts which the companions could not tolerate and so they
began to protest.

But 'Uthman disregarded everything and reproached none of his agents,
nor did he remove them from their posts. During the second six years of
his rule he gave preference to his cousins over other Muslims and
appointed them to such governmental positions which gave them a free
hand over the people's life and property. For example 'Abd Allah ibn
Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh had been given the governorship of Egypt, and the
subjects had repeatedly complained to 'Uthman for 'Abd Allah's tyranny
and oppression, asking for justice. At last 'Uthman was compelled to
write to him and intimidate him. But 'Abd Allah did not abstain from his
extreme harshness and even beat some of them to death.185 When suffering
and hardship passed beyond endurance and the Muslims could no more bear
the misdeeds of 'Uthman and those around him, those of the Prophet's
companions who were in Medina, wrote letters to their Muslim brethren in
other cities and roused them to a holy war against 'Uthman. at-Tabari
quotes the text of the letter as follows: "You have departed from Medina
for the sake of jihad in the way of Almighty God and for propagating the
religion of Muhammad, whereas he who governs you has ruined and
destroyed Muhammad's faith. Reconsider your position and make haste in
strengthening the foundation of Islamic religion."

In Ibn al-Athir's narration the following sentence of the letter is
mentioned: "Your caliph has destroyed Muhammad's religion." In the
commentary of Ibn Abi al-Hadid we see this phrase added at the end of
the letter: "Depose him as a caliph." Thus the dissatisfied people came
on him from every corner until he was killed.186

al-Baladhuri writes187: "In the year 34 of Hijrah a number of the
Prophet's companions wrote a letter to their friends among other
companions,
185. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/25 to 26.

186. History of at-Tabari 5/115, Ibn al-Athir 5/70, Commentary of Ibn
Abi al-Hadid 1/165.

187. Refer to Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/60, History of
at-Tabari 5/96-97, Ibn al-Athir 3/63, Ibn Abi al- Hadid 1/303, Ibn
Kathir 7/168, Abu al-Fida' 1/168.

complaining of 'Uthman's conduct and his altering the Prophet's laws
and traditions, and of the injustice of his agents towards the people.
They criticized the caliph's deeds and asked them to come hastily to
Medina for a holy war in the way of God."

In that year none of the companions were willing to defend 'Uthman and
take his side except Zayd ibn Thabit188, Abu Usayd as-Sa'idi and Hassan
ibn Thabit189 and Ka'b ibn Malik190. The emigrants and others gathered
round 'Ali and begged him to reason with 'Uthman and advise and guide
him. 'Ali agreed and went to him and said: "The people have come to me
and have told me many things about you and your deeds. I swear that I do
not know what to say to you! Nothing is unknown to you that need be
instructed and you are not in need of guidance. You know all that we
know, and we have not got a lead over you to make it necessary to inform
you. You have been associated with the Prophet and have benefited like
us, from his words and experience.

The sons of 188. Zayd ibn Thabit ibn ad-Dahhak al-Ansari had an-Nawar,
Malik's daughter as his mother, and he was the first scribe of the
Prophet, and also served in the same post under 'Umar and Abu Bakr. When
'Umar and 'Uthman during their rule left Medina for Mecca, they
appointed him as their deputy. In 'Uthman's time Zayd acted as treasurer
of the public fund. One day 'Uthman entered and found Wuhayb, Zayd's
slave, singing. He liked his voice and granted him an annual salary of
12,000 drachmas. Zayd was a staunch supporter of 'Uthman. They differ on
the date of his death, and it is said to be between the year 43 and 55.
Marwan performed his burial prayer. Abu Usayd as-Sa'idi and Ka'b ibn
Malik, too, were the Prophet's companions. The former took part in the
battle of Badr and other battles, while the latter participated in all
the battles except Badr and Tabuk. Abu Usayd had gone blind before
'Uthman's death, and they differ about the date of his death. Refer to
Usd al- ghabah, al-Isabah and al-Isti'ab.

189. Abu 'Abd ar-Rahman, Hassan ibn Thabit al-Ansari, was a well-known
poet of the al-Khazraj tribe. His mother was Fari'ah, daughter of Khalid
al-Ansari. The Prophet said about him: "So long as Hassan supports the
Prophet, God will confirm him with the Holy Spirit." He praised the
Prophet with his fine poems and eloquent expressions, and satirised the
Quraysh infidels for their enmity and unbelief. He was very timid and
cowardly, and on the day of the infidels moved towards Medina and Salman
al-Farisi advised the Muslims to dig ditches round Medina, the Prophet
placed Hassan with the Muslim children and women in one of the forts of
Medina to be safe and hidden from the enemies. Safiyah, daughter of 'Abd
al-Muttalib, was among the ladies. During the encounter a Jew approached
the way of the fort to spy out the land. Safiyah turned to Hassan and
said: "Do not let him discover our asylum. The Prophet, who is relieved
from worrying about us, is engaged in fighting the enemy. Go and kill
this Jew!" Hassan said: "O daughter of 'Abd al-Muttalib! You know well
that lam not the men for such a field, and have not the courage for it."
Hearing these words, Safiyah got hold of a stick and knocked down the
Jew. Then she returned victoriously to the fort and said to Hassan: "Now
go and take out his clothes!" But Hassan, fearing that he would suddenly
be attacked by the dead Jew's friends answered: "O daughter of 'Abd
al-Muttalib! I am not in need of his clothes!" Owing to this same
timidity and cowardice, Hassan took part in none of the Prophet's
battles and was thus deprived of this honour.

The Prophet gave him Shirin, Mariyah's sister, in marriage from whom
'Abd ar-Rahman was born who was a cousin of Ibrahim, son of the Prophet.
Like his father, grandfather and great grandfather, Hassan lived a long
life and died in the year 40 or 50 or 54 of the Hijrah at the age of
120. Refer to Usd al-ghabah 2/4-7, al-Isti'ab and al-Isabah.

190. Ka'b ibn Malik al-Ansari was of the al-Khazraj tribe, and his
by-name was 'Abd Allah or 'Abd ar-Rahman.

His mother was Layla, daughter of Zayd ibn Tha'labah al-Khazraji
al-Ansari. Ka'b came to the Prophet's presence in the night of 'Aqabah
in Mecca and offered his hand for allegiance. He took part in all his
battles except Badr and Tabuk. He was one of the three persons who
repented after refusing to participate in the war and a verse descended
about them. He was a poet among the Prophet's companions and co-operated
closely with Hassan (already mentioned) in reproaching the Quraysh and
infidels. Hassan satirized their parentage and Ka'b would warn them of
the valor of Islam's warriors! 'Uthman held dear these two poets and
granted them bounties out of the Muslim public fund, and property,
sometimes without a reason. So these two were among his devotees, until
'Uthman won a great fume. Refer to Usd al-ghabah 4/247, al-Isti'ab,
al-Isabah and Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd.

Abu Quhafah and al-Khattab were not worthier than you in the
performance of good deeds, since you are closer to the Prophet in your
attachment and kinship. Once you had the honour of being his son-in-law.
So, come to yourself and fear for your life. You go ahead so blindly
that it is very hard to give you a clear sight, and you have sunk in
such ignorance that it is impossible to drag you out."

'Uthman answered: "I swear to God that if you were in my place, I would
not reproach you, and would not blame you for favoring your kith and
kin, or protecting your helpless relatives, or for appointing to jobs
those who were appointed by 'Umar! I ask you in the name of God to tell
me had not 'Umar appointed to governorship al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah who
had no merit at all?" 'Ali said: "Yes, it is true."

'Uthman said: "Why is it then that you blame me now for appointing my
relative, son of 'Amir as governor?"

'Ali said: "I must remind you that when 'Umar appointed someone he
dominated him completely, and trampled upon him before doing so. And
when he received a report about his misdeed, he was strict to him, and
summoned him, and showed him severity of action. But you have failed to
do so, and have shown weakness and lenience to your kith and kin."

'Uthman said: "But they are not only my kith and kin, they are your
relatives too." (since the Umayyads and Banu Hashim were cousins) 'Ali
said: "Yes, upon my life they are my close relations, but they possess
no virtue and chastity and others have with me a greater superiority and
merit." 'Uthman said: "Had 'Umar not given governorship to Mu'awiyah?"
'Ali said: "Yes but Mu'awiyah feared 'Umar deeply, and was totally
obedient to him. He was even afraid of Yarf ', 'Umar's slave, more than
of 'Umar. But he is now stubbornly indifferent to you dealing with the
affairs, and does what he likes. He does these things without informing
you and says to the people: 'This is 'Uthman's order!' The people report
these matters to you but you take no step at all!"191

Then 'Ali rose and went out. After his exit 'Uthman went to the mosque,
climbed the pulpit and said: "There is a shortcoming to every deed, and
a defect in every task. The pest of this ummah and defect of this
blessing are the cavillers, who appear to exhibit what you approve of,
while in secret they perform such deeds that you disapprove! Like an
ostrich they follow every noise and love the remotest watering-thought!
By God, you people now 191. We drew the reader's attention to the above
conversation between 'Ali and 'Uthman two chief companions of the
Prophet and pioneers in embracing Islam, and we particularly point out
'Uthman's arguments as a caliph of the Muslims in rejecting 'Ali's
objections, when he speaks of the unworthiness of al-Mughayrah ibn
Shu'bah who had been appointed by 'Umar, meaning that he, too, was
justified in appointing as governors such a bad and unworthy person as
'Amir whom he himself and others knew to be wicked. He also exonerates
himself by speaking about his ties of relationship as the reason for
appointing Mu'awiyah and similar persons while he knows that these men
never abstain from the plunder of public funds and injustice towards the
people's life or property. (Sardar-Niya)

criticize me for what you had submitted to in 'Umar's time and turn
away from them, whereas 'Umar trampled upon you and knocked you on the
head and pulled out your root with his sharp tongue! You were so afraid
of him that you bowed to his ugliness and beauty and were wholly
obedient to him. But you show insolence and rebel against me who am
gentle and lenient to you and have withheld my hand and tongue from
you."

At this moment Marwan was about to say something but 'Uthman ex-
claimed: "Be silent!"192

**Marwan ibn al-Hakam**

As the subject of Marwan will come up often in subsequent chapters, we
should introduce this distinguished personality who later on became one
of the Umayyad rulers.

He is the son of al-Hakam ibn Abi al-'As whom we introduced in the
chapter on al-Walid and his governorship of Kufah. His by-name is Abu
'Abd al- Malik, and he was a cousin of 'Uthman as well as his
son-in-law. He was born before the capture of Mecca, and he was only a
child when he accompanied his father to exile in at-Ta'if by the order
of the Prophet. He remained in exile with his father and brothers until
'Uthman's caliphate, and then 'Uthman brought them back to Medina, and
kept Marwan close to him and entrusted him with the scribe office of his
court.

Marwan's presence and his influence on the caliph were the main factor
of 'Uthman's misfortune, people's dissatisfaction and eventually
Muslims' uprising against 'Uthman. When the rebels besieged him and
Marwan instead of treating them with moderation, rose to fight them, he
was injured in the neck during the conflict and as a consequence one of
the tendons of his neck was cut off and his neck remained awry to the
end of his life and the people scoffingly nicknamed him "the crooked
figure".

One day 'Ali looked at him and said: "Woe to you, and woe to the ummah
of Muhammad from you and your offspring's!" Marwan fought in the battle
of al-Jamal in 'A'ishah's army against 'Ali and when Mu'awiyah became
caliph, he made Marwan governor of Medina, Mecca and at-Ta'if, but
dismissed him from this post in the year 48 of the Hijrah, and replaced
him by Sa'id ibn Abi al-'As.

When Mu'awiyah ibn Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah died in ash-Sham and did not
appoint anyone as his successor, a number of people in ash-Sham showed
allegiance to Marwan, while ad-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fahri and his friends
in ash-Sham showed allegiance to 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr. Consequently
fighting took place between Marwan and ad-Dahhak at Maraj Rahit of
Damascus in which ad-Dahhak was killed and ash-Sham and Egypt came under
192. al-Baladhuri 5/60, History of at-Tabari 5/96 to 97, Ibn al-Athir
3/63, Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/303, Ibn Kathir 7/168 and Abu al-Fida' 1/168.

the control of Marwan, and he married the wife of Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah,
Khalid's mother, in order to bring everything under his complete
domination. One day Marwan was angry with Khalid and insulted him with a
very obscene word about his mother. Khalid said to him: "You are a
trusted traitor!"

and complained of him to his mother and reported what had happened. She
was very angry at this insult to herself, and said to her son: "Keep
this to yourself, and particularly let not Marwan know that you have
reported it to me." Then in order to punish Marwan, she held a private
session with her maids, and after divulging her plan, she made them her
accomplice, and sat down waiting. When Marwan came in, Khalid's mother
and her maids rushed upon him and knocked him down. Then she picked up a
pillow and placed it on his mouth and sat down on it until he died.

Historians have written that Marwan is one of the few people who have
been killed by women.193 A description of his thought and beliefs, will
be given in later chapters for the reader to judge.

**Pleaders for justice proceed to Medina**

Do you not see how 'Uthman intends to deceive and lead me astray by
bribing me?

Muhammad son of Abu Hudhayfah

The chief of the Kufans was Ka'b ibn 'Ubdah an-Nahdi, that of the
people of Basra was al-Muthana ibn Mukharrimah al-'Abdi, and that of the
Egyptians was Kinanah ibn Bishr ibn 'Attab. They described 'Uthman's
misdeed and the changes he had brought about and the pacts which
according to God's testimony he had violated. At last they decided not
to remain silent, but to return to their respective cities and act as
the spokesmen of this meeting and inform the people of the conclusion of
their discussions, and let those who agreed with them know their plan
which was to go to 'Uthman's house the following year and reproach him
for his misdeeds.

If 'Uthman regretted his conduct and abstained from wrong deeds, all
the better, otherwise the y would reach a final decision about him. This
group acted upon this decision.194 As the people of Egypt showed more
fervor than those of other lands, in order to quench the flame of their
revolution, 'Uthman sent Muhammad ibn 193. Refer to Usd al-ghabah
4/384-389, al-Isti'ab and al-Isabah. 194. Ansab al-ashraf al-Baladhuri
5/59.

Abi Hudhayfah, a sum of 30,000 drachmas and a camel-load of clothes to
silence the leader of the riot.

Muhammad ordered to exhibit the gifts in the mosque, and addressing the
Muslims he said: "O Muslims! Do you not see how 'Uthman intends to
deceive and lead me astray by bribing me, and thus make me abandon my
faith?" 'Uthman's action and Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah's reaction
enhanced the Egyptians' enmity for 'Uthman and roused them for further
criticisms, and so they turned more to Muhammad and chose him as their
leader.195

The money thus spent by 'Uthman for this purpose could not prevent the
Egyptians from their departure for Medina in compliance to the pact
concluded in the mosque of al-Haram. On the contrary they left Egypt in
due time for Medina in the company of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, while
Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah remained in Egypt. Meanwhile 'Abd ar-Rahman
ibn 'Udays al- Balwi196 accompanied by five-hundred Egyptians left for
Medina in the month of Rajab, spreading the rumor that they intended to
go on pilgrimage.

When 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, governor of Egypt, learnt of
this matter, he quickly sent a messenger to Medina, reporting to the
caliph the departure of 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Udays and his friends for
Medina, and stating that Muhammad ibn Abi Hudhayfah had seen them off as
for as 'Ajrud, while they had spread the rumor that they intend to make
a pilgrimage to Mecca, whereas they have secretly told their friends
that their departure was for the purpose of uprising against 'Uthman and
his overthrow or even death. 'Abd Allah's messenger covered the distance
between Egypt and Medina in eleven nights and carried the message.
Meanwhile the Egyptians proceeded towards Medina without halting and
reached Dhu Khushub near that city and stayed there.

According to another narration 'Abd Allah, after getting permission
from 'Uthman, left his seat of government following the Egyptians, and
when he reached Ilah, he was informed that the Egyptians had besieged
'Uthman in Medina and Muhammad bin Abi Hudhayfah has risen in his
absence from Egypt. So he thought it expedient to return to Egypt to
preserve his rule there. On the other hand when Muhammad ibn Abi
Hudhayfah learnt of the success of the Egyptians in Medina and their
siege of 'Uthman, he took the opportunity of 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi
Sarh's absence and with the aid of his followers he rose and easily took
control of Egypt, and the people willingly accepted his rule.

When 'Abd Allah reached Egypt, his entry was checked by Muhammad and
195. History of at-Tabari 5/114 and 115, al-Baladhuri 5/51.

196. 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Udays al-Balwi is one of those who took part
in the al-Hudaybiyah (called ar- Ridwan) with the Prophet, and was
present in the conquest of Egypt, and rose up there with the Egyptians
against 'Uthman. Mu'awiyah imprisoned him in Palestine, and when he fled
from prison he ordered to kill him in the year 36. Refer to al-Isabah
4/171.

when he realized that he was faced with an accomplished fact, he
decided to give up his rule over Egypt and went straight to Palestine
and stayed there until 'Uthman's assassination.

at-Tabari, quoting az-Zubayr, writes197: The Egyptians wrote a letter
to 'Uthman from as-Suqya or Dhu Khushub which was delivered by one of
them. But 'Uthman gave no answer and ordered to expel the messenger in
degradation from the palace. The Egyptians who had turned against
'Uthman were six hundred in number and were divided into four groups,
each under a commander, and 'Amr ibn Badil (a companion of the Prophet)
and 'Abd ar- Rahman ibn Udays jointly acting as commander-in-chief.

The text of the letter written to 'Uthman by the Egyptians is as
follows: "In the name of God, the Beneficent the Merciful. As for the
subject to remember that Allah does not change the conditions of a
people until they change their own condition198. Therefore we take God
as witness and warn you from His wrath.

God has granted you this world. Therefore do not mar your next world,
since you should not ignore your share in the hereafter and be forgetful
of it. Remember that we are enraged only in the way of God's
satisfaction and will only be pleased for His sake and now that we have
risen in His way, we will not sheath our drawn swords and keep quiet
unless you openly repent your past deeds and clarify your position for
us. We have thus informed you of our words and demands and God aids us
in facing you.


