Uthman Concludes a Pact With the Rebels
=======================================

al-Baladhuri writes199: al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah asked 'Uthman to give
him leave to contact the Egyptians and inquire into their demands. The
caliph gave him permission and when al-Mughayrah approached the
Egyptians' camp, they cried out: "O you one-eyed blind man! Go back, you
shameless one! Go back, you wicked fellow!"

So al-Mughayrah had to return. 'Uthman summoned 'Amr ibn al-'As and
said to him: "Go and meet this group and invite them towards the Book of
God and we will meet their wishes."

Amr approached the Egyptians and greeted them and they replied: "May
God remove your health from you! O enemy of God goes back! O son of
Nabighah, go back!, we neither trust you nor can your grace be trusted."
'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar and some of those present said to 'Uthman: "The
only 197. History of at-Tabari 5/111 to 112, al-Baladhuri 5/64 to 65,
Ibn al-Athir 3/68, Description of Nahj al-

balaghah 1/162 to 164, Ibn Kathir 7/172, Ibn Khaldun 2/396 to 397 and
Ibn A'tham 147-152.

198. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter ar-Ra'd, Verse 11.

199. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/111 to 112.

person who can carry out this mission is 'Ali ibn Abi Talib." When 'Ali
came, 'Uthman said to him: "O Abu al-Hasan! Contact these people and
invite them to the Book of God and His prophet's traditions!" 'Ali
answered: "I accept this task only on condition that you promise me and
take God to witness that you will fulfill whatever I promise them on
your behalf."

'Uthman said: "I accept." So 'Ali took his promise and his oath upon
God's testimony, which were the strongest he could secure, and then
departed. When he faced the Egyptians, they cried out: "Go back, 'Ali!"
But 'Ali said: "No! I come forward and promise acting upon the Book of
God and the fulfillment of your demands." Then he explained what had
taken place between him and 'Uthman, and promised that 'Uthman would
fulfill his promise. The Egyptians asked: "Do you guarantee it?" He
said: "Yes." So they said: "If this is so, we agree." Then some of the
chiefs and dignitaries of Egypt accompanied by 'Ali entered Medina and
went to 'Uthman's house. They explained their purpose and reproached the
caliph. 'Uthman did not refute any of their objections and admitted all
of them, and undertook to remedy them. The Egyptian deputies asked him
to express it in writing and give it to them for a greater assurance. Re
agreed and wrote the following pact in his own handwriting:

"In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

This is an agreement that 'Uthman, servant of God and Commander of the
Faithful writes for that group of believers and Muslims who have been
irritated with him, and he undertakes: 1-To act henceforth according to
the Book of God and the Prophet's tradition.

2-To reimburse the salaries of those which I have stopped. 3-To give
grace to those who fear my rage and safeguard their freedom. 4-To bring
back the exiled to their families. 5-To abstain from keeping the
soldiers at the frontiers for a long time. 6-To divide the spoils of war
among the warriors without any scruple or exception.

'Ali ibn Abi Talib acts on behalf of 'Uthman towards the believers and
Muslims as a guarantor for the fulfillment of all these commitments. The
following persons testify the correctness of the above commitments:

1-az-Zubayr ibn al-'Awam
2-Talhah ibn 'Ubayd Allah
3-Sa'd ibn Malik Abi Waqqas
4-'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar
5-Zayd ibn Thabit
6-Sahl ibn Hunayf
7-Abu Ayyub Khalid ibn Zayd.

Dated: Dhu al-Qa'dah, 35 of the Hijrah."

Then each group took a copy of the above pact and returned.

**Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr and governorship of Egypt**

The accounts given by al-Baladhuri and others show that in addition to
the above pact, 'Uthman gave another document to the Egyptians in which
he dismissed 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh from the governorship of
Egypt and replaced him by Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr.

al-Baladhuri writes: Talhah, 'A'ishah's cousin stood up and spoke
harshly to 'Uthman. 'A'ishah, too, sent 'Uthman a message to give the
right of the Egyptians with the dismissal of 'Abd Allah from his
position as governor of Egypt. At this time 'Ali entered and spoke on
behalf of the Egyptians, saying: "These people want you to remove 'Abd
Allah from his position and appoint another person in his place. They
accuse 'Abd Allah of having spilled an innocent person's blood too.
Dismiss him and judge between them. If the accusation is true and 'Abd
Allah has committed such a crime, administer God's law in his case and
redress their right."

'Uthman said to the Egyptians: "You yourself choose someone as governor
of Egypt and I will issue the decree." A group of the Egyptians made
signs to each other nominating Muhammad son of Abi Bakr, and eventually
asked 'Uthman to issue the decree for his governorship.200

'Uthman accepted the proposal and issued a decree in Muhammad's name,
and commissioned a number of the Emigrants and Ansar to act as
supervisors in this change of governorship between him and 'Abd Allah
ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, and at the same time to investigate the claim of
the Egyptians against 'Abd Allah, and report their findings to
'Uthman.

In this way both sides separated in perfect peace and reconciliation
and the Egyptians returned to Egypt from Medina, fully satisfied with
their mission. 'Ali abandons his support for 'Uthman 'Uthman! I swear to
God that lam certain that Marwan will bring about your annihilation and
then cannot save you.

Imam 'Ali

200. It seems that in the choice of Muhammad as governor of Egypt, the
suggestion and activity of 'A'ishah, his sister and of Talhah, his
cousin, and others of Banu Taym have not been without influence.

**'Uthman's political repentance**

When peace and reconciliation were made between the Egyptians and
'Uthman with the efforts and mediation of Imam 'Ali, concluded a pact
under-taking to fulfill their wishes and after they returned fully
satisfied, the Imam said to 'Uthman: "Now stand up and speak to the
people, informing them of your intentions and take God as witness to
your sincere return and repentance; for, the conditions in most cities
of Islam are wretched and convulsive, and everyone speaks of you and
your conduct, and this time it is feared that the Kufans will rise in
rebellion against you. Now you will turn to me to go and speak with
them. But in such a case I will be unable to undertake such a task and
they will accept no excuse from me. It could also be that the people of
Basra may rise against you, and then if you ask me to go and negotiate
with them and if I refuse to do so, you may accuse me of having broken
the ties of relationship with you and of having trifled with your
right."

'Uthman rose and went to the mosque, delivering a sermon, expressing
regret and repentance, saying: "O people! I swear to God, I was aware of
everything you criticized me for, and all I had done. I did everything
with full knowledge, and never acted ignorantly. But so far I have been
badly misled by my inner whims and desires and facts were shown me in an
inverted way, ultimately leading me astray, and turning me away from
truth and rightfulness. I myself heard the Prophet say: Whoever is
involved in a blunder, should repent, and anyone who commits a sin,
should repent, and let not himself wander in deviation, and if he
continues his injustice, he will belong to that group who have turned
away from the path of truth altogether.

Now when I descend from the pulpit your leaders and dignitaries may
come to me and state their proposals. I swear to God that I shall comply
with their rightful wishes. There is no way which does not reach God,
and all return to Him.

Let your select ones not turn away from proximity to me, and let them
know that if my right hand does not obey them, my left hand will submit
to them." The people were moved with compassion at 'Uthman's words and
some of them even wept for his helplessness. At this time Sa'id ibn Zayd
said to him: "O commander of the faithful! No one feels more compassion
for you than I. Therefore, think of yourself and act upon what you have
promised."

**Marwan's obstruction**

When 'Uthman descended the pulpit and entered his house, he saw Marwan
and Sa'id and some of the Umayyads waiting for him. They had not
attended the sermon in the mosque. When 'Uthman sat down, Marwan turned
to him and said: "Would the Commander of the Faithful permit me to say
something?" Na'ilah, 'Uthman's wife, interrupted and said: "No! You had
better say nothing and remain silent." Then she continued: "By God, the
conditions are so tense and confused that people will rebel against him
and kill him, too and make orphans of his children. In regard to the
existing conditions he has made promises that would not be advisable not
to keep."

Marwan who was taken aback at this untimely meddlesomeness, turned to
Na'ilah and said sharply: "What has it got to do with you? Your father
departed this world when he could not even perform his ablution
properly!" Na'ilah shouted angrily: "Keep quiet, Marwan! You speak of
fathers, and say something of my dead father, and lie about him. Rather
it is your father whom no one can talk good about him. I swear to God
that if your father were not 'Uthman's uncle and naturally the evil of
an uncle is bound to affect his nephew, I would say something to you
which you could never deny?"

Marwan was compelled to turn away from her and then turning to 'Uthman,
repeated his former request to speak, and 'Uthman gave him leave to do
so. Marwan said: "May you accept the blessings of my parents. How fine
would it have been for you to utter those words when you possessed power
and ability and when you were not so humble and abject. Then I would
have been the first person to be pleased and to support you, and would
even have aided you in that declaration. But alas! You uttered those
words at a time when everything had quickened down and there was left no
sign of the tumultuous torrent of your threatening power but foams
mingled with straw on the earth. You stretched your arm of imploration
towards them in complete abjectness and humility, and surrendered to
them in full humbleness and helplessness. I swear to God that if you
insist upon a sin for which you beg only God's forgiveness, it would be
far better than confessing your impotence to the people and expressing
your repentance. If you wished to win people's favour with your
repentance, there was no need to confess your errors and sins. It is
because of this expression of impotence and confession of your blunders
that people have converged into masses threatening you."

'Uthman said to Marwan: "Go out and speak to them, for, I feel ashamed
of talking to them!" Marwan went out. The people had gathered there to
state their wants and needs. When Marwan appeared at the door, he faced
the crowd and said: "What is going on? Have you come for plunder? Shame
on you! I see that everyone has brought his friend with him, but not
those whom I expected to see! What is wrong? Have you sharpened your
teeth for our government? The way you have rushed upon us shows that you
intend to seize it from us! Go away! I swear to God that if you intend
to attack us, you will receive such a punishment that you never expected
and it will cost you heavily. What stupid people you are! Go back to
your homes. You are wrong! We have never retreated before you, and will
never surrender our power and rule!"

**'Uthman's prudent wife**

The people were perplexed at what they had heard the caliph promise an
hour before, and what they were hearing now. What a difference between
these two! It was difficult to find an answer. Some people went to 'Ali
and informed him of what had occurred. 'Ali entered upon 'Uthman in
great anger and said:

"Have you not yet put Marwan aside? Does he not still leave you alone?
Does he intend to remove from you your religion and intelligence? And
you move on like an abject and poor camel with a bent head towards
wherever you are dragged? I swear to God that Marwan has neither a true
faith, nor a sound common sense. I swear to God from what I see that
Marwan will bring about your annihilation, and then cannot save you. You
have trampled upon your honour and prestige, and you are captivated by
the destiny of your conduct and deeds. I will not come here again and
will have nothing to do with you, and will not blame you for your
deeds."

When 'Ali left 'Uthman's house in that state of mind, Na'ilah,
'Uthman's wife, asked permission to speak when he gave her leave, she
said: "I heard what 'Ali said. He will not come here again. You have
placed your hand in Marwan's hand and let him drag you wherever he
wants."

'Uthman said: "What do you think I should do?" Na'ilah said: "Fear God
Almighty, and follow the ways of Abu Bakr and 'Umar. If you obey Marwan,
he will cause your death eventually. Marwan, has no worth in people's
eyes, and it is because of him that they have turned away from you. Send
someone to 'Ali and invite him for reconciliation. He is your relative
and people have seen no injustice from him." 'Uthman sent someone for
'Ali but he abstained from coming and said: "I have told him that I
would not go again."

Meanwhile when Marwan learnt of Na'ilah's words, he went to 'Uthman,
sat down and asked permission to speak. 'Uthman gave him leave and he
said: "This Na'ilah, this daughter of al-Farafasah..." but 'Uthman
interrupted him and said: "Don't speak of her since the consequence will
be bad for you. By God, she is more concerned about me than you are and
wishes me well." Thus Marwan had to remain silent. at-Tabari says in his
book201:

'Abd ar- Rahman ibn al-Aswad speaks of Marwan as follows: May God bring
shame on Marwan! 'Uthman came among the people and secured their
satisfaction. This closeness with them and the purity of emotion so
affected him that involuntarily tears came to his eyes on the pulpit and
the people too wept with him. I noticed that his beard had become wet
with tears, and at the same time he said: "O God! I beg your
forgiveness! I beg your forgiveness! By God, if I were to be a bought
slave, I would submit to it and be glad. When I go home, come to me. I
swear to God I will no more conceal myself from you, and will 201.
at-Tabari 5/112, Ibn al-Athir 3/96, al-Baladhuri 5/65 for a part of this
narration.

not place a sentinel at my door! I will give you your right and even
more and will satisfy you more than ever. I promise to keep away from me
Marwan and his relatives!"

When 'Uthman went home, he ordered to leave the door open and have no
sentinel there. But Marwan went in with him and soon after he made the
caliph go back on his word. He deceived him and resorted to such slyness
as to dissuade him from his reconciliation with people and his intention
to carry out his promises. Consequently 'Uthman did not leave the house
for three days feeling ashamed.202

On the same day Marwan went out of 'Uthman's house and shouted at the
people: "Shame on all of you except a few that I consider as friends. Go
back to your houses. If the Commander of the Faithful wishes to see any
of you, he will send for you otherwise no one has the right to leave his
house." At this time I was looking for 'Ali. When I entered the mosque I
saw him sitting between the Prophet's tomb and his pulpit and Muhammad
ibn Abi Bakr and 'Ammar ibn Yasir were sitting by him and reporting the
matter of Marwan and his conduct towards the people. When 'Ali saw me,
he said:

-Were you in the mosque when 'Uthman delivered his sermon? -I said:
"Yes," then 'Ali asked: "Did you hear Marwan's words, too?" I said:
"Yes." 'Ali then said: "May God help the Muslims! If I sit at home and
have nothing to do with 'Uthman, he will say: "You have disregarded me
and my right and my kinship and have abandoned it. And if I interfere
and speak to the people, Marwan comes forward and makes a toy of 'Uthman
despite his old age and the fact that he has been associated with the
Prophet, and drags him wherever he wishes."

We were talking when a messenger came from 'Uthman saying that 'Uthman
wished to see 'Ali. 'Ali said loudly: "Tell him that I will neither come
to him, nor will I mediate between him and the Muslims." His messenger
returned to report 'Ali's words. 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn al-Aswad continues
his narration, saying: Two nights later I saw 'Uthman coming from some
place. I asked Natil, 'Uthman's slave: "Where does the caliph come
from?" He said: "From 'Ali's house."

The following evening I visited 'Ali who said to me: "Last night
'Uthman came to my house claiming that he would no more return to the
wrong acts of the past and will carry out all he had promised." I
answered: "Did you do so after you spoke to the people from the
Prophet's pulpit and promised them all kinds of assistance and assured
them of it all and then went home? Then Marwan came out of your house
and abused and insulted the (hopeful) people and hurt their feelings."

'Uthman rose in annoyance and on leaving he said: "You have severed
your 202. One of the caliph's duties is to lead the congregation prayer,
so 'Uthman shirked this duty for three days. (Sardar-Niya)

kinship with me and humbled me and turned the people against me!" 'Ali
said: "I swear that I have been more of a friend and supporter to you
than anyone else, and have kept you away from people's molestation. But
wherever I humbled myself for your sake, Marwan has come up and you,
have accepted his words and ignored my efforts and guidance." 'Ali says
that Then 'Uthman left for his house.

'Abd ar-Rahman says: Thenceforth I did not see 'Ali having anything
more to do with the business of the caliphate or defend it as he had
done before.203 'Uthman is besieged God knows that I noticed in 'Ali's
visage signs of pity and compassion for 'Uthman.

Ibn 'Abbas

We read that Imam 'Ali repeatedly and sincerely stood up to save
'Uthman and negotiated with his representatives from one side and the
oppressed people as the other side as mediator, in order to quench the
fire of revolution and keep the caliph immune. But despite all his
efforts, whenever, 'Uthman promised to fulfill the wishes of the people
and put an end to the domination of the Umayyads oppressors over the
life and property of the Muslims, he was led astray by his unwise the
Umayyads companions headed by Marwan. Thus he would break his promises,
with the consequence that renewed riots began once again and 'Uthman had
to call on 'Ali to his aid. But the weakness and incapability's of
'Uthman went so far that the Imam had to abstain from further aid and
leave the caliph to himself to deal with the situation and let him and
his adviser Marwan and other Umayyad chiefs reach an agreement with the
people who had besieged him to secure their rights and see justice done,
and accepted no promise but his abdication.

'Ikrimah, quoting Ibn 'Abbas, describes as follows the account of
'Uthman's siege: They besieged 'Uthman twice. The first time he was in
siege by the Egyptians for twelve days which ended with the mediation of
'Ali at Dhu Khushub. I swear to God that 'Ali endeavored with perfect
sincerity to save 'Uthman and spared no effort in this way until they
vexed him with 'Uthman. The reason was that Marwan, Sa'id and their
relatives instigated 'Uthman 203. According to the testimony of history
and various narrations, 'Ali ibn 'Abi Talib has defended 'Uthman even
more than the Umayyads did who were closely related to the caliph, and
his defense has been very useful, too. As the author's intention has not
been to write a biography, he has given only a few examples in his
book.

(Sardar-Niya)

against 'Ali and he believed their words and even confirmed them. They
said to him: "If only 'Ali desires, no one dares to approach and
criticize you." Meanwhile, 'Ali gave advice to 'Uthman and guided him
and spoke harshly of Marwan and his relatives with him. They, in their
turn, were uneasy at this conduct of 'Ali and said to 'Uthman: "Though
you are his Imam and leader and have priority over him and are his
cousin and near of kin, he speaks thus to your face. Then what would he
not say behind your back?!"

They uttered so many remarks of this kind to 'Uthman that at last 'Ali
broke off his contact with him and abstained from cooperating with him.
Ibn 'Abbas said: On the day that I left Medina for Mecca, I visited 'Ali
and told him that I was ordered by 'Uthman to go to Mecca. 'Ali said: "
'Uthman does not really wish anyone to advise him. He has collected
round him a number of mean and ill-natured individuals who have seized
some lands and earmarked their taxes and tributes for themselves,
plundering the products of people's labors." I answered: "Owing to his
kinship with us it would be right and fitting that you should rise to
defend him and no excuse is acceptable from you m this matter!"

Ibn 'Abbas concludes, saying: "God knows that I noticed in 'Ali's
visage signs of pity and compassion for 'Uthman, and at the same time I
saw that this matter was too heavy for him."204 'Ikrimah says also: One
Friday, 'Uthman climbed the pulpit of the mosque and praised God the
Almighty. At this moment a man rose and exclaimed to 'Uthman: "If you
are truthful, make the Book of God your guide and carry out its
decrees."

'Uthman told him to sit down and he did so. But he stood up again and
protested. 'Uthman told him again to sit down, and he did so. But he
stood up again and protested. 'Uthman told him again to sit down. At
last he ordered to force him to sit down. Meantime differences arose
among the people and they began to attack each other with pebbles so
insistently that the air was full of them, with the result that 'Uthman
fell down unconscious from the pulpit, and they carried him home. At
this time one of his servants came out of the house, carrying a Qur'an
and recited the following verse aloud205:

"Surely they who divided their religion into parts and became sects,
you have no concern with them; their affair is only with Allah, then He
will inform them of what they did." 'Ali hurried to 'Uthman's house and
found him unconscious and surrounded by the Umayyads. He asked what had
happened. They said: " 'Ali! You have brought death upon us and caused
this to the caliph! By God! If you attain your wish, we will make this
world a bitter place for you!" 204. History of at-Tabari 5/113.

205. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-An'am, Verse 159.

206. History of at-Tabari 5/116-117, Ibn al-Athir 3/71, Ibn Abi
al-Hadid 1/166.

When 'Ali heard this remark, he left 'Uthman's house in great anger and
annoyance. 'Ikrimah also says206: The people of Medina wrote to 'Uthman,
describing his misdeeds and insistently demanded his repentance. They
had sworn that they would not give up unless he acts upon what is
prescribed by God, and grant it to them, otherwise they would kill
him.

'Uthman who was frightened for his life discussed the matter with his
wife, children and Umayyads companions saying to them: "You see that I
am placed under pressure from every side and the sparks of public
rebellion surround me intensely. What can I do?" They all suggested that
'Ali should be sent for to talk with the people and make promises to
them and treat them leniently until reinforcement is provided to support
him. 'Uthman said: "The people will no longer be deceived and they won't
accept any excuses. The first time I made promises to them I did not act
up on them. This time they are bound to seize a divine pact from me and
demand a survey, and if I agree, they will want its fulfillment."

Marwan said: "O commander of the faithful! To approach them and secure
their approval is better than engaging in conflict with them until you
are in a strong position. Promise them whatever they ask, and in your
talk with them, be as lenient as you can. Anyway as they have rebelled
against you, your pact and promise to them are not so valid and
binding!" 'Uthman agreed and sent for 'Ali. When he arrived 'Uthman said
to him: "You have seen what the people have done and what I did. You
also know my situation. I do not feel secure for my life from this
crowd. Use whatever means you can to ward off their evil from me! May
Great God be a surety that I will give them whatever they want from me
and my relatives, even if my blood is shed in the process."

'Ali replied: "The people require your justice more than your blood.
You should know that behind this door and against you I have seen a
people who will by no means speak of agreement and compromise with you
until their right is secured. You had concluded a pact with them and
took God as witness to abandon your past acts which had been the main
factor of their rage. And I calmed them down because of the promises you
made. But you have not acted upon any items of your promise. Do not try
to deceive me this time, and do not feel happy with something
chimerical. For, if I decide to get in touch with them this time, I
shall judge according to the exigency of right and justice and will
grant them their right."

'Uthman said: "I accept. Make promises to them. I swear to God that I
will fulfill them."

'Ali came out and said to the people: " You have asked for your right,
and you have secured it. 'Uthman has accepted and promised to observe
right and justice towards you on behalf of himself and others, and to
abstain from whatever is contrary to your wish. Believe his words, and
emphatically ask him to fulfill them."

The people said: "We agree, but give us some assurances for we do not
trust his words without action!" 'Ali said: "You are right," and then he
went back to 'Uthman and informed him of what had taken place. 'Uthman
said: "Arrange for a reprieve between us by which I may comply with
their demands. For, I do not have the power to fulfill all their wishes
in one day." 'Ali said: "The matters which are related to Medina require
no reprieve, but as for other cities the grace period is the time when
your instruction reaches them."

'Uthman answered: "that is true. Nevertheless ask for three days' grace
even about what is related to Medina." 'Ali said: "Very well", and then
went Out and informed the people. Then a pact was concluded between them
and 'Uthman to the effect that he would redress the rights of the
oppressed within three days, and remove the agents who are disliked by
the people. In that pact he had called God to witness the strongest
agreement which could be received from a servant and the fulfillment of
his promise. It was testified by a group of Emigrant and Ansar chiefs.
Thus the Muslims ended their antagonism to 'Uthman and went away hoping
for the fulfillment of the pact. But with the dispersion of the crowd,
'Uthman did not remain idle, and instead of granting their demands, he
was engaged in collecting forces and war equipment for confronting the
people, and formed a large army with the captives who belonged to the
government.

When the three days' grace was over and there came no sign of the
fulfillment of 'Uthman's promises, nor of the removal of any of his
agents, the people rose up in rebellion once more. 'Amr ibn Hazm
al-Ansari informed the Egyptians at Dhu Khushub of the non-fulfillment
of 'Uthman's promises, and a fresh revolution. They accompanied him to
Medina, and sent deputies to 'Uthman. When they entered, they said:
"Have you not repented your past deeds, and promised upon God's
testimony to abstain from whatever has roused the people's rage and
hatred?"

'Uthman said: "Yes, and I still uphold that pact." They said: "If this
is so, what is this letter that you have written about us to 'Abd Allah,
your agent in Egypt? We have seized it from your messenger!" He said: "I
have done nothing and I know nothing of what you say." They said: "Your
messenger was riding your special camel, and the letter is in the
handwriting of your secretary and bears your seal as a caliph!" He said:
"As for the camel, it may have been stolen. Moreover two handwritings
may look alike and the signature or the seal may be forgery!" They said:
"we are not hasty in your affairs, though we consider you as accused.
Nevertheless, we ask you to remove the evil of your debauchee agents
from us, and place as governor over us someone whose hands are not
polluted with our life and property."

He said: "What a position would I have if I remove an agent that you
dislike and appoint someone as governor that you like? In that case
everything will be in accordance with your order, and I will be a
good-for-nothing fellow!" They said: "By God! You must either do these
things or retire as caliph. If you show my resistance we will kill you.
Think well and fear for your life!" He said: "Forget this idea that I
would relinquish my position as caliph. I shall never disrobe myself
from the garment, which God has placed on my body!"

**A strange letter**

Cut off their heads and their hands, and let them write in their blood,
and then hang their bodies on date-palms. A letter from 'Uthman to the
governor of Egypt Now let us see what was the strange letter of which
the Egyptians spoke as a definite evidence of the caliph's revelation of
his promise and his obstinacy, and how it came into their hands.

If you remember, the first time that 'Uthman was besieged by the
Egyptians, he showed a desire to make peace with them through 'Ali's
mediation, and repented his past deeds. The Egyptians, too, on their
part promised not to molest him on condition that he should be just to
them and remove 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh and replaced by
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr as governor of Egypt and dispatched a number of
Emigrants and Ansar there to investigate the Egyptians' complaints of
the dismissed governor.

The Egyptians accompanied these supervisors of 'Uthman's reform project
to Egypt and when they reached Ilah207 or a few miles near it, they
noticed a rider behind them proceeding in the same direction. They
inquired as to his identity and destination. The rider who was a black
man, introduced himself as 'Uthman's slave and said he was carrying a
verbal message for 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd, governor of Egypt.

Some of the Egyptians thought it advisable to search him in case
'Uthman had issued an order contrary to expectation to 'Abd Allah. When
they found 207. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/26-29, History of
at-Tabari 5/199-200, ar-Riyad an-nadrah 2/123-125, al- Ma'arif of Ibn
Qutaybah 84, al-'Iqd al-farid 2/263, Ibn al-Athir 3/70-71, Ibn Abi
al-Hadid 1/165-166, Ibn Kathir 7/173-189, History of Khamis 2/259.

nothing in his baggage they decided to leave him alone. But Kinanah ibn
Bishr said: "By God! I won't let you act so carelessly until I search
inside his water- skin." They said: "God be praised! Could it be
possible that he has got something there?" He answered: "People's
cunning takes different forms, and one is not secure from slyness and
deceit." Then he untied the water-skin and poured down the contents and
suddenly a bottle fell out in which there was a lead pipe inside which
there was a letter containing the following points: "When 'Amr ibn Badil
comes to you, seize him and cut off his head, and cut off the hands of
Ibn Udays, Kinanah and 'Urwah and let them writhe in their blood until
they die! After their death hang their bodies on date-palms."

When the Egyptians read the contents, they said: "It is now lawful to
spill 'Uthman's blood." They turned back towards Medina, met 'Ali and
narrated the matter and gave 'Uthman's letter to him. 'Ali showed the
letter to 'Uthman and asked him what he meant by it. 'Uthman swore that
he had neither written the letter, nor did he know of it. He added: "The
handwriting is my secretary's, and the seal resembles mine!" 'Ali asked:
"Whom do you suspect then? Whom do you accuse?" 'Uthman answered: "I
accuse you and my secretary!" According to another narration he said: "I
accuse you since the people obey you and you do not disperse them from
around me!"

'Ali in great anger went out and as he was leaving he turned to 'Uthman
and said: "Maybe it was your own order." It is also said that the
Umayyads said to 'Ali on that occasion: "O 'Ali! You have ruined us and
incited the people to revolt against us!" 'Ali answered: "You stupid
fools! How could I have a hand in this when I dispersed the people from
around 'Uthman and many times tried to adjust his affairs? What else can
I do?" Then he turned back and leaving he said: "O God! You know that
lam innocent of what they attribute to me. If meanwhile 'Uthman's blood
is shed, I have no responsibility at all."

The caliph's seal was usually kept by Hamran208 and when he was exiled
to Basra by 'Uthman, he took it from him and gave it to Marwan. It is
also said about the letter which was seized by the Egyptians that Marwan
as the caliph's seal-keeper had a direct hand in it and 'Uthman had no
knowledge of it. When the Egyptians showed the letter to 'Uthman, he
denied his knowledge of it and said: "It is a forgery!" They said: "Is
it not in your secretary's handwriting?" He said: "It is but he who has
written it without my order." They said: "Your slave has been its
messenger!" He said: "It is true, but he has left Medina without my
permission."

They said: "But he was riding your special camel." He said: "The
camel

208. The subject of the exile of Hamran, the freed slave of 'Uthman to
Basra was mentioned in the story of al- Walid ibn 'Uqbah.

must have been taken without my knowledge and leave." They said: "There
are two alternatives: either you are telling the truth, or lying and
this is your own doing! If this letter is written to 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd
ibn Abi Sarh and you are lying, you deserve being deposed since you have
given this order to shed our blood without having any reason for it. But
if you are telling the truth and know nothing of the letter and of your
slave and camel, then you deserve removal from the caliphate on account
of your weakness and negligence about the affairs and allowing your
wicked relations to interfere in the affairs of the Muslims; for it is
not proper and advisable to have you as Emir and leader when others make
use of your weakness and ignorance." They added: "You have during you
rule unjustly lashed a number of the Prophet's friends and companions
and other Muslims only on the charge of advising and guiding you and for
reminding you to return towards right and justice. Now the time has come
for you to prepare yourself for punishment!"

'Uthman answered: "Firstly even an Imam and leader may occasionally
blunder, but I shall never place myself at your disposal for punishment;
for, if I were to pay personally the punishment of every innocent and
oppressed person, I myself would be destroyed."209

The Egyptians said: "You have committed many great and undesirable
misdeeds, each of which alone deserves your deposal, and when you have
been spoken to you have uttered a verbal repentance and expressed regret
and penitence for your conduct. But contrary to all expectations you
have fallen back on the same and similar deeds and violated your
repentance. When we have come to you to redress our rights and do
justice, you have resorted again to regret and repentance to keep our
minds away from the subject.

At that time Muhammad ibn Muslamah severely reproached our conduct
towards you but at the same time he guaranteed the fulfillment of your
promise. But when this time you summoned him for mediation between us
and yourself, he refused your request, and kept away from you, and said:
'I will no longer interfere in his business.' Anyhow on the first
occasion we yielded and returned to give you no excuse, and waited
hopefully for the fulfillment of your promises and relying on Great
God-Whom you took as witness. But after all that repentance and
affability and to our great astonishment we found a letter written by
you to your agent about killing us and cutting off our hands and hanging
our bodies.

Now you pretend that you know nothing of it, whereas that order was
carried 209. The Prophet in his last days of life climbed the pulpit of
his mosque and said in his sermon: "Whoever has been oppressed by me,
may stand up and retaliate, and not leave it to the hereafter." A
companion rose and said: "In one of the battles you were riding a camel,
and your staff hit me in the belly. Now I wish to retaliate your deed."
The Prophet ordered to produce the same staff and gave it to that man
who said: "At that time my belly was naked!" The Prophet lifted his robe
and bared that part of his body, preparing himself for that man's
retaliation. A silence mingled wit fear fell over the mosque and
everyone held his breath. The Prophet, ill and feverish, had prepared
himself for punishment. But at this moment that man bent down and kissed
the Prophet's body and said: "I take refuge from divine punishment to
the retaliation place, which is the body of the Prophet of God!" 'Uthman
has been the caliph of this same Prophet! (Sardar-Niya)

by your slave riding your personal camel and in the handwriting of your
secretary and bearing your seal as a caliph.

Now in view of what we have seen of you in the past and of the
injustice of your verdicts, of earmarking public funds for yourself and
your relatives, and the fact that you expressed regret and repentance
and violated it and have fallen back on your former deeds, no one but
you can resort to such ugly deeds, which are contrary to right and
conscience.

On the first occasion we let you free, which was a wrong decision. For
we should then have removed you from your position, and replaced you by
one of the Prophet's friends who, unlike you, had committed no wrong and
had not been tarnished with accusation.

Now leave to us the position of caliphate and retire, since this
retirement is the most peaceful solution which will benefit both
parties."

'Uthman said: "Have you nothing more to say, and have you said all you
want?" They said: "Yes!" then 'Uthman continued: "After praising God,
let me say that you have disregarded justice and fairness in your words,
and have hastily issued a verdict which is far from right and equity.
When you say that I should retire, you should know that I shall never
remove from my body the garment that God has placed on it, and will
never put aside the task by which He has honoured me and selected me out
of all people. But I repent and abandon misconducts, and will never
engage in actions which are disposed by the Muslims; for, I swear to God
that I desire His favour and fear His wrath."

The Egyptians said: "If this were the first time you had blundered and
then repented and were steadfast in your repentance and did not resume
your misdeeds, it would have been incumbent upon us to accept your
proposal and leave you alone. You are well aware that despite your many
wrong deeds in the past, we accepted your first repentance and did not
molest you, having no more anxiety and never supposing that you would
write something against us to your agent, ordering our death, as you
have done and as it is proved by your letter. Now what assurance can we
have about you and your conduct, while we have tested you and found you
to be perfidious? You do not repent a sin without committing that sin
again. You should realize now that we will not return without deposing
you and replacing you by someone else. If your followers and relatives
decide to confront and massacre us, we will resist and fight them to
death until we overcome and kill your or be killed in the process."

'Uthman answered: "As for my abandoning my position as ruler, it is an
impossible thing; for, even if you hang me, it would be far easier to
give up the position which God has granted me as caliph. As for your
claim that you will fight those who aid me in killing you, I do not
order anyone to fight you, and if meanwhile someone rises in my support,
it is not I who have given such an order. Upon my life, if I intended to
fight you, I would have issued a written instruction to the Islamic
armies about this matter and would have filled Medina with soldiers and
warriors, or I would have sought refuge in Egypt or Iraq. Nevertheless,
think of yourselves and if you have no pity for my life, fear for your
own; for, if you shed my blood, much bloodshed will follow!" When the
Egyptian deputies departed, 'Uthman summoned Muhammad ibn Muslamah and
asked him to bring back the Egyptians. Muhammad answered:

"By God I cannot lie to them twice in one year!"

al-Baladhuri writes210: The Egyptians were within twelve miles of
Medina when they saw the caliph's messenger hurriedly going towards
Egypt. When they found the letter Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr held a session
in the presence of the Emigrants and Ansar and read the letter to them,
the content of which was as follows: "When Ibn Abi Bakr and so and so
came to you, use every trick in order to kill them, and destroy the writ
of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr's governorship and until my next notice keep
your position as governor, and imprison anyone who intends to come and
complain to me."

When the Egyptians heard the content of the letter, they were full of
rage and fury, and hastily returned to Medina. Muhammad first got a few
of his companions to put their seals on the letter, and when they
reached Medina, they assembled 'Ali, Talhah, az-Zubayr, Sa'd and all the
Prophet's companions and narrated the story of 'Uthman's messenger and
the letter, and recited its contents to them. When the session was over,
not one of those present was left who did not express his vexation and
hatred at this lowly action of 'Uthman and this matter added to the
painful reminiscences about Ibn Mas'ud, 'Ammar ibn Yasir and Abu Dharr,
enhanced their range and dislike towards 'Uthman. The companions
departed for their homes, feeling exceedingly vexed at these successive
events and at 'Uthman's attitude and his letter about the Muslims. The
people besieged 'Uthman, and Ibn Abi Bakr assisted by Talhah asked the
aid of the Banu Taym tribe and others for a clash with 'Uthman, and
meanwhile 'A'ishah continued to hurt 'Uthman with her bitter tongue.

It is stated in al-Bad'u wa at-tarikh211 Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, Talhah,
az- Zubayr and 'A'ishah were among the most stubborn opponents of
'Uthman. The Emigrants and Ansar, too, left 'Uthman alone and had
nothing to do with him and were completely indifferent towards the
difficulty that had arisen for him. In the mosque 'A'ishah protested to
'Uthman and enumerated his misdeeds, and by exhibiting a hair of the
Prophet and his robe and shoes to the crowd cried out: "How soon you
have ignored and forgotten the way and tradition of the Prophet!"

When 'Uthman heard these words, he began to speak ill of Abu Bakr's
household, and uttered many abuses and was so enraged that he did not
know what to say.

210. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/67-68.

211. al-Bad' wa at-tarikh 5/205.

The leaders of the opposition against 'Uthman were three members of the
Banu Taym tribe, namely 'A'ishah, her brother Muhammad and her cousin
Talhah. As historians write, many times there occurred very sharp and
violent clashes between 'A'ishah and 'Uthman. For instance al-Ya'qubi
writes in his book of history212: 'Uthman was speaking on the pulpit the
Prophet would give sermons when 'A'ishah suddenly held one of the
Prophet's shirts and showing it, cried out loudly: "O Muslims! This is
the Prophet's garment which is not yet old and worn Out. But so soon has
'Uthman forgotten and abandoned the way and tradition of the Prophet!"

'Uthman who was taken aback at the unexpected outcry of 'A'ishah, felt
obliged to resort to the Qur'an. So he recited the following verse of
the Qur'an in answer to her: "If Thou turn not away their (women) device
from me, I will yearn towards them and become one of the ignorant."
213


