A'ishah's Historical Verdict
============================

Kill 'Uthman, this stupid, Jewish old man, since he has become an
infidel.

'A'ishah 'A'ishah who had a deep rancor for 'Uthman and wished Talhah,
her cousin, to take over the leadership, made utmost use of people's
rebellion and siege of 'Uthman and issued her historical verdict for his
death.

Ibn A'tham writes about this matter in his book214: When 'A'ishah
realized that the people were determined unanimously to kill 'Uthman,
she addressed him like this: "O 'Uthman! You misused the Muslims' public
fund for yourself, and gave the Umayyads a free hand over their life and
property and appointed them to governmental posts, and thus placed the
ummah of Muhammad in straitened circumstances. May God seize from you
heavenly favour and blessing.215 If it were not for the fact that you
pray five times a day like other Muslims, they would have cut off your
head like a camel.!"

When 'Uthman heard her words, he recited the following verse of the
Qur'an216:

212. History of al-Ya'qubi 2/175.

213. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter Yusuf, Verse 33.

214. Ibn A'tham 1/155.

215. This threat seems to have been uttered by 'A'ishah before her
brother discovered 'Uthman's letter, for, after her brother saw the writ
for his own death, she no longer paid attention to his devotional act of
praying, and issued the verdict for his death.

216. According to commentators the basis of the descent of Chapter
at-Tahrim of the Qur'an was the action of 'A'ishah and another wife of
the Prophet, and it is about those two ladies. 'Uthman, too, retailed
'A'ishah's "Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve the wife
of Noah and the wife of Loot; they were both wives of two of Our
righteous servants, but they acted treacherously towards them, so they
availed them naught against Allah, and it was said: Enter both the fire
will those who enter." 217 Thus with this smashing verse 'Uthman
answered 'A'ishah, who was a hot- tempered and unruly woman and could
never control herself in anger.

This answer of 'Uthman and his letter which was seized by her brother
on the way to Egypt in which order had been given for the death of
himself and his companions, roused 'A'ishah, who was devoted to her
relations, so violently that she openly and daringly issued the verdict
for 'Uthman's death and his infidelity.

She cried out: "Kill this "Na'thal" for his infidelity."218 As soon as
these words were uttered by her, they acted as a flame to a heap of dry
grass and were repeated by each person to another. This verdict was
quoted by all those who never expected it and dared not utter it for
their fear of the Quraysh leaders in Medina.

Now let us see what the word "Na'thal" means. The following are the
meanings of the word "Na'thal" as found in the dictionary:

1-A male hyena

2-Stupid and ignorant old man.

3-In Egypt: a man with a long beard had this name.

4-In Medina: a Jew who had such a name and 'Uthman was likened to
him.

It should be said that to 'A'ishah who was very intelligent, not only
was this word familiar in its various meanings, but also owing to her
natural eloquence and fluency of expression she concentrated all its
meanings in that short and decisive sentence and flung it like a deadly
arrow straight at 'Uthman to remain as a lasting stain on him and his
character.

That short sentence was used by the enemies of 'Uthman as a maxim, and
even after the caliph was overthrown and killed on the basis of that
very verdict, the word "Na'thal" continued to be used for a long time by
his enemies, and has been recorded in history.

al-A'war ash-Shanni speaks of it in his poem as follows219: "I am
wearied of both Na'thal 'Uthman and son of Sakhr, Mu'awiyah." Muhammad
ibn Abi Siarah ibn Abi Zuhayr al-Qurayshi says in his poem220: "We
killed Na'thal 'Uthman in the name of tradition when he checked the
advance of our glittering banners!"

And when 'Amr ibn al-'As recited the following line in the battle of
Siffin: "Bring back to us our master (meaning 'Uthman) as he was," 217.
The Holy Qur'an, Chapter at-Tahrim, Verse 10. 218. History of at-Tabari
4/477, History of Ibn A'tham 1/155, Ibn al-Athir 3/87, Ibn Abi al-Hadid
2/77, and an- Nihayah of Ibn al-Athir 4/156.

219. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/105.

220. Book of Siffin, pages 256, 257, 454 and Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/482.

The Iraqis answered him as follows: "The swords of Madhhaj and Hamdan
prevented Na'thal 'Uthman from returning safe and sound." 'Amr ibn
al-'As exclaimed again: "Restore to us our master, and that is enough
for us." The Iraqis answered221: "How can we restore Na'thal to you now
that he has gone rotten and decayed?"

**A survey of 'A'ishah's verdict**

Although before 'A'ishah's issue of the verdict for killing 'Uthman
there existed a slight hope of reconciliation and compromise between him
and the people through the mediation of 'Ali and others, yet with her
explicit order there was an end to that hope and 'Uthman's death became
inevitable. We know that 'A'ishah had secured that strong position since
the time of the two elder caliphs; for they showed such a respect and
homage to her and consulted her in high matters that she found an
exalted rank in the Muslims' eyes.

Moreover, what enhanced the effect of her verdicts and orders, was her
particular opportunism and the perfect readiness of its enforcers. For
example she issued the order for 'Uthman's death at a time when there
existed a violent difference and conflict between the Umayyad leaders
who ruled the land on the one hand and other classes of Muslims on the
other and the flames of sedition and riots in various parts oft he
country seriously threatened the center and seat of the caliphate. We
have narrated some of these events, and avoided further details for the
sake of brevity.

The issue of the verdict left two alternatives for all the Muslims
including the Prophet's companions and others who wished to carry it out
with determination, namely: war or neutrality. For war, too, there
existed two ways: either to fight on the caliph's front which was
besieged by the people and against them, or to join the ranks of the
people and take part in the revolution against the caliph and his
government 'Ali ibn Abi Talib and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas of the council of
six remained neutral but Talhah and az-Zubayr took sides with the people
and also acted as commanders of the rebels. Those who called 'Uthman
"Na'thal"

The word "Na'thal" became a publicly used terminology and 'A'ishah's
verdict about killing 'Uthman a slogan. Although she is the first person
who used that word for 'Uthman and made it common, but in his life time,
too, those who were deeply annoyed with him, used it to his face. One of
these people was 221. Book of Siffin, pages 256, 257,454, and Ibn Abi
al-Hadid 1/482.

Jabalah ibn 'Amr as-Sa'idi222. at-Tabari writes: Jabalah was standing
in front of his house and had a chain in his hand when 'Uthman passed by
him. Jabalah said to him: "O, Na'thal! By God, I will kill you and will
put you on a camel and send you straight to hell!"

al-Baladhuri writes: While Jabalah had a chain in his hand, 'Uthman
arrived and Jabalah said: "Do you see this chain? I will throw it round
your neck, unless you abandon your companions! You have made the market
of Medina a fief of al-Harith ibn al-Hakam and have done this and that!"
Jabalah's protest to 'Uthman was due to the fact that 'Uthman had left
the affairs of the market of Medina in the hands of his cousin
al-Harith, and the latter bought all the strategic goods which came to
Medina, seemingly in the name of the caliph, and then sold them at any
price he wished for any profit he desired. In fact he gained huge profit
in this way, having no competitor in this process, and no one dared to
express any objection.

Moreover, al-Harith, owing to his kinship to 'Uthman, and his position
as caliph, enjoyed an extraordinary influence and blackmailed other
merchants and committed illegitimate and inhuman acts. The tradesmen and
merchants had repeatedly complained to 'Uthman and had discussed with
him the bullying acts of al-Harith to persuade him to cut short the
hands of his favorite cousin from the control of the Medinan market and
remove his molestation of the people there. But 'Uthman paid no
attention to their demands and took no step against al-Harith.

The supporters of 'Uthman and those who considered that their lordship
and enormous wealth depended on the people's silence and unquestioned
obedience towards the absolute power of the caliph, and in order to
preserve that scarecrow, named 'Uthman in power insistently asked
Jabalah to abandon his opposition to 'Uthman and not to harp on his
misdeeds. But he strongly rejected their suggestions and said: "Yes, by
God, I am never prepared to follow your wish, and thereby stand
remorsefully and dejectedly of the just threshold of God on Resurrection
Day and exclaim: O God! I had no alternative or option but to hear and
obey the commands of my chiefs and thus they brought about my
unhappiness and perversion."

at-Tabari writes elsewhere: One day 'Uthman passing by a group, greeted
them and they returned his salutations. Jabalah was among them and he
asked others: "Why did you respond to the greeting of a man who has
committed so many misdeeds?" Then he turned to 'Uthman and said: "By
God, I will throw this chain round your neck, unless you dismiss your
wrongful agents and drive them away." 'Uthman asked: "Which ones are you
speaking of? I swear to God, I have not made anyone my own favorite nor
have shown any 222. A difference of view exists about his lineage, and
it is said that he had been one of the wise companions of the Prophet
and had taken part with Siffin in the battle of Siffin, and settled down
in Egypt in the last years of his life. Refer to Usd al-ghabah 1/269.

discrimination." He said: "How can you make such a claim, while you
have made such men as Marwan, Mu'awiyah, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amir ibn
Kurayz, 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd and others favorites and brought them close
to your administration? Among them are such individuals of whom the
Qur'an speaks reproachfully and whose blood is considered by the Prophet
lawful to shed!"

'Abd Allah ibn 'Amir was a cousin of 'Uthman on his mother's side, for,
Arwa, 'Uthman's mother was the daughter of Kurayz. As to how the
governorship of Basra was granted to 'Abd Allah, there is an interesting
story connected with it. One day Shabal ibn Khalid, half-brother of
Ziyad ibn Abihi and son of Sumayyah Ma'rufah, arrived when the Umayyad
chiefs were sitting around 'Uthman, and said: "Is there no one among you
who desires to be as wealthy as he is? Is there no obscure person among
you who wishes to be as famous as he is? Is there no one among you
who... Is there no one among you... that you have had to hand over Iraq
as fief to Abu Musa al-Ash'ari (who is not of the Quraysh line and Mudar
tribe and belongs to the Yemen tribes?"223 'Uthman who was moved by
Shabal's words, immediately granted the governorship of Basra to his
sixteen year old cousin, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amir ibn Kurayz, and removed
Abu Musa al-Ash'ari from that position.224 at-Tabari quotes Hatib,
saying225: I was present on the mosque one day, and 'Uthman was leaning
on the Prophet's staff, which was held in sermon times by Abu Bakr and
'Umar, and speaking when Jahjah suddenly cried out:

"Na'thal! Descend from the pulpit!"226 Abu Habibah says: Jahjah
al-Ghifari rose and exclaimed: "O 'Uthman! We have prepared for you a
feeble camel, a cloak and a chain! Descend from the pulpit! We will
cover you up in the cloak, and put the chain round your neck and mount
you on the camel and will send you to the volcano mountain!" 'Uthman
said to Jahjah in answer: "May God make you and what you have prepared
for me uglier!"

The narrator says: Jahjah did not address these words in private to
'Uthman, but he did so in public, and at this time 'Uthman's supporters
and kinsmen surrounded him and took him home. Abu Habibah says: "This
was the last time I saw 'Uthman."

It is said that after this incident he did not leave his house more
than one or two times, for, after that he was arrested by the people and
assassinated.

223. We know that Shabal al-Mudari was greatly vexed to see that the
governor of Basra was a man of Yemen.

224. Refer to al-Isti'ab in connection with Shabal, also to Usd
al-ghabah 2/385 and al-Isabah 2/159.

225. History of at-Tabari 5/114, al-Baladhuri 5/47, Ibn al-Athir 3/70,
Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/165, Ibn Kathir 7/157, al-Isabah 1/253, History of
Khamis 2/260.

226. There is no unanimity about Jahjah's parentage. he was present at
the ar-Ridwan allegiance. He seized the staff on which 'Uthman was
leaning and broke it on his own knee and the broken pieces caused a
suppuration which remain with him, and he died year after 'Uthman's
death. Usd al-ghabah 1/309.

227. al-Baladhuri 5/81 and 5/103.

**'Uthman turns to 'A'ishah for help**

When 'Uthman ignored the people's demand and 'A'ishah issued the
verdict of his death, the people besieged him. Meanwhile the people of
other cities who bad been driven to extremities by the oppression of
'Uthman's agents, after receiving her letters inciting them to rise
against the caliph, proceeded to Medina to carry Out her order.227
Talhah, 'A'ishah's cousin, acted as leader of the rebels and issued
necessary orders.

228 There remained no refuge for the caliph now, especially as no hope
was left to save his life after the issue of 'A'ishah's verdict. When
'Uthman found himself in this strait, he ordered Marwan ibn al-Hakam and
'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Attab229 to meet 'A'ishah who was preparing herself
for pilgrimage to bring about reconciliation between her and him. These
two men went to meet 'A'ishah and said to her: "If you forget your
journey and remain in Medina, there is a hope that with the blessing of
your presence God may protect this man ('Uthman)." And Marwan added:
"The caliph promises to offer you two drachmas for every drachma that
you intended to spend for this travel."

'A'ishah answered: "I have packed my baggage and consider this
pilgrimage obligatory for myself, and I swear to God that I will not act
upon your demand." 'Abd ar-Rahman and Marwan rose in the disappointment
of Marwan recited the following lines:

"Qays set fire to a city against me and when the flames rose high and
swallowed me, he let me alone." When 'A'ishah heard this ironical remark
of Marwan, she said in a serious and determined tone: "Marwan! You
imagine that I am in doubt about your master 'Uthman! I swear to God
that I long to place him in one of my packets and have the strength to
carry it to throw him into the sea!"230 'A'ishah left Medina for Mecca,
and in that year 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas was appointed as pilgrimage
leader by 'Uthman. When Ibn 'Abbas saw 'A'ishah in al-Salsal, she said
to him: "Ibn 'Abbas I beg you in the name of God not to scatter these
people who have revolted against this man ('Uthman) with your reasoning
and persuasive tongue, and do not make them waver about this unruly and
selfish man. The people have become clear-sighted and distinguish the
right. They have gathered together from every city about the matter,
which has risen high, I myself saw Talhah having seized the keys of the
government treasury. If he assumes the rein of affairs, he will
undoubtedly 228. al-Baladhuri 5/81 and 5/103.

229. 'Abd ar-Rahman took part in the battle of al-Jamal under 'A'ishah.
It is said that he lost one arm in that battle and it was picked up by a
vulture and dropped on al-Yamamah, and it was recognized by the people
from the ring. Nasab Quraysh 187 to 193. 230. al-Baladhuri 5/75, History
of Ibn A'tham 155, Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd 5/25 printed in Leaden. A part of
this story in History of al-Ya'qubi 2/124.

follow the line of his cousin Abu Bakr."

Ibn 'Abbas answered: "But dear mother, if a calamity befalls him and he
be killed, the people will not obey anyone but our leader 'Ali."
'A'ishah said hurriedly: "It is enough! I have no intention of arguing
with you!"231 'Uthman in siege of Talhah, 'A'ishah's cousin

'Uthman was in siege for forty days and during this time Talhah held
the rein of affairs, and performed congregation prayer with the people.
at-Tabari History Talhah, 'A'ishah's cousin who was strongly supported
by her, was gradually getting the control of the situation and
increasing his power and influence until he seized the treasury of
public funds and this helped to enhance his power. On the other hand the
siege of 'Uthman was becoming tighter and his power and influence
rapidly diminishing and becoming more limited.232 When 'Uthman found the
conditions extremely serious, and his position as caliph wholly
unstable, and his life in great danger, he sent 'Abd Allah ibn al-
Harith ibn Nufal, a descendant of 'Abd al-Muttalib to Imam 'Ali with
these lines233:

"If I am to be eaten, eat me yourself; otherwise save me before they
tear me to pieces." At that time 'Ali was in Khaybar, not in Medina and
the people had gathered round Talhah and received orders from him. When
'Uthman's messenger arrived and delivered the written message, 'Ali
returned to Medina and went straight to 'Uthman.

'Uthman said to him: "I have a right over you in several ways: Islam,
brotherhood, family ties, and being the Prophet's son-in-law. Even if
you disregard all these and we suppose ourselves to be living in pagan
times, it would be a disgrace for the house of 'Abd Manaf to have its
power and rule seized by a son of Taym tribe (Talhah)."

231. History of at-Tabari 5/140, History of Ibn A'tham 156, We have
quoted this story from at-Tabari and al- Baladhuri.

232. History of at-Tabari 5/140, Ibn A'tham 156. We have quoted this
story from at-Tabari and al-Baladhuri.

233. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/78, History of at-Tabari 5/154,
Ibn al-Athir 3/64, Kanz 6/389, Tradition 5965, We have quoted Ibn
al-Athir's narrative which was the briefest. Refer also to al-Kamil of
al-Mubrrad 11, printed Leaden, Zuhar al-adab 1/75 published by
ar-Rahmaniyah, and Ibn A'tham 156-157.

'Ali said: "You will soon see!" Saying this, he left 'Uthman's house
and went to the Prophet's mosque, and placing his hand on Usamah's
shoulder they proceeded together to Talhah's house. When they reached
its entrance, the uproar and clamor of the people shook the house. 'Ali
managed to reach Talhah and said to him: "Talhah! What is this turmoil
that you have started?" Talhah answered: "O Abu al-Hasan! You have come
too late! Everything is over at your arrival."

According to another narration, 'Ali said to Talhah: "I ask you for
God's sake to scatter the people from around 'Uthman!" Talhah answered:
"By God I shall never do that unless Banu Umayyah grant people's
right."

'Ali said nothing in answer to Talhah, and went out till he reached the
treasury and ordered to open its door. But as there was no key at hand,
he ordered to break down the door and then poured out everything and
began dividing it among the people. The news of this distribution
reached Talhah's house, and the people who had gathered there, wishing
to have a share of the public fund, left Talhah's house stealthily and
hastened towards 'Ali and thus Talhah was left alone.

When 'Uthman heard what 'Ali had done, he was very pleased, and at this
moment Talhah arrived and said to 'Uthman: "O Commander of the faithful!
I beg God's forgiveness for what I have done. I had an idea in my mind,
but God did not favour it and created an obstacle between me and my
purpose!" 'Uthman answered: "I swear to God that you have not come here
to repent. You have come because you find yourselves defeated in this
process! I leave it to God to avenge this action of yours.!"

Talhah blocks the water from reaching 'Uthman but 'Ali provides it for
him at-Tabari writes: " 'Uthman was besieged for forty days and during
this time Talhah performed congregational prayer with the people!"234
Ansab al-Ashraf al-Baladhuri writes235: None of the Prophet's companions
showed such opposition to 'Uthman as Talhah did. Talhah and az-Zubayr
had taken control of affairs, and Talhah prevented water from reaching
'Uthman's house. 'Ali who stayed in his own land within a mile of
Medina, sent a message to Talhah to let 'Uthman get water from his own
well of Rumah and abstain from making them suffer thirst. But Talhah
refused to comply.

at-Tabari writes236: When the besiegers tightened their siege and
prevented water from reaching 'Uthman's house, 'Uthman sent someone to
'Ali, asking for help by supplying him with water. 'Ali talked to
Talhah, but as the latter evaded giving an answer, 'Ali was so enraged
that Talhah had no alternative 234. History of at-Tabari 5/117.

235. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/81 and 90.

236. History of at-Tabari 5/117. 5/113.

but to agree, and at last water was carried on animals to 'Uthman's
house. al-Baladhuri writes237: The people besieged 'Uthman and blocked
the way of water to him. So he was forced to come out of the house and
ask the people if 'Ali was amidst them. They said no. He asked if Sa'd
was there, and they gave a negative answer.

'Uthman remained silent for some moments and then said: "Is there
anyone here to go and tell 'Ali to get us water?" When this was reported
to 'Ali, he sent 'Uthman three water-skins full of water. The Banu
Hashim and Banu Umayyah slaves surrounded the water-skins to keep them
secure from the rebels. Nevertheless by the time the water reached
'Uthman's house, some of these slaves received injuries.238

**Talhah insists upon 'Uthman's assassination**

At this time Mujamma' ibn Jariyah al-Ansari happened to come upon
Talhah who asked him: "Mujamma'! What is your master doing?" Mujamma'
answered: "By God, I believe that you intend to kill him eventually."
Talhah said sarcastically: "Would the world turn upside down if he is
killed?" 'Abd Allah ibn 'Ayyash ibn Abi Rabi'ah says239: (When 'Uthman
was besieged) one day I visited him and talked with him for an hour.
During the conversation 'Uthman held my hand and asked me to listen to
the noise outside his house. Someone was saying:

-What are you waiting for? Another answered: Wait! He may come back!
While we were listening we heard Talhah's voice asking someone "Where is
Ibn 'Udays?" Someone answered: "He is here!" Ibn 'Udays went forward and
Talhah whispered something in his ear. Ibn 'Udays returned and said to
his friends: "From this moment let not anyone visit 'Uthman." At this
moment 'Uthman said: "O God! Remove the evil of Talhah from me, for, he
has roused and instigated the people against me. I pray to God not to
let him benefit from this turmoil but bring about his blood to be shed.
He has trodden upon my respect when he had no such right!" Ibn 'Ayyash
says: As I wanted to leave the caliph's house, they stopped me by the
order of Ibn 'Udays until Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, happening to pass by
ordered them: "Leave him alone" and then they let me go.

237. al-Baladhuri 5/64-69.

238. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/74.

239. History of at-Tabari 5/112, History of Ibn al-Athir 3/73.


