The End For 'uthman
===================

All are unanimous that 'Uthman's body was left on the ground for three
days until 'Ali personally intervened in the matter of its burial.

al-Baladhuri

When it was reported to 'Ali that the people are determined to kill
'Uthman, he said to his own sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn: "Take up your
swords and stand at 'Uthman's door and do not allow anyone to rush upon
the caliph." They obeyed their father's order and rushed to 'Uthman's
house. There was a strange tumult going on around the caliph's house and
the people there insisted upon putting an end to 'Uthman's life. At this
time a conflict started between the invaders and defenders, coloring
their swords with each other's blood. al-Hasan's face was covered in
blood in the clash, and the head of Qanbar, 'Ali's servant was badly
injured.

When Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr saw this, he felt afraid that the Banu
Hashim may be so enraged on seeing what had happened to 'Ali's sons that
they would start a riot. So he summoned two of the attackers and said to
them: "If the Banu Hashim notice this scene and especially if they see
here the blood- covered face of al-Hasan, they may scatter the people
from around 'Uthman with their swords and thus make all our plans
ineffective Therefore it would be wiser if we enter 'Uthman's house by
the wall and take his life quietly."

Then Muhammad and the other two climbed to the roof of an Ansar's house
which was next to 'Uthman's house, and entered the caliph's house. The
supporters of 'Uthman saw nothing of this, since in this siege they had
all except 'Uthman's wife, gone up on the roofs of houses. When these
three entered 'Uthman's house, Muhammad said to the other two: "I will
enter ahead of you and when you see me holding him between my arms, rush
in and kill him with your knives and daggers!"

Saying this he leapt into the room and seized 'Uthman's beard. When
'Uthman saw him, he said sharply: "If your father were here and saw your
disrespect to me, he would reproach your deed!"

These words caused Muhammad's hands to tremble, but at this moment the
other two accomplices leapt in and with many blows of their daggers
killed 'Uthman.240 Ibn Abi al-Hadid writes241: "On the day that 'Uthman
was killed, Talhah who had covered his face with a cloth to hide himself
from public eyes, shot arrows at 'Uthman's house and when he saw that
the presence of the defenders made it impossible to enter the house and
seize 'Uthman, he took his friends to 240. Ansab al-ashraf of
al-Baladhuri 5/69, at-Tabari 5/118.

241. Ibn Abi al-Hadid 5/404.

the roof of an Ansar's house and climbed down to 'Uthman's house and
killed him."

at-Tabari242 says this Ansari fellow was 'Amr ibn Hazm and quotes a
witness of this event as follows: They went inside 'Amr ibn Hazm's house
who was a neighbor of 'Uthman and had a brief clash with the defenders.
I swear to God I have not forgotten the moment when Sawdan ibn Hamran
came out and cried out: "Where is Talhah? We have killed 'Uthman!"

al-Baladhuri writes243: When 'Ali learnt of 'Uthman's assassination, he
hurried to 'Uthman's house and said to his sons: How did this happen
whereas you stood at the caliph's door? Then he gave one of them a slap
on the face and the other a blow on the chest, and in great anger left
the house. On his way he came across Talhah who seemed to be as active
as before. When he saw 'Ali, he said: "O Abu al-Hasan! What has made you
so red in the face and angry?" 'Ali answered: "May God's curse fall upon
you! How can one engage in killing a companion of the Prophet?!" Talhah
answered: "If he had driven away Marwan from him, he would not have been
killed!"

'Ali turned away and went back to his house. The incident of the
caliph's burial There is a unanimity of view that 'Uthman's body was
left on the ground for three days until 'Ali himself intervened for his
burial.244 at-Tabari writes: The companions of 'Uthman discussed with
'Ali the question of the caliph's burial and requested him to allow
'Uthman's family to bury his body. 'Ali did so and gave them permission.
'Uthman's body was escorted by a small number of his family members.
They intended to have the body buried in Hash Kawkab, a Jewish cemetery.
On seeing the coffin the crowd threw stones at it and rushed to overturn
it. When 'Ali heard of this matter, he sent a number of people to
prevent the crowd from their action and protect the corpse. They did so
until they carried it to its destination and buried it in the
above-mentioned cemetery. He was buried in darkness rather late in the
evening, and no one was present there except Marwan al-Hakam, 'Uthman's
fifth daughter and three of his servants, making five in all.

At her father's burial, 'Uthman's daughter wailed with lamentation, but
at this moment the people threw stones at them and shouted: "Na'thal!
Na'thal!" After Mu'awiyah became caliph, he ordered to pull down the
wall of Hash Kawkab cemetery and thus this part was annexed to the
al-Baqi' cemetery. He ordered also that the Muslims should bury their
dead around 'Uthmans' 242. History of at-Tabari 5/122.

243. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/69-70.

244. History of at-Tabari 5/143, Ibn al-Athir 3/76, Ibn A'tham 159,
ar-Riyad an-nadrah 2/131-132.

grave so as to join this grave to those of the Muslims.

**Appendices A word with critics**

Recently when I was engaged in revising this book and preparing it for
publication, I heard that a writer called A.M. had written a critical
note of the Arabic original of the book on 'A'ishah in No. 7 issue of
the Journal of Book Guide for the Iranian year 1340 (1961).

I secured a copy of the said journal, and after reading page 696 of No.
273 of it, I realized that the writer's intention had not been to make a
scientific and logical criticism of the book, but he has rather had a
private motive in taking up this matter; for, he had selected certain
passages of the book and had omitted the introduction and conclusion of
each part, and in line with his hidden intentions he had purposefully
used words and phrases to destroy the books' value as a research work
and scientific study, and make such a reliable and worthy book look as
lacking all validity and importance.

Some of the objections raised by Mr. A. M. were answered eloquently in
the same journal by a clear-sighted scholar for whom I feel a great
respect, and he has expressed his appreciation of this research work and
defended it worthily. But this time the latter scholar has raised
certain other criticisms about the contents of the book which criticisms
cannot be disregarded and left unanswered, especially as these
objections may also have occurred to other lovers of Islamic subjects
and culture.

Now that this book of the Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam is
being printed for the second time and offered to the public, and the
readers are more or less familiar with the contents of the book, it
would be worth while, after an introduction to quote the exact
objections of the honorable scholar and those of Mr. A. M. and then
answer them.

**Falsehoods and fables in important Islamic sources**

It should unfortunately be admitted that the history of early Islam is
full of lies and calumnies. Many an imaginary and bloody battle has been
recorded in them and attributed to the time of Abu Bakr or as victories
won during the rule of Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman none of which has
ever taken place nor any blood ever spilt.

On the other hand many a real war has been mingled with fable and
irrefutable historical facts have been turned into unbelievable stories
and fantastic novels. The great scholar Mr. 'Askari has spent more than
forty years of his life on the research and survey of the history of
early Islam to discover these bitter truths and found out that these
falsehoods and fables have found their way since the beginning of the
second century of Hijrah into the valid and important historical sources
of Islam through the clever and falsehood- fabricating hands of the
genius of the east, namely Sayf ibn 'Umar at-Tamimi and his atheistic
fellow-thinkers, and they continue to remain the same to the present
era.

Mr. 'Askari has introduced in his worthy work of research such works as
'Abd Allah ibn Saba'245, Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah,246 One
hundred and fifty false companions247 and other works of his to prove
the existence of so many lies and fabrications on the basis of definite
historical facts, and to show that all those lies and fables have been
presented first by at- Tabari as real events in his book and then other
historians like Ibn al-Athir in his al-Kamil, Ibn Kathir in his
al-Bidayah wa an-nihayah, Ibn Khaldun in his al-'Ibar, Mir Khand in his
Rawdat as-safa, Ahmad Amin in his Fajr al-Islam, Farid Wajdi in his
Da'irat al-ma'arif and a number of Orientalists in the Islamic
Encyclopedia and other writers in their books have borrowed them from
at- Tabari and recorded them.

The book of one hundred and fifty false companions by the present
writer is a clear evidence of how so many false companions have been
made up for the Prophet and who have never been created by God, and yet
surprisingly enough in their biographies their miraculous acts, poems
and traditions have found their way into such credible books as
al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah, Tajrid, al- Isabah and Ibn 'Asakir's
History.

Many a non-existing spot and places on the earth are recorded on the
basis of the same fables in such reliable geographical books as Mu'jam
al-buldan, Marasid al-itla' and other works describing their geography
and conditions. Mr. 'Askari after long years of study and research in
hundreds of reliable texts and sources, has found that all these lies
and fables have found their way into reliable important Islamic
historical sources only through Sayf ibn 'Umar at-Tamimi who has also
been charged with atheism, God knows how many other fables and lies by
other atheists and enemies of Islam are recorded in important and
reliable sources of the school of caliphs which have not yet been
recognized!

For more than 12 centuries these fables have existed in reliable books,
and as Mr. 'Askari states, he has worriedly published a part of them in
the lunar year 1375 of Hijrah in his first work entitled 'Abd Allah ibn
Saba' al-madkhal, 245. 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' has been translated and
printed in three volumes by the scholars Sayyid Ahmad Zanjani, Shaykh
Muhammad Sadiq Najmi and Shaykh Hashim Hirisi.

246. Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah is written under the title of
"The Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam". The first volume of it
has been translated by me, the second by Messrs. Najmi and Hirisi and
the third by Mr. Jawidan.

247. The first volume of one hundred and fifty false companions is
translated and published by me, and the other volumes are being
translated.

waiting for a reaction to this work.248 This book of 'Abd Allah Saba'
was first printed and published in an-Najaf, and for the second and
third times reprinted in Egypt and Beirut. It has also frequently been
printed in India, Turkey and Iran in Turkish, Persian and English
languages, and it is received well by men of learning and scholars who
have written criticisms and appreciation's of it in reliable journals,
thereby encouraging Mr. 'Askari to endeavor and publish the second part
of this series of topics which is one of the most significant parts of
Islamic history.

**Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah**

Scholars of narration and traditions are well aware that none of the
intimates and companions of the Prophet have produced so many traditions
about his life and characteristics as 'A'ishah has done.

The traditions of 'A'ishah comprises the first day of revelation of the
Prophet to the last moment of his life, and then continues to include
the period of her father's caliphate, the time of his old loyal friend
'Umar and his successors 'Uthman and 'Ali until the rule of Mu'awiyah.
She quotes traditions showing the Prophet's predictions made related to
the events after his life, and contains praises and appreciation's of
Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman in support of their position as caliphs and
their party and followers. There are also available from 'A'ishah many
traditions related to the interpretation of Quranic verses and
explanation of Islamic ideas and injunctions.

The total number of traditions narrated from her is 2210 in number,
while in the book of Musnad Ahmad alone nearly the same number of
traditions has been quoted from her. This number begins with the first
days of revelation to the Prophet, whereas we know that she entered the
Prophet's house in Medina a year and a half after the emigration and
fifteen years after his ordainment as Prophet, and that she has had only
eight years and a few months of joint life with him.

All the writers and scholars who have been engaged in discussing the
events of history of early Islam and especially the Prophet's life, both
Orientalists and Muslims (except Shi'ah scholars) have been guided by
these same traditions of 'A'ishah.

The traditions of this lady of early Islam have described all the
Prophet's marriages, whether they have had an injunctional propaganda
aspect, or have been effected for political reasons and high interests
of Islam and Muslims or for emotional purposes, in such a way as if all
of them have been effected by lust and sexual instincts!

These same traditions of 'A'ishah which have found their way into all
the 248. Refer to the Introduction of the book 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' p.
33, translated by Mr. Fahri Zanjani.

(reliable and important historical and jurisdictional sources of the
followers of caliphs, have served as a bad guide for Orientalists, with
the result that they and the enemies of Islam, and friendly-seeming
enemies have wounded the founder of Islam with their words by relying on
'A'ishah's traditions and consider the Prophet and religion of Islam as
lustful and commonplace! It is here that discussion and investigation
become necessary for a committed scholar in order to clarify the truth,
since this research reveals the facts and will promote religion and its
advance.

Consequently this scholar has concentrated the second part of his
important scientific research on a survey of 'A'ishah's traditions. But
as this research was not possible except through a full understanding of
the spirit and mentality of this lady and her likes and dislikes Mr.
'Askari has, as mentioned already, in the preface by reference to valid
historical sources in the first section of this topic described the
principal part of her life in which he speaks of her party and political
activities, and when necessary he has subjected some of her traditions
to a survey and criticism. This part of the book too, has been
translated into Persian and printed in three volumes under the title of
"The Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam". The second part which
contains a comprehensive survey of her traditions will soon go to the
press.

Now that the goal of writing this series of topics and evaluation of
tradition and Islamic history by the great scholar Mr. 'Askari have
become considerably clear, we turn to the original subject, namely
answers to the objections. But as our respected scholar has left some of
Mr. A. M.'s criticisms unanswered, we give priority to Mr. A. M. in
receiving answers and as we have promised, we will first quote his
criticisms and then will answer them.

Mr. A. M.'s criticisms and answers to them Mr. A. M. writes in the
second part of his criticism which is related to the difference of age
between 'A'ishah and the Prophet, as follows249: C. This difference of
age had two results: firstly during her life it created such stories as
that of "Ifk" which is reflected in the Qur'an and Safwan and Hassan ibn
Thabit as its heroes, and secondly after the Prophet's death 'A'ishah
was still passing through her youthful and active period and this
produced heroic military acts on her part.

A. Firstly concerning the Ifk tradition and its related story, we
should remember that the tradition is given by 'A'ishah herself and all
its related narration's end with her person, not to any other source of
sources.

On the other hand in the Ifk story there is a mention of personalities
who were not alive at the probable time of the occurrence of such an
event. Other cases exist, too, which make the question of Ifk doubtful
in connection with

249. The first part of his criticisms has been adequately answered by
our learned scholar. 'A'ishah herself.

Moreover there are a number of narration's and reports which consider
the Ifk verse to be a reference to Mariyah, the mother of the only son
of the Prophet, and the matters becomes so complicated and painful that
God testifies the purity and chastity of that innocent lady and thus it
relieves the Muslims and shuts the mouths of babblers.250

As we said, the Ifk tradition in the way described by 'A'ishah is a
tradition narrated from her and it is one of the cases discussed by the
author in the second part of the book.

Secondly, concerning his statement about the military activities of
'A'ishah in her youth and the heroic acts of this lady of early Islam,
the matter is quite the reverse for according to the verdict of history,
after the Prophet's death, 'A'ishah spent her youthful years in the time
of the rule of her father Abu Bakr and his old friend 'Umar, and left
those years behind in full comfort and tranquility and away from all
turmoil, enjoying extraordinary respect and honour, and until the age of
forty she never stepped out of her house except two times and even then
to make a pilgrimage.

When she entered the period of old age in her fifth decade of life, she
began the tumultuous period of activity, heroic deeds and military joys.
She accepted the position of commander in chief of the forces in the
battle of al-Jamal against 'Ali, imposed on him by the people despite
him own wish, and took part in the battle as an experienced army
commander riding a milled camel in the battlefield!

C. Mr. A. M. writes: For example one of the scenes where young 'A'ishah
protests angrily against the repeated marriage of the Prophet is as
follows: The Prophet declared that any woman who wished so, could place
herself at the disposal of the Prophet, and he could select anyone he
liked and reject anyone he did not want, and in confirmation of this
decision the verse descended allowing his freedom of choice. Then
'A'ishah became angry and said to the Prophet: "O Muhammad! God, too,
seems to fulfill your wishes!" A. If you read the above account more
carefully and compare it with the exact Arabic phrases the translation
of which will be given below, you will see the difference:

According to al-Bukhari and Muslim, 'A'ishah said: I felt vexed with
the women who offered themselves to the Prophet without expecting a
dowry and said to him: "Would a free-born woman offer herself?" At this
time the following verse descended: Keep away any of your wives you
wish, and keep any of them you desire, and if you call back to yourself
the one you have sent away, there is no offence on your part.

I said to him: "I see that God approves of your wish."

Here you can see that not only no declaration, which Mr. A. M. claims,
is 250. Refer to page 156 of this book and the words of the scholar Ibn
Abi al-Hadid and pages 97 to 103. made by the Prophet, but no such
declaration is seen in the whole book or any book of traditions and
biography, and no woman has ever been taken in marriage by the Prophet
the way described by Mr. A. M. He considers the Prophet a
pleasure-loving lover of women and in using words below the dignity of
the Prophet attributes such a story to him.

Would the writings of Mr. A. M. not be an evidence of his idea and
opinion of Islam and its prophet?

Mr. A. M. writes:

C. "While the Prophet was in bed with 'A'ishah he received the
companions. Such a story is quoted in the first part of the book.
'A'ishah said: "I was in bed with the Prophet when Abu Bakr arrived and
was allowed to enter. Then 'Umar came and was admitted in the same way,
and only when 'Uthman arrived the Prophet covered himself."

A. I ask the reader to refer once more to the former chapter on the
'period of support and confirmation' about this story where one of
'A'ishah's traditions about 'Uthman has been considered, and see the
great difference between the quoted tradition and Mr. A. M.'s statement.
He has omitted the first and last part of the tradition as well as the
criticisms of the exalted scholar on the basis of which he has refuted
that tradition, and thus he has fabricated his own version of it in
accordance with his motive, whereas such a treason is most indecent
coming from an educated person.

C. Mr. A. M. writes: When 'Ali went to Basra for the battle of
al-Jamal, Hafsah and minstrels of Medina made the following song:

A. We are compelled to quote here the translation of the exact words of
the book of 'A'ishah's Traditions about the story which is written on
page 137 of that book as follows:

'Abu Mikhnaf narrates: When 'Ali reached Dhu Qar251, 'A'ishah wrote to
Hafsah, daughter of 'Umar as follows: I must say that 'Ali has arrived
at Dhu Qar and is worried and perplexed on hearing about our great
military forces and equipment there. For, if he retreats one step, he
shies off like a horse, and if he advances one step, he collapses and is
vanquished. When Hafsah received the letter, she ordered her slave-
girls to arrange festivity and beat the tambourine and sing this song:

The at-Tulaqa'252 girls gathered in Hafsah's house to hear that song.
The news reached Umm Kulthum, daughter of 'Ali. She covered herself with
a robe and veil and went to Hafsah's place with an anonymous group and
then in the heat of their merry-making started by Hafsah, Umm Kulthum
removed her veil, and on seeing her Hafsah was greatly embarrassed and
uttered: "We are from 251. Dhu Qar was a place on the way to Basra.

252. at-Tulaqa' is the name of that group of the Quraysh who did not
embrace the Prophet's faith until he captured Mecca and all of them were
taken as his slaves according to the law of war. Later on the Prophet
set them all free, and so they became his freed slaves, and most of them
felt a rancor towards him. God and return to Him." Umm Kulthum said: "It
is not something new for you and 'A'ishah to join hands against him. It
was only yesterday that with each other's aid you rose against his
brother, the Prophet, and God punished you as you deserved." Hafsah
answered:

"That is enough, may God favour you!" Then she asked to bring
'A'ishah's letter, tore it up and begged God's forgiveness.253 Do you
now see Mr. A. M.'s evil intention? God knows what he has in mind. He
begins his criticism of the book by insulting the lofty position of the
Imam, and as you read, he has omitted the first and last part of the
subject and has offended the holy personality of the leader of the
world's pious believers, whereas the honorable author had intended to
show the inner feelings of these two ladies of early Islam, namely the
daughters of the first two caliphs, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, towards Imam
'Ali and at the same time to refer to chapter at- Tahrim which is an
admonishment of 'A'ishah and Hafsah who aided each other to hurt the
Prophet.

The points mentioned by Mr. A. M. in the journal of Book Guide for
introducing the book are with one exceptions answered elaborately by our
exalted scholar and were quoted to show that:

1-Mr. A. M. as a would-be trustworthy writer has never shown any
sincerity and trustworthiness in quoting the contents of the book. By
omitting the significant parts of a book which is written scientifically
and which is based on more than forty years of research by the author he
has lowered it to the rank of a simple and unscientific book and has
introduced it as such to the world of learning, and has thus shown his
evil intention. Indeed no more than this can be expected from the writer
of the book of "Twenty-three Years" in order to refute Islam and his
prophet.

2-What Mr. A. M. has written in the name of introducing the book is in
fact an account of his own attitude and thought about the history of
early Islam and its chaste and honest prophet. For the works of the
great scholar Mr. 'Askari which are written on the evaluation of
tradition and history, beginning with 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' al-madkhal,
have been printed and published for a quarter of a century and placed at
the disposal of experts and scholars of the east and west, and have been
subjected to survey and discussion by such great literary and religious
and scientific circles of the world as al-Azhar of Egypt, to be followed
by a series of profound investigations, as well as wonder and praise of
his works. But as this welcome and these reactions shown by the great
scholars of the world to Mr. 'Askari's book have assumed a scientific
and technical aspect, and have been produced in all sincerity and
absence of fanaticism and private motives, they have not reached Mr. A.
M.'s ears who has imagined that he can easily undermine the worth of
scientific and technical researches.

253. Umm Kulthum refers explicitly to the Quranic and Hafsah. Refer to
the related chapter of this book.

**A word with the writer**

We said at the beginning that a fine scholar who is greatly respected
by us and from whose books and lectures I have greatly benefited, has
answered some parts of Mr. A. M.'s criticisms in a long article printed
in No. 9 of the journal of Book Guide. He himself has also made some
criticisms about the book that, irrespective of his exalted position as
a scholar and man of learning and as I hope to give priority to truth,
therefore, after quoting his exact objections and criticisms, we will
deal with and answer them.

He writes on page 895 of the said journal as follows:

C. I cannot yet predict the success or failure of Mr. 'Askari in his
objective, to see whether the effect of the book is to make 'A'ishah's
Traditions lose their validity for those who consider them reliable, or
whether they make the fanatics for or against 'A'ishah more fanatical in
their prejudice.

A. The rain falls and produces tulips in the garden and motes in the
swamp. All are unanimous about the fineness of rain, but its effect
varies on different lands. This matter is not confined only to the book
of the great scholar. Every psychological and religious book has such a
fate. Do you believe that the book of Abu Hurayrah by the great Sayyid
Sharaf ad-Din al-'Amili who has cruelly attacked Abu Hurayrah and his
traditions and whose book you yourself have praised, is an exception to
this rule, remembering the position of Abu Hurayrah in the Sunni
community and among the followers of the school of caliphs? Whereas many
books have been written refuting him and ash-Shaykh Mahmud Abu Rayh,
while no such rebuttal has been written on any works of Mr. 'Askari.

When a definite scientific fact is discovered, do you think it
permissible to hide the truth merely for a regard for the public and
their fanaticism? You yourself know well that this prejudice is worth
studying, not only in the ordinary and illiterate class of people, but
also in the learned and scholarly class. If one were to abstain from
telling the truth because of a regard for the prejudice of either of the
two groups who were supporters or opposers, and scientific matters were
to be concealed, would the level of knowledge and vision rise to this
amazing extent?

We know that in the present world and in the open space which is
created for stating truth, the door of excuse is shut to both scholars
and human society, and the number of narrow-minded people and religious
sectarians has considerably been reduced.

You have written:

C. What Mr. 'Askari may surely be criticized for, is his negligence
about a basic question. He has forgotten that owing to Christian
propaganda and the fanning up of this fire by a particular group, a
special sensitivity has been created today in the minds of the young
concerning the Prophet's plurality of marriage, a sensitivity which
exists also about the wars of early Islam.

A. Our dear scholar knows that the enemies of Islam, especially
Christian missionaries as Orientalists have for hundreds of years
obtained most of our precious books at the highest prices, and having
long been engaged in the discussion and criticism of them. Long before
us they have even printed our books especially those of the Sunnis and
congregation, together with their scientific research and technical
indices in Europe, and have even made an index of the Quranic
vocabulary. One of their scholars has prepared an index of fourteen sets
of the most reliable books of traditions and biographies of the
outstanding personalities of Islamic history, explaining each tradition
or topic on the basis of more than fifty books. They have even made an
index of the vocabulary of tradition which is far more voluminous than
the previous index. The researchers of Brockelmann in history and
literature is a source of reference in the world. They have experts for
every corner of the Islamic realm and for every century of Islam. Thus
the malicious have no need of our writing. They have access to whatever
they want, and whenever they decide, they can engage in writing either
self-interestedly or impartially.

In view of all this, if we investigate and be convinced that the source
of all those misrepresentations about the Prophet's marriages and even
about some jurisprudentially verdicts and interpretation of some Quranic
verses, and chapters is derived from these same traditions attribute to
'A'ishah, and discover that such traditions are untrue, should we remain
silent and leave a weapon in the hands of the enemies of Islam?

Dear Sir! To what goal do you invite the people of our time by your
book and your pleasant lectures? Is your goal anything but Islam and
acceptance of its truths? If you recognize right would you disregard it
for the sake of wrong and remain silent? Or on the contrary would you
disregard matters of time, place, conditions of the day, transitory
wishes and tastes of a particular group of people, and would according
to your duty reveal what is right and true, and thus pay your debt?

Concerning your reference to the wars of early Islam, fortunately Mr.
'Askari has openly and elaborately revealed the true visage of
historical facts as a result of his valuable scientific researches in
his book of one hundred and fifty false companions, the first volume of
which has been translated and printed by myself. He has, in his second
volume of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', proved at length the invalidity of the
idea that Islam was advanced with the sword.

Therefore, the investigation of such matters and declaration of truth
do not only create no danger for the Muslims and Islam, but they will
also promote its greatness and advance. If any danger might exist it is
in the mind and spirit of some of us who with our poverty of knowledge
retreat before the wrong criticisms of individuals who are fascinated by
the propaganda of the same Orientalists, and thus show our weakness.

It is not our duty to interpret Islam and its truth according to the
wishes of these people or conceal it, and drag Islam behind their ideas.
On the contrary it is our duty to declare what is right and attract them
towards Islam, and place the truth on their table and let them discuss
and investigate it freely. C. You have written: The author has not
foreseen that these same seemingly baseless matters will one day be
printed in a dignified journal by a critic under the title of
"Historical points" in the name of fresh discoveries about the life of
the Prophet of Islam.

A. Our dear scholar knows that the misuse of a matter by an individual
or individuals does not prevent a person from writing a book, especially
such valid books. You have surely read in the same journal, page 697 No.
277 the reference to the subject of cleanliness, as stated by the writer
who introduces the book. If you have not, this is what he writes:

"The book of cleanliness (or ceremonious purification of the body) by
Muhammad Taqi Majlisi, Part One, Tehran, 'Ilmi Brothers, year 1340 is in
1032 pages. This voluminous book of one thousand pages is a description
of ceremonious cleanliness from a well-known book of jurisprudence, and
it is the first volume of it. Is cleanliness such a difficult and
problematic matter that its discussion does not end even in one thousand
pages?!"

You see the result of malevolence! Thus the late Majlisi is criticized
why he has written such an elaborate book that compels a critic to write
about it in a dignified journal!

C. Our dear scholar has written: The author has quoted some of these
matters and he has left his analysis and criticism for the second volume
of the book. Thus he has paved the way for doubt in the form of cash and
has left its removal on credit.

A. We hope that our explanations will serve to answer his criticism, We
have already stated in the introduction to this chapter that Mr. 'Askari
has postponed the discussion and survey of 'A'ishah's traditions to the
second volume of this book. He has devoted Volume One to a description
of the mentality, spirit, morals and significant acts of 'A'ishah during
the time of the Prophet, the two elder caliphs and his two sons-in-law,
and he has cited as example a tradition of hers whenever necessary, and
has discussed it, showing its weak points and implied objections and
proving its falsity and baselessness. Therefore the removal of doubt has
not been effected on credit.

C. The dear scholar writes: A decisive expression of opinion in such
matters depends on a high council of well-informed and discerning
experts which can guide our religious propaganda and publications
towards high Islamic interests, or it can at least check such chaos and
confusion. But unfortunately we lack such a council, though we hope that
this idea will soon be put into practice. A. It would have been proper
if our dear scholar had not made a hasty prejudgment and before deciding
to make this strong protest he had contacted well-versed persons and
centers of learning to find out the views of world scholars, especially
those of Egyptian universities such as Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawud professor
of the language chair and ash-Shaykh Mahmud Abu Rayh about Mr. 'Askari's
book.

We ask our learned master to refer to the words of those two great
Egyptian scholars, a part of which is quoted in the introduction of this
book and to the statement of Abu Rayh which has been given in the
introduction of Volume Two, and then find out what discussions have
taken place between leading Sunni and congregation scholars about this
and other words of Mr. 'Askari, and what praises are bestowed on him.
Then he can compare his judgment in the research center of Iran with the
conclusion of the leaders of the school of caliphs and Sunni and
congregation followers in the Sunni center of Egypt concerning the
scientific researches of Mr. 'Askari and then sit in judgment and say in
all fairness what a great difference exists between the two.

C. Our dear scholar writes: I do not claim that I can clarify this part
of the Prophet's life in this brief article. It is Mr. 'Askari's duty in
view of his negligence in this book, to write a comprehensive treatise
on this subject for his Persian-speaking compatriots?

A. At this stage the supposition comes to the mind that our learned
scholar may have left our reading that part of the book which has been
improperly and unfairly criticized by Mr. A. M.

We ask what negligence has been committed by Mr. 'Askari for which he
must offer atonement? You should have first read his introduction to see
that his intention has not been to write a history book or describe the
life of the Prophet and his wives especially that of 'A'ishah. Therefore
there has been no negligence to require expiation.

It seems that we are compelled once more to state that the author has
reached the conclusion after spending long years of his life in the
survey and study of various literary, jurisprudentially, traditional and
historical texts of early Islam, that the quotation and forging of
annals and false happenings in historical text, as well as untrue
narration of traditions by their narrators, have diverted the history of
Islam from its true course and have exhibited the visage of Islam to the
world quite the reverse of what it has really been. It is for this
reason that Orientalists and enemies of Islam by relying on these
forgeries and fables of Sayf ibn 'Umar at-Tamimi have confronted Islam
and have scoffed at the Prophet and at the holy religion of Islam.

Now I quote a point of yours about Mr. A. M. you have written on page
896 of the journal:

C. To my mind however much one wishes to attribute it to propriety, yet
one sees signs of malevolence in this article. (Then you add the reason
for it and say:) For, firstly the critic himself is aware that the
selected parts are all distorted and subject to criticism and the author
of the book himself has protected against their validity. Nevertheless
like a person who has produced an evidence of a crime against someone,
he has selected some pungent sections in connection with the Prophet and
given them the name of "Historical points".

A. In view of the scholar's diagnosis concerning the existence of
malevolence in the article of Mr. A. M. in introducing the book, now the
question arises: "Does there remain any more room for criticism and
objection towards the book of 'A'ishah's traditions?"


Tehran, Deymah, 1355 Iranian year (1976) 'Ata Muhammad Sardar-Niya


