Support of Islam
================

All the above points show that the glory and greatness of Islam are
based on its laws and teachings, not on its followers, and this
greatness is not the product of the support and confirmation by its
followers so as to expose it to annihilation by them.

I myself believe that if the entire world rises to fight and joins
hands to destroy it, there cannot be inflicted the slights damage upon
its glory and greatness. Similarly, if the whole world join hands to
glorify and support it, nothing can be added to that glory and
greatness; for, the secret of Islam lies in its lofty principles, and
the secret of those principles lies in themselves not in the visage of
its followers. This is a point which is understood only by true scholars
and learned people. Therefore, if the pioneers of Islam and the
Prophet's companions are subjected to discussion and criticism and their
life, words and deeds are analyzed in detail in order to introduce the
wicked and dishonest persons to the world of Islam, no damage will be
done to Islam and its spiritual truth. On the contrary, an Islam which
lays the foundation of justice through its injunctions, and declares the
equality of all human beings in the eyes of the law, will allow such a
survey and criticism, and particularly insist upon such an investigation
and criticism for the sake of discovering truth and leading people
towards their right destination.

Why should we go that far? The great reformer of humanity, Muhammad,
has in his wise guidance, directly and indirectly encouraged us to
follow truth alone and accept and support truth only because of its
being right irrespective of individuals, even if it were in the interest
of a poor and helpless person, and also to rise up against falsehood and
corruption, even if it is to the detriment of a noble and distinguished
individual, and to make no discrimination between the noble and ignoble
for the enforcement of divine punishments.

**Muhammad and enforcement of justice**

It is narrated in the traditions of Sahih that Usamah ibn Zayd whose
father and himself were respected by the Prophet, one day interceded
with him to exempt a noble woman of Quraysh who had committed theft,
from being given due punishment, but that great reformer and divine
Prophet refused to accept this intercession and uttered his well-known
and everlasting remark about this matter, saying: "O people! Your
predecessors wasted away everything of theirs! They let alone a noble
person, who had committed theft, whereas they punished a weak and
unknown thief! I swear to God that if Fatimah, daughter of Muhammad,
committed theft, I would cut off her hand!"

It was with such final words that the Prophet, the founder of the
principles of justice and equality, refused not to enforce the
punishment prescribed by heavenly laws upon that noble woman of
al-Makhzumi tribe, despite her high rank and dignity among her own
people.6 In this way, the Prophet abolished class differences hundreds
of years before theorists of communism tried to remove them. At a time
when he declared the law of justice and equality, he made all people
equal under that law, and gave personal help to abstemious, shelterless
and distressed people against the powerful and infamous tyrants. This
law has been clearly expressed in the Qur'an, and holy and prophetic
traditions. The Qur'an says:

"O you men! Surely We have created you of a male and a female, and made
you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the most
honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful of his
duty." 7 The holy tradition says: "Whoever puts into practice my order,
will have heaven for his abode even if he is an Abyssinian slave, and he
who disobeys will have the fire of hell for his seat, even if he is a
dignitary of the Quraysh." Most of the noble traditions of the Prophet
are manifest examples of the height of humanity and justice.

**The close and distant friends of Muhammad**

Where the Prophet speaks of future and unveils occurrences, he
describes his companions after his demise as follows: some of them will
proceed worthily in the way of God, while some others will deviate; a
number rise up against justice, while others will resort to mutiny and
injustice.

He addressed 'Ammar and said: "O 'Ammar! You will be killed by a group
of rebellious and tyrannical individuals!" And he said to 'Ali: "O 'Ali!
Do you know the most miserable of past and future people?" 'Ali
answered: "God and His prophet are more aware." The Prophet said: "The
most miserable of past people was he who cut off the leg of the Thamud
tribe's camel; and the most miserable of the future persons is he who
kills you."8

All these points show that without any doubt the Prophet's companions
differ from each other in terms of their rank and position like other
people. Some of them have attained the highest degree of perfection,
virtue and humanity, whereas some others have remained in the abyss of
meanness and corruption, and not all of them have succeeded to gain
honour as companions of the Prophet or to find the way leading to truth
and perfection, and thus to win equality with others.

This being the case, would this law that believes the companions and
other people are equal in the religion of Islam and makes dignity and
superiority dependent upon the degree of chastity and performance of
sacred injunctions of Islam, not be the most adequate reason for that
group of people who have not 6.Sahih Muslim 5/114.

7.The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Hujurat, Verse 13.

8.al-Imamah wa as-siyasah, Ibn Qutaybah 1/119, Printed in Cairo.

yet abandoned the way of caution, to permit a discussion and a critical
survey of the Prophet's companions? A companion who has not followed the
path of truth and has not submitted to the sacred law of Islam, cannot
claim a distinction only by being a companion of the Prophet, in the
same way that the people of our own time who have been separated greatly
from the era of the Prophet, but have fully understood his holy
principles and have been deeply influenced by Islam, cannot be
reproached for not having lived in the Prophet's time and not having had
the good fortune of being his companions.

In fact, there are many individuals who are near in appearance, but far
in reality, whereas there may be many who are far in appearance, and yet
close in reality. In my opinion, we and the Prophet's companions are
equal in our call for truth and the need for propagating the exalted
laws of Islam.

Indeed, the greatest distinction gained by the Prophet's companions in
benefiting from his association has been their opportunity to have
personal contact with and received direct command from the master of the
faith. It should be remembered that this distinction has no more than
two aspects: Firstly, the great blessing of his companionship and
receiving his direct command without intermediary, and secondly it is
the most convincing sign and decisive argument for the companion
himself.

If the companionship with the Prophet could, in itself, provide the
means for his intercession on the day of resurrection, and protect the
companion from criticism, and keep him immune from hardships and
upheaval of time, and prevent the issuance of a verdict by the Muslims
for or against him, the Prophet would never have uttered these
historical and everlasting words to his dearest child: "O Fatimah,
daughter of the Prophet of God! Ask me whatever you wish, for before the
threshold of divine justice, the fact of your being the daughter of the
Prophet will be of no avail to you."9

This historical statement was uttered by the Prophet to his daughter on
the day when the following verse descended to him: "Inform your close
relations." Indeed, the lofty principles laid down by the Prophet about
justice and equality consider all people equally in carrying out the
punishments based on Islamic injunctions.


Some time ago, research scholar Mr. Murtada 'Askari presented his book
"Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah" to men of learning and scholars,
especially to two groups of readers who fervently sought truth, heartily
desired to discern the philosophy of Islamic history, and comprehend the
reasons and history of the canon law and its principles. He engaged
himself in this research at a time when he came across undeniable
documents concerning the life of 9.This tradition is among those quoted
from 'A'ishah, Umm al-Mu'minin. It will be discussed in the subsequent
volumes of this book. (Sardar-Niya)

Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah, and he made use of them to present the truth,
and express his views freely. However telling the truth and seeking it
are regarded as an unforgivable offence by the short-sighted and by
those who think it improper to criticize and issue a verdict of any kind
against each of the Prophet's companions, since they themselves have
enforced a limit for this survey and investigations about those
companions.

Mr. 'Askari has, in his book, fully adopted the method of critics and
researchers by employing scientific sequence and scrutiny, and explained
in his introduction the difficulties and obstacles which existed in the
way of investigation for all seekers of truth. One of these obstacles
may be a scholar's attachment to his own feelings and partiality,
causing him to prefer one group or personality to another, due to his
prejudice, while this may be contrary to truth. Or owing to
self-interest and adverse motive, he may resort to every trick in order
to conceal truth. This is the way of some writers who try to establish
some concordance between two opposite views. This concordance may seem
agreeable, but it is obvious that two contrary views and aspects cannot
be brought together to create harmony.

Mr. 'Askari has succeeded in removing in his own discussion such
defects, which exist in the way of every scholar's investigation. He
pursues a definite goal from which he has not deviated, and he has not
made personalities and authorities the axis of his task, since his aim
has been to discover truth. Moreover, he has been able to lay aside his
own feelings and inclinations, and allow perfect freedom to intellect
alone in issuing verdicts, avoiding all blind and misleading prejudices,
and showing no preference to one group over another, even if that group
belongs to his own sect. It would be no exaggeration to say that Mr.
'Askari has laid down a firm and steadfast rule in the method of his
investigation. What mostly attracts scholars apart from the apparent
form of this book and wins their praise and admiration, is the fact that
he has been able to observe the general law in his scientific
discussion, and analyze the traditions of Umm al-Mu'minin with perfect
care and caution, and thus reveal the truth with all its
manifestations.

**'Ali's assassination and 'A'ishah's praise of God**

Historical evidence compels us to express doubt about some of the
traditions of Umm al-Mu'minin, such as the traditions which speak of the
caliphate of the two elders (Abu Bakr and 'Umar) without a mention of
'Ali, and also the traditions related to the qualities of the two elder
caliphs and 'Uthman and 'Ali's ways, since in these traditions, feeling
and interest have played an important role, for, her relationship with
Abu Bakr was one between a daughter and father. Similarly, her words
about 'Umar are very different from her expressions about 'Ali who was
considered a rival of Abu Bakr and 'Umar. Also, her rise against 'Uthman
and her incitement of people to shed his blood, and then her uprising,
for the sake of avenging his death, are other arguments, which make us,
doubt the truth of her words.

In the same way, her actions against 'Ali, her aids to his enemies and
her alliance with Talhah and az-Zubayr who had broken their vow with
'Ali, and her starting the fire of the battle of al-Jamal, are all clear
examples of her rancor and long-standing hostility towards such a chaste
Imam as 'Ali, using those acts as a means to create division and
dispersion among the Muslims. She felt such a pain in her heart about
'Ali that it gave her no tranquility. Even when she heard the news of
the Imam's assassination, she prostrated herself to thank God, and
recited a couplet expressing her feeling.

Each of her traditions is related to one of such important historical
events, which should be treated with caution, and discovery of truth
gives her a higher position than her personality and one's own
inclinations.

Moreover, a companion of the Prophet may, like other people, err in his
verdict and judgment, since so long as a human being, whoever he may be,
acts upon his own opinion and taste, he may be right or wrong. But an
investigator has no right to lay aside wisdom and intelligence, humble
himself before great personalities, and conceal the truth. He is not
permitted in his evaluation, to place right and wrong views on the same
level. His duty is to state the truth in its full sense.

In addition, when we agree that every authority may err and blunder and
hence will be called to account at the threshold of divine justice, Umm
al- Mu'minin will not be exempted from this rule, and no injustice is
done to her. From the viewpoint of scientific and research method,
injustice occurs when we give a prejudiced judgment about 'Ali and
'A'ishah, and consider them to be equal from the viewpoint of justice,
or when we regard 'Ali, who proceeded in the right path, as an authority
to be at par with those who had gone astray, such as 'A'ishah, Mu'awiyah
and other companions who rose in opposition to and dispute with 'Ali.

**'Ali regarded God as his governor**

'Ali, not in his capacity as the "Gate of the City of Knowledge" and
the Guardian appointed by Muhammad, not only because he uttered the
truth strongly and explicitly and defended it staunchly and thus gave
religion strength and consistency, and not because of all the above
qualities, but on account of the fact that he has been the possessor of
all the attributes of perfection in its full sense, has attained his
status.

What has placed 'Ali above everyone else is the fact that in all his
words and deeds, he regarded God as his supervisor and a watchful
governor, and was strict upon himself in the interest of the Muslims,
preferring public and Muslim society's interests to his own and worldly
gains. During his Caliphate, the noblest stage of humanity and
perfection of a human being is distinguished in such a rank and
position. He, in this period in particular, was a perfect model in his
food, dress, justice of his verdicts, and avoidance of the deceptive
manifestation of the world.

While others exerted great efforts to secure Caliphate, in the case of
'Ali it was caliphate itself, which hastened towards him. Others
preferred their interests and those of their relatives to public
interests, but 'Ali placed public interests before those of his own and
his kinsmen.

At the time 'Ali was in Kufah, his brother 'Aqil ibn Abi Talib joined
him. 'Ali welcomed and asked him why he had come to Kufah. 'Aqil said:
"My salary is not adequate for our livelihood, and the high cost of
living in Medina has put me heavily in debt. I have come to ask for your
help to save me from this situation."

'Ali said: "I swear to God that I have nothing but my own salary. So
you must wait until the due time of payment so that you may receive it
instead of me." 'Aqil said: "Do you think that I have come so far from
Hejaz in the hope of receiving your salary? Of what worth is your share
of salary to me? How can it solve my problem?" The chaste Imam answered:
"Do you know of any worldly goods belonging to me? Or do you expect God
to burn time in the fire of hell for offering Muslims' funds to a
relative?"

Thus 'Aqil who could not tolerate the justice of a chaste Imam as 'Ali,
turned to and joined Mu'awiyah who made no distinction between
legitimate and illegitimate acts, and regarded public funds as his
personal property. This event acquaints us with 'Ali's personality and
the extent of his chastity and degree of preferring public interests to
those of himself and his kinsmen. It can be claimed without any doubt
that none of the Prophet's companions but 'Ali had attained such a
height of humanity and perfection; or, he himself has, in all sincerity,
uttered his famous and immortal phrase saying: "O world, deceive others
but not me!"

**'Ali and the Caliphate**

I do not think there is any companion of the Prophet whose verdict and
authority may not be subject to comments except 'Ali about whose
authority there does not exist the slightest room for criticism. I make
this statement with full courage since it is confirmed by all the
political events that have occurred in Islam.

'Umar interfered in the matter of caliphate with the result that Abu
Bakr succeeded to get that position. In his decree he argued that he had
checked riot and sedition, and after Abu Bakr he shouldered that heavy
responsibility, and on many occasions, confessed his own mistake in
giving his verdict in favor of Abu Bakr's caliphate. At that time when
some of the companions spoke to him about the allegiance to his son 'Abd
Allah, he answered: "It is enough for 'Umar's household to have one
person responsible and to be called to account at the threshold of
divine justice about Muhammad's ummah." But 'Ali explained, contrary to
the two elders and concerning the matter of caliphate, that he was
engaged in a more important task, namely preparing the body of the
Prophet for burial.10

This was the greatest criticism leveled always against Abu Bakr and
'Umar, showing, 'Ali to be entitled against those two. In the election
of the caliph after 'Umar, 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Awf gave his verdict upon
'Ali and 'Uthman who were two of the six candidates for the Caliphate
nominated by 'Umar, and notified to those two the duty of the caliph in
relation to his own verdict. Although he knew that 'Ali would not submit
to his authority, he began first by proposing to 'Ali the acceptance of
the terms of caliphate.

'Ali accepted that duty to the extent of his power and ability, and
assurance of his conscience before God and His prophet. But 'Uthman, in
order not to let the chance of caliphate escape him, accepted
unconditio

nally all those conditions, irrespective of his power and ability. In
accepting the terms of the son of 'Awf, 'Ali was more eager to win the
consent of God and His prophet, and Muslims' interests than to gain the
position of caliph and command, whereas 'Uthman cherished that position
rather than anything else. God knows whether, at the outset, 'Uthman
possessed perfect discernment of the task faced by him, or whether he
realized it, later on, since this is an internal matter about which we
cannot issue a verdict and we can only judge by appearance.

**Historical verdicts of 'A'ishah**

At first 'A'ishah agreed to 'Uthman's caliphate and confirmed it. Then
she turned against him and gave an opposite verdict. For that reason,
her authority is not reliable. But 'Ali, despite establishing the
reasons for his rivalry with 'Uthman on the issue of caliphate, did not,
unlike 'A'ishah, rise in conflict with 'Uthman.

After 'Uthman was killed, 'Ali refused to accept allegiance of Talhah
and az- Zubayr except in the mosque and in the presence of all people,
and when they forced him to accept caliphate, he rose in the mosque and
said: "I was weary of becoming your caliph, but you favored only my
command. Remember that I shall take no step except with your approval
and advice. I hold the keys to your public funds, but I shall never take
one drachma of it without your approval." 10.For this reason, 'Ali did
not attend the penthouse of Banu Sa'idah, and in his absence, Abu Bakr
and 'Umar hastily embarked on electing the caliph. If they had wanted
for the conclusion of the Prophet's burial ceremony so that 'Ali could
attend their gathering, such events would not have taken place, and the
course of Islamic history would have been different. (Sardar-Niya)

Then he asked: "Do you agree to this?" The people shouted their
agreement, and 'Ali said: "O God! Be their witness," and then he
accepted the caliphate. 'Ali had made the right decision and thus he
left no excuse for people, since it was they who forced him to accept
that position and not because he himself desired it. Therefore, anyone
who shirked his duty and opposed 'Ali, would be a traitor and guilty,
and he who remained loyal would be a true believer. 'A'ishah resorted to
a verdict once again, namely when she rose to oppose the murderers of
'Uthman and avenge his murder, and formally collaborated with Talhah and
az-Zubayr who had broken their pact with 'Ali and trampled upon their
allegiance with him. This motivated action showed that it was not free
from spite and grudge so that the people accused her of having risen,
not to avenge 'Uthman's blood, but intending to cause division and
dispersion among the Muslims and scattering people from around 'Ali. Had
there been anyone else in 'Ali's place, she would not have resorted to
such an action.

**Umm Salamah's historical letter to 'A'ishah**

'A'ishah's action in fighting 'Ali was the second split that occurred
in the foundation of Islam after 'Umar's move with regard to caliphate.
This statement is not a personal opinion expressed for a particular
motive. They are undeniable facts about which just leaders of nations
and well-known impartial historians are unanimous.

The action of 'A'ishah has been despised by supporters of justice and
truth since the time of the Prophet's companions. A witness to this
claim is Umm Salamah, another consort of the Prophet. She wrote a letter
of counsel to 'A'ishah, asking her to abstain from this action, and
warned her against the Creation of division and dispersion among the
Muslims. The letter goes like this:

"From Umm Salamah, wife of the Prophet of God, to 'A'ishah, Umm al-
Mu'minin. I praise Unique God and confess His uniqueness. But now, you
have, with your action, torn the veil of respect between the Prophet of
God (p.b.u.h.) and his nation, and desecrated it. The Qur'an has
gathered up your skirt; so do not obstinately drag it along. Your rank
and position are secure; so do not lose them in a futile manner. Fear
Unique God Who is the guardian of this ummah! If the Prophet of God had
considered it worthy of women to fight, he would certainly have issued a
command in this connection. Do you not know that he has forbidden you
from challenging others. For, if any deviation takes place in the pillar
of religion, it will never be corrected by the force of women, and not
repaired by them. The holy war of women is to observe self-control,
chastity and contentment.

If the exalted Prophet sees you driving your camel in the desert form
one watering place to another, what will you say to him? You are bound
to hasten towards him sooner or later. I dare say that if they tell me:
'O Umm Salamah, enter heaven', I would feel ashamed in meeting the
Prophet while I have shown disrespect to him.

Therefore, veil yourself and remain peacefully in your house. You will
be doing the greatest service to this nation if you do nothing for them.
I know also that if I were to inform you of a remark I have from the
holy Prophet, you will writhe like one bitten by a snake! That is all."
This letter is another evidence that 'A'ishah had erred in her judgment,
and confirms this point that the reason for her uprising had not really
been others' interest in society and solidarity of the Muslims.
Moreover, none of the consorts of the Prophet assisted her in this
uprising.


