The Author's Goal in This Book
==============================

Mr. 'Askari, may God reward him for his truthfulness, has never
intended, in his precise scientific discussion, to rouse people against
'A'ishah despite her errors in issuing a verdict in her uprising. During
his discussion, he has tried to correct the ideas on historical events
in the minds of most people who have not been able to understand the
Prophet's companions, and have failed to distinguish right and wrong
from their utterances, and have consequently been deprived of
understanding proper history and its basis and also Islamic canon laws.
By his efforts in this regard he has also sought that people understand
the Prophet's traditions without being affected by feelings and minor
interests and prejudice towards the narrators of tradition, but with the
use of their knowledge.

The reason is that if the people understand the whole or a part of the
Prophet's traditions they will easily become aware of the secret behind
differences between Islamic sects and jurisprudentially creeds, and will
realize to what extent these differences are artificial and a product of
those rulers who, because of particular motives, preferred one party
over another, and fabricated any tradition that they desired in order to
reinforce the foundation of their rule and strengthen their own group.
Or they may have compelled some companions of the Prophet to alter or
misinterpret some of those traditions. It was preferable for them to
depict a companion as liar and deduce something from his statement that
would serve their own interest and thus strengthen their rule.

Before ending my scientific discussion which has been undertaken to
please God, I wish to advise Mr. 'Askari to make use of his scientific
subject of this discussion for a higher purpose, namely bringing various
Islamic sects closer and lay a firmer foundation as desired by learned
and enlightened people, in order to bring about unity and solidarity
among the Muslims. It is quite possible that he, while deeply involved
with research, may follow this suggestion in practice since there does
not exist an inherent basic difference between a moderate Shi'ah and an
intelligent Sunni, and there is no doubt that each of these two sects,
so long as they pursue a single goal and are sincere in their purpose,
will make utmost efforts to remove defects and refine one another.

Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawud
Cairo, College of Languages

**Author's preface**

**The motive for writing this book**

"And if Allah pleases He would certainly make you a single nation." The
Qur'an, chapter an-Nahl, Verse 93 Many researchers in noble traditions
of the Prophet of Islam have, since long ago, realized that there exist
wide differences between some of these traditions themselves, and also
between them and the verses of the divine Book. The result was that some
of the past scholars decided to account for and interpret these
differences in order to remove objections to the Prophet and his
traditions, and they wrote books entitled: "Ta'wil mukhtalif
al-hadith"11, "Bayan mushkil al-hadith"12, "Bayan mushkilat al-athar"13,
etc., which roused the hostility of such critics as atheists and
Christian missionaries, and a group of orientalists so that by reliance
on the contradictions and differences of these traditions, they could
reproach the Prophet of Islam and deride and criticize his religion. But
both groups were ignorant of the fact that the great collection of
traditions, especially those which contradict each other, have not been
written in the same style to make them confident that all of them have
come from and have been stated exactly by the Prophet so that these
could be subjected to a single general survey.

They are a collection of several different traditions, which have
reached us from various narrators. A researcher must first classify them
in connection with the type of narrators. For example, the traditions
related to 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin, Anas14, Abu Hurayrah15, 'Abd Allah
ibn 'Umar16 must each be collected separately and compared in
conjunction with the traditions of other narrators who have quoted from
the Prophet (with 11.By Ibn Qutaybah, 'Abd Allah ibn Muslim, died 280 or
276 AH.

12.By Muhammad, Ya-Husayn Ibn Furak, died 446 or 406 AH.

13. By Abu Ja'far, Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Azdi at-Tahawi, died 321 or
332 AH. 14.Anas ibn Malik ibn an-Nadr claims to have served the Prophet
for ten years. From him 2286 of the Prophet's traditions have been
quoted. He died in the year 92 or 93 AH in Basra and was buried there.
His biography is given in al-Isti'ab p. 40, and Usd al-ghabah 1/127,
al-Isabah 227 and Jawami' as-sirah 276. 15. There are differences about
the parentage of Abu Hurayrah ad-Dawsi. None of the Prophet's companions
equals him in the number of traditions, and a total of 5374 of the
Prophet's traditions have been quoted from him. He died in 57 or 58 AH
and was buried in al-Baqi' cemetery of Medina. Refer to Jawami' as-sirah
276, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd 7/20, al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah and al-Isabah.

16. 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar is the son of the second caliph. 2630 of the
Prophet's traditions have been narrated by him. He was killed in 73 AH
due to the plot hatched by al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf who ordered to kill him
with a poisoned spear from behind in a crowded place. Refer to Jawami'
as-sirah 276, al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah and al- Isabah.

due attention to the life story, views and ideas of each of them) in
order to discover truth.

I realized this matter when I was investigating the historical events
of early Islam through traditions. I was particularly attracted by the
traditions quoted from 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin, and I was convinced
that the history of Islam from the beginning of the Prophet's ordainment
until the allegiance with Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah will not be understood
properly unless Umm al- Mu'minin's traditions which are one of the most
important source of the history of early Islam, are studied and
evaluated impartially, and solely for the sake of finding the truth.

I believe also that understanding some verses of the heavenly Book as
well as Islamic jurisprudence for whose explanation reference is made to
the Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin depends on a previous study of these
traditions. As I intended to discuss and organize the history of the
critical Islamic period, I was obliged to give priority to the
evaluation of these traditions before dealing with other topics. A
discussion of such matters especially concerning the leaders of early
Islam involves certain difficulties which are not very easy for a Muslim
scholar to remove.

**Let us investigate impartially**

The first difficulty for an oriental Muslim writer is to deal with
views with which he has been accustomed and brought up, and which have
influenced his life and mentality and taken deep roots in all aspects of
his existence, as well as the beliefs possessed by his society. He
regards the personalities of early Islam to be superior to other human
beings, and considers their time and the people of their time more holy,
and his belief about them and their time is different from that about
others and their time.

If such a writer is unable to remove this difficulty in his discussion
and research, his subject will become just the defense of his beliefs
instead of seeking truth. As I realized this fact, I decided especially
in this connection, not to give attention to my feelings concerning the
respect I felt for 'A'ishah Umm al- Mu'minin as a consort of the
Prophet, observe no discrimination between revered Islamic personalities
and others who happened to enter the discussion, and attribute to them
various feelings and motives that all people have, so that after
analyzing the events which have occurred during the life of Umm al-
Mu'minin, I would be able to discuss and survey her words and traditions
for the discovery of truth alone.

Although I do not claim complete success in this determination, I have
used my utmost endeavor for this purpose, and I leave it to others to
judge. But I take God as my witness in saying that only the hope of
assisting the scholars to investigate the true story of early Islam and
the Quranic injunctions, has been my motive in the study and survey of
this subject.

**Islam or faith and belief**

Secondly, if he succeeds in removing the above difficulty in his
investigation, there figures another problem, namely the effect of the
publication of such topics on coordination and unity among the Muslims.
Now this question arises that since with the efforts of the strivers and
reformers of Islam, the hopes and expectations of various groups of
Muslims have, to some extent, been fulfilled and they are brought close
to each other and the means of their brotherhood and solidarity have
been provided, will it be proper to describe in detail the past events
and publish matters which not only produce violent refutation and
criticism but also rouse dormant feelings and produce aversion and
hatred? But opposed to this question, the following matter must be
brought up which cannot be easily disregarded. If on the excuse of the
futility of benevolent reformers' effort, such a discussion and
investigation would not be acceptable, in that case, no one will engage
in scientific research, and this would be an unpardonable injustice to
knowledge, consequently, the facts of Islam would, as in former
centuries, remain hidden behind the veil of mental rigidity and futile
fanaticism, and as a result the discord and differences among various
Islamic sects would manifest themselves more intensely. This is
certainly not something to be approved by reformers and those who are
interested in Islamic solidarity.

Consequently, while we sincerely desire the success of our Muslim
brethren in laying aside all differences and uprooting dispersion, in
response to the call of the benevolent reformers of Islam, we feel a
particular respect for learning and knowledge and regard them as
belonging to a different category; for, those who have endeavored
constantly to lay the foundations of Muslim unity and solidarity,
proclaim that solidarity under the sacred banner of Islam, while Islam,
in itself, has no international political motivation. But it is a faith
and belief in a set of realities born only out of a perfectly scientific
criticism, discussion and research, and in concealing those facts under
such excuses and pretexts, no single and firm faith, or belief would be
produced, and the proper and direct course of Islam would not be
distinguished from the pitfall of perdition and aberration.

I beg God Almighty to grant us success in following the right path,
for, it is He who guides all to the right path.

**Deep Islamic solidarity**

The third difficulty that arises is the outcry that is the main
stimulant of that faith and rises from the heart. It is a faith in the
fact that only Islam should govern the Muslim society and serve as the
foundation of our social solidarity. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us
to make constant efforts for reviving Islamic life and give it a solid
foundation.

O strivers in the way of truth, may God grant you success! Do you not
invite all the Muslims to return to Islam, and submit to its principles
and enforce its laws? What is the way of understanding Islamic
principles and injunctions? Is it other than a survey and research, from
the beginning of its history, and discovery of the true traditions of
the great Prophet as well as a study of the life and ideas of their
narrators, so that by this means, we may comprehend the cause of descent
of the Quranic verses and thereby understand the Islamic injunctions
which we should obey and call on others to act upon?

As we are bound to act upon the injunctions of Islam, we must first
obtain a knowledge about them, since action is not possible without
knowledge. It can be stated with complete confidence that the effort for
Islamic solidarity, and steadfastness in bringing back Islam to the
Muslim society, are not incompatible with the discussion and
investigation of the history of Islam and a careful survey of the
traditions of its Prophet. On the contrary, it serves as its basis and
both subjects serve as complements to one another, for, bringing Islam
back to the Muslim society would not be possible without creating
harmony among the Muslims, and understanding the meaning of the Quranic
verses and the Prophet's utterances as well as history of Islam.

Similarly, so long as there exists no faith in the necessity of
bringing Islam back to the Muslim society, no friendship and proper
brotherhood will be established among the Muslims, since if this were
not so, what would be the basis of harmony among the Muslims? What would
give them unity and the common direction? Moreover, creation of
brotherhood is not possible except through making the Muslims understand
each other's views, and take to proper criticism in order to discover
and follow the truth. In that case, these words of God in the Qur'an
would be applicable to them:

"Give good news to those who listen to the word, then follow the best
of it; those are they whom Allah has guided and those it is who are the
men of understanding."17 This is our call and we beg God to enable us
and all our Muslim brethren to follow these noble words. The
difficulties mentioned above have been peculiar to the Muslims.

**Worship of ancestors**

In the history of Islam, like the history of other nations and
religions of the world, in addition to what we have already mentioned,
there have always been three other great obstacles which have acted as
barriers to many seekers of truth 17. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter az-Zumar,
Verse 18.

and historians, checking them from following truth and knowledge. The
first and the foremost difficulty have been the habit of excessive
respect for and even worship of ancestors. Since history was written,
man has always been accustomed to show unnecessary and undue reverence
to those who have gone by. This led to idolatry, and thus Nasr, Yaghuth,
Wadd, Ya'uq and Suwa',18 who were good and virtuous men were respected
greatly by their contemporaries, but after their death, this respect
took the form of worship. Surprisingly, we see our good people of the
past who, in various periods of their lives, go so far in their
rejection and criticism that they issue verdicts of death for each other
and consider legitimate shedding the blood of their rivals and
followers. But after the passage of long years, the present generation
has gone to this in its reverence and respect for them that they do not
even allow any survey and investigation of their words and deeds to
themselves and to others, thus preventing discovery of truth
altogether.

**Blind prejudice**

The second barrier is improper, indecent and, at the same time, comic
prejudice, which serves as a barrier keeping man, confined within the
wall of darkness and ignorance. This is an altar of sacrifice where we
have witnessed many victims throughout human history in every country
and every period. Religious fanaticism twice turned the city of Rayy
into ruins at the beginning of the seventh century AH.19 The Hanafites
and Shafi'ites rose first against the Shi'ites and cruelly massacred
them. Then the Shafi'ites attacked the Hanafi sect and shed their blood,
with the result that houses were demolished and the city was destroyed.
This is an example of the altar of sacrifice due to fanaticism. We can
easily find thousands of victims in history as a result of ugly,
ill-omened, touching and funny prejudice.

**Demagogues**

The third obstacle is the most hateful of them, namely the influence
exerted by those in power in various periods of history. It was they who
by using bayonets and their position did whatever they desired, and
forcefully and by means of demagogy and affectation blocked the way of
discussion and investigation, and since the year 655 formally barred the
nation's jurisprudence from practicing jurisprudence.20

I do not know whether now that after eight centuries preliminary steps
have been taken to prove the way of practicing jurisprudence, and some
progress has 18. These five idols were worshipped by the Quraysh, and
their names are mentioned in the Holy Qur'an. Refer to commentary on
Verse 24 of Chapter Nuh in the book "ad-Durr al-manthur" 6/269 and other
commentaries. 19. Yaqut, Rayy Vocabulary, 4/355.

20. Bibrus al-Bunduqdari formally banned practice of jurisprudence in
Egypt in 665 AH. Refer to Khutat of al- Miqrizi, p. 161. How deserving
it would be for Egypt to allow this after so many centuries!

been made in this respect, the time has not come to permit the Muslims
to resort to discussion and investigation, too, or whether they would do
nothing but imitate their predecessors.

No! the situation would not continue to remain so, since owing to the
constant efforts of reformers, the light of knowledge has made truth
evident to an undeniable extent, and the time will arrive very soon when
people will laugh at our suffering for not being allowed any discussion
and investigation, in the same way that we are now laughing at the
indecent obstinacy and fanaticism of the people of Rayy in that
period.

Beside these obstacles, on hearing the praise of someone we have got
into the habit of closing our ears to a criticism of him, or when we
resort to fault- finding and criticism, we cannot afford to hear a
praise of him. But I will introduce 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin on the
basis of what I have found in traditions and history, whether this
introduction takes the form of criticism or praise. If someone is not
content with this description and cannot bear the difficulties already
mentioned (which are mutually felt by both the writer and reader), then
he can hand over the book to another person who is able to remove those
obstacles out of this way.

Indeed, anyone who wishes to recognize Umm al-Mu'minin through history
and traditions and analyze her personality so far as it is possible
through the study of traditions, the following pages which describe
various periods of this lady of early Islam are at his disposal. It is
worthier to follow truth. May the right spirit be blessed!

Sayyid Murtada 'Askari
Baghdad, College of Theology

**Part One

'A'ishah in the Prophet's household Chapter al-Ahzab of the Qur'an
Verses 28 to 33:**

"O Prophet! Say to your wives: If you desire this world's life and its
nature, then come, I will give you a provision and allow you to depart a
goodly departing;

And if you desire Allah and His Apostle and the latter abode, then
surely Allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty
reward. O wives of the Prophet! Whoever of you commits an open
indecency, the punishment shall be increased to her doubly; and this is
easy to Allah. And whoever of you is obedient to Allah and His Apostle
and does good, We will give to her reward doubly, and We have prepared
for her an honorable sustenance.

O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other of the women; if you
will be on your guard, then be not soft in your speech, lest he in whose
heart is a disease yearn; and speak a good word. And stay in your houses
and do not display your finery like the displaying of the ignorance of
yore."

**A glance at 'A'ishah's life**

'A'ishah had a nervous, sharp and unruly Tempe.

**The author**

'A'ishah was the daughter of the first caliph 'Abd Allah Abu Bakr, son
of Abu Quhafah 'Uthman, and granddaughter of 'Amir ibn Ka'b of the house
of Taym (Quraysh). She was born in the fourth year after the Prophet's
ordainment in Mecca and grew up in the same city. After the death of his
first loyal wife, Khadijah, and two years before his emigration to
Medina, the Prophet wedded 'A'ishah, and a year and a half after the
emigration, in the lunar month of Shawwal, and after the battle of Badr,
on the insistence of her father, Abu Bakr, took her to his own house.
When the Prophet died, she was only eighteen years old. Thus Umm
al-Mu'minin spent only eight years and five months of her life in the
Prophet's house.

After the departure of the Prophet, 'A'ishah was a staunch supporter of
the government of the time in the caliphate of her father Abu Bakr, and
after him, in the rule of his sincere friend, 'Umar, and evens in the
first half of 'Uthman's caliphate.

In the second half of 'Uthman's caliphate, for certain reasons which
will be explained later, 'A'ishah got offended with 'Uthman, and this
vexation gradually changed into rancor and hostility owing to certain
incidents which occurred between her and 'Uthman. As a result of the
sharp acts of 'Umm al- Mu'minin and violent reactions of 'Uthman, this
hostility went so far that despite all her support of the caliphs and
caliphate, she joined the ranks of 'Uthman's opponents, and even acted
as their leader, opposing 'Uthman to such an extent that she fanned up
the flame of public uprising and revolution until 'Uthman was
assassinated.

With the death of 'Uthman, and people's allegiance to Imam 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib as caliph, 'A'ishah saw that her plan was ruined21 and so she
raised the banner of opposition to the Imam, and roused his rivals and
opponents to wage the battle of al-Jamal22 in Basra against him and
herself commanded the opponents' forces in this fight.

'A'ishah was defeated in the battle of al-Jamal and her forces were
badly crushed, but Imam 'Ali brought her back respectfully to Medina,
where she continued to stay until the assassination of Imam 'Ali. When
Mu'awiyah, son of Abu Sufyan seized power, he resorted to fabricating
and publishing false traditions through his supporters and hirelings,
describing the merits and virtues of his own house in particular, and
those of 'A'ishah's group and supporters and Imam 'Ali's opponents in
general. In the propagation of these praises and eulogies, 'A'ishah
herself played an important role which will be described later.

'A'ishah died on the night of Tuesday 10th of Shawwal, 57 or 59 AH, in
Medina and Abu Hurayrah, successor to Marwan ibn al-Hakam, who was
Governor of Medina, performed her funeral prayers,23 and according to
her will she was buried in the al-Baqi' alongside the graves of other
wives of the Prophet.24 'A'ishah had a nervous, sharp and unruly temper.
A forceful nature, quickness of understanding the position and taking
decision, sharp intelligence, envy and intense jealousy, too, were
elements of her personality. She was extremely jealous of her he
husband, and this jealousy was so intense that she could not allow
anyone else to find a place in his heart, or let the smallest 21. There
is no doubt that in her uprising against 'Uthman, 'A'ishah intended to
bring the caliphate back to her family (Taym tribe), nominating her
cousin Talhah for this position. The second volume of this book reveals
this political plot. (Sardar-Niya)

22. al-Jamal means "camel" in Arabic, and the reason for calling this
combat as the battle of al-Jamal was that 'A'ishah rode mailed camel and
commanded the army against Imam 'Ali (Sardar-Niya). 23. In that year,
Marwan, Governor of Medina, had left that city on a pilgrimage to Mecca.
24. For a detailed account of 'A'ishah, refer to the book al-Isabah
38-40 and al-Mustadrak, al-Isti'ab, Usd al- ghabah and Tabaqat of Ibn
Sa'd.

particle of his affection be given to another person whoever he or she
may have been.

'A'ishah deeply loved her kith and kin, and was so prejudiced in their
favour that she lost her head whenever their interests were endangered,
and thus she forgot her position and, by no means, abstained from
supporting their interests. All these were her moral qualities, which
held away during her whole life, especially the short years of her
married life with the Prophet. Lastly 'A'ishah is one of those
everlasting women whose name will be remembered in history until the end
of the world.

**The secret behind the plurality of the Prophet's wives Why did the
Prophet have several wives?**

**A discussion of nation's customs**

Every nation's customs are produced by its environment from the
viewpoint of geography, economics, education, ideas and beliefs, taking
shape in a succession of eras and centuries, and finding firm and strong
roots in the texture of that nation.

That is why it is a very difficult matter for a scholar to discuss and
survey the customs of a people who possess a history in accordance with
their position; for, one cannot look upon the way of life and moral and
spiritual characteristics, customs and habits of a nation from the
viewpoint of the present-day society, or at our customs and social and
economic environment as well as our means of communication, education
and association of various nations, and draw a conclusion and pass a
judgment. Today we live in relatively large cities, stay in rather
comfortable houses, and benefit from all the facilities provided by
modern architecture for an easy life as well as parks, well-equipped
stores, fast transport, different means of communications such as
telephone, microwave etc. So that when some famous figure, for instance,
sneezes at the other end of the world, every one at this end hears and
sees it in less than a second. Customs and habits conform with such an
environment.

With this very brief and concise introduction, how can we, in view of
the vision and understanding of our society, pass judgment to reach a
conclusion about the habits, customs and traditions that existed
fourteen centuries ago? What do we know of the tribal life in forts,
under tents and in deserts within the framework of tribal customs and
traditions? Even if we know something, will this knowledge be enough to
enable us to feel at home amidst that tribe and within the bounds of its
customs and traditions? Can we, like them, view matters from the same
angle of that time and place, and the same habits and customs of several
centuries ago of tribal upbringing and pass a judgement? possible way,
or place at your disposal all the social customs and circumstances of
various tribes of Arabia in a perfectly clear and tangible manner
related to fourteen centuries ago, to the extent that you may feel to be
one of them. What we can do is to try to describe the circumstances of
that environment to the extent of acquainting you with the historical
facts of that land.

**Certain facts of history**

All historians in the world, both friendly and hostile, are unanimous
in the following points: 1-The people of Arabia before advent of Islam,
owing to the unfavorable nature of the environment, lived mostly in
tents and consequently the means of their livelihood were obtained, not
through agriculture or in some cases, not through animal husbandry, but
through plunder of each other or massacre of other tribes, so that they
could provide themselves with sustenance for a few days and rescue
themselves from hunger.

2-With the exception of Yemen and ash-Sham, and several small and
insignificant oases in the parched deserts of Arabia, and a few villages
and small towns (if they could be called so) the biggest and the most
populous of which were Mecca and Yathrib, no sign of development and
civilization could be seen in that scorched land. 3-Wealth and property
were monopolized by the idolatrous feudals of Mecca and chiefs of the
Quraysh tribe, and perhaps the Jews of Yathrib and other neighboring
oases. Other inhabitants of that dry land had nothing but hot sighs
which rose from their bare breasts on account of such an intense poverty
and distress, and no smoke emitted from their hearths. Also no water
boiled in their pots, and it was only their tears of despair, which
flowed down their lackluster eyes.

4-Lack of harmony of environment and tent-dwelling, the scourge of
scorching seasonal winds of the dry and burning desert, bloodshed,
massacre and plunder for making sustenance even for a few days; poverty
and indigence, hard life, savagery and thousands of other miseries had
deprived most of those poor and unhappy people of tender and fine human
feelings to such an extent that they buried alive their unfortunate
daughters with their own hands in order to get rid of any additional
burden at their paltry and miserable meal, and check themselves from
offering that unhappy, broken and poor community of Hejaz another
creature who would be more unfortunate than themselves.

The Qur'an says in chapter al-An'am, verse 151:

"Say: (O Prophet!) Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden to
you. Remember that you do not associate anything with Him, and show
kindness to your parents, and do not slay your children for fear of
poverty." And in Chapter al-Isra' (Banu Isra'il), verse 31, it says:
"And do not kill your children for fear of poverty; we give them
sustenance and yourselves too; surely to kill them is a great wrong."
And in Chapter at-Takwir, verses 8 and 9 it says: "And when the one
buried alive is asked (on Resurrection Day), for what sin was she
killed?"

They were afraid for the following reasons:

1-In fights, retreats, massacres and plunders, girls not only were a
hindrance, but owing to poverty and indigence they were also likely to
be driven to disgraceful deeds and debauchery, thus ruining the honour
of the family. 2-Owing to their physical peculiarities, in defeats and
retreats, women and girls were often taken prisoner by the enemy and
sold as slaves. 3-In the family and tribe, girls had the role of
consumers and were an economic burden on the family, and could thus
usurp the place of active and efficient men and boys of the family and
tribe. Chapter an-Nahl of the Qur'an, verses 58 and 59 say: "And when a
daughter is announced to one of them his face becomes black and he is
full of wrath.

He hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which is
announced to him. Shall he keep it with disgrace or bury it alive in the
dust?" It is clear as to what the life of such girls who remained alive
would be. Moreover, in the society of Arabia of those days, a woman had
no position at all. She was regarded by men as a means of quenching
their lust, and sometimes she was inherited by the eldest son who as her
sole owner could offer her to anyone he wished or arranged her marriage
to him. He could force his slave-girls to sell their bodies and offer
the money thus gained to their owner, or to throw themselves into the
arms of any men of their master's choice. She could be deprived of all
inheritance, and be rated as a captive, a slave, an outcast, a hated
being, a wicked element lacking all worth and asset, a troublesome
creature and a burden to society. She had no right to her own
belongings, and was even deprived of living in the way she desired.

God Almighty says in Chapter an-Nur of the Qur'an, verse 33: "And do
not compel your slave-girls to prostitution, when they desire to keep
chaste, in order to seek frail good of this world's life, and whoever
compels them, then surely after their compulsion Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful" This was how the pre-Islamic Arabs treated their women, and
when we speak of Arab women, we are referring to the land of Hejaz. But
in those days in no nation or religion were women considered to be
free-born human beings. Let us lay aside futile prejudice, and turn the
pages of history books of various nations and religions to see that our
claim is supported fully, and then realize that it is only Islam that
completely respects the rights of women as free-born human beings.25

25. If we are fair we could see that in this era of the conquest of
space, woman's position is not any better than the period of paganism
except that she is now exploited under the deceptive cover of women's
liberty and In view of the regrettable state of the Arabs' life in those
days, the position a woman held in such a society, and the problems
caused by her in every family and tribe, let us now turn to the study of
the attitude of Islam towards women as a result of the noble Prophet's
wise treatment of this divine creature who has been created by God as
man's partner and companion and given the task of bringing stability and
tranquility into human life.


