Economic Combat of Quraysh With the Prophet
===========================================

In the days when the Prophet was newly ordained, the Quraysh rose up to
check the propagation and spread of this new religion, and tried to find
the means of vanquishing him through the exigencies of those times. They
proposed to his sons-in-law to divorce his daughters and send them back
to their father's house in order to deter the Prophet from engaging in
spiritual and religious mission of prophethood, and thus compelling him
to attend to material duties of providing livelihood for his family.

This story has been mentioned in "Sirah of Ibn Hisham": The Quraysh
said to each other: "You have freed Muhammad from the worry of
supporting his family, send back his daughters to him to keep him
occupied with the task of getting subsistence for them." Then to carry
out their plan, they got in touch with the Prophet's sons-in-law, namely
Abu al-'As the nephew of Khadijah, and 'Utbah, son of Abu Lahab who was
the Prophet's nephew26, and proposed to them that, in return for
divorcing Muhammad's daughter, they would let them marry any of the
girls of the Quraysh (who were the nobles of Mecca) that they desired.
Abu al-'As, who felt a deep affection for his wife (daughter of the
Prophet), refused the proposal, but 'Utbah answered that he would agree
on the condition that they let him marry the daughter of Sa'id ibn
al-'As or his granddaughter, that is, daughter of Aban ibn Sa'id ibn
al-'As. The Quraysh fulfilled his wish and jet him marry the daughter of
Sa'id ibn al--'As, and thus he divorced Ruqayyah, daughter of the
Prophet.

In view of this historical happening, it can easily be seen to what
extent a woman was burden for a man of family, so that the Quraysh
adopted this method as the most decisive way of fighting the Prophet.

**Economic support for the Prophet and winning over the enemy**

On the one hand, at a time when the hostility of the Quraysh with the
Prophet and his friends reached its height, some of his friends, both
men and women, on equality, and this era unchivalrously blemishes the
true worth and personality of this repose-producing angel of life with
pretended respect. Look at sexual films and the manner of their
propaganda and marketing as well as soliciting of customers in cafe's,
and discotheques through women and their beauty, and trace the reason
for the increase of divorce to find the cause of the misery and
misfortunes of our present society.

26. Some have introduced him as 'Utaybah, the other son of Abu Lahab.

his advice, departed for Abyssinia and then emigrated to Medina, thus
abandoning all their property and belonging for the consent of God. They
only succeeded in saving their lives from the Quraysh, and eventually
the Prophet himself joined them in Medina and chose that city as the
center of his activities. Some of these homeless people were so indigent
that they did not even have any clothes, and the Prophet let them settle
on a roofed platform in the mosque of Medina for days and nights, and
that is why they were given the name of Ashab as-suffah (companions of
the platform).

Among these wanderers there were guardian-less widows and lonely girls
whom the honour of Islam could not allow to stay on that platform with
the men, or permit them to stay in the houses of Ansar (those who helped
the Prophet) without any logical and legitimate reason.

On the other hand, with the occurrence of battles and death of Muslim
fighters in the field, the number of unprotected women and girls
regularly increased. But on the recommendation of the Prophet, these
females did not remain without a guardian, and by being made the legal
consort of the Prophet, they shared the life of his other companions,
and could enter their houses and prevents shattering of life.

**Marriage as a means of preventing conflict and bloodshed**

There had been long-standing customs in various Arab tribes, some of
which still prevail. For instance, if a combat occurred between two
tribes or blood was shed, the best way to prevent further bloodshed and
loss of life and plunder, was to arrange inter-marriage between the two
hostile groups, so that with the creation of this kinship, massacre and
plunder would be stopped, and also loyal allies acquiesce to fight other
enemies.

Now let us return to the main subject and continue the topic on
exploring the reason for the plurality of the Prophet's wives.

**1-Khadijah, daughter of Khuwaylad al-Asadiyah al-Qurayshiyah**

Khadijah was the first lady to become the consort of the Prophet, and
also the first woman to embrace this faith. She had married twice before
him and had some children by them. Her marriage with the Prophet took
place fifteen years before his ordainment when she was forty years of
age, while the Prophet was twenty-five. Khadijah died in the tenth year
after ordainment when she was sixty-five. She was the only wife of the
Prophet for twenty- five years, and during this period, she spared no
effort in offering her wealth and devotion to him to promote the divine
mission of her husband.

The Prophet's children, with the exception of Ibrahim, came from
Khadijah, and so long as she lived, he did not marry another, and to the
end of his life, he remembered Khadijah as the first lady of Islam. With
the abundant alms she offered, he kept alive and respected her memory.
The year Khadijah died, the Prophet had gone through fiftieth year of
his very active life.

**2-Sudah, daughter of Zam'ah**

At first, Sudah had married her cousin, as-Sakran, and accompanied the
second group of Muslim emigrants to Abyssinia. as-Sakran died after his
return from Abyssinia in Mecca and left Sudah without a guardian. After
the death of Khadijah, the Prophet married Sudah who was then of an
advanced age and had no one to take care of her. She died at the time of
caliphate of Mu'awiyah in Medina in the year 54 AH.

**3-'A'ishah, daughter of Abu Bakr**

The Prophet proposed marriage with 'A'ishah in the same year as with
Sudah, but he took the former to his house in Medina after the battle of
Badr upon the insistence of her father, Abu Bakr.

**4-Hafsah, daughter of 'Umar**

Hafsah, daughter of the second caliph, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, was born
five years before the ordainment of the Prophet of Islam. At first she
wedded Khunays, son of Hudhafah, and immigrated with him to Medina. In
the battle of Badr, he died after being wounded, leaving Hafsah a widow.
Her father, 'Umar, was looking for a husband for her among the Prophet's
friends, and at first made a proposal to 'Uthman who was rich and of the
Umayyads, and though his wife Ruqayyah who was the Prophet's daughter,
had died, 'Uthman did not agree to this proposal of marriage and gave a
negative answer. 'Umar asked Abu Bakr to marry Hafsah, but Abu Bakr,
too, refused. So 'Umar who was offended with the refusal of two
distinguished friends of the Prophet, complained to the Prophet against
them, and the Prophet settled the matter by himself marrying Hafsah.
Hafsah died in the lunar month of Sha'ban in the year 45 AH in the
caliphate of Mu'awiyah. Marwan, governor of Medina, performed her burial
prayer, and she was buried in al-Baqi'.27

5-Zaynab, daughter of Khuzaymah

Zaynab had married twice before being wedded to the Prophet. Her second
husband was killed in the battle of Uhud. The Prophet proposed to marry
her, and she left the decision to himself. The Prophet married her in
the lunar month of Ramadan in the third year after Hijrah. Zaynab died
eight months after this marriage in the lunar month of Rabi' al-Awwal
(Rabi' I) in the fourth year after 27. Refer to the translation of
Hafsah in al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah, al-Isabah and Tabaqat. Hijrah.28

6-Umm Salamah, daughter of Abu Umayyah

Her name was Hind, and she was the daughter of Abu Umayyah al-Makhzumi,
and her mother was 'Atikah, daughter of 'Amir al-Makhzumi. At first she
was the wife of Abu Salamah 'Abd Allah, son of 'Abd al-Asad al-Makhzumi,
both of whom embraced Islam in Mecca. When the misconduct of the Quraysh
towards the Muslims in Mecca became intolerable, the Prophet ordered
them to emigrate to Abyssinia, where Umm Salamah gave birth to her
children. Then the family returned to Mecca, and when the Prophet
emigrated to Medina, Abu Salamah mounted his wife and a child on a
camel, took the halter and proceeded towards Medina.

Umm Salamah narrates the story as follows: "When my relatives realized
our intention to depart, they said to Abu Salamah: 'You yourself fled
from us to become a Muslim. But we swear to God that we will not let you
carry a woman of our family from one city to another,' and they pulled
the halter out of his hand. When the relatives of Abu Salamah saw this,
they protested angrily to them, and said: 'If you separate Umm
al-Salamah from her husband, we will not let you take her child with you
since he is our child.' In this dispute the child's arm was dislocated,
but finally Abu Salamah took away the child with him and my relatives
kept me with them, and Abu Salamah departed for Medina."

She then adds: "They separated me from my husband. Every day I went to
the valley of al-Abtah in Mecca, and sat there weeping till evening.
This went on for seven days until one of my cousins, while passing by,
saw me. He went to our relatives asking them why they did not leave the
poor woman alone and why they separated her from her husband. This
protest had a positive effect, and they told me I could join my husband
if I wished. When the relatives of my husband saw this, they brought
back my child to me. I took him in my arms, mounted a camel and
proceeded towards Medina, without any companion until I reached the land
of at-Tan'im. 'Uthman, son of Talhah 'Abd ad-Dari al- Qurayshi, saw me
and shouted: 'O daughter of Umayyah, where are you going to?' I said: 'I
am going to my husband in Medina.' He asked: 'Is anyone accompanying
you?' I said: 'No, by God, except God and this son of mine.' He said:
'By God, I cannot let you go alone.' Then he took the camel's halter and
walked ahead. I swear to God I have never seen a man more chivalrous
than him on this journey. Whenever we reached a halting place, he caused
the camel to kneel down, and himself stayed some distance away to rest
under a tree, and when it was time to move, he came and tied the saddle
on the camel's back and stood aside telling me to mount. After I did so,
he took the halter and pulled the 28. al-Isabah 4/309.

camel behind him. This continued till we came close to Medina. He
showed me the village of Quba' and said: 'This is where your husband is
staying.' Then he went away and I joined my husband there."

When Umm Salamah reached Medina, it was said that she was the first
lady to emigrate to Medina. The family stayed there until the battle of
Uhud took place. Abu Salamah joined the Prophet to participate in that
battle when he was wounded and eventually succumbed to the same wound in
Medina and Umm Salamah was left without a guardian. The Prophet married
Umm Salamah who was now old and sterile, and thus he took her and her
children under his protection and support.

Umm Salamah died during the caliphate of Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah and after
the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn.29

7-Juwayriyah, daughter of al-Harith The story of the marriage of the
Prophet with Juwayriyah is a long one, but briefly speaking, al-Harith
was the chief of the tribe of Banu al-Mustalaq that lived about thirty
kilometers away from Medina. It was in the fifth or sixth year after
Hijrah that al-Harith, with the aid of other tribes, collected a large
force intending to carry out a surprise ride upon Medina and annihilate
the Muslims. The Prophet, who was aware of this plan, sent one of his
companions to keep a watch on the tribe of al-Harith in order to find
out the position and number of the enemy and report it. His envoy
carried out the mission successfully and brought the Prophet useful
information about the enemy's military position.

Meanwhile, a spy too came from the army of al-Harith among the Muslims
to collect information, but he was captured before he could render any
service. The Muslims invited him to embrace Islam but he refused, and
thus they were forced to kill him. After this incident, the Prophet made
the first move and attacked the tribe of Banu al-Mustalaq.

When the men from other tribes in the army of al-Harith saw themselves
confronted with an unexpected attack, they fled and left al-Harith's
army alone to engage in battle. The crier of Islam proposed the
acceptance of this faith to al-Harith's troops but they did not only
refuse the invitation but also killed the crier with arrows.

When the Muslims saw this, they rushed at once upon the enemy and in a
hard battle, which ensued, the tribe of al-Harith surrendered after
defeat. Of the Muslim army only one soldier was killed, while
al-Harith's army lost ten men. The Muslims captured much spoil and many
men as prisoners. Juwayriyah whose husband had been killed in this
battle, was one of the captives, and she was given to one of the Ansar
(Prophet's helpers) as his share.

When they returned to Medina, she went to the Prophet begging him for

29. Refer for a full account to the books al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah and
Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd. freedom. The Prophet said the ransom, freed and
then married her. When the Prophet's companions heard this news, as a
sign of respect to this marriage, they set free all the captives in
their possession. al-Harith, on hearing this report came to Medina and
embraced Islam, and on his return to his tribe, made them all embrace
Islam.

8-Umm Habibah, daughter of Abu Sufyan

Umm Habibah's father, Abu Sufyan was the archenemy of the Prophet of
Islam and instigator and ringleader of the Quraysh battles against the
Prophet. Unlike her father, Umm Habibah embraced Islam and emigrated to
Abyssinia with her husband and he died there, leaving her without a
caretaker. When the Prophet heard of this he sent someone to her in
Abyssinia, asking her hand in marriage and eventually he married her in
the seventh year after Hijrah.

The news of his daughter's marriage with the Prophet deeply enraged Abu
Sufyan who was enemy of God and His prophet, and uttered such words
which showed his defeat in the face of the greatness and exalted moral
and spiritual position of the Prophet. He said: "One cannot punch this
male in the nose."30 One year after this marriage, the peace treaty of
al-Hudaybiyah took place in the 8th year AH and the Quraysh, despite all
of their obstinacy, were vanquished by the greatness and power of Islam,
thus actually and formally recognizing this divine faith.

Do you suppose this marriage has been devoid of effect in securing such
a great advantage? 9-Safiyah, daughter of Huyay Safiyah was the daughter
of Huyay ibn Akhtab from the progeny of Aaron, brother of Moses, and her
mother was Barrah, daughter of Samuel, from the Banu Qurayzah tribe.

Her first husband was Salam, son of Mushkim, and after being divorced,
she was wedded to Kinanah, son of ar-Rabi', from Banu an-Nadir tribe.
But ar- Rabi' was killed by the Muslims in the battle of Khaybar, and
the infidels in Khaybar were taken captive by the Muslims after the
battle. The Prophet took her to himself as a war prisoner and when he
noticed a blue mark on he face he asked how it had come about. She
answered: "One night I dreamt that a moon rose from Medina and settled
on my lap. I related my dream to my husband, Rabi', and he felt very
uneasy and shouted at me: 'Do you hope to become a king's consort who
has risen in Medina?' and he slapped me so hard on the face that it went
blue, and this is the effect of that blow." After hearing the story, the
Prophet said to Safiyah: "If you embrace Islam, I will marry you, and if
you remain a Jew, I will set you free to return to your

30. Refer to Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd 8/80-86 and al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah
and al-Isabah.

people and tribe." She said: "Prior to invitation to Islam, I had
already embraced it. Moreover, I have no parents and have nothing to do
with the Jews for you to give me the choice between faith and
infidelity. God and His prophet are much more important to me than
freedom and return to my kins." The Prophet told her to observe the
period of waiting related to her husband's death, and then wedded her
and settled her in the al-'Aliyah locality of Medina in the house of one
of the members of Banu Harithah tribe. 'A'ishah, while veiled, secretly
visited Safiyah. The Prophet asked her:

"How did you find Safiyah?" She answered: "I found her a Jewess." He
said: "Don't call her a Jewess since she has embraced Islam and is a
good Muslim." Safiyah loved the Prophet deeply and did not abstain from
expressing affection. One example of this love emerged when the Prophet
had fallen ill and his consorts had gathered around him, Safiyah said
anxiously to the Prophet: "I swear to God that I long to have your pain
transferred to my body." On hearing the words of Safiyah, other wives of
the Prophet winked at each other and raised their eyebrows, considering
her words to be ostentatious. But this unfair conduct of the ladies was
duly observed by the Prophet. So he addressed them, saying: "Go and
cleanse yourself of wrong thoughts." They asked the reason, and he said:
"Your gestures and hints. I swear to God that she is truthful sincere in
her words."

Safiyah died in the year 52 AH in Medina during the caliphate of
Mu'awiyah and was buried in al-Baqi' cemetery.31

10-Maymunah, daughter of al-Harith

Maymunah, daughter of al-Harith al-Hilaliyah, was at first the wife of
Mas'ud ath-Thaqafi, and after being divorced she married Abu Rahm ibn
'Abd al- 'Uzza and lived with him until his death. In the year 7 AH when
the Prophet was on a pilgrimage to Mecca, she wedded him. The sermon was
read by his son-in-law Abbas (husband of his sister) and the Prophet's
uncle. She accompanied him to Medina.

Maymunah was the last lady to marry the Prophet. There is no agreement
about the date of her death, but the most accepted view is that she died
in the year 51 AH on her return from pilgrimage at a halting place
called Sarf. 11-Zaynab, daughter of Jahsh The stories of the Prophet's
marriages were so far similar to each other, having a clear reason. But
there was another reason for his marriage with Zaynab, which requires an
introduction.

As we know, reformers in the world usually took the first step
themselves in

31. Refer to Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd 8/120.

carrying out their plan of reform for society, and began with
themselves and their family. They spared no effort and self-sacrifice
necessary for attaining their sacred goal and then went on to invite
their kith and kin, and afterwards other human beings to act upon the
plan.

The Prophet of Islam, as a unique reformer of humanity, was no
exception to this law, and he began with himself to reform society and
do away with the hated customs of pagan times upon the order of God. For
this reason in his last Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca he said: "Usury of any
type is null and void, and the first usury I abolish is the usury of my
uncle al-'Abbas.32 Every blood that is shed in pagan times is lost, and
the first blood I waste is the blood of Rabi'ah son, grandson of 'Abd
al-Muttalib."33

In the biography of the Prophet, there is much evidence about this
episode. His marriage with Zaynab, daughter of Jahsh, is one of those
cases where the Prophet sought it to break up the system of ignorance
and ugly customs of pagan times.

The Prophet by this marriage pursued the following two fundamental
objectives:

1-To remove class distinction.
2-To abolish the verdicts related to adopt sons.34

Zayd ibn Harithah, the Prophet's adopted son, was in his childhood
attacked by a group of Arabs and kidnapped, and then put up for sale in
Mecca. The Prophet was present at the sale, and upon feeling an
attachment for him bought him for his wife, Khadijah, and she offered
the child to the Prophet. Zayd's parents, who were afflicted at the
disappearance of their endeared child, knew nothing of his fate. One day
some members of Zayd's tribe happened to see him in Mecca and they
recognized each other, and Zayd sent a poem through them for his
parents, saying: "Be not worried. I live in the family of the noblest of
Arab tribes and I am well-looked after."

Zayd's father and uncle who were informed of his situation and
residence took some money with them and left for Mecca, hoping to buy
him back. When they met the Prophet and explained their purpose, he
said: "If Zayd wishes to leave me, I have no objection." He summoned
Zayd, and when he saw his father and uncle, he admitted his kinship.
Then the Prophet explained to him their purpose and gave him the option
to stay or to leave. Zayd answered: "I shall never prefer anyone to
you." His father said: "My boy, do you prefer slavery to the freedom of
living with your father?" He answered, pointing to the Prophet: "Yes,
with such a person."

32. al-'Abbas, uncle of the Prophet, was a well-known usurer of Mecca
in the pagan times. 33. This grandson was a baby in the Banu Layth tribe
who was wrongly killed by the people of the Hudhayl tribe. Banu Hashim
continued till the time when the Prophet uttered the above words, to
demand revenge upon the said tribe for the blood of that child. Sirah
Ibn Hisham 4/375.

34. In pagan times there was a custom that in adopting a son with the
child's agreement, he was regarded as a real son of that person in whose
case all the laws of one's own son were applicable.

Then the Prophet took Zayd's hand and brought him to the rock of
Isma'il (in the Ka'bah) and said in a loud voice: "Be witness that Zayd
is my son; he inherits from me and I inherit from him." When Zayd's
father and uncle heard this, they were overjoyed and returned home.
After Zayd's freedom, the people called him "Zayd ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd
Allah." Zaynab, daughter of Jahsh, who was a niece of the Prophet, was
his ward, and a marriage proposal for her came from some of the Quraysh
tribe. She asked the Prophet what to do. He proposed her marriage with
Zayd. Zaynab protested and said: "Would you give me, your niece, to a
freed slave of yours?" Zaynab's brother and sister did not approve of
this marriage either, on account of the existing class difference until
a divine revelation descended about this matter, saying:

"And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle, he surely
strays off a manifest straying." 35

This verse silenced all three of them and they expressed their
agreement, with Zaynab declaring her readiness to marry Zayd. The
Prophet solemnized the ceremony with the same lofty goal of removing
class differences and aristocratic pride.

Zaynab went to Zayd's house and lived along with the other wife of
Zayd, called Umm Ayman, who had also been freed by the Prophet, and with
her child Usamah. Such a life made Zaynab uneasy and she began to
maltreat Zayd. This misbehavior continued until Zayd complained of her
to the Prophet and asked his permission to divorce her. But the Prophet
said:

"Keep your wife to yourself and be careful of your duty to Allah" 36
However, her misconduct made Zayd so weary that upon his insistence, the
Prophet agreed to their separation and she was eventually divorced. When
her legal period of separation was over, the Prophet was ordered by God
to break another custom of pagan times by marrying Zaynab, so as to show
that the laws related to one's own son do not apply to an adopted son,
and one can marry the divorced wife of one's adopted son.

It was hard for the Prophet to carry out this matter, and he was
worried about the people's attitude and their idle talk, until the
following verse descended showing his intense anxiety:

"Do you fear people, while it is worthier for you to fear God? Now that
Zayd has freed that woman, We allow you to wed her so that believers
would not be 35. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Ahzab, Verse 36.

36. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Ahzab, Verse 37.

blamed for marrying the divorced wives of their adopted sons."37 On the
basis of this verse and its explicit comment the Prophet married Zaynab
to break by divine order, the despised and illogical customs of pagan
times.

What has been said shows that most of the Prophet's marriages were
based on the advisability, policy and interest of the society, execution
of divine laws, as well as breaking the wrong customs of pagan times,
not for the sake of satisfying carnal desires or animal instincts.

**The ladies who offered themselves to the Prophet without a dowry**

There were other women who offered themselves to the Prophet without
demanding a dowry. What is meant by the word "offer" according to the
Qur'an is proposal of marriage. Books of biography and history mention
several such women, one of whom is Khulah, daughter of Hakim.

12-Khulah, daughter of Hakim al-Hilaliyah

She was a woman who proposed marriage to the Prophet, but he postponed
giving an answer. She served in his house until the Prophet wedded her
to 'Uthman ibn Maz'un and she lived in the latter's house till his
death.38 13-Another lady

Sahl ibn Sa'd narrates: A woman came to the Prophet and offered herself
in marriage. The Prophet remained silent. A Muslim man, who was present,
said: "O Prophet! If you have no need of this woman, wed her to me." The
Prophet said: "What have you to give her as dowry?" He answered: "Only
the shirt I am wearing." The Prophet said: "If you give it to her, you
will go naked. Try to find something else." He said: "I have nothing."
The Prophet said: "Not an iron ring?" He said: "Not even that." The
Prophet said: "Do you remember any verses of the Qur'an?" He said "yes"
and recited several of them. The Prophet said: "Then I; offer you this
woman in marriage, her dowry being those very verses of the Qur'an."

In the Prophet's biography there are mentioned the names of several
other ladies who proposed marriage to the Prophet such as Umm Sharik and
Umm Layla. Some of them had spent a heart-rending life in the way of
Islam before going to the Prophet, but it is explicitly stated that the
Prophet married none of them.39

37. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Ahzab, Verse 37. Hilyat of Abu Nu'aym
2/53, translated by Zaynab and commentary of the verse. Refer to Majma'
al-bayan.

38. Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd 8/158.

39. Commentary of as-Suyuti 5/209.

**A special verdict for a particular person**

We have already spoken of the distress and homelessness of Muslim women
of that time in the city of Medina, and saw how necessary it was in the
sublime interests of Islam for the Prophet to get married with women of
some unruly Arab tribes. As every Muslim is allowed to take four wives,
we see that an exception was made in the case of the Prophet. This
exception is mentioned in verses 50-52 of Chapter al-Ahzab, as follows:
"O Prophet! Surely We have made lawful to you your wives whom you have
given their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses out of
those of whom Allah has given to you as prisoners of war, and the
daughters of your paternal uncles and the daughters of your maternal
uncles and the daughters of your maternal aunts who fled with you; and a
behaving woman if she gave herself to the Prophet if the Prophet desired
to marry her - specially for you, not for the rest of believers, We know
what We have ordained for them concerning their wives, and those whom
their right hand possess in order that no blame may attach to you; and
Allah is Forgiving Merciful.

You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you whom
you please, and whom you desire of those whom you had separated
provisionally; no blame attaches to you; this is most proper; so that
their eye may be cool and they may not grieve, and that they should be
pleased, all of them, with what you have given them, and Allah knows
what is in your hearts; and Allah is Knowing Forbearing.

It is not allowed to you to take women after wards, nor that you should
change them for other wives, though their beauty be pleasing to you,
except what your right hand possesses; and Allah is Watchful over all
things." These were God's commands given explicitly in the above verses,
leaving it to the Prophet to take steps about what he thinks advisable.
Thus, the number of his wives reached nine by the end of his life. This
number was allowed only to the Prophet, while other men were allowed no
more than four wives. In the above verses, the limit of the Prophet's
freedom is fixed at minus women's beauty, and this is a well-devised
matter, and for this reason he is not allowed, unlike other men, to
change by means of divorce any of his wives for new wives. The Prophet
made use of this option for safeguarding the sublime interests of Islam
and spiritual and political leadership in order to meet the human needs
of the society's honorable women.

But when after the capture of Mecca the Muslims found a sound position,
the Prophet did not marry again since he had no further need of the
above verdict.

**Conclusion of the survey**

It is clear now concerning the Prophet's marriages that he lives with a
lady who was fifteen years his senior, down to the age of fifty which is
the height of a man's natural growth; a lady who died at the age of 65,
and during that period he married no one else, and after Khadijah he
married another woman advanced in years. Such was the Prophet's married
life in Mecca until he emigrated to Medina and took charge of the grave
responsibility of managing the Muslim society. At that time, the number
of indigent and exiled believers who came to him every day reached
eighty.

They settled on the platform of the Prophet's mosque and some of them
were inadequately dressed. At such a time, there were Muslim women who
had lost their guardians in the battles of Muslims with infidels or in
other happenings, and they could not return to their relatives since the
latter were regarded as infidels and enemies of God and His prophet, and
were thus looked upon as untouchables. All this happened in a community
where women were anyhow regarded as a burden, and many fathers buried
them alive for fear of falling short of subsistence for them. In the
battles against the Prophet, too, they proposed to divorce his daughters
in order to defeat him. The situation became so difficult in Medina for
believing women that if a widow had a father, he insisted that one of
his friends should marry her.

In such a case, was the Prophet's marriage with Hafsah not aimed at
compensating her mental affliction and removal of her vexation with his
two companions, Abu Bakr and 'Uthman? At such a time, what could another
old lady, Umm Salamah who had lost her husband in the battle of Uhud, do
with so many children in a strange city? Could she possibly return to
Mecca to the same family whose tyranny had forced her to flee to
Abyssinia in Africa? Or how could the other lady, Zaynab daughter of
Khuzaymah, who had already married twice before getting married to the
Prophet and whose second husband was killed in the battle of Uhud,
continue her life?

Similarly, what remedy was there but for the Prophet's protection for
Umm Habibah daughter of Abu Sufyan, who due to molestation by her family
was compelled to run away with her husband to Abyssinia where she lost
him? Umm Habibah is the daughter of the same Abu Sufyan who spared no
crime for the annihilation of Islam and humbling the Prophet. He was the
man behind all rebellions against the Prophet, who tried to preserve the
honour of the same Abu Sufyan to an unimaginable degree. Indeed, if the
Quraysh led by Abu Sufyan often had tried to send the Prophet's
daughters back to his house, the same Prophet wedded Abu Sufyan's
daughter in Abyssinia and brought her with all respect and dignity to
Medina. He made her the wife of the noblest Arab, the grandson of 'Abd
al-Muttalib - an action which so overjoyed Abu Sufyan that he uttered
his famous proverbial remark.

What reaction was produced in the other men of the Umayyad household by
such noble acts? There is nothing at hand that could have quoted them,
but concerning the marriage with Juwayriyah, of the Banu al-Mustalaq
tribe, we hear of an extensive reaction.

This tribe which was a branch of Khuza'ah tribes lived about thirty
kilometers from Medina. Their chief, al-Harith, gathered a large army of
Arab tribes to fight the Prophet, but the Prophet made a surprise raid
against him that led to the flight of other tribes who had come to help
al-Harith. The Prophet proposed that they embrace Islam, but they
refused. In the ensuing battle, al- Harith's tribe was defeated, and its
combatants surrendered. Among the prisoners was the daughter of
al-Harith, chief of the tribe. The Prophet bought her from the man who
had taken her prisoner, and after freeing and marrying her, put her on
an equal footing with the other ladies of his house, whereas he could
use her as a slave-concubine. To show respect to the Prophet's action,
the Muslims freed all the prisoners of this tribe. When al-Harith heard
of this matter, he came to Medina and embraced Islam, and then his whole
tribe followed his example.

In the peace of al-Hudaybiyah this tribe and Khuza'ah tribe joined the
Prophet against the Quraysh and their allies. Now we can see the reason
for the custom prevalent among the war-stricken Arab tribes. When they
desired peace and reconciliation, the victorious tribe offered girls in
marriage to the oppressed tribe, thus creating a political tie between
them. Obviously, the Prophet's marriages with females from the defeated
tribes were no exception to this rule, such as his marriage with Safiyah
of the Khaybar Jews, and marrying Rayhanah of the Banu an-Nadir Jews
with a Jew of the Banu Qurayzah.

The purpose of the Prophet was clear in such marriages: to join
together unruly Arab tribes. And this point becomes more evident when we
see that none of his marriages took place with his Ansar tribes, since
the widows of this group lived with their families and had no need of
financial support.

It was the Ansar themselves who at the beginning of the Muslims'
emigration to Medina always helped such women with dwelling, food and
clothes. The Prophet's wisdom is evident in all his marriages. Only in
two cases there is a need for inquiry. The marriage with 'A'ishah is the
first case, since he wedded her at the age of nine and this is contrary
to prevalent custom especially of the urban people. In answer to this,
we have already said that it is not right to compare the custom of that
time and place with one of our own time and place. The Prophet was not
the only person who married a girl of that age. He gave his own daughter
Fatimah az-Zahra' in marriage at the same age, and this is a prophet's
action from the viewpoint of Islamic law. Moreover, in hot regions,
Human beings reach the stage of natural puberty sooner and also get old
sooner. This is often seen in India today and many a time a girl reaches
puberty and becomes pregnant even before the age of nine and also gets
old and infirm sooner, whereas in the mountains of Tibet the reverse is
true, to the extent that it is said a man may reach the age of two
hundred there, and the age of one hundred is considered young for him.

The second case is the Prophet's marriage with Zaynab, divorcee of
Usamah, the adopted son of the Prophet, the reason for which has been
explained by us earlier.

After these explanations about the reason for the plurality of the
Prophet's wives, there arises the question as to why there has come
about a misapprehension and cynicism about his marriages. The answer is
that our study of biographies and traditions shows that such pessimism
and misunderstanding is due to the annals narrated about this issue from
'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin, in which the Prophet has been presented as a
women- loving man, and this is the motive for writing this book. In the
next chapter, we will discuss some of these narrations.


