Some Remarks About Ibn Abi Al-hadid Al-mu'tazili
================================================

Fatimah was deeply annoyed with 'A'ishah, since the women of Medina
reported to her the offending words of 'A'ishah.Ibn Abi al-Hadid 79.
Musnad of Ahmad 6/150 and 154, narrated by Musa ibn Talhah.

80. Musnad of Ahmad 6/117, Traditions of at-Tirmidhi p. 247, Traditions
of Ibn Majah 1/315, al-Bukhari 2/177, 4, 36 and 195, al-Isti'ab on
Khadijah's life, Musnad of Ahmad 6/58, 102, 202 and 279, History of Ibn
Kathir 3/128, Kanz al-'ummal 6/224, Tradition Nos. 3973 and 3974.

Next to the remarks of Imam 'Ali about 'A'ishah's long-standing rancor
towards him, we now hear the words of Ibn Abi al-Hadid about this
matter. He says: When I was studying theology, I read out this sermon of
the Imam in the presence of my master, ash-Shaykh Abi Ya'qub Yusuf, son
of Isma'il al- Lama'ani (may God save him), and asked him to explain the
philosophy behind Imam's utterance. He complied with my request and gave
an elaborate explanation, whose summary I quote here. I cannot remember
all his words, so I must confine myself to this brief account. A part of
it comprises his own words, while the rest is mine based on his own
ideas. Shaykh Abu Ya'qub says:

A step-mother for Fatimah

The hostility between 'A'ishah and Fatimah began when the Prophet
married 'A'ishah upon Khadijah's death, and she took her place. It was
natural for Fatimah to be dissatisfied at having a stepmother, and also
natural for a woman to be vexed at her husband's affection for this
daughter of his former wife and for the second wife too.

Similarly a daughter dislikes her father's attention to another woman
who is a rival of her mother, even though she is no longer alive. Even
if Khadijah were still alive and 'A'ishah entered the Prophet's house,
their quarrel would be more noisy and violent. Now that she was dead,
this hostility would be transferred to and inherited by her daughter.
Moreover, it is said that the Prophet loved 'A'ishah very much81 and
showed her favour. So the more the Prophet showed affection to the new
wife, the more uneasy became Fatimah and was more deeply hurt.

**Fatimah as the Prophet's darling**

The Prophet loved Fatimah more than people expected, and respected her
much more than men show affection to their daughters. This went beyond
the limit of a parent's love for his child. The Prophet had repeatedly
and on different occasions declared in both private and public meetings
that "Fatimah is the lady of all ladies in the world, and she is the
equal of Mary, daughter of Imran."82 On the day of Resurrection when
Fatimah walks on, the herald of the Empyrean will proclaim: "Turn your
eyes down, for, Fatimah, daughter of Muhammad, is passing."83 These are
all traditions about the truth of which there is no doubt. It is also
81. The said affection of 'A'ishah is based on the statements of
'A'ishah herself, and we will discuss this matter in its proper place.
82. Kanz al-'ummal 6/219, tradition 3853, 3854 and 3855, and p. 218
tradition 3834 and 3836.

83. al-Mustadrak 3/153 and 156, Kanz 6/218, tradition 3830, 3831 and
3832. 84. al-Mustadrak 3/158-159, Kanz 6/218, tradition 3834 and 3836,
p. 291 tradition 3864.

stated that the marriage of Fatimah and 'Ali was solemnized in heaven
and testified by favorite angels.84 The Prophet often used to say: "What
pains Fatimah pains me, and what angers her angers me. She is a part of
me, and her anxiety makes me worried and anxious."85

These and similar matters roused the envoy and uneasiness of 'A'ishah,
and to the same extent that the Prophet honoured and endeared Fatimah,
'A'ishah's jealousy became intense. But we know that even more trifling
matters can produce rancor and envy in human hearts.

But to the same extent that 'A'ishah suffered from the respect shown to
Fatimah by the Prophet, Imam 'Ali felt pleased, and Fatimah became
dearer to him. It often happens that women create enmity in the heart of
their husbands, and as the proverb says, "They are companions of the
night." Fatimah often complained of 'A'ishah when some women of Medina
and her neighbors came to her and reported the latter's words. Then the
same women went to 'A'ishah and told her Fatimah's remarks. As Fatimah
complained to 'Ali about 'A'ishah, that lady, too, complained of Fatimah
to her own father, since she knew that the Prophet, her husband, would
not pay heed to her complaint of Fatimah.

**Multilateral rancours**

This matter, in its turn, had an undesirable effect on Abu Bakr's
spirit and pained him. When he saw that the Prophet spared no chance to
praise 'Ali and had become very intimate with him, the former, too, felt
envious of 'Ali and his closeness with the Prophet, while in his
capacity as the Prophet's father-in-law, he regarded himself superior to
'Ali.

Talhah, 'A'ishah's cousin, too, was not free from this envy and mental
anxiety, and 'A'ishah often went to her father and cousin to listen to
their words of expectation and complaint, while they, in turn, paid
attention to hers. Thus they exchanged with each other their feelings of
hostility towards 'Ali and Fatimah, and hardened their hearts towards
them. I cannot exonerate 'Ali from engaging in these matters either.

Moreover, during the Prophet's lifetime there had occurred some
altercations between 'A'ishah and 'Ali, each of which was enough to
rouse latent feelings, and cause mischief.

It is narrated that one day the Prophet was strolling and talking with
'Ali, and their private conversation lasted for quite some time.86
'A'ishah who was 85. Kanz 6/210, tradition 3866, Biography of Fatimah
and Khadijah in Tabaqat Vol. 8, al-Isabah, al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah,
Hilyat of Abu Nu'aym, Tahdhib al-kamal.

86. Historians state that this private talk took place at the time of
the battle of at-Ta'if, and when it became lengthy the people commented
on its elongation. A narration says that when Abu Bakr commented on its
elongation to the Prophet, he answered: "I was not in communion with
him, but it was from Cod." Refer to Sahih of at-Tirmidhi 2/200, History
of al-Khatib 7/402, Kanz 6/159 and 399, Usd al-ghabah 4/27. following
them unawares, suddenly came upon them and said: "What matter of
importance has engaged you two for such a long time?" It is said that
the Prophet became angry at this interruption. It is also narrated that
some food was brought for him and he ordered his servant to throw it
down; a reaction which is commonly shown by a husband or wife.

**The Prophet's intense affection for Fatimah's children**

On the one hand, Fatimah had given birth to several male and female
children, whereas 'A'ishah had none, and more painful than that, from
her viewpoint, was the fact that the Prophet regarded Fatimah's children
as his own and called them thus: "Bring my child...Don't stop my
child...What is my son doing?" How would a woman feel who had no
children of her own, and saw that her husband called his grandchildren
as his own children, showed them a fatherly affection, and loved them
deeply? Would she, too, love them and their mother? Or would she dislike
and even hate them? Would she wish them a happy life or would she desire
their annihilation?

The most painful of all was the fact that the Prophet ordered to shut
the entrance of her father's house facing the mosque while he allowed
the door of 'Ali's house leading to the mosque to be left open.87 It was
also hard for 'A'ishah to tolerate the fact that the Prophet replaced
Abu Bakr with 'Ali in the mission of taking Quranic chapter Bara'at to
Mecca and reading it to the infidels after having initially assigned
this task to him.88 When God gave Ibrahim to the Prophet by his wife
Mariyah, 'Ali did not abstain from expressing his joy, and offered more
willing help to her than he had done for the other ladies of the
Prophet. When Mariyah was accused of a blunder, it was 'Ali who did his
best to exonerate her and prove the baselessness of the charge in such a
tangible way that it left no room for babblers to utter another word.

All these events filled 'A'ishah's heart with rage and hatred of 'Ali
and made her more determined for vengeance.

With the death of Ibrahim, a great sorrow was felt by Mariyah, and
there came an end to sarcasm and wounding words. Both 'Ali and Fatimah,
too, became deeply sad at Ibrahim's death, since they preferred Mariyah
to 'A'ishah and wished her to remain superior to other wives of the
Prophet in having a son. But destiny did neither realize their wishes
nor those of Mariyah. 87. Musnad of Ahmad, Kanz 6/154, Tradition 2495
selection of Kanz 5/29 al-Mustadrak 3/125, Sahih of at- Tirmidhi
13/176.

88. Musnad of Ahmad 1/331, al-Mustadrak 3/51 and 52, Musnad of Ahmad
1/2 from Abu Bakr, 1/351 from 'Ali, al-Khasa'is of an-Nisa'i 20.

**'Ali and the issue of caliphate**

'Ali had no doubt that after the Prophet, the caliphate would belong to
him and there would be no rival.89 It was owing to this assurance that
when his uncle al- 'Abbas at the Prophet's ablution ceremony said to
him: "Give me your hand that I may swear allegiance to you so that the
people would say that the uncle of the Prophet has sworn allegiance to
his cousin. This would benefit you and no one would oppose you any
longer," he answered: "O uncle! Is there anyone beside me who covets the
caliphate?" He answered: "You will see soon enough."

'Ali said: "I have no wish to see the issue of my caliphate being
settled behind closed shutters and I want all people to participate
openly in it, and vote for me." Then he remained silent. When the
Prophet's sickness became serious, he ordered the Usamah army to
depart90 and told Abu Bakr and other Emigrant and Ansar leaders to take
part under that commander in this expedition. If this had taken place
and the Prophet passed away, 'Ali's caliphate would be certain. 'Ali
himself supposed that with the passing away of the Prophet, Medina would
be devoid of a rival to his caliphate, and the people would easily show
allegiance to him, and it would be impossible for his rivals and
opponents to disagree with it, thus compelling them to obey him. But Abu
Bakr receiving a message from 'A'ishah about the approaching death of
the Prophet, left Usamah's army and returned to Medina.

**Abu Bakr's performance of prayer with the people**

As far as I know, 'Ali has introduced 'A'ishah herself as the factor
responsible for this scene. It was she who ordered Bilal, his father's
slave, to tell him to perform his prayer with the people; for the
Prophet is said to have stated that someone should perform the morning
prayer with the people without naming that person. But after issuing
that order, the Prophet in his last moments while he was leaning on the
arms of 'Ali and al-Fadl ibn al-'Abbas, came out and stood at the altar
and after performing the prayer, returned home and his last at
sunrise.

'Umar considered Abu Bakr's readiness and standing for prayer with the
89. This statement belongs to Ibn Abi al-Hadid and is not true. Refer to
the book of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' 1/106 on the caliphate candidates.

90. Ibn Sa'd writes in his Tabaqat: All the Emigrant and Ansar leaders
were ordered by the Prophet to take part in the Usamah's army, including
Abu Bakr, 'Umar, Abu Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas etc.
Some of them protested against the choice of such commanders and said:
"Why is a boy given command while there are Emigrant and Ansar leaders?"
When the Prophet heard this, he climbed the pulpit in anger and after
praising God, said: "What is this I hear about Usamah's command?" These
words were uttered on Saturday and he died on Monday the same week.
Tabaqat Vol. 2, 1/136, Vol. 4, 1/46, Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 2/391, Kanz
5/312, Selection of Kanz 4/108.

people as a sufficient reason and merit for being chosen as caliph and
said: "Which of you allow yourself to be superior to him who has been
given precedence in prayer by the Prophet?" The fact that the Prophet
came Out of the house and personally performed the prayer with the
people was not taken as an act to check Abu Bakr's Imamate for the
people, as only it was said that the Prophet desired to perform that
task personally to the possible extent.

Thus, on the basis of this incident and subject, they showed allegiance
to Abu Bakr, while 'Ali accused 'A'ishah of being the main element
behind that scene and its originator. He repeatedly described this
matter in the gatherings of his friends and said: It was not without
reason that the Prophet told this to Hafsah and 'A'ishah: "You are the
little friend of Yusuf!" In this way, he wanted to show his dislike of
what they had done, and indicate especially his anger with 'A'ishah,
for, there were Hafsah and 'A'ishah who took advantage of the Prophet's
order to take the lead in sending their fathers to act as Imam of the
prayer. As the Prophet was aware of their intention, he left the house
in a sickly state and by taking Abu Bakr's place at the altar, he
himself acted as Imam of the ummah to the last moments of his life. With
this action, he wanted to nullify 'A'ishah's role in paving the way for
his father's caliphate.

Nevertheless this act of the Prophet in countering the efforts and
extensive propaganda of 'Umar and his friends for making possible Abu
Bakr's caliphate, did not succeed, especially as 'Umar and his
accomplices had already taken preliminary steps for the domination of
Abu Bakr as caliph, and had already won the approval of a number for
this action. A number of Emigrant and Ansar elites had joined them in
favour of this plan, and it seemed that time and heavenly destiny, too,
assisted them.

These happenings were the most painful and shattering of all for 'Ali -
a great calamity which hurt his spirit, for which he blamed none but
'A'ishah. He often spoke of this to his intimate friends and asked God
for judgment. Above all, he suffered much and bore many discomforts in
refusing allegiance to Abu Bakr until they forced him to submit to
it.91

From the moment of the death of the Prophet till the burial of the sick
body of his daughter, Fatimah, a short time afterwards, 'A'ishah
regularly cut biting remarks at Fatimah, and both 'Ali and Fatimah could
do nothing but remain patient, and only disclose their complaint and
suffering with God. 'A'ishah benefited from the support of her father
and other authorities of the caliphate, and was shown greater respect
every day, whereas 'Ali and Fatimah were regarded as vanquished ones,
driven away from the center of power and influence. They seized Fadak
from her and despite all her efforts she could not 91. Refer to the book
of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', Chapter as-Saqifah.

get it back.92 Meanwhile, the women who visited Fatimah, repeated
'A'ishah's harsh words for her and badly hurt her feelings. The same
women carried the remarks of her husband and herself back to 'A'ishah
and fanned up the fire of rancor and hostility between both sides.

But there were great differences between the two sides, namely the
victor and the vanquished, the ruler and the ruled. Under such a
situation, the stings and sarcasm of the victor is most painful for the
vanquished and obviously such mental tortures inflicted by the enemy are
much more terrible than any other calamity.

Here I interrupted the words of the ash-Shaykh and said: "Do you affirm
this too? The Prophet did not appoint anyone for leading the prayer, and
it was 'A'ishah who waywardly took steps for sending her father on this
mission." In answer, the ash-Shaykh said: "I do not say so; it is 'Ali
who says so, and his account is not mine. He himself was involved with
the matter and was a witness. But the reports I have received show that
the Prophet had appointed Abu Bakr for the prayer, whereas 'Ali's
evidence is based on his own knowledge of the affairs, and he has
witnessed the center of this activity or has at least strongly suspected
it." Then the ash-Shaykh continued: Eventually Fatimah died, and the
Prophet's wives took part in the funeral ceremony except 'A'ishah who
did not only pretend sickness and abstained from attending the mourning
ceremony of the Prophet's daughter, but also her words of gladness about
this happening were reported to 'Ali.

After Fatimah's death, 'Ali pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr and it is
said that following 'Ali's allegiance 'A'ishah openly expressed her joy
that no rival or opponent was left for her father's caliphate and 'Ali's
claim of caliphate proved of no avail.

Conditions remained the same until 'Uthman's caliphate, but the old
rancor continued to exist and blood continued to boil. As time passed,
'Ali's sufferings increased and his mental pressure became more intense
until 'Uthman was assassinated. 'A'ishah herself played an effective
role in rousing people's antagonism for 'Uthman as she stubbornly
opposed him and in encouraging people to kill him, she said: "May God
kill 'Uthman!" The reason why she rose against him and instigated people
to kill him, was the fact that she hoped that with the death of 'Uthman
who came from the Umayyads, caliphate would once more return to her own
house namely Taym tribe and in order to attain that goal, she had, in
anticipation nominated Talhah, her cousin, for the position of caliph.

But when 'Uthman was killed, the people, contrary to 'A'ishah's

92. Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd, Edition 2, 2/86, Sahih al-Bukhari Chapter in
the battle of Khaybar Sahih Muslim 1/72 and 3/153 quoting the words of
the Prophet, Ibn Kathir 6/285 to 286, and Ibn 'Abd Rabbih 3/64, Musnad
of Ahmad 1/4, 6, 9, 10, 14 and 2/353.

expectations chose 'Ali as caliph and swore allegiance to him. When
'A'ishah heard the report, she cried out involuntarily: "Pity for
'Uthman! He was innocently killed!" It was thus that 'A'ishah showed her
old hostility towards 'Ali, worked hard in rousing the opportunists
against the Imam, and finally started the battle of "al-Jamal" in the
way we have already described. This was a brief account of the remarks
of ash-Shaykh Abu Ya'qub who was neither a follower of the faith of the
Prophet's household nor did he support the Shi'ah.

We have given the main but brief account of the writing of Ibn Abi
al-Hadid in describing the Imam's sermon wherein 'A'ishah's old rancor
has been explicitly described. Scholar Ibn Abi al-Hadid has clearly and
impartially ex- plained the ambiguous points of 'A'ishah's life during
her marital life, her relations with the near kins of the Prophet and
her actions after his death. We merely confine ourselves to what we have
already stated about other aspects of her life; for, if we were to
engage in further research about various periods of her life and her
influence on the Islamic society (which would in itself require the
compilation of a separate book) it is feared that this task might
deviate us from our main purpose which is a discussion and investigation
of her traditions.

**Summary**

What we have described in this chapter briefly shows that 'A'ishah was
a very stubborn and envious woman. The examples of her character may be
seen in her marital life with the Prophet, and her conduct towards other
wives and members of his family.

Moreover, as we have only briefly narrated the events in this chapter,
we will elaborate upon them in the following pages to denote that she
showed the same intense ardor and attachment to preserve the interests
of her own relatives, family and party93 and was deeply prejudiced.
This, coupled with violence, made her commit horrible deeds and utter
sharp, biting and insulting words. 93. 'A'ishah had formed a party for
herself, and she said: "The Prophet's wives were divided into two
groups, one party included myself, Hafsah and Sudah, and the other
consisted of Umm Salamah and other wives of the Prophet." The tradition
shows that Fatimah, the Prophet's daughter, was in the second group.
Refer to Sahih al- Bukhari's book 2/60. But outside the Prophet's house,
as you will see in the following pages, 'A'ishah spent all her life
promoting the interests of her relatives and party.


