Part Three 'a'ishah in the Time of 'uthman's Rule
=================================================

**Who was 'Uthman?**

Abu 'Abd Allah and Abu 'Amr 'Uthman was the son of 'Affan, and grandson
of Abu al-'As ibn Umayyah al-Qurayshi. His mother was Arwa, daughter of
Kurayz ibn Rabi'ah ibn 'Abd Shams, while Arwa's mother was al-Bayda',
daughter of 'Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet's aunt.121 'Uthman was from
the group of men who were the first in embracing Islam. He married
Ruqayyah, daughter of the Prophet and emigrated with her to Abyssinia,
and after his return from there, went over to Medina. 'Uthman did not
take part in the battle of Badr on the excuse of nursing his sick wife,
Ruqayyah, and when she died, he married Umm Kulthum, another daughter of
the Prophet. She, too, died while her father was alive. 'Uthman did not
have any children from the Prophet's daughters.

When 'Umar was wounded by Abu Lu'lu'ah Firuz, slave of al-Mughayrah, he
on his death bed nominated 'Uthman as one of the six members of the
council, but made the final choice of the caliph subject to the
agreement of 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Awf who was also on the six-member
council.

Speaking in such a council, 'Abd ar-Rahman stated: "I will forego my
being chosen as caliph or the condition that you accept my nominee."
When they agreed to this proposal, he too declared that for assuming the
position of caliph, one must act upon the Book of God, the Prophet's
tradition and policy of Abu Bakr and 'Umar. He made this offer first to
'Ali, but 'Ali refused the last of the conditions.122 Consequently, 'Abd
ar-Rahman and after him the council 121. Refer to his biography in
al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah, al-Isabah and Tabaqat.

122. On his death-bed, 'Umar nominated six of the companions of the
Prophet as candidates for the caliphate after his ('Umar's) death,
arranging that they should choose one from amongst themselves as within
three days, in this manner. If the majority voted for someone and the
rest opposed it, these opposers should be beheaded, and if the votes
were equally divided in two groups, then the winner would be the group
to which 'Abd ar- Rahman belonged. We saw that 'Abd ar-Rahman sidelined
himself after 'Umar's death on condition that his nominee should be
accepted by the others. He knew 'Ali well and was acquainted with his
mentality and his knowledge of the Islamic laws, apart from knowing that
'Ali would never sacrifice the injunctions of God and His prophet for
the covetings of a group of selfish and ambitious individuals, or waste
twenty-three year long efforts of the Prophet for a few days of rule and
assumption of power. Consequently 'Ali would not accept the ways and
policies of Abu Bakr and 'Umar.

'Umar himself was aware of this, and he may well have given 'Abd
ar-Rahman certain instructions how to act in this case. In view of this
matter, and as the course of history and available evidence show, and
because of the collusions behind closed doors in those days, we see that
'Abd ar- Rahman could not agree with 'Ali's caliphate upon his refusal
to accept the third condition. 'Ali was not prepared to sell his faith
for this world of theirs, and knowing well that with his refusal to
follow the ways of the two elder caliphs, he would lose the chance of
being chosen as caliph, he replied at once: "I accept the Book of God
and the Prophet's tradition, but not the ways of the two sheikhs. I
adopt my own way." If 'Abd ar-Rahman members pledged allegiance to
'Uthman on Saturday, first of Muharram, 24th year after Hijrah, three
days after the burial of 'Umar, since 'Uthman had accepted all the
conditions laid down by 'Abd ar-Rahman.

'Uthman became caliph and ruled for twelve years. The period of
'Uthman's rule can be divided into two parts: the period of confirmation
and support, and the period of wrath and rebellion. It was that same
wrath and rebellion as well as people's uprising against the confusion
in the country and the selfishness of 'Uthman's companions, most of whom
were the Umayyads, which caused 'Uthman's overthrow and death, and made
the assassination of the caliph something simple and feasible.

As we said in our account of 'A'ishah, in people's uprising against
'Uthman and his assassination by the rebels, 'A'ishah played a very
effective role. There is a difference of opinion about the date of
'Uthman's death, and it is stated to have occurred between 12th and 28th
of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah of the year 35 AH. His age, too, at the
time of his death is stated to have been between 82 and 92. His body was
buried after three days outside the al-Baqi' cemetery in a place called
Hash Kawkab, which was the Jews' cemetery, surrounded by four walls.
When Mu'awiyah became caliph, he ordered the demolition of the walls,
and thus 'Uthman's grave came to be included among the Muslims' graves
in al- Baqi' cemetery.

**'A'ishah and 'Uthman the period of confirmation and support**

'A'ishah, like other chiefs of Quraysh, rose up to support 'Uthman's
caliphate Text of the book The initial years of 'Uthman's rule were
similar to those of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and 'A'ishah thought that she
would continue; as in the past, to enjoy the respect shown to her by
'Uthman as the next caliph to receive advantages above other wives of
the Prophet, and constantly have a free hand in the settlement of
affairs. It was owing to these expectations that 'A'ishah, like other
Quraysh chiefs, decided to support 'Uthman, and by issuing some
traditions about 'Uthman gave him the benefit of her unsparing support
and also to his caliphate for six years.

The traditions which are narrated from 'A'ishah in praise and eulogy of
had made his proposal to other members of the council, they would have
undoubtedly accepted it. But we see that next to 'Ali, he made the
proposal to 'Uthman, his own son-in-law, and 'Uthman accepted it without
the slightest hesitation. Indeed, what were the ways and policies of the
two elder caliphs upon which 'Abd ar- Rahman insisted, and which were
refused by 'Ali? (Sardar-Niya) 'Uthman with no mention being made of his
death, belong, in all probability, to this short period namely the
period of her support of 'Uthman.

Here we give examples of such traditions as quoted by Musnad of
Ahmad:

'A'ishah said: " The Prophet and I were lying down under the same cloak
when Abu Bakr arrived and asked permission to enter. The Prophet,
remaining where he was, gave him permission to come in, and after
fulfilling his wish, Abu Bakr left the room. After Abu Bakr, 'Umar asked
permission to meet the Prophet, and he too was admitted to his presence
in the same way , and then dispatched after meeting his wish. Then
'Uthman arrived and asked to meet This time the Prophet rose and after
arranging his dress admitted him. After attending to his affair the
Prophet let him leave. At this time, I said to the Prophet: 'When Abu
Bakr and 'Umar came in, you received them without changing your
position, but on 'Uthman's arrival you arranged your garment as if you
felt shy of him.' He answered: 'You see, 'Uthman is a shy and modest
fellow. I feared that if he saw me in that condition, his shyness would
prevent him from stating his wish.' "

According to another narration123 'A'ishah says: "The Prophet was lying
down in bed and had covered himself up with my cloak. When 'Uthman
begged leave to meet him, he told me to cover myself up. I said: 'O
Prophet of God! -You did not get nervous at the arrival of Abu Bakr and
'Umar. How is it, Len, that you prepare yourself so carefully and
arrange your clothes in order to receive 'Uthman?' He said: 'O
'A'ishah!124 Why should I not show respect to him when, I swear to God,
angels too are respectful to him in his presence?' "

In our opinion, the narration and publication of this tradition date
back to the time of 'Uthman's caliphate, since as we have already stated
in this tradition the names of the three above caliphs are mentioned in
the order of their assumption of power and this may assure us that the
date of the above tradition was subsequent to the rule of the two elder
caliphs and assumption of power by 'Uthman.

It shows also that the above tradition must have been narrated before
the commencement of differences between 'A'ishah and 'Uthman, and her
disaffection with him, and before his assassination and quite a long
time before her decision to kill him; for, otherwise in this tradition,
like other similar traditions narrated about 'Uthman, his assassination
would have been mentioned.

In addition to what has already been said, the points that create
considerable doubt in this tradition are:

1-As the Prophet himself was a symbol of Etiquette and politeness and
123. Muslim 7/117 Chapter on 'Uthman's virtue, Musnad Ahmad 6/155.

124. Sahih of Muslim 7/116, Musnad Ahmad 6/62, Kanz 6/376 tradition No.
5845 and 6/148 tradition No. 2413 and 2417, p. 382 tradition No. 5904,
Selections of Kanz 5/2 and 17, History of Ibn 'Asakir, Ansab al-ashraf
of al-Baladhuri.

greatest teacher, how can he admit Abu Bakr and 'Umar, while in a
restful position under a cloak with his wife without a feeling of
shyness and modesty, whereas on the arrival of 'Uthman, he hastily
dresses himself and tells 'A'ishah to do so too? 2-Moreover, why should
the Prophet resort to discrimination between the above three leading
companions of his, and how is it that the angels feel shy of 'Uthman
alone?

The period of wrath and rebellion 'A'ishah was the first to rise
against 'Uthman and take over the leadership of his opponents till he
was killed.

**Historians**

In the first half of 'Uthman's rule 'A'ishah supported him and always
showed obedience to him without fail. Even when she and the other wives
of the Prophet intended to make a Hajj pilgrimage, first she asked his
permission. In this connection, she says: "When 'Umar passed away and
'Uthman held the rein of affairs, I, Umm Salamah, Maymunah and Umm
Habibah sent someone to ask him leave for Hajj pilgrimage." 'Uthman sent
this answer: "You remember the way of 'Umar. Like him, I will take you
with me to the pilgrimage. So I am ready to take with me any of you,
ladies of the Prophet, wishing to undertake a Hajj pilgrimage." 'Uthman
fulfilled his promise and took us to this Hajj pilgrimage except Zaynab
who had died in 'Umar's time and had not accompanied him on pilgrimage,
while Sudah, daughter of Zam'ah and we were veiled from public
eyes.125

In that year, 'Uthman accompanied these ladies to Mecca and entrusted
their protection to 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn 'Awf and Sa'd ibn Zayd. But this
atmosphere of amity did not last long, and with the passage of time,
differences arose between 'A'ishah and 'Uthman, with the result that
'Uthman deducted from her pension the two thousand dinars which 'Umar
had added to it. al-Ya'qubi says in his history126: "An umbrage occurred
between 'A'ishah and 'Uthman and he deducted from her pension the two
thousand dinars which 'Umar had added as a privilege over the other
wives of the Prophet and put her salary on the same scale as theirs."

We do not know the exact date of the commencement of the dispute, but
we 125. Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd 8/209.

126. History of al-Ya'qubi 2/132, History of Ibn A'tham 155.

know only that it ensued in the second half of 'Uthman's rule. We know
also that it was not a sudden incident, but was something gradual, which
was intensified until the split between them, became very deep.

We know also that 'A'ishah was the first person to show open opposition
to 'Uthman and gather the dissidents to the caliphate around her and act
as their leader until the caliph was killed.127 It is also certain that
when the tension and opposition to 'Uthman and people's uprising against
him were at their height, the hostility of no tribe and Muslim family of
that time was as intense towards 'Uthman as that of the Taym tribe to
which the family of Abu Bakr belonged. Among the matters which
increasingly kindled the128 flame of dispute between 'A'ishah and
'Uthman and made hostility more evident and public, was the subject of
al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah, half-brother of 'Uthman, and Ibn Mas'ud Sahabi, a
chaste and popular man, each of whom we will deal with separately.

**al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah and governorship of Kufah**

We see that in the Qur'an, al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah has been introduced as a
wicked man who was notorious for winebibbing and obscene acts. Text of
the book We said that 'Uthman on his assumption of power, was supported
by 'A'ishah and for six years he benefited from this support of the lady
of early Islam, and spared no effort in showing respect and honor to
her. But as time went by, difference arose between them and they began
forming factions and fronts. 'A'ishah, in order to show 'Uthman her
power and influence with people, made use of every possible occasion to
rouse people's antagonism towards him. This hostility reached such a
point where these two figures were ready to make attempts on one
another's life.

'Uthman appointed al-Walid, his sinning. Debauchee and winebibbing
half- brother, as governor of Kufah, an act which obviously caused this
man's confrontations with the people of Kufah and created pretexts for
'A'ishah to attack 'Uthman. We will now look through the history and
earlier centuries to give an idea of that period, the deeds of al-Walid,
the people's reactions and 'A'ishah's attitude and steps.

al-Walid was the son of 'Uqbah and grandson of Abu Mu'ayt ibn Abi
'Amr,

127. at-Tabari 5/172 in the accounts of the year 36, talk between Ibn
Kilab and 'A'ishah.

128. Ansab al-ashraf of al-Baladhuri 5/68.

called Dhakwan. Dhakwan was a paid slave of Umayyah ibn 'Abd Shams who
adopted him as son. al-Walid's mother, Arwa, was the daughter of Kurayz
ibn Rabi'ah, 'Uthman's mother. Thus al-Walid became 'Uthman's brother on
his mother's side. 'Uqbah, al-Walid's father was a neighbor of the
Prophet in Mecca and at the beginning of the Prophet's ordainment, he
frequented his sessions.

One day 'A'ishah had invited a number of guests to his house and had
asked the Prophet, too, to attend this feast. The Prophet accepted the
invitation, but abstained from eating anything except on the condition
that 'Uqbah express faith in the Unique God. 'Uqbah agreed to do so and
thus embraced Islam. When the Qurayshis learnt of this matter, they
said: " 'Uqbah has abandoned the faith of his ancestors." 'Uqbah had a
friend who was not present in Mecca at that time, being on a journey to
ash-Sham. On his return one night he asked his wife: "How are Muhammad
and his claims?" She answered: "He is persevering getting on." -"What is
my friend 'Uqbah doing?" -"He, too, has given up his ancestors' faith
and accepted Muhammad's religion."

'Uqbah's friend129 became very uneasy on hearing this and spent an
uncomfortable night. Next morning when 'Uqbah came to see him and
greeted him, he did not look at him and remained silent. 'Uqbah asked:
"Why do you not return my greeting?" -"How can I do so when you have
abandoned your religion?" -"Have Quraysh, too, made such a supposition
about me?" -"Yes."

-"What can I do to change their opinion about me?" -"It's very simple.
You can enter Muhammad's session, spit on his face and insult him with
the worst of abuses." 'Uqbah acted upon his friend's suggestion and did
what he should not have done. The Prophet showed no reaction to 'Uqbah's
misconduct, and only wiped his face, and turning to 'Uqbah said: "If I
ever get hold of you outside Mecca, I will cut off your head!" According
to another narration, the conversation between 'Uqbah and his friend was
as follows:

-''Uqbah! Have you abandoned your ancestors' faith?" -"No! It is not
so. One day Muhammad was a guest in my house and swore that if did not
embrace Islam, he would not touch my food. I felt embarrassed and to
please him I uttered the words testifying the belief in God. But I did
not do it in seriousness and sincerity."

-"I won't look at you again unless you spit on Muhammad's face and kick
129. In some narrations, this friend is said to be Ibn Ubayy ibn Khalaf,
and in others Umayyah ibn Khalaf. and slap him, thus showing your
dislike of him." 'Uqbah saw the Prophet prostrating in Dar an-Nudwah and
carried out his friend's suggestion in full. The Prophet said to him:
"If I ever see you outside Mecca, I will cut off your head."

From that time onward, 'Uqbah became one of the most headstrong enemies
of the Prophet and went so far as to get hold of a sheep's tripe and
throw its filthy contents on the Prophet's head.130

When the battle of Badr began, and 'Uqbah's friends hastened to join
the infidels in the fight with the Prophet, they proposed to him, too,
to join them in the combat, but he excused himself, saying: "I fear this
man since he warned me that if he ever found me outside Mecca, he would
cut off my head." His friends said: "You have a red-haired camel under
you, and if we happen to be defeated and are to retreat, you can easily
flee and save yourself.' They kept on persuading him until he agreed to
join them, and he took part in the battle. When the battle started the
Muslims with divine aid inflicted a severe defeat on the infidels. At
that time in a stampede 'Uqbah's camel shied off and carried him to an
open desert. The Muslims arrived and took him and seventy others
captive. When they brought him to the Prophet, he looked at 'Uqbah and
ordered to kill him. When 'Uqbah heard this order, he cried out madly:
"Why do you want to kill me alone out of so many captives?" The Prophet
said:

"Your guilt is cardinal. You are to be killed because you showed
infidelity to God and His prophet and committed injustice." Then he
ordered 'Ali to cut his head off.

The following verse has descended about him: "And the day when the
unjust shall bite his hands, saying: O! would that I had taken away with
the Apostle; O woe is me! would that I had not taken such a one for a
friend! Certainly he led me astray from the reminder after it had come
to me; and the Satan foils to aid man." 131

**The Qur'an introduces al-Walid**

al-Walid is the son of the same 'Uqbah. On the day that Mecca was
captured by the Muslims and the Prophet and when there was no escape for
the infidels and those who had gone astray, he embraced Islam, and after
some time, the Prophet sent him to the tribe of Banu al-Mustalaq to
collect religious tithe. al-Walid returned a little while later to
report that the members of that tribe had turned apostate and refused to
pay tithe. The reason for making such a report was that a group of
people of that tribe, on hearing of al-Walid's arrival had come out to
meet and welcome the Prophet's envoy. But al-Walid seemed 130. Tabaqat
of Ibn Sa'd 1/186 printed in Egypt.

131. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Furqan, Verses 27 and 28, Sirah of Ibn
Hisham 1/385 and 2/25, Imta' al- asma' p. 61 and 90, at-Tabari's
commentary, al-Qurtubi's commentary, az-Zamakhshari's commentary, Ibn
Kathir, ad-Durr al-manthur, an-Nayshaburi, ar-Razi, etc.

to have taken this gathering as a plot against himself and was so
frightened that without facing or talking to them, he hurried back to
Medina and gave that false report. The Prophet ordered Khalid ibn
al-Walid to go to that tribe and after investigating the truth to make a
report. He insisted that Khalid should not be hasty and see to the
matter quietly and with all possible care. Khalid said in his report
that the said tribe were Muslims and had by no means become apostate. At
this time the following verse descended showing al-Walid to be an
evil-doer:

"O you who believe! if an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look
carefully into it' lest you harm a people in ignorance then be sorry for
what you have done."132

Now 'Uthman, caliph of the Muslims who considered himself successor to
the Prophet, appointed such a notorious evil-doer as governor of Kufah
simply on account of his kinship with him, and removed from that
position Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, former commander-in-chief of 'Umar's army,
whereas Sa'd had, in 'Umar's time and upon his order, built Kufah,
turning it into a frontier garrison, and had housed there the soldiers
who had accompanied him in the war against Iran. The people of Kufah had
a deep respect for Sa'd.

An evil-doer as a governor When al-Walid entered Kufah and Sa'd learnt
of his mission, he turned to him and said in surprise:

"We have been away from one another. It seems that despite your
stupidity in the past, you have become somewhat intelligent and acquired
competence, while in fact it is we who have become stupid and ignorant."
al-Walid answered: "Sa'd! Don't get angry! It is this government and
monarchy that passes like a ball into different hands." Sa'd answered
with conviction: "Yes, I see that you will soon turn it into a
monarchy."133

The people of Kufah were angry at this change of governor and
protested, saying: " 'Uthman has chosen a bad successor to Sa'd ibn
Waqqas." Abu al-Faraj in al-Aghani describes the rule of al-Walid as
stated by Khalid ibn Sa'id as follows: al-'Abbas ibn 'Abd al- Muttalib,
Abu Sufyan, al-Hakam ibn 'Abi al-'As and al-Walid ibn 'Uqbah were the
only people who had the privilege of sitting next to him or in his
seat." One day, as usual, al-Walid was sitting with the caliph, when
al-Hakam, 'Uthman's uncle, arrived. 'Uthman rose in respect, offered his
seat to him and took another seat himself. 'Uthman's gesture towards
al-Hakam vexed al- 132. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Hujurat, verse 6.
133. Refer to Tabaqat, al-Isti'ab, Usd al-ghabah, al-Isabah and Kanz,
and to all commentaries concerning the above verse.

Walid very much, but he said nothing. After al-Hakam's departure, he
turned to 'Uthman and said: "O commander of the faithful! When you
showed preference to your uncle over me, I was reminded of these
couplets." 'Uthman answered: "al-Hakam is after all a great man of the
Quraysh and it is incumbent upon us to show him respect. What are your
couplets?" al-Walid recited the following couplets:

"I noticed he held his uncle dearer than his brother, whereas this is
an innovation and was not customary before. When I saw this, I longed to
see 'Umar and Khalid ('Uthman's sons) grow up and call me uncle on
resurrection day." 'Uthman felt sorry for him by virtue of these
couplets and in order to cause no umbrage with his half-brother, he gave
him a share in his government and said: "We offer you the governorship
of Iraq!" Thus, a notorious fellow whom God has called "an evil-doer" in
His heavenly Book, was given the power to govern the life, honour and
religion of the Muslims and act as an absolute ruler.

**al-Hakam, the caliph's uncle**

Let us see who al-Hakam is and what is his position that produces so
much respect for him on the part of 'Uthman, caliph of the Muslims. He
was the son of Abu al-'As, 'Uthman's uncle, and a grandson of Umayyah
ibn 'Abd Shams al-Qurayshi. al-Baladhuri says in 5/27: In pagan times,
al-Hakam was a neighbor of the Prophet and after the ordainment he did
more than all other neighbors to molest the Prophet.

al-Hakam embraced Islam after the capture of Mecca and settled in
Medina. But the Muslims regarded him to be weak and lax in religion;
for, though he had apparently embraced Islam, he walked behind the
Prophet mimicking his footsteps and making faces about him. In prayer,
he used his hands and fingers to perform comic gestures. One day the
Prophet happened to notice his mimicry and comic gestures, and was vexed
at it, and turning to him said imperiously: "Stay as you are!" As a
result of this curse, he remained in that comic state from that moment
to the end of his life, and his mouth, head and hands kept on shaking
nauseatingly all the time.

The Muslims were right in doubting al-Hakam's faith, since, despite
this strange and comic appearance which was due to the Prophet's curse,
he did not abandon molesting the Prophet, and one day when the Prophet
had stayed in the house of one of his ladies, al-Hakam stealthily peered
inside through a crack in the door. The Prophet recognized him and came
out with a stick and said: "Who will save me from this filthy lizard?"
Then he added: 'He and his offspring's must not live in the same city as
me' and exiled them to at-Ta'if. After the Prophet breathed his last,
'Uthman interceded for his uncle, al- Hakam and asked Abu Bakr to let
him and his children return to Medina. Abu Bakr refused permission and
said: "I dare not allow those who have been exiled by the Prophet to
return to Medina."

When 'Umar became caliph, 'Uthman renewed his request, but he met with
a similar refusal. But when 'Uthman became caliph, he brought back
al-Hakam and his offspring's to Medina, saying: "I had interceded with
the Prophet to allow their return to Medina and he had given a favorable
promise. However, owing to his death it was not fulfilled."

The Muslims were not pleased with the return to Medina of those exiled
by the Prophet. al-Baladhuri says on p. 5/22: "al-Hakam exposed the
Prophet's secrets. The Prophet laid a curse on him and exiled him and
his children to at- Ta'if saying that he should not stay in the same
city as himself." al-Hakam and his children remained in exile there
until 'Uthman became caliph and he brought them back to Medina.
al-Baladhuri says on p. 28: "The Muslims were very angry at the act of
'Uthman in granting to al-Hakam the whole of tithe revenue amounting to
300,000 dinars which the latter bad collected from the Khuza'ah tribe.
He says on p. 27: "al-Hakam died during 'Uthman's rule and the caliph
performed the burial prayer for him and pitched a tent over his grave as
a sign of respect. This was al-Hakam the notorious fellow to whom
'Uthman offered his seat and sat below him."


