The Prophet Announcing His Successor in His First Preach
========================================================

The following two traditions are written, one after the other, in the
History of al-Tabari which is one of the important history book for the
Sunnis. Besides al-Tabari, many other historians and traditionists and
commentators of Quran from among Sunnis have recorded this tradition in
their books. (see below for the list of references). The two traditions
explicitly indicate that the Holy Prophet of Islam (peace be upon him
and his family), with the order of Allah, has introduced Ali Ibn Abi
Talib as his successor even in his first open preach to the people:

Narrated Ibn Humayed, from Salamah, from Muhammad Ibn Is'haq, from Abd
al- Ghaffar Ibn al-Qasim, from al-Minhal Ibn Amr, from abdallah Ibn
al-Harith Ibn Nawfal Ibn al-Harith Ibn Abd al-Muttalib, from Abdallah
Ibn Abbas, from Ali Ibn Abi Talib:

When the verse "And warn your close tribe (Quran 26:214)" was revealed
to the prophet, he called me and said to me, "Ali, God has commanded me
to warn my tribe of near kindred. I was troubled by this, since I knew
that when I discuss the matter to them they would respond in a way which
I would not like.

I kept silent until Gabriel came to me and said "If you do not do what
you are commanded, your Lord will punish you." So prepare a measure of
wheat for us, add a leg of lamb to it, fill a large bowl of milk for us,
and then invite sons of Abd al- Muttalib for me so that I may speak to
them what I have been commanded to tell them."

I did what he had told me to do. At that time they numbered forty men
more or less, including his uncles Abu Talib, Hamzah, al-Abbas, and Abu
Lahab. When they had gathered together, he called me to bring the food
which I had prepared. I brought it, and when I put it down, prophet took
a piece of meat, broke it with his teeth, put it in the dish. Then he
said, "Take in the name of God."

They ate until they could eat no more, and yet the food was as it had
been. I swear by God, in whose hand Ali's soul rests, that a single man
could have eaten the amount of food which I prepared for them. Then he
said "Give them something to drink."

So I brought them the bowl and they drank from it until they became
full, and I swear by God that one man could have drunk that amount. When
prophet wanted to speak to them, Abu Lahab interrupted him and said
"Your host has long since bewitched you." Then they dispersed without
the prophet speaking to them.

On the following day he said to me "Ali, this man interrupted what I
wanted to say so that people dispersed before I could speak to them.
Prepare the same food for us as you did yesterday, and invite them
here." I did this, and brought them food when he called me. He did as he
had done the other day, and they ate until they could eat no more. Then
he said, "Bring the bowl," and they drank until they could drink no
more.

Then he spoke to them, saying, "Banu Abd al-Muttalib, I don't know of
any young man among Arabs who has brought for his people something
better than what I have brought to you. I bring the best of this world
and the world after, since God has commanded me to summon you to him.

Which of you will aid me in this matter, so that he will be my brother,
my executor (Wasi), my successor (Caliph) among you?" They all held
back, and even though I was the youngest, I said "I will be your helper,
O' prophet of God." He put his hand on the back of my neck and said
"This is my brother, my executor (Wasi), my successor (Caliph) among
you, so listen to him and obey him." They rose up laughing and saying to
Abu Talib, "He has commanded you to obey your son and to obey him!"

**Sunni References:**

(1) History of al-Tabari, English version, v6, pp 88-91
(2) History of Ibn Athir, v2, p62
(3) History of Ibn Asakir, v1, p85
(4) Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Hafidh Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, v5,
p97
(5) Tafsir al-Khazin, by Ala'uddin al-Shafi'i, v3, p371
(6) Shawahid al-Tanzil, by al-Hasakani, v1, p371
(7) Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v15, p15, pp 100-117
(8) al-Sirah al-Halabiyah, v1, p311
(9) Dala'il al-Nabawiyyah, by al-Baihaqi, v1, pp 428-430
(10) al-Mukhtasar, by Abul Fida, v1, pp 116-117
(11) Life of Muhammad, by Hasan Haykal, p104 (First Arabic Edition
only. In the second edition the last sentence of Prophet is deleted.)
(12) Tahdhib al-Athar, v4, pp 62-63.

The above tradition was also narrated by important Sunni figures such
as Muhammad Ibn Is'haq, Ibn Abu Hatem, and Ibn Mardawayh. It is also
recorded by many orientalists including T. Carlyle, E. Gibbon, J.
Davenport, and W. Irving.

As we see, Prophet ordered people to LISTEN AND FOLLOW ALI even in his
first open preach, that is, when he declared his prophethood openly.
"Shia" means "The Followers", and it is exclusively used for "The
Followers of Imam Ali". Thus Shia school of thought was in fact
established by the Holy Prophet of Islam (PBUH&HF) from the beginning of
his mission.

If we follow Imam Ali (AS), this is because the Holy Prophet asked us
to do so. Moreover, whatever Imam Ali (AS) (and other 11 Imams) has said
is the exact teachings and sayings of the Prophet Muhammad, and whatever
Prophet Muhammad has said is the exact teachings and sayings of Allah.
This is because the prophets and Imams are infallible and they do not
say anything in contrary to what they have been commanded to say.

The next tradition in the History of al-Tabari is as follows:

Narrated Zakariyya Ibn Yahya al-Darir, from Affan Ibn Muslim, from Abu
Awanah, from Uthman Ibn al-Mughirah, from Abu Sadiq, from Rabiah Ibn
Najid:

A man said to Ali: "O Commander of believers, how did you become the
heir of your cousin to the exclusion of your paternal uncle?" Ali
said:"Ahem" three times until every body craned their necks and pricked
up their ears, and then said "Prophet invited the whole of the Banu Abd
al-Muttalib, including his own closest relatives, to eat a year old lamb
and to drink some milk.

He also prepared a quantity of wheat for them, and they ate until they
were full, while the food remained as it was, as though it had not been
touched. Then he called for a drinking cup and they drank until they
could drink no more, while the drink remained as though it had not been
touched and they had not drunk.

Then he said Banu abd al Muttalib, I have been sent to all men in
general and to you in particular. Now that you have seen what you have
seen, which of you will swear an oath of allegiance to me to become my
brother, my companion, and my inheritor? Not one of them rose up, so I
stood up before him even though I was the youngest there. He said Sit
down. He repeated the words he had spoken for three times while I would
rise up and he would say to me sit down. On the third occasion, he
struck his hand on mine. In this way I became the heir of my cousin to
the exclusion of my uncle."

Sunni References: History of al-Tabari, English version, v6, pp 91-92

**Side Comments**

A Sunni brother mentioned that in the above incedent the Prophet was
only addressing his own family Banu Abd al-Muttalib and not the whole of
the Muslims. The most probable explanation here is that the Prophet
intended Ali as his successor in taking care of the affairs that relate
to the family of Banu Abd al-Muttalib only in his absence and after his
demise and not as a successor to the leadership of all Muslims.

Here I should state, first, that the Children of Abd al-Muttalib were
not the family of Prophet. They were the relatives of Prophet. From the
quoted tradition, we can not conclude that what he said was just for his
relatives. He just started with his relatives.

Now, do you honestly believe that Prophet assigned a successor after
him for the tribe of Abd al-Muttalib, but he forgot to assign any
successor for the rest of community? Prophet was not a nationalist. He
was not sent only for the children of Abd al-Muttalib. He was sent to
all mankind as he mentioned himself in the tradition. So why is this
negligence (about forgetting other people)? If assigning a successor is
duty of prophet, it can not be limited to a certain people, because the
Prophet was not sent just to a certain people.

Moreover, it was not the only time that the prophet declared Ali as his
successor. However, it was the first time. There are many traditions
inside Sunni collections of traditions which either implicitly or
explicitly indicate whom the Prophet (PBUH&HF) chose as his successor.
The official announcement, however, was in "Ghadir Khum" as Sihah Sittah
(the six Sunni collections of the traditions) testify.

It is also important to recall that the historical accounts are always
written and controled by people who are in power. this is the case for
every era, and the tyrant governments of the Umayad and the Abbasid were
not exempt from this rule. As such, in most cases, facts are not
explicitly written in the history, but one can find them implicitly.
These are the peicies of information which have been mistakenly passed
trough the censorship of the Governors throughout history.

Prophet (PBUH) said:

Ali is with truth, and truth is with Ali.


Sunni reference: Tarikh, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi


**How is This Possible ?**

[ The following article is adopted from the book "Brother of Muhammad
(pbuh&hf)" written by late Mohammad Jawad Chirri (RA). The event under
discussion is when the Prophet (pbuh&hf) were ordered by Allah (swt) to
preach to his relatives ]

The two Shaikhs: al-Bukhari and Muslim did not mention the important
event pertaining the first preach of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) though it was
reported by many historians and traditionists. Instead, Muslim and some
other traditionists reported an event that took place after this
event.

They reported the appearance of the Messenger on Al-Safa and his call
to the Qureshite clans (the Meccans) and his invitation to them to
believe in the new faith. Muslim and these reporters mentioned this late
event and tied it with the verse of the warning of the closest relative
of the Holy Prophet. Muslim recorded that Abu Huriarah reported the
following:

When this verse was revealed: "And warn thy closest relatives," the
Messenger of God called the Qureshites and they came together. He
addressed them in general and in particular. He said: "O children of
Ka'ab Ibn Lu'ay, save yourselves from Hell. O children of Murrah lbn
Ka'ab, save yourselves from Hell. O children of Hashim save yourselves
from Hell. O Fatimah, save yourself from Hell. For I do not possess any
protection for you from God, except that you have relations to me which
I would like to observe."

Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, v3, pp 79-80

It is amazing that God commanded His Messenger to warn the closest of
his relatives, who were the children of Abdul-Muttalib, but the Prophet
called upon the children of Ka'ab Ibn Lu'ay and the children of Murrah
Ibn Ka'ab who are from the remotest of his relatives. It is
inconceivable that the Messenger of God disobeys what his Lord commanded
him to do.

And what is more amazing is that the messenger called upon his daughter
(Fatimah) publicly, to save herself from Hell, yet she was the purest
Muslim girl whose father and mother were the purest parents.

Fatimah, at the time of the revelation of the above verse was according
to the historians, either two years or eight years old. al-Hakim in his
al- Mustadrak, v3, p61 reported that she was born 41 years after the
birth of her father.

It would be illogical that the Prophet addresses himself to a two year
old child or that he put a pure Muslim girl (who was still a minor, not
exceeding eight years of age) on the same level with the pagans of Banu
Ka'ab and Banu Murrah.

And more curious is the Hadith of Aisha which Muslim recorded in his
Sahih as follows:

"When the verse of warning was revealed, the Messenger of God said: 'O
Fatimah, daughter of Mohammad, Safiya, daughter of Abdul-Muttalib, I
have nothing in my power to protect you against God. Ask me from my
wealth whatever you want.' "

Sunni reference: Sahih Muslim, v3, p79-80

This Hadith does not agree with the previous one. For this Hadith
reported that the Holy Prophet addressed himself to the children of
Abdul-Muttalib alone, while the other Hadith reported that the Holy
Prophet publicly addressed himself mostly to other than the Prophet's
clan.

And most weird in this Hadith is that the Messenger addressed himself
publicly while on the Safa mainly to his youngest daughter Fatimah while
she was living with him where he sees her every hour. It is also curious
that the address which he directed to her and to the other members of
the children of Abdul- Muttalib did not contain any message, such as
calling upon them to worship God or to avoid idol-worshipping.

Furthermore, Aisha was not born at the time of the event. The Messenger
died when she was only eighteen years old. (See al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa'd,
v8, p61). And this event took place ten years before the Hijrah (twenty
years before his death).

Abu Hurairah also was not an eye-witness to the event because he saw
the Messenger for the first time when the Messenger was coming back from
Khaibar in the 7th year after the Hijrah. (See al- Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa'd,
v4, p327).

And more curious than all is that Al-Zamakhshari reported that Aisha,
daughter of Abu Bakr and Hafsa, daughter of Omar, were among the ones
whom the Holy Prophet addressed after the revelation of this verse of
warning (which was revealed before the birth of Aisha). (See al-Sirah
al- Halabiyyah, by Ali Ibn Burhanuddin al-Halabi, v1, p321)

This clearly indicates that recorders or the reporters of these
traditions were seriously confused. They overlooked the fact that the
verse commands the Prophet to warn his closest relatives, who were the
children of Abdul- Muttalib, and that the Holy Prophet is not expected
to disobey the order of God. What these traditions convey is opposed to
the verse itself, and whatever disagrees with the Holy Qur'an has to be
disregarded.

The event which the historians and many Hadith recorders reported of
holding a conference with his immediate relatives is the only logical
course which the Holy Prophet was expected to follow after the
revelation of the verse.


**The Opinion of Imam Ali (AS) on Caliphate**

A contributor mentioned that, in one of the sermons of Nahjul Balagha
it is written that Imam Ali mentioned consultation as one of the reason
why he has the legitimate right for Caliphate. Here, Ali is
contradicting the Shia thesis that Muhammad wanted to appoint Ali as the
Imam.

What you are referring to is not a sermon of Imam Ali to Muslims, and
you have also taken it out of context. it was a part of his letter to
Muawiyah when he refused to give his oath to Imam Ali (AS). Moreover, in
contrary to your claim, in that letter Imam Ali (AS) did NOT say that he
BELIEVES in the function of election for Caliphate. (Please see the full
text of the letter below). He rather wanted to use the argument of his
opponents against themselves.

When all the people of Medina unanimously swore allegiance to Imam Ali
(AS), Muawiyah refused to comply apprehending danger for his own power,
and in order to provide an excuse for his disloyalty, he claimed that
since he did not participate in the election, the election of Imam Ali
(AS) was unlawful, and thus there should be another general election.

This was while Abu Bakr was elected by a very few number of people and
there was no national vote so that one could consider the caliphate of
Abu Bakr as a result of people's election. But the rulers who came after
the Prophet imposed upon people that this is what election means, and
this became a principle imposed on people and assumed to be their
verdict that whoever the nobles of Medina elect would be deemed to
represent the entire world of Islam, and no person has right to question
it, whether he was present at the time of election or not, and that no
one has right to reconsider the matter.

People, from whom Muawiyah was later receiving support, were those who
had clamored the loudest about that argument. But when the rulership of
the Muslim State in the form of caliphate came to Imam Ali, they
rebelled against it, many of them were rebelling even after having sworn
the oath of allegiance to him.

Here, in this letter to Muawiyah, Imam Ali (AS) is quoting the argument
which was once employed against him when he refused to give his oath to
Abu Bakr. Imam Ali (AS) mentioned that if an election by people is the
criterion to decide on the Caliphate, a general election took place in
Medina to elect him as Caliph by Emigrants and Helpers and nobody can
deny this fact. Therefore even according to the principles formulated by
the opponents of Imam Ali (AS), his election was lawful, regular and
bonafide.

Thus Muslim who already accepted such principles to legitimize the
election of the Abu Bakr, have no the right to speak or act against him
(Ali). And Muawiyah had no right to propose re-election nor to refuse
allegiance when, in practice, he recognized this principle for Abu
Bakr.

In his letter, the Imam wrote to Muawiyah:

"Verily those who swore allegiance to Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman have
sworn allegiance to me on the same basis on which they swore allegiance
to them. On this basis, he who was present has no choice (to
reconsider), and he who was absent has no right to reject. And
consultation was confined to Emigrant and Helpers. If they agree on an
individual and name him leader, it was supposed that it is Allah's
satisfaction.

If any one goes against such decision due to innovation, they (used to)
return him from what he kept away, and if he refuses (to abide the
decision) they (used to) fight him for following a course other than of
the believers, and Allah will put him back from where he had run
away."

"O' Muawiyah, if you use your brain without your tendencies and
desires, you will find me the most innocent of all in respects to
Uthman's blood, and you surely know that I was in seclusion from him,
unless you conceal what is quite open to you and attribute all these
false rumors to me."

In the above letter Imam Ali is using counter argument to demolish the
argument of Muawiyah. This method is known as arguing with the adversary
on the basis of his wrong premises so as to demolish his argument. On
the point of religion, Imam Ali (AS) never regarded consultation with
chiefs or the common vote to be the criterion of the validity of
Caliphate, otherwise he would not have allowed himself to delay to give
allegiance to Abu Bakr for the first six month of his Caliphate which is
an undeniable fact held by all Muslims.

This is proof of the fact that he did not regard these self- concocted
methods as the criterion for the validity of caliphate. However, to
place before Muawiyah meant opening the door to questions and answers.
He, therefore, attempted to convince him with his own premises and
beliefs so that there could be no scope for interpretation or for
confusing the matter.

Imam Ali cited the above argument merely as a stopple against Muawiyah
(and in another occasion to Talha and Zubair) simply to prove how
fictitious and flimsy were the points raised by his enemies to deprive
him of his just rights and how they would go back upon their accepted
principles to harm him.

One may recall that such counter argument was used by Prophet Abraham
in the Quran where he once claimed to be the worshipper of the Sun and
the moon to show people that how a wrong premise would result in self-
contradictory result.

On this occasion, Imam Ali (AS) did not argue on the strength of any
saying of the prophet which would serve as his final say about the
caliphate, because the grounds for refusal in his case was in respect of
the style of the principle of the election.

Therefore, in keeping with the requirements of the situation, a reply
based on the opponent's principles could alone quiten him. Even if he
had argued on the strength of the Prophet's command, it would have
subjected to various interpretations and the matter would have prolonged
instead of being settled. In fact Muawiyah's real aim was to prolong the
matter that at some point his own authority might get support.

Imam Ali had already witnessed that soon after the death of Prophet
(PBUH&HF) all his sayings regarding to appointment of his successor had
been set aside. Therefore, how after the laps of a long time, could one
be expected to accept it when habit had been established to follow one's
free will against the Prophet's commandments?

Moreover, there are many sermons in Nhajul Balagha where Imam Ali
unequivocally states his right was usurped from day one of the death of
the Mercy to Mankind, Muhammad (PBUH&HF). below is one example of it:

Sermon 7/3 of Nahjul Balagha
Survey of the period after the demise of the Holy Prophet (PBUH&HF)

[This is the famous sermon of Shiqshiqiyyah. It is so named because
while Imam Ali was delivering it an Iraqi got up and presented a letter
to him. He got busy in reading it. When he had finished the letter
Abdullah Ibn Abbas requested him to continue his sermon. The Imam
replied, " Ibn Abbas !
This speech of mine was extempore and was being delivered at the
impulse of that moment like the Shiqshiqiyyah (the roar of a camel), it
can't be continued." So far as the subject is concerned the sermon is
self-explanatory.]

Beware! By Allah the son of Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr)(2) dressed himself
with it (the caliphate) and he certainly knew that my position in
relation to it was the same as the position of the axis in relation to
the hand-mill. The flood water flows down from me and the bird cannot
fly upto me. I put a curtain against the caliphate and kept myself
detached from it.

Then I began to think whether I should assault or endure calmly the
blinding darkness of tribulations wherein the grown up are made feeble
and the young grow old and the true believer acts under strain till he
meets Allah (on his death). I found that endurance thereon was wiser. So
I adopted patience although there was pricking in the eye and
suffocation (of mortification) in the throat. I watched the plundering
of my inheritance till the first one went his way but handed over the
Caliphate to Ibn al-Khattab after himself.

(Then he quoted al-A\`sha's verse).

My days are now passed on the camel's back (in difficulty) while there
were days (of ease) when I enjoyed the company of Jabir's brother
Hayyan.(3)

It is strange that during his lifetime he wished to be released from
the caliphate but he confirmed it for the other one after his death. No
doubt these two shared its udders strictly among themselves. This one
put the Caliphate in a tough enclosure where the utterance was haughty
and the touch was rough. Mistakes were in plenty and so also the excuses
therefore. One in contact with it was like the rider of an unruly camel.
If he pulled up its rein the very nostril would be slit, but if he let
it loose he would be thrown. Consequently, by Allah people got involved
in recklessness, wickedness, unsteadiness and deviation.

Nevertheless, I remained patient despite length of period and stiffness
of trial, till when he went his way (of death) he put the matter (of
Caliphate) in a group(4) and regarded me to be one of them. But good
Heavens! what had I to do with this "consultation"? Where was any doubt
about me with regard to the first of them that I was now considered akin
to these ones? But I remained low when they were low and flew high when
they flew high. One of them turned against me because of his hatred and
the other got inclined the other way due to his in-law relationship and
this thing and that thing, till the third man of these people stood up
with heaving breasts between his dung and fodder. With him his children
of his grand-father, (Umayyah) also stood up swallowing up Allah's
wealth(5) like a camel devouring the foliage of spring, till his rope
broke down, his actions finished him and his gluttony brought him down
prostrate.

At that moment, nothing took me by surprise, but the crowd of people
rushing to me. It advanced towards me from every side like the mane of
the hyena so much so that Hasan and Husayn were getting crushed and both
the ends of my shoulder garment were torn. They collected around me like
the herd of sheep and goats. When I took up the reins of government one
party broke away and another turned disobedient while the rest began
acting wrongfully as if they had not heard the word of Allah saying:

That abode in the hereafter, We assign it for those who intend not to
exult themselves in the earth, nor (to make) mischief (therein); and the
end is (best) for the pious ones. (Qur'an, 28:83)

Yes, by Allah, they had heard it and understood it but the world
appeared glittering in their eyes and its embellishments seduced them.
Behold, by Him who split the grain (to grow) and created living beings,
if people had not come to me and supporters had not exhausted the
argument and if there had been no pledge of Allah with the learned to
the effect that they should not acquiesce in the gluttony of the
oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed I would have cast the rope of
Caliphate on its own shoulders, and would have given the last one the
same treatment as to the first one. Then you would have seen that in my
view this world of yours is no better than the sneezing of a goat.

Don't tell me this is the product of Sayyed Radhi. In fact, this
particular sermon of Imam Ali was being circulated among the Sunni
scholars 200 years before the BIRTH of Sayyed Radhi and they
acknowledged that the above sermon is the genuine sayings of Imam Ali
(AS), and I have 27 documents to prove this. In fact, Nahjul Balagha is
not merely a Shi'ite source, and many Sunni scholars have also written
commentary to it.

Prophet (PBUH&HF) said:

Whoever I am his prophet, Ali is his ruler.

- On the Khilafa of Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS):

Abdullah Ibn Masud narrated:

The messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) ordered me to follow him, on the night
of the Jinn. I went with him until we reached the hight of Macca... (the
prophet) said: "I was promised that the Jinn and human will believe in
me. As to the human they believed in me, as to the Jinn you have seen";
he continued: "I feel that my end is drawing near." I said: O Messenger
of Allah, won't you make Abu Bakr as your Caliph? He turned away from
me, so I realized that he disagreed; I said: O Messenger of Allah, won't
you make Umar as your Caliph? He turned away from me, so I realized that
he disagreed;

I said: O Messenger of Allah, won't you make Ali as your Caliph? He
said: "(That's) him. By the One whom there is no God beside Him, if you
chose him and obeyd him He (Allah) entered you into Paradise all
together."

**Sunni references:**

- Majma' al-Zawa'id, by al-Haythami, v8, p314
- Also mentioned by al-Tabarani


