Necessity of the Existence of Imam Al-mahdi (as)
================================================

This article addresses the necessity of the existence of the
Representative of Allah on the earth at any time. The opponents of Shia
protest that although Shia consider the Imam necessary in order to
expound the injunctions and verities of religion and to guide the
people, the occultation of the Imam is the negation of this very
purpose, for an Imam in occultation who cannot be reached by mankind
cannot be in any way beneficial or effective.

The opponents argue that if God wills to bring forth an Imam to reform
mankind, He is able to create him at the necessary moment and does not
need to create him thousands of years earlier.

In answer to this, it must be said that such people have not really
understood the meaning of the Imam, for the duty of the Imam is not only
the explanation of the religious sciences and external guidance of the
people. In the same way that he has the duty of guiding men outwardly,
the Imam also bears the function of "Walayah" and the internal guidance
of human.

The divinely appointed Imam directs human's spiritual life and orients
the inner aspect of human action toward God. Clearly, his physical
presence or absence has no effect in this matter. Imam is the
representative of Allah (Khalifatullah) on the earth, and is His vice-
regent. He is the connection between the heavens and the earth, and is
appointed by Allah as the intermediate for the rest of creatures.

His existence is always necessary even if the time has not as yet
arrived for his outward appearance and the universal reconstruction that
he is to bring about.

Let me provide an example to clarify this delicate issue. Any human
needs blood to continue his life, and the existence of blood is
necessary in every single moment of life. This need is NOT, in anyway,
independent of God. He is God who has created this need for human, and
He is the one who has fulfilled it.

Similarly the function of Imam over the rest of creatures is NOT
independent of God. He was Allah who created this need for the universe
and He was Allah who has fulfilled it. Allah (SWT) wished the
inhabitants of the earth not to be able to live without the existence of
His representative on the earth, the same way that Allah wished our body
not to be able to survive without blood. Notice that in the above
examples, both Imam and blood are no more than the creation of Allah.

A divinely appointed Imam is a human, but being human does not mean
that he could not have any authority over other human by the permission
of Allah. The closer the human is to Allah, the more authority he will
have. Closeness to Allah is obtained through obedience and piety. When
one reaches that level of perfection, he does not desire anything except
Allah's orders.

Imam is not divine, but he is fully supported by divine power. He has
been given authority as the Quranic verses below testifies. This
authority has come from Allah and is also controlled by Allah.

Another example would be to consider a company with a president and
some managers and employees. The one who is closer to the president (in
his position or any other aspects) has more authority than the others.
This authority is given and is controlled by the president at any time.
This authority is not in parallel with the authority of president, and
remains as long as the president wishes to.

The authorized person does not feel independence and can not do
anything against the order of the president, otherwise the position will
be taken away from him. The president has appointed that person to carry
out a task.

Similarly, a divinely appointed Imam is NOT considered a parallel power
beside Allah, and his authority is NOT independent of Allah since Allah
does NOT relinquish His Majesty and Sovereignty to ANYONE. If He gives
His righteous Servant a certain power or authority, He will still have
control over that individual. Quran testifies that Allah has ASSIGNED
some Imams with authority to guide mankind:

"And We assigned them Imams who guide by our authority and We have
inspired in them the doing of good deeds." (Quran 21:73)

Also:

"And We appointed from among them some Imams who guide by our authority
since they were patient and believed firmly in Our Signs." (Quran
32:24)

Moreover, on the commentary of Quranic verse: "And lo! verily I am
Forgiving toward him who repents and believes and does good deeds, and
afterward he accept guidance [20:82]", Ibn Hajar mentioned that it is
narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) as well as Thabit al-Lubnani
that, the end of verse means "he is guided to the Wilayah of the Ahlul-
Bayt." (al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11,
section 1, p235).

Allah, Exalted, also said:

"O' you who believe! Obey Allah, and Obey Apostle and those from among
you who are given authority (by Allah)." (Quran 4:59)

Who are those Imams whom Allah gave them authority and are to be obeyed
beside the Prophet?

The above verses of Quran prove beyond doubt that a divinely appointed
Imam has authority and he guides. The authority of Imam is not
restricted over a group of people but also covers every other creatures
(see Quran 36:12 which uses the word Imam for keeping the account of
everything). Again, this authority is controlled by Allah.

Allah also said in Quran:

"(O' Muhammad!) You are but a Warner, and for every community there
exists a Guide." (Quran 13:7).

Prophet Muhammad was a Warner, and the Imams of his Ahlul-Bayt were
each a Guide for the people of their time. In fact, the following Sunni
commentators of Quran narrated that the word "Guide" in the above verse
was Imam Ali (AS):

- Tafsir al-Tabari, v13, p72;
- Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, on the commentary of verse 13:7
- Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, under verse 13:7 of Quran
- Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v6, p157
- Noor al-Absar, by al-Shablanji, p70
- Kunooz al-Haqa'iq, by al-Manawi, p42.

If there should be a Guide for each time, as the verse 13:7 testifies,
then my question is: Who is this guide today? There should be an alive
Imam in every instant of time, in order the above verses make sense.
This is another proof for the fact that Imam al-Mahdi (AS) is alive.
Moreover, Allah said:

That which is spared by Allah (on the earth) is better for you if you
are believers. (Quran 11:86)

The above verse is another proof for the fact that there exists one
individual at each era who is spared by Allah (Baqiyyatullah) on the
earth to maintain the cause of faith and he is the Imam of that age, and
this position was never vacated so long as the earth carries even one
human being.

This, in fact, is a doctrine of Shia Muslims that a "Proof (Hujjah) of
Allah" should always exist on earth for earth to continue its function
as a living place for human being. It is NOT that Hujjah is god or
life-giver, rather it is because Allah has created the world for the
best of His servants. The best of Allah's creation is the one who is the
most obedient to him at each time.

Other creatures are considered to be secondary objects in the sight of
Allah. Besides, there are traditions stating that if it happens that
there exists only one human on the earth, he is the "Proof (Hujjah) of
Allah". This implies that Allah never left the human on the earth
without His representative. At the time of the prophets, the Hujjah were
the prophets.

Now that there will be no prophet after Prophet Muhammad, the Hujjah is
his living Ahlul-Bayt at each era till the day of resurrection. The
necessity of the existence of a Hujjah on the earth follows that this
world will end when the last Imam passes away.

Beside what we quoted from Quran, let us quote some traditions from
Sunni sources to support the above assertions. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and many
others narrated:

The Messenger of Allah said: "The stars are amnesty for the inhabitants
of the heavens, and if the stars go away (i.e., become non-existent),
the inhabitants of the heavens will be destroyed. And my Ahlul-Bayt are
amnesty for the inhabitants of the earth, and if my Ahlul-Bayt go away
(i.e., all die), the inhabitants of the earth will be destroyed."

**Sunni references:**

- Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p671, Tradition \#1145
- Dhakha'ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p14
- Manaqib Ahmad, and many more such as al-Tabarani, etc.
- al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p234
- Musnad, Abu Ya'ala, on the authority of Salama Ibn Awka' in which the
wording is: "The stars are amnesty for the inhabitants of the heavens,
and my Ahlul-Bayt are the amnesty for my Ummah."

Also:

The Messenger of Allah said: "The stars help prevent the inhabitants of
the earth from being drowned, and my Ahlul-Bayt are the protectors of my
community against disputes (in religious matters). Therefore, whichever
groups among the Arabs opposes my Ahlul-Bayt, shall be split up by
dissensions and will become (a party of) Satan."

**Sunni reference:**

- al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, p149, who said this tradition is
authentic (Sahih).
- al-Tabarani, quoting Ibn Abbas
- Also in al-Manaqib Ahmad, as quoted by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari.
- al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p234

Ibn Hajar mentioned the above two traditions as well as many other
similar ones under the commentary of the following Quranic verse:

"It is not for Allah to punish them while you are among them." (Quran
8:33)

Then Ibn Hajar comments that: "Ahlul-Bayt are amnesty for the
inhabitant of the earth the same as the Messenger of Allah was amnesty
for them." In the next page, after mentioning a tradition from Sahih
Muslim which states that after the end of government of Justice in the
last days, just before the day of resurrection Allah sends a wind which
takes the souls of all the believers and only wrong-doers will remain
when the earthquakes of hour of resurrection occurs. Then Ibn Hajar
comments:

To my opinion, it probably refers to the Ahlul-Bayt, since Allah
created this world for the sake of the Prophet, and has made its
existence conditional to the existence of his Ahlul-Bayt for they have
certain virtues in common with the Prophet as Fakhr al-Razi mentioned,
and because the Messenger of Allah said on their virtue that: "O Allah!
They are from me and I am from them" since they are a part of him as
their mother, Fatimah, was a part of him. Thus they (Ahlul- Bayt) are
also amnesty for the earth (similar to what the above verse establishes
for the Prophet himself).

Sunni reference: al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section
1, p234

In another tradition, it is narrated that:

The holy Prophet was asked: "What would be the condition of the people
after the Ahlul-Bayt," and he replied: "Their condition will be like
that of an ass whose spine is fractured."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, p143

These traditions, therefore, leave no room for any doubt regarding to
existence of Ahlul-Bayt in each era, and that the Imam of the time, Imam
al- Mahdi (AS), is alive. Now look at the following tradition:

The Messenger of Allah said: "Regard the Ahlul-Bayt among you as the
head to the body, or the eyes to the face, for the face is only guided
by the eyes."

**Sunni references:**

- Is'af al-Raghibeen, by al-Saban
- al-Sharaf al-Mua'abbad, by Shaikh Yusuf al-Nabahani, p31, by more
than one authority

Also the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said:

"In every generation of my followers there are going to be just and
righteous members of my Ahlul-Bayt to counteract the alterations and
corruption's which the misguided people will try to make in my religion,
to remove the false allegations of the untruthful and contradict the
misinterpretations of the ignorant. Be aware! Your Imam shall be your
representative before Allah, so be careful whom you adopt as your
representative."

**Sunni references:**

- al-Sirah, by al-Mala
- al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section 1, p231 under
the commentary of verse: "And stop them, for they shall be questioned!
[37:24]"

And now a saying from Commander of Believers, Imam Ali (AS):

"I and my pure holy descendants and my virtuous household are most
sober in childhood and when we grow up we are the wisest: we are the
means through which Allah shall exterminate falsehood and break the
teeth of blood-thirsty wolves and restore you the freedom by removing
the ropes that are tied around your necks. Allah wished to commence (all
things) through us, and to complete (all things) through us."

**Sunni references:**

- Kanz al-Ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, v6, p36
- Aydah al-Ishkal, by Abd al-Ghani

The clear and unequivocal terms in which the Holy Prophet has directed
us about these matters in the above-mentioned traditions cannot be
surpassed or equaled in any other language. The word Ahlul-Bayt can not
cover all the family of the Prophet (PBUH&HF). This label applies only
to those who occupy the position of Imams by Divine Decree, as
established by reasons and upheld by the traditions. Learned scholars
from the major section of the Muslims also admit this. For instance, Ibn
Hajar writes in his al- Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah:

"The Ahlul-Bayt, whom the Holy Prophet has designated as protectors are
the learned men among his family, since the guidance can be attained
only through them. They are like the stars through whom we are guided in
the right direction, and if the starts are taken away (or hidden) we
would come face to face with the signs of the Almighty as promised
(i.e., the Day of Resurrection).

This will happen when the Mahdi will come, as mentioned in the
traditions, and the Prophet Jesus will say his prayers behind him, the
Dajjal will be slain, and then the signs of the Almighty will appear one
after another."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section
1, p234

This is why the demise of the twelfth Imam will bring the end of the
world, and this is one of the reasons that he should be alive. In
another place, Ibn Hajar writes:

"The traditions which describe the necessity of adherence to Ahlul-
Bayt until the day of Judgment, also imply that the existence of the
righteous members of the family of the Prophet will NOT terminate until
the day of Judgment the same way as the Book of Allah will remain."

Sunni reference: al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section
1, p232

The occultation of the twelfth Imam is divided into two parts: the
first, the minor occultation (Ghaybah al-Sughra) which began in 259/873
and ended in 329/939, lasting about seventy year. On that period, people
were in contact with him through four special deputies. These four
deputies knew the place of Imam and were able to directly contact him.

That period served as preparing his followers to the absence of the
Imam. The second, the major occultation which commenced in 329/939 and
will continue as long as God wills it. There is no special deputy in
direct contact with him in this period, and Muslim scholars are his
general deputies at this time without having ability to meet him.

It might be that the Imam (AS) showed himself to someone during the
major occultation, but it was never a regular occurrence, and no one can
claim to meet him anytime he wishes. Moreover, even if Imam (AS) appears
to a person and gives him an instruction, it is only personal, and is
not meant for all people.

The Shi'a doctrine quite clearly states that the Imam (AS) would not
deputize a person at this time. In fact, any claim of receiving new
public orders (which are not found in our traditions narrated from
Ahlul-Bayt) during the major occultation is considered itself to be the
proof of the falsity of such claim. There is NO specific place of
residence known for Imam al-Mahdi (AS) and no one knows his whereabouts
on the earth except Allah, and he has been seen by different people
throughout his life in various locations of the world.

Imam al-Mahdi (AS) wrote through one of his special deputies during the
minor occultation:

"Rest assured, no one has a special relationship with Allah. Whoever
denies me is not from my (community). The appearance of the Relief (al-
Faraj) depends solely upon Allah. Therefore those who propose a certain
time for it are liars. As to the benefit of my existence in occultation,
it is like the benefit of the sun behind the clouds where the eyes do
not see it. Indeed, my existence is an amnesty for the inhabitants of
the earth. Pray much to Allah to hasten the Relief, for therein also
lies the release from your sufferings."

Guidance can be of different ways. Do we need to see God to guide us?
How about the Prophet who has already passed away? The above tradition
of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) gives a very interesting analogy, and the same
analogy was given by the Prophet (PBUH&HF) on the account of Imam
al-Mahdi (please see the article titled: Leadership and Infallibility).
If we want to see our way and in order to walk safely, we need light.

The Sun provides this light for us even if it is hidden behind the
clouds where the eyes do not see it directly. Similarly, we benefit from
the guidance of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) even though we can not see him during
his period of occultation.

As I mentioned earlier, Imam al-Mahdi and all other Imams and prophets
are not anything but the best creatures of Allah. They were NOT divine
in any way. However, I have seen few English translated Shi'i books in
which the phrases like "divine Imam" or "divine Prophet" have been used.
By looking at those books in the original language, it became evident
that by "a divine leader" the translator meant "a divinely appointed
leader", that is, a leader who has been assigned by Allah (and not by
people).

Such phrases should not any how imply that those leaders are divine
themselves. This is the matter of understanding the phrase. Although
there are many translated Islamic books which have very poor
translation, but fortunately the occurrence of such ambiguous words
which are critical to the understanding of the reader, is quite rare.

Also Imam al-Mahdi (AS) is NOT a prophet, and as such he will bring
neither a new religion nor a new religious law. He does not cancel any
regulations set by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF), but he will enforce the
true Islamic based on the genuine Sunnah of the Prophet (PBUH&HF).
However there are some authentic traditions which state that although
Imam al-Mahdi does not bring any new law when he comes, some people say:
he is bringing a new religion.

Those traditions further explain that it is as a result of many
innovations set by pseudo-scholars into to the religion of Islam. Imam
al- Mahdi's mission is to reject ALL the innovations and to revive the
Sunnah of Prophet Muhammad which was polluted by people throughout the
history. As a result of ignorance of people to the true Sunnah of
Prophet, they think he is bringing a new religion. Some traditions say
that Imam al-Mahdi will also provide the unique interpretation (Tafsir
book; divine commentary) for the Quran.


