A Glance At the Concocted Traditions
====================================

It is an indisputable fact of Islam that a noble man of the highest
caliber, from the progeny of the Holy Prophet (S.A.) and offspring of
Hazrat Fatema Zahra (S.A.) will appear in the last era of the world,
defunct religion, establish justice and equity and purge the world from
all evils. All the sects of Islam unanimously agree that this major
upheaval will be known as 'the Revolution of Mahdi.

Verily the Sunni traditionalists have adorned and embellished their
books with the detailed narration of this glorious revolution. Of course
there is a difference of opinion in their view point regarding his
pedigree like some say that he is the immediate son and successor of
Imam Hasan Askari (A.S.),

while others opine that he is from the offspring of Imam Hasan al-
Mujtaba (A.S.), still others think that he is from the generation of
Imam Husain (A.S.). There are a few who falter that he will belong to
Abbasid lineage. Some of them believe that he was born in 255 A.H. and
others are adamant that he is yet to take birth.

Some predict that he will reappear from Holy Mecca, while some forecast
that he will arrive from Khurasan there are also some who assert that he
will rise from 'the far west'. There are some pedantic scholars who out
of their shallow and scant knowledge arbitrated that Mahdi and Hazrat
Isa (A.S.) are one and the same person. Precisely speaking according to
them, Mahdi is none else but Hazrat Isa (A.S.).

Such different and discordant narrations have stemmed from those
contradictory traditions which are recorded in various books. It is
deplorable, indeed such fabricated and concocted traditions have slowly
and gradually penetrated into the books of Ahle-Sunnat traditionalists.
From the historical view point it is evident that such traditions were
fabricated by those imposters who claimed to be 'Mahdi' and have
attracted hordes of naive followers. Some of the renowned Sunni scholars
and traditionalists have admitted to the rampant fabrication of
traditions in their books viz Ibn Jauzi in 'Al-Mauzoo'aat', Zahabi in
'Meezanul Etedaal', Ibn Araq in 'Al-Ahadithuz-Zaeefa wal-Mauzoo'ah'.

In this brief article, such concocted and fabricated traditions will be
discussed, their authenticity scrutinized and their truth exposed. 1.
Ibn Majah Qazveeni in his 'Sahih' narrates from Anas bin Malik who
relates from the. Holy Prophet (S.A.) that:

"Mahdi is none else but Jesus, the son of Mary."

Which purports that the Mahdi of Islam is Hazrat Isa (A.S.). None of
the scholars of Ahle-Sunnat have accepted this concept (that Isa is
Mahdi) because this tradition contradicts various other traditions of
the Holy Prophet (S.A.) which are authentic and continuous. Particularly
those traditions in which the Holy Prophet (S.A.) has said that 'He will
be from my progeny and from the offspring of Fatema (S.A.)'.

The noted celebrity of Ahle-Sunnat, Imam Qurtubbi (exp. 671 A.H.) in
his famous exegesis of Quran i.e. 'At-Tazkera fi Umuril Akhera' has
declared that it is a weak tradition because in the reliable traditions
of the Holy Prophet (S.A.) it is clearly mentioned that he will be from
his own lineage, from the children of Fatema (S.A.). These traditions
are much more authentic and reliable than the one in question. Hence the
verdict will be based on the most authentic traditions rather than the
weaker ones.

Such objections are raised by other Sunni stalwarts too. Like Ibn
Qayyim in fiftieth chapter of Al-MunarAl-MunifFil-HadithAs-Sahih
waz-Zaeef. And according to Baihaqi, the narrators of this tradition are
unknown or unreliable.Also the sequence of tradition is not consistent
but is lost from some where in between. This tradition is one of the
single reports of Mohammad bin Khalid Junaidi.

Zahabi in his Meezanul-Etedaal in third volume, Pg. No. 535 has
decisively stated that Mohammad bin Khalid is an unknown narrator and
the traditions related by him are not acceptable. More or less similar
thing is indicted by another great scholar Abul HasanAaburi in
'Manaqibush-Shafei'.

However the unreliability of narrators and incorrect contents of the
traditions prove that it is a spurious tradition. But despite all such
inherent weaknesses some of the Sunni scholars like Ibn Kathir and
Qurtubbi have made efforts to prove it a correct tradition by whimsical
interpretations and fragile justifications.

They have asserted that the Mahdi does not imply a particular person
but it is used in its literal sense which means 'guided'. Thus Hazrat
Isa (A.S.) is the best guided person though this meaning is not correct
in itself. Those things which are pertinent to this tradition like the
events and conditions of last era, commotion and distraught which will
be ubiquitous refute this justification were given in order to maintain
the credibility of the book i.e. Sunane-Ibn Majah because it is claimed
that all the traditions in the book are correct and authentic.

2. Ibn Asakir from the third Caliph Usman bin Affaan and he had related
from the Holy Prophet (S.A.) that :

"The Mahdi is from the progeny of my uncle Abbas",

means 'Mahdi will be from Bani Abbas. In this context Hafiz Mohibuddeen
Tabari in his 'Zak-haerul-Uqba' Pg. 206 has quoted on the authority of
Hafiz Sahmi, who quoted from Ibn Abbas who related from Holy Prophet
(S.A.) that: 'Once the Holy Prophet (S.A.) addressed him thus : "Mahdi
will be from your offspring who will disseminate guidance and quell
deviations. Allah the Almighty commenced His religion from me and will
culminate it on your progeny."

Muhibuddeen Tabari has quoted two more traditions from Abu Huraira and
from Abdus-Samad of similar contents. Besides this, Abul Faraj Isfahan!
has quoted from a courtier scholar of Bani Abbas namely Qati bin Abbas
in his book 'Al-Aghani'(Vol. 12, Pg. 81), a tradition ascribed to Holy
Prophet (S.A.) without mentioning the chain of narrators.

All these traditions are supporting the notion that Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.)
will be from the lineage of Abbas, the uncle of the Holy Prophet (S.A.).
In other terms he will be from Bani Abbas. But if a person is scantily
aware of the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S.A.) in this regard then
he can infer on his own that it is a concocted and an unscrupulously
fabricated tradition. Such few traditions are starkly contradictory to
those authentic and continuous traditions which abound the books of
traditions. Such as :

"Mahdi will descend from my lineage from the offspring of Fatema."

It was this reason that such a great Sunni scholar like Dar Qutni has
objected to the former tradition and thus commented :

"This is a weird and queer tradition related only by the slave of Bani
Hashim namely Mohammad bin Walid."

As it was hinted earlier that historically these were the product of
claimants to attract the laymen towards themselves and gain their
sympathies. As a further step they entitled Mohammad bin Abdullah bin
Ali as 'Mahdi'. They distorted the religion of Holy Prophet (S.A.) for
their greed of rule for few days in this transient world. Qazi Luqman
bin Mohammad has hinted towards such heinous vices of Bani Abbas in his
eulogy.

"The time when gems were compared to their like. Similarly Mohammad bin
Abdullah was entitled as "Mahdi'.This Mohammad bin Abdullah bin Ali
Abbasi is a wretched transgressor. If mere similarity in names was
sufficient then every man named as 'Ahmed'would have been a Prophet.
Alas! every name is not like its named ones. And ignorance made them
dumb and blind ."

This is not the only attempt to dupe and deceive the common populace
but there are numerous such instances which are cited over here. 3.
Tirmizi in his 'Sahih' has quoted from 'Zaeda', he narrated from 'Aasem'
and in turn he quoted from 'Zar', who narrated it from Abdullah bin
Masud who related from the Holy Prophet (S.A.) that :

"If a solitary day is left from the eve of doomsday then Allah will
prolong that day to such an extent that a man from my progeny will rise.
Whose name will be my name and his father's name will be my father's
name. He will fill the world with justice and equity as it would be
filled with injustice and oppression."


The contents of this tradition are continuous and reliable according to
Shia and Sunni scholars. It has been narrated in various ways. The thing
which has made this narration of Tirmizi skeptical are those words which
are not quoted in other authentic hooks. In other books the phrase of
'his father's name is the same as my father's, is not recorded they all
have recorded only 'his name will be same as mine'.

This doubt holds ground when we notice the name of 'Zaeda' in the chain
of narrators, which according to Sunni scholars of 'Rejal' is not
reliable and adds more words in the concept of traditions. Because that
chain of narrators where Zaeda's name is not there and only namesof
Aasem, Zar, Abdullah bin Masud are mentioned then addition of 'his
father's name is same as that of my father' is not seen. But all have
sufficed upto 'his name will be same as mine.

This point requires special attention that Tirmizi whose book is
enumerated among Sehah Sittah has narrated the same tradition elsewhere
but has not narrated this addition (i.e. his father's name will be my
father's name) over there . Similarly in the ranks of traditionalists
Ahmed bin Hanbal is accorded precedence over Ibn Majah. Ahmed ibn Hanbal
in his 'Musnad' has recorded the same tradition at four places but even
for once he has not mentioned this addition'. (Vol. 1, Pg. 377, 430,
448)


