Importance of Imamat and Staus of Imam (a.s)
============================================

Imamat is a matter of great merit. In fact no other issue in Islam is
more significant than the subject of Imamat. Its importance lies in the
fact that it's the only reliable means to reach to the true recognition
of Allah. It is only through Imamat that one can obtain the true
recognition of Allah and comprehend the manner of worshipping Him. If
anyone adopts some means of worshipping Allah other than the one
suggested by the Imams (a.s), he will never be successful in his
endeavor.

The following phrases of Ziarat-e-Jameah-e-Kabirah highlight this point
beautifully.

"May my parents, myself, my family and my wealth be sacrificed for you.
The one who desired to reach Allah began from you. The one who has
acknowledged His Unity has obtained Tauheed from you. The one who loves
Allah turns towards you" (Mafatihul Jinaan)

In this same Ziarat, it is mentioned elsewhere 'The one who comes to
you has received salvation and the one who forsakes you is ruined. You
invite (the people) towards Allah and point towards Him." (Mafatihul
Jinaan)

When we ponder over these phrases of Ziarat-e-Jameah, it becomes clear
that only the path shown by the Able Bait (a.s.) can lead us to true
recognition of Allah and His Tauheed and in this manner He can be
worshipped as He ought to be worshipped. And should it not be like this?
These are the personalities who invite the people towards Allah and show
the path towards Him since Allah has created man solely for His worship.
Allah says in the Quran " I have not created man and the jinn except
that they should worship Me.'
(Surah Zaariyat: 52)

If man wants to realize the aim of his creation, then he should worship
Allah. And for Allah's genuine and acceptable worship it is necessary to
tread the path shown by the Able Bait (a.s.).

In the light of the phrases of Ziarat-e-Jameah let us also cast a
glance at the phrases of Dua-e-Nudbah. .This Dua is specifically for
Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.). It is recommended to recite it on Idd-ul-Fitr,
Idd-uz-Zoha, Idd-e-Ghadeer and every Friday in which it is found
'...Where is that gate of Allah through which it is possible to reach
Him? Where is the face of Allah towards whom all other 'friends (Awliya)
of Allah turn? Where is the one who is the medium between the heavens
and the earth ?'

The Imam (a.s) of every era is the means for reaching towards Allah. It
is through the Imam alone that Allah's true recognition can be acquired
and it is through him that one can leam to worship Allah and reach Him.
In this era the 'Proof (Hujjat) of Allah and the Imam of the time is
none other than our twelfth Imam Hazrat Hujjat b. Hasan Askari
(a.t.f.s.).

Genuine recognition and Allah's worship i.e. establishing a divine link
through knowledge and actions, is facilitated through the belief in
Imamat. The belief in the Imamat of Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.) means
acknowledging the gate that helps man reach Allah's recognition. Status
of Imamat:

Allah has bestowed the illustrious status of Imamat upon our Imams
(a.s) not without any reason or wisdom. Allah Himself alludes to this
fact in the noble Quran when He declares 'So when they were patient, We
made them Imams from amongst themselves who guide the people by Our
commands.'(Surah Sajdah: 24) This brief verse highlights four crucial
points:

'We have made them as Imams.' This shows that the right of appointing
an Imam rests exclusively with Allah and with none else. This is a
matter of appointment of an Imam for the entire creation and not a
matter of appointing some 'Imam' for congregational prayers in a local
mosque. Among them:

Allah has appointed only a few from the nation for this crucial
position. This shows that each and every person is not eligible for this
rank. Allah sees the qualities and abilities and only then does He
bestow this honor. They Guide the people:

They guide the people by Our commands and orders. There are two types
of systems prevalent in the universe viz. (creation) and (order). The
system of creation is that system wherein (he things come into existence
through the normal process of "cause and effect". For instance the sperm
gradually (after passing through various stages) is converted into a
man.

Or a seed after undergoing through the normal processes finally becomes
a tree. On the other hand, in the system of 'Amr' - which is superior to
the system of creation - things don't move through the normal process.
Nor is time and space a pre-condition for the actualization of the
outcome. Here only the intention of 'Be' is sufficient. As Allah says in
the Quran: 'His command - when He intends anything -is only to say, "Be"
and it becomes.'

(Surah Yasin: 82)

This means that the mere intention of a thing is sufficient to bring
about its existence. Neither any cause or reason is essential nor are
there any restrictions of time and place. These Imams (a.s) guide by
virtue of (this) command of Allah. If they desire to guide someone then
a simple intention on their part is enough to guide that person.

Like the way Janabe Zohair b. Qain (r.a.) was guided by Imam Husain
(a.s). In a brief meeting of a just a few moments. Imam (a.s) changed
Zohair b. Qain (r.a.) completely. But in order to be included in this
form of guidance it is necessary that a person raises himself to such a
high level that he becomes eligible to derive benefits from the winds of
guidance. Idleness is from our side.

It is essential for the earth to bear such qualities that will make it
profit from the pure drops of rain and will lead to the flourishing of
flora and fauna. Today this guidance is present for us in the form of
Hazrat Wali-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.). The only precondition is that we should
derive benefit from him.

This particular phrase shows why this distinction of Imamat was granted
to them. It is truly a miracle of Quran that it had explained the
exalted status of Imamat in only two words. As if the entire sea has
been capsuled in a pair of hands. Allah - through the phrase has defined
the foundation of Imamat and through the phrase He has elucidated the
responsibility of Imamat.


**The Origin of Patience**

Patience has various levels. In logical terminology it is a 'sum total'
with different degrees and which cannot be applied universally. It is of
three kinds viz. patience near sins, patience in the face of calamities
and patience on one's desires. However, it is not our aim over here to
get into a detailed discussion on this topic.

The origin of patience lies in talking less, in controlling one's
tongue, in refraining one's self from talking nonsense or irrational
talks. It involves training oneself to talk only when it is necessary
and that too in a concise manner. This is the very first stage of
patience. There is a lot of emphasis on silence in books related to
spiritual training. Along with the tongue it is also essential to keep
one's eyes also in control. The 'Nafs' of a person employs these two
faculties in a lot of futile things.

**Perfect Patience:**

Gradually a person should prepare himself to be patient on the bounties
of this world. The heart should not be accustomed to the comforts of the
world, nor should any of its pleasures build a house in it. No form of
lust or greed should be allowed to enter the heart. We find in
Dua-e-Nudbah. 'And when You fixed the condition that they will forsake
this detestable world and its luxuries and comforts and will not attach
one's self to it, then they accepted this condition.

Then when You saw that they fulfilled this demand in totality. You
favoured them and made them Your proximate and You reserved for them the
best of remembrances and the finest of descriptions and adulation and
You descended upon them Your angels.' To remain patient on the bounties
of this world is just one of the stages. There are many more stages of
patience after this. The stage after the world is that of 'Barzakh'.

Another form of patience is to exercise complete restraint and mastery
on our thoughts. This particular stage is more arduous than being
patient upon the bounties of the world. Man can turn his face away from
the luxuries of this world. But his thoughts too should be in his
control. He should have such command and influence upon his 'Nafs' that
no thought should be able to enter his mind without his consent. It is
not a matter of few moments, hours, days and years. No doubt this is
extremely difficult.

Just try to keep yourself focused on one particular point for a few
moments - taking care that your attention is not distracted by any other
thought - you will realized the magnitude of this task. When it is
difficult to concentrate for such a small duration of time then to keep
one's mind free from distractions and diversions for the whole life is
that stage of patience which is far higher than being patient on
calamities. Here the mind falters and becomes helpless.

Imam Husain (a.s), even when surrounded by grief and calamities says
'In the name of Allah, by the strength and support of Allah and for the
sake of Allah.'

'At the time when he (a.s) was strewn with wounds and injuries and when
he fell from his horse to the ground and when he was rubbing his blood
on his face at that time too he was saying In such dangerous and
difficult times too no other thought could distract Imam Husain (a.s)
from remembering Allah.

'Allah knows best where He places His message (Surah An'aam: 124)

After this world comes the Hereafter. Nothing from the Hereafter should
attract a person. Neither the bounties of Paradise nor the chastisement
of Hell nor the stages of Mahshar. Ameerul Momineen - Imam Alt ibn Talib
(a.s) has expressed this most eloquently when he says Some people
worship Allah for the sake of rewards. This is the worship of traders.
While some worship Allah due to the fear of being punished. This is the
worship of a slave. Yet others worship Allah out of gratitude for His
bounties. This is the worship of free men.'
(Nahjul Balagha: trad. 237, vol. 2, Ansariyan Publications) One should
have so much control on one's 'Nafs' that while worshipping Allah he
should neither think about the bounties of Paradise nor about the
punishments of Hell. It is extremely difficult to reach to this stage of
patience. And this stage too demands a remarkable amount of restrain on
the 'Nafs'.


