The Ideal Worshipper
====================

Allah's worship is solely for Him. Nothing can be associated with Allah
in His worship. It means that the sole aim of our worship is to achieve
Allah's satisfaction, neither this world nor Barzakh nor the Hereafter.
It is obvious that the one who has submitted himself to Allah's love and
whose excellence lies in Allah's worship, then to him nothing else
matters. All other things are worthless in his eyes.

Everything is subservient and obedient to his wishes and orders. It is
found in Ziarat-e-Jameah wherein it is said 'Everything is lowly and
subservient to you.' Our Imam is not only for humans on this earth. He
is the Imam of the entire universe. It is because of presence of Imam
(a.s.) that rain descends on the earth, the heaven and the earth are
secure in their respective places and our difficulties are repelled.

When a person reaches to this perfect level of worship then he becomes
a symbol of divine attributes. In fact many a times those who are far
removed from reality and are not well versed with the teachings of Ahle
Bait (a.s.) start considering this emblem of divine characteristics as
Allah Himself!

This complete worshipper - by the permission of Allah - nurtures the
entire universe and provides sustenance to each and every individual and
arranges for all other necessities of life so that everyone is able to
reach to his goal of perfection. It is for this reason that it is
mentioned for Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.)

'It is due to his existence that the heavens and the earth are secure
in their place and it is due to his benevolence that everyone acquires
sustenance.'

No doubt that Allah is the One Who is the giver of life. However, He
gives it due to the benevolence of Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.), Allah is the
One who provides sustenance, but it is through the blessings of
Imam-e-Asr (a.t.f.s.). All the bounties that are available on this earth
are due to the benevolence ofHazrat Hujj at ibne Hasan Askari
(a.t.f.s.).

Now, when all the favours that we receive from Allah are through
Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) then all our worship and supplications towards
Allah will be worthy of acceptance if they are acceptable near
Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.). Keeping in mind the endless benefits that we
receive from Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) we are obliged to confess with a
sense of remorse that "0 Master of the time! It's been a long time since
we are receiving benefits through you.

We are living our lives through your grace and acquiring Allah's
bounties due to your benevolence. It is due to your venerable presence
that our body and soul are being nourished. It is only because of you
that Allah's kindness reaches us. Yet when we look at our actions and
within ourselves, it becomes apparent to us that we have still not been
able to acquire your true recognition. We have not recognized your true
value nor have we been able to fulfill your rights.

We have contributed so much to your suffering that we shudder to think
how Allah will take our account. At every step we have derived benefits
from you but have not done anything for you. We have acquired fame and
status through you but have not done anything to glorify your name. We
have received our sustenance due to your grace but have not spent
anything in your way. We have exploited you in all walks of our life for
our personal gains but have failed to endure any form of adversity for
your sake.'

'0 the Yusuf of Janabe Zahra! We - like the brothers of Hazrat Yusuf
(a.s.) - are ashamed of ourselves in front of you. We confess that we
have oppressed and wronged you. And we seek forgiveness from you for our
actions.

**Patience of Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.):**

In light of the latest scientific research, it has been firmly
established that past events are present in the atmosphere. However, our
perception is so weak that we are unable to comprehend those
occurrences. With some focused training of the soul, a person can
visualise an event in the past like Day of Ashoora and see it with his
eyes.

However, there are some episodes in the event of Karbala, which are
very heart rending. It is beyond the capacity of ordinary humans to
endure them. But the entire event of Karbala - right down to its
minutest details - is witnessed by Imam-e-Zamana's (a.t.f.s.), including
all those events that are unbearable for the average human being.
Besides this, the dress of Imam Husain (a.s) drenched in his blood is
present right in front of Imam-e-Zamana's (a.t.f.s.) eyes and fresh
blood is continuously dripping from it. This will continue till the
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.), when he (a.t.f.s.) finally avenges the
massacre of Karbala.

Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) has to witness all these calamities everyday
and then be patient upon them. He actually sees the calamities with his
eyes and is patient upon them while it is difficult for us to bear it
even by listening to them. Indeed what must be the level of Imam's
(a.t.f.s.) patience and forbearance? Apart from the tribulations of
Karbala, Imam (a.t.f.s.) also witnesses the calamities that befell
Janabe Zahra (s.a) and Ameerul Momineen (a.s.), then Imam Hasan (a.s)
and every Imam till his lather Imam Hasan Askari (a.s).

All persecution that was meted out to his friends and lovers (i.e.
Shias) are also before his eyes. He sees them, but is extremely patient
and forbearing. In spite of having the authority, he has to accept
Allah's command and remain in occultation and be patient. If someone
reflects on all this, he will comprehend the troubled and distressed
condition of Imam (a.t.f.s.).

He will also realise the significance of praying for the earliest
reappearance of Imam (a.t.f.s.), preparing the ground for his
reappearance, bringing the people closer to him (a.t.f.s.) and making
them eager and restless for his presence. These are some of our
responsibilities in the period ofoccultation.

It should not be that lapses and laziness on our part become the cause
of increase in his (a.t.f.s.) pain and suffering. Otherwise we will lose
face in front of our Imam and will be very regretful after that.

We hope that by pondering on this discussion the readers may have
comprehended the significance of the phrase" One who petience" of the
verse. Come let all of us present ourselves in front of Allah through
Imam (a.s.) and pray to Him that He should forgive our shortcomings. And
through the afflictions heaped on Janabe Zahra (s.a), let us beseech and
pray for the earliest reappearance of Yusuf-e-Zahra.


