Supplement 1
============

The renowned scholar of Ahle-Sunnah and reliable traditionalists of
fifth century HafizAbu Noaim Isfahan! has recorded the traditions
regarding Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) from very reliable sources in his book
'Manaqibul-Mahdi'. He has narrated this tradition from 31 different
channels with the exception of 'Zaeda's' narration. Not a single
tradition included the added phrase. This phrase is narrated only by
'Zaeda'. (Ref. Al-Bayan Fi-Akhbare-Sa.hibiz Zaman, at the end of first
chapter Pg. 94-96).

It is undoubtedly proved that Zaeda, as his name implies has added the
so-called phrase. But it is deplorable to note that Abu Daud has ignored
other reliable channels of narration and has opted to choose only the
narration of Zaeda. Some other scholars of Ahle-Sunnah too have
benefited from this fabricated tradition.

Albeit, the author of 'Iqdud-Durar has quoted this tradition from
Sunane-Abi-Daud but did not record this addition. On this basis it can
be concluded that the versions of Sunane-Abi- Daud must have been
tampered with (particularly after the seventh century) or correctors
must have added the phrase on their own accord while verifying.

Apart from this the acclaimed traditionalists ofAhle-Sun-nah, who have
a deep dexterity and expertise in sitting and sorting out the traditions
have objected to this tradition vociferously. Some of them are Hafiz
Ganji Shafei in 'Al-Bayan Fi-Akhbare-Sahibiz Zaman', Khwaja Mohammad
Parsa Hanafi (exp.866) in the footnotes of 'Faslul-Khitab' and Ihn Talha
Shafei in Ghayatus-Sol. They all have unanimously regarded it as weak,
unreliable, discontinuous and contradictory to correct traditions.

The reason for this tradition of Zaeda being fabricated are those
authentic and continuous traditions in which the name of Hazrat Mahdi's
(A.S.) father is mentioned as 'Hasan'. The below given tradition is
quoted as an example.

The accredited traditionalist of Ahle-Sunnah Abu Noaim Isfahan!
narrates from a veteran interpreter Ibn Khashaah wlio relates from Imam
Alt Reza (A.S.) that:

"The Mahdi is the pious son of Hasan Askari." Such traditions are also
found in 'Faraedus-Simtain' (Chap. 35, 73)

4. The Doyen ofTraditionalists of Ahle-Sunnah Abu Daud, whose book is
among the much respected 'Sehah-e-Sittah' narrates one tradition from
Abu Ishaq who quoted Hazrat Ali (A.S.) and who related that Hazrat
Mohammad (S.A.) said while looking at Imam Hasan (A.S.) :

"This son of mine is the chief - one of his descendants will bear the
name of your Prophet."

Some of the great Sunni scholars like the ideological guide and Leader
of Wahabis, Ibn Qayyim Jauzi in AI-Munar-Al-Munif, Sehudi (exp. 911),Ibn
Kathir in 'Al-Fitan wal-Malahim and Ihn Hajar in Sawaeq have quoted this
tradition profusely in their respective books and have regarded Imam
Mahdi (A.S.) from the lineage of Imam Hasan (A.S.) on the ground.sthat
since a person from his lineage will avenge this humiliation hence he
had signed the truce.

But even this tradition is fabricated and distorted as the earlier
ones. As can be seen from the following facts :

(a) Same tradition is quoted by the author of 'Iqdud-Dunir' from the
same chain of narrators from Sunane Abi Daud but instead of phrase 'he
looked towards his son Hasan\* the author has indicated 'he looked
towards his son Husain'. Perhaps the scribe must have written 'Hasan'
instead of 'Husain'. Those who are experienced in this field will
realise that this possibility does exist.

(b) There are innumerable traditions which have continuously stated
that Imam Mahdi (A.S.) will be the descendant of Imam Husain(A.S.).
Hence according to the science of traditions if one lone tradition is
contradictory to numerous continuous (Mutawatir) traditions then this
tradition will not be taken into consideration. Ibn Hajar has related
from Hazrat Ali (A.S.) in his book 'As-Sawaequl-Muharreqa' on Pg. No.
165 that :

"The world will not perish unless a man, from the progeny of my son
Husain, will not rise who will fill the earth with justice as it was
fraught with injustice."

Muhibuddeen-e-Tahari in 'Zakhaerul-Uqha'on Pg. 136 has narratedfrom
Huzaifa Yamani who related from the Holy Prophet (S.A.) that:

"If a single day remains from the age of this world then Almighty will
prolong that day to such an extent that one of my sons will appear,
whose name will be as mine." Hazrat Salman inquired : "From the progeny
of which son"? The Holy Prophet (S.A.) placed his hand on Imam Husain
(A.S.) and said :

"From the progeny of this son."

(c) If despite these two narrations we accept the tradition of Abu Daud
even then the point is not against us. Because Imam Baqir (A.S.) is the
first grandson of Imam Husain (A.S.) and the second grandson of Imam
Hasan (A.S.). His mother was Fatema, the daughter of Imam Hasan (A.S.).
Hence Imam Mahdi (A.S.) is the son of Imam Hasan (A.S.) as well as Imam
Husain (A.S.). Hilali relates that once the Holy Prophet (S.A.) consoled
his daughter Hazrat Fatema (S.A.) in these words :

The two sons of this nation are your sons Hasan and Husain, who descend
from me. They are the chiefs of the youth of Paradise. By Allah, their
parents are superior to them. 0 'Fatema ! by Allah the Mahdi of this
nation will be the descendant of both of them."

(d) Keeping these facts in mind that it is a lone tradition which is
contradictory to other several continuous traditions, also there may he
a possibility of error in script. This becomes crystal clear that it is
not an authentic tradition particularly when the historical facts are
contrary to the tradition. The reason is that those who are attributed
as Mahdi, among them is the grandson ofImam Hasan (A.S.), Moham-mad bin
Abdullah known as 'Nafse-Zakiyya.

Bani Abhas's campaign attributed him to be Mahdi so as to earn the
sympathy of masses and take undue advantage of this belief which is
deep-rooted in their hearts and thus topple the reign of Bani Umayya.
They publicized and promoted his name and first thing they did was that
they added 'his father's name is same as that of my father (as it was
hinted in the discussion on third tradition), since the name of this
'Mahdi's' father was Abdullah. Then for dispelling further doubts they
falsely claimed that Mahdi is (lie descendant of Imam Hasan (A.S.),
because Moham-mad bin Abdullah descended from the lineage of Imam Hasan
(A.S.).

Then for consolidating their position they fabricated another tradition
from the mouth of Abu Huraira that there was a stammering in the speech
of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) (Ref. Maqatilut-Talebin) because Mohammad bin
Ahdullah had stammering in his tongue. Finally Bani Abbas succeeded in
grabbing power, by deriving undue advantage from this belief and
intimidating their masses. When they got absolute control then they
killed the same Mahdi and his father and again spread the news that
Nafse-Zakiyyah who would be killed before the Mahdi is slained and the
reappearance of Mahdi has drawn nigh.

Imam Jafar Sadiq (A.S.) had predicted about each and every event long
back. (Maqatilut-Talebeen, Pg. 141-142, Al-Adabus-Sul-taniyyah Fakhri
Pg. 16 has mentioned everything in detail.)The embezzlement and meddling
of Bani Abbas are not limited to politics or ethics. But they have not
even spared the interpretations of Quranic verses and traditions. The
details of which shall be given later in another article.

But those who commit such despicable embezzlement, distort the religion
of Allah, make additions in the tradition of Holy Prophet (S.A.) or
ascribe false things to him and record such baseless things in their
books, which misguide the simpletons and ordinary believers; are they
not among those who are condemned in this verse :

"Surely those who conceal such clear evidences and guidance which we
have revealed and clarified in the book for the people, they are cursed
by Allah and the curse of cursors be upon them."

All the hopes are reposed in the day when Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) will
reappear and reform the distortions and misguided men.


