The Belief in Mahdaviyat and Sunni Scholars
===========================================

In the present times, the worldwide condition of Islam is such that,
despite of its being divine and veracious (truthful) religion, it is
despised by many upto the extent of enmity. The reason being false
propaganda and baseless misconceptions. Same is the conditions of belief
in 'Mahdaviyat' in Islamic world. And inspite of it being one of the
cardinal beliefs, majority of Muslims consider it as fictitious and
fabricated one.

There is a group among them who either willingly or unwillingly accept
this belief due to chain of narrations. But they reject those traditions
which is related with the attributes and personality of Hazrat Mahdi
(A.S.).

Whatsoever misunderstandings regarding the belief in 'Mahdaviyat are
there, two groups of scholars are responsible for that. Firstly, if we
cast a cursory glance on the history of Muslim rulers and their times we
will see there were always be a group of people, who apparently by their
attires and traits were scholars but in reality their beliefs and
ideologies were that of an ignorant man, their behavior were
sufficiently convincing of their sycophancy.

They were those who at times in order to conceal falsehood and at other
times to prove the government as a divine government committed every
vicious and villainous deed. Let us call them as "Imitative Scholars",
(Since they always imitated the shadow of falsehood). These scholars
went on a spree to propagate against the belief in Mahdaviyat in several
ways.

Sometimes the traditions related to Mahdaviyat were regarded weak.
Sometimes, they added such a phrase to be relevant and suited the
Imposter Mahdi' and in this way, they shatter the very foundation of
this belief. And following in the foot-steps of the same scholars, some
recent scholars have rejected the fundamentals of this belief and
considered it an absolutely un-Islamic belief, fabricated by Shias.

"The second group of those who reject this belief are those whose
thinking have been influenced by materialistic outlook and they breath
in the environment of materialism. Thus materialism had penetrated even
into their beliefs. Consequently, either they reject transcendental and
hidden aspects from their base, or they try to mould them into
materialistic frame-work. Leave aside the aspect of Mahdaviyat,

they have not even spared the belief in Revelation, Prophethood and
above all : Monotheism.........................The only reason being
that after accepting the materialistic ideas, it is impossible to
believe in transcendental ideas. Since the belief in Mahdaviyat is also
a belief in hidden concept and more over to believe that Hazrat Mahdi
(a.s.) is a mortal like us and though he passes his life amongst us, he
is far from our vision. Hence this belief for materialists is like
adding insult to injury. Thus to relieve themselves from this belief
they reject this idea outrightly and refuse to accept the existence of
Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.). Subsequently, the refusal of first group increases
the haughtiness of the second group.

There are innumerable replies to the doubts and baseless notions of
both the aforementioned groups. And these doubts themselves are
self-contradictory and inherently weak. But it is not possible for us to
quote those replies over here. Interested readers may refer to the books
compiled redundantly to refute the ideas of skeptics and disbeliever,
only through those parameters which are accepted by consensus of Muslims
Viz. 'Quran and Traditions.........And in this regard, we will also
furnish proofs from some very reliable and trustworthy Ouranic
exponents.............and traditionalists......... of 'Ahle-Sunnat from
their very authentic books. And for the understanding of a layman we
will also produce some historical evidences from history and view points
of ancient Sunni scholars. So that the truth becomes manifest and
explicit and righteous may be notified from them.

I) The Interpreters of Quran : have mentioned countless ayats regarding
Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) from Quran. And moreover many books have been
complied by the name of "MAHDI IN QURAN". But over here we will confine
our discussion to those ayats which, interpreters have related it to
Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) by some source or reference.

1) Imam Abu Ishaq Thalabi who is a renown exponent of Quran writes in
his exegeses in "The ayat of Quran.........Means.

indicates means the war between Quraish and Almawali in which Quraish
will emerge victorious.........relates to......which means the Rulers of
Bai Abbas and ....... is letter to Hazrat Mahdi which means!
.......chapter...7 related from Naeem Ibne Hammad)

2) Imam Abu Ishaq Thalabi writes in the ... of 9th ayat of Surah-kahf
which is particular to Ashabe Kahf that Holy Prophet (as) said that :
Mahdi (a.s.) will say Salam to Ashabe-Kahf and Ashabe-Kahf will reply to
it and by the order of God will again revert to their condition, and
will not rise before Quiyamat (2-Iqdud-Dorar-chapter 7).

3) Muqatil Ibn Sulaiman and his followers regarding the
ayat......opined that it is concerning the re-appearance of Hazrat Mahdi
(a.s.).....Over here refers to.....(i.e. the hour of re-appearance) of
H. Mahdi (a.s.)

4) The author of Nurul-Absaar, Shablanji writes in his book on page no.
188. In the book so tafsir the details of ayat ....... (Surah Zukhruf
Ayat) is mentioned as it is pertaining to H. Mahdi (a.s.) who is in the
offspring of Janabe-Fatema (a.s.). Reference : As-Sawaaequl Mohreqapage.
96, Is aafur-Raghebin page. 156, Surah Zukhruf ayat-61).

5) Allama Shahabuddin who is popularly known as Malakul-Ulama
Shamsuddin Ibn Umar Al-Hindi, who had compiled a tafsir by the name of
'Al-Bahrul Mawaj' writes in his tafsir on the authority of Jabir Ibn
Abdullah Ansari, he quotes a tradition that : Jabir went to meet
Janabe-Zahra (a.s.). He saw she is having tablets over which names of
Imams were inscribed. who were from the progeny on H.Fatema
(a.s.).........Then name of Zainul-Abedin who is the son of Hussain, who
is father of nine Imams, then next Imam Mohammad Baqir (a.s.) and upto
the ninth Imam Mohammad (after Hussain) who is Al-Hujjatullah Al-Qaem
Imam Mahdi (a.s.) He will disappear, will have long life. Like among
believers, Hazrat Isa, Hazrat Ilyas and H.Khizr were having longlife and
among disbelievers. 'Dajjal' and Saamri' were having long-lives.

II Traditionalists.

1) Ahmed Ibn Hanbal in his 'Musnad' and Tirmizi, Abu Dawood and Ibn
Maajah in their 'Sehah' record one tradition verbation
as.......Translation. "Even if a single day will remain in the tenure of
this world, then Allah will raise a man from my progeny who fill this
earth with justice as it will be replete with injustice and oppression".
(Is aafur-Raghebin, Nurul-Absar--134, Al-Bayan fi Akhbare - Sahibuz -
zaman - 85).

2. Similarly, another oft-repeated tradition has been quoted profusely,
the contents of which are. "In the last days a man will appear from my
progeny, whose name will be same as as mine and his epithet will be
similar to mine. He will fill this earth with equity and justice as it
will be fraught with injustice and oppression". (Tazkertul-Khaowas, Sibt
Ibn Jauzi-204)

3) Abu Saeed Khudri says that : 'I heard Prophet of Allah saying that :
"After me there will be twelve Imams, among them ninth after Hussain
will be "Mahdi." (Nurul-Absar-Shablanji page 255).

4) Holy Prophet (s) said : "Mahdi is from my progeny from the offspring
of H.Fatema Zahra (S.A.) " (Sunan Abi Dawood-Kitabul-Mahdi, Vol-4-page.
151) 5) Holy Prophet (s) said : "Whosoever denies the uprising of Hazrat
Mahdi (a.s.) had denied each and everything revealed upon me and as a
result

becomes infidel". (Faraedus-Simtain-Hamuiy).

The aforementioned traditions are authentic and explicitly regarding
Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.) who will rise in the last days, who is from the
progeny of Imam Hussain (a.s.) and H.Fatema (s.a.). Particularly, the
last traditions shows the importance of this belief viz. 'the
disbelievers in this (H.Mahdi) is like disbeliever in Quran and is an
infidel. Although, this much is sufficient for.........i.e. men of
understanding, but we for the sake of utmost satisfaction delve into the
view points of Scholars.

**III Scholars:**

1) Sayed Ahmed Zaini Dahlan, the Mufti of Makka Opines on the
traditions pertaining to 'Mahdi' (a.s.) that : "Such traditions are
Mutawatir' (too profusely repeated), among them some are 'Sahih'
(Correct), some are 'Hasan. (approved Good) and some are 'Zaif
(weak)".

It is crystal clear from the statement of Mufti of Makka, that though
some traditions are "weak" but still they are Mutawatir (i.e. profusely
quoted). And it is well-known to the learned-men, especially those who
are expert in).....Ilme - Rejaal ' (study of narrators of traditions)
that if any traditions attains the merit of "Tawatur' (continuously &
profusely repeated) then some weak traditions cannot effect its
authenticity and we have pointed towards this fact in our various
editions sufficiently.

2- In Al-Lumaat, Shaikh Abdul Haq wrote: "The traditions regarding the
existence of Hazrat .Mahdi are abundant, from which is is clear that
Mahdi (a.s.) will be from the progeny of Fatema Zahra (s.a.) (Footnote
of Sahih Tirmizi vol. 2 page 46.)

3- Allama and Faqihatul-Harmain, Abu Abdullah Mohammad Yusuf
Al-Quraishi, Al-Ganji-Shafei has devoted one entire chapter to this
subject, which is fifteenth chapter of his book, the subject is "The
proof for life, existence, seclusion and remaining alive of Mahdi uptil
now" and in this chapter he has propounded some in controvertible proofs
in support of his claim. (Al-Bayan - fi Akhbare - Sahibuzzaman - page,
102)

4- Aalimul - Allama - Shamsuddin Yusuf Al-Hanafi - Sibt ibn Jauzi .....
that Mahdi (a.s.) is Mohammad bin Hasan ..... bin Abi Talib (a.s.), his
epithet is Abu abdullah, Abul - Qasim, he is Khalaful Hujjat,
Sahebuzzaman, Qaem-al-Muntazar and last Imam (a.s.)

5- Qazi Behlul Behjat writer. "The birth of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) occurred
on 15th Shabaan 255 A.H., his mother was Narjis Khatun, his father
expired, when he was only 5 years old". He continues..... 'he had two
occultations firstly Ghaibate-Sughra (Minor Occultation) and he will
remain alive until Allah permits him to re-appear and fill with tyranny
and oppression." (Tarikhe-Aale Mohammad-page, 270.).

6- Shahabuddin Ibn Hajar Al-Hanafi states that "Mahdi's age at the time
of his father's demise was 5 years. He was bestowed with wisdom and
erudition. He is known by the name of Al-Qaem - Al-Muntazar."
(As-Sawaequl-Mohreqa page, 124)

Apart from these scholars many other jurists have also given their
verdicts in favour of existence of Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.), some of them are
as below :-

1) Abu Suroor Ahmed bin Ziyaa Al - Hanfi

2) Mohammad bin Mohammad Al-Maleki

3) Yahya bin Mohammad bin Al-Hanbali

Let us now analyse the viewpoints of ancient and reliable historians
regarding Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.) in the historical perspective. So that his
existence may be proved from all the angles and viewpoints.

**IV. Historians**

1- Qazi Ahmed Ibn Khallakaan writes : "Abul Qasim Mohammad bin Hasan
Askari ..... who according to the creed of Imamiyat is twelfth Imam, and
is known by the name of Al-Hujjah." And Ibne Arzaq in his history
(Mayafareqin) has also recorded the date of birth of Hazrat Mahdi
(a.s.). (Wafayatul-Aajen-vol.3 page, 316.)

2- Abu Mohammad Abdullah bin Mohammad bin Al-Khashaab indites in his
book of history; Mawalidul Aaimma wafyatuhum.' "He is the bearer of two
names, 'Al-Khalaf and Mohammad' and he will reappear in the last days of
era. A part of the cloud will always shadow him on his head. Wherever he
may go this cloud will also accompany him while shadowing over-head. And
a very eloquent voice will be heard from grand heavens ..... that, this
is Mahdi". (Al-Majalisus saniyyah vol. 5 page, 586.)

3- Historian Abdul Malik Usaami Makki while writing about H. Mahdi
(a.s.) states that "Mohammad Mahdi (a.s.) son of Hasan Askari (a.s.) son
of Ali Taqi (a.s.) son of.....son of Ali bin Abi Talib (May Allah be
pleased with all of them). His birth took place of Friday on 15th
Shabaan, 255 A.H. And this is most accurate year of birth. His mother's
name was Susan or 'Narjis'.

His epithet is Abul Qasim and his agnomen are Al-Hujjah, Al-Khalafe -
Saleh Al-Qaem - Al-Muntazar, Sahebuz-zaman and 'Mahdi' And among these
'Mahdi' is the most famous title". He writes further while explaining
the matter in detail regarding his personality. ....broad and sturdy
shoulders, with handsome and pleasing face, beautiful hairs and broad
forehead. His father expired when he was only five year old."
(Samatun-Nujum-il-awaali- vol.4 page, 138).

4- Shaikh Akbar Mohyiddin Ibn Arabi in his 'Futuhaat' writes about the
uprising of Mahdi (a.s.) that "He will not reappear unless the world is
filled with injustice and oppression to such an extent that a single day
is left in the tenure of this world. He will be from the offspring of
the Prophet(s) and progeny of Fatema (s.a.) His forefather is Imam
Hussain (a.s.) and his father is Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) ".

From all the proofs mentioned above it is proved that the Belief in
Mahdaviyat' is one of the branches of the tree of Islamic creed. Last
Prophet Hazrat Mohammad Mustafa (s.a.w.) has explained quite many
traditions in this regard, from which it is proved that Hazrat Mahdi
(a.s.) is from the progeny of Fatema, son of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)
and twelfth Imam, finally Prophet(s) has also mentioned about his two
occultations.

And Keeping the importance of belief in view, it is also explained that
denying the belief is tantamount to accept infidelity. (Kufr.)
Especially those traditions of Prophet(s) which expound the concept of
occultations and longevity is for the attention of those scholars whose
ideology is influenced and affected by materialism and hence they have
rejected this belief outrightly.


