H.mahdi A.s. As Portrayed in Hadith-e-qudsi
===========================================

Hadith-e-Qudsi are those concepts and ideas, which are although
revealed to the prophets in the same manner as revelations are made but
same are expressed in the words and phrases of the prophets and not of
Allah. There is a difference between Hadith-e-Qudsi, Quranic verses and
the traditions of Masumeen (A.S.). Often Hadith-e-Qudsi was revealed
with different messages for different concepts.

In this brief disquisition, we would like to ascertain about the
various dimensions of the personality of Hazrat Mahdi (A. S.) but only
in the light of Hadith-e-Qudsi ;-

In the luminiscent sky of Imamat the position of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is
like a sparkling star. Allah, the Almighty has also remembered Hazrat
Mahdi (A.S.) with the same agnomen. As said in Hadith-e-Qudsi "Amongst
them Al-Qaem is like a sparkling star" (Kamaluddm, pg. 252).

As the Holy Quran has also confirmed that:-

"THAT BEACON WAS AS IF A SPARKLING STAR"

The position of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) could also be understood by the
fact that Allah, the Exalted, loves him and holds him dear who endears
him. He has made the love of Imam (A.S.) obligatory upon the people. As
it can be found in Hadith-e-Qudsi that:

"0 Mohammad! Love him (Mahdi) because I love him and whosoever-loves
him, I love him too. Same love is mentioned in the Holy Quran in these
words :-

"SOON ALLAH SHALL BRING FORTH A PEOPLE- WHO ARE LOVED BY ALLAH AND THEY
ARE LOVED BY HIM."

In this ayat Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) and his companions are referred as ' a
people'. Though the whole world may perish but certainly one day Allah
will bring forth such people l) Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is the true friend
of Allah, veritable representative and a guided proof on His creatures
:-

"He would be My true friend and a veritable guided (representative) on
My creatures."

2) There are some sentences in Hadith-e-Qudsi which point out at the
pedigree of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.). For instance, when Hazrat Musa (A.S.)
inquired about the chain of guidance after him, then he was replied
as:

"0 Musa! Verily he (Mahdi) would be from the lineage of Ahmed (the Holy
Prophet (S.A.) ) and his off springs."

(Behar, Vol. 36, pg. 370)

The occultation of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is mentioned in Hadith-e-Qudsi
in these words :- "He will undergo a prolonged occultation."

As it is known to all of us that Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is in occultation
since last one thousand one hundred and fifty three years, which is a
very long period.

3) The Divine Promise would be fulfilled through Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.).
It includes many important aspects of the aims of creation encompassed
by the affairs of guidance. The series of guidance for men is continued
through various modes and means. The messages of God were conveyed to
man through various sources.

There was only one aim behind it that man may be guided so that he may
achieve success and prosperity in this world and hereafter. Some of
these aims were achieved by the earlier guides but it will culminate
with the reappearance of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) because the series of
guidance could attain perfection only through the station of Imamat.

Whatever promises are made by Allah shall be fulfilled after the
reappearance of Imam-e-Zaman (A.S.), e.g. 'the earth will be cleansed
from all the evil powers', the establishment of a Divine Order, revival
of defunct nations, discovering the hidden treasure troves,
dissemination of Divine Knowledge's, nullifying the effects of all the
cultures, the halal things will be declared permitted and the haram
things will be made haram, the Almighty will aid and assist His religion
and wreak vengeance on all the Satanic powers, finally the Divine
Kingdom will be established.

In the times of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.), only Allah will be worshipped and
none else.

"And whoever is Qaem from amongst you, I will inhabitate My earth
through him. Through him only, i will eliminate My enemies from the
earth. My friends will be made his successors. "
(Amali-Saduq, pg. 505)

4) The condition of society after the reappearance:

One thing is very clear that all religious commands will be followed up
during the rule of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.). Apart from this there are also
some other special characteristics of his rule which are mentioned in
Hadith-e-Qudsi. Like in his rule, the whole universe will eulogize and
extol him and each and everything will be engaged in praise and
approbation. Only pious, upright and virtuous men will live on earth.
The Divine destiny will be manifested and angels will support him.

The kingdom and ruler ship will be only of Imam Zaman (A.S.) and the
truthful men will they enjoy position, no wrong or injustice will be
done to them nor will they be encumbered. The earth will be replete with
the bounties of Allah. The flag of justice and equity will flutter on
the whole world, whose fruition would be seen in his rule.

" The treasure troves and wealth mines will be discovered by My orders.
He is the proof (of God) who will fill this earth with justice and
equity." (Ja waharus Saniya by Shaikh Hurre Ameli, pg. 2 79.)

These were some of the facts which were mentioned in Hadith-e-Qudsi
about the excellence of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) and it should be remembered
that these are the sayings of Allah, which again prove the excellence
and meritorious position of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.). This goes a long way in
enhancing our recognition of Imam (A.S.).

"0 Allah! Hasten his reappearance."


