Imam Mahdi (a.s.) in Sehah-e-sitah
==================================

The belief in Imam Mahdi (A.S.) has been a topic of debate since the
very inception of Islam. Most of the Islamic scholars are so deeply
drowned in the pit of prejudice that they deny the existence of Imam
Mahdi (A.S.) in its entirety. They assert that it is an idea fabricated
by the Shias which has no origin either in Quran or in Prophetic
traditions and is an unfounded belief.

As far as Quran is concerned, time and again in several articles of
Yamahdi.com we have proved the point. God-willing in this article we
shall try to prove the holy existence of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) from the
Prophetic traditions.

We shall also try to establish that not only this belief is not
concocted by Shi'te zealots but it is such a foundation of Islam which
cannot be rejected. The Holy Prophet (S.A.) and his companions were
awaiting such a 'Reformer' who will establish justice and equity in the
world and thus fulfill the Divine Promise of "so that it (Islam) may
prevail upon all the religions" (Quran).

**Why Sehah-e-Sittah?**

Often it happens that when Shia Scholars bring some proofs, then
immediately the Sunni learned men retort by, "If you prove it from
Sehah-e-Sittah we will believe. We believe only in the references of
Sehah-e-Sittah and nothing else." How far their reply is correct or
incorrect is beyond the limits of this article.

But it will not be out of place to mention that umpteen Sunni beliefs
are not to be found in Sehah-e- Sittah. For instance the belief in
'Ashrae Mubashshirah', these are those ten 'fortunate' companions of the
Holy Prophet (S.A.) who were promised paradise in their lifetime. But,
this belief Of Ahle-Sunnat is not to be found in any of the Sehah.
Nevertheless in order to exhaust the arguments, we will confine our
references and citations from Sehah Sittah alone.


**Imam Mahdi (A.S.) is from the Holy Ahlebait (A.S.)**

1- Hafiz Abu Abdullah Mohammad bin Yazid Al Qazvini narrates in his
'Sunane-Ihn Majah' that Hazrat Ali (A.S.) related from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.) that :

"The Mahdi is from us Ahlebait, Allah shall organize his affairs within
one night." (Sunane-lbn Majah, Kitabul Fitan, Tradition No. 4085).
Bukhari has quoted the same tradition ditto in his 'Tarikh' but only
Allah knows who advised him against quoting the tradition in his
'Sahih'.

2- Saeed bin Musayyab relates that once we were sitting in the company
ofUmme Salmah (R.A.) when we mentioned about Mahdi, she replied that I
have heard the Holy Prophet (S.A.) saying : "The Mahdi is from the
offspring of Fatema."

3- Anas bin Malik related from the Holy Prophet (S.A.) that "We, the
progeny of Abdul Muttalib viz. I, Hamza, Ali, Jafar, Hasan, Husain and
Mahdi are the chiefs of inhabitants of Paradise." 4- Abu Isa Mohammad
bin Sauda narrates in his Sahihe-Tirmizi, that the Holy Prophet (S.A.)
said :

"The world will not perish unless a man from my progeny will not rule
on the land of Arabs-." (Sahihe-Tirmizi, Kitabul Fitan, Chapter of The
Reports on Mahdi', Tradition No. 2230.)

Abu Isa opined that the tradition is also quoted from Ali (A.S.), Abu
Saeed Umme Salma and Abu Huraira. This is a correct and authentic
tradition. Apart from this, classifying a separate chapter in his Sahih
about Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) itself speaks volumes about the importance of
the subject. There are numerous such traditions from the Holy Prophecy
(S.A.) which proclaim that the Mahdi will be only from Ahlebait (A.S.)
and none else. Two conclusions can be derived from such traditions.

Firstly, Haznit Mahdi (A.S.) is not an ordinary person. He is such an
extraordinary and sublime person of whom the Holy Prophet (S.A.) is
proud. He (S.A.) heaves a breathe of pride when he announces that Hazrat
Mahdi (A.S.) is from his own progeny. Secondly, these traditions exposed
and unmasked all those importers and pseudo-Mahdi is who were neither
related to the Holy Prophet (S.A.) nor were in any way linked to his
Ahlebait (A.S.).


