The Reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) Is Inevitable
===================================================

Some persons reject the existence and the reappearance of Imam-e- Zaman
(A.S.) because of his concealed birth, occultation and longevity. Today
when the majority of the Islamic sects are scoffing at us because we are
convinced of the existence of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) then it should not be in
the least surprising because the believers were always made the target
of mockery. (For details refer to Holy Quran).

The Holy Prophet (S.A.) had spoken a lot about Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) and
declared emphatically that Qiyamat will never occur unless Hazrat Mahdi
(A.S.) does not arrive. Thus it has been quoted from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.) that:

"If a single day remains from the age of this world then Allah will
prolong that day to such an extent that, He will raise a man from my
progeny on that particular day-." (Sunane-Abi Daud, Kitabul Mahdi,
Tradition No. 4282)

There are numerous such traditions in the books of 'Sehah-e-Sittah'.
Often a question arises that why always a similarity is struck between
the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) and the occurrence of Qiyamat ?

The reason is that Qiyamat is one of the promises of Allah, the
Almighty, Who always fulfills His promises. Similarly, Hazrat Mahdi
(A.S.) is also one of the promises of Allah. Hence occasionally, he is
also referred as 'Mahdi-e-Mauood' (The Promised Mahdi) whose advent is
mentioned in the Holy Quran in the following words:

"O Prophet say) Then await certainly I am awaiting too." (Araf:81)

Hence if Qiyamat is an irrefutable reality then the advent of Mahdi too
is an incontrovertible fact.

Secondly the belief in Mahdaviyat is one of the fundamentals of Islam
and as much a basic principle as Qiyamat is. This purports that the
denial of the belief in Mahdaviyat is like the abnegation of a basic
fundamental of Islam, and denial of any of the fundamentals of Islam is
infidelity. All the same, Khwaja Kalan Qunduzi Hanafi narrates a
tradition from the Holy Prophet that :

"The one who denied the reappearance of Mahdi (A.S.) then it is as if
he has disbelieved in all that which was revealed upon the (Prophet)
Mohammad (S.A.)."

Is there any further proof required? The conclusion which is derived
after keen perusal of logical and traditional reasoning is that any one
who denies the existence or the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) will
be an infidel and not a Muslim. Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) And Justice:

Whenever the Holy Quran has mentioned about the aims of Prophets then
it has mentioned about the establishment of justice as a chief objective
of their mission. As it is said in the Holy Quran that:

"So that man may deal with justice."

In Sehah Sittah whenever Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is mentioned, then along
with it, his attributes also have been described. One of these
descriptions is that when he will come, he will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and inequity.

For instance "He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it
would be rife with tyranny and oppression". (Sunane-Abi Daud, Tradition
Nos. 2283, 4282) It can be inferred from these traditions that the
purpose of the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) is the dissemination of
justice. Secondly, when he will arrive then injustice and oppression
would be rampant in the world.

The oppressors would be obeyed and the disbelievers would be disgraced.
There will he only one person who will turn the tide whose name will be
on the name of Holy Prophet (S.A.) and his epithet will be same as that
of the Prophet (S.A.). It will be the era of the fulfillment of Divine
promises such as :

"... The last era is for the pious men" (Araf:127) and "... So that if
(Islam) may prevail upon all religions though the polytheists may
resent." (Tauba : 33) and people will realize the truth of the following
verse :

"Say ('0 Prophet) truth has come and falsehood vanished, Surely
falsehood was bound to vanish." (Bani Israil; 80) An Emphatic Command
For The Believers:

The revolution of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) will not be an ordinary one. It
will bring a sea change in the cosmic order in its wake. It is evident
that for bringing about such an unparallel revolution Hazrat Mahdi (A.S
) will need a legion of companions who are determined and can endure all
sorts of untold calamities in their way. Perhaps for this reason the
Holy Prophet (S.A.) had laid emphasis on the believers to aid and assist
Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) when he reappears. He (S.A.) put the same in the
following words:-

"So if you will see him then pledge allegiance to him even if you have
to crawl on an iceberg because he is the Caliph of Allah, the Mahdi."
(Sunane-lbne-Majah, Tradition No. 4084)

It can be inferred from this tradition that it has been stressed to
assist Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) in all conditions, either in comfort or
calamity. Alas ! the Muslims slaughtered the one whom the Holy Prophet
(S.A.) regarded as his son in Karbala and denied the existence of one in
whom he reposed all his hopes and expectations. Only Allah knows how
this community will face Him and His Prophet (S.A.) on the day of
Qiyamat.

Anyhow, all the topics discussed over here are extracted from
Sehah-e-Sittah which are unchallengeable and undeniable. For, a majority
of Sunni scholars agree that whoever dared to reject or question
Sehah-e-Sittah has intact repudiated the Holy Prophet (S.A.) and has
consequently disbelieved in Islam. Also it can be noticed that those
compilers of Sahih who have not narrated the traditions regarding Hazrat
Mahdi (A.S.) in their books have quoted the same in their other books.

If any of the Sehah does not contain a proper and adequate narration
about him then it does not cast any serious impact on the veracity of
the beliefs in Imam Mahdi (A.S.), because in other Sehah it has been
related redundantly. Here it was mentioned only to apprise others that
even Sehah-e-Sittah is not devoid of the traditions regarding Hazrat
Mahdi (A.S.). This much should suffice to those who are skeptical of the
veritahility of this pristine belief.


