Imam Mahdi A.s. in the View of Wahabis
======================================

After propounding Oura'nic and traditional arguments there remains no
doubt amongst any Muslim, irrespective of his being Sunni, Shia, Wahabi
or Non-Wahabi, regarding the belief in Imam Mahdi (A.S.) and it is
proved beyond doubt that it is a genuine Islamic belief. But since the
Wahabi sect is having a very narrow-minded belief about some of the
concepts of Islam hence from its very inception, it has been a butt of
rebuke from the Muslim scholars. In this brief article we will analyze
the viewpoint of Wahabis regarding Imam Mahdi (A.S.).

Intact the following proofs will clarify that like other Muslim
scholars even Wahabi Scholars believe in Mahdaviyat and they regard this
belief as the culmination of the Islamic creed.

1- The Wahabi sect is an offshoot of the Ahle-Sunnah and like other
Muslims, believe in Qur'an and traditions. They also have faith in the
traditions of Sehah-e-Sittah and other authentic books. Since the
traditions pertaining to Imam Mahdi (A.S.) are quoted from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.) and are found in abundance in the books of traditions,
hence they do believe in Imam Mahdi (A.S.).

2- Ibn Taimiyyah (exp. 728 A.H.) was a Hanbali scholar of 7th- 8th
century who is also known as the ideological leader of Wahabis. In his
book 'Minhaajus-Sunnah' (which was a vehement assault on Shias), he
considers the traditions regarding Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) as authentic and
says about him in the following words :

"Those traditions by which the advent of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) is
expostulated are correct which are recorded by Abu Dawood, Tirmidhi,
Ahmed Hanbal, and other traditionalists. For instance, the tradition of
the Holy Prophet (S.A.) related by Ibn Mas'ud that:

"Even if a single day will remain from the eve of doomsday, Allah the
Almighty will prolong that day to such an extent till He raises a man
from my Ahle Bait (A.S.)."

3- Shamsuddin Mohammad bin Abi Bakr, popularly known as Ibn
Qayyum-e-Jauzi (exp. 751 A.H.), a noted celebrity of the Hanbali sect
and an ardent follower and preacher of Ibn Taimiyah's ideas, has
compiled an entire book on the topic of Imam Mahdi (A.S.). He has
adorned his book with the title of 'Al-Mahdi'.

The same scholar has written another book by the name of 'Al- Munaar Al
Munif Fis-Sahih Waz Zaeef which is infact an explanation of Ibn Jauzi's
book 'Al-Mauzoo'aat'. In this book in the 15th Chapter from Pg. 326 to
344, he has quoted some traditions regarding Imam Mahdi (A.S.) along
with the discussion on the authenticity of the traditions. He has
concluded that traditions pertaining to Imam Mahdi (A.S.) are genuine
and a part of the Islamic tradition.

In the same book, he has written, while quoting from the book of 'Abdul
Husain Aberi ' that: "The traditions regarding Imam Mahdi (A.S.) are
plenty (Mutawatir) and abundantly prove that he will be from the
progenyofthe Holy Prophet (S.A.) ."

4- Allama Mohammad bin Ali Shaukani (exp. 1250 A.H.) was formerly a
Zaidi who later on converted to Wahabism to become its prolific preacher
in Yemen. He was such a staunch believer in Mahdaviyat that he wrote one
whole book on the subject by the name of 'Al-Tauzeeh Fi Tawatir Ma Ja'aa
Fil-Mahdi wal-Dajjal wal Maseeh This book has been a major source of
reference of most scholars. The following sentence from this book
deserves attention :"Those traditions which are narrated regarding
Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) are plenty. It is sufficient for him who possesses
little faith and justice."

5- Shaikh Abdul Mohsin bin Ahmad Abbad, an erudite professor of the
Wahabi university of Medina, has written a book by the name of 'Aqidato
Ahle-Sunnat wal-Asar Fil Mahdi Al-Muntazar' in which he has debated that
the belief in Mahdaviyat is not confined only to Shias but is a pure
Islamic belief. The traditions regarding Mahdaviyat are continuous and
believing in Hazrat Imam Mahdi (A.S.) is essential.

Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is from the progeny of Fatema Zahra (S.A.) and will
reappear in the last era of the world. Moreover, he has enlisted the
names of one twenty six companions who have quoted the traditions
regarding Imam Mahdi (A.S.), thirty eight names of celebrated scholars
and traditionalists who have related the traditions, of which four are
compiler of the Sehahs. Then he has mentioned the names often great
Sunni scholars who have written books on this subject.

Shaikh Abbad has written another book as a refutation to the book of
his contemporary scholar from Kuwait whose name was Shaikh Abdullah bin
Zaid who made some very strident objections on the belief. This book is
called :" Ar-Raddo Ala Man Kazeba bil Ahadith As Sahiha fil Mahdi." In
this article, first the vitriol objections of the Kuwaiti writer are
quoted verbatim then he has them and later and later given fittings
replies. Keeping these facts in mind, is there any Muslim who can doubt
the veracity of this belief ? Is it possible that someone claims to be a
Muslim but does not believe in this fundamental creed ?


May Allah helps us in following the right path


