Publisher's Note
================

At a time when the general milieu in the subcontinent of India was
overwhelmed by the powers of darkness, and the soundness of Faith was
reeling under the potentially threatening squalls and the blinding
forages of superstitions and paganism, Allah the Almighty, by dint of
His special blessing,

sent a personality, who, by the strength of his Faith, knowledge and
rhetoric, dissipated the redoubtable forces of depravity and smashed the
self-made idols of Shirk (polytheism) and Bid'ah (innovations in
religion) and established the base of pure Tauhid (Islamic
Monotheism).

This great personality was Shah Ismail Muhaddith Dehlawi {May Allah
have mercy on him}, who was the grandson of Shah Waliullah Dehlawi, a
man of profound knowledge and great name to be reckoned with in terms of
his authentic scholarship among the most qualified and famous
celebrities of his time.

The services which he has rendered for the reformation of Ummah and his
undertaking the task of Da'wah (the mission of propagating Islam);
especially after the previous works of Shaikhul-Islam Imam Ibn Taimiyah
and Muhammad bin AbdulWahhab, are absolutely unforgettable and shall
always be cherished in our minds.

His status is specially far more prominent and elevated due to the fact
that he not only carried on with his struggle on the strength of his pen
and tongue, but he practically joined Tahreek-ul-Mujahidin (the first
Islamic Mujahid movement) under the inspiring leadership of Saiyid Ahmad
Shaheed and achieved martyrdom in his armed struggle against the Sikhs
at Balakot and hence set an ideal example for the weak, incapacitated
and oppressed Muslims of India.

The age of Shah Ismail Shaheed was infested and contaminated with the
poisonous atmosphere of Shirk and innovations. The Indian Muslims, under
the influence of the Hindu mythological faith, had entered such rituals
and beliefs in Islam that they even surpassed the ones observed during
the pre-Islamic period (in terms of their polytheistic rituals).

Taking the above facts into consideration, Shah Ismail Shaheed's
religious sense of honor and the integrity of his Faith could not
tolerate the spectacle that Islam which has been choiced for the slaves
of Allah to confirm His Oneness (which is also the purpose of affirming
one's faith in the Prophethood), should be infiltrated with and gnawed
by the concept of associating partners to Allah.

In order to achieve this august and noble purpose, he compiled
Taqwiyat-ul-Iman (the strengthening of faith), wherein he, along with
construing and elaborating on Qur'an and Ahadith, also expatiated at
length about the pure Islamic beliefs, and declaring all the innovations
and rituals the source of ignorance in the light of Qur'an and Sunnah,
he emphatically enjoined upon the Muslims to avoid being involved with
them. Apart from bearing such exalted and elevated aims, this book, on
account of its elegant,

breezy, simple and elaborate style of prose (according to the
requirement of its age), proved to be so much popular among the peoples
that it has so far been published in millions and has enlightened
trillions of delinquent and strayed people and has guided them to the
Right Path.

It must be brought to the attention of our readers that a preface
written by Maulana Ghulam Rasool Mehr (the late), encompassing an
eloquent description and a mighty rhetoric on the comprehensive benefits
and profitability of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman is also included in this book and
hence we presume that writing anything further in this regard shall be
amounting to proverbially carrying coals to Newcastle.

However, the only thing we would like to add here is, that this book is
being published with all its former qualitative characteristics along
with the corrections and castigations effected by Moulana (the late).

However, some minor changes in words and style have been made keeping
in line with the call of time. We are optimistic that the readers of
this book shall be kind enough to tolerate these changes, as the same
shall make it a lot easier for them to understand the facts which this
book comprises.

However, we have spared no effort in making Taqwiyat-ul-Iman more
presentable and appealing to our readers. May Allah bless us with a
guidance to be led on the Right Path. Amin.


**PREFACE**

Shah Muhammad Ismail {May Allah have mercy on him} the author of
Taqwiyat-ul-.Iman was the solitary son of Shah Abdul-Ghani {May Allah
have mercy on him}, the grandson of Shah Waliullah Muhaddith Dehlawi
{May Allah have mercy on him}, and the nephew of Shah Abdul Aziz
Muhaddith {May Allah have mercy on him}, Shah Rafiuddin Muhaddith {May
Allah have mercy on him} and Shah Abdul-Qadir Muhaddith {May Allah have
mercy on him}.

In the vast Indian subcontinent, no one else other than Shah Ismail
perhaps enjoys such a high and respectable pedigree in terms of
knowledge and grace, teaching and instructing, writing and compiling,
lecturing and prompting guidance, reinvigorating and renewing the
teachings of religion, reviving Islam and reforming the Ummah. Very few
people may have had a privilege of getting such a rich and spectacular
heritage. Shah Ismail Shaheed {May Allah have mercy on him} not only
lived up to the great reputation and enormity of his legacy, but he
practically furthered its splendor manifold times and added luster to
it.

According to an authentic source, Shah Ismail {May Allah have mercy on
him} was born on 12th Rabi'ul-Awwal 1193 H (corresponding to 26th April
1779 G). It means that he was almost seven years older than his
religious preceptor and mentor, the Amir-ul-Muminin (the head of the
believers) Saiyid Ahmad Barailawi {May Allah have mercy on him}. The
name of his mother was Bibi Fatimah {May Allah have mercy on her}.1

1 ] Mir Shahamat Ali, in the preface of his English translation of
'Taqwiyat ul-Iman, has mentioned his date of birth as 28th of
Shawwall195 H. And has stated his mother's name as Fadeelat-un-Nisa
(daughter of Moulvi Alauddin Phulti).

His maternal ancestry undoubtedly belonged to Phulat and his sister
Bibi Ruqaiya's first marriage to his maternal cousin Moulvi Kamaluddin
did take place in Phulat itself, but the authentic statement regarding
his date of birth and the name of his mother is the one which is
recorded in the 'text. We do not know about the source of his reference.
He has mentioned several other things in his biography which are
incorrect.

**Education & training:**

Shah Sahib attained his preliminary education from his esteemed father.
At the tender age of eight, he had memorized the Noble Qur'an. On 16th
of Rajab 1203 H (12th April 1789 G), Shah Abdul Ghani {May Allah have
mercy upon him} passed away while Shah Shaheed was only 10 years old.

Each of his three paternal uncles (Shah Abdul-Aziz {May Allah have
mercy upon him} Shah Rafiuddin {May Allah have mercy on him} and Shah
Abdul-Qadir{May Allah have mercy on him} were equally keen to
affectionately take charge of upbringing their bereaved nephew, but this
responsibility was formally shouldered by Shah Abdul-Qadir {May Allah
have mercy on him} who himself had only one daughter.

He is the one who taught the text books to Shah Ismail {May Allah have
mercy on him.. He attained a degree of proficiency in all the prescribed
subjects which were then in vogue and which were considered to be the
highest standard of education one could possibly secure those days. He
secured a degree of completion in the studies of Ahadith from Shah
Abdul-Aziz {May Allah have mercy on him} and thus he completed his
education while he was about 15 or 16 years old.

According to Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan, he was so much overconfident in the
very beginning stage of his studies that he would never remember as to
where the lesson would really start. Sometimes he would start reading
the text which immediately followed his present lesson. Whenever Shah
Abdul-Qadir interrupted him such as to remind him of his actual lesson,
he would answer that he avoided it since it was too easy for him,

and whenever Shah Abdul-Qadir would ask him any question concerning the
portion which he had skipped, he would start delivering such an eloquent
lecture about it that the people around him would be taken aback by
surprise. Sometimes he would start his lesson proceeding the one which
he is supposed to read and when Shah Abdul- Qadir brought his attention
to it, he would express such doubts that even an accomplished instructor
like him would have to pay a special attention in responding to his
querries. His extraordinary intelligence became renowned far and wide.

After he had completed his formal studies, people would put direct
querries to him even while he was walking on the road simply to examine
him, keeping in mind the fact that so long as he did not have a book in
his hand, he would not be able to give satisfactory answers to their
querries. But Shah Ismail 'Nould unhesitatingly start lecturing them and
provide such a detailed answer to their querries that they would be
ultimately put to shame on their boldness.

Maulana Muhammad Khan Alam Madrasi has written on the authority of
Maulana Saiyid Muhammad Ali Rampuri's statement that Shah Shaheed was a
scholar of a very deep, profound, and authentic knowledge and had
memorized the Noble Qur'an by heart. He had thirty thousand Ahadith on
the tip of his tongue.

Saiyid Sahib's {May Allah have mercy on him} Bai'a (pledge):

Even though Shah Shaheed's fame in terms of his learning and wisdom had
traveled far and wide, but he was a man of a rather carefree
disposition, which means that he had not adopted an occupation on a
permanent basis, the reason of which could possibly be that the
activities which were practiced by his family members, might have been
inadequately suited for the reforming purpose according to his
viewpoint, while he had no other new activity in his frame of mind.

Or it could be that he would have had set his heart on a certain course
of action and was only waiting in search of companions and fellows.

In. 1234 H (1819 G) Amirul-Muminin (the head of the believers) Saiyid
Ahmad Barailawy {May Allah have mercy on him} abandoned the company of
Nawab Amir Khan, the ruler of Tounk proceeded to Delhi from Rajputana
and took residence in Akbar Abadi Mosque. The first to take a pledge of
allegiance on his hand was Maulana Muhammad Yusuf Phulti,

who was presumably a grandson of Shah Ahlullah, a brother of Shah
Waliullah {May Allah have mercy on him}.The second person to take such a
pledge on his blessed hand was Maulana Abdul-Hai {May Allah have mercy
on him} (the son-in-law of Shah Abdul-Aziz {May Allah have mercy on
him}and finally it was Shah Shaheed who took a pledge on his hand. Once
he did it, his life underwent a total transformation.

He became obsessed with the task of reformation and guidance day and
night. On every Tuesday and Friday, he regularly delivered a religious
lecture in Shahi Masjid (Royal Mosque). Sir Saiyid says in one of his
writings that the people came to the Friday prayers in such a huge
number, as if they throng the mosques for the 'Eid prayers in the form
of a massive and thundering crowd.

Their number was phenomenal and innumerable. The method of his
sermonizing was so pleasing that whatever he said, got ingratiated in
the hearts of the people and they imbibed it to the core. Even if it
involved a snag or a controversial point the same was cleared away
during the course of his sermon. Revival of Sunnah and deterring Shirk
(polytheism) and Bid'ah (innovations) were the special subjects of his
religious lectures.

This was the time when the mission of the revival of religion commenced
in full swing with all its might. This was the era about which Maulana
Abul-Kalam Azad {May Allah have mercy on him}notes the following remarks
in his book Tadhkirah:

"The secrets of (the mission of) Da'wah (i.e. call to Islam) and
reformation of Ummah that were buried in the ruins of Old Delhi and the
hovels and shanties of Kotla, were now being revived thanks to the
involvement of the reigning sovereign, which caused a wave of
consternation in the markets of Shahjahanabad and an uproar on the
stairs of Jami' Masjid by this great and distinguished person.

Not only that, the news transcended the boundaries of the Indian
subcontinent but had it's repercussions far and wide. The things which
the great and renowned personalities of their time would not dare to
express even inside the closed rooms, were now being said, heard and
practiced in the open without reserve and the blood of martyrdom was
indenting its indelible imprints and inscribing its redoubtable saga in
the annals of the world history."


**The pilgrimage journey:**

In Shawwal 1236 (July 1821 G), Saiyid Ahmad {May Allah have mercy on
him}intended to perform Hajj. Taking into account the possibility of
death during a sea-journey, many scholars had pronounced their judgments
to the effect that the performance of Hajj is no longer to be considered
of an obligatory nature. Some people even went to the extent of saying
that according to the commandment of the Qur'anic verse:

{And not throw yourselves into destruction}

The purpose of Hajj is nothing but the disobedience of Allah (May Allah
forbid!). One of the methods which could be employed to checkmate this
evil trend was through one's writings, verbal preachings, and therefore
Saiyid Sahib, Shah Ismail{May Allah have mercy on him}, Maulana
Abdul-Hai {May Allah have mercy on him}Shah Abdul-Aziz {May Allah have
mercy on him} and the righteous scholars did not leave any stone
unturned in regard to this obligation of theirs.

Another method was to subject the atmosphere of this vast country to
the barrage of a positive publicity in regard to the performance of Hajj
by taking a practical course of action in order to awaken and revive the
public fervor interest and enthusiasm in it. Saiyid Ahmad {May Allah
have mercy on him} was a man of determination and courage, who
undoubtedly acted upon the second method also, the most surprising part
of it being that he directed an open invitation for Hajj to all the
Muslims of the country.

He made a common declaration to the effect that everybody should be
prepared to perform the pilgrimage whether or not he has sufficient
funds available with him for the journey. He took it upon himself to
shoulder a comprehensive responsibility for everybody's Hajj.

He not only preserved the obligatory nature of Hajj in its original
form in the minds of people but also practically demonstrated to them
that this obligation may be performed at ease, provided one should be
determined to perform it as a Divine commandment with the intention of a
true and sincere Muslim.

Therefore, it followed that Saiyid Ahmad proceeded to perform Hajj with
a caravan consisting of seven hundred and fifty Muslims. He was also
accompanied by Shah Shaheed, his esteemed mother, and his sister. They
rented ten ships, assigned an Amir to each ship to look after the
affairs of the pilgrims traveling aboard them and commenced their
journey from Calcutta.

After the completion of their Hajj and having visited all the sacred
places, they came back in Sha'ban 1239 H (April 1824 G). During this
journey, Shah Ismail {May Allah have mercy on him} was appointed as an
Amir over a group of people traveling aboard one of the ships.


