Invitation To Jihad
===================

Upon his return from the pilgrimage, Shah Shaheed {May Allah have mercy
on him} dedicated himself wholeheartedly for the sole purpose of
inviting people to Jihad as per the instructions of his religious
preceptor. Sir Saiyid in one of his writings says:

"According to the instructions of his chief, leader of the virtuous
ones and preceptor of the path of guidance, he adopted such a style of
speech and sermonizing that it mainly elaborated on the details and
explanations concerning Jihad in Allah's course to such an extent that
the burnishing effect of his speeches made the inner conscience of
Muslims clean and immaculate like a mirror.

He became so much involved and dedicated to this cause of righteousness
that everybody was involuntarily intrigued with a longing that his life
be sacrificed for this esteemed cause of virtuosity and his whole self
be exerted for the upliftment of religion of Prophet Muhammad {Peace be
upon Him}.

**Migration:**

He spent more or less one year and nine months in the task of his
invitations to Jihad. When different groups of Mujahidin were formed at
different places, it was decided after due exchange of thoughts and
deliberations that Jihad should be commenced starting from the frontier
region where the Sikh government of the Punjab had started committing
aggressions.
On 7th Jumada-al- Ukhra 1241 H (17th January 1826 G), Shah Shaheed {May
Allah have mercy on him} commenced his migration on his way to Jihad.
Then he was accompanied by only 500 or 600 people.

It was decided that once they reached the prescribed centre, they would
first run an appraisal on the prevalent circumstances and then the
remaining groups would be called in. During this journey, Shah Shaheed
was bearing a special responsibility of the administrative matters in
general as well as being a flag-bearer of the targets concerning the
mission of propagating Islam.

This group commenced its journey from Rai Baraili and went all the way
to Peshawar via Bundhail Khand, Gwallior, Tonk, Ajmer, the desert of
Marwar, Umar Kot, Hyderabad (Sind), Shikarpur, Quetta, Qandhar, Ghazni
and Kabul.

It was about three thousand miles journey comprising searing deserts
where there was no trace of water for miles and miles, big and mighty
rivers, intractable mountains as well as frosty landscape. It took ten
months to cover all this distance.

**Jihad:**

Jihad with sword (i.e. the armed struggle) commenced on the 20th of
Jumada-al-ula 1242 H (20th December 1826 G). The following is a brief
account of his most specific and salient accomplishments:

1. It is only due to his efforts that the people of the frontier region
gave the pledge of allegiance on the hands of Saiyid Sahib concerning
Jihad. Most of the deliberations which were conducted with the religious
scholars and the elderly in the frontier region were initiated by Shah
Shaheed.

2. He is the one who organized the matters concerning Jihad in the
district of Hazara. Even though he had only ten or eleven Mujahidin in
the battle of Shankiyari at his command, yet he convincingly vanquished
over a fairly huge legion of Sikh army by displaying a feat of
extraordinary perseverance and steadfastness.

During the course of this battle, Shah Shaheed's robe got perforated
with bullets and one of his fingers got bruised by a gunshot. Later he
would point to his finger in a good humor and jocularly remark (by
playing a pun on words) "This is my finger of martyrdom." (This very
expression, with a twist of the linguistic pun, would also mean, "This
is my finger of witnessing that there is no one worthy of being
worshipped except Allah and Muhammad{Peace be upon Him})

3. It is only due to his efforts that the people were prepared to take
an oath of allegiance in regard to the observance of Shari'ah in their
day-to-day lives and the people of the frontier region enjoyed the
blessings and bounties of a government based on the principles of
Islamic law.

4. It was under his leadership that the prominent victories were
achieved in the battles of Amb, Ashrah, Mardan and Mayar. After the
conquest of Peshawar, Saiyid Sahib nominated none other than him to
conduct negotiations with Sultan Muhammad Khan Barak Zai. Due to the
recalcitrance of the opportunistic elements in the frontier region, the
circumstances therein got extremely deteriorated and threateningly
adverse and when Saiyid Sahib took a decision to abandon this centre and
proceeded to Kashmir through the intractable and difficult route
traversing and winding through the mountainous landscape, he was also
accompanied by Shah Shaheed in this journey.

5. During their journey to Kashmir, a battle at Balakot on 24th
Dhil-Qa'dah 1246 H (6th May 1831 G) took place wherein Saiyid Sahib,
Shah Shaheed and the majority of Mujdhidin attained their martyrdom.


**A glimpse of his biography:**

As far as we could understand by looking at his biography, Shah Shaheed
never liked formalities in the matters of his day-to-day living. Upon
being accompanied with Saiyid Ahmad, he became so much gleeful and
carefree within his lowest standard of living as if he was seated on the
throne of an emperor. When he reached Calcutta while being emote to his
pilgrimage, the agent of East India Company, Munshi Aminuddin Ahmad came
to visit him. During his time, he was considered to be one of the rich
and famous personalities of Calcutta. After meeting Saiyid Ahmad, he
enquired of him concerning the whereabouts of Shah Ismail {May Allah
have mercy on him}.

At that very moment, he was walking towards Saiyid Ahmad after having
alighted from the ship. His clothes were all besmeared with dirt. When
the people beaconed in his direction, Munshi Aminuddin was under the
impression that he would have been some other Ismail.

In order to clarify himself further, he reiterated his question saying,
"The person I am enquiring about is Shah Ismail {May Allah have mercy on
him} who is the nephew of Shah Abdul-Aziz {May Allah have mercy on him}.
When he was told that this very person is the one he was looking for, he
was so much moved to observe his simplicity in disposition and
informality in manners that he involuntarily turned emotional and burst
into tears.

Saiyid Ahmad gave a horse to Shah Ismail so that he may use it as a
means of transport, but whenever he went out to run an errand for
himself, he made one of his colleagues mount on it while he himself
preferred to walk on foot on the plea that so long as we are out on a
religious mission, the more we bear the hardships, the more virtues we
shall accrue to our credit.

His faithful attachment to Saiyid Ahmad is a renowned fact. People have
spun many a yam in regard to his attachment with him. Regardless whether
these stories are true or false, there is no denying the fact that Shah
Ismail had a very deep and extraordinary attachment with Saiyid Ahmad.
In spite of all this, his faith in him never had any bearing on his
truthfulness as he never hesitated to say the right thing. On one
occasion,

the Amb Fort, which sheltered Saiyid Ahmad's family and the other
ladies, was threatened with an imminent danger. Saiyid Ahmad wrote a
letter to Shah Ismail instructing him to convey the ladies out to a safe
place so that the Mujdhidin do not have to come across any possible
difficulty during the course of their battle. Shah Ismail had a notion
that the ouster of ladies from there would have an adverse effect on the
morals of the people ~round them as the same shall be interpreted by
them to be a presentiment of a lurking disaster.

Therefore, it was conveyed to Saiyid Ahmad that this action at this
juncture would be untimely and hence inadvisable. When Saiyid Ahmad
reiterated his instructions, Shah Ismail wrote to him in no uncertain
terms that the compliance with his instructions shall only harm Muslims
and therefore he alone shall be answerable about it on the Day of
Judgment. Upon hearing this Saiyid Ahmad took his orders back.

Even though he was not that old, but a study of the events covering his
last days reveals that his physique had grown extremely weak and
emaciated as a result of his being constantly subjected to the rigorous
and laborious work which he kept rendering for the sake of religion. On
one occasion, he insistently made a small cannon mounted on his
shoulders in order to awaken the spirit of determination among the
people, but his feet started shaking and staggering about due to the
burden.

While climbing a mountain, he would start panting profusely just after
clambering his way up a few steps, but despite having been in this
enfeebled condition, it never happened till the last moment that he
would ever lag behind anyone in taking an active part in a battle or in
the matter of undertaking a journey. He would never even slacken to
cover up two days journey in one day whenever the same was required of
him, keeping in view the realization of the desired objectives of the
war.

On several occasions, in the frontier region, he had to come to grips
with the religious, martial and political problems of a crucial nature
and Shah Ismail kept resolving them with an effortless ease. A famous
chronicle had it that while he was once busy in curry- combing a horse,
some people enquired of him concerning some religious matters. He kept
curry- combing his horse while responding to the queries of his
interlocutors to the fullest. Saiyid Jafar Ali Naqwi writes that once he
had an opportunity to be led by him in one of his prayers. In a prayer
consisting of two Rak'a, he recited the complete 'Surah Bani Israel' in
such a mystifying and spiritually enlightening manner that he never ever
derived such a blissful and heart-felt pleasure behind any Imam till the
moment of writing. He writes that he will never ever forget that
particular prayer in his lifetime.

Is there any who will remember (or receive admonition):

It was Shah Ismail {May Allah have mercy on him}who exerted every
moment of his life in upholding the word of truth and the revival of
Islam. He is the one who sacrificed all his worldly pleasures in the
service of religion without the least hesitation and demonstrated the
sincerity of his mission by the blood of his martyrdom.

In case we are courageous enough to gauge the ratings of our Faith in
Allah and run an unbiased appraisal on the quality of our religious
integrity, where shall we all stand? How unfortunate it is that hundreds
of the so-called and self-proclaimed 'saints' occupying their seats and
sanctum sanctorums inside the shrines of the erstwhile saints in the
name of religion, have been heaping curses, on this great scholar and
Mujahid, constantly for a period of hundred and twenty-five years. They
did not only eye his love of Islam with suspicion, but doubted his Islam
itself. We are listened to these curses and abuses with such a great
interest and enthusiasm, as if it was a unique heroic deed and requisite
to preserve and safeguard one's religion and piety.

**Children:**

Shah Abdul-Qadir conducted Shah Shaheed's matrimony with his
grand-daughter Bibi Kulthum. He sired only one child whose name was Shah
Muhammad Umar, who spent all his life in an absorbed state (as if lost
in meditation).

**His works:**

Shah Ismail Shaheed has several works to his credit. Here are some of
them to name a few:

1. A treatise on the principles of Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) which
has been published.

2. A treatise on logic which has been referred to, by Sir Saiyid Ahmad
Khan.

3. A book titled "Clarifying the evident truth about the rulings
concerning the dead and the shrines." Experts observe that no book, the
like of, has ever been written in any language which brings into
limelight the reality of Bid'ah (inventing new things in religion).
Regrettably, this work could not have been completed. This has been
published twice or thrice along with its Urdu translation.

4. "The Status and Dignity of an Imam." This too is an excellent book.
The Persian manuscripts are very rare now, however Urdu versions are
available.

5. "Illuminating the two eyes in regard to the raising of hands." This
is the collection of those Ahadith which prove that the raising of hands
(as prescribed during a prayer) is an act of Sunnah (supererogatory).
This book has been published many times with its Urdu version. Its
Arabic edition has recently been published along with the explanatory
notes by Jamiat-e-Ahle-Hadith, Pakistan (The Department for the
Propagation of Sunnah) in an extremely elegant style.1

6. "The Straight Path." This book has four chapters. Only the first
chapter has been written by Shah Shaheed. The contents of it all have
originally been written by Saiyid Sahib, whereas the expressions and the
style of writing belong to Shah Sahib. Its Urdu version has also been
published. Its Persian version was only published once and is now very
rarely available.2

7. "Taqwiyat-ul-Iman" (the strengthening of Faith), the details of
which follow further ahead.

8. Yak-Rozi (One dayer), is a short treatise in which Moulvi Fadl Haq
Khairabadi's objections on his book Taqwiyat-ul-Iman have been answered.
While Shah Sahib was on his way to the mosque to perform his prayer, he
received the letter of Moulvi Fadl Haq. Immediately after offering his
prayer, he sat down to write an answer to it and finished it in one
stroke. This is why it has been named Yak Rozi.

9. Makateeb (The written notes), is one of his very big collections.
Some of them became quite well-known in his name. He wrote most of them
on the instigation of Saiyid Sahib.

10. His verified works which are as follows

A Persian Qaseedah (panegyric) in praise of the Prophet{Peace be upon
Him}
A Persian "Qaseedah"' (panegyric) praising Saiyid Sahib.
A Persian Mathnawi (long narrative poem) known as Silk-e-Noor (a thread
of light) on the subject of Tauhid (The Oneness of Allah).
An Urdu Mathnawi (long narrative poem) also on the subject of Tauhid.
A Persian Mathnawi (long narrative poem) in explanation of a Hadith.


**The history of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman**

Taqwiyat-ul-Iman was first published in 1242 (1826-27 G) at the time
when Shah Saheed, Saiyid Ahmad Barailawi {May Allah have mercy on him}
had migrated along with a group of Mujahidin from their beloved native
land and an armed struggle (Jihad) was about to take place for the
liberation and purification of India.

Within a period of last 170 years, we can not say with any degree of
certainty as to how many times it has so far been published. However, we
presume by employing a rough guess that the same must have been
published at least four or five million copies! Trillions of people have
been enlightened by reading it. This is such a dignity which perhaps no
other book of Urdu language other than Taqwiyat-ul-Iman has the honor of
achieving so far. A blizzard of misgivings and a string of diatribe
which was unleashed against this book has been seldom witnessed by any
other book.

If we look at the history of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman today, a strange
spectacle materialises in our imagination, as if it is an ocean being
rocked by the fury of a hurricane, it's surface being constantly lashed
by the tumult, anguish, friction and tempestuousness of its broken
waves, thereby giving it a great resemblance with the Day of Judgment.

Dejection is writ large on the faces of the captains of all the
colossal and Herculean ships and they are all anchored firmly sticking
on to the sea-shore. However, there is only one courageous navigator
who, despite the fragility of his ship, is still keeping his ship
continuously asail. He is a person of such an unflinching Faith and
solidity that all the ravages 'Al-Maktabah As-Salafiyah ' has also
published its translated version.

This has now Alhamdulillah been published by Al-Maktabah As-Salafiyah
and depredations fail to produce a single favoring grimace of fidgeting
on his eyebrow. All those atrocities and redouble furies of the
hurricane who had forced all the sea stalwarts and the old salts to dock
their ships by the sea-shore the equally forbidding and threatening in
intimidating this very daunting navigator,

but he, for the sake of his sense of duty and compliance, braves and
defies them. This navigator kept advancing further ahead thwarting and
frustrating all the forces who are at work in his opposition and thus
becomes entitled to such a position of honor which only fall to the lot
of the ones exhibiting forbearance and patience.

**The salient features of this book:**

The subject matter of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman is Tauhid (the Oneness of
Allah), which is the foundation and the basis of religion. Innumerable
books and treatises have so far been written on this topic, but the
style of Shah Shaheed and his technique of the subject treatment is the
most outstanding and unique one and is purely reformatory. He made only
Qur'an and Sunnah the orbit of his discussion just like the righteous
scholars.

He proffers and refers to the Qur'anic verses and Ahadith and
interprets them in a very simple and comprehensible style and brings to
light the true status of all the unlawful customs and rituals, which are
commonly practiced in the society and are detrimental to the faith of
Tauhid (Islamic Monotheism) in a very pleasant and impressive style.

He gathered under different topics all the horrible blunders of Faith
and practice which are contrary to teaching of Islamic Monotheism, for
instance, committing an act of Shirk (associating partners to Allah) in
terms of knowledge, regulating the affairs of the universe, habits and
practices and Shirk in worshipping. Hence Taqwiyat-ul-Iman has become an
authentic and unique book on the subject of Tauhid. In addition to the
above, it also attempts to highlight the following:

1. This book is an extremely surprising specimen, giving us an insight
into the educational, practical and cultural patterns which were in
vogue during the times of Shah Shaheed. If someone intends to have a
background information as to what were the dogmatic, practiced and moral
ailments which the Muslims were suffering from in this vast country
before one hundred and thirty years, this book shall prove to be an
excellent source of information for him.

2. Shah Shaheed did not make himself contented with the task of merely
elucidating the intricacies of the theoretical precepts of Tauhid but he
rather assumed such a style of writing which makes reader mentally
conjure up a picture of that society and its surrounding milieu in which
that book had been written. This potentially enhances the efficacy and
effectiveness of Da'wah (Call to Islam).

3. Even though this book covers an extremely important subject, but
Shah Shaheed adopted such a method of reasoning and deducing facts that
both a slightly educated as well as an extremely educated person,
according to their own intellectual standards of perception, may and
have been benefiting from the said book.

4. Even though this book was written during a period when the Urdu
prose-writing was developing through its preliminary stages, but Shah
Sahib's prose is so simple, breezy, fresh and pleasing that, except a
few words and idioms, it is not simple even today to write such a
fascinating book. This is an undemiable fact that even though the Urdu
language has progressed through the additional phases of its
development, it will always consider Taqwiyat-ul-Iman to be an
invaluable treasure in terms of stylistics.

The opposite attitudes of respect and neglect:

It is an extremely amazing phenomenon that even though
Taqwiyat-ul-Iman, is replete with a host of advantages, it has been
subjected to an ambivalent attitude on the part of its devotees, as this
book, on one hand was well taken care of, while on the other hand, it
was thrown into neglect too at the same time. People paid such a
tremendous attention to its publication and distribution that no other
book in Urdu language could rival it.

It has been the practice of many people and organizations that they
used to publish thousands of its copies annually and distributed it
either gratis or against a very nominal charge, while on the other hand,
it was neglected to such an extent that no castigation or correction was
ever effected in it.

No one even cared about getting it serialized under different chapters
or producing it in a more polished and presentable shape keeping in view
the ever changing tastes and proclivities of the readers. It seems as if
the devotees of this book have merely given it a sanctified status,
limiting their association and attachment with this book to the extent
of preserving it and handing it over in its original and unabridged form
to the oncoming generations.

According to my knowledge, there have been only two attempts so far in
regard to the correction of the text and entering footnotes to it on two
different occasions, but they two were not accomplished in a
full-fledged manner.

**Essential tasks:**

There have been many essential tasks which may not be hidden from the
eyes of the people who have a refined taste in compiling and publishing.
A study of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman at once reveals that Shah Shaheed, just
similar to his other works, also wrote it at once and in a single
effort.

Since he had devoted his life to the great cause of the Islamic revival
whole-heartedly to the extent that he had hardly any time left for other
activities, he did not have an opportunity to review his manuscript of
Taqwiyat-ul-Iman either. The essential task concerning this book which
Shah Shaheed could not undertake to accomplish by himself, his devotees
were supposed to do the needful by themselves. For instance, they could
have effected the following changes:

1. They could have got the book properly synchronized and serialized
under different titles and sub-titles to render it easier for the
readers as well as to make it more fruitful and informative for them.

2. Shah Sahib, according to his requirement, had only mentioned the
texts of Ahadith. Now it was necessary to give an account of the sources
of those Ahadith (in terms of their ratings) in the footnotes below, and
the references to the printed books should have been stated therein.

3. Whatever unlawful activities and customs Shah Sahib observed around
him, he briefly mentioned about them in his book. Those customs and
activities had gradually phased out with the passage of time. It was
necessary that their characteristic features also be stated briefly so
that a reader may I get a clear-cut idea that practicing those things
are unlawful indeed. This would help them avoid the other similar
activities I which assume different forms and shapes during different
periods.

4. During the times of Shah Shaheed, the mode of punctuation in writing
was different especially the full stops and comas etc. were not at all
observed. Later, the writing system gradually kept developing and
advancing. It was necessary that the old style of writing be replaced by
the new one by introducing full stops and comas etc. in the text so that
the same becomes easily understandable to the readers, as this step
would have enhanced the utility of this book considerably.

5. As it has earlier been mentioned, that even today Taqwiyat-ul-1man
is a rare book in terms of it's simplicity, comprehensibility,
impeccability of text and fascination. Despite all the above facts, some
of its words and phrases were not very clearly comprehensible to the
readers and therefore required an explanation.

It is not very heartening to note that none of the above could have
been accomplished. Some people did pay attention to it, but could not
accomplish these tasks according to what was actually required of them.
Therefore, a systematic and organized version of Taqwiyat-ul-1man is
published for the realization and fulfillment of the said purposes.

**The present age:**

Today, the scope of this book's potential fruitfulness has widened
immensely. Instead of being branded as a flag-bearer of Wahabism in the
common parlance, he is today recognized as a proponent of the great
Islamic revival, who raised a banner of Jihad (an armed struggle for
holy purpose) on the vast land of the Indian subcontinent to lay the
foundation of a just and rightful Islamic government.

It was a time when all the traces of a thousand years of Muslim
domination of the subcontinent were on the wane. He took up the cudgels
for purification and independence in an atmosphere which was charged
with desolation and dejection. He demonstrated to the Muslims the path
of determination, courage and perseverance while the glory of their
conquest and dominance was almost breathing its last.

Today, a description of the saga, highlighting his gallant and heroic
deeds in his capacity as a Mujahid (the one who struggles in the path of
Allah) is considered to be as an extremely effective means of imparting
a correct religious education, and therefore, it is a tremendous service
to render Taqwiyat-ul-1man more attractive and worth reading for a
Joe-public.

This is also an undeniable reality that whatever pronouncements Shah
Shaheed had made a hundred and thirty years ago, could not be thoroughly
understood and appreciated in terms of its importance and qualitative
superiority in all the previous ages as much as it could be realized and
appreciated during the present time of ours.


**The orderly arrangement of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman**

Prior to arranging Taqwiyat-ul-1man in an orderly shape, Shah Shaheed
had compiled Ahadith in the confirmation of Tauhid (Oneness of Allah)
and the rejection of Shirk (associating partners to Allah) and Bid 'at
(inventing new things in religion), a collection which he named Radd-ul-
Ashrak (in rejection of polytheism).

The late Nawab Siddique Hasan Khan then worked on the references and
sources of these Ahadith and got this collection published under the
title of Al- Idrak li-takhreej Ahadith Radd-ul-Ashrak" (Perception to
infer Ahadith in the negation of polytheism). Shah Shaheed only rendered
the first portion of this collection into Urdu and this very portion is
known as Taqwiyat-ul-1man. The remainder of the portion was published by
the Late Moulvi Sultan Muhammad in Urdu under the title of
Tadhkir-ul-1khwan (Reminding to the brothers).

We can not say with any degree of certitude as to in which period
Taqwiyat-ul-Iman has actually been written. At one place, this book
comprises a description of the sanctified Ka 'bah' s courtyard in such
an effective manner that it gives an impression that Shah Shaheed was
himself an eye-witness to this spectacle and hence we can deduce that
this book must have been written after his return from Hajj.

Spurred on by the instigation of some of his friends, Mulla Sahib
Baghdadi voiced some of his objections on Taqwiyat-ul-Iman. Shah Shaheed
wrote a letter from Kanpur in response to his objections and the year
which is inscribed on this letter is l240H, which further subscribes to
the notion that the said book must have been written in the beginning of
l240H after his return from Hajj.

During that period, Shah Shaheed had dedicated himself to the task of
propagating Islam and organizing for Jihad with all his heart and soul
and he departed for the cause of Jihad on the 7th of Jumada-al-Ukhra
124lH. Upon having read the letter of Shah Shaheed, Mulla Sahib Baghdadi
confessed his mistake. Among the scholars of Delhi, the one who was
renowned to be the most prominently active in his opposition, was
Maulana Fadl Haq Khairabadi,

about whom it has been generally acknowledged now that despite having
been a dignified scholar and possessing an immense amount of knowledge,
his dogmatic precepts and beliefs were no different than that of a
Joe-public.

He triggered the controversy of the possibility of existence and
non-existence of the Prophet's {Peace be upon Him} counterpart and did
not take into account the difference between Allah's Will and His
Capability to bring something into existence. Shah Shaheed, through his
treatise known as Yak-Rozi (One-dayer), had proved the baselessness of
all these objections. We cannot elaborate on these dimensions here due
to the lack of space.

**Different versions of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman:**

The first and foremost task in regard to getting the book rearranged
and making it more polished was to collect such versions which are more
authentic and have more room for dependability. The versions which were
readily available for reference are as follows:

A hand-written version dated 7th of Dhil-Qa'dah l252H (13th February
l837G) comprising a total of 114 pages, each page consisting of 14
lines, and each line containing 16 words. This is the oldest manuscript
available in the humble view of the writer. Some of its pages are rather
moth- eaten. The first eight pages are not available.

1. A hand-written version comprising 237 pages, each page consisting of
8 lines, each line comprising 14 words, excellent handwriting and a fine
paper. Date of writing has not been mentioned on it.

2. A printed version of Taqwiyat-ul-Iman published by Darul-Uloom
Printing press, Delhi in the year 1847 G, containing altogether 92
pages. It has not been confirmed as to what edition it exactly was, as
no other copy of its former printed version is available to us.

3. A copy of its type-written version (cursive style). This version was
corrected by Moulana Muhammad Hasan under the auspices of Moulvi
Abdul-Latif and Moulvi Kamil under the supervision of Munshi Ghulam
Maula and Munshi Wajid Sahib and was printed in Muhsini Printing Press,
Calcutta. The printing was completed in 1854 G. A special attention was
paid to the correction of the text in the said version.

A comparison of the texts reveals that the reviser has effected a few
changes in it. In addition to this one, we also had an opportunity to
refer to several other editions as well. An edition which was published
by Jamiyat-ud-Da'wathWat-Tabligh (Association for the propagation of
Islam) and compiled by Maulana Muhiuddin Ahmad Qusuri is especially
worth- mentioning.

**The principles of getting it organized:**

We have had some detailed discussions with some dignified and
accomplished scholars in regard to determining the regulations and
limits of getting this book re-organized and render it more refined and
polished. All those scholars were bona fide ones and were really worth
giving their views about it.

Some observed that all the archaic words and obsolete idiomatic phrases
should be changed accordingly and some complexities in the syntax should
be altered necessarily at least to such an extent that it should be
easily comprehensible to the ones who are only accustomed to studying
the books written in the present-day prose style.

These kinds of partial changes had been effected earlier also, but
pursuant to giving this matter a profound thought, it seemed suitable
that no part of it be modified and the text should be printed in its
original form as it was, after purging it from imperfections through a
laborious research. However, the style of punctuation which was
prevalent during the times of Shah Shaheed was avoided and the present
style of punctuation was adopted. For instance:

1. During Shah Shaheed's times, some of the words were written in a
spliced form. But in the recent version, these words have been printed
separately according to the present day practice.

2. Some verbal forms denoting tenses, which had different grammatical
shapes during the times of Shah Shaheed, have been changed according to
the present day usage in the new version.

3. The whole book has been covered with the punctuation marks so that
the sentences and phrases become clearly distinguishable. The words like
'and' etc. which were then being used as a comma or a dash, have also
been deleted in the new edition. According to our view, none of the
above may be considered a change in the main text as this is only a
difference in the mode of punctuation.

4. The words and phrases that required an interpretation have been
explained either in the footnotes below, or a word or two have been
added in the main text within parenthesis (brackets).

5. Those Ahadith which were partially referred to in the main text,
have been completed in the footnotes.

6. Shah Shaheed, while referring to the translation of some of the
Qur'anic verses, only focused on its implied meanings and the message he
intended to convey through it. In regard to the literal translation of
such verses, the translation of Shah Abdul-Qadir Muhaddith {May Allah
have mercy on him}has been presented in the book.

**The last word:**

Within the limits of one resources and capabilities, we have tried our
utmost to make the reading of this book more and more easy, attractive
and enjoyable. What ever amount of success we have achieved in this
regard so far, we only think of it as a miracle of the ever present
mercy and blessing of Allah the Exalted. In case this meager endeavor of
ours does happen to contain some flaws, we consider it to be a
shortcoming of our mind and perception and hence, owe our apologies to
our dear readers.

We, however, should hasten to add that the only purpose we had in our
minds was to broaden the scope of the profitability of this important
religious accomplishment of Shah Shaheed to its maximum length so that
the Muslims may become Muslims in the true sense of the word.

And last but not least, our ultimate supplication is that the praise is
to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds, and our salutations
and greetings to the Lord of all the Messengers.


Ghulam Rasool Mehr


