Chapter Three : the Vices of Polytheism
=======================================

**The Virtues of Monotheism**

The polytheism cannot be forgiven:

{Verily! Allah forgives not (the sin of) setting up partners in worship
with Him, but He forgives whom He pleases, sins other than that, and
whoever sets up partners in worship with Allah, has indeed strayed far
away.}(V.4:l16)

The one who does not discriminate between the permissible and the
forbidden, commits theft, idles away his time doing nothing, shuns his
prayers and fasting, does not give his wife and children their due
rights and becomes incumbent on disobeying his parents -has indeed
strayed from the path of Allah, but the one who gets strangled in the
quagmire of Shirk has strayed very much far away by getting involved in
such a sinful act as shall never be forgiven by Allah except by showing
repentance.

As far as other sins are concerned, Allah may perhaps forgive them even
without repentance (on the part of the slave). It becomes thus known
that Shirk is an unpardonable crime and the person who commits it is
bound to be punished.

If an act of Shirk, thus committed, is of such an extreme kind which
turns a person into a polytheist, then the penalty thus incurred by the
person is an eternal Hell-fire, for he will neither be ever released
from it, nor shall get any rest and peace whatsoever therein. As to the
acts of minor degree of Shirk1, their doers are bound to be penalized
according to the penalties which are apportioned for them by Allah the
Exalted.

As far as the penalties which have been specified by Allah in regard to
other sinful acts are concerned, they mainly depend on the Will of
Allah. (Depending on His Will, He may forgive them or, He may punish the
doer).

**Explaining Shirk:**

We thus understand that Shirk is the biggest of all sins (i.e. and no
sin surpasses it in terms of gravity, severity and enormity). It can be
explained by the following example:

Let us suppose that a king has a specific penal code for his subjects
comprising all kinds of penalties for different kinds of offences like,
theft, robbery, sleeping while being on duty as a guard, a delayed
arrival at the king's court, fleeing from the battlefield and delaying
the payment of government revenues etc.

are all crimes deserving specific punishments. The king, depending on
his will, can either duly punish the offenders or forgive them, but
there are a few crimes whose commission clearly indicates a rebellion,
like an act of coronating and enthroning a nobleman, a 1

Whether a 'Shirk' is of a monstrous nature or of a minor degree, is
forbidden anyway and is contrary to the concept of Islamic Monotheism.

minister, a fief, a chieftain, a sweeper or a shoe-maker and declaring
anyone of the above as a king in the presence of the king himself. Such
an act shall be considered as a mutiny. Or similarly, if a throne or a
crown is made for any of the above categories of people or anyone of
them is called with such title as 'Your Excellency' or 'His Highness' or
'His Majesty' or is treated with the observance of a royal protocol or a
certain day is specified for him as a gala festival or a certain vow is
made to him after a royal fashion, is what constitutes the greatest of
all crimes which must never go unpunished.

A monarch who overlooks giving out punishments on such crimes, is bound
to have a weak and staggering empire and the wise people shall libel
such a monarch as incapable and unworthy of ruling an empire. Dear
friends! Let us fear from the Master of the universe, the Sovereign who
has a great sense of honor and an unlimited power.

How can such a Lord let the polytheists go unpunished! May Allah bless
all the Muslims with His mercy and save them from such dangerous
calamities as Shirk. Amin!

**Shirk, the greatest of all vices**

Allah the Exalted One says in one of His verses:

{And (remember) when Luqman said to his son when he was advising him:
'Join not in worship others with Allah. Verily! Joining others in
worship with Allah is a great Zulm (wrong) indeed.}(V.3l:13)

It means that Allah had awarded clairvoyance to Luqman {May Allah have
mercy on him} By utilizing his mental faculties, he understood that
giving away someone's right to someone else is an act of great
injustice. The one who gives away Allah's Right to someone else among
His creatures is similar to a person who gives away something to the
meanest one, what in fact is due to be given to the greatest one.

As long as Allah is the Greatest of all and all His creatures rank no
more than a slave before Him, what injustice should be greater than
putting a royal crown on the head of a shoe-maker!

We must understand that anyone whether one of the most eminent human
beings or any of the angels dearest and nearest to Allah does not carry
the status of even a shoe- maker in terms of frivolity and disgrace,
while facing the magnificence of Divinity. Thus it becomes clear that as
Shari'ah has regarded Shirk to be an extremely enormous sinful act,
one's wisdom and common intellect also recognizes Shirk to be as such.

It is the greatest of all vices which is a fact, because the greatest
of all inequities to be found in a man is that he should disrespect his
elders. Who else is bigger than Allah in greatness! Committing an act of
Shirk verily amounts to being disrespectful towards Him.

Tauhid (Monotheism) is the only way out:

Allah has said in one of the verses of the Noble Qur'an: {And we did
not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad {peace be upon Him}) but
We inspired him (saying): La ilaha ilIa Ana [none has the right to be
worshipped but I (Allah)], so worship Me (Alone and none else).}
(V.2l:25)

It means that all the Messengers were sent by Allah with exactly the
same commandment that none but Allah should be worshipped and only Allah
is worthy of being worshipped. We thus understand that the commandment
in regard to the recognition of Oneness of Allah and the prohibition
concerning the joining of others in worship with Him is a matter which
is a common constituent of all the previous revealed doctrines, and
hence this is the only way out for one's salvation. The rest of all the
other creeds are in error.

**Allah is disgusted with Shirk:**

It is reported by Abu Hurairah {May Allah have mercy on him} that
Allah's Messenger {Peace be upon Him} said: Allah has made the following
statement: "I am most dispensed with the action of joining others in
worship with Me. Whosoever does an act in which he joins others in
worship with Me, I shun him and his partners and become disgusted with
him."

It means that unlike others who divide their shared goods among
themselves, I do not do so because I stand in need of no one. Whoever
performs a virtuous deed for Me by giving Me a partner in it, I do not
even take My share and leave the whole of it for others and become
disgusted with him. It thus becomes known to us that whoever does an act
for Allah, and does the same act for an entity other than Allah, he has
indeed committed Shirk and it further elaborates that any act of worship
which is dedicated to Allah by the polytheists is unacceptable. Allah is
disgusted with such acts and such people.

Affirming the Oneness of Allah prior to the dawn of time itself: Allah
the Exalted says:

{And (remember) when your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam,
from their loins, their seed (or from Adam's loin his offspring) and
made them testify as to themselves (saying): 'Am I not your Lord?' They
said: 'Yes! We testify,' lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection:
'Verily, we have been unaware of this. Or lest you should say: 'It was
only our fathers aforetime who took others as partners in worship along
with Allah, and we were (merely their) descendants after them; will You
then destroy us because of the deeds of men who practiced Al-Batil (i.e.
polytheism and committing crimes and sins, invoking and worshipping
others besides Allah)?}(V.7:172,173)

It has been reported by Ahmad on the authority of Ubai bin {May Allah
have mercy on him} in regard to the interpretation of the verse
(regarding the time when Allah made the offspring of Adam testify)
saying that Allah gathered all the progeny of Adam, formed them in
pairs, then made their facial features and shapes, then gave them the
power of speech.

When they began to speak, He took a covenant from them by asking them,
"Am I not your Rabb?" They answered, "Verily, You are our Rabb!"1 Allah
then stated, "I hereby make all the seven strata of heavens Rabb means
among other things, the Creator, the Sustainer, the Provider and the One
in Whose hand is the disposal of all affairs.[I] Thus they confirmed to
it.

Then Allah elevated Adam (to a certain height) who could see all of
them. he saw that there rich among them as well as poor, beautiful as
well as ugly. Upon sighting this, Adam enquired of Allah, "O our Rabb!
Why didn't You create all of them as equals?" He answered, "I like to be
offered thanks." Then A dam {Peace be upon Him} sighted among them the
Prophets {Peace be upon Them} too whose faces were glowing like lamps
and who had an aura of illumination surrounding their faces.

Then Allah the Exalted took also an acknowledgement from all the
Prophets in regard to their Prophethood. It alludes to that pledge which
is mentioned in 1 and earth as well as your father Adam a witness unto
you lest you should employ an excuse of being unaware of it on the Day
of Resurrection. Be certain that none is worthy of being worshipped
except Me and none but Me is your Rabb. Do not associate partners with
Me in worshipping. I shall keep sending my Messengers unto you who will
in turn continue to remind you of this covenant of yours with Me and I
shall reveal my Books unto you." All of them answered, "We hereby
testify that You are our Rabb and You are the object of our worship.
None but You is our Lord and none but You is worthy of our worship.

**Shirk cannot be presented as an authority:**

Ubai bin Ka'b{May Allah have mercy on him}, while interpreting the
above verse said that Allah gathered all the offspring of Adam at one
place, formed them into groups, for instance, He separated the Prophets,
saints, martyrs, pious people, obedient ones, disobedient ones into
different groups. Similarly, He segregated the Jews, the Christians, the
polytheists and the followers of every religion.

Then whatever facial features and shapes one had to be given in this
world, Allah made them appear exactly in the same manner there
accordingly. Someone was made to appear as good-looking, someone as
bad-looking, someone as conversant, someone as dumb, and someone as a
lame person.

Then all of them were given the faculty of speech and then asked, "Am I
not your Rabb?" All of them acknowledged the lordship of Allah and then
Allah took a pledge from all of them to the effect that they shall not
take anyone as their ruler and master except Him Alone and shall not
consider anyone worthy of being worshipped except Him Alone.

Then Allah made all the seven strata of heavens and earth as witnesses
and said that the Prophets shall be sent unto you to remind you of this
pledge of yours and they shall bring with them the heavenly scriptures.
Everyone has individually affirmed the Oneness of Allah and rejected
associating partners with Him in an era prior to the dawn of time itself
and therefore, no one may be presented as an evidence in the matter of
Shirk (i.e. a preceptor, a mendicant, a sheikh, a father, a grandfather,
a king, a religious scholar or a saint).

The excuse of forgetfulness shall not be accepted:

If someone thinks that after being in this world, we no longer remember
the said pledge and in case we commit an act of Shirk now, we shall not
be punished as there is no questioning in forgetfulness. The answer to
this notion of theirs is that there are many things a man does not
remember but once reminded by a creditable and authentic person, it all
comes back to his memory.

For instance, no one remembers his date of birth, but once he hears
about it from people, he has no qualms about saying it with certainty
that I was born on such and such date, in such and such year and at such
and such hour.

He only recognizes his parents upon hearing from people. He does not
consider anyone else as his mother. In case one does not perform his
obligations towards his mother and proclaims someone else as his mother,
the people are bound to ridicule and censure him.

In response to their chidings, if he postulates that as long as I do
not remember my birth, why should I consider this woman as my mother?
People have no reason to castigate me about it! Once this person blurts
out such a statement, people shall definitely regard him to be a perfect
moron and a rude person.

It thus becomes known to us that since a man believes in many a thing
to the extent of certitude on the basis of hearing them merely from the
Qur'an with the following statement: (And there was also a time) when We
took a pledge from the Prophets. These Prophets include you (Prophet
Muhammad {Peace be upon Him} , Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus the son of
Mary). people, how is it that he should disbelieve the teachings of the
Prophets who are the people of a great status and magnificent caliber!

The basic teachings of the Prophets and the (Divine) Scriptures:

Thus we understand that every one has been individually inculcated and
stressed upon in the realms of the spirits to adopt and adhere to the
concept of Tauhid1(Monotheism) and shun Shirk (polytheism), i.e.
associating partners with Allah in the acts belonging to Him. All the
Prophets have been sent to this world for the sole purpose of reminding
people of this covenant and its renewal.

The instructions of more than one hundred and twenty-four thousand
Messengers of Allah and the central knowledge contained in all the
Divine Scriptures concentrate on just one point, "Beware! the concept of
Tauhid (Monotheism) should not be tampered with and do not even think of
associating partners with Allah! Do not consider anyone as an absolute
sovereign and a disposer (of the affairs) except Allah! Do not resort to
anyone for the fulfillment of your wishes and making vows except
Allah!"

Once we are informed about the following Hadith, there is no room left
whatsoever for an excuse to commit an act of Shirk by anybody. This is
how the Hadith goes: It is narrated by Mu'adh bin Jabal {May Allah have
mercy on him} that he was instructed by the Prophet {Peace be upon Him}
to the effect that:

"You must not join others as partners with Allah even if you are
murdered or burnt to death." (Musnad Ahmad)

This means that we must not consider anyone else other than Allah as
worthy of being worshipped and do not care for being molested by a jinn
or devil. As the Muslims must patiently bear the brunt of the external
calamities, without jeopardizing their Faith, they must also bear the
internal inflictions (i.e., molestations on the part of jinns, ghosts
and other such beings) with patience without perverting their Faith out
of their fright.

They should hold the belief that everything whether an affliction or
comfort is directly governed by Allah. Allah sometimes puts his faithful
believers on trial. A believer is tested according to the strength of
his Faith. Sometime pious people are subjected to chastisement on the
part of the wicked persons so that a distinction may be established
between the sincere and the hypocrite.

As the pious are apparently molested by the disobedient ones and the
Muslims by the disbelievers (through the Will of Allah) and they
continue to bear with it with perseverance and patience without
perverting their Faith due to being disgruntled with the trials,
similarly the pious are sometimes subjected to trouble on the part of
jinns and Satans through the Will of Allah.

So one should bear with it steadfastly and patiently without yielding
to their hegemony out of the fear of their oppression. Thus it becomes
known to us that if a person denies a deity (false deity other than
Allah) out of being averse to Shirk, repudiates and condemns making vows
and offerings to it, removes the erroneous and unjustified customs
associated with it; and in the process of doing it, if such a person
incurs either a loss of life or a loss in terms of finances, or should
Satan happen to chastise him in the name of a preceptor or a martyr (by
making such fake appearances), he must understand that Allah is 1

It means declaring Allah to be the only God Who deserves to be
worshipped in truth and confirming all attributes with which He has
gratified Himself or that are attributed to Him by His Messenger {Peace
be upon Him} .

testing his Faith which he must humbly bear with and should hold on to
his Faith steadfastly. We must remember that Allah tightens His grip on
the oppressors after giving them plenty of rope and liberates the
oppressed from their talons, similarly He shall grab on to the
oppressors among the jinn in due course of time and shall release the
adherents to the concept of Oneness of Allah (the monotheists upholding
the cause of 'Tauhid') from their tyranny.

It has been narrated by Ibn Mas'ud {May Allah have mercy on him}:

"A person enquired of the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} as to which is
the biggest of all sins. He said that it is to call upon someone else
other than Allah, thinking of him as similar to Allah, even though Allah
has created you." (Al-Bukhari-Muslim)

It means that as Allah (on account of His Knowledge and Capability), is
believed to be the Omnipresent and the Conductor of the whole universe,
and is called upon in times of distress, similarly calling upon some
other entity other than Allah believing in it to be characterized by the
same qualities is the greatest of all sinful acts. Because none has the
capability to solve the problems of creatures except Allah.

Furthermore, as long as our Rabb is Allah, we must call upon Him Alone
in distress situations as we have no link with any other entity. For
example, if someone becomes a slave to a king, he is bound to approach
his king for the fulfillment of all his needs.

Not to speak of a shoe-maker or a sweeper, he will not even approach
other kings (for his personal needs). Since there is no entity at all,
whatsoever, who could be considered a counterpart of Allah, is it not a
folly to approach any other entity for the fulfillment of one's needs?
Tauhid (Monotheism) and forgiveness:

It has been narrated by Anas {May Allah have mercy on him} that the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"Allah the Exalted states to the posterity of Adam that if you happen
to meet Me with the sinful acts of the entire world, I shall meet you
with an equal amount of mercy provided you have not joined partners with
Me."

It means that there had been many delinquent and sinful people in the
world including Pharaoh and Haman etc. as well as Satan, who also is to
be found in this world. All these sinners have been committing sins and
shall continue committing them till Doomsday. Now, if a person
supposedly commits all these sins collectively to his sole account
individually, chances are that Allah shall bestow on him an equal amount
of mercy and forgiveness, provided he has not committed Shirk. Thus it
becomes known to us that with the blessing of Tauhid, all the sins are
forgiven1 exactly in the same manner as the virtuous deeds are destroyed
by the evil of Shirk.

1

The purpose of mentioning this Hadith here is to clarify that
committing an act of Shirk is an extremely obnoxious and abominable
thing. One should not however, deduce that as long as one is free from
Shirk, the commission of other sinful acts are in any way justifiable.
In regard to the forgiveness of sins, one should take into consideration
the general rule of Shari'ah (i.e., seeking Allah's forgiveness and
becoming repentant).

This is also a fact that when a man is completely cleansed off the
impurities of Shirk and shall uphold a faith that none but Allah is his
Master, and there is no place to flee His Rule, none offers shelter to
the ones who disobey Him, all are helpless before Him, none can deter
His Commandment,

none can intercede with Him on behalf of someone else and no one can
make a recommendation before Him for someone without His Permission, -on
nursing this set of beliefs - the possibility of sins which might be
committed by him could be only either due to his inherent human
weaknesses or his forgetfulness.

And then such a person shall have been groaning under the burden of
these sins, shall be utterly disgusted and shall not be able to raise
his head (out of a sense of shame and remorse). This type of person is
undoubtedly blessed with the mercy of Allah. As the amount of sins
increases, so increases the intensity of his remorse and the more his
remorse becomes intense, so does the mercy of Allah.

We must remember the point that the sin of a devout monotheist can do
what a virtuous deed of a polytheist cannot. A delinquent monotheist is
a thousand times better than an observant and pious polytheist exactly
in a similar manner as a criminal subject is a thousand times preferable
to a toady mutineer, because the former is remorseful on his sin, and
the latter proud and callous.


