Chapter Four : the Negation of Shirk in Knowledge
=================================================

Allah says in one of the Qur'anic verses as follows:

{And with Him are the keys of the Ghaib (all that is hidden), none
knows them but He. And He knows whatever there is in (or on) the earth
and in the sea; not a leaf falls, but He knows it. There is not a grain
in the darkness of the earth nor anything fresh or dry, but is written
in a Clear Record.} (V.6:59)

It means that Allah has bestowed on the humans some faculties so that
they may have an access to the knowledge concerning the apparent on the
physical plane; for instance eyes to sight, ears to listen, nose to
smell, tongue to taste, hands to grope about, and intellect to
understand. Then, the above faculties have been put at the disposal of a
human being so that he may utilize them on his own accord; for instance,
whenever he intends to see an object,

he may open his eyes and whenever he does not intend to see it, he may
close them. Other limbs may also be utilized in a similar manner. Human
beings have been given the keys to have an access to the knowledge of
the evident things. As the matter of doing and undoing a lock mainly
depends on the will of its owner, similarly the act of gaining knowledge
about the apparent things depends upon the will of a human being.

Only Allah possesses the knowledge of Ghaib (unseen and hidden):

Contrary to the above, it is beyond the authority of a human being to
gain the knowledge of the unknown, as Allah Himself preserves the keys
to it. No entity whatsoever (whether one of the most prominent humans or
one of the most eminent angels) has been given an authority to know
about the unseen in a manner that they may exercise their own will to
gain knowledge about the hidden matters. However, whenever Allah so
wishes, He reveals a certain amount of information concerning the
Unknown to someone.

Giving information about the unknown solely depends on the Will of
Allah and not on the desire of someone. On many occasions Allah's
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} had a desire to gain knowledge about a
certain thing or occurrence, which he could not know,

but the same was revealed to him whenever Allah intended to do so.
During the era of Prophethood, the hypocrites slandered \`Aisha {May
Allah have mercy on Her} which shocked the Prophet {Peace be upon Him}
tremendously. He tried- to probe into the matter for -many days, but
failed to ferret out the truth. And when Allah intended, the Prophet was
informed through the process of revelation that the hypocrites are none
but liars and the chastity of 'Aisha Siddiqah {May Allah have mercy on
her} was verily beyond reproach. A Muslim monotheist must have a
conviction that Allah preserves the keys to the treasures of the unknown
with none but Himself and has appointed none as their treasurer. No one
can stop Him if He Himself awards something to whomsoever He so wishes
(by Himself unlocking one of His treasures).

The one who claims to have the knowledge of Ghaib (unseen), is a
liar:

We thus understand that anyone who claims to possess a certain art or
knowledge enabling him to have a peep into the Ghaib, to reveal the past
incidents and to adumbrate about the futuristic events, is an outright
liar claiming godship. In case someone recognizes a Prophet, a saint, a
jinn, an angel, an Imam, a man of piety, a religious preceptor, a
martyr, an astrologer, a seer, a clairvoyant, a prestidigitator, a
pundit, a ghost, or a fairy to be as such (having the knowledge of the
unknown), such a person becomes a Mushrik,

and he (rejects and negates) denies the contents of the above verses.
Even if a certain prediction of an astronomer, by a sheer chance,
happens to come true, it does not prove his knowledge of the unknown
because most of their statements turn out to be incorrect. Hence we
understand that it is beyond their capacity to have a knowledge of the
Ghaib.

A conjectural utterance may at times prove to be correct and at times
incorrect. The same is also true in regard to making Prophecies, getting
the things known through a Divine Inspiration, or resorting the Qur'anic
verses to gain an insight into the future events. A revelation, however,
is never incorrect and is not under their control. Allah reveals
whatever He intends to, out of His Own Free Will. A revelation does not
depend on the desire of anyone. Allah the Exalted says:

{Say: 'None in the heavens and the earth knows the Ghaib (unseen)
except Allah, nor can they perceive when they shall be
resurrected.}(V.27:65)

It means that no one has the capability to have an access to the
knowledge of the Ghaib whether he is one of the most prestigious human
beings or one of the most high-ranking angels. This fact may be
corroborated by the evidence that the whole world knows about the advent
of the Doomsday, but none of them knows as to when shall it occur! Had
they been possessing the capability to gain knowledge of everything,
they would have known the date of its advent also! The matters of Ghaib
(the unknown and unseen):

Allah the Almighty says:

{Verily, Allah! With Him (alone) is the knowledge of the Hour, He sends
down the rain, and knows that which is in the wombs. No person knows
what he will earn tomorrow, and no person knows in what land he will
die. Verily, Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware (of things.} (V.31:34) It
means that Allah Alone knows the matters of the Ghaib. While no one
other than Him has the knowledge of the unseen. Nobody knows as to when
shall the Doomsday occur, a news so much wide-spread and well-known
among the people that they are almost certain about its occurrence, what
about the matters like victory and defeat, health and sickness and
(others like it) similar to it. No one knows about them either.

These matters are neither well-known like the Doomsday nor are
absolutely definite. Similarly, nobody knows when shall it start raining
even though it has a definite season and it often rains during that
season.

Most of people do wish to know about it and had it been possible to
know it beforehand, they would indeed have known about it. Then how
could the people possibly know about the things which neither belong to
a particular season nor are they of any public interest like someone's
death and his life-span, being blessed with a child or not, being
wealthy or impoverished,

emerging victorious or facing an ignominy of defeat etc. No one knows
as to whether a womb carries one or more than one child1, whether a
fetus is a male one or a female one, complete or defective, beautiful or
ugly, even though the physicians do 1 Even the contemporary medical
science can determine the sex of the fetus only in case it happens to be
in the last stages of its birth.

narrate the reasons causing different formations and configurations,
but they do not know about someone's particular case. In such a case,
how could one possibly read the internal matters of a person like
thoughts, intentions and the condition of one's Faith and hypocrisy. As
long as one does not know as to what he himself shall be doing
tomorrow,

how could he know about the circumstances of others and since a man
does not even have an inkling about the place of his death, how could he
have a fore-knowledge about the day and time of his passing away. Be it
as it may, no person or entity has the capability to learn about the
future by exercising his own free will and choice except Allah.

Hence it becomes known to us that the people who claim to have the
knowledge of the unseen are none but liars. The so-called concepts and
methods of learning about what is unseen like a Divine inspiration,
soothsaying, foretelling by figures, astronomy, divination and casting
lots are none but falsehood and are only Satanic tricks and illusions.

Muslims should not be entangled with them and give them no credit at
all. And if someone neither claims to possess the knowledge of the
unseen nor claims to have the capability of knowing it by exercising his
own free will but he only claims that a certain matter which Allah has
informed him about, was beyond his control and capacity; and his own
choice and will, had nothing to do with it; in this case there are both
the possibilities, the man making such a statement, could either be
truthful or a liar.

Do not call upon anyone but Allah: Allah says:

{And who is more stray than one who calls (invokes) besides Allah, such
as will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, and who are (even)
unaware of their calls (invocations) to them?} (V.46:5)

It means that the polytheists are an extremely idiotic bunch of people,
who, by avoiding Allah (who possesses all authority and knowledge)
invoke the other so-called deities who neither hear their invocations
nor are capable of doing anything. Even if they keep calling them till
the Doomsday,

those (so-called) deities would not respond to their calls. Thus we may
deduce that the people who call upon the men of piety from a certain
distance by only requesting them to pray to Allah for them so that Allah
may fulfill their wishes, also commit an act of Shirk even though they
may not think it to be as such,

since the prayer of fulfillment is eventually directed to Allah. But in
fact, this act has become tainted with Shirk as a third person has been
called upon with the belief that this person possesses the capability of
hearing from far and near (if invoked), whereas it is a quality which is
attributed to Allah Alone. Allah Himself says that they (deities etc.)
are unaware of their calls (invocations) to them. They do not hear the
invocations of a caller even if he keeps shouting (his invocations)
until the Doomsday.

Allah Alone, possesses the power of benefit and inflicting harm:

{Say (O Muhammad {Peace be upon Him}): "I possess no power of benefit
or hurt to myself except as Allah wills. If I had the knowledge of the
Ghaib (unseen), I should have secured for myself an abundance of wealth,
and no evil should have touched me. I am but a warner, and a bringer of
glad tidings unto people who believe."}(V. 7: 188)

The Prophet {Peace be upon Him}is the leader of all the Prophets. Many
miracles are ascribed to him and people learned the subtleties and
nuances of religion from him. People acquired piety and virtuosity by
following his prescribed path. Allah Himself I instructed him to give
people an account of his helplessness making it clearly known to the
people that he is neither capable of exercising any authority nor
possesses any knowledge of the unseen. One can easily run a conjecture
from the fact that as long as he does not even possess an authority to
gain a certain advantage for himself or to ward off an evil from
inflicting him, how could he benefit or harm someone else.

Had he been having the knowledge of the unseen, he would have known
about the results of a certain action beforehand even prior to
undertaking it, and if he had a faintest premonition that the result of
a certain action is going to be unfavorable, he would not have
undertaken that action at all.

The knowledge of the unseen is one of the Attributes of Allah and he is
merely a Messenger. The mission of a Messenger is only confined to
warning people about the dire consequences of bad actions and to give
people glad tidings about virtuous deeds. This too benefits the ones who
nurse such a Belief (Tauhid) in their hearts and the nurturing of such a
Belief is also one of the Qualities of Allah.

**The original assignment of the Prophets:**

It becomes known to us that the greatness of the Prophets and saints
epitomizes in the fact that they direct people to the path of Allah and
give people information about whatever good and bad deeds they are
themselves informed of. Allah has endowed their propagation with a
quality of a convincing effectiveness. Many people are directed to the
Right Path through their efforts. No such authority has been conferred
on them that they should personally conduct and dispose off the worldly
matters like causing death to someone, bless someone with a son or
daughter,

warding off an evil, fulfillment of one's wishes, crowning someone with
success or destine someone to defeat, granting someone riches or making
someone indigent and impoverished, turning someone into either a king or
a mendicant, transforming someone into a nobleman and minister or
turning someone into a poor and dejected person, kindling the spark of
Faith in someone's heart or having the same snatched away from him,

or turning a healthy person into a sick person and sick person into a
healthy one. These attributes belong to Allah only and everybody,
regardless of his status, is unable to do such things except Allah.
Everyone is treated on an equal footing in terms of this inability.

The Prophets do not have the knowledge of the unseen:

The Prophets do not enjoy the distinction of having been awarded the
keys to the unseen to the effect that they may have a cognizance of
someone's innermost feelings or could make predictions about whether or
not someone is going to be blessed with a child, whether one's business
is going to yield profit or incur a loss, or whether someone is going to
emerge victorious in a battlefield or face a defeat.

As far as the above things are concerned, everybody is equally unaware
about them regardless of his status. However, certain remarks which are
made in reference to a certain context out of one's wisdom do sometimes
come true. Similarly, these eminent people (i.e., the Prophets) make
certain remarks in relation to a certain context using their own wisdom
which sometimes prove to be correct and sometimes incorrect. But
whatever information a Prophet is given through Divine Revelation is
never incorrect, but the Revelation does not depend on a Prophet's own
will.

The sayings of the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} regarding the knowledge
of the unseen: It has been narrated by Rubai' bint Muawwidh bin'
Afra1:

1 'Afra is the name of the mother of \`Auf, Muawwidh and Mu'adh {May
Allah have mercy on him}.'Afra {May Allah have mercy on him} had six
sons, all of whom participated in the battle of Badr. Two of them were
killed as martyrs in the battle of Badr. Mu'adh and Muawwidh {May Allah
have mercy on him} jointly killed Abu Jahl.

"The Prophet {Peace be upon Him} came to me while I was about to depart
to my husband's house (after the completion of marriage ceremony) and
sat next to me on my bed. Some of our young girls, to the accompaniment
of the sound of a drumbeat, started narrating the saga of our martyrs
during the battle of Badr. One of them even went to the extent of saying
that our Prophet (who is amongst us) knows what is going to happen
tomorrow. He (the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said, "Stop what you are
saying now and say what you have been saying before." (Al- Bukhari)

It means that on the occasion of Rubayi \`Ansariya' s marriage
ceremony, Prophet {Peace be upon Him} sat by her side. While singing
frolickingly, the young girls made a remark saying that our Prophet
knows what is going to happen tomorrow. The Prophet {Peace be upon Him}
prohibited them from making such an utterance and asked them to refrain
from it thenceforth. It thus becomes clearly known that a person no
matter how pious and virtuous he is, we must not believe that he has the
knowledge of the unseen.

The poets, who keep eulogizing the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} by
writing panegyric and laudatory poems extolling him to the skies and
thereby justifying their uncalled for eloquence under the pretext of a
mere exaggeration, is absolutely inc9rrect. So long as the Prophet
{Peace be upon Him} did not even allow the young girls to recite verses
in his praise, how could it be justifiable for an intellectual poet to
verbalize or listen to such verses.

The saying of Aisha {May Allah have mercy on Her}:

Aisha {May Allah have mercy on Her} stated:

"Whosoever ascribes the knowledge of five things to Allah's Prophet
Muhammad {Peace be upon Him} which Allah has referred to in the verse
saying: Allah has the knowledge of the Hour," (V.31:34), has attributed
to him a monstrous calumny." (Al-Bukhari) It means that all the matters
related to the unseen are covered under these five things that are
stated at the end of Surah Luqman and mentioned earlier. Therefore,
whoever says that the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} knew all the things
belonging to the realms of the unknown, has indeed committed an
immensely slanderous act. None has the knowledge of the Ghaib except
Allah.

It has been reported by Umm Ala {May Allah have mercy on her} that the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"Even though I am a Messenger of Allah, I can say swearingly by Him in
the earnest, that I do not have a faintest idea as to what is going to
happen to me or to you." (Al-Bukhari) It implies that the kind of
treatment Allah is going to mete out to his slaves in this world, in
their graves, or in the Hereafter is neither known by a Prophet, nor a
sage. They neither know about themselves nor about the others.

If someone happens to know about a certain person through Revelation
that he is going to have a happy ending, such a piece of information
thus acquired (through Revelation) is regarded to be no more than a
brief and superficial knowledge. Acquiring any further knowledge is
beyond their capacity.


**Chapter Five : The Negation of Shirk in Authority**

Allah says:

{Say: In Whose Hand is the sovereignty of everything (i.e. treasures of
each and everything)? And He protects (all), while against Whom there is
no protector, (i.e. if Allah saves anyone none can punish or harm him,
and if Allah punishes or harms anyone none can save him), if you know.
They will say: '(All that belongs) to Allah.' Say: How then are you
deceived and turn away from the truth?}(V.23:88, 89)

It means that even if a Mushrik (polytheist) is questioned as to who is
the one who has an absolute authority and command to conduct and dispose
off the worldly affairs in whatever way he pleases and there is none who
could deter or circumvent Him, they will say that it is verily Allah the
Almighty. As long as this is the ultimate truth, isn't it a lunacy to
entreat other entities (other than Allah) and request them for the
fulfillment of ones desires! We must also bear in mind that even during
the era of the Prophet {Peace be upon Him},

there were people who believed that there is no counterpart of Allah
and there is none who could equal Him but they still worshipped idols
considering them as their intercessors and asked them for the
fulfillment of their wishes, and hence became Mushrik (polytheists).
Even today, if someone believes that any other entity (other than Allah)
exercises it's authority in disposing off the worldly affairs and
worships it as his intercessor, he will become a Mushrik even though he
does not regard it to be as Allah's equal in the matter of withstanding
His Might.

Allah is the One Who causes benefit and inflicts harm:

Allah the Almighty says:

{Say: 'It is not my power to cause you harm, or bring you to the Right
Path.' Say (O Muhammad {Peace be upon Him}: "None can protect me from
Allah's punishment (if I were to disobey Him), nor should I find refuge
except in Him."}(V.72:21, 22)

It means that the matters which are either beneficial to you or are
detrimental to your interests are beyond my (the Prophet's) control. You
must not exceed the limits and become proud by harboring a fallacy that
as you are my followers, you have a strong base and you enjoy the
privilege of having a strong advocate and a beloved intercessor, you are
free to do according to the dictates of your whims and I will eventually
save you from the perdition of Allah. But the case is that I myself
happen to be at His mercy and see no refuge except with Him Alone, how
could I save others from punishment.

It thus becomes clear that the ones who forget Allah by banking on the
religious preceptors and thereby defying His Instructions, have indeed
strayed from the Right Path, because the Prophet {Peace be upon Him}
used to fear Allah day and night and could see his refuge with none but
Allah. Since the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} was himself meticulously
observant about these matters, how could any so and-so may even think of
the possibility of being exonerated from punishment despite committing
sinful acts. None is the sustainer except Allah:

Allah the Exalted says:

{And they worship others besides Allah, -such as do not and cannot own
any provision for them from the heavens or the earth.}(V.16:73)

It means that the people accord them such a respect and honor as
deserved by Allah only, even though they have nothing to do with
providing them any livelihood. Neither can they induce rain nor can they
grow anything from the earth. They are devoid of any capability
whatsoever. It is amazing to notice a popular fallacy among the masses
that the sages, even though possessing a capability of exercising
authority in the day-to-day worldly matters, they do not interfere in
these matters out of a sense of respectfulness, and are contented with
the Divine destiny.

Otherwise, they can make the whole universe upside down if they so
wish, but thinking of the enormity of evil and a havoc which could be
wrought by such an action, they keep mum and maintain their composure.
This idea is absolutely incorrect. They are not capable of doing that
either in terms of action or power. In other words, they do not possess
any capability and power to exercise such kind of authority.

Invoke none but Allah:

Allah the Almighty says:

{And invoke not besides Allah, any that will neither profit you, nor
hurt you, but if (in case) you did so, you shall certainly be one of the
Zalimun (polytheists and wrong doers)} (V.10:106) It means that in the
presence of Allah, who is the Lord of all the majesty, honor and
magnificence, calling upon such incapacitated entities who can neither
profit nor hurt anyone is truly a wrongful act for the simple reason
that a position of honor, which is the prerogative of the greatest only,
is being given to the riffraff among the people who are not worth their
salt.

Allah says:

{Say: (O Muhammad {Peace be upon Him} to those polytheists, pagans,
etc.) "Call upon those whom you assert (to be associate gods) besides
Allah, they possess not even the weight of an atom (or a small
ant), -either in the heavens or on the earth, nor have they any share in
either, nor there is for Him any supporter from among them.'
Intercession with Him profits not, except for him whom He permits.1
Until when fear is banished from their (angels') hearts, they (angels)
say: 1

It implies that the intercessor as well the intercessed had been
frantically waiting for the approval. Once the approval was granted,
they had been asking each other as to what their Lord had said. This is
a psychological situation which will overwhelm everybody where they will
be asking each other in an amazed stupefaction as to whether or not the
permission of their Lord has been granted?


'What is that your Lord has said?' They say: 'The truth.' And He is the
Most High, the Most Great.}(V.34:22,23)

**No intercession without His Permission:**

There are several forms involved in asking someone for the fulfillment
of one's desires in distress situations and getting the same fulfilled
by him. It could be that the person so requested is himself the master,
or a partner of the master, or has influence upon the master himself, as
a king may concede to the opinions of his deputies (in their capacity of
being the pillars of the empire) as making them displeased jeopardizes
the administration of the government, or a situation wherein a person
happens to intercede with his master for someone which the master dares
not refuse and willy-nilly becomes obliged to accord his approval, like
the princesses or the queens whose love is cherished by a king and as
such can not reject an intercession made by them out of their love.

Now, let us think about the polytheists who despite Allah, call upon
the saints and ask them to fulfill their wishes. These saints do not
even own a pittance in the universe nor they have a wee bit of share in
it. They are neither the pillars of the Divine empire nor are they
assistants and helpers to Allah the Almighty so that Allah succumbs to
their pressurization and concedes to whatever they say.

They can not even utter a word in regard to someone's intercession
without the permission of Allah Himself and may acquire nothing for
anyone. Once they happen to be in the presence of Allah and hear His
Commandment, they become so much awe-inspired and instilled with fear
that they almost lose their senses.

They do not even dare speak to Allah to reconfirm His Statement out of
respect and being overpowered by fright, but they ask each other as to
what their Lord has said, and once they confirm it, they will have to
believe it and testify to it and hence the question of daring to make an
intercession or playing an advocate on someone else's behalf does not
arise.

**Types of intercession:**

The most important thing which we must bear in mind is that the masses
take pride in the intercession (which they believe shall) to be made by
the Prophets and saints for them on the Day of Judgment. They have
forgotten Allah by having misunderstood the meaning of Shafa'ah. In fact
Shafa'ah means 'interceding with someone on someone else's behalf'.

In this world, there are many forms of making an intercession. For
example, a felony of theft committed by a thief becomes proven in the
sight of a king and a deputy or a minister mediates with the king and
saves him from punishment which he has incurred due to crime. In this
situation, the king did intend to punish the miscreant in accordance
with the law of the country, but as long as the king honors the
minister's word, he acquits the thief and lets him go unpunished.

The king does so because the minister is one of the pillars on which
his whole kingdom is based upon and he does not want make the minister
displeased lest his displeasure should jeopardize the organizational
machinery of the government. Taking all these matters into his
consideration, the king thus suppresses his anger and forgives the
thief.

This type of intercession is known as Shafa'at-e-Wajahat which means
that the request of the minister has been granted due to his honor and
high-ranking status. An intercession due to one's high-ranking status is
not possible:

An intercession by someone, enjoying a high-ranking status and the one
who is dear and near to Allah, is utterly impossible. A person who
recognizes an entity (other than Allah) to be such kind of mediator, is
definitely a polytheist and undoubtedly an ignorant person. He has not
understood the meaning of llah (God) and has not appreciated the status
of the King of kings at all. Allah's Status is so Great and Exalted that
if He so wishes, He may bring into existence millions of Prophets,

saints, jinns, angels, and entities equal to Gabriel and Prophet
Muhammad {Peace be upon Him} in terms of status, merely by uttering a
word "Be," He can decimate all the universe including heavens and earth
within a blinking of an eye and create a different world. Everything
comes into existence merely by His Will and He does not require matter
and substance to create things.

If all the human beings and jinns right from the era of Adam {Peace be
upon Him} and until the Doomsday, altogether become like Gabriel and
Prophets (in terms of piety and virtuosity), it will not add up an iota
in the grandeur of Allah's empire and if all of them turn into devils
and antichrists (in terms of disobedience and vices), there shall still
be no reduction in the magnificence of His empire. In any case, He will
still continue to be the Greatest of all and the King of all kings. No
one can either harm Him or benefit Him.

There is also a Hadith to this end which says:

"O my slaves! In case all among you (the jinns and humans) who have
passed away and the ones who shall be born in future in unison become
like the one who is the most pious among you all, you must remember that
it will add up nothing in my empire. Similarly, if you collectively
(including the ones who have passed away as well as the oncoming
generations) become vice- ridden and sinners like the one worst among
you all, it shall effect no reduction at all in my kingdom."

Acceptance of one's intercession out of love is not possible:

Another type of interceding is that a prince, a queen or a beloved of
the king comes forward and does not let the king punish a thief. The
king, out of his love for the person in question, does not wish to make
him displeased and therefore, grants a pardon to the thief. This kind of
intercession is known as an acceptance of intercession granted out of
love for the person concerned. The king, being driven by the love of the
concerned person, takes into account the fact that invoking a beloved's
displeasure shall in turn inflict pain on himself and hence he concedes
to the request of his beloved. This kind of occurrence in the court of
Allah the Almighty is impossible.

If someone reckons a prophet or a saint to be this kind of intercessor,
he also is a pure polytheist and an utterly ignorant person. Allah, the
King of kings, may reward his slaves by honoring them in whatever manner
He pleases, may confer grand titles on them like Habib (the beloved),
Khalil (the friend), Kalim (conversant), Ruhullah (Allah's spirit) and
Wajih (the good-looking). Likewise He may bestow on His slaves such
titles of honor as Rasul Karim (a kind messenger), Makin (the high
rank).

Ruhul-Quds (the holy spirit) and Ruhul-Amin (the honest spirit). But it
should be in mind that a master is after all, a master and a slave is
after all a slave. (They are poles apart). Each one has a specified
limit. As a slave becomes enraptured in pondering over the bliss of His
mercy, he also becomes overwhelmed with a feeling of fright when he
happens to think about His overpowering greatness.

**Interceding with permission:**

The third kind of intercession implies the situation wherein a thief
indeed is found guilty of theft but he has not committed it by way of
profession but he has unfortunately slipped into it (being a victim of
circumstances). Out of a feeling of guilt, this person now feels
extremely remorseful, his head lowered downward, constantly being gnawed
by the fear of punishment. Paying due respect to the law of the land, he
considers himself to be vice-ridden, a perpetrator of sin and thus
eligible for punishment.

He does not flee the king and does not request a courtier or a minister
to intercede with the king for his amnesty. He seeks no one's support
other than the king himself. He only pins his hopes to His Majesty day
in and day out and is awaiting the pronouncement of a judgment in regard
to the delinquency. The king, taking pity on his deplorable condition,
intends to connive at his delinquency but also wants to uphold the law
of the country lest it should be looked down upon by the people.

Now, a governor or a minister, after getting a wink from the king,
comes forward to intercede on his behalf. So the king grants a pardon to
the thief apparently on the plea that so long as the governor has
himself interceded for him, he has to honor it. The governor did not
intercede for the thief because he was either his relative, friend or
one of his acquaintances or he took the responsibility of defending him,
but it was simply due to the fact that the king willingly instructed him
to do so.

Obviously, he is a governor appointed by the king and not a supporter
of the thief (and hence he will not undertake an action of this kind
without a nod of approval from the king), as the one who favors a thief
is himself a thief. This type of intercession is known as "an
intercession with permission" (mediation with the permission and
willingness of the master himself).

This kind of intercession only shall prevail in the court of Allah the
Almighty. An intercession by a Prophet or a saint which is mentioned in
the Noble Qur'an is none other than this type of intercession.

**The Straight Path:**

It is obligatory on every human being to call upon none but Allah
Alone, must fear Him all the time and keep seeking His forgiveness from
sins regularly. One must confess to having committed sins before Him
Alone and consider Him Alone to be one's master and supporter. One
should seek refuge in none but Allah and must not depend on anyone's
support, as our Lord is All-Forgiver and Most Compassionate. Out of His
sheer blessing and mercy, He will obviate all our miseries and forgive
all our sins.

Whomsoever He wishes, shall appoint as your intercessor on His own
instruction. As you entrust Him with the fulfillment of all your needs,
so should you entrust Him with the responsibility of assigning anyone as
your intercessor whosoever He wishes. Never depend on anyone's support.
Call upon Him Alone to lend you support. Never forget the real Master.
Appreciate and pay due deference to the rulings of Shari 'ah (Islamic
law) and disregard the established social customs and traditions (in
case they happen to be in a direct confrontation with the rulings of
Shari'ah). Abiding by the social mores by disregarding the injunctions
of Shari 'ah is an extremely severe crime.

All the Prophets and saints are averse to it. They never intercede on
behalf of someone who adhere to the social customs and defy the
injunctions of Shari'ah. On the contrary, they become opposed to such
people and become displeased with them, because their piety only rested
on the factor that they accorded every preference to the willingness of
Allah.

They used to abandon their wives, children, followers, disciples,
servants and friends for the sake of Allah and whenever those people
used to do anything contrary to the Will of Allah, they turned into
their enemies.

What goodness of polytheists could attract the people of eminence to be
their intercessors with Allah and engage themselves in a heated
discussion with Him for their sake? Such a thing is never bound to
happen as they (i.e. Prophets and saints) are their enemies. Loving and
contradicting people for the sake of Allah only, is the quality they are
characterized with. In case Allah does intend to make someone taste the
Hell-fire, they shall be only prepared to fell him into the Hell-fire by
dealing him a few blows and pushes. They are merely dependent on the
Will of Allah and shall irresistibly tilt towards it.

It is reported by Ibn Abbas {May Allah have mercy on him}:

"One day I was behind the Prophet {Peace be upon Him}.He addressed me
and said, 'O boy! Remember Allah and Allah shall remember you. Remember
Allah and you shall see Him right before you. Whenever you ask for
anything, ask it from Allah and whenever you look for assistance, do it
by requesting Allah Alone. Be certain that if all the people
collectively agree to do you a benefit, they shall not be able to do
more than what Allah has preordained for you and in case they all agree
to inflict harm on you, they would not do it more than what Allah has in
store for you. The pens have been lifted and the books have gone dry."
(Tirmidhi)

It means that Allah the Almighty is truly and justifiably the King of
all kings. He is not proud (and haughty) like the kings of the world as
they do not pay any heed to the pleadings of any of their subjects due
to an empty sense of conceit. It is only due to this reason that if the
general people were to ask for anything from the king, they do it
through his deputies instead of having a direct audience with the king
himself so that their request be granted for their sake, at least. But
Allah is far above this type of categorization. On the contrary, He is
Extremely Beneficent and Most Merciful.

In order to attract His attention, no one's mediation is required. He
takes care of everyone individually and remembers everyone regardless
whether or not someone intercedes for him. He is Pure, Supreme and Far
Exalted from the rest. His Court is unlike the courts of the worldly
kings wherein the people in general are unable to have an access to the
royal court; only the king's deputies themselves exercise their
authority on the public and the subjects having no option but to obey
their orders. On the contrary, it is the Divine court and Allah is far
nearer to His slaves.

An ordinary man, who turns to Him and focuses his attention onto Him by
the depths of his heart, would find Him near himself. There is no veil
between a slave and Allah except (the curtain of) his own negligence.1

Allah is the Nearest to all:

If someone happens to be away from Allah, it is only due to his own
negligence. Otherwise the Rabb is very nearer to all.

Anyone calling upon a Prophet or a saint with the notion that they
shall draw him near Allah, do not understand the fact that a distance
however, is wedged between him and a saint or a Prophet, whereas Allah
is in fact very very close to him. We can understand it through this
example: Let us suppose that a slave stands alone in the presence of the
king who is all ears to listen to him, 1

'Al-Qadar (Destiny) is another name for the Divine knowledge. No human
being can know as to what is written in his own or someone's else's
destiny. Therefore, it is the first and last obligation on every human
being to strictly observe the Divine injunctions and interdictions
(following Allah's Instructions and avoiding things which He forbade),
and should look forward to all goodness out of His mercy.

but he instead, calls one of the deputies loudly and request him to
convey his request to the attention of His Majesty. What do you think of
this slave now? Obviously he is either blind or crazy! Everyone must ask
Allah Alone and must seek His Help Alone in distress. One must be
absolutely certain that whatever has already been written down in one's
destiny may not be erased. In case the world to its entirety becomes
incumbent on benefiting or harming someone, they can do it no more than
what has already been written in his destiny.

Thus it becomes abundantly clear that no one has the capability of
effecting a change in one's fate. A person who has no children in his
destiny, who can bless him with children and the one who has already
completed his life-span, who can grant him a lease of life? Therefore,
whoever maintains that Allah has empowered His saints to effect a change
in someone's destiny is quite incorrect.

The fact is that Allah grants His approvals to the invocations of
everyone among His slaves sometimes only, whereas He certainly accords
His approval to most of the supplications made by the Prophets and
saints. He is the One who guides someone to offer supplications to Him
and He Himself approves of them. Making a supplication and getting the
same approved are both preordained and inscribed in one's fate.

Nothing in the world happens outside the sphere and realms of fate and
no one, regardless of his big and small status, or whether he is a
Prophet or a saint, is capable of doing anything. All one can do is
praying to Allah. Now He has the option of either according His approval
to it or denying it as a matter of wisdom and precaution. Trust in Allah
Alone:
It has been reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Amr bin Al-Aas
{peace be upon him} that the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"Every human heart has a way (i.e. an option) in every field. The one
who lets his heart pursue all the avenues, Allah shall not pay any heed
to such a person as to in which avenue he has been destroyed. The one
who has a complete trust in Allah, He will suffice him in all the
avenues." (Ibn Majah).

It means that whenever a person is entangled in a distress, or stands
in need of something, his thoughts wander around in all directions. His
mind entertain different ideas, like invoking a certain Prophet, an
Imam, a preceptor, a martyr or a fairy. He thinks about consulting an
astronomer, a seer, a soothsayer or asking a priest to suggest a way of
success for him by casting lots etc.

Then the one who runs after every thought, Allah becomes impervious to
his supplications and does not include him in the list of his sincere
and faithful slaves and thus he loses any chance of being directed and
led to the Right Path by Allah. Eventually such a person gets destroyed
as a result of running after these thoughts. Someone turns into an
atheist,

someone becomes an apostate whereas someone else negates and rejects
everything believing in nothing at all. However, the one who trusts in
Allah and does not run after any fancy is truly a beloved slave of
Allah. The avenues of His directions are open to him and his heart
becomes blessed with such a quiet, calmness and bliss as can never be
achieved by the ones running after their (fleeting) fancies. Whatever is
written in one's destiny is bound to happen but the ones who run after
thoughts are constantly plagued with trouble whereas the ones having
trust in Allah rest in peace.1 1

It is reported on the authority of Anas {May Allah have mercy on him}
that the Prophet{Peace be upon Him} said:

Do not consider Allah on an equal footing with the worldly kings who do
all the major functions by themselves and let their servants perform the
menial jobs and hence the people are bound to entreat these servants for
the mere trifles. But the management of Allah is a far cry from it.
Allah is Omnipotent and within a twinkling of an eye, can ameliorate,
treat and rectify innumerable matters. None is a partner in His dominion
and sovereignty, none shares His authority; and therefore, no matter how
minute and negligible a thing could be, one should demand it directly
from Him. No one other than Him can give anything to anyone either big
or small. Relationship does not benefit:

It is reported by Abu Hurairah {May Allah have mercy on him} that when
the verse "And warn your tribe of near kindred" (V.26:214) was revealed,
the called his relatives and addressed them in the following manner:

"O the progeny of Ka'b bin Luwai! Save your selves from (the torment
of) the Hell-fire, for I will not help you in rescuing you from the
torment of Allah! 0 the progeny of Murrah bin Ka'b! Save your selves
from (the torment of) the Hell-fire, for I will not avail you in (the
matter of) rescuing you from the torment of Allah! O the progeny of 'Abd
Shams! Save your selves from (the torment of) the Hell-fire, for I will
not avail you in (the matter of) rescuing you from the torment of Allah!
O the progeny of 'Abd Manafl Save your selves from (the torment of) the
Hell-fire, for I will not avail you in (the matter of) rescuing you from
the torment of Allah!

O the progeny of Hashim! Save your selves from (the torment of) the
Hellfire, for I will not avail you in (the matter of) rescuing you from
the torment of Allah! 0 the progeny of Abdul Muttalib! Save your selves
from (the torment of) the Hellfire, for I will not avail you in (the
matter of) rescuing you from the torment of Allah! O Fatimah! Save your
self from the (the torment of) Hell-fire! Take whatever you like to take
of my property, because I shall not be able to rescue you from the
torment of Allah at all!" (Al-Bukhari -Muslim)

It means that the ones who happen to be the relatives of a saint, they
become confident of their support and therefore become proud and
fearless. Therefore, Allah has enjoined upon His beloved Prophet {Peace
be upon Him} to warn his relatives regarding this matter accordingly. He
(the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} made it conspicuously clear to all,

even to his beloved daughter that a relation only may help in matters
which lie under one's control and possession. As regards my belongings,
those are at my disposal, I can dispense with them without being miserly
but as regards the matters concerning Allah, they are far beyond my
power and authority, I can neither vouch for anyone nor could I mediate
for him.

Everyone must gird up his loins to face the Day of Judgment and must
think of rescuing himself from the Hell-fire. It thus becomes known to
us that being a relative of a pious man and a saint, does not exonerate
anyone from the accountability of his deeds towards Allah. As long as a
man does not take it upon himself to perform good deeds, it is difficult
for him to pull through "Every Muslim must ask for the fulfillment of
his entire needs from his Rabb, to the extent that even if he is in need
of salt, he should ask his Rabb for it and if one of his shoe-laces
breaks off, he must still ask his Rabb for it." (Tirmidhi)


