Chapter Seven : Prohibition of Shirk in Social Customs
======================================================

This chapter contains various Verses and Ahddith which prove that the
manner in which a man expresses his gratitude to Allah and dignifies Him
in his day-to-day mundane affairs, observing and employing different
modes, he must refrain from doing the same in respect of any entity
other than Allah.

The whispering of Satan (Devil prodding):

Allah the Almighty says:

{They (all those who worship others than Allah) invoke nothing but
female deities besides Him (Allah), and they invoke nothing but Satan a
persistent rebel!" Allah cursed him. And he (Satan) said: 'I will take
an appointed portion of your slaves. Verily, I will mislead them, and
surely, I will arouse in them false desires; and certainly, I will order
them to slit the ears of cattle, and indeed I will order them to change
the nature created by Allah.

And whoever takes Satan as a Wali (protector or helper) instead of
Allah, has surely suffered a manifest loss. He (Satan) makes promises to
them, and arouses in them false desires; and Satan's promises are
nothing but deceptions. The dwelling of such (people) is Hell, and they
will find no way of escape from it.} (V.4:117-l20)

The people who invoke deities other than Allah, they worship none but
females (according to them). Someone calls upon Hazrat Bibi, someone
Bibi Asiyah, someone Bibi Utawli, someone red fairy, someone black
fairy, someone Satila, someone Masani and someone goddess Kali. These
are merely fancies having no trace of reality.

These presumed male and female deities are none but delinquent
fallacies and whisperings induced by Satan which the people have taken
to be the objects of worship. The one who speaks and creates spectacles
(by playing tricks) sometimes, is none other than Satan himself.

All the acts of worship which are being carried out by these
polytheists are to propitiate none but Satan. According to them, they
only make their vows and offerings to women, but in fact it is all
seized upon by Satan. These things neither benefit them in terms of
religion nor help them in their mundane affairs. Since Satan himself is
a renegade and an outcast, how could he possibly benefit someone in
terms of his religious and moral edification? Moreover, he is a sworn
enemy to the mankind and hence no favor could ever be expected from an
antagonist.

He has already stated in the presence of Allah saying, "I will convert
many of Your slaves into my own slaves. I shall destroy their wisdom in
such a manner that they will recognize their own ideas as authentic ones
and follow them. They shall dedicate animals to me which shall be bar-
coded with the sign of such vows which they would be making in my name.
For instance,

they shall slit an animal's ears or amputate them, or they shall put a
sash around it's neck, or color its forehead with henna, or embellish
its face with trappings, or place a coin in its mouth. Be it as it may,
any sign which denotes that this animal relates to a vow belonging to
such and such deity is included in this category. Satan had already gone
to the extent of saying that I shall hold such a sway on people that
they shall be persuaded to deform the shapes and facial features created
by Allah. Someone shall raise a plait in someone's name, someone shall
perforate his nose or ear in the name of some deity, someone shall shave
off his beard and someone shall exhibit his mendicancy by shaving off
his eyebrows.

These are satanic deeds and are contrary to the Islamic teachings. Then
the one who abandons Allah, the Munificent and follows the path of
Satan, is bound to suffer a manifest loss. This is owing to the fact
that first of all, Satan is an enemy to the human beings. Secondly, he
is not capable of doing anything other than inducing whispering in the
hearts of the people.

He beguiles and placates people momentarily by making false promises to
them by suggesting that if you believe in such and such deity, your such
and such wishes shall be fulfilled. He allures them with tremendous
aspirations that if you could muster a certain massive amount of riches,
you may acquire for yourself such resplendently beautiful garden, an
orchard for a magnificent palace.

As long as these hopes are evanescent and never get materialized, the
man gets fidgeted, forgets Allah in his spasmodic bewilderment and runs
after the so-called deities. All his wild and erratic pursuits turn out
to be a cry in the wilderness bearing no fruits as he acquires nothing
except what has already been penned down in his destiny. This is nothing
but a deceptive mirage and a whispering aroused by Satan.

The outcome of all this trumpery is that a man becomes entangled and
enmeshed into the quagmire of Shirk and deserves the Hellfire. He falls
prey to the ruses of the Devil so dangerously that despite trying his
might and mane, he finds himself unable (and incapacitated) to get
himself freed from his tentacles.

Polytheistic rituals in regard to the soliciting of children:

Allah the Almighty says:

{It is He Who has created you from a single person (Adam), and (then)
He has created from him his wife (Eve), in order that he might enjoy the
pleasure of living with her. When he had sexual relation with her, she
became pregnant and she carried it about lightly. Then when it became
heavy, they both invoked Allah, their Lord (saying): If you give us a
Salih child (good in every aspect), we shall indeed be among the
grateful. But when He gave them a Salih child (good in every aspect),
they ascribed partners to Him (Allah) in that which He has given to
them. High is Allah, Exalted above all that they ascribe as partners to
Him.} (V. 7: 189,190)

It alludes to the fact that Allah Himself created the man originally
gave him a wife and caused a feeling of love to grow between them. And
when they expected a child, they made supplications to Allah that they
would be extremely thankful to Him if He blessed them with a Salih child
(i.e. good in every aspect of life and robust in health and sound in his
mental faculties etc.) Once blessed with such a child according to what
they longed for, they turned into the devotees of the so-called deities
and started making vows to them.

Some people take their children to the graves of saints and some to
their sanctums. Someone raises a braided plait on his shaven head in
someone's name, whereas someone else either puts a sash (around one's
neck)1 or a chain (around one's neck or feet). Someone even goes to the
extent of committing such an inequity that he 1

A sash or chain of administering a vow People wear them at the time of
making a vow, and take them off at it's completion. This is a custom
observed by many people.

coerces and subjugates his child to turn into a mendicant (as a
gratitude towards the accomplishment of his vow to a deity) and giving
his children such polytheistic names like Nabi Bakhsh, Ali Bakhsh, Pir
Bakhsh, Satila Bakhsh, Ganga Bakhsh, Jamna Das, etc. etc. As far as
Allah is concerned, He is totally free from their callousness and
insensitivity, but these dolts become deprived of their Faith.

**Polytheistic rituals in Agriculture**

Allah the Almighty says:

{And they assign to Allah a share of the tilth and cattle which He has
created, and they say: 'This is for Allah' according to their pretending
and this is for our (Allah's so-called) partners.' But the share of
their (Allah's so-called) 'partners' reaches not Allah, while the share
of Allah reaches their (Allah's so-called) "partners!" Evil is the way
they judge!} (V.6:136) It means that even though there is no denying in
the fact that all the grain and animals have been created by Allah, but
despite having a cognizance of this fact, polytheists dedicate some
things of theirs for the false deities other than Allah as like they
dedicate for Allah and it is an astonishing reality that the tremendous
amount of respect which they observe while dedicating these things to
the other so-called deities, they fail to exhibit the same amount of
veneration while apportioning Allah's share in their offerings.

**Polytheistic rituals in regard to the cattle:**

Allah the Almighty says:

{And according to their pretending, they say' such and such cattle and
crops are forbidden, and none should eat of them except those whom we
allow.' And (they say) there are cattle forbidden to be used for burden
or any other work, and cattle on which (at slaughtering) the Name of
Allah is not pronounced; lying against Him (Allah). He will recompense
them for what they used to fabricate.} (V.6:138)

Some people express their opinion about a certain thing (by merely
running a conjecture) that such and such thing is a unique one having a
streak of oddity, and therefore it only behooves that particular person
to have it. Some people do not use these animals as beasts of burden and
do not let others ride them either, on the plea that as long as this
animal is under a vow (made to such and such deity), it commands our
respect and thus we are bound to hallow it as a sacred entity. Some
people dedicate the animals to the so-called deities presuming that
these acts shall go a long way to propitiate Allah and thus their
long-cherished penchants shall be fulfilled, but fallacious are their
conjectures and deeds for which shall they indeed be penalized.

Allah the Almighty says:

{Allah has not instituted things like Bahirah (a she-camel whose milk
was spared for the idols and nobody was allowed to milk it) or a Saibah
(a she-camel let loose for free pasture for their false gods, e.g.
idols, etc. and nothing was allowed to be carried on it), or a Wasilah
(a she-camel at it's first delivery and then again gives birth to a she
camel at it's second delivery) or a Ham (a stallion-camel freed from
work for their idols, after it had finished a number of copulations
assigned for it, all these animals were liberated in honor of idols as
practiced by pagan Arabs in the pre-Islamic period). But those who
disbelieve invent lies against Allah, and most of them have no
understanding.} (V.5:l03)

A ritual slit was used to be etched out on to the ear of an animal
which was dedicated to a certain deity. This kind of animal was known as
Bahirah. Had this animal been a bull, it was called Sdibah.. An animal
which was declared to be under such a conditional vow that if the same
gave birth to a male colt, it (the colt) would be given away as an
offering. Now, if the said animal gave birth to both a male and female
offspring at one stroke, they would refrain from giving away even the
male colt as an offering. Such a pair of colts was called Wasilah.
People would stop riding and putting their burden on an animal which
gave birth to ten off-springs. Such an animal was called Ham. It has
clearly been stated that all these practices are merely customs and
rituals and have nothing to do with the injunctions of Shari 'ah.

Thus it becomes known to us that the acts of dedicating an animal to a
certain deity, bar-coding it, and determining that such and such deity
shall only accept a cow, a goat or a hen in terms of offerings (against
vows made to them), are nothing but the myths and rituals of ignorance
and are in contravention of the sanctified Islamic law.

**Slandering Allah in the matters of lawful and forbidden things:**

Allah the Almighty says:

{And say not concerning that which your tongues put forth falsely:
'This is lawful and this is forbidden,' so as to invent lies against
Allah. Verily, those who invent lies against Allah will never
prosper.}(V.16:ll6)

It means that one should not take it upon himself to determine as to
what is lawful and what isn't, because such an act is the sole
prerogative of Allah. This sort of thing shall only amount to inventing
lies against Allah. It is wrong to be driven by one's own flights of
fancies that if that particular assignment is undertaken after this
particular fashion, it will click or else it shall go haywire, for one
can never succeed by inventing lies against Allah.

Thus it becomes known to us that fostering such myths that one should
not partake of betel leaves in the month of Muharram, one should not
wear red dresses, the male should not eat the food of vowing in the name
of Bibi, a food offering made in the name of a certain saint must
contain those particular vegetables or the same should necessary contain
Missi (a kind of female cosmetics in the olden days)

and henna etc., or declaring that such a food should not be eaten by a
female slave or for the woman who remarries (either after the death of
her first husband or after being divorced by him) or the ones belonging
to the lower castes of the society, or an adulteress, declaring that the
offering made in the name of Shah Abdul-Haque (a saint) has to be a
Halwa (a sweet dish) necessarily which should be prepared with an utmost
precaution and that it should not be had by someone who is addicted to
using a hubble-bubble,

alleging that the offering made to Shah Madar (a saint) has to be
Maleeda (a sweet dish); the one offered to Bu Ali Qalandar, has to be a
dish of Siwaiyan (vermicelli) and the one offered in the name of the
Companions of the Cave (Ashdbe-Kahf), a dish of meat and bread. Giving
currency to such myths that on the occasion of someone's marriage or in
the event of somebody's death, it is necessary to observe such and such
customs, propagating such ideas that a woman should not remarry after
the death of her husband, should not attend a marriage ceremony or
should not marinate pickles,

fanning a superstition that this particular person should not wear blue
clothes and that person should abstain himself from wearing red ones
etc. All the above things are acts of Shirk and the people who
perpetrate such things are in fact interfering in the matters which
solely belong to Allah the Almighty and hence are inventing their own
Shari' ah.

Giving credit to the influence of planets (Zodiac signs), is an act of
Shirk:

Zaid bin Khalid bin Juhni {May Allah have mercy on him} narrated the
following Hadith:

"One day the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} led us the morning prayer in
Hudaibiyah pursuant to a night-long rain. After completing the prayer,
he diverted his attention to the people and said, 'Do you know what your
Rabb said?

' The Companions {May Allah be pleased with Them} answered that Allah
and His Prophet {Peace be upon Him} knew the best. The Prophet {Peace be
upon Him} answered, 'Allah said that among the slaves of mine who
entered the morning, some were believers and some disbelievers. The one
who said that this rain was induced due to the blessing and mercy of
Allah has indeed affirmed his Faith in Me and denounced the stars and
the one who said that this rain was caused and brought by such and such
star1, has denounced me and affirmed his Faith in stars."
(Al-Bukhari -Muslim)

It means that the one who cherishes such a belief that the stars (which
are merely a creation of Allah) exercise their influence in the matters
of the universe, Allah considers him as the one who negates Him. Such a
person is none but a star-worshipper. The one who affirms that this
universe is operative by Allah's command, is His beloved slave and not a
star-worshipper. Thus, we understand that believing in propitious and
unpropitious hours, making an inquiry as to which day or date is
auspicious or inauspicious (to commence an activity) and giving one's
credit to the observations of an astrologer are the activities which
open the door to Shirk (polytheism). This is due to the fact that all
these activities belong to astrology and these are only the
star-worshippers who believe in them.

**The astrologers are magicians and the magicians are disbelievers:**

It is narrated by Ibn Abbas{May Allah have mercy on him} that the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"The one who learns a chapter of astrology in a way contrary to the
commandments of Allah, has 1

'Naw' is translated as 'Zodiac'. It implies one's destiny, fate,
horoscope or a certain position within the constellation. The expression
implies the position of the moon in the sky. In the terminology of
astrology, it implies those planets or the zodiac positions of the moon
which are in a swinging motion day and night. They are attributed to be
carrying special effects and specific modes of influence on each hour of
the day and night. Astrologers pronounce something as auspicious or in
auspicious by observing them, which is absolutely wrong.

learnt a part of magic. An astrologer is a soothsayer, a soothsayer is
a magician, and a magician is a disbeliever." (Razin)1

It means that the Noble Qur'an states that the stars are a
manifestation of the power and wisdom of Allah. They serve as an
embellishment to the sky and a scourge to drive away the Devil.2The
Qur'an never states that these stars have the power to interfere in the
running of nature or that they have a direct bearing on the virtuosity
and vices taking place in the world.

Now, if someone disregards the former merits of the stars and
postulates that these heavenly bodies influence the worldly affairs and
thus claims to have the knowledge of the unseen, he indeed is a
polytheist. As the soothsayers, in the pre-Islamic period of ignorance,
used to predict about the unseen by consulting the jinns, the
astrologers do the same by consulting the stars which means that a
soothsayer, an astronomer, a Rammal (a conjurer),


a Jaffar (a soothsayer) all follow the same creed. A Kahin (the one who
prophesies about the future events) courts friendship with the jinns
just like a magician and the same is not possible until one believes in
them, invokes them and makes an offer to them. It all relates to
infidelity and making partners to Allah. May Allah the Almighty save and
preserve Muslims from committing acts or Shirk. Amin.


