The Sin of Believing in Astrology
=================================

It is narrated by Hafsah {May Allah have mercy on Her} the Mother of
Believers, that the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"The one who approaches a soothsayer and consults him about any matter,
his prayers shall not be accepted for forty days." (Muslim)

It means that anybody who approaches a certain person, claiming to have
the knowledge of the unseen, and thus enquires of him about any of his
problems, his prayers shall not be accepted for forty days. This is due
to the fact that such a person has committed an act of Shirk, and Shirk
destroys all acts of worship. An astrologer, a conjurer, a diviner, the
one who predicts about the unseen by casting lots etc. are all
categorized as soothsayers.

**Deducing an Omen is an act of disbelief:**

It is narrated by Qabisah {May Allah have mercy on him} that the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"The acts of making prophesies through making a bird fly, or casting
lots to infer a good or bad omen or declaring something to be carrying a
foreboding presentiment are acts of disbelief and 1

Razin bin Mu'awiyah is one of the leading narrators of Hadith. He died
in the sixth century according to the Hijra calendar. 2

The three advantages of stars which are mentioned in the Noble Qur'an
are: Beautification of sky, driving away the devils and providing
guidelines to the sea and land travelers.

apostasy."1 It is narrated by Abdullah bin Mas'ud {May Allah have mercy
on him} that the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said: "Taking an omen is an
act of Shirk, taking an omen is an act of Shirk, taking an omen is an
act of Shirk!"

The custom of taking an omen was rife in the Arabian society and the
Arabs had a great belief in it. The Prophet {Peace be upon Him}
reiterated that it is an act of Shirk so that the people should refrain
from having a faith in this absurdity.

Sa'd bin Malik {May Allah have mercy on him} narrated that the Prophet
{Peace be upon Him} said:

"A belief (i.e. in the magical properties) that an owl is a sign of
omen, is baseless, no disease gets transmitted from one person to
another; and nothing is inauspicious (carries a misfortune). Had it been
so, the same would have been found in a woman, a house and in a horse."
(Abu Dawud) A belief was rife among the then Arabs, about a victim of a
murder whose death is still ur1fetaliated, that an owl comes out of his
skull and pleads for his revenge. This owl was known as Hammah. The
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} declared this kind of faith to be baseless.
Thus, the concept of the transmigration of souls is thoroughly baseless
too. The Arabs were of the opinion that the diseases like itching and
leprosy etc. are contagious ones. The Prophet {Peace be upon Him}
refuted this view to be an erroneous one.

Thus it becomes known to us that a view which is generally held by the
people to the effect that the people suffering from smallpox should be
avoided and that the children should not be permitted to go near them,
is among the myths cherished by the disbelievers, and hence we should
not give our credit to them, which means that we should not nurse such a
faith that the ailment of that person shall strike us automatically
Without the will of Allah since no disease strikes anyone unless Allah
commands it to be so. (However, from the medical point of view, there is
no harm in taking the necessary precautions).

A myth which has gained a wide currency among the people is that they
often keep observing that 1

Al-'lyafah used to release a deer or a bird. If these animals proceeded
to the right, they considered it to be auspicious, but if the same
proceeded to the left, they considered it to be as a foreboding one and
thus refrained from commencing an act. At-Tayarah also implies the same
meaning. The people who were known as At-Tarq used to either cast
pebbles on the ground or draw lines in the sand thereby inferring good
or bad omens.

a certain assignment is inauspicious for the particular person and
hence he did not succeed in it. This belief is erroneous too. The
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} stated that, had something been
inauspicious, it would have been a house, a horse and a woman.1 The
above things sometimes do prove to be inauspicious, but no formula has
been prescribed to ascertain their inauspiciousness. A belief widespread
among the people is that a house resembling a lion's mouth2 a horse
having a star-like forehead and a woman having a vicious mouth are
inauspicious.

These myths are baseless, having no authenticity, and the Muslims
should pay no attention to them. If someone buys a new house, a horse or
marries a woman, one should only ask Allah to make them auspicious for
him and similarly one should seek Allah's protection from their evil. As
to the rest of things, one should refrain from harboring such notions as
to this particular work augured well for him whereas that particular
assignment proved to be ill-starred to him, and therefore he flopped in
it.

It is narrated by Abu Hurairah {May Allah have mercy on him} that the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"There is no contagion (a disease transmitting from one person to
another), no owl (believing in its so-called magical properties) and no
Safar (a ghost allegedly inhabiting the belly of a person)." (Bukhari)

A view which was rife among the Arabs regarding the people suffering
from Ju'ul-Kalb (an ailment characterized by an insatiable hunger) was
that his belly was inhabited by an evil spirit which in took all the
food he devoured and therefore his hunger was never satiated. This
so-called evil spirit was known as Safar. The Prophet {Peace be upon
Him} declared that there is no such thing as a ghost or an evil-spirit
(i.e. inhabiting the belly of the sick person) and this was merely a
superstition. Thus we understand that the ailments are not induced by
the evil spirits.

Some people believe that some of the diseases occur due to the
influence of some evil spirits like Satila, Masani, Barahi3 etc. but
this is untrue. During the pre-Islamic period, people used to consider
the 1 The Prophet {Peace be upon Him} on another occasion, elaborated on
it this way:

"An evil house is the one which has bad neighbors, an evil woman is the
one who is short-tempered and ill-mannered, and a horse which is not
worth keeping is the one who is unruly and skittish." 2

A house which is broad and wide at the front and small and constrained
at the rear is called Sher Dahan (lion- mouthed). The Indians considered
this type of house to be evil and inauspicious. 3

Barahi is the name of a goddess of diseases among the Hindus, which is
worshipped to repel diseases.

month of Safar as an evil one and did not perform any activity during
this month. This was wrong too. Thus, it becomes known to us that
considering the thirteen days of Safar as inauspicious and believing
that the calamities befall the earth during this specific period and
deeming a thing, date, day or an hour to be of an evil presentiment are
all polytheistic concepts. It has been narrated by Ibn Majah on the
authority of Jabir {May Allah have mercy on him} that the Prophet {Peace
be upon Him} took the hand of a leper, put his hand along with his own
hand in a bowl and said: "Have an absolute Faith and trust in Allah and
eat."

It means that our trust lies in Allah Alone. He can inflict disease on
anyone whomsoever He wishes and can make anyone hale and hearty. We, on
our part, do not desist from eating with anyone and do not believe that
a disease may be transmitted from one person to another. Do not make
Allah an Intercessor:

It is narrated by Abu Dawud on the authority of Jubair bin Mut'im {May
Allah have mercy on him} that a nomad Arab came to the Prophet {Peace be
upon Him} and said:

"People are suffering from hardships, the children are suffering from
an extreme hunger and the livestock has perished. We would like you to
make supplications to Allah on our behalf to invoke rain. We would like
to appoint you as our intercessor towards Allah and appoint Allah as our
intercessor before you."

The Prophet {Peace be upon Him} (upon hearing this) started mentioning
the glory of Allah by repeating the phrase "Glory is to Allah, Glory is
to Allah." He kept doing it for such a length of time that one could
notice it (the expressions of curiosity) writ large on the faces of his
Companions. Then the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said, 'You the one who
do not understand!' Allah does not intercede on anyone's behalf.

Far Exalted is He (in his position and status) than doing this. O
ignorant person! Do you know what Allah is? His Throne rests like this
on the heavens!" He then made a gesture with folding his fingers in a
round and convex shape denoting it to be like a dome and said that the
Throne, under the weight of His Majesty is wobbling and shaking about
exactly as if the saddle of a camel gyrates and creaks about under the
weight of a rider."

The incident goes that once there was a drought in the Arabian
Peninsula. A bedouin came to the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} and told
him the sufferings of the people and asked him to make supplications to
Allah. He further said that we would like to intercede with Allah on our
behalf and similarly we would like Allah to be our mediator to you in
this matter. Once the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} heard what he said, he
started trembling due to fear of Allah and started uttering the words of
praises manifesting the greatness of Allah.

The facial expressions of the audience changed considerably as they
heard the words epitomizing Allah's dignity and magnificence. Then the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} went on to explain to the bedouin that the
authority belongs only to the Master. If the Master does the needful by
accepting someone's mediation, it is so kind of him. If someone says
that we have brought Allah to the Messenger as an intercessor, it means
that such a person has vested an absolute power and authority in the
hands of the Prophet, even though this prerogative belongs to none but
Allah only.

The Prophet {Peace be upon Him} enjoined upon him to never repeat like
this. Allah the Almighty is so great and magnificent that all the
Prophets and saints do not even measure a particle before Him. His
Throne encircles all the heavens and earth just like a dome. Even though
the Throne is too massive and gigantic, yet it is unable to withstand
the greatness of this Emperor of emperors and thus it is wavering and
creaking about.

His creatures are unable to perceive and appreciate His greatness and
they are not capable of expressing about it by using their normal
thoughts and perceptions. Interfering in His work and laying hands in
the matters concerning His great empire is out of question. He is so
powerful that He can accomplish millions of things without the help of
an army, or even a minister or a consultant, just in one stroke. Why
should He go to anyone to intercede on someone's behalf? Who could be
powerful before Him? Prophet Muhammad {Peace be upon Him}, who is the
best creation of Allah among all the human beings,

became flabbergasted with, consternation upon hearing an indecent
remark from a bedouin and started praising Allah in every respect of His
grandeur which fills the earth and the skies. What do we make out of the
people who stat1 associating familiarity with Allah akin to a brother's
or a friend's relationship and keep blurting out their gossips with a
big mouth?

Someone says that he has purchased Allah for a mere pittance and
someone alleges that he is two years older than his Lord! Someone does
not even feel shy to utter a blasphemy to the effect that he would never
see his Lord if He appears to him in any shape other than that of his
religious preceptor. Someone has uttered a couplet which runs in the
following manner: "My heart is bruised with an extreme love of Prophet
Muhammad {Peace be upon Him} and I nurse an envy against my Lord."

Another poet says:

"One must treat Allah with a madness whereas Prophet Muhammad {Peace be
upon Him} must be treated with an absolute seriousness and mental
composure." Someone considers the personality of Muhammad {Peace be upon
Him} preferable to Allah Himself. All these things are pathetic and
utterly deplorable. Why have the Muslims turned mentally decrepit ones
and have become blindfolded in the presence of the Noble Qur'an. May
Allah protect us from these acts of delinquencies. Amin.

Someone has justifiably remarked:

"We ask Allah's guidance that may He bless us with (an attitude of)
respectfulness as a disrespectful person becomes deprived of the
blessing of his Lord." A practice which is prevalent among the people is
that once they conduct a gathering and complete all the portions of the
Noble Qur'an therein, they pronounce a formula sentence which goes like
this:

"O Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jilani! Please fulfill our desire for Allah's
sake!"

This statement is a manifest Shirk.1 May Allah save Muslims from such
acts! One should never utter a word from his mouth which reeks of Shirk
(polytheism) or a word which borders on impropriety and
disrespectfulness towards Allah! Allah the Almighty is magnificent! He
is the Emperor of emperors, Who is perfect in all respects and His glory
never fades! It is only to punish one for a minor fault and forgive
other for a minor deed-depends wholly on His own will.

It is an arrogance to suppose that even though one has apparently used
a word showing disrespectfulness, but in fact the same alludes to a
distant meaning. This is due to the fact that Allah is far above it all
and defies all the enigmas. If someone starts gossiping freely with his
elders, it is bound to be regarded as an arrogance and sauciness. It
only suits to be free with one's close friends in this respect and not
with one's father or a king.

**The dearest names to Allah:**

It is narrated by Muslim on the authority of Ibn Umar {May Allah have
mercy on him} that the Prophet said:

"The dearest names with Allah are Abdullah and Abdur-Rahman." How
lovely it is to have a name like the slave of Allah or the slave of the
Most Gracious. This category includes Abdul-Quddus, Abdul-Jaleel,
Abdul-Khaliq, Ilahi Bakhsh, Allah Diya, Allah Dad etc. All these names
demonstrate a relationship to Allah. Kunya 2(pet name) with the name of
Allah must be avoided: It is narrated by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i on the
authority of Shuraih bin Hani {May Allah have mercy on him}:

"When I, along with the delegation of my clan, visited the Prophet
{Peace be upon Him}, he {Peace be upon Him} noticed that the people of
my clan were addressing me with a patronymic appellation of Abul-Hakam.
He (the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} called me and said, "Hakam (the one
having a jurisdiction) is none but Allah Himself. Only His commandments
are effective. Why do you have such a pet name as Abul-Hakam."

1 According to the Hadith of the Prophet {Peace be upon Him}, the
recitation of Salam on the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} prior to a
supplication and after it, is the reason for the acceptance of one's
supplication. Adopting someone as an intermediary (or as a means of
directing one's supplications to Allah) is a practice which is not
endorsed and authenticated in a fare and square manner by either of the
four Imam or the eminent personalities of the three ages of Islam (the
ages of the preferential order according to the Prophet {Peace be upon
Him}. Therefore, one should also avoid resorting to such means.

2 Calling one, "O father of so-and-so" or "a mother of so-and-so."

It means that it is only the prerogative of Allah to settle the
disputes and give verdict in regard to all the dissensions, a fact which
shall be demonstrated on the Day of Judgment. No other is capable of
doing that. Thus it becomes clear to us that a word which only befits
the magnificence of Allah must not be used for someone else. For
instance, none but Allah should be called the "King of kings." "He Alone
is the Rabb of the whole universe and can do anything He likes."

This type of expressions may only be used for Allah. Similarly the
expressions like the object of worship, the All-wise, the Carefree etc.
are only fit to be used for Allah Alone. Only say Ma Shii Allah (What
Allah wished):

It is narrated in Sharh As-Sunnah by Hudhaifa{May Allah have mercy on
him} that the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"Do not say, what Allah and Muhammad {Peace be upon Him} wished, but
you should only say, what Allah wished."

It means that none of the creatures has a say in the matters concerning
Divinity, no matter how great and close one that creature could be. For
instance, one should never say that if Allah and His Messenger wished,
it should happen so, since all the things in the world happen by the
Will of Allah only and not by the will of the Prophet. If someone
enquires of you as to what a person really conceals in his heart, or
when that person shall be marrying or how many leaves that particular
tree bears or how many stars are there up in the heavens,

never respond to him by saying that these things are only known by
Allah and His Prophet, as the knowledge of the unseen rests with Allah
and not with His Prophet. However, there is no harm if someone says such
a thing in regard to the religious matters as Allah has given a full
knowledge of religion to His Prophet and has commanded people to comply
with the instructions of His Prophet.

Taking an oath in the name of anyone other than Allah is an act of
Shirk:

It is narrated by Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Umar {May Allah have
mercy on him} that he heard the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} saying:

"The one who administers an oath in the name of anyone other than
Allah, has committed an act of Shirk."

It is narrated by Abdur-Rahmiin bin Samurah {May Allah have mercy on
him} that the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said: "Do not take an oath in
the name of the idols nor in the name of your fathers." (Muslim). It is
narrated by Ibn Umar {May Allah have mercy on him} that Allah's Prophet
{Peace be upon Him} said:

"Allah prohibits you from taking an oath in the name of your
forefathers. If anyone of you were to take an oath, let him either do it
in the Name of Allah or he should observe silence." (Al- Bukhari-Muslim)
It is narrated by Abu Hurairah {May Allah have mercy on him} that the
Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said:

"Whoever has taken an oath in the name of Al-Laat and Al-Uzza (name of
two idols) (by the force of habit), he must say La Ilaha ill-Allah.
(There is no one worthy of being worshipped but Allah).
(Al-Bukhari-Muslim)

During the pre-Islamic period, it was a common practice to swear to the
idols. After embracing Islam, if someone happens to swear to an idol
unconsciously (by the force of habit), he must immediately recite La
Ilaha ill-Allah to affirm the Oneness of Allah. Thus it becomes known to
us that we must refrain from taking an oath in anyone's name other than
Allah. If such a thing happens inadvertently, one must immediately seek
Allah's forgiveness. The types of oaths prevalent among the polytheists
tend to weaken and jeopardize the Faith.

The verdict of the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} about observing vows:

It is narrated by Thabit bin Dahhak {May Allah have mercy on him}:

A certain person during the era of the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} made
a vow that he would slaughter a camel in a place known as "Bawanah."
Then this person came to the Prophet {Peace be upon Him} and informed
him about his vow. The Prophet {Peace be upon Him} said: Does the said
place comprise any of the sanctums (dedicated to any of the deities
during the pre-Islamic period)?" The Companions of the Prophet {Peace be
upon Him} answered in negative.

Then the Prophet enquired of them as to whether had there been any
festival observed there? They still answered in negative. Then the
Prophet instructed this person to go ahead with observing his vow saying
that it is forbidden to observe only that kind of vow which defies and
contradicts Allah's injunctions. (Abu-Dawud)

Thus it becomes known to us that it is a sinful act to observe a vow in
the name of anyone other than Allah. One should never accomplish such a
vow because making an intention to undertake such a vow is itself a sin
and if someone still goes ahead and completes it, he will only incur an
increased amount of sin. It is further added to our knowledge that a
place where the animals are sacrificed in the name of the deities (to
the exclusion of Allah), their worship is regularly conducted and
congregational activities of Shirk are performed, we should not even
carry there an animal which is to be sacrificed in the Name of Allah. We
should also refrain from attending such activities, irrespective of our
intention whether good or bad, because participating in these activities
is itself a perpetually bad thing.


