Introduction
============

The purpose of the present paper is to advance the construction of a
model for rationality for the Post-modern Age. The identification of
reason with science is no longer sustainable. What I propose is the
development of an idea of prudent reason of Aristotelian inspiration. My
method consists in*bringing* Aristotelian concepts to the current debate
by connecting them with related present-day notions. In this way, the
incorporation of Aristotelian notions into the current debate is made
possible, as is the integration of today’s concepts into a coherent and
fertile metaphysical framework, while a third effect, one of vast
importance, is also obtained: from the Aristotelian perspective, the
integrity of human action is recuperated, and is no longer split off in
unconnected areas - Aristotelian anthropology may thus contribute to
saving what Russell called ‘the schizophrenia of modern man’.

Today, then, Aristotelian prudence is correctly expressed in the
attitude of intellectual modesty and respect for reality that we find in
thinkers like Pierce, Popper and Jonas, enshrined in the Peircian maxim
of not blocking the way of inquiry and in Jonas’s responsibility
principle, which insists on the protection of the conditions for the
continuity of life[^1] . These positions of contemporary authors are
strengthened when understood against the background of Aristotelian
ontology (there is a plurality of substances; being may be actual or
potential, there is a path from*is* to*ought* . Man is desiring
intelligence or intelligent desire; reality is not a copy of the
concept, but is intelligible).

Furthermore, things being thus, we realize that a rational attitude is
fundamentally the same in the different contexts of science and in other
areas of human life. It is a question basically of protecting openness
of human action in the future, for we know that it will have to tackle a
(socio-natural) world whose future is also open. This attitude of
protecting openness does not guarantee anything, but it is the best bet
we can place in order for creative discoveries to continue to be made,
so that man’s and nature’s creativity may survive.

One might think, however, that both Aristotelian prudence and Peirce’s
maxim, together with Jonas’s responsibility principle are a scanty
characterization of human action, for they do not take into account its
creative  aspects. Jonas does not for a moment believe that his ethics
alone can bring about total good, but rather, aware of its limits, he
just seeks to protect the conditions of liberty, happiness and the
future assumption of responsibilities; in the same way that Aristotelian
prudence, rather than effectively producing practical truth, protects
and cultivates the conditions for its appearance; in the same way as
Peirce recommends as the ultimate maxim of reason, as the most universal
and conclusive norm, that we should ensure the conditions needed for
free research, and not block the way of inquiry. In short, the rational
attitude consists above all in a protection and stimulation of the
creative capacities that will allow us to adapt in the future to
unforeseeable conditions. Prudent rationality, although it does not
guarantee it, is directed towards*creative discovery* , seeking to make
it possible at all times, ensuring and stimulating the right conditions
for it, removing obstacles, and upholding the openness of human action
so that it can tackle the future course of events, always open and never
altogether determined. On the other hand, the compliance with prudence
and responsibility in difficult situations depends precisely on
creativity. All too often human action is described from the
methodological or ethical point of view as a set of alternatives, as the
obligation to choose from pre-set options; in this way, it is forgotten
that many times the best option - or the least bad - is not available
and has to be created*while* it is chosen and put into effect.
Furthermore, the development of what is created and judgement on its
adaptation are again carried out under the auspices of prudence. This
multiple linking of the principles of prudence with*creative discovery*
demands of us an elucidation of this concept.

Current versions of prudence, like Peirce’s maxim or Jonas’s principle,
are at the service of creative discovery. Aristotelian prudence seeks
practical truth. This article seeks to trace a movement from the
Aristotelian notion of*practical truth* to the Peircian concept
of*creative discovery* , or, if we prefer, of*poetic listening* , as
Prigogine would say. Science discovers as it creates: it*makes*
discoveries. This allows its activity to go in the direction of truth,
but that truth must be made, brought about and actualized. Science -
unlike the Moderns - does not aspire principally to certainty, but must
go on - unlike the Postmoderns - looking for truth. It will be, of
course, a*practical truth* .

The recognition of the practical implication of science, in its genesis,
its applications and its justification, and the renunciation of the
ideal of certainty no doubt mark the end of an era. The fallibilists,
like Popper, distinguish between truth and certainty. Therefore, the
critique of the ideal of certainty that characterizes Postmodernism does
not necessarily have to affect the ideal of truth. But once the
practical nature of science is recognized, the truth corresponding to it
is practical truth. The notion of practical truth is of Aristotelian
origin and is set out and studied in*Ethica  Nicomachea* VI, 2.

It seems to me that this notion allows us at the same time to save the
objectivity of science and its constructive aspect, without one
threatening the other. Within the present argument it also allows us to
bring out the deep reasons for which science is a prudent activity,
never subjected to a rigid method, for it is creative, nor left to the
whim of the irrational, for it must adjust to the reality it discovers.
It may be shown, furthermore, as an activity that makes discoveries, to
be not substantially different from other human activities, such as the
arts, poetry, technology or moral action, although it has clear
differences of manner with them. Now that its relationship with the
Aristotelian concept of practical truth has been demonstrated, the
notion of creative discovery also finds a basis in ontology and in
Aristotelian anthropology of act and potentiality, and therefore looses
its paradoxical aspect.

To comply with the goal mentioned, I shall first set forth (in**section
2** ) the contents of the Aristotelian concept of practical truth just
as it appears in*Ethica Nicomachae* VI, 2. Secondly, I shall show how
the Aristotelian notion of practical truth may be linked with today’s
notion of creative discovery (in**section 3** ). To my mind, discoveries
are*made* in many human activities: in science, poetry, art, technology,
politics and ethics[^2] . In all human activities there is a theoretical
aspect and a constructive one, which are only distinguished
conceptually: we behold what we make, and this beholding is one of
reality, for what we see are the possibilities of reality that our
action has actualized, putting them before our eyes. Human action makes
the discovery of similarity and puts it into practice physically (art,
technology, politics, etc.) or simply contemplates it (poetry, science).
In a world inhabited by a plurality of substances, real and possible,
which are not absolutely*identical* or chaotically*different* , human
action weaves the web of*similarities* . The ‘mechanism’  that produces
similarities is called metaphor; as Umberto Eco would say: the
‘Aristotelian machine of the metaphor’, which, of course, is not a
machine but a person. In**section 4** , I shall set forth this idea of
metaphor as the prime nucleus of human creativity, as the creative
discovery of similarity[^3] . Finally, I shall set out the conclusions
of this article and the outlook for future papers (in**section 5** ).


