Practical Truth
===============

Aristotle defines prudence (*phrónesis* ) as:

A true and reasoned state of capacity to act with regard to the things
that are good or bad for man[^4] .

By this definition he distinguishes prudence from other notions. Given
that it is a disposition (*héxis* ), it will be distinguished from
science (*episteme* ), for prudence will be a knowledge linked to human
action. Secondly, as it is practical (*praktike* ), its result will be
an action, not an object, which distinguishes it from art or technology
(*tekhne* ). The demand for rationality and truth (‘*...metà lógoy
alethe* ’) distinguishes prudence from moral values and sets it among
the intellectual virtues. Lastly, the fact that it concerns good and
evil*for mankind* , and not good and evil as abstract concepts,
differentiates prudence and wisdom (*sophia* ).

Prudence is not science, but neither is it simple opinion or skill[^5] ,
it is genuine rational knowledge with the intention of objective truth.
The truth of human action falls within the jurisdiction of the
Aristotelian concept of*practical truth* , the kind of truth that seeks
prudence:

Now this kind of intellect and of truth - according to*EN* - is
practical [...] of the part which is practical and intellectual the good
state is truth in agreement with right desire[^6] .

Practical truth has two dimensions: concord between desire and intellect
(which is why it is a kind of truth) and creation of an objective good
(which is why it is practical). When there is agreement between desire
and intelligence, an objective good is also produced, in the world by
the action and in the subject that constructs and improves itself. So
practical truth does not consist only in the agreement between two human
faculties, but also has an objective dimension:

It is well said, then, that it is by doing just acts that the just man
is produced [...] without doing these no one would have even a prospect
of becoming good. But most people do not do these, but take refuge in
theory [...] behaving somewhat like patients who listen attentively to
their doctors, but do none of the things they are ordered to do[^7] .

That is, in order to know truthfully  what is good for man, one must do
it:

For the things we have to learn before we can do them, we learn by doing
them[^8] .

According to Aristotle, the inherent truth of science (‘*episteme* ’ in
the narrow sense) is necessary and is not mixed with error, and the
Greeks themselves suspected that this perfect knowledge was reserved for
God, and man could only aspire to it[^9] . Practical truth, however, is
the result of successive corrections, of a history of trial and error,
of rectifying in our conduct the tendencies to the powerful attraction
of extremes; a history, according to Aristotle, of approaching the happy
medium, or equilibrium. On the other hand, to lose ground towards either
of the extremes is, as Aristotle says, very easy, you just have to let
yourself go[^10] .

Finally, it might seem that practical truth has to do only with the
interest or usefulness of an action, and with its potential for making
for a pleasant life. Thinking this way reduces prudence to a mere skill
(*deinós* ) or ability to achieve any ends. But prudence does not only
seek partial ends but, in the final analysis, ‘good life in
general’[^11] . Science governed by ability would be instrumental in the
poorer sense of the word.

But this is only so if we forget that among man’s most conspicuous
interests is knowledge[^12] , the satisfying of curiosity about what
surrounds him. Aristotle says that virtue is about pleasures and
pains[^13] and that, therefore, the most virtuous life will be the most
pleasurable, the one most full of happiness[^14] . But, according to
him, what produces the most pleasure is knowledge of the world, of man
himself and of the divine. Therefore, he who seeks happiness is he who
seeks knowledge, truth, the philosopher in the original sense.


