Practical truth and creative discovery
======================================

It may seem that Aristotelian prudence, Peirce’s maxim and Jonas’s
principle are indicators of a negative type, advice as to what to avoid.
Indeed the Peircian maxim which we have mentioned is formulated in a
negative way, as is Jonas’s responsibility principle. The fact that the
Greek term used by Aristotle (*phrónesis* ) can be translated as
prudence brings out these negative connotations even more. Some authors
prefer to avoid them, rendering*phronesis* as ‘practical wisdom’ rather
than ‘prudence’. There is, however, no cause for worry about these
connotations for, in fact,*phronesis* is knowledge based on experience
and tends especially to foresee the unwanted consequences of our
actions, above all those which would make rectification or correction
impossible, and which would make us forfeit our very capacity to go on
learning from experience and with it our freedom and reason. ‘Prudentia’
appears in Cicero as a contraction of the Latin term ‘providentia’, that
is foresight. If the Modern ideals had been fulfilled completely, then
our reason, in the shape of the scientific method, would be our eye on
the future, steering research and human action with certainty in such a
way that that other kind of practical knowledge, grounded on living
experience, fallible and ever fearful that something irremediable might
happen, the custodian of our freedom, the knowledge we call prudence,
could be forgone. But this was not to be. Today we need more than ever -
because our scope for action is more powerful than ever - the prudential
attitude in order to avoid a one-way journey to error, slavery or
extinction. That is, we need an attitude of carefulness, of watchfulness
and of custodianship of our freedom, rather that a set of rules for
exercising it. Nature is creative, prolific, unforeseeable and fecund,
as is borne out by our presence among living things. People also are by
nature nodes of spontaneity, substances projected towards the future. In
the light of this reality, we do not need to become obsessed with
marking routes for our creativity, or rules, or rigour for the rules,
but rather with protecting or pampering the capacity for openness, for
novelty, for creation, already present in nature, and also in people, in
the shape of freedom. We cannot hope for a more reasonable method than
one that prepares us to face what is new and unforeseeable, the
extraordinary[^15] , what nobody knows or has ever seen. Only prudence
protects the way to the realization of truth, to the discovery that is
made.

Of course, this way of taking prudence does not identify it with
inaction. On the contrary, the custody of our freedom and creativity
obviously requires actions of all kinds advised by prudence. But we know
little of the roots of creativity, prudence only tells us - and without
any guarantee - how to ensure its conditions here and now. Pierre Duhem
comments with irony that whoever things that an idea comes to the
scientist out of nowhere, as if by magic, is like the child who sees the
chick come out of its shell and thinks that it all happened in that
instant, without imagining for a moment the complexity of a long period
of gestation[^16] . The scientist usually prepares the ground through
study, meditation, progress in the correct formulation of the problem,
conversation, observation, reading, etc. Despite everything the
hypothesis, according to Duhem, ‘must germinate in him without him’[^17]
. And, once he has an idea, again his ‘free and laborious activity must
come into play’ to ‘develop it and make it bear fruit’[^18] . We say of
our idea that they occur to us, not that ‘we occur them’, but we freely
take care of the conditions in which they might arise.

Knowledge, as the human action that it is, is then two-sided. On the one
hand it is the fruit of human creativity, while on the other it responds
to the reality of things. It is objective and subjective. We are not
mere mirrors of nature, yet on the other hand relativist epistemologies
will never be able to explain the nature of error, they will never be
able to tell us what happens when reality simply says no. The two sides
of human knowledge, which discovers reality at the same time as it
creates it, is perfectly summed up in the expression ‘creative
discovery’ or, as Prigogine beautifully puts it, ‘poetic listening’.

But it is one thing to have a suitable formula for talking about human
knowledge and it is another to endow that formula with content, with a
content that will avoid its paradoxical aspect. From my point of view, a
good way of carrying out such a task is to relate the formula to the
Aristotelian concept of practical truth. It is true that this concept is
not free of a paradoxical aspect, but within the framework of
Aristotelian philosophy it may be demonstrated to have full coherence.

For us, for the moment, it already has an advantage, that is its
connection with prudence. Practical truth, that is the truth that is
made, is the result of the creative force arising from the protection of
prudence.

But the Aristotelian concept of  practical truth has, according to the
most authorized interpreters, certain limitations. It appears in
connection with prudence, but not with science or technology. In these
areas, truth is traditionally established by the adaptation of ideas to
things. In science, true ideas are those which, so to speak, imitate the
things that they are about; in the production of artefacts, these follow
the ideas. The very truth of practice also has two poles, but neither
dominates the other. Practical truth consists in the adaptation of wish
to understanding. Here the characteristics of truth are different,
because the adaptation of the two poles must happen via integration,
with neither of them suffering any violence to adjust to the other, for
at such a moment, man, who is intelligent desire and desiring
intelligence, would be betraying himself, would cease to be authentic
and true. This happens both when desires are denied by extreme
asceticism and when they rule without restriction over the intelligence
to the point of  clouding it and forging it. In  other words, what is to
be achieved is not previously granted by either of the poles in such a
way that the other simply has to adjust to it, but what both have to
adjust to must be made as something new at the same time as the
adjustment is made. Every human action consists in a creative task of
this type (as does the very history of humanity), and their common
result, if they are true, will be a life of fulfilment and the human
being himself. In this regard, it may be said without any doubt that
there exists a type of truth that is not conceived as an abstract
agreement, but which rather is made, comes into effect, or to be more
exact, is actualized, because the way in which wish and understanding
finally come to an agreement was potential in both, and is discovered.
This is the objective aspect of practical truth. But this potentiality
had to be actualized by the subject. This is the creative aspect of
practical truth. The paradoxical appearance of the formula fades away
once it is set against the Aristotelian background of the potential and
the actual.

Theoretical truth, for its part, may now be understood as the ideal
correspondence, considered in abstract, between ideas and things, as a
limit humans will never be able to reach (‘There is a mark to which the
man who has the rule looks, and heightens or relaxes his activity
accordingly, and there is a standard which determines the mean states
which we say are intermediate between excess and defect’[^19] ).

We can sum up the general characteristics of practical truth as follows:
it consists in the adaptation of two poles brought about by the action
of a subject; it is established when the adaptation is without any
violence by either pole on the other, but arises at an intermediate and
better point; the result is something new and in the process both poles
undergo changes; the adaptation may be understood as the actualizing of
a potentiality; insofar as the potentiality was real, practical truth is
objective; insofar as its bringing about requires human action, it is
creative; there is no automatic rule for the creation or for the
recognition of this type of truth, yet arbitrariness is excluded; it is
an exercise ‘determined by a rational principle, and by that principle
by which the man of practical wisdom [*phronimos* ] would determine
it’[^20] .

Could we extend this notion of practical truth as a creative discovery
also to science and technology, and in general to all human kinds of
knowledge and action? In my opinion we could. To do so we need to
recognize the practical aspects of science and the cognitive aspects of
technology, in order to appreciate to what extent science also creates
and technology also discovers. We need to definitely integrate knowledge
and action.

The genuine act of discovery does not discover what is hidden behind a
veil, behind a web of appearances, behind the unstable phenomenon, but
brings about what was there potentially. To discover is indeed to*make a
discovery* . When by discover we mean simply remove the veil behind
which reality is supposedly hidden from us, wipe our glasses, clean our
eyes, rid the mind of deception, when the catharsis or the critique
takes the leading role, then the illusion of method is produced. Because
a veil may be unwoven in order, thread by thread, in a premeditated and
orthogonal alternation of horizontal and vertical strands, or armed with
scissors we can unveil along a set path. When to discover is basically
to eliminate something that is there, whether a veil or a vice, an
element of deception or distraction, then it can be done with method,
for, at the end of the day, one knows what one is up against. When
discovering, or rather making a discovery, is creating, producing what
was not there, poetizing, conjecturing, inventing, then no algorithm is
possible, nor is any general method, nor is there any law or rule
capable of tackling the unknown, the different and new, the
extraordinary. To discover is to make actual, to bring about, and
thereby to make clear and obvious some facet of reality that was
previously just potential. The discoveries man makes are genuinely his
creation, for the potentialities that nature itself does not actualize
require man’s creative intervention (whether practical or poetic) to
become actual. The same is true for science as for art or technology.

To make a discovery, however, is not simply to construct (as
constructivism says), but to actualize, to invent (in the Latin sense of
the verb*invenio* , with all its rich polysemy). Mere construction
leaves us a long way from the desirable objectivity, it steeps us in
relativism and subjectivism, while actualizing brings together the
creative and ‘veritative’ facets of every genuine discovery, of every
invention, for what is said to be discovered is only really discovered
if it previously existed potentially. This is the objective,
‘veritative’ pole of discovery.

And what is it that covers possibilities before they are discovered? A
deceptive phenomenon? The appearances of the way of opinion?
Deficiencies of our minds, of our conduct or of the language we use?
Rather than any of this and in a much more radical way, possibilities
‘are hidden’ behind what substances are in act. Nothing negative or
deceptive, nothing that must be eliminated, but the very act of each
substance is what primarily harbours its potentialities. Discovery is
not, then, the elimination of anything, but creation, the actualization
of real possibilities.

Nature is creative, generative, it is*physis* , and actualizes
potentialities in a natural way. Art and technology imitate nature in
this, not because they copy its products, but because they produce like
it. Thus is it said by Aristotle and thus is it interpreted, I believe
quite rightly, by Ricœur[^21] .

For this line of interpretation, much seems to be suggested by Heidegger
in his text*Die Frage Nach Der Technik* [^22] , where he states that
technology discovers, brings about possibilities that existed in nature
thanks to the creative action, the poetics, of man. The steam engine
actualizes the movements that nature could, but did not, yield; wind
farms actualize the electricity present in wind; solar panels make
actual the lukewarm pleasure of a bath, hidden and aloof in sunlight;
swords and pistols what there is of terror in iron. Technology is then a
means of transformation, of actualization, and sometimes of humanization
of nature (when it does not become a risk). But it is also a means of
knowledge, as art is, for it brings out what was hidden, not behind a
veil, but as a potentiality. And then we see metal as a resource, steam
as movement or, what is more, as a journey or as a leave-taking or
reunion, wind as heat under the pot, the controlled collision of two
minute nuclei as the horn of plenty, or if they get out of control, as
the end of man’s home. But this is just a seeing, and this seeing may be
distinguished from doing, or rather*in* the doing, which is technology.

Let us remember that nature actualizes its possibilities and by so doing
reveals itself to us, that human technology and art do the same: with
their process of making they actualize what was potential and so develop
reality and our knowledge. Therefore, art and technology are  modes both
of action and of human investigation of reality. Both nature and
technology or art afford us knowledge because they are active, because
they actualize what was only potential, because they are continually
inventing and making discoveries, nature because of its own dynamism,
technology thanks to human action. Such is Heidegger’s view of
technology (from a rather hurried and free reading).

It seems clear, then, that to technology, like art, we can apply the
notion of practical truth. We can now see that the artefact is not a
mere realization of an idea, but the result of a process of adaptation,
of  ‘becoming alike’ of two poles: needs (many of them ‘superfluous’, as
Ortega y Gasset would have said, perhaps the most important ones) and
availabilities (skill, materials, finance, etc.). When there is a
genuine technical invention, the meeting point is not discovered mainly
by an automatic method, or by a downward negotiation in which both parts
give ground, but by an act of invention that gels, as a symptom of
truth, in innovation. It is by no means strange that every technical
innovation entails the modification of the two poles, of our needs and
out capacities, this is what is to be expected from their nature of
practical truth.

What about science? Is it really true to say that it*makes* discoveries?
Science proceeds in the same way as nature, technology or art, except
that it does not carry out the physical transformation of this into
that, it just shows us this*as* that, the two points on the way
together, without telling us the effective steps (that is steps that
should be part of our present repertory of actions) to indeed transform
this into that, or at least without taking those steps, which will be
taken by technology, if the time, the knowledge and the wish should
come. Here science is like poetry, which also makes us see ‘that this
one is that one’[^23] and makes - and this is the key - the similarity
obvious, but does not physically transform this one into that one. There
are also differences, of course. They are similar in that they both live
from metaphor, although they use it in different ways and chase after it
with varying amounts of savagery (poetry prefers a new metaphor to the
consequences of a known one, science preferring the latter). What
science discovers in a creative way, that is, by actualizing the
potentialities of the things themselves, is similarity. Science puts
over the similarity it discovers in the form of concepts, laws and
theories. Resemblance is caught and created by one and the same action.
Potential similarity is caught and actualized by the mind and this idea
is true, for similarity seen corresponds to similarity made. Here truth
itself depends on and is identified with the creation of its object. But
similarity, whose physical cause is always in the past and is of a
genetic character, the present reality of which is always by way of a
potentiality, unless its is actualized by a cognizant being, it also has
a future dimension, the effective transformation of this into that. This
is why science sometimes has desirable applications, while in other
cases it shows us the possibilities that should never be actualized by
anybody. (Might there also be applied poetry?)

The Aristotelian theory of action allows for a correct integration of
moving desire (the physician wishes to heal), the knowing intellect (he
knows that the patient needs warmth and that there is a blanket in the
cupboard) and the movement that is made (he puts the blanket over the
patient). Desire undergoes a process of differentiation as the result of
deliberation[^24] . On reaching a certain degree of specification, the
desire thus differentiated is now in line with the repertory of
available movements and brings off the action (it is not possible
to*heal* , just like that, in the abstract, but it*is* possible
to*heal-putting-over-the-patient-here-and-now-the-blanket-in-the-cupboard*
). The desire is not exterior to the intellect or the movement, nor are
these exterior to each other, but movement is differentiated desire,
incubated by means of intellectual deliberation.


