Metaphor as a creative discovery of similarity
==============================================

The Aristotelian outlook allows us to integrate knowledge and action.
Or, rather, it allows to see the human being as a unitary whole, whose
motivations, knowledge and movements are only different in the analysis,
but are physically integrated in one and the same substance, they are
that substance. The notion of practical truth, or creative discovery, is
then applicable to all aspects of human life. The prime object of
creative discovery is similarity. This process of creative discovery
could correctly be called metaphorization. To discover the similarity is
at the same time to actualize it. The discovery of the similarity breaks
the extremes of identity and difference, produces a mid point and,
better, enables us to see ‘this’ as ‘that’ and, from there, to build
concepts, laws and theories, and to physically transform ‘this’ into
‘that’, in what would be just one more differentiated action.

‘[...]we all naturally find it agreeable to get hold of new ideas
easily; words express ideas and therefore those words are the most
agreeable that enable us to get hold of new ideas. Now strange words
simply puzzle us; ordinary words convey only what we know already; it is
from metaphor that we can best get hold of something fresh (*he dè
metaphorá poieî toûto málista* ). When the poet calls old age “a
withered stalk”, he conveys a new idea, a new fact, to us by means of
the general notion (*dià toû génous* ) of “lost bloom”, which is common
to both things. The similes of the poets do the same, and therefore, if
they are good similes, give an effect of brilliance[^25] ‘.

Let us comment on some salient features of this passage. After this
text, no doubt could remain of the cognitive purport of metaphor and
simile, although Aristotle does stress that in order to be cognitive,
they must fulfil certain requirements, that is they must be proper.

Secondly, we are informed that teaching is accomplished*by means of the
kind* (*dià toû génous* ), when an objective similarity hits one in the
eye. The kind is but a means of gaining knowledge - it is not the final
purpose of knowledge. Showing that two entities are similar in some way,
that they belong to the*same kind* , enables us to transfer our
knowledge of the more familiar one to the other, thus affording us a
better understanding of the new or inexperienced. This transfer must,
however, be subject to the filter of critical scrutiny to avoid improper
uses.

Thirdly, Aristotle unites the æsthetic and cognitive aspects of an
expression. In his*Rhetorics* [^26] , he also asserts that learning and
admiring are sources of pleasure[^27] .

What does Aristotle mean by a proper metaphor or comparison? We may
recall here the passage from*Poetics* [^28] defining four types of
metaphorical expression bearing in mind that he goes on to say that ‘of
the four kinds of metaphor the most taking is the proportional kind’. It
is therefore clear that an image is proper insofar as it is based upon
an objective proportional analogy and expresses a*real* similarity
allowing us the information transfer from one pole to the other.

What, then, became of the creative aspect of metaphor? Did it turn out
to be a mere discovery? Is this kind of knowledge not simply a mirror or
nature?

The concept of*creative, or poietic, discovery* is used by Haley[^29] as
an intermediate between the traditional and interactionist views of
metaphor. According to the former, true metaphor is just a discovery of
underlying similarities, where the cognitive subject has a rather
passive function - it is a mirror of nature. Interactionism, on the
other hand, proclaims metaphoric creativity, with a subject that creates
a web of connections, organizing reality in an active way. Nevertheless,
this view fails to provide a clear account of the constraints affecting
the creation, interpretation and evaluation of figures. Indurkhya is
also aware of this shortcoming and seeks to solve it. In my opinion,
however, finding a solution to this problem depends on the
acknowledgement of  the objective pole, that is, real similarities that
one can either discover or fail to discover. Yet nothing in the
expression itself allows for mechanical decoding, for a metaphor works
or not according to the interpreter, to his background, and his
creativity in building conjectures. It also depends on the world itself,
on the*potential* (but*real* ) similarities between entities dwelling in
it. What then, could possibly constitute a creative discovery?

We shall see. Similarities uncovered by true metaphorical expressions
are real. There are objective constraints existing as*possibilities* in
entities - any two entities either have or do not have the potential to
be seen as similar in some respect by a given cognitive subject.  We
cannot, however, rest on any special intuitive faculty for similarities.
The potential for objects to be seen as similar cannot be actualized or
communicated without an active subject[^30] . In the first place, we
need to invent conjectures or hypotheses and set them up against the
facts. In this way, we are able to descry new resemblances between
objects. On the other hand we can also try to communicate them by means
of a metaphorical expression, that is, by building new language or
stretching the semantic range of existing language. To construe a
metaphor, however, the receiver needs to display the same creative
attitude as we have before nature. It is in this sense that metaphor is
just as much a discovery as a creation. It may rightly be called, then,
a*creative, or poietic,  discovery* .

The expression ‘creative discovery’ is not explicitly mentioned in
Aristotle’s*Poetics* , nor in his*Rhetoric* , though I would not
consider it anachronistic to say that its meaning may be inferred from
several passages, for example:

‘Metaphors must be drawn, as has been said already, from things that are
related to the original thing, and yet not obviously related - just as
in philosophy also an acute mind will perceive resemblances even in
things far apart’[^31] .

Therefore,

‘the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor. It is the one
thing that cannot be learnt from others, and it is also a sign of
genius[...]’[^32] .

Spotting resemblances for the first time requires the invention of new
points of view, of new interpretative hypotheses, of new and fallible
conjectures.*Similarity is not that which is at the same time in two
different places or substances, but that which can be created from both
by a cognitive agent.* Consequently, similarity is not a direct or ontic
relationship between two or more objects, as all dynamic action is, but
one established by means of a subject[^33] . In spite of the objective
character of*potential* similarities, there are no*actual* ones unless
they are established by a cognitive subject.

We very often find that a good metaphor, because of its creative
nature,  seems unpredictable yet, owing to its characteristic of
objective discovery,  it appear obvious to nearly everybody once
enunciated. Thus, Aristotle said that metaphor gave greater clarity than
anything else could[^34] and makes us see[^35] . Metaphor, Aristotle
states, brings our senses face to face with reality: ‘I mean using
expressions thatrepresent things as in a state of activity (*ósa
energoûnta semaínei* )[^36] .


