Conclusion
==========

Is there still anything left like a method of discovery? Something does
indeed remain different from ‘anything goes’, a mid point between
algorithm and anarchism: the prudent being and the metaphorical being.
This is the only rule that can face up to an ever different reality, new
and changing, because it is law incarnate: it is the prudent person who
can carry out prudent actions, it is the metaphorical person who can
create new connections, images or theories. An a human being is thus a
being set in time, creative, who can respond to novelty with novelty.
Prudence advises us always to have an open mind and an open attitude, to
welcome as true that which comes to us as truth, but never in such a way
that it becomes impossible to check it, always with some, albeit remote,
reserve. In the same way that prudence recommends virtue as a
precondition of freedom, of rectification, of correction, and in the
final instance, of creation. Only prudence can extract wisdom from past
experience and direct future action in a non-mechanical but rational
way, without certainty or arbitrariness, remaining always open to
novelty, to the extraordinary, whether it comes from the world or from
the person himself. Only prudence is compatible simultaneously with
truth and creativity. Prudence recommends also a culture of itself which
will make us not only prudent, but also, as Paul Ricœur says,
metaphorical[^37] . This is the genuinely creative part, which will also
have to be built into the person himself and which no method can
guarantee if it does not arise from within or we do not appropriate it
from a culture. In any event, Aristotle is more optimistic regarding the
possibility of becoming prudent than becoming metaphorical. The former
seems to be attainable through education, by doing prudent works with
the guidance of a prudent person. While, according to Aristotle, it is
very important to be metaphorical, but ‘it is the one thing that cannot
be learnt from others; and it is also a sign of genius for to draw good
metaphors is to perceive resemblance’[^38] . In my opinion, there must
remain for further research the problem of whether it is possible to
cultivate creativity. Since Aristotle’s time, many things have changed,
among them our knowledge of didactics and of the psychology of learning.

Finally, I should like to be permitted to point out that Aristotle
himself was able to glimpse the possibility of applying the notion of
practical truth to science, to wisdom and to technology. There is a text
by Aristotle which seems to me to be extremely valuable in this regard,
contained in*Metaphysics* M 10. Naturally, if we seek to make use of the
Greek’s ideas in today’s debates, we should not lose sight of this
passage, perhaps one with the most bearing on the present of all
Aristotle’s works. In it he distinguishes two kinds of ‘science and
knowledge’: potential and actual. He basically says that the idea that
science concerns the universal is true only to a certain extent, because
it is also possible to speak of a science of the particular, ‘[that]
deals with*a this* ’. Potential science and knowledge will indeed
concern the universal, but science and knowledge in act will concern
what is in act, that is, ‘*a this* ’. Whenever we get to know something
or to recognize it in the present, what we get to know is not a
universal, but*a this* . We do of course know what we know*through* the
universal, ‘by means of the kind’, but in act we know what is in act. We
must also bear in mind, that an act is not something that finishes in an
instant. The Aristotelian notion of act - as is made clear
in*Metaphysics* Q 6 - is not linked to instantaneousness but with full
presence, which can be prolonged through time, for we can in one act see
and go on seeing, live and go on living, think and go on thinking, be
happy and go on being happy. I cannot here develop all the implications
of these passages[^39] , which are many and profound and require a
complete re-reading of Aristotle, but I would at least like to suggest
that practical truth could be understood asthe truth of science in act .


