Islam, the Qur'an and the Arabic Literature
===========================================

Elsayed M.H Omran Vol XIV No. 1 , Spring 1988

Since the advent of Islam and the revelation of the Qur'an in the early
years of the seventh century AD, the Muslim Holy Book has been the
subject of many extensive analytical studies. The focus of the great
majority of these studies has been the theological and legislative
aspects of the Holy Book, for the Qur'an provides Muslims with detailed
guidance on their everyday problems. Together with the sayings, actions,
and recommendations of Muhammad, the Qur'an has been the ultimate source
of legal authority for Muslims over the past fourteen centuries. Muslim
scholars have painstakingly examined, analyzed and interpreted the
various verses of the Holy Book, detailing the requirements the Qur'an
imposes on Muslims in order for them to achieve spiritual purity. Thus,
in addition to its legislative and theological value, the Qur'an has
also served as a source of spiritual guidance for the followers of
Islam.

There is, however, another aspect of the Qur'an which has received far
less attention than its theological and legislative guidance, namely its
linguistic significance, for the Qur'an was undoubtedly the first book
to be composed in Arabic. The advent of Islam and the revelation of the
Qur'an have had far-reaching effects on the status, the content, and the
structure of the Arabic language. [^1] This paper will examine the
linguistic influence of the Qur'an and the impact of its revelation on
Arabic. It will be argued that, while the Arabic language was extremely
effective as the medium for the revelation of the Holy Qur'an and the
dissemination of the new faith, the language benefited enormously from
the new role it acquired with the advent of Islam.

**Islam and Arabic: a unique relationship**

The revelation of the Qur'an in Arabic set the scene for a unique and
lasting relationship between the language and Islam. On the one hand,
Arabic provided a very effective medium for communicating the message of
the religion. On the other hand, Islam helped Arabic to acquire the
universal status which it has continued to enjoy since the Middle Ages,
emerging as one of the principal world languages. It has been argued
that Arabic has not simply remained 'ancilliary to Islam' [^2] but that
it has also been significant as a means of 'cultural and national
revival in the Arabic-speaking countries.' [^3] Arabic is a rich and
expressive language and has played an important role in the cultural
preservation of the Arabic-speaking people. However, without the bond it
has had with Islam, Arabic would probably not have undergone the
internal revolution it did, nor expanded beyond the borders of the
Arabian Peninsula with such speed and magnitude.

The relationship of Islam and the Qur'an to Arabic involves more than
just the use of a language to communicate a divine message. There are a
number of factors which set this relationship apart from that which
exists between other holy books and the languages in which they
appeared, for Arabic has come to be closely associated with Islam, and
in this way has acquired a semi-official status. It is implicit that
anyone professing Islam cannot ignore the role Arabic plays in his
faith.

Embracing Islam, therefore, entails exposure to, and familiarity with,
the Arabic language. Such familiarity is necessitated by the fact that
memorization and recitation of Qur'anic verses in their original
language is necessary for the performance of the daily rituals. Other
holy books may have had an impact on the languages in which they
originally appeared, but the impact that Islam and the Qur'an have had
on Arabic appears to be unique in its extent and durability. It has
often been the case that a holy book appears in a given language and is
then translated into other languages, in which it continues to be read
and recited during the performance of rituals, but, in the case of the
Qur'an, although it has been translated into many languages, these
translations cannot replace the original language as a language of
worship, which continues to be Arabic for all Muslims, native speakers
and others.

Other holy books also came to be associated with specific languages,
such as the Torah with Hebrew, and, perhaps less intimately, the New
Testament with Greek and Latin. However, the nature of the relationship
between the Qur'an and Arabic is still unique for reasons to be given
below.

**The Qur'an: Muhammad's strongest argument**

It has often been argued that the Qur'an is not only the first book,
and the highest linguistic achievement, of the Arabic language, but that
it is also Muhammad's strongest argument against those who doubted his
Message. The question that needs to be addressed here concerns the
reason why a holy book, a composition of language, should be hailed as
Islam's (and Muhammad's) strongest argument. [^4] The point has sometimes
been made that other prophets had more tangible miracles. In the case of
Muhammad, however, the miracle was not comparable to Moses' staff or
Christ's healing powers, but was simply the expression in language of
the Qur'an.

To understand why Muhammad's strongest argument or miracle was a book,
the Holy Qur'an, it is necessary to understand the role language and
linguistic composition played in the lives of the pre-Islamic Arabs. It
is also important to understand the nature of the Arabic language itself
during the pre-Islamic period. This understanding will help to show why
the revelation of the Qur'an through Muhammad found attentive ears among
his contemporaries, who not only were articulate users of the language
but held those skilled in the arts of linguistic composition in high
esteem. [^5]

**The role played by language in pre-Islamic Arabia**

Before the rise of Islam, Arabic was mainly a spoken language with an
oral literature of elaborate poetry and, to a lesser extent, prose. [^6]
Writing had not yet fully developed and memorization was the most common
means of preserving the literature. [^7] Both poetry and prose in the
pre-Islamic era dealt with a rather limited range of topics which
included in the case of poetry praise, eulogy (panegyric), defamation,
and love, and in the case of prose superstition, legends, parables, and
wisdom tales. [^8]

Pre-Islamic Arabs took great pride in their language and in articulate
and accurate speech, the latter being one of the main requisites for
social prominence. On this particular point, Professor Hitti writes:No
people in the world manifest such enthusiastic admiration for literary
expression and are moved by the word, spoken or written, as the Arabs.
Hardly any language seems capable of exercising over the minds of its
users such an irresistible influence as Arabic. [^9]

What made this phenomenon even more remarkable is the near absence of
other forms of artistic expression such as music, painting, and drama.
The sole elaborate form of artistic expression available to the
pre-Islamic Arabs was the art of the spoken word. [^10] Eloquence and the
ability to compose articulate prose or poetry were foremost among the
traits of a worthy bedouin. [^11]

Other such traits included horsemanship, courage, and hospitality.With
its very nature and structure, its abundance of imagery, vocabulary, and
figures of speech, the Arabic language lent itself to elaborate poetic
composition and sonorous prose. The tremendous quantity of poetry that
we have inherited attests to the significant role language played in
pre-Islamic Arabia. In fact, the role language and poetry played was so
important that other fields of study which developed during the first
centuries of the Islamic era were greatly influenced by the then
established study of poetic literature. [^12]

The importance of poetry for that era is clearly manifest in the
writings of scholars from subsequent centuries. Al-Jahiz (d. 869), for
instance, quotes poetic works in his famous al-Bayan wa l-Tabyin. [^13]
The grammarian al-Asma'i (d. c. 830) used the term fasih (articulate) in
reference to the poets whom he quotes. The following quotation from Ibn
Rashiq further illustrates the importance attached to linguistic skills
in pre-Islamic Arabia. He writes:

Whenever a poet emerged in an Arab tribe, other tribes would come to
congratulate, feasts would be prepared, the women would join together on
lutes as they do at weddings, and old and young men would all rejoice at
the good news. The Arabs used to congratulate each other only on the
birth of a child and when a poet rose among them. [^14]

In his 'Uyun al-Akhbar, Ibn Qutayba defined poetry as follows:

Poetry is the mine of knowledge of the Arabs and the book of their
wisdom, the archive of their history and the reservoir of their epic
days, the wall that defends their exploits, the impassable trench that
preserves their glories, the impartial witness for the day of judgement.
[^15]

Ibn Khaldun (d. 1406), a notable scholar of the fourteenth century,
remarked on the importance of poetry in Arab life:

It should be known that Arabs thought highly of poetry as a form of
speech. Therefore, they made it the archives of their history, the
evidence for what they considered right and wrong, and the principal
basis of reference for most of their sciences and wisdom. [^16]

Almost four centuries earlier, Ibn Faris (d. 1005) elaborated on the
same theme, but went further to comment on the quality of the poetry
that was composed during the pre-Islamic era:

Poetry is the archive of the Arabs; in it their genealogies have been
preserved; it sheds light on the darkest and strangest things found in
the Book of God and in the tradition of God's apostle and that of his
companions. Perhaps a poem may be luckier than another, and one poem
sweeter and more elegant than another, but none of the ancient poems
lacks its degree of excellence. [^17]

Such was the role that the spoken word played in the life of
pre-Islamic Arabs. With the emphasis placed on eloquent and articulate
speech, the prominent position occupied by those who had the talent for
linguistic composition, and the pride the early Arabs took in their
language, it is little wonder that the Qur'an was revealed in the most
eloquent, articulate, and elaborate style the Arabic language has known.
The Qur'an has without doubt provided a level of linguistic excellence
unparalleled in the history of the Arabic language.

Theologians explain this phenomenon as God's wisdom in addressing the
articulate Arabs through the medium in which they were most adept and
with which they felt most comfortable. The effectiveness of the Qur'an
was thus ensured by the fact that it represented a level of eloquence
unattainable even by their most eloquent speakers. The Qur'an remains a
book of inimitable quality, not only from a linguistic, but also from
and intellectual, point of view. When Muhammad was challenged by his
fellow countrymen to present a miracle, in keeping with the tradition of
other prophets, he presented the Qur'an to them. The inimitability of
the Qur'an is repeatedly emphasized in the Holy Book itself. Thus the
Qur'an challenges the disbelievers:

And if you are in doubt as to what we have revealed, then produce a
sura like unto it. (2: 23) [^18]

A yet stronger challenge occurs in another chapter:

Or do they say: 'He forged it'? Say: 'Bring then a sura like unto it
and call [to your aid] anyone you can. ' (10: 38)

**The role of the poet in pre-Islamic Arabia**

Except for a few proverbs, legends, and some magical and medicinal
formulee, the bulk of the literary heritage from the pre-Islamic era was
in the form of poetry. [^19] Prose, which lacks the elaborate rhythm and
formal structure of poetry, did not lend itself easily to memorization.
Furthermore, in the absence of a developed system of writing, prose was
much less easily preserved. Prose works from the pre-Islamic period were
mainly genealogies (ansab) and legends dealing with inter-tribal wars
(ayyam al-'arab). [^20] Poetry therefore represents the main form of
artistic expression during the pre-Islamic era.

The significance of poetry in pre-Islamic Arabia was underscored by the
annual fairs, the most famous of which was the Suq Ukaz, in which poets
competed for fame and recognition through recitations of poetry. The
recitations constituted the main form of entertainment at the fairs.
which were cultural as well as trading events.

The pre-Islamic poet, enjoying his enviable talent for composing
poetry, played multiple roles. He was an artist, an entertainer, a
journalist, and the spokesman for his tribe. Furthermore, he was the
historian who kept alive the history and past glories of his tribe. His
poetry provided a very effective means of propaganda and public
relations. He was readily capable of influencing public opinion, and his
poetry was sought by kings and tribal chiefs who generously rewarded
him. In short, the poet enjoyed a very prominent status in pre-Islamic
Arabia. [^21]

**The inimitability of the Qur'an**

The inimitability of the Qur'an is not limited to its content. In fact,
the Holy Book of Islam is held by Muslim scholars to be inimitable not
only in its content but also in its language. The Qur'an, it has been
constantly maintained, embodies linguistic and literary beauty which
exceeds anything of human origin. This is borne out by the fact that
no-one has ever been able to compose anything remotely resembling it in
its linguistic, literary, or conceptual elegance. [^22] This point is
repeatedly emphasized in the Holy Book itself. Thus the Qur'an says:

If the whole of mankind and the jinn were to gather together to produce
the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof, even
if they backed each other up. (17:88)

The inimitable nature of the Qur'an was recognized by generation after
generation of scholars. Al-Tabari (d. 923) dealt with this subject in
his voluminous study of the Holy Book. [^23] Al-Zamakhshari elaborated on
this theme in his famous al-Kashshaf, [^24] as did Baydawi in his Tafsir.
[^25] AlBaqillam, a prominent scholar, wrote a book which he devoted
entirely to this subject and to which he gave the title I'jaz al-Qur'an
(The Inimitability of the Qur'an). [^26] Here he wrote:

The Qur'an is so wonderfully arranged and so marvellously composed, and
so exalted is its literary excellence that it is beyond what any mere
creature could attain. [^27]

Al-Jawziyya, also a noted scholar, added that:

Whoever knows Arabic and is acquainted with lexicography, grammar,
rhetoric, and Arabic poetry and prose recognizes ipso facto the
supremacy of the Qur'an [^28] Ibn Khaldun also dealt with certain aspects
of the style of the Qur'an:

The inimitability of the Qur'an consists in the fact that its language
indicates all the requirements of the situation referred to, whether
they are stated or understood. This represents the highest degree of
speech. In addition, the Qur'an is perfect in the choice of words and
excellence of arrangement. [^29]

The inimitability as well as the linguistic significance of the Qur'an
can be better understood within its pre-Islamic context and according to
the role language played during that period. Furthermore, the linguistic
significance of the Qur'an can also be better understood within that
same context. The linguistic aspect of the Holy Book was brilliantly
used by the Prophet in challenging and eventually prevailing upon his
fellow Arabs who held in high esteem those who were eloquent and
articulate. The eloquence of the Qur'an clearly impressed and
overwhelmed them. This explains why the Qur'an has been referred to as
'Muhammad's miracle', or. as the 'miracle of Islam'. The use of the
power of the Qur'an as a means of persuasion was admitted by the Prophet
himself and was mentioned repeatedly in the Qur'an mostly in the form of
a challenge to the disbelievers to produce something similar. On the
need and justification for the Prophet to use a book such as the Qur'an,
Ibn Qutayba wrote:

God offered the Qur'an as the Prophet's sign in the same way as He
offered signs for all the other prophets. He sent the things most
appropriate to the time in which they were sent. Thus Moses had the
power to divide the sea with his hand and rod, and to let the rock burst
forth with water in the desert, and all his other signs in a time of
magic. And Jesus had the power to bring the dead back to life, to make
birds out of clay, to cure those who had been blind from birth and the
leprous, and all his other signs in a time of medicine. And Muhammad,
may God bless him and grant him salvation, had the book and all his
other signs in a time of eloquence. [^30]

**The impact of the Qur'an of the Arabic language**

**Structure and content**

As has already been pointed out, scholars have gone to great lengths
over the past thirteen centuries to describe and emphasize the
inimitability of the verses of the Qur'an. However, the impact of the
revelation of the Qur'an on the Arabic language, its structure and
content, has certainly been the focus of fewer studies. Works on the
inimitability of the Qur'an have mostly focused on the literary beauty
of the Holy Book, its conceptual strength and precision. Another
important aspect of the Qur'an, one not adequately addressed, lies in
its linguistic impact on the form and content of the Arabic language.

The Holy Qur'an has undoubtedly helped reinforce and deepen the Arab
people's awareness of the richness and beauty of their tongue. From a
linguistic point of view, the revelation of the Qur'an was the most
important event in the history of the Arabic language. It was an event
with far-reaching and lasting consequence, for the Qur'an gave Arabic a
form which it had hitherto lacked. In fact, it was due to the desire to
preserve the Qur'an that efforts were made to develop and refine the
Arabic alphabet.

It was within the same context that Abu l-Aswad al-Du'ali developed the
dot system in the first century of the Islamic era in his attempt to lay
the basis for Arabic grammatical theory. [^31] His efforts were among the
first to establish a permanent form for the Arabic alphabet and hence
the Arabic writing system. As deciphered from the earliest inscriptions,
the Arabic alphabet was vague, unsystematic, and inefficient. The dot
system as developed by al-Du'ah helped to clarify and establish
distinctions which were otherwise unclear. In fact, it can be maintained
that had it not been for the strong desire to preserve the Qur'an, its
form, grammar, pronunciation, and accuracy, the Arabic alphabet and
writing system might not have developed as quickly as they did.

The Arabic alphabet and writing system were only one aspect of the
Qur'an's impact on the language; it also gave Arabic a rigidity of form
and a precision of presentation which were novel to the language, as
well as a host of new locutions, complex concepts, meanings, and
arguments. Furthermore, the Qur'an enriched the lexicon of the language
by bringing new words and expressions into use, and by introducing
loan-words from foreign languages. It also presented a firm set of
linguistic standards and directions which were instrumental in the
subsequent documentation of Arabic grammar.

The Qur'an likewise helped to expand the scope of Arabic as it was
known in the early years of the seventh century. Islam and the Qur'an
helped to open new horizons and fields of study which included such
disciplines as philology, Islamic law (the sharia), and Islamic
philosophy. The Qur'an also introduced a host of new themes and
linguistic forms not only to the Arabic language but to the Arab mind as
well. Taha Husayn dealt with this particular aspect of the verses of the
Qur'an when he wrote:

In its external form the Qur'an is neither poetry nor prose. It is not
poetry because it does not observe the metre and rhyme of poetry, and it
is not prose because it is not composed in the same manner in which
prose was customarily composed. [^32]

The Qur'an consists of verses which vary in length depending on their
theme and the occasion for which they were revealed. What is most
interesting about Qur'anic verses is the superb selection of words, a
selection which helps to induce varying reading speeds, which render
these verses most effective. On this particular point,

Taha Husayn wrote:

For example, those verses dealing with the dialogues that took place
between the Prophet and the pagans as well as those dealing with
legislation require the type of low reading speed appropriate to
explanation and recapitulation. On the other hand, those verses in which
the pagans are warned of the fate that awaits them require a higher
speed appropriate to censuring and warning. [^33]

The varying speeds which Taha Husayn mentions appear to be achieved
with remarkable spontaneity, which is the result, in Taha Husayn's
words, of 'a careful selection of words and expressions.' [^34] He gives
sura 26, al-Shu'ara', as an example of the type of verse requiring
speedy reading, and sura 28, al-Qasas, as an example of that requiring
slow reading.

Another aspect of the novelty of the Qur'an language has to do with its
themes. These themes and topics represent a clear departure from those
which had been hitherto familiar to the Arabs. As Taha Husayn explained:
It does not deal with any such things as ruins, camels, or long journeys
in the desert; nor does it describe longing for the beloved, love, or
eulogy, topics most familiar to pre-Islamic Arabs. But rather it talks
to the Arabs about such things as the oneness of God, His limitless
power, His knowledge, which is unattainable, His will, which is
unstoppable, and His creation of heaven and earth. [^35]

This passage underscores yet another innovative aspect of the Qur'an,
namely the presentation of novel themes through an abundance of examples
all aimed at illustration and persuasion. The use of illustration is one
of the most effective stylistic techniques of the Qur'an. One can hardly
read a verse without experiencing the impact of this technique.

The art of narrative style represents another innovative aspect of the
Qur'an. It relates in astounding detail the stories of Noah Abraham,
Joseph, Moses, and Jesus, among others. It presents the dialogues that
took place in such stories and the claims and counter-claims made by
each of the opposing parties. Story-telling may not have been totally
novel in pre-Islamic Arabia given the significant quantity of parables,
epics, and myths that were inherited from that period. What was novel,
however, was the type of integrated, elaborate story involving such
essential items as theme, plot, well-developed characters, and
denouement which are to be found in the Qur'an, which refers itself to
the benefit in telling such stories:

We do relate unto thee the most beautiful stories, in that We reveal
unto thee this [portion of the] Qur'an. Before this thou too were among
those who knew it not. (1: 3)

**Lexical borrowing**

Lexical borrowing is another area in which the Qur'an established
precedent. The Holy Book draws freely on words of non-Arabic origin,
including Persian, Sanskrit, and Syriac. The importance of the Qur'an in
this respect can be better understood against a deep-seated theme which
can be discerned in the writings of scholars of preand early Islam,
namely, that the Arabian Peninsula was, during the pre-Islamic era, more
or less isolated from the rest of the world, and that the Arabic
language, and consequently the Qur'an, was the unique product of the
Arabian desert. Inherent in this theme is a belief in the 'purity' of
the Arabic tongue and hence the scholars' reluctance to agree with the
fact that in its attempt to illustrate the breadth of human religious
experience the Qur'an drew on the lexicons of other languages and
religions. [^36] The verse: Thus have We sent down this Arabic Qur'an is
often cited in support of this view. [^37] It is obvious from the
literature that the majority of the earlier scholars, for example,
al-Shafi'i, Ibn Jarir, Abu ' Ubayda, al-Qadi Abu Bakr, and Ibn Faris,
rejected the theory that some of the words of the Qur'an were not of
Arabic origin. [^38] The question of lexical borrowing and the existence
of foreign words in the Qur'an was viewed differently by different
scholars. Thus the earlier scholars maintained that the existence of
foreign words implied and inadequacy of the language. Al-Suyuti quoted
Ibn Aws as saying:

If the Qur'an had contained anything other than Arabic, then it would
be thought that Arabic was incapable of expressing those things in its
own words. [^39]

Later scholars, however, viewed lexical borrowing differently. Thus,
al-Suyuti explained that the adoption of some non-Arabic words in the
Qur'an took place because such words denoted objects or ideas for which
no Arabic words were readily available. [^40] Examples include the
Persian words 'istibraq' (a thick, silky brocade), 'ibriq' (a water
jug); the Nabatean word 'akwab' (goblets); the Aramaic word 'asfar' (a
large book); the Hebrew borrowing 'rahman' (merciful); and the Syriac
words 'zayt' (olive oil) and 'zaytun' (the olive tree). The Qur'an has
several hundred such foreign borrowings. Earlier generations of Muslim
scholars maintained that such words were either ancient Arabic words
that had gone out of use until the revelation of the Qur'an, or that
such words were ancient borrowings introduced into Arabic long before
the Revelation which had since then acquired an Arabic pattern. [^41]

Whether we agree with the view that foreign words in the Qur'an are
direct borrowings from other languages or with the view that the
majority of these words were ancient borrowings which occurred in
pre-Islamic poetry and which had been in use long before the revelation
of the Qur'an, it is a fact that the Qur'an contains words that are not
of Arabic origin. Such words come from a host of languages including
Ethiopic, Persian, Greek, Sanskrit, Syriac, Hebrew, Nabatean, Coptic,
Turkish, and Berber. [^42] By adopting words of non-Arabic origin, the
Qur'an may have helped to legitimize a very important linguistic
process, that of lexical borrowing.

The importance of this practice derives particularly from the fact that
the use of foreign words was viewed unfavourably by a large number of
Arab scholars at that time. [^43] The term 'ajami (Persian, foreign) was
used strictly in reference to non-Arabic words to set them aside from
native Arabic words. During the documentation of the grammar in the
first three centuries of the Islamic calendar, the same term was used to
refer to less-than-native pronunciations of Arabic. In their attempt to
document the grammar, the early scholars considered the speech of the
bedouins in the heart of the desert to be the most reliable and purest,
apparently due to their belief that the bedouins seldom left the desert
or mixed with speakers of other languages. [^44] Likewise, the early
grammarians did not look favourably upon the adoption of foreign terms
into Arabic, apparently in the belief that borrowing would indicate
certain gaps or deficiencies in the language.

Since it contained words of non-Arabic origin, the Qur'an established a
precedent for lexical borrowing as a tool whereby languages may enrich
themselves. This was clearly one of the most innovative aspects of the
Qur'an. It is particularly important given the unfavourable climate that
prevailed among the early Muslim scholars with respect to lexical
borrowing.

**Structure and style**

The Qur'an has made remarkable contributions to the structure and style
of the Arabic language. It combines within its covers the first
documentation of the sentence patterns of Arabic, and it was
instrumental in the documentation of Arabic grammar which began in the
first Islamic century. From the time of Sibawayh (d. c. 793) up to the
present day there is hardly a page in any manual of Arabic grammar which
does not contain one or more verses from the Qur'an. Furthermore, the
strong interest in Qur'anic studies brought with it an equally strong
interest in Arabic linguistic studies.

The style of the Qur'an helped to develop and enrich the Arabic
language. As the first book in the Arabic language, it introduced
stylistic innovations which greatly influenced trends in subsequent
generations. Foremost among such trends is the Qur'an's abundant use of
figures of speech in place of simple words. The Qur'an makes extensive
use of illustrations, imagery, and metaphor, thus adding beauty, life,
and colour to plain words In fact, the ubiquity of figures of speech in
the Qur'an has led Sayyid Qutb to conclude that 'the use of imagery and
figures of speech is the Qur'an's preferred style.' [^45] The preference
for figures of speech over plain words appears to be a general trend
that permeates the entire Book. Thus, the Qur'an affirms the
impossibility of the disbelievers' entry into paradise:

Nor will they enter the Garden until a thick rope can pass through the
eye of a needle. (7: 40)

Confirming that the disbelievers' actions will be in vain, the Qur'an
conveys this notion in the following way:

The parable of those who reject their Lord is that their works are as
ashes on which the wind blows furiously as on a tempestuous day. (14:
18)

Another idea, that of those who do charitable acts yet spoil what they
have done by gloating and reminding others of such acts is conveyed
thus:

they are in a parable like a hard, barren rock on which is a little
soil: on it falls heavy rain which leaves it just a bare stone. (2:
265)

The opposite case, namely that of those who spend for God's sake rather
than in order to boast, is also expressed through imagery:

as a garden, high and fertile; heavy rain falls on it but makes it
yield a double increase of harvest. (2: 265)

Earlier in the same sura, the same idea is conveyed through a different
figure of speech:

The parable of those who spend their money in the way of God is that of
a grain of corn: it groweth seven ears and each ear hath a hundred
grains. (2: 261)

Criticizing those who worship gods other than Allah, the Qur'an likens
their actions to that of a spider building a web:

The parable of those who take protectors other than God is that of the
spider building for itself a house; but, truly, the flimsiest of houses
is the spider's house. (29: 41)

Doomsday is one of the frequent themes of the Qur'an. The description
of the horrors of that day is also presented through figures of
speech:

for the convulsion of the Hour will be a terrible thing! The day ye
shall see it, each mother giving suck shall forget her suckling-babe,
and each pregnant female shall deliver her load. Thou shalt see mankind
as in a drunken riot, yet not drunk. (22: 2)

Another very characteristic stylistic device of the Qur'an is that of
anthropomorphization. Thus it describes dawn as breathing away the
darkness (78: 10), the night as concealing the sun and veiling the day,
the wind as fecundating, causing the rain to fall (15: 22). The sea is
likened to ink which, if used, will not suffice to write the words of
God:

Say: If the ocean were ink wherewith to write out the words of my Lord,
sooner would the ocean be exhausted, even if we added another ocean like
it. (18: 109)

Slandering is likened to eating another persons's flesh:

Nor speak ill of each other behind their backs. Would any of you like
to eat the flesh of his dead brother. (49: 12)

The rhythmic patterns of speech found in Qur'anic recitations is yet
another remarkable aspect of the language of the Qur'an. These patterns
are a reflection of the special array of words and arrangement of
phrases found in the Book. In the view of many scholars such verses
combine the characteristics of both poetry and prose. [^46] Unlike some
poetry, the verses of the Qur'an do not have one single rhyme, thus
there is more room for flexibility and freedom of expression. The Qur'an
does, however, reflect certain aspects of poetry, especially with
respect to its use of words with identical numbers of syllables.

This 'music' is more noticeable in short verses than it is in long
ones. [^47] Sayyid Qutb cites sura 53 (al-Najm) as an excellent example
of prose rhythm produced by words similar in length and all ending in
the same sound, in this case the long a [^48] There is another type of
internal rhythm which is inherent in the structure of the single
sentence. This is seen when the length of words varies within the same
sura. A good example of this is sura 19 (Maryam), which begins with
short words and phrases, then changes to longer ones. Furthermore, the
rhythms of the various segments are enhanced by the use of two main
rhymes throughout the entire sura. These rhymes end either in nun or mim
preceded by either ya' or wa'w.

The narrative aspect of Qur'an style remains one of the most creative
and innovative of the Holy Book, one which has profoundly influenced and
enriched the Arabic language. Whatever narrative style the language had
in pre-Islamic times were relatively crude and primitive. Even though
the narrative parts of the Qur'an were clearly put to the service of the
main theme of the Book, i.e., religion, the narrative was so highly
developed and integrated that it became a work of art in itself. The
Qur'an is remarkably innovative with respect to its method of
presentation, which involves four different techniques.

One common technique is that if beginning a story with a short summery,
followed by the details from beginning to end, as in sura 18 (al-Kahf).
The second technique is that of beginning a story by presenting the
conclusion first, then the lesson to be derived from it, and then the
story from beginning to end, as in the story of Moses in sura 28
(al-Qasas). The third technique presents the story directly without
introduction, as in that of Mary following the birth of Jesus in sura 19
(Maryam), and the story of King Solomon and the ants in sura 27
(al-Naml). The fourth, and perhaps most innovative, technique is that of
presenting the story through dramatization. This technique gives only a
brief introduction signalling the beginning of the scene, followed by a
dramatization of the story with a dialogue among the various characters,
as in the story of Abraham and Ismail in sura 2.

An important element in the structure of Qur'anic narrative is the
varied use of the element of surprise. In some cases the anticlimax is
kept from the main players and spectators, and is unfolded for both
simultaneously towards the end, as in sura 18 in the story of Moses and
the scholar. Another use of the element of surprise reveals the
anticlimax to the audience but conceals it from the characters, who act
in total ignorance. The Qur'an commonly uses this technique in
situations where satire is intended (satire which is directed at the
actors and their behaviour) as in the story in sura 68 (al-Qalam). A
third technique reveals part of the anticlimax to the audience while
keeping part of it concealed from both the audience and the characters,
as in the story in sura 27 (al-Naml).

The structure of Qur'anic narrative displays the well-developed
elements of an integrated literary work. One of the elements
indispensable to dramatized narrative is change of scenery, which the
Qur'an utilizes fully. In the story of Joseph in sura 12, the reader is
presented with a succession of scenes, each of which leads to the next,
picking up the main thread of the narrative. Joseph's story comprises
some twenty-eight scenes, each of which leads to the next in a manner
which maintains the organic unity of the entire narrative. All such
scenes are presented through dialogues replete with details and ideas.

The result of such a well-knit passage is that the reader finds himself
drawn to the narrative, moving anxiously from one scene to another. This
effect is achieved through a coherent series of events which sustain his
curiosity and interest. In one scene, for example, we find one of
Joseph's brothers entering the king's court in Egypt where Joseph is the
keeper of the store-house. In this scene, Joseph stipulates to his
brothers that they should bring their younger brother to the king's
court in order to receive provisions. The next scene presents the
brothers deliberating among themselves, which is followed by a scene in
which they have returned to face their father, Jacob.

The following scene takes the brothers back to Egypt to confront
Joseph. The presentation of the narrative in dramatic form involving a
succession of scenes brings home effortlessly the main theme and the
lessons to be derived from the whole narrative. The use of dialogue
makes the scenes more vivid and closer to life. This is an art in which
the Qur'an excels, and an art in which it is remarkably innovative. It
is clearly a form of literary composition which the Qur'an, the first
book in Arabic, introduced to the language.

The portrayal of personalities is a very significant element of the
narrative; here, again, the Qur'an sets a precedent. The depiction of
personalities in the various narratives manages to convey to the reader
the precise dimensions and traits of such figures. This is done through
the words and actions of the personalities portrayed. In the story of
Moses, for example, the reader is readily able to discern, through
Moses' actions, the type of aggressive yet emotionally sensitive person
he was meant to portray. Conversely, in the story of Abraham, the
Qur'anic verses carefully depict a calm, peaceful, and patient
personality. This careful and accurate delineation of personality is
effected largely through dialogue which skillfully brings out the traits
of such personalities. The dialogue, in turn, is rendered even more
effective by a very careful choice of words.

**Islam, the Qur'an, and the internationalization of the Arabic
language**

The revelation of the Quran in Arabic in the early part of the seventh
century AD helped the language to acquire and international status which
it has continued to enjoy until the present day. It has been argued that
Arabic has not simply remained ancilliary to Islam but that it has been
significant as a 'means of cultural and national revival in the
Arabic-speaking countries.' [^49] It is true that Arabic has played an
important role in the life and history of the Arab people, but without
the bond it has with Islam it would not have been likely to have
acquired the type of international status it has acquired through Islam.
It was under the banner of religion that Arabic spread beyond the
borders of the Arabian Peninsula. The early Muslims who emerged from the
north-western part of the Arabian Peninsula brought with them not only
the Islamic religion but Arabic as well. This phenomenon was so
remarkable that, within a few centuries after the revelation of the
Qur'an, Arabic became the common language of government, correspondence,
business, and literary expression.

The speed and facility with which Arabic was first accepted and then
eventually absorbed in the new countries was remarkable, and it was
largely due to its association with Islam. Converts to the new religion
looked with great interest towards the original language of their Holy
Book. [^50] They were clearly fascinated by the new religion and its
language. The desire on the part of the new converts to identify with
the resourceful pioneers emerging from the Arabian Peninsula was yet
another factor in their adoption of the language.

Arabic was able to replace such languages as Greek and Syriac in Syria
and the Fertile Crescent, Coptic, Greek, and Latin in Egypt, and Pahlavi
in Persia. Syriac, a dialect of the ancient Aramaic language, had a
flourishing literature until it gave way to Arabic in the seventh
century AD, and was subsequently limited to being a vehicle for
translating Greek literature and philosophy into Arabic. In Egypt, the
languages used until the early seventh century were Coptic and Greek;
both languages, however, gave way to Arabic, which became the common
language of the country, with Coptic as the language of the local
Christian Church.

By the end of the ninth century, Arabic was already being used in
churches alongside Coptic. [^51] In Persia, Pahlavi, the language of the
Sassanian dynasty (224 640 AD), used the Arabic alphabet and contained a
large number of Arabic loan-words. Following the Arab conquest in 640,
Pahlavi gave way to New Persian, which adopted the Arabic script and
which was greatly influenced by Arabic. It is estimated that one third
of the vocabulary of modern Persian (Farsi), is of Arabic origin. [^52]
Persian scholars engaged in the field of Islamic studies wrote mostly in
Arabic. Among these were such prominent figures as Ibn Sina (980 1037),
al Ghazzali (1058-1111), and Abu Bakr al-Razi of the twelfth century AD
who wrote more than thirty books in Arabic. Even though Farsi began to
develop its own identity and become gradually independent from Arabic
around the tenth century AD, [^53] the language is still written in the
Arabic script. [^54]

Similarly, the Arabic script was adopted for the Turkic languages
following the conversion to Islam of speakers of these languages, which
include, in the Southern Division, Turkish, Azerbaijani, Turkoman, and
Chuvash, and, in the Eastern Division, Kinghiz, Kazakh, and Tatar. The
Turkic languages continued to use the Arabic script until the early part
of this century. The Turkish language, the most important of the Turkic
languages, was doubly influenced by Arabic; first, through conversion to
Islam, the adoption of the Arabic script, and the adoption of a large
number of Arabic loan-words, and secondly through the medium of Farsi.
As in the case of the latter, Arabic was the language of composition for
many Turkish scholars, notably in the fields of religious and
philological studies. [^55]

In the Indian subcontinent, the introduction of Arabic was similarly
largely due to the adoption of the Islamic faith. It was the language of
government during the reign of the sultan Jalal al-Din (963-1014 AH).
There is evidence, however, that Arabic reached India prior to the tenth
Islamic century through Farsi, which was the language of the court in
India prior to the advent of Islam. Urdu, a written variety of
Hindustani with a substantial quantity of Arabic words, is the language
used by Muslims; it employs the Arabic alphabet. A great majority of the
Urdu scholars of the twelfth Islamic century used the medium of Arabic
for their writings. Prominent among them were Wali Allah al-Dihlawi,
Shibli al-Na'mani, and Karamat Husayn. [^56] Arabic gained more and more
ground with the increasing Muslim influence in India. Urdu, which has a
vocabulary of which at least thirty per cent is of Arabic origin,
continues to the present to be the foremost among the dialects spoken
among the Muslims of India and Pakistan. The impact of Arabic extended
to other Indic languages such as Hindi and Sindhi, the latter using the
Arabic alphabet.

In south-east Asia, the arrival of Islam in the fourteenth century AD
brought with it the Arabic language, whose alphabet was subsequently
adopted by the Malayo-Polynesian languages. These languages are spoken
by the inhabitants of the Malay Peninsula, Madagascar, Taiwan,
Indonesia, New Guinea, the Melanesian, Micronesian, and Polynesian
islands, the Phillipines, and New Zealand. These languages employ
writing systems based on the Roman, Hindic, and Arabic alphabets. [^57]

The impact of Islam and the Arabic language was not confined to these
parts of Arabia, Africa, and Asia. Indeed, the spread of Islam into the
European continent led to the subsequent introduction of Arabic. Less
than a century later, the impact of Arabic began to be felt on such
languages as Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, English, and German.
The impact was most noticeable in Spain and Portugal, where Arabic
existed alongside the native languages and was used in church liturgy
and in business transactions. It was generally through Spanish,
Portuguese, and Italian that Arabic influenced other European languages,
including the Scandanavian languages.

The number of Arabic loan-words in Spanish is in the thousands. Many
names of cities, rivers, villages, and provinces in Spain have retained
their Arabic forms, as in place-names which begin with the words bani,
wadi, and al('son', 'valley', and 'the', respectively), as in Bani
al-Madina, Wadi al-Kabir, and al-Qasr. [^58] Among the Arabic loan-words
in European languages there is a host of scientific terminology. The
existence of scientific words of Arabic origin in European languages is
attributed to the pioneering efforts of Muslim scholars in the fields of
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and medicine. In their works, Muslim
scholars had to coin an entirely new terminology to introduce their
innovations, which included such novel concepts as algebra, the
algorithm, alkali, alchemy, and alcohol. In addition to scientific
terms, European languages contain many everyday words of Arabic origin,
e.g., coffee, sugar, saffron, admiral, arsenal. Arabic numerals are
another case in point.

**Conclusion**

The Arabic language has without doubt served as a very effective medium
for the communication of the message of Islam, and as the Prophet's
strongest argument against the challenges of his articulate and eloquent
contemporaries. It has also served as a means for preserving the
cultural and religious heritage of Arabic-speaking and Muslim peoples.
In this sense, the language has been extremely useful to the religion.
However, in its role as the language of the Qur'an, Arabic has benefited
enormously. There is a clear legitimacy to the claim that Islam and the
Qur'an have helped to preserve Arabic from decay and deterioration, for
it was mainly due to the need to preserve the accuracy and pronunciation
of the verses of the Qur'an that efforts were instigated towards
refining the Arabic alphabet.

Subsequently, the Qur'an was instrumental in the codification of Arabic
grammar in the second the third Islamic centuries. Furthermore, the need
for Muslims, whether native or non-native speakers of Arabic, to
memorize and recite verses from the Qur'an in their daily worship has
helped to keep the Arabic language alive. It was due to its association
with Islam and the Qur'an that Arabic gained a good deal of prestige as
the language of a young faith, a faith that was gaining more and more
followers with each new day. The interest in the new faith this brought
with it interest in the language of that faith. It was under the banner
of Islam that Arabic spread beyond the borders of the Arabian Peninsula
to far-off areas in Europe, south-east Asia, and Africa.

From literary, structural, and stylistic points of view, the Qur'an
added immeasurably to the beauty of the language, introducing new
styles, forms of expression, figures of speech, and structures. The
Qur'an also enriched and expanded the vocabulary of the Arabic language
by employing hundreds of words of foreign origin, thus demonstrating the
legitimacy of lexical borrowing as a linguistic device. The Qur'an
similarly presented Arab scholars with a higher criterion of literary
excellence and set new and more rigid standards for literary composition
for subsequent generations of Arab scholars.

The model that the Qur'an provided, while remaining inimitable, has
sharpened the literary skill and kindled the talent of generations of
scholars in their attempts to emulate the style and literary excellence
of the Qur'an, the first book in the Arabic language. Interest in the
Qur'an, its language, and its exegesis gave rise to a number of related
disciplines, which include philological, religious, and linguistic
studies. There is no doubt that the Arabic language was extremely useful
as a medium for the revelation of the Holy Qur'an and for communicating
God's final message to the pre-Islamic Arabs of the seventh century. It
is, however, the conclusion of this paper that the Arabic language
underwent drastic changes in its structure, content, and status due to
its association with Islam and the Qur'an, changes that the language
would not have undergone had it not been for the new role it acquired in
its bond with Islam and the Qur'an.

**Footnotes:**

[^1] See, for this view, 'Abbas Hasan, Al-Lugha wa-l-nahw bayn al-qadim
wa-l-hadith, Cairo, 1966, and Ibrahim Anis, Min asrar al-lugha, Cairo,
1970.

[^2] Anwar Cheyne, The Arabic language: its role in history, Minnesota,
1969, ch. 4,pp. 53 ff.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] On this subject, see Taha Husayn's excellent argument in his Mir'at
al-Islam, pp. 125 ff., and Sayyid Qutbs Al-Taswir al-fanni fi l-Qur'an,
chs. 1-3.
[^5] Philip K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, London, 1967, pp. 87 ff.
[^6] Cheyne, Op. Cit., ch. 4, pp. 52 ff.
[^7] Ibid. ,ch.4,pp.52ff.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Hitti, Op. Cit., pp. 90 ff.
[^10] Ibrahim Anis, Fi l-lahajat al'arabiyya, Cairo, 1962, ch. 2, pp. 33
ff.
[^11] Vicente Cantarino, Arabic poetics in the golden age, Leiden, 1975,
pp. 17 ff.
[^12] Ibid., ch. 1, pp. 9 ff.
[^13] Al-Jahiz, Kitab al-Bayan, Cairo, 1965
[^14] Ibn Rashiq, 'Umda, Cairo, 1934, vol. 1, 65; also in al-Suyuti,
Muzhir,Cairo, n.d., vol. 2, 203.
[^15] Ibn Qutayba, 'Uyun al-akhbar, Cairo, 1964, vol. 2, 185.
[^16] Ibn Khaldun, Al-Muqaddima, vol. 3, 375.
[^17] Al-Suyuti, Op. Cit., vol. 2, 291.
[^18] All Qur'anic quotations are taken, with some modification, from
the translation of Yusuf A. Ali, The Holy Qur'an, London, 1983.
[^19] Hitti, Op. Cit., pp. 90-91.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] Cheyne. Op. Cit.. pp. 56 ff
[^22] A number of excellent works were devoted entirely to this aspect
of tne Qur'an, e.g., al-Suyiti, al Itqan, and al-Baqillani, I'jaz
al-Qur'an, Beirut, 1979.
[^23] Abu Ja far Muhammad b. Jarir al-Tabari, Tafsir al-Qur'an.
[^24] Mahmud b. Umar al-Zamakhashari (d. 1143).
[^25] Nasr al-Din al-Baidawi (d. 1286)
[^26] Al Baqillan, Op. Cit.. pp 45 ff
[^27] Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Kitab al-Fawai'id al-mushawwig ila •ulum
al-Qur'an wa'ilm al-bayan, Cairo, 1909, pp. 7, 246.
[^28] Ibn Khaldun, Op. Cit., vol. 3, 338
[^29] Ibn Qutayba, Kitab Ta'wil mushkil al-Qur'an, Cairo, 1954, p. 10.
[^30] Ibn Khaldun, Op. Cit., vol. 3, 1266
[^31] Taha Husayn, Op. Cit., p. 129.
[^32] Ibid., pp. 130 ff.
[^33] Ibid., pp. 129 ff.
[^34] Ibid., p. 125
[^35] Arthur Jeffrey, The Foreign vocabulary of the Qur'an. Lahore,
1977, pp. 5 ff.
[^36] Ibid., pp. 6 ff.
[^37] Al-Suyuti, al Itqan, vol. 1, § 38, p. 136.
[^38] Ibid., p. 136.
[^39] Ibid., pp. 136 ff.
[^40] Ibid., pp. 137 ff.
[^41] Ibid.
[^42] Ibid., pp. 138 ff.
[^43] Al-Suyuti, Itqan
[^44] 'Abbas Hasan, Op. Cit., pp. 72 ff.
[^45] Sayyid Qutb, Op. Cit., pp. 34 ff.
[^46] Ibid., pp. 87 ff.
[^47] Ibid.
[^48] Ibid.
[^49] Cheyne, Op. Cit., pp. 5 ff.
[^50] Anwar al-Jindi, Al-Fusha lughat al-Qur'an, Beirut, n.d., p. 31.
[^51] Ibid, p. 45.
[^52] Ibid., p. 72.
[^53] Ibid., p. 72. See also Cheyne, Op. Cit., p. 1.
[^54] Al-Jindi, Op Cit.,p. 77
[^55] In a discussion with Dr Baynurza Hayit, a prominent Turkistani
scholar who lives and writes in West Germany, at the third annual
meeting of the American Council for the Study of Islamic Societies held
at Villanova University in May 1986, he informed me that Turkic
languages enjoyed a high degree of mutual intelligibility and
interaction during that period in which the Arabic script was in use,
and that this feature began to disappear following the switch of writing
system in some of these languages.
[^56] Al-Jindi, Op. Cit., p. 81.
[^57] William H. Harris and Judith S. Levy, The New Columbia
Encyclopedia, New York and London, 1975, p. 1670.
[^58] Banilmadina is a large resort on the Costa del Sol in southern
Spain, Guadalquivir is a river which runs through the ancient city of
Seville, and the Alcazar is the famous palace in that city.


