The Illustrious Period of the Imamate of Imam Zayn Al-'abidin
=============================================================

Seyyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi
Al-Serat, Vol. 5 (1979), Nos. 3 & 4

No Imam began his Imamat in a more tragic atmosphere. The first day of
his Imamat saw him seriously ill and a captive of the army of Yazid in
Karbala. His father and predecessor had sacrificed all he had on the
altar of truth; and Imam Zayn al-'Abidin found himself with a group of
helpless widows and orphans being led from place to place, from the
durbar of Ibn Ziyad to the court of Yazid. Finally they were thrown into
a prison, where the Imam spent the first year of his Imamat, cut off
from the followers of his father and unable to look after their
affairs.

Understandably, the tragedy of Karbala had created a chaos in the Shi'a
world. Shi'as were in the throes of a dark pessimism, and the community
was in disarray. A movement had already begun to accept Muhammad al
Hanafiyah, son of Amir-ul-Mu'minin 'Ali as the 4th Imam. Muhammad al
Hanafiyah himself had no such design. But the problem was: how to stop
that movement without putting the life of Imam Zayn al-'Abidin in
danger?

Yazid had not hesitated to murder Imam Husayn in spite of the highest
prestige the Imam had in the Muslims' eyes. It would have been far more
easier for him to kill Imam Zayn al-'Abidin a young man of 23 years of
age, whose divine virtues were yet to shine before the Muslim community.
And it was not in the interest of Islam that Imam Zayn al-'Abidin be
martyred so soon after Imam Husayn.

Altogether, Imam Zayn al-'Abidin had three difficult tasks before
him:

1. To announce his Imamat publicly without seeming to oppose
outsiders.
2. To weld the community together, making a "tasbih" (rosary) out of
the scattered beads - doing it in such a way as not to give Yazid and
Yazidites an excuse to retaliate.
3. To expand true faith, providing a beacon of light to guide the
seekers of truth to the safety of true faith and virtuous deeds - doing
it without attracting untoward attention of his enemies.

Any of these Himalayan tasks would have defeated a lesser being. But
Imam Zayn al-'Abidin under divine guidance did achieve all these aims in
such a beautiful and unobtrusive way that even his followers, who
tremendously benefited, and are benefiting, from his superb leadership
did not consciously realise how they were being guided.

**ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS IMAMAT**

This took the form of a family dispute:

Muhammad al-Hanafiyah claimed that he was the Imam after his brother,
Imam Husayn (as Imam Husayn, had become Imam after the eldest brother,
Imam Hasan). Imam Zayn al-'Abidin said that his uncle's claim was wrong;
that he (i.e. Imam Zayn al-'Abidin) was Imam after his father, by divine
appointment. This family "feud" apparently could not be resolved; and
ultimately Imam Zayn al-'Abidin suggested that the "Black Stone"
(al-Hajarul-aswad) of Ka'bah be approached for its judgement. Muhammad
al Hanafiyah readily agreed and both parties went to Mecca during Hajj
season, when thousands of pilgrims had assembled for the pilgrimage.

The stranger than fiction news must have spread like wild fire that
'Ali bin al-Husayn and Muhammad al-Hanafiyah wanted the Black Stone to
judge between them. Everyone must have wondered how could a stone judge
between two persons. They must have eagerly waited to see the outcome
when the two parties would approach the Stone. What would they say when
the Stone, being a stone, would not respond to their arguments!

This must have been the feeling of the crowd when the uncle and the
nephew slowly advanced towards the Black Stone. First Muharnmad
al-Hanafiyah talked to the Stone; there was no response. Imam Zayn
al-'Abidin said: "Had you, O Uncle, been the Wasi and Imam, it would
certainly have answered you."

Muhammad al-Hanafiyah said "Now, O Nephew, you pray and ask it." Imam
Zayn al-'Abidin prayed to Allah and then asked the Black Stone to
declare in clear Arabic as to who was the Wasi and Imam after al-Husayn
bin 'Ali.

There was a tremor in the Stone and then Allah made it speak in clear
Arabic: "O Allah, verily Wisayah and Imamah, after al-Husayn bin 'Ali is
for Zayn al-'Abidin 'Ali bin al-Husayn, son of 'Ali bin Abi Talib and
Fatimah bint Rasulillah." Muhammad al-Hanafiyah accepted the verdict and
declared his allegiance for Imam Zayn al-'Abidin.

(al-Ihtijaj of al-Tabrasi, al-Kafi of al-Kulaini, Basa'-erud-Darajat,
A'lumul-wara, Manaqib of Ibn Shahr 'Ashob, Biharul-Anwar, Vol. XI, of
Majlisi).

This "dispute" was the beginning of the end of the Kaisaniyah movement,
which wanted to accept Muhammad al-Hanafiyah as Imam. The schism in the
Shia rank was arrested; and as it was only a "family feud", Yazid could
not object to it in any way.

But the miraculous nature of the episode and the timing served its
purpose. The pilgrims on returning to heir homes must have felt
compelled to narrate this strange story; and thus the Shi'as throughout
the Muslim world came to know, without any formal proclamation, that
Imam Zayn al-'Abidin was their divinely-appointed Leader and Guide.

**UNITING THE SHIA COMMUNITY**

This is an even more fascinating aspect of his Imamat.

How was he to unite all the Shi'as in an, ever-lasting bond? What was
the factor which could join them permanently?

Philosophical exhortations? But they have effect on only small group of
intellectuals; man-in-the-street is not influenced by them. Moreover, it
cannot influence the "feelings"; and "unity" is a feeling of oneness.
Some joyous aspects of religion? Joy and happiness is a "feeling", no
doubt. But it does not necessarily "unite" the people. Many is the time
when a man celebrates a joyous function and his brother refuses to join
him, because of some minor misunderstandings. But let there be a tragedy
in that house, and the same brother would rush therein to share that
sorrow.

This tendency of human nature brings us to the third alternative
Sorrow.

Sorrow and grief succeeds in binding the mourners together, while
intellectual arguments and joyous functions fail to achieve that object.
Have not you seen how at the time of a national tragedy all political
differences are genuinely forgotten and how the whole nation unites
together to share the sorrow and shoulder the resulting
responsibilities? Imam Zayn al-'Abidin under divine command selected
this method to unite the community.

And again it was adopted apparently just as a personal way of life,
without its being aimed against anyone.

Majlisi (in Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. XI) has written a chapter, "His
mourning and Weeping on the Martyrdom of his Father, May Grace of Allah
be on Both", in which he, inter alia, writes:

"And it is said that he (i.e. Imam Zayn al-'Abidin) continued to weep
till his eyes were endangered. And whenever he took water to drink, he
wept till the tears filled the pot. Someone talked to him about it and
he replied: "Why should not I cry, when my father was denied the water
which was free to the beasts and animals?

"And never was food brought to him but that he wept, so much so that a
servant told him: "May I be your ransom, O Son of the Messenger of
Allah! I am afraid that you would die (of this weeping)". The Imam said:
'I only complain of my distraction and anguish to Allah and I do not
know. Never do I remember the massacre of the children of Fatimah but
that tears strangle me.'"

Naturally, this example set by their Imam was followed by the Shias
every where; and they joined hands to establish mourning of Imam Husayn
whenever possible. This created a feeling of oneness and unity in all
persons attending those mourning-sessions.

And how could Yazid or Yazidites tell Imam Zayn al-'Abidin not to
remember his father?

This institution of mourning became the focal-point of all religious
activities of the Shia community and the life-line of their faith. In
later periods, the enemies of the faith realised the vital role which
the "mourning" plays in religious education and character-building of
the Shias, and they tried to stop it by the force of their "Fatwa". Now
they have changed their tactics. Now they ask: Why should one mourn for
an event which occurred more than 1300 years ago? They ask it while they
are fully aware that these mourning sessions (Majalis) are the
best-organised, well-attended religious schools, where the participants
willingly learn the basic tenets of faith, are exhorted to emulate the
way of life of Ahl i-Bayt; and thus their Islamic outlook on the life
and the world is fortified.

This seat of learning was given to the Shi'a community by Imam Zayn
al-'Abidin so unobtrusively that even the community did not realise its
importance and significance in the beginning.

**TEACHING TRUE ISLAM**

The previous two tasks were stepping-stones to reach this most
important of his responsibilities. We have seen how the Imam announced
his Imamat by means of a "family feud", and how he gave his followers a
platform of unity in the form of his mourning for his father. In neither
instance he addressed any outsider; still the message got through.
Likewise, in meeting this third and most important of his tasks, he did
not address any human being. He selected the form of Du'a (invocation)
for this purpose. He recorded his Du'as in a book form and asked his two
sons to make copies of the book. This recording itself is an, indication
that these invocations were not just a prayer, but also a means of
guidance for the Muslims.

How could anyone tell him not to ask his wants from Allah? How could
anyone come between Allah and His servant, when raising his hands he
called his Lord in a heart-rending voice to come to his aid and to help
him out of his difficulties. But those recorded duas are a treasure of
Islamic knowledge. One finds in them almost all theological and ethical
questions answered eloquently and eruditely. Reading them, the heart is
filled with true belief and sincere love of Allah; and the light of
virtue and nobleness illuminates the character.

It is not possible to give here even a short review of this sacred
book, generally known as "As-Sahifatus-Sajjadiyah" and
"As-Sahifatul-Kamilah"; and also called "Psalm of 'Ale Muhammad" and
"Injil of Ahlul Bait."

When this book was shown to Egyptian scholars, they were thunderstruck
and awed by its beauty. They were amazed and stunned by the purity of
thought and perfection of character to which this book irresistibly
leads its reader.

The renowned scholar, late Al-Tantawi wrote:

"I have studied this book with utmost care. I have gone through the
Du'as (invocations) and Munajats (supplications) with a searching eye. I
was stunned by the lofty meanings and deep sense contained therein. I
was deeply impressed by the value and magnificence of these invocations.
I wonder how the Muslims all along been ignorant of such valuable
treasure. They have been in deep slumber all these centuries. They could
not even feel that Allah had supplied them with such a precious store of
knowledge.

"The invocations in this book have two distinct approaches: the one
seeks for the knowledge and guidance to keep away from sins and evil
things, while the other persuades and exhorts one to enable one's 'self'
by performance of virtuous deeds. We may say that these Invocations,
full of knowledge and guidance, are a wonderful treasure of secrets, and
contain hints regarding self-reproachment, admission of shortcomings,
with tears and self-purification, warding off vicissitudes and
difficulties, safe-guarding oneself from the tyrannies of the enemy,
recovery from various diseases and so on. All such Du'as are found
mostly in the first part of the book, while the later part consists of
the loftiness and grandeur of Allah, His creation and other wonders of
His power and might.

"Is it not wonderful? Does not it show that these holy personages are
unveiling many secrets of learning and unravellirig many mysteries of
knowledge for Muslims, who happen to be completely ignorant of it. It is
a fact that the affairs of human beings are divided into two parts: The
one is to keep away from evil, the other to acquire good traits together
with the knowledge of Divine existence, which is essential for
self-purification and spiritual perfection."

Then he goes on expounding these points with help of many invocations.
In another article, he compares an invocation of Imam Zayn al-'Abidin
with the prayer of the Prophet Nuh (Noah). Just to give an example of
the high religious and ethical standard taught by our Holy Imam, I am
quoting here extracts from a Du'a, known as Makerim-ul-Akhlaq (Noble
Character). This Du'a is enough to lead the reciter on the right path,
making him a perfect Muslim and a virtuous believer.

O Lord, Thou art my shelter if I grow sad, and Thou art my resource if
I am in need and unto Thee I cry for help, when deeply afflicted, and
with Thee is recompense for what is lost, and reformation for what is
corrupted, and alteration for what Thou disapprovest:

Therefore, favour me with security before calamity, and bounty before
begging (for it) and right direction before error and spare me from
bearing me peace on the day of resurrection and favour me with hand some
guidance.

O Lord, bless Muhammad and his Al (family) and ward off (evil) from me
with Thy grace, and nourish me with Thy blessing, and reform me with Thy
graciousness and cure me with Thy goodness and hide me in the shelter of
Thy mercy and clothe me with Thy approbation, and help me, when matters
grow difficult about me, (to choose) the most righteous of them, and
when actions become dubious, (to select) the purest of them, and when
the creeds conflict, (to adopt) the most praiseworthy of them.

O Lord, bless Muhammad and his Al (family) and crown me with
sufficiency and adorn me with the grace of Thy love and grant me true
guidance and do not try me with prosperity and confer on me the beauty
of comfort and do not make my life a succession of trials, and do not
reject my prayer with repulsion; for, I do not recognise any as Thy
rival, and I do not call upon any as Thy equal.

O Lord, bless Muhammad and his Al (family) and restrain me from
extravagance and preserve my subsistence from waste and increase my
possessions by giving blessing therein and let me walk along the path of
benevolence; in whatever I spend my (wealth). In this way Imam Zayn
al-'Abidin spent his life providing guidance not only for the Muslims of
his time, but also for the generations to come. When he left this world,
he had more than accomplished all that he was entrusted with by Allah.


