Imam Hasan 'the Myth of His Divorces'
=====================================

S. Saeed Akhtar Rizvi
Al-Serat, Vol 4 (1978), No 3

Imam Hasan has been the victim of a most malicious propaganda for the
last 1,250 years. He is portrayed as "fond of ease and quiet" by his
admirers (Ameer Ali in "Spirit of Islam") and "the great divorcer" by
his detractors (Willi Frischaurer in "The Aga Khans").

Before looking at individual reports, it is important to find out when
this allegation was put forward, by whom and why. After a thorough study
of these reports, I have found that the first man known to accuse Imam
Hasan of "marrying and divorcing" was the 2nd Abbasid Khalifa, Mansur,
who because of his dynastic policies was bent upon belittling Amir
al-Mu'minin \`Ali and his descendants.

It will help the readers to know how Abbasids came to power.

As Ameer \`Ali writes in "Spirit of Islam" (p.302), "the tragical fate
of Husain and his children sent a thrill of horror through Islam; and
the revulsion of feeling which it caused proved eventually the salvation
of Faith ... It made the bulk of Moslems think of what the Master had
done, and of the injuries which the children of his enemies were
inflicting on Islam."

By the beginning of the 2nd century of Hijra, "Persia, Irak and Hijaz,
which had suffered most from the atrocities of the Bani-Omeyya, were
honeycombed by secret organisations for the over-throw of the hated
family. The Bani-Abbas were the most active in the movement to subvert
the Omeyyad rule, at first,.perhaps, from a sincere desire to restore to
the Fatimids their just rights, but afterwards in their own interests."
(Ibid, p.307.)

When Bani Hashim were planning to overthrow the Umayyad dynasty, they
first secretly called a meeting of all members of the clan. They decided
that, if they succeeded, they would make Muhammad, Nafs al-Zikiyya (Pure
Soul) Khalifa. Muhammad was son of Abdallah son of Hasan Muthanna son of
Imam Hasan. Among those who made the bia'a were Abu'l-Abbas (Saffah) and
Mansur.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq remained aloof from all these activities and told
Abdallah (father of Nafs al-Zakiyya) that his son would not succeed;
that Mansur would sit on the throne instead. Abdullah did not like this
frankness and accused Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq of envy! Anyhow the slogan of
Rida aal-Muhammad (to please the Descendants of the Prophet) proved a
success and people gathered behind the agents of Bani Hashim, thinking
that they wanted to remove Bani Umayya and install a descendant of the
Prophet as Khalifa. Bani Umayya were overthrown in 132 A.H.

But when the time came to install a Khalifa from Aal-Muhammad, the
Abbasids forgot all their pledges and their bay'a to Muhammad Nafs
al-Zakiyya. They put Abu'l-Abbas Saffah on the throne.

Abu'l-'Abbas died after four years, and his brother Mansur came to
power. Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya did not forget that Mansur was under
obligation to accept him as Khalifa; neither could Mansur forget it. The
solution, according to Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya, was to rise against
Mansur. The solution, according to Mansur, was to annihilate all the
descendants of Imam Hasan.

"The same fierce jealousy with which the Bani-Omeyya had pursued or
persecuted the Bani-Fatima, characterised the conduct of Bani-Abbas
towards the descendants of Muhammad. They had no claim to the Caliphate
themselves; they made the affection of the people for the children of
Fatima the means for their own elevation, and when they had attained the
desired end they rewarded the Fatimids with bitter persecution." (Ibid,
p.304.)

Mansur came to Medina in 144 A.H. and in one sweeping operation
arrested all the family of Imam Hasan and took them to Baghdad. It is
not the place to enumerate the torture - physical and mental - meted out
to the descendants of Imam Hasan.

Now Mansur wanted to absolve himself from the legal,and moral
obligations of that oath of allegiance. It was not only the question of
his own conscience; he had to assure the public also that he was the
constitutional and rightful Khalifa.

For this purpose, he gave a public address after that mass arrest, in
which he shamelessly said:

"By God, we left the descendants of Abu Talib and the Khilafat; we did
not interfere at all. \`Ali ibn Abi Talib became Khalifa. After him
Hasan ibn \`Ali became Khalifa. By God, he did not deserve it. He was
offered money, which he accepted; Mu'awiya sent him a message that he
would make him his successor. So, Hasan abdicated the Khilafat and left
the government and power. He left everything to Mu'awiya, and turned his
attention, to women, marrying one woman today, divorcing another one
tomorrow. He remained like this till he died in his bed."

(AI-Mas'udi; in Muruj al-Dhahab, Vol.3, p.226)

The main theme of this address was that Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya had no
claim of Khilafat because his great-grand-father, Imam Hasan, has
relinquished this power.

Accordingly, he wrote a letter to Muhammad who was still at large and
was gathering an army to fight against Mansur: "The Khilatat of your
ancestor (Ali) reached to Hasan; he sold it to Mu'awiya in consideration
of money and cloth Now, if you had any right in the Khilafat, you had
already sold it and received its price."

But Mansur knew that this line of argument solved only the immediate
problem of the bay'a of Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya. It could not prevent
one of the descendants of Imam Husain from claim to the Khilafat for
himself. Therefore, he left no stone unturned to prove that the Fatimids
were not entitled to the inheritance of the Holy Prophet at all; and
that Bani' Abbas were the rightful heirs of the Holy Prophet. In Arabia,
prior to Islam, inheritance "was governed by the rule of agnacy." It
means that only those persons who were connected with the deceased
'through males' were recognised as entitled to take a share in his
inheritance (they are called 'agnatic relatives'), and neither women nor
persons connected to the deceased through them had any right of
succession, (they are called 'uterine relatives').

"Thus it was that whilst adopted sons and even slaves had rights, the
children of daughters and sisters had no place in the customary rules
which regulated succession."

(Ameer \`Ali in 'Mohammedan Law', Vol.2, p.75) Islam put an end to such
affront to human nature, and in the Qur'an there are specific provisions
for the succession of daughters, mothers and sisters.

But Mansur, in rank defiance of the Qur'an, revived the old custom of
agnacy. Ameer \`Ali writes: "When the Abbasids succeeded in overthrowing
the Omeyyads, they found it necessary to legitimatise their title to the
Caliphate, for the eyes of the Moslem world were still turned to the
descendants of the Prophet as the rightful heirs to his temporal and
spiritual heritage and in effecting this they found their chief support
in the doctrine of agnacy. They claimed that as descendants of the
Prophet's uncle, Abbas, they were his 'agnates' and as such had a better
title than the descendants of his daughter Fatima. And this was the
keystone of the fabric built up by the ablest monarch of the House of
Abbas, Mansur, the real founder of the Sunni Church."
(Ibid, p.76)

And as a result, the Sunni Law still retains largely the customary rule
of pre-Islamic Arabs. Ameer \`Ali says: "The rule of agnacy has thus
remained, chiefly from dynastic reasons, a part of Sunni system. In
early times it was strongly enforced as under the old Romans. If a
person died without leaving any 'agnatic' relations but a daughter's or
sister's child, his property did not go to the latter but escheated to
the Caliph (i.e. was taken over by the Caliph). In 896 A.D. the Caliph
Mutazid Billah abolished this cruel rule, and laid down that in the
absence of sharers and agnates (Asabah) the "uterine relations" should
succeed. And this has remained the law ever since."

(Ibid)

But even after this half-hearted amendment, the uterine relations are
placed in the last category, and it is only in the absence of sharers,
agnates and (even) the emancipated that they receive any share in the
inheritance.

(Ibid, p.68)

Thus this "ablest" monarch of the House of 'Abbas contrived to silence
Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya by alleging that Imam Hasan had sold his right
of Khilafat; and then by an ingenious reversion to pre-Islamic custom,
disinherited all descendants of Fatima for ever! But, as Ameer \`Ali has
pointed out, descendants of Fatima were also descendants of \`Ali who,
as the son of Abu Talib, was 'agnate relative' of the Holy Prophet
(connected to him by male relation)!"

This is not the place to explain why Imam Hasan entered into treaty
with Mu'awiya; nor do I want to comment upon the claim made by Muhammad
Nafs al-Zakiyya that he was entitled to Khilafat "because he was a
descendant of Fatima." The Imamate is based not on inheritance, but on
"Appointment by Allah" through the Holy Prophet or the preceding Imam.
Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya based his claim on falsity, and Mansur tried to
answer him with a bigger falsity. But in this conflict, the real
sufferer proved to be Imam Hasan whose sacred name was made the object
of the false propaganda that he married a woman today and divorced
another tomorrow.

Bani Umayya had established a full-fledged department to fabricate
"ahadith" to smear the names of AhI al-bayt. But they were not as
successful in their endeavours as Mansur was.

His rule of inheritance by agnates is still followed by the Sunni
schools of Law; and his propaganda against Imam Hasan has even found its
way into some Shi'a books.

Let us now look at these reports:

Some have reported 70 wives. Others have increased the number to 90.
Still others have said 250 wives! The highest number is 300! The first
report of 70 wives is given by Abu'l-Hasan \`Ali ibn Abdullah Al-Basri
Al-Mada'ini, who died in 225 A.H. This man was a partisan of Bani
Umayya - he was a freed slave of Sumra ibn Habib, an Umayyad.

Ubn Adi has said of him: He is not strong in Hadith. (Mizan al-I
'tidal, Vol.2, p.232, Lisan al-Mizan, Vol.4, p.253) This Madaini does
not say from where he got this number of 70.

The second report of 90 wives appears in Nur al-Absar of Shablanji who
died in 1298 AH. Reports of 250 and 300 wives are found in Quwwat
al-Qulub (Vol. 2, p.246) of Abu Talib Makki who died in 380 A.H. He
writes: "Hasan ibn \`Ali married 250 wives; and it is said that 300
wives. \`Ali was very much annoyed and grieved by it, because when Hasan
divorced a woman, \`Ali felt embarrassment before her family. \`Ali used
to say that 'Hasan is habitual divorcer; you people should not give your
daughters to him." Then a man from the tribe of Hamdan said:

'O amir al-Mu'minin, by God, we will give him our daughters; and he may
retain whomsoever he wishes and may divorce whomsoever he dislikes.'
Hearing it, \`Ali was very much pleased and recited the following
poem:

"If I would be in-charge of any gate of Paradise I would tell the tribe
of Hamdan, 'Enter into Paradise with peace." "Imam Hasan had likeness of
the Prophet in facial features as well as in manners and character. The
Holy Prophet told him, 'O Hasan, you are like me in features and
character and manners.' Also he said, 'Hasan is from me and Husain is
from \`Ali.' "Hasan, often married 4 wives in one sitting and then
divorced 4 wives in one sitting."

Now this man Abu Talib had become mad at the time of writing this book
Quwwat al-Qulub. He went to Baghdad and people came to see him. When
they heard his senseless talk, all went away, and avoided him. One of
his savings of that time is that "None is more harmful for the people
than their Creator." The scolars have frankly said that he has written
many things in that book which have no foundation at all. These were the
original reporters. All those who came after them have blindly copied
from their books.

The fact is that it was impossible for Imam Hasan to marry so many
wives even if he wanted to. All the narrations imply that he started
this alleged pursuit of pleasure during the Khilafat of his father in
Kufa. \`Ali came to Kufa in 37 Hijra. Imam Hasan had at least three
wives in Kufa.

1. Khawal Fazariya, who was the mother of Hasan Muthanna (the
grandfather of Muhammad Nafs al-Zakiyya). She survived Imam Hasan. This
marriage had taken place in Medina.

2. Umm Ishaq bint Talha. She was the mother of Husain Athram, Talha and
Fatima. This marriage also had taken place in Medina. She survived Imam
Hasan; and was later married to Imam Husain.

3. Ju'da bint Ash-ath. This marriage took place in Kufa and she also
survived Imam Hasan. (She poisoned him on instigation of Mu'aviya.)
Islam allows a man to marry up to four women at any given time. As Imam
Hasan already had three wives, who were with him up to the last day of
his life, he could marry only one more woman at any time.

Bearing in mind this limitation, one can only regard the statement of
Quwwat al-Qulub with amusement: "Often he (Imam Hasan) married 4 wives
in one sitting and then divorced them in one sitting." How could he
marry 4 wives in one sitting when he already had 3 wives? Now suppose
that he married a fourth wife, and then divorced her. As long as that
divorced wife was in 'idda (period of probation, normally 3 months) she
was counted legally his wife, and Imam Hasan could not marry another
wife before expiry of her 'idda.

Let us, now, suppose that he married a woman. As divorce cannot be
given in a month in which co-habitation has taken place, the earliest
that that wife could be divorced was in next month; her 'idda continued
for 3 months. Thus, four months passed before Imam Hasan could be free
to marry another wife. One wife in four months gives us a maximum of 3
wives in a year. Supposing that Imam Hasan had no other work except
marrying and divorcing, as Mansur said, and if we count from 37 A.H. up
to his martyrdom at the beginning of 51 A.H. to get a period of 14
years, this will give us a maximum number of 42 possible marriages.

And the minimum alleged by these scholars is 70 wives!

After this clarification, there is no need for further comment upon
these reports. Yet it is worthwhile to examine these reports a little
more in order to show how absolutely unreliable they are.

Abu Talib Makki says: "\`Ali used to say that Hasan is a habitual
divorcer; do not give him your daughters." The question is, why \`Ali
told people in public not to give Hasan their daughters? Had he, first,
told Hasan not to divorce so much? If so, did Hasan disobey him? Nobody
says that Hasan was, God forbid, a disobedient son. Even Abu Talib Makki
admits that Hasan was like the Holy Prophet in facial features and in
manners and character. Can a disobedient son be universally accepted as
having the character and manner of the Holy Prophet?

Or did \`Ali forbid people in public without first trying to restrain
Hasan from this alleged behaviour?

Can \`Ali be expected to do such a childish thing, degrading his
heir-apparent in public, without first advising him accordingly? As both
alternatives lead to absurdity, the only conclusion remains that this
report was forged by someone who wanted to discredit both \`Ali and
Hasan by one fabrication.

The most amusing is the report of aforementioned Abu'l-Hasan
al-Mada'ini who says: "When Hasan died, all his former wives came out in
a group in his funeral procession, with open heads and bare feet, and
they were shouting "We are the wives of Hasan!" Who has ever heard of
such a procession in Islamic society? What was the sense in shouting 'we
are the wives of Hasan'? And how did their husbands of that time allow
them to form that comic procession?

It will be interesting to see the gradual development of this
propaganda.

First comes Mansur, in 144 A.H., declaring that Imam Hasan was
'marrying one woman today, divorcing another tomorrow.'

Then comes al-Mada'ini (died 225 A.H.) who gives a specific number of
70 and produces the procession of those divorced wives at the funeral.

Then al-Kafi (compiled in 326 A.H.) gives two \`Ahadith' that Imam
Hasan divorced very much.

Then comes Abu Talib Makki (380 A.H.) who thought that 70 was not
consistent with 'marrying a woman one day and divorcing another
tomorrow'; so he increased the number to 250; still his mathematics was
not satisfied, so he quoted an unknown source and finally said '300'.

Lastly comes the French historian, H. Lammens, who writes in 'Shorter
Encyclopaedia of Islam':

"He (Imam Hasan) spent the best part of his youth in making and
unmaking marriages; about a hundred are enumerated. (Remember that
Mansur had alleged this to happen after the treaty with Mu'awiya in the
last ten years of Imam Hasan's life But this 'historian' antidates it to
his youth! And so far as enumeration is concerned, only 14 are
enumerated, not 100 as he alleges.) These easy morals earned him the
title mitlak 'the divorcer' and involved \`Ali in severe enmities."
(Now, on what authority this 'historian' has made this fantastic
assertion? No evidence can be produced to support this allegation.)

In another place he writes: that Imam Hasan proved that he was very
extravagant. He built separate houses for all those wives; each had her
retinue of servants and attendants. Even during the Khilafat of \`Ali
when there was hardship and strict financial control, he used to spend
money in the same way.

Did Rev. H. Lammens produce even a fabricated Hadith or report to show
that Imam Hasan had built separate houses for all those (100!) wives
with all the paraphernalia which he so willingly enumerates? The answer
is 'NO'. It is just the product of his fertile imagination. It is these
people who take upon themselves the task of producing 'authentic'
history of Islam for the receptive minds of Westerners!


