The Scholarly Jihad of the Imams 95 - 148 A.h
=============================================

Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi Vol IX No. 1 and 2

The period under discussion (95-148 A.H /712-765 A.D.) began and ended
in the times of the Vth and VIth Imams. The persecutions of the Shi'is
continued unabated from Mu'awiya's time to almost the very last days of
the Umayyads, although this dynasty in its latter days was considerably
weakened by internal strife. Zayd, the grandson of Husayn, rose up to
establish the rule of religion and justice in 122/740, but he was felled
by an arrow in his forehead, and his army of 15,000 fled.

His body was exhumed by order of the Umayyad caliph, Hisham, was
mutilated, beheaded and crucified in Kufa and left there for years on
the cross. Then Hisham's successor, al-Walid, ordered the body to be
burned, and the ashes scattered on the banks of the Euphrates. Zayd's
son, Yahya, rose up in Khorasan; coincidently he also was killed by an
arrow which pierced his brain. He was beheaded; the head was sent to
al-Walid and the body crucified. This was in 125/743. The body remained
on the cross till Abu Muslim al-Khurasani rose in Khorasan and the call
rose up against the Umayyads "to please the progeny of Muhammad", and
Umayyad rule ended.

But the persecution in itself was a major cause of the spread of the
persecuted Shi'a faith. Muhammad Jawad al-Mughniya writes: "The Shi'is
offered arguments from the Qur'an and the traditions of the Prophet and
advanced intellectual reasons to the effect that the love of the
Prophet's family-members was obligatory, and that it was essential to
follow them and to hold fast to their rope; that it was obligatory to
keep aloof from their enemies. They wrote many books about their
superiority and virtues. But none of these books or arguments proved as
effective in strengthening and spreading the Shi'a faith as did the
policy of Mu'awiya and his Umayyad successors.

Surely the persecution carried out by the Umayyads was more effective
than a thousand and one books or than a thousand and one proofs in
proving the status of 'Ali and confirming his divine right to the
Caliphate. [^1] "' Dr. Taha Husain says: "So far as propagating beliefs
and attracting people to follow them is concerned, nothing is more
effective than persecution. It creates sympathy for those who undergo
suffering, and are engulfed by tragedies, and who are subjected to
pressure by the ruler. To the same degree it creates revulsion against
this ruler who resorts to injustice, carries his tyrannies to the
furthest limit and overburdens the population with hardships.

For this reason, the Shi' a cause became great during the last decade
of Mu'awiya's reign, and their call spread -and what a spread it was-in
the eastern Islamic countries and southern Arabia. And by the time
Mu'awiya had died, many people, and especially the general public in
Iraq, believed that hate of Umayyads and love of the Ahl al Bayt was
their religion.' [^2] Wellhausen writes: "All the people of Iraq during
Mu'awiya's reign, and especially the Kufites were Shi'i and this was not
only among individuals but among whole tribes and chiefs of the tribes."
[^3]

Arabia, Iraq and Khorasan, together with the Yemen and Bahrain were in
turmoil; hatred of the Umayyads became an established factor of the body
politic, and to the same degree people gravitated towards the
descendants of 'Ali. Several factors led to this result:

1. They were the Ahl al-Bayt; Allah had chosen that house for His
Prophethood; it was appropriate that the people should choose them for
their guidance.

2. They were the first to rise against the Umayyads and their
tyrannies; they were the first to speak for the oppressed masses and to
sacrifice their lives for this cause.

3. Not only the Ahl al-Bayt, but even their Shi'is, right from the
beginning of Umayyad rule, worked openly and secretly against those
tyrants; and they faced all the consequences: massacres, banishments,
imprisonments, crucifixions, and all types of torture. [^4]

Ibn al-Athir confirms that when the 'Abbasids joined this campaign
towards the end, "they were using the slogan that they wanted to avenge
the murders of Husayn, Zayd and Yahya." [^5]

Wellhausen writes: "The 'Abbasids tried their utmost to keep secret
from the people their intention that they wanted to replace the
descendants of Fatima; instead, they pretended that they were doing
whatever they were doing for the sake of the Fatimids. They rose in
Khorasan and other places claiming that they wanted to avenge the
martyrs of the children of Fatima." [^6]

"The 'Abbasids rose in the name of the 'Alawites, and on the shoulders
of their Shi'is. (After the success) they changed their attitude towards
them, and their oppression of the Shi'is increased in magnitude and
intensity." [^7]

Muhammad Ahmad al-Buraq says: "The call really was for the 'Alawites,
because the Khurasanis were attached to the descendants of 'Ali, not to
the descendants of Abbas. That is why as Saffah and his successors
always kept their eyes open and tried to prevent Shi'ism from spreading
further in Khorasan They encouraged the poets to praise them (i.e., the
'Abbasids) and gave them rewards, and those poets used to cast
aspersions against the descendants of 'Ali." [^8]

"This led the 'Abbasid 'caliphs' to renounce the faith of Ahl al-Bayt
(which they had followed up to the beginning of their period of rule)
and accept Sunnism, because they were afraid that if Shi'ism spread, the
rule would go to the 'Alawites. Thus the 'Abbasids faithfully followed
the Umayyads in policy, belief and practice." [^9]

Be that as it may, the Umayyads in their last days and the 'Abbasids in
their first days could not give much attention to the Shi' is. Thus the
fifth Imam started teaching his faith in Madina openly. People came to
him from far and wide to learn from him explanations of the Qur'an, the
traditions, rules of the sharia, theology, etc. It was not a formal
madrasa (university, school); yet, for want of a better word, we shall
call it the madrasa of the Imam. The fifth Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir
(95-114/712-732) died before the madrasa had reached its point of
perfection, but his son, the sixth Imam, Ja'far As-Sadiq developed it to
such an extent that the number of his disciples exceeded four thousand.
This continued up to 132/750 when the 'Abbasids came to power Although
as-Saffah, the first 'Abbasid caliph, ruled for only four years, and
that time was mostly taken up in consolidating his power, he found time
to call the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq to his capital, Hira, where he was held
incommunicado. One man who wanted to see him had to disguise himself as
a hawker of cucumber to reach the Imam.' [^10] But later he came back to
Madina.

Then came al-Mansur (13S158/754-775) whose only aim in life, it seems,
was to kill every descendant of 'Ali. The Shi'is in general, and the
'Alawites in particular, were persecuted more brutally than they were
during the reign of the Umayyads. He put even more hindrance in the way
of the Imam. "He forbade the people to go to the Imam, and forbade the
Imam to sit (outside) to receive the people, and put the utmost pressure
on him. So much so that if a problem appeared in a Shi'is life
concerning, for example, marriage, divorce or some other matter, and he
had no knowledge of the rule of the sharia about it, he could not reach
the Imam, and, as a result, the man and the wife had to separate. "
[^11]

After a long period, al-Mansur allowed the Imam to benefit the people
with his divine knowledge, [^12] but there were always spies to report
his words and answers. Therefore, the Imam had to be cautious in his
discourses. In short, the period of freedom had gone, so far as the
Shi'is were concerned.

Anyhow, this period coincided with the movement of free thinking which
had started in the Muslim world. Arabs came in contact with the older
civilizations of Iran, Syria and Egypt, and became acquainted with
Zoroastrian and Manichean beliefs and Greek philosophy. Some books had
already been translated from Greek and other languages. Many scholars
adopted strange beliefs and foreign ideas and spread them among the
common people. One finds a bewildering plethora of new sects
mushrooming.

Atheism was openly advocated even in the great mosque of the Ka'ba; the
Murji'ites, by saying that faith is not affected by deeds, supported the
tyrannies of the rulers; the "exaggerators" (ghulat) claimed divinity
for this or that human being (even the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was believed
to be God by Abul Khattab). The Kharijites declared that all Muslims who
were opposed to them were infidels; The sufis adopted some ideas from
Christian monks and Hindu ascetics, and led people away from Islamic
monotheism; the traditionalists flooded the Muslim world with forged
traditions. In short, there was a deluge of anti- Islamic ideals and
ideas which inundated true Islam. Amidst this all, these two Imams
guided to the truth.

These Imams and their faithful disciples were the first to see this
danger, and they were ready to fight it with their logical evidence.
They defended the true faith, repulsed its enemies, and raised the
standards of the shari'a. They launched an unremitting jihad (academic,
of course) against the ghulat and showed them in their true colours.
They argued with the Muttazilites, the Murji'ites, and the Kharijites in
public and proved the weakness of their standpoints. They exposed the
sufis and refuted their arguments. They corrected what was wrong in the
theological ideas of many Muslim scholars, and showed them where they
had gone wrong in jurisprudence.' [^13]

As we have explained above, the major part of this work was done by the
Imam Ja' far as-Sadiq. As a result of his untiring defence of Islam, the
Muslim world came to see in him the only hope for the salvation of
Islam. Eyes turned towards him, thinkers accepted the Imam as their
"great-teacher"; people used to come into his presence with pen and
paper ready, and his words were recorded on the spot. Thousands of such
notebooks were filled, and the words of the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
attained the same prestige as those of the Messenger of God. Not only
the Shi'is, Sunnis, Mu'tazilites and atheists, but also the Hindus and
Christians came to him and benefited from his discourses. The Sunni
Imam, Malik b. Anas, the founder of the Maliki school of law, said: "No
eye ever saw, no ear ever heard, and no heart ever imagined anyone
superior to Ja'far b. Muhammad in virtue, knowledge, worship and piety.
[^14]

Ibn Shahr ashub writes: "So much knowledge has been narrated from as-
Sadiq that has never been narrated from anyone else; and the scholars of
traditions have collected the names of his trustworthy narrators of
various beliefs and views, and they were four thousand men." Abu Na'im
writes in Hilyatu 'l-Awliya: "Malik b. Anas, Shutba b. Hajjaj, Sufyan
at-Thawri, Ibn Jarih, 'Abdullah b. 'Amr, Rawh, b. Qasim, Sufyan b.
'Uyayna, Sulayman b. Bilal, Isma'il b. Ja'far, Hakim b. Isma'il, 'Abdu
l-'Aziz b. Mukhtar, Wuhayb b. Khalid, Ibrahim b. Tahman, among others
..., narrated from Ja'far as-Sadiq, peace be upon him." [^15] Quoting
from others, Ibn Shahr 'ashub has added the names of the Sunni Imams
Malik, ash-Shat and Ahmad b. Hanbal, and al-Hasan b. as-Salih, Abu Ayyub
as-Sajistani and 'Umar b. Dinar. [^16]

Hasan b. Ziyad says that Imam Abu Hanifa (founder of the Hanafi school
of Sunni law) was asked about the most learned man he had seen. He
replied: "Ja'far b. Muhammad." [^17]

Nuh b. Darraj asked Ibn Abi Layla: "Would you leave (i.e. change) an
opinion you have expressed or a judgment you have delivered for any
other person's words?" He said: "No. Except one man." Nuh asked: "And
who is he?" He said: "Ja'far b. Muhammad."' [^18]

The above is only a partial list of Sunni scholars and Imams who came
to the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq and benefited from his teachings. Add to it
the names of the sufis, atheists, Hindus and Kharijites who flocked to
his madrasa, and one can appreciate what a treasure of knowledge was
given to people by the Imam.

When others benefitted so much, how much more must have been gathered
by the Shi'is. One of his well-known disciples, Aban b. Taghlib,
narrated from him thirty thousand traditions. Hasan b. Ali al-Washsha'
said: "I found in the mosque of Kufa nine hundred shaykhs, every one of
them saying 'Ja'far b. Muhammad told me ...' " [^19]

In al-Munjid we find: "His (Ja'far as-Sadiq's) madrasa was the
continuation of his father's (al-Baqir's) madrasa, and was extremely
successful in spreading Islamic culture; the number of its students in
Madina was at least 4,000, and they came from all Muslim countries.
There was a large branch-school in Kufa. One of the greatest
achievements of as-Sadiq was his call to write and edit; before that
little writing was done. The number of the books written by his students
was at least four hundred by four hundred writers." [^20]

The Shaykh Muhammad Husayn al-Muzaffar writes: "The best days for the
Shi'is were the transition period, the last years of the Umayyads and
the early years of the'Abbasids ... The Shi'is took advantage of this
breathing space to drink from the stream of the knowledge of the Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq; they traveled to him to receive from him the commands
of religion and its reality. His disciples narrated from him in every
branch of knowledge, as is seen in the Shi'is books. His disciples were
not only from the Shi'a community, but all the sects narrated from him,
as is clearly mentioned in the books of, hadith and rijal.

Ibn ' Uqdah, the Shaykh at-Tusi and the Muhaqqiq enumerated his
narrators, and the total came to four thousand." [^21]

This open teaching and unrestricted preaching increased the number of
the Shi'is in every region throughout the Muslim world. It is not
possible to give a list of well-known Shi's scholars and missionaries of
that time, as it would be too lengthy. The teachings and explanations of
the Imams removed the veils of ambiguity from the Shi'i faith and showed
its teachings in clear terms. Theology, explanation of the Qur'an,
morality, jurisprudence, in short every branch of religious knowledge,
was explained in a clear perspective.

The faith had not changed an iota, nor the Qur'anic explanations, nor
the traditions; but the discussions and arguments with the
newly-appeared sects clarified many fine points and gave Shi'i theology
its distinct shape. Also, Shi'i fiqh (law) was so developed at this time
that people started calling it the Ja'fari school of law. The Shaykh
Mustafa 'Abdur' Razzaq of al-Azhar University says: "The eagerness to
codify law came to the Shi'is earlier than to other Muslims." [^22] Some
of the factors which helped in this development were:

1. The intellectual advancement of the Muslims;
2. The fortuitousness of the transitional period between the Umayyads
and the 'Abbasids;
3. The gatherings of thousands of eager disciples.

Such favourable factors never came together before or after this
period, and that is why other Imams could not do as much, although all
of them possessed the same divine knowledge.

That knowledge was not confined to religious subjects only, and we
shall mention in the next part of this article two examples of the
contributions of this madrasa to other branches of knowledge.

**Part II**

In part I we examined the prominence of the school of the Imam Ja'far
as- Sadiq in the religious sciences, and discussed the reasons for its
pre-eminence. Now we shall see how it also contributed to other branches
of knowledge, those of the natural sciences.

(a) CHEMISTRY. Jabir b. Hayyan (the Geber of the Latins), who has been
called one of the 'fathers of chemistry' and 'the most famous Arabic
alchemist' [^23], was one of the students of the Imam Ja'far, as-Sadiq.
The quantity of Jabir's output is quite staggering: besides his writings
in chemistry, he wrote 1,300 treatises on mechanics, 500 on medicine,
and 500 against Greek philosophy, not to mention other subjects. The
number of his books which have been printed in Latin, French and German
since the 17th century comes to thirty, if we count his '500 booklets'
as one book. There are 36 known manuscripts of his works in the British
Museum, the Biblioteque Nationale in Paris and in other libraries in
Germany. Egypt, Iran and Turkey. The extent to which he is indebted to
the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq in his research and teachings may be judged
from the fact that in many of his books we find: 'My master and mawla.
Ja'far. peace be upon him, told me that ...', and in his book, 'al
Manfa'a' he explicitly says: 'I acquired this knowledge from Ja'far b.
Muhammad, the leader of the people in his time.' [^24]

George Sarton, referring to Jabir's untranslated work, writes: 'We find
in them remarkably sound views on methods of chemical research; a theory
on the geologic formation of metals; the so-called sulphur-mercury
theory of metals ...; preparation of various substances (e.g., basic
lead carbonate; arsenic; and antimony from their sulphides). Jabir deals
also with various applications, e.g., refinement of metals, preparation
of steel. dyeing of cloth and leather, varnishes to waterproof cloth and
protect iron, use of manganese dioxide in glass making, use of iron
pyrites for writing in gold, distillation of vinegar to concentrate
acetic acid. He observed the imponderability of mag- netic force.' [^25]
He also discovered that each metal and material had a basic weight; he
called this 'the knowledge of weights, 'ilm al-mawazin.' [^26] He was, in
the words of Sarton: 'a very great personality, one of the greatest in
mediaeval science.' [^27]

Several of his writings have been translated by scholars such as M.
Berthelot, Octave Hodas, E. J. Holmyard, Ernst Darmstaedter and Max
Mayerhoff. Berthelot wrote in his 'History of Chemistry': 'The name
Jabir holds the same place in the history of chemistry which the name of
Aristotle holds in the history of logic.' [^28] Holmyard wrote: 'Jabir
was the student and friend of Ja'far as-Sadiq; and he found in his
incomparable Imam a supporter and helper, the trustworthy guide and
helmsman whose direction is always needed. And Jabir wanted to free
chemistry, through the direction of his teacher, from the myths of the
ancients which had held it in shackles since Alexandria; and he
succeeded to a great extent in this aim.' [^29]

(b) ANATOMY. A Hindu physician attached to the court of al-Mansur once
asked the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq if he wanted to learn something in this
field from him. The Imam said: 'No. What I have is better than what you
have.' Then began a very interesting discourse, in which the Imam asked
the physician questions like these: Why is the head covered with hair?
Why are there lines and wrinkles on the forehead? Why are the eyes
shaped like almonds? Why has the nose been placed between the eyes? Why
are the hair and the nails without life (sensation)? These questions
moved from the head downwards, till he ended up by asking: Why do the
knees fold backwards, and why is the foot hollow on one side? To all
these questions, the physician had only one reply: 'I do not know.' The
Imam said:

'But I do know.' Then he explained all the questions, showing the
wisdom and power of the Creator. The hair is created over the head so
that oil may reach inside, and heat may go out through it, and so that
it may protect the head from heat and cold. There are lines and wrinkles
on the forehead so that sweat from the head does not reach the eyes.
giving the person a chance to wipe it away. The eyes are almond-shaped
so as to make it easy to put medicine inside them and remove dirt from
them. Had they been square or round, both would have been difficult. The
nose is put between the eyes as it helps to divide the light equally
towards both eyes. The hair and nails lack sensation to make it easier
to cut and trim them. If there were life in them it would have hurt a
person to cut them. The knees fold backwards because human beings walk
forward, and the foot is hollow to make movement easier.' The physician
became a convert to Islam. [^30]

A booklet which was dictated by the Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq in four
sessions to his disciple Mufaddal b. 'Umar was widely narrated, and has
been widely studied and copied to the present day; al-Majlisi copied the
whole book into the second volume of his 'Bihar al Anwar'. [^31] In this
book, the Imam explained the wonders of creation, showing at every stage
how all of it is inter related and could not have come into being by
chance. In the first session, he explained the creation of man, his
organs of perception, the power of his mind, his gradual development.
and all the functions of body and mind. In the second session.

he explained the animal world and its common features; then he divided
animals into groups: carnivorous and herbivorous animals; birds and
reptiles; and so forth, explaining every group's special
characteristics. In the process of doing this he described the donkey.
the dog, the elephant, the giraffe, the monkey, domestic mammals,
reindeer, the fox, the dolphin, the pythom the ant, the spider, the
chicken, the peacock the pheasant, the flamingo, the sparrow, the owl,
the bat, the bee, the locust and fish. The third session was devoted to
geography. geology. astronomy (not astrology) and other related
subjects, such as minerals, trees and medicine. In the last session the
Imam dealt with the most common objection made by atheists: If there is
a Creator, then why is there so much suffering in the world? The Imam
answered this with the same attention to detail as he had shown in the
previous sessions, with systematic arguments.

This book is a treasure of knowledge, written to refute the ideas of
atheists. Everywhere the Imam draws attention to the wisdom and power of
the Creator. Two examples will be given here at random. 'Allah created
eyesight to perceive colours; had there been colour but no eye to see
it, there would have been no use for colour. And He created hearing to
perceive sounds: had there been sounds but no ear to hear them, there
would have been no reason to have them. The same is true for all kinds
of perception. and the same is true in the opposite sense: had there
been eyesight but no colour to see, eyesight would have been useless;
and if there had been ears, but no sounds to hear, ears would also have
been useless. Now, see how Allah has gauged everything to fit with
everything else.

For every organ of perception he made something for it to perceive, and
for every sensory phenomenon something to perceive it. Not only that.
but He created the medium between the organs of perception and their
objects, without which perception could not take place; for example,
light and air: if there were no light eyesight could not perceive
colour; and if there were no air to carry sounds to the ear, it could
not hear them. Can someone with a sound mind who observes all these
interconnected phenomena fail to admit that they could not exist without
the Will and Measuring of a Merciful, All-Knowing Creator?' [^32]

At one point Mufaddal said: 'O My Master! Some people think that all
this was made by nature ' The Imam dictated: 'Ask them about this
nature. Is it a thing which has the knowledge and power for such work?
Or is it without knowledge and power? If they say that it has knowledge
and power, then why should they disbelieve in a Creator, because these
[i.e., knowledge and power] are His attributes. And if they think that
nature does it without knowledge and will, and yet there is so much
wisdom and perfection in these works, they must admit that it could come
only from a Wise Creator. [The fact is that] nature is only [a name for]
the system in creation which operates as He has made it operate.' [^33]

There is an interesting aside in the fourth day's session, where the
Imam said: 'The name of the universe in Greek is qusmus (kosmos), and it
means 'adornment'. This name was given to it by their philosophers and
wise men. Could they have named it so except because of the order and
system which they found there? They were not content to call it a
system; they called it an 'adornment' to show that the order and system
found therein has the highest degree of beauty and splendour.' [^34]

**Notes:**

[^1] Muhammad Jawad al Mughniya, ash Shia wal Hakimun, al Maktab al
Ahliya, Beirut, 1st edition 1961, p. 75
[^2] Taha Husain, Ali wa Banuh as quoted in ash Shia, p. 80
[^3] J. Wellhausen, al Khawarij wa shia (trans into Arabic of his The
Kharijites and the Shi'ites ed. 1985 p. 499) quoted by M. J. al Mughniya
in his ash Shia wat Tashayyu, Maktaba al Madrasa wa Dar al Kitab al
Libnani, Beirut, note 8 p. 68
[^4] M. J al Mughniya, as shia wat Tashayyu, pp. 134-5
[^5] Ibn al Athir, al Kamil fi t Tarikh, Beirut, 1975, vol. 4 pp 330-2
[^6] J. Wellhausen, Tarikh ad Dawlati l Arabiya (trans into Arabic of
his History of the Arabs), p. 489, quoted by M. J. al Mughniya is his
ash Shia wa l Hakimun, p. 135
[^7] M. J. al Mughniya, op cit pp 135-6
[^8] Muhammad Ahmad al Buraq, Abu l Abbas as Saffah, as quoted in as
Shia wal Hakimun, p. 134
[^9] M. J. al Mughniya, op cit p. 139
[^10] Muhammad Baqir al Majlisi, Bihar al Anwar, new edition, Tehran,
1385 A.H, vol. 47, p. 171 quoting Qutb al Din ar Rawandi, al Kharaij wa
l Jaraih, p. 234
[^11] Ibn Shahr ashub, Manaqib, vol. 4 al Matba al Alimiya, Qum, p.
238
[^12] ibid, many similar reports are given in Fadl b. Hasan at Tabarsi,
al Ihtijaj, and al Majlisi, op cit
[^13] ibid
[^14] Ibn Hajar al Asqalani, Tadhib al Tadhib, Hyderabad, 1325 A.H, vol.
2, p. 104
[^15] Ibn Shahr ashub, Manaqab, vol. 4 p 247-8
[^16] Ibn Shahr ashub, op cit, p. 248
[^17] ibid, p. 254
[^18] ibid, p. 249
[^19] Muhsin al Amin, Ayan ash Shia, vol. 4 Part II, Mathah al Imaf,
Ebirut, ed. 1380/1920
[^20] Al Munjid fi l Alam, Beirut (21st ed.) 1973
[^21] Muhammad Husayn al Muzaffar, Tarikh ash Shia, Dar az Zahra,
Beirut, 3rd edition 1402/1982 pp. 53, 55
[^22] M. Abdur Razzaq, Tahmid li Tarikh al Falsafat al Islamiy, Cairo,
1959, p. 202
[^23] G. Sarton. Introduction to the History of Science, vol. 1.
Baltimore. 1927. p. 532.
[^24] 'Abdullah Nima. Falasifat ash Shi'a, Beirut, 1966. p. 196. This
book is an excellent source for those who wish to examine the
contribution of Shiah scholars to philosophy and science. The author
discusses Jabirs life and contribution between pp. 184 and 231.
[^25] G. Sarton. op. cit., p. 532. For the Imam Ja'far as Sadiq. see,
ibid.. p. 508.
[^26] Quoted by Abdullah Ni'ma. op. cit., pp. 61. 187.
[^27] G. Sarton. op. cit., p. 532.
[^28] Quoted by 'Abdullah Ni'ma. op. cit., p. 187.
[^29] Quoted by 'Abdullah Niima. ibid., pp. 193-4.
[^30] ash-Shaykh as-Saduq, Ilal ash shari'a, n.p., 1311. p. 44.
[^31] al Majlisi, Bihar al Anwar. new ed.. vol. 111, pp. 57-151.
[^32] ibid.,p.69.
[^33] ibid., p. 67. 34. ibid., p. 146.


