Kitab Al-irshad' By Al-mufid
============================

Dr. I. K. A. Howard Al-Serat, Vol. 3 (1977), No. 3

Al-Shaikh al-Mufid's full name was Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Nu'man
al-Harithi al-Baghadi al-'Ukbari; his kunya was Abu 'Abd Allah. As well
as being called al-Shaikh al-Mufid, he was known in both Shi'i and
non-Shi'i circles as Ibn al-Mu'allim. He was born in the year 338
A.H./949 and was brought up in a village. His father brought him to
Baghdad for his education. There he studied under Shi'i and Mu'tazili
scholars. He showed such promise that one of his teachers recommended
that he study under one of the leading scholars of the period, 'Ali b.
'Isa al-Ramani. He also studied under the leading Shi'i traditionists of
the time, al-Shaikh al-Saduq. [^1]

Al-Mufid lived during the period when the Buyids held political sway
over Baghdad. They permitted much more tolerance towards the Shi'ites
whether of Imami or Zaidi persuasion; they themselves were probably of
Zaidi persuasion. As a result of this tolerant attitude, the Shi'ites
were allowed to celebrate in public the Days of Ghadir Khumm (when the
Prophet is said to have nominated 'Ali as his successor before the
people) on 18th Dhu'l-Hijja, and 'Ashura, 10th Muharram (when al-Husain
was killed at Karbala'). As a counter demonstration, some of the
non-Shi'ites celebrated the Day of the Cave, (when the Prophet with Abu
Bakr took refuge in a cave to escape the Quraysh who were pursuing them)
on 26th Dhu'l-Hijja and also the day when Mus'ab ibn al-Zubair defeated
al-Mukhtar b. Abi 'Ubaid on the 18th Muharram. [^2]

It is said that al-Mufid earned his title of al-Mufid as a result of a
dispute about the relative merits of the two events - Ghadir Khumm and
the Cave. The story goes that when al-Mufid - Abu 'Abd Allah as he was -
went to visit the scholar 'Ali b. 'Isa al-Ramani, mentioned above, there
was a great crowd of people with the scholar.

When the crowd grew thinner, the young Abu 'Abd Allah approached the
scholar. However, then the arrival of a man from Basra was announced.
The two, that is 'Ali b. 'Isa and his visitor from Basra, spoke for some
time. Then the visitor asked 'Ali b. 'Isa what he had to say about the
events of Ghadir Khumm and the Cave. 'Ali b. 'Isa replied:

"The tradition of the Cave is definite knowledge (diraya) while the
tradition of Ghadir is (of the status) of a narration (riwaya). A
narration (riwaya) does not require the same (acceptance) as definite
knowledge (diraya)." The Basran could not find an answer to this and
departed.

However, al-Mufid took up the discussion:

"O Shaykh, I have a problem," he said to 'Ali b. 'Isa.
"Put it forward, then," replied the latter.
"What would you say about someone who fought against a just Imam?"
asked al-Mufid.
"He is an unbeliever (kafir)," was the answer. Then after a pause he
changed it to "grave sinner (fasiq)."
"What do you say about the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali b. Abi
Talib?" . He was an Imam."

"What do you say about the Battle of the Camel, and some of the
companions who fought against Ali b. Abi Talib." Therefore according to
the above argument they should be described as fasiq, that is grave
sinners who would go to hell. (However there is a tradition that these
companions were among ten people whom the Prophet said would go to
heaven. Thus 'Ali b. 'Isa has to explain how they could be fasiq and go
to heaven. He does this in his next answer.)

"They repented."

"The tradition of the Battle of the Camel is definite knowledge
(diraya) while the tradition of the repentance is a narration (riwaya),"
replied al-Mufid.

Thus al-Mufid had turned the tables on him. The event of the cave was
something all Muslims accepted as fact but there was no point in giving
the well-reported tradition of Ghadir Khumm inferior status since if
this was done the same terminology could be used to question the
repentance of the said companions, which was also accepted by most
Muslims.

'Ali b. 'Isa was very impressed by the young man's reasoning. He asked
him about his teacher and then gave him a note to take to that man. In
the note he recommended his intellect and gave him the nickname of
al-Mufid, "the one who gives benefit". [^3]

Al-Mufid soon became one of the foremost scholars of his time. He was
an outstanding theologian and jurist, and a brilliant polemical writer
on behalf of the Shi'ites. He became head of the Shi'i scholars in
Baghdad and took part in many debates and discussions with his
opponents.

As we have seen there was some rivalry between various groups during
this period. This rivalry became much more tense during the time of the
four rival days of remembrance which all came within four weeks of each
other. Riots sometimes broke out and the authorities had to take firm
action to restore the situation. After such a riot in 398 A.H./1007,
al-Mufid was nearly exiled from Baghdad. However, in 410 A.H./1019, he
was banished for a short time.[^4]

During his life, al-Mufid was not only a brilliant debater and disputer
he was a fine teacher and an outstanding and prolific writer As a
teacher he will be remembered for the greatness of his three most
outstanding pupils. They were the two 'Alids, al-Sharif al Radi and al
Sharif al Murtada. Al Sharif al-Radi is perhaps best remembered as the
compiler of many of Ali b. Abi Talib's speeches, sermons and letters
Nahj al-balagha. His brother al Sharif al-Murtada was a brilliant
theologian and an outstanding literateur. The other pupil was to become
Shaikh al-Ta'ifa; he was Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tusi.

The writings of al-Shaikh al-Mufid were numerous. Al-Tusi tells us in
the Fihrist that they numbered nearly two hundred. A number of these
still survive; some have been published and some are still in manuscript
form. Among them is al-Muqni'a, a work on tradition, which al-Tusi used
as the basis for his great work Tahdhib al-ahkam fi sharh a/-munqi'a.[^5]
In theology, we are left with an important treatise Awa'il al-maqalat,
where al-Mufid discusses Shi'i theology in relation to other schools;
this work has been recently studied by a leading French scholar.[^6] A
working on the battle of the Camel, known as Kitab al-Jamal also
survives. There is also Kitab al-Irshad which will be discussed later.

Al-Shaikh al-Mufid died in the month of Ramadan in the year 413
A.H./1022. One report says that over 80,000 people attended his
funeral.[^7] Al-Tusi himself reports that such a great crowd of mourners,
both of opponents as well as friends, had not been seen before.[^8]
Al-Sharif al-Murtada led the funeral prayers and gave an eulogy. After
being buried in his own house, his body was later removed and buried
near to the great shrine of two of the Imams in Baghdad, known as
al-Kazimayn. [^9]

**Kitab al-Irshad [^10]**

This book sets out to name the twelve Shi'i Imams. It briefly describes
the circumstances of the Imamate of each Imam, the miracles that each
performed by which he gave evidence of his Imamate, the virtues of each
Imam, and the circumstances of the death of all the Imams and the
disappearance of the last Imam. It also gives an outline of the nass, or
the nomination of each Imam.

The Imamate of 'Ali b. Abi Talib after the Prophet is the cornerstone
of the Shi'i view of succession and the Imamate in general. Therefore it
is natural that the book should devote considerable space to 'Ali.
Nearly half of the book is concerned with him. In particular al-Mufid
pays great attention to 'Ali's career during the life of the Prophet.
'Ali is revealed as the person of outstanding merit during that period,
the one who most deserved and was most entitled to succeed the
Prophet.

The reports of the traditions by which the Prophet is said to have made
'Ali's succession clear are fully reported, especially the tradition of
Ghadir Khumm. In addition several of his speeches are given. Al-Mufid
gives an account of some of 'Ali's legal decisions during the time of
the three Caliphs, and he explains that 'Ali, although entitled to the
office of the Caliphate, held back from attempting to seize the office
or expressing public discontent. Little space is given to 'Ali's reign
as Caliph, perhaps because these events had been discussed elsewhere by
the author in Kitab al-Jamal for instance. The circumstances of 'Ali's
murder by lbn Muljam are given in full and the author quotes from
historical authorities, such as Abu Mikhnaf and Isma'il b. Rashid.

The Imamate of al-Hasan is described more briefly by the author. The
martyrdom of al-Husain at Karbala' is given at some length. In this
account al-Mufid tells us that he has relied on Abu Mikhnaf and Ibn
al-Kalbi, who were also the main authorities of the historian al-Tabari
for this event.

The other Imams are dealt with more briefly and in succession. The
final Imam - the Qa'im, the Mahdi - is dealt with in more detail. The
author gives the evidence of those who saw him. This is particularly
important as doubt was expressed of his existence. He also refers to
miracles performed by him; he tells of the prophecies about him and
gives an account of what will happen when he returns.

Al-Irshad represents an important statement of Shi'i belief. It is
written more as a defence of the Imami Shi'i view of the Imamate and it
takes care to provide believers with the evidence of the Imamate. In
establishing the Imamate of 'Ali, the doctrine of nass is shown by the
author to be legitimate.

Its legitimate use is carried on by 'Ali and his successors. In the
author's view, the proof to the world of the Imamate of each of the
Imams is expressed in the miracles performed by each Imam. Important
moments in the lives of the Imams, such as the martyrdom of al-Husain
and the ghaiba, the disappearance of the last Imam, are dealt with in
some detail.

Al-Irshad was not the first work to be written on the subject.
Al-Tabari, who died in the second half of the fourth century wrote two
volumes on the Imamate; the first, al-Mustarshid, deals with 'Ali b. Abi
Talib and the second Dala'il al-imama is an account of Fatima, and the
other eleven Imams. However these two works are not as well-organised as
al-Mufid's, nor do they make as much use of non-Shi'i sources as
al-Mufid does.

Al-Irshad, then, represents a valuable contribution to the history of
the Imamate, It has been written by one of the outstanding Imami Shi'i
writers of his time and must be considered as one of the definitive
Shi'i works on the history of the Imamate.

**Notes:**

1. On al-Shaikh al-Saduq cf. A-Serat Vol.II No.2, June, 1976, 19-22;
2. H. Laoust, "Les Agitations Religieuses a Baghdad" in Islamic
Civilisation 950-1150 (ed. D. H. Richards) (Oxford 1973), 170.
3. Ibn Idris al-Hilli, Kitab aI-Sara'ir cited by al-Zanjani in his
introduction to al-Mufid's Awa'il al-maqalat, (Tabriz, A.H. 1100%).
4. Al-Tusi, a1-Fihrist (ed. Sprenger), new edition including indexes by
Mahmoud Ramyar (Mashhad, A.H. 1351), 314.
5. Cf. Al-Serat, Vol. II No.3, September 1976, 23-25.
6. D. Sourdel, "L'Imamisme vu par le Cheikh al-Mufid", Revue des Etudes
Islamique, XL, (Paris, 1972), 217-296.
7. D. Sourdel "Le Shaykh al-Mufid", Islamic Civilisation 950-1150, op.
cit., 189, citing Ibn Abi Tayy.
8. Al-Tusi, op.cit., 315.
9. Al-Hilli, al-Idah at the foot of al-Tusi, op. cit., 316.
10. Kitab al-Irshad (ed. Al-Mayamawi) edition reproduced with
additional notes by al-Akhundi, Teheran, A.H.1377.


**Islam and the Question of Violence**

Seyyed Hossein Nasr Vol. XIII, No. 2 Despite the presence of violence
in many regions of the world ranging from Ireland to Lebanon to the
Pacific Basin and involving many religions from Christianity to
Hinduism, the Western world associates Islam more than any other
religion with violence. The Muslim conquest of Spain, the Crusades -
which were not begun by Muslims -, and the Ottoman domination of eastern
Europe have provided a historical memory of Islam as being related to
force and power. Moreover, the upheavals of the past few decades in the
Middle East and especially movements using the name of Islam and seeking
to solve problems of the Muslim world created by conditions and causes
beyond the control of Muslims have only reinforced the idea prevalent in
the West that in some special way Islam is related to violence.

To understand the nature of Islam and the truth about the assertion
often made of Islam's espousal of violence. it is important to analyze
this question clearly remembering that the word islam itself means peace
and that the history of Islam has certainly not been witness to any more
violence than one finds in other civilizations, particularly that of the
West. In what follows.

however, it is the Islamic religion in its principles and ideals with
which we are especially concerned and not particular events or facts
relating to the domain of historical contingency belonging to the
unfolding of Islam in the plane of human history First of all, it is
necessary to define what we mean by violence. There are several
dictionary definitions that can be taken into account such as 'swift and
intense force', 'rough or injurious physical force or action', 'unjust
or unwarranted exertion of force especially against the rights of
others', rough or immediate vehemence' and finally 'injury resulting
from the distortion of meaning or fact'. If these definitions are
accepted for violence, then the question can be asked as to how Islam is
related to these definitions.

As far as 'force' is concerned, Islam is not completely opposed to its
use but rather seeks to control it in the light of the divine Law
(al-shari'a). This world is one in which force is to be found
everywhere, in nature as well as in human society, among men as well as
within the human soul. The goal of Islam is to establish equilibrium
amidst this field of tension of various forces. The Islamic concept of
justice itself is related to equilibrium, the word for justice (al-'adl)
in Arabic being related in its etymology to the word for equilibrium
(ta'adul). All force used under the guidance of the divine Law with the
aim of re-establishing an equilibrium that is destroyed is accepted and
in fact necessary, for it means to carry out and establish justice.

Moreover, not to use force in such a way is to fall prey to other
forces which cannot but increase disequilibrium and disorder and result
in greater injustice. Whether the use of force in this manner is swift
and intense or gentle and mild depends upon the circumstances, but in
all cases force can only be used with the aim of establishing
equilibrium and harmony and not for personal or sectarian reasons
identified with the interests of a person or a particular group and not
the whole.

By embracing the 'world' and not shunning the 'kingdom of Caesar',
Islam took upon itself responsibility for the world in which force is
present. But by virtue of the same fact it limited the use of force and
despite all the wars, invasions, and attacks which it experienced. it
was able to create an ambiance of peace and tranquillity which can still
be felt whenever something of the traditional Islamic world survives.
The peace that dominates the courtyard of a mosque or a garden whether
it be in Marrakesh or Lahore is not accidental but the result of the
control of force with the aim of establishing that harmony which results
from equilibrium of forces, whether those forces be natural, social or
psychological.

As for the meaning of violence as 'rough or injurious physical force or
action', Islamic Law opposes all uses of force in this sense except in
the case of war or for punishment of criminals in accordance with the
shari'a. Even in war, however, the inflicting of any injury to women and
children is forbidden as is the use of force against civilians. Only
fighters in the field of battle must be confronted with force and it is
only against them that injurious physical force can be used. Inflicting
injuries outside of this context or in the punishment of criminals
according to the dictum of the shari'a and the view of a judge is
completely forbidden by Islamic Law.

As far as violence in the sense of the use of unjust force against the
rights of others and laws is concerned, Islam stands totally opposed to
it. Rights of human beings are defined by Islamic Law and are protected
by this Law which embraces not only Muslims but also followers of other
religions who are considered as 'People of the Book (ahl al-kitab)'. If
there is nevertheless violation in Islamic society, it is due not to the
teachings of Islam but the imperfection of the human recipients of the
Divine Message.

Man 15 man wherever he might be and no religion can neutralize
completely the imperfections inherent in the nature of fallen man. What
is remarkable, however, is not that some violence in this sense of the
word does exist in Muslim societies, but that despite so many negative
social and economic factors aggravated by the advent of colonialism,
overpopulation, industrialization, modernization resulting in cultural
dislocation, and so many other elements, there is less violence as
unjust exertion of force against others in most Islamic countries than
in the industrialized West.

If one understands by violence 'rough or immoderate vehemence'. then
Islam is totally opposed to it. The perspective of Islam is based upon
moderation and its morality is grounded upon the principle of avoiding
extremes and keeping to the golden mean. Nothing is more alien to the
Islamic perspective than vehemence, not to say immoderate vehemence.
Even if force is to be used, it must be on the basis of moderation.

Finally, if by violence is meant 'distortion of meaning or fact
resulting in injury to others', Islam is completely opposed to it. Islam
is based on the Truth which saves and which finds its supreme expression
in the testimony of the faith, la ilaha illa 'Llah (there is no divinity
but the Divine). Any distortion of truth is against the basic teachings
of the religion even if no one were to be affected by it. How much more
would distortion resulting in injury be against the teachings of the
Qur'an and the tradition of the Prophet!

In conclusion it must be emphasized that since Islam embraces the whole
of life and does not distinguish between the sacred and the secular, it
concerns itself with force and power which characterize this world as
such. But Islam, in controlling the use of force in the direction of
creating equilibrium and harmony, limits it and opposes violence as
aggression to the rights of both God and His creatures as defined by the
divine Law. The goal of Islam is the attainment of peace but this peace
can only be experienced through that exertion (jihad) and the use of
force which begins with the disciplining of ourselves and leads to
living in the world in accordance with the dicta of the shar'ia.

Islam seeks to enable man to live according to his theomorphic nature
and not to violate that nature. Islam condones the use of force only to
the extent of opposing that centripetal tendency which turns man against
what he is in his inner reality. The use of force can only be condoned
in the sense of undoing the violation of our own nature and the chaos
which has resulted from the loss of equilibrium. But such a use of force
is not in reality violence as usually understood. It is the exertion of
human will and effort in the direction of conforming to the Will of God
and in surrendering the human will to the divine Will. From this
surrender (taslim) comes peace (salam), hence islam, and only through
this islam can the violence inbred within the nature of fallen man be
controlled and the beast within subdued so that man lives at peace with
himself and the world because he lives at peace with God.


