The Spiritual Significance of Jihad
===================================

Seyyed Hossein Nasr Vol. IX, No. 1

And those who perform jihad for Us, We shall certainly guide them in
Our ways, and God is surely with the doers of good. (Quran XXXIX; 69)

You have returned from the lesser jihad to the greater jihad.
(Hadith)

The Arabic term jihad, usually translated into European languages as
holy war, more on the basis of its juridical usage in Islam rather than
on its much more universal meaning in the Quran and Hadith, is derived
from the root jhd whose primary meaning is to strive or to exert
oneself. Its translation into holy war combined with the erroneous
notion of Islam prevalent in the West as the 'religion of the sword' has
helped to eclipse its inner and spiritual significance and to distort
its connotation.

Nor has the appearance upon the stage of history during the past
century and especially during the past few years of an array of
movements within the Islamic world often contending or even imposing
each other and using the word jihad or one of its derivative forms
helped to make known the full import of its traditional meaning which
alone is of concern to us here.

Instead recent distortions and even total reversal of the meaning of
jihad as understood over the ages by Muslims have made it more difficult
than ever before to gain insight into this key religious and spiritual
concept.

To understand the spiritual significance of jihad and its wide
application to nearly every aspect of human life as understood by Islam,
it is necessary to remember that Islam bases itself upon the idea of
establishing equilibrium within the being of man as well as in the human
society where he functions and fulfills the goals of his earthly life.
This equilibrium, which is the terrestrial reflection of Divine Justice
and the necessary condition for peace in the human domain, is the basis
upon which the soul takes its flight towards that peace which, to use
Christian terms, 'passeth understanding'.

If Christian morality sees the aim of the spiritual life and its own
morality as based on the vertical flight towards that perfection and
ideal which is embodied in Christ, Islam sees it in the establishment of
an equilibrium both outward and inward as the necessary basis for the
vertical ascent. The very stability of Islamic society over the
centuries, the immutability of Islamic norms embodied in the Shari'ah,
and the timeless character of traditional Islamic civilization which is
the consequence of its permanent and immutable prototype are all
reflections of both the ideal of equilibrium and its realization as is
so evident in the teachings of the Shari'ah (or Divine Law) as well as
works of Islamic art, that equilibrium which is inseparable from the
very name of islam as being related to salam or peace.

The preservation of equilibrium in this world, however, does not mean
simply a static or inactive passivity since life by nature implies
movement. In the face of the contingencies of the world of change, of
the withering effects of time, of the vicissitudes of terrestrial
existence, to remain in equilibrium requires continuous exertion.

It means carrying out jihad at every stage of life. Human nature being
what it is, given to forgetfulness and the conquest of our immortal soul
by the carnal soul or passions, the very process of life of both the
individual and the human collectivity implies the ever-present danger of
the loss of equilibrium and the fact of falling into the state of
disequilibrium which if allowed to continue cannot but lead to
disintegration on the individual level and chaos on the scale of
community life.

To avoid this tragic end and to fulfill the entelechy of the human
state which is the realization of unity (al-tawhid) or total
integration, Muslims as both individuals and members of Islamic society
must carry out jihad, that is they must exert themselves at all moments
of life to fight a battle both inward and outward against those forces
that if not combatted will destroy that equilibrium which is the
necessary condition for the spiritual life of the person and the
functioning of human society. This fact is especially true if society is
seen as a collectivity which bears the imprint of the Divine Norm rather
than an antheap of contending and opposing units and forces.

Man is at once a spiritual and corporeal being, a micro-cosm complete
unto himself; yet he is the member of a society within which alone are
certain aspects of his being developed and certain of his needs
fulfilled. He possesses at once an intelligence whose substance is
ultimately of a divine character and sentiments which can either veil
his intelligence or abett his quest for his own Origin. In him are found
both love and hatred, generosity and coveteousness, compassion and
aggression.

Moreover, there have existed until now not just one but several
'humanities' with their own religious and moral norms and national,
ethnic and racial groups with their own bonds of affiliation. As a
result the practice of jihad as applied to the world of multiplicity and
the vicissitudes of human existence in the external world has come to
develop numerous ramifications in the fields of political and economic
activity and in social life and come to partake on the external level of
the complexity which characterizes the human world.

In its most outward sense jihad came to mean the defence of dar
al-islam, that is, the Islamic world, from invasion and intrusion by
non-Islamic forces. The earliest wars of Islamic history which
threatened the very existence of the young community came to be known as
jihad par excellence in this outward sense of 'holy war'.

But it was upon returning from one of these early wars, which was of
paramount importance in the survival of the newly established religious
community and therefore of cosmic significance, that the Prophet
nevertheless said to his companions that they had returned from the
lesser holy war to the greater holy war, the greater jihad being the
inner battle against all the forces which would prevent man from living
according to the theomorphic norm which is his primordial and God given
nature. Throughout Islamic history, the lesser holy war has echoed in
the Islamic world when parts or the whole of that world have been
threatened by forces from without or within.

This call has been especially persistent since the nineteenth century
with the advent of colonialism and the threat to the very existence of
the Islamic world. It must be remembered, however, that even in such
cases when the idea of jihad has been evoked in certain parts of the
Islamic world, it has not usually been a question of religion simply
sanctioning war but of the attempt of a society in which religion
remains of central concern to protect itself from being conquered either
by military and economic forces or by ideas of an alien nature. This
does not mean, however, that in some cases especially in recent times,
religious sentiments have not been used or misused to intensify or
legitimize a conflict.

But to say the least, the Islamic world does not have a monopoly on
this abuse as the history of other civilizations including even the
secularized West demonstrates so amply. Moreover, human nature being
what it is, once religion ceases to be of central significance to a
particular human collectivity, then men fight and kill each other for
much less exalted issues than their heavenly faith. By including the
question of war in its sacred legislation, Islam did not condone but
limited war and its consequences as the history of the traditional
Islamic world bears out. In any case the idea of total war and the
actual practice of the extermination of whole civilian populations did
not grow out of a civilization whose dominant religion saw jihad in a
positive light.

On the more external level, the lesser jihad also includes the
socio-economic domain. It means the reassertion of justice in the
external environment of human existence starting with man himself. To
defend one's rights and reputation, to defend the honour of oneself and
one's family is itself a jihad and a religious duty. So is the
strengthening of all those social bonds from the family to the whole of
the Muslim people (al-ummah) which the Shari'ah emphasizes.

To seek social justice in accordance with the tenets of the Quran and
of course not in the modern secularist sense is a way of re-establishing
equilibrium in human society, that is, of performing jihad, as are
constructive economic enterprises provided the well-being of the whole
person is kept in mind and material welfare does not become an end in
itself; provided one does not lose sight of the Quranic verse, 'The
other world is better for you than this one'. To forget the proper
relation between the two worlds would itself be instrumental in bringing
about disequilibrium and would be a kind of jihad in reverse.

All of those external forms of jihad would remain incomplete and in
fact contribute to an excessive externalization of human being, if they
were not complemented by the greater or inner jihad which man must carry
out continuously within himself for the nobility of the human state
resides in the constant tension between what we appear to be and what we
really are and the need to transcend ourselves throughout this journey
of earthly life in order to become what we 'are'.

From the spiritual point of view all the 'pillars' of Islam can be seen
as being related to jihad. The fundamental witnesses, 'There is no
divinity but Allah' and 'Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah', through
the utterance of which a person becomes a Muslim are not only statements
about the Truth as seen in the Islamic perspective but also weapons for
the practice of inner jihad. The very form of the first witness (La
ilaha illa' Lla-h in Arabic) when written in Arabic calligraphy is like
a bent sword with which all otherness is removed from the Supreme
Reality while all that is positive in manifestation is returned to that
Reality.

The second witness is the blinding assertion of the powerful and
majestic descent of all that constitutes in a positive manner the
cosmos, man and revelation from that Supreme Reality. To invoke the two
witnesses in the form of the sacred language in which they were revealed
is to practice the inner jihad and to bring about awareness of who we
are, from whence we come and where is our ultimate abode.

The daily prayers (salat or namaz) which constitute the heart of the
Islamic rites are again a never ending jihad which punctuate human
existence in a continuous rhythm in conformity with the rhythm of the
cosmos. To perform the prayers with regularity and concentration
requires the constant exertion of our will and an unending battle and
striving against forgetfulness, dissipation and laziness. It is itself a
form of spiritual warfare.

Likewise, the fast of Ramadan in which one wears the armour of inner
purity and detachment against the passions and temptations of the
outside world requires an asceticism and inner discipline which cannot
come about except through an inner holy war. Nor is the hajj to the
centre of the Islamic world in Mecca possible without long preparation,
effort, often suffering and endurance of hardship. It requires great
effort and exertion so that the Prophet could say, 'The hajj is the most
excellent of all jihads".

Like the knight in quest of the Holy Grail, the pilgrim to the house of
the Beloved must engage in a spiritual warfare whose end makes all
sacrifice and all hardship pale into significance, for the hajj to the
House of God implies for the person who practices the inner jihad
encounter with the Master of the House who also resides at the centre of
that other Ka'bah which is the heart.

Finally the giving of zakat or religious tax and khums is again a form
of jihad not only in that in departing from one's wealth man must fight
against the coveteousness and greed of his carnal soul, but also in that
through the payment of zakat and khums in its many forms man contributes
to the establishment of economic justice in human society. Although
jihad is not one of the 'pillars of Islam', it in a sense resides within
all the other 'pillars'. From the spiritual point of view in fact all of
the 'pillars' can be seen in the light of an inner jihad which is
essential to the life of man from the Islamic point of view and which
does not oppose but complements contemplativity and the peace which
result from the contemplation of the One.

The great stations of perfection in the spiritual life can also be seen
in the light of the inner jihad. To become detached from the impurities
of the world in order to repose in the purity of the Divine Presence
requires an intense jihad for our soul has its roots sunk deeply into
the transient world which the soul of fallen man mistakes for reality.
To overcome the lethargy, passivity and indifference of the soul,
qualities which have become second nature to man as a result of his
forgetting who he is constitutes likewise a constant jihad. To pull the
reigns of the soul from dissipating itself outwardly as a result of its
centrifugal tendencies and to bring it back to the centre wherein
resides Divine Peace and all the beauty which the soul seeks in vain in
the domain of multiplicity is again an inner jihad.

To melt the hardened heart into a flowing stream of love which would
embrace the whole of creation in virtue of the love for God is to
perform the alchemical process of solve et coagula inwardly through a
'work' which is none other than an inner struggle and battle against
what the soul has become in order to transform it into that which it
'is' and has never ceased to be if only it were to become aware of its
own nature. Finally, to realize that only the Absolute is absolute and
that only the Self can ultimately utter 'I' is to perform the supreme
jihad of awakening the soul from the dream of forgetfulness and enabling
it to gain the supreme principal knowledge for the sake of which it was
created.

The inner jihad or warfare seen spiritually and esoterically can be
considered therefore as the key for the understanding of the whole
spiritual process, and the path for the realization of the One which
lies at the heart of the Islamic message seen in its totality. The
Islamic path towards perfection can be conceived in the light of the
symbolism of the greater jihad to which the Prophet of Islam, who
founded this path on earth, himself referred.

In the same way that with every breath the principle of life which
functions in us irrespective of our will and as long as it is willed by
Him who created us, exerts itself through jihad to instill life within
our whole body, at every moment in our conscious life we should seek to
perform jihad in not only establishing equilibrium in the world about us
but also in awakening to that Divine Reality which is the very source of
our consciousness.

For the spiritual man, every breath is a reminder that he should
continue the inner jihad until he awakens from all dreaming and until
the very rhythm of his heart echoes that primordial sacred Name by which
all things were made and through which all things return to their
Origin. The Prophet said, 'Man is asleep and when he dies he awakens'.
Through inner jihad the spiritual man dies in this life in order to
cease all dreaming, in order to awaken to that Reality which is the
origin of all realities, in order to behold that Beauty of which all
earthly beauty is but a pale reflection, in order to attain that Peace
which all men seek but which can in fact be found only through the inner
jihad.


