The Imam Husayn's Concepts of Religion and Leadership
=====================================================

S.H.M Jafri Vol XI No. 1

ONLY now and again does there arise above the common level some rare
spirit, who, having looked upon God face to face, reflects more clearly
the divine purpose, and puts into practice more courageously the divine
guidances. The light of such a man shines like a strong beacon on a dark
and disordered world. Our concepts of human values, human dignity and
human freedom are better understood today because there has come into
its life, among others, a personality that is a flame of God.

His suffering embodies the pride of mankind, and in his sacrifice is
reflected the eternal patience of man's greatness. An intrepid spirit,
an impregnable will-power, and a superhuman passion for truth and
justice are his main characteristics. And that man is Husayn b. 'Ali,
the grandson of the Prophet of Islam. He presents to us the purest, the
most elevating and the most inspiring ideal known to man. He is the one
who taught man that death is not worse than a dishonourable life. He
showed the world the real meaning of religion and the function of the
leaders of mankind.

Religion as such is as old as man himself and is an inseparable part of
his history, and therefore it has always been an object of deliberation,
speculation, interpretation and also of rejection and criticism. From
its earliest form of animism, nature-worship or totemism to that of its
purest form of monotheism, religion in its broadest sense symbolizes and
articulates society's most basic values and commitments. Moreover, there
is the elemental urge in man not only to live, but to live nobly. When
our passion for noble living receives cosmic backing, we have the
peculiar ardour of religion. There is no one who does not raise at some
time or other these fundamental questions: What am I? What is my origin?
What is my destiny?

Religion is based on the discovery of the essential worth and dignity
of the individual and his relation to a higher world of reality. When
the human being perceives that he belongs to an order of reality higher
than brute nature, he cannot be satisfied by worldly success or
materialistic achievements. That he is capable of martyrdom for ideals
shows that he lives in and for a world of eternal realities. Worship is
man's reach out to the divine.

Religion is the discipline which touches the conscience and helps us to
struggle with evil and sordidness, saves us from greed, lust and hatred,
releases moral power, and imparts courage in the enterprise of saving
man from his inordinate desires. As a discipline of the mind, it
contains the key and the essential means of coping with evil which
threatens not only the dignity of man but his very existence. It implies
the submission of our thinking and conduct to eternal truth. In its
essence, religion is a summons to spiritual adventure. It is not
theology, but practice and discipline. It is the only remedy for a pride
of spirit which has divorced itself from the eternal; when the human
spirit defies its sources and conditions and claims absolute
self-sufficiency, it becomes insane and suicidal.

To restore the lost relationship between the individual and the eternal
is the purpose of religion. It is this basic and fundamental
relationship which alone can bring ease and harmony in man's
relationship with God, with himself, with his fellow man or with the
society in which he lives, and with nature. If the relationship between
the individual and the sole Creator is broken, the entire fabric of
peaceful and meaningful human life will be broken. It is this harmony
which religions serve to establish, Islam being the last of them.

Islam means peace as well as submission to the will of God and this is
the essence of the Islamic concept of religion. The submission to God in
Islam implies, in attitude and action, a regulation of our lives. God,
according to Islam, is not a dogma but an ideal and a regulative force
in life, and a guarantee of our highest values. Thus, the submission to
God, the 'Ideal', with a firm belief in its reality, is a life both of
virtue and inner happiness. A man who submits himself to God is true to
his real self and, therefore, attains inner peace, which is real
happiness, and quite different from worldly pleasures. This happiness
more than compensates for any lack of material gain, or for physical
pain and suffering.

It is with this concept of religion in general and Islam in particular
that we should try to understand how the grandson of the Prophet of
Islam, the Imam Husayn b. 'Ali, explains the meaning of religion and the
function of religious leadership. The question of the leadership of
mankind is the oft- repeated topic of the Qur'an. Whenever the Qur'an
talks about divine guidance it also points out those who are entitled to
guide. The Qur'anic terms for leaders of mankind are rasul, nabi and
imam.

The first two are specific terms, whereas the word imam is used in a
rather general sense for those who are endowed with the special
qualities with which they can lead others to righteousness and good
deeds. Thus, for example, we read in the Qur'an that when Abraham, the
patriarch of the prophets was told by God 'Behold, I make you an imam
(leader) of the people', he asked:

'And what about my offspring?' God replied: 'My covenant will not go to
evildoers.' Thus an imam, or leader, of the people is one who leads the
people in all cases of conscience, keeps the covenant of God remembered
and the teaching of the Prophets alive and effective. He is to protect
the religio- ethical message delivered by the messenger of God from
being corrupted and changed, and to save it from the reactionary forces
which emerge from time to time.

The Message of the Prophet of Islam passed into the hands of the
worldly Umayyads within thirty years of his death. After the death of
'Ali in 40/661, Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan appropriated the office of the
leadership of the community for himself through the use of force and
deceit and ruled the Muslims for twenty years. On Mu'awiya's death, his
son Yazid assumed the role of the leadership of the Muslims as the
caliph in accordance with the former's unprecedented testament.

Yazid's anti-Islamic behaviour and openly irreligious practices were
well known throughout the Muslim world and earned for him contempt and
disfavour, especially among those who cared for Islamic religio-ethical
values. An embodiment of all sorts of vice, tyranny, injustice,
oppression and despotic rule, Yazid wanted Husayn to pay him homage as
the leader of the Muslim community and submit himself to his authority.
That was the crucial point in Islamic history when the meaning of
religion had to be reasserted and the function of leadership
redefined.

This was done by Husayn b. 'Ali with the most effective method of
sacrifice, suffering and martyrdom. In reply to the letters written by
the people of Iraq inviting him to come to Kufa to take up their
leadership, as they had no imam other than him, Husayn wrote to them:

From Husayn b. Ali to the believers and Muslims [of Iraq]: You have
invited me to come to you because you have no imam to guide you, and
that you hope my arrival there will unite you in the right path and in
the truth. You must be clear about the fact that the imam can only be
one who follows the Book of God, makes justice and honesty his conduct
and behaviour, judges with truth, and devotes himself to the service of
God.

In response to the invitation of the people of Basra, Husayn replied:

. . . I have sent my messenger to you and I call you to the Book of
God, and the sunna of his Prophet, the sunna which has become
obliterated; innovations have become active and energetic. If you listen
to me and obey my orders, I will guide you to the right path. May the
peace and mercy of God be upon you.

There is space here only to give these two quotations from numerous
such statements which Husayn made from the time he left Medina till his
martyrdom about six months later. These quotations are by themselves a
complete explanation of Husayn's approach to the question of leadership
as well as of the function of religion in society. They also explain the
duties of an imeim and the nature of the Imamate which was so distorted
at this point in Islamic history.

The main points which emerge from them are: (i) that an imam is one who
unites the people; (ii) that he should lead them to the right path and
to truth; (iii) that the Qur'an, as the Book of God, is an eternal
truth, and the duty of the imam is to follow its model, and conduct his
life according to the will of God; (iv) that the imam must make justice
and honesty the cornerstones of his life; (v) that truth in its most
universal and absolute form must be his only criterion; (vi) and that he
must devote himself to the service of God.

The functions of the imam enumerated here are both particular and
universal, descriptive and normative, and primary and evaluative; they
can be applied in every society, time and epoch. They are particular,
descriptive and normative when read strictly in the context of Islam,
and are universal, primary and evaluative if read in their general
meaning which embraces all religions and the whole of humanity.

The key terms in Husayn's declarations are: the unity of people (which
is basically a unity of purpose), the right path, truth, justice and
honesty, and devotion to the service of God. These are in the essence of
all religions as well as of Islam. Here religion is not separated from
the well-being of society, and society is based on the eternal reality
which creates consciousness in society.

An inseparably implied meaning of Husayn's declarations is that the
leader of men need not take an active part in politics or in
governmental affairs. His primary function is to serve humanity with
ethical and normative integrity. He must create moral consciousness and
a sense of responsibility which transcends the limits of the political
community.

He must serve social and spiritual values, but unfortunately
totalitarian and despotic regimes subordinate spiritual and moral
activities to their ends. It is at this point that Husayn rises up to
set a new standard of leadership for challenging totalitarianism,
despotism and the forces of evil. There were two ways open to him, one
to mass his forces, gather strength, power, weapons and the military
might to combat the despotic rule of Yazid. This would not have been
difficult for the prestigious grandson of the Prophet, if he had wanted
to resort to such action. But the actions of Husayn show that from the
beginning to the end his strategy aimed at a much higher goal than
simply accession to the caliphate, the term given to temporal authority
in Islam.

There is no evidence that he tried, while at Mecca, to enlist active
supporters from among the people who gathered around him, or to
propagate his cause among the great number of people who were coming to
Mecca for the hajj; there is also no evidence that he attempted to send
his emissaries to stir up any rebellion in the provinces such as the
Yemen or Persia, which were sympathetic to his household, even though he
was advised by some of his family members to do so. Above all, had he
acted promptly on the invitation of the Kufans, while Umayyad control
over the city was weak, he might have had a fair chance of success in
grasping temporal power. In the six-month period before the battle of
Karbala', Husayn did nothing to consolidate his strength and military
power. Instead, throughout this period he was preparing himself for a
different strategy of revolution.

Some of the writers on Karbala', looking at it from the common
standards of war and victory, describe Husayn's action as an ambitious
attempt to wrest political power and as an error of judgement. Husayn's
numerous speeches, addresses, letters and statements bear testimony to
the fact that he was fully aware of the situation and the consequences.
Suffice it to point out that on the road from Medina to Mecca, then at
the time when he was being the 'House of God' for Kufa, and finally
throughout the journey from Mecca to Kufa he was informed and warned by
dozens of people about the danger and that 'the hearts of the Iraqis
were for him but their swords were for the Umayyads'. But Husayn's
replies to all of those who attempted to deflect him from his purpose
were always more or less in the same vein:

I leave it to God to choose what is best.... God is not hostile to him
who proposes the just cause.

From these replies it is clear that Husayn was fully aware of the
dangers he would encounter and that he had a certain strategy and plan
in mind to bring about a revolution in the consciousness of the Muslim
community. Furthermore, it is also very clear from the sources, as has
been pointed out above, that Husayn did not try to organize or mobilize
military support, which he easily could have done in the Hijaz, nor did
he even try to exploit whatever physical strength was available to
him.

On the contrary, from the moment he left Mecca for Kufa, time and again
he gathered those accompanying him and asked them to leave him alone and
go to safety, the last of these requests being on the night of 'Ashura'.
Is it conceivable that anyone striving for political ascendancy would
ask his supporters to abandon him? No one can answer this question in
the affirmative. What then did Husayn have in mind? Why was he still
heading for Kufa?

A careful study and analysis of the events of Karbala' reveals that
from the very beginning Husayn was planning for a complete revolution in
the religious consciousness of Muslims. All of his actions show that he
was aware of the fact that a victory achieved through military strength
and might is always temporary, because another stronger power can, in
the course of time, bring it down in ruins. But a victory achieved
through suffering and sacrifice is everlasting and leaves permanent
imprints on man's consciousness. Husayn was brought up in the lap of the
founder of Islam and had inherited the love and devotion to the Islamic
way of life from his father.

As time went on, he noticed the great changes which were rapidly taking
place in the community in regard to religious feelings and morality. The
natural process of conflict and struggle between action and reaction was
now at work. That is, Muhammad's progressive Islamic action had
succeeded in suppressing Arab conservatism, embodied in heathen
pre-Islamic practices and ways of thinking. But in less than thirty
years' time this Arab conservatism had revitalized itself as a forceful
reaction to challenge Muhammad's action once again. The forces of this
reaction had already moved into motion with the rise of Mu'awiya, but
the succession of Yazid was a clear sign that the reactionary forces had
mobilized themselves and now re-emerged with full vigour.

The strength of this reaction embodied in Yazid's character, was now
powerful enough to suppress, or at least efface, the Prophet's action.
His conduct amounted to open ridicule of Muhammad's sunna and the norms
of the Qur'an. He openly defied the Prophethood of Muhammad and the
revelation received by him. Now this same Yazid had become the head of
the Muslim community and was asking Husayn to accept his authority.
Husayn's acceptance of Yazid, with the latter's reactionary attitude
against Islamic norms, would not have meant merely a political
arrangement but an endorsement of Yazid's character and way of life as
well. Thus the entire ethical and religious system of Islam, in the
thinking of Husayn, was now in dire need of the reactivation of
Muhammad's action against the old Arabian reaction and required a
complete shaking up.

He realized that mere force of arms would not save Islamic action and
consciousness. To him it needed a shaking and jolting of hearts and
feelings. This, he decided, could only be achieved through sacrifice and
suffering, and therefore, in order to save Islam and its values, and the
freedom of man and his dignity, Husayn made one of the greatest
sacrifices in human history. Eighteen male members of his family
including a six- month-old son and 44 of his companions were killed in
front of him and then he himself laid down his life at the altar of
truth and human rights.

Husayn's body, already torn by numerous wounds, was trampled under the
hooves of the horses, his tents were burnt and looted; the helpless
women and children were shamelessly paraded through the streets of Iraq
and Syria as captives, and were treated with humiliation at the crowded
courts of Ibn Ziyad in Kufa, and Yazid in Damascus.

Husayn was fully aware of the extent of the brutal nature of the
reactionary forces. He knew that after killing him the Umayyads would
make his wife and children captives, and take them all the way from Kufa
to Damascus. This caravan of the captives of the Prophet's immediate
family would publicize Husayn's message and would force the Muslims'
hearts to ponder on the tragedy. It would make the Muslims think over
the whole affair and would awaken their consciousness. This is exactly
what happened; Husayn succeeded in his purpose.

It is difficult today to evaluate exactly the impact of Husayn's action
on Islamic morality and way of thinking because it prevailed. Had Husayn
not shaken and awakened Muslim consciousness by this method, can it be
said that Yazid's way of life would not have become standard behaviour
in the Muslim community, endorsed and accepted by the grandson of the
Prophet. Even after Yazid, despotic rulers have held power in Islam, and
the character and personal behaviour of these despotic rulers has not
been very different from that of Yazid, but the change in thinking which
prevailed after the sacrifice of Husayn always served as a criterion of
distinction between the Islamic concept of leadership and the behaviour
of totalitarian and despotic rulers. Husayn tells the world that it is
no use destroying man; we must destroy man's anti-human actions and
conduct. If rulers are overthrown but the system remains unaltered,
nothing is gained.


