The Prophet and Prophetic Tradition - the Last Prophet and Universal Man
========================================================================

Professor Syed Hossein Nasr
Vol III No. 1 , 1397

"Extract" The Prophet and prophetic traditions — from Ideals &
Realities of Islam written by Professor S. Hossein Nasr, and published
by George Allen and Unwin Lh4., 2nd edition London 1975.

The Prophet as the founder of Islam and the messenger of God's
revelation to mankind is the interpreter par excellence of the Book of
God; and his Hadith and Sunnah, his sayings and actions, are after the
Quran, the most important sources of the Islamic tradition. In order to
understand the sig- nificance of the Prophet it is not sufficient to
study, from the outside historical texts pertaining to his life.

One must view him also from within the Islamic point of view and try to
discover the position he occupies in the religious consciousness of
Muslims. When in any Islamic language one says the Prophet, it means
Muhammad—whose name as such is never iterated except that as a courtesy
it be followed by the formula 'Sall' Allahu 'alaihi wa sallam', that is,
'may God's blessing and salutation be upon him'.

It is even legitimate to say that, in general, when one says the
Prophet it means the prophet of Islam; for although in every religion
the founder who is an aspect of the Universal Intellect, becomes the
Aspect, the Word the Incarnation, nevertheless each founder emphasizes a
certain aspect of the Truth and even typifies that aspect universally.
Although there is belief in incarnation in many religions, when one says
the Incarnation it refers to Christ who personifies this aspect.

And although every prophet and saint has experienced 'enlightenment',
the Enlightenment refers to the experience of the Buddha which is the
most outstanding and universal embodiment of this experience. In the
same manner the prophet of Islam is the prototype and perfect embodiment
of prophecy and so in a profound sense is the Prophet. In fact in Islam
every form of revelation is envisaged as a prophecy whose complete and
total realization is to be seen in Muhammad—Upon whom be peace. As the
Sufi poet Mahmud Shabistari writes in h is incomparable Gulshan-i raz
(the Secret Rose Garden):

The first appearance of prophethood was in Adam,
And its perfection was in the 'Seal of the Prophets'. (Whinfield
translation)

It is difficult for a non-Muslim to understand the spiritual
significance of the Prophet and his role as the prototype of the
religious and spiritual life, especially if one comes from a Christian
background. Compared to Christ, or to the Buddha for that matter, the
earthly career of the Prophet seems often too human and too engrossed in
the vicissitudes of social, economic and political activity to serve as
a model for the spiritual life.

That is why so many people who write today of the great spiritual
guides of humanity are not able to understand and interpret him
sympathetically. It is easier to see the spiritual radiance of Christ or
even medieval saints, Christian or Muslim, than that of the Prophet;
although the Prophet is the supreme saint in Islam without whom there
would have been no sanctity whatsoever.

The reason for this difficulty is that the spiritual nature of the
Prophet is veiled in his human one and his purely spiritual function is
hidden in his duties as the guide of men and the leader of a community.
It was the function of the Prophet to be, not only a spiritual guide,
but also the organizer of a new social order with all that such a
function implies. And it is precisely this aspect of his being that
veils his purely spiritual dimension from foreign eyes.

Outsiders have understood his political genius, his power of oratory,
his great statesmanship, but few have understood how he could be the
religious and spiritual guide of men and how his life could be emu-
lated by those who aspire to sanctity. This is particularly true in the
modern world in which religion is separated from other domains of life
and most modern men can hardly imagine how a spiritual being could also
be immersed in the most intense political and social activity.

Actually if the contour of the personality of the Prophet is to be
under- stood he should not be compared to Christ or the Buddha whose
message was meant primarily for saintly men and who founded a community
based on monastic life which later became the norm of a whole society.
Rather, because of his dual function as 'king' and 'prophet', as the
guide of men in this world and the hereafter, the Prophet should be
compared to the prophet-kings of the Old Testament, to David and
Solomon, and especially to Abraham himself.

Or to cite once again an example outside the Abrahamic tradition, the
spiritual type of the Prophet should be compared in Hinduism, to Rama
and Krishna, who although in a completely different traditional climate,
were avataras and at the same time kings and house- holders who
participated in social life with all that such activity implies as
recorded in the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.

This type of figure who is at once a spiritual being and a leader of
men has always been, relatively speaking, rare in the Christian West,
especially in modern times. Political life has become so divorced from
spiritual principles that to many people such a function itself appears
as an impossibility in proof of which Westerners often point to the
purely spiritual life of Christ who said, 'My Kingdom is not of this
world.' And even historically the Occident has not witnessed many
figures of this type unless one considers the Templars and in another
context such devout kings as Charlemagne and St. Louis.

The figure of the Prophet is thus difficult for many Occidentals to
understand and this misconception to which often bad intention has been
added is responsible for the nearly total ignorance of his spiritual
nature in most works written about him in Western languages of which the
number is legion. One could in fact say that of the major elements of
Islam the real significance of the Prophet is the least understood to
non Muslims and especialiy to Occidentals.

The Prophet did participate in social life in its fullest sense. He
married, had a household, was a father and moreover he was ruler and
judge and had also to fight many wars in which he underwent painful
ordeals. He had to undergo many hardships and experience all the
difficulties which human life especially that of the founder of a new
state and society, implies. But with- in all these activities his heart
rested in contentment with the Divine, and he continued inwardly to
repose in the Divine Peace. In fact his participation in social and
political life was precisely to integrate this domain into a spiritual
centre.

The Prophet entertained no political or worldly ambition whatsoever. He
was by nature a contemplative. Before being chosen as prophet he did not
like to frequent social gatherings and activities. He led a caravan from
Mecca to Syria passing through the majestic silence of the desert whose
very 'infinity' induces man towards contemplation. He often spent long
periods in the cave of Hira' in solitude and meditation. He did not
believe himself to be by nature a man of the world or one who was
naturally inclined to seek political power among the Quraysh or social
eminence in Meccan society although he came from the noblest family.

It was in fact very painful and difficult for him to accept the burden
of prophecy which implied the founding of not only a new religion but
also a new social and political order. All the traditional sources,
which alone matter in this case testify to the great hardship the
Prophet underwent by being chosen to participate in the active life in
its most acute form.

Modern studies on the life of the Prophet which depict him as a man who
enjoyed fighting wars are totally untrue and in fact a reversal of the
real personality of the Prophet. Immediately after the reception of the
first revelation the Prophet confessed to his wife, Khadijah, how
difficult it was for him to accept the burden of prophecy and how
fearful he was of all that such a mission implied.

Likewise, with the marriages of the Prophet, they are not at all signs
of his lenience vis-a-vis the flesh. During the period of youth when the
passions are most strong the Prophet lived with only one wife who was
much older than he and also underwent long periods of abstinence. And as
a prophet many of his marriages were political ones which, in the
prevalent social structure of Arabia, guaranteed the consolidation of
the newly founded Muslim community.

Multiple marriage, for him, as is true of Islam in general, was not so
much enjoyment as responsibility and a means of integration of the newly
founded society. Besides, in Islam the whole problem of sexuality
appears in a different light from that in Christianity and should not be
judged by the same standards. The multiple marriages of the Prophet, far
from pointing to his weakness towards 'the flesh' symbolize his
patriarchal nature and his function, not as a saint who withdraws from
the world, but as one who sanctifies the very life of the world by
living in it and accepting it with the aim of integrating it into a
higher order of reality.

The Prophet has also often been criticized by modern Western authors
for being cruel and for having treated men harshly. Such a charge is
again absurd because critics of this kind have forgotten that either a
religion leaves the world aside, as Christ did, or integrates the world,
in which case it must deal with such questions as war, retribution,
justice, etc. When Charlemagne or some other Christian king thrust a
sword into the breast of a heathen soldier he was, from the individual
point of view, being cruel to that soldier. But on the universal plane
this was a necessity for the preservation of a Christian civilization
which had to defend its borders or perish. The same holds true for a
Buddhist king or ruler, or for that matter any religious authority which
seeks to integrate human society.

The Prophet exercised the utmost kindness possible and was harsh only
with traitors. Now, a traitor against a newly founded religious
community, which God has willed and whose existence is a mercy from
heaven for mankind, is a traitor against the Truth itself. The harshness
of the Prophet in such cases is an expression of Divine Justice.

One cannot accuse God of being cruel because men die, or because there
is illness and ugliness in the world. Every construction implies a
previous destruction, a clearing of grounds for the appearance of a new
form. This holds true not only in case of a physical structure but also
in case of a new revelation which must clear the ground if it is to be a
new social and political order as well as a purely reiigious one. What
appears to some as the cruelty of the Prophet towards men is precisely
this aspect of his function as the instrument of God for the
establishment of a new world order whose homeland in Arabia was to be
pure of any paganism and polytheism which if present would pollute the
very source of this new fountain of life. As to what concerned his own
person, the Prophet was always the epitome of kindness and generosity.

Nowhere is the nobility and generosity of the Prophet better
exemplified than in his triumphant entry into Mecca, which in a sense
highlights his earthly career. There, at a moment when the very people
who had caused untold hardships and trials for the Prophet were
completely subdued by him, instead of thinking of vengeance, which was
certainly his due, he forgave them.

One must study closely the almost unimaginable obstacles placed before
the Prophet by these same people, of the immense suffering he had
undergone because of them, to realize what degree of generosity this act
of the Prophet implies. It is not actually necessary to give an
apologetic account of the life of the Prophet, but these matters need to
be answered because the false and often malicious accusations of this
kind made against the founder of Islam in so many modern studies make
the understanding of him by those who rely upon such studies well nigh
impossible.

Also the Prophet was not certainly without love and compassion. Many
incidents in his life and sayings recorded in Hadith literature? point
to his depth of love for God which, in conformity with the general
perspective of Islam, was never divorced from the knowledge of Him. For
example in a well known Hadith, he said, 'O Lord, grant to me the love
of thee. Grant that I love those that love thee. Grant that I may do the
deed that wins thy love. Make thy love dear to me more than self, family
and wealth.' Such sayings clearly demonstrate the fact that although the
Prophet was in a sense a king or ruler of a community and a judge and
had to deal according to Justice in both capacities, he was at the same
time one whose being was anchored in the love for God. Otherwise, he
could not have been a prophet.

From the Muslim point of view, the Prophet is the symbol of perfection
of both the human person and human society. He is the prototype of the
human individual and the human collectivity. As such he bears certain
characteristics in the eye of traditional Muslims which can only be
discovered by studying the traditional accounts of him. The many Western
works on the Prophet, with very few exceptions, are useless from this
point of view no matter how much historical data they provide for the
reader.

The same holds true in fact for the new type of biographies of the
Prophet written by modernized Muslims who would like at all cost to make
the Prophet an ordinary man and neglect systematically any aspect of his
being that does not conform to a humanistic and rationalistic framework
they have adopted a priori, mostly as a result of either influence from
or reaction to the modern Western point of view.

The profound characteristics of the Prophet which have guided the
Islamic community over the centuries and have left an indelible mark on
the consciousness of the Muslim cannot be discerned save through the
traditional sources and the Hadith, and, of course, the Quran itself
which bears the perfume of the soul of the person through whom it was
revealed.

The universal characteristics of the Prophet are not the same as his
daily actions and day to day life, which can be read about in standard
biogra- phies of the Prophet, and with which we cannot deal here. They
are, rather characteristics which issue forth from his personality as a
particular spiritual prototype.Seen in this light there are essentially
three qualities that characterize the Prophet. First of all the Prophet
possessed the quality of piety in its most universal sense, that quality
which attaches man to God The Prophet was in that sense pious. He had a
profound piety which inwardly attached him to God, that made him place
the interest of God before everything else including himself. Secondly
he had a quality of combativeness, of always being actively engaged in
combat against all that negated the Truth and disrupted harmony.
Externally it meant fighting wars, either military, political or social
ones, the war which the Prophet named the 'little holy war' (al-jihad
al-asghar). Inwardly this combativeness meant a continuous war against
the carnal soul (nafs), against all that in man tends towards the
negation of God and His Will, the 'great holy war' (al-jihad
al-akbar).

It is difficult for modern men to understand the positive symbolism of
war thanks to modern technology which has made war total and its
instruments the very embodiment of what is ugly and evil. Men therefore
think that the role of religion is only in preserving some kind of
precarious peace. This, of course, is true, but not in the superficial
sense that is usually meant. If religion is to be an integral part of
life it must try to establish peace in the most profound sense, namely
to establish equilibrium between all the existing forces that surround
man and to overcome all the forces that tend to destroy this
equilibrium. No religion has sought to establish peace in this sense
more than Islam.

It is precisely in such a context that war can have a positive meaning
as the activity to establish harmony both inwardly and outwardly and it
is in this sense that Islam has stressed the positive aspect of
combativeness.

The Prophet embodies to an eminent degree this perfection of combative
virtue. If one thinks of the Buddha as sitting in a state of
contemplation under the Bo-tree, the Prophet can be imagined as a rider
sitting on a steed with the sword of justice and discrimination drawn in
his hand and galloping at full speed, yet ready to come to an immediate
halt before the mountain of Truth.

The Prophet was faced from the beginning of his prophetic mission with
the task of wielding the sword of Truth, of establishing equilibrium and
in this arduous task he had no rest. His rest and repose was in the
heart of the holy war (jihad) itself and he represents this aspect of
spirituality in which peace comes not in passivity but in true activity.
Peace belongs to one who is inwardly at peace with the Will of Heaven
and outwardly at war with the forces of disruption and disequilibrium.

Finally, the Prophet possessed the quality of magnanimity in its
fullness. His soul displayed a grandeur which every devout Muslim feels.
He is for the Muslim nobility and magnanimity personified. This aspect
of the Prophet is fully displayed in his treatment of his companions
which, in fact, has been the model for later ages and which all
generations of Muslims have sought to emulate.

To put it another way, which focuses more sharply the personality of
the Prophet, the qualities can be enumerated as strength, nobility and
serenity or inner calm. Strength is outwardly manifested in the little
holy war and inwardly in the great holy war according to the saying of
the Prophet who, returning from one of the early wars, said, 'We have
returned from the small jihad to the great jihad.' It is this great
jihad which is of particular spiritual significance as a war against all
those tendencies which pull the soul of man away from the Centre and
Origin and bar him from the grace of heaven.

The nobility or generosity of the Prophet shows itself most of all in
charity towards all men and more generally towards all beings. Of course
this virtue is not central as in Christianity which can be called the
religion of charity. But it is important on the human level and as it
concerns the person of the Prophet. It points to the fact that there was
no narrowness or pettiness in the soul of the Prophet, no limitation in
giving of himself to others. A spiritual man is one who always gives to
those around him and does not re- ceive, according to the saying, 'It is
more blessed to give than to receive'. It was characteristic of the
Prophet to have always given till the last moment of his life. He never
asked anything for himself and never sought to receive.

The aspect of serenity, which also characterizes all true expressions
of Islam is essentially the love of truth. It is to put the Truth before
everything else. It is to be impartial, to be logical on the level of
discourse, not to let one's emotions colour and prejudice one's
intellectual judgment. It is not to be a rationalist, but to see the
truth of things and to love the Truth above all else. To love the Truth
is to love God who is the Truth, one of His Names being the Truth
(al-haqq).

If one were to compare these qualities of the Prophet, namely,
strength, nobility and serenity, with those of the founders of the other
great religions one would see that they are not necessarily the same
because firstly, the Prophet was not himself the Divine Incarnation and
secondly, because each religion emphasizes a certain aspect of the
Truth. One cannot follow and emulate Christ in the same manner as the
Prophet because in Christianity Christ is the God-man, the Divine
Incarnation.

One can be absorbed into his nature but he cannot be copied as the
perfection of the human state. One can neither walk on water nor raise
the dead to life. Still, when one thinks of Christianity and Christ
another set of characteristics come to mind, such as divinity,
incarnation, and on another level love, charity and sacrifice. Or when
one thinks of the Buddha and Buddhism it is most of all the ideas of
pity for the whole of creation, enlightenment and illumination and
extinction in Nirvana that stand out.

In Islam, when one thinks of the Prophet who is to be emulated, it is
the image of a strong personality that comes to mind, who is severe with
himself and with the false and the unjust, and charitable towards the
world that surrounds him. On the basis of these two virtues of strength
and sobriety on the one hand and charity and generosity on the other, he
is serene extinguished in the Truth. He is that warrior on horseback who
halts before the mountain of Truth, passive towards the Divine Will,
active towards the world, hard and sober towards himself and kind and
generous towards the creatures about him.

These qualities characteristic of the Prophet are contained virtually
in the sound of the second Shahadah, Muhammadun rasul Allah, that is
Muhammad is the Prophet of God, in its Arabic pronunciation, not in its
translation into another language. Here again the symbolism is
inextricably connected to the sounds and forms of the sacred language
and cannot be translated. The very sound of the name Muhammad implies
force, a sudden breaking forth of a power which is from God and is not
just human.

The word rasul with its elongated second syllable symbolizes this
'expansion of the chest' {inshirah al-sadr), and a generosity that flows
from the being of the Prophet and which ultimately comes from God. As
for Allah it is, of course, the Truth itself which terminates the
formula. The second Shahadah thus implies by its sound the power,
generosity and serenity of reposing in the Truth characteristic of the
Prophet. But this repose in the Truth is not based on a flight from the
world but on a penetration into it in order to inte- grate and organize
it. The spiritual castle in Islam is based on the firm foundations of
harmony within human society and in individual human life.

In the traditional prayers on the Prophet which all Muslims recite on
certain occasions, God's blessing and salutation are asked for the
Prophet who is God's servant ('abd), His messenger (rasul), and the
unlettered Prophet (al-nabi al-ummi). For example, one well-known
version of the formula of benediction upon the Prophet is as follows:

'Oh, God, bless our Lord Muhammad, Thy servant and Thy Messenger, the
unlettered Prophet, and his family and his companions, and salute
them.'

Here again the three epithets with which his name is qualified
symbolize his three basic characteristics which stand out most in the
eyes of devout Muslims. He is first of all an 'abd; but who is an 'abd
except one whose will is surrendered to the will of his master, who is
himself poor (faqir) but rich on account of what his master bestows upon
him. As the 'abd of God the Prophet exemplified in its fullness this
spiritual poverty and sobriety which is so characteristic of Islam.

He loved fasting, vigilance, prayer, all of which have become essential
elements in Islamic religious life. As an 'abd the Prophet put
everything in the hands of God and realized a poverty which is, in
reality, the most perfect and enduring wealth.

The rasul in this formula again symbolizes his aspect of charity and
generosity and metaphysically the rasul himself is sent because of God's
charity for the world and men whom He loves so that He sends His
prophets to guide them. That is why the Prophet is 'God's mercy to the
worlds.' For the Muslim the Prophet himself displays mercy and
generosity, a generosity which flows from the nobility of character.
Islam has always emphasized this quality and sought to inculcate
nobility in the souls of men. A good Muslim must have some nobility and
generosity which always reflect this aspect of the personality of the
Prophet.


