Revelation and Salvation Towards an Islamic View of History
===========================================================

Mahmoud A. Ayoub

Islam is a conscious act of submission of the creature to the will of
the creator. I use the words 'conscious act' deliberately to distinguish
between inherent islam, which is the law of God for all created things
in nature, and voluntary islam, which is the human faith-commitment to
affirm the Oneness (tawhid) of God and obey His will. Faith and
obedience, however, presuppose knowledge and knowledge requires
communication. This communication of the divine will to humankind is
what Islam calls wahi, or revelation. Yet revelation is not simply the
issuance of edicts which must be unquestionably obeyed. It is rather a
relationship of intense involvement of God in human history and of man
in the divine challenge as God's viceregent (khalifa) in the earth.
[^1].

God, the Qur'an tells us, [^2] communicates to all creatures what we may
call their instincts of survival. He communicates through normative laws
to the sun and the moon, to the stars, and to day and night to follow a
predetermined course and not to overstep their limits. [^3] In this
general sense, all things are 'muslims', submitters to the will of God.
This universal islam is presented in the Qur'an as a challenge to man's
willful rejection of faith. How would you, humankind, reject faith in
God when to Him have submitted all that is in the heavens and on the
earth voluntarily and by coercion? (3: 38). Thus what we term the laws
of nature, such as the law of gravity, are according to Islam the ways
in which nature expresses its islam to God.

Angels, like the rest of creation, are muslims by nature or, in some
sense, by compulsion. They lack the faculties which distinguish man as a
volitional being from the rest of creation. Angels cannot disobey God or
commit acts of evil and sin. I believe Satan was not an angel even
though, under the influence of Jewish and Christian tradition, some
Qur'an commentators and tradi- tionists have argued this only as a
possibility. [^4] Nor is Satan's power to do evil beyond the divine will
and decree. He is simply given respite to the day when they (humankind)
shall be raised up (15: 28-35). Hence human evil-the only true evil in
the world because it is an act of voluntary choice can be overcome by
divine guidance which is the task of prophets, the recipients of divine
revelation.

Islam insists, both in the Qur'an and prophetic, hadith tradition, that
every human being is born with an innate knowledge of God. This
knowledge is not so much awareness or information, rather it is a state
of innocent faith, a state (fitra) of the original creation expressed
anew in every child. 'Every child,' the Prophet is said to have
declared, 'is born in the (state) of fitra; then his parents make him
into a Jew, a Christian, or a Magian (i.e., Zoroastrian).

' In another version of the same tradition, the Prophet adds: 'And if
(the parents) are Muslims, then a Muslim.' [^5] The Qur'an states, even
more precisely, that this state is the fitra in which God created
humankind, there is no changing of God's creation (30: 30). Man is
therefore created with a primitive but wholesome knowledge of God. The
role of the prophets is to guide humanity through revelation to live the
full implications of this knowledge.

History is, according to the Islamic view of revelation, the history of
God's dealing with humanity through His prophets. Yet revelation in its
primordial beginnings belongs to metahistory, the time when we were all
in the realm of atoms, ideas in the mind of God. On that primordial day,
the Qur'an states, God took from the children of Adam, from their loins,
their progeny and made them bear witness against themselves, saying:

'Am I not your Lord?' They answered: 'Yes, we hear and we witness' (7:
172). This primordial act of divine revelation was the covenant which
God made with all human beings to 'hear and witness' to His absolute
sovereignty and lordship over all creation. The rest of human history
continues to echo, through the prophets whom God sent to every nation,
this divine challenge. History is, moreover, the stage on which we act
out our response to this primordial question.

In yet another Qur'anic verse we read: We have offered the trust
(amana) to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refuse
to bear it and cowered before it. Yet man bore it, for man is truly
wrongdoing, foolish (33: 75). This trust is, according to tradition,
divine Oneness with all the implications of this knowledge for human
life and history.

Man is foolish not because he is unable to bear the trust he
voluntarily chose to bear, but rather because he continuously wrongs his
own soul by knowingly breaking his covenant with God through the sin of
association (shirk) of other things with Him, yet God is All-Merciful
and Compassionate. In His infinite mercy, He called man time and again
back to Him. This He did through a long series of prophets from Adam to
Muhammad whose number was, according to tradition, 124,000.

This divine insistence on our salvation through prophetic guidance
implies two important but paradoxical principles. It implies first that
man is a sinner, capable of great evil. The second principle is that man
is nonetheless God's viceregent in the earth whose ideal goal is
prophetic existence. These two principles are dramatically expressed in
the Qur'anic portrayal of Adam as the crown of creation before whom
angels had to bow down in respectful obeisance. In contrast, the Qur'an
portrays Adam and Eve as disobedient sinners begging for divine mercy
and forgiveness. [^6]

The story of Adam's creation, fall and restoration as related in the
Qur'an is an instructive commentary on the biblical account which the
Qur'an accepts in its broad outlines. When God decided to create Adam,
He announced to the angels: 'I am about to make a viceregent in the
earth.' The angels protested: 'Will you place in it one who would spread
corruption in it and shed blood while we proclaim Your praise and
sanctify You?' Then God told Adam all the names, which may be regarded
as the first act of divine revelation to man in history. God then
challenged the angels to name the things whose identities He revealed to
His viceregent, but they admitted their ignorance and sought God's
mercy. 'Praise be to you, we have no knowledge save that which You
taught us....' Adam, who was taught by God the art of language with all
its symbolism, was higher than the angels. Thus they were ordered to
prostrate themselves before him in veneration, not worship; they all did
except Iblis (Satan) who refused and was puffed up with pride (2:
30-34).' [^7]

In an interesting colloquy between God and Satan, reported in the
Qur'an, we see both the reason for man's exultation and for Satan's
pride. God asks Iblis: 'What prevented you from prostrating yourself
before one whom I fashioned with my two hands . . . ?' Satan answered:
'I am better than he; you created him of clay and created me of fire'
(38: 75). [^8] Thus God expelled the arrogant Satan from his presence and
placed Adam in the garden of Paradise.

Adam, however, was made not for Paradise but for the earth. God
therefore gave Satan authority over Adam and his descendants in order
that the eternal battle between good and evil should rage on its
legitimate stage, earth. Adam was tempted by Satan with eternal life,
everlasting dominion and angelic existence. He fell and was sent with
his spouse to the earth to exercise their true mission, God's
viceregency.

From the beginning, God created the human soul and inspired it with its
evil and piety (91:6-7). Thus man is as prone to evil and destruction as
he is to righteousness and good deeds. With this choice, however, go sin
and repentance, and forgiveness and guidance. Adam did disobey his Lord,
but then he received certain words from his Lord and He turned towards
him, for He is truly relenting, compassionate (2: 36). Thus Adam sinned
and was guided back to God by God through revelation. Adam was both the
first sinner but also the first prophet.

Every man and woman thereafter carries in him or herself the same
potential. This is not to say that every human being is a prophet, but
that the goal of humanity is life with God. Nowhere more powerfully and
aesthetically has this ideal been interiorized and presented than in the
lives and works of the mystics, the friends (awliya') of God, whom we
call Sufis.

It has already been observed that every human individual is born in the
state (fitra) of innate faith in God as the one and only creator and
sovereign lord of all beings. What then, it must be asked, is the role
of the prophets in human history? Their role is twofold, first to remind
men of their covenant with God, or bring them back to the state of pure
faith. Man, according to the Qur'an, is a forgetful creature.

The Qur'an was sent, as were other scriptures, from God as a reminder.
Indeed, one of the many names of the Qur'an is al-Dhikr (the
remembrance). The second task of the prophets, or to be more precise,
the prophet-messengers, is to transmit divine precepts or moral
imperatives which are to regulate human conduct. In Islam, this is known
as the shari'a, or sacred law.

Islam distinguishes between a prophet and a messenger, and between
these and the righteous friends (awliya') of God. A prophet is one who
receives revelation in dreams and by other indirect means. He may be
sent to only a few people and for a specific purpose, or he may be a
prophet in himself. In contrast, a messenger is one who receives direct
revelation through an angel, or even more directly from God, as was the
case with Moses. A messenger, in addition, is a legislator. Every
messenger (rasul) is a prophet (nabi) but not every prophet is a
messenger. This is because the main distinction between the two rests
not on revelation, but on the promulgation and application of sacred
laws based on revealed divine principles.

Among the 124,000 prophets, tradition asserts that there were 313
messengers. The Qur'an refers to eighteen, five of whom are known as
ulu-al-'azm, or messengers with power or resolve. These are: Noah, the
father of humanity after the Deluge; Abraham, the archetypal man of
faith in the one God; Moses, the recipient of the Torah; Jesus, the Word
of God and His spirit and the recipient of the Evangel; and Muhammad,
the recipient of the Qur'an, the seal of the prophets and last messenger
to humankind. Moses and Muhammad, however, occupy a special place in
prophetic history because they were prophets and statesmen. They did not
simply transmit the message, they implemented it in the life of a
socio-political order.

Islamic tradition insists that God never left any community without a
warner, in order that men should have no argument or contention (hujja)
against God after the apostles (4: 165). The question was inevitably
asked: What becomes of humanity in times of prophetic interruption
(fatra), and even more seriously after prophecy has ceased altogether?
Several answers to this question have appeared in the form of minority
sects in Islam, some of which, like the Bahais, broke away completely
from the community. What may be termed the 'orthodox' Shi'i answer has
been more or less tolerated as a fifth way (madhhab) alongside the four
official Sunni schools.

Based on a complex system of Qur'an exegesis and prophetic hadith
tradition, Shi'i Muslims early in the community's history posited
another cycle concentric with that of prophethood and extending beyond
it. This is the cycle of walaya, (authority or allegiance) or imama
(temporal and spiritual headship) of the Muslim community. The imams
must always be physical as well as spiritual heirs to the prophets. With
the exception of Jesus whose first heir or viceregent (wasi) was Simon
Peter, the imam must be a brother or descendent of the Prophet. The imam
may also be a prophet, as was the case of Abraham.

[^9] But in general, the imamate is higher than prophethood and below
apostleship. The imam is the bearer of the knowledge of the prophet whom
he succeeds and by prophetic inheritance from one prophet to the next,
the imam is also heir to the knowledge of all previous prophets. His
task is not to promulgate new laws, rather it is to interpret, safeguard
and implement the shari'a of the prophet of whom he is the heir. Like
prophets, the imams must be protected (ma'sum) by God from error. They
must also manifest miracles as proof of their imamate.

The doctrine of the imamate no doubt evolved as part of the general
loyalty of an important segment of the Muslim community to 'Ali (the
cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet) and his descendents. As a result
of complex historical circumstances which cannot be considered here, the
Shi'a (followers) of 'Ali and devotees of the ahl al-bayt (household) of
the Prophet Muhammad, built an impressive philosophy of history and a
tragic ethos around the personalities of the imams. For the purpose of
this discussion, it must be observed that while the imams are not
recipients of revelation, they are muhaddathun (i.e., spoken to) by
angels. [^10] More importantly, the imamate is a necessary extension of
prophethood.

Without it, revelation remains unfulfilled beyond the time of the
prophet to whom the revelation was sent. Of course, Shi'i Muslims in all
this had the Qur'an in mind. But it was inevitable that a universal
doctrine of the imamate had to evolve to fit the Islamic universal
doctrine of prophethood and revelation. [^11]

I spoke earlier of Abraham as the 'archetypal man of faith'. He
exhibits in the Qur'an and Islamic tradition a robust and dynamic
personality. More significantly, however, Abraham typifies man's
spiritual journey from that primal state (fitra) of innocent faith in
God to doubt, then to faith, and finally to absolute certainty.

From a contemplative observation at night of the universe around him,
Abraham deduced that it must have a lord. He first took the moon, on
account of its splendour, to be that Power. But the moon set and Abraham
cried with disappointment: 'I do not love those that set.' He then saw
the sun, even more luminous and of much greater magnitude. Abraham
exclaimed: 'This is my lord, this is greater!' But when the sun also
set, he exclaimed: 'O my people, I dissociate myself from what you do'
(7: 76 8). Finally, in an outburst of divine illumination, Abraham cried
out: 'I turn my face to Him who created the heavens and the earth, a man
of pure faith, nor am I one of the Associators [i.e., of other things
with God]' (6: 79).

It was after this discovery of the truth by his unaided reason that
Abraham received revelation. He discovered God, as it were, then God
guided him and granted him the gift of prophethood, then chose him as
His intimate friend (khalil) and finally appointed him as the imam
(leader) of humankind. It is perhaps not fortuitous that Abraham, the
father of prophets and first muslim, left us no specific corpus of
revelation. 'The scrolls of Abraham' are mentioned in the Qur'an, [^12]
but tradition asserts that they were lost. Abraham left no revelation of
his own because he belongs to all revelation. He is the hero and maker
of revelation-history rather than its guide. The mission of Muhammad and
the Qur'an was to call men to the pure (hanif) faith of Abraham, who was
neither a Jew nor a Christian but a man of pure faith, a muslim, that
is, a submitter to God. [^13]
The Qur'an is, for Muslims, the final revelation to humankind. Before
discussing the nature of the Qur'an and its relationship to human
history, it may be well to say a word about the life and character of
Muhammad and the manner of the revelation of the Qur'an to him. Mecca
before Islam was a thriving commercial city in north Arabia lying on the
trade route between Syria in the west and south Arabia and India in the
east. Mecca also housed the ancient shrine of the Ka'aba, which was an
important place of pilgrimage and a lucrative source of income for the
city. With the rise of material wealth, morals declined so that
sensitive men and women rejected the idolatry of their society and its
moral turpitude. They either turned to Judaism or Christianity, or
privately worshipped God in anticipation of a new prophet who would
usher in a new era. It was in this highly charged atmosphere that
Muhammad, son of 'Abd Allah, was born in 570 or 71 AD.

Muhammad lost his parents in infancy and was cared for by his
grandfather, 'Abd al-Muttalib, and when he died, he was cared for by his
uncle, Abu Talib. Muhammad was, according to tradition, a man of mild
and contemplative nature. At the age of 25, he married a rich widow,
Khadija, who stood by him until she died about ten years later. Khadija
had a Christian cousin named Waraqa b. Nawfal who may have been
well-versed in scriptures.

Tradition tells us that Waraqa could read and write both Hebrew and
Arabic and that he read the Gospel in Hebrew and translated it into
Arabic. At the beginning of Muhammad's prophetic career when he was
uncertain of the source and nature of his revelation, he found great
support in this Christian man who on seeing him and hearing what he had
to say, cried out: 'Holy, holy! Verily by Him in whose hand is Waraqa's
soul, . . . there has come unto him the greatest Naimus (law) who came
to Moses aforetime, and lo, he is the prophet of this people.' Soon,
however, Waraqa died. [^14]

Every year, we are told, Muhammad used to leave his home during the
month of Ramadan for Ghar Hira, a cave on a mountain outside Mecca.
There he spent his nights in devotion and contemplation until one day an
angel appeared to him, later identified as Gabriel, the angel of
revelation, who communicated the first five verses of the Qur'an:

(1) Recite in the name of your Lord who created
(2) created man from a blood clot.
(3) Recite, for your Lord is most magnanimous,
(4) Who taught by the pen.
(5) He taught man that which he knew not (95: 1-5).

After a brief interruption, revelations continued to come, warning the
Meccans of the coming day of judgement and calling them to moral
righteousness and the worship of the one and only God. (1) Have you
considered him who cries lies to the faith? (2) It is he who repulses
the orphan; (3) nor does he urge the feeding of the needy. (4) Woe to
them that pray, (5) but are negligent in their prayers; (6) they who act
hypocritically, (7) and withhold the utensil (102). In this brief sura
of the Qur'an is expressed the entire message of the Book. The message
is to have faith in God and manifest this faith through worship and good
works.

In Mecca, this message was couched in a powerful, eschatological
language. When, however, the Prophet and a small band of his followers
migrated to Medina in 622 AD, the message was expressed in normative
moral and religious precepts necessary for the regulation of a socio-
political and religious community. These norms were to provide the
primary source of Muslim sacred law, the shari'a. By the time the
Prophet died in 10 AH/632 AD, all the fundamentals Islam and its rites
of worship were instituted. In one of the last verses of the Qur'an to
be revealed, God says: I have perfected your religion for you; I have
completed my favour towards you, and have accepted Islam as a religion
for you (5: 3).

The Qur'an was revealed over a period of twenty-two years during
Muhammad's prophetic career, first for twelve years in Mecca as a warner
and preacher, then the remaining ten in Medina as a warner, preacher,
prophet, and statesman. Thus we can see how the Qur'an is intimately
related to the life of an actual society.

Yet the Qur'an is also the transcendent Word of God, preserved from
eternity in the well-guarded tablet (85: 21-2). It is at once a book of
guidance sent down by God through the angel Gabriel, who actually taught
it to Muhammad, and a numinous power sent down upon your (Muhammad's)
heart (26: 194). Two modes of revelation are described by tradition.

The first is the direct communication by the angel to the Prophet who
then dictated the verses or suras to scribes as he did not know how to
read or write. The second mode is a sound which the Prophet heard in his
ears, while in a trancelike state, a sound like the ringing of a bell.
'This,' the Prophet said, 'was the hardest for me to bear.' [^15] This is
the Qur'an in its primordial essence, unfettered by human sounds and
letters. It is the Qur'an as it is 'in the Mother of the Book,' the
archetypal source of revelation.

The Qur'an is, for Muslims, the literal and timeless divine Word which
entered our time. It became a book which Muslims write down, memorize,
recite, and live by. The Qur'an is therefore analogous to Christ in
Christianity, who is the eternal Logos that was made flesh and dwelt
among us (John 1: 14). Yet with this similarity, there is an essential
difference. Christ is God's self-revelation or disclosure through
incarnation. Hence, the Word was with God and the Word was God (John 1:
1).

The Qur'an, on the other hand, is the revelation of God's will and
purpose for humanity. Although the Qur'an shares in divine
transcendence, God remains the wholly other, absolutely transcendent
lord over his entire creation. This crucial difference has, as we shall
see, set the two communities of faith far apart, thus making any
meaningful dialogue between them a hard challenge to the principles of
love and tolerance which are basic to the faith of both communities.

The analogy of the Qur'an with Christ may be carried a step further
into the history of Muslims and Christians. The christological
controversies which so intensely engaged the Fathers of the early Church
were paralleled in early Muslim history by theological controversies
regarding the createdness or eternity of the Qur'an. In both cases, the
issue was the relationship of the revelation to the revealer, and hence
the fear of compromising the unity and transcendence of God.

Furthermore, as the Church has through the ages been occupied with the
humanity of Christ, so have Muslims been occupied with the question of
earthliness, or humanity, of the Qur'an. In my view, neither community
has been able to recognize the full implication of the humanity of the
revelation even though in both cases the man Jesus and the earthly
Qur'an have imposed themselves so powerfully on our history and
theology.

For Muslims, this is clear from the fact that the Qur'an followed the
course of their formative history with an amazing intimacy. It dealt
with the community's hopes and failures; it consoled the Prophet and his
people and reproached them. Of even greater significance has been the
fact that many of its verses were revealed in answer to specific
problems or questions of individual Muslims. Thus the occasions or
reasons (asbab) of the revelation (nuzul) of the Qur'an has become an
important branch of the sciences of the Qur'an.

Having considered the Islamic view of revelation as it relates to the
Qur'an, we shall now consider more specifically the Qur'anic view of
previous revelation. The Qur'an asserts that to every nation or
community God sent an apostle to convey to them the message of his lord
in their own tongue. Thus what has been said regarding the Qur'an
applies to all scriptures. They were all with God, preserved in a
celestial archetype which the Qur'an calls umm al-kitab (Mother of the
Book).

The truth they contain is, moreover, one and the same: to have faith in
God alone and not associate any other thing or being with Him, to
worship God, and to do good works. Differences, when they exist, are
simply due to the variety in human culture and historical circumstances.
Each messenger had to let the message entrusted to him by God speak the
truth as it relates to the condition of his people. It may be further
argued that inasmuch as all the major revelations are meant for humanity
in the various stages of its progress, revelation must also be
progressive so as to speak meaningfully to the human condition at every
stage of its history.

Thus details relating to laws of sanction and prohibition in one
revelation could be changed or abrogated by a subsequent one. Jesus thus
claims in the Qur'an, 'I have come to make lawful for you (the Jews)
some of the things that were unlawful' (3: 50). This process, however,
stopped with the Qur'an. Thereafter men are to understand and apply the
precepts of this final revelation in their lives. Henceforth God's
guidance will be through inspiration and not revelation.

The Qur'an deals only with the Torah of Moses and the Gospel of Jesus
as specific instances of revelation. Christians and Jews are called
'people of the book,' an appelation which applies indirectly to Muslims
as well: Say, O people of the book, come to a common word [of agreement]
between you and us that we worship no one beside God ... (3: 64). The
Qur'an further asserts that in the Gospel ... there is guidance and
light (5: 44). Let therefore the people of the Gospel judge in
accordance with what was revealed in it, the Qur'an enjoins (5: 47). The
Qur'an further challenges Muhammad and the Jews who came to ask him to
judge among them, How could they make you a judge over them when they
have the Torah in which is the judgement of God? (5: 43).

If the Torah, the Gospel and the Qur'an are one in their message and
purpose, they why are they so different in reality and why are the three
communities of faith in such discord among themselves? These
differences, the Qur'an asserts, are due to the fact that some of the
Jews and Christians have willfully altered words from their rightful
places (4: 46).

This accusation of tahrif (altering or distorting) by the Jews and the
Christians of their own sacred books has played an unfortunate role in
Muslim-Jewish-Christian polemics.

The problem of tahrif is a very complex one which cannot be discussed
in this general essay. It must be observed, however, that the Qur'an
seems to suggest that such alteration or distortion was more of the
interpretation or meaning rather than the actual text of the Torah and
Gospel. An example of this misinterpretation is the verses in both
scriptures referring to the coming of Muhammad and which were given
different interpretations by the scholars-priests and rabbis of the two
communities. [^16] Another and even more serious example of Christian
misinterpretation of the message and personality of Christ is their
assertion that Christ is God or the Son of God. [^17]

All this notwithstanding, the Qur'an still leaves much room for
dialogue and amity among the faithful of the three communities. It was
unfortunately not the scriptures of the three communities that were
called upon to judge and decide among their people; but rather
political, economic, and military exigencies were to determine the
relations among Muslims, Christians and Jews.

The Qur'an never criticized the faith of Christians and Jews, or
Judaism and Christianity as such. Rather it always qualifies its
statements with: Some among the people of the book . . . or a group of
the people of the book ..., and so on. Later tradition could not be
satisfied with such an open relationship. Thus tahrif was taken to mean
an actual change of the text of the scriptures through interpolations
and deletions. In an interesting, hadith the Prophet says:

'Do not believe the people of the book nor disbelieve them. Rather say,
we believe in that which was sent down to us.' [^18] This ambivalence
towards the people of the book is even less apparent in the Qur'an. In
several places the Qur'an invokes previous scriptures and their people
to argue for its own claim to authenticity. Thus the Qur'an addresses
Muhammad: If you are in doubt concerning that which we have sent down to
you, then ask those who have been reading the book before you ... (10:
194). The Qur'an similarly enjoins the Muslims: Ask the people of
remembrance (ahl al-dhikr) if you do not know (16: 43). The people of
remembrance are the people of the scriptures which the Qur'an often
designates as the Remembrance. [^19]

Every religious tradition, or at least the three with which we are here
concerned, must in the end see itself as in some way the last word of
divine truth or revelation to humanity. Islam adopted an open and unique
attitude to previous religious traditions and their revelations, an
attitude made necessary by the Islamic view of history as
revelation-history.

Since revelation ceased with the Qur'an, and apostleship with Muhammad,
Islam has seen itself as the final confirmation and fulfillment of all
previous revelations. By dint of geographic and cultural proximity of
the Muslim community to Christians and Jews, this openness and challenge
had to be directed at the people of the book. Thus it was inevitable
that conflict would arise.

The Qur'an sees itself not only as dependent for its own claim to
authenticity on the Torah and the Gospel, but also as 'confirming' the
truth which they contain and superceding them. This view which the
Qur'an holds of itself and the attitude it evinced within the Muslim
community of Medina led to sharp and tragic conflict with the
well-established Jewish community. This in turn resulted in open
hostility on both sides.

The Qur'an exhibits greater hostility towards the Jews than towards the
Christians but here again it may be argued that this hostility was
directed towards the Jews of Medina with whom the Prophet and early
Muslim community had many political and economic problems. The Qur'an
admits the favour of God towards the children of Israel and their
covenant with Him, but rejects the Jewish notion of chosenness and
exclusivity. This problem, I believe, is older than Islam. It was quite
prevalent in the earlier culture of the Syro-Aramaic Near East and is
reflected even in the Gospel. [^20]

The contrast between the Qur'anic treatment of the Jews and Christians
may be best seen in a late verse revealed in the context of much
Jewish-Muslim conflict in a still nascent and imperiled Muslim
community. The verse reads: You would find the greatest of hostility
among men towards those who have faith to be Jews and those who have
associated (other things with God); and you would tind the nearest of
them in love towards those who have faith to be those who say, 'We are
Christians.' This is because there are among them pastors and monks; nor
do they act arrogantly (5: 82). But by the Jews, the Qur'an intended
those of Medina, and by the Christians those of Abyssinia and their
legendary king, al-Najashi (Nagus), who received Muslims well when they
had to flee Mecca in the first Muslim migration. [^21]

Every sacred book, be it the Qur'an, Torah or Gospel, is open to many
kinds of interpretation in accordance with our increased knowledge of
one another and the historical circumstances which we together share.
The ancient biblical promise to the Jews of Zion has been interpreted
both spiritually and politically. The political ramifications of that
interpretation are still very much with us. Likewise, the Gospel parable
of the king's wedding feast [^22] gave St.

Augustine scriptural authority to argue for the compulsion of the
Donatist back to the Church even if coercion were necessary. Sufis have
often interpreted the Qur'anic verses enjoining the faithful to strive
in the way of God with the sword to mean striving against the evil in
one's own heart and soul with the sword of truth.

They found clear support in prophetic hadith for this view which called
the jihad against the carnal soul 'the greater jihad.' The Qur'an also
distinguishes between the jihad in the way of God and jihad in God,
where God says: And those who strive in Us, We shall guide them to our
ways (29:69). The ways of God are designated by another verse as the
ways of peace (51:16).

The ancient divine promise of guidance in the face of evil and sin was
made not only to Adam and his spouse but to all their progeny after
them. Guidance in Islam is analogous to the Holy Spirit in Christianity.
God will still guide those who seek peace to understand His revelations
and learn from them.

In our world of great possibilities for a better life of health and
plenty or total devastation, we need to interpret our scriptures in ways
that promote a meaningful dialogue which would lead to a true fellowship
of faith. He has showed you, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of you but to do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk
humbly with your God? (Micah 6:8 (RSV)). You will know the truth and the
truth will make you free (John 8:32). ... Guidance shall come from me to
you, and whoever follows My guidance, no fear shall come upon them, nor
will they grieve (2:38).

**Notes:**

[^1] See 2: 30.
[^2] See 16:68.
[^3] See 36: 40.
[^4] See Ayoub, The Qur'an and its Interpreters, 1, New York: SUNY
Press, 1983, ad 2: 30-34.
[^5] Sahih Muslim, 3rd ed.. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr. 1398/1978. XVI, 210
[^6] See Ayoub, op. cit., 1, ad 2:30-38.
[^7] See the previous footnote.
[^8] See also 7: 12.
[^9] See 2:123.
[^10] Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
Al-Usul min al-kafi, 3rd ed., Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-lslamiyya. 1388,
I, 174 6.
[^11] For a useful summary of the doctrine of the imamate, see M. Ayoub,
Redemptive Suffering in Islam: a Study of the Devotional Aspects of
'Ashura' in Twelver Shi'ism, The Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1978, pp.
5348; and Henri Corbin, 'De la philosophie prophetique en Islam
Shi'ite', Eranos Jarbuch, xxx (1962), 49-1 16
[^12] See 82:18-1 9
[^13] 3:67. On Abraham in the Islamic tradition see Kenneth Cragg, The
Privilege of Man, London: University of London, Athlone Press, 1968, ch.
3; and Youakim Moubarac. Abraham dans le Coran, Paris: Librairie
Philosophique J. Vrin, 1958.
[^14] A. Guillaume. The Life of Muhammad: A Translation of Ibn Ishaqs
Sirat Rasul Allah. 3rd ed.. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1970, p.
170.
[^15] 'Imad al-Din Abu 'l-Fida' Isma'il b. Kathir, Al-sira al-nabawiya,
Beirut: Dar al-Ma'rifa, 1396/1971, I, 421.
[^16] See Guillaume, op. cit., p. 103; and Ali b. Rabban al-Tabari,
Al-din wa'l dawla, 3rd ed., Beirut: Dar al-Afaq al-Jadida, 1979. (The
book has also been translated into English under the title Religion and
the Empire.)
[^17] See Q. 5:17, 73. and 116.
[^18] Sahih al-Bukhari, Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d., v, 150.
[^19] See 15:9 and 21: 105
[^20] See J. Spencer Trimingham, Christianity among the Arabs in
Pre-Islamic Times, London: Longman, 1979, pp. 41 49. See also Matt 3:
9.
[^21] See Guillaume. op. cit., pp. 146-50.
[^22] See Luke 14:16-24


