'man La Yahduruh Al-faqih' By Al-saduq
======================================

Dr. I. K. A. Howard Al-Serat, Vol. 2 (1976), No. 2

**The Author**

Al-Shaikh al-Saduq is the title given to Abu Ja'far Muhammad b. 'Ali
ibn Babawaih al Qummi. He was the leading traditionist of his time (4th
Century A.H.) and one of the most outstanding traditionists of Shi'ite
Islam. He earned the title of al-Shaikh al-Saduq on account of his great
learning and his reputation for truthfulness. It is a title which he
also shares with his father.

Al-Shaikh 'Ali, the father of the author, was a leading figure among
the scholars of Qumm. By the father's time the family were established
as strong adherents of Shi'ite Islam. However, it is not known how early
the family entered into Islam.[^1] Al-Shaikh al-Saduq is sometimes known
as Ibn Babawaih. This is the family name and indicates the Persian
origin of the family. For Babwaih is an Arabicized version of the
Persian form Babuyah.[^2]

The date of al-Shaikh al-Saduq's birth is not known exactly. However an
interesting story surrounds the circumstances of his birth. When his
father was in Iraq, he met Abul Qasim al-Husain b. Rawh, the third agent
of the Hidden Imam. During their meeting he asked the latter several
questions. Later he wrote to al-Husain b. Rawh asking him to take a
letter to the Hidden Imam. In this letter he asked for a son. Al-Husain
sent back an answer telling him that they (the Hidden Imam and
al-Husain) had prayed to God to ask Him to grant the request and he
would be rewarded with two sons. Another version of the story says three
sons. The elder, or eldest, of these sons was Muhammad, that is
al-Shaikh al-Saduq, our author.

On the basis of this story, early Shi'ite scholars have placed his
birth after the year 305 A.H. probably 306 A.H. For al-Husain b. Rawh
was the agent of the Hidden Imam from 305 A.H. until his death in 326
A.H. Al-Shaikh al-Saduq was born and grew up in Qumm. He was educated by
his father and came into close contact with all the leading scholars of
Shi'ite Islam in Qumm and studied under many of them.[^3]

Qumm was one of centres of the study of Shi'ite traditions and it was
this form of religious learning which held great influence over
al-Shaikh al-Saduq. He travelled widely visiting many cities in search
of traditions and as a result the number of scholars whom he learned
traditions from is considerable. The number is put at 211.

The importance of traditions is emphasized by al-Shaikh al-Saduq and he
quotes traditions against speculative theology. His works reflect this
interest in traditions and nearly all of them take the form of
compilations of traditions. However he did write a creed of Shi'ite
Islam al-I'tiqadat. His pupil, the eminent theologian al-Shaikh
al-Mufid, wrote a correction of this creed Tashih al-i'tiqad where he
criticises him on several points.[^4]

The number of al-Shaikh al-Saduq's works is considerable.[^5] Al-Tusi
says that they numbered over 300 but list only 43 of them that he has
immediately in his possession, while al-Najashi lists 193 of them.
Curiously enough al-Najashi does not mention the important work Man la
y'ahduruh al-faqih! Many of the works of al-Shaikh al-Saduq have been
lost but a considerable number survive and have been published. There
are also other works not yet published but extant in manuscript form.

As has been mentioned during his life al-Shaikh al-Saduq devoted most
of his energy to the collection and compilation of traditions; he was
also a great teacher of tradition. During the last years of his life al
Shaikh' al Saduq lived in a Rayy. He had been invited there by the Buyid
Rukn al Dawla.[^6] He seems to have been well-treated and honoured there
by Rukn al-Dawla and took part in many discussions with him. However it
is reported that his teaching was eventually restricted by the Buyid
Wazir Ibn 'Abbad. The attack appears to have been aimed at traditions
for several Sunni traditionists also suffered similar restrictions at
the hands of Ibn 'Abbad.[^7]

Al-Shaikh al-Saduq died in al-Rayy in 381 A.H. and he was buried there.
He was probably more than 70 years of age. He left behind him many
collections of traditions which are of great importance.

**Man la yahduruh al-faqih**

This work is included in the four major books of the traditions of
Shi'ite Islam Despite the fact that many of his other works are
extremely important, this book must be regarded as his most important
work However some authorities maintain that there were five major books
of traditions and they include another of al Shaikh al Saduq's works
Madinat al-'ilm, in this number.[^8] Al-Tusi mentions that the latter
work was bigger than Man la yahduruh al-faqih.[^9] It appears that this
book is no longer existant. It seems to have been concerned with usul
al-din (the principles of religion) rather than the furu', which are the
practical regulations for carrying out the shari'a, the holy law of
Islam.

As its title implies Man la yahduruh al faqih was concerned with furu'.
It has be neatly translated by E. G. Brown as "Every man his own
lawyer"[^10] In his introduction to the book al-Shaikh al-Saduq explains
the circumstances of its composition and the reason for its title. When
he was at Ilaq near Balkh, he met Sharif al-Din Abu 'Abd Allah known as
Ni'mah whose full name was Muhammad b. Al-Husain b. Al-Husain b. Ishaq
b. Musa b. Ja'far b.

Muhammad b. Ali b. Al-Husain b. Ali b. Abi Talib. He was delighted with
his discourses with him andh his gentleness, kindness, dignity and
interest in religion. He brought a book compiled by Muhammad b. Zakharia
al-Razi entitled Man la yahduruh al-Talib or "Every man his own doctor"
to the attention of al-Shaikh al-Saduq. He, then, asked him to compile a
book on fiqh (jurisprudence), al-halal Wa-'1-haram (the permitted and
prohibited) al-shara-i' wa-'l-ahkam (revealed law and (ordinary) laws)
which would draw on all the works which the Shaikh had composed on the
subject. This book would be called Man la yahduruh al-faqih and would
function as a work of reference.[^11]

In fact the work represents a definitive synopsis of all the traditions
which al-Shaikh al-Saduq had collected and included in individual books
on specific legal subjects. In the lists of books of al-Shaikh al-Saduq,
individual works are attributed to him on every subject of the furu';
examples are such works as Kitab al-nikah "Book of Marriage" or Kitab
al-hajj "Book of the Pilgrimage". That this was the intention of both
the author and the learned member of Ahl al-bait is emphasised by the
author when he says that Sharif al-Din had asked him for this work
despite the fact that he had copied or heard from him the traditions of
145 books.[^12]

Another element in the work that stresses that it was conceived as a
reference book to help ordinary Shi'ites in the practise of the legal
requirements of Islam is the general absence of the isnads for
traditions. The isnads - or the chain of authorities by which the
tradition had been received from the Prophet or one of the Imams - was,
and is, an all-important feature of the science of traditions. Therefore
this book was not meant to be a work for scholars, who would want to
check the authorities. Scholars could check the isnads in the numerous
individual studies compiled by al-Shaikh al-Saduq.

This book was a summary of the study of legal traditions by one of the
great scholars of traditions. Al-Shaikh al-Saduq says that he complied
with the request for him to compile the book "... because I found it
appropriate to do so. I compiled the book without isnads (asanid) so
that the chains (of authority) should not be too many (-and make the
book too long-) and so that the book's advantages might be abundant. I
did not have the usual intention of compilers (of books of traditions)
to put forward everything which they (could) narrate but my intention
was to put forward those things by which I gave legal opinions and which
I judged to be correct.[^13]

Al-Shaikh al-Saduq also gives an account of some of the earlier works
which he referred to. These works were the books of Hariz b. 'Abd Allah
al-Sijistani - he died during the life time of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq; the
book of 'Ubaid Allah b. 'Ali al-Halabi - who was also a contemporary of
Imam Ja'far; the books of Ali b. Mahziyar - who took traditions from
Imam 'Ali al-Rida, Imam Muhammad al-Jawad and Imam al-Hadi; the books of
al-Husain b. Sa'id - who also heard traditions from those three Imams;
the Nawadir of Ahmad b. Muhammad b. 'Isa - who died in 297 A.H. and also
heard traditions from those three Imams; the Kitab nawadir al-hikma of
Muhammad b. Yahya b. 'Imran al-Ash'ari; Kitab al-rahma of Sa'd b. 'Abd
Allah - who died in 299 A.H. or 301 A.H.; the Jami' of Muhammad b.
al-Hasan - who was one of the teachers of the Shaikh and died in 343
A.H.; the Nawadir of Muhammad b. Abi 'Umayr - who died in 218 A.H.; the
Kitab al-Mahasin of Ahmad b. Abi 'Abd Allah al-Barqi (i.e. Ahmad b.
Muhammad b. Khalid al-Barqi) who died in 274 A.H. or 280 A.H. (this book
has been published in Teheran); and the Risala which his father had
written to him.

The Shaikh goes on to mention that he also consulted many other works
whose names occur in the book-lists.[^14] This inclusion of the list of
some of the works consulted is useful evidence that the works of both
al-Shaikh al-Saduq and his predecessor, al-Kulaini, who compiled the
first of the four major books of Shi'ite traditions, al-Kafi, represent
the culmination of works of traditions which had been compiled in a
continuous process from the earliest times and at least from the time of
Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq.

In addition to these references which the author gives in his
introduction he frequently refers to his own works during the course of
the book. Thus at the end of his Bab nawadir al-hajj (Chapter of
Exceptional Traditions of the Pillgrimage), he says: "I have published
these nawadir with isnads with others in Kitab jami', nawadir
al-hajj."[^15]

Another feature of the work is the method used by the author. He does
not leave the traditions to speak for themselves but frequently draws
rules from the traditions or explains their meaning. In a summary of the
various traditions on the pilgrimage, he gives a long outline of all the
rituals which should be performed by the faithful with very few
traditions intervening in his outline.[^16]

The book covers most of the points concerned with the furu' (practices)
of fiqh jurisprudence. It is not arranged in chapters (kutub) but in
smaller sections (abwab), with the various categories such as fasting
and pilgrimage following closely after each other. As indicated, its
lack of isnads and al-Shaikh al-Saduq's own explanations make it an
extremely useful compendium of law for ordinary Shi'ite Muslims of the
period.

The book, naturally as one of the four major works of traditions, has
had many commentaries written on it. Among the great Shi'ite writers who
have written such commentaries are al-Sayyid Ahmad b. Zain al-'Abidin
al-'Alawi al-'Amili (died 1060 A.H.) and Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi
al-Awwal (died 1070 A H ).[^17] The book itself has been recently
published in four volumes in Teheran.

**Notes:**

1. Cf. "Introduction" by al-Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan in his
edition of Man la yahduruh al-faqih (4 volumes Teheran, 1390), I, pages
h-w
2. A. A. Fyzee, A Shi'ite Creed (Calcutta, 1942), p.8 footnote 2
3. Cf. al-Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan, "Introduction", op cit,
I, pages z-t
4. W. Madelung, "Imamism and Mu'tazilite Theology", Le Shi'isme
Imamite, (Paris 1970), 21
5. Al-Shaikh al-Tusi, al-Fihrist (Mashhad 1351 A.H.S.), 303
6. Cited by A. A. Fyzee, op cit., 11, 16
7. Cited by W. Madelung, op cit., 20
8. Al-Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan, op cit., page Ar
9. Al-Shaikh al-Tusi, loc cit
10. Cited by A. A. Fyzee, op cit., 6
11. Man la yahduruh al-faqih, I, 2-3
12. Ibid, I. 3
13. Ibid
14. Ibid, I, 3-5
15. Ibid, II, 311
16. Ibid, II, 311
17. For a full list cf. "Introduction", ibid pages Aba-Ana


