Why "islamic" Science?
======================

Yahya Cooper
Vol IX No. 1

The Islamic world today is the inheritor of an intellectual tradition
which stretches back to the time of the Qura'nic revelation and beyond.
Although we lack a comprehensive account in modern literature of a
history of this tradition, situating it in the framework of the general
history of ideas, this is not because the idea for such a project is a
novelty. We find references to this continuity of thought in and beyond
the Islamic context in all the great works of the Islamic tradition.

While some philosophers (in metaphysics and certain natural sciences)
trace their origins back through the lens of the revelation to the
ancient Greeks, others find their ancestors in ancient India, Iran and
Egypt, among other places. Even the more strictly theological sciences
can trace their development by way of the prophets who preceded
Muhammad. The Qur'anic revelation was the point in time and
consciousness at which all these different rays of thought were
refracted into a new and shining beam. This beam has seemed to diminish
in intensity, and many Moslems today have found themselves asking why
this should have happened. Anxious to re- instate the "Islamic
sciences", they have first tried to find out why they were eclipsed by
their Western counterparts or why, in some cases, they just
disappeared.

In a more mystical vein, some authors have suggested that, like bottled
sunshine, this wisdom is protected from desecration within the
depositories of the true guardians of Islam. Our intention here is not
to investigate these whys and wherefores; we shall take off in a
different direction in the hope of finding new horizons. We shall begin
by examining the identity of the "Islamic sciences", and in the process
we shall become aware that this identity lies not within the sciences
themselves, but in something more fundamental.

As an example of a science that is still practised in Islamic centres
of learning, "Islamic philosophy" provides us with a good starting
point. What is it about this philosophy that makes it "Islamic"? It
could be one of three things: either its subject matter is Islamic, or
its practitioners are, or its methodology is. Now the odd thing about
its subject matter is its surprising lack of specificity as regards
religious affiliation. There is, of course, a large part of it which is
concerned with matters either entirely, or, at any rate, partly,
theological in character: the Oneness of God and the nature of His
attributes (particularly His knowledge) in metaphysics, and the source
of authority in the "practical" philosophy of ethics and politics are
witnesses to this.

In a more indirect way, many of the problems which were taken up by the
early philosophers of this tradition, and which have become conventional
topics in the literature, owe their conception to the fact that they
were originally subjects of debate among the kalam theologians which the
philosophers tried to settle by their own methods. But this in itself
makes their philosophy no more "Islamic" than similar considerations
would make contemporary Western philosophy "Christian", and we would do
well to note that when "Western philosophy" investigates matters of
theology this is referred to as philosophy of religion, not "Christian
philosophy".

It is perhaps more revealing, in this context, that Western authors
have given us "Buddhist philosophy", "the philosophy of the Vendanta",
and so forth despite the fact that they have given us no "Christian
philosophy" (unless they can restrict it to such things as Neo-Thomism,
for example), nor do we find any reference to "atheistic philosophy". It
seems on this score, then, merely a convenience for bracketing up
"alien" philosophies, for apparently rather dubious motives, and
relegating them to other areas of research - anthropology, history,
sociology, etc. - and leaving the field of "true philosophy" (or
"philosophy per se") to contemporary Western philosophy.

There is, of course, a large part of "Islamic philosophy" which does
not directly concern itself with the kind of subject matter we have so
far mentioned. Logic is not regarded as part of philosophy as such in so
far as it remains purely within its own bounds and stays formal, so to
speak, but whenever logic raises questions outside this boundary,
questions which involve the notions of existence or knowledge, for
example, such questions become a part of "metaphysics in its more
general sense" (al-ila-hiyat bi '1- ma'na '/-'amm), and it would be
difficult to see how anyone could have thought this to be "Islamic" in
subject matter.

Indeed its practitioners have thought it to apply well beyond the
bounds of any theological considerations to all human thought. There
would seem to be little of a sectarian nature about discussions of the
law of the excluded middle, for example. What is true about this section
of philosophy, however, is its Aristotelian nature, and there can be no
doubt that it should properly be regarded as one of the streams flowing
from the First Teacher (al-mu allim al-awwal). (The intention here, it
must be pointed out, is not to claim that this part of the philosophy is
non-Islamic, as will become clear later; we are merely innocently asking
what it means to call it "Islamic", and specifically as regards its
subject matter.)

It used to be the fashion to use the term "Arabic philosophy" until it
was protested that many of the practitioners were not Arabs. This really
is beside the point, as "Arabic" refers almost exclusively to the
language, and, while many works have been written, especially latterly,
in non-Arabic languages, the main vehicle for the philosophy can
justifiably be claimed to be Arabic. However, this is certainly an
accidental feature, and to specify the subject by its language only
panders to a far from scholarly preoccupation with the undesirable
connotations of nationalism.

Both the adjectives "Arabic" and "Islamic", however, and more
importantly, must be regarded with suspicion since their only function
seems to be to direct attention away from the variety within the
philosophy and the serious compatibility between the subject matter of
this philosophy and that of other "non-Islamic philosophies". When we
move on to consider the practitioners of the science, and whether their
being Islamic or not is the reason for calling their philosophy
"Islamic", it becomes even clearer that motives other than the purely
scholarly are involved.

Now it is perfectly true that nearly all "Islamic" philosophers have
been Moslems, and the exception are those earlier Christian and Jewish
philosophers who, because of geographical and social factors, found
themselves in a tradition which was almost entirely practised by
Moslems. It is also unquestionably the case that practically all of
these Moslem philosophers considered they were following the Islamic
injunction to pursue knowledge, when they studied, taught and wrote
about the science.

So much for history. But while it may be of interest, often of great
interest, to know the religious beliefs of a philosopher, it is very
often a red herring if his work is considered entirely from this point
of view; and, especially when he claims a degree of universality for his
ideas, the philosopher deserves to be given the benefit of the doubt, at
least when his claim so made is being examined. The point is that when a
philosopher is discussing, let us say, the nature of human knowledge,
and as long as he restricts the method of his discussion to
philosophical reasoning, whatever that may be and however it may be
understood, we are more likely to understand him if we also restrict our
reading of him to the same topic and analysis. The distractions that are
bound to accompany our constantly being reminded of his religious
affiliations in this context are more than likely to result in
non-comprehension.

These considerations may be important elsewhere, when, for example, it
is of great relevance to consider Copernicus' neo-Platonic affinities in
the context of the evolution of his ideas; but it can hardly be of much
help in understanding the mathematics of his astronomical tables. Again,
if, having read a philosopher on his own grounds, we can seriously claim
that he has written nonsense or is incomprehensible, it is then of some
interest to ask if this is the result of his religious beliefs, at least
as far as the discipline of the history of ideas is concerned.

Up to now, we have refrained from anything more specific than hinting
at the true reasons for the popularity of the term "Islamic philosophy".
It is time we were more direct. The reader so far may think that he is
in for another diatribe against the wicked ways of the orientalists, but
we think that quite enough has already been said about their motives to
give them a rest for the time being. The problem we have is both more
general and more specific than could be meaningfully dealt with by
attacking them. Moreover, the use of the term "orientalist" is now
encouraging the same kind of distractions as we have found associated
with the use of the term "Islamic philosopher".

The more general aspect of the problem does concern the person steeped
in Western culture. We can notice, on the one hand, an awareness that
the increasing specialization of Western science is rendering it
literally meaningless; its mystification by the scientists themsleves
demands a long period of "initiation" for anyone who would attempt to
understand some part of it, an "initiation" which, it is increasingly
being understood, does not lead the acolyte along a path of careful
reasoning, slowly unfolding intricacies to him, as his initiators would
like him to believe, but which employs a wide variety of other
techniques designed to ensure that he accepts ways of looking at things
without subjecting these ways to profound scrutiny.

This is a necessary initiation, for it is quite impossible for a human
being to assimilate the conclusions of any modern science without
accepting many steps uncritically; modern sciences are that complex.
This is all very good for modern science, but should the acolyte get
lost, or decide that he would prefer not to accept something he is
required to accept uncritically, he will no longer be treated as a
co-researcher, entitled to all the sympathy a fellow traveller could
expect to receive; other techniques are at hand, besides that of patient
critical re-examination, to determine whether he should be allowed to
continue his journey.

On the other hand, a dissatisfaction with the results of modern science
(and note the irony of this, for it is with the claim that modern
science shows its superiority by its unparallelled results that its
practitioners construct their first line of defence) leads more and more
people to look elsewhere for answers to the problems created by these
results. Now this rebellion can be contained as long as the search by
the dissatisfied results only in indigestion from the intake of too much
cross-cultural ice-cream, for it can be ascribed to the weakness of the
human soul which, finding the complexities of "science" too much to take
in, indulges itself in the luxuries of irrational but comforting exotic
alternatives on the menu. The more exotic, the more this "argument"
seems to hold out.

Our intention is not to claim that anything with the adjective Islamic
added to it is the correct antacid for the indigestion; far from it. But
it is surely a great advantage that an adjective which has such alarming
connotations for the Westerner can be attached to a whole scientific
tradition, thus effectively striking centuries of human thought off the
menu with one stoke of the pen, even putting it on the list of
prescribed drugs, and effectively out of the reach of any but the most
intrepid dietary sleuth.

To round things off, and just in case anyone wishes to raise the
objection that philosophy is not science, let us now come to our third
suggestion for why the term "Islamic" has been used. This third
suggestion concerns the methodology of "Islamic philosophy".

What has been said so far as regards subject matter and practitioners
took philosophy as its example; but there is nothing which could not
equally well have been applied to natural science or any other brands of
learning, say law or history, just to take two examples. And this
generalizing step can equally well be applied in the case of
methodology.

Although it is no longer current practice in the West to call
philosophy a science (or history and law for that matter), this is not
the case in other traditions, especially in Islam. Here science and
knowledge each share the same Arabic word (ilm), and each area in which
knowledge is thought to be acquired becomes a science.

We need not concern ourselves here with why philosophy is not
considered in science in the West, let alone with what it might be if is
not one, but since within the tradition we are considering philosophy is
a science, we can, for our present purposes, use this fact to justify
our generalization from philosophy to all forms of knowledge,
particularly as far as methodology is concerned. And here there does
seem to be an element in the way in which knowledge is pursued which is
so particular and so applicable to all the sciences as to justify the
use of the term "Islamic" .

It may be thought that we are speaking here of no more than the
Aristotelian scheme of deductive science, which, starting from first
principles seeks to derive in its special way all that can be known
(perhaps we should say known with certainty), but we must stress that
this is not so. It is quite true that the Aristotelian system for
classifying the sciences is the preferred methodological starting point
of the "Islamic philosophers", so that even law and history become
classified according to it; and it is also true that besides metaphysics
and logic (are the Western versions of these Aristotelian?) perhaps the
only surviving example of what we might call a rigorously Aristotelian
science, namely that of jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh), is to be found
within the present Islamic educational system; but this is not the
feature which makes these sciences "Islamic". It is rather something
else within the Islamic tradition as a whole which finds a special
affinity with the Aristotelian approach.

If any Muslim is asked what the central belief of his faith is, he will
undoubtedly reply: tawhid. Even before he speaks of prophethood or
Muhammad. The outsider may see the decisive distinguishing feature of
Islam to be the declarer of the revelation, but the Muslim sees not this
but the belief in tawhid—"making one". He believes that this is the real
message not only of Islam, but of all religions, but that it was
conceived in its perfection for the Islamic revelation. It is sometimes
translated as "monotheism", and this is contained within its meaning,
but a look at its grammatical form discloses its active aspect of making
unity. It is this aspect of bringing together into a oneness that
justifies the affinity which Islamic scholars have for the Aristotelian
scientific system, and helps to explain the degree to which it was
elaborated by them.

We said earlier that there was a specific aspect to our problem, as
well as the more general one which concerned the West, and the specific
aspect concerns the Muslim. For the Muslim has taken to neglecting his
own scientific tradition. The campaign of Western science has been
largely successful in suppressing competition not only in the West but
also elsewhere, perhaps nowhere more successfully than in the Muslim
world. In which universities in Muslim countries, or anywhere else, are
the Islamic sciences practised, not as a historical discipline, but as
"living" sciences?

It is perhaps true that a large factor in this transformation has been
the idea that since Aristotelian science has been the foundation of the
"Islamic sciences", it is necessary for anyone who wishes to pursue the
tradition to accept the Aristotelian system as a dogma, but we have
tried to show that this is a mistake. There is nothing dogmatic about
the Aristotelian system; it is chosen because of its great affinity to
the idea of tawhid. It must therefore be, and is, open to examination,
and if it is found to be unsatisfactory as a principle of knowledge,
appropriate steps should be taken to rectify the situation.

We do not wish in any sense to imply that there is something wrong with
the Aristotelian world view, and it seems that there is good reason to
suppose that many of the criticisms directed at it in the West are not
founded on the "rational" principles that have been claimed to support
these criticisms. However, this matter is an area of research which has
scarcely been opened up, and is one which should engage the attention of
any true, dare we say, Islamic philosopher. When such a study is
undertaken, proper attention will have to be paid to the reasons for
which this Aristotelian system has proved so attractive to Muslim
thinkers, but the belief that such a system is intrinsically "inferior"
should be rejected at the beginning - no petitio principii!

The problem, then, is one of penetrating behind labels, especially
labels not chosen by oneself, to see whether they did not in fact carry
with them unwanted subliminal messages in the way of uncritically
accepted ideas which hamper healthy growth. The thinker should not be
frightened out of exploring new (or old) territory simply because others
have tried to convince him by dubious strategies either that he is
entering upon an illicit venture or that what he intends to do is a
waste of time. Few things in the history of ideas receive fatal blows
from the onslaught of scientists and philosophers; they have a habit of
reappearing.

So before we all do what we are supposed to do and confess that the
Islamic contribution to science has had its day, we should examine
whether there are any good reasons for such a recantation. It goes
without saying that the history of the sciences in the Islamic lands is
not an unbroken chain of one "discovery" following upon another, any
more than is that of modern science; within them too there is an
abundant wealth of ideas, sometimes taken up and developed, sometimes
rejected and forgotten, but never lost for ever.

A serious study of these (by which we mean something more than a
historical study) can, side by side with a serious study of new ideas,
bring renewed vigour into the sciences in the Islamic world and enable
solutions to be found to the increasing problems facing man which have
resulted from his monomaniacal obsession with what has now become of
ficial science, the child he thought he had brought into the world
unaided, and which now threatens to smother him under its own weight.

"Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth".


