Religious Education of the Younger Generation
=============================================

Zakir Vol IV No. 1, 1398

At present the problem of imparting religious education to our children
is exercising the minds of many parents and guardians. Those who are
con- concerned about the weal, welfare and spiritual well-being of our
budding youths feel concerned that, in the absence of proper
understanding of the fundamental beliefs and cardinal principles of
religion, our children may become preys to the scepticism and disbelief
which is destroying the moral fabric of our society—society which is
euphemistically called "permissive society".

This concern is felt in all parts of the world where people hold fast
to their religious beliefs and cherish them as the storehouse of best
moral values. In particular, in countries of the West, where our people
are settled with their families, this concern is more vocally, and at
times vociferously, expressed; and rightly so, because our children are
amenable to extraneous influences which keep on assailing and
undermining their religious beliefs, dogmas and susceptibilities.

Whilst I fully endorse the proposition that there is a crying need for
impart- ing knowledge of the fundamentals of our religion and its
cardinal principles to the new generation, I join issue with the
proponents of these ideas on the methods to be adopted for achieving
this end. My purpose in writing this article is to sound a note of
warning that religious education of the conven- tional type which makes
children of 6 to 10 memorise the "Usool-e-Deen" and "Furoo-e-Deen" with
the dogmatic comments on them handed down to us from generation to
generation, will not in the least serve the purpose we have in view,
namely, to prepare our future generations for the onslaught from various
quarters on their religious beliefs and practices.

When I say this, I am speaking from personal knowledge having attended
such a "Maktab" (school) in my childhood where venerable preachers
religiously repeated and reiterated all that they were expected to
impart to their young pupils and, in fulfilment of what they thought to
be part of their duty, made the pupils memorise them, and even chant
them with all the zeal and fervour the young souls were capable of.

It is said that: "Truth is bitter but its fruit is sweet". I know that
what I am trying to expound may be unpalatable or may seem to be gall
and wormwood to the taste of many who are steeped in orthodoxy; but in
the larger interest of truth it must be said for whatever it is worth .
Present day knowledge of chi Id psychology has led many advanced
countries to modify and revise their con- cepts of children's education
at the earliest stage.

It is now well-recognised that highly learned, capable and
understanding teachers are required to handle children just when they
embark on their studies because, during their formative years, they must
be given every encouragement and opportunity to develop their enquiring
minds. When we talk about the religious education of our children, do we
have in mind selection and appointment of persons possessing aptitude
and education of the highest standard both religious and secular, and
capability to mould the character and develop the reasoning faculties of
our children in the best of traditions?

Are we not thinking of taking unction to our souls by entrusting them
to the care of half-baked teachers of theology who accept the
appointments more for earning their livelihood than with the high
motives of inculcating love of religion amongst the pupils by explaining
and expounding the undercurrent of truth and love of God and His
creatures which pervades His universe and which is the essence of our
religion? When we ask the parents to send their children to religious
schools, do we tell them to whose care they will be entrusted, or are we
presuming that it does not matter a whit who is to be entrusted this
sacred duty so long as he is having a smattering of the fundamental
principles of our religion?I am sincerely of the view that imparting of
religious knowledge in a perfunctory manner will not serve the purpose
and those who receive it will remain as vulnerable as those who never
attend such schools or classes. It would be like laying the foundation
of a house on quicksand—building an edifice with a tottering base.

It may appear to quite a few that I am over-emphasising one particular
aspect of the matter and magnifying it manifold, but I honestly believe
that, so far, very little has been done to produce the right type of
religious teachers who can handle the education of our younger
generation and equip them with sound knowledge and beliefs that can
withstand attacks of outsiders, and emerge successfully in later life
with unflinching faith and unshakeable belief in the righteousness of
our creed.

Some years back I got an English translation of "Bab-ul-Ahada Ashara"
which is an exposition of the Eleventh Chapter of Allama Hilli's work on
the fundamental principles of Shi'a beliefs by Miqdad-e-Fazil al-Hilli,
one of the foremost disciples of Allama Hilli. According to the
translator, this book is being taught in a large number of Shi'a
religious schools because it explains and clarifies the fundamental
principles of Islam as understood and applied by Shi'a theologians. The
translator mentions that the Eleventh Chapter of the treatise of Allama
Hilli is so difficult to understand that even scholars of religion
cannot properly comprehend it and, for that reason, the com- mentator
has expounded and elaborated the matters set out in it so as to make
them easily understandable. With all due deference to the learned
commentator, the book is full of puerile arguments developed in a
laboured manner, reminiscent of the style of Greek logicians of yore.

These syllo gistic exercises appear to be far below the standard to be
expected in a work associated with the name of one of the most respected
and learned Shi'a divines, Allama Hilli. Only very recently the late
Agha Mirza Mehdi Pooya published his "Fundamentals of Islam" in English
for the younger generation to meet a long-felt want. In my view, every
person who wants his children to understand the fundamental principles
of Islam, as enunciated by the Shi'a School, must make this book
available to them. I may hasten to add that the work is not meant for
children of very tender age but for those who have reached sufficient
maturity and are capable of discernment.

To me it seems that religious knowledge, in the right sense of the
word, as distinct and distinguished from religious jingoism, can be
imparted only to children who have reached such age. Agha Pooya's
"Fundamentalsof Islam" may, perhaps serve a far better purpose than the
classes conducted by religious teachers whose scholastic credentials are
suspect and whose own knowledge is strictly limited, and who, more often
than not, are so hide-bound in their approach that they generate more
heat than light in the course of the discussions and discourses. Lest I
am misunderstood, I may clarify that I am all for selection and
appointment of really learned and competent teachers of religious
principles and doctrinces, in the true sense of the term, who can
inculcate and develop a taste and kindle a yearning for religion in
their pupils and not merely teach as a fulfilment of their professional
duty during the appointed hours; persons who can clear mental cobwebs
and aberrations by encourag- ing questions and arguments and not stifle
them by snubs and scorn, persons who, like Tennyson, feel:

There is more truth in honest doubts

Believe me, than in all your creeds.

My genuine apprehension is that such dedicated persons are so rare and
difficult to find that, instead of searching for them far and wide, we
may compromise by settling for and selecting persons who, to us, may
seem to be second or third best but who, in reality, may be the very
antithesis of what is needed by the yearning hearts and inquiring minds
of our talented youths whose appetite for information and knowledge is
whetted by the present day discoveries of science and progress in
methods of education.

The topic of religious education cannot be discussed without mentioning
the role of Majalis-e-Imam Husain which have acquired the status of a
religious institution in our society. The platforms which they provide
during the months of Muharram and Safar can be very effectively used for
the purpose in view, but unfortunately it must be admitted in all
honesty that they have not even touched the fringe of the problem. They
have fallen far short of expectation, mainly due to the fact that many
of the venerable gentlemen who adorn the pulpits and deliver lectures
are so steeped in outworn con- cepts, wrongly called traditions, that,
if I may be excused the use of the expression in connection with the
performance of these august persons, they simply get "inebriated by the
exuberance of their own verbosity".

More often than not, their sermons are "full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing". Times out of number they put forward arguments
which cannot bear scrutiny, knowing full well that what they say will go
unchallenged because time-worn, unwritten rules of behaviour in such
Majalis require the audience to mutely suffer such travesties of facts.
They expound the view of some of the Ulema of bygone days who, with due
deference to the very valuable work done by them and contributions made
in the course of development of religious thoughts, have made many
patent mistakes and errors of judgment. This is because they were of
earth, earthly. This is because they were fallible human beings like
us.

I am not saying these things to denigrate these learned masters of the
past who have earned our respect and esteem by their voluminous positive
contributions. The fault lies squarely with their successors who have
not used their reasoning faculties, the most precious gift of God to
mankind, and evading and avoiding all research, have adopted a
subservient and even atavistic attitude in using the material handed
down to them by the past generation of religious scholars.

If many of the learned Ulema of the past made mistakes, they can well
be attributed to the circum- stances in which they were working, to the
fact that they did not have at their disposal all the facilities for
research that we have today. In those days, general knowledge in various
fields was strictly limited, means of communication were scant and
meagre. If our present day religious scholars fail to do research in
various aspects and facets of religion and take shelter behind the works
of past scholars, placing them on pedestals which facts and
circumstances do not warrant, who is to be blamed for it? It is such un-
questioning attitude that is likely to alienate our younger generation
from religion and all that it stands for.

We find that in sermons delivered from the pulpits often there are
glaring contradictions which create not only credibility gaps but also
lead to the impression, albeit wrong, that what are narrated as facts of
history are fibs, mere myths and figments of imagination. If sweeping
statements are made in the course of these sermons which, on the face of
them, are patently illogical and untrue, and they go un- challenged,
many of our intelligent and discerning youths may begin to doubt and
question the veracity of other facts and principles which are placed in
juxtaposition with them. Such sermons prove counter-productive.

It is true that to the vast majority of people who attend the
Majalis-e-Aza whatever is preached from the pulpit is the essence of
truth and they just keep on gaping with admiration, unmindful of the
correctness or otherwise of the utterances in the tradition of the
admiration of the young pupils of Goldsmith for their teacher about
which he has said:

And still they gazed and still their wonder grew How one small head
could carry all he knew.

But it is not what these majority of simple souls think or believe that
really matters. It is what the thinking, brooding, reflecting
intelligentsia amongst our younger generation think and believe that
counts. It is these intellectual elites who can really mould and
influence the future generations of our people and so it is our
religious duty to cater for their spiritual needs and to ensure that
they get ample opportunity to challenge all assertions and aver- ments
made in the course of the perorations.

This can be possible if we divide the time of our 1l/lajalis into two
parts—one for delivery of the lectures as at present and the other,
immediately following it, for discussions on various aspects of
religion, including questioning of facts and principles enunciated
during the harangue but not necessarily confined to it.

Such symposia can be held with two or three participants, including the
speaker of that day, with some learned man presiding as compere to
regulate the proceedings and ensure that the discussion is held at an
intellectual level and there are no frivolities. Such programmes must,
at the same time, provide utmost freedom to the participants to air
their views without any recrimina- tion and rancour, subject, however,
to maintenance of standards of decency and decorum associated with such
solemn functions.

Out of such functions and discussions, more often than not,
considerable benefits are likely to accrue to the audience as well as
the participants. It is possible that some of the other participants may
be more knowledgeable than the main speaker of the day and the latter
may himself gain the most from such discussions. At least, when he knows
that he will not be able to get away with his "terminological
inexactitudes" he will think twice before taking liberty with facts and
common sense. Has not Firdousi the immortal poet of Iran, said:

I have heard from the wise man that there is a lot of wisdom (in this
world) But it is scattered amongst a very large number of people.)

Unless we convert our Majalis-e-Aza into forums of such religious
discussions, of course, retaining the essential characteristic of it by
allocating a reason- able time for Azadaree-e-Husain, one of the most
important purposes of it will be lost and frustrated.

I have made bold to say several things which may be unpalatable to many
because I feel that truth transcends all other considerations. I am
reminded of the verse of Sadi:

Sadi do not tread the path of formality
If you know the truth, speak it up and be done with it
Speak out what you know as the truth for it is better that way
Neither indulge in graft nor in blandishments.


