The Fast of 'ashura
===================

Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi
Vol VIII No. 3 & 4

Some traditions are found in Sunni books to the effect that the Prophet
(s.a.w.) on migrating to Medina found the Jews fasting on the 10th of
Muharram. He asked them why, and was told: "It is an auspicious day; it
is the day when God delivered the children of Israel from their enemy
(i.e. Pharaoh); and, therefore, Moses fasted on that day." The Prophet
(s.a.w.) said, "I am worthier of Moses than you are." Thereupon, he
fasted on that day and ordered (the Muslims) to fast.

1. al-Sahih of al-Bukhari, Vol.3; Egypt ed.; p.54
2. Mishkatul-Masabih; Delhi ed.; 1307 A.H.; p.l72

It is noted by the commentator of Mishkatul-Masabih that "it was in the
second year, because in the first year the Prophet had arrived at Medina
after 'Ashura, in Rabi'ul-awwal."

How much importance was this fast supposed to have may be judged from
another tradition narrated in al-Sahih of. al-Bukhari: "The Prophet
(s.a.w.) ordered a man from the (tribe of) Aslam: Announce to the people
that whoever has eaten should fast the rest of the day, and whoever has
not eaten should fast (the whole day), because today is the 'Ashura
(10th day of Muharram)."

That very year the fast of Ramadan was ordained and the obligation to
fast on 'Ashura was abrogated, as has been claimed in other traditions
narrated in the same book. Still, reportedly, it carries much importance
as a voluntary fast.

Now let us look closely at these traditions:

First: The Jews had their own calendar and months. There is no logic in
saying that they fasted on the 10th of Muharram - unless it could be
proved that this date always coincided with a Jewish day of fast.

It was mentioned in my article, "Martyrdom of Imam Husayn and the
Muslim and the Jewish Calendars" (Alserat, Vol.VI, No's 3 & 4; Muharram
1401 Nov.1980) that the first month of the Jews (Abib, later named
Nisan) coincided with Rajab of the Arabs. W.O.E.Oesterley and Theodore
H.Robinson have written that in Arabia "the most important of all the
new-moon festivals was that which fell in the month of Ragab (sic),
equivalent to the Hebrew month 'Abib, for this was the time when the
ancient Arabs celebrated the Spring festival." (Hebrew Religion;
S.P.C.K., London; 1955; p.128)

Probably, in ancient times the two branches of Abraham's house followed
the same system of intercalating an additional month 7 times in a cycle
of 19 years. And in this way the 7th Jewish month, Tishri I, coincided
with Muharram. And the 'Ashura of Muharram synchronized with 10th of
Tishri I, the Jewish Day of Atonement - a day of fast.

In that article, it was observed that the two calendars lost their
synchronization when Islam, in the 9th year of hijra, disallowed
intercalation. But on deeper consideration it transpired that that
parity was lost long before the advent of Islam, because the Arabs did
not follow any mathematical calculation in their intercalation. That was
why the Muharram of the 2nd year of Hijra began on 5th July, 623 C.E.
(Al-Munjid, 21st ed.), months before Tishri I (which always coincides
with September-October).

Clearly, 'Ashura of Muharram in that year (or, for that matter, during
the Prophet's whole life at Medina) had no significance whatsoever for
the Jews.

The question is: Why did they fast on that day?

Second: The Jewish Midrashic literature relates the 10th day of the 7th
month (Yom Hakippurim - Day of Atonement) to the event of bringing the
tablets of the Covenant from Mount Sinai, as Dr. Mishael Maswari-Caspi
has written in his letter, quoted in my previous article, mentioned
above.

The question is: If the Jews had wanted to keep the long-lost
synchronization of Tishri I and Muharram in view, how was it that they
forgot to narrate this tradition to the Prophet?

Third: The month in which God delivered the Israelites from Pharaoh was
Abib (i.e. Rajab), as the Bible clearly says: "Observe the month of
Abib, and keep the passover unto the Lord thy God: for in the month of
Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night." (Deut.,
16:1)

The question is: How could the Jews transfer an event of Abib
(originally coinciding with Rajab) to Muharram, in open defiance of
their Torah? And lastly here is a point to ponder for the Muslims: The
Prophet (s.a.w.) was sent with a religion to abrogate all previous
religions and shari'ah. How was it that he deigned to imitate the custom
of the Jews?

It is clear from above-mentioned facts that the Jews had no reason at
all to fast on 'Ashura of Muharram at that period; and this story, built
on that premise, is just that - a fiction. Obviously, it was invented by
a narrator who only knew that once upon a time Muharram coincided with
the Jews' Tishri I; but was totally unaware of contemporary Jewish
religion and culture.

One feels constrained to mention here that this and other such
traditions were forged by camp-followers of the Umayyads, after the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn, as a part of their campaign to turn the 10th
of Muharram into a day of rejoicing. These traditions are of the same
genre as those which say that it was on the 10th of Muharram that Noah's
ark rested on Mount Arafat, the fire became cool and safe for Abraham,
and Jesus ascended to the heaven. In the same category came the
traditions exhorting the Muslims to treat 'Ashura as a festival of joy,
and to store one's food-grain on this very day as it would increase
one's sustenance and bring the blessings of Allah to the household.

**The History of the Islamic Calendar in the Light of the Hijra**

Hakim Muhammad Said Vol X No. 1 , Spring 1984

Reprinted, by courtesy of the editor, from Hamdard Islamicus, vol. IV,
no.3 {1981)

The course of history is generally thought to be along a progressive
path, but there are occasions when its progress seems to come to a
standstill, and it becomes quiescent and inactive. The release of energy
in such situations is converted into entropy, i.e. energy that cannot be
used.

Such situations and occasions are those that are opposed and are
antithetical to the dynamism of history, its usual characteristic. When
man, forgetting his Creator and his Benefactor, takes to the worship of
the outward phenomena of nature and begins to ascribe the attributes of
Deity to man and prostrates himself before human beings who temporarily
hold the reins of power, he becomes increasingly prone to the violation
of God's laws, thereby generating conflict on earth and tending to
ignore moral laws and ethics.

He becomes, then, averse to light and takes to the worship of darkness.
The course of history, in such a situation, becomes static. Such inertia
is not the one that is opposed to dynamics but represents that
inactivity-as has its birth in conflict and confusion. History in such a
situation seems to assume the state of a spectator gazing at this
spectacle with amazement and disappointment, and in utter dejection
casts a look at the sky to find out what it has further in store for
it.

Perhaps, it is in such circumstances that the Heavenly Court decides
how to do away with the obstacles that lay athwart the path of progress
and to remove these impediments cluttering up the course of history.
These impediments are represented and epitomized by regressive,
retrograde and unnatural cultures.

God Almighty has Himself pointed to the condign punishments that visit
nations violating His laws. And so we are told: So We took each one in
his sin; of them was he on whom We sent a hurricane, and of them was he
who was overtaken by the (awful) cry, and of them was he whom We caused
the earth to swallow, and of them was he whom We drowned. It was not for
Allah to wrong them, but they wronged themselves. (129: 40).

The period of life which the Prophet (peace be unto him) passed among
the hard-hearted and unrelenting people of Mecca represented an era in
which the caravan of history seems to have come to a stop, becoming
static. When we examine the age, it seems as if the ever moving caravan
of life is awaiting some terrible fate at the hands of heaven in the
shadow of the hot mountains and feverish rocks. Such a decision is at
last manifested. But the raison d'etre for such a judgement was the
person whom God Himself designated as Rahma lil-'Alimin' and the maximum
extent to which his anger and displeasure could go was to turn his
countenance away from his adversary. His compassion, his mercy, and his
tolerance are also reflected in the code of laws which were made to
descend upon him.

It was, therefore, decided by God Himself that the polytheists of Mecca
be spared destruction used in all the other forms. Al-Hurmuzan, then,
explained to them how to use 'Umar, (however), said: "Give the people an
era which they can use in business and which permits them an exact
indication of the date in the mutual dealings". A Jewish convert to
Islam who was present said: "we (Jews) have a similar calculation which
we ascribe to Alexander". The others, however, did not like that era,
because it was too far back.

Some were for the adoption of the Persian era. It was, however,
objected that the Persian era had no fixed epoch year and always stared
entirely anew with the ascension (to the throne) of each new king. An
agreement was reached to institute the era of the rule of Islam,
beginning with the Hijra of the Prophet from Mecca to Medina. There are
no such differences of opinion with regard to the date of the Hijra as
there are with regard to the time when the call first came to Muhammad
and with regard to the day and year of his birth. And although the date
of his death is fixed, it is no pleasant thought to use (such a sad
event) as the beginning of the era. The Hijra, moreover, coincided in
time with the success of the religion (millah) of Islam, the frequent
arrival of embassies, and the Muslim ascent to Power. It is a time of
blessings and a very impressive (historical) event. The Hijra took place
on Tuesday, Rabi 1, 8th.

The first of that year -that is, al-Muharram-fell on a Thursday
according to the average (calculation). After this had become generally
known, it was considered (the correct date). However, according to
observation (of the new moon) and astronomical(?) calculation, the day
fell on a Friday. The author of the Nihayat al-idrak said that (the
Hijra) was used, and for all future times the era was counted from it.
Agreement on this matter was reached in the year 17 of the Hijra, the
fourth year of the caliphate of 'Umar.

Until then, each year (after the Hijra) was called after its main
event, and this was used for dating purposes. The first year of the
Prophet's residence in Medina was thus called: 'The permission to
travel'. The second year was called: 'The year of the command to fight'.
The third year: 'The year of the test', and so on. Afterwards, the
custom of naming the year after the main events was abandoned.

'Ubayd b. 'Umayr said: "Al-Muharram is the month of God. It is the
beginning of the year. It is used as the beginning of the era. In
al-Muharram, the Ka'bah is clothed, and money is coined. There is one
day in al-Muharram on which repenting sinners are forgiven".

A tradition regarding "the first month of the year being al-Muharram,"
ascribed to Muhammad appears in ad-Daylamis Firdaws. Ad-Daylami's son
reported the same tradition on the authority of 'Ali without the
indication of a chain of transmitters." (F. Rosenthal, A History of
Muslim Historiography, Leiden 1952, pp. 312-313).

At the dawn of history man tried to determine the significance of
months and years in his own way. History is not in a position to tell
which nation first divided the calendar into years, months, weeks and
days-that is to say, how, when, and where it was that a collection of
seven days was called a week, of thirty days a month, and twelve months
a year. Despite the fact that this fact lies buried in the haze of
obscurity, we can still gain access to it through a process of
visualization; and we can take the aid of reason to and that this River
of Radiance should change its course.

Hijra does not signify merely a journey between the two cities (Mecca
and Medina) of the Arabian peninsula but the movement by the caravan of
history again from a static state.

When the Prophet (peace be upon him) began to depart for Medina, his
steps were, on the face of things, treading on a journey, but in reality
they were setting the wheels of history into motion. And history, when
it witnessed this movement, again embarked upon a journey with fresh
determination. Fourteen hundred years have passed since this journey was
embarked upon; it is still on the move, and will be so till the end of
the world.

What influence did Hijra exercise upon the history of man and what it
gave to mankind is something that lies outside the scope of this paper.
I now come to the theme of the history of the Hijra calendar.

When the need for toning up the administration of the Caliphate arose
during the time of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab and it became necessary to have
a calendar so as to fix the dates. The Caliph, who was so well aware of
the sunna of the Prophet and of his temperament, instead of fixing the
standard from the birth of the Prophet, which heralded an entirely new
chapter in the history of man or his death which had placed such a heavy
responsibility upon the shoulders of the Caliphs or some other event, he
ordered the adoption of the Hijra as the basic date for the Islamic
calendar.

Al-Hakim narrates the tradition on the authority of Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri
that when the Prophet came to Medina, he ordered the introduction of the
Muslim era, but this tradition has been held to be weak in authority by
the Muhaddithun. The authoritative tradition, according to them, says
that the custom of imprinting dates upon deeds, documents and epistles
was given currency to during the time of the second Caliph according to
the instructions left by the Prophet himself. (F. Rosenthal, A History
of Muslim Historiography, Leiden 1952, p.309.).

Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-Sakhawi (d. 902) in his
al-I'lan bi'l-Tawbikh li-man dhamma ahl al-tawrikh gives the following
details about the origin of the Islamic calendar:

"A report on the authority of Ibn ' Abbas states that there existed no
era in Medina when the Prophet arrived there. People came to use an era
a month or two after his arrival. This continued until Muhammad's death.
Then, the use of an era was discontinued, and there was none during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr and the first four years of the caliphate of
'Umar. Then, the (Muslim) era was established.'Umar is reported to have
said to the assembled dignitaries among the men around Muhammad: "The
income is considerable.

What we have distributed has been without fixed dates. How can we
remedy that?" One answer came from al-Hurmuzan. He had been king of
alAhwaz. After his capture during the conquest of Persia, he had been
brought to 'Umar and had become a Muslim. He said: "The Persians have a
(method of) calculation which they call mahroz and which they ascribe to
their Sassanid rulers.

The word mahroz was arabicized as mu'arrakh, and the infinitive ta'rikh
was formed from it. It was also deduce that, as civilization became more
complex and when it became necessary to devise ways and means of fixing
periods and eras, man must have been guided by his day-to-day phenomena
of repetition, based upon an ever-continuing rhythm-served as his
guides. The flux and re-flux of the moon-tides must have drawn man's
attention towards it, since on specific days it is crescent-shaped, on
others gibbous, followed by increase in moonlight till it reaches its
maximum limit, with subsequent decrease in an ever-continuing rhythmic
cycle.

This phenomenon was so clear and simple that it hardly required any
philosophization. Changes in the weather must also have struck man as
being related to the moon, as the twelve lunar cycles provided him with
a clue to the past weather. These were such clear and simple
observations that they did not demand any sophisticated argumentation.
And, therefore, despite the silence of history on this point, it can be
said that the division of time into months and years on the basis of the
lunar concept is the oldest insofar as history is concerned. There are
other proofs for this belief, based upon semantics and sound; and
history has been making use of them. Word-forms have. in the event,
cultural and conceptual backgrounds.

History also provides us with alternative calendar systems for fixing
historical periods, e.g. some major war or some important event. It has
also happened that a calendar has had its origin in the enthronement of
a king etc. All these systems are, however, arbitrary and local. On the
other hand, the lunar calendar has a universal background, while the
other systems are limited to geographical boundaries. Festivals and
religious congregations also were specific to particular people or
nations and did not carry equal significance for all.

When man took to agriculture, it was discovered that the lunar system
did not fully correspond to the weather and the crops, and therefore
some modification was necessary. It was felt that if within one lunar
month a crop was harvested or some (particular) weather was witnessed,
then after four years neither that crop nor the weather was to be seen.
According to the astronomical principle, through waxing and waning of
the moon there is a difference of one month in one year every four
years. For both seasons and agricultural crops, the difference of one
month bears some significance. Seasons are related to the solar system,
as also are agricultural crops. Therefore, the lunar and solar systems
were reconciled by adding a few more days to the lunar months, and the
two systems were thus reconciled.

**Lawnd or Kabisa**

This method whereby the lunar months are reconciled with the solar
system are designated as lawnd or kabisa. We get information about this
system from the ancient calendars of India, China, Egypt and Syria. The
Jewish calendar was also similar. Later on the lunar and solar calendars
were separated, although for religious festivals it was the lunar system
which was acknowledged as the guide, as in the case of the Christians
Easter, and Diwali of the Hindus, and Yom Kippur of the Jews. The
practical shape that this division took was that the lunar system was
earmarked for religious occasions and the solar system for business and
administrative transactions. We have thus both systems running side by
side.

**The Solar Calendar**

There are a few things connected with the solar system requiring
consideration. We have to take into account the rotation of the earth
which is of two kinds: (1) on its own axis in such a way as to produce
day and night and (2) in an eliptical orbit round the sun giving rise to
changes in seasons. One full rotation along this eliptical orbit is
completed in 365/5/48/46 days, and the period is designated as the solar
year. But it is not equally divisible into twelve months.

The present-day solar calendar-the Gregorian-has been so divided that
seven months consist of 31 days, four months of 30 days, and one month
of 28 days. In order to account for the fractions, every fourth year a
day is added to the month of February, called the leap-year. But
consideration will show that even this division does not do away with
the fraction. After every four hundred years seasonal changes occur and
probably because of this fact the solar calendar requires constant
modification. It is just not possible to remove this discrepancy.

The League of Nations had set up a Special Committee at Geneva in 1923
charged with the formulation of a calendar that would be universally
acceptable and would be reconcilable with seasonal changes. One of the
recommendations of this Committee was that the year was to be divided
into 13 months. However, such a calendar would not be devised as the
seasons in the hemispheres differ in their periodic occurrence. The
proximity and the distance of the sun in the East and the West naturally
give rise to substantial differences. Because of this inherent
discrepancy, it was not possible for the solar calendar to gain
universal acceptance.

The lunar calendar system, on the other hand, is free from most of
these defects, and admits of broader acceptance. It is not connected
with seasonal changes. The appearance and disappearance of the moon
twelve times in a year can be easily observed. It revolves round the
earth, and since its orbit is eliptical and not totally circular, it
comes close to the earth and becomes distant from it. Its speed of
rotation is also not the same; hence it completes its trajectory
sometimes in 30 and at others in 29 days. The total period taken in its
rotation round the earth is 354/48/34 days. It is not visible at any
place on the thirteenth time in less than this period. This, then is the
basis of the lunar system.

We have now to consider what the Qur'an has to say about the
computation of months and years. It is true that, having given man a
code of conduct, it has given full thought and rational freedom to man
but has circumscribed these limits. Insofar as the computation of months
and years is concerned, the Qur'an has provided a guideline in one of
the verses which is as follows:

He it is who appointed the sun a splendour and the moon a light and
measured for her stages, that ye might know the number of the years, and
the reckoning. (10:5)

The following verse directs us regarding the number of months:

Lo! the number of the months with Allah is twelve months by Allah's
ordinance in the day that He created the heavens and the earth... (9:
36)

The purport of these Qur'anic verses is that we must take the moon to
be the source of the calendar, and any other system that would be
unnatural will not succeed, being non-natural and, therefore, it is that
the Islamic calendar is based on the lunar system. Its beginnings can be
traced to the Prophet, but, as a regular feature, it came into its own
during the time of the second Caliph 'Umar I. Ahmad ibn Hanbal and
al-Bukhari report through Maymun ibn Mihran that "an I.O.U.

payable in Sha'ban was presented to 'Umar I. Thereupon 'Umar asked
which Sha'ban, last Sha'ban, or this one or the coming one? Give the
people something that they can understand." (F. Rosenthal, A History of
Muslim Historiography, Leiden 1952, p.310). He then issued a regular
directive and founded the present-day calendar in 16 A.H. from which
time the practice is being followed. Al-Suyuti, in the chapter on "News
and Ordinances" in his Ta'rikh al-Khulafa' (ed. Cairo 1351 A.H.) writes
with reference to al-Musayyab that the second orthodox Caliph had the
Hijra dates inserted in all administrative directives two and a half
years after his assumption of the Caliphate on the advice of 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib, and this became the practice from 16 A.H. onwards.

Al-Tabari in his Ta'rikh al-Rusul wa'l Muluk gives the following
exposition:

The Prophet on the occasion of the Hajjat al Wada' said:

O people! Time after undergoing a full revolution has returned to its
original state; the day Allah created the heavens and the earth. (vol.
iii, p.l50, Cairo 1969).

It will be essential to keep some historical facts about ourselves in
order to understand the pre-Islamic calendar. The Arabs were seized by
the fatal malady of idolatry three hundred years before the advent of
the Prophet, the Hajj for them was nothing more than a big festival.
Their calendar being lunar, this feast was sometimes held in seasons
when the crops had not been harvested and were not yet ready for sale.
They, therefore, devised the method of kabzsa, according to which a year
sometimes consisted of 13 months.

The period of the Hajj was also not specified. The responsibility for
announcing the date of the Hajj was entrusted to a man from Banu Kinana
named Qalammas, who was to announce on the occasion of the Hajj when the
next pilgrimage was to be performed, and which month the thirteenth
month was to follow. The first Qalammas was an individual, but then the
name became specific to the announcer. We thus see a sizeable number of
the Qalammasa. The Qalammasi calendar was based upon lunar computation,
and another link in the historical chain is provided by the fact that
among the Arabs the months of Rajab, Dhu'l-Qa'da, Dhu'l-Hijja, and
Muharram were regarded as the months of peace and sanctity. But, with
this calendar, these months also began to undergo changes, and it was
one of the responsibilities of the Qalammasa to announce as to what
months would be the sacred months in the following year. They are called
al-nasi' in Arabic.

The custom of kabisa was current among the Beduins but not among the
townsmen. The Arabs had, therefore, two calendars: one was with the
kabisa, the other without it. The Prophet in his address, to which we
have referred, announced the abrogation of both-i.e. the kabisa and
nasi'. Thus the time for the pilgrimage was fixed and the lunar calendar
was to be enforced without the kabisa.

The lunar calendar of the Muslims began with the Hijra of the Prophet.
The first day of the month of Muharram of the year of the Hijra i.e. the
migration of the Prophet, was the first day of this calendar. Despite
its being known as the solar calendar beginning with the 20th of
September 622 C.E., according to the Gregorian calendar, before that,
the year of the Elephant was used by the Arabs as the epoch of their
era. This previous lunar calendar of the Arabs was totally abrogated in
the 10th year of the Hijra on the occasion of the Prophet's address at
the Hajjat al-Wada'. The lunar calendar thus became current without any
addition or modification.

Hastings' Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics (vol. iii, p. 127) says
that the Muslims have borrowed the concept of the week and the festivals
from the Jews. As regards festivals, yawn al-nahr derives its importance
from its association with the Prophet Abraham, from whom the Prophet was
directly descended. According to Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, it is one of
the attributes of the Prophet that this festival should have vouchsafed
to the Muslims the best of religions. It is, therefore, out of the
question that it should have been borrowed.

The names of the Arabic months were retained by the Muslims with slight
modifications because of their significance. The first month is
al-Muharram and the last is Dhu'l-Hijja. The names of the months are
consecutively as follows: Muharram al-Haram, ,Safar, Rabi' alAwwal,
RabiC al-Thani, Jumada al-Awwal, Jumada al-Thani, Rajab, Sha'ban,
Ramadan, Shawwal, Dhu'l-Qa'da and Dhu'l-Hijja.

The concept of the week in Islam derives from spiritual purgation and
self-reform, while the name of the last day, al-Jum'a, is Qur'anic. The
days have been serially named as yawm al-sabt, yawm al-a,had, yawm
al-athnayn, yawm al-thalatha, yawm al-arba'a, yawm al-khamls, and yawm
al-jum'a.

**Bibliography**

1. Al-Sakhawi, Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman, al-I'lan
bi'l-Tawbikh li-man dhamma ahl al-tawrikh, Damascus 1349 A.H., English
trans. in F Rosenthal, A History of Muslim Historiography, Leiden 1952,
pp. 201-450. (Urdu transl.), Markazi Urdu Board, Lahore 1968.
2. Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh al-Rusul wa'l Muluk, Dar al-Ma'arif, Cairo, 2nd
ed. 1969, iii. 150.
3. Al-Dinawari, Abu Hanifa, Al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, Cairo 1960, (Urdu
transl.), Markazi Urdu Board, Lahore 1968.
4. Hashimi, 'Abd al-Quddus, Taqwim-i Tarikhi (in Urdu) Central
Institute of Islamic Research, Karachi, 1965.


