Martyrdom of Imam Husayn and the Muslim and Jewish Calendars
============================================================

Seyyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi
Vol VI No. 3 & 4 , 1401

THE 1400th year of the hijra caleadar is nearing its end. Since the
last two years or more a substantial amount of time, energy and money is
being spent of what has come to be known as the commemoration of the end
of the 14th century of hijra and the welcome of the 15th. Seminars are
being held, articles written, booklets published, postage stamps issued
and a lot of trinkets designed, made and sold to honour this occasion.
Not even the ruling dynasty of Saudi Arabia seems to mind that all these
festivities—financed with petro-dollars and arranged with the active
blessings of their religious leaders—are innovations (bid'ah), which the
Muslims of even a century ago knew nothing about.

It is, of course, the natural offspring of a process started a few
decades ago when western imperialism established its hold in the Middle
East. The Muslims of Egypt and some other countries began celebrating
the (Muslim) New Year on 1st Muharram. By this act, they introduced a
new "festival" in Islam.

Of course, the justifications are many. It is claimed that these
14thcentury functions are held "to assess the impact of Islam on
humanity and the contribution of Muslims to various branches of learning
and in the upliftment of human society", "to probe into the past
successes and failures" and "to hammer out new plans for the future".

Noble ideas, indeed. And nobody—least of all, the present writer— would
deny their relevance and validity. But these rationalizations do not
alter the fact that this celebration is an innovation (bid'ah). If such
commendable goals may justify this innovation, then one has a right to
ask these Muslims as to why they condemn the commemoration of the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn as an unlawful act ?

Is not this mourning justified on these very grounds? The remembrance
of Imam Husayn's supreme sacrifice on the altar of truth strengthens the
moral fibre of the Muslims; keeps their feet firmly on the path of
righteousuess and piety; and creates in them a willingness to sacrifice
their all in the way of Allah. It also helps the mourners in "probing
their successes and failures" of the past year, and in "chalking out a
new plan" for their religious, spiritual and social "upliftment for the
future."

The principle should always remain the same, shouldn't it ?

Lest there be any misunderstanding, it should be clarified here that
the mourning for Imam Husayn is not a bid 'ah (innovation) at all. It
was started by the Holy Prophet of Islam himself, more than 50 years
before the event; and he was seen in a vision by the Mother of the
believers, Umm Salmah, on the day of Husayn's martyrdom, mourning for
Husayn. And Allah has ordered thousands of angels to weep on the grave
of Imam Husayn till the day of resurrection. These traditions are
narrated in the Sunni books, and show that this particular mourning is
the sunnah of the Holy Prophet and of the angels:

1. Some 50 years before the event of Karbala, the Prophet wept when he
was told by the angel that Husayn would be killed by the army of Yazid
in Karbala. Then Gabriel asked, "O Prophet of God, do you want me to
give you some earth from his place of martyrdom ?" The Prophet said,
"Yes". Gabriel gave him a handful of earth of Karbala and the Prophet
began weeping uncontrollably.

This tradition is recorded in Mishkatul-Masabih, Musnad of Imam Ahmad
bin Hanbal, as-Sawaiqul Muhriqah of Allamah Ibn Hajar Makki and
Sirrul-'alamin of Imam Ghazali; and has been narrated by Imam Sha'abi,
Imam Baihaqi, Imam Hakim and scores of other traditionalists. The
Prophet gave that earth to his wife, Ummul Mu'mineen, Umm Salmah, and
told her, "When you see this earth turned into blood, know that Husayn
has been martyred."

2. On the 10th Muharram, 61 A.H., Umm Salmah was asleep in the
afternoon when she saw the Prophet in her dream: He stood there in a
tragic coadition, his hair was dusty and dishevelled, and in his hand
was a bottle full of blood. Umm Salmah asked him what it was. The
Prophet said, "This is the blood of Husayn and his companions. I was
collecting it since this morning." Umm Salmah woke up and hurried
towards the bottle which contained the earth of Karbala; she saw red
blood flowing from it. Then she cried and called her relatives and
started mourning for Husayn. This tradition is narrated in Musnad of
Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, as-Sawaiqul Muhriqah, Mishkatul-Masabih, Sahih of
Tirmidhi and other books.

3. Shaikh 'Abdul Qadir Jilani writes ia his book Ghunyatut-Talebeen,
Vol. II page 62; "70,000 angels came on the grave of Husayn bin 'Ali
after his martyrdom and they are weeping on him and will remain weeping
unto the Day of Judgement."

4. God says in the Qur'an about Pharaoh and his army: "neither the Sky
nor the Earth wept for them and they were not given chance." (ad-Dukhaa,
Verse 29)

Imam Muslim records in explanation of this ayat, "When Husayn was
martyred, the Sky as well as the Earth wept on him and weeping of the
sky is its being red." (Sahih of Muslim).

It is a sign of the greatness of the 10th Muharram that Allah commanded
the Israelites to observe it as a day of mourning; it was accompanied by
a stern warning that anybody disobeying that law would be cut off from
his tribe. The following is the passage quoted from Leviticus (Chapter
23, verses 23-32):—

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, in the seventh month, in the first day of the month,
shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy
convocation. Ye shall do no servile work therein; but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the Lord And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a day
of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall
afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.
And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of atonement,
to make an atonement for you before the Lord your God.

For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day,
he shall be cut off from among his people. And whatsoever soul it be
that doeth any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from
among his people. Ye shall do no manner of work; it shall be a stature
for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings. It shall be
unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the
ninth day of the month at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate
your sabbath.

This command is also briefly mentioned in Leviticus 16: 29-34. To
understand what is meant by the seventh month, the following facts
should be kept in mind:

1. The year of the Hebrews was based on lunar system. To make it
coincide with solar year, a thirteenth month, Veadar, was added 7 times
in a cycle of 19 years. The year began with the month of Abib (i.e.,
Nisan) with the new moon next before or next after the spring equinox.

2. The Arabs before Islam used to follow the same system. Thus their
months coincided with the Jewish months; and Rajab coincided with Abib
(i.e., Nisan) of the Jews. And the Jewish 7th month coincided with
Muharram of the Arabs. (In original Hebrew reckoning, this seventh month
was called Ethanim; now it is called Tishri I). As the original Jewish
year began near the spring equinox (i.e. 21st March of the Gregorian
calendar), the seventh month was bound to occur in SeptemberOctober.

3. Some time after the Exile, the Jews changed the new year from Nisan
to the day of the new moon of the 7th month. Now it is their first
month; except that the system of fasting and observing other laws
concerning the 1st, 9th and 10th days (of the 7th month) mentioned above
continues unchanged. Yom Hakippurim is faithfully observed with all due
solemnity on the 10th day of the original seventh (i.e. the present
first) month. (The Hebrew term, Yom Hakippurim, is rendered as
Yaum-ul-Kaffarah in Arabic and Day of Atonement in English. In 1973, the
world became familiar with the term 'Yom Kippur' when Egypt chose that
day to start war with Israel, and thus caught them unprepared—the whole
country was engaged in observing the fast and other rules of the Day of
Atonement).

4. In the 9th year of Hijra, Islam forbade intercalation of the
additional month every leap year. "Surely the number of months with
Allah is twelve . . . Postponing (of a month, i.e. by intercalation) is
only an addition in disbelief..." (Qur'an, 9: 37-38) From then on, the
parity between the Jewish and the Muslim calendars disappeared.

5. In spite of that disparity, the Muharram of 61 A.H. began with
Tishri I; and 10th Muharram, the day when Imam Husayn was martyred was
10th Tishri (Yom Hakippurim). See, for reference, the chart comparing
the Hijra and Christian calendars, given in the 21st edition of
al-Munjid. Thus the relationship of Yom Hakippurim with 10th Muharram
was true not only because originally Muharram used to coincide with
Tishri, but also because the martyrdom actually occurred on that very
day.

I once discussed this commandment with Professor N. Q. King, of
California University. I told him that, as apparently no significant
historical event had happened on that day in Jewish history, one might
safely say that it was a sort of prognosis of the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn. The Professor wrote about it to his colleague, Dr. Mishael
Maswari-Caspi, who very kindly wrote to me on March 28, 1978. In this
letter, he writes, inter alia, on this subject as follows:

"If there is a link between the 10th of Al-Muharram and Yom Hakippurim,
it is not just a coincidence, but emphasizes that we are truly close to
each other." He agreed that "in both places, Leviticus 23 and Leviticus
16, historicization is not emphasized. Nor is the historical connection
brought out in Tractate Yoms, the tractate dealing in many details of
the Day of Atonement." He further writes that "although no historical
correlation is found, the spiritual and religious aspects are of utmost
importance in both Bible and Talmud, whereas in the Midrashic literature
(Midrash Tanhuma, Tisa 31) they relate this holy day to the event of
bringing the tablets of the Covenant from Mount Sinai.

It says 'The first time he went down on the 17th of Tammuz. He saw the
calf and he broke the tablets. For two days he punished the people. He
remained there from the 20th of Tammuz through the whole month of Ab, 40
days. Then he went up on the first day of Elul, staying 40 days, being
the 10th of Tishri.' This is why this holy day is devoted to atonement,
and this is why the High Priest entered the Holy of Holies not in his
fancy cloth wiah stripes of gold (reminiscent of the golden calf), but
in a purely white garment."

In view of the fact that the original commandment of Leviticus, as well
as Tractate Yoms, does not refer to any historicization, one may safely
say that the event mentioned in Midrash Tanhu1na, Tisa 31, had no
bearing, as a historical event, on this commandment. Rather it is the
spiritual and religious aspects that are of paramount importance. The
spiritual significance of bringing the tablets of the Covenant may be
one of those aspects And so may be the prognosis of the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn not as a historical event but as a spiritual guiding
light.

It is not uncommon about the early events of the Islamic history, and
especially so if they happened in Muharram or Safar, that a difference
of one year appears in their timing in various narrations. For example,
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn is said to happen on 10th Muharram, in the
year 60, or the year 61, depending on various reports. But in fact, in
most cases, there is no material difference between the two.

Both speak of the same year—one calling it the 60th, and the other the
61st, year after Hijrah The reason for this confusing discrepancy is as
follows: As mentioned earlier, in pre-Islamic days the year of the Arabs
coincided with that of the Jews—Muharram was identical with the first
(i.e. the original seventh) month of the Jewish calendar.

When the Holy Prophet migrated to Medina in the month of Rabi'ul-awwal,
the Muslims on the order of the Prophet himself started the Muslim
calendar. They said that this or that event occurred in this or that
month after Hijrah. This continued "till a year was completed", and then
they began saying that a certain event occurred in the first or second
year of Hijrah; and so on. And in this way the Hijra calendar was
established.

Reports to this effect are given in the Annals of al-Tabari (Prima
series, E. J. Brill, Laden, ed. 1882-1885) Vol. III p. 1250 from Ibn
Shahab, Ibn 'Abbas and 'Amr b. Dinar; and in Vol. V, p. 2480, from Ibn
'Abbas.

It may be inferred from the words, "till a year was completed", that
the year began with Rabi'ul-awwal and ended with Safar. Accordiag to
another narrative, the Hijrah calendar was established in the region of
the 2nd Caliph, in 16th year after Hijrah. The reparts to this effect
are found in the same two places of the Annals of al-Tabari. According
to this narrative (of Sa'id b. Al-Musayyab), 'Umar gathered the people
and asked them: From which day should we write (the Calendar) ? 'Ali
said: From the day the Apostle of Allah migrated and left the land of
polytheism. So 'Umar did so."

The day whea the Holy Prophet left Mecca was 1st Rabi'ul-awwal.
(Safinatul-Bihar, Vol. 2, p. 696).

It appears from the first narrative that the Muslim year began with the
month of Rabi'ul-awwal; and that it was done by the order of the Prophet
himself And if the second narrative is correct, then 'Ali had advised to
start the year from Rabi'ul-awwal, an advice that according to this
report, the second caliph accepted.

But the Arabs were accustomed to count Muharram as the first month, and
old habits die hard; and that is why many people continued to follow
that custom. That is the only explanation why Muharram came to be
counted as first month of the Hijrah calendar. Obviously, this month had
nothing to do with the Hijrah the event upon which the Muslim year is
based. There is a report ia the same Annals, from Muhammad b. Sirin that
the people, after discussion, had unanimously agreed to begin the year
with Muharram. But obviously this report is an attempt to justify the
practice which by the time of Ibn Sirin (d. 110 A.H.) had firmly
established itself in the Muslim society.

For those who, in early days, counted Rabi'ul-awwal as the first month,
Muharram was the 11th month of the old year; for others it was the 1st
month of the new year. Thus by the former reckoning, Imam Husayn was
martyred in Muharram that was the 11th month of the year 60 A.H.; by the
later reckoning, the same Muharram was the 1st month of the year 61
A.H.


