The Principle of Ijtihad in Islam
=================================

Murtada Mutahhari Vol X, No. 1 (Translated by John Cooper. This
translation was carried out during the period of tenure of a Fellowship
of the British Institute of Persian Studies, for which the translator
would like to express his gratitude.)

The article hereunder translated into English, first appeared in the
collection "Bahthi dar bara­yi Marja\`iyat wa Ruhaniyat" [^1], which was
reviewed by Lambton [^2]. This volume contained essays by figures who
were then prominent in the anjumanha­yi islami, an organization of
groups with a religiously educated leadership concerned to initiate
public debate of, and interest in, Islamic solutions to contemporary
political, economic and social problems.

The occasion for the publication of this volume was the death of the
marja\` al­taqlid of his time, Ayatullah Burujirdi, in 1961, and the
discussions contained therein dealt with various aspects of taqlid and
the religious institutions. Summaries and discussion of the articles
will be found in Lambton.

Most of the authors subsequently became leading names in the 1979
Iranian Revolution. Mahdi Bazargan, who had had both a religious and a
secular education and had been influential among the younger generation
as a professor at the University of Tehran and later as a politician,
became the first Prime Minister of the new Islamic Republic's
provisional government. Ayatullah Taliqani was an active revolutionary
figure who had spent much time in SAVAK prisons.

He was particularly well known in Tehran where he commanded much
respect. He died in the early morning of 10 September 1979 [^3]. Sayyid
Muhammad Bihishti became the first head of the Islamic Republican Party,
as well as Chief Justice of the post­revolutionary High Court; he held
both posts until his assassination in the bombing of the Party
headquarters on 29 June 1981. Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i was much
weakened by illness by the time of the revolution, but was held in
universal esteem for his piety and learning.

He died on 15 November 1981. All these figures, except \`Allama
Tabataba'i were also important members of the Revolutionary Council,
which had been set up by Ayatullah Khumayni during his stay in Paris.
The author of the present article, Murtada Mutahhari, had been appointed
head of this Council by Ayatullah Khumayni, and it was he who had first
convened it. After the victory of the revolution, the Council continued
to play an extremely important role in the course of events, even after
the setting up of the provisional government, indeed right up to the
formation of the new Majlis.

Murtada Mutahhari was born in a village some forty kilometres from
Mashhad in 1338/1919­20. After a primary education mostly at the hands
of his father, he entered, still a child, the hawza­yi \`ilmiya, the
traditional educational establishment, of Mashhad, but he soon left for
Qum, the centre for religious education in Iran. Even during the time of
his elementary studies there he was greatly affected by the lessons in
akhlaq (Islamic ethics) given by Ayatullah Khumayni, which Mutahhari
himself described as being in reality lessons in ma\`arif wa
sayr­u­suluk (the theoretical and practical approaches to mysticism)
[^4], and he later studied metaphysics (falsafa) with him as well as
jurisprudence (usul al­fiqh).

He was especially attracted by falsafa, theoretical mysticism (\`irfan)
and theology (kalam), the "intellectual sciences", and he also studied
these subjects with \`Allama Tabataba'i.

His teachers in law (fiqh) were all the important figures of the time,
but especially Ayatullah Burujirdi, who became the marja\` al­taqlid,
and also head of the hawza­yi \`ilmiya of Qum, in 1945. Murtada
Mutahhari studied both fiqh and usul al­fiqh in the classes of Ayatullah
Burujirdi for ten years. He was also deeply affected at about this time
by lessons on "Nahj al-Balagha" [^5] given by Mirza \`Ali Aqa Shirazi
Isfahani, whom he had met in Isfahan. He later said that, although he
had been reading this work since his childhood, he now felt that he had
discovered a "new world".[^6] Subsequently, Mutahhari became a well known
teacher in Qum, first in Arabic language and literature, and later in
logic (mantiq), usul al­fiqh, and falsafa.

In 1952, Murtada Mutahhari moved to Tehran, where, two years later, he
began teaching in the Theology Faculty of the University. Not only did
he make a strong impression on students, but his move to Tehran also
meant that he could become involved with such organizations as the
anjuman ha­yi islami. These Islamic Associations were groups of
students, engineers, doctors, merchants, etc., set up during the fifties
and sixties; they formed the nucleus of the movement that was to become,
eventually, the revolution. He was also a founder member of the
Husayniya­yi Irshad, which played a central role in the religious life
of the capital during the four years of its existence until its closure
by the authorities in 1973 [^7].

At the same time he maintained his contact with traditional religious
activities, teaching first in the Madrasa­yi Marvi in Tehran, and later
back in Qum, and also preaching in mosques in Tehran and elsewhere in
the country. Through his lectures and writings - articles and books - he
became a famous and much­respected figure throughout Iran, but it was
mainly among the students and teachers of the schools and universities
that he was most influential, setting an example and inspiring them as a
committed and socially aware Muslim with a traditional education who
could make an intellectually appropriate and exciting response to modern
secularizing tendencies.

His wide­ranging knowledge and scholarship are reflected in the scope
of his writings, which cover the fields of law, philosophy, theology,
history and literature.[^8] He was also one of the few high­ranking
\`ulama' to be in continuous contact with Ayatullah Khumayni during the
fifteen or so years in which the movement which led to the revolution
was developing. He was actively engaged in all the stages of this
movement.

His life came to an abrupt and untimely end when he was shot in the
street by an assassin after a meeting of the Revolutionary Council on
the evening of 1 May 1979. Animated mourning accompanied his funeral
cortege from Tehran to Qum, where he was buried near the shrine of the
sister of the eighth Shi\`i Imam.

The discussion of taqlid had been important in the wake of Ayatullah
Burujirdi's death for the reasons given by Lambton. A solution to the
problems posed in those articles was never achieved, and events
subsequently altered the whole structure of the discussion, but the
issues raised did open important new areas for thought. As a result of
the revolution, the question of wilayat al­faqih came to the fore, and
taqlid became the subject of even greater public concern.

As long as taqlid had been restricted in the common understanding as
applying only to matters which belonged to the rubrics of the
collections of fatwas issued by the marja\`s, the only real debate took
place within the legal classroom; but during the seventies, and hand in
hand with the reawakening of political sensibilities, the boundaries of
fiqh were seen by the public to expand and encompass new territory. The
definition of these new frontiers was a source of some confusion, and
hence of heightened interest, and, in the great post­revolutionary surge
of printing, the Burujirdi volume was re­issued.

Taqlid had long been a socially important element in Iranian society,
and in Shi\`i society in general, for it united people, at least as
inhabitants of the same universe of duties and obligations, under their
marja\`s, but the events leading up to the revolution demonstrated the
power that the marja\`s could command through, among other means, their
issuing of proclamations (\`ilamiyas); this was reminiscent of the
mobilization of the Iranian people during the tobacco protest of 1891­2,
and during the Constitutional Revolution of 1906-11.

The following article is presented as a description of taqlid and
ijtihad by a leading contemporary Shi\`i mujtahid who strove to make
Islam comprehensible to the modern Iranian and to find answers to the
problems of his time within the Islamic framework. The text has been
left in its entirety; there were no footnotes in the original.

It is not for the believers to go forth all together; but why should
not a party of every section of them go forth, to become learned in
religion, and to warn their people when they return to them, that they
may beware. (9:122) [^9]

**What is ijtihad?**

The question of ijtihad is a very topical one these days.[^10] Many
people ask, either aloud or to themselves, what form ijtihad takes in
Islam, and from where Islam got the concept. Why should one practice
taqlid? What are the conditions for ijtihad? What are the duties of a
mujtahid?

Broadly speaking, ijtihad has the meaning of being an authority in the
matters of Islam; but there are two ways of being an authority and
deriving opinions in the matters of Islam in the eyes of us Shi\`i
Muslims: one which is in accordance with the shari\`a, and one which is
forbidden by it. Similarly, taqlid is of two kinds: one which is in
accordance with the shari\`a, and one which is forbidden.

The kind of ijtihad which is forbidden by the shari'a.

Now, the kind of ijtihad which, in our opinion, is forbidden is that
which means "legislating" or "enacting the law", by which we mean that
the mujtahid passes a judgement which is not in the Book (the Qur'an) or
the Sunna, according to his own thought and his own opinion - this is
technically called ijtihad al­ra'y. According to Shi\`i Islam, this kind
of ijtihad is forbidden, but in Sunni Islam it is permitted. In the
latter the sources of legislation, and the valid proofs for determining
the shar\`ia, are given as the Book, the Sunna and ijtihad. The Sunnis
place ijtihad, which is the ijtihad al­ra'y explained above, on the same
level as the Book and the Sunna.

This difference takes its origin in the fact that Sunni Muslims say
that the commands which are given in the shari\`a from the Book and the
Sunna are limited and finite, whereas circumstances and events which
occur are not, so another source in addition to the Book and the Sunna
must be appointed for the legislation of Divine commands - and that
source is the very same as we have defined as ijtihad al­ra'y.
Concerning this matter, they have also narrated hadiths from the
Prophet, and one of them is that when the Prophet sent Mu\`adh b.

Jabal to the Yemen, he asked him how he would issue commands there. He
replied: "In conformity with the Book." "And if it is not to be found in
the book?" "I will make use of the Sunna of the Prophet." "And if it is
not to be found in the Sunna of the Prophet?" "Ajtahidu ra' yi, " he
replied, which means: I will employ my own thought, ability and tact.
They also narrate other hadiths in connection with this matter.

There is a difference of view among Sunni Muslims as to what ijtihad
al-ra'y is, and as to how it is to be conceived. In his famous book, the
"Risala" [^11] which was the first book to be written on the principles
of Islamic jurisprudence (usul al­fiqh), (...) al­Shafi\`i insists that
the only valid ijtihad according to hadith is qiyas [reasoning by
analogy]. Qiyas, briefly, is the taking into account of similar cases,
and ruling in a case from one's own opinion by comparing it with these
other similar cases.

But some other Sunni fuqaha [experts in fiqh, sing.: faqih] did not
recognize ijtihad al­ra'y as being exclusively qiyas; they also counted
istihsan ["finding the good" by one's own deliberations] as valid.
Istihsan means to see, quite independently, without taking similar cases
into account, what is nearest to the truth and to justice, and to give
one's opinion according as one's inclination and intellect approve.
Similarly with istislah [determining what is in the interests of human
welfare by one's own deliberationsl, which means the seeming of one
thing as more expedient than another, and ta\`awwul in which, although a
ruling may have been reached in one of the nusus [the textual bases for
a precept of the shari\`a sing.:

nass], in a verse from the Qur'an or in a hadith from the Prophet, one
still has the right, for some reason, to dispense with the contents of
the nass and to give priority to one's own independent opinion (ijtihad
al­ra'y). Each of these requires explanation and a detailed account, and
the Shi\`i­Sunni debate is relevant to such an account. Many books have
been written both for and against this idea, viz., that ijtihad is on a
par with textual evidence, and the best of them is the treatise written
recently by the late \`Allama, the Sayyid Sharaf al­Din, called "al­Nass
wa l­Ijtihad".[^12]

Now, according to Shi\`i Muslims, such a kind of ijtihad is not
permitted by the shari\`a. In the view of Shi\`i Muslims and their
Imams, the first basic principle of this matter, i.e., that the rulings
of the Book and the Sunna are not adequate and that it is therefore
necessary to practice ijtihad al­ra'y, is not correct.

There are many hadiths relevant to this discussion, and, in general,
[they tell us that] there exist rulings for every eventuality in the
Book and the Sunna. In "al­Kafi" [^13], after the chapter on bid\`a
[innovation] and maqa'is [measurements], there is a chapter with the
title: "Chapter on referring to the Book and the Sunna - and there is no
halal [permitted thing] or haram [forbidden thing] or anything which the
people need which does not come in the Book or the Sunna." The Imams of
the ahl al­bayt have been known since the earliest days as opponents of
qiyas and ra'y.

Of course, the acceptance or non­acceptance of qiyas and ijtihad al­ra'
y can be studied from two angles. Firstly, from the aspect from which I
have looked at it; that is to say, we count qiyas and ijtihad al­ra'y as
one of the sources of Islamic legislation, and place it alongside the
Book and the Sunna, and say that there are cases which have not been
ruled upon by revelation and which mujtahids must explain using their
own opinion. Or alternatively, [we can study it] from the aspect that (
. . . ) qiyas and ijtihad al-ra'y [arel a means for deriving the real
rulings, just as we use the other ways and means such as khabar
al­wahid.[^14] In other words, it is possible to perceive qiyas as either
a substantive (mawdu\`iya) [element in law], or a methodological
(tariqiya) [principle].

In Shi\`i fiqh, qiyas and ra'y are invalid in both of the above senses.
In the first sense, the reason is that we have no ruling which is not
given in the Book and the Sunna; and in the second case, the reason is
that qiyas and ra'y are kinds of surmise and conjecture which lead to
many errors. The fundamental opposition of Shi\`i and Sunni legists in
the matter of qiyas is in the first sense, although the second aspect
has become more famous among the scholars of usul (the principles and
methodology of fiqh).

The right of ijtihad did not last for long among the Sunnis. Perhaps
the cause of this was the difficulty which occurred in practice: for if
such a right were to continue [for any great length of time], especially
if ta\`awwul and the precedence of something over the texts were to be
permitted, and everyone were permitted to change or interpret according
to his own opinion, nothing would remain of the way of Islam (din
al­islam).

Perhaps it is for this reason that the right of independent ijtihad was
gradually withdrawn, and the view of the Sunni \`ulama became that they
instructed people to practice taqlid of only the four mujtahids, the
four famous Imams - Abu Hanifa [d.150/767], al­Shafi\`i; [d.204/820],
Malik b. Anas [d.179/795] and Ahmad b. Hanbal [d.241/855] - and forbade
people to follow anyone apart from these four persons. This measure was
first taken in Egypt in the seventh hijri century, and then taken up in
the rest of the lands of Islam.

Ijtihad permitted by the shari'a.

The word ijtihad was used until the fifth hijri century with this
particular meaning, i.e., with the meaning of qiyas and ijtihad al­ra'y,
a kind of ijtihad which is prohibited in the eyes of the Shi\`a. Up to
that time, the Shi\`i \`ulama included a chapter on ijtihad in their
books only because they wanted to refute it, to emphasize that it was
null and void, and to proscribe it, as did the Shaykh al­Tusi in some of
his works. But the meaning of this word gradually extended beyond this
specific meaning, and the Sunni \`ulama themselves began not to use
'ijtihad' in the specific sense of ijtihad al­ra'y, [as a source] which
was on the same level as the Book and the Sunna.

[Such a shift in the meaning of the word can be seen with] Ibn Hajib
[^15] in his "Mukhtasar al­usul", on which \`Adud al­Din al­Iji wrote a
commentary known as al­\`Adudi, and which has been till recently, and
maybe still is, the authoritatively approved book on [Sunni] usul, and
before him with al­Ghazali [^16] in his famous work "al­Mustasfa".

It then became used rather in the unqualified sense of effort or
exertion to arrive at the rulings of the shari\`a, and was defined as
"the maximum employment of effort and exertion in deducing the rulings
of the shari\`a from the valid proofs (adilla, sing. dalil, see below ).
However, it is another matter to decide what the valid proofs of the
shari\`a are: whether qiyas, istihsan, and so forth, are among them or
not.

From this time onwards, the Shi\`i \`ulama also adopted this word
because they accepted this [general] meaning. This kind of ijtihad was a
kind approved by the shari\`a. Although the word had originally been one
to be avoided among the Shi\`a, after its meaning and the concept it
denoted had undergone this change, their \`ulama, discarded their
prejudice and subsequently had no reservations about using it. It seems
that in many instances the Shi\`i \`ulama, were careful to consider
unity of method and conformity among Muslims as a whole.

For example, the Sunnis came to recognize ijma\` (consensus of opinion
among the \`ulama) as a proof leading to certainty, and, in practice,
they also held it to be fundamental and substantive (mawdu\`i) just like
qiyas, whereas the Shi\`a did not accept it. However, to protect the
unity of method, they gave the name ijma\` to a principle which they did
accept [^17]. The Sunnis said that the valid proofs were four in number:
the Book, the Sunna, ijma and ijtihad (qiyas); the Shi\`a said the valid
proofs were four: the Book, the Sunna, ijma\` and \`aql (reason). They
merely substituted \`aql for qiyas.

At any rate, 'ijtihad' gradually found a wider meaning, i.e., the
employment of careful consideration and reasoning in reaching an
understanding of the valid proofs of the shari\`a. This, of course needs
a series of sciences as a suitable preliminary basis on which to develop
the ability to consider and reason correctly and systematically. The
\`ulama of Islam gradually realized that the deduction and derivation of
the precepts from the combined valid proofs of the shari\`a necessitated
[the learning] of a series of preparatory sciences and studies such as
the sciences of literature, logic, the Qur'anic sciences and tafsir
(Qur'anic exegesis), the science of hadith and the narrators of hadith
(rijal al­hadith), the science of the methodology of usul al­fiqh, and
even a knowledge of the fiqh of the other sects of Islam. A mujtahid was
someone who was a master of all these sciences.

I think it extremely likely, though I cannot state this categorically,
that the first person among the Shi\`a to use the words ijtihad and
mujtahid [positively] was the \`Allama al­Hilli.[^18] In his work "
Tahdhib al­usul'', he puts the chapter on ijtihad after the chapter on
qiyas, and there he uses the word in the same sense in which it is used
today.

[We can therefore say that] the ijtihad which is forbidden and rejected
in the eyes of the Shi\`a is ra' y and qiyas, which were originally
called ijtihad, whether this is counted as a source of the shari\`a and
as an independent basis for legislation, or taken as a means for
deriving and deducing true precepts; whereas the ijtihad which they deem
correct according to the shari\`a is that which means effort and
exertion based on expert technical knowledge.

In answer to the question: what is the meaning, the use and the place
of ijtihad in Islam, it can thus be said that it is ijtihad in the
meaning that it is used today, i.e., competence and expert technical
knowledge. It is obvious that someone who wants to refer to the Qur'an
and hadith must know how to explain the meaning of the Qur'an, he must
know the meaning of the verses, which verses abrogate which verses,
which ones have clear meanings and which ones ambiguous meanings [^19] -
and he must be able to distinguish which hadith is valid and
authoritative and which not. In addition, he must understand, on the
basis of correct rational principles, incompatibilities between hadiths
to the extent that it is possible for him to resolve them, and he must
be able to distinguish the cases in which the \`ulama of the Shi\`a sect
have consensus (ijma\`).

In the verses of the Qur'an themselves, and similarly in the hadith, a
series of general principles [for verification and interpretation] are
laid down, and the use and exercise of these principles need training
and practice, just as in the case of all other basic principles in every
science. Like the skilled technician who knows which material to choose
from all the materials available to him, the mujtahid must have
proficiency and ability.

In hadith, especially, there is a great deal of fabrication, the true
and the false are mixed together; the expert must have the power to
distinguish between them. In short, he must have enough preliminary
knowledge so that he can exercise competence, authority and technical
expertise.

**The appearance of the Akhbaris in Shi'i Islam**

Here we must mention an important and perilous current which first
appeared around four centuries ago in the Shi\`i world over the question
of ijtihad - Akhbarism. If a group of the \`ulama had not been
forthright and challenged it, and had not taken a stand against this
current and destroyed it, there is no knowing in what position we should
be today.

The actual school of the Akhbaris is no more than four centuries old.
Its founder was a man by the name of Mulla Muhammad Amin al­Astarabadi
[d. 1033/1624], who was, personally, a gifted man who found many
followers among the \`ulama'. The Akhbaris themselves claimed that the
original Shi\`is, up to the time of the Shaykh al­Saduq [^20], were all
followers of the Akhbari doctrine, but the truth is that Akhbarism as a
school with basic postulates did not exist more than four centuries ago.
These postulates were:

the denial of the possibility of arriving at certainty through
exercising reason (\`aql); the denial of the validity and the proof
(dalil) of the Qur'an on the pretext that the understanding of the
Qur'an lay exclusively in the hands of the Prophet's ahl al­bayt, and
that our duty is to consult the hadith of the ahl al­bayt [for its
interpretation and understanding]; the assertion that ijma\` was the
innovation of the Sunnis; the assertion that, of the four valid proofs
(adilla), i.e., the Book, the Sunna, ijma\` and \`aql, only the Sunna is
able to lead to certainty, the assertion that all the hadith that appear
in the "four books"" are true and valid, and of categorical provenance
[from the Imams] (qat\`i al­sudur).

In his book, ''\`Uddat al­Usul", the Shaykh al­Tusi mentions a group of
former Shi\`i scholars under the name of the "Muqallida", and adversely
criticises them; but they had no school of their own, and the reason
that the Shaykh called them "Muqallida" was that even in the
fundamentals of dogmatics (usul al­din) they constructed their proofs
with hadith.

At any rate, the school of the Akhbaris took its stand against the
school of ijtihad and taqlid. They denied the legal competence,
jurisdiction and technical expertise that the mujtahids believed in;
they considered taqlid of anyone else than the ma\`sumin [^22] to be
illegal. According to them, only the hadith are authoritative, and since
there is no right of ijtihad or deriving of opinions, people must
necessarily have recourse directly to the texts of the traditions and
act upon them, no scholar calling himself a mujtahid or a marja\`
al­taqlid [^23] can act as an intermediary.

Mulla Amin al­Astarabadi, the founder of this school, and personally a
very gifted man, learned and well­travelled, wrote a book called
"al-Fawa'id al­Madaniya" in which he went to war with the mujtahids with
astonishing stubbornness. He particularly tried to refute the principle
of the authority of \`aql. He claimed that it was only a proof in
matters which had their origin in the senses, or which were related to
sensory objects (such as in mathematics), and that in matters other than
these it was inadmissible as a proof.[^24]

It so happens that this idea was practically contemporary with the
appearance of empirical philosophy in Europe. The latter denied the
validity of pure reason, and al­Astarabadi denied its validity in
religion. Now where did he get this idea? Was it his own original idea,
or did he get it from elsewhere? We cannot say.

I remember that in the summer of 1322 [Sh./1943] I went to Burujird,
and at that time the late Ayatullah Burujirdi was still living there,
not yet having come to Qum. One day, the talk was of this idea of the
Akhbaris, and he criticised it, saying that the appearance of this idea
among them was the effect of the wave of empiricism that had arisen in
Europe. I heard this from him at that time.

Afterwards, when he came to Qum, and his lessons in usul al­fiqh
reached this topic, i.e., the validity of certainty as a proof (hujjat
al qat\`), I was waiting to hear this opinion again from him, but
unfortunately he did not say anything about it. Now, I cannot say if
this had only been a conjecture which he had voiced, or whether he had
evidence, but I, myself, have not till now found any evidence for it,
and I feel it is extremely unlikely that empirical thinking had then
reached the East from the West. However, against this is the fact that
Ayatullah Burujirdi never spoke without evidence. I now regret that I
never asked him for an explanation at the time.

**The struggle with Akhbarism**

In brief, Akhbarism was a movement in opposition to \`aql. An amazing
ossification and inflexibility ruled in their doctrine. Fortunately,
some discerning individuals like Wahid Bihbihani [^25], famous as "Aqa",
whose descendants are even now known as "Al­i Aqa (Family of Aqa)", and
his pupils, and afterwards the late Shaykh Murtada al­Ansari [^26], took
a stand and fought against this doctrine.

Wahid Bihbihani lived in Karbala.[^27] At that time, the author of the
"Hada'iq"[^28] an erudite Akhbari, was also in Karbala, and both of them
had a following of students. Wahid was a follower of the doctrine of
ijtihad, and the author of the "Hada'iq" of the Akhbari doctrine, and
occasionally there were bitter disputes. In the end, Wahid Bihbihani
defeated the author of the "Hada'iq", and it is said that the
outstanding pupils of Aqa Wahid, such as Kashif al­Ghita', Bahr
al­\`Ulum and the Sayyid Mahdi Shahrastani [^29], had first of all been
pupils of the author of the "Hada'iq" and had afterwards left him and
joined the lessons of Wahid Bihbihani.

Of course, the author of the ''Hada'iq'' was a moderate Akhbari; he
claimed that his doctrine was identical with that of Muhammad Baqir
al-Majlisi [^30], half way between Akhbari and Usuli. Moreover, he was a
pious and godfearing man of faith, and although Wahid Bihbihani fought
against him vociferously and forbade congregational prayers behind him,
he, quite the contrary, said that congregational prayers behind Aqa
Wahid were valid. It is said that at the time of his death he left in
his will that Wahid Bihbihani should recite his funerary prayer.

The struggle of the Shaykh al­Ansari was such that he managed to build
a solid foundation for the science of usul al­fiqh; and it is said that
he maintained that if Amin al­Astarabadi had been alive he would have
accepted his usul.

Naturally, the Akhbari school was defeated as a result of this
opposition, and now it has no following except here and there. However,
not all the ideas of Akhbarism, which penetrated people's minds so
quickly and securely after the appearance of Mulla Amin, and which held
sway for more or less two hundred years, have disappeared. Even now we
see many who do not recognize the permissibility of an exegesis of the
Qur'an unless a hadith is quoted. The inflexibility of Akhbarism still
reigns in many of the matters of akhlaq (ethics) and in social problems,
even in some parts of fiqh. But now is not the time for me to expand on
this.

One thing which is a cause of the popularity of the Akhbari way of
thinking is their self­righteousness, which is pleasing to ordinary
people, because their ideas are formulated in such a way that they seem
to be claiming: "we are not saying anything we have invented ourselves,
we are people of obedience and submission; we say nothing except what
the Imam al­Baqir (or the Imam al­Sadiq, etc.) said; we do not speak
ourselves, we only say what the ma\`sumin said."

In the chapter on ihtiyat and bara'a (precaution and exemption from
obligation) in his "Fara' id al­Usul" the Shaykh al­Ansari quotes from
Ni\`mat Allah al­Jaza'iri [^31], who maintained the doctrine of the
Akhbaris:

Can any rational person conceive the possibility that on the day of
Resurrection they will bring forth one of the slaves of Allah (i.e., the
Akhbaris) and ask him how he acted, and that when he says that he acted
according to what the ma\`sumin ordered and that everywhere there was no
word from the ma\`sumin he desisted as a precaution, they will take such
a person to Hell, while they will lead a thoughtless person who was
inattentive to the words of the ma\`sumin (i.e., an Usuli who follows
the doctrine of ijtihad), who rejects every hadith on the slightest
pretext, to heaven? It is not possible!

The answer which the mujtahids give is that this kind of obedience and
submission is not submission to the words of the ma\`sumin, but
submission to ignorance. If it is really certain that the ma\`sumin said
something, then we must submit; but these people wanted to submit
ignorantly to everything they heard. I will give as an example something
which I have recently come across, so that the difference between the
rigid Akhbari way of thinking and the ijtihadi way of thinking can be
seen.


