A Sample of the Two Ways of Thinking
====================================

It has been commanded in many hadiths that the end of the turban should
always hang down and pass round the neck, not only at the time of
prayer, but at all times. One of these hadiths is as follows:

The difference between a Muslim and an unbeliever is the passing of the
end of the turban round his neck (al­talahhi).

A number of Akhbaris have seized upon this hadith and those like it,
and said that the end of the turban must always hang down. But Mulla
Muhsin Fayd [^32], although he did not think very highly of ijtihad, did
in fact act in accordance with ijtihad in his chapter on apparel and
adornment (al­ziy wa l­tajammul) in his "Kitab al­Wafi': and say that in
former times the unbelievers had a slogan to the effect that the end of
the turban should be tucked in on top, and they called this act
iqti\`at.

If someone did this, it implied that he was one of them, and this
hadith ordered that this slogan should be challenged and not followed.
However this slogan has for a long time ceased to be current, and thus
the subject of the hadith is no longer a matter of concern; on the
contrary, since everyone tucks the end of his turban in on top, it is
forbidden for someone to drape it round his neck, for it would be
dressing in a way which drew attention to oneself, and this is
unlawful.

Here the ossified doctrine of Akhbarism ruled that the text of the
hadith ordered that the end of the turban must hang down, and it is an
interference with it for us to add our words to it and give our own
opinion and practice ijtihad. But the thinking of ijtihad is that we
have two commands: one is the command to keep clear of the slogan of the
unbelievers, which is the spirit of the subject of this hadith; and the
other is the command to avoid ostentatious dress.

In the days when this slogan had currency, and Muslims were trying to
avoid appearing to comply with it, it became an obligation on everybody
to keep the ends of their turbans hanging down; but now that this state
of affairs no longer pertains and the slogan has fallen into oblivion,
and now that ordinarily no­one lets the end of his turban hang down, if
someone were to do this, it would be an instance of ostentatious
clothing, and this is illicit. This is just one example which I wanted
to give you: there are many like it.

It is narrated from Wahid Bihbihani that he said:

Once, the new moon of Shawwal [the month following Ramadan] had been
established because it had been sighted by many people (tawatur). So
many people came and said that they had seen the new moon that certainty
had been obtained in the matter for me [^33], so I gave the order that
that day was the \`Id al­Fitr [the feast marking the end of Ramadan].
One of the Akhbaris protested to me that I had not seen it myself, and
that it had not been witnessed by people who had been proven to be
\`adil [to always act in accordance with the shari\`a], and that I
should therefore not have given the ruling. I said that it was
mutawatir, and that this was a source of certainty for me. He then asked
me in what hadith it had been narrated that tawatur was a valid proof
leading to certainty.

It is also well known that some of the Akhbaris gave the command that
the testimony of belief should always be written on the shroud of the
corpse in this way:

Isma\`il yashhadu an la ilaha illa llah (Isma\`il testifies that there
is no god but Allah).

Now the reason [they say] that the testimony is to be written in the
name of Isma\`il is that it is narrated in a hadith that the Imam
al­Sadiq wrote in this way on the shroud of his son Isma\`il. The
Akhbaris had never stopped to think that it was written thus on his
shroud because his name was Isma\`il; and that now, for example, that
Hasan has died, they should say: "We should write his own name on the
shroud, not that of Isma\`il.'' Instead they argued: "This would be
ijtihad, resorting to one's own opinion and relying on \`aql. We are the
people of obedience and submission to the words of the Imams al­Baqir
and al­Sadiq, and we, for our part, will not interfere."

The kind of taqlid that is forbidden by the shari\`a.

Let us now turn to taqlid. It is [as was said before] of two kinds:
licit and illicit [in terms of the shari\`a]. There is a kind of taqlid
which is the blind following of one's surroundings and of habit, which
is, of course, forbidden, and it is this which is condemned in the
Qur'an when those who say:

Behold, we found our forefathers agreed on what to believe - and
verily, it is but in their footsteps that we follow. (42:23)

are condemned. We have said that taqlid is of two kinds: licit and
illicit. What we meant by illicit taqlid is not confined solely to the
kind of taqlid which is the blind imitation of one's surroundings, of
habit, of one's parents or ancestors, but we wanted also to say that
taqlid between those who do not have [the necessary] knowledge
(al-jahil) and those who do (al­\`alim), the consultation of the faqih
by the ordinary person, is of two kinds: licit and illicit.

We occasionally hear these days from some people who are looking for a
marja\` al­taqlid, that they are looking to find someone to whom they
can give unqualified allegiance. We want to say that the taqlid which
Islam has commanded is not "unqualified allegiance"; it is the opening,
and keeping open, of one's eyes, of awareness. If taqlid takes on an
aspect of devotion, thousands of evil affects will come about.

Now there is a well­known and detailed hadith on this subject which I
shall quote for you:

Whichever of the fuqaha can protect his self [^34], who can preserve his
religion, who fights his desires and is obedient to the commands of his
Master, should be followed by the people in taqlid.

This is one of the textual proofs for taqlid and ijtihad. The Shaykh
al­Ansari said about this hadith that the signs of truth are evident in
it.

It is an appendage to the following verse from the Qur'an:

And there are among them unlettered people who have no real knowledge
of the divine Book, only wishful beliefs, and they depend on nothing but
conjecture.(2:78)

This verse comes in condemnation of the ignorant and illiterate Jews
who followed, and practiced taqlid of, their religious scholars and
leaders, and it comes after some verses which mention the unattractive
behaviour of the Jewish religious scholars. It points out that a group
of them were such ignorant and illiterate people that they knew nothing
of the divine Book except a string of imaginary beliefs [about it] and
such things as they wished to believe, and that they had gone after
surmise and illusion.

**The hadith of the sixth Imam concerning the kind of taqlid which is
illicit**

The following hadith is connected to the previous verse. Someone said
to the Imam al­Sadiq that the ordinary, illiterate Jews had no other
alternative but to take in everything they heard from their religious
scholars and to follow them. If there is any blame, it should be
directed towards the Jewish scholars themselves. Why should the Qur'an
censure helpless ordinary people who knew nothing and were only
following their scholars? What difference is there between the common
Jew and the common Muslim? If taqlid by ordinary people and their
following of the learned is forbidden, we Muslims, who follow our
scholars, this person reasoned, must also be the objects of reprehension
and censure. If the former should not have accepted what their scholars
said, then the latter should not accept what their scholars say.

The Imam said:

In one respect there is a difference between the ordinary Jew and the
Jewish scholars, and the ordinary Muslim and the Muslim scholars, and in
another respect there is a similarity. In so far as there is a
similarity, God has commanded the ordinary Muslim also not to practice
that kind of taqlid of scholars, but in so far as there is a difference,
He has not.

The person who had asked the Imam then said: O son of the Messenger of
Allah, please explain what you mean.

Then Imam said:

The ordinary Jews could see from their scholars and the way that they
behaved that they were quite clearly lying: they did not refrain from
accepting bribes, they changed the laws and the rulings of the courts in
exchange for favours. They knew that they displayed partiality to
certain individuals. They indulged their personal likes and dislikes,
they would give one man's right to someone else. .. On account of
natural, common sense, which God has created in everyone, we all know
that we must not accept the speech of people who behave in such a way as
this; we must not accept the word of God and the prophets from the
tongues of such people as this.

What the Imam meant here was that no­one can say that the ordinary
Jewish people did not know that they should not act in accordance with
what had been said by those of their scholars who acted contrary to the
divine commands of their religion. This is not something that someone
might not know. Knowledge of this kind is put by God into every person's
nature, and everyone's reason acknowledges it. In the terminology of
logic, it is a 'inborn' proposition; its proof is contained within
itself. According to the dictate of every intellect, one must not pay
any attention to the utterance of someone whose philosophy of life is
purity and the rejection of the human passions but who pursues what his
desires tell him to. Then the Imam continued:

It is the same thing for our people: they too, if they understand or
see with their own eyes that there is behaviour contrary to the shari\`a
on the part of their scholars, strong prejudices, a scramble after the
ephemera of this world, preference for their own supporters however
irreligious they may be, and judgement against their opponents even when
they deserve verdicts in their favour, if they perceive such behaviour
among them and then follow them, they are just the same as the Jewish
people and should be reprimanded and censured.

So it is clear that unquestioning allegiance and shutting one's eyes to
the truth is not the kind of taqlid which is encouraged or permitted by
the shari\`a. Licit taqlid means having one's eyes open and being
observant and alert; otherwise it is accepting responsibility for, and
being an accomplice to, an illicit act.

**Regarding the popular belief that the \`ulama cannot be tainted by
immorality**

Some people imagine that the effect of sin on individuals is not of
only one kind: that sin has an effect on ordinary people which annuls
their piety and right behaviour, but that it has no effect on the
\`ulama' who have some kind of immunity. It is like the difference
between a little water and a lot which, if it is more than one kurr
[^35], cannot be tainted by any unclean thing. Now, in fact, Islam does
not consider anyone to be untaintable, not even the Prophet. For why
then should God have said:

[O Prophet] say: 'I also, if I commit a sin, fear punishment on the
Great Day.'? Why should He have said:

If any kind of attributing godhood to other than Allah (shirk) enters
your actions, your work will be spoilt?

All this is to show that there is no kind of partiality or
discrimination, there is no immunity from sin for anyone.

The story of Moses and God's righteous servants, which is in the
Qur'an, is a wonderful story. One moral which can be drawn from it is
that the follower should surrender to the one he is following up to the
point where basic principles and the law are not contravened. If it is
seen that the leader does something against these principles, one must
not remain silent. It is true that the fact that in the story the things
which the servant of God does are not, in his view, against these basic
principles, since he sees a wider horizon and can see into the heart of
the matter;

they were, rather, his very duty and responsibility. But the question
here is why Moses was not patient, and why he gave vent to his
criticisms, despite the fact that he had promised [the servant of God]
and himself that he would not make any objection? Why, then, did he
protest and criticise? The defect in Moses' actions was not his
protesting and criticising, but the fact that he was not aware of the
undivulged aspect of the matter, the inward and secret side of the
events. Of course, if he had been aware of the hidden reasons for what
happened, he would not have objected, and he would have wanted to
discover the secret of the affair;

but as long as his actions were, from his own point of view, against
basic principles and the divine Law, his faith would not allow him to
remain silent. There are those who have said that if the actions of that
servant of God were to be repeated on the Day of the Resurrection, Moses
would still object to them and criticise them, unless, by that time, he
were to become aware of the hidden reasons behind them. Moses said to
the servant of God:

"Shall I follow you so that you may teach me, of what you have been
taught, right judgement."

"Assuredly you will not be able to bear with me patiently." Then he
explained the reason very clearly: "And how should you bear patiently
what you have never encompassed in your knowledge?" Moses said:

"Yet you will find me, if Allah will, patient, and I shall not rebel
against you in anything." Moses did not say that he would be patient
whether he discovered the secret of the matter or not. He merely said
that he hoped he would have that patience. Of course, this patience did
exist within Moses as long as he understood the reason for things. Then
the servant of God wanted to have something more definite from him;
that, even if he did not discover the reason for what had happened, he
would remain silent and not protest until the time came for him to
explain.

"Then, if you follow me, do not question me on anything until I myself
introduce the mention of it to you." (117:66­70) Here, the verse does
not say if Moses accepted; it only says that after this they both set
out together and continued till the end of the story which we all
know.

At any rate, I wanted to show that the ignorant person's taqlid of the
learned should not be blind allegiance. The unlawful kind of taqlid
between one who is ignorant and one who has knowledge is that kind in
which unquestioning obedience exists, which takes some such form as: "an
ignorant person cannot quarrel with a learned person; we don't
understand, perhaps the duties imposed by the shari\`a necessitate its
being like this."

I have mentioned this story as evidence and corroboration for what was
in the hadith of the Imam al­Sadiq.

**Taqlid permitted by the shari\`a**

After what I have narrated concerning the kind of taqlid forbidden by
the shari\`a, the Imam went on to explain the kind of taqlid permitted
by the shari\`a the kind which is to be praised, in these words:
Whichever of the fuqaha' can protect his self, who can preserve his
religion, who fights his desires and is obedient to the commands of his
Master, then he should be followed by the people in taqlid.

Of course, it is clear that the struggle of a spiritual \`alim with his
weaker desires is very different from the struggle of an ordinary
person, because the desires of each individual are associated with
specific activities. The desires of a youth are one thing, the desires
of an old man another; everyone, in whatever position, degree, stage or
age he may be, has a particular kind of desire. The standard for
subservience to inferior desires for a spiritual \`alim is not what we
see:

for example, whether he drinks alcohol or not, whether he has stopped
praying and fasting or not, whether he gambles or not.[^37] The standard
for the subservience to inferior desires for such a person is whether he
desires position, to have his hand kissed, to become famous and popular
and have people walk behind him, to use the wealth of the Muslims to
lord over others, to allow his friends and relatives, especially his
sons, to benefit from the wealth of the Muslims. Then the Imam said:

Only some of the Shi\`i fuqaha have these great qualities and traits of
character, not all of them. This hadith, on account of its final
phrases, is one of the pieces of evidence in the question of ijtihad and
taqlid. So it is clear that both ijtihad and taqlid can be divided into
two kinds: that which is permitted by the shari\`a and that which is
not.

**Why is taqlid of a dead person not permitted**

We have a principle in fiqh, which is one of the indisputable points of
our fiqh, that taqlid of a dead person in the first instance is not
permitted. If taqlid of a dead person is permitted, it is only when
taqlid is carried on from someone who was followed [by the same person]
while he was alive and is now dead.[^38] Moreover, the carrying on of the
taqlid of a dead person must also be with the permission of a living
mujtahid. I am not concerned here with the reasons in fiqh for this
principle, so I will only say that it is a very basic idea, but only on
the condition that the aim of the principle is clearly understood.

The first purpose of this principle is that it should be a means for
the survival of the traditional centres of learning of the Islamic
sciences, so that there should be continuity, and that the Islamic
sciences should be perserved - not only preserved, but that they should
advance day by day and be perfected, and that those matters which had
not previously been solved should be solved.

It is not the case that all our problems have been solved in the past
by our \`ulama', and that now we have no more problems and no more work.
We have thousands of riddles and difficulties in kalam (theology),
Qur'anic exegesis, fiqh and the other Islamic sciences, many of which
have been solved by the great \`ulama' of the past, but many of which
remain, and it is the duty of those who follow on to solve them and to
gradually write better and more complete texts in each subject, to
continue each subject and develop it, just as in the past, too,
exegesis, theology and law were gradually developed. The caravan must
not be brought to a halt in mid­journey. So people's taqlid of living
mujtahids, and their heeding them, is a means to the continuance and
development of the Islamic sciences.

Another reason is that every day Muslims are faced with new problems in
their lives, and they do not know what there duty is in these matters.
It is necessary to have living fuqaha', aware of the contemporary
situation, to respond to this great need. It is narrated in one hadith
concerning ijtihad and taqlid:

As for al­hawadith al­waqi\`a, refer concerning them to the narrators
of our hadith.

These hawadith al­waqi\`a are exactly these new problems which arise as
time passes. Study and research into the books of fiqh from different
epochs and centuries shows that gradually, according to the needs of the
people, new problems arise in fiqh, and that the fuqaha' set out to
answer them. It is for this reason that the dimensions of fiqh have
increased.

If a researcher were to make a tally, he could discover, for example,
in what century, in what place and for what reason, such­and­such a
problem arose in fiqh. If it were not necessary for a living mujtahid to
give answers to these problems, what difference would there be between
taqlid of a living person and taqlid of a dead person? It would be
better to follow in taqlid some of the dead mujtahids like the Shaykh
al­Ansari, who, on the admission of the now­living mujtahids themselves,
was the most knowledgeable and learned.

Basically, the 'secret' of ijtihad lies in applying general principles
to new problems and changed circumstances. The real mujtahid is one who
has mastered this 'secret', who has observed how things change, and
subsequently how the rulings on them have changed. For there is no skill
in only thinking about things which are in the past and have already
been thought about; or, at the most, changing an \`ala l­aqwa into an
\`ala l­ahwat.[^39] or vice versa; there is no need to make a song and
dance about any of this.

Of course, ijtihad has many preconditions and prerequisites; a mujtahid
must have acquired the various [preliminary] sciences. It is necessary
that he should have applied himself to the study of Arabic language and
literature, to logic, to the study of usul (jurisprudence), even to the
history of Islam and the fiqh of the other sects, so that he might
become a true and thorough faqih. No one can ordinarily lay claim to
ijtihad just by reading a few books on Arabic grammar, or rhetoric and
logic, then three or four of the set books for the intermediate stage,
such as the "Fara'id", the "Makasib" or the "Kifaya"[^40], and then
spending a few hours in the dars­i kharij.[^41] He does not then become
qualified to sit with the "Wasa'il" and "Jawahir"[^42], in front of him
and issue legal opinions.

He must be completely knowledgeable in exegesis and hadith, that is to
say in the several thousands of hadith which appeared in the two and a
half centuries from the time of the Prophet to the time of the Imam
al­Hasan al­\`Askari, and of the circumstances in which they appeared;
he must also know Islamic history and the fiqh of other Islamic sects,
and the narrators of traditions and their biographies and reliability.

Ayatullah Burujirdi was a true faqih. It is not my habit to mention
people by name, and while he was alive I never mentioned him in my
lectures. But now that he has died and there can be no ulterior motive,
I can say that this man was truly a distinguished and outstanding faqih.
He was conversant with, and proficient in, all these sciences, in
exegesis, hadith, knowledge of the narrators of hadith, in the sciences
of the evaluation of hadith (\`ilm al-daraya), and in the fiqh of the
other sects of Islam.

**How the faqih's outlook on the world affects the legal opinions he
issues**

The work of a faqih and mujtahid is the deduction and derivation of the
precepts [of the shari\`a]; but his knowledge and understanding of all
things, in other words, his world­view, has a great influence on the
decisions he makes. The faqih must have all the information on matters
upon which he is going to issue a fatwa. If we imagine a faqih who is
always sitting in the corner of his house or his madrasa, and compare
him with a faqih who is conversant with the currents of life, both of
them refer back to the valid proofs of the shari\`a, but each one of
them will derive his legal rulings in a particular way, using a
particular method.

Let me give an example. Suppose that someone who grew up in Tehran, or
in a big town like Tehran, where running water is in plentiful supply
and there are reservoirs and tanks and gutters, becomes a faqih and
wishes to issue a fatwa concerning the precepts about what is pure and
what is impure. When he refers to the hadiths on purity and impurity,
such a person will, owing to his own previous experience, make a
deduction in a way which will be extremely circumspect and will
necessitate the avoidance of many things. But the same person, once he
has been to the House of God [the Ka\`aba] and seen the conditions of
purity and impurity and the lack of water in that place, will find
himself changing his outlook regarding the subject of purity and
impurity. After such a journey, if he consults the hadiths on this
matter, he will see them in a different light.

If someone compares the fatwas of the fuqaha' with each other, and then
pays attention to the individual circumstances and each of these
scholars' ways of thinking about living problems, he will see how the
mental environment of a faqih and the information he has concerning the
outside world influence his legal rulings in such a way that the legal
rulings of an Arab faqih have an Arabic flavour, those of an Iranian
have an Iranian flavour, and those of a country­dweller have a rustic
flavour as opposed to the urban feel of those of a city­dweller.

This religion is the final religion; it is not exclusive to a
particular time or place; it is relevant to all times and places. It is
a religion which came to establish order and progress in the life of
man, so how could a faqih who is uninformed of the natural arrangement
and movement of things and who does not believe in a progression towards
perfection in life, deduce the high and truly progressive laws of this
upright (hanif) religion in a way which is in perfect accordance with
the truth? For this religion came to give order to this natural
arrangement, movement and development, and it guarantees its guidance.

**The understanding of necessities**

At the present time, we have some cases in our fiqh where our fuqaha'
have given a definite ruling on the requirement of something only
because they have seen the necessity and importance of the matter. In
other words, since there is no transmitted evidence from the verses of
the Qur'an or from hadith which is explicit and sufficient, and since
there is also no valid consensus in the matter, they have used the
fourth basic principle of derivation, i.e., the principle of independent
reasoning (\`aql).

In this kind of instance, the fuqaha' become certain that the command
of God in such and­such a case is such­and­such, because of the
importance of the matter and their knowledge of the spirit of Islam
which leaves no important matter in abeyance. For example, in the case
of the legal ruling given by the fuqaha' concerning the guardianship
(wilaya) of the ruler and the subsidiary problems connected with it, if
the importance of this matter had not been realised, no legal rulings
would have been issued. The fuqaha' have only issued them to the extent
which they understand to be necessary. Other instances similar to this
can be found where the reason that a legal ruling has not been given is
the fact that the importance and necessity of the matter has not been
fully realised.

**An important recommendation**
Here I have a recommendation which could be most useful for the
advancement and development of our fiqh. It was previously put forward
by the late Shaykh \`Abd al­Karim al­Yazdi[^43], and I am here only
reiterating his proposal.

He asked what it was that required people to follow only one person in
taqlid in all matters. Would it not be better if specialised divisions
were established in fiqh? That is to say, there would be groups who,
after having completed the general study of fiqh and become experts in
it, would specialise in one particular section, and then people would
follow them in that particular section. For example, some would take as
their specialisation \`ibadat (the rites of Islam), and others
mu\`amilat (transactions), some siyasat (politics), and other ahkam
(criminal law);

this is exactly what has been done in medicine where specialised
branches have been created, and doctors divided into groups for each
speciality, some being heart specialists, some eye specialists, some
ear, nose and throat specialists, and others specialists in other
branches. If this were done, each person could study his own branch more
thoroughly. I believe that there is a discussion of this matter in the
book "al­Kalam Yajurru l­Kalam" by the Sayyid Ahmad al-Zanjani.[^44]

This recommendation is a very good one, and I will add only that the
need to divide fiqh up and to create specialised branches arose a
hundred years ago, and in present circumstances the fuqaha of today will
impede the forward development of fiqh and stunt its growth unless they
heed this recommendation.

**The division of the sciences into specialised branches**

The division of the sciences is the result of their development, but
also its cause. For a science gradually progresses until it reaches the
point where it is no longer possible for a single person to investigate
all the problems it raises. It must then necessarily be divided up into
branches of specialisation. Thus the division of a science and the
creation of branches within it is the result and the effect of the
development of that science, while, at the same time, more progress is
made when these branches are created, and thought can be concentrated on
the special problems in each branch.

In all the world's sciences - medicine, mathematics, law, literature
and philosophy - branches of specialisation have been created, and for
that very reason progress has been accelerated in each of these
branches.

**The progress made in fiqh during the last thousand years**

There was a time when fiqh was a very limited science. When we refer
back to the texts before the time of the Shaykh al­Tusi, we see how
restricted it was. By writing his "al­Mabsut", al­Tusi took fiqh into
new realms and enlarged its scope, and in the course of time, as a
result of the efforts of the \`ulama' and fuqaha, and because of the
creation of new problems and the initiation of new investigations to
answer them, fiqh progressed even further, to the point where, about a
hundred years ago, when the author of the "Jawahir" wrote his complete
compendium of fiqh, he was only just able to finish it.

It is said that he started his task when he was about twenty years old,
and that, thanks to his extraordinary genius, continual work and a long
life, he was able to write the last pages right at the very end of his
life. The "Jawahir" was printed in six very bulky [lithographed]
volumes, while the whole of al­Tusi's "al­Mabsut", which was in his time
the example of a comprehensive work on fiqh, is probably less than half
of one of these six volumes. After the author of the "Jawahir" died, the
foundations of a new fiqh were laid by the Shaykh Murtada al­Ansari, and
the epitome of this new fiqh was that great man's "al­Makasib" and
"al­Tahara".[^45] Since his time, no­one could even conceive of teaching
a complete cycle of fiqh with such thorough explanation and research.

At the present time, after this advance in the development of our fiqh,
which occurred in the same way as similar advances in other sciences all
over the world, and which has been the result of the efforts of the
\`ulama' and fuqaha' of the past, the scholars of today will find
themselves faced with the choice of either curbing any further progress
in fiqh or putting this sensible and progressive recommendation into
practice and creating branches of specialization, as a result of which
people will come to discriminate in their taqlid, in the same way as
they discriminate in referring to a doctor.

**A council of fuqaha'**

There is another recommendation which I wish to make, and the more
fully I explain what I have in mind the better it will be. At the
present time, when branches of specialization exist in every science,
resulting in breathtaking advances in these sciences, there is another
practice which, in its turn, has acted as a contributing factor, and
this is practical and theoretical cooperation between first rank
scientists and specialists in all the branches of science.

Now, solitary theorising or experiment no longer has any value, nothing
is to be achieved from going one's own way. In every branch, scholars
and scientists are constantly engaged in exchanging ideas; they put the
results of their thinking at the disposal of other specialists, and the
scientists of one continent cooperate with those of another. The result
of this theoretical and experimental cooperation between first rank
scientists is that if a useful and valid theory is put forward, it can
be published and establish itself more quickly, whereas, if a theory is
weak, its failing can be discovered and it can be eliminated sooner, so
that in the future the pupils of the authorities who developed these
theories will be saved from these errors.

Unfortunately, we still have not created any division of labour or
specialization among ourselves, no practical or theoretical cooperation,
and it is clear that as long as this is delayed, progress and the
solution of difficulties cannot be achieved. There is no need for a
proof of the need for scientific cooperation and the exchange of ideas
since it is so self­evident, but so that it may not be doubted, I shall
show, by quotations from the Qur'an and "Nahj al­Balagha ", that this
recommendation, this progressive order, is to be found within Islam
itself.

In the Qur'an, in the sura called al­Shura (Counsel), it is said:

And those who answer their Lord, and perform the prayer, their affair
being counsel between them, and expend of that We have provided them
with. (42:38)

This verse describes the true believers and followers of Islam in this
way: they reply to the call of God, they establish prayer, they do their
work in consultation with each other, and they dispose of that which God
has bestowed on them. So, in the view of Islam, consultation and the
exchange of ideas is one of the basic principles of life for people of
faith, the true followers of Islam.

In "Nahj al­Balaqha" it is said:

Know that a group of the slaves of Allah with whom knowledge of Allah
was entrusted keep His secret; they cause His springs to flow (i.e.,
they open the springs of knowledge for the people), they have friendly
relations with one another and feelings of affection, they meet each
other with warmth and cheerfulness and love, they quench each other's
thirst from the cup of their acquired knowledge, and they emerge with
their thirsts quenched.

If scientific consultation were to come into existence in the science
of fiqh, and the principle of the exchange of ideas were to be
thoroughly practiced, many of the differences between legal opinions
would be resolved, quite apart from the advances that would be made in
the science as such. There is no alternative: if we maintain that our
fiqh is also one of the world's genuine sciences, we must make use of
the methods used in the other sciences. If we do not, the result will be
that it will no longer be considered a science.

I have other useful and urgent recommendations, but my time is running
out and I cannot mention them now, for it would take almost another
three quarters of an hour, and I know that some people have a long way
to go to reach their homes.

The verse of the Qur'an which I quoted at the beginning was:

It is not for the believers to go forth all together; but why should
not a party of every section of them go forth, to become learned
(yatafaqqahu) in the religion, and to warn their people when they return
to them, that they may beware. (19:122)

This verse explicitly instructs that a group of the Muslims should
study (tafaqquh) their religion and let others benefit from what they
have studied. Tafaqquh is from the root f­q­h. The meaning of fiqh is
not mere understanding: rather, it is deep understanding of, and perfect
insight into, the truth of something. In his "Mufradat", Raghib [^46],
says:

Fiqh is the reaching for hidden knowledge by means of manifest
knowledge.

Taffaquh is defined as: Going after something and becoming expert in
it.

The above verse is addressed to Muslims whose understanding of Islam is
not superficial, telling them to think deeply and discover the meaning
and the spirit of the rules of Islam. This verse is the evidence for
ijtihad and the study of fiqh, and it is also the evidence for our
recommendations. Just as this verse lays the foundation for ijtihad and
tafaqquh in Islam, so also it advocates that these two things should be
more widely practiced. More attention should be paid to what is
required, the \`ulama' should start to sit in fiqh counsels, the
individualistic approach should be discouraged, and branches of
specialization should be created, so that our fiqh may continue on its
path of perfection.

**Footnotes**

1. Tehran, 1962.

2. Lambton, A.K.S., 'A reconsideration of the position of the marja\`
taqlid and the religious institution., Studia Islamica, XX (1964),
115­135. (See also, al­Serat, Vol Vll, No. 1 (1981), p. 12­27)

3. For further information on these two persons, refer to the section
by Yann Richard on 'Contemporary Shi\`i Thought' in: Keddie, N.R., Roots
of Revolution: an Interpretative History of Modern Iran, New Haven,
1981.

4. See the author's introduction to the new edition of: Mutahhari, M.,
"llal­Girayish bi Maddigari' Qum, 1980, pp. 8­9.

5. The collection of orations, homilies and letters of the first Shi\`i
Imam, \`Ali b. Abi Talib, compiled by the Sharif al­Radi (d.
406/1015).

6. For these and many other details of Mutahhari's life and times,
reference should be made to the article 'Sayri dar zindigi­yi \`ilmi va
inqilabi­yi ustad shahid Murtada Mutahhari', in: \`Abd al­Karim Surush
(ed.), Yadnama­yi Ustad Shahid Murtada Mutahhari, Tehran, 1981, pp.
319­380.

7. It was reopened after the revolution.

8. For a complete list of his published and unpublished works, refer
to: \`Abd al­Karim Surush, op. cit., 436­556.

9. The translation of Qur'anic verses and hadiths has been made in
accordance with the author's own Persian translation except where this
is more an interpretation than a translation, in which case a more
literal English translation is given.

10. This address was given on 1 Urdibihisht 1340 Sh. (21 April 1961),
three weeks after the death of Ayatullah Burujirdi.

11. (Cairo, 1940) The main work in jurisprudence by Abu \`Abdillah
Muhammad b. Idris al-Shafi\`i (150/767 ­ 204/820), the founder of the
Shafi\`iya legal school. He laid the foundations for the systematic
treatment of qiyas.

12. The Sayyid \`Abd al­Husayn al­Musawi Sharaf al­Din (1290/1873­4­
1377/1957­8), born in Kazimayn, educated in Najaf, but subsequently
resident mostly in the Lebanon. He is popularly famous for his
''al­Muraja\`at'' (Sayda, 1355/1936­7; frequently reprinted), which
contains his detailed correspondence with the Egyptian scholar Salim
al­Bishri in defense of Shi\`ism. His "Al­Nass was l­Ijtihad" was
published in Najaf in 1375/1955­6, and has also been reprinted several
times. He is also the author of "Abu Hurayra" (Sayda, n.d.), a book
about the controversial narrator of hadith.

13. "Al­Kafi fi \`Ilm al­Din", (ed \`A. A. Ghaffari, 8 vols., Tehran,
1377­9) the first and largest of the Shi\`i collections of hadith,
compiled by Muhammad b. Ya\`qub b. Ishaq al­Razi al-Kulayni (d.
328/939). It contains over 16,000 traditions from the Prophet and the
Imams covering all aspects of the usul (the 'roots', mainly theological)
and the furu\` (the 'branches', mainly preceptual) of the religion.

14. The khabar al­wahid is that kind of tradition which has not reached
the status of tawatur, i.e., has not been narrated by so many
traditionalists that there is no doubt about its validity. Under certain
conditions, such traditions are admissible as proof (hujja) in the
derivation of precepts.

15. Abu Ja\`far Muhammad b. al­Hasan b. \`Ali al­Tusi (385/995 ­
460/1067), the Shaykh al­Ta'ifa (the Chief [scholar] of the [Shi\`a]
Sect), author of ''\`Uddat al­Usul" (Tehran, 1314).

16. Jamal al­Din Abu \`Amr \`Uthman b. \`Umar b. Abi Bakr b. Yusuf, Ibn
al­Hajib (570/1174 ­646/1249), the Maliki legist, author of "Muntaha
al­Su'al wa l­Amal fi \`ilmay al­Usul wa l­Jada"' which he condensed
into his "Mukhtasar al­Usul". Besides al­Iji's commentary on this
abridgement, there is also one by the \`Allama al­Hilli (see below, note
19), called "Ghayat al­Usul" which he wrote to refute al­Iji's (see:
''al­Dhari\`a'', XIV, p.56).

17. Abu Hamid Muhammad al­Tusi al­Ghazali (450/1058 ­ 505/1 111), who
followed the Shafi\`i madhhab. The full title of his work on
jurisprudence is "al­Mustasfa min \`ilm al­Usul" (2 vols, Cairo,
1356).

18. The main substantial difference between Shi\`i and Sunni ijma\` is
that the former must contain the opinion of the Imam in the consensus.
The discussion of how this can be achieved during the Imam's occultation
forms one of the important parts of the science of usul.

19. Jamal al­Din Abu Mansur, Hasan b. Yusuf b. \`Ali b. Mutahhar, the
\`Allama al­Hilli (648/1250 ­ 726/1325), the famous legist, philosopher
and mutakallim, author of "Tahdhib Tariq al­ Wusul ila \`ilm al­Usul''
(Tehran, 1308).

20. Abu Ja\`far, Muhammad b. \`Ali b. al­Husayn b. Babawayh al­Qummi
(d. 381/991).

21. These are: "al­Kafi" (see note 13); "Man la Yahdurahu l­Faqih "
(ed. H. M. Khirsan, 4 vols, Najaf, 1957, by 1958­62), also by al­Tusi.
22. The fourteen "impeccables": i.e., the Prophet, his daughter Fatimat
al­Zahra, and the twelve Imams.

23. After the student of fiqh has mastered the necessary sciences, he
may, if his teacher considers him to be capable of deriving his own
legal opinions, receive a certificate authorizing him to do so; but he
still cannot be followed by others in taqlid. For this to happen, he
must rise to the final degree and become a marja\` al­taqlid, where
other qualities besides just his scholarship, e.g., his piety and
conformity to the shari\`a, cause him to be respected above other
mujtahids, and thus to become a source of certainty to his muqallids
that in following him they will not deviate from the shari\`a.

24. This is a question of certainty (qat\`, yaqin): the evidence for
the existence of a precept must be such as to leave no room for any kind
of doubt in the mind of the person who models his behaviour according to
it; in the case of proofs concerning sensory evidence, the very data
themselves are only probablistic, so no proof employing them can arrive
at demonstrable certainty. Therefore, in such a proof, other
probabalistic elements such as \`aql are admissible, but these cannot be
used to derive the precepts of the shari\`a.

25. Muhammad Baqir b. Muhammad al­Bihbihani (1116­8/1704­7 ­
1208/1793­4).

26. The Shaykh Murtada b. Muhammad Amin b. Shams al­Din b. Ahmad b. Nur
al­Din b. Muhammad Sadiq al­Shushtari al­Dizfuli al­Ansari (1214/1799 ­
1281/1864), whose "Rasa'il", on usul al­fiqh were published as "Fara'id
al­Usul''(Tehran, 1296). His works in usul and fiqh now form the
backbone of the present­day teaching of these subjects.

27. One of the \`atabat, the Shi\`i sacred towns in Iraq, the site of
the battle where the third Imam, al­Husayn, and his followers were
massacred on 10 Muharram 61/680. It is about 95 kms. S.S.W. of
Baghdad.

28. The Shaykh Yusuf b. Ahmad al­Bahrani (d. 1186/1772), author of
''al­Hada\`iq al­Nadira Ahkam al­\`Itra al­Tahira" (ed. M.T. al­Irwani,
20 vols., Najaf, 1377­ ).

29. a) Ja\`far b. Khidr b. Yahya al­Najafi (1164/751 ­ 1227/1812),
known as "Kashif al­Ghita \`an Mubhamat al­Shari\`a al­Gharra" (Tehran,
1271). b) The Sayyid Muhammad Mahdi b. Murtada b. Muhammad b. \` Abd
al­Karim al­Hasani al­Husayni (1154­5/1741­2 ­ 1212/1797), known as the
Sayyid Bahr al­\`Ulum. c) The Sayyid Muhammad Mahdi al­Shahrastani
al­Ha'iri b. Abi'l­Qasim al­Musawi (d. 1216/1801).

30. Muhammad Baqir b. Muhammad Taqi b. Maqsud \`Ali al­Majlisi
al­Isfahani (1037/1627 ­ 1111/1700), compiler of the encyclopaedic
collection of Shi\`i hadith, "Bihar al­A nwar" (110 vols, Tehran, 1376­
[vol. VIII, Tehran, 1304])

31. The Sayyid Ni\`mat Allah b. \`Abdillah b. Muhammad al­Musawi
al­Jaza'iri (d. 1112/1700), a pupil of the \`Allama al­Majlisi (see
previous note). 32. Muhammad b. Murtada b. Mahmud Muhsin al­Kashani (d.
1091/1680).

33. It is to be understood that tawatur is a proof of certainty
according to the science of usul al-fiqh, and that it has been so
established independently of textual proofs. This rational view was
challenged by the Akhbaris precisely because of the lack of textual
backing.

34. Protecting the nafs, the soul, the greater, moral jihad, as opposed
to the lesser jihad of protecting Islam against the external enemy.

35. One kurr of water is approximately 377 litres. In religious law if
an amount less than this comes into contact with a religiously impure
thing, the water too becomes impure, whereas above this amount the
purity is not endangered.

36. \`Abd Salih, the "Righteous Servant". For this story see the sura
of "al­Kahf', 60 ­ 82.

37. Since he obviously refrains from such activities.

38. According to a commonly accepted ruling, this applies only to those
matters which the muqallid formerly performed according to the fatawa of
the subsequently deceased marja\` al-taqlid. If any new matter arises
for him, he must follow the fatwa of a living, \`adil mujtahid

39. Two principles (usul \`amalia) for the preponderance of one opinion
over another in fiqh. If one opinion is chosen over another \`ala
l­aqwa, it is chosen because the proof for it is thought to be stronger;
if it chosen \`ala l­ahwat, it is because of the principle of precaution
(ihtiyat) which requires that what is least likely to be at variance
with the shari\`a should be adopted. It will be appreciated that there
may be a good deal of rather trivial argument as to whether one or the
other of the two opinions should be chosen, according to which of these
two principles is preferred.

40. a) for "Fara'id al­ Usul", see above, note 26. b) "Kitab
al­Makasib", also by the Shaykh al­Ansari, an extensive exposition of
the section in fiqh on transactions. c) "Kifayat al­Usul" (2 vols,
Tehran, n.d.) by "Akhund" Mulla Muhammad Kazim al­Khurasani (d.
1329/1911), a systematic text on usul al­fiqh.

41. After the student (talaba, lit. 'seeker') has completed his reading
of the main texts and mastered the necessary preliminary sciences, he
may continue to the more detailed, but also more specialised, courses
given by the main teachers of the subjects concerned. These lessons, the
dars­i kharij, are kharij to (outside, beyond) the texts, and the
teacher will expound his own opinions, thus teaching the actual practice
of ijtihad. The teacher will be able to assess the abilities of his
pupils in these classes, and, in the case of fiqh, may subsequently
award a certificate of ijtihad to those he considers to have mastered
all the required skills and to be consequently in a position to employ
them to arrive at their own legal opinions (see also above, note 23).

42. a) "Wasa'il al­Shi\`a" (ed. \`A. al­Rabbani M. al­Razi, 20 vols,
Tehran, 1376 ­1389), by the Shaykh Muhammad b. al­Hasan al­Hurr
al­\`Amili (d. 1104/1693); the most comprehensive collection of hadith
relevant to fiqh, arranged according to subject matter. b) "Jawahir
al­Kalam" (ed. \`A. Quchani et al., 43 vols, Najaf-Qum-Tehran,
1377­1401), by the Shaykh Muhammad Hasan b. Baqir al­Najafi (d.
1266/1849); an extensive commentary on the "Sharayi\` al­Islam" by the
Muhaqqiq al­Hilli (602/1202 ­ 676/1277).

43. The Shaykh \`Abd al­Karim b. Muhammad Ja\`far al­Mirjirdi al­Yazdi
al­Hairi (1276/1859­60 ­ 1355/1937), whose move from Arak to Qum in 1920
began the modern history of that city as a centre of Shi\`i learning.

44. The Sayyid Ahmad al­Husayni al­Zanjani (1308/1890 ­ 1393/1973), a
Qummi scholar. His "al­Kalam Yajurru l­Kalam" (3 vols, Tehran,
1363/1944) is a compendium of historical, literary, biographical and
hadith information.

45. By the Shaykh al­Ansari.

46. "Al­Mufradat fi Gharib al­Qur'an'', (ed. M. S. al­Kilani, Cairo,
1961), by Abu l­Qasim al­Husayn b. Muhammad b. al­Mafdal al­Isfahani (d.
502/1108­9), a famous lexicon of obscure meanings in the Qur'an.


