About the Islamic Seminary
==========================

This international organization named THE ISLAMIC SEMINARY,
established, under the patronage of His Eminence Imam Khui (Rehmatullah
alaih of Najaf of Iraq) in 1977, is endeavouring to convey authentic
Islamic literature to the people of the world.

The object of this organization is to meet the spiritual needs of the
present age, to draw the attention of the people to real and solid
Islamic learning and to safeguard the valuable treasure of knowledge
which has been entrusted to us by the Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad and
by his Holy Ahlul Bayt (peace be upon them).

This organization has so far published more than one hundred books in
English, Urdu, Arabic, French, Malay, Hausa, Sindhi and Gujrati which
enjoy a high position among the publications on Islamic literature. If
Allah Wills this process of publication will continue and will show the
Straight Path to the humanity. Moreover, many madaris which are being
run under the supervision of the Seminary are playing their role in
spreading Islamic education among the youths of the community.

Furthermore, the Seminary also participates in the establishment and
development of social and welfare projects of the community. Spreading
the message of slam is a task which needs cooperation by all of us. The
Seminary invites you to participate in this noble task so that the
teachings of slam may be spread round the globe.

I pray to Almighty Allah to favour us with His Kindness and
Blessings.

Agha YusufAli Nafsi, Representative of Ayatullah-al-Uzma Sistani
(Najaf- Iraq)

INTRODUCTION OF IMAM HUSAYN (P) IN LECTURES ON ASHURA

It cannot be gainsaid that the Ashura Day or the Tragedy of Karbala has
no parallel in the history of the world. Though its significance has
been realized by a large number of people, yet it requires to be brought
home to the ignorant masses and the educated persons, who are desirous
of learning the true concepts of Islam, but have been handicapped by
hearing or listening to only one-sided or biased accounts.

This tragedy occurred (61 A.H) 50 years after the passing away of the
Holy Prophet (11 A.H). The hero of this tragedy was Husayn bin Ali bin
Ali Talib (P) the grandson of the Holy Prophet. The Holy Imam [ Husayn
(P) ] was martyred on the l0th of Muharrum (Ashura day 61 A.H) at the
plains of Karbala (Iraq).

Why was he martyred? It was because he refused to pay allegiance to
Yazid who was nominated Caliph by his father Muawiyyah. Muawiyyah, who
belonged to the Umayyad clan was the worst enemy of Ali (P) who, like
the Holy Prophet, belonged to the Hashimiite clan. The enmity between
the Umayyad and the Hashimiites was proverbial. In the battle of Badr
most of the Umayyad were killed and Islam was now on a firm footing. Abu
Sufyan who was always trying to kill the Holy Prophet and destroy Islam,
was the leader of the Umayyad. Although later he apparently professed
Islam, he was at heart the bitterest enemy of Islam and the Prophet.

When Yazid, the vilest of the vile, son of Muawiyyah and grandson of
Abu Sufyan, declared himself to be the Caliph of Islam, he got martyred
Husayn son of Ali and Fatima, the dearest daughter of the Prophet of
Islam. The fight between Husayn (P) and Yazid (L) was really a fight
between Truth and Falsehood, and between Faith and Infidelity .Had
Husayn (P) any desire for power, he would not have gone forward to
sacrifice his life along with a band of less than hundred of his kith
and kin including his children and women.

This tragedy occurred within fifty years of the passing away of the
Holy Prophet. During the twenty-three years of the Prophetic mission an
unparalleled revolution had taken place. The Holy Prophet suffered
extreme troubles in propagating Islam which gloriously spread by leaps
and bounds with the support of his real uncle Abu Talib who had nurtured
him in his childhood and protected and defended him from his inveterate
enemies.

After the demise of Abu Talib the Holy Prophet pursued his preaching
with his cousin Ali bin Abi Talib (P) at his support, until the task was
accomplished in 10 A.H. It was then that after receiving Allah's command
Proclaim what has been sent down to you and if you do not, you would not
accomplish the mission at all. -(5 : 67). The Prophet of Islam,
returning from his Farewell Hajj, ordered a halt at Ghadir-e-Khum on
18th Zil Hij, mounted the pulpit and taking Ali's(P) hand in his own
proclaimed amongst multitudes of muslims. "I leave behind two grand
things -Allah's Book (the Qur'an) and my Progeny (Ali, Fatima, Hasan and
Husayn). Beware! how you behave to them when I am gone from amongst you.
Both of them will never separate from each other until they reach me in
Heaven at the fountain of Kauther". Then he reiterated taking Ali's hand
in his hand "Whomsoever I own the guardian- ship Ali also owns his
guardianship?" The Divine Mission was accomplished and shortly
afterwards the Holy Prophet passed away in Madina on 28th of Safer or
12th of Rabiul Awwal.

Thus ended the revelation of Wahi,since the Holy Prophet was the last
Prophet and the Holy Qur'an is the last Book of Allah.

The Holy Prophet in his lifetime had forewarned the people of the
atrocious activities of Bani Umayya against his progeny. The Holy Qur'an
also said: Say O Prophet! I do: not require any recompense from you
except love for my kin. Allah also said about the Prophet's Ahlul Bayt:
Verily Allah intends but to keep off from you, O' the People of the
House, every kind of uncleanness and purify you with a thorough
purification. (33: 33)

The Prophet of Islam had repeatedly expressed his extreme love for his
Ahlul Bayt and had announced their supreme merits. About Ali (P), he
said "I am the City of Knowledge and Ali is its Gate. " About Fatima he
said, "Fatima is a part of mine; whoever grieves her grieves me." He
also said "Hasan and Husayn are the two youths of Paradise." He said,
"Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn; Allah loves him who loves
Husayn."

Now we can see what happened to Islam within fifty years of the demise
of the Holy Prophet. Islam was almost metamorphosed into irreligion. Was
it due to bad teachings of Islam or was it due to those in authority who
held the reins of Islamic Government? The worst period, however, came
when one who assumed the Caliphate proclaimed -"Neither there was any
Wahi (revelation) nor there came any angel; I have taken revenge for the
killings of my ancestors at Badr ."- yazid bin Muawiyyah.

And it was Husayn bin Ali and Fatima, and grandson of the Holy Prophet,
who rose against that tyrant and was martyred at Karbala on the Ashura
Day on the l0th of Muharram 61 A.H. along with his 72 kith and kin
including a six-month-old babe Ali Asghar, who was shot dead thirsty.
The echoes of the martyrs' sufferings and the wailings of the children
and women of the Prophet's Household, who were later taken prisoners,
are still resounding throughout the world. A deep and unbiased study of
the history of Ashura will convince the reader that Karbala has put into
the shade the atrocities the world has ever seen.


