Supplement
==========

We have amongst us a historian named Dr. Ayati (the late Dr. Muhammad
Ibrahim Ayati, author of the book entitled 'Tarikh-i-Ashura published by
the Islamic Seminary) who was fully conversant with the history of early
Islam. I daresay that perhaps in the whole of Tehran, rather in the
entire country, there is none else who is as conversant with the history
of early Islam as he was. There is no other ,person who may possess as
wide an information about that period of history as he did. He had
thorough knowledge of all the history books and historical details
relating to that period. For example, if you asked him something about
the battle of Badr he could supply you detailed information about each
person who participated in that battle. In fact in most cases he could
also tell as to who the parents and the near relatives of an individual
participating in the battle of Badr were. Whatever he says serves as an
authority.

However, it cannot be helped that you people of Tehran are not
accustomed to hearing thil1gs based on research. His latest writing
which has been published by the University relates to the history of
Undlus (Spain) and its name, too, is Tarikh-i-Undlus.' In this book an
account has been given of a tragedy of the history of Islam about which
we Muslims and especially the Iranian have been most negligent. This
book is worth reading and you must read it.

In any case it was being said that the object of Imam Husayn's (P)
rising and the philosophy behind mourning should be announced from the
pulpits continuously, so that profit and object may be achieved for
which Imam Zayn-al-Abideen (P), Imam Baqir (P), Imam Sadiq (P) and Imam
Kazim (P) had been recommending mourning, and poets like Kumait and
De'abil may appear and their elegies may produce the required results.
We should not do any such thing as may cool down sentiments. On the
other hand we should do those things which make the sentiments more
intense and by which the love of the people for truth and hatred for
falsehood increases.

There has always been strife in the world between truth and falsehood
and it will continue forever. Prophet Musa (P) and Pharaoh have always
been in the world. Prophet Ibrahim (P) and Nimrud have always been in
the world. Prophet Muhammad (P) and Abu Jehl have always been there.
Imam Ali (P) and Mu'Awiyyah have always been in the world. Imam Husayn
(P) and Yazid have always been there.

Dr. Muhammad Iqbal, the poet of the East, says:

[Musa (P) and Pharaoh; and Shabbir (P) and Yazid are the two forces
which appear in life]. It is not meant that people of the position of
Prophet Ibrahim (P), Prophet Musa (P), Prophet Muhammad (P), Imam Ali
(P) and Imam Husayn (P) have always been there. What is meant is that
truth and falsehood have always been at war with each other. There have
always been two paths before the society -one is that of truth and the
other is that of falsehood. This is one aspect of 'majlis' and elegy, in
which we participate.

The other aspect is that of instruction and guidance and ordering to do
good and restraining from evil. The question is: What should be done in
this regard and what should be the method of action? I think we should
act according to the method proposed for us in respect of Friday sermon
and about which I quoted a hadith of Imam Riza (P) last night. This
order of the Holy Imam (P) is very comprehensive. However, in our
society Friday prayers is not generally offered so that this order may
be followed in Friday sermons. [Praise be to Allah. After the end of the
Satanic government of the Shah, matchless gatherings for Friday prayers
take place in every city of Iran. Only in Tehran forty to fifty lakh
persons offer Friday prayers at one place. In today's Iran this sentence
of Imam Khomeini is seen written on the walls: "Friday prayer is not an
ordinary prayer."] Hence it can be done in those sermons and speeches
which are current amongst us by the blessings of Imam Husayn bin Ali
(P).

In the hadith of Imam Riza (P), the Eighth Imam, which I narrated last
night the duties of a khateeb (preacher) have been divided into three
parts.

About the first part it has been said: Friday is the day on which all
people gather together and a large gathering of the Muslims is formed.
Islam wishes that on this occasion the leader of the Muslims should
preach, invite people to obey Allah and warn them against sins.

There is not a single person who may not stand in need 'of preaching
and advice. It is possible that a person may not stand in need of
receiving education from another, but there is none who may remain
unaffected by any suggestions and pieces of advice. This is so because
it is one thing to know something and it is another to be impressed by
the instruction of a religious and pious preacher. It is said that Imam
Ali (P) used to ask some one from amongst his companions to give him
advice and he also said that hearing is more effective than knowing.

It is necessary that the person who possesses the capability and
competence to perform this task should always exhort and advise the
people, should make them remember Allah, should not allow them to become
oblivious of death and should warn them against the consequences of sin,
should speak about the grave and the Day of Judgment, and should invite
the attention of the people to Divine Justice. These are necessary
things and the society can never do without them. In the past there have
been some very good preachers amongst us and by the grace of Allah they
are present even now. The more the competent and qualified preachers
there are the better. This thing is necessary in connection with Khutba
(oration) and the pulpit.

The second part of the duties of a Khateeb is that &bout which Imam
Riza (P) has said:

"It is the duty of a Khateeb to inform the people of the things which
are in their interest from the religious and worldly points of view and
to tell them as to what they should do in the prevailing circumstances
and what their religious and worldly interests demand."

Evidently this is a very huge task and is more difficult than
admonition, exhortation and general preaching. If a person is pious,
righteous and sincere and if he knows a few sentences of preaching he
can preach, and his preaching will also be useful to some extent. If a
person pious, righteous and sincere, it' will be sufficient if he
narrates a few sayings of the leaders of the faith. However, if a person
wishes to narrate the large religious and worldly problems of the people
and to inform them about all these things, it is a very difficult
task.

Two difficulties arise in this task. Firstly it needs vast information
and secondly sincerity is very necessary so that the speaker may inform
others clearly about what he considers to be in their religious and
worldly interest.

As regards information the preacher should have sufficient knowledge of
the principles and bases of faith and should be aware of the spirit of
Islamic teachings. He should also be competent to distinguish between
the apparent and latent contents of Islamic teachings so that he may be
able to understand the religious interests and to explain them. Only
general religious information is not sufficient for this purpose.
Furthermore, it is also necessary for him to understand the society and
to know what is happening in the world and what the interests of the
Islamic society demand in the present circumstances, so that he may be
able to acquaint the people with the latest developments taking place in
the world and the interests of the Islamic society.

Unfortunately this aspect of our preaching is weak. There are many
preachers, and other aspects of preaching are not weak or at least not
very weak. However, this aspect is very weak and this is due to lack of
study. What Imam Riza (P) has said in this behalf is very valuable. He
said that the people should be made aware of their religious and worldly
interests. A person who has been concerned with only a few books
pertaining to a particular branch of knowledge (e.g. Jurisprudence,
literature or philosophy) and who has spent his life in a corner of the
school, cannot understand what the condition of the society is and what
its needs are. A person cannot keep an eye on the interests of the
society while sitting in a corner of the school. It is also necessary to
possess knowledge of the changing conditions of the world. A very sharp
perception is necessary to assess what is going to happen in future and
how the society should deal with it to escape any danger. It is not
possible to lead or guide without possessing foresight.

What does guidance mean? Guidance means to show the right path. When a
caravan is going to a destination its members ask some one: Which is the
way towards such and such place? And he replies: "Go this way. " This is
guidance. Who can be the guide of the caravan? Only that person, who
knows on which path the caravan is and where it is going, can be a
guide. The society, too, is like a caravan which "is always in motion.
Whether we like it or not, this caravan moves on. We should know in
which direction this caravan should be taken.

For example, suppose that a motor car driver is driving a car. In this
condition the steering wheel should be in his hands. At some place he
has to stop the car and at another place he has to increase its speed.
At some place he has to turn the steering wheel and at another place he
has to change the gear Or to apply the brakes. All these things are
necessary for driving the car properly. Same is the case with the
society .All such things are to be done to make it proceed in the right
direction. At times its direction is to be changed. At times its speed
is to be increased. And at times it is to be brought to a standstill.
Everything is to be done at the appropriate time. This is what is called
'understanding the interest of society.' A person who does not
understand this thing can neither become the guide of the society nor
can he talk about its interest.

We can become the guides and leaders of the society only when we
understand all these things and know when a particular thing is to be
done -where a brake should be applied to the society and where its
direction should be changed. The society continues to proceed. There are
turns and curves on the way. At times social turnings appear and the
society reaches a place where it has to turn very carefully. Our
society, too, is now faced with such conditions. A new civilization is
emerging and new thoughts and ideas are occurring. There're obstacles in
our way and we have to walk very carefully so that we may pass every
turning easily and without facing any danger The steering should be
turned very slowly so that no dangerous situation should arise. There is
so to say, a wall or barrier before us. We have to proceed on our way
escaping this wall. It is not possible to walk on with closed eyes as we
walked before.

Previously there was no obstacle but now there is an obstacle. The
river has come. We have reached the pass of the mountain. In any case it
is for the leader of the society to decide after careful deliberation as
to where the society has to turn and which new path it has to adopt to
reach the destination. Similarly we should know where to increase the
speed. Now a days the world has become a racecourse. All are
endeavouring to go ahead of others and to win the race. Hence it is
necessary to increase the speed. Now a days there is a race of science
and industry. In the circumstances it is necessary that the society
should be brought in motion so that it may not lag behind in the race.
All these things show that mere criticism and raising objections cannot
be called guidance.

One day, while speaking to some students in Madresa-i-Marvi on the
subject I said: Being the guide of the nation does not mean that we
should make prohibiting the people our profession. Whenever there is
some thing we may say: 'Don't do that. Don't do this' and thus subject
the people to difficulties. Sometimes we should also encourage the
people and prepare them to do work. I gave this very example of motor
car and said: Like the motor car driver we should at times increase the
speed, and at times turn the steering wheel and at times apply the
brakes, and at times turn the bright light. Every occasion has its own
exigencies. Then I said by way of jest: We should not always be Mr.
Brake so that we may apply brake everywhere. Only applying the brake is
not enough. At' times we should become Mr. Steering and Mr. Gear also.
Upon this one of the students said: We are nothing but only a reverse
gear.

In any case understanding different situations necessitates vast
knowledge and abundant information. One should try to find out where the
fortification is. The fortification should be occupied. Whatever
opportunity becomes available should be availed of. The Holy Prophet has
said; The breeze of Allah's blessing blows occasionally. Allah's
blessing is like the zephyr about which it is not known as to when it
will come. Remain alert so that whenever that fragrant air comes you may
benefit from it. A good and proper opportunity is like a wave of
transient air which comes and passes away. If it escapes from one's
hand, it cannot be caught. Woe be to us, for we lose opportunities.

The materialists in our country and those misled persons who have put
the label of religion on their creed are very clever. They go on
grabbing one social post after another and one fortification after
another from our hands and go on occupying sensitive centres and thus
achieve their ends. On the other hand we do nothing but only say: "Don't
do this, don't do that, apply the brake" and are very happy and
satisfied with this achievement.

The statement of Imam Riza (P) means that the people should be informed
about their religious and worldly interests. As I have already said
there are two conditions for this viz. Knowledge and sincerity.
Knowledge is required for faith as well as for the world. The preacher
should be acquainted with faith and should also be aware of the present
conditions and the social events, changes and present inclinations in
the modern world.

"Unless you know the way how can you guide?"

Now as regards sincerity, the late Haji Noori has written a book
entitled "Lulu-wal-Marjan'. I heard the name of this book previously but
read it only this year. This book is about the recitation of elegies and
the reciters of elegies and has nothing to do with preaching and oratory
or with preachers and Khateebs. Haji Noori has mentioned two conditions
for reciting an elegy viz sincerity and truth and has discussed both
these points very ably. Truly speaking I have liked this book very much
and as such my regard for Haji Noori has increased. He was a
traditionalist and a very pious man. He had a profound knowledge of
religious law. He was the teacher of the late Haji Sheikh Abbas Qummi.
Sheikh Abbas and many others have admitted that in the matter of
following religious law they have not attained the position which was
occupied by their teacher. I had read the important books written by
Haji Noori and was devoted to him. To tell the truth, however, my
devotion to him increased further after reading this small book.

In the preface of this book he mentions the name of an Indian scholar
with great respect and says: "That gentleman wrote a letter to me
wherein he complained about the condition of majlis and pulpit in India
and said that the reciters of elegies there mostly related false
stories." He adds that the Indian scholar requested him to write a book
in this behalf so that the falsehood of these people might be
forestalled. Haji Noori says further: "Perhaps the Indian scholar
thought that it was only in India that the reciters of elegies told
false stories and such a thing must not be happening in Iran and Iraq
and only true and reliable traditions must have been recited there. He
is not aware that the centre of the publication of falsehood is here and
it is from here that false stories reach India.

" Then Haji Noori says: The entire fault in this regard lies with the
Ulema who do not criticize and raise objections. If they had not been so
careless and had kept an eye on the truth and falsehood of these people
and had restrained them from narrating lies, the state of affairs would
not have been so bad; these people would not have become so bold and
dauntless, and would not have published such plain falsehoods; the true
lmamiyyah religion would not have become a butt of ridicule to such an
extent and the majalis would not have been so dull and unblessed. "

In any case it is a very nice book on the particular subject and I
wonder why it has not acquired that popularity which it deserves. Haji
Noori has mentioned two conditions for composing and reciting elegies
viz. sincerity and truth and has discussed both of them admirably.
Especially as regards different kinds of truth and falsehood he has
discussed them in detail which shows how well conversant he is with the
traditions and Hadith. I have not seen such a detailed discussion on
this subject anywhere else.

Discussing sincerity (lkhlas) he has spoken about narrating the tragic
events (of Karbala) on remuneration. Sincerity means that an act should
be performed to seek the pleasure of Allah and there should be no other
motive. There are many kinds of acts which are performed for purposes
other than the pleasure of Allah. One of them is earning money as
mentioned above. There are other kinds also which I would like to
mention. In my view they are more important and much more dangerous than
taking wages and remuneration.

One kind of such acts is that some person, after occupying the chair of
oratory or the pulpit of Imam Husayn (P) instead of preaching religion,
assumes the role of a broker of some one and makes the pulpit the means
of propaganda for certain personalities. Unfortunately this thing is
present in our society and the pulpits are misused. It is immaterial
whether the personality for whom the speaker is acting as an agent is a
political personality or a spiritual personality or some one else, and
similarly whether the person who is acting as an agent is the organiser
of the majlis or the person who leads prayers or a person holding a
higher position than the leader of the prayers.

Such acts lower the position and dignity of the pulpit. Evidently when
a person performs an act he also coins some explanation for it. However,
there is no doubt about it that one of the things which have deprived
the pulpit of its dignity is this very acting by the orators as agents.
For this reason the pulpit has become the chair of the agent and it is
necessary to purify it of this pollution.

There is one thing more and it is that, if it is proposed to narrate.
the religious and worldly interests according to the saying of the
Eighth Holy Imam cited above, it should be remembered that talking about
what is expedient is one thing and saying interesting things is another.
Talking about expedient things does not mean that we should say what is
liked by the people and that they should applaud us.

Perhaps you are aware as to why the people were opposed to the Prophets
of their times. Why did so many people oppose every Prophet, who was
sent to this world? Why did the number of the followers of the Prophets
remain less during their own time? There is a special reason for it, and
it is that the Prophets campaigned against the weaknesses and
shortcomings of the people whereas we try to take advantage of the
weaknesses of others. They (the Prophets) wanted to correct the
weaknesses and shortcomings of the people whereas we want to take undue
advantage of their weakness and shortcomings. We do not talk about their
benefit but want to please the organiser of the majlis and the audience.
We do not speak according to their interest but speak according to their
inclinations. We know that such and such story is false and will mislead
the people, but we narrate it to please them.

For example we know that the following story is a mere concoction and
the creation of the imagination of the story - tellers, still we narrate
it to please the audience.

**The story:-**

There was a Christian who was very sinful and was immersed in .all
moral and sensual defects. It so happened that on one occasion he joined
the pilgrims of Karbala, When they reached the gate of the city all
others dismounted and proceeded for Ziarat but the Chirstian, being a
non-Muslim, stopped outside the gate, lay down on his luggage and went
to sleep. The caravans of the pilgrims continued to pass by and the dust
raised by them settled on the body of the Christian. The Christian
dreamt that it was the Day of Judgment and the people came in groups and
obtained certificate of salvation from Imam Husayn (P). The angels came
and introduced each group saying: ' These people used to weep. These
people used to beat their breasts. These people used to mourn with
chains. These people used to distribute offerings in the majalis. These
people used to set up sabils etc. etc."

Imam Husayn (P) gave certificates of salvation to all the groups and
none was left before the angels. The Holy Imam (P), however, said to
them: 'One man is still left. You have not brought him before me.' The
angels said: 'Now none is left. We angels cannot commit a mistake. We
have complete record with us.' The Holy Imam (P), however, -said: 'You
are certainly mistaken. A Christian was sleeping outside the gate of the
city. When the caravans of the pilgrims passed by him their dust settled
on his clothes. Any person, on whose body or clothes this dust settles,
cannot go to Hell. Hence, a certificate of salvation should also be
given to that Christian. ' There are similar other stories as well.

As I have already said all this amounts to taking undue advantage of
the ignorance and weaknesses of the people and increasing their
deviation and baseless pride. The Prophets did not do this. They used to
fight against the weaknesses of the people. They took their interests
into consideration but not their inclinations and their pleasures. It
was for this reason that only a small number of persons became devoted
to them during their times. In short two things are necessary to carry
out the order: of the Holy Imam Riza (P) -one of them is knowledge and
information and the other is sincerity.

The necessary information too is of two kinds: Firstly complete
information about religion and secondly acquaintance with the conditions
and social events of the world. In the case of sincerity also I have
invited attention to two things which we need at present: Firstly, the
pulpit should not be allowed to become the chair of agency and secondly,
the weaknesses of the society should be combated and undue profit should
not be derived from them. The third part of the hadith of Imam Riza (P)
was this: "The Khateeb should inform the people of the news received
from the far-off places, inhabited by the Muslims, about the good or bad
events taking place there."

It is the duty of the Khateeb to inform the people about the events,
faced by the Islamic society at far off places, of which they are not
aware. In short he should narrate the internal and foreign affairs. Are
you aware of what is happening to the Muslims in the world? Are you
aware of the foreign policy of the world of Islam? The Khateeb should
inform the people about all these things.

Just take the example of the tragedy which has taken place .in Algeria.
[This lecture was delivered when the Algerian war 'of independence was
going on.] Our Khateebs should communicate the latest news about this
tragedy to the people. It should not be that the Khateebs either remain
absolutely quiet or if they do say something, it should be at the time
when the news has spread through- out the world or they may repeat only
those things which are published in the newspapers every day. They
should send their special correspondent to Algeria to obtain the latest
news himself or at least obtain the latest news from the news
agencies.

It should be remembered that the French Secret Service is like Yazid's
amly. When the atrocities committed by Yazid's army are narrated, why
should their atrocities (i.e. of the French Secret Service) not be
narrated? What is the difference between these two? They, too, are not
in any way behind them in the matter of villainy. They have also not
left anything undone. They have not spared even the women and children.
They have burnt the books and libraries, ruined the populated areas,
destroyed the farms and have been guilty of genocide [The same
atrocities are being committed today by Israel in the Sabrah and Shatila
camps of the Palestinians and the same thing is being done by the Soviet
Union in Afghanistan. The American imperialism is also committing
similar atrocities in different parts of the world.]. They are also
performing the same acts as have been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an about
some people: As soon as they leave you, they quickly commit evil in the
land, destroying the farms and the people. (Surah Baqarah, verse 205)

The martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P), whose memory must be kept alive by
us, is in fact a warning for us, so that we should see as to what
calamity befell Islam on that occasion. Keeping the memory of this
tragedy alive means that we should remain alert lest Islam should be
faced with another similar calamity. On the contrary, however, we have
not learnt any such lesson. Calamities much greater than the tragedy of
Algeria befell Islam but all of us remained quiet and did not at all
stir.

Sometime back I had a talk with a great scholar, who is also a Mujtahid
of great following, about the Tragedy of Undlus. During our conversation
I said to him: Five hundred years ago a great tragedy befell Islam and
the Muslims (This tragedy ended in 1498 A.D.). They lost a great centre
of Islamic Civilization. Most of the Muslims were either killed or burnt
alive. At one place the Christians burnt three thousand persons alive.
Out of two lakh Muslims who wanted to migrate from the country (the
Christians themselves had permitted them to leave) one lakh were killed
on the way. Gustav Loubon (the famous French historian of the 17th
Century) who was himself a Christian says: "The horrible sufferings to
which the Christians subjected the Muslims in Spain have no parallel in
the world history." Such great cruelties were committed but you will see
that in the books written by the Iranians from that time till today,
whether in Arabic or in Persian, not even one person has mentioned the
calamity which befell Islam, not to speak of expression of sorrow or
sympathy with the Muslims of Spain. There was none who might have
informed the people about this tragic event. Apparently the first book
on the history of Undlus written in Iran is the one written recently by
Dr. Ayati. It has been published by the University.

It is necessary that such events be narrated from the pulpits and the
people may be informed about them. Do you know even now as to what
hardships are being suffered by our Muslim brethren living in the cities
which were previously a part of Iran but have since been merged in
communist countries. Do you know the present condition of the Muslims of
Eastern Turkey? Do you know the condition of the Muslims in Kashmir? Do
you know anything about the Palestinian refugees? Do you know what a
great danger Israel is for the Muslim world today?

At present the world of Islam is faced with great dangers.
Notwithstanding its importance the Algerian problem is of a local
nature. However, the nature of two other dangers has assumed unusual
importance in the foreign policy of the Islamic world. One of these two
dangers is communism and the other is Zionism. [Communism is controlled
by Russia and Zionism is supported by USA.] One of them is explicit
blasphemy and the other is the latent one. Both of them have spread a
network of spying in all Muslim countries. Only Allah knows how many
millions of dollars are spent by them on their mischievous activities.
Both of them are bent upon cutting the Jugular vein of Islam. You should
be vigilant and fully cautious against these dangers. You often hear
that such and such Arab country is not on good terms with such and such
Arab country, or the relations between Syria and Egypt are strained, or
Jordan does not have good relations with Syria, or the conditions in
Saudi Arabia are not good. You should know that Israel has its hand in
all these disputes.

It is necessary to warn the people against this danger. But who should
inform them? Should it be government? Well, government is not in a
position to perform its own duties. Should they be the political
parties? No such thing is included in the constitution of the political
parties. It is the duty of the Khateebs to inform the people about this
danger. They should perform their duty, because they are considered to
be the spokesmen of Islam.

**THE KHATEEB IS THE SPOKESMAN OF ISLAM**

Every government and every big organisation has a spokesman. It is said
that the government spokesman has said this and that. The religion of
Islam should also have a spokesman. The spokesmen of Islam are the
Khateebs and the people of the pulpit. Imam Riza (P) has said:

"The people should be informed of the conditions prevailing in the
far-off places which they are not aware of "Imam Riza (P) said this
thing with great seriousness. We should know what the activities of the
Imperialists, the communists and the Jews are and it is obligatory to
narrate them. If all these things are narrated from the pulpit of Imam
Husayn (P) it can really be called the protector of Islam. This is the
philosophy underlying the mourning for Imam Husayn (P). Otherwise what
does he gain from our weeping and why should he need our tears? What
Imam Husayn (P) wants is that his name and ideology should remain alive;
we should fight against falsehood in the light of his ideology, should
wage war against communism, should eradicate imperialist and Zionist
cons- piracies and should campaign against injustice, corruption,
gambling and intoxicating drinks.

Paying homage to Imam Husayn (P) while reciting ziyarat we proclaim:
"We bear witness that you offered prayers and gave alms and enjoined
good and prohibited evil and struggled in the way of Allah. By the name
of that Imam Husayn (P), may Allah make us men of action!" We also
recite "Would that we too were with you on that day; we would have
accomplished great position." Apparently we can't be there in an event
which happened fourteen centuries ago but through these words of emotion
we relive the past and infuse vitality into the principle of Imam - the
Prince of Martyrs.

The Martyr of Karbala passed away but his school is still alive, and we
have to struggle under the Husayni banner and persevere on and on in the
path of Truth. How wonderful the last night (Ashura night) was! It is
unimaginable what happened to Husayn ibne Ali (P) and his
self-sacrificing companions on that night. It was a bright and lively
night for them! Says a poet: "The night of the stalwarts of the path of
Allah is as bright and luminous as the day. In fact the night of the
lively people is never dark."

As I have said Imam Husayn (P) said on the night of Ashura "Let us ask
for respite for tonight so that I may pass this night in prayers and
supplications. "

The narrator says: "That night a contingent of thirty soldiers of Ibne
Ziyad's army passed near the Holy Imam's camp and heard the echoes of
some voices. When they came near to know what it was they heard the
voices of supplications and repentance before Allah.

The sound like the buzzing of the bees was coming from the camp of Imam
Husayn (P). Someone was bowing and was saying: "Holy is my cherisher
Lord, the Greatest with His Glory. " Someone was in prostration and was
saying: "Holy is my Cherisher Lord, the Highest with His Glory." Someone
was reciting the Holy Quran; someone was saying " Allah is the Greatest"
and someone was saying "Holy is Allah." Seeing all this the soldiers
were so much enthralled that they said, "We were misguided, now we will
support them."

I do not know whether the companions of Imam Husayn (P) slept for
sometime that night or kept on waking, and praying till morning.
However, they sharpened their weapons, changed the order of their camps
and were fully prepared to fight. When it was dawn the Holy Imam led the
morning prayers and thereafter made a brief speech. After praising and
Glorifying Allah he said to his companions. "Today Allah the Great and
High, has permitted us to get killed. Now it is our duty to embrace
martyrdom."

The following supplication is also related from him. He invoked Allah
on the Ashura day thus:

"O' Allah! I have absolute trust in you in all my troubles and I have
pinned my hope on you alone in all my afflictions. You are the only
support in all matters which confront me, Lord! I had come across, in my
life, unaccountable sufferings, but I resigned myself to your will and
you removed all those hardships, and helped me. You alone are the Giver
of all blessings, and you are the Master of all that is good. And you
alone are the only Sustainers of all the needs."

A soldier of the enemy's army came from the back side of the Holy
Imam's tents to launch a surprise attack in the night. He saw that the
passage was blocked. When he did not find the way he began to use
abusive language. One of the companions of the Holy Imam asked him
permission to kill him. The Holy Imam did not give him the permission.
The companion said that he knew that the man was an apostate. The Holy
Imam said, "I do not want to take the initiative in fighting." Since the
Holy Imam wanted to discharge fully all his responsibilities, he again
talked to his enemies on the Ashura day and addressed them several
times, but the hard-hearted enemy did not take any notice of his
sermons.

The accursed Umar-e-S'ad made a villainous move. When the forces of
both the sides were facing each other he was first to shoot an arrow
towards the companions of Imam Husayn (P) and he shouted: "O' men! Be a
witness before Amir Abdullah bin Ziyad that the first man who shot an
arrow towards Husayn (P) was I." After Umar S'ad had shot the arrow,
there began a shower of arrows. Consequently a number of the Holy Imam's
companions were martyred.

Now listen to some sentences about Imam Husayn's (P) bidding farewell
to his people.

When the Holy Imam was left alone and all his companions and young
relatives were martyred, their holy dead bodies were before his eyes. He
had seen the dead bodies of Habib " biri Muzahir, Muslim bin Awssajah,
Ali Akbar, and Qasim lying on the scorching sand. He saw the dead bodies
of his infant child, Ali Asghar, and Abul Fazl Abbas (P). He was
extremely busy since morning. It was his endeavour to lift the bodies of
his companions and youths one by one and place them side by side with
one another in a special" tent. In this tent there were all the martyrs
lying adjacent to each other with the exception of two martyrs -his
infant child Ali Asghar (P) and his illustrious brother Abul Fazlil
Abbas (P).

The Holy Imam buried the body of Hazrat Ali Asghar near the tents
because he knew that later the holy dead bodies of the martyrs would be
trampled down, and he did not want to let the sacred body of Ali Asghar
(P) be trampled under the hooves of the horses.

Why was Abul Fazlil Abbas's body left out at a side? When the reason
was asked from Imam Sajjad he used to say with tears in his eyes: "The
body of this Holy martyr was so much torn apart that it could not be so
easily brought to the tent. This was the scene which was before the Holy
Imam. When the Holy Imam's seventy-two companions and youthful stalwarts
had been martyred he came to his tent and bidding the inmates of his
household farewell called out:

"O' Sukayna, O' Fatima! O' Zaynab! O Umme Kulsoom'! let this be my last
salaam to you. O' my daughters! O my sisters! I bid you farewell." His
daughter said, "My father! Have you surrendered yourself to martyrdom?"
The Holy Imam said, "My daughter! What can a man do except surrendering
himself to martyrdom when he is left alone in the hour of trial. It is
the Will of Allah." He once again bade farewell to the people of his
household.

Then it so happened that he marched on towards the river Furat
(Euphrates) and put four thousand enemy archers to rout and tearing
their rows reached the shore. When he reached the water he seemed to be
saying to his horse. "O my steed! I will not drink water until you drink
it." The horse, too, had become acutely sensitive and perhaps knew the
piquancy of the time. It raised its head and did not drink water. In the
meantime a man shouted: "Husayn (P)! You want to drink water here, and
there the army is about to attack the tents of your women." He however,
left the water and instantly proceeded to the tents.

Now the Imam said farewell to his people for the second time. He
consoled them and advised them to be patient and forbearing and assured
them of a good reward from the Almighty Allah. He also asked them to put
on their dresses. He meant to say that they should wear the dress which
befits the captives. He told them that those people would make them
captives. Then he said: "Be prepared to bear troubles and hardships, and
rest assured that Allah the Almighty is your guard and protector. He
will save you from the mischief of the enemy. Your enemy shall be doomed
to different kinds of afflictions and you on the other hand shall be
provided with various kinds of blessings, and your honour and respect
shall be enhanced. But be careful that you do not utter a single word
which does not befit your dignity. "

Holy is the Lord! How pure is this faith and belief and how sober was
the reliance on it! In this condition also he was sure that honour
belonged to him from Allah and ignominy" was for the enemy He did not
consider himself to be defeated, and was sure that it was the enemy who
was doomed to defeat. Now, this time, he said farewell to his people for
the last time and left them and was martyred fighting. The narrator"
says: "Never in my life did I see a martyred person before whose eyes
his children, his family men, friends and companions were killed and
still he was so well-composed and self-confident."

Even in this condition when he made an attack the enemy was seen
fleeing like sheep. He had made for himself "a central place from where
he attacked and then came back to it. This place was so near his tents
that his voice could reach there. He did not go from that place and was
constantly watching towards the tents of his womenfolk. When he reached
his central place he used to raise a slogan which could be heard by his
household people. His slogan was "There is no power greater than Allah's
Power." 'That is, if I am able to fight it is due to the strength given
by Allah; if I remain patient, it is from Allah's blessings; and if I
express thanks it is also due to Allah. Whatever it is, it is from
Alfah."

I shudder to think how the Holy Imam could move his thirsty tongue in
his mouth. Obviously he could hardly utter any thing further. Lastly he
took a little respite. In the meantime a man hit his forehead with a
stone and it began to bleed. When he was wiping the blood with his
sleeve another accursed man shot a poison soaked arrow on his bosom. He
then invoked Allah:

"In the Name of Allah, the Almighty Allah for the sake of the Ummah of
the Prophet of Allah there is no power greater than the Power of Allah,
the Almighty Allah! Peace and Mercy of Allah be upon Muhammad and his
pious Chosen Descendants."


