Causes of Husaini Jihad
=======================

Dr. Ibrahim Ayati

I seek refuge in the Hearer and the Omniscient Allah from the accursed
Satan. In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

Do not think of those slain for the cause of Allah as dead. They are
alive with their Lord and receive sustenance from Him. (Surah Al Imran,
3: 169)

The subject of today's speech is the causes which obliged Imam Husayn
(P) to take a stand and the events on account of which he decided that
it would be a sin to sit quiet under those circumstances. I must mention
at the very outset that those events did not take place all of a sudden.
In other words it did not so happen that after the death of Mu'awiyyah
son of Abu Sufyan in the month of Rajab in 60 A.H.

a critical state of affairs appeared in the Islamic society, and
obliged Imam Husayn (P) to rise to the occasion and before that there
was nothing in Islamic history , which might be considered to be the
introduction and prelude to the Imam's stand. In fact this is not the
position and a search for the causes of Imam Husayn's (P) decision
should be made in the history of at least thirty years ago. This is as
regards the direct causes. If indirect causes are also taken into
account we shall have to go back even beyond that. However, it is
neither intended to mention these indirect causes nor is this the
.proper occasion for that.

However thirty years before 60 A.H. i.e. in 29 A.H. or 30 A.H. the
causes for this sacred movement had come into existence. As is known the
Umayyad Caliph, 'Uthman son of, Affan ruled the Muslims and occupied the
Islamic Caliphate for about twelve years. As you have read in history
the trend of the Islamic Government underwent a change during the last
six years of 'Uthman's Caliphate. What should take place in the Islamic
Government is that the people should enjoy full freedom in all matters
except that it should be necessary for everyone to obey law. None should
be under obligation to do anything except to remain within the limits of
his rights and to observe law, so much so that none should be bound to
act according to the Caliph's personal wish and pleasure. It was this
form of government which had undergone a change.

The Muslims became free from obeying law and instead of that it became
necessary for them to respect the desires and policies of the Caliph. In
other words the trend of the Islamic Government had become such that it
became necessary for every person to act according to the policies and
wishes of the Court of the Caliphate even though this might result in
violating the law.

Whoever took a step against the wishes of the Court of the Caliph was
taken to task and considered to be a culprit, although he might be
innocent and obedient to law. As you are aware ' Ammar Yasir (a renowned
companion) was punished during the Caliphate of Uthman and Abuzar
Ghifari (another renowned companion) was justice but protected religion
and took care about lawful and unlawful things were imprisoned and
tortured because they did not act according to the wishes and interests
of the Caliph and his Court and did not care even for the displeasure of
the Caliph in the matter of truth and justice. Contrary to this there
were those who supported the policies and wishes of the court. As
regards those people not only that their interests remained safe but the
rights and interests of others also went into their pockets. It is
evident from the history of Islam that during the last six years of the
Caliphate of 'Uthman bin' Affan those who were 'People of Paradise' in
the eyes of the common man had, by usurping the property of the widows
and orphans, accumulated so much wealth that one wonders at it.

When the activities of those who were called the 'People of Paradise'
were such, it is evident as to what must have been done by those who
were the 'People of Hell'. As is well-known the non-Shi'ah sources have
quoted a tradition (Hadith) from the Holy Prophet. On the basis of
decisive proof the Shi'ah consider this tradition to be wrong and forged
and deny its authenticity. In this tradition it has been insinuated that
the Holy Prophet conveyed the . good news to ten of his companions that
they were the 'People of Paradise'. It can very well be seen what
calamities these 'People of Paradise' let loose during the last six
years of the Caliphate of 'Uthman. They usurped the rights of the
helpless Muslims and misappropriated the assets of Baytul Mal (Public
treasury).

It was the same wealth on which Imam' Ali bad exercised strict control
during the period of his Caliphate and the two Caliphs preceding 'Uthman
as well as Uthman himself during the early days of his Caliphate had
also considered it necessary to spend it carefully. As an example I have
noted from an authentic source of the history of Islam some facts about
these so-called 'People of Paradise' during the period of 'Uthman. I
shall relate these facts to you so that you should also know that what I
am saying is not on account of prejudice or personal fanaticism but my
object is that you should study the events which took place gradually
after 29- 30 A.H. You may know the reason which made: lmam Husayn's (P)
action necessary and why he came to the conclusion that there was no
remedy to counteract the tendency of deviation from truth which had been
looming large in the minds of the people except by sacrificing his and
his companions lives. God-willing my speech will make this matter
sufficiently clear.

Those persons who are. acquainted with the history of Islam and its
primary sources know Mas'udl very well. ' All bin al-Husayn al-Mas'udi
.is a notable Islamic historian and geographer, who is relied upon by
all the five-Islamic schools of thought. His book entitled 'Murujuz
Zahab' is interesting, exquisite and reliable.

Writing about the Caliphate of 'Uthman, Mas'udi says: When the Caliph
'Uthman bin' Affan was murdered he left behind 150 gold dinars and
1,000,000 dirhams in cash. After 'Uthman Imam Ali (P) became the Caliph.
When he was martyred Imam Hasan (P) declared from the pulpit: 'My father
has not left behind any gold or silver coin as legacy except 700
dirhams.

This amount was also saved by him out of his stipend to make payment to
a servant for household work'. (Murujuz Zahab (Vol. 11, p. 426; Printed
in Egypt, 1948). According to a tradition Imam' Ali (P) left 250
dirhams, the Holy Qur'an and a sword as inheritance for his family.) On
the other hand besides lakhs of dirhams and dinars mentioned above
'Uthman owned property in Wadi'ul-Qara, Hunayn etc. which was worth one
lakh gold dinars. Moreover, he possessed innumerable horses and camels.
(Murujuz Zahab, Vol. 11, p. 341.)

According to the tradition of 'Ashra-e-Mubashshira, (the ten who were
given the good news) 'Uthman was a 'Man of Paradise'. As the head of the
Islamic state the Holy Prophet could not collect even ten dirhams. Imam
Ali (P) and Abu Bakr and 'Umar did not also make any material gain from
the Office of the Caliph. However, 'Uthman gained a good deal from it.

Mas'udi also writes: Zubair bin al-' Awwam got constructed a famous
palace in Basra. Besides this he also possessed many houses in Basra,
Kufa and Alexandria (Egypt). According to the said tradition and in my
words this Zubair was also a 'Man of Paradise'. Zubair"s legacy
consisted of 50,000 gold dinars, 1000 horses, 1000 slaves and
slave-girls and a large quantity of immovable property in different
cities. It is 'an indisputable fact that so much wealth could not be
accumulated by lawful means. A large part of it was the right of those
deprived persons who were not in the good books of the government.
Hence, these people appropriated their share as well.

Mas'udi also writes that Talha bin Ubaydullah Taymi who was another
'man of Paradise' got constructed a well-known palace in Kufa.

Mas'udi says: The income of Talha bin Ubaydullah Taymi from his
property in only Iraq was 1000 gold dinars and according to a narration
it was even more than that. Talha got his house constructed in Madina
with baked bricks, lime, and costly timber.

Mas'udi says further: Abdur Rahman bin' Awl Zuhari who was another 'Man
of Paradise' got a spacious house built. There were 100 horses in his
stable and he also owned 1000 camels and 10,000 goats and sheep.
Moreover, he had four wives at the time of his death. When a person who
dies has children the eighth part of the property left by him goes to
his wife or wives (i.e. whether the number of wives be one, two, three
or four) She or they get only the eighth part. As Abdur Rahman bin ' Awf
had f our wives each wife got 1/32 of his property and this 1/32
amounted to 84,000 gold dinars. He, too, was a man of Paradise.

Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas was also a 'Man of Paradise'. Mas'udi writes that
he got a lofty and splendid palace built. Of course, Zayd bin Thabit is
not included in the ten 'People of Paradise'. However, he also left so
much gold at the time of his death that it had to be broken with hammers
for being distributed among his successors. His movable and immovable
property was worth 100,000 dinars.

Mas'udi writes further: Ya'la bin Umayyah who is also called Ya'la bin
Munayyah (Munayyah was his mother's name and Uinayyah was his father)
held important political and administrative offices during the period of
the Caliphate of 'Uthman. In our terminology he was the Finance
Minister. Mas'udi says: Ya'ala bin Umayyah left 500,000 gold dinars at
the time of his death. Moreover, the people owed him a large amount of
debt. His property and other legacy valued 300,000 dinars. Thereafter,
Mas'udi says: "This was not the state of affairs during the period of
'Umar bin Khattii.b and the policy at that time was straightforward and
clear'.

of Uthman that in the event of one being faithful to government one
could violate the law to any extent. When a person won the favor of the
court. he had nothing to fear if he infringed the law. Anyhow Mas'udi
says that this was not the position during the Caliphate of 'Umar i.e.
the system of government and the method of collection and distribution
of wealth was such that Talha, Zubair, Sa'd bin Abi 'Waqas and others
could not pick up courage to appropriate the property of the Muslims and
accumulate such a large quantity of wealth. (Murujuz Zahab vol. II p.
342 - 343.)

As you are aware the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali (P) became
Caliph after the murder of 'Uthman. The difficulty which Imam Ali (P)
had to face was as to how he could eradicate greed and other bad habits
which had taken root in the society. During the four years and six
months' period of his Caliphate he continued to campaign against this
difficulty. His confrontation was with those very people who wished to
accumulate wealth during the Caliphate of Imam Ali (P) as well. Imam Ali
(P) did not accept this position and said: "This is not possible. On the
other hand I shall take back from you the wealth which you have acquired
by unlawful means and shall deposit it in Baytul Mal (Public Treasury).
It was this tussle which eventually cost Imam Ali (P) his life.

As you are aware, after Imam Ali (P) the Caliphate was transferred to
Imam Hasan (P) and he became his father's successor. You must be knowing
that during the time of Imam Hasan (P) the social and political
conditions of the Muslims had assumed a special shape. If Imam Hasan (P)
had continued fighting against Mu'awiyyah bin Abu Sufyan at that time
none of the two parties could achieve easy success, because the strength
of the Muslims was almost equally divided in the two armies.

In the circumstances no alternative was left for Imam Hasan (P) but to
abandon fighting in order to avoid futile blood- shed. This futile
bloodshed could only benefit the Eastern Roman Empire or internally the
Khawaraj. If as a result of fighting four or five lakh Muslims had lost
their lives only Allah knows what the fate of the Muslims would have
been if they had fought against the Romans, what shape the danger from
Khawaraj would have assumed and what course the Islamic history would
have adopted. This is my explanation of the situation. You should also
ponder over it. This is not the subject of our discussion at present and
I do not, therefore, wish to go into detail. Anyhow, Imam Hasan (P)
secluded himself from Caliphate. However, it does not mean that he
submitted to Mu'awiyyah and accepted him as Caliph and Commander of the
Faithful. One of the terms of the peace pact which was concluded between
Imam Hasan (P) and Mu'awiyya was this:

"Imam Hasan (P) hereby makes peace with Mu'awiyya and retires on the
condition that he will never address Mu'awiyya as Commander of the
Faithful i.e. he does not acknowledge Mu'awiyya to be the Caliph of the
Muslims and Commander of the Faithful." I conclude this discussion here.
In my view this matter is a decisive proof against those who think that
Imam Hasan (P) had submitted to Mu'awiyyah, acknowledged him Caliph of
the Muslims and became one of his obedient subjects. This did not happen
at all. I have noted an extract about this matter from Kamilut Tawarikh
of Ibne Athir which I would like to narrate before you. Ibne Athir is
the author of Kamilut Tawarikh and Usudul Ghabah Ma'rifatis Sahabah.
Both of these books are valuable Islamic writings.

Ibne Athir writes that when Imam Hasan (P) retired and Mu'awiyya
assumed the reins of the office of Caliph, the Kharijite Farwah bin
Naufal Shuja'ie, who had previously separated and gone to Sehrzur along
with five hundred men said: "There is no doubt about it that it is now
necessary to fight against the government of the time, and after
Mu'awiyyah's coming to power and becoming Caliph, war has become
obligatory for us.

" Then these people proceeded to Iraq and reached the palm-grove of
Kufa. By that time Imam Hasan (P) had left Iraq and was on his way to
Madina. When Mu'awiyyah came to know that the Khaijite Farwah, along
with , his five hundred men, was ready to revolt, he, in order to
strengthen the peace made with Imam Hasan ( as thought by him) sent a
message to Imam Hasan (P). This letter was written when Imam Hasan was
on his way to the Hijaz. Mu'awiyyah said: "The Kharijite Farwah bin
Naufal is proceeding to Kufa along with five hundred companions. You are
directed to go there and fight against him and save Kufa. Thereafter,
you will be free to proceed to Madina."

When Mu'awiyyah's letter was delivered to Imam Hasan(P) he was in
Qadisiyyah. In his reply the Holy Imam wrote the following bold letter
to Mu'awiyyah: "If I had wished to fight against one of the people of
Qibla I would first of all have fought against you. I have left you only
for the sake of the welfare of the Ummah and to save it from
bloodshed.

"O Mu'awiyyah! You wish that Hasan bin Ali (P) should quell the revolt
of a Kharijite in the capacity of one of your officers. I have renounced
the Caliphate in the interest of the Muslims. If I had wished to fight
against the people of the Qibla or against one who is apparently a
Muslim, I would first of all have fought against you (i.e. you are worst
amongst the Muslims)."

Ponder on the word 'taraktuk' (1 have left you). The Imam says: "I have
left you and have not fought against you." The meaning is the same which
I have stated and in my view it is the best meaning here i.e. '1
abdicated and left you in the interest of the Ummah and to save it from
bloodshed.' As I have already stated the reason of the Holy Imam's
action was that it was useless to fight, because the armies of the two
sides were almost equally strong and if they had weakened each other by
fighting and shedding blood, both of them would have been annihibilated.
Only the enemy could benefit from this state of affairs and that was
what Imam Hasan (P) had written to Mu'awiyyah. [ Tarikh al Kamil, Vol.
III, p. 205 (Printed at Muniriyah Press, Egypt) ]

It should not be thought that after the martyrdom of Imam Hasan (P),
Imam Husayn (P) sat calm and quiet during the period of ten years when
Mu'awiyyah was still alive (i.e. from 50 A.H. to 60 A.H.). It is true
that during this period he did not consider it necessary to draw his
sword against Mu'awiyyah as he considered it necessary to draw it
against Yazid. However, he continued to point out the mistakes of
Mu'awiyyah and to criticize him. His brother Imam Hasan (P) had also
rejected the validity of the Caliphate of Mu' awiyyah in the sentences
which you have just heard and Imam Husayn (P) also did the same thing.

Now I would like to narrate one or two sentences of Ibn-e-Qutaibah
Dinori. Ibn Qutaibah is one of the distinguished ulema of Islam and
definitely a Sunni and not a Shi'ah. In his famous book' AI-Imamah wal
Siyasah' he writes: "This is the letter which Imam Husayn (P) wrote to
Mu'awiyyah."I mention a few sentences of this letter "so that it may
become clear as to what attitude Imam Husayn (P) had adopted towards
Mu'awiyyah and whether he acknowledged him to be a Caliph and an
honourable head of the State. During the said period of ten years had he
really acknowledged the Caliphate, government and leadership of
Mu'awiyyah? Or is it correct what Ibn Qutaibah writes? Now I reproduce a
few sentences of this letter. Imam Husayn (P) writes to Mu'awiyyah:

"Did you not murder Hujr bin Adi and his companions although they were
devout and pious? They hated heresies and ordered the people to do good
and restrained them from doing bad deeds. You murdered them cruelly and
broke' promises while earlier you had granted them security. This was
boldness against the Command of Allah and infringement of your promises.
Did you not murder' Amr bin alHumuq who was a distinguished companion of
the Holy Prophet? Amr bin al.

Humuq was the man whose body was melted by worship. You murdered him
after granting him security and making such promises that if those
promises had been made to the deer of the desert they too would have
come down from the mountains. Did you not declare the pretender Ziyad to
be the son of Abu Sufyan although the Holy Prophet had declared that the
child belonged to the person in whose house it is born and the adulterer
should be stoned to death. Then you set Ziyad over the followers of
Islam so that he might kill them, amputate their hands and feet and hang
them on palm trees. Praise be to Allah! O Mu'awiyyah! It appears that
neither you have any connection with this Ummah nor this Ummah has any
connection with you. O Mu'awiyyah! fear Allah and understand that Allah
has a Record Book in which everything, whether big or small, is
recorded.

O Muawiyyah! Know it for certain that Allah cannot ignore the fact that
you accuse the people merely because they resent that you have nominated
an ignorant and inexperienced boy ruler, who drinks wine and plays with
the dogs. I think you have destroyed yourself, lost your faith and
twined the subjects. Peace be upon you." (AI-Imamah wal Siyasah, Vol. I,
p. 190, written by Ibn-e-Qutaibah Abdullah bin Muslim (died 287 A.H.)
Printed in Egypt 1356 A.H).

This was the manner in which Imam Hasan (P) and Imam Husayn (P)
addressed Mu'awiyyah and criticized his policies and government. Ali bin
al- Husayn Mas'udi has written some sentences which explain the last
sentences of Imam Husayn (P) about Yazid and have a great effect on
Islam and the history of Islam. He says: "Yazid was a pleasure-seeking
man. He had with him hunting animals, dogs, monkeys and leopards. He
arranged parties in which wine was served. One day after the murder of
Imam Husayn (P) wine was being drunk. Ibn-e-Ziyad was sitting on the
right hand side of Yazid. Addressing the cup-bearer Yazid said: "O
Cup-bearer! Give me a cup of wine which should quench my thirst
thoroughly. Then give another cup like that to Ibn-e-Ziyad who is my
confidant and who strengthens my successes and efforts."

Thereafter, mentioning the cruelty and injustice of Yazid Mas'udi
writes (Maroon al Sahib, Val. III, p. 77-78.): "For his subjects Yazid
was like Pharaoh," Then he says: "Rather Pharaoh treated his subjects
more equitably and, as compared with Yazid, was more just with the upper
classes as well as the common people. In other words he was better
thanYazid." Then Mas'udi says: "The common Muslims also began to be
affected by the extravagance, shameless intrepidity and irreligiousness
of Yazid. It means that according to the proverb "The people follow the
religion of the rulers" the sins which were committed by Yazid were also
committed by the dignitaries of the State. It was during his time that
music became prevalent in Makkah and Madina.

When the dignitaries of the State and the Caliph himself followed the
path of sin, the common people also went the same way. In Makkah and
Madina the people became habituated to singing and hearing songs. The
instruments of amusement began to be used. As the Caliph himself was a
drunkard the people also began to drink wine openly." Mas'udi says that
Yazid, i.e. the man who called himself the Caliph of the Muslims, had a
monkey whose "Kunyah" (Patronymic appellation) was Abu Qays. This monkey
was brought in the parties in which wine was drunk and wine was put for
it in a basin. This monkey was very wicked. It was made to ride a
trained wild she-ass which took part in horse race.

The she-ass was saddled and the rein was given in the hand of the
monkey and thus the she-ass of Abu Qays took part in the race. At times
the monkey won the race. Abu Qays was made to wear a red and yellow
silken garment and the lap of the garment was tied to its waist. A
coloured silken cap was placed on its head. The she-ass was also adorned
with multicoloured clothes. This is referred to in the sentence which
Imam Husayn (P) wrote in his letter to Mu'3wiyyah about Yazid.

Muawiyyah died in Rajab 60 A.H. and as you are aware Yazid succeeded
him. I saw a strange sentence in a book. It was written in it: "The
correct answer to the question as to why Imam Husayn (P) accepted
martyrdom and did not swear allegiance to Yazid is that he realized that
whether he swore allegiance to Yazid or not he would be murdered. And
when he saw that his death was certain in either case he decided to die
honourably in the path of Allah." This curious remark is absolutely
baseless.

The martyrdom of the Doyen of the Martyrs is something much higher than
this that, when he felt that he was sure to be killed, he thought of
dying respectably and to acquire the honour of martyrdom for the sake of
Islam. After studying the circumstances and events, which had taken
place during at last thirty preceding years, Imam Husayn (P) came to the
conclusion that the deviation of the government and the Muslims from the
path of religion had become so acute that it could not be remedied by
sermons and speeches or by writing books and treatises. This acute
deviation could not be corrected by these methods.

An ordinary deviation and especially of an individual can be remedied
by means of a brief movement and a brief action and effort and the
misguided person can be brought to the right path. However, if the
deviation is acute and unusual and concerns the basic problems of the
Islamic society and especially if it expands and becomes common, no
result can be achieved from an ordinary movement or usual writing and
speech.

Imam Husayn (P) had realized it fully that in order to make fruitful
the steps taken by Imam Ali (P), the Commander of the Faithful and Imam
Hasan (P) it was necessary that a pungent rising and an unusual bloody
movement should be resorted to, because without it, it was not possible
to combat the activities of Mu'3wiyyah and others like him. Evidently
none can narrate the causes of the rising of Imam Husayn (P) in the
manner in which they can be narrated by the Imam himself. From the
writings and speeches of Imam Husayn (P) collectively and especially
from their arrangement I have come to the conclusion that from the very
beginning of his movement Imam Husayn (P) had started acquainting the
people with the causes of the step taken by him and the spirit of his
movement.

I have noted some extracts from certain writings and speeches of Imam
Husayn (P) which I shall narrate. Beginning with the will which he wrote
in Madina for his brother Muhammad bin Hanafiyah up to the last and
clear and unambiguous sermon which he delivered at the halting-place
called 'Baiza' before Hur bin Yazid Riyahi and his companions (which,
God willing, I shall mansions later) Imam Husayn (P) had made it clear
to the Muslims that the perverseness resorted to by the Islamic
Government and the breach which had appeared in all the social affairs
the province gets so little rains that cultivation is not possible not
self-sacrifice and unique rising. In the third volume of Bihourly An war
Allama Majlisi has quoted a tradition from the "Maqtal" of Muhammad bin
Abi Talib Moosvi, who is one of the Imamiyyah Ulema. It is possible that
this tradition may have been quoted in other books as well.

It has been said in that tradition that when the governor of Madina
pressed Imam Husayn (P) to swear allegiance to Yazid he (Imam Husayn)
visited the grave of the Holy Prophet a number of times that night,
offered prayers there, made supplication and perhaps slept there. During
the next night also he went there and offered prayers and then uttered
the sentences wherein he pointed to the reasons for his rising. He said:
"O Lord, this is the grave of your Prophet and and I am the grandson of
Your Prophet.

The situation with which I am faced is known to You." The last sentence
is in the book whose name I have not mentioned and it is also not
necessary to mention it. Evidently this sentence means: 'O Lord, these
people want to kill me and I have no alternative left but to get ready
for being killed although personally I am not willing to be killed.'
However, I would not like that some Muslim may take this sentence to
mean that feeling the danger of martyrdom in the path of Allah Imam
Husayn (P) was complaining and crying and was betraying despair and
weakness by the grave of the Holy Prophet.

O Muslims! Amr bin Jamuh was a Muslim who was previously an idol-
worshipper and the custodian of one of the idol temples in Madina. He
spent a large part of his life as an idol worshipper and embraced Islam
in his old age. When he became a Muslim he advanced spiritually so much
that when he came out to. Participate in the battle of Uhud he raised
his hands in prayer and said: 'O Lord! Grant me martyrdom. O Lord! Grant
me martyrdom. O Lord!

Let it not be that I may return from this journey alive without
achieving my object.' (Seerate Rasullah, al Istiab, Usudul Ghibah,
al-lsibah.) When the spirit of a Muslim who had spent most of his life
in worshipping idols is elevated by Islam to such an extent that he
considers returning alive to his family from the battle-field to be a
failure and privation how is it possible that Imam Husayn (P). should
complain to his grandfather and say: 'O Prophet of Allah, save me. These
people are going to kill me!' It does not mean this. Standing by the
side of the grave of the Holy Prophet the Holy Imam said: "O Lord, You
are aware of the situation with which I am faced.

" That situation was the same which Imam Husayn (P) had assessed. That
situation was the deplorable deviation in which the Muslim society was
plunged. After making a deep study of this deviation and carefully
examining the government and all aspects of its system Imam Husayn (P)
arrived at the conclusion that the Islamic society could not be
delivered from this danger and acute deviation without sacrifice and
martyrdom.

Then the Imam said: "O Lord! You know that I like good deeds and hate
bad deeds. " In this sentence the Imam comes nearer to the subject
matter, but, in spite of this, the common people cannot understand what
he means to say. The Imam added: "O Almighty Allah! I request you to
make, for the sake of this sacred grave and the master of this grave,
the circumstances which You have chosen for me, the means of Your
pleasure as well as that of Your Prophet."

So far the Imam has indicated only that the object of his rising was
'to order the people to do good and to restrain them from evil.' What
did he mean by ordering to do good and restraining from evil? Perhaps
after reading his 'will' or hearing these sentences some persons may
think that Imam Husayn (P) wanted to go to Kufa and to ask the traders
and the bakers of that city not to weigh less and direct the merchants
not to charge interest (restraining from evil) and to tell the young men
of Kufa not to be careless about their prayers (ordering to do good). In
fact the matter is much more important than this. Such 'ordering to do
good' and 'restraining from evil' could be done even by the preachers of
Kufa. In the tenth volume of "Behar" it has been quoted from the
"Maqtal" of Muhammad bin Abi Talib Moosvi that at the time of his
departure from Madina Imam Husayn (P) wrote this will to his brother
Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. This is the will of Husayn (P) son of Ali (P) son of Abi Talib
(P) to his brother Muhammad, known as Ibne Hanafiyyah.

"Husayn (P) son of Ali (P) testifies that Allah is One and has no
partner and there is no god other than Him and that Muhammad (P) is His
servant and Messenger who has brought the true religion from the True
Lord. Paradise is True and Hell is also True and there is no doubt about
it that the Day of Judgment will come. On that Day Allah will raise the
dead from their graves and will bring them to life once again and
accounting of their deeds will take place."

Then the Imam speaks about the real matter and says: "My rising is not
an ordinary one. My movement is not based on worldly desires, nor do I
intend to oppress anyone, " He says further: "I am going to reform the
Ummah of my grandfather". In this sentence the Imam made it clear that a
dangerous deterioration had taken place and it could not be corrected
without rising and making sacrifice. The deterioration was such that
none other than Husayn (P) could reform it. The deviation had become so
acute that it could not be remedied by only speeches, writings, sermons
and preaching. However, it was still not clear as to what the Imam meant
to say.

He adds: "During this rising I intend to call the people to do good and
to restrain themselves from evil and follow the ways of my grandfather,
the Holy Prophet of Allah and my father Ali ibne Abi Talib (P). Hence,
if any person accepts truth nothing can be better than this because
Allah likes truth. However, if none accepts truth even then I shall have
patience, but it does not mean that I shall sit idle i.e. if need be I
shall cover this path alone till Allah decides between me and these
people according to truth. He is the Greatest of all judges. This is my
will to you and success is in the hands of Allah. I rely on Him and I
have to return to Him."

I have been speaking to you for an hour. I have also to keep the time
in view. I shall, therefore, speak on the remaining points of this
subject in some other meeting.

In the book entitled 'Kashf-al-Ghummah' of Ali bin Isa Arbali it has
been narrated by Muhammad bin Talha and similarly Syed Ibne Tawoos has
quoted in his book 'Lahuf' that Imam Husayn (P) arrived in Mecca on the
third of the month of Sh'aban and stayed there till the eighth of
Zil-Haj. None could imagine that the son of the Holy Prophet would
suddenly leave Mecca on the eighth of Zil-Haj and would come out of the
state of 'ehram' after performing Umra and without performing the
ceremonies of Haj. When he decided to proceed to Iraq he delivered a
sermon. Here I would request you to be attentive. It is possible that
many persons may be able to understand the object of the Holy Imam from
the sentences which he uttered on this occasion. After praising Allah
and sending greetings to the Holy Prophet, Imam Husayn (P) said:

"Death has marked the children of Adam (P) just as a necklace marks the
neck of a young woman." It appears that in Mecca the Holy Imam said the
real thing more openly and told the people what the state of affairs was
and what was going to happen in future. He talked about death and
martyrdom which clearly shows that the Islamic society had deteriorated
so much that it could not be reformed by spending money or by writing
treatises or holding religious meetings or delivering religious
speeches. Even Imam Husayn (P) could not perhaps bring about reformation
by such means. Now the only means of reformation was martyrdom and that
too of a person like Husayn (P) son of Ali (P).

In this sermon the entire talk is about martyrdom. It is about death
and joining the Holy Prophet (P) and falling a prey to the wolves of
Karbala and the journey which would culminate in martyrdom, although we
are aware that Imam Husayn (P) most probably delivered this sermon on
the seventh of Zil Haj in Masjid-al-Haram before a public gathering,
when the conditions were apparently favourable for him. Many people
thought that Yazid bin Muawiyyah would soon abdicate and the Caliphate
would be transferred to Imam Husayn (P). The Imam's special
representative Muslim bin Aqueel had informed him from Kufa that all the
people were with him and did not consider anyone other than him (the
Holy Imam) to be deserving of Imamate and Caliphate. He, therefore,
asked Imam Husayn (P) to reach Kufa as early as possible. This situation
was apparently agreeable and the conditions were favourable and
satisfactory. In spite of this Imam Husayn (P) was talking about death,
martyrdom and the wolves of Iraq. What it means is that he had arrived
at the conclusion that in the circumstances nothing except martyrdom
could produce the desired result.

Today I conclude my submissions with this address. The necklace puts a
mark on the neck of a young girl." That is to say man is destined to
die.

At present I do not wish to comment on the beauty of this sentence, nor
do I want to mention the. euphemism present in the word 'Khut'. This
sentence means that death is the "necklace" (ornament) of man. The Holy
Imam says further: "How fond I am of meeting my ancestors. " He means to
say 'according to my assessment the present social perverseness cannot
be remedied unless I adopt the way which was adopted by my father Ali
(P) and my grandfather the Holy Prophet and join them.' He says further:
"I am as fond of martyrdom as Prophet Yaqub (P) was fond of his son
Yusuf (P). The site of my martyrdom has been selected by Allah and I am
now going there. "

From this sentence we conclude that his entire plan was arranged by the
Almighty Allah and Husayn (P) bin Ali (P) had no 'hand in it. For the
reformation of the dangerous social perverseness Allah had chosen Husayn
(P) from eternity for martyrdom and self-sacrifice. The said sentence
may be taken to mean that Allah had predestined martyrdom for Imam
Husayn (P) or that, keeping the exigencies of time in view, the Holy
Imam had himself embraced martyrdom. It can be said that both the
meanings are correct.

Thereafter, the Holy Imam mentions the matter in clearer terms and
says: "It seems that I see the wild wolves of Iraq tearing my body into
pieces between Nawawis and Karbala and filling their hungry bellies and
empty baskets. Their task is to fill their bellies and my task is to
campaign against this acute social perverseness." Again the purport is
the same. It is the same plan which the Almighty Allah had chalked out
to remedy the dangerous social perverse- ness of the Muslims in the
shape of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P). Then the Holy Imam says:
"There is no escape from that which is predestined. We Ahl-al-Bayt are
pleased with that which Allah wills. We like that which He likes for us.
We bear with patience whatever calamity comes upon us from Allah and He
gives us good reward fot it."

Now I omit a few sentences. However, the last sentence also deserves
special attention. The Holy Imam says: "Whoever is prepared to sacrifice
his life for us and to meet Allah should come with us. Allah willing I
am leaving tomorrow morning. "

This sentence means that the problems regarding the religion of Allah
and human rights and defence of the Islamic society are different in
different periods. At times it is necessary to spend money in the path
of Allah. At other time preaching and admonitions are required. And
still at another time it becomes necessary to write articles in
newspapers, magazines and books so that the Muslims may read those
articles and become aware of the necessities of religion. In this
sentence Imam Husayn (P) made it clear that that was not the occasion
when Islam might be helped with money, Jihad with the pen or verbal
admonition and advice.

At times social perverseness reaches a stage at which it is not
possible to remedy it except by means of martyrdom and self-sacrifice.
By saying: "Whoever is prepared to sacrifice his life for us:' the Holy
Imam made it clear that none should think that as Imam Husayn (P) was
going to rise in the path of Allah he, too, would give a subscription of
fifty dirhams or Obaidullah bin Hur Ja'afi should say that he would
present a strong horse or someone else might say that he would give five
swords, seven coats of mail and four spears. Imam Husayn (P) did not
need swords or coats of mail or spears. The deterioration of the Islamic
society had become so acute that the conditions could not improve by
these means. He wanted only life and, therefore, said: "Whoever is
prepared to sacrifice his life and to shed his blood in this path and to
meet Allah should accompany us. I am leaving tomorrow morning."

It is the eighth night of Muharram today. The speech has perhaps become
more lengthy than you expected. Give me another five minutes so that I
may mention the sufferings of Ahl-al-Bayt.

"...... Hisham bin Muhammad bin Saib Kalbi (Tad Kara tool Khawas, Sibt
ibn-e-Jauzi) who was one of the companions of Imam Jafar al Sadiq (P)
quotes in his Maqtal that when Imam Husayn (P) realized on the day of
Ashura that the people of Kufa were determined to kill him he opened the
Qur'an, placed it on his head and said with a loud voice: "O people! The
Book of Allah is here to decide between you and me. My grandfather is
Muhammad (P), the Prophet of Allah. O people! for what offence do you
consider killing me lawful? Study the verse of 'Purification', the verse
of 'Mubahila' and the verse of 'Hal Ata' in the Qur'an and look into the
Sunnah of the Holy Prophet. Thereafter, if you think that it is lawful
to kill me you may kill me, but if you realize that it is unlwful to
kill me you should refrain from this heinous act. "

What a unique and inspiring act it was that Imam Husayn (P) was
stirring the religious sentiments of the people of Kufa! However, when
he saw that they were devoid of religious sentiments, he decided to rely
on their human sentiments. Meter all even if the people of Kufa were not
interested in religion and did not fear the Hereafter they were at least
human beings and a human being, too, has sentiments which can be stirred
up. The Holy Imam saw that a child was crying owing to extrme thirst. I
do not know who this child was -whether it was a boy or a girl and
whether it was a suckling who had been brought out of the tent by some
slave or slave-girl or a young one who had walked out of the tent
himself.

However, it is known that it was a child of Imam Husayn (P) himself.
When Imam Husayn (P) saw that the religious sentiments of the people of
Kufa could not be aroused and in the meantime he saw that one of his
children had been brought out of the tent by some one or had come out
himself and was crying on account of acute thirst he, in my words,
relied on the human sentiments and said: "O people of Iraq! If you do
not take pity on me, at least take pity on this innocent child.'
However, their response was very strange. They proved that they were
devoid of the human sentiments also as they lacked religious sentiments.
The proof of this was the arrow which left the bow and settled in the
throat of the child and the child met martyrdom.


