The Successful Effort
=====================

Dr. Husaini Bahishti

I seek refuge in the Hearer and the Omniscient Allah from the accursed
Satan.

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Believers, shall I
show you a bargain which will save you from the painful torment. Have
faith in Allah and His Messenger and strive hard for His cause with your
wealth and your selves. This is better for you if only you knew it.

Allah will forgive your sins and admit you into Paradise wherein
streams flow, and you will live in the lofty mansions of the Garden of
Eden. This is indeed the greatest triumph. {Besides forgiveness) you
will receive other favours which you will love: Help from Allah and an
immediate victory. O Prophet, give such glad news to the believers.
(Surah Saf, Verses 10 -13)

Ever since man was created he has been destined to make continuous
efforts. In his very nature factors opposed to one another are at work.
He is a compound of various passions and desires. Some of his
inclinations fall under the category of perverted desires which may also
be called baser animal instincts. Their object is to avail oneself of
animal enjoyments like eating, drinking and reveling. There are other
inclinations in him which divert him from the sensual enjoyments to
higher spiritual, intellectual and human perfections. The power and will
of man is the arena of his contrary and varied desires. It is due to his
conflicting desires that man is always perplexed. For example if a
person wants to do an ordinary task and if he is habituated to do it, he
does it quite easily on account of his habit. However, if the task is
new and he is not accustomed to it, he cannot do it straightaway. Many
doubts rise in his mind.

At one time he thinks that he should perform the task and at another
time he thinks that he should not. Sometimes he says that the task is
right and sometimes he imagines that it is not right. Desire demands
that he should perform that task but reason advises him that he should
not do it. Or reason demands that he should perform a task but desire
insists that he should not.

A conflict of this kind continues between his mind and heart for
sometime. Eventually, however, one of the inclinations dominates and he
utilizes his power and determination according to it. Desire and reason
and materialism and spiritualism are at war with each other since
eternity and the foundation of life has been laid on this conflict.
Besides this internal conflict man has to face innumerable difficulties
and obstacles in the outer world also in the fulfillment of his desires
and achievement of his objects. As we have got accustomed to these
difficulties and they are not new for us, we do not even feel them in
every day life. However, if observed carefully, it becomes known that
during a day a man has to face various obstacles against which he has to
combat.

In every environment human life has to face a continuous conflict and
dispute. Not to speak of the life of an individual this way of conflict
and opposition continue to be present in the life of every tribe, every
society and every nation. Dispute and confrontation continue between
persons belonging to one profession and another profession, between one
brotherhood and another brotherhood, between one nation and another
nation, between one society and another society and between one class
and another class. As a result of this, civil wars and international
wars take place from time to time. It is not wrong to say that disputes
and confrontations are inevitable reality of human life. Where are
those, who think that from the time they arrive in this world they
should spend a very happy life for fifty, seventy or one hundred years
and eat, drink and be merry .In the morning they should take rest at
home till 10 O'clock and thereafter they mayor may not perform any task.
If they go out to do some work they return home by noon, have a siesta
and then go to sleep at night at the usual time.

Although it may not be seen by us, such a person is also faced with an
internal conflict. If observed carefully it becomes known that such a
person does not possess that joy and cheerfulness which is possessed by
one who makes effort. No doubt he walks, eats and drinks but he is like
a dead person who is devoid of enthusiasm and ambition. In spite of this
he suffers from an internal strife and worry .It is possible that owing
to his having become accustomed to this strife he may not feel it.
However, the thought always crosses his mind as to why he is sitting
idle Why has he lagged behind others? Why does he not possess honor and
renown? What is the use of this futile life? Why does he lack enthusiasm
and ambition? He spends most of the moments of his idleness and leisure
in a dilemma. The fact is that it is not possible to live without effort
and striving.

Whether it be the life of an individual or of a society the law of
competition, effort and conflict applies everywhere. And as it is the
law and it is the fate of man that strenuous effort is unavoidable, it
is necessary that we should select a work which is useful, and our
competition in the field of our choice should be honourable, fruitful
and purposeful. And this is the topic of today's speech. This topic that
is "Successful striving" has taken into account the historical events
which took place on certain dates.

There are some pre-conditions for a successful effort which it is
necessary to know and to keep in mind in, the struggle of life:

The first thing is that there should be a specific and clear aim of our
effort. An aimless effort is meaningless. Every effort has no doubt an
aim but that aim is usually ambiguous and not clear. It is often seen
that a person struggles throughout his life but eventually achieves
nothing. Why? It is because his struggle and effort did not have a
specified path. He worked and made effort but his aim was not clear and
fixed. He roamed about in a blind alley. His labor was lost and he got
nothing. If the history of the nations of the world is studied, numerous
examples of futile and purposeless efforts will be found. It is possible
that everyone of you may have seen the examples of aimless effort in
your own life or in the life of your nation or you may have read about
them in books. It is necessary that the target and aim of the effort
should be clear and unambiguous and at the same time it should be
sublime and meaningful.

At times it is seen that the object is clear and fixed and the person
concerned can also spend his time to achieve it but does not agree to
spend money for it. At times, however, he considers his object to be
more important than wealth and does not mind spending money to achieve
it, but steps back if his health is to be staked. At times a person is
prepared even to sacrifice his health but when he finds his life to be
in danger he becomes nervous and withdraws from the field. At times,
however, the object is so lofty that a person gets ready to sacrifice
not only his own life but also to sacrifice, with perfect sincerity, the
lives of his most dear ones. This is the precious object to which every
human being should pay attention. This object is acquires the pleasure
of Allah.

This is the first condition of successful effort. The second condition
is that the person concerned should be talented, fond of his work and be
steadfast. Allah Himself says in the Holy Qur'an: To those who have
said, "Allah is our Lord" and who have remained steadfast to their
belief, the angels will descend saying, Do not be afraid or grieved.
Receive the glad news of Paradise which was promised to you. We are your
guardians in this world and in the life to come, where you will have
whatever you call for, a hospitable welcome from the All-forgiving and
All- merciful Allah. (Surah Ha Mim Sajdah, Verses 30 -31)

O Believers! i.e. O those persons whom the prophet invited to the Unity
of Allah for thirteen years in Mecca you did not accept his invitation
(except a small number from amongst you) but when he arrived in Madina
and set up the Islamic government you also became the lovers of Islam
and began supporting it! why do you preach what you do not practice ? It
is most hateful in the sight of Allah if you say something and do it
not. Allah loves those who fight in His way in ranks as if they were an
unbreakable metalled rock. (Surah Saf, 2- 4).

Some Muslims saw that the martyrs of Badr enjoyed great honour and
position in the eyes of Allah, the Holy Prophet and the Muslims, and
acquired the spiritual as well as the worldly blessings and respect and
would get spiritual reward in the Hereafter, they sat together and said:
Would that we too had participated in the battle of Badr and performed
Jihad and enjoyed the honour which has fallen to the share of those who
took part in that battle. It was just as the Shi'ah of today address the
martyrs of Karbala occasionally and some of them perhaps every day and
say: "Would that we had been with you and this great blessing had also
fallen to our share!" Whenever they sat together after the battle of
Badr, they said the same thing.

It so happened that after some time the battle of Uhud took place.
During this battle some of those persons who had been saying
continuously: 'Would that we had attained the blessing of martyrdom in
the battle of Badr' retreated at the very outset and at last it so
happened that the life of the Holy Prophet was endangered. When the Holy
Prophet and the Muslims were faced with danger those very people who had
desired martyrdom thought of saving their own' lives and seeking refuge
here and there.

On this occasion Allah says: What has happened to your desire for
martyrdom? You used to say: Would that the battle of Badr had taken
place once again so that we could be blessed with martyrdom! Why do you
preach what you do not practice? Allah is very much annoyed with those
who only speak and say: 'We are ready to make sacrifices' but at the
time of action they hide themselves and seek refuge. Allah hates such
people because they deceive their leaders and lower the name of
successful effort. Allah loves those who fight for His cause in ranks
firm as an unbreakable concrete wall. It is they who make the campaign
successful.

Another condition, which is very important and is rarely seen amongst
us people, is the selection of the correct method of making effort.
There are numerous kinds of effort e.g. individual effort, collective
effort, secret effort, open effort mild effort, hard effort, armed
effort, unarmed effort, effort with cold weapons, effort with hot
weapons, local effort away from the battlefield, effort in the
battlefield etc. Every one of them has its own occasion, time, and
method. In European terminology every effort has its own tactics. Those
persons who undertake to make effort to achieve an object should also
know its method. Relationship between the object and the manner and
method of the effort are absolutely necessary. It is very unfortunate
that we see that, in order to achieve an object some people spend money
and time and at times sacrifice even their lives but, in spite of their
sincerity and good intention their method is not correct. According to
their own thinking they do all this for a good purpose but their method
is wrong and there is no congruity between their object and their way of
working.

I say once again that congruity of an object with the method adopted to
achieve it is absolutely necessary and important. Many efforts have
failed because the correct method for their achievement was not adopted.
Now if you keep these three conditions in mind it, will not be difficult
to understand what course the tragedy of Karbala adopted. After
Muawiyyah, Yazid, whose debauchery was no secret, ruled the Muslims as
the King of Islam and successor of the Holy Prophet. He drank wine and
gambled openly and created class and family distinction in the classless
Muslim society. This was the result of his rule.

On such a drunkard and an ignorant person becoming the Caliph some
brave men declined to acknowledge his corrupt government. They were not
prepared to cooperate with him. However, Yazid was not prepared to leave
them alone. He issued orders to all his functionaries, officers and
governors to obtain bay'at (allegiance -i.e. promise to cooperate) for
him from all the people and especially the distinguished persons. In
Madina, which was the cradle of Islam some distinguished and famous
persons declined to acknowledge Yazid's government formally and to take
oath of allegiance to him at the hands of his representatives. One
amongst them was Imam Husayn (P).

In the meantime some persons gathered together in Kufa. It will be
better if I introduce Kufa to you briefly. Kufa was a bad city as well
as a good city .It was bad because a large number of its residents were
cowardly; they wavered in taking decisions, and were, therefore,
unreliable. And it was good for the reason that there also lived those
brilliant personalities of Islam, who had been educated and trained
under the patronage of Imam Ali (P). Although their number was small,
they reflected as to whether it was proper to swear allegiance to Yazid.
Then they consulted the people. All of them replied in the negative and
said that Yazid was not at all fit for the office of Caliphate. Now the
question arose as to who should be approached in the matter.

On making enquiries they came to know that in the Hijaz two or three
and even more distinguished persons had declined to swear allegiance to
Yazid, and the most towering personality among them was Imam Husayn (P).
They, therefore, started correspondence with him and invited him to come
to the capital of his father. They wrote: "We wish to fight under your
command against the Yazid's government. The circumstances are favourable
for the purpose. Imam Husayn (P) received one letter and then another
and then the fourth, so much so that a chain was formed of the
messengers bringing the letters. They brought ten, twenty or hundred
letters.

Some letters bore the signatures of one man, others of two and still
other of five or ten. Thus a stack was formed of the letters received by
Imam Husayn (P) from different places. In short. as you know very well
the Holy Imam sent Muslim bin Aqueel to Kufa so that after finding out
the correct situation he might obtain bay'at for the Holy Imam from the
people of Kufa and send a report to him to enable him to decide the
future line of action. This was the beginning of the rising and campaign
of the Holy Imam.

But what was the object of Abu Abdullah Imam Husayn (P)? Did he want to
take possession of government? Did he want to rule the Islamic
territories, especially Iraq and Kufa? No. It was not his object to
possess government. His object was to exalt truth and to differentiate
between truth and falsehood. It was his wish that, whether he attained
ruler ship or not. it might become quite clear to the people as to what
is truth and what is falsehood. If he attained government well and good.
In that event he could utilize the power of government for performing
those tasks, which are liked by Allah. But even if he did not get
government he would achieve his object. The events which took place in
Karbala have been recorded by history in golden words for all times to
come. The Jihad of the Muslims in Karbala has become the greatest model
of fight between truth and falsehood till eternity. Allah be praised!
How lofty was the object of the Holy Imam and at the same time how clear
and decisive!

Who were the persons that were selected by the Holy Imam for the
battle? They were those steadfast men who were keen to take the lead in
the collective effort and wanted to learn a lesson from the Holy Imam
.

Two kinds of persons were participating in this campaign. One group
consisted of those who were playing the central role in the battle. It
was necessary that they should be experienced and reliable; their arms
should be strong' and their spirits high. They should be steadfast and
should know their duty. They should be obedient and sincere. One
specimen of theirs is Muslim bin Aqueel and the other was Qais bin
Mashar Saidavi who delivered the Holy Imam's letter in Kufa. Imam Husayn
(P) had selected these persons very carefully.

There was another group which consisted of the syrnpathisers of the
movement Their assistance could be sought when necessary but deep
investigation was not possible in their selection. Their task was only
to obey. Some of them had joined the caravan of Imam Rusayn (P).

When Muslim left Madina and reached Kufa some new events took place. A
large crowd gathered round him. Noman bin Bashir, the governor of Kufa,
was dismissed from office and was replaced by Ibne Ziad. Ibne Ziad was a
blood -thirsty and cruel person. Now within twenty four hours the
circumstances took a new turn. In the afternoon of 8th Zil-Raj Muslim
received the news that through some weak-minded persons his host Rani
bin Urwah had been taken deceitfully to the Governor's Rouse. There Ibne
Ziad insulted Rani very much, struck him on his head and face with a
stick and then imprisoned him After Rani's imprisonment Muslim asked his
special men to inform the supporters of the movement to gather in the
Masjid of Kufa and around it so that he might address them there. The
Governor's Rouse was situated opposite the Masjid.

Ibne Ziad had been the ruler of Kufa for many days then and was busy in
his work but he did not have more than thirty policemen. Besides them
there were twenty supporters of Bani Oma'yyah who were with him at that
time. Ibne Ziad and about fifty of his companions went on the upper
story of the house to see what was happening in the Masjid. As soon as
the people saw Ibne Ziad and his friends they raised slogans against
them and began to pelt stones and abused Ibne Ziad and the government of
Yazid. At that time this was the position of Ibne Ziad vis-a-vis
Muslim

In the evening of 8th Zil Haj Ibne Ziad studied the situation
carefully. At last he took some clever steps which cannot be narrated
here in detail. He sent some persons each of whom took away one, two or
four persons out of the Masjid. A mother came and took away her son. A
father came and he also took away his son. A mother-in-law came and took
away her son-in-Iaw. An uncle came and took away his nephew. If one was
taken away by making alluring promises another was taken away by means
of threats. When it was time for evening prayers Muslim decided to offer
prayers. By that time there were only thirty men, who offered prayers
with him. When the prayers were over Muslim wished to come out of the
Masjid and" found that no human being could be seen anywhere.

He did not even know the road leading to the place where he was
staying. He was a new-comer to Kufa and was not acquainted with its
roads and lanes and there was none who might guide him to his
destination! There were the unreliable and worthless people of Kufa.
These people were not at all fit for being relied upon to initiate an
effort.

This is a specimen of those unreliable persons about whom Muslim had
Written to Imam Husayn (P) as a consequence of which the Holy Imam had
departed from Mecca. On the way many persons joined the caravan of Imam
Husayn (P). The people continued to come. However, when the Holy Imam
reached near Iraq news was received by him that the conditions were no
longer the same as were reported by Muslim. Muslim and Hani had been
killed. Abdullah bin Yaqtar who was carrying a letter sent by Imam
Husayn (P) to Muslim and the people of Kufa was arrested on the way and
put to death.

Shaykh Mufid has written in 'Irshad' (Printed in Isfahan, page 198)
that Muslim reached Kufa on Tuesday the 8th of Zil-haj and was martyred
on Wednesday the 9th of Zil-Haj. In any case the Husayni movement did
not stop in spite of these dreadful news but its modus operandi no doubt
underwent a change. Now that the conditions had changed the Holy Imam
ordered his companions to assemble at one place. Then he came there and
read out a writing. After praising the Almighty Allah he said:

You must have heard the dreadful news which are being received from
Kufa. Muslim, Hani and Abdullah bin Yaqtar have been killed. The people
have betrayed us. I want to continue my journey so that I, too, may be
killed. Whoever has come with me with the hope of wealth, position,
office and happy life should go away. Thereupon most of those who had
joined the caravan on the way went away. Only Imam Husayn (P) and those
who had come with him from Madina were with him. Besides them only a few
persons who had joined them on the way remained steadfast. Naturally
others lost heart. As the plan of the effort was now changed, only
people of pure nature and firm faith could accompany the Imam.

In fact it was those persons who were needed in Karbala - persons who
should be daring and brave, should have firm faith in their object and
should be prepared to sacrifice their lives.

In the case of war and confrontation one thing is very important and it
is that the persons who are used to maintain courage should be honest
and reliable, and the entire personnel should consist of experienced and
sincere persons who should be faithful to the object. An example of a
respectable personality suited to act as intermediary was Qais bin
Mashar Saidavi. While he was carrying a letter from Imam Husayn (P) to
the people of Kufa Haseen bin Nameer, an officer of Ibne Zi'ad arrested
him near Qadsiyah and sent him to Ibne Ziad. Ibne Ziad told him that if
he wanted his life to be spared he should mount the pulpit and abuse
Imam Husayn (P). Qais stood on the pulpit and said:

" All praise is for Allah. Husayn (P) bin Ali (P) is the best among all
creatures. He is the worthy son of Lady Fatima (P), the beloved daughter
of the Holy Prophet. He has sent me a message and asked me to convey
that message to you. All of you should rise immediately to help him. "
Then Qais sent greetings to Imam Ali (P) and Imam Husayn (P) and cursed
Mu'awiyyah, Yazid and Obaidullah ibn Ziad. As soon as he finished his
speech Obaidullah ordered him to be brought down from the pulpit. He
was, therefore, seized and thrown down from the roof of the palace, as a
consequence of which he met martyrdom. Anyhow Imam Husayn (P) continued
his journey towards Kufa along with his small group. On the way he met
Hur. Thereafter, he changed his course and pursued a path which led
neither to Kufa nor to Madina so that he might think about the future
line of action.

Just ponder over the events. In the first instance the Holy Imam went
from Madina to Mecca and then proceeded to Karbala. His object was quite
clear. It was to defend the true religion, reality and the Divine law
and to seek Allah's pleasure. The method and the policy was also
determined. Imam Husayn (P) knew that he should tread the path from
which there should be no question of return. If on the way and even on
the day of Ashura he said to the functionaries of Ibne Ziad that, if the
people of Kufa did not wish that he should come to their city, he might
be left alone so that he might return to the place from where he had
come, there were some other aspects of this matter, because on the way
the Holy Imam had said time and again that there was no return from the
path which he was pursuing.

The Holy Imam was leaving the halting place called 'Qasr-e- Bani
Maqata1'. No reply had yet been received to the letter which Hur had
sent to Ibne Ziad and the position was not, therefore, clear as to what
the final decision would be. Aqbah bin Sam'an says: I was near the Holy
Imam. I saw him sleeping on the back of his animal of riding. Shortly
after he woke up and said: "We are from Allah and we have to return to
Him and all praise is for Allah, the Lord of the Worlds." He repeated
these words thrice whereupon his son Ali Akbar stepped forward and
enquired about the reason for it.

The Holy Imam said: My son! I went to sleep while riding and dreamt
that the people of my caravan were going and death was pursuing them.

Do you know what Ali Akbar had said? He said: " Are we not on the true
path?" The Holy Imam replied: "Yes, certainly we are". Thereupon Ali
Akbar said: ""Then why should we fear death? We shall not abandon the
true path till our last breath. We welcome death". Imam Husayn (P)
needed persons of this caliber. Before reaching Nainavah and Karbala the
Holy Imam said once again that he was going to meet death. This was also
necessary so that the people might understand clearly that he had not
come to acquire the ruler ship of Kufa and they might not say later that
he had come on the invitation of the people of Kufa, but when he
realized that it was not possible for him to occupy Kufa, his sense of
honor was aroused and he preferred an honorable death to an abject life.
It was not that he could not tolerate the bitterness of being deprived
of rulers hip.

It was for this reason that he said again and again: "If you do not
like my coming, I am prepared to go back. Do not think that my sense of
honor has been aroused and life has become intolerable for me after
being deprived of rulers hip and that I am now prepared to commit
suicide. " He repeated this sentence again and again so that someone
might not read the verse Don't endanger your life yourself about him.

For the true explanation and interpretation of the event of Karbala it
is necessary that this sentence should remain in history and should be
repeated again and again. By this means it is possible to understand all
the minor events which took place during this period till the day of
Ashura. You people should understand very clearly as to what the Holy
Imam desired. In spite of all the alterations made by the enemy in the
event of Karbala there is a lesson in the details which have come down
to the succeeding generations, On the day of Ashura, after it had become
known that 'fighting was inevitable, Imam Husayn (P) ordered, after
arraying the troops, all the tents to be collected at one place. He also
ordered sufficient quantity of fire-wood to be thrown in the ditch which
had been dug at the back of the tents and put on fire so that the enemy
might not attack from behind. Then he arranged his army consisting of
seventy-two persons and established the right wing, the left wing and
the center according to the military methods of that time. He also
appointed the standard- bearers of the army.

While Imam Husayn (P) was arranging his army some foot- soldiers and
horsemen of the enemy's army held mutual consultations and decided to
attack the tents of the Holy Imam from behind. One of them, rather their
ring-leader, was Shimr. When they came to attack according to the plan,
they were surprised to see that a ditch had been dug and fire was
burning in it. It showed that the Imam had made preparations for a
fierce fighting. They were very much disappointed on account of the step
taken by Imam Husayn (P). Shimr shouted: "O Husayn! You have not waited
even for the Day of Judgment and. have prepared fire for yourself in
this world, itself. These w6rds of Shimr were very painful for the
supporters and well-wishers of Imam Husayn (P). Muslim bin Ausajah said
to the Imam: "O my Master! Permit me to send this Villain to Hell by
shooting an arrow from here. "

Please ponder over what the Holy Imam said in reply. He said: "No. I do
not agree that fighting should be started by us. I wish that the world
should see that I am following the Holy Prophet who fought all the
battles for the defence of Islam. None should muster' up his courage to
say that the Holy Prophet and his family tried to gain superiority
through sword. I wish that the world should see that I have not started
fighting. " Addressing Muslim bin Ausajah he said: "Do not shoot an
arrow. Let them start fighting. Then he arrayed the troops once again
and said thereafter: "Let me speak to these people in the first
instance".

Then he mounted his animal of riding and proceeded towards the army of
the enemy with great dignity Standing before the enemies he asked them
with a loud voice to keep quiet and hear him. When all of them became
silent and attentive the Holy Imam began his speech. Two or three
sentences in his speech were very important. Firstly he said: '"0
people! If you do not recognize me, go and ask those amongst you who are
acquainted with the family of the Holy Prophet. They will introduce me
to you. You are aware that I am the son of the Holy Prophet." Just
reflect as to why Imam Husayn (P) was introducing himself in Karbala on
the day of Ashura. He did so lest some treacherous hypocrites should say
later deceitfully: 'Ibne Ziad befooled and betrayed us. We thought that
the man who came was someone else. If we had known that it was the son
of the Holy Prophet we would not have fought against him at all. On the
other hand we would have helped him.'

Gentlemen! Do not wonder at all at the point which I have mentioned
before you. You must have seen very often how people distort facts while
presenting them before others. In those days the means of communication
were limited and people had very little knowledge of facts. All the
means of communication were then in the hands of government and it was
very easy to distort facts. Is it not true? Just see how Mu'awiyyah
abused Imam Ali (P) in Syria! Then why wonder that Imam Husayn (P)
feared that the same people might say later: 'Had we known that the
traveler who had been invited was Imam Husayn (P) son of Ali (P) we
would have sacrificed our lives to defend him.' This was the reason why
Imam Husayn (P) introduced himself to them.

Then the Holy Imam said: "O people! You have come here to fight against
me. Did you yourselves not invite me? What has happened to your
invitation and what do you mean by con- fronting me? Have I committed
anything wrong during this period which makes the shedding of my blood
lawful? Have I killed anyone of you? After all why are you bent upon
taking my life?" He said this, so that some dubious persons might not
try later to explain away the action of the people of Kufa by saying
that whoever rises against the government of the time is a rebel and it
is lawful to shed his blood.

As regards the position of the Holy Imam vis-à-vis these people they
themselves had called him. He, therefore, wanted to make them understand
thus: 'It was you who invited me and I have accepted your invitation. It
was you who said that Allah's religion was being trampled upon. I have,
therefore, come here to defend Islam. Now how will you say that in the
first instance you invited Husayn and pretended to be his supporters and
then killed him in Karbala.' Are these the ways of historical decency?

These are some points about the event of Karbala which are instructive
and worthy: of attention. I have said what I had to say. Now let us
mourn the death of the martyrs of Karbala tonight. Let every one perform
this task. The gist of what I have said so far is that all the Muslims
and all the supporters and lovers of Imam Husayn (P) and all the
followers of Islam should understand that conflict is unavoidable in
life and effort should always continue. The most delicious and palatable
effort is that which is made in support of truth and against falsehood.
It is necessary to keep the thinking about truth alive and to try to
enforce the law of truth.

You should understand it clearly that making effort is a brilliant
Islamic tradition and if it is desired that we should succeed in our
efforts our objective should not only be above any doubt but should also
be clear and reliable, so that when this principle is presented before
the people they should accept it and try whole-heartedly to achieve it
and should not refrain from sacrificing their lives and property for it,
when they are called upon to do so. It is also necessary that the policy
is chalked out, keeping in view the conditions of the time, and a line
of action should be adopted taking into account the needs of the time
and place.

If all these things are kept in mind success is certain and Divine help
will surely come to us. Allah says: Believers, if you make effort Allah
will help you and make you steadfast. (Surah Muhammad, Verse 7)

In other words it means: If you sacrifice your lives and property in
the path of Allah you should know that firstly you will acquire the
prosperity and success of the faith and the world; and secondly you will
become entitled to Paradise; and thirdly: You will get the thing which
you like and that is the help of Allah and a speedy victory. Hence
convey this good news to the believers. (Surah Saf, Verse 13).


