Jihad and Martyrdom
===================

Ustaz Moosvi

I seek refuge in the Hearer and the Omniscient Allah from the accursed
Satan. In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. The believers
fight for the cause of Allah. The unbelievers fight for the cause of the
Devil. So fight against the friends of Satan, for the evil plans of
Satan are certainly weak. (Surah Nisa, verse 76).

One of the important Islamic subjects which have often been discussed
is Jihad. If most of the Quranic verses are studied carefully and in a
proper manner it will be observed that every time after a few verses
there occurs a verse which contains an order regarding Jihad. On the one
hand fighting and Jihad has been mentioned on one ground or another in
the verses containing religious, social and moral principles and orders,
and on the other hand the propaganda is being carried on for a few
centuries that Islam spread through sword and made advances and con-
quests so much so that this vicious propaganda has impressed even our
educated young men. The Muslim and impartial non-Muslim scholars have
also written books on the Islamic principles of defence and Jihad. What
does Jihad mean in Islam and how did Islam make progress? Did a
revolution take place in the Arabian Peninsula? How many lives did each
party lose in this intellectual, moral and social revolution?

Were the battles fought in the early days of Islam defensive or
offensive? All these questions are important m themselves. However, if
we start discussing these matters it is feared that we shall he
digressing from our real subject and the things which it is proposed to
narrate now will he left unsaid Apart from the religious and social
orders, laws and rules, defence is a natural and psychological matter
Allah has created a power m human nature which is called the power of
anger This power is also present in animals in different forms and its
object is the defence of their life Every animate being has a right to
live and in order to defend this right it makes use of its limbs.

The Almighty Allah has not only deposited this power in every animate
being hut has also created it m the plants It appears that some kinds of
vegetations are meant for the living beings like fruits and flowers, and
there are some other kinds which exist only for procreation although
other beings are no doubt pleased with their beauty and they enjoy it.
It is for this reason that there are sharp and dry thorns m some
fruit-hearing r trees Similarly there are sharp thorns in some flowers
Dagger like thorns around a flower indicate its internal power which
says with dumb language that its beauty, elegance and sweet smell demand
that the hand of an oppressor should not reach it.

In yesterday's meeting a young man recited some verses. (These verses
are of Nizami of Ganja. (The translation of) the first verse is as
follows: How long will you be frozen like ice and be like a rat which is
dead in water.) In any case some one has said well "Man falls a prey to
disorder (Khalal) owing to abject life and becomes helpless as a result
of cruelty and oppression If you wish to have a hunch of flowers in your
lap remain armed and ready for defence like a thorn"

From the point of view of eloquence these verses are in a way a miracle
and express a reality in the form of poetry. It is a fact that owing to
abjectness and humiliation the psychological equilibrium of a person is
destroyed It is possible that those who live the life of abjectness and
humiliation may very well perceive the realities, but they cannot
express them with their hands and tongue. This is what 'Khalal'
(disorder) means. No doubt it cannot be explained in a better way.
'Disorder' means that harmony ceases to exist between man's powers of
deliberation, understanding and action. Humiliation creates
psychological disorder. If the flower wants to preserve its freshness
and beauty and remain fixed to the branch, it is necessary that the
thorns should not allow the hand of an oppressor to approach it. Hence
this is the natural law of defence which appears in the animals in the
shape of horns, paws and teeth, and in the human beings in the shape of
the power of anger.

As man has been granted reason which is responsible for utilizing all
his natural powers in a correct manner he uses his power of anger to
safeguard his right, honour, reputation and national interest. Hence, if
we suppose that some law- giver or prophet comes and says that a nation
should be deprived of competence to fight and to defend itself, it will
be just like a reformer saying that as sexual power is the cause of bad
conduct and occasionally of harm, the men and women should be totally
deprived of this power. This example shows that the power of anger
should continue to exist in the human beings although it should, no
doubt, be put on the right path. Allah has created various powers and
abilities in man, but has also advised that they should be utilized in a
correct manner for the benefit and welfare of mankind.

For example the object of the creation of sexual power is the
procreation of human species. Similarly desire for food and hunger have
been created in man so that he may eat enough food to remain alive. If
the sexual power is not used properly it can, instead of becoming the
cause of procreation of species, become the cause of extinction of
species. The result of gluttony and sensuality is that instead of living
for eighty or one hundred years one passes away at the age of thirty or
forty years which is a sort of suicide. If the sexual power is used in
an unlawful manner a man instead of being the agent of reproduction
falls a prey to gonorrhea and syphilis and his power to generate comes
to an end.

Same is the case with the power of anger. When this power appears in
man he should use this weapon in a proper manner and should defend his
right, honour, reputation and country. However, if this power is used in
a manner other than the one prescribed by Allah, for example, if wars
are started on lame excuses or an effort is made to attack and occupy
the territories of others without just cause, this very power will
become the source of genocide. As the power of anger is present in man,
it should be bound by rules, and the manner in which it should appear
should be wise and healthy. Even if religion and law had not existed the
wise and righteous men of the world would have desired to sit together
and find out ways and means for reformation.

Now as regards the question as to what they would have done 'we can say
that it is possible that they might have thought of a plan to eliminate
war totally from the world. However, this is more easily said than
done.

Even today such claims are made. Arms reduction and control committees
and reconciliation commissions work day and night. This is, how- ever,
in conference rooms and palaces, but the underground factories remain
busy in manufacturing most destructive arms. Meetings are held to
discuss peace, banning of wars and stopping of atomic experiments and
right under the very nose of the participants of those meetings atom
bombs are manufactured. Then what should be done? What should be done is
that the power of anger should be spent in the path of Allah.

This is what Islam says. Islam has given dispute and fighting the name
of Jihad and has also imposed the condition of its being in the path of
Allah. Jihad in the path of Allah has been ordered in the Quran, Hadith
and our religious teachings. Now where and on which side is the path of
Allah? Is it towards the sky, towards the Ka'abah or towards Jerusalem?
In fact the path of Allah means the path of human welfare i.e. the path
of truth and justice. It means the path of human freedom in which some
people or some persons belonging to a particular class should not
dominate others. The general public should have equal opportunities in
the acquisition of knowledge.

N o particular class should monopolize the natural resources which have
been created by Allah for all. Allah has bestowed internal strength and
spiritual competence on all human beings. He has created this air, this
atmosphere and this light for the benefit of all, so that they may make
use of their capabilities and corporeal and spiritual powers. It is to
maintain this freedom that the believers have been ordered to perform
Jihad in the path of Allah. In our jurisprudence there is a chapter on
Jihad, which may please be looked into.

Jihad is discussed in connection with the Articles of Worship. There
are two parts of our Jurisprudence out of which one deals with the
Articles of Worship and the other with Transactions. The difference
between Articles of Worship and Transactions is that in the Articles of
Worship intention of proximity to Allah is necessary .For example,
prayers, fasting, Hajj, Zakat, Khums, ordering to do good and
restraining from evil, and Jihad are all Articles of Worship. Hence if a
person draws his sword and fights with the unbelievers but not with the
intention of proximity to Allah, he will no get spiritual reward. Even
if he is killed he will get no reward. He will get spiritual reward only
if he performs Jihad with the intention of proximity to Allah. Proximity
(qurbat) means being near to Allah. Now let us see once again what 'in
the path of Allah' means, where is Allah so that we may come near to
Him? Allah is Omnipresent and Omniscient.

His Intention and Attributes are apparent in the world. His proximity
is achieved when the individuals and the society act to please Him
according to His commands. Allah is Just and Wise. Hence practicing
justice and wisdom and making the people utilize the springs of goodness
and blessings is Jihad in the path of Allah. It is for this reason that
Jihad has been described as one of the Articles of Worship. When we
glance at the Quranic verses we find that wherever the word 'fighting'
or 'Jihad' occurs the condition 'in the path of Allah' has invariably
been imposed. In the verse, which I recited in the beginning as the
title of my speech, the Almighty Allah says: The believers fight for the
cause of Allah. The unbelievers fight for the cause of the Devil
(Taghut). So fight against the friends of Satan, for the evil plans of
Satan are certainly weak.

It seems that one part of this proposition is an admitted fact. Dispute
and fighting not only exist but they are inherent in human nature. The
real thing is the other part thereof. There are two kinds of human
beings -the believers and the unbelievers.

Life consists of fighting and effort. Those, who are true believers and
whose object is high and exalted, fight for the cause of Allah and
those, who are otherwise, fight for the cause of Taghut. You will ask:
What does 'Taghut' mean? What kind of word is this? Have those people
who read the Qur'an pondered over this word? 'Taghut' is the
hyperbolical form of 'Tughyan'. Tafa-alma'o (overflowing of water) means
that water became so abundant and its pressure became so much that it
over flowed its banks. Consequently there was flood which destroyed the
houses in the area and ruined the trees and farms.

This is the meaning of the flood of water. 'Taghut' means the
headstrong person who transgresses the bounds. This word is more
comprehensive than the words 'despot' and 'dictator', coined by the
Greek philosophers and the scholars of sociology, which are still in
use. This is so because 'despot' means a headstrong ruler who may
possibly rule over himself and may suppress his own desires, but
'Taghut' is that obstinate and headstrong person who transgresses all
bounds of decency and tramples upon the rights of all others; his
sensual desires increase so much that he may go to any extent. Some
people are of the view that 'Taghut, means idol.

It is true that idol is also a meaning of 'Taghut: but this meaning is
not quite correct from the literal point of view and it does not also
carry this meaning. Literally AI-Taghiah means headstrong, cruel and
proud and Al- Taghut means one who transgresses the limit; very
misguided; that is, Satan, who restrains others from doing good deeds.
Idol may be statute or image of the Roman Emperors or of some other
monarch.

In the 60th verse of Surah Nisa the Almighty Allah says: They choose to
take their affairs to Taghut for Judgment even though they are commanded
to deny him.

Evidently none takes his case to an idol for judgment. This shows that
the word 'Taghut' does not mean 'idol'. The word 'Taghut' has occurred
in the Quran at perhaps nine or seven places. It has occurred in Surah
Baqarah at two places in Aayat-al-Kursi alone. As we all know recitation
of Aayat-al- Kursi, especially after prayers, carries great spiritual
reward.

Aayat-al-Kursi: There is no compulsion in religion. Certainly, right
has become clearly distinct from wrong. who- ever rejects Taghut and
believes in Allah has firmly taken hold of a strong handle that never
breaks. Allah is All-hearing and All-knowing. Allah is the Guardian of
the believers and it is He who takes them out of darkness into light.
Taghut is the guardian of those who deny the Truth and he leads them
from light to darkness. (Surah Baqarah, Verse 256 & 257)

Man possesses one of the two conditions. Either his acts, his intention
and his thinking are for the sake of Allah, in which case he gradually
comes out of the darkness of worldly desires into the light of knowledge
and learning and sees his future to be bright, or the Devil (Taghut)
dominates over him. Man cannot live without a guardian. His guardian
will be either Allah or the Devil (Taghut). The Prophets and the Imams
are also guardians. We call them wali (guardian) because they implement
the Divine Will. Hence they are Aulia of Allah.

The Holy Prophet said to the people: " Am I not nearer to you than you
are to yourselves? You wished to be idolaters; you wished to remain
ignorant; you wished to shed the blood of one another; you wished to
remain weak, abject and helpless and subservient to the neighbouring
nations. You have seen that when I took your affairs in my hands you got
everything.

" In the same way on the day of Ghadir the Holy Prophet presented the
people with the last warning. As the revolution which had taken place
was before the eyes of the people and all of them were aware of it, he
said: " Am I not nearer to you than you are to yourselves?" If man does
not follow the teachings of Allah and the guardians he will inevitably
come under the control of 'Taghut'. Its sign and its result have also
been referred to thus: 'Taghut will gradually deprive him of the light
of nature, reason and perception and push him into the darkness of
ignorance, sensuality and wrong thinking.'

As has been said in the Quran the believers fight for the sake of Allah
whereas the unbelievers fight for the sake of Taghut. In this world
fighting is an unavoidable reality. If fighting ceases to take place in
the world the result will be that either the world will cease to exist
or it will be transformed into an absolutely new world. In other words
if fighting ceases to exist the human nature will undergo an absolute
change. In that case his life will be a different life. In any case so
long as human nature is as it is, fighting will continue to take place.
The fact is that those who are believers fight for the sake of Allah and
those who lack faith fight for the sake of Taghut, and they may be cruel
and headstrong. Those who transgress the limits ask afterwards:

"What is the object of this fighting?" This is another point. So far I
have mentioned so many points. The first point was that fighting is
inherent in human nature and it is not possible to eradicate it from the
world. The second point was that religion is not opposed to fighting. By
religion I mean the perfect religion and not Christianity. Apparently
Christianity instructs that there should be no fighting. It is
well-known that Prophet Jesus (P) said: 'If some one slaps you on one
cheek put the other cheek also before him " But has this ever been
followed in practice? What is the source of the wars which take place
every now and then? Are they initiated by us, Muslims?

Who was responsible for the bloodshed which took place during the last
one century in the shape of civil wars or world wars? Christianity says
that if you want to enter the Kingdom of Heaven you should lead a single
life; neither a man nor a woman should marry. Has this recommendation
ever been acted upon? Has the Christian Europe not become the centre of
sensuality? This is the reaction of this restraint. Only a few nuns and
monks have occupied the monasteries and subdued their corporeal
faculties in the name of Christianity. If it is a fact that Christianity
.has given such an order it must be a temporary order. Otherwise this
claim is not true. No doubt Islam confirms the Prophethood of Jesus
Christ (P). It must, therefore, be believed that all such things are
mere concoctions. The Qur'an says: We did not command them to lead the
monastic life. This was their own method of seeking the pleasure of
Allah. (Surah Hadid, Verse 27)

Monasticism is not the name of leading a single life only. Sequestering
oneself from the world, not defending truth and reality and abandoning
the right and law of defending oneself is also in fact monasticism. It
is for this reason that monasticism cannot become the general law of the
world. The administration of the world can be run only by means of that
law, which in the first instance builds human disposition and regulates
the society according to human nature, and should say simultaneously
that natural preferences form part of human disposition, but they should
not be used for homicide, plundering, sensuality, invasion and
exploitation, but they should be only for goodness and welfare work. You
should defend your right, your honour and your country. Defend the
constitution and laws. Develop this disposition gradually and make it
proceed in the right direction.

Fight them (the unbelievers} so that there will be no disbelief in
Allah and Allah's religion becomes dominant. If, change their behaviour
there would be no hostility against any one except the unjust. (Surah
Baqarah, verse 192 -Surah Anfal, Verse 39)

There are the two aspects of 'in the path of Allah ', one of which is
positive and the other is negative. Fight, but with what pose? Should it
be for the sake of conquest and to acquire booty? No. On the other hand
convey the message of Allah to the people and free them from the
servitude of the oppressors. Remove the hardships of human life.
Eliminate those powers and classes which are opposed to the rights of
the masses and which suppress their rights and speech. These are the
meanings of 'in the path of Allah'! Relieve the people of the tightness
of the atmosphere so that they may become acquainted with the Source of
the Universe i.e.

the Almighty Allah. Fight with the powerful classes who deceive the
weak to achieve their own ends and who make their lives miserable -those
who make the people go astray from the right path, ensnare them in
falsehood, make them deviate from the Unity of Allah and put them on the
path of polytheism, idolatry and worship of power. These are the
difficulties and troubles of human life which must be removed from the
path. We should eliminate those special classes, who lead luxurious
lives at the cost of the hard labour of the common people and who
trample upon the rights of millions of people as the Caesar and Kisra
used to do. Just see what a Muslim soldier once said.

When this bare -footed Arab soldier came to the Commander of the
Iranian forces, the Commander said to him: "Have you come to occupy this
country? Have you come to loot wealth? Are you hungry? Are you in need
of dress? We shall let you have your fill. We shall give money to your
officers as well as to your soldiers. So you should go back to your
country."

The Iranian Commander thought that he had sufficiently impressed the
Muslim soldier. But just see what reply he gave and how his words were
recorded in history. He said to the Iranian Commander's face something
very meaningful. He said: "We have been deputed by our Prophet to
liberate the nations of the world from the man -made laws and religions,
which have been made in the interest of some special classes and instead
of that to make everyone get his right and to elevate the common people
by means of Islam to the position of dignity and respect. (This refers
to the Battle of Qadsiya that was fought in 637 A.D. during the
Caliphate of Umar, the Second Caliph and wherein Rustam Farrukhzad was
killed) This is Islamic Jihad and this is what Jihad means i.e.
spreading the truth and endeavouring to preserve one's right. Islam does
not call this effort 'fighting' or 'war', but gives it the name of Jihad
i.e. effort for the sake of Truth. The jurists mention 'the path of
Allah' with it.

Some one asked the Holy Prophet: "What will be the position of a person
who goes in the field of Jihad so that he may acquire some booty?" The
Holy Prophet said thrice: " Allah will not grant him any spiritual
reward."

Another person asked: "If a person participates in a battle to display
his bravery, So that people may see his feats and he may become famous,
is such a person a mujahid in the path of Allah?" The Holy Prophet
replied: " A mujahid is he, who performs Jihad so that Allah's cause may
stand supreme and His will may prevail."(Surah Taubah, Verse 40)

This is the path of Allah and this is what Islamic Jihad means. This is
not the occasion to narrate all the relevant verses and to explain
them.

Of course, it is true that after the early period of Islam crookedness
took place among the Muslims. During the period of the Omayyad Caliphs
Islamic Jihad was also metamorphosed like everything else of Islam,
because it also forms part of the basic principles of Islam. The British
historian Carlyle has said very well. I do not remember his exact words
(We reproduce Thomas Carlyl's statement from his book "On Heroes,
Hero-Worship and the Heroic in History" after end of this chapter -
Publisher) but while defending Islam against the accusation that it has
spread by means of sword he says: "This matter needs to be studied from
a still higher angle.

Is Islam true or not? If it is the code of monotheism and Godliness; if
it has its own system which is based on just laws and if it enjoins
working for the betterment and welfare of the the people it is a true
religion and it is from Allah; if it is true it should spread and
flourish -if not by means of sword let it be by means of teeth and
claws." It cannot be asked as to why Islam spread by means of sword. The
real question is as to what spread -truth or falsehood? Your argument is
that as this religion has spread by means of sword it is false. We say
that it is not correct. As it is a true religion the sword should
necessarily be used for its advancement. Why do you think the other way?
If you have no enmity against Islam and if you do not want to calumniate
it and humiliate it in the eyes of a handful of fanatic persons of
Europe why do you say that Islam is a false religion as battles were
fought to spread it.

You should say that as Islam is a true religion it has ordered its
followers to fight. If a plant does not bear flowers why should thorns
be sown around it? If man does not possess the individual right to live
and to defend himself why has he been given the power of anger? As man
has been given this power a right of his is established and when he
possesses this right it is necessary for him to use this power. Of
course this power should be used by him to defend his right and not for
an invalid purpose.

This is the reality of Jihad. Hence it is absolutely incredible that a
religion which is true and has come from Allah should. have no defensive
and propagative aspect and there should be no arrangement for its
advancement. If there were a religion, which did not have its defensive
system, we do not believe that it would have said that it was from Allah
and for the welfare of mankind and its object was the guidance and
betterment of the people till the Day of Judgment.

Islam is the religion which desires the reformation of humanity. It
turns the face of man from animal desires and makes him pay attention
directly to Allah. It wants that the cause of justice may stand supreme.
It wants the end of those powerful persons who make the people tools for
murder and plundering on various national and other pretexts. In this
way it wants religion may become exclusively for Allah. Islam is a
religion which aims at becoming the code of our life with its real
spirit. Only then will it make us say that Allah is One and He has sent
a Prophet for our guidance.

If some one asks you as to how the deviated world can be reformed, you
should tell him that the way of its reformation is that the people of
the world should wage war against those tyrants who play with the lives,
property and honour of the people and plunder their rights. If a sacred
battle is fought by means of which the Pharaohs of the time are
obliterated from the face of the earth it will not be a bad thing. This
is religion.

When some one says: "It is truth" then he should have a sword in his
hand and say "It is truth and this truth should advance". Evidently the
people will ask: "How far should it advance?" Tell them that it should
advance up to the point the religion advances and falsehood surrenders
before truth. Now they are Muslims and your brethren.

However, if they say that they wish to continue to hold their beliefs
and will pray in their own way, but agree to submit to the general
Islamic law, they will be called 'Zimmi' (Non-Muslims in an Islamic
State are called 'Zimmi!).

Whoever becomes a Zimmi also enjoys the same rights as a Muslim does.
Now an Arab cannot say that as Islam first appeared in his land he is
superior to a non-Arab. On the other hand if a non-Arab becomes a
Muslim, he becomes equal to an Arab and even superior to him if he is
comparatively more pious. Similarly a person, who is more acquainted
with the principles and teachings of Islam, enjoys a higher position.
This is the criterion of superiority.

To whatever colour or creed a man belongs whether he is a Chinese, a
Roman or a Zanzibari, if he admits the reality, he becomes a Muslim and
all Muslims enjoy equal rights. None is entitled to tell another: " As I
am an Arab and have embraced Islam earlier than you, I enjoy a prior
right as compared with you and as you have embraced Islam later, your
right is superseded."

The basic reason: for the deterioration which took place after the
early days of Islam was that gradually the Arabs became proud and
thought that as they were the first to embrace Islam and their country
was the birth place of this religion they enjoyed superiority over
others. On this basis the Arabs began usurping the rights of others and
pushed them back. Later also this national and racial discrimination
continued and became the cause of various calamities.

Even today it is the same national and racial bias, which is I found
among the foreign rulers and foreign organizations, who are prejudiced
against the Muslims, and are creating dissensions I among them and
placing obstacles in their path. Would that the Muslims had become
brothers like the devoted followers of the early days of Islam ! All of
them should be equal and if they fight they should fight to secure
freedom for the weak.

To sum up is it possible that there. is a religion in the world which
has come from Allah but no order has been given about its advancement
and defence? Even if we suppose the existence of such a religion, it
will not be correct. After all against whom should fighting take place?
Against whom has Jihad been ordered? Jihad means that in the first
instance the people should be invited to Islam. As this invitation is
exactly in conformity with nature, they will certainly accept it,
especially those who live freely.

However, there is a group which includes the. ruling clique and the
opportunist class. This group knows that its interest lies in the
position that people should not gather together on truth and, therefore,
naturally opposes this invitation. It is at this stage that fighting
starts and its object is to eliminate this class. Thus those persons,
who possess Islamic capabilities, come in the forefront. Did this very
thing not happen in Iran? A study of history will show that the people
were: happy on being' invited to embrace Islam. Only those military I
officers who received pension from the rulers opposed the Muslims and
the general public was supporting the Muslims. There are many examples
in history which go to show that the Roman and Iranian public cooperated
with the Muslims and helped them. The people used to say: "If your
slogan is really , Allah o Akbar' (Allah is Great) we are glad to
receive you."

They said: " All human beings are equal before Allah and we are,
therefore, ready to help you." They, too, therefore, participated in the
battle from the side of the Muslims with the object of removing that
deteriorated and corrupt class which had suppressed the thinking and
capabilities of the people. As a consequence of this the latent
capabilities of the Iranians suddenly made their appearance. Turn every
leaf of the history of Iran before Islam and after Islam. How did all
these poets, scholars, writers, researchers and orators come into
existence all of a sudden? It was the blessing of Islam which washed and
purified the dirty society.

Islam says: "Preach the truth. If there is any obstacle in the way
remove it. If the opponents attack you, you are also entitled to defend
yourselves. Your mission is to convey the message of Islam to the
people. As Islam is the religion of Allah it is necessary to remove
every impediment and obstacle from its way." The second question is that
of defence. If the infidels or some other foreign powers attack a Muslim
country it is the duty of all Muslims to defend the Muslim country.

Thus there are two kinds of war. The object of one is to advance
whereas the other is defensive war .There is also another kind of war
and Jihad which is called 'Civil war'. A religious minority may accept
the guardianship of the Muslims and acquire the status of "Zimmi" in a
country in which Islamic government is established and Islamic laws are
promulgated, Islamic penalties are imposed and its administration is run
with the money provided by the Muslim tax -payers. As regards the Jewish
or Christian minority living in such a country Islam says:

'If the Zimmis remain within the limits of their responsibility and act
according to their promise they are free to perform worship in their own
way like any Muslim.'

If the Zimmis pay 'Jazyah' (a sort of tax) their life and property will
be safe like that of a Muslim. None will be entitled to attack their
property and honour. However, if they violate the promise made by them
they will no longer remain Zimmis but will become 'Muharib' (Combatant
rebels). Since they have transgressed the limits, war will be waged
against them within the Islamic country till they obey truth and law and
submit once again to the Islamic government.

Now let us see in the light of Islamic Jurisprudence as to what the
duties and responsibilities of a Zimmi are, and to what extent the
Muslims are under obligation t() mete out good treatment to him. This
information is available in detail in our books on Jurisprudence. I,
however, quote below an extract from the book entitled
'Mukhtasar-al-Nafe' of Allama Hilli. He says that there are five
conditions for being a Zimmi:

(1) The Zimmi should pay Jazyah i.e. he should pay a special tax to"
the Islamic public treasury so that his rights are secured and the
Muslims do not harm him.

(2) He should not harm the Muslims, should not commit adultery with a
Muslim woman, should not steal the property of the Muslims and should
not maintain liaison with the enemies of the Muslims.

(3) He should not perform openly those acts which have been declared
unlawful by Islam such as drinking wine, adultery and marrying those
women to whom marrying is not permissible in Islam.

(4) The non-Muslims should not construct new Churches and. Synagogues,
should not ring bells (in the temples) and should follow the general
laws in this behalf. (Churches, Masjids and Houses have been discussed
and orders relating to them have been narrated). In any 'case the
non-Muslims cannot construct new places of worship and if they construct
any, the same would be pulled down. At places where the sound of the
Azan of the Muslims is raised the sound of bell should not be raised.

(5) No Zimmi is entitled to construct a building which is higher than
that of the Muslim.

To whom do the multi-storied buildings situated on our main roads
belong? Who are those who are cooperating with the enemies of the
Muslims in this country when the Islamic law exists? Is it Islamic
jurisprudence:! I wish that you yourselves should admit as to who are
usurping the wealth of the Muslims and helping Zionism and all the Jews
in the world. Who are they who become the cause of the modesty of Muslim
women being outraged? Are they Zimmis or combatant rebels? Only a Jurist
can give judgement about it.

If, according to the orders narrated by the Sunni and Shi'ah Ulema in
this behalf, a government itself (supposing that this is not the state
of affairs in our country) is involved in these matters what is the
responsibility of the Muslims and what attitude should they adopt
towards that government? What is the order of the Islamic jurisprudence?
I do not wish that fanaticism should be involved in narrating this
order.


