Supplement
==========

On the one hand they push the Muslims into deserts and violate the
limits prescribed by Islam and on the other hand they grab and continue
to grab the wealth of the Muslims on different pretexts and are spending
it to propagate immodesty instead of utilizing it for productive and
development works. I do not name anyone. If a foreign government opens
an embassy , the high officers and Ministers of this Islamic country
also go there and eat and drink and spend their time in revelries. What
should be the attitude of the Muslims to such a government? This you
should decide yourself.

Is a government which does not follow the laws of Islam entitled to
rule the Muslims?

Please ponder over it. If it is false, refute it; and if it is true,
this state of affairs does not conform to the Islamic principles. Today
Zionism is the second face of imperialism. In its real shape imperialism
has been defeated. Now it has put on the garb of Zionism, and Zionism
has assumed the shape of Israel. In Iran Israel has disguised itself in
another manner and has appeared in the shape of Bahaism. (Iran is a
Shi'ah Islamic country but here only good wishes can be expressed for
Islam, because the Bahais dominate all the departments and Ministries of
this country)

I address the government officers who are present here openly or
secretly and say: "Sir, it is a matter which concerns Islam. It concerns
religion and religion wants that the supervision of the country should
be in its own hands. It should be above the Head of State and it should
also be below him. Now please consider yourself as to why I am
inconveniencing you with these words. Do not allow me to speak. Silence
me. Then my responsibility will come to an end. However, when I come
here I shall be obliged to narrate the Islamic laws. I am not the
employee of anyone. I am not in the pay of anyone. I do not wish that
the administration of the country should be entrusted to me. I do not
want any title. I am what I am, whether you like it or not.

I have been worried very much since yesterday and this has been only
due to the fact that yesterday evening some young Muslims had arranged a
'Majlis' in Wazashib. What is all this. Why am I not told clearly not to
mount the pulpit and not to address a Majlis.

I am saying all this because I am worried. I myself am responsible for
what I say. I am afraid lest tomorrow you should catch hold of the
:master of the house, interrogate him and begin playing with his life.
He is not concerned. Tell me that I have told a lie, I speak against
Islam, I am guilty of sabotage and I maintain liaison with the foreign
missions. Say what you like; charge sheet me.

People know what I am and what is the shape of an Islamic government.
Are these people fit to be called the protectors of faith? We could not
raise our heads when we were told in Motmar-i-lslami as to what kind of
relations we have with other countries.

I ask the Minister of Agriculture: Sir is there no Muslim adviser in
this country? Is there no engineer here? If there is . none borrow them
from Switzerland, India or Germany. But is it necessary that the adviser
for the division of land should be a Zionist Jew? After all about how
many things should one complain? I say this because I know it and I have
proof about it. Refute me if you can. I know about the celebration which
was held a month ago, where it was held and who its organizers were. I
know their names. I also know the advisers. We were informed about it,
but I said that we were not concerned. You know how much publicity is
given in the newspapers when some one proceeds on a journey or returns
from it. However, when a conference was held about al-Quds none wrote
even a word about its participants or about the discussions held in it.
Whose hand can be in it except that of the agents of Israel -the same
agents of Israel who are busy destroying morals, modesty, economy,
ambition and aspiration and everything else in this country. As
Aqa-i-Motaheri has said their aspiration is above every danger. Today I
want to warn all of you -all the Muslim brethren and Ulema and elders
about the danger ahead. Then you may know better what to do. Or let the
government refute me and say that what I am saying is all a bundle of
lies and mere propaganda. We cannot raise our head before the world on
account of shame.

This is also a stage of Jihad and that too ,is Jihad which is performed
against the infidels for the advancement of Islam. Defence of Islam and
the Islamic country is also Jihad. The object of one Jihad is that a
Zimmi may not become a muharib (combatant rebel). There are three kinds
of Jihad ordered by Islam. The campaign against despotism and
dictatorship is also Jihad so that none should act arbitrarily in an
Islamic country and should not become a Devil. It is the duty of every
Muslim to correct a despot and a dictator and tender him good advice.
Despotism or dictatorship is not a good thing in itself. It is not in
the interest of the country. It is not in the interest of the society.
No dictator can remain in position forever. He should be admonished.

If he does not listen to advice he should be confronted and force
should be used against him. It is possible that you, who are Muslims,
may say that if the position is this why don't the Ulema mention these
things in connection with Jihad. Why have different things been said in
our traditions and Hadith in this regard? When we look at the early
history of Islam we see that in the early days of Islam the Commander of
the Faithful treated valid all those battles, in which the Muslims had
participated. He not only was on the side of the Mujahids (fighters) but
also sent his sons to fight some battles. But what happened thereafter?
Thereafter came the period of Muawiyyah and Yazid. According to the
traditions about Jihad which have come down to us one of the conditions
of Jihad is that it should be performed under the leadership of a
righteous Imam or a righteous ruler. It has been stated specifically in
the traditions and Hadith that warfare should not be for strengthening
the authority of an oppressive ruler or an oppressive leader. Hence it
has been ordered that fighting and defence should be under- taken under
the leadership of a just ruler.

What were the conditions during the time of the Imams? The Muslims
fought and the Islamic territories expanded, but to whose benefit? If a
Muslim goes and conquers China and as a result of that Abdul Malik bin
Marwan, or Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik or some Abbasid Caliph benefits and
becomes the Commander of the Faithful and Caliph of the Muslims, Islam
does not want such a conquest. It is for the reason that the permission
of a righteous ruler for Jihad has been insisted upon again and again in
the Hadith. This is the real matter. It is just as has been said in the
Hadith about Friday prayers which needs attention. Friday prayer is the
sign of rulership. If it had been said that it was valid to offer Friday
prayers led by any person it would have meant acknowledging the
government of Walid bin Abdul Malik or Mutawakkal Abbasl or any Omayyad
as valid, because Friday prayers were led by their representatives.

However Friday prayer is not like other prayers. Hence it has been
said: Offer Friday prayers if there is a righteous Imam to lead it;
otherwise do not offer it. Do not support and acknowledge a despotic
government. However, if the Muslims themselves gather together and offer
prayers and the said obstacle is not there, there is no reason why
Friday prayers should not be obligatory. When we study the Hadith
regarding Friday prayers we find that it is similar to Jihad. The Holy
Imams of Ahl-al- Bayt used to say: 'For what purpose do you perform
Jihad? Do you perform it so that the people may get more war booty? Or
that luxuries may increase in the palace of Haroon-al-Rashid? Or that
the number of the singing girls should rise from one thousand to five
thousand?' The Imams did not accept such an Islam. Such an Islam is not
admissible. There is no result of such a development except that the
reality of Islam is hidden. When Umar bin Abdul Aziz became Caliph he
tried to reform the state of affairs. However, when he restrained the
usurpers opposition began from all sides. It was perhaps the governor of
Turkistan who wrote at that time:

"People are coming in large numbers and wish that we may accept their
Islam so that they may not have to pay tribute or Jazyah. Permit us not
to accept their Islam so that we may continue to charge Jazyah from
them. " Umar bin Abdul Aziz sent a representative of his with
instructions to go there and whip the governor. He also wrote to him: "
Allah sent His Prophet as a guide and not as a collector of revenue." It
was written from Egypt: "The Copts are becoming Muslims Permit us to
circumcise them. We may accept the Islam of those who agree to be
circumcised and we may charge Jazyah from others." On this occasion also
Umar bin Abdul Aziz sent a representative of his and wrote: " Allah sent
Muhammad (P) as the last of the Prophets to guide the people and not to
circumcise the people. "

In short the Islamic conquests had assumed this shape. At last it so
happened that one Islamic country began attacking the other. The object
of these attacks was to grab the wealth of the other country .The Holy
Imams have, therefore, said that Jihad is permissible, only when a
righteous Imam or a righteous ruler issues its order. Some jurists have
said- that righteous Imam means an infallible Imam. However, if that had
been so, the word "righteous' (Adil) would not have been used for him.
Righteousness and infallibility are the inseparable attributes of the
Holy Imams, that is to say every infallible person is righteous, but
every righteous person is not infallible. Hence, if the leader- ship of
Muslims is in the hands of a righteous person, Jihad is obligatory for
all of them. In my opinion this is a subject, which the great Ulema,
scholars and orators should discuss and conduct further research.

It is not possible that a true religion, which has its own discipline
should be devoid of Jihad and defence and with whatever calamity Islam
and the Muslims are faced the Muslims should sit still, waste the power
of advancement of Islam and make it lifeless and static. I re- collect a
Hadith which I want to narrate before you: "Once, when Imam Sajjad (P)
was going to perform Hajj, a man named Ibad Basri who was fond of
criticism and dispute, came to him and said: 'You have abandoned the
difficult task of Jihad and adopted the easy task of Haj, although Allah
says: Allah has purchased the souls and property of the believers in
exchange for Paradise. They fight for the cause of Allah to destroy His
enemies and to sacrifice themselves. This is a true promise, which He
has revealed in the Torah, the Gospel and the Qur'an. No one is more
true to His promise than Allah. Let this bargain be glad news for them.
This is indeed the supreme triumph. " (Surah Taubah, verse 111)

The Imam said with great coolness, which was peculiar to him: 'Read the
other verse following that verse. The verse does not end in its meaning
here. Read its remaining part also. ' He read: (The believers) who
repent of their sins, worship Allah, praise Him, travel through the land
(for pious purposes). kneel down and prostrate themselves in obedience
to Allah, make others do good and prevent them from sins and abide by
the Laws of Allah, will receive a great reward. Let this be a glad news
to the believers. (Surah Taubah, verse 112)

According to this verse the condition for performing Jihad is that the
Mujahid should repent his sins, should worship Allah, should come out of
his home, should kneel down and prostrate himself before Allah, should
make others do good and prevent them from sins and should abide by the
Laws of Allah. The Imam Said to that man: "Have you seen anywhere
persons possessing these qualities. Participating in Jihad along with
such persons is superior to Hajj." That is, the question is for what
purpose and in whose company Jihad should be performed. During the time
of the Holy Imams such conditions were created that it was necessary to
ponder over the manner of their reasoning about Jihad and to understand
fully the words used by them. Do they mean to say that the power of
defence and ambition for development of the Muslims should be eliminated
and they should become sycophants, abject, helpless and weak? Was it not
their object that the Muslims should not lose their lives without
cause?

The people should rise for Jihad when truth is evident and it is known
who the opponent is. They should rise when the intentions are good and
Jihad is in the path of Allah, otherwise Islam, notwithstanding the
importance attached by it to Jihad and fighting, considers human lives
more valuable. It does not desire that the people should be carried away
by sentiments and lose their lives, or their blood may stir and they may
sacrifice themselves, for the benefit of a particular group.

When the people are asked to defend the country for its security and
permanence or for the honour of the nation, a Muslim will inevitably
ask: 'For whom and for which country?

Have I gone mad that I should defend the country so that the hold of a
few persons should become more strong and they should loot more than
before? Of course, if I am asked to step forward in the path of Allah to
support Truth, I am ready to do so.'

If a true Muslim is asked whether he would fight for the sake of a
particular material school of thought which guarantees food and dress
his reply will evidently be: 'These people are madly going after the
world. The Jihad of those wise people, who are above these things and
follow the Islamic teachings, is for Truth and for the sake of Allah.
Islam has prepared permanent paths for it.'

Here are a few sentences of the sermon which Imam Husayn (P) delivered
after reaching near Karbala. Abu Mukhnaf Tabari quotes it from Uqbah bin
Abi-al-'Ezarat. I am not aware whether or not some persons will be able
to digest this tradition. In any case at the halting-place called
'Baizah " when soldiers of Hur (who later joined the Holy Imam) were
also present before the Imam, he stood up and uttered these words so
that his object might become clear to all. This is a matter of
principle. After praising Allah he said: "0 people! The Holy Prophet has
said: It was the method of the Imams that when they had to communicate
something special to their Shi'ah and devotees and followers, they said
it from their own side but when those addressed were not devoted to them
or were double -minded they (the Imams) quoted the Hadith of the Holy
Prophet. [ In both the cases, however. the words were of the Holy
Prophet (P). ]

"If a person sees a despotic ruler who treats lawful the things made
unlawful by Allah, violates the covenant of Allah, opposes the Sunnah of
the Holy Prophet, oppresses the servants of Allah, and treats them
disgracefully and he does not endeavour to change his (the ruler's)
conduct by means of his words and deeds (i.e. remains silent) Allah is
entitled to throw that tyrant in whichever layer of Hell He likes, and
send to Hell along with him the person who remains silent, because owing
to his silence he also becomes a partner in his injustice and crime."
This is what the Holy Prophet has said.

Then the Holy Imam said: "See and beware of the fact that these people
(i.e. the government and its agents) have submitted to Satan and have
ceased to obey the Beneficent Allah. They are spreading evil openly.
They have suspended the penal laws. They have appropriated public
property. They have made lawful the things made unlawful by Allah and
made unlawful the things made lawful by Allah. If all other Muslims
remain silent it is my primary duty to change this state of affairs. "

Then he addressed the people further and said: "You sent letters and
messages to me. Your representatives came to see me. and said that you
had made a covenant to help me and not to desert me. Now, if you remain
faithful to your covenant and oath, it will be something wise, because I
am Husayn son of Ali and son of Fatima (P), the beloved daughter of the
Holy Prophet. I myself am with you and the members of my family are with
the members of your families.

"We do not consider ourselves separate from you nor do we desire any
distinction. We are with the people. We shall suffer what the people
suffer and the people will suffer what we suffer. Our life is with the
lives of the people. We do not want to rule the people and to enjoy any
distinction between you and us. We consider ourselves to be one of you.
Our wives and children are like your wives and children
(Tarikh-i-Tabari. Vol. IV).

These words of the Holy Imam could not surprise anyone, because the
people had before them the specimen of a few years' government of Imam
Ali (P). When anyone saw him in the streets and bazars of Kufa, did he
feel any difference between him and an ordinary citizen? Did anyone, who
visited his house, find his house and household furniture better than
that of others? Did the members of his family enjoy any distinction
between them and the families of others? This is an excellent specimen
of an Islamic government and an Islamic ruler. This is not the
government of any individual. It is the government of Allah.

As a matter of principle none enjoys sovereignty in Islam except Allah.
Sovereignty belongs to Allah only. (Surah An'am, verse 57). The Prophet,
the Imams and after them the Mujtahids and even the Common Muslims only
enforce the Divine laws. It was for this reason that Imam Husayn (P)
said: "I myself am with you and the members of my family are with the
members of your families." i.e. 'you should not think that I wish that
my own life as well as the lives of the members of my family should
remain safe whereas I should make others lay down their lives. , The
apparent difference between Imam Ali(P) and MJl'3.wiyyah was also the
same. Mu'3.wiyyah used to remain behind the front resting on a big
pillow, and a soft mattress was spread under his feet. Sweets of all
kinds were placed before him. He ate the sweets and laughed and sent the
unlucky persons to face the swords. He ordered them: "Go and be killed".
Imam Ali (P) also used to give orders but he remained ahead of others on
the front, faced the swords and arrows, advised and guided others and
raised slogans.

When we imagine the scene of the battle of Siffin we see Mu'3.wiyyah
sitting in his seat and ridiculing others. He is happy that he has
befooled the simpletons, roused their sentiments by means of misleading
propaganda and sent them to the front so that he himself might rule
peacefully. When Imam. Ali (P) gave some orders he himself was the first
to step forward. This is the specimen of: "I myself am with you and the
members of my family are with the members of your families. "

Then the Holy Imam said: "If you have broken the oath of allegiance
(bay'at) and now are regretful, and have turned away from your covenant
it is not strange on your part. You did the same thing with my father,
my brother and my cousin Muslim. Whoever relies on you will be deceived.
If you do not fulfill your promise you will not only harm me but will
also be the losers yourselves. Whoever breaks his promise harms himself.
Allah will soon make me independent of you, when He will provide me
place in the neighbourhood of His blessings."

It has been quoted in Behar-al-Anwar from "Manaqib-e-Ibne Shahre
Ashobe" that when Hur ibn Yazid Riahi made the Holy Imam dismount in the
land of Karbala in compliance with the orders of Ubaidullah ibne Ziad
and himself also dismounted along with his one thousand soldiers, Imam
Husayn (P) asked for pen and paper and wrote a letter to the elders and
distinguished persons of Kufa.

"From Husayn ibne Ali (P) to Sulaiman bin Sard, Mussayyab bin Najyah,
Rafa'ah bin Shaddad, Abdullah bin Wal arid other believers."(The
distinguished Shi'ah who were addressed by the Holy Imam, were either in
prison or had been exiled or could not come to him for some other
reason. The letter begins with these words: You know that the Holy
Prophet said: " If a person sees a despotic ruler...." Perhaps he
reproduced the sentences of the sermon mentioned above and sent them to
the people of Kufa.

The winding up of this discussion concerns a martyr. The conditions of
martyrdom and its effects have been discussed in detail in
Jurisprudence. Whoever understands its reality and its object and then
sacrifices his life, remaining steadfast, is a martyr according to the
terminology of the Holy Qur'an i.e. a martyr is one, who observes Truth
and sacrifices his life after observing Truth and whose object of being
killed is not on account of some one's mistake or instigation or rousing
of sentiments. A martyr does not lay down his life on account of avarice
or personal benefit but with the intention of acquiring proximity to
Allah. He is above personal wishes and desires. He is well aware of the
value and worth of Truth and it is for this reason that he courts death
for the sake of Truth. This is the reality of self -sacrificing. It is
not that a sufi should sit in a monastery and repeat the name of Allah
and should think that he has become one with Truth. To be in proximity
with Truth means:

If you sacrifice your feet and your head in the path of Allah your
entire body (from top to bottom) will become the light of Allah.

A martyr is he, who surrenders his life for the sake of Truth, forgets
his self in the path of Truth and after observing Truth gets ready to
sacrifice his life to establish Truth. Everyone who is killed is not a
martyr. A person, who is .killed on account of some error or in
connection with some matter which has a worldly aspect, is one, who is a
loser in this world as well as in the Hereafter.

A martyr is one, who strengthens his faith, recognizes Allah, believes
in the Hereafter, believes in its permanency and sets his face against
the worldly connections after fully understanding his aim and object. As
such, a person, who observes Truth, is not afraid of death. Death is
easy for him. Some Sufis say that while offering prayers one should pay
attention to the Pole. They say that as man is material he cannot pay
attention to Allah who is Absolute. Hence, in order to pay attention to
Allah he should rely on some material manifestation. This view of the
Sufis is wrong. The fact is that attention can be paid to the Absolute
only after gradually com1ng out of the material limits. Incidentally,
however, we allude to a particular group. While offering prayers we say:
You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek assistance. Guide
us to the right path. (Surah Hamd, Verse 4) and then say invariably:

The path of those to whom You have granted blessings. Which blessings?
Are they wealth and power? In another verse it has been said: Those who
obey Allah and His Prophet. They will be with those who have been
granted blessings by Allah. Then there comes the details of those
blessed groups. The first of them are the Prophets. Then come the
Siddiqin (Truthful) i.e. those who have observed Truth with their heart
and intellect and testified it with their lives and property. And then
the Shuhada (martyrs) i.e. those who laid down "their lives in the path
of Allah. Their rank is very high. And then there are Saliheen (the
Righteous) who come after the first three groups and follow them during
their lives. These are the four groups upon whom Allah has bestowed all
His blessings. Hence those who obey Allah are also with them and are
their fellow-travellers.

As an internal revolution takes place in the martyrs they observe Truth
and are killed for the sake of Truth. Allah has also guaranteed the
preservation of their lives. Are you not surprised to know that some
persons were gathered in a corner of the world. Their enemies did not
allow their voice to be heard outside. They encircled and besieged them
and put them to death and cut their bodies to pieces. They did not spare
even one of them lest he shall go to other places and inform the people
about what had happened. In spite of this the creatures of Allah
preserved their names, actions and monuments. Is it not a miracle? Is it
not a manifestation of Truth that their history continues to exist in
the world? The names of their parents and the names of their wives and
even the names of their horses and the words uttered by them in the
battle - field are all alive and have become immortal.

From where did these details come and how were they preserved? The
reason is that these people passed the stage of mortality and went to
the stage of eternity. This is the foundation of gradual perfection and
spiritual journey. On reaching the stomach of a sheep vegetation is
converted into flesh, skin and bones and on reaching man's stomach
mutton is changed into reflection, perception, strength and faith. If it
reaches the stomach of a distinguished person it is changed into
determination, power, faith and other talents which are eternal. Thus it
becomes known that sacrifice is a stage of gradual perfection. Rumi
says:

" After being annihilated in the capacity of an inanimate being I
became competent to grow. Then why should I fear that I shall become
extinct after death."

A person who sacrifices his life for an exalted reality certainly
continues to exist. Hence why should I fear that I shall become extinct
after death. On the other hand: "If I die once again in the capacity of
a human being it is possible that I may arrive in the celestial world
and grow plumage like the angels."

The people of Karbala had grown plumage on the day of Ashura. It seems
that their personality had been strengthened. One of them said: "O Abu
Abdullah permit me to go to the battle field, " Another said: "Permit me
to sacrifice my life. I am no longer desirous of living". They were men
of this type. They too had wives and children and other relatives. They
too had their needs. Take the case of Zuhayr bin Qayn Bijali. Once he
was impressed by the propaganda of Mu'awiyyah and his government and
demanded blood-money in connection with the murder of Uthman. As regards
the descendants of Imam Ali (P) he looked at them in a different manner.
By chance he met Husayn bin Ali (P) on the way and went to his tent. It
is not known what they talked about and what enthusiasm the Holy Imam
inculcated in him so that it made him cut off all worldly relations. A
little earlier he possessed animals such as camels, sheep, goats and
cows. He had a tribe. He was a wealthy man. Now he suddenly abandoned
all these things. He himself says that he saw that his very figure was
changed.

After all why are we people so soulless? Evidently, because we have no
object. And as we have no object we think that wealth- and strength are
the only things which matter, by what- ever means they are acquired. If
they are not available life is bitter. When a person, whether he is a
trader, a craftsman or an employee of government, returns home in the
evening, he looks so tired and morose that even his wife and children
cannot pick- up courage to speak to him. This is so, because he has not
got what he desired. What did he desire? Whether he is a military man or
a civilian employee, he says: 'Today or this year all my colleagues have
been promoted, but I have not been promoted. All of them, except me,
have been given a higher rank. The income of such and such person has
increased immensely, but my income continues to be the same. My
financial circumstances are so narrow. ' All are dejected and depressed.
Why? Because they have become slaves of the material world. Come let us
become martyrs so that we may dominate the world. This is what is meant
by 'believer'. This very Zohyr-e-Qayn, dejected and double-minded, met
Imam Husayn. (P) He did not know what life really meant and whether Ali
was on the right path or Mu'awiyyah. He was filled with various doubts
and suspicions.

He was spending his days in a state of perplexity and was overpowered
by desires and regrets. He could not get time on account of his
abominable activities of the world. However, when he returned he had
acquired a new life. All his doubts had been removed. He cut off all
worldly relations and attained martyrdom. He became a martyr there and
then even before he was killed. This is called 'martyrdom'. The
disturbance of his mind came to an end. Life became easy for him. When
he under- stood the Truth he became indifferent to everything else. It
became immaterial for him whether he lived or was killed. When he
returned to his tent he said to his wife (whose name has been recorded
in history as 'Binte Amru'): 'Go and look after your task. My task is
finished. All these cows, sheep, goats and camels are yours. I am no
longer interested in them. 'Zohayr walked on. The night of Ashur came.
And then it was the morning of Ashur and then came the afternoon. Blood
was trickling from his body and his lips were dry on account of thirst.
In this condition he came up to Imam Husayn (P) and placed his hand on
his shoulder. Immediately on seeing him he closed his eyes. We do not
know what he saw. We cannot understand what he meant. Was Zohayr insane?
Can we say that these people were insane? Zohayr touched the shoulder of
Abu Abdullah and said: "May my life be your ransom; you have rescued me.
You have set me free. You have freed me from the worldly desires. I am
not sorry at all." Blood was trickling from his body and he was saying:
"I am not sorry." His children were going to become orphans and he was
saying: "I am not sorry." His wife was going to become a widow and he
was saying: "I am not sorry." He had so much control on himself.

Then he said: "Why should I be sorry? Today I shall meet your
grandfather, the Holy Prophet of Allah, and Imam Hasan (P) and Imam Ali.
(P) Now the distances are coming to an end. This body of mine is getting
mixed with dust and blood. Such was his faith in the eternity of reality
and the secret of humanity! He said: "I am going to meet your
grandfather. I am going to meet your brother and your father." Saying
this he fell down before Imam Husayn (P) and breathed his last. It is
said that his wife had gone away to Kufa and awaited news about him. At
last she came to know that all had been killed. Imam Husayn (P) was
killed, his children were killed, his brothers were killed, and his
companions were killed. She then gave a shroud to a slave and asked him
to go and shroud and bury his master.

When the slave came, he felt ashamed and did not shroud or bury his
master. Possibly he returned without performing these jobs. When his
mistress asked him whether he had shrouded and buried his master he
perhaps said: "How could I do all this. When I reached there I saw the
limbs of the children of the Holy Prophet and Lady Fatima (P) lying on
the hot land of Karbala, besmeared with dust and blood. How could it be
that I should have left those bodies in that condition and shrouded and
buried my master?" [ It has been said in Tazkara-i-Ibne jauzi:

'When Zohayr ibne Qayn was killed in the company of Imam Husayn (P) his
wife said to her slave: 'Go and bury your master. When the slave came he
saw Imam Husayn (P) lying with tattered clothes on the ground. He said
to himself: 'Should I bury my master and leave Imam Husayn (P) in this
condition?' He, therefore, shrouded the Holy Imam first and used another
shroud for his master. However, the jurists say that a martyr should be
buried along with his blood-stained dress and it is not necessary to
shroud him. ]

No power is greater than Allah's.


