What Made Imam Husayn (p) Rise
==============================

Dr. Ibrahim Aayati

I seek refuge in the Hearer and the Omniscient Allah from the accursed
Satan. In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

Think not of those who are slain in the way of Allah, as dead. Nay,
they are living. With their Lord, being sustained; Jubilant (are they)
because of that which Allah has bestowed upon them of His bounty,
rejoicing for the sake of those who have not joined them but are left
behind: that there no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve.
They rejoice because of favour from Allah and He kindness, and that
Allah does not wastes the reward of the believers. (Surah Ale Imran, 3:
169 -171)

In the first instance I apologies to those respectable hearers who are
standing or are sitting on the ground owing to lack of space.

On the eighth night I spoke about 'the causes which obliged Imam Husayn
(P) to rise.' Today I intend to speak about 'the reasons of the rising
of Imam Husayn (P). It is perhaps necessary to remind that the subject
of the speech delivered on the eighth night and that proposed to be
delivered today is one and the same, although in the advertisements two
different titles have been given to it. Its reason is that the wording
of the title was not proposed by me. On the other hand I briefly
mentioned the subject of the speech and said that an announcement about
it might be made in appropriate words. Consequently Maktab-i-Tauhid
published the former title in their advertisement whereas in the
advertisement published by' Anjuman-i-Muhandesin-i-Islami' the latter
title was given. It will be appropriate to say here:

(Your beauty is only one. We mention it differently in our own words
but everyone points to the same one beauty).

I pray to Allah that this verse may apply to every step and to every
stage of every movement of the Muslim Ummah.

It is necessary to repeat briefly what I said on the eighth night. I do
not consider it proper that the hearers who were not present on that
night may not pay attention to the point which in my view is very
important. I had said that it is very surprising that some scholars and
distinguished writers have asked as to why Imam Husayn (P) did not swear
allegiance to Yazid bin Mu'awiyyah and resorted to such an instant
rising as a result of which he himself and he companions were martyred
and the members of his family were made prisoners. The following reply
is given to it.

On account of the experience which Imam Husayn (P) had regarding the
government of Bani Sufyan and the people of that time and keeping in
view the treatment which these people had meted out to his father, the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (P), and his brother Imam Hasan (P),
he was certain that if he submitted and swore allegiance to Yazid he
would be killed, and if he did not submit, even then he would be killed.
Hence he courted martyrdom willfully. (I am ashamed to have mentioned
the interpretation).

I explained in detail that night that such a remark is absolutely
baseless and totally opposed to the greatness of the sacred movement of
Abu Abdullah. J No matter who said this, it is quite baseless and
inconvincible. If it is said that there was For details see Dr Ibrahim
Ayati's book Tarikh-e-Ashuraand Dr.Jafar Shaheedi's book Bina-e-karbala
no chance for Imam Husayn (P) to live and even if he had submitted to
Yazid he would have been killed by poisoning or by some other means and
seeing no way out he got ready to be killed, what will be the value of
Imam Husayn's (P) action and how is it possible that the world should
admit this sacred movement to be the most sacred movement of the History
of Islam and basically the best of all religious movements whether they
pertain to the period preceding Imam Husayn (P) or after him? The real
thing is not this.

In fact Imam Husayn (P) assessed the condition of the Islamic society
in 60 AB. and came to the conclusion that the Muslims had deviated so
much that their reformation and the removal of the dangerous social
evils were not possible without such a rising and such a sacred
movement. Imam Husayn (P) was feeling that the religion of Islam and the
Muslim Ummah could not survive without a bloody rising. It was,
therefore, necessary that he should be martyred and his relatives and
sisters who may be called the best orators of Islam (of whom one is
Zaynab (P), another Umme Kulsum (P), another Fatima bint al-Husayn (P)
and another Ali-ibn-al-Husayn (P) should be taken prisoners and be made
to pass through the streets so that they might invite the attention of
the Muslim Ummah to the disgraceful state of affairs of that time, and
save the Muslims for ever from the danger of death and extinction, might
keep alive the sacred movement, which existed since the time prior to
Husayn bin Ali (P), and might pave the path for such sacred movements in
future.

I wish that if possible I may also allude to the movements which
existed before Husayn bin Ali (P). It will be better if we infer the
causes of and the incentives to the movement of Karbala from the
speeches and writings of Imam Husayn (P) himself. As I said, the causes
for the rising of Imam Husayn (P) had begun to appear gradually during
the last part of Uthman's Caliphate. In this connection I had quoted
some reliable historical references and had also explained some extracts
from the speeches and writings of Imam Husayn (P), which throw light on
the causes which obliged him to rise.

Passing systematically through different stages we had reached the
stage at which on the 7th of Zil-Haj of 60 A.H. Husayn ibne Ali (P)
delivered a speech before the pilgrims of the Holy Ka'abah in which he
explained his movement to some extent. I had said that the rising was
not such that anyone might have participated in it by giving
subscription, or making a speech, or by writing in newspapers or a
pamphlet about it and introducing it to the people. There was only one
way of participation and that was martyrdom and self -sacrifice. I had
finished my address with what Imam Husayn (P) had said at the end of his
speech.

He said: "I do not want financial aid from the traders and merchants. I
do not need writers. I need only those fighters who are sincerely
prepared to sacrifice their lives in the path of Allah."

Thus in the historical journey which we commenced in the night of the
eighth we reached Mecca on the 7th of Zil-Haj. Now, with your permission
I shall take one step back. However, taking one step back means, so to
say, going two steps forward if Allah so wills. I go back to Madina and
quote that sentence in which Imam Husayn (P) himself had stated the
object of his rising in more explicit and clear words.

As you are aware Walid bin Utbah bin Abi Sufyan, the Governor of
Madina, had pressed Imam Husayn (P) under Yazid's orders to swear
allegiance to Yazid. The incident had taken place on the 27th of Rajab
at night in the house of Walid. Imam Husayn (P) did not swear allegiance
but said that he would inform him of his final decision in the matter
after one or two days. On the following day Abdullah bin Zubayr ran away
from Madina on account of fear but Husayn bin Ali (P) stayed on in
Madina till the night of 28th Rajab, 60 A.H.

Sayyad Ibne Tawoos writes in his book 'Luhoof': "When morning came Imam
Husayn (P) went out of his house to find out what the political
conditions were and how the people had reacted to the death of
Mu'awiyyah, the succession of Yazid and the demand of Walid that Imam
Husayn (P) should swear allegiance to Yazid. In the street he met Marwan
bin Hakam. It was the 27th of Rajab. Marwan said: "O Aba Abdullah! I
tender you a sincere advice. If you agree to what I say it will be
good". His manner of speech was strangely presumptuous. Imam Husayn (P)
said: "What is your advice? Let me hear it."

Look at the boldness of this impudent man. He said: "O Husayn ibne Ali
(P)! I, Marwan bin Hakam order. you to swear allegiance to Yazid bin
Mu'awiyyah, to acknowledge his Caliphate, Imamate and leadership and to
accept him as the Head of the Ummah, for, in my opinion, therein lies
the goodness of your religion as well as your world. If you do not swear
allegiance to Yazid, your faith as well as your world will be ruined.
"

Imam Husayn (P) said: "We are from Allah and we have to return to Him.
" This sentence is read when a calamity befalls a person. I do not know
what the tragedy was.

I think the great tragedy on account of which Imam Husayn (P) recited
"We are from Allah " was the intellectual deviation of the Muslims. They
had gone astray to such an extent that Marwan said that the faith and
the world of Imam Husayn (P) could remain safe only if he swore
allegiance to Yazid! Then the Holy Imam said:

"Then good bye to such an Islam. " This is the sentence which throws
more light on the cause of his rising and movement than all those
sentences which I quoted in the eighth night. I had said: Imam Husayn
(P) said: "I want the people to do good and to restrain from evil. " It
is possible that some one may think that Imam Husayn (P) wanted to ask
the green-grocers of Kufa not to weigh less, to instruct the merchants
not to charge interest, to ask the preachers of Kufa not to tell false
things from the pulpit, not to flatter others and not to waste the time
of the people by telling them baseless things. However, the task which
Imam Husayn (P) wanted to perform was not this. The problem which was
before him was much more important than this.

This task could very well be performed by the preachers of the city.
What Husayn bin Ali (P) wanted to do was to improve the deplorable
condition of the Muslim Ummah and to correct the perverseness of the
society by means of an effective rising. This sentence throws light to
some extent on the stimuli of Imam Husayn's (P) rising. He said: "If
matters have really taken such a turn that a person like Yazid bin
Mu'awiyyah has become the leader of the Ummah and the chief of the
Muslims of the world, in other words their Imam, then good bye should be
said to such an Islam for I have heard my grandfather, the Prophet of
Allah, saying that caliphate is unlawful for the family of Abu Sufyan
because they are not fit to become the chiefs of the Muslims and to rule
over them."

However dispute arose between Imam Husayn (P) and Marwan and after
exchange of hot words Marwan went away filled with anger.

We come across another instance similar, to this at another place. It
is a letter of Imam Husayn (P). The people of Kufa had sent all their
letters to the Holy Imam at Mecca in three installments. This point is
also worth remembering that all the letters, which the people of Kufa
had sent to the Holy Imam and in which they had expressed willingness to
assist him and to support his sacred movement, were received in three
installments and there was no sundry letters besides those. The first
installment was received on the l0th of Ramzan and the second on the
l2th of that month. As regards the third installment I have not come
across a specific information as to when it reached, although it has
been specified that it was sent from Kufa two days after the second
installment was sent.

As a rule it should have reached Mecca two days after the arrival of
the second installment. There is another proof also of this fact but
this is not the occasion to mention its details. In any case, however,
the third installment of the letters of the people of Kufa must have
reached Mecca on the l4th of Ramzan of 60 A.H. Thus in three
installments and within six days all the letters, covenants and
affidavits were received and in the meantime Imam Husayn (P) also
decided to send Muslim bin Aqueel to Iraq.

The date of the departure of Muslim bin Aqueel is definitely known. It
was the 15th of Ramzan. It means that the Holy Imam sent Muslim to Kufa
on the day following that on which the last installment of the letters
was received. Now this is a letter which Imam Husayn (P) sent to the
people of Kufa through Saeed bin Abdullah Hanafi and Hani bin. Hani
Sabi'ie in reply to their letters before sending Muslim bin Aqueel to
Iraq. It should be remembered that the first man, who carried the letter
viz. Saeed bin Abdullah, is one of the martyrs of Karbala.

In this letter also Husayn bin Ali (P) writes stating the purpose of
his movement: "I swear by my life that an Imam is he, whose decision is
always according to the Qur'an." It means that the object of this rising
and movement was not to teach the craftsmen of Iraq the religious rules
and laws, for the matter was different from that. The condition of the
Islamic government and the Muslims of the world had become so deplorable
that it could not be corrected except through a rising by a personality
like Imam Husayn. (P) He wrote:

Whether the word used is 'Imam' or 'Ra'ie' (literal meaning shepherd)
or 'Maula' (as in the Hadith " Ali is Moula of whomever I am Maula"). or
'Sultan' (its meaning in the terminology of religion is the man who
rules the Muslim Ummah in the capacity of the successor of the Holy
Prophet) his decisions are according to the Holy Qur'an. He should be
just. (Al-Qaymu bilqist) He should follow the true faith or make others
follow the true faith (both the meanings are correct). He should
dedicate himself to Allah. Only that person whose object is only to seek
the pleasure of Allah is fit for Imamate. The phrase " Ala Zatullah"
also carries the same meaning as "Fi Sabilillah ".

Every act which is for the benefit and welfare of the Ummah is
considered to be in the path of Allah. The path of Allah is not limited
to offering prayers, fasting and performing Haj. What- ever step is
taken for the welfare and advancement of the Muslim Ummah and whatever
action brings the Muslims of the world nearer to their Islamic objects
and helps them in becoming a power befitting the followers of the Holy
Qur'an is the path of Allah and following that path is dedicating
oneself to Allah.

In his famous book entitled 'Tarikhul Umum wal Muluk' Muhammad bin
Jarir Tabari has quoted another brief speech of Imam Husayn (P) which he
delivered at a halting place called "Zi Hasam. " There is some
difference of opinion regarding the pronunciation of this name and
possibly the pronunciation adopted by me is more correct. It is the
place where the vanguard of the enemy arrived and there was a danger of
Imam Husayn (P) being besieged by the Iraqi army. Here the Imam
delivered a speech wherein he stated the reason for his rising.

He said: "Don't you see that Truth is not being followed and falsehood
is not being avoided?"

And when the condition of the Ummah becomes like this, rising becomes
obligatory for a responsible personality like the Doyen of the Martyrs.
He said, "Don't you see yourself? Why do you ask me as to why I don't
swear allegiance to Yazid and why I do not accept this Islamic
government and why I do not acknowledge Yazid son of Muawiyyah bin Abu
Sufyan as the leader and Head of the Muslim Ummah? In short it is not
necessary to ask me this question. Why don't you see the present
condition of the Ummah yourselves? Don't you see yourselves that truth
is not being followed? It does not mean that the people have begun
telling lies or while in their homes they resort to excessive
backbiting. Such sins have always been committed by the people. But
don't you see how much the Islamic leadership has deviated from Truth
and justice, and oppression and lending support to the oppressors have
become its business. Don't you see that truth is not being followed and
falsehood is not being refrained from?"

He meant to say that a believer is desirous of meeting Allah or, as it
appears to be more appropriate, he meant that in such deplorable
circumstances a believer should get up with a strong desire for
martyrdom and should get ready to sacrifice his life and to meet Allah.
It is the same thing which the Holy Imam had said in Masjid-al-Haram. As
has been quoted by Syed Ibne Tawoos in 'Luhoof' and by Ali bin Isa in
"Kashf-al-Ghammah' there also he had talked about martyrdom and
self-sacrifice and here also he said: "I consider laying down my life in
this path to be a blessing for me and it is extremely painful to me to
live with the oppressors arid tyrants."

Dear hearers! I wish to be brief in saying what I have to say and thus
to honour to some extent the promise made to you by the organisers of
the Majlis that the Majlis will come to an end by 10 O'clock. Of course,
I can also say that wise men are themselves responsible for their words
and as I myself had made no such promise it is not obligatory for me to
fulfill the promise made by others. However, I have to look after their
honour as well. Ibne Athir Jazri, the author of "Usud-al-Ghabah" has
also written a book named 'AI-Kamil fit Tarikh'. Truly speaking both of
these books are a valuable capital of Islamic literature. Ibne Athir
says in Al-Kamil: " After having come face to face with Hur bin Yazid
Riahi Imam Husayn (P) delivered two sermons -one before the noon prayers
and the other after the afternoon prayers. After the afternoon prayers
the Holy Imam got up and made a speech. Addressing Hur bin Yazid Riahi
and his companions he said: ,"0 people! If you fear Allah and give the
rightful persons their rights, it will be the means of Allah being more
pleased with you.

" Here by the word 'right' he does not mean that kind of right which is
infringed when a person damages the wall of the house of his neighbour
or when he boards a bus earlier than others without standing in a queue
and waiting for his turn. Here right means that right which is the basis
of all rights. If that right is injured all other rights are injured and
if that right is safe the safety of other rights is also ensured. That
right is the right of the guardianship and leadership of the Muslim
Ummah. And then he said more explicitly:

"We, the members of the Holy Prophet's household and his heirs, are
more entitled to be your rulers and your leaders and guardians in the
matter of your faith and your world. We are more rightful than the
pretenders who wrongly claim this office and who have no concern with
it. They are those who treat you cruelly and oppress you (i.e. these
people cannot be accepted to be the successors of the Holy Prophet and
the guardians of the Qur'an)."

Ibn Jarir Tabari has also quoted a serm6n of Imam Husayn (P) which he
delivered at the halting-place called 'Baiza'. 'Baiza is a halting place
between the Hijaz and Iraq and is perhaps a part of Iraq. According to
Ibne Jarir Tabari Imam Husayn (P) delivered this sermon at this place
before his own companions as well as those of Hur bin Yazid Riahi. It
was quoted later by others as well. I may mention here that on this
occasion the Holy Imam explained his object further and informed those
present how and why he had decided to rise.

The Imam said: My grandfather and your Prophet has said: "If a person
sees a cruel ruler or leader who treats as lawful the things made
unlawful by Allah, violates the covenant made with Allah and opposes the
Sunnah of the Holy Prophet and keeps silent and does not move, his end
will be like that of the same tyrant ruler (in the Hell). The allusion
was towards Yazid who possessed all these criminal qualities. Yazid was
one of those cruel leaders about whom the Quran says: Wa minhum aimmatun
Yad 'una ilan nar. All leaders do not take their people to Paradise.
There are some leaders who do take their followers to Paradise i.e.

towards advancement and prosperity, but according to the Holy Quran
there are some "who push their people into torture, fire and
destruction. " An apt example of such leaders IS Yazid bin Mu'awiyyah
(and here the allusion is towards him), who oppressed the people, was
accustomed to crime and sin and who violated the rights of the people.
After observing that state of affairs the Holy Imam said: "I (Husayn bin
Ali) am observing in the government of Yazid, the Muslim (who observes
these conditions) who does not endeavour to change the conditions by
means of his words and deeds, does not rise against the cruel ruler,
does not take any practical step against him or does not oppose him at
least with his tongue Allah is entitled to send that Muslim to the
place, where he sends the cruel ruler, and to mete out identical
treatment to both of them."

Then the Holy Imam said: "Now in 60 A.H. the Muslim Ummah is also faced
with the same situation. You can see that these people (Yazid and his
agents) have become permanently subservient to Satan and have ceased to
obey Allah. They are committing heinous acts openly and have suspended
the penal laws. If a merchant or an ordinary man commits a crime they
punish him according to Islamic penal laws, but if their favourites and
those who work in their interest commit one hundred crimes they are not
administered even one lash. "

As I had said this practice had been started during the second half of
the Caliphate of Uthman and protest and rising against the government
had also started at the same time. I shall present a list of those
protests. As regards suspension of penal laws it does not mean that they
did not punish anyone. Even during the time of Yazid the hands of the
people were amputated. The adulterers were also punished. I am not aware
whether the dacoits were executed or were awarded some other
punishment.

In any case it is an admitted fact that at that time the entire
administration was run negatively as well as positively -on the' basis
of personal policies and interests of the rulers i.e. they let off or
punished one at their discretion. Imam Husayn (P) says: "These are the
deviations and irregularities which have become the cause of my rising.
One of the great misdeeds of Yazid's government is that the public
wealth, which should have been spent for the benefit of the people and
to remove their difficulties has been appropriated by the persons in
authority for their own benefit. They have made lawful the things which
Allah has made unlawful and have made unlawful the things which Allah
has made lawful."

Then the Holy Imam said: "When the state of affairs is this and the
order of the Holy Prophet in these circumstances is as mentioned by me,
who can be more suitable to change this position than I. I am the son of
Lady Fatima (P). I am one of the people of the Cloak. I am one of those
about whom the Verse of Purification and the Verse of Mubahila have been
revealed. I am the son of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (P). Then
who is more suited than me to change the condition in which all the
causes and factors of the downfall of the Ummah have gathered
together?"

Who is better than Husayn (P) who should come and stage a rising. Ibne
Abbas does not enjoy that position. Muhammad bin Hanfiyyah, too, does
not enjoy that position. Habib ibne Mazahir is a companion of the Holy
Prophet but even he cannot perform the task which can be performed by
me. Similar is the case with Muslim bin Ausjah and Hani bin Urwah
Muradi. Husayn's (P) cousin Muslim bin Aqueel and his own brother Abul
Fazal Abbas are persons who can lay down their lives for the achievement
of the object of this rising but even they cannot become its central
figure. Only the personality of Husain bin Ali bin Abi Talib (P) is the
central point of this movement.

In spite of the fact that on the day of Ashura Imam Husayn (P) could
see that the enemies were bent upon killing him and also knew that they
would achieve their end soon, he was satisfied that events were taking
place as he had desired. Still he began one of his sermons with this
very subject.

As you are aware Imam Husayn (P) delivered many sermons and made many
speeches on the day of Ashura. All these sermons are very eloquent and
impressive. It is surprising that these sermons were delivered by an
orator who knew very well that after these speeches he would not only be
called to account but would be called to account with the aid of thirty
thousand spears.

These are the sermons of an orator who was thirsty and did not have
even a drop of water to moist his lips. He knew that after some time his
women and children were going to be made prisoners by the impudent and
stone-hearted enemies. He was hungry and though he complained of thirst
his self - respect prevented him from complaining of hunger. Imam Sajjad
(P) says: "The grandson of the Holy Prophet was martyred when he was
thirsty as well as hungry."

A hungry and thirsty orator delivers a speech before thirty thousand
soldiers of the enemy, whose spears are ready to kill him and whose
horses will trample upon his body after some time. Notwithstanding this
he delivers a speech and a solid speech, too. In his speech there is
eloquence and maturity. He does not betray any weakness or helplessness.
As the number of his companions decreases his speech becomes more
forceful and he begins speaking more clearly and more explicity. Has the
entire human history seen an orator, whose manner of speech should not
be affected by any development, who should not get worried in any
circumstances and the flow of whose speech should not undergo any
change?

In his speech the Holy Imam said: "You accursed! Woe be to you! Have
you gathered here to kill me and to earn disgrace for yourselves?

" Are you not those people who had requested me earnestly' a month ago
to come to your rescue and had said that you were not prepared to accept
Yazid bin Muwaiyyah as Your ruler? I responded to your request
sympathetically and came up to you. What ate you doing now?" Please pay
attention to this point. It is a very strange sentence. The Holy Imam
said: "Do you know which swords you are drawing against Husayn, son of
Ali (P) and the best and most sincere soldier of Islam? These are the
same swords which the Holy Prophet gave in your hands. You are trying to
burn and destroy us. You are trying to burn and destroy us with the same
fire which we had kindled to burn and reduce to ashes your and our
enemy.

The Holy Imam means to say: 'Yazid bin Mu'awiyyah who has now become
the Caliph of you Muslims, is not your friend but your enemy. You have
lost the competence to distinguish between your friend and your enemy
and consequently you do not know siding with whom is in your interest
and support to whom is injurious for you. All of you have joined hands
against your friends in order to serve the interest of your enemies
although they have never done justice to you nor can you expect it from
them in future.

On the day of Ashura he said in his sermon another important thing. It
should not be forgotten that when Imam Husayn (P) was delivering his
speech on the day of Ashura he was fully besieged by the blood- thirsty
enemies and there was none there to support him except a few companions
of his. In fact most of his companions had been martyred as a result of
the severe attack in the morning and shooting of the arrows and those
who remained were badly wounded. In these circumstances he addressed his
enemies saying:

By Allah even if Husayn bin Ali (P) had possessed no other attribute on
account of which the free people might have loved him, his manner of
reasoning in justification of his movement and rising would have been
sufficient to acknowledge him as the chief of all those persons who will
rise till the Day of Judgment to support Truth and justice and to
suppress injustice. He said: "O people of Kufa! Hear me. I have studied
the state of affairs of the society carefully and I understand what the
matter really is. This illegitimate son of an illegitimate, Obaidullah
ibne Ziad bin Abih, has cornered me in such a way that I have no
alternative left except to do one of the two things: Either I should
unsheathe the sword and start fighting or I should accept abjectness and
humiliation."

I (the speaker) may submit that the Holy Imam's saying that he should
accept abjectness and humiliation does not mean only that he should
accept humiliation for himself but it also means that he should open the
path of humiliation, helplessness and weakness for the Ummah -the same
Ummah which has been honoured and elevated by Allah and His Prophet. It
is not, however, possible that Husayn bin Ali (P) should allow this
honourable Ummah to be humiliated during the period of his Imamate. He
says: "But you should know that my decision is final and irrevocable. I
have chosen the path of fighting because we are not going to be
humiliated. In other words the Muslim Ummah is far away from
humiliation. Allah has made it honourable. That we should be humiliated
is not liked either by Allah or by His Prophet or by the believers. It
is not acceptable to us, who have been bought up in the pious laps of
our mothers that we should open the door of abjectness, humiliation,
despair and despondency for ourselves or for the Ummah."

Here how wonderful is his reference to obedience to the nasty and mean
people! The Holy Imam said: "The brave and dauntless persons who belong
to me and who are arrayed with me would not like their own humiliation
or that of the Ummah. They are not the people who would prefer
submission and obedience to the nasty and mean persons, to martyrdom and
self-sacrifice.

When Ali bin Al-Husayn (P) (i.e. Ali Akbar (P) read rajaz (epic verses)
on the day of Ashura he made the words of his father the title of his
rajaz and said: "I am the son of Husayn bin Ali (P). We and the House of
Allah are nearer to the Holy Prophet. I shall continue to pierce my
spear into your bodies till it becomes crooked. I shall administer you a
blow with my sword which will be severer than the blow of my father.
This will be the blow of a Hashimi and an Arabian young man. By Allah,
the son of a bastard cannot rule over us."

I quoted some remarks and writings of Imam Husayn (P) that night and
some have been quoted by me today. In the end I may mention that in one
of the speeches delivered by the Holy Imam on the day of Ashura he also
read some couplets. The reasons for the mission of Imam Husayn (P) have
become more or less clear. He was perfectly sure of his success at every
stage. He was sure that the sacrifices made by him and his companions
would bear fruit. He quoted the verses of Farwah bin Museek Muradi.
Farwah bin Museek was a distinguished companion of the Holy Prophet.
These verses of his are very animating and meaningful. By reading these
verses before the enemies, Imam Husayn (P) proved it definitely that it
was he, who would be successful and his efforts would bear fruit: "If we
defeat the enemy, it has been an old practice with us and we have always
smashed the heads of our enemies. But if we are apparently defeated and
are killed and they gain the so-called victory, even then the defeat
will not fall to our share and we shall not be overcome. Whether we kill
the enemy or are killed the victory will be ours in either case."

We are not cowardly and chicken-hearted. We are chiefs of the brave in
the world. If we are killed it will not be because we are cowardly, but
it will be because the time of our martyrdom has come.

This is what usually happens: Death attacks one at one time and another
at another time. (i.e. if we are going to die today, our enemies will
meet death tomorrow).

Just as death has taken the past generations in its arms, it will, in
the same way, take us and our companions in its arms. And then comes a
wonderfully unique verse:

If the Kings of the world had lived eternally we, too, would have lived
eternally, because we are the Kings of the Kingdom of heaven. And if the
noblemen and the most distinguished persons had got permanent life, we
would have got it earlier than everyone else. In short Imam Husayn (P)
was fully satisfied with the result at every stage. In the end I wish to
draw your attention to another point. It is possible that, from what I
have said or what has been said elsewhere, some persons may draw the
conclusion that the rising of Imam Husayn (P) and his movement were the
only sacred "and armed campaign in Islam and there is no possibility of
a similar effort being made till the Day of Judgement. However, that is
not the correct position. Examples of movements similar to that of Imam
Husayn (P) are found before and after the Holy Imam and will continue to
be found in future. As I have said the sacred personality of Imam Husayn
(P) is the central point of the Islamic movements. His rising confirmed
the earlier movements and set an example for future.

If someone explains the rising of Imam Husayn (P) by saying that his
rising has absolved the Muslim Ummah from the obligation for every
movement and effort and now only in his ninth generation Imam Mahdi (P)
will come one day and start such a movement and the responsibility of
all other Muslims of the world in the behalf has ended, it is not
correct. Such a thinking is in fact totally opposed to his aim and
object. I said in the eighth night that during the second half of the
caliphate of Uthman the Muslims had deviated a great deal from the right
path and the rising also commenced at that time.

I had given my speech the title: "The causes which obliged Imam Husayn
(P) to rise" or "The factors responsible for the rising of Imam Husayn
(P)". It will, therefore, be inappropriate if I do not explain that even
before Imam Husayn (P) some great personalities had been making efforts
with the same object for which Imam Husayn (P) rose and started their
movement and these efforts continued even after Imam Husayn (P). If
people do not or cannot understand the value of such efforts, it is due
to their ignorance.

Abu Zar Ghiffari possessed an extraordinary personality. When he felt
that the system of government had deviated from the right path, he,
notwithstanding his old age, rose to oppose it. He opposed it severely
and criticised the government with harsh words. He made speeches, quoted
the Hadith of the Holy Prophet and criticized Uthman in his presence as
well as in his absence in the bazars and streets. It can be said that
from the historical point of view Abu Zar, a great Companion of the Holy
Prophet, was the pioneer of all these efforts and movements.
Consequently he was exiled and suffered hardships and at last died in a
state of helplessness at a place called 'Rabzah', away from his
homeland.

When, after Abu Zar and Uthman, the Commander of the Faithful Ali (P)
was martyred and Mu'awiyyah was at the helm of affairs, the people
resorted to their former practice. When Abu Zar passed away Hajar bin
Addi Kindi took his place. While Abu Zar was alone, Hajar had thirteen
other companions also from amongst the distinguished Muslims who raised
their voice against the malpractices of Mu'awiyyah. These fourteen men
were chained and taken from Iraq to Syria.

There two of them were let off and the remaining twelve were sent to a
place named 'Marj-al-Azra Mami'. There six of them were executed, four
were released on the recommendation of some persons and the remaining
two requested that they might be taken before Mu'awiyyah so that they
might repent in a regular manner. There one of them apologized and was
released, but the other began criticising Mu'awiyyah to his face more
severely. Mu'awiyyah said: "This man is' the worst of them all. Why has
he been brought here?" Simultaneously he wrote a letter to Ziad bin
Abih, the governor of Iraq. This man was named Abdur Rahman bin Hasan
Anzi Shaheed. Mu'awiyyah sent him to Iraq and wrote to Ziad:

"Kill this man in the worst manner." When Mu'awiyyah's order reached
Ziad he said to Abdur Rahman: "The Commander of the Faithful has ordered
me to kill you in the worst manner. In my opinion the worst manner of
killing is that I should dig a grave and bury you alive. " This
magnanimous person is reckoned to be one of the great martyrs of Islam.
He was a companion of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (P). His only
offence was that he used to criticize the disgraceful state of affairs
which was prevailing at that time. A grave was, therefore, dug and he
was buried alive. This is not a concoction and this story can be seen in
'Kamil' of Ibne Athir and other authentic books.

When the time of Imam Husayn (P) came he also began acting according to
the old practice. In the end, however, his effort adopted a purely
unusual direction, which was proper according to the conditions
prevailing during his time and was also worthy of him. Hence, he himself
and his near ones were martyred and from many points of view his rising
acquired a central position among all the previous and later sacred
movements in the history of Islam.

I may also say that when I speak about rising, effort and movement from
this pulpit and in this very respectable Majlis, it does not mean
creation of any disturbance or disorder. 011 the other hand it is to
explain those sacred movements which were conducted in the history of
Islam by worthy and respectable personalities for the betterment of the
Muslims and improvement of their conditions. Imam Husayn (P) did not
close and seal the book of rising and movement.

As you are aware just as Imam Husayn (P) rose against Yazid, his
grandson Zayd bin Ali (P) rose against Omayyad ruler, Hisham bin Abdul
Malik. Zayd bin Ali (P) was killed. His body was sent to the gallows His
supporters buried his dead body at night and submerged his grave in
water, but the spies informed the enemy about it. His body was,
therefore, exhumed on the following day, stripped of its clothings and
hanged at the place where the garbage of the city of Kufa was dumped.
The body of Zayd bin Ali (P) remained hanged on the gallows for four
years. Those people thought that Hisham would stand to gain if the body
of Zayd bin Mi (P) remained hanged and the descendants of the Holy
Prophet would sustain loss. However, history gave the final judgment
that this entire matter was beneficial only for Truth and the Truthful
people.

After Zayd bin Ali (P) his son Yahya bin Zayd rose and his dead body
remained suspended on the gallows for seven years.

There were various standard-bearers of the risings of the history of
Islam which were spread over a long period during the Omayyad and
Abbasid Caliphates. The first rising was staged by Abu Zar. On one day
the standard-bearer was Hajar bin Addi; on another day it was Husayn bin
Ali (P) who became the centre of all sacred movements; on another day it
was Zayd bin Ali (P); on another day it was Yahya bin Zayd and on
another day it was Husayn bin Ali bin al Hasan bin al-Hasan bin Ali (P)
bin Abi Talib (P), who was the leader of the martyrs of "Fakh "
Similarly on one day the standard- bearer was Musa bin Jafar (P) and on
other days there were others. If there is a person who does not wish to
understand the importance and value of these movements but raises some
legal objections also in some cases, it can only be said about him with
regret that he is a nincompoop.

Was the action and the rising of Zayd bin Ali (P) right or not?

Was the rising of Yahya bin Zaid according to law or otherwise? It is
sufficient to say in this regard that Imam Sadiq (P) declared the rising
of Zaid bin Ali (P) to be in order and confirmed it. After his martyrdom
Imam Sadiq (P) said: "My uncle Zaid bin Ali (P) adopted the same path as
was adopted by the martyrs of Badr during the time of the Holy Prophet.
Their object was the same. Zaid bin Ali (P)'s aim was the same as that
of the martyrs of Badr.

Now no ijtihad (decree) which is opposed to 'nass' i.e. explicit order
(text) can be correct nor can ignorance about self-sacrifice and rising
being necessary for a nation be in order. All that can be said about
such persons is that they stand helpless on account of their ignorance.
I have studied the history of Islam to some extent. As regards the
history of other nations I have not studied it thoroughly and cannot,
therefore, say anything with certainty. Generally speaking, however,
there is no doubt about the fact that not only the Muslims but every
other nation (like the Christians, the Jews and others) which exists on
the face of the earth is alive only as a result of its efforts and
dedicated movements. At the most it can be said that a special situation
has arisen in the history of Islam.

It will not be out of place to mention here another point. Although
that point is not connected directly with my today's speech, it will be
wrong to ignore it.

That point is this: What is the reason that the tragedy of the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P) has acquired the central position among all
the events, movements and armed campaigns of the history of Islam? N o
other rising, movement and collective martyrdom has acquired that renown
and importance which has been acquired by the event of Karbala. This
tragedy is the greatest among all the tragedies of the history of
Islam.

According to my counting more than eighty persons were martyred in the
battle of Uhud. It was a very great tragedy. The bodies of the martyrs
of Uhud were mutilated. Their noses, ears and lips were cut off. Their
dead bodies were metamorphosed in such a way that the sisters could not
recognize their brothers. In spite of this, however, the tragedy of Uhud
cannot equal the tragedy of Karbala.

Another great tragedy was that under the orders of Mansur Dawaniqi
sixteen persons from amongst the Hasani Syeds were imprisoned in the
Hashimite Jail of Kufa. They died there one after the other but Mansur
did not permit the dead body of any of them to be brought out till all
of them breathed their last. The dead bodies of those who died remained
under the roof of the jail which fell on the bodies of the sixteen
martyrs -the descendants of the Holy Prophet. They were neither bathed
nor shrouded nor buried. This tragedy cannot also equal the tragedy of
Karbala.

O Abu Abdullah! Your tragedy has no parallel in the history of mankind.
This is a true and admitted fact. Certainly this is the position. But
why is it so? In spite of the fact that the time for my speech has now
come to an end I shall say at least in reply to this question that it is
definite and certain that a very important cause of the superiority of
the movement and rising of Imam Husain (P) was those events which took
place immediately after his companions' martyrdom. On the one hand this
rising became universally known by means of the prisoners belonging to
Ahl-al-Bayt and on the other hand the killers of Imam Husayn (P) played
an important role in making it so known. After the martyrdom of the Holy
Imam (P) and the end of the campaign the enemies showed utmost meanness.
They cut the bodies of the martyrs to pieces and looted their clothes.
They ransacked the tents and set them on fire. They trampled the bodies
of the martyrs with the hooves of the horses and raised their heads on
spears. They treated the bereaved prisoners harshly and struck their dry
lips with batons.

These shameful acts commenced from Karbala and continued till their
arrival in Syria. And Yazid took part in such heinous activities
himself. However, wherever the prisoners belonging to Ahlay Bayt went,
they talked about their own success and disgrace of the enemy with such
dignity and seriousness as if nothing had happened. At the time when all
the people considered them to be defeated and their enemies to be
successful they made it known that ,in fact it was they who had been
successful and victorious and nothing except disgrace had fallen to the
lot of the boastful and shameless enemy.

Speeches were delivered by Imam Zayn-al-Abideen (P) in the outskirts of
Kufa and by Lady Zaynab (P) and Umme Kulsum (P) in the bazaars of the
city and contrary to the assessments and expectations of the common
people they predicted the decline of the Ommayyad government.

On another occasion Zaynab Kubra (P) delivered a speech in the court of
Yazid and accused him of heresy thrice in clear words. Imam
Zayn-al-Abideen (P) delivered a sermon in Damascus where he introduced
himself fully and created difficulties for Yazid. When Imam Abid (P) was
in a bazaar of Damascus in the capacity of a prisoner Ibrahim bin Talha
bin Obaidullah approached him and said to tease him: "O Ali bin
al-Husayn (P)! Tell me who has won." The Holy Imam (P) said in reply:
"When it is time for prayers pronounce Azan and say Iqamat. Then you
will come to know who has won". i.e. although you belong to the family
of Tayyam and are an enemy of Bani Hashim, unless you apostatize from
Islam you will have to say in Azan and Iqamat: 'I certify that Muhammad
(P) is the Prophet of Allah'. 'We and not others are the descendants of
Muhammad (P). So long as Islam lasts the dignity of ours, the progeny of
Muhammad (P), will remain established and cannot diminish. "

I am sure that if Ibne Sa'ad and Ibne Ziad had, even as a measure of
self-interest, behaved respectfully towards Imam Husayn (P) and after
his martyrdom towards the Ahl-al-Bayt and if they had not prevented the
burial of the martyrs and had sent the Ahl-al-Bayt from Karbala to
Madina direct, and if the Caliph's court had not resorted to
absurdities, and if the Ahl-al- Bayt had not been able to conduct
effective propaganda in their own favour, the picture of the martyrdom
of Imam Husayn (P) and his magnanimous companions, which has emerged in
the world now, would not have taken such a shape and their enemies would
not have been humiliated and disgraced in the manner they have been.


