Sermon and the Pulpit (1)
=========================

Ustaz Murtaza Mutahhari

I seek refuge in the Hearer and Omniscient Allah from the accursed
Satan. In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

The Beneficent (Allah) has taught the Qur'an (to Muhammad (P)). He
created man and has taught him intelligible speech. The subject of
todays speech is Khutba and the Pulpit'. As Khutba' also means speech,
the subject of this speech is "speech" i.e. it is its own subject. In
the literary sense delivering a speech is called oration. The logicians
have mentioned five kinds of speech which are called the 'Five Arts' One
of these is oratory.

This division has been made by Aristotle. This is not the occasion to
narrate the history of oratory or to discuss what has been said about
the technical merits of oratory. Some logicians have mentioned it in
detail. A voluminous book can be prepared only if we take into account
the details given in Avicennas' book 'Shifa'.

However, it is not proposed to discuss here these matters, because I
wish that discussion should not take place only from the theoretical
point of view. As the subject of our today's address is 'oration and the
pulpit' and pulpit means speech on religious matters, our today's talk
is about religious oratory and we are not concerned here with oratory in
general and other kinds of speech. Today I wish to throw light on the
relationship of oratory with Islam.

Oratory is connected with Islam in many ways. Firstly, oratory is an
art and any art or craft can be used to strengthen a view or belief as
well as to weaken it. As regards the difference between an art or a
craft it is altogether a different matter.

If you go to Masjid-i-Shah in Isfahan and look at the Dome of Sheikh
Lutfullah, you will see how art, craft and artistry have assisted
religion i.e. how religious feelings and artistic talent have helped
each other and how a religious slogan has assumed the shape of art and
craftsmanship. Calligraphy is also an art. Exquisite Quranic writings
e.g. the one written by Baysanqar in the hall of Maqsurah-i-Mashhad go
to show how art and skill can become the means of strengthening
religious feelings.

Oratory, too, is an art and a skill, and art and skill have their
effect on the society and they are reckoned to be social factors;
therefore, oratory is also one of the social factors. As a matter of
fact no other art has as much effect on the society as oratory has.
Hence, if you look at the art of oratory from this point of view, you
will feel that this art, too, is related to it. Just as stone-cutters
were born in Islam and stone-cutting flourished; glass-makers were born
and glass-making flourished; floriculturists were born and mosaic and
flower-work flourished, in the same way Islam nourished great orators in
its lap. There were many amongst them who became known with the name of
Khateeb (Orator).

You will observe that in the books on 'Asma-i-Rijal' (Names of Men) and
in their Translations there have been many persons who became known as
'Khateeb'. One of them was Khateeb Razi, and another was Khateeb Basri.
There were others who were called Khateeb Damishqui, Khateeb Tabreezi
and Khateeb Hasfaki. There were persons who became famous as 'Khateeb'
during their life-time or afterwards. Fortunately even today some great
religious orators are present among us. The late Syed Jamaluddin Mghani,
besides possessing other qualities, was a great orator. He brought about
a revolution in Egypt by means of his speeches. He made the people weep
not on account of anything but on their own deplorable condition. Islam
has brought up some great orators. It has a history of its own. I only
wanted to make a reference to it, because it is not possible here to go
into details.

In any case oratory is also related to Islam in the same manner in
which other arts are related. Islam has produced various kinds of
artists and craftsmen and one group out of them consists of orators and
poets.

**ROLE PLAYED BY ISLAM IN THE ADVANCEMENT OF ORATORY:**

The direct influence exercised by Islam on the progress and advancement
of oratory is another aspect of the relationship between oratory and
Islam. Islam not only influenced the art of oratory but also bestowed
upon it a high position. Out of the arts which are associated with the
language (i.e. poetry, writing and speaking) the Arabs were conspicuous
in composing verses of highest merit. The Arabs are poets by nature.
Before the advent of Islam also distinguished poets were present among
them. The fact is that owing to their limited information they could
express only limited ideas in their verses, but remaining confined to
the ideas, which were within their reach, they wrote very good verses.
In the field of oratory, however, the Arabs did not possess such
excellence. Although we possess a large stock of verses pertaining to
the Age of Ignorance, we come across very few specimens of their
oratory. However, some of their specimens are available. As regards the
third art, viz writing, no specimen is available. We do not have any
book relating to the Age of Ignorance which may serve as an example of
the method of writing of that age.

Islam developed all these three arts. The meaning of the verses
expanded. If the verses of the period of Islam are compared with those
of the Age of Ignorance considerable difference will be found between
them from the point of view of vastness of ideas. As regards the field
of oratory Islam brought about a great revolution in it. It was Islam,
by means of which composition and compilation of books started.

There is a book named "Jamharut Khutba al-Arab". This compilation
contains the orations of the Arabs relating to the Age of Ignorance and
the period of Islam. If you glance at the orations of the Age of
Ignorance, you will find that from the point of view of ideas they are
very simple and unsophisticated. However, when you see the orations of
the period of Islam you will find a sort of revolution. Out of the
orations of the Age of Ignorance some sentences of Aktham bin Sayfi and
of the renowned Arab orator named Qus bin Sa'adah Ayadi have been
quoted, but you will observe that they are quite ordinary and unadorned.
However, as soon as you enter the Islamic period and look at the sermons
delivered by the Holy Prophet, you will come across a new manner of
speech. In these sermons the ideas are different; various learnings are
narrated; there is spirituality; there are social and moral problems and
there is knowledge and wisdom, whereas in the orations of the Age of
Ignorance no such things were present. Islam has developed all the three
arts associated with the language. The Holy Qur'an itself is an
excellent specimen of miraculous linguistics and eloquence and declares
speech to be a blessing of the Almighty Allah:

The Beneficent (Allah) has taught the Qur'an to Muhammad (P). He
created man and taught him intelligible speech. The very first verses
which were revealed to the Holy Prophet of Islam related to pen and
speech.

Muhammad (P)! Read in the name of your Lord who created (all things).
He created man from a clot of blood. Recite! Your Lord is the most
Honourable One, Who, by the pen taught man which he did not know. (Surah
Alaq, 96: 1-4) As a result of this education not only a revolution took
place in the art of oratory but the art of writing also flourished. It
was not without reason that the Muslims invented things related to
language and rules about the science of eloquence and rhetorics.

Furthermore, the Holy Prophet and the Commander of the Faithful are
acknowledged to be the greatest orators of the world. This is not the
occasion when I should quote some extracts from their speeches and
compare them with the speeches made by the Arabs of the Age of
Ignorance. The point on which I propose to speak today is that there is
a very firm relationship between Islam and oratory and that relationship
is that on a special occasion oratory has been made a part of faith. If
you are asked as to which that occasion is can you tell it? Of course,
there is an occasion when oratory also becomes obligatory like Prayers,
Fasting, Haj, Zakat, Khums, etc. That occasion is Friday prayers. In
Islam there is a weekly prayers which is called 'Friday prayers'. In
Surah Jum'ah of the Holy Qur'an itself this prayers has been specially
mentioned:

"Believers! on Friday when the Call for prayer is made, try to attend
prayers (Zikr -remembering Allah) and leave off all business. This would
be better for you if only you knew it. " All the Sunni and Shiah
exegetists agree that here 'zikr' means Friday prayers.

What is Friday prayers? It is the noon prayers which is offered on
Friday, but it is different from other prayers. Firstly noon prayers
offered on all other days consists of four rak'ats but Friday prayers
consists of two rak'ats only. As regards the reason for Friday prayers
consisting of two rak'ats I shall mention it later. In any case there
are only two rak'ats of -Friday prayers. The other thing is that it is
obligatory to offer this prayers in congregation, but it is not
obligatory to offer other prayers (i.e. dawn, noon, afternoon, evening
and early night prayers) in congregation. The third thing is that when
Friday prayers is offered at a place, it is obligatory for those living
within a radius of two farsangs of that place to participate in the
prayers, unless they are unable to do so on account of some valid
reason. The fourth thing is that if Friday prayers is arranged at a
particular place it is unlawful to arrange such prayers at another place
which is situated within a radius of one farsang of the first place.
There should be only one prayer.

What a magnificent prayers it will be if it is offered in this manner.
For example, if Friday prayers is arranged In Tehran at the place where
we are gathered at present and people belonging to places up to Shamiran
In the north and up to the city of Ray in the south and up to a distance
of twelve kilo- meters in the east as well as in the west (because two
legal farsangs are equal to twelve kilometers) participate in that
prayers and Friday prayers IS not offered anywhere else up to a distance
of six kilometers from here, you can very well imagine what a large
gathering it will be.

There are two rak'ats of this prayers instead of four because it has
been said frequently in the Hadith and traditions and it is an
established fact that in the Friday prayers which is offered in
congregation, it is obligatory to deliver two sermons and these two
sermons replace the other two rak'ats.

It is the same thing which I said i.e. in the religion of Islam there
is an occasion when speech or sermon is a part of faith and a part of
prayers. The Commander of the Faithful Ali (P) has said that the sermon
itself is prayers. So long as the Imam delivers the sermon and does not
dismount the pulpit, t4e people should listen to him quietly as if they
were in the state of offering prayers. However, there are some
exceptions also. For example, it is not obligatory that one should sit
facing the Qiblah while hearing the sermon or that the Imam should face
the Qiblah while delivering it. Anyhow the two sermons which are
obligatory on this occasion are in place of two rak'ats of the noon
prayers.

You will wonder at these Islamic orders, which you have not heard
before or have heard very rarely and will ask as to what is the object
of this Friday gathering and all its ceremonies. And you will wonder all
the more when you learn that the main object of this gathering is
hearing these sermons. You will realize from this how necessary and
important these sermons are. They are so important that as soon as the-
muezzin pronounces 'Takbir' it is necessary that every person, wherever
he may be, and whatever he may be doing, should leave his work and hurry
up for Friday prayers, and should first hear the two sermons and then
offer two rak'ats of prayers. After this he is free. This has been
mentioned by Allah in Surah Jum'ah in these words:

Believers, on Friday when the call for prayers is made, try to attend
prayers (remembering Allah) and leave off all business. This would be
better for you if only you knew it. When the prayers ends, disperse
through the land and seek the favour of Allah. I may also mention that
as regards the noon prayers the Azan is pronounced in the first instance
at noon and then prayers is offered, but on Friday, , if it is proposed
to offer Friday prayers, the Azan is pronounced before noon. What should
be done is that Azan should be pronounced at such a time that both the
sermons should be completed before the sun begins to decline.

As soon as the voice of the muezzin rises for Friday prayers buying and
selling become unlawful. The Holy Qur'an says: "Leave off all business
". This is one of the indisputable orders of Islam. There is no
difference of opinion between the Shiah and the Sunnis in this respect.
If Friday prayers is offered at a place in the correct manner and Azan
is pronounced, and a shopkeeper is sitting or standing near the weighing
scales and a customer, for example, is purchasing cheese from him, and
he (the shopkeeper) is cutting cheese with a knife, it is obligatory for
both of them that as soon as they hear 'Allaho Akbar' they should
suspend the transaction and hurry up to attend the prayers. i.e. hurry
up to attend the prayers and leave off all business.

At that time buying and selling is unlawful. It is obligatory for the
people to go immediately and hear the sermon. In Friday prayers there
are two sermons and not one. After delivering one sermon the Imam sits
down and remains quiet for a while. Then he stands up again and delivers
the second sermon.

It has become known that the Friday sermons are so important that the
main object of this gathering is to hear these sermons. As regards the
contents of these sermons and speeches they should consist of the praise
of Allah and thereafter greetings to the Holy Prophet and the Holy
Imams, then preaching and some important matters which I shall explain
later and then recitation of a Surah of the Holy Qur'an. This is the
material prescribed by Islam for these sermons.

In order to understand how important the presence of the people in this
gathering is, please ponder on the tradition according to which it is
obligatory that the officials of the Police, and Jail Departments should
bring the prisoners also along with them and provide them the
opportunity to participate in this weekly general gathering. They should
bring them in, their custody and should keep an eye on them so that they
may not run away. In other words it is necessary that a prisoner should
also be brought out of jail so that he may offer Friday prayers along
with the congregation and may then return to his place.

Some formalities have also been prescribed for the Imam of Friday
prayers. One of them is that he should wear a turban. It means that he
should tie on his head a small scarf with two or three folds like the
turban of the Holy Prophet. May Haji Rahim Arabab Isfahani live long.

It is possible that many of 'you may be knowing him. He is one of the
greatest scholars of Jurisprudence, Usul, Philosophy and old Mathematics
and has been the pupil of the late Jahangir Khan Qashqai. Like the late
Jahangir Khan he also still wears a leather cap. In all other respects
his dress is like that of other Ulema and his coat, cloak and appearance
resemble theirs. The only difference is that he wears a leather cap. He
has a firm faith in Friday prayers and himself leads Friday prayers in
Isfahan. However, as the people do not take interest in Friday prayers
it is not as splendid as it ought to be. When he comes for Friday
prayers he wears a small turban i.e. a scarf with two or three folds.

I remember that when I met him in Isfahan in 1339 a reference was made
to him of Friday prayers. He said: "I don't know when the Shi'ah will
absolve themselves from the accusation that they have abandoned Friday
prayers. All Islamic sects criticize us and reproach us from the
religious point of view saying that we have forsaken Friday prayers." He
wished that a few million humans might be spent on the largest Masjid in
Qum and Friday prayers might be offered there in a befitting manner.

The other thing is that the Imam should be standing while delivering
the sermon. The Holy Qur'an says: When they see some merchandise or some
sport, they rush towards it and leave you alone standing. Say: "(Allah's
rewards for good deeds) are better than merriment or merchandise; Allah
IS the best Sustainer. " (Surah Jum'ah, 62: 11) i.e. the habits and
customs of the Age of Ignorance still persist in untrained people. As
soon as their eyes fall on merchandise or the sound of a drum reaches
their ears they rush towards it and leave you alone standing. This verse
refers to the following incident: One day while the Holy Prophet was
delivering Friday sermon the sound of a drum was heard. This was a
signal of the fact that merchandise had arrived. ,The people, fearing
that the merchandise might be sold out, went away leaving the Holy
Prophet standing.

The point to which it is proposed to allude by narrating this event is
that 'they left the Holy Prophet standing' which means that he was
standing while delivering the sermon. It is said that the innovation of
delivering the sermon in a sitting posture was introduced by Mu'awiyyah.
As regards the question whether the Imam (i.e. one who leads the Friday
congregational prayers) and Khateeb (who delivers the Friday sermon)
should be one and the same person or it is possible that the Khateeb
should be one person and the Imam should be another, there is a
difference of opinion about it. The majority of the Ulema believe that
the Khateeb and Imam should be the same person. In fact according to
some Ulema the foremost condition for a person being Imam of Friday
prayers is that he should be able to deliver a sermon. In many
traditions this thing has been narrated under the title of
'Imam-i-Yakhtab:

Another thing is that when the Imam stands up to deliver the Friday
sermon he should lean on a sword, a spear or a staff and should deliver
the sermon in that state.

In Friday sermon it is necessary that, besides praising Allah,
remembering the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams and reciting a Surah of
the Holy Quran, the Khateeb should exhort and admonish the Muslims and
narrate things which are necessary for them. In order to know what
subject should be narrated in a Friday sermon we are guided by a Hadith.
In the first volume of Wasail-ush Shiah ahadith has been quoted with
reference to "Ila-Iush-shara'e" and " 'Uyun-ul-Akhbar ul-Riza" among the
Hadith which are related to Friday sermon. This Hadith has been quoted
from Imam Riza (P) by Fazal bin Shazan Nishapuri, who is one of our
distinguished and reliable narrators. It has been said in this Hadith.

"The sermon has been prescribed for Friday, because Friday is a day of
general gathering and on that day all persons should participate in this
gathering.

" Allah has prescribed this rule so that the chief of the community may
preach before the people and invite them to obedience to Allah and warn
them against the evil consequences of sins.

"And he may also inform them as to what their spiritual and material
interests demand and may tell them in what their welfare really lies.
"Moreover, he (the Imam) should be able to tell the people what happens
to the Muslims in the far off places." Different events take place in
the world of Islam. Sometimes they are a sort of good news for the
Muslims e.g. when Islam achieves a success or advancement. In that case
it is proper that the people should be informed about it. And at other
times the world of Islam meets a mishap. In that event also it is
necessary that the Muslims should be aware of the condition of one
another. For example they should know as to what happened to the Muslims
in Palestine and at other places during the preceding week.

As regards the question as to why two sermons should be delivered and
why one sermon is not sufficient and whether there is any difference
between the two sermons this Hadith provides a reply to this question as
well. Two sermons have been made obligatory so that in one of them Allah
is praised and His Reverence and Greatness is mentioned and in the other
the needs of the people are narrated, and they are properly advised and
admonished. However, as the author of 'Wasail-ush-Shiah' has said it is
not always necessary.

Today I have said all this in connection with discussion about 'Sermon
and the Pulpit' to make it known that in Islam there is an order
according to which sermonizing is treated to be a part of faith. As
regards the question as to why it is not current among. the Shiah it is
a different matter. I cannot understand as to why the conditions of this
blessed and important prayers have been considered to be so severe that
practically it has been abandoned and almost abolished.

I have to say one thing more and it concerns preaching.

There is some difference between preaching and oration. Oration is an
art and it has a technical aspect. Furthermore, the object of oration is
to rouse the sentiments and feelings in one way or the other. However,
the object of preaching is to pacify the passions and its apparent
aspect is to restrain the people from doing evil deeds and to warn them
against their consequences. If we admit that the object of oratory is
absolutely to convince, then preaching is also a kind of oratory .In any
case the word 'preaching' is used when we employ those sentences whose
object is to warn or restrain and subdue lust and anger where necessary.
Raghib Isfahani says:

'Preaching means to restrain along with warning i.e. warning against
the consequences.' Then he quotes the words of the famous linguist
Khalid bin Ahmed who says: 'Preaching' is to remind the people of good
deeds in such a way that the heart may become mild. Hence preaching is
that speech which brings about tenderness of heart.

To restrain the people from selfishness, sensuality, usury and
hypocrisy and to remind them of death, the Day of Judgment and the good
or evil consequences of their deeds in this world and in the Hereafter
is 'preaching'.

As compared with this there are many kinds of oratory. Sometimes its
object is to rouse the people and to prepare them for fighting.
Sometimes its object is political. Sometimes it is employed to impress
the court of law. Sometimes it is used for religious and moral purposes.
Sometimes it is used to build up the morale of the soldiers in the
battlefield. Sometimes it is meant to inform the people of their
political and social rights. Sometimes it is resorted to invoke pity
e.g. the speech made by a lawyer in the court for the reduction of the
punishment of a criminal or in connection with a mercy petition.
Similarly at times its object is to arouse the religious and moral sense
of the people. In our society preaching is more current than oratory,
although as I have just said there are many kinds of oratory.

Perhaps it is because of this that our 'majalis' have mostly the aspect
of preaching and the Friday prayers, the sermons whereof can have
various aspects, has been abandoned by us.

The thing which still exists among us in the name of 'majalis-i-wa'z '
(meetings for preaching) commemorates the majalis which were established
by the sufis. It means that a regular majlis should be arranged; some
persons should assemble to hear and a person should address them in the
capacity of a regular preacher and admonisher. Apparently it is a
creation of the sufis. It was a good thing and later others also held
such majalis. For centuries we have had books which have been compiled
with the name of 'majalis-i-wa'z' e.g. Majalis-i-Sa'di, Majalis-i-Rumi
etc. This was a good thing and later others also followed them. The
Shiah gave currency to the majalis of the mourning of Imam Husayn (P)
reciting "marsiyah"(Elegy). This, too, was a very good thing to do.

I think that as the 'majalis-i-wa'z' were originally started in
imitation of the sufis and as sufiism is based on suppression of carnal
desires and refining and purification of self, this subject is more in
harmony with preaching. Although our Khateebs are not sufis, they also
insist more on abstemiousness and abandonment of material desires.

Nehj-al-Balagha, which is a compilation of some sermons of the
Commander of the Faithful AIi (P), contains different kinds of sermons.
In it there are impressive preachings as well as zealous sermons. Sheikh
Muhammad Abdohoo, the Grand Mufti of Egypt, has written a brief
commentary on Nehj-al Balagha and its preface. In his preface he writes
thus:

"When I began studying this book I came across different kinds of
expressions in it, which impressed me very much. While studying this
book I felt that after one scene another was coming: before my eyes. At
times it seemed as if persons wearing hides of lions and leopards were
ready to attack. I myself was so much impressed that I wished that I
might go into the battle- field, shed the blood of the enemies and also
receive wounds myself. Then I saw that the scene had changed. I was
before a preacher who was making the hearts elegant and tender with his
words and was bestowing purity and neatness on them. Then suddenly
another scene appeared. I felt that a politician and a social reformer
was speaking about the welfare of the people. At times it so seemed that
an angel had stretched his hand from the celestial world and wanted to
pull the people up to the heavens."

It is a fact that sermons of different kinds are found in
Nehj-al-Balagha. They contain preaching and admonition as well as
narrations about the Unity of Allah and cognition. Amongst them there
are political sermons as well as epic sermons. Here I quote, as a
specimen, a small extract from an epic sermon. The armies of Imam Ali
(P) and Mu'awiyyah came face to face with each other in the Battle of
Siffin. Imam Ali (P) was informed that Mu'awiyyah's army had advanced
and occupied the watercourse and had stopped supply of water to them.
The soldiers, therefore, sought permission from the Holy Imam to start
fighting at once so that they might occupy the channel once again.

The Holy Imam said: "Wait. It is possible that we may be able to solve
this problem by means of a dialogue." He then sent a letter to
Mu'awiyyah through a messenger saying: "I have reached here but it is my
earnest desire that instead of using arms we may resolve our differences
by means of a dialogue. You have advanced and stopped the supply of
water to my soldiers. It will be proper if you should order your men
immediately to release water." Mu'awiyyah did not pay any heed to the
matter. On the other hand he considered the occupation of the source of
water supply to be a success for him. Amr bin 'As who was Mu'awiyyah's
minister and counsellor said to him: "Issue orders (as desired by Ali
(P" and do not cause him inconvenience. Ali (r) is not such a person
that he would remain thirsty and would not use force. " But Mu'awiyyah
did not agree with him. After the coming and going of messengers a
number of times Imam Ali (P) was obliged to order an attack to be
launched, so that Mu'awiyyah's soldiers might be pushed back.

This was the time to rouse the enthusiasm and sense of honour of the
soldiers. With only three or four sentences Imam Ali (P) created such a
zeal and enthusiasm among his men that within a short time Mu'awiyyah's
soldiers had to retreat. Whenever I read those sentences my body begins
to tremble. Those sentences are as follows:

"These people have initiated the fight and they want to attack you like
a hungry beast falling on its prey." "Hence, there are only two ways:
either you should endure abjectness, humiliation and retreat, or quench
the thirst of your swords with the blood of these wretched devils, so
that you may quench your own thirst with water." "The purpose of life
lies in this that you should lay down your life for a righteous cause
and should prevail over the enemy with success, and death lies in this
that you live a disgraceful life." These sentences aroused the sense of
honour of the soldiers of the Holy Imam's army, so much so that they
pushed back Mu'awiyyah's men within a short time.

Now I wish to present as specimen one or two sentences out of the
sermons of Imam Ali's beloved son Imam Husayn (P). Nowadays Friday
sermons are not current among us, but by the blessing of Imam Husayn (P)
orations and pulpits continue to exist. Sermons are delivered in other
countries also but in our country religious sermons are based on the
mourning majalis of Husayn bin Ali (P).

Abu Abdullah (P) followed in the footsteps of his magnanimous father in
all matters, and his oratory, too, was of the same pattern. However, Abu
Abdullah (P) did not get even as much time to address the people as
became available to the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (P) during
the period of his Caliphate. The brief opportunity which Abu Abdullah
(P) could avail himself of in this behalf was during his journey from
Mecca to Karbala and then during the eight days which he spent in
Karbala. It was during this short period that his ability as an orator
became conspicuously evident. The Holy Imam 's sermons which are
available at present were mostly delivered during this period. The
sermons of Imam Husayn (P) are an exact specimen of the sermons of his
illustrious father. Their spirit is the same and the same meanings flow
in them. Imam Ali (P) himself said: "The tongue is the tool of the
spirit. If meanings do not descend on the tongue what can the tongue do?
But if the meanings are flowing in the spirit the tongue cannot withhold
them " . He also said:

"We are the masters of speech. Its roots are connected with ourselves
and its branches cast their shadows on our heads." The first sermon of
Imam Husayn (P), which is a manifestation of perfect eloquence and is
replete with, sagacity, bravery, high-mindedness and belief in the
unseen, is the one which he delivered in Mecca before his departure for
Karbala. In this sermon he announced his determination and incidentally
declared: "Whoever has a feeling that I have a right cause before me can
join me in my mission."

"Death has marked off the descendants of Adam in the same manner in
which the sign of a necklace appears on the neck of a young woman. I am
eager to meet my ancestors just as Yaqub (P) was eager to meet his son,
Prophet Yusuf (P).

"Whoever is prepared to sacrifice his life for us and is ready to meet
his Lord should accompany us. God willing I shall depart tomorrow
morning." During the course of his journey he delivered a number of
sermons, each one unique in its place. Here I want to remember his
sermon on the night of Ashoora. As the day of ninth Moharram came to an
end, a stern message was received from ibn-Zyad to finish up the matter.
At that juncture Imam (P) sought respite for a night saying: " Allah
knows that I want respite not to prolong my life for one more night, but
for that I may pass the last night of my worldly life in prayers, and
supplications. Allah knows very well how dearly I love these acts."

A nights respite was reluctantly granted. Imam Husayn (P) gathered his
companions in a tent where water-containers were generally kept. Thus he
addressed the gathering: 'I praise Allah from the bottom of my heart,
whether there is ease or difficulty I praise Allah under all
circumstances. O Allah! I praise you! You bestowed upon us Quranic
knowledge and insight into religious matters. "

As he was speaking these words he was fully aware that he was
surrounded by an army of blood-thirsty enemies, and that he along with
his staunch companions would be mercilessly killed the next day. He knew
very well that his wives and children would be taken prisoners by the
ruthless enemies. But, his words reflect his poise and his confident
spirit. Just ponder over his thankfulness to Allah! As he had knowledge
that his difficulties were predestined he was carefree.

He was expressing thankfulness to Allah and praising Him. He was
declaring that whatever were the conditions, whether it was happiness or
grief, whether the circumstances were favourable or adverse, he was
always grateful to Allah. His fondness for Allah was the same when he
was under the patronage of his grandfather the Holy Prophet (P) and it
was the same when his body was writhing on the hot sands of Karbala and
his lips were dry with extreme thirst. He continued: "There were days
when the Prophet of Allah was kissing my lips and I thank Allah for
that, and there will come a day when these very lips will be hit by a
staff and I shall be thankful to Allah at that time also, because He has
destined it to be so. My position is not only that of infinite patience;
it is also that of extreme thankfulness to Allah. "

The Imam then began to enumerate the graces of Allah one by one -the
graces which are peerless. He expressed gratitude to Allah for the
graces bestowed upon him and said: "I praise You O Allah that You graced
my family with Prophet-hood and thus made it distinct. And, there is no
position loftier and higher than prophethood! I praise You O Allah! that
You taught us the exegesis of the Holy Quran and chose us for that
knowledge. I praise you that you gave us insight into religious matters.
If all the bounties of the world are put together, they can't compare
with your grace that you chose us for the knowledge of the Holy Qur'an.
Nothing can compete with the position that we have got through our
physical and spiritual relationship with the Holy Prophet (P). And, all
the bounties of the world combined cannot equal your grace that you have
given me insight into the spirit and meaning of religion."

After this the Imam turned to his family men and companions thanking
them for their unflinching loyalty and adherence. He said: "I have never
seen a body of persons more loyal and faithful than my companions, and a
family more loving and kind than my own family. May Allah grant you
better recompense."

Let us now see the acme of renunciation! He permitted all his faithful
followers and family men to leave him saying:' These fellows are bent
upon killing me and they won't nurse grudge against any body if they
succeed in killing me. You may take advantage of the darkness of night
and go away." Saying this the Imam lowered his head so that anybody
desiring to depart would not have to face humiliation. But his gallant
companions were steadfast. Hazrat Abbas stood up and declared: "How can
it be possible that we leave you amidst danger and mind our own safety?
How can we face Allah if we do this? What answer may we produce before
the Holy Prophet (P) if he enquires about you? Anyhow life is worthless
if we lose you:'

After that Muslim ibn Awsja rose and said: "Can I leave you? No by
Allah no! I shall continue to fight your enemies till I thrust the edge
of my lance into their hearts and as long as I can hold my sword in my
hand. Even when I am left with no weapon in my hand I shall continue to
hit your enemies with pebbles and thus discharge my duty regarding you
and that I may rightfully claim before the Almighty that I haven't
budged from the duty which the Holy Prophet (P) had reposed in me. Even
if it be so that I get killed and my corpse be burnt and the ashes be
blown in the wind, and this process is to be repeated seventy times I
won't leave you alone. To sacrifice life for you is earning permanent
glory forever."

These were the talks that solaced the heart of Imam Husayn (P) and
these were the true sentiments of his staunch followers! And there is no
power and strength save with Allah the Most High, the Grand.


