Sermon and the Pulpit (2)
=========================

Ustaz Murtaza Mutahhari

I seek refuge in the Hearer and Omniscient Allah from the accursed
Satan. In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful The Beneficent
(Allah) has taught the Quran [to Muhammad (P)] He created man and has
taught him intelligible speech. (Surah Rahman, 55:1-4) In the previous
lecture I talked about oratory and its relationship with Islam and about
the change which Islam brought about in it. In this connection I also
mentioned an Islamic order according to which Islam has declared a
special kind of oration to be an integral part of Islamic teachings. In
our country oration and pulpit exist on account of the tragedy of
Karbala, but, as I wanted to speak on different aspects of this subject,
the discussion about Friday prayers was necessary in this regard.
Furthermore, I talked about the ceremonies and rules which have been
prescribed for Friday sermon. My object in doing so was that when I
talked about 'Khutba' again I might propose that in these days also we
should follow these orders.

I had said that in our country oratory and pulpit owe their existence
to the Great Martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P). It may be asked as to how it
is so. It is so because, as all of us know, Imam Husayn (P) started a
movement against the system which was current during his time and was
martyred. That there are Hadith, which lay stress on mourning for him,
cannot be denied. Mourning is one of the indisputable articles of faith
of Shiah Islam. The" Holy Imams have recommended it very strongly that
the memory of Ashura should be maintained. The poets have been advised
to write verses on this subject and to move the feelings of the people.
Shedding tears over the heart-rending tragedy of Ashura is considered to
be a holy act. In many Hadith weeping and crying has been reckoned to be
very virtuous. I do not intend to narrate those Hadith today but briefly
say that it is not possible for any Shi'ah to deny that our religion has
given these orders.

Here it is necessary to discuss several questions: What was the
philosophy of Imam Husayn's (P) rising? Why did he rise? What was the
stimulus for his rising? Why have the Holy Imams made the recommendation
that the memory of the rising of Imam Husayn (P) should be kept alive
and should not be forgotten? After all what is the philosophy behind
keeping the subject of Ashura alive?

According to the belief of us Shi'ah none of the religious orders is
devoid of philosophy. Hence the philosophy under-lying these two things
should be known. When that philosophy becomes known, it will be realized
as to what the importance of these orders is and how much we should
profit from the orders relating to the tragedy of Karbala.

Why did Imam Husayn (P) rise? This can be explained in three ways.
Firstly, we may say that the rising of Imam Husayn (P) was an ordinary
event the object of which was (God forbid) an effort to achieve personal
gain. However, this is an explanation which cannot at all be accepted by
any Muslim and it is also not supported by historical events.

The second explanation which is usually given by the common people is
that Imam Husayn (P) sacrificed his life and attained martyrdom for the
salvation of this Ummah i.e. " in fact, his martyrdom is an atonement
for the sins of the Ummah. This thinking is exactly like the belief
coined by the Christians about Christ (P) who, they say, got himself
crucified so that he might make atonement for the sins of his followers.
In other words Imam Husayn (P) was martyred so that the sinners might
escape the punishment which was to be awarded to them on the Day of
Judgment and might, therefore, commit sins freely. This belief would
mean that Imam Husayn (P) saw that although some Yazids, Ibne Ziads,
Shimrs and Sinans were present in the world, their number was small. He
there- fore, thought of doing something which might increase their
number.

Hence he set up a factory for manufacturing Yazids and Ibne Ziads so
that they might form large numbers in the following days. This way of
thinking and this explanation is extremely dangerous. No method can be
more effective than this way of thinking to eliminate the effect of the
movement of Imam Husayn (P), to fight against his aims and objects and
to make ineffective and prove irrational the orders which we have
received regarding mourning for him. Believe me, one of the reasons for
our being reckless and remiss in our acts is that the movement of Imam
Husayn (P) has been explained so wrongly and its result is before your
eyes. I have said 'One of the reasons' because there are other reasons
also which are connected with the national and racial aspect.

Murjia were of the view that faith and belief are sufficient for
salvation and good deeds are not necessary. If the belief is true the
Almighty Allah will forgive every misdeed. Zayd bin Ali bin Al-Husayn
(P) said about this sect:

"Owing to the propaganda of these people with the hope that Allah will
forgive sins, the sinners have become encouraged to commit any sin they
like." This was the belief of Murjia' at that time and the belief of the
Shi'ah was its opposite. However, nowadays the Shi'ah say what Murjia'
used to say in olden times. At that time the belief of the Shi'ah was in
accordance with this Qur'anic text:

"Faith is necessary and good deeds are also necessary. " The third
explanation is that the circumstances had taken such a turn in the world
of Islam that Imam Husayn (P) considered it his duty to rise. He was of
the view that it was necessary for him, rather it was his duty to rise
for the safety of Islam. His difference and dispute with the caliph of
the time was not as to who from between them should be the Caliph and
whether the Holy Imam was entitled to hold the office which was held by
Yazid. Their difference was basic and fundamental.

If instead of Yazid another person had done the same deeds and adopted
the same ways and manners, Imam Husayn (P) would have risen against him
as he rose against Yazid whether the treatment meted out by him to the
Holy Imam himself had been good or bad. Yazid and his supporters were
prepared to render every assistance to Imam Husayn (P) provided that he
did not interfere with what they did and confirmed their conduct.

If the Holy Imam had asked for a territory e.g. if he had demanded that
the rulership of the Hijaz and Yemen might be given to him or the
administration of the provinces of Iraq and Khorasan might be placed at
his disposal they would certainly have entrusted these territories to
him. He would also have been given full control on these territories. He
might have collected as much revenue as he liked and might have spent it
ill the way he wished. It would have been at his discretion to send any
money to the central government or not. In fact the battle of Imam
Husayn (P) was the battle of principle and faith. It was the battle
between truth and falsehood. And in this battle of truth and falsehood
the position of Imam Husayn's (P) own person was secondary .He had made
this thing clear to his companions in a few words. He uttered these
words in a sermon which was most probably delivered when Hur and his
companions had arrived and on this account it was a general address. He
said:
"Don't you see that truth is not being followed and false-hood is not
being avoided. In the circumstances it is the duty of every believer to
get ready for martyrdom." He did not say: 'It is the duty of the Imam to
get ready for martyrdom'. He did not' also say: 'It .is the personal
duty of Husayn (P) to get ready for martyrdom.' On the other hand he
said: "It is the duty of every believer" i.e. in such circumstances a
believer should prefer death to life. When truth is not being followed
and there is no restraint on falsehood it becomes obligatory for a
Muslim to rise and get ready to face martyrdom.

Out of these explanations one is that which can be put forward only by
an enemy of Imam Husayn (P). Another explanation is that which has been
given by the Holy Imam himself i.e. he rose in the path of Allah, And
another explanation is that which is offered by the ignorant friends of
Imam Husayn (P). This explanation is more dangerous and misleading than
the one given by the Holy Imam's enemies and is very much remote from
his aim and object.

Now the second part of the question is 'Why did the Holy Imams (P)
recommend that meetings should be held to mourn the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (P)? Its reason is also the same as stated by me just now. Imam
Husayn (P) did not embrace martyrdom to achieve any personal end or to
atone for the sins of the Ummah, but laid down his life in the path of
Allah and was martyred fighting against falsehood. Hence, the Holy Imams
of Ahlul Bayt wished that the school of Imam Husayn 's (P) martyrdom
might continue to exist and his movement might remain alive (The great
leader Imam Ayatullah Khomeini has said: "To arrange a majlis of
mourning for Imam Husayn (P) is a means of the existence of Islam. Those
who oppose the majalis of the Doyen of the Martyrs are absolutely
unaware of the reality of Islam.

Mourning for Imam Husayn (P) has safeguarded Islam till the present
day.") As the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P) was a movement of campaign
between truth and falsehood it is necessary that it should continue to
exist forever. Otherwise it is immaterial for lmam Husayn (P) whether we
weep for him or not and it does not also benefit us that we may only sit
together and weep and then disperse. What the Holy Imams wanted was that
the rising of Imam Husayn (P) should continue to exist for ever as a
living monument and a beacon light, because it generates the love for
truth and seeks truth and freedom. The lesson of this movement of
freedom and independence and the campaign against aggression and
despotism should continue to remain in our hearts all the time.

The result of this order was that a revolution took place during the
time of the Holy Imams (P) themselves, and the name of Imam Husayn (P)
became a slogan of revolution against oppression. Many revolutionary
poets made their appearance. Kumait Asadi was born. De'bol Khuza'i came
into existence. Do you know who Kumait Asadi was and who De'bil Khuza'i
was? They were rauza Khawans (narrators of the tragedies of Karbala) but
not rauza Khawans like me. They were poets who composed elegies but not
like Mohtashim Kashani. I wish to narrate before you some Arabic verses
of Kumait Asadi, De'bil Kuza'i Ibn-al-Rumi and Abu Faras Hamadani so
that you may compare them with the verses of Mohtashim which are praised
abundantly by the people. However, there can be no comparison between
them. The verses of these poets reflect the teachings of Imam Husayn
(P). Only the verses of Kumait Asadi were more harmful for Bani Omayyah
than an army. Who was this man? He was a poet who wrote elegies but was
not one of those elegywriters who recite some doggerels, pocket some
money in lieu of that and go away. When he composed verses he shook the
world and made the court of the Caliph tremble.

Abdullah bin Hasan bin. Ali (P), popularly known as Abdullah Mehz was
impressed so much by the forceful verses of Kumait that he brought the
title-deed of his piece of land and presented it to him. Kumait said:
"It is not at all possible for me to accept it. I read elegies for the
Doyen of the Martyrs and compose those verses to seek the pleasure of
Allah. I do not compose verses to earn money." However, on Abdullah's
insistence he had to agree and he accepted the title-deed. After a few
days Kumait went to see Abdullah bin Hasan bin Ali (P) and said to him:
"I have a request to make to you and hope that you will accept it. "
Abdullah said: "I shall certainly accept it. Let me know what it is."
Kumait said: "I shall tell you only after you have made a firm promise."
Thereupon, Abdullah made the promise and possibly swore as well. As soon
as he made the promise Kumait returned the title-deed to him and said
that he could not accept it.

On another occasion Bani Hashim collected some money and presented it
to him. He, however, flatly refused to accept the money and in spite of
their best efforts they could not make him agree to take it.

This man suffered great hardships on account of his verses and because
of reciting such elegies but he remained steadfast and firm. At last he
was caught and taken to the house of Yusuf bin Umar Thaqfi, the governor
of Kufa and he appointed eight men to torture him physically and
mentally. The last words which he uttered at the time of his death were:
(O Lord! members of the Prophet's Household. O Lord! members of the
Prophet's Household!).

You do know De'bil bin Ali Khuza'il He used to say: "I have been a
nomad for the last fifty years."

How can it be possible to assess and evaluate the value and worth of
the literary contributions made by those elegy writers who were educated
and trained by the Holy Imams themselves? They only composed and recited
elegies. They wrote elegies but there were no wailings and lamentations
in their elegies. They composed epic elegies. Their panegyrics were
impressive like the articles of a revolutionary thinker. Under the
auspices of the Doyen of the Martyrs Imam Husayn (P) they criticized
Bani Omayyah and Bani Abbas so severely that the latter had to suffer
extremely on account of that.

You must have heard that Mutawakkil had ordered the grave of Imam
Husayn (P) to be submerged in water and none was be allowed to approach
it. He also ordered that if anyone went near the grave, his hand would
be cut off and one who uttered the name of Husayn (P) would be awarded
severe punishment. You must be thinking that Mutawakkil was suffering
from some psychological ailment and it was for this reason that he
nursed irrational and uncalled-for enmity against Imam Husayn (P) in his
heart. However, the real position was different from this.

As a result of the recommendation made by the Holy Imams of Ahlul Bayt
for mourning the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P) and the appearance of
poets like Kumait and De'bil Khuza'i Imam Husayn's (P) name had caused
such a reaction that his very name was instrumental in bringing about
the causes of the decline of Mutawakkil's father. Mutawakkil could see
very clearly that every poet wielded more power against him than an army
and even after his martyrdom Imam Husayn (P) was as competent to
frustrate his (Mutawakkil's) schemes as he was during his life.

As the instructions and orders given by the Imams of Ahlul Bayt that
the memory of Imam Husayn (P) should be kept alive had given his name
the shape of a doctrine and belief against oppression, Mutawakkil, after
due deliberations, decided to get this article of faith put to an end.
He did not wish that the memory of Imam Husayn (P) should remain alive
in any form. Otherwise, however, Mutawakkil was quite an intelligent
person. He also pretended to be a pious man and did not also suffer from
any complex in respect of Imam Husayn (P). But he could see that recital
of elegies had assumed the form of an ideology which he could not afford
to suppress at any cost.

There are many other stories also. If they are compiled it will become
known that so long as the poets who composed elegies for Imam Husayn (P)
followed the teachings of the Holy lmams their role in the society
remained laudable. If these things are understood and it is no doubt
necessary to understand them, it will be possible to benefit properly
from the mourning for Imam Husayn (P).

Nevertheless I say that in spite of all their shortcomings the
sentiments and feelings of the people for the Doyen of the Martyrs are
sincere and pious even today of course. There are some persons whose
intention is not bad but when they see that 'mourning' has been
interpreted wrongly they say that it will be better if this practice is
ended, because, according to them, some people weep and cry, because
they have heard that sins are forgiven by doing so, and, if it is not
so, they will not weep at all. However, this view is held owing to
misunderstanding and the reality is not this. No one can be made to weep
by offering a reward.

If you do not believe in this, you may collect some parsons and ask
them to weep for another person say for Shah Abbas, for half an hour and
promise them one thousand tumans per head for doing so. Is it possible
to do so? Weeping needs sentiments. So long as a person is not moved he
cannot weep. A person can weep only when he is sad or his heart is
touched. The sentiments of the people in respect of Imam Husayn (P) are
in a way truly real. The people love Imam Husayn (P) sincerely and are
devoted to him and shed tears for him from the bottom of their heart.
Lots of tears are shed during the months of Moharram and Safar. It is
not possible to weep without grief, love, feelings and sentiments. These
sentiments are very precious but we have not so far profited from them
as we should have. As regards the reason for our not profiting from the
sentiments adequately it is a different matter.

We have many things from which we do not profit. We have the river
Karoon from which we have not benefited so far. Then can it be said that
the river Karoon is of no use? We had underground deposits of oil which
we did not exploit for centuries. There were and are thousands of
mineral deposits in our country which we have not utilized so far.

If it is desired that our country should be happy and prosperous, we
should develop educationally and industrially and should proceed on the
path of freedom and independence which is the best and the easiest way,
and in my opinion the only way to achieve this object is that the true
sentiments of the people regarding Imam Husayn (P) should be utilized.
[This was the slogan which was raised to bring about Islamic revolution
In Iran: Nuzhzat-e-ma Husayni-Rahbar-e-ma Khumayne. (Our movement is
Husayni (P) and our leader is Khomeini)]. These sentiments are real and
relate to a personality who really deserves them and who has presented a
viewpoint which is lofty and great.

Why should we not act according to the guidance provided by our
religion and faith? It is a very good guidance which must be followed
and benefit should be derived from it.

In any case 'the oration and the pulpit' current amongst us is the
result of the tragedy of Karbala and the emphatic recommendation made by
the Holy Imams for mourning the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (P). It is the
blessing of this mourning that intelligent and religious persons deliver
speeches in the majalis. Now as the majalis are arranged in the name of
Imam Husayn (P) and as the people gather together for his sake why
should we not avail ourselves of this opportunity to derive another
benefit and why should we not act incidentally on another principle?
That principle is, that of ordering to do good and restraining from
evil. Thus there will be two pulpits of Imam Husayn (P). One will be
meant for reciting elegies and expression of sentiments in support of
the oppressed and against the oppressor.

This pulpit, if used properly, will produce all the great results
mentioned by me earlier. As regards the second pulpit it will be that of
'ordering to do good and restraining from evil.' The system of preaching
and guidance which is prevalent in our country and the 'ordering to do
good and restraining from evil' which is done verbally is all due to the
sacred name of Imam Husayn (P). This is a very appropriate method and a
good custom. It is a very good thing that the pulpit of Imam Husayn (P)
is used implicitly for 'ordering to do good and restraining from evil'
and for imparting instructions in principles and secondary matters of
faith to some extent, and some use is made of the real sentiments of the
people in respect of Imam Husayn (P).

Many people do not gather in the name of any other person as they do in
the name of Imam Husayn (P). It is, therefore, a very good thing that
such a system exists. Now as regards the question as to how it is acted
upon it depends on the ability and competence of the speaker and on
whether he can narrate the beliefs and the principles of faith, whether
he can exhort and admonish the people, whether he can explain what is
lawful and what is unlawful and whether he can inform the people about
their religious and worldly interests. In any case, the people are
prepared to hear the speaker on account of the blessings of Imam Husayn
(P). Now it depends on the speaker whether or not he is able to narrate
these facts.

When the position is this, it is necessary that the matter should be
given careful consideration and efforts should be made to reform the
narration from both the points of view -from the point of view of
reciting elegies as well 'as from the point of view of admonition and
guidance.

As regards elegies it is necessary for those who recite them that they
should pay heed to the real spirit of the movement of Imam Husayn (P)
and its object, and should keep in mind the real reason for the Imams
having given orders and instructions in respect of mourning. As these
instructions have not been given without reason they (the reciters of
elegies) should inform the people about the object of the Karbala
movement and the philosophy underlying mourning for Imam Husayn (P).
This thing should reach the ears of the people not only once or twice or
even hundreds of times but for ever. It is, therefore, necessary that
the speakers themselves should be clear-sighted and well-informed. Their
information should not be limited to a few commonplace 'Jang-namas'
(Epic poems) and they should not be master pieces of self -styled
orators. These people narrate many things after hearing them from one
another.

If they are asked as to where they learnt a particular thing from, they
say: 'It was narrated by such and such great orator.' It means that it
has not been seen in any book but is only hearsay. There are many funny
incidents in this regard. If I had the requisite time at my disposal I
would have narrated some of them before you and you would have learnt
that when a person coins a lie how rapidly it spreads and how by passing
from one person to another it eventually reaches from one city to
another city and from one region to another region. It is necessary that
historical events should be quoted only from reliable historical books
and according to the credible reports of the historians.

We have amongst us a historian named Dr. Ayati (the late Dr. Muhammad
Ibrahim Ayati, author of the book entitled 'Tarikh-i-Ashura published by
the Islamic Seminary) who was fully conversant with the history of early
Islam. I daresay that perhaps in the whole of Tehran, rather in the
entire country, there is none else who is as conversant with the history
of early Islam as he was. There is no other ,person who may possess as
wide an information about that period of history as he did. He had
thorough knowledge of all the history books and historical details
relating to that period. For example, if you asked him something about
the battle of Badr he could supply you detailed information about each
person who participated in that battle.

In fact in most cases he could also tell as to who the parents and the
near relatives of an individual participating in the battle of Badr
were. Whatever he says serves as an authority. However, it cannot be
helped that you people of Tehran are not accustomed to hearing thil1gs
based on research. His latest writing which has been published by the
University relates to the history of Undlus (Spain) and its name, too,
is Tarikh-i-Undlus.' In this book an account has been given of a tragedy
of the history of Islam about which we Muslims and especially the
Iranian have been most negligent. This book is worth reading and you
must read it.

In any case it was being said that the object of Imam Husayn's (P)
rising and the philosophy behind mourning should be announced from the
pulpits continuously, so that profit and object may be achieved for
which Imam Zayn-al-Abideen (P), Imam Baqir (P), Imam Sadiq (P) and Imam
Kazim (P) had been recommending mourning, and poets like Kumait and
De'abil may appear and their elegies may produce the required results.
We should not do any such thing as may cool down sentiments. On the
other hand we should do those things which make the sentiments more
intense and by which the love of the people for truth and hatred for
falsehood increases.

There has always been strife in the world between truth and falsehood
and it will continue forever. Prophet Musa (P) and Pharaoh have always
been in the world. Prophet Ibrahim (P) and Nimrud have always been in
the world. Prophet Muhammad (P) and Abu Jehl have always been there.
Imam Ali (P) and Mu'Awiyyah have always been in the world. Imam Husayn
(P) and Yazid have always been there.

Dr. Muhammad Iqbal, the poet of the East, says:

[Musa (P) and Pharaoh; and Shabbir (P) and Yazid are the two forces
which appear in life]. It is not meant that people of the position of
Prophet Ibrahim (P), Prophet Musa (P), Prophet Muhammad (P), Imam Ali
(P) and Imam Husayn (P) have always been there. What is meant is that
truth and falsehood have always been at war with each other. There have
always been two paths before the society -one is that of truth and the
other is that of falsehood. This is one aspect of 'majlis' and elegy, in
which we participate.

The other aspect is that of instruction and guidance and ordering to do
good and restraining from evil. The question is: What should be done in
this regard and what should be the method of action? I think we should
act according to the method proposed for us in respect of Friday sermon
and about which I quoted a hadith of Imam Riza (P) last night. This
order of the Holy Imam (P) is very comprehensive. However, in our
society Friday prayers is not generally offered so that this order may
be followed in Friday sermons. [Praise be to Allah. After the end of the
Satanic government of the Shah, matchless gatherings for Friday prayers
take place in every city of Iran. Only in Tehran forty to fifty lakh
persons offer Friday prayers at one place. In today's Iran this sentence
of Imam Khomeini is seen written on the walls: "Friday prayer is not an
ordinary prayer."] Hence it can be done in those sermons and speeches
which are current amongst us by the blessings of Imam Husayn bin Ali
(P).

In the hadith of Imam Riza (P), the Eighth Imam, which I narrated last
night the duties of a khateeb (preacher) have been divided into three
parts. About the first part it has been said: Friday is the day on which
all people gather together and a large gathering of the Muslims is
formed. Islam wishes that on this occasion the leader of the Muslims
should preach, invite people to obey Allah and warn them against sins.

There is not a single person who may not stand in need 'of preaching
and advice. It is possible that a person may not stand in need of
receiving education from another, but there is none who may remain
unaffected by any suggestions and pieces of advice. This is so because
it is one thing to know something and it is another to be impressed by
the instruction of a religious and pious preacher. It is said that Imam
Ali (P) used to ask some one from amongst his companions to give him
advice and he also said that hearing is more effective than knowing.

It is necessary that the person who possesses the capability and
competence to perform this task should always exhort and advise the
people, should make them remember Allah, should not allow them to become
oblivious of death and should warn them against the consequences of sin,
should speak about the grave and the Day of Judgment, and should invite
the attention of the people to Divine Justice. These are necessary
things and the society can never do without them. In the past there have
been some very good preachers amongst us and by the grace of Allah they
are present even now. The more the competent and qualified preachers
there are the better. This thing is necessary in connection with Khutba
(oration) and the pulpit.

The second part of the duties of a Khateeb is that &bout which Imam
Riza (P) has said:

"It is the duty of a Khateeb to inform the people of the things which
are in their interest from the religious and worldly points of view and
to tell them as to what they should do in the prevailing circumstances
and what their religious and worldly interests demand."

Evidently this is a very huge task and is more difficult than
admonition, exhortation and general preaching. If a person is pious,
righteous and sincere and if he knows a few sentences of preaching he
can preach, and his preaching will also be useful to some extent. If a
person pious, righteous and sincere, it' will be sufficient if he
narrates a few sayings of the leaders of the faith. However, if a person
wishes to narrate the large religious and worldly problems of the people
and to inform them about all these things, it is a very difficult
task.

Two difficulties arise in this task. Firstly it needs vast information
and secondly sincerity is very necessary so that the speaker may inform
others clearly about what he considers to be in their religious and
worldly interest.

As regards information the preacher should have sufficient knowledge of
the principles and bases of faith and should be aware of the spirit of
Islamic teachings. He should also be competent to distinguish between
the apparent and latent contents of Islamic teachings so that he may be
able to understand the religious interests and to explain them. Only
general religious information is not sufficient for this purpose.
Furthermore, it is also necessary for him to understand the society and
to know what is happening in the world and what the interests of the
Islamic society demand in the present circumstances, so that he may be
able to acquaint the people with the latest developments taking place in
the world and the interests of the Islamic society.

Unfortunately this aspect of our preaching is weak. There are many
preachers, and other aspects of preaching are not weak or at least not
very weak. However, this aspect is very weak and this is due to lack of
study. What Imam Riza (P) has said in this behalf is very valuable. He
said that the people should be made aware of their religious and worldly
interests. A person who has been concerned with only a few books
pertaining to a particular branch of knowledge (e.g. Jurisprudence,
literature or philosophy) and who has spent his life in a corner of the
school, cannot understand what the condition of the society is and what
its needs are. A person cannot keep an eye on the interests of the
society while sitting in a corner of the school. It is also necessary to
possess knowledge of the changing conditions of the world. A very sharp
perception is necessary to assess what is going to happen in future and
how the society should deal with it to escape any danger. It is not
possible to lead or guide without possessing foresight.

What does guidance mean? Guidance means to show the right path. When a
caravan is going to a destination its members ask some one: Which is the
way towards such and such place? And he replies: "Go this way. " This is
guidance. Who can be the guide of the caravan? Only that person, who
knows on which path the caravan is and where it is going, can be a
guide. The society, too, is like a caravan which "is always in motion.
Whether we like it or not, this caravan moves on. We should know in
which direction this caravan should be taken.

For example, suppose that a motor car driver is driving a car. In this
condition the steering wheel should be in his hands. At some place he
has to stop the car and at another place he has to increase its speed.
At some place he has to turn the steering wheel and at another place he
has to change the gear Or to apply the brakes. All these things are
necessary for driving the car properly. Same is the case with the
society .All such things are to be done to make it proceed in the right
direction. At times its direction is to be changed. At times its speed
is to be increased. And at times it is to be brought to a standstill.
Everything is to be done at the appropriate time. This is what is called
'understanding the interest of society.' A person who does not
understand this thing can neither become the guide of the society nor
can he talk about its interest.


