Introduction
============

All praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. May peace and
blessings be upon His servant and beloved Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) our
guide and intercessor with Allah, the Exalted; and upon his purified
household, his faithful companions, and those who follow his path until
the Day of Judgment.

The sun of Islam brilliantly rose, and enlightened the path which guide
mankind to a blissful life both here and the Hereafter. It guides the
deviated, protects the weak, uplifts the downtrodden, satisfies the
hungry and clothes the naked. Islam came to clarify all rights and
obligations; and to free the individual, family, and the ummah1 from
fear, injustice, ignorance and hunger.

According to its laws, white and black, ruler and ruled, man and woman
are all equal. Islam determines a just balance which organizes every
aspect of life, and all needs of the human race. It marvelously caters
to any need in life, while carrying the message of guidance and reform,
the flambeau of power and mercy and the banner of freedom and justice,
in quest of a secure life for all humanity under its shades, till the
end of life on earth.

In Islam, we find attributes that no other religion offers. Islam
reconciles the creed with the legislation and morals. It responds to the
corporal needs and spiritual desires, and identifies the deterrent
punishment. It cultivates morals to form the balanced ummah. Then it
makes justice the ruler and observer and, the conscience a guide. It
promises reward for the righteous believers, and punishment for those
who go astray.

One main attribute of Islam is that it raises the status of man, and
asserts his high position as the viceroy of the Creator and the best of
all creatures. Mankind revives the earth and the souls by construction
and faith, while honoring the religiously ordained duties. Islam orders
fulfilling of divine obligations, and makes it compulsory for the
keeping up of prayer, fasting, and the performance of Hajj , and jihad
(holy struggle for the sake of Allah)...etc.

Hajj is indeed a source of guidance and innumerable benefits and
interests, and a stronghold of defence and uprightness. Allah, the Most
High, ordains Hajj so that the ummah of the Seal of the prophets remains
the bearer of the monotheistic banner to achieve the unity of
humanity,

[ 2 ]

and carries out the most desired objectives of humanity: freedom,
equality, justice, security, welfare, brotherhood, stability and
prosperity.

Hall is a discharge of Allah's dues, and for mankind a tour of the
body, a journey of the soul, a unification of the ummah and the
dissemination of monotheism. In it there are short term benefits of this
world, and the everlasting benefits of the Hereafter. Al-Balagh
Foundation presents to its dear readers this booklet on Hajj, asking
Allah to amply grant us His help to accomplish this duty to the best of
our abilities, so that the ummah may reap the bounties of its humble
endeavors.

We ask Him to aid us in our efforts to do good works which pleases Him,
to fulfill that which has been commanded of us, to glorify and give due
respect to the religious duties of Islam. "and whoever respects the
signs of Allah, this surely is (the outcome) of die piety of hearts".


AL-BALAGH FOUNDATION


**Hajj - A Definition**

Literally, Hall refers to the intention of visiting a place. The Holy
Qur'an transfers the meaning of Hajj from its lexical general meaning to
a traditionally specific meaning which denotes the annual pilgrimage to
the Holy Ka'ba in Mecca, one of the religious duties of Islam.

The great annual gathering called Hajj, is a collection of rites and
ceremonies, offered by Muslims, who are bound to carry out religious
duties, in a specific place and during a specific time set by Islam,
similar to the way the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) did.

Hajj is so called because the Muslim who performs it goes to Mecca, the
Sacred House, at the start of Dhul-Hijjah (the eleventh month of the
Muslim calendar) and visits other sacred places like Arafat, Mina and
Muzdalifah to offer his devotions.

Islam states specific dates, time and place for offering such
devotions. Failing to heed them renders them unacceptable by Allah.

Ihram (donning the pilgrim's robes) begins in a certain place. Tawaf
(the ceremonial circumambulation of the Ka'ba) is done in a specific
place. Sa y (walking seven times between the hills of Safa and Marwah)
is done in a certain place. Wuquf (remaining in certain places during
Hajj) is performed in specific places. Likewise, Rainy al-Jamarat
(casting stones at the symbolic Satans) is done at specific sites and
passing some nights is also a rite done in a certain place...etc.

[ 3 ]

As place has its significance and lawful position in this worship, date
and time, also, have importance and impact as a prominent factor that
renders this worship correct. Therefore, the most important of the
devotions connected to this great duty are offered at specific times.
Staying in Arafat, for example, takes place on the 9th day of
Dhul-Hijjah. Passing the night at Muzdalifah is on the night of 10th
(eve of Eid al-Adh hah): Yawm An-Nahr (the day in which animals are
sacrificed) is the 10th day which is also the day of Eid. And spending
the night at Mina is on the 11th and the 12th nights, of
Dhul-Hijjah...all of them are related firmly to specific times.


**IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF THE FATHER OF THE PROPHETS:**

**IBRAHIM (A.S.)**

The Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) continued his long journey across Babylonia,
Syria and Arabia. He folded up long periods of time, while crossing
plains, hills, valleys, rivers and deserts to arrive eventually in the
promised land of Mekkah al-Mukarramah. To this place, he brought with
the pioneers of faith and life; his wife Hajar and his eldest son
lshmael (a.s.).

The land of peace was the last station of the journey of Ibrahim
(a.s.). Ibrahim (a.s.) examines the deserts and mountains of Mecca, as
if looking for a new great event that will come into being on this
particular land. Ibrahim's great heart resorts to silence to cover his
secret and fate. Ibrahim (a.s.) raises his head, and stretches his hands
towards the heavens. He humbly says:

"0 our Lord! Surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
un-productive of fruit near Your Sacred House, our Lord! That they may
keep up prayer; therefore, make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them and provide them with fruits; happily they may be grateful." Holy
Qur'an (14:37)

With these words Ibrahim (a.s.) bids adieu to his wife and child and
returns to Palestine to his first wife Sarah. Hajar finds refuge in
silence, Ishmael turns about. She clambers up and down the two hillocks
of Safa and Marwah. He gets desperately thirsty. Hajar (Hagger) runs up
the nearby hill in search of water. She seeks water but in vain and in
her desperation climbs up another hill. He kicks the desert's sands with
his small feet. On his withered lips, there is thirst and dryness. Deep
in his heart there is love and faith. In his eyes is the great hope of
the future

[ 4 ]

which gives the good news of the rising of an Ummah that will grow in
the barren valley the tree of faith and life. For some precious drops of
water, the baby beats the ground with his feet, and caresses the sands
with his fingers with the serenity of the prophets and the love of the
saints, as if stroking the breast of the earth - the dear mother - so it
may pour on his lips drops of water. The helpless mother watches in deep
anguish. Behold, the earth's heart relents affectionately to her great
son.

It responds to his wish as he responds to the call of Allah. The ground
splits a little, and suddenly a spring flows to extinguish the thirst of
the earth. This is a sign foretelling the greatness of this great baby.
Hajar is seized by astonishment.

Is it true or a mirage? She slowly approaches the water and dips her
hand into it and gives a handful to Ishmael. Mother and son Ishmael stay
near the spring of Zamzam. Ishmael joyfully plays around it, in the land
of the Divine Messages, soon to rebuild in this very land with his
father, the Ka'ba, to which the hearts of the monotheists have always
longed for. A place visited by its lovers.

Years pass and Ibrahim (a.s.) returns to meet Ishmael, to write a new
chapter of the history of faith on the sacred land. He, with the aid of
his son, embarks on the building of a house for worship. He continues
the construction. He raises the foundations of the house, little by
little the house, symbolic of monotheism in the heart of barren Arabia,
is built. The Ka'ba is raised, where the souls circumambulate around
it:

"And when We assigned to Ibrahim the place of the House, saying: Do not
associate with Me anything, wad purify My House for those who
circumambulate wad the standing wad the bowing wad the prostrating. And
proclaim to the mankind (the duty of) pilgrimage; they shall come to you
on foot and on every lean camel, coming from every remote path". Holy
Qur'an (22:28-27)

Ibrahim (a.s.) and his son complete the construction of the house

"And when Ibrahim wad Ishmael raised the foundations of the House:

Our Lord! Accept from us; surely You are All-Hearing: All-Knowing, Our
Lord! And make us both submissive to You and (raise) from our offspring
a nation submitting to You and show us our ways of devotion wad turn to
us (mercifully), surely You are the Oft-returning (to mercy), the
Merciful". Holy Qur'an (21:127-128)

[ 5 ]

The House of Allah became a symbol of faith, a place of worship and
glorification of Allah, a place to which people journey, a place of
sanctity and security to the guests of Allah.

Ibrahim (a.s.) was looking after the House. In it he was humbly
worshipping and glorifying Allah, and holding it in high esteem. He
deeply felt the glory of this sublime symbol and waited for its great
role in humanity's life.

This stony House was Allah's. It was a simple humble House floating on
a sea of sand amidst waves of mountains and scattered hills, surrounded
by bareness on every side. Could any one think that house set up in the
middle of the desert, out of touch with the spring and people, could
ever be so inhabited and highly glorified? Yes...

"And your Lord creates wad chooses whom He wills." Holy Qur'an
(28:68)

It was not long before glory shaded the land of stones and sand. The
bare valleys of Mecca became a valley of fertility and abundance.

And why not? Was it not the land chosen by Allah to be the center of
Ibrahim's message, the caller of the faith, and the roving messenger who
was fascinated by the message of monotheism, and escaped the injustice
of the tyrants to the justice of Allah, and from the nonsense of
idol-worship to the religious wisdom of righteousness?

Was it not the land that deeply believed in Ibrahim's goals when the
fertile valleys of Babylonia and Syria turned him down? Was it not the
land that would enrich the soul with faith, and make the whole earth
prosperous with civilization? Allah had chosen it for Ibrahim (a.s.) to
put the Ka'ba in its heart and prepare a place for worship.

Was it not the land Allah willed to be a secure sanctuary and a house
of peace?

Yes, indeed it was!

Allah willed that, within a short time the stark valley was clothed in
a verdant vest. It was rapidly inhabited by the hearts of lovers and
became crowded with worshippers. The valley echoed with the resounding
call and Allah wanted this to be, so He ordered Ibrahim (a.s.):

"And proclaim to mankind (the duty of) pilgrimage; they will come to
you on foot wad on every Lean camel, coming from every remote path".
Holy Qur'an (22:27)

[ 6 ]

Ibrahim (a.s.) called mankind and the faithful's hearts responded. The
caravans of the (pilgrims) compete generation after generation - to
perform Hajj (pilgrimage). The voice of Ibrahim (a.s.) is still
powerfully echoing in the ease of men, wafted on the waves of air: A
perpetual call, a lovely voice, to which the souls anxiously and eagerly
listen, and the hearts zealously hover towards. That is the call of our
father lbrahim (a.s.) still ringing in the hearts of the uniteranians,
when they are still responding to it humbly:

Labbaika .Allahumma labbaik
Labbaika La sharika laka labbaik
Innal hamda wan ni'mata laka wal mulk
La sharika laka

(Here I am, my Lord here I am.)

(Here I am, You have no partner, here I am.)
(Praise, grace and the kingdom is for You.)
(You have no painter.)

Therefore, Hajj became a religious duty since the Father of the
Prophets Ibrahim (a.s.) voiced the monotheists' call over two milleniums
later, when mankind had almost forgotten Ibrahim's toil, and had plunged
in idol worship, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) the direct descendant of
Ibrahim and Ishmael renewed the call of Islam, of which Hajj is a main
pillar. The Ka'ba is its direction. The Glorious Our'an calls on all
Muslims:

"...it is the duty of mankind towards Allah to make the pilgrimage to
the House, whoever aim afford die way there, and whoever disbelieves
surely Allah is Self- Sufficient above any need of the beings. " Holy
Qur'an (3:97)

A narrative from the household of the Prophet (s.a.w.) says:

"In the period between the prophethood of Jesus and Muhammad, the Ka'
ba complained to Allah, the Exalted saying: 0 my Lord! Why my visitors
have dwindled? Why my worshippers have decreased? Allah, the Most High
replied that: I shall send down a new light for the people who will
eagerly long to you as the cattle yearn for their young ones2. This is a
clear reference to Ibrahim and Ishmael's illustrious descendants Prophet
Muhammad and his ummah who revived the great socio-political-religious
gathering at the Ka' ba, called Hajj."

[ 7 ]

Imam Mi (a.s.) says:

"(Allah) has made Hajj to His Sacred House incumbent upon you, by
making it (Ka'ba) the Qibla for humankind. People gather around it (to
satisfy their longing for faith and religion), as animals gather around
(a watering place to satisfy their thirst) and as pigeons flock towards
a place of refuge. Allah, the Exalted has made Hajj a sign of their
humbleness to His greatness, and their submission to His mightiness.
Allah chose from His servants obedient ones who respond to His call
believe in His word. They follow in the footsteps of His messenger, and
imitate His angels who circumambulate around His throne."3


