Hajj Al-tamattu
===============

This Hajj consists of the following rites:

1. Ihram:

The best time of Ihram, is the eighth of Dhul-Hijjah (Yam al-Tatwiiya).
But this date may be preceded by three days or be delayed to noon of the
9th of Dhul-Hijjah. Ihram starts in the holy city of Mecca and
preferably at the Holy Mosque. The pilgrim should make his/her intention
as follows:

WI begin Ihram of Hajj al-Tamattu seeking Allah's nearness Subsequently
the pilgrim starts Talbiyah (saying of labbaik) after donning the attire
of Ihram. A person after finishing Ummrah al-Tamattu and leaving aside
Ihram, should not leave Mecca because of a need and if the need arises,
it is obligatory to wear Ihram for the Hajj al-Tamattu in Mecca and
leave Mecca in the state of Ihram and in the same state of Ihram, return
for the Hajj.

2. Staying at Arafat:

Arafat is the name of a valley in which the pilgrim stays on the 9th of
Dhul-Hijjah. It is an area of more than two square miles and is
approximately 12 miles outside Mecca. The pilgrim should stay at Arafat
on the ninth day of Dhul-Hijjah, from noon till sunset. Kindly note that
it is forbidden to leave Arafat before sunset be it intentionally or
unintentionally. The pilgrim should also make the intention of seeking
Allah's nearness, so if the pilgrim spends the whole time in sleep or
in

[ 24 ]

unconciousness, the staying will be invalid and the type of pilgrimage
is changed to Umrah al-Mufredah. Thus Hajj al-Tamattu should be
performed the following year. The obligation and definition of staying
in Arafat is precisely the absolute staying in that noble place, whether
you reach there by walking or sitting in or on a means of
transportation.

3. Staying at Muzdalifah:

On the night of the Eid (festival), and while leaving Arafat after
sunset, the pilgrim sets out for Muzdalifah (the name of a place also
called Al-misha' r al-Hararn. The obligatory time for this is between
the whiteness of dawn and sunrise.

Staying in Mash'ar is a form of worship in which the intention is
obligatory. If you pass through the valley of Mash'ar before the rising
of the sun, you have committed a transgression but without redeeming it.
It is permitted for the following (those who meet difficulty because of
the large crowd on the morning of Eid) to leave Muzdalifah before
dawn:

1. People who do not have the strength like women, children and old
men.

2. People who have an excuse like fear or sickness.

3. People who are the guides to the above-mentioned people and must
watch out for or take care of them.

4. The Obligations of the Pilgrim in Mina:

The pilgrim, after leaving Muzdalifah, should set out for Mina to
perform the following three acts:

1. Pelting in Jamrah al-A-qabah:

It is (the largest symbol of the devil which is situated on the
outskirts of Mina towards Mecca), and should be thrown with seven
pebbles on the tenth day, and the followings should be observed:

a. Throwing of the pebbles must be accompanied by the intention of
seeking Allah's nearness.

b. The number of pebbles must be seven.

c. Pebbles must be thrown separately (one after the other) i.e. it is
not permitted to throw several pebbles at a time.

d. Pebbles should reach the place and whatever does not reach, does not
count.

e. The time of throwing is from the rising of the sun of the Eid day,
till the sunset of the same day.

Note: It is permissible to those who meet difficulty (in throwing the
pebbles at the exact time) or fear for themselves because of the large

[ 25 ]

crowd (like women, the old men, sick and the weak), to do it on the
night of Eid.

f. Pebbles must be from the sacred area; and those outside (the sacred
area) are not acceptable.

g. Pebbles should not have been used previously (even if they were used
in the preceding years).

h. It is recommended that the pebbles be collected in Mash'ar.

i. Throwing must be done with the hands.

j. A person must be sure that the pebbles should hit the mark.

k. Another person may act as a representative (in throwing the pebbles)
for children, the sick and those who, because of an excuse, cannot
themselves go to the place for the throwing of the pebbles.

l. A person who is excused from throwing the pebbles in the day time,
can do so at any time during the night.

2. Offering the Sacrifice at Mine:

a. It is obligatory for the pilgrim to slaughter an animal at Mina with
the intention of seeking Allah's nearness.

b. For the sacrifice, one of four types of animals must be used: Camel
(not less than five years), cow (not less than two years), sheep (more
that one year) or goat (more than two years). Among them, the camel is
the best.

c. The animal should be healthy, free of defect (not sick. blind, lame,
too old or very lean).

d. If the pilgrim is unable to buy the sacrificial animal, instead one
must fast ten days (three in Mina and the other seven in his/her
homeland).

3. Shaving (Halq) wad cutting some hair or the nails (Taqseer):

a. Shaving is preferred (for men), particularly for the one who is
performing Hajj for the first time. Some jurisprudents consider shaving
(for men) as obligatory; but (for women) shaving is not permitted.
instead, she must cut only a bit of her hair or nails.

Note: After performing the above mentioned obligations, everything
which was forbidden for the pilgrim during Ihram, becomes lawful except
using perfumes and having sex if one is married.

5. The Acts in Mecca:

After the performance of the rituals on the tenth day in Mina, the
pilgrim has to go to Mecca for day of Eid to perform the following:

[ 26 ]

1. The circumambulation of the Hajj. It is exactly like the
circumambulation of Umrah and should be done with the intention of
seeking Allah's nearness.

2. The rituat prayer (two rak'as) of circumambulation of the Hajj
should be done behind Ibrahim's station, preceded with the intention of
seeking Allah's nearness.

3. The Sa'y (going and coming) between Safa and Marwah with the
intention of seeking Allah's nearness.

6. The Circumambulation of Women:

It is similar to the circumambulation of Umrah, done with the intention
of seeking Allah's nearness.

7. The Ritual Prayer of the Circumambulation of Women:

It is obligatory to perform the two raka's prayer behind Ibrahim's
station with the intention of seeking Allah's nearness.

Note: the circumambulation of women and its prayer are obligatory for
both men and women. If they perform it not, both women for men and men
for women do not becomes permissible. This however, is not a pillar of
Hajj and nonperformance does not invalidate the pilgrimage.

8. Spending the Night at Mimi:

After performing the pilgrim has to go back to Mina and spend the 11th
and 12th nights of Dhul-Hijjah at Mina with the intention of seeking
Allah's nearness.

The pilgrim can leave Mina after the noon of the 12th day. Should
he/she stay at Mina till sunset, one is obliged to spend the 13th night
and pelting Jamarat on that day becomes obligatory.

9. Pelting the Jamarat:

The last compulsory duty of the three Jamarat should be performed on
the 11th and 12th of Dhul-Hijjah with the intention of seeking Allah's
nearness. If one spends the 13th night this makes pelting the Jamarat
necessary on the next day.

**Note:**

1. The first Jamarat should be pelted first and then the middle one,
and lastly the Jamarat al-A qabah.

2. The pilgrim should throw only seven pebbles, following the same
rules of the day on which the offerings are slaughtered.

[ 27 ]

Regulations Concerning Women During Hajj and Umrah:

1. On the one hand, it is forbidden for a woman, while in Ihram, to
cover all or part of her face (that which must be washed during ablution
wudu with a veil or even a covering that she puts on her forehead where
it clings to her face. On the other hand, it is permissible for her to
cover her face while sleeping.

2. It is permitted for her to be in the state of Ihram with sewn
covering and her regular shoes where the upper part of her feet are not
uncovered.

3. She should perform sa' y (going and coming back seven times between
Safa and Marwah) emulating Hajar's search for water) at her usual pace;
not hurrying.

4. In order for her to be out of the state of Ihram, she should only
perform taqsir (to cut a bit of her hair not shave her head).

5. If she has begun to menstruate she is forbidden to do the umrah of
tamattu. When she arrives in Mecca and has more time, she should wait
until she is purified and if she is purified even during the ninth day
of Dhil-Hijjah; during which she can perform her Umrah and, then,
assumes I/tram for Hag, in this case, it is obligatory for her first to
do circumambulation tawaf of Umrah; to pray two ritual Rak'ah prayers of
circumambulation; to performs the endeavor (sa'y); to cut a bit of her
hair taqsir; to make Ihram of Hajj and, then, go to Arafat.

6.If she is having her monthly period and she has not been ritually
purified until the last moments for the umrah of tamattu, she should
change her intention to hajj of Ifrad , that is, perform the umrah after
the end of the hajj, and her hajj is correct and replaces the Islamic
Hajj.

7. Menstruation and bleeding after childbirth do not forbid her from
performing certain acts like assuming Ihram in stated Miqats, standing
in Arafat and Muzdalifah, performing the acts to be done in Mina and
doing sa'y (the endeavor between Safa and Marwah). They only forbid her
from entering the Sacred Mosque, or doing circumambulation and other
actions which are forbidden in this state.

8. If her menstruation or bleeding after childbirth has stopped and she
cannot do ritual bathing ghusl, because of her sickness or finding no
water, she should do tayamum (a substitute for ablution) and, then, do
her obligatory circumambulation.

[ 28 ]

9. If her menstruation started before performing the circumambulation
of Hajj and she could not stay in Mecca to be purified and do her
obligations, because her caravan of pilgrims does not wait for her, she
must appoint another person to do her circumambulation, then, she,
performs her endeavor sa'y after the circumambulation of her
representative.


