Excellence of the two Shaykhs
=============================

(Published in ‘Al-Jawwad’, February 1956 A.D. issue)

After objecting to the existence of the Master of the Age (a.t.f.s.),
Rizwan editor says: Shias in the view of Musa Kazim (as): “Now let us
see this narration on page 159 of *Usul al-Kafi*: Imam Musa Kazim (as)
said: ‘Allah sent wrath upon the Shias.’ If I select my Shias, I will
not find any but talkative ones and if I test them, I will not find them
but apostates.”[^1]

This verdict is not of the Shias but of Imam Musa Kazim, which is
present in their books. Now Shias should contemplate on what is the
opinion of their Imam about them, because if we say anything they would
complain. Not only this, but it is mentioned in the reliable book of
Shias, *Ihtijaj* of Tabarsi:[^2] “All the twelve sects of Shias would go
to Hell.”

It is mentioned in *Rijal Kishi* that the Shia community consists of
three parts: First is sinful and unfortunate while the other two are
foolish.” Similarly, it is narrated in *Furu al-Kafi*[^3] that Imam Ali
(as) said, “I pity the deeds of the Shias.”

Killers of Husain were also Shias!
----------------------------------

“It is mentioned in *Majalisul Muttaqin* (page 29) that: Imam Husain
(as) holding his son Ali Asghar in his arms said to the disbelievers, ‘O
Shias! You killed me as well as the people of my house (Ahlul Bayt).’ It
is mentioned in *Rijal Kishi* (page 13) that Imam Husain addressed the
Shias, ‘O Shias! You killed me and plundered all my belongings.’

Shia books say that the killers of Husain were Shias themselves.”

I am amused that along with his slyness, deception, fraud, distorting
nature and malice, the gems of the knowledge of the Rizwan editor are
also exposed. It has become evident that the foundation of his religion
cannot be laid without deceit. Some of the wordings of the above passage
are blatant lies, some intentional distortions and some miracles of
misunderstanding. I write these three aspects separately so that it is
easy to answer them.

Blatant Lies
------------

“The editor of Rizwan has mentioned on the authority of *Rijal Kishi*
Pg. 13: Imam Husain addressed the Shias, ‘O Shias! You killed me and
plundered all my belongings.’ Hence it is proved from Shia books that
Shias were only the killers of Husain.”

I never before felt to say that the editor of Rizwan never got an
opportunity to himself read all the books he has mentioned and quoted.
Its proof is that he has not quoted the correct page number of a single
reference. As a result, I had to read whole books to find the reference.
If at all I found it, it was in such a way that the objection of the
Rizwan editor was not applicable to it. It is clear that his editorship
is wholly dependant on gossips.

However, this passage and reference has crossed all limits of deceit. I
challenge that if the Rizwan editor or anyone of his religion shows me
this saying of Imam Husain (as) not only from page 13 but from the ‘B’
of ‘Bismillah’[^4] to the end, I would reward him a thousand rupees.

The editor of Rizwan has also resorted to a similar deception in a later
topic. Though restriction of maintaining a serial order had restrained
me from discussing it, I feel that I would have to write all these
things once again next month. The editor of Rizwan would not be ashamed
of being exposed again and again but I am very conscious about my time,
so I shall discuss that also here itself. He writes as follows:

Siddiq and Farooq
-----------------

“Ali al-Murtada, the lion of God, most proximate to the Merciful Lord,
says in his sermon regarding the Siddiq Akbar (Abu Bakr) and Farooq Azam
(Umar), “They both (Siddiq and Farooq) were just Imams (as). They were
righteous and died righteous. May Allah’s blessings be on them on the
Day of Judgment.”

I request the Shias to read this sermon of Ali (as) al-Murtada
Karamullah Wajhul Karim properly. Ali (as) says that the caliphates of
Siddiq and Farooq were lawful and they both trod the path of truth.

Not only this, they even died on truth.

Not only this, but Allah would shower blessings upon them on the Day of
Judgment.

Just think upon it!

Shia scholars say that Ali (as) paid allegiance to Siddiq and Farooq
under Taqiyyah or due to some other reason. Firstly, it is against the
honor of the Lion of God that he should feel afraid and approve the
caliphate only out of fear. Even if we agree to this, the above sermon
of Ali (as), which he delivered after the death of Hazrat Siddiq and
Farooq, contradicts it. He said that Siddiq and Farooq were righteous
and died righteous and Allah will send His blessings upon them on the
Day of Judgment.

When Ali (r.a.) had power, what was the need to fear?

Allah had agreed upon the caliphate of the three caliphs.

“The right of choosing the caliph belongs to Immigrants and Helpers
only. If these Immigrants and Helpers unite over the Imamate or
caliphate of a person, and they appoint him as the Imam, it has the
approval of Allah.”

Now Shias should decide that if the caliphates of the three caliphs were
not valid, how could Haider-e-Karrar (Imam Ali) state thus?

Does it not prove that the caliphates of the three caliphs were correct
in the view of Ali (as)?”

According to some narrations Shaitan told Lady Hawwa (Eve), “The
nearness of that tree which God had prohibited is over and there is no
harm in eating the fruits of that tree.” When Lady Hawwa hesitated, the
Shaitan immediately swore by Allah. Lady Hawwa thought how someone could
swear by Allah falsely (because this was the first swearing which proved
false) and she believed the saying of Shaitan to be true.

Poor semi-literate subscribers of Rizwan were deceived by these
hypothetical sources and sermons in a similar manner. They would have
thought how someone could print a wrong account in a journal. Hence,
whatever the Rizwan editor quotes must be present in Shia books and is a
saying of Imam Ali (as). Today there is no dearth of such people in
villages who pick up pages of novels and fictions lying on the ground
and keep them safely thinking that since it is a printed-paper, there
would surely be a thing worthy of respect and a true subject in it. How
could they know that it contains useless matters?

In order to strengthen the belief of the readers, Mr. Editor has
challenged in later issues that whosoever proves a single reference
wrong, would be awarded a thousand rupees.

Those readers who have read my earlier issues might have clearly
understood the fact that none of the references were free of deception.
He has resorted to distortion and deception everywhere but I did not
repeat this challenge on purpose. For instance, he has said that
‘Mus’haf-e-Fatima’ and ‘Jame’ are both Qurans. While the complete
account of these two books are present in the same narrations whose
parts he has quoted. If I had quoted the whole narration and asked him,
“Since you have given a wrong description that these two books are also
Quran, now give me a thousand rupees,” he would have humbly said, “The
narration was in Arabic and hence I could not understand it clearly. I
had just quoted what I understood, so the Shias should forgive me.” Thus
the matter would have ended.

However, there is no excuse of such ignorance in the narration of *Rijal
Kishi*’ and sermon of Amirul Momineen (as) because both of them are not
even found anywhere. Hence, the Rizwan editor should either show the
saying of Imam Husain (as) in *Rijal Kishi*’ or cough up a thousand
rupees. Further, he should either show that saying of Amirul Momineen
(as) in a Shia book which is acceptable (not the one quoted by Ahlul
Sunnat) or present a thousand rupees more.

Anyone among the believers of Pakistan can file a lawsuit against the
Rizwan editor over the bet of reward and recover two thousand rupees
along with legal expenses. Half of the money should be donated to the
Association of Scholarships of Sayyids and believers (Pakistan) for
scholarships in jurisprudence. While half of it should be donated to the
Association of Scholarships of Sayyids and believers (India). So that
students of religious schools may be given scholarships through this.

After proving the fact that there is no existence of such a saying of
Amirul Momineen (as), no need remains to object to the blessed wordings
of the Rizwan editor. Still, let us ignore this fact for a moment and
for the sake of completion of argument, let us glance at this concocted
saying and interpretation of the Rizwan editor so that he reaches home.

Firstly, all the words of this saying have multiple meanings and do not
make any clear sense:

1) *Imamah:* According to the Holy Quran, there are two types of Imams –
‘Guiding Imams’ and ‘Imams of hell’. Refer to the following verses:

***“And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command…”***[^5]

***“And We made them Imams who call to the fire…”***[^6]

How can we judge whether the Imam here does not imply Imams leading to
hell?

2) *Adilan* or *Adil:* Adl (Justice) and Udool (to deviate). Both are
active nouns (Ism-e-Faail) and the meaning can be both ‘justice’ and ‘to
deviate’. What is the proof that here it does not imply ‘deviation from
truth’?

3) *Qasitan* or *Qasit:* It means both, just and equitable, and unjust
and sinner. Jabir (r.a.) narrates that the Messenger of Allah (S) said
regarding the circumstance of revelation of the verse of: ***But if We
should take you away, still We shall inflict retribution on them…***[^7]
“This verse was revealed in the honor of Imam Ali (as) because after me
he would fight with the oath breakers (Nakiseen), the unjust (Qasiteen)
and apostates (Mariqeen).”[^8] Now, how can we say that ‘Qasitaan’ does
not mean unjust and sinners here?

4) Kaana Alal Haq (The two were upon the truth): ‘Ala’ (upon) is used in
various meanings. One of them is ‘upon’, according to which, the
sentence would mean, ‘they both were rightful’. However, second meaning
is ‘opposite’. It is said that if ‘Shahida lahu’ (gave witness in
accordance with it) is said ‘Shahida alaiha’ then it would mean ‘gave a
testimony against it’. What is the reason that the second sense is not
implied here, that ‘they both were *against* the truth’.

5) Wa maa taa alaihe (And the two died upon it): There would be two
meanings of this sentence also due to ‘Alaa’ viz. ‘they both died
rightful’ and ‘they both died when they were against the truth’.

6) Fa alaihimaa rahmatullaahi yaumal Qiyamah (May mercy of Allah be on
them on the Day of Judgment): ‘Ala’ is present here also. Hence both
interpretations are possible: viz. ‘May God’s mercy be upon them on the
Day of Judgment’ and ‘May God’s mercy be *against* them on the Day of
Judgment.’

The editor of Rizwan should tell us how he could force a person to
believe only in the former meaning and not the latter one?

That is: “They both were leaders taking others to hell. They were
deviated from the ‘Right path’ and were unjust. They were against truth
and died against truth. Thus, may God’s mercy be against both of them.”

Secondly, context is required to find the meaning of similar words. The
editor of Rizwan does not have any historical or literary proof for his
translation other than his belief. I have the context and proof of my
translation that Amirul Momineen (as) really considered the Shaykhs
unjust and deviated from the Sunnah of Prophet (S). The books of Ahlul
Sunnat are replete with such discussions. Allamah Qutaybah writes in
*Al-Imamah Was-siyaasah* about the battle of Naharwan: Amirul Momineen
(as) asked a Khatha’mi man to pay allegiance. He said that he would pay
allegiance to him on the command of Quran, Sunnah of Prophet (S) and
method of Shaykhs. Amirul Momineen (as) asked, “Why do you mix the
method of Abu Bakr and Umar with the Book of God and Sunnah of Prophet
(S)? The two were tyrannical and unjust rulers.”

In the same way the following tradition of Amirul Momineen (as) is
quoted on Pg. 154 of *Tanqeed-e-Akhbar* on the authority of *Kanzul
Ummal, Kitabul Iktiqa* and *Tabaqat* of Ibn Saad:

Amirul Momineen Ali (as) said, “So I came to know, that by Allah, Umar
would surely not act on justice according to the Sunnah of Prophet (S).”

That is why Amirul Momineen (as) never considered the two Shaykhs just
and rightful. So he did not accept the condition of the Shaykhs’
practice at the time of consultation (Shura) and spurned the apparent
caliphate. These thoughts of Ali were not such that they be hidden and
only revealed after the death of the Shaykhs but they were obvious in
their lifetime also. Even caliph Umar was aware of it. Thus, according
to one of the narrations of *Sahih Muslim* (belief on whose traditions
is one of the necessities of religion of Ahlul Sunnat), Umar himself
complained inter alia a long discussion with Amirul Momineen (as) and
Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib and said, “You both considered me a liar,
sinner, disloyal and treacherous.”

Obviously, when other proven sayings of Amirul Momineen (as) show that
he considered Abu Bakr and Umar unjust, deviated from the way of the
Prophet (S), liar, sinner, disloyal and treacherous, hence if a saying
of Amirul Momineen were presented whose meaning is somewhat similar to
this we would surely have to believe in that meaning only but it would
be necessary to reject the meaning, which is opposite to these sayings.

Thirdly, the Rizwan editor has not given any reference for this saying
in any issue after the ‘Sayyadush Shohada Number’. Instead he has given
the proof that Allamah Hairi has interpreted this saying and given
selfish meanings. It is concluded from his interpretation that if he had
not considered it a saying of Amirul Momineen (as) why he had
interpreted it?

The interpretation of Allamah Hairi is not present with me but I am sure
that the explanation would not be dissimilar to that of mine because the
aspects of these similar words are very lucid. However, my explanation
does not prove that I really believe that this is a saying of Imam (as).
Similarly, Allamah Hairi (May Allah exalt his status) might have given
an amusing explanation of this saying. So how the Rizwan editor got
involved in a pleasant thought that the Allamah also believes that it
was a saying of Imam? O gentleman! It is the favor of Allah, the
Almighty, upon we Shias from eternity that not only Sunnis but all other
opponents are caught guilty by us through their own testimonies and
writings and struck dumb with such amazement that they can’t even find a
way to escape to even Mount Uhad.[^9]

Hence, it had been our ever-lasting method that when opponents cook up
and narrate hypothetical issues, we accept them for a time being and
then refute them using their own sources. It is about our Shia religion
that Allah has promised: ***“that He might cause it to prevail over all
religions…”***[^10] We are proud to give such a series of blows to the
opposite sects from every angle that they become satisfied. Hence, you
can see the result of your concocted saying. Allah put such a seal on
the mind of its forger that he wrote every such sentence, which would be
used against him only. For the kind information of the Rizwan editor,
let me tell him that this is neither a sermon of Amirul Momineen (as)
nor a saying of an Imam but an invention of an over-smart Ahlul Sunnat
gentleman. Its mention can neither be found in Shia books nor in
traditions of Ahlul Sunnat. Hence you could not write even a reference
heard by you for this hypothetical saying. Just estimate your worth from
this.

Fourthly, if the Rizwan editor was not aware of the references presented
by me, before raising the objection, he should have at least thought
that if Amirul Momineen (as) considered those leaders so just, rightful
and worthy of Divine Mercy why he would have said the Book of God and
recommendations of Prophet (S) are all right but he would not follow the
Shaykhs when Abdur Rahman bin Auf placed forth this condition at the
time of consultation (Shura) that they would pay allegiance to Amirul
Momineen (as) if he followed the Book of God, Sunnah of Prophet (S) and
Sunnah of the Shaykhs. These incidents are so famous and in safe custody
of history that there is no need for a special reference for them. Any
Islamic history containing incidents of Shura committee can be referred
on this issue.

Did Amirul Momineen not want to (God forbid) perform the duties of
caliphate with justice? Or did he not want to live and die rightfully?
Or did he want to (God forbid) remain aloof from Divine Mercy? After
all, Amirul Momineen (as) wanted to live such a life. Hence, if he
considered Shaykhs just, why he remained so wary of them?

Let me mention one more point at the end of the discussion that Abu Bakr
and Umar are mentioned as ‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’ and ‘Farooq-e-Azam’ in the
preface of an account after associating it to Amirul Momineen (as). This
injustice is also worthy of attention because the Holy Prophet (S)
himself says that only Ali (as) is ‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’ and ‘Farooq-e-Azam’.
Refer to the following narration:

Salman al-Farsi (r.a.) narrates that the Messenger of Allah (S) used to
say regarding Imam Ali (as), “He was the first to bring faith on me, he
would be the first to meet me on the Day of Judgment, and he is
‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’ and ‘Farooq-e-Azam’ and the Master of the faithful ones
while wealth is the master of believers.”[^11]

One should not think that maybe Ali (as) is ‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’ and
‘Farooq-e-Azam’ but the Shaykhs are also given this title. Because the
Messenger of Allah (S) has already negated it saying there is no
‘Siddiq’ save Ali (as) in this community. Refer to the following
tradition:

Ibn Abbas and Abu Laila narrate that the Messenger of Allah (S) said,
“There are three ‘Siddiqs’ (truthful ones). (1) Habib Najjar, believer
of the Al-Yaa Seen, (2) Hizqil, believer from the community of Firon and
(3) Ali Ibn Abi Talib; and Ali is most exalted of them.” Imam Bukhari
has narrated this from Ibn Abbas and Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal from Abu
Laila.[^12]

This shows that Abu Bakr being called ‘Siddiq’ is not in accordance with
any lawful proof or divine decree. Now refer to this saying of the Holy
Prophet (S) regarding ‘Farooq’:

Abu Laila narrates that the Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Shortly after
me, sedition will raise its head. If such a condition arises remain
attached to Ali (as) because he is the only ‘Farooq’ (distinguisher
between right and wrong).”

Khwarizmi, Dailami and Allamah Ibn Abdul Bar narrate this tradition in
*Istiab*.[^13]

It clearly proves that the Holy Prophet (S) did not regard anyone except
Ali (a.s) as ‘Farooq’. He commanded them to remain attached to Ali (as)
in the rising sedition i.e. of the issue of caliphate after him. What is
the right to call Umar ‘Farooq’ or ‘Farooq-e-Azam’?

The great Ahlul Sunnat scholar, Maulana Ubaidullah Amritsari has quoted
eleven traditions from Pg. 22 to 25 in his book, *Arjahul Matalib* on
the authority of the following narrators that Imam Ali (as) is
‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’ and ‘Farooq-e-Azam’:

1) Allamah Muhib Tabari (in *Riyazun Nazara fi Fazaelul Ashara)*

2) Imam Tibrani (in *Mojam)*

3) Dailami

4) Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal (in *Musnad)*

5) Imam Nasai (in *Khasais)*

6) Imam Hakim (in *Mustadrak)*

7) Hafiz Abu Zaid Uthman bin Abi Shayba (in *Sunan)*

8) Ibn Asim (in *Sunnat)*

9) Hafiz Abu Naeem (in *Hilyatul Awliya)*

10) Abu Ja'far Aqeeli

11) Ibn Qutaybah (in *Maa’rif)*

12) Imam Bukhari (in *Sahih Bukhari)*

13) Ibnul Hijam (in *Tafsir)*

14) Allamah Ibn Abdul Basr (in *Istiab)*

The following companions narrate these traditions:

1) Salman Al-Farsi

2) Abu Dharr Ghiffari

3) Ibad bin Abdullah

4) Muaazat Aduyah

5) Ibn Abbas

6) Abu Laila

7) Amirul Momineen Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) himself.

Hence, Amirul Momineen (as) declared from the pulpit, “If anyone other
than me claims to be ‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’ he is a liar.”

Imam Ali (as) said, “I am the servant of God and brother of the
Messenger of Allah (S). I am ‘Siddiq-e-Akbar’. None other than me can
say this except a liar. I prayed for seven years before anyone
did.”[^14]

This tradition is narrated in *Arjahul Matalib* of Amritsari, *Manaqib*
of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Khasais* of Imam Nasai, *Mustadrak* of Imam
Hakim, *Sunan* of Hafiz Abu Zaid, *Sunnat* of Ibn Asim and *Hilayatul
Awliya* of Hafiz Abu Naeem.

[^1]: Furu al-Kafi, Pg. 107

[^2]: Page 141

[^3]: Vol. 3, Pg. 31

[^4]: That is from the first word

[^5]: Surah Sajdah 32:24

[^6]: Surah Qasas 28:41

[^7]: Surah Zukhruf 43:41

[^8]: Arjahul Matalib Pg. 38-39

[^9]: A reference to the flight of some prominent companions of the
Prophet (as) from the battle of Uhad

[^10]: Surah Tawbah 9:33

[^11]: Arjahul Matalib, Maulana Ubaidullah Amritsari

[^12]: Arjahul Matalib, Maulana Ubaidullah Amritsari Pg. 22

[^13]: Arjahul Matalib, Maulana Ubaidullah Amritsari Pg. 25

[^14]: Arjahul Matalib, Maulana Ubaidullah Amritsari Pg. 23


