Were Shias the killers of Imam Husain (as)?
===========================================

(Published in ‘Al-Jawwad’, February 1956 A.D. issue)

Intentional distortion
----------------------

A reference of Rizwan editor has been discussed above under the heading
of ‘Blatant Lies’ in which he has accused Shias for killing Imam Husain
(as). He has purposely distorted the translation of the text of
*Majalisul Muttaqin* on this topic though comprehension also plays a
major role in this translation. The wordings of *Majalisul Muttaqin* are
taken from the *Maqtal* of Abi Mikhnaf. First let us see how this
incident is narrated in the *Maqtal* of Abi Mikhnaf:

Imam Husain (as) told Umme Kulthum, “Bring Ali Asghar to me.” He took
the child near the army and said, “O People! You killed my brother, son,
helper and friends. Now, none except this child is left, in whose liver
flames are leaping due to thirst. Give him a sip of water.”[^1]

Shahid-e-Rabe’ has described this matter in the text which is presented
by the Rizwan editor. Its correct translation is as follows:

“O People! You killed my Shias (friends) and martyred my family
members.”

However, note the capability of the Rizwan editor who translates as, “O
Shias! You killed me too…

The Lord of the worlds has condemned Jews and Christians in numerous
places in Quran that they distorted Divine scriptures and ***“they
altered the words from their places and they neglected a portion of what
they were reminded of…”***[^2] In this way, they wanted to live a happy
life. For example, refer to the following verse of Quran:

***“Most surely there is a party amongst those who distort the Book with
their tongue that you may consider it to be (a part) of the Book, and
they say, It is from Allah, while it is not from Allah, and they tell a
lie against Allah whilst they know.”***[^3]

Did you see how the Rizwan editor made a successful attempt to become a
connotation of this verse by twisting the tongue and changing the
wordings? He also proved the following saying of the Prophet (S)
practically:

“Whatever has happened among the past nations will happen among this
nation also. To such an extent that even if they had entered a burrow of
an animal, you too would enter it.”

Umar was greatly interested in the Jews and hence, he had to face the
displeasure of the Holy Prophet (S) one day. Surely, that habit has
reached the Rizwan editor through inheritance. Like Jews, he also,
***“altered the words from their places and…neglected a portion…”***
Thus in this unequivocal statement he changes simple term of ‘My Shias’
into pieces made ‘Me’ a separate word. He made ‘Shias’ a predicate of
‘people’, which was actually the suffix of ‘My’ and created a new
compound ‘Shia people’ and immediately translated it as, “O Shias! You
killed me and my Ahlul Bayt also.”

***“(They) distort the Book with their tongue that you may consider it
to be (a part) of the Book, and they say, it is from Allah, while it is
not from Allah.”***[^4]

God be praised!

This adornment of new ways has made you rightful that you roam telling
your disciples:

“What is accomplished by me, could not be accomplished by even Rustom.”

But, my lord! If you did not have the capability to understand Arabic
and Persian you should at least have thought how it could be correct to
say ‘You killed me’ taking Ali Asghar (as) on his hands? Was Imam Husain
already martyred at that time? But how could the Rizwan editor
understand these points of common sense? Because,

***“Allah has set a seal upon their hearts and upon their hearing and
there is a covering over their eyes.”***[^5]

This is the result of your distortion and dishonesty in quoting a
statement of *Rijal Kishi*’ that ‘Killers of Husain were Shias’.

If you really want to know who the killers of Husain were and who their
followers are today, read my article ‘Killers of Husain (as)’ from
beginning to end. It is printed in ‘Arbaeen special issue 1374 A.H. of
Razakar’. It is such a clear mirror that you would be able to see your
features very clearly. If you have any shame you would refrain from
making such statements in future.

What a scandal, that people who consider the accursed Yazid, the
accursed Marwan as their caliphs, who accept narrations of Umar Saad
(l.a.) and accursed Shimr, who consider the enmity of Ahlul Bayt and
obedience of killers of Husain a part of their belief, are taunting the
slaves of holy Ahlul Bayt (as) that ‘Killer of Husain were Shias’.

[^1]: Maqtal, Abu Mikhnaf, Pg. 39, Printed Bombay, 1311 AH

[^2]: Surah Maidah 5:31

[^3]: Surah Aale Imran 3:78

[^4]: Surah Aale Imran 3:78

[^5]: Surah Baqarah 2:7


