Mutah (Temporary Marriage)
==========================

(Published in ‘Al-Jawwad’, March 1957 A.D., April 1957 A.D., February
1958 A.D.)

Regarding Mutah, the editor of Rizwan writes:

Mutah
-----

According to the Shias it is a very good deed to use women after giving
them some pennies, without performing Nikah with them. It is even that,
God forbid, it is permissible even with Sayyid women after giving them
some money. This is so because they believe that performing Mutah gives
them the rank of Husain, Ali and even the Holy Prophet (S). It is
mentioned on page 50 of *Burhanul Mutah*: “One who performs Mutah once
gets the rank of Hasan. One who performs twice gets the rank of Husain.
One who performs thrice gets the rank of Ali and one who performs Mutah
four times gets the rank of the Holy Prophet (S).”

I have estimated from a later writing that either the Rizwan editor is
unaware of the meaning of Mutah or he intentionally wants to deceive the
common people. Since he has tried to answer the questions of ‘Razakar’
regarding Mutah in December 1954 A.D. issue and has used about three
pages for it. I present his statements that tell us about his knowledge
regarding Mutah.

1) “The method of performing Mutah is to catch a woman and say, “I want
you for one night or a definite period for five rupees.” If the woman
agrees, everything is permissible. If Mutah is correct, what is the
difference between this and going to a brothel?”[^1]

2) “However, they should know that there is a vast difference between
Mutah and Nikah. This is the reason why we find two different chapters
in the books as Kitabul Mutah and Kitab Al-Nikah. In brief, Mutah is a
temporary contract, which is a way of passing ones time just like a
temporary contract with a prostitute. And just a little amount is fixed
for it, it is done similarly in Mutah.”[^2]

3) “As an amount is fixed with a prostitute and a deal is made for one
or two nights, similarly it is done in Mutah. As if the wine is same and
the label has changed.”[^3]

In such a condition, first I would like to describe the rules and
regulations and the actual nature of Mutah so that there would not be
any possibility of misunderstanding.

It appears from the writings of the Rizwan editor that maybe Mutah is
another name for adultery and there is no difference between the two.
Hence, first of all, I would like to ask what is the difference between
a permanent Nikah and adultery?

The natural urges are fulfilled in Nikah as well as adultery. Hence if
an atheist says, “The method of Nikah is to catch a woman and say that
one wants her in exchange of a definite amount. If the woman agrees,
everything is permissible. Nikah is correct. Then what is the difference
between this and going to a brothel?” What reply would the Rizwan editor
give?

Perhaps, he would say that there is a ‘proposal’ and ‘consent’ therein,
but this purpose is present in adultery also.

Probably, he would suggest ‘dower’, but then people going to brothels
also fix an amount and pay it.

May be he would mention the open declaration of Nikah but then many a
times lustful rich people keep prostitutes after open declaration of
‘proposal and consents’ (in their own words) and giving them money.

Possibly he would present the issue that after Nikah a woman is confined
to a single man only. However, there are many such prostitutes who are
confined to a rich man after signing a contract with him.

Maybe he would say that both spouses inherit each other in Nikah.
Nevertheless, this rule is not general and absolute because if the wife
kills her husband she does not inherit. Similarly, if she is from among
the People of the Book[^4] she cannot inherit. Thus, if all these wives
cannot inherit, what is the problem in keeping a prostitute who would
not inherit? What is the difference?

Actually, the difference between Nikah and adultery is that Nikah is
under the command of God while adultery is against it. No other strong
reason of excellence can be presented. As it would be discussed later,
both permanent and temporary marriages performed on the command of God
are equal. Thus, although many acts are similar to fornication, yet they
are appreciable in permanent marriage because they are carried out
according to Divine commands. Similarly, Mutah is also appreciable
because it is in accordance to Divine commands.

Let us now make a comparison between permanent and temporary marriage.

We should first know that Islamic jurisprudence and Quran have fixed two
types of Nikahs. First, the permanent Nikah, in which no time limit is
fixed, while proposal and consent are required. Naturally, this contract
lasts for an unlimited period of time. Once a person is bound by this
contract he would have to take a particular step in order to terminate
it, which is called ‘divorce’. If divorce were not given this contract
would last life long.

The second type is called ‘limited Nikah’ (also called as Mutah) whose
matrimonial proposal and consent also has a time limit. Naturally, such
a contract automatically ends after the stipulated period of time.

Now let us compare the rules and regulations of the two.

(1) It is an important condition in both types of Nikah that the wife
should not be from the prohibited degree (Mahrams). That is, she must
not be among the women whom the Holy Quran has prohibited to marry. She
must not be already married to someone or in the waiting period (Iddah)
of some other man. In brief, temporary marriage is prohibited with those
women who are prohibited for permanent marriage also because both are
kinds of Nikah only. And as it is permissible but detestable to marry a
prostitute in every Islamic sect, it is also detestable to do Mutah with
her.

(2) Dower (Mehr), matrimonial proposal and consent are obligatory in
permanent marriage; they are obligatory in Mutah also. As the amount of
Dower is fixed through mutual agreement between man and woman in the
first kind, it is done in the second kind also.

(3) As it is necessary for a woman to observe Iddah[^5] after divorce is
given to her i.e. she could not marry for a fixed period of time,
similarly it is obligatory on a woman to observe Iddah for a fixed
period of time after the period of Mutah is over i.e. she cannot marry
another man for a fixed period.

(4) Similarly, a woman has to observe ‘Iddah of death’ for a fixed
period of time after the death of her husband in both the cases. It may
be permanent or temporary marriage (Mutah).

(5) As the man and woman become husband and wife of each other after
permanent marriage and the woman cannot even think of anyone else, they
become husband and wife of each other after temporary marriage also and
the woman cannot even think of anyone else.

(6) As the permanent marriage is not an evil deed due to it being in
accordance with divine command, Mutah is also not an evil deed due to
its performance in accordance with divine command.

(7) As the offspring of a permanent wife is a lawful inheritor of its
father, it is a lawful inheritor in Mutah also and there is no
difference between them.

These were laws, which are obligatory and marriage cannot even be
imagined without them. And you might have seen that Nikah and Mutah are
almost same in these obligatory conditions and specialties.

Once again I emphasize that obligatory conditions and specialties of
Nikah are only those, which are discussed above. They are same for
permanent marriage and Mutah (temporary marriage).

There are some more laws, which change according to circumstances. It
does not mean that a woman is not the wife if any of these conditions
are not fulfilled.

For instance,

• If a person (Sunni) performs permanent marriage with a Jew or
Christian woman, then also, the wife cannot inherit her Muslim husband.
Similarly, if a wife kills her husband, she cannot inherit him.
Nevertheless, not becoming an inheritor does not end her wifehood, while
fulfillment of other obligatory conditions like Iddah are obligatory and
she would be considered wife in all conditions.

Similarly, if according to some Shia scholars, if the woman taken in
Mutah marriage cannot inherit her husband, how can it be proved that
‘since she cannot inherit, how can she be a wife’?

I have purposely used the phrase ‘some Shia scholars’ because a group of
Shia scholars are of the opinion that a wife inherits the husband in
Mutah also. Alamul Huda Syed Murtada (a.r.) writes in *Kitabul
Intesar:*[^6]

“Not receiving inheritance is not a proof that a woman is not a wife of
a man because ‘dhimmiyyah wife’[^7], ‘slave wife’ and husband’s
murderer-wife are neither his inheritors nor is the husband their
inheritor. However, they are wives without any doubt. Apart from this,
according to our religion, inheritance is given in Mutah also provided
that there is no condition of non-inheritance among the special
conditions decided at the time of marriage.”

• If a wife is disobedient to her husband, her maintenance is not
obligatory on the husband even though she may be a permanent wife. This
is a uniform verdict among all the Muslims. However, non-obligation of
maintenance does not affect her wifehood because inheritance and
maintenance, both are not the essential elements of marriage. Similarly,
if the maintenance of wife in Mutah is not necessary on the husband what
effect does it have on her wifehood?

• There is no divorce in ‘limited marriage’ i.e. Mutah. The reason for
this is already discussed above. As this marriage is dissolved
automatically after a stipulated period, there is no need to quote some
formula again to end it. While permanent marriage is for the whole life.
Hence it is necessary to quote the formula of divorce in order to end it
(if it needs be ended before death).

Except divorce, all issues applicable for the permanent wife like
‘Zihar’[^8], ‘Liaan’[^9] Eelaa[^10] etc. are also applicable to the
Mutah wife. There is no difference between them.

If the readers permit I would quote some paragraphs of our scholars,
which would shed light on the terms and conditions described by me and
those who are really involved in a misunderstanding about Mutah would be
reassured. As for people like the Rizwan editor who purposely remain
ignorant, their solution was not with even the Holy Prophet (S).

• The Mutah of woman is that a woman marries one provided that there is
no prohibited act in marriage according to the religion of Islam. That
is, she must not be among the prohibited degree of relational
prohibition as well as causal. She must not be in prohibited degree due
to breast-feeding. She must not be already having a husband and not be
in the Iddah of previous one and other religious prohibitions should not
be present. For instance, she must not be the ex-wife of ones father or
sister of a present wife etc. She must marry one in such a state for a
fixed dower and period through recitation of marriage formula, which is
based on Islamic law. After mutual agreement she must recite the formula
of Mutah like in Nikah. Then mention the fixed dower and time (e.g. a
day, a month, a year or some years etc.). One should immediately reply:
‘Qabiltu’ (I accept). It is permissible to have a representative (to
pronounce the formula of Mutah) like it is done in other marriages.
After this, the woman is one’s wife and he her husband till the
stipulated period of time comes to an end.[^11]

• A woman with whom Mutah is performed is also a lawful wife and a legal
marriage is performed with her. As for sustenance, inheritance and
distribution of nights, in which she does not have a share, all these
are based on particular factors due to which a wife in Mutah is exempted
from these general rules.[^12]

• All the signs of wifehood are applied to a woman with whom Mutah is
performed. All the rules are valid on her except some of those orders,
which with definite evidences do not include a Mutah wife.[^13]

• When the mutually fixed time ends, it is permissible for the husband
to immediately tie a knot with her once again, and not wait for
completion of Iddah (as it is permitted in permanent marriage to return
during the Iddah of revocable divorce). However, no other man except her
husband can marry her till the period of Iddah ends.[^14]

• If conjugal relations were established, the woman would have to
observe Iddah for two menstrual cycles after the Mutah ends. According
to a narration, it could be observed for only one menstrual cycle, but
it is not a reliable report. If a woman does not have menses and she has
not reached menopause she must observe Iddah for 45 days. If the husband
dies during the period of Mutah she would have to observe Iddah of death
for four months and ten days even if conjugal relations were not
established and she is not pregnant. If she is pregnant she has to
observe Iddah till the childbirth or four months and ten days, whichever
is longer.

• It is narrated from Ibn Bazigh that a person asked Imam Reza (as), “If
a person performs Mutah with a woman and puts forth a condition that if
a boy is born it would not be his. What if a male child is born to her
after this?” Imam (as) strictly opposed this denial and considered the
rejection of the father a great sin, he said, “What? Would he reject
that boy?”[^15]

• Zihar is valid occurs with Mutah wife also (due to more correct
saying) because the verse of Zihar is general and the Mutah wife is also
a wife and there is no restriction of a permanent wife in the
verse.[^16]

• Shaykh al-Mufeed and Syed Murtada (a.r.) have said that ‘Liaan’ is
applicable with the Mutah wife because she is a wife and hence, she is
also included in the generality of the verse.[^17]

• Scholars have a difference of opinion about the right to inheritance
in Mutah. There are a number of opinions in this. The first is that both
husband and wife become mutual inheritors of each other through this
marriage as in the case of permanent marriage. This is a saying of Ibn
Barraj and he gives the evidence that the verse of inheritance in
marriage is general. The Mutah wife is also a wife and she also inherits
like other wives.

The second opinion is exactly opposed to the first. None of the spouses
inherit each other. Its proof is that inheritance is a religious command
and its right is based on some religious proofs. And merely being a wife
is not a proof enough of being rightful to inheritance because there are
many wives who inherit and many who cannot. Thus, how can inheritance be
given on the basis of just wifehood, without any other legal
commandment?[^18]

This is Mutah, whose dreadful picture is drawn by the Rizwan editor. You
have seen that there is no difference between Mutah and Nikah except
that there is no period fixed in permanent marriage while a period is
fixed in Mutah.

All the supposed evils of Mutah can also be found in permanent marriage
after which, divorce may be given. Rather the evils become ten-fold due
to divorce after permanent marriage. An example of this is, suppose you
want to travel somewhere and you hire a vehicle for this purpose and
start your journey. On the way, you reach a deserted area where there is
no place to stay at night or hire some other vehicle and the vehicle
owner leaves stranded there and returns. What hell would befall you?
Just imagine!

On the contrary, if the vehicle owner tells you beforehand that he would
drop you at so and so place and not go ahead, you would have the option
to travel with him and plan your future course of action or find some
other way if you do not like his terms and conditions.

Which is the better option between the two? Indeed, every sensible
person would denounce the vehicle owner in the first case. However, no
accusation can be laid on him in the second case because he had already
stated the terms beforehand.

The same corollary is found in ‘divorce after Nikah’ and ‘Mutah’. A man
performing Mutah tells the woman beforehand that he would keep her as a
wife, say for five years. After that, she is free, after completing the
Iddah period. If a woman considers this condition acceptable, she can
perform Mutah or the discussion would end; but in any case there would
no deceit.

On the contrary, if the man does not reveal any of his such plans and a
permanent marriage is performed, then if he divorces the wife after two,
four or ten days, you can imagine the condition of the poor woman due to
the shipwreck of her life, in the middle of the high seas.

It is clear from this example that those hypothetical defects (none of
which has happened till date) described about Mutah are ten-fold in
divorce after Nikah. Keeping in mind this example, is the Rizwan editor
still prepared to ridicule divorce and permanent marriage also?

In any case, it has become as clear as daylight from the above discourse
that there is no difference between the importance and conditions of the
elements, conditions and nature of Mutah and permanent marriage from the
point of view of reason and jurisprudence. Now a possible question is
whether Mutah is permissible and in accordance with the command of God
or not? Hence I consider it important to describe the history of Mutah
and some related issues so that its historical background is revealed.

Mutah was in vogue since the beginning of Islam
-----------------------------------------------

No sect doubts that Mutah was permissible from the beginning of Islam.
It was not only permissible but also in vogue. Imam Razi writes in the
commentary of the verse of Mutah:

“Everybody is unanimous that Mutah was permissible in the beginning of
Islam.”[^19]

These wordings are found in *Tafsir Gharaaibul Quran.*[^20] Imam
Fakhruddin Razi writes in *Tafsir Al-Kabir:*[^21]

“Muslims are unanimous that Mutah was permissible in Islam and no one
has a difference of opinion in it.”

Similarly, Allamah Khazin Baghdadi, a Sunni scholar writes:

“Nikah of Mutah is to perform Nikah with a woman for a fixed period and
Dower. When the stipulated period ends, the marriage ends automatically
without divorce. The woman should observe Iddah and husband and wife
would not inherit each other. This type of marriage was present in the
beginning of Islam.”[^22]

Where is the space to quote the testimonies of all the Ahlul Sunnat
scholars? I can just state the references here so that if Rizwan editor
desires he can ask someone to read those books and easily understand
that Mutah was permissible in the beginning of Islam:

(1) *Tafsir Malimut Tanzil* by Allamah Baghavi[^23]

(2) *Sharh Sahih Muslim* by Muhiuddin Abu Zakaria Noori[^24]

(3) *Neelul Maram min Tafsir Ayatul Ahkam* by Nawab Siddiq Hasan Khan of
Bhopal[^25]

(4) *Ifadatush Shuyukh Bamiqdarul Nasikh wal mansookh* by Nawab Siddiq
Hasan Khan Bhopal[^26]

(5) *Tafsir Quran* by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan[^27]

(6) *Zaadul Maad* by Allamah Shamsuddin Ibn Qayyim Jawzi Hanbali[^28]

Permission of Mutah in Quran
----------------------------

The issue that Mutah was in vogue in the beginning of Islam is clearly
mentioned in the above references. But it should not be thought that it
is an invention of the time of ignorance, which continued till the time
of Islam because the existence of Mutah is not found in any history,
tradition or narration. It clearly proves that it was a new law
promulgated by Islam and its method is also the invention of Islam. The
custom of Mutah remained from the beginning of Islam till the last days
of the Holy Prophet (S) without any hindrance. Till the time Mecca was
conquered and the battle of Autaas or Hunain was also won. Read the
later events from the book of Hafiz Jalaluddin Suyuti, *Qaule Khuda wal
Muhsanaat:*

“Muslim, Abu Dawood, Tirmidhi and Nasai have narrated from Abu Saeed
Khudri; ‘We Muslims arrested some married women in Autaas. We considered
it abominable to be intimate with married women. Thus, we asked about it
from the Messenger of Allah (S) and this verse was revealed at that
time:

***“And all married women except those whom your right hands possess
(this is) Allah's ordinance to you…”***[^29]

That is the women one gets as war-booty are permissible for him. Thus,
we considered them lawful.’”

Tibrani has narrated from Ibn Abbas that after the victory of the battle
of Hunain, Muslims got some women of People of the Book as war-booty who
were already married. When a person tried to go near a woman, she would
talk of her marital status. At last, the Messenger of Allah (S) was
asked regarding this. This verse was revealed at that time that married
women are prohibited except those who become your slave-girls…[^30]

Now read the whole verse and consider it in the light of the
above-mentioned circumstances of revelation. Enumerating the prohibited
women, it is said at last:

***“…And all married women except those whom your right hands possess
(this is) Allah’s ordinance to you, and lawful for you are (all women)
besides those, provided that you seek*** ***(them) with your property,
taking (them) in marriage not committing fornication. Then as to those
whom you profit by, give them their dowries as appointed; and there is
no blame on you about what you mutually agree after what is
appointed.”***[^31]

The method of description in this verse clearly shows that the order of
permission of Mutah is not given here for the first time but the actual
purpose of command is that so and so are prohibited women and married
women are included in it. However, those married women who become one’s
slave-girls are lawful.

Incidentally a special order is given regarding Mutah that when one
performs Mutah with permitted women, he should immediately give the
dower to her. It is possible to give dower later on if the wife agrees
in permanent marriage. It is called ‘Mehr-e-Mojal’ (delayed dower).
However, there is no such option in Mutah. Later on, however it is
commanded that if both agree, the dower and period of Mutah can be
increased or decreased.

By the way, this verse verifies the command of Mutah and all scholars
and commentators, Shia or Sunni, and all followers of companions
consider this verse to be related to Mutah. The following excerpts from
the books of Ahlul Sunnat support my claim:

(1) Nawab Siddiq Hasan Khan says:

Scholars have a difference of opinion regarding the meaning of this
verse. Hasan and Mujahid have said that it means one should pay the
dower to women with whom one has fulfilled his physical desires after
Nikah. People (majority of them) say that this verse only implies
Mutah.[^32]

After this, he writes in the commentary of:

***“There is no blame on you if you divorce women when you have not
touched them or appointed for them a portion…”***[^33]

“According to the majority of scholars who believe this verse to be
related to Mutah, it means that if a husband and wife agree there is no
harm in increase or decrease in the period of Mutah or dower.”[^34]

(2) He also writes in one of his other works about the same topic:

According to a majority, this verse implies Mutah.[^35]

(3) Qazi Thanaullah Panipati writes in the commentary of this verse:

A group believes that ‘Itimnaa’ in this verse means Mutah.[^36]

(4) The writer of *Tafsir Khazin* says:

A community has said that the command of Mutah is stated in this
verse.[^37]

Allamah Baghavi writes in Tafsir Malimut Tanzil
-----------------------------------------------

**Allamah Baghavi writes in** **Tafsir Malimut Tanzil:**[^38]

Scholars have a difference of opinion about the meaning of this verse.
Hasan and Mujahid say that it means that one should pay the dower to
women with whom one has fulfilled his physical desires after Nikah, as
their compensation. Other scholars believe that it implies Mutah.[^39]

Incidentally, make a note that in all writings of Ahlul Sunnat scholars,
Mutah is called as ‘Nikah of Mutah’ or ‘marriage of Mutah’ and compare
it to the statement of the Rizwan editor that ‘Mutah means to use women
after giving some money without Nikah’, and recite a Fatiha (say
farewell) to his knowledge and wisdom.

(5) Sir Syed Ahmad Khan writes in his commentary about this verse:

This verse is also among verses in whose commentary I have a difference
of opinion with other scholars and commentators. All commentators call
this as the verse of Mutah i.e. the permission of Mutah is given in this
verse.

(6) Imam Fakhruddin Razi has given considerable explanation in the
commentary of this verse. He writes:

“Those who consider Mutah permissible argue through this verse in many
ways. First evidence is this verse itself:

***“…provided that you seek (them) with your property, taking (them) in
marriage not committing fornication. Then as to those whom you profit
by, give them their dowries…”***[^40]

There are two ways of argument through this verse:

First, we can say that both permanent Nikah and Mutah are included in
this verse because it is a saying of God, ‘Seek women through your
wealth.’ Both the aspects are included in it. One can either keep the
woman for an unlimited period of time or for a limited period. If both
these aspects are included in it, the saying of God that, ‘All women are
permissible for you except those in the prohibited degree that you seek
them through your wealth’, is a proof of lawfulness of both kinds
(permanent Nikah and Mutah) i.e. Mutah is also lawful like permanent
marriage.

Second, we can say that this verse is revealed for Mutah only and it has
no relation with permanent marriage. There are a number of reasons for
it as follows:

The first reason is the narration that Ubayy Ibn Kaab (who was the chief
of the reciters of Quran and an elite scribe) used to add ‘Ila ajalim
musammah’ (for a stipulated period) to this verse i.e. ‘Pay the dower of
the woman immediately, with whom you have performed Mutah for a fixed
period of time’. Abdullah Ibn Abbas also used to read this verse
similarly and the people of Islam did not consider their recitation
wrong. As if they were united over the correctness of this recitation.
When the correctness of this recitation is proved through unanimity the
permission of Mutah is also evident.”

This is an open support of the belief of distortion of Quran by Allamah
Fakhruddin Razi. The editor of Rizwan should be ashamed of his own
misdeeds and keep aloof from accusing the Shias of distortion.

The second reason is that it is only mentioned in the verse that, ‘It is
permissible for you that you seek them through your wealth’. And after
that God has commanded to pay their dower. This shows that seeking them
just through wealth makes the relationship lawful. Such a condition is
found in Mutah only. Thus, Nikah of Mutah is permissible.

After these arguments, let me present the reply of those who do not
consider it permissible:

“The reply to the first argument is that Allah has discussed about those
women with whom Nikah is prohibited that, ‘Your mothers are unlawful of
you…(and so forth)’ and it is said in the end, ‘Except them all women
are permissible for you’. The same act is permitted here, which was
prohibited with those women in the prohibited degree. As only Nikah with
mahrams was prohibited, only Nikah is permitted with other women (and
not Mutah).

Secondly, God has commanded it along with piety and piety is found in
the proper Nikah only.

Thirdly, God has commanded it without evil deeds. God has called
‘adultery’ as ‘Safah’ because it implies ‘Safh-e-Maa’ (wasting of semen)
in it while other aims of Nikah are not fulfilled. As there is no other
purpose than satisfying one’s desires in Mutah, it is also a ‘Safah’ (an
evil deed).”

Abu Bakr Razi has made these statements as arguments against the
supporters of Mutah.[^41]

However, these three answers are unacceptable to Imam Fakhruddin Razi
himself. Thus, he writes after that:

“But the first point presented by Abu Bakr Razi is that at first, God
has discussed about those women with whom not only permanent marriage
but also intimate relations are prohibited. Then it is said that except
those, other women are permissible. That is, one can maintain intimate
relations with other women (be it through permanent marriage, Nikah of
Mutah or by keeping as a slave-girl etc.). Then defect is there in this
explanation of the supporter of Mutah?

The second point stated by Abu Bakr Razi is that piety is not found
without a correct Nikah (that is permanent marriage). He has not
presented any proof of this fact.

Thirdly, he says that fornication is called ‘safah’ because it implies
just ‘Safh-e-maa’ (fulfilling the desire). Actually, it is not so in
Mutah because the desire is fulfilled in Mutah in such a way that it is
within the circle of Islamic law and there is permission from God. Thus,
how can it be called adultery? How can a person considering Mutah
prohibited be in the circle of Islamic law? We would say that the real
debate is that whether Mutah is prohibited or not. Hence, how did you,
in the beginning itself, say that Mutah is prohibited (it is as if one
presents just his claim as proof)? Hence, it is proved that the opinion
of Abu Bakr Razi is weak and unacceptable.”

After these answers, Imam Razi has written his last decision based on
comparative study as follows:

“And, the only thing to be relied upon in this debate is that we say
that we do not deny that Mutah was legal. We can only say that it was
abrogated. On this basis, if a proof of lawfulness of Mutah is found in
this verse, it does not affect our aim in any way.”[^42]

It is clear that the proof of Mutah through this verse is such an
established fact that Imam Razi had to believe in it at last. As for its
abrogation, I will shed light on it later on.

The recitation of ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (for a stated period)
-------------------------------------------------------------

We have discussed above that scholars of ‘recitation and commentary’
like Ubayy bin Kaab and Abdullah bin Abbas used to read the verse of
Mutah along with ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (i.e. pay the dower immediately
to one with whom you perform Mutah for a stated period’). Maybe, this
saying will put the Rizwan editor in palpitation. Hence, let me inform
that this sentence ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ was not present in the Quran
according to Shias.

At the most, we can consider it as a ‘marginal commentary’ written by
those companions as an explanatory note. However, according to Imam
Razi, Ahlul Sunnat were not deniers of this recitation nor are they now.
I have presented innumerable proofs of their belief in distortion of
Quran in a previous chapter.

According to Razi, they are unanimous over this. Hence, they consider
those sentences to be part of Quran. Hafiz Ibn Jurair Tabari has
calculated the list of those narrators, in detail, who considered the
words, ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ part of Quran in his book, *Jameul Bayan.*
After congratulating the Rizwan editor for the belief in distortion of
Quran, I mention the names of those narrators in brief as follows:

1) Imam Suda read this verse as: ‘Then as to those whom you profit by
*for a prescribed time’*. Then he mentions all the laws of Mutah. This
tradition is narrated from Hafiz Tabarsi from Muhammad bin Al-Husain
from Ahmad bin Mufazzal from Ibaat from al-Suda.

2) Mujahid (whom some people mistakenly consider a denier of Mutah)
after reading this verse, said that this verse implies the Nikah of
Mutah. This is narrated from Muhammad bin Umar from Abi Asim from Isa
from Ibn Ubayy Bakheeh from Mujahid.

3) Abdullah bin Abbas (who is called as the rabbi of the Islamic nation,
Jurist of Quran and the Divine Scholar) used to read this verse along
with ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (for a stipulated period) and he supported
the lawfulness of Mutah strongly.

Narrators who narrate differing traditions of Ibn Abbas on this topic
are: Abu Kuraib, Yahya bin Isa, Naseer bin Abil Ashath, Habib bin Abi
Thabit, Abu Thabit, Hamid bin Musa’dah, Bushr bin Mufazzal, Dawood, Abu
Nazarah, Ibn Muthanna, Abdul A’ala, Muhammad bin Ja'far, Shayba, Abu
Salmah, Abu Dawood, Abu Ishaq bin Umar, Ibn Abil Adi, Khilad bin Aslam
and Nazr.

Hafiz Suyuti has given the reference of following writers in *Tafsir
Itqan* in addition to those mentioned above:

Abd bin Hamid, Ibn Ambaari and Imam Hakim in *Mustadrak*. They have
agreed that those narrations of Ibn Abbas are true.

In many of these narrations there is an emphasizing arrangement and
declaration: i.e. he said thrice, “By Allah! He has revealed this verse
in this way only.”

4) Both Qatadah and Abdullah bin Abbas say that they have seen this
verse along with the words ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (till a stated term) in
the copy of a famous reciter companion like Ubayy bin Kaab. The
narrators of Ibn Abbas are already mentioned while following narrators
have narrated this tradition from Qatadah:

5) Ibn Bashar, Abdul A’ala and Saeed. It is also narrated by Abd bin
Hamid. Refer *Tafsir Jameul Bayan* of Imam Jurair Tabari[^43] and
*Tafsir Gharaibul Quran*.[^44] Saeed bin Jubair, a famous follower of
companion himself also used to read this verse along with ‘Ila ajalim
musammaa’ (till a stated term). The chain of this narration is: Hafiz
Tabari, Muthanna, Abu Naeem, Isa bin Imrul Qaariyul Asadee, Amr bin
Marah, Saeed bin Jubair. All these references and narrations are taken
from *Jameul Bayan.*[^45]

6) Shaykhul Islam Shaukani writes in *Neel Al-Autaar*[^46] about
Abdullah bin Masud that his recitation included ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’
(till a stated term). Imam Nawawi writes in *Sharh Muslim* that he
recited with ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (till a stated term). It should be
clear that a saying of the Messenger of Allah (S) regarding Ubayy bin
Kaab and Ibn Masud is present in *Tafsir Itqan* that: “Learn the Quran
from four people viz. Abdullah bin Masud, Saalim, Maaz and Ubayy bin
Kaab.’

I emphasize that the recitation of ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (till a stated
term) is not rare, rather the Ahlul Sunnat themselves are unanimous on
it, according to Razi. Many obedient companions, reciters of Quran and
narrators of traditions used to read the verse in the same way. It seems
from the narration of Tibrani and Baihaqi from Ibn Abbas that this verse
was commonly read in the same way during the time of the Prophet (S). It
was said, “People used to read this verse with a limited period of time
and ‘Ila ajalim musammaa’ (till a stated term) was also read.”

If Ahlul Sunnat obey the commandments of rare recitations it is
obligatory for them to obey this famous and unanimous recitation. A note
on obeying rare recitation is present in *Tafsir Itqan:*

“Qazi Abu Tayyab, Qazi Husain, Allamah Roobani and Allamah Rafai have
said that rare recitation will be given the rank of solitary report and
acted upon. Allamah Ibn Sabaki has regarded this saying correct in
*Jameul Jawama* and *Sharh Mukhtasar.* The companions protested the
cutting off of the hands of thief through this recitation of Ibn Masud
and Imam Abu Hanifah also believes the same.”

If a rare recitation of Ibn Masud was followed, why is it not obligatory
to obey this when apart from Ibn Masud, loyal companions like Ubayy bin
Kaab, Abdullah bin Abbas, Qatadah, Saeed bin Jubair and Suda and
according to Ibn Abbas, all the companions of Prophet (S) and according
to Imam Razi whole community is unanimous on this recitation (‘Ila
ajalim musammaa’)? Why is it considered prohibited? The Rizwan editor
should provide the answer keeping the narrations, commentaries and
principles of jurisprudence in his mind.

Now we come to the point.

I was describing the history of Mutah. The discussion of the revelation
of the verse of Mutah started and the debate of its recitation began.
Anyway, Mutah was in vogue peacefully during the time of Prophet (S) and
the holy companions used to act on it during the time of the first
caliph. Remarkably, the daughter of the caliph, mother of faithfuls,
A’ysha’s elder sister, Asma binte Abi Bakr had established Mutah with
Zubair at a simple dower of two Yemeni chadors.[^47]

Even during the period of Umar considerable time passed while Mutah was
commonly practiced. Suddenly an incident occurred as a result of which
the second caliph developed a dislike of Mutah in his heart. The
incident is as follows:

1) Abdur Razzaq has narrated the incident of Amr bin Hareeth from Jubair
in his book. Jubair states that the companion, Amr bin Hareeth went to
Kufa and performed Mutah with a slave-girl and she became pregnant. When
caliph Umar asked Amr bin Hareeth regarding this, the latter confessed
and the former prohibited Mutah immediately.[^48]

2) Abdur Razzaq has narrated from Ibn Abbas through a correct chain that
nothing except Umme Arakah made the caliph Umar hostile to Mutah. She
became pregnant and when Umar asked, “From where did this come?” She
said, “Salmah bin Umayyah performed Mutah with me”. According to the
narration of Abu Al-Zubair, it was Mabad bin Umayyah instead of Salmah
bin Umayyah in this incident.[^49]

3) Umar bin Shabah states that Salmah bin Umayyah performed Mutah with
the slave-girl of Hakim bin Umayyah bin Auqas, Aslama. A child was born
to her but Salmah rejected him. After saying this, Ibn Kabi has also
said that when caliph Umar came to know about this incident, he
prohibited Mutah.[^50]

4) It is narrated from Urwah bin Zubair that Khawla binte Hakim came to
caliph Umar and said that Rabia bin Umayyah performed Mutah with a minor
girl and she became pregnant. Caliph Umar became surly and came out
pulling at his cloak and saying, “Is this Mutah? If I would have
prohibited it before I could have stoned them now.”[^51]

The compiler of *Tafsirul Ayaat* has baselessly derived from the above
narration of *Muwatta* in his book *Madhkur,*[^52] that Rabia bin
Umayyah had performed Mutah with a lady from the family of the second
caliph and hence, the caliph was infuriated. According to me, this
conclusion is not justified. It is already discussed above that the
daughter of the first caliph had performed Mutah with Zubair out of
which, Abdullah bin Zubair was born. This shows that women of reputed
families used to perform Mutah freely during those times. There are no
apparent conditions, which prove that caliph Abu Bakr disliked this act
of his daughter. Then why should caliph Umar, who is regarded
subordinate in rank to him, hate this permissible act for the ladies of
his house?

Anyway, I do not want to argue as to which of the above incidents is
true. The fact is that caliph Umar got angry over a displeasing incident
and he stopped the practice of Mutah after half the period of his
caliphate had passed. Allamah Qaushiji, an Ahlul Sunnat scholar writes
in *Sharh Tajwid:*

Caliph Umar ascended the pulpit and said:

“O people! Three things were in vogue during the time of the Prophet (S)
but I abolish them and consider them unlawful. I would punish one who
commits them. They are performing Mutah with women, Mutah of Hajj and
saying ‘Hayya alaa khairil amal’[^53] in the prayer-call (Azaan).”

Imam Razi writes: It is narrated from caliph Umar that he said in a
sermon that Mutah of Hajj and Mutah with women was in vogue during the
time of the Prophet (S) but he was prohibiting them and would punish
anyone who performs them.[^54]

The books of Ahlul Sunnat are full of innumerable narrations of such
incidents on this topic. Here are some more references:

(1) *Kanzul Ummal*[^55]

The narrations in this book are taken from the following sources:

    a) Abu Salih scribe of Laith Samarqandi

    b) Tahawi

    c) Ibn Jurair Tabari

    d) Ibn Asakir

    e) *Zaad Al-Maad* by Allamah Ibn Qayyim[^56]

These are historical events, which cannot be denied by any Islamic sect.
I have presented them in a chronological order. It is as clear as
daylight that there was no proof of prohibition of Mutah till the first
half of the period of caliphate of the second caliph. The prohibition of
Mutah was same as other new laws declared by him from the pulpit. When
objected, he used to say, “Everybody including women behind veil are
more aware of Islamic laws than Umar.”

There were people who knew that acts permitted by Muhammad are permitted
till the Day of Judgment and those prohibited by Muhammad are prohibited
till the Day of Judgment. They knew that no one, be it a common man or a
caliph, has any right to amend the Islamic laws. They were not ready to
respect this declaration of caliph Umar. Even Abdullah bin Umar, his own
son, did not consider this saying worthy of attention: “I prohibit Mutah
with women and Mutah of Hajj.” Read this narration of *Sahih Tirmidhi*
which is certified ‘correct’ by Hafiz Tirmidhi:

Salim bin Abdullah said to Ibn Shahab, “I heard that a Syrian asked
Abdullah bin Umar about Mutah of Hajj. Abdullah bin Umar said that it
was permissible. The Syrian said that the latter’s father had prohibited
it. Abdullah bin Umar said, ‘My father prohibited it but the Messenger
of Allah (S) used to practice it. Then, should one obey my father or the
Messenger of Allah (S)? What is your opinion?’ The Syrian said that one
should obey the command of the Messenger of Allah (S).” Imam Tirmidhi
says that this tradition is ‘good’ and ‘correct’.[^57]

Similarly, Urwah bin Zubair objected to Abdullah bin Abbas regarding
Mutah of Hajj that the latter considered it permissible while Abu Bakr
and Umar did not. The conversation of that time is quoted in *Kanzul
Ummal*,[^58] in brief. However, Allamah Ibn Qayyim has quoted it in
detail in *Zaadul Maad*[^59] and also expressed some of his views:

“Urwah said, ‘But Abu Bakr and Umar did not permit it.’ Ibn Abbas said,
‘By Allah, you will not stop from waywardness till Allah sends
chastisement on you. I am informing you about the command of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and you are talking about Abu Bakr and Umar!’
Urwah said, ‘Abu Bakr and Umar knew the Sunnah (practice) of the
Messenger of Allah (S) better than you and they were more obedient.’”

After quoting this conversation, the Allamah writes:

“And we can tell Urwah that Ibn Abbas knew the Sunnah of the Messenger
of Allah (S) more than him and was better than him. Ibn Abbas was better
than him in the matter of the Messenger of Allah (S), Abu Bakr and Umar
and no Muslim can doubt it.”

It is quoted on Pg. 215 of the book, *Madhkur* after this conversation,
‘This is the opinion of scholars’. Then, he further argues and writes:

“After all, why did Ibn Abbas and Abdullah bin Umar not say that Abu
Bakr and Umar knew the Holy Prophet (S) better than they did (so that it
is necessary to follow them)? Actually, no obedient companion can agree
to oppose the Nass (explicit order) of the Holy Prophet (S) through this
answer. They knew the commands of Allah and His Prophet (S) better. They
feared Allah and hence, did not subordinate the saying of an infallible
(Prophet) to the sayings of non-infallibles.”

This was the reason that companions like Imam Ali (as), Abdullah bin
Abbas, Imran bin Hasin, Ubayy Ibn Kaab, Abdullah bin Masud, Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari, Abu Saeed Khudri, Amir Muawiyah, Abu Saeed, Salmah Ibn
Umayyah bin Khalaf, Mabad bin Umayyah bin Khalaf, Amr bin Hareeth, Asma
binte Abi Bakr and followers of companions like Tawus, Saeed bin Jubair,
Ataa, all the jurists of Mecca, people of Yemen and Ibn Juraih
considered Mutah lawful in spite of the prohibition of caliph Umar. They
did not respect the saying of caliph Umar against the Divine command and
order of the Prophet (S). Please read the following:

A) Allamah Ibn Jazm states that the following companions considered
Mutah permissible even after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah
(S):

Ibn Masud, Muawiyah, Abu Saeed, Ibn Abbas, Salmah bin Umayyah, Jabir bin
Abdullah, Amr bin Hareeth. It is narrated from Jabir that during the
whole life of the Messenger of Allah (S) and Abu Bakr and in half the
period of the caliphate of Umar, all companions practiced Mutah.[^60]

B) Ibn Jazm has narrated from companions other than Ibn Abbas in *Muhli*
and said that after the Prophet (S), a large group of senior companions
was formed over the lawfulness of Mutah. They include and the following
companions:

Asma binte Abi Bakr, Jabir bin Abdullah, Ibn Masud, Ibn Abbas, Muawiyah,
Amr bin Hareeth, Abu Saeed, Salmah bin Umayyah bin Khalaf, Mabad bin
Umayyah bin Khalaf. Jabir states that all the companions considered
Mutah lawful during the time of the Messenger of Allah (S).[^61]

C) Imam Ali (as) said, “If Umar had not prevented people from Mutah,
except an unfortunate evil one, none would have committed
fornication.”[^62]

D) Companion Imran bin Hasin says that the verse of Mutah was revealed
in the Book of Allah. No such verse was revealed after that which could
have abrogated it. The Messenger of Allah (S) permitted us and we
performed Mutah accordingly. The Messenger of Allah (S) passed away but
did not prohibit us from it. After that, a person (i.e. Caliph Umar)
said whatever he pleased.[^63]

E) Jabir bin Abdullah says that during the time of the Messenger of
Allah (S) and the first caliph they used to perform Mutah for as many
days as they wanted by giving a handful of dates or flour. Later on,
caliph Umar prohibited Mutah due to the incident of Amr bin
Hareeth.[^64]

F) Companion Abu Saeed says that anyone among them could perform Mutah
by giving a cup of parched barley meal (sattu).

Abu Saeed also says, “We used to perform Mutah by giving a piece of
cloth during the time of the Messenger of Allah (S).”[^65]

G) Allamah Ibnul Barr says, “People of Mecca and Yemen are having a
similar ideology as that of Ibn Abbas regarding the lawfulness of
Mutah.” Ibn Jazm has also said that followers (Tabi’in) like Tawus,
Saeed bin Jubair, Ataa and all the jurists of Mecca considered Mutah
lawful.[^66]

H) Followers of companions like Tawus, Ataa, Saeed bin Jubair and all
the jurists of Mecca considered Mutah lawful. Ibn Juraih, a jurist of
Mecca was among those famous persons who considered Mutah lawful.[^67]

This was the condition of scholars who had the knowledge of truth and
the secrets of Islamic law. They were masters in jurisprudence,
traditions, commentary and recitation. But even such people are not rare
who went all the way to justify the acts of their leaders

A large group tried their best to find a way out of the prohibition of
Mutah by the second caliph. While the caliph himself had given this
explanation at the time of his declaration:

“Two Mutas (Mutah of Hajj and Mutah with women) were in vogue during the
time of Prophet (S). I prohibit them and would punish one who commits
them.”[^68]

However, some scholars and excellent personalities say that Mutah was
abrogated during the time of Prophet (S) itself and caliph Umar declared
it openly. Before abrogating a command of Quran, following questions
naturally come to one’s mind:

(1) Was this order abrogated through a verse or a tradition?

(2) Was the abrogating verse revealed before or after its revelation?

(3) Whether the abrogating verse is really contradicting the command or
not?

(4) Can a tradition abrogate the command of a Quranic verse?

(5) Was the abrogating tradition revealed before that command or after
it?

(6) Is the abrogating tradition really opposed to the command of that
Quranic verse or not?

(7) If the tradition is contradicting the command, does it have enough
authenticity that the command of a verse be considered abrogated?

Come let us hear the replies to these questions from people who support
the abrogation of the command of Mutah.

First Question
--------------

That is, what is the abrogator of this verse? There is a vast difference
of opinion in it.

Many people say that this verse was abrogated by a saying of the Prophet
(S) (the sayings will be discussed later). While Imam Shafei and others
believe that this order was abrogated only by another verse. However
there is a difference of opinion in the selection of this verse.

1) Imam Shafei says:

“The abrogator of the verse of Mutah is this verse of Surah Momin:
***‘And who guard their private parts, Except before their mates or
those whom their right hands possess, for they surely are not
blamable.’***[^69] because a woman with whom Mutah is performed is
neither a wife nor a slave-girl.

2) It is narrated from Ataa Khorasani that: The verse of Mutah was
abrogated by this saying: “O Prophet! When you divorce women, divorce
them with Iddah.” (i.e. they should observe Iddah).

3) Caliph Umar said: “Mutah was abrogated by Nikah, divorce, Iddah and
inheritance.”

All three sayings are quoted in *Tafsir Lubaabut Tawil*[^70] by Allamah
Khazin Baghdadi. The fourth saying is of Allamah Ibn Jazm, which he has
quoted in his book, *Marefatun Nasikh wal Mansookh:*

“The abrogators of Mutah are those verses in which a wife is entitled to
an eighth or fourth part of inheritance because the Mutah wife is not
entitled to inheritance.”

It would be better to describe the conditions of abrogation before
writing my opinions on these sayings.

Allamah Ibn Qayyim Jawzi says: The abrogation of a command depends on
four conditions and those who consider that Mutah of Hajj is abrogated
cannot fulfill even a single condition. Firstly, a Nass (text) or
explicit order should be present for abrogation. Secondly, that another
Nass or explicit order should be contradictory to the former command.
Thirdly, that Nass should be strong enough to stand against the proofs
of the first command. Fourthly, that contradictory order should have
been issued after the first one.[^71]

He further explains:

“When we see the companions of the Messenger of Allah (S) that they have
a difference of opinion regarding an issue about which it is proved that
the Holy Prophet (S) himself did it or ordered it and some companions
say that it was abrogated later on or it was not general but a
restricted one while other companions say that the order is not
abrogated but still present; then a saying of one who supports or
considers it restricted will not be accepted if it is against Islamic
law and without a proof. At the most, both the sayings will contradict
each other and the decision of their dispute would rest on ‘proof’.

When a dispute arises, it is obligatory to turn towards Allah and His
Messenger (S) according to the command of Quran (and it should be taken
according to the saying and practice of Messenger only and not due to
trust others’ sayings. Thus, if Abu Dharr or Uthman say that Mutah of
Hajj is abrogated or it is restricted while Abu Musa and Abdullah bin
Abbas say that it is permissible and its command is general, the
responsibility of presenting a proof falls on one who claims it to be
abrogated.”[^72]

It shows that it is the responsibility of Ahlul Sunnat to present a
proof, since it is they who believe in the abrogation of Mutah. Also
that proof should fulfill all the conditions. We Shias know that it was
in vogue in the time of the Holy Prophet (S) and is present even today.
The purpose is that the liability of proving the prohibition of Mutah is
on Ahlul Sunnat. None of the verses presented by them as proofs of
abrogation fulfill the required conditions as would become clear later
on.

Second and Third Questions
--------------------------

It is necessary to discuss both these questions together in order to
maintain sequence. The first verse, which is alleged to be the verse of
abrogation of Mutah is:

“And who guard their private parts, except before their mates or those
whom their right hands possess, for they surely are not blamable”[^73]

Firstly, this verse was revealed long before the verse of Mutah. As
Surah Mominoon was revealed in Mecca while verse of Mutah was revealed
approximately eight years after Hijrat. How can a verse revealed in
Mecca be an abrogator of a verse revealed a number of years later?

Secondly, according to all those who support the lawfulness of Mutah,
the Mutah wife is a spouse. Then how can the argument of Shafei and
Allamah Ibn Jawzi: “As a woman of Mutah is neither a wife nor a
slave-girl while relations with only wife and slave-girl are permitted
in this verse. Hence, relations with a woman of Mutah are prohibited” be
considered correct? Everybody can understand it because we consider the
woman of Mutah, a wife. A detailed debate is already over in the forgone
pages. According to the partisans of Mutah, a woman of Mutah is a wife
just as is she is in a permanent marriage.

Thus, it is proved that neither this verse (which is called abrogator)
was revealed after the verse of Mutah nor does it oppose the order of
Mutah. Due to this, it is impossible to call it abrogator. Hence,
Allamah Zamakhshari of Ahlul Sunnat has quoted in the exegesis of this
verse in his *Tafsir Kashaf:*

“If you ask me whether there is any proof of prohibition of Mutah in
this verse or not, I would reply in the negative. Since a woman who has
performed the Nikah of Mutah (if Mutah is permissible), is also included
in marriage.”[^74]

The second verse is:

***“O Prophet! When you divorce women, divorce them for their prescribed
time…”***[^75]

That is, the women should observe Iddah.

Firstly, the Ahlul Sunnat do not present an evidence that this verse was
revealed after the command of Mutah even though its responsibility rests
on them alone while it is known that the practice of divorce was in
vogue from the beginning of Islam. It did not start after the battle of
Hunain that somebody could say that this verse was revealed after the
order of Mutah.

Secondly, implying prohibition of Mutah through this verse is just like
shooting ‘arrows’ in the dark. It is neither commanded in this verse
that divorce is compulsory for all marriages so that one can present a
proof that as there is no divorce in Mutah, it is not lawful nor anyone
says that Iddah is not necessary after the completion of the period of
Mutah so that it could claimed that since there is no Iddah in Mutah, it
is unlawful.

The only command in this verse is: “It is obligatory for a woman to
observe Iddah after divorce.” Where is the explanation in this verse
that to which women and when, a divorce be given? Hence a pair of
questions arises against the Ahlul Sunnat in this verse also.

Similarly, according to the fourth saying, the verse of inheritance is
an abrogator of the command of Mutah because there is no inheritance in
Mutah. Firstly, thinking that the verses of inheritance were revealed
after the verse of Mutah is the best example of ignorance of Islamic
History. Since the verses of inheritance were revealed during the early
times of Hijrat[^76] while the command of Mutah was issued after the
battle of Hunain or Autaas.

Secondly, there is a difference of opinion about the inheritance of a
Mutah wife. Scholars who grant the right to inheritance to a Mutah wife
would consider this proof of Allamah Ibn Hazm absolutely invalid.

Also, even those who do not support the inheritance of the Mutah wife do
not say that she is not a spouse, and hence, she would not receive
inheritance but they say that the verse of inheritance is only about a
permanent wife.

Since their proofs show that the verse of inheritance indicates the
order of a special category just as the verse of divorce is revealed for
a permanent wife only and has no connection with the Mutah wife. So, can
anyone raise an objection to it? This objection can surely be raised
only when a category of permanent wives is deprived of the right to
inheritance. For example, a killer of husband is deprived of the right
to inheritance. However, Ahlul Sunnat scholars do not object at that
time and peacefully accept it. Since it is definitely proved from
traditions that even though a killer wife is considered a spouse, she is
not entitled to inheritance.

To conclude, when every wife, in spite of being a spouse does not get
inheritance how can this argument be correct that since a Mutah wife
does not inherit, she is not a spouse at all?

Thus, both questions regarding this verse fall against the sense taken
by Ahlul Sunnat. As for the saying of caliph Umar that Nikah, divorce,
Iddah and inheritance together abrogate Mutah, firstly, I have a doubt
in this matter. How can a person who says, “I prohibit these acts even
though they both were in vogue during the time of Prophet (S),” say that
this command is abrogated by so and so verses? Since belief in both
these things would imply that verses of prohibition of Mutah were
revealed continuously but, God forbid, the Holy Prophet (S) did not pay
any attention to them and a sin remained in vogue.

Secondly, a long discussion is already over regarding the abrogation by
the verse of divorce, verse of Iddah and verse of inheritance. While the
thought of abrogation of the command of Mutah through the verse of Nikah
is very amusing because just as Nikah includes the permanent marriage,
it also includes Mutah, as Allamah Zamakhshari has said. With a word
that imagines the prohibition of permanent and temporary marriage, it
shows the knowledge of the narrator.

In addition to this, the revelation of the verse of Nikah before battle
of Hunain or Autaas is established because the issue of Nikah was
clarified in the beginning of Islam itself. That is why Sir Syed Ahmad
Khan says:

“Majority of Muslims say that there is permission for Mutah in this
verse without a doubt, but this command was abrogated. However, the
objection is weak according to me because of the verses selected for the
abrogation of this order.”[^77]

Since it was not possible to prove the abrogation of the command of
Mutah through Quranic verses, the Ahlul Sunnat tried to abrogate it
through traditions. Nevertheless, the condition is same here too. No two
people agree over a saying. The wonder of this divine saying is evident:

***“Do they not then meditate on the Quran? And if it were from any
other than Allah, they would have found in it many a
discrepancy.”***[^78]

Fourth Question
---------------

Before presenting these narrations, one should know that according to
the majority of Ahlul Sunnat scholars, the abrogation of the verses of
Quran is not possible through traditions. The sect of Imam Shafei says:

“According to Shafei religion, Sunnah (traditions) cannot abrogate
verses of Quran.”[^79]

Thus, after it is proved that the verse of Mutah is not abrogated by any
other verse, we can at least consider the followers of Imam Shafei
believers in lawfulness of Mutah. As for Hanafi and other such people,
who believe that a tradition can abrogate the Quran, our discussion
would be aimed them only. The decision of remaining three questions
associated with traditions will be easily finalized by the discoveries
of Ahlul Sunnat only.

The discussion would become very lengthy if all the traditions are
presented separately. Hence, I present their summary in the form of
discussions of Ahlul Sunnat scholars.

(1) Allamah Nawawi has quoted the following paragraphs of Qazi Ayaz in
*Sharh Sahih Muslim:*

“Imam Muslim has narrated from Salmah bin Akoo that Mutah was legalized
in the battle of Autaas. It is narrated from Sabrah that it was
legalized on the day of the Meccan conquest. Autaas and conquest of
Mecca have the same meaning. Then it was made unlawful on the same day.
According to a tradition from Imam Ali (as), Mutah was made unlawful in
the battle of Khyber and this battle was fought before the conquest of
Mecca.

Apart from Imam Muslim, others have narrated from Imam Ali (as) that the
Holy Prophet (S) prohibited Mutah in the battle of Tabuk. The chain of
this narration is: Ishaq bin Rashid, Zuhri, Abdullah bin Muhammad
Hanafiyyah, Muhammad Hanafiyyah, Imam Ali (as). However, no one has
obeyed this narration and Ishaq bin Rashid has made a mistake in it.
Since this same narration is quoted by Imam Malik in *Muwatta* from the
chain of Zuhri. It is also quoted by Sufyan bin Uyinnah, Amri, Yunus
etc. There is a mention of Khyber in it. Even Imam Muslim has quoted
this narration from the chain of Imam Zuhri about the prohibition in
Khyber only and it is true.

Abu Dawood has narrated from Sabrah Jehni that Mutah was prohibited in
the Farewell Hajj[^80]. According to Abu Dawood, it is the most correct
saying among all the narrations. It is also narrated from Sabrah that
Mutah was legalized at the time of the Farewell Hajj. Then the Messenger
of Allah (S) immediately prohibited it till the Day of Judgment.

Fifth saying: And it is narrated from Hasan Basri that Mutah was never
legalized except at the time of Umratul Qaza[^81]. It is worthy of
discussion that this narration is also from Sabrah only. However, Imam
Muslim has not discussed the limitation of time in any narration of
Sabrah except in the narration of Muhammad bin Saeed, Ishaq bin Ibrahim,
Yahya bin Yahya in which, he has mentioned that prohibition of Mutah was
done at the time of the conquest of Mecca.

According to the saying of the scholars of traditions, a narration,
which says that Mutah was legalized at the time of the Farewell Hajj is
a mistake of the narrator because there was no need to make it lawful on
that day nor were the companions alone and away from women. Most of the
companions had come to Hajj along with their spouses hence what was the
need to legalize Mutah? The fact is that only prohibition was made at
the time of the Farewell Hajj as found in many narrations. The revival
of prohibition was because the people had gathered in large numbers and
the religion was reaching completion. Islamic law was becoming perfect
(so that those present there may inform the absentees about these laws).
Apart from the prohibition of Mutah, he had once again explained the
permissible and prohibited acts on that day. He made the absolute
prohibition on Mutah evident by saying, “Now this order is prohibited
till the Day of Judgment.”

However Qazi Ayaz said, that “the mention of different venues in
different traditions, like the battle of Khyber, ‘Umrah Qaza’, conquest
of Mecca or Autaas, shows the possibility that the Messenger of Allah
(S) prohibited Mutah on all these occasions because the report of
prohibition of Mutah at the time of the battle of Khyber is correct and
there is no scope of doubt in it, rather that tradition is from reliable
and trustworthy narrators.

But according to a narration from Sufyan: “The Holy Prophet (S)
prohibited Mutah and donkey meat on the day of Khyber.” Some people say
regarding this narration that there are two separate parts in it. It
means that the narrator said, “The Messenger of Allah (S) prohibited
Mutah” (and did not specify a time of prohibition of Mutah). Then he
said, “and donkey meat on the day of Khyber”. If it is read like this
then the specification of time as the day of Khyber will be for
prohibition of donkey meat only. The time of prohibition of Mutah will
not be understood. The need of reading it like this is so that the
meaning of various narrations will become harmonious and concordant.

I think that the only credible possibility is that Mutah was prohibited
at the time of the conquest of Mecca. As for donkey meat, it was
doubtlessly banned at the time of Khyber only.”

Qazi Ayaz says that the best saying is what we have stated previously
that the Messenger of Allah (S) prohibited Mutah on a number of
occasions. Then also, those narrations, which say that Mutah was
legalized at the time of Umratul Qaza, conquest of Mecca and battle of
Autaas. It seems that even after prohibition, the Messenger of Allah (S)
might have permitted it according to the need of that time. In such a
condition, one has to believe that Mutah was prohibited forever in the
battle of Khyber and Umratul Qaza, but at the time of the conquest of
Mecca it was legalized for the time being due to the need, and then
again it was prohibited forever.

As for the narration, which considers it to be legalized at the time of
the Farewell Hajj, it will be annulled because it is narrated from
Sabrah Jehni and reliable narrators have also narrated from Sabrah Jehni
that Mutah was legalized at the time of conquest of Mecca and banned at
the time of the Farewell Hajj. Thus, the narration of Sabrah over which
most companions are unanimous, will be accepted. That is, the narration
that Mutah was prohibited at the time of the conquest of Mecca and the
repetition of its prohibition at the time of the Farewell Hajj was to
emphasize the former order.

As for the saying of Hasan, Mutah was permitted only at the time of
Umratul Qaza and not before or after that; it is rejected by those
traditions, which say that Mutah was prohibited in the battle of Khyber
(because the incident of Khyber occurred before Umratul Qaza). Those
narrations reject it which say that Mutah was legalized at the time of
the ‘conquest of Mecca’ or battle of Autaas. Apart from this, the
narration on which the saying of Hasan is based is also narrated from
Sabrah Jehni. The narrations of permission and prohibition on other
times are also narrated from him only and those narrations are more
correct. Hence this narration, which is against the correct narration,
will be rejected.

Some scholars believe that Mutah was legalized many times and banned
twice and abrogated. Allah knows best.”[^82]

After this, Imam Nawawi writes about his sect as follows:

“It is a correct belief that (Mutah) was prohibited and permitted twice
viz. it was permissible before the battle of Khyber but prohibited after
it and again it was permitted on the day of conquest of Mecca and it is
also the day of Autaas because both are same. Then it was again
prohibited in that period only after three days till the Day of Judgment
and this prohibition would remain till then. It is not permissible to
say that legalization of Mutah was confined to the period of Khyber and
the prohibition on the Day of Khyber is forever. The order on the day of
conquest of Mecca was just an emphasis on prohibition. The command of
permission was not prior to the conquest of Mecca (hence, the order of
prohibition was given once again) as understood by Mazri and Qazi. Thus,
those narrations which Muslim has mentioned about legalization of Mutah
on the day of Khyber are clear. Hence it is unlawful to annul them and
there is no hindrance in prohibition of this legalization twice.”

Even Imam Shafei and Imam Muslim believe that Mutah was legalized and
prohibited a number of times. Imam Muslim has titled the chapter of
Mutah as follows:

“Chapter of Mutah and discussion that Mutah was legalized then
abrogated, again legalized and again abrogated and that its abrogation
will continue till the Day of Judgment.”

Imam Shafei says:

“I do not know any act in Islam which was legalized and then prohibited,
again it was permitted and again prohibited except Mutah. Some even say
that Mutah was abrogated thrice and even more than that.”[^83]

The wordings discussed above are taken from *Sharh Sahih Muslim*. Now
let us take a stroll through *Sahih Bukhari* to understand how diligent
a search those poor scholars had to make due to various types of
narrations and how much they are struggling. They are trapped in the
whirlpool of narrations in such a way that there is no way of salvation.
Hafiz Ibn Hajar Asqalani writes:

“Sohaili says that there is a difference of opinion about the time of
prohibition of Mutah. The poorest narration is that in which it is said
that it (was prohibited) in the battle of Tabuk. It is narrated from
Hasan that the prohibition was issued at the time of Umratul Qaza. While
it is famous that the prohibition was issued at the time of the conquest
of Mecca, as narrated by Muslim from Rabi bin Sabrah. According to a
narration of Abu Dawood from Rabi, it was prohibited at the time of the
Farewell Hajj. Narrators who say that it was prohibited in the battle of
Autaas are like those who say that it was done in ‘Aamul Fath’.”[^84]

Considering all these, six occasions are found, viz. Khyber, Umratul
Qaza, conquest of Mecca, Autaas, Tabuk and the farewell Hajj. The
addition of Hunain is imminent because it is also present in a
narration, which I had stated earlier thus either Sohaili was unaware or
he purposely left it because its narrators were unreliable. Or because
the battles of Autaas and Hunain are same. As for the narration of
Tabuk, it is recorded by Ishaq bin Rahuyah and Ibn Habaan by their own
chains from the tradition of Abu Huraira. As for the narration of Hasan
Basri, it is recorded in their own way by Abdullah and he adds ‘Maa
kaanat qablaha wa laa baadiha’ (There was nothing before it and after
it).

This addition is a favorite deed of its narrator, Amr bin Ubaid and he
is ‘The eliminator of tradition’. Saeed Ibn Mansur has recorded from
Hasan (Basri) in a correct way without any addition. The proof of the
conquest of Mecca is found in *Sahih Muslim* as said by Sohaili. Even
Autaas is proved in *Sahih Muslim* through the tradition of Salmah bin
Akoo. The farewell Hajj is also proved by Abu Dawood from the narration
of Rabi. When this is made clear, (keep it in mind) that except the
conquest of Mecca, no other narration is correct without a cause even if
the channel of the tradition of the battle of Khyber is correct but the
descriptions of scholars have already been discussed.

The news of Umratul Qaza is not correct because it is among those
narrations of Hasan in which a link in chain of narrators is missing and
it becomes weak. Since he used to narrate traditions from everyone. Even
if we consider it correct, it is possible that he meant the day of
Khyber by Umratul Qaza because both occurred in the same year itself
just as the conquest of Mecca and Autaas are same. However, the incident
of Tabuk does not explain it in the tradition of Abu Huraira that
Muslims did Mutah with women in that condition only. It seems that Mutah
might have occurred long before and releasing might have been done to
those women.

Or prohibition was done long before but some Muslims were unaware and
they continued to act on the former permission and hence, the
prohibition was related to anger as the ban was imposed earlier. Also
the tradition of Abu Huraira is in the situation of the statement. Since
it is a narration of Mumil bin Ismail from Akramah bin Ammar Yasir and
there is scope for discussion regarding both. However, the tradition of
Jabir from the channel of Ibad bin Kathir is incorrect and forsaken.
This difference of opinion about the Farewell Hajj is due to Rabi bin
Sabrah while his narration of the conquest of Mecca is correct and
famous…Among all those events the most correct one is conquest of
Mecca.”[^85]

The conclusion of the discussion so far is that if the Ahlul Sunnat say
that the verse of Mutah was abrogated by traditions, a question arises
naturally, ‘Can a verse be abrogated by a tradition?’ We have discussed
the saying of Imam Shafei, that “a tradition cannot abrogate Quran.” The
arguments of Imam Nawawi, commentator of *Sahih Muslim* and Hafiz Ibn
Hajar Asqalani, commentator of *Sahih Bukhari* are presented for people
who believe in the abrogation of Quran by traditions. It is proved from
them that seven different occasions of prohibition are present in the
traditions. They are: battle of Khyber, Umratul Qaza, conquest of Mecca,
battle of Autaas, battle of Tabuk, the Farewell Hajj and battle of
Hunain.

Fifth and seventh Question
--------------------------

Now I am going to discuss about the questions that: Did the abrogating
tradition arrive before or after the revelation of the verse? And if
that tradition is contradicting, does it have enough credibility to
abrogate the command of Quran?

The weight of those traditions can be understood by their being a
practical exegesis of:

***“Do they not then meditate on the Quran? And if it were from any
other than Allah, they would have found in it many a
discrepancy.”***[^86]

There is such a severe difference of opinion in them that poor the Ahlul
Sunnat scholars are not able to decide at all whether Mutah was really
prohibited and when was it prohibited?

It is not surprising that every sycophant expert wrote each tradition
according to his or her keen intelligence. This problem befell on
scholars who came later on to darn those mistakes and prove them right.
Thus, Imam Muslim and Imam Shafei had to say that Mutah was legalized
and banned twice. Imam Shafei had the feeling while saying so that the
Islamic law is not a child’s game that it is made and broken again and
again, but to prove the prohibition of Mutah it was necessary to accept
all these traditions and he accepted them after saying:

“I do not know any act in Islam which was legalized and then prohibited,
again it was permitted and again prohibited, except Mutah.”

However, all seven traditions can be true due to the saying of
permission and prohibition twice. Hence, some people believe that it was
permitted and prohibited thrice. Some have said even more than that. The
meaning of accepting the sayings of the Ahlul Sunnat is as if their God
is very weak in taking decisions. At times, He makes Mutah lawful and
then becomes aware of its defects and prohibits it. Then again He finds
good qualities in Mutah and he makes it lawful. Once more He comes to
know such faults, which were hidden from Him till now, and He bans it.
This cycle goes on for as many as seven times.

By the way, the ideology adopted by Imam Nawawi after cross-examination
of all these narrations is discussed above. He believes that all other
narrations are wrong and only the narrations of prohibition at the time
of Khyber and conquest of Mecca are correct. As he says, “The correct
view is that Mutah was prohibited and legalized twice, viz. it was
permissible before the battle of Khyber and banned in the battle and it
was legalized on the day of the conquest of Mecca and the narration of
the day of Autaas also implies conquest of Mecca because both the events
are closely related. It was prohibited three days after that.”

Thus according to the saying of Imam Nawawi, Mutah was absolutely
prohibited at the time of the conquest of Mecca.

Allamah Hafiz Ibn Hajar Asqalani writes in *Fathul Bari Sahih Bukhari*
after analyzing all the narrations: “(Among the occasions of prohibition
of Mutah) the most explicit one, as said by me, is conquest of Mecca.”

That is, even Allamah says that Mutah was prohibited forever on the
occasion of the conquest of Mecca and all other narrations are wrong and
doubtful.

After the final decision of both these Imams and Allamahs, recollect the
time of the revelation of the verse of Mutah from past discussions.
Consider this saying of Allamah Jalaluddin Suyuti:

“All four writers of *Sihah* books, i.e. Imam Muslim, Imam Abu Dawood,
Tirmidhi and Nasai have narrated from Abu Saeed Khudri that the verse of
Mutah was revealed after the battle of Hunain. Allamah Tibrani has also
narrated from Ibn Abbas that this verse was revealed after the battle of
Hunain.”[^87]

All know that the battle of Hunain was fought after the conquest of
Mecca. Where have those narrations gone that Mutah was banned at the
time of the conquest of Mecca forever? Here, the verse of Quran says
that Mutah was legalized in the battle of Hunain after the conquest of
Mecca. While Imam Nawawi and Allamah Asqalani, according to their
correct narrations, give a verdict of prohibition of Mutah till the Day
of Judgment on the occasion of conquest of Mecca.

Even if we disregard the numerous differences of opinions and accept the
saying of Ahlul Sunnat that Mutah was prohibited through a tradition of
the Messenger of Allah (S) on the day of the conquest of Mecca then also
we would have to believe that this tradition was abrogated by a verse of
Quran during the battle of Hunain through its revelation and now Mutah
will remain lawful till the Day of Judgment.

So, these two points also prove to be against the Ahlul Sunnat.

Sixth Question
--------------

Are the abrogating traditions really against the command of this verse
or not?

There is no need for writing much in this matter because even if all
those narrations really prove the prohibition of Mutah then also their
weakness and occurrence before the verse of Mutah are discussed above.
But there is a condition after the acceptance of which, the stain of lie
and treachery to the Prophet (S) is removed from the skirts of those
narrators (whom the Rizwan editor considers ‘all of them are just’) and
those narrations do not remain contrary to the Divine verses. The
command of the verse also remains in its place.

If the Rizwan editor shows thankfulness, I can tell him about a remote
possibility about “the compilers of traditions and Quran”, that the
words of those narrations are not contradictory when you consider the
possibility that the companions of the Prophet (S) who were traveling
with him and had performed Mutah due to necessity at Khyber, Umratul
Qaza or the Farewell Hajj and various other places. When it was time to
return the Prophet (S) came to know that some companions have performed
Mutah, so he advised them to leave those women in a proper manner.

That is, to free them by forgiving the remaining time because they were
returning home and the necessity of these Mutah wives was getting over.
The Messenger of Allah (S) was a Prophet and a guide of the people. He
was more affectionate to the Muslims than their own parents. He was
watchful of their affairs and had the power of discretion on them.
Hence, there is no need to be surprised if he guided them in their
private matters. These advices were given to different people at
different occasions by the Messenger of Allah (S), which the narrators,
due to their low understanding or unfair nature, considered that he had
prohibited Mutah.

I have presented this possibility only for comfort of the Rizwan editor
because a severe stroke was being inflicted on his belief of
infallibility of companions when the narrations were proved wrong. It is
proved from these compilers of narrations and Quran that even if all
these narrations would be true then also each one could have been
applied to this condition. None of them could have clearly opposed the
order of the lawfulness of the verse of Mutah. Hence, even this Question
is against the ideology of Ahlul Sunnat.

In brief, none of the points presented by the Ahlul Sunnat for the
abrogation of the verse of Mutah are correct nor they have such a
capacity to confront a Quranic verse. Thus, praise be to Allah, it is
found through intense explanation that the verse of Mutah was never
abrogated.

After that, recollect the saying of Umar, “Two Mutahs were in vogue
during the time of the Messenger of Allah (S).”

Once again read this confession of Imam Razi:

“We do not deny that Mutah was lawful. We only say that it was
abrogated.”

The state of abrogation is clear (that it was not abrogated); its
lawfulness is stable in its place.

Thus far we have discussed the statement of the Rizwan editor that,
“According to Shias it is a very good deed to use women after giving
them some money without performing Nikah with them.”

The next sentence is:

“God forbid, it is permissible even with Sayyid women after giving them
some money.”

Like Mutah, the literal meaning of Nikah is physical relationship
between a man and woman. If there would have been Nikah’ in place of
‘Mutah’ then also its literal translation would have been the same as
done by the Rizwan editor. It is possible that the editor, of Rizwan
start labeling Nikah also as voluptuousness. Thus, let me say that he
distorted this correct translation also according to his habit that he
included the wordings “after giving them some money” which is not
mentioned anywhere in the actual text.

Maybe the editor who makes fun of the amount of dower by saying “after
giving them some money” does not know that the companions used to
perform Nikah and Mutah after giving a handful of dates or flour. When
the daughter of caliph Abu Bakr, Asma, performed Mutah with Zubair, her
dower was only two Yemeni chadors. It can be said in the respectful
language of the Rizwan editor as follows:

“Zubair did a great deed by using the daughter of caliph Abu Bakr
without performing Nikah after giving two Yemeni chadors. As a result of
which Abdullah bin Zubair was born.”

Actually, the Rizwan editor is himself unaware of the affairs of his
religion. Otherwise, he would not have made an unsuccessful attempt to
find out the point of ‘using women after giving some money without
performing Nikah’. Though his great Imam, Abu Hanifah has given a
verdict: “There is no harm in establishing physical relations with a
woman after giving her compensation because it is given to her for the
same purpose. Imam Ghazzali writes in his book, *Mankhool* about this
great Imam:

“And, as far as unlawful sex is concerned, Imam Abu Hanifah has opened
such venues that the penalty is eliminated. For instance, coition on
contract basis and performing Nikah with mothers and establishing sexual
relations with them. He thinks that all those acts invalidate the
penalty. A person who wants to do the evil act with a believing woman,
what difficulty would he have in hiring her for this work? Who can
explain the justification of this issue?”

And Imam Malik goes a step ahead and says that if a man were paid
remuneration it would be permissible to even perform the act of the
community of Prophet Lut (as) with him. His verdict is as follows:

“Sodomy is permissible with one’s slave or employee.”

Even the Hanafites believe it. Their Allamah Chilpi has remarked on the
margin of *Sharh Waqayah* that:

“A person who penetrates the anus of a stranger man or woman. We have
kept the condition of ‘stranger man and woman’ because there is a
consensus that if someone does this with his slave, wife or a slave-girl
there is no penalty and Qazi Khan has clarified this.”[^88]

My sincere advice to the Rizwan editor is that if he wants to find a
stamp of approval for such good deeds he should not waste his time in
searching it among the Shias. All such products are available in his own
house. The only condition is sincere search.

Then the Rizwan editor writes:

“This is so because they believe that performing Mutah gives them the
rank of Husain, Ali and even the Holy Prophet (S). It is written on page
50 of *Burhanul Mutah:* “One who performs Mutah once gets the rank of
Hasan. One who performs twice gets the rank of Husain. One who performs
thrice gets the rank of Ali and one who performs Mutah four times gets
the rank of the Holy Prophet (S). There is no power and strength except
from Allah!”

The Rizwan editor has done a great distortion while copying this
narration also according to his old habit. *Burhanul Mutah* is not
present with me but I present the detailed explanation of this narration
from *Tafsir Minhajus Sadiqeen.* The narration found, is:

“A believer who performs Mutah once, gets the rank of martyrdom. The
leader of martyrs is Imam Husain (as). A person, who performs the Nikah
of Mutah twice, gets a place among the rank of virtuous. The leader of
virtuous is Imam Hasan (as). A person who performs Mutah thrice will get
the rank of ‘truthfuls’. The leader of truthfuls is Amirul Momineen
(as). A person who performs Mutah four times will be included among the
rank of prophets. The leader of prophets is Prophet Muhammad Mustafa
(S).”

Note this honesty! The intention of this narration is that if a person
performs Mutah he will get the honor of living under the flag of the
leadership of Imam Husain (as), Imam Hasan (as), Amirul Momineen (as)
and the Messenger of Allah (S). While the Rizwan editor says that he
will get the rank of these Holy personalities.

Moreover, this narration is based on the verse:

***“And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favors from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and*** ***a goodly company are
they!”***[^89]

Obviously, when such is the rank of common obedience, what ranks can be
received in a worship act, in which there is an utmost fear of taunts
and punishment from the Ahlul Sunnat caliphs? The Ahlul Sunnat forgot
their lustful deeds against Shariah and raised objections to an act
which was in accordance with it. Hence, those who perform them are
worthy of receiving those ranks.

On the contrary, the Ahlul Sunnat bestow those high ranks to every
honest trader. However, we do not find any spiritual exertion, hurt,
taunt or punishment in any trade, instead there is profit.

Allamah Hafiz Zahabi has quoted this narration from Ibn Umar in *Mizanul
Itidal:*

“A truthful, trustworthy Muslim trader would be with the prophets,
truthfuls and martyrs on the Day of Judgment. This tradition is correct
according to its meaning and excellent according to its chain. It is not
necessary that he would be of their rank also while accompanying them.
This saying is for only those *“who obey Allah and Prophet (S)…*till the
end of the verse.”

After this explanation by Allamah Dhahabi who can object to the
narration of *Minhajus Sadiqeen?*

[^1]: Rizwan, Pg. 14

[^2]: Rizwan, Pg. 15

[^3]: Rizwan, Pg. 15

[^4]: Jew or Christian

[^5]: Waiting period before a woman can marry again

[^6]: Pg. 63, 64; Iran

[^7]: Jew or Christians living in Muslim territories

[^8]: Pre-Islamic form of divorce, consisting in the words of
repudiation: You are to me like my mother’s back. (anti a’layyah
ka-zahri ummi).

[^9]: Sworn allegation of adultery committed by either husband or wife

[^10]: Willful oath that one would not to go to ones wife

[^11]: Fusulul Muhimma, Pg. 54, 1347 A.H. Edition

[^12]: Kitab-e-Madhkur, Pg. 60

[^13]: Aslush Shia wa Usulaha, Pg. 94

[^14]: Sarair, Ibn Idris

[^15]: Furu al-Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 196, Tahzib, Man Laa Yahzaruhul Faqih

[^16]: Sharh Lumah, Vol. 2

[^17]: Masalikul Afham, Vol. 1

[^18]: Hadaifun Nadhrah, Vol. 7, Pg. 165

[^19]: Tafsir Kabir, Vol. 3, Pg. 195, Egypt

[^20]: Vol. 1, Pg. 421

[^21]: Vol. 3, Pg. 196

[^22]: Tafsir Labaabut Tawil fi Maaniyut Tanzil, Egypt, Vol. 1, Pg. 423

[^23]: Egypt, on the margin of Labaabut Tawil, Vol. 1, Pg. 423

[^24]: Delhi, Vol. 1, Pg. 450

[^25]: Lucknow, Pg. 75

[^26]: Kanpur, Pg. 37

[^27]: Aligarh, Vol. 2, Pg. 316

[^28]: Egypt, Vol. 1, Pg. 401

[^29]: Surah Nisa 4:24

[^30]: Lubabun Nuqool fi Asbaabun Nuzul, Egypt, on the margin of
Tanwirul Miqyas Pg. 77

[^31]: Surah Nisa 4:24

[^32]: Neelul Maraam min Tafsir Ayaatil Ahkam, Pg. 75

[^33]: Surah Baqarah 2:236

[^34]: Pg. 76

[^35]: Ifadatush Shuyookh, Pg. 37

[^36]: Tafsir Mazhari, Pg. 572

[^37]: Tafsir Khazin, Vol. 1, Pg. 423

[^38]: Vol. I

[^39]: Tafsir Malimut Tanzil, on the margins of Tafsir Khazin, Egypt,
Pg. 423

[^40]: Surah Nisa 4:24

[^41]: Tafsir Madhkoor, Pg. 197

[^42]: Tafsir Madhkur, Pg. 197

[^43]: Vol. 5, Pg. 9

[^44]: Vol. 1, Pg. 22

[^45]: Egypt, Vol. 5, Pg. 9

[^46]: Vol. 6, Pg. 48

[^47]: Covering sheets

[^48]: Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 9, Pg. 138

[^49]: Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 9, Pg. 138

[^50]: Isabah fi Marefatus Sahaba, Vol. 2, Pg. 63, Egypt

[^51]: Muwatta Imam Malik Vol. 2, Pg. 30, Egypt

[^52]: Pg. 298

[^53]: Hasten to the best of the deeds

[^54]: Tafsir Kabir, Vol. 3, Pg. 195, Egypt

[^55]: Vol. 3

[^56]: Vol. 1, Pg. 243

[^57]: Sahih Tirmidhi, Pg. 106, Nawal Kishor Press, Zaad Al-Maad,
Allamah Ibn Qayyim, Vol. 1, Pg. 215

[^58]: Vol. 8, Pg. 293

[^59]: Vol. 1, Pg. 219

[^60]: Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 9, Pg. 138

[^61]: Neelul Autaar, Vol. 6, Pg. 44

[^62]: Tafsir Jameul Bayan, by Hafiz Ibn Jurair Tabari Vol. 5, Pg. 9

[^63]: Tafsir Kabir, Vol. 3, Pg. 95 and Tafsir Gharaibul Quran, Allamah
Nishapuri

[^64]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 1, Pg. 45, Delhi

[^65]: Kanzul Ummal, Vol. 7, Pg. 295

[^66]: Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 9, Pg. 138

[^67]: Neelul Autaar, by Allamah Shaukani Vol. 6, Pg. 44

[^68]: Tafsir Kabir, Vol. 3, Pg. 195

[^69]: Surah Mominoon 23:5-6

[^70]: Vol. 1, Pg. 423

[^71]: Zaadul Maad, Vol. 1, Pg. 212

[^72]: Zaadul Maad, Vol. 1, Pg. 213

[^73]: 23:5-6

[^74]: Tafsir Kashaf, Vol. 2, Pg. 287

[^75]: Surah Talaq 65:1

[^76]: The Prophet’s migration to Medina

[^77]: Tafsir Quran, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, Vol. 2, Pg. 216

[^78]: Surah Nisa 4:82

[^79]: Tafsir Lubaabut Tawil, Allamah Khazin Baghdadi Vol. 1, Pg. 423

[^80]: Arabic = Hajjatul Wada'

[^81]: Lapsed Umrah pilgrimage, in the year Treaty of Hudaibiyah was
signed.

[^82]: Sharh Sahih Muslim, Imam Nawawi Vol. 1, Pg. 450, Mujtabai Press,
Delhi

[^83]: Tafsir Mazhari, Qazi Thanaullah Panipati Pg. 72

[^84]: Year of conquest

[^85]: Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 9, Pg. 133, Egypt, 1325
A.H.

[^86]: Surah Nisa 4:82

[^87]: Lubaabun Nuqool fi Asbaabun Nuzul, on the margin of Tanwirul
Qiyas, Pg. 77, Egypt

[^88]: Margin of Sharh Waqaayah, Kitabul Hudood Pg. 212

[^89]: Surah Nisa 4:69


