Imam Abu Hanifah, Wrapping of silk and other issues
===================================================

(Published in ‘Al-Jawwad’, February 1958 A.D.)

After that, the Rizwan editor writes out of the wonders of shamefulness
as follows: “Not only this, the Shia faith is so dirty that it is
permissible to have sexual relations even with women in the prohibited
degree (Mahram) provided one has wrapped his private part with silk.
Zainul Abideen Haeri Mazandarani, a Shia scholar, writes in *Zakhiratul
Ma’ad* (page 95) that: ‘Intercourse (with mother and sisters) is
permissible after wrapping silk.’”

The editor of Rizwan has written about Shaykh Zainul Abideen Mazandarani
in a very disrespectful way. Thus, after this he and all the scholars of
his religion do not have any right to be addressed respectfully.
However, I would like to follow the way of Ahlul Bayt (as) and remain
within the limits of civility.

The reality shall be exposed when you read the question and answer of
*Zakhiratul Maad* in entirety:

“Question: If a person wraps a silk handkerchief or something like it
over his sexual organ so that during intercourse or otherwise it does
not come in contact with the woman’s body, is ritual bath (Ghusl)
obligatory on him?

Answer: The obligation of ritual bath is not bereft of strength. And it
is narrated from Abu Hanifah that it is permissible to penetrate the
mahrams (mothers, sister, daughter etc.) after wrapping silk.”

This question and answer prove that the questioner has tried to obtain a
verdict of his Shia religion about that issue of Ahlul Sunnat. Shaykh
Mazandarani says that the ritual bath would be obligatory in any case.
However, it is the ideology of Abu Hanifah that leave aside the
obligation of ritual bath, it is even permitted to fulfill one’s lust in
this way through women in the prohibited degree.

Hence, this is the verdict of the Hanafis and has no connection with the
Shias. The editor of Rizwan omitted the words ‘it is narrated from Abu
Hanifah’ and tried to grant the Shias that we fulfill our lust through
mahrams after wrapping silk. He has repeated this in the journal of the
Safar month also that ‘these wordings are present on Pg. 95 of
*Zakhiratul Maad* and one who proves it wrong would be rewarded a
thousand rupees.’

I do not want to argue much in this matter but I want to show that if
narrations are presented in this way after omitting some words and any
religion is criticized with it the Rizwan editor will not get protection
in the corner of the grave also. Here are some examples:

A) Today any Christian can say, “It is present in the fourteenth
ruku[^1] of the sixth part of Quran that: ‘surely God is third among the
three’. This proves that the belief of Trinity is sanctioned by Quran.
One who proves this reference wrong would be rewarded a hundred thousand
rupees.”

B) Then, another Christian can say, “Isa was the son of God, and it is
quoted in the eleventh ruku of the tenth part of the Quran that ‘Isa is
the son of God’.”

C) Not only this but he himself is God as mentioned in the seventh and
fourteenth ruku of sixth part that ‘surely God is Messiah bin Maryam’.
One who proves these references wrong would be rewarded a hundred
thousand rupees.

Under such circumstances, the Rizwan editor would become a Christian due
to his own rule.

D) At that time, a Jew could say, “Why did you become a Christian? Our
religion is even more ancient and true, and supported by Quran, as
‘Uzair is the son of God’. This is also present in the tenth part’s
eleventh ruku.

E) Not only this, according to our belief, the Quran considers God as
helpless. It is mentioned in the thirteenth ruku of the same part that
‘the hands of God are tied’. One who disproves these references shall be
rewarded ten million rupees.”

At that time, the Rizwan editor would prefer to become a Jew.

F) But the problem is that the idol-worshippers would not allow him to
be at peace and say, “The command is present in Surah Nuh of Quran that,
‘By no means leave your Gods, nor leave Wadd nor Suwa nor Yaghus and
Yauq and Nasr.’ One who proves this reference wrong would be awarded a
billion rupees.” Then, the poor editor of Rizwan, Maulana Syed Mahmud
Ahmad Rizvi, would start prostrating before the idols.

G) Alls well till here, but he would also have to become a Shia with
which he has deep hatred. I challenge that the leader of Sunnis, Shah
Abdul Aziz Dehlavi has written all those defects, which were found in
the three caliphs, A’ysha and Muawiyah in his book *Tohfa Ithna
Ashariya*. All those facts are present even today in the same book. If a
person proves this reference wrong he would be awarded ten billion
rupees.

H) Well, *Tohfa Ithna Ashariya* is the work of someone else. I present
the sentences penned by the Rizwan editor himself. The editor of Rizwan
has written them in the issue of December 1954 from Pg. 6 to 10. They
are not the sentences of anyone else. The Rizwan editor has himself
written them as headings in bold letters:

    (1) The Righteous Caliphate and Yazid in the same pan

    (2) Companions of the Prophet sacrificed Islam

    (3) Abu Bakr was not farsighted

    (4) Umar accepted insult to religion

    (5) Talha and Zubair were liars

    (6) A’ysha was a revolter

    (7) A’ysha, Siddiq and Uthman were wealth- hoarders

    (8) All companions and followers of companions liked luxury and
power

    (9) Amir Muawiyah, Iblis and Ahriman (Zoroastrian God of Darkness)

    (10) The Prophet’s daughters married infidels

    (11) The father-in-law of the Messenger of Allah (S) was an infidel

The Rizwan editor has himself written all these statements. If someone
proves this reference wrong he would be rewarded a hundred billion
rupees. When the Rizwan editor has already accepted all these issues
what stops him from being a Shia? It is better to either prove these
references wrong and win the prize or become a Shia and improve his
hereafter.

When the distrust of the Rizwan editor was unveiled in ‘Razakar’ that he
has removed the words: ‘It is narrated from Abu Hanifah’ and committed
great dishonesty, he became so blatant that he tried to prove that the
Mujtahid Mazandarani had quoted Abu Hanifah to ridicule him.

However, it was neither an occasion of ridicule nor any word of the
writing proves that it is a taunt. Mujtahid has written these statements
as proof. It is obvious that to quote someone in reply and not rejecting
it, proves that the one whose saying is quoted by Mujtahid, he is his
religious leader and guide.

This proves that Abu Hanifah must also be an Imam of Shias. Now if the
editor of *Razakar* says that there is no Abu Hanifah among Shias he
should ask this only from Mujtahid. If not, he should visit his grave
and do ‘Chilla’ (forty day seclusion for mystic communism) and say,
“Sir, you died after writing this and left us in trouble. What have you
written?” Some reply might come from his grave.[^2]

Maybe the Rizwan editor would purposely fail to recognize this Abu
Hanifah. But he cannot succeed in befooling the people.

Come, Mr. Rizwan Editor, let me tell you who this Abu Hanifah is. He is
your Imam and a leader of the Hanafis. Among the four Sunni schools of
Islamic law, Numan bin Thabit Kufi is the head of the Hanafi school. He
is also called ‘Abu Hanifah (r.a.)’. Hammad was his teacher and his
students include Imam Abu Yusuf and Imam Muhammad bin Hasan. Both his
students are credited with propagating his religion. His biography
titled *Seeratun Numaan* is written and published by Allamah Shibli.

Do you recognize him now?

What can now be the reply for the blatant allegation that Abu Hanifah is
called our Imam? Whereas our twelve Imams are those before whom the
world bows. Venerating whose shrines is a cause of honor for the rulers
of the time.

Also note another misinterpretation, that after stating the obligation
of the ritual bath, Mazandarani quotes the saying of Abu Hanifah that
‘Intercourse with Mahrams after wrapping silk’, you construe it to be an
approval and proof of obligation of ritual bath. It is the height of
misunderstanding.

Actually, the Rizwan editor is infuriated that Mazandarani relied on
writings of others and increased the condition of ‘wrapping silk’ in the
verdict of Imam Abu Hanifah. While the verdict given by their Imam did
not have even that much restriction that one should wrap silk. There was
complete freedom that any Hanafi could perform Nikah with his mother,
sister, daughter, paternal aunt, maternal aunt, niece, mother-in-law,
daughter-in-law and all Mahrams and fulfill his lust through them and
increase his progeny. It is written in the famous book of Hanafite
teachings, *Hidayah:*[^3]

“If a person marries a woman with whom Nikah is prohibited and then,
even if he goes to bed with her, according to Abu Hanifah the legal
penalty would not be applicable on him.”[^4]

And the ‘Great Imam’ has proved it as follows:

“And, according to Abu Hanifah, this marriage is correct according to
the circumstance because it is capable of fulfilling the need. Women are
daughters of Adam and capable of bearing children and this is the aim of
marriage.”[^5]

Fakhruddin Razi, a famous Sunni Imam, has described this verdict of Imam
Abu Hanifah in his renowned *Tafsir Kabir*[^6] in the exegesis of the
verse:

***“Forbidden to you are your mothers…”***[^7]

“The third point mentioned by Shafei (r.a.) is that if a man marries his
mother and even commits incest, the penalty is applicable to him while
Abu Hanifah (r.a.) has said that the penalty is not applicable.”

Obviously, if an Imam gives such freedom and a scholar of another
religion interprets it in an incomplete way and restricts them to the
use of a silk handkerchief, the Hanafi scholars and especially the
Rizwan editor would be annoyed. However, Mazandarani has not used the
words ‘wrapping silk’ without any reason because Imam Abu Hanifah did
not want to trouble his followers by making it incumbent on them to all
the time perform Nikah with mother, sisters etc. hence, he has
prescribed this method for them. A verdict is present in *Bahrur Raqaiq
Sharh Kanzud Daqaiq* (Book of Marriage) that fulfilling lust by Mahrams
after wrapping silk etc. is permissible. If it is done with mahram women
after a cloth is wrapped on one’s organ, its prohibition is not proved.

Similar advice is given to those who do not want to care about Islamic
law during fasting days that they should wrap silk and fulfill their
desires so that they remain safe of the obligation of atonement
(Kaffarah) etc.

Not only this, but even the ritual bath would not become obligatory.
This narration is present in *Jameur Rumooz.*

Hence, Aqa Mazandarani has replied that the ritual bath would be
obligatory among we Shias in such a state also. However, according to
Abu Hanifah, a great Imam of Ahlul Sunnat, if one copulates after
wrapping silk, the ritual bath would not be obligatory on him. Not only
this, but according to him, even mahrams can become objects of lust
after wrapping silk.

This is the true sense of Aqa Mazandarani. God knows what the Rizwan
editor understood from it due to his good sense or evil intention?

Now, the Rizwan editor would have recognized Abu Hanifah as to what the
temperament of his great leader was and the secret of the popularity of
Hanafi faith is also understood. Such liberal laws attract everyone. God
be praised! If you want to see more wonders of your Imam, read the
following statements of Imam Ghazzali. You will come across some more
interesting laws:

“Abu Hanifah has almost destroyed the Islamic law. He made its ways
dubious and changed its system…The disorder in details of Prayer in his
religion is not a hidden issue. The discussion would become lengthy if I
delve deeper. The fruit of his foolishness is obvious even in the
shortest Prayer. Even if he presents his shortest prayer to a foolish
ignorant, he would also flatly refuse to follow him (such is the picture
of that Prayer).

If a person dives into a pond of wine, wears a tanned skin of dog, says
‘Takbiratul Ihraam’ (Allaho Akbar) in Hindi or Turkish languages without
performing ‘intention’, and instead of reciting Quranic chapters recites
the translation of ‘Madhaa Mataan’, (Two green leaflets), pecks two
prostrations without bowing so fast that he does not even perform
‘Quood’ (short sitting in prayers) in between, and at the end he
intentionally releases flatulence without reciting Tashahud, it would be
considered a salutation and (then the prayer is complete).

If one passes gas in the middle of prayer he should perform ablution (at
that time) and after the prayer, he should pass it deliberately, since
he did not intend to complete the prayer in his former effort. (Here)
every sensible person should be certain that Allah did not appoint any
Prophet with such prayer and the Messenger of Allah (S) himself never
invited towards such a prayer. Moreover, prayer is a pillar of Islam.
Nevertheless, Abu Hanifah considered the above-mentioned prayer as the
shortest obligatory prayer. He believes that messengers were sent only
with such a prayer and all other acts in prayer are for etiquette and
are recommended. As far as fasting is concerned, he has uprooted its
pillars and left it half-dead, because he made it compulsory to give
precedence to intention of fasting.

For Zakat he issued a verdict that it is permissible to delay its
payment even if it is badly needed and the eyes of beggars remain open
waiting for it. He also gave a verdict that if a person dies before
paying Zakat, its obligation would be taken away from him. Did not Abu
Hanifah destroy the Islamic law in this way?

For Hajj, he gave an exactly opposite order. That it is obligatory to
perform the Hajj immediately. However, needs of other Muslims are not
related with Hajj (as in Zakat).

These were some of his wonders in worship acts. Now, as for penalties,
he annulled their purpose also and ruined all the basics and commands.
The purpose of Islamic law is protection of life, dignity and wealth.
Abu Hanifah demolished the rule of capital punishment in cases when a
killer kills with a stone. He made strangling of neck, drowning in water
and killing through various heavy things a way to avoid capital
punishment. He moved so ahead that he rejected sense and extemporization
and said that killing with such objects cannot be called murder and it
is doubtful. Which sensible person can believe in such emulation? Except
when there is an effect of excessive stupidity.

As far as copulation is concerned, Imam Abu Hanifah has established ways
through which penalties are annulled. For example, paid sex and
establishing sexual relations with mothers after performing Nikah with
them. He believed that all these acts invalidate penalties. A person who
wants to commit an evil act with a believing woman, what difficulty
would he have in hiring her? Can anyone justify this?” Then he said that
if four just witnesses testify against him for fornication and he
himself confesses once, the penalty shall be cancelled.

He gave a verdict about wealth and property that making minor changes in
a usurped thing deprives the owner of its ownership. For instance,
making flour out of usurped wheat…At last, he made such a rule, which
almost demolished the Shariah of Muhammad (S). When false testimonies
are presented about the Nikah of a wife with someone else and if the
judge wrongly gives decision in its favor the woman becomes lawful for
him even though this second man is fully aware of the truth and the
woman would in future be prohibited on her former husband.”

After this the cup of Imam Ghazzali’s patience began to overflow and he
says:

“And if the hearts would not have united over the emulation (Taqleed) of
such foolishness even one whose feelings were a little perfect would not
have followed one who explains the Islamic law like this. Thus the
former Imams denounced Abu Hanifah with great severity. The scholars
have accused him of destroying their Islamic law. Even Qazi Abu Bakr
said after seeing the law of retaliation of Abu Hanifah that it is
insane to assume that the killer did not intend to murder with those
heavy objects. On the other hand, if he has a contrary belief and issues
this order he has made a good plan to destroy religion.”[^8]

If some more details of the ‘great Imam’ are needed refer to the
following writings in the fourth part of this same book *Kitab
Mankhool:*

“Abu Hanifah was not a jurist (Mujtahid) because he was unaware of the
(rules of) language. His saying, “Lau Ramaahu bi Abu Qubais” ‘If he
shoots an arrow towards Mt. Abu Qubais’ proves his ignorance (in spite
of the presence of the article ‘bi’ he says ‘Abu’ instead of ‘Abi’).
That is, it should be, ‘If he shoots an arrow towards Mt. Abi Qubais’.
Also, he was unaware of traditions. Hence, he was attracted towards weak
traditions and rejected the correct ones. He was not even a ‘Faqih’
(expert jurisprudent) and used to resort to conjecture for no reason at
all even though it was often contrary to reality.”

The same Qazi Abu Bakr whose saying is quoted by Imam Ghazzali says
regarding Abu Hanifah after much argumentation that:

“There is no need to worry while opposing Abu Hanifah because I am sure
he has committed mistakes in ninety percent of his verdicts in which he
differs with the other Imams and in the remaining ten percent he is an
equal partner in this. It is even possible that his opponents may have
precedence in this also.”

The editor of Rizwan would have known as to who that Abu Hanifah is, who
permits fulfillment of lust even from mahrams. He might have also learnt
of his other feats. How much favor he has bestowed on the Messenger of
Allah (S) that he did not let anything from prayer to penalties of
murder un-tempered. According to the saying of Imam Ghazzali, ‘he
devastated it completely’.

If leaders are such what the followers would be? Praise be to Allah.

Followers all over the world try to emulate their leaders. If the Rizwan
editor too tries to emulate Imam Abu Hanifah what can one say? He would
get a license to all types of lustful deeds, in spite of the claim of
Islam.

In 1957 A.D., some Pakistanis performed prayers of Eid al-Azha in Urdu.
There was a great hue and cry on this from Pakistan to India, that it
was an innovation, an insult to Islam and disgrace of Divine commands
etc. etc.

God knows what all they said. While those followers had just stepped on
the way shown by this great Imam. Had they moved a little forward, God
knows what these spectators would have done. However, I am surprised
over only one thing that the followers had to bear these atrocities, but
the holy personality who opened the door to this innovation and dishonor
of Divine religion is called the ‘Great Imam (r.a.)’.

[^1]: Subdivision of (Juz/para) parts of Quran

[^2]: Rizwan, Lahore Pg. 12 14/7, December 1954

[^3]: Published at Matba Shaykh Yahya, Pg. 381

[^4]: Hidaya, Pg. 381

[^5]: Hidaya, Pg. 381

[^6]: Vol. 3, Jamaliya, Egypt, First edition Pg. 182

[^7]: Surah Nisa 4:23

[^8]: Kitab Mankhool, Imam Ghazzali with reference to Istiqsaaul Afham,
Vol. 2, Pg. 199-201


