Glossary of Islamic Terms
=========================

**a.s.** :An abbreviation of ‘alaihis salaam’, that is “Peace be on
him”.

**a.t.f.s.** :An abbreviation of ‘ajjil allaahu ta’ala farajahu
shareef’, that is “May Allah hasten his reappearance”.

**Aale Muhammad** :Progeny of Muhammad

**Aamal** : Rituals

**Ahlul Sunnat wal Jamat** : Majority Muslims who believe Abu Bakr to be
the first caliph

**Ahlul Bayt** :People of the house. They are The Holy Prophet (S),
Janabe Fatima Zahra (s.a.), Ali (as) and his eleven successors.

**Allamahs** :Plural of Allamah, a learned scholar

**Amirul** **Momineen** :Leader of the believers. Title of Imam Ali bin
Abi Talib (as)

**Amr-e-Takveeni** :Things beyond the control of man. Natural factors
etc.

**Amr-e-Tashri** :Things under the control of man. Voluntary deeds etc.

**Arsh** :Throne or heavens

**Ashura** :10th of Muharram, day of the martyrdom of Imam Husain (as)
and the tragedy of Kerbala

**Asr** :Afternoon (prayer)

**Ayat** :Verse of the Holy Quran

**Azan** :Call for prayer

**Bada** :Change in divine will

**Baseer** :All-seeing

**Bismillah** :In the Name of Allah

**Dirham** :Unit of currency

**Dua** :Invocation

**Fajr** :Morning

**Faqih** :Jurisprudent

**Firon** :Pharaoh

**Ghusl** :Ritual bath

**Hadith-e-Nabawi** :A statement of the Holy Prophet (S) or a Masoom
(as)

**Hadith-e-Qudsi** :A saying of Allah apart from the verses of Quran

**Hafiz** :One who knows the Quran by heart

**Hajj** :Annual pilgrimage to Mecca during the month of Zilqad

**Halaal** :Permissible, legal

**Haraam** :Prohibited, illegal

**Hasanah** :Unit of heavenly rewards

**Hijrat/Hijrah** :Flight of the Holy Prophet (S) from Mecca to Medina.
Beginning of the Islamic calendar

**Hourul Eein** :Black eyed Houries of Paradise

**Hujjat** :Proof

**Iblis** :Satan

**Iddah** :Waiting period for women before they could remarry

**Ijma** :Consensus

**Insha-Allah** :If Allah wills

**Iqamah** :Shorter call for Prayer

**Isha** :Late evening

**Janabat** :A state of ritual impurity that can be removed by
performing Ghusl (Bath)

**Juz** :Arabic word for part. 30th part of Quran

**Ka’ba** :The Holy House of Allah, the directions that Muslims face
during prayers.

**Kaffarah** :Fine, penalty

**Khariji** :A group which arose against Ali bin Abi Talib (as) after
the battle of Siffeen. A heretic sect

**Khilqat** :Creation

**Liaan**: : Sworn allegation of adultery committed by either husband or
wife

**Maghrebain** :The two prayers of Maghrib (early evening) and Isha
(late evening)

**Maghrib** :Evening prayer, time of sunset

**Mahram(pl.** **Mahrams)** :Relatives between whom marriage is
prohibited

**Makrooh** :Detestable, in the Islamic terminology it denotes an action
performing which does not incur sin but refraining from which earns
divine rewards

**Makruh** :variant spelling of above term

**Maliki** :Followers of the Sunnite Imam Malik

**Maraja’ Taqleed** :The Mujtahid whom people follow in matters of
practical law

**Masjidul** **Haram** :The sacred mosque in Mecca

**Masoomeen** :(Singular- Masoom): Infallible

**Mehr** :Dower

**Mithqal** :A measure of weight of about 4.6 gms.

**Momin** :Believer

**Mubah** :Permitted. It denotes an action performing of which earns no
rewards and refraining from it is not punishable

**Mullahs** :Muslim scholars/leaders

**Mureed** : The Restorer

**Mus’haf** :Scroll

**Mustahab** :Recommended. It is an action performing which earns
rewards and refraining from it is not punishable

**Mutawatir** :A tradition related through so many narrators that it is
considered absolutely authentic

**Najis** :Unclean

**Nawafil** :Recommended prayers

**Para** :30th part of Quran

**q.s.** :An abbreviation of ‘Quddasa Sirruhu’, which literally means:
“May his resting place remain pure.”

**Qaem** :One would rise. A title of Imam Mahdi (as)

**Qibla** :Prayer direction

**Qunut** :Supplication recited in ritual prayers, usually in the second
unit (rakat)

**Quraish** :the tribe of the Messenger of Allah (S)

**Rajm** :Stoning, punishment for adultery

**Rakat** :A unit of ritual prayer

**Ruku** :Bowing down or genuflection in the ritual prayers

**s.a.** :An abbreviation of ‘sallallaahu alaihi wa sallam’, that is
“Blessings be on him and peace”.

**s.a.w.s.** :An abbreviation of ‘sallallaahu alaihi wa aalihi wa
sallam’, that is “Blessings be on him and his Progeny and peace”.

**Sadaqah** :Voluntary charity, alm

**Safar** :Second month of the Islamic calendar

**Salaam** :Salute, Islamic greeting

**Salaat** :Ritual prayers

**Salawat** :Allaahumma S’alle a’laa Muha’ammadinw wa aali Muh’ammad

**Samee** :All-hearing

**Saqifah** :The place where Abu Bakr took caliphate

**Sayyid** :Lit. chief. A term for descendants of Lady Fatima through
Imam Husain (as)

**Sayyidush** **Shohada** :Chief of the Martyrs, a title of Imam Husain
(as)

**Shabaan** :The eighth month of the Muslim (Lunar) calendar

**Shab-e-Qadr** :The Night of Power or 19th, 21st and 23rd nights of the
month of Ramadan

**Shahadatain** :the two testimonies of Islamic faith.

**Shariat/ Shariah** :Islamic law

**Shaykh** :Lit. elder. A genealogical division among Muslims

**Sheb-e-Abi Talib** :Valley in Mecca where the Messenger of Allah (S)
and the early Muslims took refuge for some time

**Shura** :Consultation committee formed by Umar for selecting Uthman as
the next caliph

**Siraat** :Path

**Sujud** :Plural of Sajdah, prostration

**Sunnah** :Practice (esp. of the Messenger of Allah)

**Surahs** :Chapter of Quran

**t.s.** :Abbreviation of Taaba Saraa. See the meaning of ‘q.s.’

**Tabi’in** :Followers of the companions of the Prophet

**Takbir** :Allaho Akbar, God is the Greatest

**Takbiratul** **Ihram** :Saying Allaho Akbar at the beginning of the
ritual prayer

**Taqiyyah** :Dissimulation

**Taqleed** :Emulation of a scholar in Islamic practical law

**Taqwa** :Piety

**Tasbeehaat** :Plural of Tasbih, glorification of Allah (esp. in bowing
and prostrations in the ritual prayers)

**Tasbih** :Rosary

**Tashahud** :Recitation in the sitting position in the second and the
last unit of the ritual prayer

**Tawfeeq (pl.** **Tawfeeqaat)** :Divine inspiration

**Tawheed** :Belief in the absolute Oneness of Allah

**Tayammum** :Substitute of ablution/ritual bath when use of water is
not possible or advisable

**Taziyah** :A replica of the tomb of Imam Husain (as)

**Thawaab** :Divine rewards

**Thawr, cave of** :The cave where the Messenger of Allah (S) hid on way
to Medina

**Torah** :The Old Testament

**Two Shaykhs** :Abu Bakr and Umar

**Umrah** :Optional pilgrimage to Mecca

**Umratul** **Qaza** :Lapsed Umrah

**Wajib** :Obligatory

**Wilayat** :Guardianship, belief in the guardianship of Ahlul Bayt (as)
and love towards them

**Wudhu** :Ritual ablution

**Zakat** :Obligatory Islamic wealth tax

**Ziarat** :Visitation/ or recitation of salutation while facing the
tomb of religious personalities

**Zihar** : Pre-Islamic form of divorce, consisting in the words of
repudiation: You are to me like my mother’s back. (anti a’layyah
ka-zahri ummi).

**Zinnoorain** :Master of two lights. Uthman, the third caliph

**Zuhoor** :Reappearance (of Imam Mahdi [a.t.f.s.]).

**Zuhr** : Noon prayers

**Zuhrain** :The two ritual prayers of Zuhr (noon) and Asr (afternoon)


