Translator’s Foreword
=====================

Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and benedictions upon the
Messenger of Allah and his Purified Progeny (as). By the Grace of the
Almighty, the English translation of *Itmaam-i-Hujjat* is completed on
the 18th of Zilhajj (Eid-e-Ghadeer), 1426 A.H.

What could be a better occasion to refute the allegations of the enemies
of the followers of Ahlul Bayt (as)!

The author, late Allamah Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi (q.s.) was one of the
most competent researchers in the field of religion and polemics. In
this book he has applied his dexterity to reply to the baseless but
horrifying objections against the Shia religion.

This book covers almost all the major objections that scholars of Ahlul
Sunnat and other opponents of Shias aim against Shia beliefs and
customs.

Allamah Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi (q.s.) has refuted them in his typical
style and quoted extensively from their own books to support his
arguments.

I had to exercise great care in translating this book, as the Urdu
language is well known for idiomatic subtleties and ironic style. This
sometimes makes it almost impossible to render perfectly all the
meanings in a different language, but I have tried my best not to stray
way from the actual meaning and at the same time to make the book
readable to the English reader.

Readers would have to get used to read the words “Rizwan Editor” again
and again as the book is addressed to him and in reply to his
objections.

Since the English equivalents of Islamic terminology do not convey the
exact meaning, I have sometimes used the original Arabic terms with the
English meaning in parentheses. However those who are not conversant
with Arabic words may refer to the “Glossary of Islamic Terms” at the
end of the book.

Lastly I thank my son, Sayed Maqsood for assisting in the translation of
this book and typing of the manuscript. May the Almighty Allah reward
him and make his love for languages to serve the cause of the True
Religion.

*Wassalaam*

*Sayyid Athar Husain S.H.Rizvi*  
 Al-Qalam Translators & Writers Bureau, Vasai, (India)  
 January 19, 2006 - 18th Zilhajj 1426 (Eid-e-Ghadeer)  
*Email:* ***<sayedathar@hotmail.com>***


