Preface
=======

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

In a time when the whole world is hell bent on hindering the spreading
light of Islam and is trying different types of schemes to suppress this
voice and every possible scheme is being carried out. Especially hectic
efforts are made to create doubts among the Muslims regarding their
faith and dissent is being sowed among them to foster disunity so that
they remain involved in such controversies and get no opportunity to
propagate Islam. It is the same method that was resorted to during the
apparent caliphate of Ali (as) and so many external issues were raised
that there was no limit to it. When all those plans failed, Imam Ali
(as) was martyred.

Today, the world is moving fast in the direction of Islam like those
dying of thirst rush towards water. At such time it is necessary to rise
above internal differences and present the true picture of Islam before
others and demonstrate such unity and accord like the Holy Quran, the
traditions of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the Holy Imams advise.

Everyone knows that imperialist and Zionist powers never want to see the
Muslims unite. If they had even a little soft corner for the Muslims,
they would not have allowed the enemies of Muslims to bomb the Muslims
anywhere they like.

There had never been greater need for unity among the Muslims. It is an
established fact that when Islam is attacked, the attacker does not
discriminate between different sects, rather he attacks all the Muslims.
In such circumstances, when Islam is being attacked from all directions,
sometimes the Islamic laws are made butts of ridicule, at other times
its principles are mocked at, it is also sometimes publicized that it is
an insufficient system, it is labeled to be materialistic and also
called as the legacy of the period of ignorance.

Under such circumstances, the need of the hour is to unite together
according to the command of the Holy Quran and secure the well being of
the society by countering the enemies with irrefutable proofs. Today the
enemies of Islam are not inimical to a particular personality or a
particular sect. They are enemies of Islam and they intend to eradicate
Islam. At present whatever distinction we have is due to Islam alone.
Whatever dignity and position we have among the people is only for the
sake of Islam. People accord respect to us solely for the fact that we
teach them about Allah and the Prophet. This status has made us
honorable in the eyes of people. Therefore if we do anything that
renders Islam blameworthy and emboldens the enemies, we can be sure that
every kind of such action and behavior is detrimental to ourselves.

After the Islamic revolution of Iran an atmosphere of unity and
integration has been created among the Muslims and the two great sects
of Islam have begun to come near each other. The atmosphere of distrust,
that the imperialist powers had created, is considerably reduced. The
commands of Quran are:

***And hold fast by the covenant of Allah all together and be not
disunited…***[^1]

***And be not like those who became divided and disagreed…***[^2]

The verse between the above two verses is as follows:

***And from among you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is that shall be
successful.***[^3]

There is command of unity and agreement before this verse, and after it,
prohibition of controversies and disunity; and consensus. That is in the
Holy Quran the style of propagation is consensual and harmonious and not
based on disunity and dissension.

It is a fact that what the Zionists and the imperialists fear most is
the unity of Muslims, and they should really fear it. However, those who
claim to be the sons of Quran and the sons of Monotheism should be
pleased with the unity of Muslims.

But it is a tragedy that even the world-renowned and award-winning
Mullahs are not happy with this atmosphere of unity. They do not, at
all, like this unity, no one knows why. While they should be more
pleased with this atmosphere on whose lips the verses of Quran remain
all the time. If those who have received this style in legacy had raised
their voices against this unity, it would not have been surprising.

But today even those who used to assume silence in controversial matters
are screaming at the top of their voices. Is it because they are
connected to the imperialist and Zionist powers? Is it because they had
been favored by the enemies of Islam and now they want their pound of
flesh? It seems to be so. That the words in their mouths are not theirs
and the ink in their pens is not theirs. It is the voice of imperialism
in their mouths and the ink of imperialism in their pens. It is a matter
of great pity that these people, even in their last moments, instead of
repenting and seeking forgiveness are fulfilling the wishes of
imperialism and remain puppets in the hands of Zionists.

Objections against the Shias are nothing new. In every age there were
people who by raising objections had consoled their egos. But at a time
when people are coming near to each other and arranging rows against the
enemies of Islam, it is not a good thing and a rewarding deed to do
anything that creates dissension in the ranks.

The objections showered on Shia beliefs do not contain anything new. The
age-old objections are again recycled and repeated. These objections
have been replied in all the ages. Justice requires that after making
allegations one should also read the replies. And if there is any
deficiency or weakness in the reply, it should be highlighted. But it
seems that the objection makers, after making objections close their
eyes and no more sight remains in their eyes to read the replies. When
again their eyes open up they again pick up the pen and start writing.
And when they become tired they close their eyes to sleep and when again
they wake up they start writing in a state of stupor.

Approximately thirty years ago, Maulana Sayyid Mahmood Ahmad Rizvi had
mentioned such objections under the article, “The thorn and the flower”
in “The chief of the Martyrs” (Sayyidush Shohada, Imam Husain) special
issue of the periodical, ‘Rizwan’ (Lahore). He wrote whatever came to
his mind. When the readers see those objections they will find them to
be stock objections and age-old allegations.

We would not have replied to these objections if it had not been further
alleged that the Shias are unable to reply them.

The replies are presented here by way of “Completion of Argument”. We
hope that the justice-liking people would rise above bigotry and read
the objections and their replies and then form a correct opinion.

May Allah bestow us with the best of Tawfeeqs and may He always keep our
hearts illuminated with the love of His best and selected servants.

*Amen.*

*And there is no divine opportunity except from Allah and upon Him I
rely and in Him I trust.*

*Executive Committee*

*Idarah Nurul Islam, Faizabad*

*Muharram al-Haraam 1406 AH*

[^1]: Surah Aale Imran 3:103

[^2]: Surah Aale Imran 3:105

[^3]: Surah Aale Imran 3:104


