Mus’haf of Fatima
=================

**Mus’haf of Fatima**[^1]

The famous religious book of Shias, *Usul al-Kafi* has the following
tradition on page 146:

Imam (as) said, “We have Mus’haf-e-Fatima. And do you know what
Mus’haf-e-Fatima is?” He said, “It is a Quran, and By Allah! It does not
have even a single letter in common with your Quran.”

Now, this is a third Quran. First a forged one, then a real one, which
is with the Hidden Imam and a Mus’haf-e-Fatima also. But we don’t know
in which cave it is and who is hiding with Mus’haf-e-Fatima.

The greatest calamity for a man is to be involved with a fool. In all of
the above statements the ignorance of Rizwan about Arabic grammar has
become clear. Hence it is necessary to explain some points here.

1) The Rizwan editor has translated the unit of measurement of the
length of Quran as ‘yard’. O respected scholar! My sincere advice to you
is to get your translations checked by an elementary student of Arabic
Grammar before publishing them. The Arabic word ‘Dharaa-a’ does not
imply ‘yard’ but it means ‘a hand-span’.

2) You have messed the translation of what should be: ‘Mus’haf-e-Fatima
is three times your Quran and by Allah, it does not have a single letter
of your Quran.’ While you simply state: ‘It is a Quran, and by Allah! It
does not have even a single letter in common with your Quran.’

3) Also Rizwan says: ‘and do YOU know what is Mus’haf-e-Fatima?’ While
pronoun is ‘they’ and the translation should be: ‘and do THEY know what
is Mus’haf-e-Fatima?’ That is the Imam (as) wanted to say: ‘What could
the people who have left Ahlul Bayt (as) out of the love of others know
what Mus’haf-e-Fatima is!’ Thus Ahlul Sunnat scholars like the Rizwan
editor are also unaware of it.

At first, I was surprised how the Rizwan editor, Maulana Syed Mahmud
Ahmad Rizvi could make such silly mistakes. But after a thorough study
of Rizwan I surmise that the writer is perhaps a follower of Abu
Hanifah. My surprise disappeared after this guess because the Imam of
the Rizwan editor was also unaware of the rules of Arabic language and
science of traditions. Imam Ghazzali writes in *Mankhool:*

“As for Abu Hanifah, he was not even a jurist because he was ignorant of
language (i.e. Arabic). It was due to this ignorance that he said, “Lau
ramaahu bi Abu Qubais” (while even a student will say, “Bi Abil
Qubais”). Also, he had no knowledge about the recognition of traditions.
Hence he used to accept weak traditions and reject the correct ones. He
was not a jurist and used to say anything anywhere from his mind, which
used to be completely opposed to reality.”[^2]

By the grace of the Almighty, all these qualities of his leader are also
manifested in the Rizwan editor.

Actually Mus’haf-e-Fatima is a book of Lady Sayyida Fatima (s.a.), which
contains divine secrets and divine recognition. It is one of the trusts
of God, which is three times the Quran. It is clear from the saying of
Imam (as) that not a single letter of it is common with the Quran that
it is neither a Quran not its commentary. It is a storehouse of the
knowledge of unseen and signs of prophethood, which is beyond the reach
of the people other than an Imam, and it remains only with the Imam.

Similarly, ‘Jame’ (and Ja'fr) are the two books of Amirul Momineen (as)
containing all the events that shall occur till the Day of Judgment
written under a heading, which only an Imam can understand. The only
thing Imam (as) said about it was that its length was seventy hands
(which the Rizwan editor mentions as seventy yards). However since the
Rizwan editor would not be satisfied with my justifications I quote
Muhaqqiq Syed Sharif, a renowned Sunni scholar. He has written a gloss
on *Muwaaafiq* (which is a book of belief and theology of Ahlul Sunnat.)
Muhaqqiq Sharif writes in this gloss as follows:

“These two (Ja'fr and Jame) are books of Imam Ali (as). He has compiled
in them all the events that shall happen till the Day of Judgment
through his knowledge of letters. All the Imams of his progeny know
these books very well and used to issue commands according to them. Imam
Ali bin Musa Al-Reza (as) wrote in a document after accepting the
heir-apparency of Mamun: ‘You recognized those of our rights, which your
ancestors failed to do. I accept your pledge but Ja'fr and Jame show
that this pledge shall never be fulfilled.’”

The poor editor of Rizwan is found to be absolutely ignorant of the
books of the household of Ahlul Bayt (as). Hence whenever he heard a
name of a book from an Imam he mistook it for Quran. It is good that he
has not heard of books like *Sahifa Alawiya* and *Sahifa Sajjadiya*,
otherwise he would have considered them also Qurans and instead of
three, he would have accused the Shias of believing in five Qurans.

I recall a humorous incident about this sort of wisdom. Swami Dayanand,
the founder of Arya Samaj has raised some objections on Quran and Islam
in the fourteenth chapter of his book *Satyarth Prakash.* He objects
against the challenge of Quran that:

***“And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses besides
Allah if you are truthful.”***[^3]

The Swami says: Well! Is it impossible to produce a chapter like unto
it? Did not Maulavi Faizi in the time of King Akbar compile a Qoran
without making use of any dotted letters in it?”[^4]

Now what can be said about the double research of Rizwan editor who has
concluded that the ‘Jame’, ‘Jafr’ and ‘Mus’haf-e-Fatima’ are three
different Qurans?

[^1]: Scroll of Fatima

[^2]: Mankhool, source: Istiqsaaul Afham

[^3]: Surah Baqarah 2:21

[^4]: Actually Faizi had written a commentary of Quran with the
condition that it shall not have any dotted letters. Swami Dayanand
Saraswati has mistaken it for another Quran.


