Meaning of Bada
===============

(First published in Al-Jawwad, May-June 1955)

The editor of Rizwan has written the next objection after ‘Forged Quran’
as:

Bada (Change in Divine Will)
----------------------------

The principle of Bada in Shia ideology is also very strange. They say
that Bada happens to God. It means that at times, God forbid, He
performs an action due to His ignorance and then regrets it, and an
interesting thing is that this belief is considered so important that no
worship act is equal to it. Hence a whole chapter is devoted to Bada in
*Usul al-Kafi*, the famous religious book of Shias.

A tradition is mentioned on page 84 of *Usul al-Kafi* that Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (as) said, “If people come to know about the reward in the
belief of Bada they would not neglect it.”

Another tradition says: Zurarah says that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (as)
said, “Allah does not give prophethood to anyone unless He makes him
confess to five things: Bada, Mashiyyat (Will of God), Prostration,
Worship and Obedience.”

It is quite strange that this issue is mentioned in the reliable book of
Shias. Then it is surprising that those people believe in such a God Who
regrets over His own actions, and has to change His opinion. It is as if
He is Fazlul Haq, the Governor of Bengal, who at first deposed against
Pakistan and then regretted it.

Please ignore the literary aspects of these statements because meanings
expressed therein are so funny themselves that there is no time to pay
any attention to the words. After reading this objection I was not able
to control my laughter at many places. Before clarifying the real
objection, I feel it necessary to pen down my remarks for the
entertainment of the readers.

Firstly the Rizwan editor says, “It means that at times, (God forbid),
He performs an action due to His ignorance and lack of knowledge and
then regrets it,” I am surprised that the self-made explanation of Bada
is same as the discussion of ‘Mus’haf-e-Fatima’ and ‘Jame’.

The account regarding the two books is that after the passing away of
the Messenger of Allah (S) Allah sent an angel to comfort Lady Sayyida
Fatima in her grief who used to discuss the heavenly secrets and divine
knowledge while Amirul Momineen (as) used to note down those words. The
same writing is called ‘Mus’haf-e-Fatima’. While ‘Jame’ was a book,
which Amirul Momineen (as) had written through which the successor of
the Prophet (S) can know all the events that shall occur till the Day of
Judgment.

However the poor editor of Rizwan had to close his eyes from all these
meanings in order to enter the group of ***‘Who whispers into the hearts
of men,’***[^1] ***and*** to represent the one who says ***‘and I will
certainly cause them all to deviate.’***[^2] By writing this he proved
himself to be the representation of the verse:

“And certainly We have created for hell many of the jinn and the men;
they have hearts with which they do not understand, and they have eyes
with which they do not see, and they have ears with which they do not
hear; they are as cattle, nay, they are in worse errors; these are the
heedless ones.”[^3]

He wrote with great grandeur: “Shias consider ‘Mus’haf-e-Fatima’ and
‘Jame’ as Quran.”

Similarly, closing his eyes to the explanations relating to Bada present
in Shia books and *Usul al-Kafi* itself he has understood it to be
Allah’s ignorance, foolishness and regret and associated this foolish
belief to the Shias. While our Tawheed (Oneness of God) has reached such
a peak whereas in the words of the Urdu poet Ghalib ‘People who consider
neo-Muslims at par with the father of Imams (Ali a.s.)’ cannot reach. If
Maulana Syed Mahmud Rizvi is interested to see the wonders of the
foolish and regretful God he should refer to these golden beliefs, which
are the emblems of distinction of Ahlul Sunnat. The Rizwan editor,
probably, does not know that Ahlul Sunnat say, “When a human being is
born, he is lacking in all knowledge, power, intention and speech etc.
When these qualities are acquired by him later on he is called a
scholar. If he later gets power he is called powerful. If he fails to
gain these qualities, he shall remain ignorant and weak instead of being
knowledgeable and powerful. Similarly, God Himself is neither
knowledgeable, nor powerful or living, or Mureed[^4], Samee[^5] or
Baseer[^6], speaking nor truthful. Rather knowledge, power, life,
decision, sense of hearing, speech and truth, all such qualities are
separate and are present in the Divine Being from outside.” The greatest
proof of this belief is presented as follows:

“The dictionary and common sense testify that knowledgeable is one who
has gained knowledge from external sources. Thus God, the Almighty must
also be such a scholar that knowledge has come into his Holy Being from
somewhere outside.”

The famous Ahlul Sunnat scholar, Fazl bin Ruzbahan writes regarding this
proof:

“I am of the opinion that this proof is worthy of being trusted for the
meaning (that qualities of God are separate from His nature and are
different things). Otherwise, all logical proofs regarding this
perception are unworthy of trust and objectionable.”[^7]

How edifying are the evil consequences of comparing the Divine Being
with human beings and laying the foundation of belief by turning the
pages of dictionary, shall be discussed towards the end of this chapter.

In any case, now the Rizwan editor should tell us that if knowledge,
power etc. all these qualities are separate from Divine nature then
isn’t their God Himself an ignorant, weak, not a speaker, not a
truthful, not hearing and not alive? Is ignorance and foolishness
expected from a God who is dependent on external sources or the God of
Shias Whose qualities such as knowledge, power etc. are considered one
with His Being?

Here is another amusing statement of Rizwan:

“Then it is surprising that those people believe in such a God Who
regrets over His own actions, and has to change His opinion.”

I am amused over the fact that the poor man is surprised while he
himself is an object of surprise. That is, he does not even know that
the attack of this surprise cannot befall the Shias (because the God of
Shias is the Knower of Unseen and never regrets). It attacks the Sunnis
who not only consider God as one Who regrets but also narrate incidents
regarding this fact. Like they say that Allah destroyed the community of
Prophet Nuh (as) through the deluge and then shed tears on it Himself.
Pay attention to the following belief:

A group of foolish companions have explained God’s resemblance to the
creatures. So much so that once God had sore eyes and angels visited to
comfort Him. And He cried over the storm of Nuh (as) so much so that His
eyes pained. The Arsh (throne) creaks under Him just like a new
packsaddle on a camel. His body bulges out four inches from every side
of the Arsh.[^8]

Now the Rizwan editor should say whether this storm was not caused by
Allah Himself Who regretted about it later? If not, then, he should
believe in two gods. Otherwise, he should read his sentence modified by
us by only replacing the word of ‘Shia’ by ‘Sunni’ as follows:

“It is quite strange that this issue is mentioned in the reliable book
of Sunnis. Then it is surprising that those people believe in such a God
Who regrets over His own actions, and has to change His opinion.”

The third sentence over which I laughed out of pity is:

“It is as if He is Fazlul Haq, the Governor of Bengal, who at first
deposed against Pakistan and then regretted it.”

This statement does not befit the lips of people who hold God
responsible for every deed of man. According to Ahlul Sunnat, Fazlul Haq
of Bengal opposing Pakistan and then regretting are both deeds of God
only. Since this belief is already established among you, your ridicule
about it is like looking at yourself in the mirror and making faces at
yourself.

As for the regret of Fazlul Haq, he has learnt this act from the great
leaders of Ahlul Sunnat only. After taking allegiance from the people
forcefully, Abu Bakr regretfully announced, “Please excuse me from this
caliphate. In the presence of Ali I am not eligible for it. And
otherwise too I am not better than you.” Thus Allamah Sibte Ibn Jawzi
writes in his book *Khawasul Ummah:*

Then after he had completed the noon (Zuhr) prayer Abu Bakr climbed the
pulpit and said, “Excuse me from this allegiance because I am not better
than you while Ali is present among you.”

This regret remained with him till the time of his death. Thus at the
time of his death he wished:

“If I had only asked the Messenger of Allah (S) about this matter that
for whom the caliphate was, so that I should not have opposed the one
who was rightful for it. And if I had only asked whether there was any
share of the Helpers (Ansar) in this matter (of caliphate) or not.”[^9]

A statement of Abdur Rahman bin Auf is present in the same book that Abu
Bakr regretted three of his deeds till the time of his death and wrung
his hands in regret.

Abdur Rahman bin Auf says, “Abu Bakr Siddiq said at the time of his
death, ‘I am not sorry for anything but the three deeds which I have
committed (that I wish I had not done).’”[^10]

Similarly, Umar, the founder of the religion of Ahlul Sunnat, also
regretted three deeds greatly. On Pg. 249 of *Tafsir Dhurr al-Manthur*
(Egypt, 1314 A.H.), the famous book of Ahlul Sunnat, it is mentioned in
the exegesis of verse:

***“O people! Surely there has come to you manifest proof from your Lord
and We have sent to you clear light.”***[^11]

“Abdur Razzaq Adani, Ibn Mundhir and Hakim have narrated from Umar that
he said, ‘If I had inquired three things from the Prophet (S) they would
have been dearer to me than red camels. Firstly, regarding the caliph
after the Prophet (S), secondly, whether it was permissible to wage a
war against a community, which says that they believe in paying Zakat
but not to me. Thirdly, I should have asked about Kalalah (a childless
person whose parents are also dead).’”

And Tayalisi, Abdur Razzaq Adni, Ibn Majah, Saaji, Ibn Jurair, Hakim and
Baihaqi have narrated from Umar that he said, “If our Prophet (S) had
explained three things to us clearly it would have been dearer to me
than this world and all of its bounties. Firstly, caliphate; secondly,
Kalalah and thirdly, interest.”

The Rizwan editor should know that the caliphate was also usurped, a war
was also waged over those Muslims who refused to pay Zakat to Abu Bakr
and their honor, women, lives and property were considered permissible
to be looted. The Prophet’s saying that, ‘Imams after me will be only
from Quraish’ has also been presented as a proof against the Ansar
(helpers). All these incidents have already happened, then what for are
these statements of embarrassment on their tongues? Which openly
announce that they themselves considered the correctness of their
caliphate doubtful. It was nothing but the innocent blood of people who
refused to pay Zakat to them that was speaking aloft their heads.

I mean to say that the first brick of your religion was itself so
crooked that every follower of it will have to be embarrassed at some
time or the other over his deeds. If not today, tomorrow! If not in this
world, in the Hereafter! However, since this regret of Fazlul Haq is in
accordance with the nature of the two Shaykhs you should have valued
this deed and given him the title of ‘Caliph of Muslims’ instead of
censuring him and proving yourself ignorant of his status.

Let me now explain to you the meaning of Bada. Shaykh Mufeed (a.r.)
writes in one of his famous books, *Awailul Maqalat:*

“Regarding the meaning of Bada I say the same which all Muslims say
about abrogation and other such things like it. For example, to
impoverish after giving wealth, or to make sick after keeping healthy,
or death after life or (according to the belief of some people)
reduction and increase in age and livelihood. As for the reason of
application of Bada, its reason is that personalities who were envoys
(i.e. the Holy Prophet and the Imams) between Allah and His creatures
were heard saying this word. And if this word had not been used in such
traditions, whose authenticity is absolute I would never have considered
its use permissible.

If the verses and traditions regarding this were not found that God gets
angry, He gets pleased, He loves and is amazed then words such as
‘anger’, ‘pleasure’, ‘love’ and ‘amazement’ could not be used for Him.
Since they are found in narrations, we have begun to use them. However,
we take such a meaning from them, which no intellect can deny. The fact
is that there is no difference of opinion in the chapter of Bada between
me and other Muslims. And those who oppose Shias in this matter are
against the word of ‘Bada’ and not against the meaning of ‘Bada’. I have
exposed the wrong use of this word in such a way that there is no scope
of further discussion in this matter and my religion is the religion of
all the Shias.”[^12]

Allamah Shaykh Fazlullah Zanjani has written the following gloss on it:

“There are two meanings of the word ‘Bada’. First ‘Zuhoor’
(reappearance) and it is the literal meaning of this word according to
the dictionary. Secondly it denotes ‘changing one’s decisions on the
basis of getting new information or conjecture regarding something. The
usage of the second meaning of Bada is absolutely impossible for God of
the Universe because the outcome of it would be that we will have to
believe that God gets knowledge of a thing which He was not having
earlier.

While absolute proofs are evidently opposed to it. Thus whenever we
associate this word with God, it means that such a matter has come from
God, which we never expected. Or God made such a thing possible, which
people never thought of. And on this same basis we have to believe this
meaning only. All the words of Bada used in Quran and the legitimacy of
its usage (in the same meaning) is due to those verses of the Book of
Allah in which the usage of this word is associated with God. For
example, Allah says,

***“…and what they never thought of shall become plain to them from
Allah.”***[^13]

And there are other such verses.”

Note: This verse shows the legitimacy of the usage of word ‘Bada’ while
explaining its meaning.

Though these descriptions are absolutely clear, the understanding of the
Rizwan editor is coercing me to present more explanations. Since these
scholarly discussions won’t be understood by him without pure Urdu
language. I feel it necessary to explain two or three things before
discussing the actual point.

Some beliefs of the opponents of Islam
--------------------------------------

1) Jews believe that God created the world and is now resting, free from
all activities.

2) The Greek philosophers believed that God created the first intellect
and the first intellect created the second intellect and the first
heavens. The second intellect created the third intellect and the second
heaven. This went on till the ninth intellect that created the tenth
intellect and ninth heaven. Then the tenth intellect created the whole
world. According to them, One God can perform only a single deed. Hence
the work of God was completed after the creation of the first intellect.
All the things created in this world after that and the existence of day
and night are called wonders of these intellect. God does not have any
relation with it.

3) A group of philosophers (who are called Kamoon wa Zuhoor) believed
that God created all the things within a few moments in eternity. All
the things from the beginning to the end were created at the same time.
However, some appeared before the others. Hence all these delays and
advancements are not creation but reappearance. Just like the whole page
of newspaper is printed at the same time but you read the first word and
first alphabet first and then the next letter.

4) One of the beliefs of Mutazila sect’s chief, Nazzam, is similar to
the belief of these philosophers. That is, there exists a link between
existence and non-existence called as ‘proof’. God has ‘proved’ all the
things at once in eternity i.e. He has created them. Now, delay and
advancements are visible at the stage of world only. According to them,
neither the world not the souls of Abu Lahab and Abu Jahl were created
after the Light of Muhammad (S) but all were created at the same time.

Conclusion
----------

All these four beliefs have deposed God of His Godliness. The Jews are
clearly making their God sleep in a restful sleep as if the world has no
relation with Him. The first group of the Greek philosophers does not
permit God to even correct the mistakes of the first ten intellects.
Since correction would also be another action which is not possible for
Him. The companions of Kamoon and Zuhoor, Mutazila and Nazzam believe
that whatever God wanted to do, He has already done in the beginning and
He does not want to do anything now. As if God is now free.

Rejecting all these beliefs, the God of Universe has guided His
creatures at various places in the Holy Quran the details of which shall
be mentioned later.

Islamic belief
--------------

In any case, Islamic belief says that God alone is the Creator of all
things. He is not suspended according to the belief of the Jews and
philosophers. Nor is He such that He created everything in the beginning
and everything that is going to happen will reappear gradually while God
does not have any power over anything as they have already been created,
according to the belief of a group of Ahlul Sunnat, Mutazila and Nazzam.

But a Quranic verse says:

***“Know that, His is the creation and the command.”***[^14]

***“All those who are in the heavens and the earth ask of Him; every
moment He is in a state (of*** ***glory).”***[^15]

It means He always brings someone to non-existence, someone to
existence, makes someone sick and someone healthy, causes the birth of
someone and death of someone. The changes in the world are brought about
by His command alone. He is neither suspended nor His hands are tied
according to the belief of the Jews:

***“And the Jews say: The hand of Allah is tied up! Their hands shall be
shackled and they shall be cursed for what they say. Nay, both His hands
are spread out, He expends as He pleases.”***[^16]

In every moment of the order of creation the absolute and final
judgments are issued. Without His command, nothing can appear on these
creations of the world.

Voluntary and Non-Voluntary Actions
-----------------------------------

Every human being feels that our actions are of two types. We have a
control over some actions and on the basis of them we are applauded or
apprehended. Also we are rewarded or punished in the hereafter. For
example, praying, going somewhere, talking or keeping quiet, murdering
someone etc. On the other hand, there are some actions over which we
have no control. Hence we are neither praised not punished because of
them. For example, bearing children or not, having an elegant face or
not etc.

We can differentiate the two by the fact that one cannot ask an ailing
person ‘Why don’t you become healthy?’ however; we can ask him ‘Why
don’t you seek treatment?’ Or ‘Why don’t you go to such and such
doctor?’ You can see what is the reason behind not asking a person to
become healthy but asking him to do the treatment. It is clear that to
become healthy is out of control of an ailing person. Hence we do not
ask him about it. However, it is possible for him to do the treatment.
Thus we can criticize him if he does not go for the treatment.

Matters under the control of man, are called ‘Amr-e-Tashri-ee’ or
‘Shariat’.

Whatever is out of the control of man and are in control of God, are
called ‘Amr-e-Takveeni’ or ‘Khilqat’.

Abrogation (Naskh)
------------------

According to Islamic belief, God of Universe has full control over
‘Amr-e-Takveeni’ (which are related to creation and course of action of
the world). He has always sent the rules of way of life for
‘Amr-e-Tashri-ee’ (which are related to the control of man) through the
prophets from Prophet Adam to the Last Prophet (S) so that man could
attain Paradise and avoid hell. This modus operandi is called ‘Shariat’
or ‘Religion’. The religion of Muhammad (S) is the final one and has
abrogated all the former religions.

The connotation of abrogation is that considering the mental and
physical weaknesses of man, God makes changes in His laws so that His
laws are in accordance with the growing needs of the civilization. It
should not happen that the human species go on advancing while his
religion cannot cope up with them. The God of Universe explains the
expedience of abrogation in the following manner:

***“Whatever communications We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We
bring one better than it or like it. Do you not know that Allah has
power over all things?”***[^17]

The Jews and fatalists object to this ‘abrogation’. They ask whether God
had forgotten or made some mistakes in the prior Law that He has to send
a new Law for rectification?

Islamic scholars reply in the negative. God had neither forgotten nor
committed a mistake in the prior law. Rather those laws were in
accordance with the conditions of that time but as time passed,
situations and thoughts changed, abilities progressed, and intellects
developed and finally it became necessary to change that law. For
example, a dress made for a child can be used for a limited period only.
Once the child grows up, it would be silly to ask him to wear that same
dress. It would be necessary to make a new dress now and the tailor
cannot be blamed that he had stitched the former dress wrongly or he had
forgotten something in it that the child now needs another dress on
being a grown up. In short, it proves the skill of the tailor and not
his foolishness.

In this instance, the tailor knew even before styling the dress that
after six months or a year this dress will be rendered useless for the
child. Similarly, not only before sending the first Law but even before
the creation of Prophet Adam (as), God knew that after some centuries a
law would become inappropriate for the human species and a new law would
be sent. This proves the knowledge of Allah instead of forgetfulness or
a mistake.

The tailor was in the beginning itself aware when he had not even cut
the dress for the child. At that time too He knew that after six months
or a year it would not fit the child. In the same way the Almighty
Allah, at the time of sending the first Shariat and even before that,
even before the creation of Adam, was aware that after so many centuries
this Shariat would become unfit for humanity and another Shariat would
be sent to replace it. This proves the knowledge of God and not His
ignorance or mistake.

Bada in Involuntary Matters
---------------------------

Just as God sent a law and modified it depending upon the circumstances,
in the same way He makes changes in His actions, which are called
‘Amr-e-Takveeni’ as per the need of time. For instance, Zaid used to sit
idle. God wrote poverty in his destiny but afterwards he began to work
hard as much as possible. Thus, God wrote happiness and well being for
him. Before sending the first law, God knew that it would be abrogated
at so and so time.

Similarly He knew before giving wealth to Zaid and even before the
creation of this world that at such and such time Zaid would be given
wealth. It does not prove the ignorance or foolishness of God but the
fact that nothing can come into appearance without the consent of Allah
in this world. He is that Knowing Lord of the worlds Who knows a thing
before it comes into existence.

Now if the Rizwan editor does not have any palpitation let me tell him
that just as bringing about changes in ‘Amr-e-Tashri-ee’ out of the need
of consideration and time is called abrogation, in the same way bringing
about changes in ‘Amr-e-Takveeni’ out of the need of consideration and
time is called Bada. That is the aim of the statement of Shaykh Mufeed
(a.r.) when he says:

“Regarding the meaning of Bada I say the same which all Muslims say
about abrogation and other such things like it. For example, to
impoverish after giving wealth, or to make sick after keeping healthy,
or death after life or (according to the belief of some people)
reduction and increase in age and livelihood. The fact is that there is
no difference of opinion in the chapter of Bada between me and other
Muslims.” (and everyone believes it and hence, there is not at all any
difference between common Muslims and Shias in this matter).”

Reason for Naming
-----------------

Now the remaining issue is why this belief in God’s power and control is
termed as Bada? The reason is that in order to explain this connotation,
only this word is used in the Quran and traditions. Hence, we also use
it. You cannot ask as to why is this word used in the Quran and
traditions. Actually, God has appointed angels for the organization of
this world. He has given them the knowledge (gist and conditional) about
them at first only. Similarly, He had given it to His special creatures
also.

For the sake of their benefit, He has given them knowledge long before
the event. However, all these angels and special people always wait for
His command. They cannot understand what His decision at a particular
time will be. Even if they are having the conditional knowledge of the
commands related to them then also they are unaware of the final
decision. Consider the issue of life and death. God creates Zaid but
does not inform the Angel of Death that his life is of forty or fifty or
sixty years. It is said (or written) to him: ‘His life is of fifty years
owing to Divine wisdom. Now, if he misbehaves with his relatives or cuts
off relations from them, his life would be reduced by ten years to forty
years. If he maintains good relations with his relatives, his life would
be increased by ten years to sixty years.’

Now the Angel of Death cannot make out whether to take his soul away
from the body after forty, fifty or sixty years till the last moment.
However, that All-Knowing God knew even before the creation of this
world that Zaid will maintain good relations with his relatives and live
to be sixty. He does not give this final and absolute knowledge even to
His Angels and there are many reasons for that.

The knowledge of those angels and special ones of God is always
conditional. It also is not necessary that they be given the information
about every condition beforehand. If there is a consideration then the
condition is revealed at first only otherwise it is revealed at the
final moment (that information in which He Himself says that there are
no conditions in a particular matter and it is an absolute one). The
knowledge of the angels and special ones of God also changes according
to the fulfillment of the condition but God always knows His final
decision. There is no change in His knowledge. God says this as follows:

***“Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with
Him is the basis of the Book.”***[^18]

That is, the knowledge in which there are erasings and writings, it
denotes the knowledge of angels and special ones of God, which is also
called as ‘Tablet of erasing and writing’ (Lauh-e-Mahv-o-Ithbaat)
because it changes continuously. While the ‘Mother of Book’ (Ummul
Kitab) and ‘real book’ (Real Book) refers to the knowledge of God which
does not change, and it this which is called ‘the secure tablet’ (Lauhe
Mahfooz).

***“Nay! it is a glorious Quran. In a guarded tablet.”***[^19]

‘The guarded tablet’ in this verse signifies the knowledge of Almighty,
which never changes.

To conclude, whenever the command of God goes against the prior
knowledge of angels and special ones of God, it is called Bada in the
technical terminology of Shias. Since the meaning of Bada is
reappearance and an order appears against the expectation of the people.

Tell me, do you see any possibility of objecting to this belief?
Possibly the Rizwan editor has failed to understand this Divine issue
even after such a prolonged explanation. Hence, I shall narrate some
incidents from the Holy Quran for further elucidation. Hence consider
the following:

### First incident

The Lord promised Prophet Musa (as) that if after fasting for thirty
days he goes to Mount Tur he would be given the Torah. Prophet Musa did
as ordered. He went to Mount Tur on thirtieth day after brushing his
teeth. He did not know that he had to abstain from brushing his teeth
during these thirty days. Upon reaching there, he received an order,
‘The mouth odor of a fasting person is dearer to Me than the smell of
musk and ambergris. Hence you fast for ten more days and come without
brushing your teeth and you will get the Torah’. Thus Prophet Musa (as)
fasted for another ten days according to Divine command and received the
Torah on the fortieth day. Here are the Quranic wordings of this
incident:

***“And We appointed with Musa a time of thirty nights and completed
them with ten (more)...”***[^20]

You can see that God promised Musa (as) for thirty nights in this verse
and then extended it by ten more nights. This resulted in the change in
knowledge of Prophet Musa (as) and not the knowledge of God because God
always knew that Musa (as) would get the Torah only after 40 days. This
is revealed as follows:

***“So the appointed time of his Lord was complete forty nights.”***
[^21]

That is the reason why in another verse Prophet Musa’s (as) knowledge
was ignored and it was said:

***“And when We appointed a time of forty nights with Musa, then you
took the calf (for a god) after him and you were unjust.”***[^22]

This verse also exposes the reason behind keeping Prophet Musa (as)
unaware at first. The reason is that due to the ten-day delay of Prophet
Musa (as) in returning to his community, the weak-faith people of Bani
Israel and hypocrites fell prey to the deceit of Samri and started
worshipping the ‘golden calf’. In this way, the strength and weakness of
the belief of all the people was tested. This incident is mentioned in
Quran as follows:

***“And what caused you to hasten from your people, O Musa?***

***He said: They are here on my track and I hastened on to Thee, my
Lord, that Thou mightest be pleased.***

***He said: So surely We have tried your people after you, and the Samri
has led them astray.***

***So Musa returned to his people wrathful, sorrowing. Said he: O my
people! Did not your Lord promise you a goodly promise: did then the
time seem long to you, or did you wish that displeasure from your Lord
should be due to you, so that you broke (your) promise to me?***

***They said: We did not break (our) promise to you of our own accord,
but we were made to bear the burdens of the ornaments of the people,
then we made a casting of them, and thus did the Samri suggest.***

***So he brought forth for them a calf, a (mere) body, which had a
mooing sound, so they said: This is your god and the god of Musa, but he
forgot.***

***What! Could they not see that it did not return to them a reply, and
(that) it did not control any harm or benefit for them?”***[^23]

It is clear that if Prophet Musa (as) had already been informed, “You
will get the Torah in thirty or forty days” or “If you come without
brushing your teeth on the thirtieth day then only you will get the
Torah” or “If you come after fasting for forty days without brushing you
teeth”, how it would have been possible to test Bani Israel? The test
was possible only by promising thirty days and concealing the condition
for giving of the Torah. When Prophet Musa (as) did not fulfill this
condition the period was extended by ten more days. This ten-day
extension was against the expectations of Prophet Musa (as) and Bani
Israel. Within this short period, Samri misguided Bani Israel by saying,
“This calf is the God of Musa. Musa has gone to Tur by mistake. How
would he get the Torah there?”

The majority supported him and Prophet Harun (as) was also over-powered
while the firmness of people’s belief became clear.

### Second incident

The second incident is about the nation of Prophet Yunus (as). According
to the Quran, Prophet Yunus (as) was sent as a messenger to a hundred
thousand or more people. After preaching for a long time, only two
people brought faith on him. One was a worshipper and other a scholar.
When Prophet Yunus became disheartened after preaching for a long time,
he invoked divine curse on them. God informed him that on so and so day
chastisement would be sent upon them. Prophet Yunus (as) warned all of
them and left the area and the worshipper accompanied him.

After Prophet Yunus (as) went away, the scholar summoned all the people
of the community and explained to them that Divine chastisement was
about to befall them. If they still failed to repent and bring faith
they would all be destroyed and their hereafter shall also be ruined.

On the fixed day, Divine chastisement appeared in the form of a black
cloud. Under directions of the scholar, the community of Yunus (as)
separated the children from their mothers. All the people – elderly and
children came to an open ground repenting and crying and brought faith
with a sincere heart. At last, the chastisement hovering on their heads
receded and the people were saved. It is described in Quran as follows:

***“And wherefore was there not a town which should believe so that
their belief should have profited them but the people of Yunus? When
they believed, We removed from them the chastisement of disgrace in this
world's life and We gave them provision till a time.”***[^24]

The next day when Prophet Yunus (as) returned to see the condition of
his community he found people in an unexpected condition and they were
going about their normal lives. Without asking about anything, he
returned thinking that the people would call him a liar. On the other
hand, the people of his community were waiting for him eagerly so that
they could confess their faith to him. In any case, he boarded a ship
and when he reached the deep seas he saw a huge whale with its mouth
wide open.

The captain said, “Perhaps a slave has ran away from his master and he
is the prey of this fish. If he does not go by himself the whale would
destroy the whole ship.” Prophet Yunus (as) said, “I have run away from
my Master (i.e. God),” and he jumped into the sea. The whale swallowed
him and he remained in the whale’s belly for forty days, praising and
glorifying Allah. As a result, God commanded the fish to eject him at
the shore. His body had become very delicate and he had also become very
weak. God grew a vegetable creeper so that he remains safe from the
flies in its shade. At last when he regained some strength he returned
to his community to a warm welcome and everyone became happy. God has
related this incident in the following manner:

***“And Yunus was most surely of the apostles. When he ran away to a
ship completely laden, So he shared (with them), but was of those who
are cast off. So the fish swallowed him while he*** ***did that for
which he blamed himself. But had it not been that he was of those who
glorify (Us), He would certainly have tarried in its belly to the day
when they are raised. Then We cast him on to the vacant surface of the
earth while he was sick. And We caused to grow up for him a gourd plant.
And We sent him to a hundred thousand, rather they exceeded. And they
believed, so We gave them provision till a time.”***[^25]

The reason behind keeping the real condition secret in this incident is
obvious. If it had been revealed to Prophet Yunus (as) that the
chastisement would go away from his people, forcefulness would not have
remained in his propagation. As a result, there would not have been any
impact on the community and chastisement would have become necessary for
all of them. Hence, God declared that He would send chastisement but
kept the condition secret that if they failed to bring faith, He would
send the chastisement but the chastisement would go away if they became
faithful. The best result of it was that the whole community became
believers and all the people were saved from chastisement.

### Third incident

Similarly, the third incident is regarding the sacrifice of Prophet
Ismail (as) in which Allah commanded Prophet Ibrahim (as) in his dream
to sacrifice Ismail (as). When he went to sacrifice Prophet Ismail (as),
Allah saved him and made a ram his ransom. Were Ibrahim (as) to be
informed about the actual scene beforehand that, as he is about to
sacrifice Ismail (as) a ram is made his ransom, the purity of the hearts
of Ibrahim (as) and Ismail (as), their steadfastness, their acceptance
and compliance could not have been tested. Hence the real command was
revealed but the result was kept secret so that their acceptance and
compliance could be tested in full. That is why Allah granted him the
following certificate:

***“You have indeed shown the truth of the vision; surely thus do We
reward the doers of good.”***[^26]

Evidently in this incident and the previous two incidents of Prophet
Musa (as) and Prophet Yunus (as) the conditions of those commands were
not revealed. As a result, the community of Musa (as) thought that he
would return after thirty days. Prophet Yunus (as) thought that
chastisement would indeed befall his community. Prophet Ibrahim (as)
thought that Prophet Ismail (as) would surely be sacrificed.

When the final outcome was contrary to their expectations, they realized
that the command was actually dependent on some conditions. However, we
cannot find anywhere in those incidents that God was unaware of the
result. He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen. He knows the end of
the world since before its inception while the creatures can never
understand His expediencies. Hence, when they expect a thing from God
and the contrary happens, they say that ‘Bada’ (appearance) has
occurred. It means a thing or expedience of God has become apparent for
us which we had not expected earlier.

I hope my explanation has clarified that ‘Bada’ is not related to
‘Divine Knowledge’ but to the knowledge of human beings. People think
that a particular thing should happen in a particular way. When it
happens in an opposite manner due to various hidden conditions, there
occurs a change in the knowledge of man and not the divine knowledge.
And the appearance of the things contrary to the expectations of man is
called ‘Bada’.

Also read this text on the margins of *Awailul Maqalat* and the meaning
shall become clear:

“There are two meanings of the word ‘Bada’. First ‘Zuhoor’
(reappearance) and it is the literal meaning of this word according to
the dictionary. Secondly it denotes ‘changing one’s decisions on the
basis of getting new information or conjecture regarding something. The
usage of the second meaning of Bada is absolutely impossible for God of
the Universe because the outcome of it would be that we will have to
believe that God gets knowledge of a thing which He was not having
earlier. While absolute proofs are evidently opposed to it. Thus
whenever we associate this word with God it means that such a matter has
come from God, which we never expected. Or God did such a thing
possible, which people never thought of.”

Now if the Rizwan editor has a discerning mind he should ponder over
this Islamic belief and see what is the connotation of Bada. And how it
implies that Allah (God forbid) sometimes due to his ignorance and lack
of knowledge does a thing then regrets it.

Rather ‘Bada’ shows that man can never reach the depths of the knowledge
of Allah.

‘Bada’ actually implies that Allah is the absolute omnipotent and has
full control over all things.

The connotation of ‘Bada’ is that not even a single leaf could move
without God’s permission in the created world.

The connotation of ‘Bada’ is that God rewards the good deeds and
punishes evil.

How many foundations of Islam are laid on the belief of ‘Bada’ can be
proved by the assumption that whatever God wanted to do He has already
done and now He has no power to change it. Then it would also be
considered impossible to abrogate the old laws and send new ones.
Because it also constitutes modification of a previous action. In the
same if it is decided that whatever God wanted to do He has already
created in the beginning then emphasis on worship and warnings to avoid
sins would all be useless.

Because whomsoever Allah wants to send to Paradise He would in any case
do so and whomever He intends to send to hell will definitely bear its
punishment. Rather it can be said in more clear words that He had
already created the entry of Paradise and Hell, only its actualization
remains. It means that the creation of Zaid’s soul, his coming to this
world, doing good or bad deeds, dying and going to Paradise or Hell are
all created in the beginning. Now all these issues are appearing in a
sequence. Delay and advancement is only in actualization. Therefore it
is no use doing good or bad deeds in the expectation of Paradise or fear
of hell. Paradise and Hell are already pre-determined for us.

In addition to this if we just believe that God has already created what
He wanted to and it shall indeed come to pass, then all these countless
supplications, emphasis on their recitation, hundreds of supplications
within prayers and without, hundreds of supplications in Quran and the
declaration of God:

***“And your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you…”***[^27]

And this assertion of God:

***“And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me…”***[^28]

And other thousands of supplications like:

***“Keep us on the right path.”***[^29]

And:

***“Our Lord! Grant us good in this world and good in the hereafter, and
save us from the chastisement of the fire.”***[^30]

All these would be useless. Because our supplications would not do
anything as God would do whatever He has decreed.

Apart from this, emphasis is laid in many places that ‘Charity (Sadaqah)
keeps difficulties away’, ‘maintaining relations with relatives keeps
difficulties away and increases life’, ‘so and so prayer fulfills one’s
desires’, ‘life decreases due to cutting off relations with one’s
relatives’, ‘recitation of Quran causes prosperity’. All these would
(God forbid) become useless because God will not increase or decrease
the lifespan. Then what is the need of charity, maintaining or breaking
off relations, prayer for desires, Quran and supplications?

However if it is true that the former ‘Divine Laws’ were abrogated, it
is true that one goes to Paradise due to ones worship and to Hell due to
lack of it, that supplications are effective and the promise of God is
not false, it is correct that charity and maintaining good relations
with relatives bring prosperity while miserliness and breaking off
relations cause adversity, then one has to believe that God has made
these occurrences conditional. God has full power to take a final
decision in every matter. He knew in the beginning itself what final
decision would be taken in such and such matter. It is possible that the
decision and the result be contrary to the knowledge of the angels and
special ones of God. The appearance of this final decision contrary to
expectation, is called ‘Bada’.

When such aspects depend on ‘Bada’ it is as if confession in God’s power
and discretion is not possible without ‘Bada’. The abrogation of other
religions by Shariat of Muhammad (S), arrival of prophets and receiving
Paradise or Hell as recompense to good or bad deeds respectively are
dependent on ‘Bada’. Then what is the ambiguity in the assertion of Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq (as): “Allah has not been honored more in anything save
‘Bada’.” Or his declaration: “If people know the reward of ‘Bada’ they
would never tire of discussing it.” Because the honor of God is
dependent on ‘Bada’, which you have not understood till today due to
your foolishness. But what is the fault of Shias in this?

“If in the daylight they cannot see with their eyes.

What is the fault of the Sun in it?”[^31]

The poor editor of Rizwan does not even know that Ahlul Sunnat have a
same belief as Shias, regarding ‘Bada’. However they do not refer to it
as ‘Bada’. Hence it is just a different word and the change in name does
not change the reality.

Ghufran Maab (a.r.) writes in *Imadul Islam* in the ‘Book of Al-Tawheed’
on Pg. 112 regarding this belief:

“This shows that confession in ‘Bada’ is the belief in the command of
God that He has full control over His actions. Many laws of Shariat are
dependent on it. For example, abrogation of laws, manipulation of
jurisprudence, sending of messengers, inducements of worship,
prohibitions of unlawful acts, encouragement for supplication, charity
and maintaining good relations with relatives, all these deeds are based
on this very article of belief. All these matters are among the
necessities of religion.

If a person does not believe in this meaning of Bada he would have to
deny all those matters also (that is, neither abrogation is possible nor
modifications in laws. Neither there is a benefit in worship not there
is any harm in omission of evil deeds. There is no benefit from
supplication, charity or maintaining relations). When a person denies
all these things he would become a greater denier than the disbelievers
and transgressors. God give us refuge from this! Had the Ahlul Sunnat
not believed in the real sense of ‘Bada’, we would have labeled them
disbelievers because they would have denied a necessity of religion
(However since they also believe in the meaning of ‘Bada’, we cannot
call them disbelievers).”

The editor of Rizwan who stitches the patch of ‘Hazrat Maulana’ before
his name with his own pen is himself unaware of his religion. How can he
reach the heights of the Shia belief? If he was having the least
knowledge he would have at least known that all the Ahlul Sunnat people
are believers in the connotation of ‘Bada’. Whatever may be the name but
the connotation is same. A famous Sunni scholar, Fakhruddin Razi writes
in *Tafsir Kabir* in the commentary of the verse:

***“Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with
Him is the basis of the Book.”***[^32]

“There are two opinions about this verse. Firstly it is common to all
the commandments according to the apparent meaning. God erases and
increases sustenance. In the same way they believe that God confirms and
erases death, luck, misfortune, faith and disbelief. This is the
religion of Amr bin Masud, a companion of Holy Prophet (S). Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari has also narrated this from the Holy Prophet (S).

Secondly, this obliteration and confirmation is only for some special
things. Now there are many conditions in the selection of these special
things. Firstly, abrogation of the command before obliteration or
revelation and giving a new order in its place… Eighthly, the purpose
behind it is the obliteration and revelation of sustenance, labor and
difficulty are written by Allah in the book. But He erases them due to
supplications and charity. In this way, man is motivated to have hopes
on God… Tenthly, He can obliterate any of His orders without any
information. Only He is the Master of His order and orders as He wishes.
He is the Only Powerful One Who gives birth, mortality, life, death,
wealth and poverty. Due to this rank of His, no creature can be informed
about His secrets.”

Now compare the beliefs of Ahlul Sunnat explained by Imam Razi with the
explanation of Shaykh Mufeed (a.r.) regarding ‘Bada’ then it would
become known that the ‘untouchable belief’ which you consider ‘Bada’ to
be and get infuriated by it, it is also accepted by Ahlul Sunnat. I
repeat the explanation of Shaykh Mufeed (a.r.) once again:

“Regarding the meaning of Bada I say the same which all Muslims say
about abrogation and other such things like it. For example, to
impoverish after giving wealth, or to make sick after keeping healthy,
or death after life or (according to the belief of some people)
reduction and increase in age and livelihood.”

Similarly, Allamah Zamakhshari writes regarding the following verse in
*Tafsir Kashaf:*

***“…and no one whose life is lengthened has his life lengthened, nor is
aught diminished of one's life, but it is all in a book; surely this is
easy to Allah.”***[^33]

“It means that: Suppose it is written in the tablet that the lifespan of
so and so person is forty years if he does Hajj or Jihad and sixty years
if he does both. If he performs both the deeds and completes sixty years
of life he would have received the whole lifespan. If he could perform
only one deed and did not live for more than forty years his lifespan is
decreased from its maximum limit, that is 60 years. Holy Prophet (S) has
indicated this matter in his saying: ‘Charity and good relations
inhabits towns and increase life spans.’”

“It is narrated regarding Kaab that when Umar was injured by the
stabbing of Abu Lulu, Kaab said, ‘If Umar had supplicated, his death
would have been delayed’. Someone said to Kaab, ‘Didn’t God say:

***“…so when their doom will come they shall not be able to delay (it)
an hour nor can they bring (it) on (before its time).”***[^34]

Kaab replied, ‘God has also said:

***“…and no one whose life is lengthened has his life lengthened, nor is
aught diminished of one's life, but it is all in a book; surely this is
easy to Allah.”***[^35]

Moreover, Allah has made the following statements popular on the tongues
of people: ‘May God increase your lifespan…’ and ‘May Allah enhance your
age…’etc. Muslims use such statements day and night, which shows that it
is the belief of all Muslims that lifespan can increase and decrease.”

Similarly, Qazi Baidhawi writes in *Tafsir Baidhawi* regarding the
above-mentioned verse:

“And it is said that the lifespan of a person can be decreased and
increased due to various reasons which God has written in a book. For
instance, if Umar performs Hajj, his age would be sixty years.
Otherwise, it would be forty years.”

These writings prove that all Ahlul Sunnat scholars believe that God
obliterates and confirms in the affairs of creation. Time and again He
issues commands appropriate to the occasion and requirement of the time.
It is called ‘Bada’.

The Poor editor of Rizwan objected to Shias over a self-made explanation
of ‘Bada’ while even Ahlul Sunnat were found to have similar opinions as
the Shias. The poor ‘Hazrat Maulana’ shall be rejected by both the
sides. Both Shias and Sunnis will think that he is making fun of their
religions. They would tell him to go away. We pity the writer and hence
advise him to have a look at the books before writing on a particular
subject in future.

In the words of Ghalib:

“If the heart itself is sorrowful and a butt of ridicule

May be the narrow mind would open due to more study.”[^36]

Let me make a point clear due to which the poor Rizwan fell a prey to
his compound ignorance. The fact is that Bada has two meanings. Firstly,
‘appearance’ and secondly, ‘remaining unaware of a thing and then
becoming aware later on and changing one’s decisions’.

It is explained thus on the margins of *Awailul Maqalat.* It is not only
present in Shia traditions but also in the Holy Quran. The abrogation of
former divine laws, change in God’s commands due to ‘Divine Expedience’
is called ‘Bada’ according to jurisprudence and technical terminology.
And this technical meaning ‘appearance’ is related to the dictionary
meaning that here also it implies actualization of a new command for
humans and angels. It is this connotation that is implied in the
traditions and Quranic verses.

The poor editor of Rizwan, after hearing the literal meaning of Bada as,
‘Change in decision after getting new information’ thought that the
belief in it is also in the same sense. That is, ‘God forbid, God does
something in ignorance and foolishness and then regrets.’ Fortunately,
no one has told him that the literal meaning of ‘Sawm’ (fast) is
abstinence. Otherwise from the next Ramadhan he would begin teaching his
followers that the Arabic phrase, ‘atimmus siyaama ilal lail’ which
means, ‘then complete the fast till night’ is actually, ‘then observe
abstinence till night’. So that the youth of today, who are running away
from religion would become very particular in ‘fasting’ and the splendor
of Ramadan shall increase a thousand fold.

Not only this, if he knew that the dictionary meaning of ‘Jihad’ (Holy
War) is ‘hard work’ he would have included every teacher in his list of
‘Chief of warriors’ and every student a ‘warrior’. He would have started
kissing their feet. At that time, the title ‘caliph’ would have suited
the wrestlers.

Laws would become so easy that if one prays in the morning lying on his
bed, “O God! Please give intelligence to the Rizwan editor” the Salat
(prayer) is over. Since the dictionary meaning of ‘Salat’ is
‘invocation’.

Decide to undertake a journey to Lahore’s Mall Road for pleasure and you
have become a Haji because the dictionary meaning of Hajj is to
‘decide’.

You have already applied literal meanings to all Divine matters and
proved that God has a face (wajh), hand (yad), side (janb), calf of leg
(saq), eyes, ears, hair etc. according to the apparent meanings of
Quran. Rather Mr. Allah is also ready to burn His foot in hell.[^37]

Now it is the turn of worship acts, which are waiting for your merciful
attention. After that, neither Islam nor the people of Islam shall
remain. Only the people like you shall survive. After seeing which one
shall be compelled to say:

“Neither researchers nor scholars

Only a quadruped loaded with books.”[^38]

[^1]: Surah Naas 114:5

[^2]: Surah Hijr 15:39

[^3]: Surah Araaf 7:179

[^4]: The Restorer

[^5]: The All-hearing

[^6]: The All-seeing

[^7]: Ibtalul Batil

[^8]: Al-Milal wan Nihal, Allamah Shahristani in the margin of Kitabul
Fazl fil Milal wal Nihal, Pg. 141

[^9]: Kanzul Ummal, Mulla Ali Muttaqi, source: Musnafah, Syed Zirak
Husain

[^10]: Khulafa Pg. 21

[^11]: Surah Nisa 4:174

[^12]: Awailul Maqalat, Pg. 53 Printed at Tabriz

[^13]: Surah Zumar 39:47

[^14]: Surah Araaf 7:54

[^15]: Surah Rahman 55:29

[^16]: Surah Maidah 5:64

[^17]: Surah Baqarah 2:106

[^18]: Surah Ra’ad 13:39

[^19]: Surah Buruj 85:21-22

[^20]: Surah Araaf 7:142

[^21]: Surah Araaf 7:142

[^22]: Surah Baqarah 2:52

[^23]: Surah Taha 20:83-89

[^24]: Surah Yunus 10:98

[^25]: Surah Saffat 37:139-148

[^26]: Surah Saffat 37:105

[^27]: Surah Momin 40:60

[^28]: Surah Baqarah 2:186

[^29]: Surah Fatiha 1:6

[^30]: Surah Baqarah 2:201

[^31]: Persian Couplet

[^32]: Surah Ra’ad 13:39

[^33]: Surah Fatir 35:11

[^34]: Surah Nahl 16:61

[^35]: Surah Fatir 35:11

[^36]: Urdu Couplet

[^37]: Refer Sahih Bukhari

[^38]: A Persian couplet of Sadi


