Discourse 10: Characteristics of a Righteous Servant of Allah – Part II
=======================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَنَسِ ابْنِ مَالِكَ قَالَ: قَالُوا: يَا رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ، مَنْ
أَوْلِـيَآءُ اللٌّهِ الَّـذِينَ )لاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ(؟ فَقَالَ: أَلَّذِينَ نَظَرُوا إِلـى بَاطِنِ الدُّنْـيَا
حِينَ نَظَرَ النَّاسُ إلِـى ظَاهِرِهَا، فَاهْتَمُّوا بِآجِـلِهَا حِينَ
إِهْتَمَّ النَّاسُ بِعَاجِلِهَا، فَأَمَاتُوا مِنْهَا مَا خَشَوْا أَنْ
يُمِيتَهُمْ، وَ تَرَكُوا مِنْهَا مَا عَلِمُوا أَنْ سَيَتْرُكَهُمْ
فَمَا عَرَضَ لَهُمْ مِنْهَا عَارِضٌ إِلاَّ رَفَضُوهُ، وَ لاَ
خَادَعَهُم مِنْ رِفْعَتِهَا خَادِعٌ إِلاَّ وَضَعُوهُ، خُلِقَتِ
الدُّنْـيَا عِنْدَهُمْ فَمَا يُجَدِّدُونَهَا، وَ خَرِبَتْ بَيْنَهُم
فَمَا يَعْمُرُونَهَا، وَ مَاتَتْ فِي صُدُورِهِمْ فَمَا يُحِبُّونَهَا،
بَلْ يَهْدِمُونَهَا فَيَبْـنُونَ بِهَا آخِرَتَهُمْ، وَ يُـبَيِعُونَهَا
فَيَشْتَرُونَ بِهَا مَا يَبْقى لَهُمْ، نَظَرُوا إِلـى أَهْلِهَا صَرْعى
قَدْ حَلَّتْ بِهِمُ الْمُثَلاَتُ، فَمَا يَرَوْنَ أَمَاناً دُونَ مَا
يَرْجُونَ، وَ لاَ خَوْفاً دُونَ مَا يَحْذَرُونََ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Anas b. Malik that, “We said, 'O' Messenger of
Allah!  Who are the close, intimate friends of Allah who (Will have no
fear upon them nor will they grieve)?'  The Prophet replied, 'It is
those people who look at the inner aspects of the transient world (the
Dunya) while the other people are looking at its apparent aspects (the
physical beauties and pleasures). These people (those who are the
intimate friends of Allah) are concerned with their eventual outcome
(and are thus working for it.) while the (other) people are concerned
with this life (and are working for this life).  

So then these people (the intimate friends of Allah) die while in the
world (do not have the love of the transient world) through the fear
that the world may kill them and they also refrain from it (the
transient world). They also refrain from those things of the material
world that they feel will abandon them and they refuse whatever is
offered to them from it (the world). There is nothing in it that tries
to cheat them to make them higher except that they try to bring it down.
The material world is worn out to them (like an old, worn out piece of
clothing) and they refuse to renew it; and the world is demolished in
their sight and they refuse to rebuild it.

The material world has died in their hearts and they have no love for
it. However, these people (who are the intimate friends of Allah)
demolish the material world in order to build their next life. They sell
the material world in order to purchase something that will stay with
them for eternity. They look at the people of the world and those who
have already been brought down and they see these people (the
inhabitants of the transient world) as (spiritually) fallen -
experiencing the punishment of Allah. Thus they do not see any safety or
security except that they have the hope (of Allah) and they do not see
any fear except the one that they are afraid of (the punishment and Hell
Fire of Allah).”[^1]  
    
 The difference between “**خوف”** and “**غم”** is that the first word
(**خوف -** fear) is used in relation to events that will transpire in
the future, where as the second word (**غم -** grief) is used in
relation to events that have already passed.

There is a very important question that has been mentioned in this
tradition that all of us must sincerely ponder upon. It was asked:  “Who
are the intimate friends of Allah (SwT) who do not fear the future and
do not have grief over what has transpired in the past? ”

The Imam introduced these people to us by saying that, “The intimate
friends of Allah (SwT) (Awliya) are those people who have certain
characteristics, one of which was that if some people worship this
material world, those people (who have no fear nor grief) see the truth
of the transient world.”

In relation to those who worship this temporal world, the Noble Qur\`an
mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُونَ ظَاهِراً مِنَ الْحَيٌوةِ الدُّنْـيَا وَهُمْ عَنِ الآخِرَةِ
هُمْ غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“These people (who worship this material world) know the apparent
aspects of the life of this world very well, however they are completely
heedless of the next life.”[^2]

If these people (who worship the material world) decide to give
something in charity, they would first employ mathematical calculations
in regards to their donations (to measure their benefit and loss) and
then finally would come to the conclusion that, “I have definitely gone
into loss as my wealth has now decreased (by giving such a
donation).”[^3]

The people who do not worship this temporal world look deep in their
hearts and see the act of giving in charity in another way - just as the
Noble Qur\`an mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنْفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ فِي سَـبِيلِ اللٌّهِ
كَمَثَلِ حَبَّةٍ أَنْـبَتَتْ سَبْعَ سَنَابِلَ فِي كُلِّ سُنْـبُلَةِ
مِائَةُ حَبَّةٍ وَ اللٌّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَنْ يَشَآءُ وَاللٌّهُ وَاسِعٌ
عَليمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The parable of those people who spend their wealth in the way of Allah
is just as a grain which (is planted) and then grows seven ears. In each
ear is one hundred seeds and Allah increases (the reward) for whomsoever
He pleases and Allah is the All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.”[^4]

Those people who simply judge and look at everything through the
materialistic aspect of life say that: “If we take interest (Riba) then
our wealth will increase.”  However those who look at things in a deeper
context and view things through the spiritual life would say, “Not only
will our wealth not increase by taking interest, rather it will actually
decrease!”

In regards to this, the Qur\`an brings forth a very interesting phrase
and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمْحَقُ اللٌّهُ الرِّبوَا وَ يُرْبِي الصَّدَقَاتِ وَ اللٌّهُ لاَ
يُحِبُّ كُلَّ كَفَّار أَثِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah removes all the good that comes from Riba (Interest) and makes
charitable gifts (Sadaqah) prosper, and Allah does not love every
sinning, disbelieving person.”[^5]

When a person looks with precision, he will realize that the society in
which interest is freely given and taken will end up in poverty and
destruction and will also be plagued with insecurity. However, that
society in which there is mutual help and assistance and one in which
charity and monetary aid are given to one another is the society which
will be successful, honoured and dignified (by Allah (SwT)).

During the time of the Hajj before the Islamic Revolution (in Iran), the
newspapers were filled with articles asking why at the time of
performing the Hajj, so much hard-currency was leaving the country?  Why
were the Iranians giving all their money to the 'Arabs during the Hajj
season?

However since these people (those writing such articles) were simply
looking at the material aspects of this life, they were not able to
discern that in the place of the few thousand dollars that were leaving
the country and being spent, what amount of spiritual benefits and
profits the Hujjaj were bringing back into the country! 

It is this Hajj which forms the greatness of Islam and which leads to
the unity, self-respect and honour for the Muslims, and every heart that
goes to that sacred land returns back pure and clean!  
 We see people who go through unimaginable difficulties, for the life of
this world which is nothing more than the span of two (proverbial)
days - they go through such difficulties not even knowing if they will
be able to benefit and enjoy them in the future.

For example, there was a person who had built a house in Tehran which he
spent one and a half years just painting and finishing up the interior
of. However, this unfortunate person was not able to benefit from this
house (as shortly after building it, he passed away). His “40th Majlis”
(the gathering kept forty days after a person has passed away) was kept
in that same house!  We see how much people strive and struggle for the
materialistic pleasures of this world in which they will not live for
more than a few days, however, for the next life - which is eternal -
they do not put forth any struggles, nor do they even think about it!

The tradition under discussion contains a series of characteristics of
the true intimate friends of Allah (SwT) that if we want to summarize,
we would divide them up into the following three categories:

1) The intimate friends of Allah (SwT) know this material world very
well and they know that it is a temporary place in which they will not
be staying long.

2) These people will never become slaves of the beauties of this world
and will never be deceived by the gold and glitter of the temporary
abode since they have a good understanding of this world. (Keep in mind
that this point is a continuation of the first point).

3) They make use of this material world only for what they need and it
is upon this ruined transient world through which they build their
permanent everlasting abode. Thus, they sell this temporal abode and
purchase the next world in its place.

Sometimes we see that Allah (SwT) grants a person a very high station
and rank in this world. The question we need to ask is that from where
did this great rank come from?  When we look carefully at this person,
we see that he lived his life in the correct and proper manner and thus
transcended from the dirt of this world to the higher realms of the
heavens - he went from the low ground to the high, spiritual plains.

On the day of the Battle of Khandaq, the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali
b. Abi Talib (as) struck such a blow with his sword that this act was
referred to as being better than the worship of all of the Jinn and
Mankind until the Day of Judgement. The Noble Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَرْبَةُ عَلِيٍّ فِي يَوْمِ الْخَنْدَقِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ عِبَادَةِ
الثَّقَلَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The striking of the sword of 'Ali on the day of Khandaq was better than
the worship of all the Jinn and Mankind.”

Why was this so?  It is because on that day, the complete and perfect
manifestation of true belief (Iman) was face to face with the complete
manifestation of disbelief (Kufr). In the book, Bihar al-Anwar, we read
the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرَزَ الإِيْمَانُ كُلُّهُ إِلَى الشِّرْكِ كُلِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The complete manifestation of true faith (Iman) was face to face with
the complete manifestation of polytheism (Shirk).” [^6]

Thus, it is no surprise that the striking of the sword of 'Ali (as) was
better than the worship of all of the Jinn and Mankind!

If we truly understand this issue then we would see that within half a
day, the victory of all victories and the performance of an act of great
importance ust like those which the Martyrs of Karbala carried out, was
enacted.

It is at this time that we would see the great value and worth of our
lives, and in addition just like the intimate friends of Allah (SwT)
(about whom we have been discussing in this talk of ours), we would no
longer make the life of this material world our ultimate goal!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 181

[^2]: Surat al-Rum (30), Verse 7

[^3]: There is a tradition from the Messenger of Allah (S) where he has
stated that: أَغْفَلُ النٌّاسِ مَنْ لَمْ يَتَّعِظْ بِتَغَيُّرِ
الدُّنْيَا مِنْ حالِ إِلـى حالٍ. “The most heedless person is one who
does not take admonition from the changes in the material world.”
(Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 13, pg. 13); Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, pg. 324,
Section 80

[^4]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 261

[^5]: Ibid., Verse 276

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 17, pg. 215


