Discourse 12: The (Various) Levels of Perfection in Iman
========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ نَافِعٍ عَنْ إِبْنِ عُمَرَ، قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ : لاَ
يَكْمُلُ عَبْدٌ الإِيْمَانَ بِاللٌّهِ حَتّى يَكُونَ فِيهِ خَمْسُ
خِصَالٍ: أَلتَّوَكُّلُ عَلى اللٌّهِ، وَالتَّفْوِيضُ اِلـى اللٌّهِ،
وَالتَّسْلِيمُ لِأََمْرِ اللٌّهِ، وَالرِّضَا بِقَضَاءِ اللٌّهِ،
وَالصَّبْرُ عَلى بَلاَءِ اللٌّهِ. إِنَّهُ مَنْ أَحَبَّ فِـي اللٌّهِ،
وَأَبْغَضَ فِـي اللٌّهِ، وَ أَعْطى لِلٌّهِ، و مَنَعَ لِلٌّهِ، فَقَدِ
اسْتَكْمَلَ الإِيْمَانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Nafi' from Ibne 'Umar that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said, “A servant's faith in Allah will never become complete
until he possesses five traits: complete reliance (al-Tawakkul) in
Allah, complete dependence (al-Tafwid) on Allah (what He has decreed),
complete submission (al-Taslim) to all of the commandments of Allah,
complete contentment (al-Rida) upon what Allah has decreed, and complete
patience (al-Sabr) for the calamities that Allah brings forth; because
verily that person who loves for the sake of Allah and hates for the
sake of Allah and gives (to others) for the (sake of) Allah and holds
back (giving to others) for the (sake of) Allah is one whose faith is
complete.” [^1]  
    
 In this tradition, the Messenger of Allah (S) has elucidated upon the
various levels (that one must traverse) in order to achieve perfection
in one's faith.

Some of the scholars of Akhlaq (ethics and morality) have also more or
less mentioned the same points as the stages which one must traverse on
the path of Sair wa Suluk (the path of one who is trying to get
spiritually closer to Allah (SwT).

1. Tawakkul:
------------

The first stage is to have complete reliance in Allah (SwT). In reality,
the true believer must be one who says, “Since it is through the
knowledge, power and mercy of Allah (SwT) that I have been granted true
faith («man) and knowledge, I will take Him alone as the One whom I rely
upon.”

2. Tafwid:
----------

The second stage is that of complete dependence on Allah (SwT). In the
previous stage, it is said that the true believer is walking on the path
towards Allah (SwT) which he himself has chosen. However at this stage,
the true believer - in reality - says to Allah (SwT), “O' Allah!  You
know better than I do and thus, I leave everything in Your hands.”

### The Difference between Tawakkul and Tafwid:

At the stage of Tawakkul, a person gives precedence to everything that
he feels is for his own personal benefit and thus he sees all the limits
and restrictions for his own benefit. However in Tafwid, the person
knows that he has individual benefits at stake, however he does not see
the limits - rather - he leaves them all up to Allah (SwT) (to fulfill)
because he has complete reliance upon Him.

3. Taslim:
----------

This stage is even higher than the previously mentioned level. At this
stage, personal benefit has no meaning to the person. At the stage of
Tawakkul, one's personal wishes and desires were the topic of
discussion, however at the level of Taslim, a person does not even
consider his own personal desires.

### Question:

If it is truly as you say (that one who is at the level of Taslim does
not even make known his personal needs and desires) then there is no
meaning to Du'a and supplication, right?

### Answer:

The meaning of Taslim is not that we do not ask our needs or desires
from Allah (SwT) and that we do not call upon Him. Rather, it means that
if we have asked Him for something and our prayers have not been
answered (in this world), then we must still submit to Him (in the
apparent non-fulfillment of our supplications).

4. Rida:
--------

The stage of Rida is greater than the previously mentioned stages. It
can be said that at the level of Taslim, a person still had personal
wants and desires, however he has submitted his presence and gives up
his wants (to Allah (SwT)). However at the stage of Rida - even within a
person's own soul - there is no resistance in relation to his wishes and
desires - and this is the difference between Taslim and Rida.

These levels mentioned form the four stages of the spiritual travel
towards Allah (SwT) in the hopes of attaining closeness to Him. It is
very easy to explain these levels through words, however how far the
distance of travel is between each one of them!

Sometimes, these levels are also known as **[فناء في اللٌّه]** or
complete annihilation in Allah (SwT). Although it should be kept in mind
that the word **[فناء]** has two meanings, of which the first is the
known and rational interpretation which is reaching to the level of
Rida. In this stage, a person forgets all of his own personal wishes and
desires while in the spiritual presence of the Pure Essence of his Lord
and truly this is the correct meaning of the phrase **[فناء في اللٌّه]**
which is also the agreed upon meaning in the Islamic legislations and
our intelligence.

Of course this in no way contradicts the philosophy of Du'a
(supplication) and requesting our needs from Allah (SwT). Thus, the
person who has reached to this final stage of perfection of his «man
(true faith) - meaning the stage of Rida - is still in need of Du'a and
supplicating to Allah (SwT).

All of these stages can be achieved and reached through patience and
perseverance. Principally, patience and standing firm is the root of all
forms of happiness and contentment.

The fifth piece of advice from the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali b.
Abi Talib (as) in his testament was to observe patience, which in
reality acts as the guarantor to being able to perform the first four
pieces of advice.

How many times have we seen that in order to reach these levels of
perfection, a person readies himself and practices these acts for a few
days - however that which is important is that one must have
perseverance while treading on this path and must perpetually stay upon
it. It has been said many times that any person who has reached the
levels of 'Ilm (knowledge), action (upon what he has learned) and Taqwa,
has done so through the patience and perseverance that he displayed
while on this path.

In the end of this tradition there is a statement made that love and
hate, giving to others and holding back things from others, must all be
done sincerely for the sake of Allah (SwT) - since all of these are
signs of a person who has perfect «man!  
  

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 177


