Discourse 1: We Must Always Go To The Source of The Problem
===========================================================

   
 Imam 'Ali b. Muhammad al-Hadi (as) was a great Imam who lived under
some of the hardest conditions and opposition (to his leadership). It
was through the use of the military (of the ruling class of that time),
that the Imam was forcefully separated from his Shia (followers); and it
is because of this, that there are not many traditions narrated from
this Imam.

One of the crimes which the Bani Umayyah and the Bani 'Abbas perpetrated
on the nation was the cutting off of all relations and ties between the
people and the A\`immah of the Ahlul Bait (as). If this cutting off of
contact had not been done, then today we would have had countless books
at our disposal containing the words of these great personalities.

In the time period between the leadership of Imam Muhammad b. 'Ali
al-Baqir (as) and Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as), we see what
kind of valuable treasures were left behind for their followers. However
it is after this time, meaning during the time of Imam Musa b. Ja'far
al-Kazim (as) in which the limits and restrictions were imposed (on the
A\`immah (as)).

In any case, there are some short sayings available from Imam 'Ali b.
Muhammad al-Hadi (as) even though the words which have reached us from
this personality are quite few in number. Nevertheless, we will explain
one of the short sayings of this Imam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَيْرٌ مِنَ الْخَيْرِ فَاعِلُهُ وَ أَجْمَلَ مِنَ الْجَمِيلِ قَائِلُهُ
وَ أَرْجَحَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ حَامِلُهُ وَ شَرٌّ مِنَ الشَّرِّ جَالِبُهُ
وَ أَحْوَلَ مِنَ الْحَوْلِ رَاكِبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Even better than a good act, is the person who performs the good act;
and more attractive than beautiful (words) is the person who speaks
beautiful words; and what is more nobler that knowledge is that person
who possess knowledge; and what is even worse than wickedness is the
person who commits evil; and what is more of an obstruction than the
obstruction (itself) is the person that obstructs (others).”[^1]  
    
 In these five statements, the Imam has referred to some very important
points.  
 What is the meaning of these sentences of which, three of them refer to
something good, while the other two are in reference to something bad? 
In reality, the Imam is pointing to one fundamental principle, which is
that we must always go in search of the roots and causes (of anything).

If we wish to spread goodness and we want the proliferation of good
deeds, then we must go to its source. If we want to prevent bad deeds
from taking form, then we must go the root and source of that which is
bad. What is more important than good and bad is the person who performs
that action.

An important issue that has always been within the society and still
exists is that when a group of people decide to fight against
corruption, a majority of people look at the effects (of the actual
corruption), however they do not go after the causes (that brought that
effect into being) and therefore they are not successful. They remove
one bad thing however something else takes it place. They proceed to
remove the second thing, however, a third thing takes it place - why is
this??

This happens because one does not go after the root of a problem and the
causes for it coming into existence. Instead, one goes straight to the
effect or outcome.

This can be understood in the light of a simple example. Some people may
have eruptions (pimples, warts, etc…) on their face, or they may have
wounds and abrasions on their body and thus they rush to purchase
various types of ointments to remove these various things. However there
are other people who take the time to investigate and check if the skin
which is nourished (with vitamins and minerals) is facing some
difficulty in the way it works and because of these difficulties, the
effects which can be seen on the skin and the body of the person are
made apparent.

As is commonly held, the skin of the body is like a plain sheet or
surface that reflects what a person does (what he eats, drinks, applies
to his body, etc…). Even though putting ointment on the injury or
abrasion may suffice temporarily, however it will not remove the actual
cause (of the problem) and thus, once again these things may return on
another part of the body.

It is a good thing to use these ointments or creams to have temporary
relief from what is troubling the person; however in the mean time, one
must go in search of a permanent solution and establish the root of the
problem.

Right now, there are two major problems which are evident in our society
and they are getting worse day by day.

The first problem is in relation to the use of drugs, and the second
problem is the open and unrestricted sexual activities taking place.

The age of people who are turning to cigarettes has dropped and even
children of a young age are now becoming polluted with this disease (of
smoking). According to one of the sources of news, one of the cities
near to us (near to Qum), there are over 150 women who are addicted to
drugs - even though the experts say that women are typically less likely
to become addicted to drugs. However as can be seen, this spiritual
sickness of drugs is now common amongst women, children, youth and the
young adults.

One way to cure this danger of drug abuse is to arrest all of those who
are addicted to drugs, and all those who are dealing in this are
executed. This is one way which we can follow. However, this direction
will not solve the fundamental problem. Thus, we must see what the root
of the addiction to drugs is amongst within each society.

Is it because people have nothing else to do?  Is it because they are
not religious?  Is it because they have not been taught the proper
culture, or is it the work and actions of the hidden hand of foreigners
who state that if the youth are hooked on drugs, then an important
source for us to influence this country will be taken care of??

We will never forget the event in history when the British wanted to
take over China so much so that they tried to introduce opium into their
culture, however the Chinese understood this and stood up in opposition
to the British. The British too, by resorting to their military prowess,
brought opium into China and in the books of history this event was
recorded as the Opium War.[^2]

By bringing opium into China, they were able to pollute the people, and
once the younger generation was polluted with this addiction, the
Chinese people then had no source of opposition to their enemies (the
British). From the time the British launched the War of Opium, they were
able to take benefit from another problem that the Chinese then had to
face - that of controlling the people - more specifically, the youth.

When the Americans were dominating over Afghanistan, it was thought that
in the face of the slogans that were being raised, that the roots and
causes of tobacco and drugs would be destroyed completely. However it
has been stated in the media that the planting and cultivating of opium
actually increased and was even greater than before - even more so than
the American led war on Afghanistan! 

The Americans declare the slogan of human rights and claim that they are
fighting against corruption and drug addiction, however they are
actually lying!  They are in reality, only going after what benefits
themselves and what is in their own interests, even if this means that
they must destroy everyone else in the world.

Therefore, we must go after the source of the problem. These youth must
be taught properly and one important factor is religion. Without doubt,
a religious young man or woman will never become addicted to these
things. However, once he or she has left the religion, then they will
definitely fall into addiction.

Another issue is that of being idle and having nothing else to do. Once
a person becomes idle and lazy, then he sees that there is good money to
be made from this job (of buying and selling drugs) and thus, he will go
after this kind of work. Thus, those people who are idle and lazy will
end up being corrupted and (spiritually) polluted.

If we do not sit and think about the plans of our enemy, then how are we
going to be able to fight against them? 

Therefore, one must go after the real causes of the problems and it is
not sufficient to simply rely on the effects of the problems and go
after these.

In order to truly understand the causes, we must organize meetings and
seminars and arrange programs so that the thinkers of the society can
sit down and chart out a course of action for the future of the
community.

For simple issues and concerns that come up, we see how many conferences
and seminars are held - however for such an important task like this
one - there are none?!

The second problem which is spreading right now is in relation to the
open and unrestricted sexual activities taking place which are
corrupting the youth.

Is it simply enough to place a group of volunteers and army personnel on
the street corner and use them to stop the prohibited meeting of young
men and women and expect the issue to be resolved, or must we tackle
this problem from another angle?

We must see what the roots of this problem are, and one of them is that
fewer marriages are taking place in the society. It has gotten harder
and harder for people to get married such as the following reasons:

1.       Expectations (on both sides) have become too high;

2.       The wedding formalities have become too numerous;

3.       The Mahr (dowry) has become too high;

4.       The material cost of getting married is too great.

In addition to these, there is also the spread and proliferation of
corruption which are causing the youth to become sexually excited (at
younger ages). There are some youth who say that with the present
situation and conditions, it is very difficult to control their sexual
desires.

We would say to them that, “If you wish to watch those bad movies with
open eyes, or if you wish to watch those particular CDs and read those
magazines and then come and say that it is difficult to control
yourself, then first off, you yourself must put an end to these things
which are sexually arousing you.”

When these things which cause a person to become sexually excited are
easily available - for example, one CD can contain a whole world full of
corruption or the InterNet which is full of these things that have made
the entire world unsafe from the point of view of moral ethics and other
issues - then how is it possible for the youth to control themselves?

Sometimes, wedding parties are arranged which contain things which cause
sexual excitement and are full of filth, which go directly against the
teachings of the religion. Hundreds of youth become spiritually polluted
in one such wedding program in which men and women come together and mix
with one another and show themselves off - not to mention the dancing
and music. At the same gathering, there are groups of young boys and
girls who are single and present in such a corrupt gathering and thus,
they too become misguided.

However the youth themselves wish to take part in such a gathering and
then at the same time cry out that they are not able to control their
sexual desires! 

Thus, the factors which lead one to become sexually excited must be
removed, and the factors which can lead to early marriages must be put
into place.

Thus, we must go back to the root of the problem, whereas in most these
issues, we are simply going to the effects and outcomes of them.

However, who is there that will even bother to listen to and hear these
words?  Even more than this, who is there that is willing and ready to
speak these words to the people?!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, pg. 370

[^2]: Despite strict government regulations, foreign trade in China
expanded during the late 18th and early 19th century. As trade grew, the
West found themselves having a large and rising trade deficit with
China. They were increasingly anxious to balance their trade. Yet the
Chinese, having a self-sufficient economy, showed little interest in
Western products. Finally, in 1820, the West found a product which China
did not have, and this was opium. Between 1829 and 1855, opium smuggling
developed rapidly along China's South Coast. In 1820, 9,708 chests of
opium were smuggled in per year. 15 years later, the smuggled opium rose
to 35,445 chests, a growth of 400%. In the 1830's, opium had became a
vice in China and virtually all men under 40 smoked it. The entire army
was addicted. It affected all classes of people, from the rich merchants
to the Taoists. The total number of addicts in China in the 1830's was
as high as 12 million. Due to the smuggle of opium, the trade deficit
Western countries had quickly turned into a trade surplus. China could
not export enough tea and silk to balance the trade. Instead the
difference in trade was made up by the export of Chinese silver, which
was highly valued for its fine qualities. In the 1835-1836 fiscal year
alone, China exported 4.5 million Spanish dollars worth of silver. In
1839, the Chinese opium smokers spent 100 million taels, while the
government's entire annual revenue was only 40 million taels. The drain
of silver greatly weakened the Chinese government. One government
official wrote, “If we continue to allow this trade to flourish, in a
few dozen years, we will find ourselves without any soldiers to resist
the enemy, and no money to equip an army.” Faced with this problem, the
Chinese government opened a debate among the Manchus and senior
officials. The debate lasted for two years and in the end a minority
group which favoured an uncompromising stand prevailed. In 1839, the
emperor issued 39 articles which imposed extremely severe punishments,
including death, for smoking and trading opium. Special Commissioner Lin
Ze-xu was sent to Canton to ensure the rules were carried out. Lin,
while in Canton, made 1,600 arrests and confiscated 11,000 pounds of
opium in two months. In June, Lin forced foreign merchants to hand over
20,000 chests of opium. He burned the opium in a public demonstration
and scattered the ashes across the sea. When Lin gave the order that
Canton should be completely closed to foreign trade, the British opened
hostilities and started the Opium War. China, with its backward army,
was overwhelmed and backed down. Commissioner Lin was recalled in
disgrace and sent to exile in the Northwest. The first of the unequal
treaties, the Treaty of Nanjing was signed. The Opium War, which lasted
from 1840 to 1842, ended with China losing in shame. [Taken from:
http://historyliterature.homestead.com/files/extended.html ]


