Discourse21: Characteristics of a True Believer – Part VII
==========================================================

   
 The 25th of the lunar month of Dhul Qa'dah - according to some of our
traditions - corresponds with the event known as Dahwul Ard (Earth Day).
It is also the day when Imam 'Ali b. Musa al-Rida (as) proceeded on his
journey from Madinah towards Tus (in present day Iran).

As for the first event, we know that the meaning of Dahw is to spread or
stretch and it is from the following verse of the Noble Qur'an that we
extract this meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الأَرْضِ بَعْدَ ذٌلِكَ دَحٌيهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And after that He (Allah) spread forth the Earth.”[^1]

What exactly does it mean to spread or stretch out the Earth and how do
we rationalize this theory with today's science which states that the
Earth has come from the Solar System (that we exist in) and is actually
a piece of the Sun which broke off?

When the Earth was separated from the Sun, it was a ball of fire with
molten liquid upon it. After this occurred, air pressure was formed
around the Earth from the water which was being transformed into vapor
and with this, a period of heavy rains started to fall upon the Earth.
This rain took over the entire face of the Earth and after a bit of
time, some of the water settled into the Earth and the dry ground that
was covered by water began to show.

Thus, the term Dahwul Ard is in the meaning of that day when the dry
Earth was brought forth from the rain and water which was upon the
Earth, and according to the traditions, this event started from the
House of Allah in Makkah.

Looking at the knowledge and science of today, this theory has not been
proven wrong.

In reality, this day was a day of great blessing from Allah (SwT), since
He brought forth the dry, barren Earth from under the water which led to
this planet being suitable for habitation.

In addition, according to some of the books of history, Imam 'Ali b.
Musa al-Rida (as) began his journey from Madinah towards Tus on this day
and this is also a great Divine blessing from Allah (SwT) for the people
of Iran.  It is through his footsteps into that country that lead to the
habitability, spirituality, sanctity and the blessings of Allah (SwT)
being showered upon them, and if the sacred burial spot of the Imam (as)
was not in this country, then the Iranians would have had no place for
refuge.

Every year, close to 15,000,000 people perform his visitation (Ziyarat)
in order to renew their pledge of allegiance to the Ahlul Bait. It is
only through the spiritual shadow of the Imam (as) which covers the
country which prevents calamities from befalling the Iranians

In any case, for various reasons, this is a very special day and we pray
that Allah (SwT) grants everyone the ability to make use of the Divine
Blessings that are accompanied with this day.

We have been narrating a tradition from the Prophet of Islam (S) to the
Commander of the Faithful,'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) in which the Noble
Prophet (S) listed one hundred and three characteristics of a true
believer and of them, thirty-one have been discussed, and in today's
discussion, we cover another four.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…حَلِيماً إِذَا جُهِلَ عَلَيْهِ، صَبُوراً عَلى مَنْ أَسَاءَ إِلَيْهِ،
يُبَجَّلُ الْكَبِيرَ وَ يُرَحِّمُ الصَّغِيرَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

”(the true believer is one who) when a person (says) something out of
ignorance about him, is forbearing; patient when a person does something
bad act to him; shows respect to his elders and shows mercy to the young
ones…”[^2]  
    
 The thirty-second characteristic of a true believer is that he shows
forbearance when a person acts with ignorance in relation to him, and if
the ignorant person says something bad to him, then he bears it with
patience and he does not reply to the bad thing with something bad.

The thirty-third characteristic is that he bears with patience when a
person intentionally commits something bad to him. The difference
between this characteristic and the previous one is that the previous
characteristic was in relation to when a person said something bad,
whereas this second level, it is in relation to a person doing a bad
action against him.

In Islam we have both what is known as the legislative law and the
ethical law. The legislative law states that if a person does something
bad to you, then you are permitted to do something bad to him in return
but only to that limit which he has done to you. In these regards, the
Qur\`an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ اعْـتَدى عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا اعْـتَدى
عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then if a person attacks you then you too attack him just as he
attacked you.”[^3]

These sorts of laws have been put into place so that those who wish to
perform bad deeds would not go to an extreme (of performing bad acts
because they know there would be some sort of accountability even in
this world). However the ethical law (in relation to this) is that not
only should we not retaliate with bad in the face of a bad deed, rather,
we should repel the bad act with something nice!  In this regards, the
Qur\`an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذَا مَرُّا بِاللَّغْوِ مَرُّوا كِرَاماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And when they pass by vain and trivial acts, they pass by with
dignity.”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِدْفَعْ بِاللَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ السَّيِّئَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Repel evil with that which is much better.”[^5]

**  
**

وَ إِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلاَماً

“And when the ignorant people address them, they (simply) say,
'Peace'.”[^6]

This is the ethical law.  
 The thirty-fourth characteristic of a true believer is that one shows
respect to the elders. The issue of showing respect to one's elders and
old people of the community has been mentioned quite often in the
traditions. The late Shaikh 'Abbas al-Qummi   narrates the following
tradition in his work Safinatul Bihar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ وَقَّرَ ذَا شَيْبَةٍ لِشَيْبَتِهِ آمَنَهُ اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى مِنْ
فَزَعٍ يَوْمُ الْقِيَمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The person who shows humility to an old person due to his old age,
Allah, the Most High, will protect that person from the evil on the Day
of Judgement.”[^7]  
 In another tradition it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مِنْ إِجْلاَلِ اللٌّهِ تَعَالـى إِكْرَامُ ذَى الشَّيْبَةِ
الْمُسْلِمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely one of the greatest things of Allah, the Most High, is the
showing of respect to the older Muslims.”[^8]

The thirty-fifth characteristic of a true believer is that he shows
mercy and compassion to those younger than him.

It is well known that when a person meets a, old person, he shows
respect simply for the fact that the person is of old age, and when
someone meets a younger person he shows him honour and respect because
he has committed less sins then him(since he has been on this Earth a
shorter time)!  
    
   

[^1]: Surat al-Naziyat (79), Verse 30

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 64, pg. 311

[^3]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 194

[^4]: Surat al-Furqan (35), Verse 72

[^5]: Surat al-Mu'minun (23), Verse 96

[^6]: Surat al-Furqan (35), Verse 63

[^7]: Safinat al-Bihar, under the word شيب

[^8]: Ibid.


