Discourse 23: On the Occasion of ‘Eidul Ghadir
==============================================

   
 We are on the heels of the commemoration of the glorious event of
'Eidul Ghadir. May Allah (SwT) make this a graet day of celebration for
all of the Shia, and grant us all the ability to follow in this school
of thought which aims to make us true human beings. The ethical
tradition and verse of the Qur\`an on the occasion of 'Eidul Ghadir
concerns the greatness of the Commander of the Faithful,'Ali b. Abi
Talib (as).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَيَّدَكَ بِنَصْرِهِ وَبِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ. وَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ
قُلُوبِهِمْ لَوْ أَنْفَقْتَ مَا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا مَا أَلَّفْتَ
بَيْنَ قُلُوبِهِمْ وَلٌكِنَّ اللٌّهَ أَلَّفَ بَيْنَهُمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (Allah) it is who has strengthened you (Muhammad) with His aid and
with (the company of) the believers. And (moreover) He has put affection
between their hearts (the believers). Now if you had spent all that is
in the Earth could you have produced that affection?  But Allah (alone)
has done it…”[^1]  
    
 In this verse, the Noble Qur\`an was speaking directly to Prophet
Muhammad (S) and saying that one of the miracles of this great
personality was his ability to bring the hearts of the true believers
together; and in addition, they also rose up to assist the Prophet (S).

The word “بنصره” translated as “with His aid” points to the Hidden help
and assistance which was given (to the Prophet (S)) in various battles
that he fought and even in other non-wartime events such as the event
know as Laiatul Mabit (the night that the Prophet migrated from Makkah
to Madinah). If the help of the Divine was not present, then it is very
difficult to say if the Prophet (S) would have been saved (on that
night), or not.

Allah (SwT) assists the true believers - actually not all of the
believers - rather, only those believers whose hearts are united with
one another!  In continuation, this verse tells us that the joining of
the hearts was not something which the Prophet (S) did by himself,
rather, this was brought about through the power of Allah (SwT).

We see that during the time of ignorance of the 'Arabs, there was a
great deal of animosity for one another and this hostility was even
inherited and passed down from one generation to the next and (even
generations later), revenge would be taken against another tribe. Such a
hatred and animosity that existed in this group of people could never be
removed through the normal means at one's disposal. Thus, Allah (SwT)
said that if all that was in the Earth would have been given in charity,
still the hearts of the 'Arabs would not have been united - rather, it
is through Allah (SwT) that the hearts of the believers were made into
one.

In this noble verse of the Qur'an, the word “مؤمنين” has appeared in the
plural form and this can be done for two reasons: sometimes it is done
to mean the actual, complete definition of the word (in the plural sense
of the word), and sometimes it is done to show respect to one person.
Thus, the plural is used, however it indicates only one person - and in
this verse, both interpretations can be accepted.

In relation to this verse of the Qur'an, the late 'Allamah Amini in his
work al-Ghadir[^2] narrated two tradition - one which has been mentioned
from the work by Khatib al-Baghdadi who is one of the most well known
scholars of the Ahlus Sunnah, and another tradition from al-Suyuti
(another well known scholar of the Ahlus Sunnah). In addition, others
have also related this tradition.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ النَّبِيُّ (صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ (وَسَلَّمَ)): لَمَا
عُرِجَ بِي رَأَيْتُ عَلى سَاقِ الْعَرْشِ مَكْتُوباً: لاٌ إلٌهَ إِلاَّ
اللٌّهُ، مُحَمَّدً رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ، أَيَّدْتُهُ بِعَلِيٍّ نُصْرَتُهُ
بِعَلِيٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said, “When I was taken up (into the heavens on the
Me'raj), I saw the following written on the leg of the Throne (of
Allah): 'There is no creature or entity worthy of worship except Allah,
and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and I have strengthened him
(Muhammad) with 'Ali and I have assisted him (Muhammad) with 'Ali.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ جَابِرٍ قَالَ النَّبِيُّ (صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ
(وَسَلَّمَ)): مَكْتُوبٌ فِي بَابِ الْجَنَّةِ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ
اللٌّهُ السَّمٌّوَاتِ وَ الأَرْضِ بِأَلْفى سَنَّةٍ: لاٌ إِلٌهَ إِلاَّ
اللٌّهُ مُحَمَّدً رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ أَيَّدْتُهُ بِعَلِيٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir narrated from the Prophet (S) that he said, “One thousand years
before Allah created the heavens and the Earth, it was written on the
Door of Paradise: ''There is no creature or entity worthy of worship
except Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and I have
strengthened him (Muhammad) with 'Ali.”

The Divine Throne is the point where the beginning of creation took
place and Jannah (Paradise) is the end of the path - meaning that from
the beginning to the end (of this universe), the entire trail or pathway
is emblazoned with the name of Allah (SwT), the Prophet Muhammad (S) and
Imam 'Ali (as). This points to the fact that 'Ali (as) was trained and
brought up as the helper, brother, assistant, supporter and protector of
the Prophet (S), and in instances where everyone else ran away, it was
only 'Ali (as) who stayed to defend the Prophet (S) and the best example
of this was during the battle of Uhud.

What is the difference between assistance (نصرت) and confirming
(تأييد)?  If these two words are used separate from one another (not in
one sentence), then they carry the same meaning. However, when they are
used together, then the meaning of confirming (تأييد) is to help one in
spiritual affairs while assistance (نصرت) is in the meaning of the
physical help one gives to another person.

This tradition quoted above has a message for everyone and it tells us
that 'Ali (as) did not reach to the rank that he possessed for nothing.
Rather, through his helping the religion of the Prophet (S), he reached
to that grand status.

Helping the religion of the Prophet (S) is not achieved through holding
gatherings (majalis) to commemorate joyous occasions in the Islamic
calendar, nor is it achieved through simple recitation of poems, nor
even going for Ziyarat. Rather, that person who claims to be of the
Tashayya' (Shia), must traverse on the path of being a fighter for the
religion, especially during our present time where various types of
attacks are being leveled against the Shia, and those things which the
Shia hold sacred.

Of course, this enmity against the Shia clearly shows that the spread of
the teachings of the Ahlul Bait (as) and the Shia beliefs are on the
increase and thus, the enemies have also risen up against us and our
beliefs.

One of the proofs of the truthfulness of the Shia beliefs is the sources
and references for all of our beliefs can also be found in the books of
the Ahlus Sunnah. In addition, all of the spiritual greatness that have
been recorded about the Ahlul Bait (as)  in our books are also mentioned
in their books!

When it comes to defending the issue of Wilayah and the teachings of the
Ahlul Bait (as), we must do so with logic and related proofs and
continue such discussions with a cool head and complete control of our
entire presence.

It is our hope that Insha-Allah, we are able to be living examples of
“أيده بنصره” and that we too can assist the school of the Ahlul Bait
(as)!  
  

[^1]: Surat al-Anfal (8), Verses 62 and 63

[^2]: Mustadrak Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 2, pg. 50


