Discourse 27: Characteristics of the True Believer – Part IX
============================================================

We were previously narrating a tradition from the Noble Prophet (S) to
the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) in which a total
of one hundred and three characteristics of a true believer were
explained. Instead of aimlessly wandering around (spiritually), the
person who wishes to tread upon the path of Islamic 'Irfan (mysticism)
should make use and act upon that which is mentioned in this tradition
and one will get closer in his journey towards Allah (SwT).  
 In our previous gatherings, we discussed forty-one characteristics and
today, we cover another four characteristics of a true believer.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… وُقُوراً، صَبُوراً، رَضِياً، شُكُوراً…
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) continued: ”(A true believer) is: dignified (in the face
of challenges), patient, content (with whatever Allah decrees for him),
thankful (for the blessings that Allah gives him).”[^1]  
    
 We can actually place this tradition alongside the Khutbah of the
Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) given to Hammam in
which 110 characteristics that a muttaqin (those who have Allah
consciousness) must possess was explained.

Three of the characteristics given by the Commander of the Faithful,
'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) in his talk to Hammam were actually explanations
of the words of the Prophet (S) in this tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي الزَلاَزِلِ وُقُوراً وَ فِي الْمَكَارِهِ صَبُوراً وَ فَي
الرَّخَاءِ شَكُوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the face of calamities they are dignified, and in the face of
detestable acts they are patient; and in the face of ease and comfort,
they are thankful.”[^2]  
 The forty-second characteristic of a true believer is that of “وقوراً”.
The word “وقور” is in the meaning of something heavy, and in the Noble
Qur'an, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْراً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And in their ears is a heaviness.”[^3]  
 Thus, we see that due to the sins that people commit, Allah (SwT)
places heaviness in their ears such that they are no longer able to hear
the Truth.

In the above mentioned speech to Hammam, the Commander of the Faithful,,
'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) further said, “They (those who have consciousness
of Allah) remain in the time of trials the way they remain in comfort.” 

Sometimes, we see that certain people are like feathers such that even
with the slightest movement (in the world around them), they lose their
footing because they have absolutely no foundation. There are others who
are like a leaf; others who are like the branches of a tree; and some
who are like the entire tree - however even if a strong wind was to come
about, it would rip the tree out of the ground by its roots!  However a
true believer is like a mountain such that even with strong winds - not
only does it not move at all, rather the mountain actually makes the
wind stop in its place - and a true believer is just like this!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَلْقى فِي الأَرْضِ رَوَاسِيَ أَنْ تَمِيدَ بِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And He has set up on the Earth, mountains, standing firm, lest it
should shake with you!”[^4]  
 In the commentary of this verse of the Qur\`an it has been mentioned
that if the mountains did not exist on the Earth, then the winds would
have destroyed the all of mankind. Therefore, a true believer is one who
is able to stop all sorts of corruption and evil and at the same time,
move along with the current.

The troubles which the Commander of the Faithful,, 'Ali b. Abi Talib
(as) alluded to in this speech are sometimes in relation to the inner
being of the person such as the inner (lower) passions and desires.

It has been mentioned in Surat Yusuf where it has been stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ هَمَّتْ بِهِ وَهَمَّ بِهَا لَوْلاَ أََنْ رَأى بُرْهَانَ
رَبِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And (with passion) did she (Zulaykha) desire him, and he (Yusuf) would
have desired her, but he saw the evidence of his Lord.”[^5]

Sometimes, these troubles are outside forces, such as the evil
whisperings of the many external Shaiatin that exist.

The forty-third characteristic is that of showing extreme patience and
again, in the speech given to Hammam , the Commander of the Faithful,,
'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِي الْمَكَارِهِ صَـبُوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And during the times of distress, one is patient.”

This means that in the face of the distressful events in life, the true,
perfect believer has patience. It is not necessary that these
distressful events come upon a person with great force - rather, even in
issues such as sickness, poverty, losing one's loved ones, etc… one must
have patience.

In the life of being a student, or and treading upon the path of being a
soldier in the army of Imam al-Zaman (as), and even within the period of
our youth, there are many difficulties and challenges that come about
and if a person does not have patience and fortitude, then one will not
be able to reach any stage in one's life.

We personally know of people who used to fast during the hot days of the
summer months and at the time of breaking the fast, did not even have a
piece of bread, or even money to go to the public bath to take a
shower!  The difficulties of today are definitely much less than this
and vary for every individual.

If do not have patience, then what will happen?  If we are not patient,
will this change our situation in any way?  How beautifully Imam 'Ali
(as) has put it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ صَبَرْتَ جَرَتْ عَلَيْكَ الْمَقَادِيرَ وَ أَنْتَ مَأْجُورٌ وَ
إِنْ جَزَعْتَ جَرَتْ عَلَيْكَ الْمَقَادِيرُ وَ أَنْتَ مَأْزُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If you are patient, then surely that which has been ordained will be
granted unto you and you will be rewarded; and if you are anxious or
uneasy then surely that which has been intended will also be granted to
you but you will be surrounded (by difficulties).”[^6]

Thus, it is best that we observe patience until we are able to achieve
the reward. One intellectual stated that: “Whenever I am faced with
difficulties, I say to myself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ لَمْ أَصْبِرْ فَمَا أَفْعَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The forty-fourth characteristic of a true believer is that one is
content with whatever Allah (SwT) decrees for him.

We must strive and struggle, but with all the work that we put forth, it
is only that which Allah (SwT) has decreed that will come to pass and a
true believer must be content with this - thus, the stages of Rida and
Taslim (contentment and submission) are very important levels.

With the progress in science and technology today, there are many things
which have become clear and understandable for us, such as when a child
develops jaundice at a young age. Today it has been shown that this
yellowness of the child is actually an antibiotic that protects the
child from other diseases whereas in previous times, it was thought that
this is a great problem. There are many other 'problems' which humanity
still does not know the reason why they occur but we must be patient
despite everything.

The forty-fifth characteristic of a true believer is that one is
thankful. In the Khutbah of Hammam , the Commander of the Faithful,,
'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِي الرَّخَاءِ شَكُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In times of ease, he is thankful.”  
 Often, when a person is in a good period of security, safety, and
peace, one tends to forget Allah (SwT). However when one is plagued with
difficulties, then one falls into the remembrance of Allah (SwT). The
Noble Qur\`an has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا نَجَّاهُمْ إِلـى الْبَرِّ إِذَا هُمْ يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And when they reach back to land (after facing difficulties at sea),
once again they setup partners with Him (Allah).”[^7]  
 Thus, a true believer is that person who remembers Allah (SwT) at all
times - during old age and during one's youth and thanks Allah (SwT)
during times of difficulty and ease.

It is our hope that Allah (SwT) gives us all the ability to act upon the
words in this tradition, which are sufficient for our entire life time!

**Discourse 28:** **Characteristics of the True Believer – Part
XCharacteristics of the True Believer – Part X**

Continuing on the tradition from the Noble Prophet (S) to the Commander
of the Faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) in which a total of one hundred
and three characteristics of the true, complete believer were explained,
we will cover two more in this discussion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…قَلِيلُ الْكَلاَمِ، صَدُوقُ الْلِسَانِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ”(A true believer) speaks less and is truthful in his speech…”[^8]  
    
 Thus, the forty-sixth characteristic of a true believer is that he
speaks less. In relation to one speaking less, we have numerous
traditions which show the importance of this trait since it is through
the tongue that numerous sins are committed.

This instrument of sinning is available everywhere, at all times and is
very easy to make use of. However as for other sins, there are (other)
ways through which they are done and they have a specific time and place
in which they can be performed - however the sins of the tongue are the
most dangerous ones.

In addition, the tongue is that instrument through which (at least)
thirty of the major sins are committed. However for sins such as
drinking alcohol or gambling, there is only one instrument of the body
at use when performing that sin. Therefore in order to counter the
dangers of the tongue, we have been commanded to speak very less -
rather - we must observe silence as much as possible.  
 In relation to the importance of maintaining silence and speaking less,
we have many traditions of which, we narrate five short ones from the
book Mizanul Hikmah. Contained within each of these tradition is one
point in relation to the benefit of not speaking much.

1. Silence - The First Step in the Worship of Allah (SwT):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول اللّه : أَلصُّمْتُ هُوَ أَوَّلُ الْعِبَادَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, “Silence is the first form of
worship (of Allah).”[^9]  
 Scholars who write and speak about attaining spiritual proximity to
Allah (SwT) first off advise their students to observe silence and speak
less.

From the point of view of the general (Muslim) population, the person
who drinks as much as one drop of alcohol when he is inside a Masjid is
a very despicable person - however these same people (who think that
this act is despicable) will spend the whole day - from morning to
night - in that same sacred place indulging in backbiting, lying, and
leveling false accusations against other people and they will not even
tire out in the least!  This is because the detestability of the sins of
the tongue are very less in the eyes of the people and they do not see
such things as being bad to perform. But rather, this is one of the most
dangerous things since as a sin gets more and more despicable, the more
and more people will try to stay away from that sin, but the sins of the
tongue are not even considered as anything bad by the common people.

2. Silence Keeps Shaitan Far Away:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ : عَلَيْكَ بِطُوْلِ الصُّمْتِ فَإِنَّهُ
مُطَرِّدَةُ لِلشَّيْطَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, “I advise you to prolong keeping
quiet since this act repels Shaitan.”[^10]

When a person speaks a lot, Shaitan is around him, busy listening to
what he is saying and at any moment, it is possible that the person's
tongue may begin to swerve and one may start to speak bad things.
Sometimes the bad feelings, feuds and enmities which take place within
families are due to the useless talk that Shaitan enters into.

3. Silence - The Best Protector:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَلِيٍّ (عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ): لاٌ حَافِظٌ أَحْفَظَ مِنَ
الصُّمْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam 'Ali (as) has said, “There is no protector better for protecting (a
person) than silence.”[^11]  
 We see that sometimes the tongue is the reason why a person is even
killed. In the face of jealousy, enmity and other Shaitanic things,
remaining quiet is the best protector for a person.  
 4. Silence - The Source of Dignity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَلِيٍّ : أَلصُّمْتُ يُكْسِيكَ الْوَقَارَ وَ يَكْفِيكَ مَؤُنَةَ
الإِعْتِذَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam 'Ali (as) has said, “Silence clothes a person with the robes of
dignity and reduces the need to always ask for forgiveness”[^12]

Those people who speak too much in gatherings are less dignified that
others. Thus, it is through maintaining silence that the honour of a
person is increased.

In addition to this, a person does not need to always ask for
forgiveness because when a person speaks too much, he will fall into the
trap of saying things which may necessitate him to apologize more often.
This will lessen his spiritual worth - and if he does not ask for
forgiveness, then his worth will be lessened. Thus, if he always has to
ask others for forgiveness, then his dignity is lowered and similarly,
his honour is also lowered in the eyes of the people since he is always
forced to ask others for forgiveness for his errors.

5. Silence - The Garden of Contemplation and Reflection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَلِيٍّ : أَلصُّمْتُ رَوْضَةُ الْفِكْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam 'Ali (as) has said, “Silence is the garden of contemplation.”[^13]

The person who speaks too much does not have the time to think, nor does
he have time to study and do research. However when one is quiet, new
thoughts and views are able to come into his head which get him to start
thinking and contemplating on other issues.

Thus, when a person's tongue starts working (and he speaks too much),
then there is no opportunity left for him to reflect and ponder. For
this reason it has been stated that you should associate yourself with
those people who speak less since they will inspire you with wisdom.

This is just a small section on the traditions in relation to silence.

Continuing on, the forty-seventh characteristic of a true believer is
that he is truthful in his speech and when one does speak, his words are
carefully thought out and truthful. It has been mentioned in the
traditions that truthfulness in speech is one sign of true faith and it
has been stated, “Do not examine people through the Salat they perform
or the fasts that they keep, rather, examine and test them through the
truthfulness of their speech. If their tongue is under control, then
they have some worth to them and if their tongue is not under their
control, then they have no worth to them and even if they perform
worship of Allah, this worship has no merit in it.”

For every single Prophet that Allah (SwT) raised up, He commanded them
to follow two principles in their mission:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَدَاءُ الأَمَانَةِ وَ صِدْقُ الْحَدِيثِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Maintain and return trusts given to them and truthfulness in their
speech.”

Every morning, the tongue speaks to the other parts of the body and asks
how they are doing. The rest of the body parts reply to the tongue that,
“If you leave us, then we will all be okay!”

Insha-Allah, all of us will take this issue as something serious and
will speak less and think and will also consider whatever we speak to be
a part of the actions that we do (that we will have to account for) and
we will not take part in those gatherings in which vain and useless talk
is going on.

It is our hope that Allah (SwT) gives us all the ability to act
according to these commandments.!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 64, pg. 311

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha, Speech 193

[^3]: Surat al-Kahf (18), Verse 57

[^4]: Surat al-Nahl (16), Verse 15

[^5]: Surat Yusuf (12), Verse 24

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, pg. 92

[^7]: Surat al-\`Ankabut (29), Verse 65

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 64, pg. 311

[^9]: Mizan al-Hikmah, Under the word sumt, tradition 10805

[^10]: Ibid., tradition 10809

[^11]: Ibid., tradition 10816

[^12]: Ibid., tradition 10822

[^13]: Ibid., tradition 10823


