Discourse 29: Confusion Around the World
========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَلْقَمَةِ بْنِ الْحَصِينِ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ قَيْسَ بْنِ عَاصِمِ
الْمِنْقَرِي يَقُولُ: قَدِمْتُ عَلى رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ في وَفْدِ مِنْ
جَمَاعَةٍ مِنْ بَنِي تَمِيمٍ، فَقَالَ لِي: إِغْتَسِلْ بِمَآءِ وَ
سِدْرٍ، فَفَعَلْتُ، ثُمَّ عُدْتُ إِلَيْهِ وَ قُلْتُ: يَا رَسُولَ
اللٌّهِِ، عِظْنَا عِظَةً نَنْـتَفِعُ بِهَا، فَقَالَ: يَا قَيْسُ، إِنَّ
مَعَ الْعِزِّ ذُلاًّ، وَ إِنَّ مَعَ الْحَيَاةِ مَوْتاً، وَ إِنَّ مَعَ
الدُّنْـيَا آخِرَةً، وَ إِنَّ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَسِيـباً، وَ عَلى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ رَقِيـباً وَ إِنَّ لِكُلِّ حَسَنَةٍ ثَوَاباً، وَ لِكُلِّ
سَيِّئَةٍ عِقَاباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from 'Alqamah b. al-Hasin that he said, “I heard
Qais b. 'Asim al-Minqari say, 'I was with the Messenger of Allah (S)
with a contingent from the tribe of Bani Tamim, when he said to me: “Go
and perform a ghusl with water mixed with sidr (a type of tree).”  The
companion said, “I did as I was told and returned back to the Prophet
and said to him, 'O' Messenger of Allah!  Give us some good council so
that we can make use of this advice.”  The Prophet said, “O' Qais! 
Surely along with honour and glory comes abasement; and along with life
comes death; and with this world there is the next world; and there is
an accountability for everything and there is a Watcher over everything;
and for every good deed, there is a reward, and for every bad action
there is a punishment.”[^1]  
    
 One of the traits of this world is the upheaval that comes along with
it. By this we mean that both this world and even humanity themselves -
who are a part of this world - will never remain in one state. It is
through paying attention to this point that a person's pride and vanity
is destroyed since most of the problems and troubles of mankind are due
to one's negligence.

Thus, if mankind was not negligent, then they would not easily give
themselves up to abasement, nor would they commit sins.  In summary it
can be said that this negligence is the root of the misfortunes of
mankind and in order to remove and protect a person from this wicked
state, Islam has brought forth various ways and means that must be
employed.

Things which Destroy Pride and Negligence
-----------------------------------------

A) Paying attention to the confusion that take place around the world is
enough to wake a person up and make him humble. If one notices that
after every period of greatness (of a person or country), there is a
period of abasement; after health there is sickness; after safety and
security there is danger and anarchy; and after youth there is old age;
then one would definitely humble oneself and try to remove all forms of
negligence from within oneself.

A person must know that status, wealth, power and all other material
bounties are not everlasting and whether one likes it or not, one day,
all of these will be taken away.

This truth is something very important that the world will never remain
in one state - rather, it is always changing and evolving and thus, we
can not rely upon it. Yes, we must take this world as a bridge and a
crossing point and a (temporary) residence to prepare ourselves for the
next life, however we must understand that it is only the sacred essence
of Allah (SwT) which will remain for eternity.

B) Obedience and worship (of Allah (SwT)) are two more things which can
remove arrogance and negligence. It is through the Salat that a person
can remember Allah (SwT) and remove the negligence within him.

There are some people who ask, “Until when must we perform this Salat?” 
It must be said to them that, “As long as we are in this world, we must
continue performing the Salat since principally, we are in need of this
Salat.”  We must lift our hands in need in this Salat while in the
presence of the One who is completely free of all needs and it is from
Him alone that we must ask for the spiritual medicine to cure ourselves.
Thus, the Salat will remove our negligence and spiritually awaken us.

C) Facing tribulations and difficulties also removes the veils of
negligence from a person. When a person faces difficulties, we see that
in the early stages, they are hard to go through, however if we
carefully look at these difficulties, they are actually a blessing for
us. In other words, these tribulations and all the difficulties which
they cause are only one side of a coin while the other side of this coin
is the happiness and pleasure that one will achieve (after having passed
these tests).

One of the people who used to speak to us from the Mimbar in the past
used to give us a very good example and would say, “If the entire
highway was clean and flat (with no bumps or side railings on it), then
surely a driver would fall asleep at the wheel. However if a portion of
the highway was under construction, then the person would stay awake
while driving and he would drive with utmost caution and be more
alert.”  In addition, sometimes a portion of the road (on the side - the
shoulder) is made uneven, so that the driver does not fall asleep at the
wheel.

Trials and tribulations is similar to this - the apparent aspect of
these challenges are things which may upset a person, however there is
mercy and blessing contained within them.

Another issue that has been alluded to in this tradition is that a
person must know and understand that every act one performs - however
great or small - even something involuntary as one's breathing - is
under watch and is being recorded.[^2]

Over and above any single creature, Allah the Most High, is watching
over and seeing what we do; then the two Angels are commanded to be
witnesses and write everything in a book; and even the land that a
person lives in and his own body parts will bear witness for or against
him on the Day of Resurrection.

In addition, it is mentioned in the tradition that even the day (each
and every time period) will also bear witness on the Day of Judgement in
relation to our actions and deeds.

Thus in summary we must know that we are under close watch and
scrutinized every moment of our lives!  
  

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 175

[^2]: Not only are the two Angels - Raqib and \`Atid watching everything
that we do, however Allah (SwT) is also witness to our actions.
Therefore, in the supplication of Kumayl, Imam \`Ali (as) says the
following: وَكُلَّ سَيِّئَةٍ أَمَرْتَ بِإِثْبَاتِهَا الْكِرَامَ
الْكَاتِبِينَ الَّذِينَ وَكَّلْتَهُمْ بِحِفْظِ مَا يَكُونُ مِنِّي
وَجَعَلْتَهُمْ شُهُوداً عَلَيَّ مَعَ جَوارِحِي، وَكُنْتَ أَنْتَ
الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيَّ مِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ، وَالشَّاهِدَ لِمَا خَفِيَ عَنْهُمْ…
“…and for every evil action that You have ordered the Noble Scribes to
write down, those whom You have appointed to record all my actions and
to be witness over me along with the limbs of my body, while in addition
to these, You also observe me and You witness those acts which You have
concealed even from them.”


