Discourse 2: Characteristics of The Shia – Part I
=================================================

The main area of discussion of volume 65 of the compilation of
traditions entitled Bihar al-Anwar is in regards to elucidating on the
characteristics of the Shia (Sifatush Shia). How helpful it would truly
be if we would all read this section (of Bihar al-Anwar) and truly
comprehend what a massive responsibility we have been given by being
referred to with the sacred title of being the Shia of the Ahlul Bait
(as).

A person cannot simply profess to be a Shia nor can one simply say that
he is a Shia just because his mother and father were Shia. Being a Shia
is a concept so comprehensive that it encompasses many responsibilities
which have been thoroughly explained by the Infalliables (as), under the
banner of “Sifatush Shia” - the characteristics of the Shia.

Muyassir b. 'Abdul 'Aziz was one of the most well known companions of
Imam Muhammad b. 'Ali al-Baqir (as) and has been highly praised in the
books of 'Ilmul Rijal. The 5th Imam (as) has also said the following in
relation to Muyassir:

“O' Muyassir!  Certainly death was prescribed for you on many occasions,
however Allah delayed this event from coming to you since you maintain
your family relations (Silatul Rahm) and because you try to alleviate
the problems of your family members.”

\*Imam Muhammad b. 'Ali al-Baqir (as) once said to Muyassir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مُيَسِّرُ أَلاَّ أَخْبِرَكَ بِشِيـعَـتِنَا؟ قُلْتُ بَلى جُعِلْتُ
فِدَاكَ. قَالَ إِنَّهُمْ حُصُونٌ حَصِينَةٍ وَ صُدُورٌ أَمِينَةٍ وَ
أَحْلاَمٌ وَزِينَةٍ لَيْسُوا بِالْمَذِيعِ الْبَذَرِ وَلاَ بِالْجُفَاتِ
الْمُرَاعِينَ. رُهْـبَانٌ بِاللَّيْلِ أَسَدٌ بِالنَّهَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Muyassir!  Should I not describe to you who our Shia (true
followers) are?”  Muyassir replied, “But of course, may I be sacrificed
for you (O' Imam).”  The Imam continued: “Unquestionably they (our Shia)
are like a fortified stronghold; their chests (hearts) are places that
preserve the trusts (given to them such as secrets and private
information) and are those who have a firm, dignified intelligence; they
do not spread rumors that they are told (by others) and are not strict,
severe people; nor are they people who show off. During the night time,
they are as monks (they stay up in the night, busy in prayer and the
worship of Allah) while during the daytime, they are as lions (active,
energetic, and involved in the activities of the world and their
community).”  
    
 In this concise tradition, there are seven characteristics mentioned
which one must possess in order to be classified as a Shia. Truly, a
veiled and hidden (comprehensive) world of subject-matter and
responsibilities has been given to us in this saying.

It is possible that the meaning of “a fortified stronghold” could mean
that: “Our Shia are those who are not influenced by the negative
propaganda of the enemies.”  
 Right now, the state of culture of the world is in a very dangerous
phase. Our youth are being faced  
 with this (cultural) menace - yet have we found any way to strengthen
the inner will of our youth in relation to this cultural onslaught?  If
we are not able to destroy the causes of this sickness, then we must at
least strengthen ourselves (in defence).

This point must also be kept in mind that during the time of the
infallible A\`immah, one of their greatest complaints was that some of
their Shia used to speak openly about their (the A\`immah's) secrets.
The people of that time were told not to speak about the great rank and
status which the A\`immah possessed to just anybody. The stations of: 
Knowledge of the Unseen of the Imam; the Intercession of the Imam for
his followers on the Day of Judgement; The Imams being the custodians of
the knowledge of the Messenger of Allah (S); them being witnesses and
observers of all of the actions of the Shia and also their rewards and
punishments and…  were all issues that the common people and the enemies
of the Ahlul Bait did not have the ability to hear or accept.

There were some Shia that were very simple minded and would sit in any
gathering and would speak about whatever they wanted (about the
A\`immah) and this act of theirs did not bring about anything except for
division, enmity and hatred (for the A\`immah). Therefore, the Imam has
said, “Our Shia are they in whose chests (hearts), secrets and trusts
are kept.”

The A\`immah have also said that their Shia are those who do not spread
secrets of others without any reason; they do not seek to cause division
between two people and even worse than this, they do not go to extremes
in the religion such as those which have recently come about.

By using the pretext of having firm belief in the Wilayah (of the Ahlul
Bait), there are some people who use terminology (in relation to the
A\`immah) that may lead to disbelief. In addition, they make use of
expressions which are not befitting the A\`immah and as such, the
infallible leaders would never be pleased with such people and their
words. Thus, we too must be careful of this new form of Ghulluw or
extremism in the faith of Islam.

These people have two defects in them which lead them towards their own
destruction. First off they think that if they attribute the
characteristics of Allah (SwT) to the A\`immah, Sayyidah Zainab (s.a) or
the Shuhada’ of Karbala, then this is exactly what the definition of
Wilayah demands.

The major defect in these people is - keeping in mind the present day
and age (that we are living in) which is a time in which various ways
and methods of diffusion of news and information are available such that
if something happens that makes the news headlines this morning, then
within one hour, it will reach the furthest points of the world - that
these people use words of exaggeration in relation to the A\`immah. It
is these incorrect statements which are made and then spread far and
wide and strike a huge blow to the Shia populous.

Once they say the things they want to say and then the news reaches to
the various cities (of the world), people then proceed to scribble
graffiti on the walls of their cities proclaiming the Shia to be
disbelievers!  After this of course, the enemies start to kill and
murder the Shia. These simple minded, unaware people unknowingly utter
some words that ultimately lead to the murder of the Shia in another
part of the world!

May the curse of Allah (SwT) be upon such uninformed individuals; and
may the curse of Allah (SwT) be upon those ignorant, unaware, uneducated
people in whose hands are these Majalis (religious gatherings)!  We must
not let the organization and planning of such gatherings and Majalis lie
in the hands of such people. Thus, their planning must stay in the hands
of the 'Ulama (scholars) of the society.

From the characteristics that have been mentioned in the tradition under
discussion in relation to the Shia is that they do not get angry. Rather
they are people who are full of love and possess the traits of elegance
and grace; they have the soul and spirit (of action and speech) of 'Ali
b. Abi Talib (as) within themselves. They have the spirit of Imam Ja'far
b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) and the rest of the Infallible Leaders of true
guidance within themselves and thus, they even show love and kindness to
their enemies!

In addition, the true Shia do not show off. The Imam has said that: “Our
true Shia have two different states within themselves. If one of our
Shia is busy in the night in the worship of Allah (SwT) and someone sees
them, then that person would think that this worshipper has entirely cut
himself off from the world and is an ascetic, since he does not take
part in the activities of this world. On the other hand, when anyone
sees them in the daytime, they would say that he is like a lion in his
behavior and is always present in the daily activities of the society,
keeping active.”

With this said, we can divide the Shia and the Muslims into one of the
following five categories:

1. The Geographical Muslim or Shia:
-----------------------------------

By this we mean a Shia who was born in (for example) Iran. From the
point of view of geography, Iran is a country where the Shia live and
thus, when they want to count the number of Shia in the world, simply
being born in Iran is used as a criteria (for being Shia).  Therefore,
this humble servant of Allah (SwT) is counted as being a Shia just as
all others born in Iran. So then if the person has true belief or not;
if he know the names of the A\`immah or not; if he can list the A\`immah
in order that they came or not - it makes no difference. This is what is
referred to as the Geographical Shia.

2. Shia by Inheritance:
-----------------------

By this we mean a person whose father and mother were Shia and thus,
they were born into a family whose parents are Shia.

3. The Verbal Shia:
-------------------

These are people who verbally declare that, “We are the Shia of 'Ali b.
Abi Talib (as),” however there is no sign of this belief in their
actions.

4. The Marginal Shia:
---------------------

These are Shia that practice the beliefs however are 'border-line' and
have not reached the true depths of being a true follower. From the
teachings of the Ahlul Bait, the only thing that you can see is their
taking part in the 'Azadari (mourning for the death of Imam Husain b.
'Ali (as)) and seeking help and taking the A\`immah as an intermediary
(Tawassul) and other things such as this - however, how else can we tell
that these are Shia?  When the days of 'Ashura come about, they all
gather together to beat their chests and attend the Majalis to mourn the
death (of Imam Husain b. 'Ali (as)). They also rush to go to Masjid
Jamkaran[^1] to pray and perform the special prayers there.

We do not wish to say that these things have little importance - rather,
they are very, very important, however this is all that they understand
from being a Shia and nothing else. As for the characteristic of being
“monks during the night (staying up in prayer and worship during the
night)” and being “a lion during the daytime (active and involved in the
society)” and possessing the beauty of intelligence and preserving the
trusts which are given to them (secrets), there are absolutely none of
these signs in this group of “Shia”!

5. The True Shia:
-----------------

These are people who have complete knowledge of the Divine (Allah (SwT))
and the books of the Ahlul Bait (their sayings and words) and their way
of life is just as has been mentioned as far as the characteristics have
been mentioned in this tradition!

[^1]: A Masjid outside of Qum, Iran which was built by the order of the
12th living Imam. (Tr.)


