Discourse 31: Dangers of the Tongue
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ نَافِعِ عَنْ ابْن عُمَرَ، قَالَ، قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ : رَحِمَ
عَبْداً تَكَلَّمَ فَغَنِمَ، أَوْ سَكَتَ فَسَلِمَ. إِنَّ اللِّسانَ
أَمْلَكُ شَيْءٍ لِلإِنْسَانَ، أَلاَ وَ إِنَّ كَلاَمَ الْعَبْدِ كُلَّهُ
عَلَيْهِ، إِلاَّ ذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ تَعَالـى، اَوْ أَمْرٌ بِمَعْرُوف، أَوْ
نَهْى عَنْ مُنْكَر، أَوْ إِصْلاَحٌ بَيْنَ الْمُؤْمِنينَ. فَقَال لَهُ
مُعَاذُ بْنُ جَبَل: يَا رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ، اَنُؤَاخِذُ بِمَا
نَتَكَلَّمُ؟ فَقَالَ: وَ هَلْ يَكُبُّ النَّاسَ عَلى مَنَاخِرِهِمْ فِي
النَّارِ، إِلاَّ حَصَائِدُ أَلْسِنَتِهِمْ، فَمَنْ أَرَادَ
السَّلاَمَةَ، فَلْيَحْفَظْ مَا جَرى بِهِ لِسَانُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Nafi' from b. 'Umar that he said, the
Messenger of Allah (S) said, “May (Allah) have mercy on that servant who
gains benefit when he speaks, or one who is protected through
maintaining silence. Surely the tongue is the thing which wields the
most authority over a person. Be aware that everything that servant
speaks is against him, except for the remembrance of Allah, the High, or
the commanding of others to that which is right or preventing them from
that which is evil, or setting the affair right between two believers.” 

One of the companions named Ma'adh b. Jabal said, “O' Messenger of
Allah!  Will we be held accountable for that which we speak?”  The
Prophet replied, “Is there anything else except an active tongue of a
person that will lead him into the hell fire?  So then whoever seeks
safety (from the fire), then let him protect that which comes out from
his tongue.”[^1]  
    
 In this tradition, the Prophet (S) alluded to some issues regarding the
tongue[^2] and has stated that, “May Allah's mercy be upon that servant
whom people can benefit from his speech and who observes silence in
order to stay safe and protected.”  In this part of the tradition, there
are two important issues which we must mention:

1. More than anything else which is within the body of a person, it is
the tongue which rules and controls one. The peculiarities that exist
and which are limited to that person who has a tongue can not be seen in
any other body part nor in any other creation.

a.       The tongue is always at the disposal of the person. Sometimes
the following similitude is given that, “For a person to speak is like
drinking water.”  Even still, if a person wants to drink water we see
that there are some prerequisites which must be fulfilled and carried
out, however in order to speak there are no prerequisites.

b.       The dangers of the tongue cannot be compared to the dangers of
any other body part, and the major sins which can be committed by the
tongue number apout twenty or thirty![^3]

c.       The despicability of the sins of the tongue are not very
detested in the sight of the people and when this occurs, then the
danger and hazard of performing them also increase. If - may Allah (SwT)
protect us - a person performs adultery then he has definitely done a
very bad act in the sight of the people. However if he was to backbite
another person - then as it is mentioned in the traditions, this is
actually worse than adultery and even worse than drinking alcohol and
its punishment is much more severe!  Normally, in the beliefs of other
people, the despicability of the act of backbiting is something minor,
or it may not even be considered as something bad at all!

The Prophet (S) then continued his speech and said that, “Everything
that a person says is against him, except for three types of speech” and
this limit or threshold is a true and factual threshold and there is no
room to say that this is a symbolic gesture on behalf of the Prophet
(S). These three things include: the remembrance of Allah; Amr bil
Ma'ruf and Nahl 'Anil Munkar; and making amends between two believers.

We must make sure that all of that which we speak in this world are
limited to these three issues and if we fall out of this boundary, then
we will definitely incur loss.

In relation to this tradition, there is an interesting interpretation
which should spiritually move some people. We see that after this speech
of the Prophet (S), Ma'ad b. Jabal said, “O' Messenger of Allah!  Is
speaking also something that a person will have to be accountable
for!?”  The Prophet (S) replied, to him, “Is there anything else except
for the remuneration of the tongue that a person will be thrown face
first into the hell fire?”

Thus, it is clear that the sins for which a person will be thrown into
the hell fire - face first - are not related to the sins performed by
the chest, feet or hands - rather it is that which he has earned through
his tongue.

It may be that such a punishment has been prescribed since when a person
is thrown into the hell fire due to the sins he has committed, he will
be thrown into the fire by that thing which led him to commit the sins.
Since it is the tongue by which he committed sins, thus, he will be
thrown into the hell fire face first. Thus, the first thing to be burnt
by the fire is his tongue - and it is this same tongue that lit the
fires (of hatred and sin in the world) and it is this organ through
which one (innocently) accused people and annoyed others.

Thus, every morning when we wake up from our sleep, we must ask Allah
(SwT) to protect us from the evils of the tongue. In addition, when we
are ready to go to bed to sleep at night, we must ask forgiveness from
Allah (SwT) for the sins which we committed in the day and definitely
the tongue of a person puts one into a great difficulty.[^4] !

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 187

[^2]: The tongue is the most important instrument for communication
between people and for the conveyance of information and data from one
nation and generation to another. If this instrument of communication
did not exist, then humanity would never have been able to reach the
levels which they have arrived at today, nor would they have been able
to progress to the great levels of knowledge, intelligence, material
gains and spiritual greatness which they are currently in. The tongue
itself is an amazing part of the body of mankind which also carries a
very heavy responsibility with it. In addition to helping and assisting
a person in swallowing his food, it also plays an important role in the
chewing of food. Continuously while one is eating morsels of food, the
teeth are hammering down and pushing the food around the mouth and this
act is so skillfully performed that the tongue is saved and protected
from being crushed by the teeth, whereas we see that it is continuously
alongside and flanking the teeth! Sometime - very rarely - it can be
seen that when chewing food, the tongue too gets bitten by the teeth and
at this time we scream out in pain!  Thus if the tongue did not possess
the dexterity that it has, one can just imagine what would have happened
to it!  In addition, after one has finished eating food, the tongue
actually rubs and wipes the teeth clean of any remaining food which
happens to be on them. More important than all of this - it is through
the tongue that we are able to speak and it is by way of the fast, yet
controlled movement which is continuously happening that the tongue is
able to carry out all of these tasks. It is interesting to note that
Allah (SwT) has placed something so easy to make use of at the disposal
of mankind for the task of speaking and verbal communication and this
instrument is within reach of everyone. In addition, this body part
never feels tired or exhausted, nor does it ask for anything to continue
its work with. Even more amazing than all of this is the talent to speak
which has been infused within a human being and has been granted to him
to use. Thus, a person is able put together countless sentences in
different forms to explain his wonderful and various points of
knowledge. What is even more important than all of this is the ability
to make up various words and this point can clearly be seen if we study
the thousands of languages which exist in the world today. Truthfully:
أَلْعَظَمَةُ لِلٌّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ. “The Greatness belongs to
Allah (alone) the One, the All-Powerful.” (Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 28, pg.
17)

[^3]: In the book, “Life under the Shadow of Ethical Morals” pp. 87-90,
Ayatullah al-\`U¨ma Makarim Shirazi writes that, “The late Fai¤ Kashani,
in his book Mahajjatul Baydha fi Tahdhibul Ahya, and Ghazali in his
work, Ihyaul \`Ulumud Din have presented a very detailed discussion
under the topic of the “Sins of the Tongue.”  Ghazali has mentioned
twenty types of sins that can take place by this body part, in the
following order: 1. Speaking on those issues which a person has no
business involving himself in; 2. Speaking too much and idle talk; 3.
Speaking on vain issues such as a description of a gathering in which
alcohol, gambling and adultery take place; 4. Arguing and quarrelling
(picking apart a discussion and arguing with others to find faults with
them such as making others feel worthless or boasting about one's self);
5. Disputes, quarrelling and arguing; 6. Making up things while
speaking; 7. Speaking bad things or using foul language; 8. Cursing
others; 9. Ghina (forbidden singing) and reading poems which contain no
truth; 10. Excessive joking; 11. Mocking and making fun of others; 12.
Spreading secrets about others; 13. Making false promises; 14. Lying;
15. Backbiting; 16. Spreading talk from one person to another; 17.
Hypocrisy in one's speech (two-tongued); 18. Excessively praising
others; 19. Being negligent of the specifics of an issue and speaking
what one knows with mistakes in his words, which can result in another
person being side-lined in issues of life; 20. The common people asking
difficult questions in relation to the theological beliefs which are
outside the scope and necessity for a person to understand such issues;
It goes without saying that the problems and troubles of the tongue are
not limited to these issues which Ghazali has mentioned and that which
he has conveyed is just a portion of some of the important sins that the
tongue can perform. For example, the below acts are also some of the
troubles of the tongue that he failed to mention: 1. False accusations;
2. False testimony; 3. Self praise; 4. Spreading evil, corruption or
unfounded information and lies - even if a person does so with the
supposition that such things are true; 5. Speaking while in a tage of
anger; 6. Being forceful through one's speech with repeated questions
(such as that which Bani Isra’il used to do - and others); 7. Hurting
others through one's speech; 8. Humiliating someone who has not done
anything to warrant this treatment; 9. Denial of the favours of Allah
(SwT) through one's speech; 10. Spreading wrong information or
encouraging others to perform sins; In addition, the sins of the tongue
are not even limited to these and thus from this discussion, we can see
the importance of the tongue.

[^4]: In the words of Mawlawi: اين زبان چون سنگ وفم آهن وش است آنچه بجهد
از زبان، چون آتش است سنگ و آهن را مزن بر هم گزاف گه ز روى نَقل و گه از
روى لاف زانكه تاريك است و از هر سو پنبه زار در ميان پنبه چون باشد شرار
ظالم آن قومى كه چشمان دوختند وز سخن ها عالمى را سوختند عالمى را يك سخن
ويران كند روبهان مرده را شيران كند


