Discourse 32: The World is a Storehouse of Treasures
====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ بْنِ عَبَّاس قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسولَ اللٌّهِ
يَقُولُ: أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، بَسْطُ الأَمَلِ مُتَقَدِّمُ حُلُولِ
الأَجَلِ، وَ الْمَعَادُ مِضْمَارُ الْعَمَلِ، فَمُغْتَبِطٌ بِمَا
احْتَقَبَ غَانِمٌ، وَ مُتَيَسِّرٌ بِمَافَاتِهِ نَادِمٌ. اَيُّهَا
النَّاسُ، إِنَّ الطَّمَعَ فَقْرٌ، وَ الْيَأْسَ غَنِيٌ وَ الْقَنَاعَةَ
رَاحَةٌ، وَ الْعُزْلَةَ عِبَادَةٌ، وَ الْعَمَلَ كَنْزٌ، وَ الدُّنْيَا
مَعْدِنٌ… فَبَادِرُوا الْعَمَلَ وَ أَنْـتُمْ فِي مَهْلِ الأََنْفَاسِ،
وَ جِدَّةِ الإِحْلاَسِ، قَبْلَ أَنْ تُأْخَذُوا بِالْكَظْمِ، فَلاَ
يَنْفَعُ النَّدَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Abdullah b. 'Abbas: “I heard the Messenger of
Allah (S) say: 'O' Mankind!  Before death comes to a person, all sorts
of wishes and desires are placed in front of him and surely the
Resurrection Day is a field of trial and a competition. (On this day,
people will be in one of two groups) The (poor) person will possess (the
good form) of envy (Al-Ghibtah). In that same amount as the wealth which
he gives (in the way of Allah), will he be successful and dignified. The
other type of person is that rich person who possessed things however
did not make use of his wealth and did not spend it in the way of Allah
and thus, he will be in grief and upset.

O' People!  Surely greed is (actually) poverty, and disregarding (that
which other people have) is richness, and contentment (with what one
possesses) is comfort and distancing ones' self (from people) is
worship, and (righteous) actions are a treasure, and this world is the
mine (of treasures) … Thus while you have the opportunity, strive to
perform good deeds even if the time remaining for you (on this Earth) is
as much as the time between two breaths or the time it takes to mount
upon your saddle, before the way of breathing is taken (away from you)
at which time any remorse will be of no use.'”[^1]  
    
 The Noble Prophet (S) brought forth two points in this tradition:  
 A)  Before the time of parting (from this world) and one's death, all
of the wishes and desires (which a person possesses) will be presented
in front of him.  
 This part of the tradition may point to the fact that as a person gets
older, his (material) desires also increase - and these also become
spiritually devoid and less logical as times goes on.[^2]  
 Thus, this is the danger bell to that person - no matter how old one
is, the desires for material things increase. It is this same thing that
will prevent a person from making the best of this world in order to
prepare oneself to have a better life in the next world.

B) The Resurrection Day is the field and area of actions. The reason why
the 'Arabs refer to the competition ground as a مضمار” “ is due to the
fact that before they would start a horseback riding competition, they
would first look to find an open area to practice in and there they
would try to get their horses to run as much as they could and it is
through this act that they would accomplish two things:  
 1.       The horses would get more training and experience.  
 2.       The horses would get thinner and fitter.

The word مضمار” is also in the meaning of becoming thinner and thus, in
the 24th khutbah recorded in Nahjul Balagha it is mentioned that, “Today
is the day of the competition ground.” 

This world which we are in is the training ground and the competition is
the next life. From this expression, we can deduce that sometimes the
area of competition - the competition ground - is also referred to as
the “مضمار” since it is there that the horses will run and will get
thinner and fitter.

In any case, according to this commandment from the Noble Prophet (S),
the Resurrection Day is the competition ground for actions. We should
not think that a person will be able to reach any status in life with
long desires and hopes. At that place (on the Day of Resurrection) it is
the actions of each person which will compete with one another, and the
person who had more good deeds will be the winner of this competition
and whoever had less good deeds and was polluted (with evil and sin)
will be the loser.

This world tries to keep everyone busy with long desires whereas in the
market of the Resurrection, these desires will serve absolutely no
purpose - rather, it is only those actions which produce benefits which
will be of use for us.

From the following sentence in the hadith, we understand that people are
of two types:

One group is those who are envious (good envy) of others or مغتبط,
whereas the second group is those who are content or متيسر. Some people
have stated that the first word actually means one who is happy or
joyous however according to our opinion, it refers to a poor person who
is envious and jealous of others and in the same amount that he spends
his wealth in the way of Allah (SwT), in that same amount he will attain
happiness and success.

There are some people who possess everything (materialistically
speaking) however since they are not able to make use of their wealth,
they are always upset and discontent.

In the next sentence, there are six points which have been mentioned:

1) & 2) The wealth and poverty of a person are related to the inside
(spiritual aspects) of a person and are not related to his apparent
aspects. If a person who possesses a lot was to own everything that is
in the world, he would still be poor - and the opposite of this is true
as well that if a person who does not pay attention to the material
world did not possess anything, he will still be rich. It is the soul
which must be full (of spiritual blessings) and which must remain
self-sufficient and needless (of others) since the best wealth of a
person is his internal and spiritual wealth. Thus, one who possesses
everything (materialistically) is actually poor, and one who disregards
wealth and material pleasures of this world is the truly wealthy person:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الطَّمَعَ فَقْرٌ، وَ الْيَأْسَ غِنَىً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely coveteousness is poverty while contentment is richness.”

3) A person is in need of rest and relaxation, and if he wishes to find
this rest and relaxation, then he must do so by searching deep within
oneself since it is through contentment that a person finds ease and
comfort:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْقِنَاعَةُ رَاحَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Contentment breeds comfort.”  
 and it is due to greed that a person is often put through difficulties
and challenges.

4) In order for a person to continuously be in the worship and servitude
of Allah (SwT), one must sit in a quiet and tranquil area. By this, we
do not mean that one distances oneself entirely from the people. Rather,
we mean that during the 24 hour period, one must put aside some time for
himself to be with his soul and his Allah. The best time to engage in
this contemplation is the last part of the night just before the rising
of the sun when normally, most people are asleep. The worship and prayer
with full attention and presence of the heart in the middle of the night
gives the heart and soul of a person spiritual energy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْعُزْلَةُ عِبَادَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…distancing ones' self (from people) is worship…”

5) & 6) The treasures and riches of a person are his actions, and this
world is the quarry (where these treasures can be extracted). Therea are
various explanations and similitudes in relation to the world that have
been given. For example it has been said that this world is the planting
ground for the next life or that this life is a house of admonition and
a bridge to cross (to the next life), however it is only in this
tradition that it has been mentioned that this world is a quarry, and
this is the only place where this similitude has been given. This world
is a mine out of which treasures are extracted.

Thus in summary, for that person who makes use of this world (for the
next life), this world is not such a bad place.

From these sentences we can deduce that in reality, the world is not
something despised and despicable, rather, it is us who have made this
world something reviled:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْعَمَلَ كَنْزٌ وَ الدُّنْـيَا مَعْدِنٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…and (righteous) actions are a treasure, and this world is the mine (of
treasures)…”  
 In closing, the Prophet (S) has ended his dialogue with a discussion on
the end of the life of a person and has stated that, “Of those issues
which are hidden from people is that of the end of his life. Not a
single person knows exactly when or where one will die.”  
 In the Qur\`an, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَــا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ مَاذَا تَكْسِبُ غَداً وَ مَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ
بِأَيِّ أَرْضٍ تَمُوتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And no soul knows that which it will earn tomorrow and no soul knows in
which land it shall die.”[^3]

Thus, it is from the wisdom of Allah (SwT) that  a person is kept
unaware of the time when one will die and keeping this hidden has two
benefits which have been mentioned in the book, Tawhid al-Mufaddhal. If
man knew the time span of his life, then his existence on this Earth
would not fall out of the following two scopes:

1. If he knew he had a long life, then in this scenario, negligence
would overtake him and he would reassure himself that, “I have 10, 20 or
50 years left to live and thus, the need to ask forgiveness for my sins
can be delayed and it is not necessary to make haste in asking for
forgiveness.”  Thus, a person will continue to perform sins and pollute
himself with negligence and fall into carelessness.

2. If a person knew that he will live for one more hour, one day, one
month or even one more year, then life will have no meaning for him as
he will say to himself, “I am only going to live one more month, so then
why should I go through all of this struggle?”  Thus, the pleasure and
enjoyment from life would be gone and a person would fall into despair.

This issue has other benefits to it which make a person lean towards the
two states at any given time - meaning that he is constantly in a state
of fear and hope.

From one point of view, he does not stop stretching forth his hand and
at the same time, he does not come close to committing sins since he
does not know if he is going to live another hour. In the Islamic
narrations this issue has been mentioned quite frequently.

In this tradition, two topics have been mentioned in the following way:
In that time period that we have been given respite and are still
breathing, we must work - this wording may allude to the fact that in
between each breath that a person takes (when he breathes in and then
exhales out), the time period between this cycle is something very
short. Incidentally, it has also been mentioned that between the beats
of the heart of a person, there is a short time period of rest which is
referred to as the “respite of the heart” and thus in summary, we see
that even in between the breaths which a person takes, there is also a
respite between each one and this is the shortest period of time that a
person is able to imagine.

The Prophet (S) then stated, “…just as you are given the respite to
live, during the time when you are inhaling and exhaling each breath, in
that same amount of time, you should not have hope of living in this
life for a long period as it is possible that when you exhale you may
never inhale again.”  Therefore, in this short period of time, you must
work towards righteous actions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَادِرُوا الْعَمَلَ وَ أَنْتُمْ فِي مَهْلِ الأَنْفاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Thus while you have the opportunity, strive to perform good deeds even
if the time remaining for you (on this Earth) is as much as the time
between two breaths…”

In the past, it was common that when a noble person mounted his steed,
he would place a cloth or some material on the horse (and then mount it)
and thus, the Prophet (S) said, “If you have been given respite during
your life even for that period that it would take to put on and take off
a cloth from your house - meaning such a short period of time - then you
must work towards righteous actions since it is very likely that in the
next instant, your life would come to a close.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجِدَّةِ الإِحْلاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…or the time it takes to mount upon your saddle…”  
 Before the time that you breathe your next breath and do some action
that you will later feel guilty about and which willhave no benefit for
you after and no turning back, you should perform righteous deeds.

If a person has even a small amount of knowledge in relation to the laws
of universe, then he would know how close death is to him. In the body
of a person, we see two important organs which can easily stop working:
the heart and the brain. There are a series of thin veins which are
responsible for the nutrients going to the heart and if these thin veins
were to break, then a part of the heart would stop working and a person
would end up having a heart attack.

Within the brain of a person even, there are various capillary veins and
if even one of these was to lose its power, then the brain would stop
working - and how tragic it would be if that part of the brain that
stopped working happened to be the control centre and this could even
happen if the heart was working properly and was healthy but it is the
brain which commands the heart in its activities.

Or can we imagine if one of the veins which controls actions of one side
of the body was to lose it ability to function causing that side of the
person's body to become paralyzed. Or if due to an impact on one of the
veins, a person was to develop a blood clot, then in this event too, a
person would lose the faculty of movement.

We see that when we are eating food and are swallowing our morsels, this
small tongue that we have which is inside the mouth actually covers over
the air pipe which is in our throat. If this act was to take place with
even the slightest delay, then we know that if a small amount of food
was to get caught in our wind pipe, and if through coughing, we could
not release this food, then without doubt, our death would be sealed.

Thus in summary, if a person does even a small amount of contemplation
on the creation and at his own life, then slowly one would definitely
develop thoughts in his own mind that tonight when one goes to sleep,
there is a possibility that one will not wake up in the morning!

In any case, these events that take place both within us and outside of
our bodies are numerous.

If we take for example these travels that we endeavour which is now a
part of everyone's life we see that our journeys that we go on are full
of dangers, even if a person is careful and vigilant - however it is
possible that others may not have this same vigilance.

Thus, while we are able to and as long as we have the strength and
energy, we must go forth to perform righteous actions and leave the
accountability with Allah (SwT).

Can we truly say that all of the actions that we have performed were
sincerely for Allah (SwT) and that no amount of insincerity or material
gain were involved in them?

We must seek refuge with Allah (SwT) because when a person will enter
into the presence of the Most High and see his hands empty (of good
deeds) and when he is given his book of records in his hand, he will
scream out, just as it has been mentioned in the Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا وَيْلَتَنَا مَالِ هٌذَا الْكِتَابِ لاَ يُغَادِرُ صَغِيـرَةً وَ لاَ
كَبِيـرَةً إِلاَّ أَحْصٌيهَا وَ وَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Ah!  Woe to us!  What a book is this!  It leaves out nothing small or
great but takes account thereof!  They will find all that they did
placed before them…” !

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 183

[^2]: Without doubt, wishes and desires - or in the language of the
\`Arabs, Aml (امل) - is the thing which keeps the wheels of life of a
person in constant motion, and if this quality was to be removed from
the hearts of the people for even one day, then surely the entire system
of organization and harmony of the people would be disrupted and very
few people would have any reason to stay strive and struggle towards a
purpose. However if this same characteristic and trait transgresses the
boundaries and turns into those 'long desires that are far from reach',
then this will lead to the worst of traits including being led astry and
bad fortune for a person. This can be compared to the water of life
which rains down from the skies - however, if this rain was to pour down
in large amounts, then this could lead to the destruction and ultimate
drowning of a person. These long desires are the same ones which have
been mentioned in verses 1 to 5 of Suratul Hijr (15) in the Noble Qur’an
and it is stated that this is the same thing which leads to negligence
of Allah (SwT), the truth and the realities around Him: اَلَرَ. تِلْكَ
آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ وَقُرْآنٍ مُبِينٍ. رُبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ. ذَرْهُمْ يَأْكُلُوا وَيَتَمَتَّعُوا
وَيُلْهِهِمْ الأَمَلُ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ. وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ
قَرْيَةٍ إِلاَّ وَلَهَا كِتَابٌ مَعْلُومٌ. مَا تَسْبِقُ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ
أَجَلَهَا وَمَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ “Alif. Lam. Ra. (1) These are the verses
of Revelation of a Qur’an which makes things clear (2) Again and again
will those who disbelieve wish that they had bowed (to Allah's will) in
Islam  (3) Leave them alone to enjoy (the good things of this life) and
to please themselves: let (false) hope amuse the,  soon will knowledge
(make them understand)  (4) Never did We destroy a population that had
not a term decreed and assigned beforehand  (5) Neither can people
anticipate its term, nor delay it.” Thus, these long desires and wishes
that one can not attain or reach to usually keep a person so busy and
preoccupied that one drowns oneself in the world of imagination and
fantasy. Therefore, a person removes oneself completely from the
realities of life and becomes a stranger to this life and neglects the
ultimate aims and purposes of why we are here. In a well known tradition
which has been narrated in Nahj al-Balagha (speech 42) from \`Ali b. Abi
Talib (as) which also speaks about the reality of this issue, it has
been mentioned that: أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، إِنَّ أَخْوَفَ مَا أَخَافُ
عَلَيْكُمُ اثْنَانِ: إِتِّبَاعُ الْهَوى وَ طُولُ الأََمَلِ. فَأَمَّا
إِتِّبَاعُ الْهَوى فَيَصُدُّ عَنِ الْحَقِّ وَ أَمَّا طُولُ الأَمَلِ
فَيُنْسِي الآخِرَةَ “O' people!  Surely the most frightening of things
which I warn you about are two: Following the lower passions and having
long desires. As for following your lower passions, this will distract
you from the Truth and as for having long desires, this will cause you
to forget the next life.” Truly how many people who possessed great
abilities, talents and the capacity (to achieve great things in this
life) were transformed and changed into weak individuals due to the
negative effects of having long desires and wishes. In such a state, the
person is no longer any worth or benefit to the society - in fact, he
even tramples upon his own self worth and greatness and distances
himself from any form of perfection, just as we read in the Supplication
of Kumayl: وَحَـبَسَني عَنْ نَفْعِي بُعْدُ أَمَلِي Principally, those
desires which go beyond limits always keep a person preoccupied, and
thus we see that day and night one must strive and struggle - thinking
to himself that he is working towards his own happiness, welfare and
well-being whereas we see that actually, he is going towards nothing
except loss, failure and discontent. It is these sorts of people who
normally - because of the state they end up in end their lives through
suicide, and it is their painful and sorrowful life and example which
can be used by others who have the spiritual eyes to see (the realities)
and the spiritual ears (to hear and understand the truth) as a source of
inspiration and learning. (Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 11, pg. 119)

[^3]: Surat Luqman (31), Verse 34


