Discourse 34: Conflict Between Actions and Beliefs
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ بْنِ عُمَرَ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ
يَقُولُ: اِنَّمَا هُوَ خَيْرٌ يُرْجى، أَوْ شَرٌّ يُتَّقى، أَوْ بَاطِلٌ
عُرِفَ فَاجْـتُنِبَ، أَوْ حَقٌّ يَتَعَيَّنُ فَطُلِبَ، وَ آخِرَةٌ
أَظَلَّ إقْبَالُهَا فَسُعِىَ لَهَا، وَ دنْيَا عُرِفَ نَفَادُهَا
فَأعْرِضَ عَنْهَا… إِنَّ الْعَجَبَ كُلَّ الْعَجَبِ لِمَنْ صَدَّقَ
بِدَارِ الْبَقَاءِ، وَ هُوَ يَسْعى لِدَارِ الْفَنَاءِ، وَ عَرَفَ أَنَّ
رِضَى اللٌّهِ فِي طَاعَتِهِ، وَ هُوَ يَسْعى فِي مُخَالَفَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from 'Abdullah b. 'Umar: “I heard the Messenger of
Allah (S) say, “Surely that which is good is what a person anticipates,
and that which is bad is what a person keeps away from; and that which
is vain is what a person is made to know about and it is avoided; and
that which is the truth is clear and apparent when a person seeks it;
and the next life is drawing near so work towards it, and it is known
that this world shall come to an end, so then turn away from it. Surely
that which is the most amazing is that a person who believes and accepts
as being true that there is an eternal abode, however he strives and
struggles for the abode (of this life) which is transitory; and one
acknowledges that surely the pleasure of Allah lies in obedience to Him,
however one struggles in going against Him.” [^1]  
    
 The sentences in this tradition are somewhat complex, however that
which can be noted is that in the beginning of his words, the Noble
Prophet (S) wanted to discuss the substance of this material world. In
the continuation of the tradition, the Prophet (S) talked about the
inconsistencies between the actions and theological beliefs of a person;
meaning that the problem with people is not their inability to recognize
Allah (SwT) - rather, it is the shortcomings in their (righteous)
actions.

The traits of this world are of two types - they are either good or bad.
If they are good traits, then they are worthy for a person to seek, and
if they are bad, then it is better that a person keeps away from them.
In other words, there are a series of truths which are recognized and
defined and a person too must recognize these and accept them and must
realize that without doubt there is a next life. Each and every person
is standing at the threshold of a path, and in order to reach to
felicity in the next world, one must put forth an effort and struggle
hard.

Each of us must realize that we cannot trust this material world for it
has never been loyal to anyone, thus we must try to keep our distance
from this material world.

Many times we commit sins and place the blame of this sin on the
shoulders of being ignorant and not knowing better - although we do not
say that ignorance is not one of the causes of being misled since many
of the despicable acts and bad deeds stem from being unaware - however
if we were to put this in the balance, we would see that most of the
issues (of life around us) are clear and it is the person himself who is
to blame.

It has been mentioned in Nahjul Balagha[^2] in relation to a person who
denounces the material world as being one of deception and trickery and
a wicked place, and the Imam (as) said to him, “O you who denounce the
material world and have been deceived by it's trickery, tell me where
has the world deluded you?”

The Imam then continues and states, “Are these bones of your forefathers
and ancestors that are under the ground the things which have deluded
you?  Is it these graves which are now destroyed which belonged to your
friends and relatives the things which have deluded you?  Is it the ill
people who had fallen sick for nights on end and had been bed-ridden and
called you to their side, and through their cries, screams, yelling and
the soul leaving  their bodies the thing which has deluded you?”

Imam 'Ali (as) stated that the best of warners are these same corpses
that are placed in front of a person and with the chanting of “**لا إله
إلا الله”,** are passed in front of our eyes to see…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَفى وَاعِظاً بِمَوْتى عَايَنْتُمُوهُمْ، حُمِلُوا إِلـى قُبُورِهِمْ
غَيْرَ رَاكِبينَ، وَ أُنْزِلُوا فِيهَا غَيْرَ نَازِلِيـنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The dead whom you witness suffice as warners. They were carried to
their graves, not going themselves, and were placed in them (the grave)
but not of their own accord. It seems as if they never lived in this
world and as if the next world had always been their abode.”[^3]

In the fall season, we just need to walk through the gardens and look at
all of the lessons around us within the dead plants and trees. This is
the same garden - which in the spring time - was full of the sound of
the nightingales and the sights of all of the other beautiful sights
including the budding and blossoming flowers - and this scene is similar
to the world around us. Sometimes for a period of six months, sometimes
for a period of sixty years and sometimes for a period of… these
beauties last. So where are these things that have deluded us?  It is
the person himself who wished to delude himself and thus, when he sins
he tries to place the blame of this act on the world?

It is because of this that we have been told to occasionally pay a visit
to those who are buried in the graveyard. At least once a week we should
try to make a trip to the cemetery so that we know that our final stage
in this world is there. It has been mentioned in the traditions that
through visiting the people in the graveyard, our depression and sorrow
is reduced, because these feelings are not related to the spiritual
aspect of our lives. We show grief because of the fact that we are not
able to reach such and such a lofty station (in the material world).

We show grief over not having a nice house!  We show grief for many
reasons and thus, when we go to the graveyard and see our eventual
resting place, our hearts then become as the grave - at ease and full of
tranquility.

There is a graveyard in Qum in which many scholars are buried. One day I
went to this area of the graveyard and saw many photos above the
graves - those of my previous teachers and many of my friends - not just
one or two but all of them are buried there. When you see these photos
and the graves, then you realize that death has also been prescribed for
us and these things that the common people say in relation to death such
as: “May Allah protect us from death” and, “May we seek refuge in Allah
(from dying)” have absolutely no meaning!  Death does not joke around
with people - and all nations and religions accept the fact that the
final outcome of everyone is death and that not a single person knows
exactly when he will die!

The Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib (as) spoke some amazing
words while on his death bed and summarized everything in one sentence
when he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا بِالأَمْسِ صَاحِبُكُمْ وَ أَنَا الْيَوْمَ عِبْرَةٌ لَكُمْ وَ
غَدًا مُفَارِقُكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Yesterday I was your companion and today I am the lesson (which you
should learn from) and tomorrow I will depart from you.”[^4]

Thus, we can summarize our life in this world into these three days -
yesterday, today and tomorrow.

Therefore, is there any value that a person should commit sins or take
the rights of another person?  If these things have no value, then let
us step forward and try to correct and reform ourselves.

A Conflict Between Actions and Beliefs:
---------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… إِنَّ الْعَجَبَ كُلَّ الْعَجَبِ لِمَنْ صَدَّقَ بِدَارِ الْبَقَاءِ،
وَ هُوَ يَسْعى لِدَارِ الْفَنَاءِ، وَ عَرَفَ أَنَّ رِضَى اللٌّهِ فِي
طَاعَتِهِ، وَ هُوَ يَسْعى فِي مُخَالَفَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely that which is the most amazing is that a person who believes and
accepts as being true that there is an eternal abode, however he strives
and struggles for the abode (of this life) which is transitory; and one
acknowledges that surely the pleasure of Allah lies in obedience to Him,
however one struggles in going against Him.”

Sometimes we see that a conflict arises between a person's beliefs and
actions - by this we mean that he may believe one thing however his
actions go against this. For this sort of a conflict, we must go
straight to the source and determine what it is, since a person's
beliefs have a direct impact on his actions and similarly, his actions
are related to his beliefs.

The difference between mankind and animals is that animals only posses
the natural and animalistic instincts to work with, however mankind has
the use of power of intelligence - meaning that mankind should think and
rationalize and then determine the good and bad in the act which one
wishes to perform. Once this is determined, then one should decide how
to act. However even though mankind has been given this trait, we see
many people still have a conflict between their actions and their
beliefs and thus we must analyze where this comes from.[^5]

An example of this is in two sentences which the Prophet (S) stated in
the tradition mentioned: “It is amazing that a person accepts the Day of
Resurrection however all of his endeavours are for this material world! 
In addition, it is amazing that a person knows that the pleasure of
Allah (SwT) lies in obeying Him, however he leaves this to perform
sins!”

From the point of view of psychology, such a disparity between actions
and beliefs actually stems from various sources, some of which include:

### 1) Weak Faith:

One's theological beliefs are weak and in this instance, they get mixed
with doubt and uncertainty. This doubt stems from the absence of true
acceptance (of the religion) in the heart. Such things also have an
impact on the actions that one performs since the actions are a mirror
image of that which is inside a person's heart.

When you see a fire burning, it is impossible to think that you will
ever bring your hand close to that fire. If we had this same amount of
belief in the words of Allah (SwT) then it is impossible that a conflict
could ever occur between our beliefs and actions that we perform:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ الْيَتَامى ظُلْماً إِنَّمَا
يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ نَاراً وَ سَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِـيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely those people who oppressively eat (take) the wealth of the
orphan, certainly they are eating fire in their stomachs and soon for
them shall there be a punishment of (hell) fire.”[^6]  
 Thus, in order to be protected from these trials and tribulations and
calamities, we must make our beliefs firm.

### 2) Power of the Lower Desires:

On the surface, a person may have good, strong faith - however his lower
desires are so strong that they actually take over his faith. In order
to prevent this spiritual disease, the person has no other choice but to
control his lower desires through the (spiritual) mortification of his
soul and this can not be accomplished except by studying the lives of
the great Muslims in history, reading about our previous scholars and
studing the verses of the Qur\`an and the traditions.

### 3) Negligence:

Such a person has faith and his lower desires are not powerful but this
person can be compared to the negligent one who unintentionally goes
towards fire or who, due to his negligence, accidentally pours hot water
on his hand. In summary, negligence is one of the factors responsible
for this form of conflict between one's faith and actions.

The material aspects of this world are so beautiful and alluring that a
person becomes negligent of all other things. The path to confront this
is through constant thinking - meaning that during the day, a person
must set aside some time for contemplation - and the best time is just
before going to sleep. One must stop and think for some time about the
actions that one performed during the day and what one was not able to
do. One should think to himself where one is and why he was brought into
this world and what was the purpose of being created?  One should ask
himself if he has reached close to the purpose of existence on this
Earth?  In summary, this continuous thinking can result in the curtains
of negligence being ripped apart from oneself.[^7]

In any case, when we see that there are people who act contrary to that
which they believe in, it is due to the reasons mentioned above.

Keeping in mind these issues, from one point we see that we must
strengthen our pillars of faith and from another point, we see that we
must constantly be engaged in thought.

Our faith can be increased and strengthened through more reading and
studying and through performing good, righteous deeds and by restraining
our lower desires.

Righteous actions make a person unwavering and steadfast in one's faith;
and it increases the nur (Divine Light) of guidance in the heart of a
person!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 182

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha, Short Saying 131

[^3]: Ibid., Speech 188

[^4]: Ibid., Speech 188

[^5]: It is important to mention this point here that the meaning of
this speech is that from one point of view, this world is a mirage and
can delude people; however from another point of view, it is a place of
learning lessons. If a person was to only pay attention to the material
aspects of the world and its glitter and gold, then it would take him
off the path of truth and make him negligent of the next life and of
Allah (Glory and Greatness be to Him). Thus, each and every person must
look towards death and those who have died before and take lessons from
them and through this, one can remove the negligence from one's heart.

[^6]: Surat al-Nisa (4), Verse 10

[^7]: The following poem explains that which was mentioned: روزها فكر من
اين است و همه شب سخنم كه چرا غافل از احوال دل خويشتنم از كجا آمده ام،
آمدنم بهر چه بود؟ به كجا مى روم؟ آخر ننُمايى وطنم مانده ام سخت عجب كز چه
سبب ساخت مرا يا چه بوده ست مراد وى ازين ساختنم؟ جان كه از عالَم عِلوى
است، يقين مى دانم رختِ خود باز برآنم كه همان جا فكنم مرغ باغ ملكوتم
نِيَم از عالَم خاك دو سه روزى قفسى ساخته اند از بدنم اى خوش آن روز كه
پرواز كنم تا برِ دوست به هواى سرِكويش پر و بالى بزنم


