Discourse 36: Paying Attention to Those who Came Before Us
==========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِِ : إِنَّمَا أَنْـتُمْ خَلَفُ مَاضِـيِينَ، وَ
بَقِيَّةُ مُتَقَدِّمِينَ كَانُوا أَكْبَرَ مِنْكُمْ بَسْطَةً، وَ
أَعْظَمَ سَطْوَةً، فَأُزْعِجُوا عَنْهَا أَسْكَنَ مَاكَانُوا إِلَيْها
(وَ غَدَرَتْ بِهِمْ) وَ أُخْرِجُوا مِنْهَا أَوْثَقَ مَا كَانُوا بِهَا،
فَلَمْ يَمْنَعْهُمْ قُوَّةُ عَشِيرَةٌ، وَ لاَ قُبِلَ مِنْهُمْ بَذْلُ
فِدْيَةٌ، فَارْحَلُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ بِزَادِ مُبَلِّغٍ قَبْلَ أَنْ
تَأْخُذُوا عَلى فُجْأَةِ وَ قَدْ غَفَلْتُمْ عَنِ لإِِسْتِعْدَادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Surely you all are the remainders of
those who have come before you and the remnants of those who have
already passed. Surely those before you where much greater in power and
superior in strength and greater in authority and thus even though they
were at the pinnacle of luxury and comforts and even though they had
complete reliance on this world, He (Allah) still took them to the next
life and the most powerful people of their group and their tribe were
not able to prevent them from leaving (this world) and not even offering
all the money that they had in ransom prevented them from being taken
from this world. So before you leave this world without any sort of
preparation and while you are in a state of negligence, make sure that
you prepare something in great amount (that you will be able to use in
the next world).” [^1]  
    
 This tradition is in relation to paying attention to the history of
those who have already passed away and this is also an issue that the
Noble Qur\`an has placed great emphasis upon and which has been alluded
to in various verses of the Qur\`an.

This tradition tells us that there were nations in the past who were
much greater than us in relation to their wealth, children and power and
although they had all of this, it still did not stop the Angel 'Izra\`il
(as) (the Angel of Death), from sparing them, or giving them any
respite. Thus, we should fear as well and not be dragged into this same
outcome which they were put into of being oblivious to death!

History is one of the six sources of knowledge, since as we know, we are
not the first nation of human beings to inhabit this Earth and who have
lived on this planet. Before us human beings were on this Earth and
there were other nations too who lived here and their remains and
effects have stayed behind for us to examine; and they are of two types:

1.       The physical remnants they left behind;  
 2.       Their historical remains.

1. The physical remnants which they left behind include their historical
narratives and works. When a person studies these effects of theirs and
sees their eventual outcome, then one will easily learn lessons from
them.

2. Their historical remnants include things such as the cities which
they lived in which were destroyed and the Qur\`an alludes to such
events: “On your journeys to Sham (present day Syria), you will find the
remnants of the destroyed cities of the people of Lut, 'Ad, Thamud and
others such nations.”

Why is it that we do not hear the message that these destroyed nations
are trying to convey to us?  Why do we not learn lessons from them? 
When we walk by a cemetery, why is it that we do not pay attention to
the screams and cries of the dead?  Look at the palaces and castles that
the kings and leaders had which are now ruins. Look at the remnants that
Fir'awn has left behind! 

Look at those pyramids which were built with millions of stones and took
years to build and in which thousands of workers had a hand in
constructing. Even today, not a single person has been able to explain
how these huge rocks were gathered and put into place to construct such
buildings! 

As it has been stated that in that part of the world where the pyramids
were built there were no large mountains for thousands of kilometres
such that it would be possible that they would have been able to procure
rocks to make such monuments. And as it is known these huge buildings
were built there to act as graves for the Pharaoh!

All of these things are lesson for us. With all of the power, supremacy
and “magic” that they possessed, where they able to keep alive for
eternity or to stand up against the face of death?

These examples are all lessons that we must learn from and indeed there
are many. Even this evil Shah (that ruled Iran) - Muhammad Rida - it is
narrated that upon the roof of his mansion, there were two machines
installed that if at night, he wanted to see the sky, he would simply
turn a key and the roof would open up (so that he could see the stars).
At the time in which he ruled, this was one of the newest pieces of
technology that was available. However in the end where did the Shah
reach to with all of his pomp and glory?  Is it not that in the end, he
too was buried under the ground?

The Messengers and Intimate friends of Allah (SwT) - who were as a
bouquet of beautiful flowers of creation - were not attached to the
material pleasures of this life - so, what can be said about others? 

It is for this reason that the Messenger of Allah (S) said, “You should
fear that you are travelling towards the next world whereas you have not
yet prepared yourselves for death.”

The preparation for death is to turn back towards Allah (SwT) - Tawbah -
meaning that one must sincerely purify one's heart and soul of sins so
that one will be ready to meet death!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 181


