Discourse 37: Forgiveness and Pardon
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْـنَا رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ جَالِسٌ، إِذَا رَأَيْنَاهُ ضَاحِكاً حَتّى
بَدَتْ ثَنَايَاهُ فَقُلْنَا: يَا رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ، مِمَّا ضَحِكْتَ؟
فَقَالَ: رَجُلاَنِ مِنْ أُمَّتِـي جِيئَا بَيْنَ يَدَى رَبِّي فَقَالَ
أَحَدُهُمَا: يَا رَبِّ خُذْلِي بِمَظْلِمَتِي مِنْ آخَرَ، فَقَالَ
اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى: أَعْطِ أَخَاكَ مَظْلَمَتَهُ. فَقَالَ: يَا رَبِّ،
لَمْ يَبْقَ مِنْ حَسَنَاتِي شَيْءٌ. فَقَالَ: يَا رَبِّ، فَلْيَحْمِلْ
مِنْ أَوْزَارِي. ثُمَّ فَاضَتْ عَيْنَا رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ وَ قَالَ: إِنَّ
ذٌلِكَ الْيَوْمَ لَيَوْمٌ تَحْـتَاجُ النَّاسُ فِيهِ إِلـى مَنْ
يَحْمِلُ عَنْهُمْ أَوْزَارَهُمْ. ثُمَّ قَالَ اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى
لِلطَّالِبِ بِحَقِّهِ: إِرْفَعْ بَصَرَكَ إِلـَى الْجَنَّةِ، فَانْظُرْ
مَاذَا تَرى؟ فَرَفَعَ رَأْسَهُ، فَرَأْى مَا أَعْجَبَهُ مِنَ الْخَيْرِ
وَ النِّعْمَةِ. فَقَالَ: يَا رَبِّ لَمِنْ هٌذَا؟ فَقَالَ: لَمِنْ
أَعْطَانِي ثَمَنَهُ. فَقَالَ: يَا رَبِّ، وَ مَنْ يَمْلِكُ ثَمَنَ
ذٌلِكَ؟ فَقَالَ: أَنْتَ، فَقَالَ: كَيْفَ بِذٌلِكَ؟ فَقَالَ: بِعَفْوِكَ
عَنْ أَخِيكَ. فَقَالَ: قَدْ عَفَوْتُ. فَقَالَ اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى: فَخُذْ
بِيَدِ أَخِيكَ، فَادْخُلاَ الْجَنَّةَ. فَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ :
فَـاتَّقُو اللٌّهَ، وَ أَصْلِحُوا ذَاتَ بَيْنِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One day the Messenger of Allah (S) was sitting down and we saw him
laugh until you could see the whiteness of his front teeth. We said to
him, 'O' Messenger of Allah!  Why are you laughing?' 

The Prophet replied, “Two men from my nation were in the presence of My
Lord when one of the two men said, 'O' Lord! Take my rights (that the
other person owes me in this world) from the other person.'  Allah, the
Most High, said (to the other person), “Give your brother back his
rights (which you took from him in the world).' 

Then the second man said, 'O' Lord!  There are no more good deeds
remaining (for me to give him) in place of the oppression that I did to
him.'  The first person (who had been wronged) then said, 'O' Lord then
place all of my sins on his back.'  At this point, the Prophet began to
cry and said, 'Today is the day which the people will be in need of a
person to place their sins on.' 

Allah, the Most High, then told the person who was trying to get his
rights back, 'Lift your eyes up towards the Paradise and tell me what
you see?'  So the person lifted his head and saw that which amazed him
from amongst goodness and blessings. The man then said, “O' Lord!  Who
is this for?'  Allah replied, “This is for the person who gives his
worth over to me.”  The person questioned, 'O' Lord!  And who is the one
whose worth is that?'  Allah said, 'You.'  The man then said, 'And how
is that possible?'  

Allah replied, 'By you forgiving your brother (you have given your worth
over to me).'  The man then said, 'Surely I have forgiven him.'  At this
time, Allah, the Noble and High, said, 'So then take your brother by
your hand and both of you enter into Paradise.'  The Messenger of Allah
(S) then said, 'Have consciousness of Allah and sort out the
disagreements between yourselves.'”[^1] and [^2]  
    
 In this tradition, there are two very important points which we must
pay attention to:

1. In the next life, there will be no other way to repay the debts which
were left over from the material world and there will not be a way to
become absolved from any responsibilities that one was under (in this
world). Thus, the material rights which are on a person will be
transformed into spiritual rights (in the next life).

For example, if in this world a person does not pay back his loans, then
according to a verse of the Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ لاَ يَنْفَعُ مَالٌ وَ لاَ بَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“On the day when neither wealth nor sons will profit anyone…”[^3]

on this day (Day of Judgement), one must repay his debts through his
good deeds. If a person does not have any good deeds to give out, then
one will have to accept the other person's sins on his record.

This is a very important issue that no matter how many good deeds a
person possesses, when he enters into the field on the Day of
Resurrection, he may end up as a penniless beggar - what else does he
have to give to other people except his deeds?

No matter how few sins a person may have on his record, here, in that
great location, his sins may be increased. A question which may arise is
how is it possible for a person to take on the responsibility of the
sins of other people?

It is for this reason that while in this world, we account all our
actions and pay back any debts that we have on us since. If for example,
Allah forbid, we insult a person then we must seek his forgiveness since
that which is even more important than the wealth of a Muslim is his
honour and dignity.

It has been mentioned in Biharul Anwar that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَرْبـى الرِّبَا عِرْضُ الرَّجُلِ الْمُسْلِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the worst form of usury is the destruction of the dignity of a
Muslim for no reason.”[^4]

If we destroy the honour and dignity of a person in this world and do
not make amends for it, then the compensation will be taken from our
good deeds (in the next world) and if we do not have any good deeds with
us, then we will have to take upon their sins. Thus, not only will we
have to bear the weight of our own sins on our shoulders, but we will
also have to bear the sins of others, just as it is mentioned in the
Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَلَيَحْمِلُنَّ أَثْقَالَهُمْ وَ أَثْقَالاً مَعَ أَثْقَالِهِمْ وَ
لَيُسْئَلُنَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَمَةِ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They will bear their own burdens and (other) burdens along with their
own, and on the Day of Judgement they will be called to account for
their falsehoods.”[^5]

The next part of the hadith mentions the station of foriveness, and what
a great status it is for the one who forgives others!  It has been
mentioned in the traditions that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَمَنُ الْجَنَّةِ الْعَفْوُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The price of Paradise is forgiveness”

It is not an honour or distinction for a person that if he sees another
person doing a bad deed that he keeps this in his heart such that one
day he can take revenge on that person, because this act of taking
revenge is for the animals.

There are some people who consider taking revenge as being a proof of
their courage and bravery and are of the belief that if a person was to
strike a blow to someone, then one must strike an even harder blow to
that person, however the opposite of this is true in Islam. If a person
strikes a blow upon you, and you forgive him, then this is a sign of
your courage and that you have complete control over your soul and thus,
a hostile and revenge-seeking person is not one who is truly successful.

In this relation, not only should we forgive another person, rather even
greater than this is that we must try and destroy the difference that
exists amongst the believers and if we are able to do this, then we
should then and convert the entire society into one that is built upon
forgiveness of others and not seeking revenge.

If this characteristic does not take shape within a society, then surely
its opposite will eventually become more and more common in a society
which will result in the entire population being in disharmony, disunion
and dissension. Such issues may never come to an end but the only way
that they can be put to rest is through forgiving one another!

[^1]: Ibid., vol. 74, pg. 180

[^2]: In this tradition we see that the issue of the Day of Resurrection
is mentioned in the past tense and this may have been done because the
present tense verb is used to denote an event that will for sure happen
in the future; or it may also be done as a form of revelation which came
to the Prophet (S).

[^3]: Surat al-al-Shuara\` (26), Verse 88

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, pg. 222

[^5]: Surat al-\`Ankabut (29), Verse 13


