Discourse 39: How to Keep Away from Doubtful Things and the Lower Desires (of the Soul)
=======================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ : إِنَّمَا يُؤْتَى النَّاسُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
عَنْ إِحْدى مِنْ ثَلاَثَ: إِمَّا مِنْ شُبْهَةٍ فِي الدِّينِ
ارْتَكَبُوهَا أَوْ شَهْوَةٍ لِلَذَّةٍ آثَرُوهَا أَوْ عَصَبِيَّةِ
لَحْمَةٍ أَعْمَلُوهَا. فَإِذَا لاَحَتْ لَكُمْ شُبْهَةٌ فِي الدِّينِ
فَاجْلُوهَا بِالْيَقِينِ، وَ إِذَا عُرِضَتْ لَكُمْ شَهْوَةٌ
فَاقْمَعُوهَا بِالزُّهْدِ، وَ إِذَا عَنَّتْ لَكُمْ غَضْبَةٌ
فَأَدُّوهَا بِالْعَفُوِ. إِنَّهُ يُنَادِي مُنَادٍ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
مَنْ كَانَ لَهُ عَلى اللٌّهِِ أَجْراً فَلْيَقُمْ، فَلا يَقُومُ إِلاَّ
الْعَافُونَ، أَلَمْ تَسْمَعُوا قَوْلَهُ تَعَالـى: فَمَنْ عَفَا وَ
أَصْلَحَ فَأَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Surely when the Day of Judgement comes
about, everyone will be grouped according to one of three deeds (and put
into the hell fire): It may be due to the doubtful things of the faith
which they performed; or it may be due to the desires of the lower self
which had an effect on on; or it may be due to the prejudice which had
been acted upon [^1].

So then if any confusions or doubts come to you in matters of your
religion, then remove them through certainty (of faith); and if your
lower desires come upon you then stand up against them through
asceticism; and if anger takes you over, then remove it through
forgiveness. Surely the Caller will call out on the Day of Judgement
that whoever has any rights upon Allah should stand up and take them
back from Him. So then none except those who forgave others (in this
world) will stand up - have you not heard the words of Allah, the Most
High, “So he who forgives and makes correct the relations, his reward is
with Allah.”[^2]  
    
 In this tradition, the Noble Prophet (S) has explained to us the way to
flee from the lower desires of the soul and doubtful things and has
stated that these affairs are made clear through possessing certainty of
the heart. In addition, the lower desires of the soul can be cut off
through observing self-discipline. However as for the fire of
discrimination - whichever form it may be - this must be cooled with the
power of forgiveness, and it is due to the things which have been
mentioned in this tradition that people will enter into the Hell Fire.

However, there are a group of people who are protected when in the
presence of sins and are not dragged towards these sorts of deeds. For
example, it is impossible to think that a true religious Scholar would -
may Allah protect us - drink alcohol or gamble. However, a young
individual who has been placed in a polluted environment in which these
sins take place would quickly be attracted to these things.

In addition, those who have knowledge of the religion would not be
pulled easily into doubtful issues, whereas this may not hold true for
the “common people”. Sometimes, when the person wants to justify
something, he searches through the verses of the Qur\`an and the
traditions and will try to find some ambiguous issue and then hold firm
onto that - he will pre-judge something and bring forth proofs which are
weaker than the a spider's web.

However, we must first see what Allah (SwT) and the Prophet (S) have
truly said and must consider ourselves as students of the Qur\`an - not
teachers of the Qur\`an! 

Thus, it is for this reason that the Prophet (S) said that the source of
people going to the hell fire are three things: following doubtful
things, discrimination and adhering to lower desires of the soul.

In continuation of the tradition, the Prophet (S) has mentioned, “On the
Day of Resurrection, a caller will proclaim that anyone who has any
reward to claim from Allah (SwT) should stand up. At this point, only
those people will stand up who - during the time of anger - had chosen
the path of forgiveness and pardoned their brother in religion.”

After this, the Prophet (S) himself answers the question which was posed
that, “Why do these people have a right on Allah?”  The Prophet (S)
states that, “Have you not heard this verse of the Qur\`an which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ عَفَا وَ أَصْلَحَ فَأَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللٌّهِِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So he who forgives and makes correct the relations, his reward is with
Allah.”

Therefore, we too must strive to establish love between our fellow
Muslims.

O' Allah!  You have ordered us to forgive one another, however You are
more worthy of forgiveness than we are, we have committed oppression
upon our own souls, so please forgive us! !  
    
    
  

[^1]: The word “تعصب” (Ta\`asub) and the word “عصبية” (\`Asabiyyah)
comes from the root word “عصب” in the meaning of tape or a connector
which joins together thigns which became separated. Later on, these
words were used for any sort of interaction or relation between people;
however this word is usually used in the meaning of excessiveness in
relations and is not a good term or word to use. In the Islamic
narrations, 'Ta\`asub' has been introduced as a despicable ethical trait
and has been severely discouraged to such a point that in a tradition
from the Noble Prophet of Islam (S), we are told that: مَنْ كَانَ فِي
قَلْبِه حَبَّةٌ مِنْ خَرْدَلٍ مِنْ عَصَبِيَّةٍ، بَعَثَهُ اللٌّهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ مَعَ أَعْرَابِ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ. “The person who has even
the weight of a mustard-seed of nationalism in his heart, Allah will
raise him up on the Day of Judgement with the pre-Islamic desert
\`Arabs.” In another tradition, this time from Imam Ja\`far b. Muhammad
as-Sadiq (as) we read that: مَنْ تَعَصَّبَ اَوْ تُعُصِّبَ لَهُ، فَقَدْ
خَلَعَ رِبْقَةَ الإِيْمَانِ مِنْ عُنُقِه. “A person who shows
discrimination or is discriminated against, surely has severed true
faith from himself.” From the Islamic narrations, we can deduce that it
was Iblis who was the first creation to show discrimination. In the
Khutbah known as al-Qasiah (Khutbah 192) in Nahj al-Balaghah, the
Commander of the Faithful, \`Ali b. Abi Talib (as) has mentioned in
detail and completely clarifies the issue of nationalism and
discrimination, and we will quote just an excerpt from it: أَمٌّا
إِبْليسُ، فَتَعَصَّبَ عَلى آدَمَ لاَِصْلِهِ وَ طَعَنَ عَلَيْهِ فِي
خِلْقَتِه، فَقَالَ: أَنَا نَارِيٌّ وَ أَنْتَ طِينِيٌّ. “As for Iblis, he
showed bigotry over Adam due to his origin and challenged him in
relation to his creation and said, “I am made form fire and you are made
form Earth.” The Imam (as) then continued:  فَإِنْ كَانَ لاَ بُدَّ مِنَ
الْعَصَبِيَّةِ، فَلْيَكُنْ تَعَصُّبُكُمْ لِمَكَارِمِ الْخِصَالِ وَ
مَحَامِدِ الأَفْعَالِ وَ مَحَاسِنِ الأُُمُورِ. “So if you are compelled
to show discrimination, then let your discrimination be due to righteous
etiquette, characteristics and beautified (good) deeds.” In this
tradition we clearly see that firmly standing for that which is the
truth is something good, and not only is this act not considered as
discrimination, rather, it is through this act that the soul of a person
is actually emptied from all the incorrect actions of the ignorant and
filled with true faith. We read in a tradition from Imam \`Ali b.
al-Husain (as) that when this Imam was asked about bigotry, he replied:
أَلْعَصَبِيَّةُ الَّتِي يَأْثِمُ عَلَيْهَا صَاحِبُهَا، أَنْ يَرَى
الرَّجُلُ شِرَارَ قَوْمِهِ خَيْراً مِنْ خِيَارِ قَوْمٍ آخِرِينَ. وَ
لَيْسَ مِنَ الْعَصَبِيَّةِ أَنْ يُحِبَّ الرَّجُلُ قَوْمَهُ، وَلٌكِنْ
مِنَ الْعَصَبِيَّةِ أَنْ يُعِينَ قَوْمَهُ عَلى الظُّلْمِ. “That form of
discrimination for which a person is considered as a sinner is when a
person sees the worst of people in his nation as being better than the
best people of another nation. Discrimination is not that a person loves
those of his own nation, rather, discrimination is when one helps his
own people in committing oppression.”  (Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 15, pg.
354)

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, pg. 180


