Discourse 4: Characteristics of The Shia – Part III
===================================================

Today, we wish to discuss two traditions in relation to the followers of
the Ahlul Bait - the Shia. The first tradition concerns the greatness of
the Shia, while the second tradition is in regards to the
characteristics of the Shia.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَخَلْتُ عَلى أَبِي بَكْرٍ الْحَضْرَمِي وَ هُوَ يَجُودُ بِنَفْسِهِ
فَنَظَرَ إِلَـيَّ وَ قَالَ لَيْتَ سَاعَةٌ الْكِذْبِ أَشْهَدُ عَلى
جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ أَنِّي سَمِعْتُهُ يَقُولُ لاَ تَمُسُّ النَّارَ
مَنْ مَاتَ وَ هُوَ يَقُولُ بِـهٌذَا الأَمْرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The narrator of the tradition states that, “I entered the presence of
Abi Bakr al-Hadhrami (one of the special companions of Imam Ja'far b.
Muhammad as-Sadiq (as)) while he was about to pass away. He looked at me
and said, 'This is not the time to speak lies. I bear witness on (the
life of) Ja'far b. Muhammad that I heard him say, 'The fire of hell
shall never touch the person who dies while believes in this command
(the Wilayah of the Ahlul Bait).'”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ سُلَيمَانِ بْنِ مَهْرَانِ قَالَ: دَخَلْتُ الصَّادِقَ وَ عِنْدَهُ
نَفَرٌ مِنَ الشِّـيعَةِ وَ هُوَ يَقُولُ مَعَاشِرَ الشِّـيعَةُ كُونُوا
لَنَا زَيْناً وَلاَ تَكُونُوا عَلَيْنَا شَيْئاً قُولُوا لِلنَّاسِ
حُسْناً إِحْفَظُوا أَلْسِنَتَكُمْ وَ كُفُّوهَا عَنِ الْفُضُولِ وَ
قِـبِيحِ الْقَوْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Salman b. Mahran said, “I entered into the presence of as-Sadiq (as)
while there were a group of people from among the Shia in his company
and he said the following to them, 'O' assembly of Shia!  Be a beauty
for us (the Ahlul Bait) and do not be a source of embarrassment for us.
Speak to the people in good ways and protect your tongues. Save your
tongues from speaking things that do not need to be said, and which are
detested.”[^1]  
    
 Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) brings up two issues in this
tradition - the first being a general rule and regulation, while the
other is a clear example that must be put into practice.

The general rule is that through our actions, we must not be a source of
embarrassment for the Ahlul Bait meaning that we must act in such a way
that when people look at us, they would immediately send blessings upon
those whom we follow and would say, “Congratulations to people such as
yourself that have been trained and nurtured as you have been.”  We must
not be a source of shame for the Ahlul Bait since they are the progeny
of the Prophet (S).

The 'Ulama of the Science of Akhlaq have stated that for those
traversing the spiritual path towards reaching Allah (SwT), the first
step that must be taken is to correct one's tongue, and as long as the
tongue and what one speaks is not corrected, the heart will never become
purified.

The tongue is the key to the entire essence of a person such that we are
able to discern what kind of a person an individual is by his method of
speech.  
 It is stated that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِخْتَبَرُوهُمْ بِصِدْقِ الْحَدِيثِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Test and examine people by the truthfulness of their speech.”

If a person's tongue is under lock and key, then one will definitely
speak very carefully, with honesty, and will be extremely vigilant in
what one says.

One of the ways to protect the tongue is just as the final commandment
in the tradition states that one should:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُفُّوهَا عَنِ الْفُضُولِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Prevent it (the tongue) from speaking excessively.”

Speaking less is one of the first things a person can do to begin his
journey on the path towards Allah (SwT) and this is known in the books
of Akhlaq as sumt or keeping quiet.

One scholar has said that there are five things which can any person who
has defects within himself become a perfect and complete person and they
are: silence, fasting, waking in the night (to pray), seclusion, and the
constant remembrance of Allah (SwT).

Truly, if a person were to practice these five things, one would
definitely become closer to Allah (SwT).

The first of the points mentioned which is silence, does not mean that
one does not speak at all. Rather, it means that one should not speak if
it is not necessary and one must avoid and kind of foul or vulgar
speech!  
  

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 65, pg. 161


