Discourse 5: Characteristics of The Shia – Part IV
==================================================

   
 Our ethical discussion today is a continuation of the topic on the
Greatness of the Shia (**فضائل الشيعة**). The late 'Allamah Majlisi  has
presented a very detailed discussion in relation to both the Greatness
of the Shia (**فضائل الشيعة**) and the Characteristics of the Shia
(**صفات الشيعة**) and he narrates many traditions in regards to these
two issues.

It is very important that all of us read these traditions and know for
ourselves - and then convey to others - the meaning of these traditions
so that those people who feel proud just because they have the title of
Shia attached to them will know that to be a follower of the teachings
of the Ahlul Bait (and to be called a Shia) is not an easy task.

We narrate one tradition which even though does not direcly speak about
the greatness of the Shia, however it addresses a responsibility that a
true Shia must fulfill.

In this short tradition from Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq  (as)
addressed to Abu Basir, the Imam explains the characteristics of a Shia.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ قَالَ: كُنْتُ عِنْدَ
أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ : إِذَا دَخَلَ عَلَيْهِ أَبُو بَصِـيرٍ … فَقَالَ
يَا أَبَا مُحَمَّدٍ لَقَدْ ذَكَرَكُمُ اللٌّهُ فِي كِتَابِهِ فَقَالَ: )
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانً ( وَاللٌّه مَا أَرَادَ
بِـهٌذَا إِلاَّ الأَئِمَّةِ وَشِيعَتِهِمْ، فَهَلْ سَرَرْتَكَ يَا أَبَا
مُحَمَّدٍ؟ قَالَ: قُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ زِدْنِي…
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Muhammad b. Isma'il from his father that he
said, “I was with Abi 'Abdillah (Ja'far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as)) when
Abu Basir entered our company. He was breathing heavily when the Imam
turned towards him and asked him what was troubling him. Abu Basir said
that old age had taken him over and he was finding it very difficult to
breathe. He stated that he was on the verge of leaving this world, but
worse than all of this, he was worried about what his state would be
after death and where he would end up.

The Imam said to him, 'Why are you speaking like this when you have the
honour of being classified as a Shia?'  At this point, the Imam went on
to list the greatness and reasons why one who is a Shia should be proud
and every time the Imam mentioned a point, he said to Abu Basir, “Does
this not bring pleasure to you (that you possess this trait)?”

Abu Basir would reply to the Imam: “Of course, may I be sacrificed for
you, please continue…”  Continuing on, the Imam (as) then said, “O' Abu
Basir!  Surely Allah has spoken about you, our Shia in the Qur\`an when
He said, {Surely over My servants no authority shall you (Shaitan)
have}[^1] and verily I swear that Allah has not intended any other
servants of His in this verse except the A\`immah and their Shia
(followers).”[^2]

In relation to Shaitan, there are many questions which the youth have
recently brought up, and thus it is necessary to review these queries.

Question 1:
-----------

Why did Allah (SwT) create this filthy, despicable creature known as
Shaitan who is able to whisper evil thoughts to us and he takes us away
from the path of happiness, whereas we were created to traverse the path
of happiness and success?

Answer 1:
---------

Allah (SwT) did not create Shaitan as Shaitan - rather, He created him
pure and there was even a time when he was classified among the Angels
and thus he was not a creation that was made to negatively influence
others. Rather, he was a righteous creature and was among the pious,
spiritually close worshippers in the presence of Allah (SwT).

However, after choosing the wrong path, he lost his spiritual direction
and through his pride and seeing himself as greater than Adam (as) and
through his envy and jealousy, he ended up following his low desires.
Thus, he sought status and greatness (over Adam (as)) and lowered his
rank.

Therefore, the original cause for the spiritual fall of Shaitan was due
to him following his low desires and even today, if a person does not
follow these in their life, then there is no way that Shaitan can
influence him.  
 In relation to Shaitan, the Qur\`an mentions that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبـى وَ اسْتَكْبَرَ وَ كَانَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“But he became conceited and developed pride in himself and thus he was
one of the disbelievers.”[^3]

Due to his actions, Allah (SwT) lowered him to the status that he
currently has and thus with this said we see that Shaitan was not always
Shaitan as we know him to be.

Retort to Question 1:
---------------------

If Shaitan was part of the group of Angels, and as we know that Angels
do not have the ability to make decisions on their own and are all under
the command of Allah (SwT), then how did he disobey the orders and turn
away from the commandments of Allah (SwT)?

Answer:
-------

Shaitan was not an Angel such that he did not have the power to make his
own decisions - rather, he was from among the Jinn.

Question 2:
-----------

As it is commonly known, we were all created for happiness and
prosperity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَ الإِنْسَ إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I (Allah) did not create the Jinn and Mankind except that they should
worship Me.”[^4]

With this said, why was it necessary to have a creation such as Shaitan
who would irritate people. As well, him being a creation who can not be
seen and thus, it is not possible to defend ourselves from him?  This
(in our opinion) goes against the actual purpose of the creation of
mankind.

**Answer 2:** The Qur\`an states that Shaitan cannot influence anyone
through his own accord as the doors to the heart of each person are
closed to Shaitan. Thus, it is the person himself who opens the door of
his heart to Shaitan. In reality, there is not a single despicable
creation that can in any way influence either the country which a person
lives in, nor the soul of a person:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا سُلْطَانُهُ عَلى الَّذِينَ يَتَوَلَّونَهُ وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ
بِهِ مُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“His authority (that of Shaitan) is only over those who take him as a
supporter and who join partners with Allah.”[^5]

That person who sets up Shaitan as a partner to Allah (SwT) and follows
him (Shaitan) will also be called a Shaitan on the Day of Judgement!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا كَانَ لِيَّ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانِ إِلاَّ أَنْ دَعَوْتُكُمْ
فَأْسَتَجَبْـتُمْ فَلاَ تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I (Shaitan) had no authority over you except that I invited you and you
listened to me. Therefore, do not reproach or blame me, rather, blame
your own souls.”[^6]

It is worthy to note that Shaitan himself is one of the means or
instruments towards perfection for the human being who is striving to
become a complete person, because since struggling and fighting against
him will would lead to strengthening ones' own inner faith.

In his book the Philosophy of History, one of the well known writers of
the West named Toinby writes that, “I have studied all of the nations of
the world and did not find a single civilization except that at one time
or another, they were put face to face with a powerful foreign enemy. In
order to defend themselves, they gathered all the people together and in
the end, were victorious.”

Thus, there is a wisdom in why Shaitan exists. Similarly, if there were
no lower desires in a human being, then the mystics ('Urafa) would not
become as strong as they are in their closeness to Allah (SwT).

The Qur\`an mentions that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Certainly Shaitan has no control or authority over My true servants.”

The meaning of this verse is not that Shaitan has no control over the
Shia, rather, Allah (SwT) is telling us that He is the defender and
protector of those people that come towards Him and worship Him.

This is truly a grand station and it is one of the reasons that those
who are the true Shia should have pride that they are not under the
influence of Shaitan.

The meaning of this verse is also that those people who are under the
influence of Shaitan are not true Shia, and therefore this verse
actually increases our responsibility as followers of the Ahlul Bait.

The Shia are not people who are Ma'sum (sinless) and thus, it is
possible that Shaitan can go after them, however the Qur\`an tells us
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّـذِينَ اتَّقَوا إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُوا فَإِذَا هُمْ مُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When a thought of evil from Shaitan assaults those people who have
consciousness of Allah, then they bring Allah to remembrance, then they
are able to see straight (the true path) once again!”[^7]

When those people who have tawqa are faced with the evil whispers of
Shaitan they rush towards the remembrance of Allah (SwT) (meaning that
they bring to memory the rewards and punishments that Allah (SwT) has
mentioned in the Qur\`an) and in His remembrance, they once again open
their eyes to the realities around them.

It is possible that Shaitan can come towards a Shia, but he can not
control them and thus, the responsibility of those who are followers of
the Ahlul Bait is very heavy.

Thus the powers of Shaitan should have no influence on the individual,
society, printed-press, market place and in the temporal and spiritual
life of a person and if this does happen (Shaitan takes over) then this
is a sign that the person is not really a Shia.

It is our prayer that Allah (SwT) gives us the success to have the pride
of being classified as one of those who is a true Shia!  
    
  

[^1]: Surat al-Hijr (15), Verse 42

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 65, pg. 51

[^3]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 34

[^4]: Surat al-Nahl (16), Verse 10

[^5]: Ibid., Verse 100

[^6]: Surat Ibrahim (14), Verse 22

[^7]: Surat al-A\`raf (7), Verse 201


