Discourse 6: If Sahib Al-Zaman Were To Come (Right Now)…
========================================================

Speaking about our living Imam is both enlightening and one which
spiritually trains and educates all of us. The late 'Allamah Majlisi 
has narrated a tradition in relation to Imam al-Mahdi (as) which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا قَامَ الْقَائِمُ حَكَمَ بِالْعَدْلِ وَ ارْتَفَعَ فِي أَيَّامِهِ
الْجَوْرَ وَ امْنَتِ بِهِ السُّبُلَ وَ أَخْرَجَتِ الأَرْضُ
بَرَكَاتِـهَا وَ رَدَّ كُلَّ حَقٍّ إِلـى أَهْلِهِ وَ لَمْ يَبْقَ
أَهْلَ دِيْنٍ حَتّى يُظْهِرُ الإِسْلاَمَ وَ يَعْتَرِفُوا
بِالإِيْمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When al-Qaim makes his advent, he will judge with justice and during
the time of his advent, all forms of tyranny will be removed and the
paths (towards him) will be made safe. The Earth will bring forth Her
blessings and the rights of each and every person will be given to them
and no person who follows any other religion (din) will remain except
that they will accept al-Islam and will come towards true faith.”[^1]  
    
 In this tradition, there are seven tasks which have been mentioned that
the Imam will accomplish:

1 and 2: The government of justice and the removal of all forms of
tyranny: The opposite of justice **(عدل)** is oppression **(ظلم)** - not
tyranny **(جور)** - whereas equality **(قسط)** is the opposite of
tyranny (جور) (according to the 'Arabic definition and the Islamic
understanding of these words and their meanings).

The difference between justice **(عدل)** and equality **(قسط)** is that
as justice refers to not taking away the rights of another person,
equality means that there is no differentiation between people.
Therefore, oppression means that you take something from another for
your own self, where as tyranny means that you take something from a
person and give it to somebody else.

For example, if I forcefully take away Zaid's house from him for my own
personal use - this act is oppression. But if I take Zaid's house and
give it to another person - this is tyranny. The exact opposite of this
is that I do not take Zaid's house for my own personal use - and this is
justice, and if I do not take it for the use of another person - then
this is equality. Therefore, equality means that differentiation does
not exist where as justice means that oppression does not exist.

3. The paths will be made safe: The paths towards the Imam will be made
safe and secure.

4. Natural Blessings: The Earth will bring forth her blessings, now
whether these are the blessings that come about through farming,
blessing of the minerals from the Earth or other types of powers and
energies that are presently hidden from us - these may all be correct.

5. Responsibilities will be returned to their rightful holder: The
rights and responsibilities will be given back to those who have lost
them, and this is completely opposite to our present day and age in
which a great number of jobs and occupations are in the hands of those
who have no knowledge of them, because the issue of who they know has
taken precedence over what they know.

6. The Ruling of al-Islam: No other religion will remain on the Earth
except for Islam and thus all other religions will fuse into one
Religion and that will be al-Islam.

7. Sincere attraction to al-Islam: This part of the tradition has two
meanings to it. It is possible that it refers to the point that everyone
will become followers of the teachings of the Ahlul Bait, or it could
mean that in addition to people showing an outward form of true faith,
they will also have the inner belief to make them true believers.

There is a difference that has been mentioned in the traditions in
relation to the terms Islam and Iman. Some of the traditions state that
Islam is what a person verbally declares and through this declaration,
his life is protected and the meat which he slaughters is made
permissible to eat. However Iman is that thing which is the true essence
(of servitude to Allah (SwT)) which will act as salvation for a person
on the Day of Judgement.

In other traditions, it is mentioned that Islam is equivalent to the
Masjidul Haram, whereas Iman is (like) the Ka'bah (general and
specific). There is a possibility that this explanation could be in
reference to the verse of the Qur\`an which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتِ الأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The desert 'Arabs say to you (O' Muhammad) that we believe…”[^2]

At the head of all the things that the Imam will perform, we see in the
tradition that there are four major things which he will do which we
summarize as being:

1. Correcting the Theological Beliefs:
--------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عَلى ظَهْرِ الأَرْضَ بَيْتِ حَجَرٍ وَ مَدَرٍ إِلاَّ أَدْخَلَهُ
اللٌّهُ كَلِمَةُ الإِسْلاَمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There will not remain a single stone house, mud house, nor a tent upon
the entire Earth except the word (teachings) of Islam will be in that
place (and thus, polytheism will no longer exist).”[^3]

2. Completion of the Intelligence:
----------------------------------

The advancement of knowledge and intelligence will also take place (at
this time), just as the late 'Allamah Majlisi  makes clear by quoting a
tradition from the Infallibles in relation to this point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا قَامَ قَائِمَنَا وَضَعَ يَدَهُ عَلى رُئُوسِ الْعِبَادِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When our Qaim makes his advent, he will place his hand over the heads
of the servants…”  
 It is possible that this means that people will be under the direction
and guidance of the Imam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَجَمَعَ بِهَا عُقُولِهِمْ وَ كَمُلَتْ بِهَا أَحْلاَمَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…so then (through this act), he will gather together their intelligence
and complete their knowledge.”[^4]

3. Justice and Equality:
------------------------

In the various traditions, it has been mentioned that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمْلَأُ الأَرْضَ عَدْلاً وَ قِسْطاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ ظُلْماً وَ
جَوْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He (the Imam) will fill the Earth with justice and equality just as it
had been filled with oppression and tyranny.”[^5]

4. Correction of the Moral Ethical Traits:
------------------------------------------

From the traditions which speak about the signs at the end of time, we
can deduce that removing all of the corrupt ethical traits and bringing
back the moral values of Islam back to life will be the duty of the
Imam.

There are also traditions which state that before the advent of Imam
al-Qaim (as), many corrupt ethical traits such as: adultery, theft,
bribery, selling less that what one paid for, the drinking of alcohol,
murdering of countless innocent people and other such sins will be very
common.

Thus, the meaning of this tradition is that when Imam al-Mahdi (as)
rises up to remove and eradicate all of these things, the entire valued
and cherished system of moral ethics would already be completely
destroyed and it is Imam al-Mahdi (as) who will restore it.

Imam al-Mahdi (as) will possess an army, military and many helpers and
supporters, just as we recite in the Ziyarat of Ale Yasin:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ وَ أَتْـبَاعِهِ وَ أَنْصَارِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then place me (O' Allah) amongst his followers, supporters and
helpers.”  
 Or as it can be seen in some traditions that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُجَاهِدِينَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

”(And place us) among those who struggle and fight in his way.”

That person who wishes to be a helper of the Imam must work tirelessly
in these four points mentioned and the one who does not possess any of
these four points within himself, however prays to Allah (SwT) to make
him of the helpers of the Imam (as) will see that his prayers will be
far from being answered.

If the scholars take it upon themselves to introduce this sort of
ethical program (in the community) then without doubt, we will see one
large class of preparation and upbringing take form among the community
members.

Tawassul (to the Imam) is a good thing and it has its own place -
however:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ وَ أَتْـبَاعِهِ وَ أَنْصَارِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then place me (O' Allah) amongst his followers, supporters and
helpers.”

This request will never be achieved simply through Tawassul and prayer -
rather, our belief and acceptance of the Tawhid of Allah (SwT) must be
one of sincerity and thus, we must remove all forms and effects of
polytheism from our hearts, lives and from the society.

We must practically implement justice and equality in relation to the
people and our family and those who are around us and we must make the
valuable ethical traits apparent within ourselves.  
 If it was made completely clear for what reasons the Imam would make
his advent, then this would definitely change the face of the society.

One who does not possess any of these traits can not expect to stand in
the ranks with the Imam. Therefore, it is very good that we actively do
something to call the attention of the people towards the goals and
objectives of the Imam so that all of us can mound ourselves to becoming
better human beings.

We must know that there are hidden hands at work which are striving to
pollute the gatherings (majalis) that we hold for Imam al-Mahdi (as) by
introducing despicable forms of singing and playing of music as well as
breaking other limits of the Shari'ah. Sometimes, the enemy will use
such religious gatherings and programs to reach their evil goals, just
as the story of Masjid Dhirar through which the enemies wanted to build
a Masjid to actually destroy the roots and symbol of what a Masjid
stands for!

Thus, the goals and values must be manifested in the correct manner,
lest the enemies who are trying to remove the value and worth of such
programs become successful in their goals.

We hope that Allah (SwT) accepts this supplication in relation to us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَعْوَانِهِ وَ أَنْصَارِهِ وَ أَتْـَاعِهِ
وَ شِيعَتِهِ وَ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ بَيْنَ يَدَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Allah!  Place me from amongst his helpers, assistants, followers and
supporters and of those who fight in his ranks.” !  
  

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pg. 338

[^2]: Surat al-Hujurat (4ا), Verse 14

[^3]: Tafsir al-Qurtubi [Imam Abu \`Abdullah Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abu
Bakr al-Ansari al-Qurtubi], vol. 12, pg. 300

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pg. 338

[^5]: Ibid., vol. 14, pg. 33


