Discourse 8: Characteristics Of The Shia – Part V
=================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ يَقُولُ: إِنَّ أَحَقَّ النَّاسَ
بِالْوَرَعِ آلِ مُحَمّدٍ وَ شِيعَتِهِمْ كَيْ تَقْتَدِي الرَعِيَّةَ
بِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I heard Aba 'Abdillah (as) say, “The closest people to precaution and
keeping away from sins (al-Wara') are the family of Muhammad (blessings
of Allah be upon him and his family) and their Shia (followers) as long
as other people are following them (those who claim to be the Shia or
followers).”[^1]  
    
 Surely being classified as a Shia is a gift from the Imam to us. The
Infallible A\`immah and the Prophet (S) are all leaders for the
fspeople, and the Shia too must be leaders for the people.

In reality, within an Islamic society, the Shia must be at the forefront
and others must follow behind them - just as we see in the south of
Lebanon that among the ranks of those who are struggling (for their
rights) are the Shia and the others are following them. Everyone knows
and recognizes these people (in South Lebanon) as the ones who are
sacrificing themselves and giving up their lives for their cause.

Throughout the entire world, the Shia must not only be known for their
struggling and opposition (to tyranny) and their active Jihad (against
the enemy), rather they must also be role-models and examples in all
aspects of life for others to follow

The word Wara' **(ورع)** is a concept that is even higher than just
plain Taqwa **(تقوى)**. Some of the great scholars have said that Wara'
can actually be divided into four categories:

1. Level One - The Wara' of the Ta\`ibin
----------------------------------------

(Those who are repentant): In this level, a person is saved from
committing open transgressions (against the laws of Allah (SwT)); and
the simplest level of this is that of 'Adalah (the character of being
just and upright). By this we mean that after committing a sin and
performing sincere repentance, the person returns back to the ranks of
those who are upright and just ('Adil).

2. Level Two - The Wara' of the Salihin
---------------------------------------

(Those who are righteous): At this level, a person keeps away from
things which are doubtful - meaning that those things which are
apparently permitted (halal), however there may be some doubt in regards
to them and thus, a person keeps away from these things as well.

3. Level Three - The Wara' of the Muttaqin
------------------------------------------

(Those who have Allah-Consciousness): These people refrain from sinning,
and also refrain from those things in which there is doubt and those
things which are permitted (halal) however in which there is a
possibility that they will be dragged towards the forbidden (haram) if
they perform these acts. For example, a person who speaks little since
he fears that if he begins to speak too much, he may unknowingly
backbite another person. In reality, this sort of person has entered
into a mental state of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتْرُكُ مَا لاَ بَأْسَ بِهِ حَذَراً مِمَا بَأْسَ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I will refrain from those things which there is no problem in
performing with the fear that I may go towards those things which are
problematic (in performing).”

4. Level Four - The Wara' of the Siddiqin
-----------------------------------------

(Those who are the Truthful Ones): At this level, one turns his
attention completely away from everything other than Allah (SwT) because
of the fear that he may waste precious time of his life (on other than
His Creator). This person also turns his spiritual eyes away from
everything other than Allah (SwT) and focuses all of his attention only
on Him so that the time of his life is spent in looking towards the
Creator.

Truthfully, the most valuable possession of our lives is time, but
unfortunately sometimes we waste it and are negligent (of Allah (SwT)).
Thus, the truthful ones realize that their level of Wara' is in relation
to the time and how they spend it and are careful that they do not waste
it in being negligent of Allah (SwT).

Imam Ja'far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said that the most precautious
of people are the family of the Prophet and their followers (Shia) and
that the minimum level that they (the Shia) must be at is the first
level - meaning that the Shia must be fair and upright ('Adil) people
and leaders for other people. Thus, a Shia must not only be trying to
save himself (from the hell fire), but he must also be striving to save
others around him.

At the end of Suratul Furqan (25), there are 12 characteristics
mentioned for the 'Ibadul Rahman (Servant of the Most Merciful) of which
one of them is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا وَ
ذُرِّيَاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْـيُنٍ وَاجَعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَاماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Those people who say, 'O' our Lord grant us from among our spouses and
among our children that which enlightens our eyes and make us an Imam
(leader) for those who have Allah-Consciousness.”[^2]

There are people who pray to Allah (SwT) not to leave their children as
'normal children' - rather that they are made as the light of their eyes
and examples for other Muslims. These people humbly request Allah (SwT)
to make themselves a leader (Imam) of those who possess Taqwa. Some may
ask that is this goal to make ones' self superior or greater than other
people (in a negative context)?  No!  Rather, this is a person who is
seeking sublimity and spiritual greatness.

Therefore, it is clear that to take the name of Tashayyah' (to be a
Shia) and to claim among the people that one is in the ranks of a Shia
is something that is very simple, however it is extremely difficult to
be a true Shia.

Imam az-Zaman (as) and the rest of the Infallible Leaders of guidance
expect more from those who are scholars and those who are studying the
Islamic sciences and it is these people that must be examples and role
models for the rest of the people so that others can follow them.

Thus, the most important form of Tabligh and conveyance of the message
of Islam is that a person develops such a level of Taqwa and Wara'
within his soul that the people are able to develop a deep cognizance
(ma'rifat) of Allah (SwT) within them. Through this, the people will
know who a true human being is and who the true Shias are.

The true Shia are those who are brave, patient, full of love, those who
keep away from vices and who refrain from the prohibited acts and who do
not have the love of status or position (within society) in their
hearts.

The conditions in our present day and age are exclusive to today and we
are faced with three major crises:

1. The Political Crisis:
------------------------

Never ending problems that have taken place today everywhere in which we
do not see any positive outcome for the people of the world.

2. The Economic Crisis:
-----------------------

These are problems in relation to affordable housing, the high cost of
marriages, problems in relation to unemployment and the tribulations
brought about through inflation.

3. The Ethical Crisis: 
-----------------------

This point is even more important than the first two especially the
crisis which has erupted and engulfed the young boys and girls of the
society and is pulling them towards corruption. The reasons for this
crisis can be divided into the following three categories:

### A) The Spread of Various Technologies: 

Various CDs, photos, movies, satellite dishes, and of course the
InterNet have made the issue of sex and sexuality something that is easy
to get access to for anyone (who wants these sorts of things).

### B) Freedom with no Limits and Boundaries:

In other words, slavery under the guise of 'freedom'. By this we mean
that people are made slaves of their lower desires under the title of
freedom such that Amr bil Ma'ruf and Nahi 'anil Munkar (Forcefully
commanding to that which is ethically right and vigorously forbidding
from that which is bad or evil) is now something that people feel
embarrassed to perform. The freedom that can lead to perfection of
mankind (the religion and teachings of Allah (SwT) which came to perfect
man) have now been redefined as the reason why mankind has fallen and
descended from his true state (of perfection) (meaning that people are
blaming religion and saying that it is actually these sets of ethical
guidelines which have corrupted mankind).

### C) The Hidden Forces:

The enemies are of the belief that if they are able to corrupt the
youth, then it will be much easier to take control of them - and this
thought is absolutely correct!  These people (the enemies of Islam) feel
that the only thing stopping them from achieving their goal is the din
and akhlaq (moral ethics) of Islam, since when a community becomes
polluted by sin and corruption and becomes addicted to smoking and
drugs, then they are no longer able to stand up in defiance to the
enemy.

Should we remain quiet in the face of these issues and just recite
supplications until the reformer (the 12th Imam, may Allah hasten his
return) makes his advent?  This is the opinion of the person who are
timid and lazy.

In Karbala, how many people were present who stood up?  Or even at the
time of the Prophet of Islam (S) who stood up alone to invite the people
to Islam. In addition, Prophet Ibrahim (as) stood alone in his mission.
Thus, we must not be afraid of the number of people who are traversing
the path of justice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَسْتَوْحِشُوا فِي طَرِيقِ الْهُدى لِلْقِلَّةِ أَهْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not be afraid of traversing the path of true guidance due to the
small number of people who are upon it.”

By the grace of Allah (SwT) even today, the number of people who are on
this path is not small. On the 15th of Sha'ban, there are more people
around Masjid Jamkaran (the Masjid just outside of Qum, Iran which was
built under the direct command of the 12th Imam) than there are on the
plains of 'Arafat and that too - most of them are young men and women! 

If we look at the times of I'tikaf (spiritual retreat to the Masjid),
the youth are so anxious and excited that you can not even find a place
to sit in the Masjid - and these youth are a part of our army!

The scholars, through their writings and works must be examples so that
they are able to stand up in opposition to this moral and ethical
crisis. While on this path, our hearts must be content Divine Promises
given in the Qur\`an and traditions. Even today, people simply see the
Scholars and 'Ulama as those who only come during the Month of Muharram
to specific areas and localities for Tabligh purposes. These scholars
are supposed to come, give lectures, and then gather all of the problems
of the people and after returning back home, present the problems to the
leaders and those in charge (to help solve them).

As it has been stated, people are of two groups - there is one group of
“common people” who say that they will purify themselves during the
month of Ramadhan; however it is the “special group” of people who say
that during the month of Sha'ban, they will purify themselves and in
this state of purity, they will enter into the month of Ramadhan - since
the month of Ramadhan is the month of being the invited guests of Allah
(SwT) and the guests must first purify themselves.

The tongue and the eyes must be washed with the water of purity during
the month of Sha'ban so that one can benefit from the blessings and
bounties during the month of Ramadhan. People should also be taught that
the month of Sha'ban is the month of self-building and preparing to be
the spiritual guests of Allah (SwT).

We pray for the success in performing our responsibilities and actions
and that we do not align ourselves with the various political factions
(which divide a community).

We ourselves do not have any problems, rather, we ourselves have brought
these problems upon ourselves and thus we must all be united since it is
the enemies who have equipped themselves to defeat us, and if they were
to infuse themselves into our communities, then they will not leave
anyone alone!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 65, pg. 166, tradition 21

[^2]: Surat al-Furqan (25), Verse 74


