Preface by Allamah Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i
=============================================

Although most people are preoccupied with earning their livelihood and
pay little attention to spiritual matters, yet every man has an inherent
desire to know the absolute truth. When this dormant power comes to
surface and is awakened in some people, they gain a number of spiritual
perceptions.

Despite the claim of the sophists and the atheists that every truth is
an illusion, everybody believes in the existence of one eternal truth.
When man with a pure heart and a pure spirit looks at the permanent
factuality of the universe and at the same time observes the instability
and transience of its various parts, he realizes that this world and its
manifestations are a mirror which reflects the existence of one eternal
truth. With this realization his joy knows no bounds and he is so elated
that in his eyes everything else becomes insignificant and worthless.

This spectacle forms the basis of that impulse of the gnostics[^1] which
draws the attention of the godly people to a world beyond perception and
cultivates the love of Allah in their hearts. The pull which they feel
towards this spectacle makes them forget everything and removes many
desires from their hearts. This pull leads man to the worship of the
Invisible Being who is more manifest than all that is visible or
audible. It is this pull which gave birth to many a religion based on
Allah's worship. The real gnostic is he who worships Allah not, because
he hopes for any reward or is afraid of any punishment, but only because
he knows Him and loves Him.[^2]

It is clear from the above that gnosis is not a religion like other
religions. It is to be regarded as the central and the most vital part
of all religions. Gnosis is a perfect way of worship, based on love, not
on fear or hope. It is a way of understanding the inner facts of
religion instead of being contented with its outward and perceptible
form. Among the followers of all revealed religions, even among those
who believe in idol-worship there are individuals who follow the path of
gnosis. The gnostics are found among the followers of polytheistic
religions[^3] as well as among the Jews, Christians, Zoroastrians and
Muslims.

Appearance of Gnosis in Islam
-----------------------------

Out of the companions of the Holy Prophet Imam Ali is known for the
eloquent description of gnostic truths and the stages of spiritual life.
His sayings on this subject are a treasure of knowledge. As for the
other companions of the Holy Prophet, their sayings which have come down
to us do not contain enough material on this subject. The majority of
the mystics and gnostics, whether Sunni or Shi'ah consider the chain of
their spiritual leaders going to Imam Ali through such companions of his
as Salman Farsi, Uways Qarani, Kumayl bin Ziyad, Rashid Hujari, Mitham
Tammar, Rabi’ bin Khaytham and Hasan Basri.

Next to this group some other persons like Taus Yamani, Shayban Ra'i,
Malik ibn Dinar, Ibrahim bin Adham and Sharif Balkhi appeared in the
second century, they were considered holy men by the people. These
persons were apparently ascetics. They did not talk openly of gnosis or
mysticism, though they conceded that they were introduced to
spiritualism by the first group and trained by it.

Towards the end of the second century and the beginning of the third
some other individuals like Bayazid Bistami, Ma'ruf Karkhi and Junayd
Baghdadi appeared. They openly talked of gnosis. Some of their esoteric
sayings based on their spiritual intuition were apparently so obnoxious
that they were strongly denounced and condemned by some jurists and
theologians. Consequently several of these gnostics were imprisoned and
flogged and a few of them were even put to death.[^4] Nevertheless this
group continued to flourish and maintained its activities despite all
opposition. Thus the development of gnosis or mysticism continued till
this system reached the zenith of its popularity and expansion in the
seventh and the eighth centuries. During the later periods its
popularity fluctuated from time to time, but it has been able to
maintain its existence in the Islamic world till today.

It appears that most of the mystic leaders whose names are found in
biographies and memoirs belonged to the Sunni school of thought and the
current Sufi system that comprises some ceremonials and rituals not
consistent with the teachings of the Qur'an and Sunnah, is the heritage
transmitted by these gnostics and mystics, although their system has
subsequently adopted a few Shi'ah rites also.

Some spiritual leaders hold that no mystic or gnostic system or program
was prescribed by Islam. The present gnostic system was invented by the
mystics themselves; yet it has the approbation of Allah in the same way
as monasticism was sanctioned by Allah after it had been introduced by
the Christians into their religion with a view to propagate
Christianity.

Anyway the mystics trace the chain of their spiritual leaders to Imam
Ali through their early preceptors. (This chain of spiritual descent
resembles a genealogical tree). The account of the visions and
intuitions of the early gnostics also which has come down to us, mostly
contains those elements of spiritual life which we find in the sayings,
and teachings of Imam Ali and other Imams of the Holy Prophet's
Household (Ahlul Bayt). We can clearly observe these facts provided we
study their (the mystics) teachings patiently and calmly and are not
carried away by their fascinating sayings which are often obnoxious and
blasphemous.

(i) The sufis (Muslim mystics) regard the holiness acquired by following
the spiritual path as human perfection. According to the Shi'ah belief,
this quality is possessed by the Imams[^5] and through them can be
acquired by their true followers.

(ii) The sufi doctrine that there must always be a Qutb[^6] in the world
and the qualities they attribute to him, correspond to the Shi'ah
doctrine of Imamat. According to the "People of the Holy Prophet's
Household" the Imam (in Sufi terminology the perfect man) is a
manifestation of Allah's Names[^7] and is responsible for supervising
and guiding all human activities. This being the Shi'ah conception of
Wilayat, the great Sufis may be regarded as the proponents of the Shi'ah
doctrine, though apparently they followed the Sunni school. What we mean
to say is that the Shi'ites being the followers of an infallible Imam,
already possesses all that is indicated by the mystics. As a matter of
fact the Qutb or the perfect man conceived by the mystics does not
actually exist anywhere outside the Shi’ite world. Mere presumption is
obviously quite a different thing.

It may be mentioned here that some authentic Sunni books state that the
outward form of the Islamic law and Islamic teachings does not explain
how to perform spiritual journey.[^8] On this basis the Sufis say that
they have individually discovered certain methods and ways which
facilitate this journey. They also claim that their methods have gained
Divine sanction in the same way as previously monasticism had
gained.[^9]

As such the Sufi leaders included in their program of spiritual journey
whatever rites, rituals and formalities they deemed fit, and asked their
disciples to observe them. Gradually a vast and independent system came
into being. This system included such items as total obedience, liturgy,
special robes, music and ecstasy and rapture at the time of repeating
the liturgical formulas.

Some orders of the Sufis went to the extent of separating the *tariqah*
(the Sufi way) from the shari’ah (Islamic precepts). The adherents of
these Sufi orders practically joined hands with the Batinites (Those who
believe that in Islam everything is allegorical and has a hidden
meaning). Anyhow according to the Shi’ah point of view the original
source, of Islam, namely the Qur'an and Sunnah indicate what is
absolutely contrary to all this. It is not possible that the religious
texts would not guide to the truth or would ignore to explain an
essential program. Nor is anybody, whosoever, he may be, allowed to
ignore his duty in regard to what is obligatory or is prohibited
according to the injunctions of Islam.

What do the Qur'an and Sunnah say about Gnosis?
-----------------------------------------------

At a number of places in the Holy Qur'an Allah has directed people to
ponder over the contents of the Holy Book and not to pass by them
cursorily. In a large number of verses, the universe and the entire
creation have been described as Allah's signs. They have been called so
because they indicate a great truth. When a man sees red light as a sign
of danger, his attention is concentrated on the danger and he ceases to
pay attention to the light itself. If he still thinks of the shape,
color and nature of light, then these things will absorb his attention
and he will not he able to attend to the impending danger. Similarly the
universe and its manifestations are the signs of their Creator, an
evidence of His existence and His power.

They have no independent existence. We may look at them from any aspect,
they indicate nothing but Allah. He who looks at the world and the
people of the world from this angle under the guidance of the Qur'an, he
will perceive Allah alone. He will not be fascinated by the borrowed
charms of this world, but will see an infinite

Beauty, a Beloved manifesting Himself from behind the curtain of this
world. No doubt, as we have explained by citing the example of red
light, what the signs indicate is not this world, but the person of its
Creator. We may say that the relationship between Allah and this world
is not that of 1 + 1 or 1 x 1, but is that of 1 + 0. In other words,
this world in relation to Allah is a nonentity and does not add anything
to His Essence.

As soon as man realizes this fact, his notion of having an independent
existence is smashed and he suddenly feels imbibed with love of Allah.
Obviously this realization does not come through eyes, ears or any other
sensory organs or mental faculties, for all organs themselves are mere
signs and cannot play any significant role in providing the guidance we
are talking about.[^10]

When a man having access to Divine manifestation and desiring to
remember Allah alone, hears the following passage of the Qur'an, he
comes to know that the only path of perfect guidance is that of knowing
himself:

***O you who believe, you have charge of your own souls. He who errs
cannot injure you if you are rightly guided. (al-Ma'idah, 5:105)***

He understands that his true guide is Allah alone who enjoins upon him
to know himself and to seek the path of self-knowing, leaving all other
paths. He must see Allah through the window of his own soul and thus
achieve his real objective. That is why the Holy Prophet has said: He
who has known himself, has known Allah.[^11]

He has also said: "Those of you who know Allah better, better they know
themselves."[^12]

As for the embarking on spiritual journey there are many verses of the
Qur'an which urge the people to remember Allah. For example at one place
the Qur'an says:

***Remember Me, I will remember you. (al-Baqarah, 2:152)***

Man has been ordered to do good deeds also, which have been explained in
the Qur'an and the Sunnah. Mentioning the good deeds Allah says:
***Surely in the Messenger of Allah you have a good example. (al-Ahzab,
33:21)***

How can it be imagined that Islam would declare that there was a path
leading towards Allah without appraising the people what that path is?

And how can it be that Allah would mention a path without explaining how
it is to be traversed?

Allah says in the Holy Qur'an: ***Messenger, We have revealed this Book
to you. It contains the details of everything. (Surah an-Nahl, 16:89)***

[^1]: The Islamic esoterics known as Irfan or gnosis is sometimes
associated with Tasawwuf or mysticism whose certain rites and rituals
are repugnant to Islam. However Shi'aism considers Islamic acts of
worship to be sufficient for gaining proximity to Allah.

[^2]: Imam Ja'far Sadiq has said: "There are three categories of the
worshippers: 'Those who worship Allah out of fear; their worship is that
of the slaves. Those who worship Allah for the sake of a reward; their
worship is that of the wage-earners. Those who worship Allah out of love
and earnestness; their worship is that of the freeman. This last is the
best form of worship." (Biharul Anwar, vol. V, p. 208).

[^3]: Here the learned author has in his mind the religions of India and
the Far East in which different aspects of divinity are represented by
gods and goddesses in a mythical and symbolic form.

[^4]: Refer to the books on the biographies of the sages, such as the
Tazkiratul Awliya’ by Attar and the Taraiqul Haqa'iq by Ma’sum ‘Ali
Shah.

[^5]: The twelve successors explicitly expressed by the Holy Prophet of
Islam through Divine Will.

[^6]: When a gnostic becomes totally oblivious of himself, in the Sufi
parlance, he is said to have passed away in God, for he completely
surrenders himself to the will and guidance of Allah.

[^7]: The gnostics maintain that the world has derived its entity from
the Names of Allah and its existence and continuity depend on them. The
source of Allah's all Names is His most perfect and loftiest Name. This
Name is the station of the perfect man, called the Qutb of the universe
also. The world is never without a Qutb.

[^8]: In Islam spiritual journey is called Sair wa Suluk, which
signifies a journey towards Allah.

[^9]: Allah says: But monkery the Chnstian invented, We ordained it not
for them. We ordained only seeking Allah’s pleasure, but they observed
it not. (Surah al-Hadid, 57:27).

[^10]: Imam Ali has said: "Allah is not that who may be comprehended by
knowledge. Allah is He Who guides the argument to Himself." (Biharul
Anwar, vol. II p. 186).

[^11]: A well-known tradition repeatedly quoted in the books of both the
Sunni and Shi'ah gnostics.

[^12]: Another tradition cited in the books of the Sunni and Shi'ah
gnostics.


