Part 2.1: Stages of Spiritual Journey by Allamah Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i
===========================================================================

A materialist passes his life in the dark valley of materialism. He is
plunged in the sea of evil desires and always is tossed from this side
to that side by the waves of material relations of wealth, wife and
children. He cries for help, but in vain and in the end gets nothing but
disappointment.

Sometimes in this sea a breath of enlivening breeze (divine impulse)
pats him and kindles in him a hope that he may reach the shore safely.
But this breeze does not blow regularly. It is only occasional.

"In your life you get some pleasant breaths from your Lord. Make a point
of being benefited by them and do not turn away from them."

Under the divine impulse the novice decides to somehow or other pass the
world of plurality This journey is called by the gnostics sayr wa suluk
(spiritual journey).

Suluk means to traverse the path and sayr means to view the
characteristics and prominent features of the stages and stations on the
way.

Riyazat and acts of self-mortification are the provisions required for
this spiritual journey. As it is not easy to renounce the material
relations, the novice slowly breaks the snares of the world of plurality
and cautiously begins his journey from the material world.

Before long he enters another world called "*Barzakh*". This is the
world of his evil desires and inner thoughts. Here he finds that
material relations have accumulated a lot of impurities in his heart.
These impurities which are an offshoot of his material relations, are a
product of his voluptuous thoughts and sensual desires.

These thoughts obstruct the novice in the pursuit of his spiritual
journey with a result that he loses peace of mind. He wants to enjoy the
recollection of Allah for some time, but these thoughts suddenly
interrupt him and foil his efforts

Somebody has well said that man is always engrossed in his petty
thoughts and haunted by the ideas of gain and loss. As a result he not
only loses his composure and peace of mind, but can also not pay
attention to his spiritual journey to a higher world. It is obvious that
mental unrest is more harmful than any physical loss or pain. Man can
avoid the clash of external relations and interests, but it is difficult
for him to get rid of his own ideas and thoughts because they are always
with him.

Anyhow, the true seeker of Allah and traveler in his way is not
distressed and discouraged by these obstacles and continues to boldly
proceed to his destination with the help of his divine impulse, till he
safely gets out of the world of petty and conflicting ideas called
*Barzakh*. He has to be very vigilant and watchful lest any vicious
thought may remain lurking in some hidden corner of his mind.

When these vicious thoughts are turned out, they usually hide in some
hidden corner of the mind. The poor spiritual traveler wrongly thinks
that he has got rid of their mischief, but when he has found the way to
the fountain of life and wants to drink from it, they suddenly appear to
ruin him.

This spiritual traveler may be compared to a person who has built a
water tank in his house but has not used long. In the meantime the
impurities and pollution have settled down in the bottom of the tank
although water appears to be clear from above. He thinks that water is
clean, but when he gets down into the tank or washes something in it,
black patches appear on the surface and he finds that water is dirty.

For this reason it is necessary for the salik (spiritual traveler) to
concentrate his thoughts with the help of riyazat and acts of
self-mortification so that his attention may not be diverted from Allah.
At last when after passing through the *Barzakh* the spiritual traveler
enters the spiritual world, he still has to traverse several more stages
the details of which we will describe later.

In short the spiritual traveler watching his own lower self and the
Divine Names and Attributes gradually advances till ultimately he
reaches the stage of total fana (self-annihilation) that is passing away
from his own perishable will and then the station of baqa (abiding in
the everlasting Will of Allah). It is at this stage that the secret of
eternal life is revealed to him.

We can infer this doctrine from the Holy Qur'an also if we ponder over
certain verses of it.

***Think not of those who are slain in the way of Allah, as dead. Nay,
they are living. With their Lord they have provisions. (Surah Ali Imran,
3: 169).***

***Everything will perish save His Countenance.***[^1] ***(28:88)***

***That which you have is wasted away, and that which is with Allah
remains. (Surah an Nahl, 6:96)***

These verses put together show that the countenance of Allah are those
"who are living and who have provisions with their Lord." According to
the text of Qur'an they never perish. Certain other verses indicate that
the countenance of Allah signifies Divine names which are imperishable.

In one of its verses the Qur'an itself has interpreted the Countenance
as the Divine names and characterizes the Countenance of Allah as of
glory and honor:

***Everyone who is living will pass away, and there will remain the
countenance of your Lord of glory and honor (Surah ar Rahman, 55:27)***

All the commentators of the Qur'an agree that in this verse the phrase
"of glory and honor" qualifies the countenance, and it means the
countenance of glory and honor. As we know, the countenance of
everything is that which manifests it. The manifestations of Allah are
His Names and Attributes. It is through them that the creation looks at
Allah, or in other words, knows Him.

With this explanation we come to the conclusion that every existing
thing perishes and wastes away except the glorious and beautiful names
of Allah. This also shows that the gnostics to whom the verse, "Nay,
they are living and have their provisions with their Lord", applies, are
the manifestations of the glorious and beautiful Names of Allah.

From the above it is also clear what the Holy Imams meant when they
said: "We are the Names of Allah." Obviously to be the head of a
government or to be the highest religious and legal authority is not a
position which could be described by these words. What actually these
words denote is the state of passing away in Allah, abiding permanently
with His countenance and being a manifestation of His glorious and
beautiful Names and Attributes.

In connection with the spiritual journey another important and essential
thing is meditation or contemplation (muraqabah). It is necessary for
the spiritual traveler not to ignore meditation at any stage from the
beginning to the end.

It must be understood that meditation has many grades and is of many
types. In the initial stages the spiritual traveler has to do one type
of meditation and at later stages of another type. As the spiritual
traveler goes forward, his meditation becomes so strong that if ever it
was undertaken by a beginner, he would either give it up for good or
would be mad.

But after successfully completing the preliminary stages, the gnostic
becomes able to undertake the higher stages of meditation. At that time
many things which were lawful to him in the beginning get forbidden to
him.

As a result of careful and diligent meditation a flame of love begins to
kindle in the heart of the spiritual traveler, for it is an inborn
instinct of man to love the Absolute Beauty and Perfection. But the love
of material things overshadows this inherent love and does not allow it
to grow and become visible.

Meditation weakens this veil till ultimately it is totally lifted. Then
that innate love appears in its full splendor and leads man’s conscience
towards Allah. The mystic poets often figuratively call this divine love
"wine".

When the gnostic continues to undertake meditation, for quite a long
time, divine lights begin to be visible to him. In the beginning these
lights flash like lightning for a moment and then disappear. Gradually
the divine lights grow strong and appear like little stars. When they
grow further, they appear first like the moon and then like the sun.
Sometimes they appear like a burning lamp also. In the gnostic
terminology these lights are known as the gnostic sleep and they belong
to the world of *Barzakh*.

When the spiritual traveler has passed this stage and his meditation
grows stronger, he sees as if the heaven and the earth were all
illuminated from the East to the West. This light is called the light of
self and is seen after the gnostic has passed the world of *Barzakh*.
When after coming out of the world of *Barzakh* primary manifestations
of self begin to occur, the spiritual traveler views himself in a
material form. He often feels that he is standing beside himself. This
stage is the beginning of the stage of self stripping.

Allamah Mirza Ali Qazi used to say that one day when he came out from
his room into the veranda he suddenly saw himself standing quietly
beside himself. When he looked carefully, he saw that there was no skin
or flesh on his face. He went back into his room and looked into the
mirror. He found his face was as empty as it had never been.

Sometimes it happens that the gnostic feels as if he did not exist at
all. He tries to find himself but he does not succeed. These the
observations of the early stages of self-stripping, but they are not
free from the limitations of time and space. In the next stage, with
Allah's help the spiritual traveler can rise above these limitations
also and can view complete reality of his self. It is reported that
Mirza Jawad Malaki Tabrizi passed full fourteen years in Akhund Mulla
Husayn Quli Hamdani's company and took from him lessons in gnosis. He
says:

"One day my teacher told me about one of his pupils that thence forward
his training was my responsibility. This pupil was very pains-taking and
diligent. For six years he kept himself busy with meditation and
self-mortification. At last he reached the stage of knowing his self and
having been stripped of his evil self (passion and lust). I deemed it
proper that the teacher himself should tell that fact to this pupil. So
I took him to the house of the teacher whom I told what I wanted. The
teacher said: "That's nothing." At the same time he waved his hand and
said: "This is stripping." That pupil used to say: "I saw myself being
stripped of my body and at the same time felt as if another person just
like me was standing beside me."

It may be mentioned here that to see the things existing in the world of
*Barzakh* is comparatively of small account. It is of greater
significance to view one's own lower self (nafs) in an absolutely
stripped state, for in this case self appears as a pure reality free
from the limitations of time and space The viewing of the earlier stages
was comparatively preliminary and partial and this viewing is so to say
the perception of the whole.

Agha Sayyid Ahmad Karbala’i, another well-known and prominent pupil of
the late Akhund says: "One day I was sleeping somewhere when all of a
sudden somebody awakened me and said to me: ‘Get up at once if you want
to see the ‘eternal light.’ I opened my eyes and saw an immensely bright
light shining everywhere and in all directions."

This is a stage of the enlightenment of self. It appears in the shape of
an infinite light.

When a lucky spiritual traveler has passed this stage, he passes other
stages also with a speed in proportion to the attention he pays to
meditation. He views Allah’s Attributes or becomes conscious of Allah’s
Names as an absolute quality. On this occasion he suddenly feels that
all existing things are only a unit of knowledge and there exists
nothing but one single power.

This is the stage of the vision of the Divine attributes. The stage of
the vision of Divine names is still higher. At this stage the devotee
sees that in all the worlds there exists only one Knower and only one
Omnipotent and Living Being.

This stage is far higher than that of the consciousness of the Divine
Attributes, a state which appears in the heart, for now the spiritual
traveler does not find any being knowing, powerful and living except
Allah. This degree of vision is usually achieved during the recitation
of the Qur’an, when the reader feels that there is somebody else who is
listening to his recitation.

It may be remembered that recitation of the Qur’an is very effective in
securing this state. The devotee should offer the night prayers and
should recite in them those surahs during the recitation of which
prostration is obligatory, namely Surah Sajdah, Surah Hamim Sajdah,
Surah Najm, and Surah al-‘Alaq, for it is very pleasant to fall
prostrating while reciting a surah. Experience has also proved that it
is very effective for this purpose to recite the Surah Sad in the
Thursday night prayers (wutairah). This characteristic of this surah is
indicated by the report concerning the merits of this surah also.

When the devotee has completed all these stages and visions, he is
surrounded by divine impulses and every moment he goes closer to the
stage of real self-annihilation, till he is so seized by a divine
impulse that he is totally absorbed in the beauty and perfection of the
"True Beloved." He no longer pays heed to himself or to anybody else. He
beholds Allah everywhere. *There was Allah and nothing was with Him.*

In this condition the devotee is plunged in the fathomless sea of divine
vision.

It must be remembered that this does not mean that everything in the
material world loses its existence. Actually the devotee sees unity in
plurality. Otherwise everything continues to exist as it is. A gnostic
has said: "I was among the people for 30 years They were under the
impression that I was taking part in all their activities but actually
throughout this period I did not see them and did not know anyone but
Allah."

The coming about of this state is of great importance. In the beginning
it may come about only for a moment, but gradually its duration grows
longer, first it may last for about 10 minutes or so, then for an hour
and subsequently even for a longer period. This state may even become
permanent by the grace of Allah.

In the sayings of the gnostics this state has been termed as "abiding in
Allah" or "the ever-lasting life in Allah". Man cannot attain to this
stage of perfection unless he passes away from self. On attaining to
this stage the devotee does not see anything except Allah.

It is said that there was an enraptured sufi who was seized by a divine
impulse. His name was Baba Farajullah. People asked him to say something
about the world. He said: "What can I say about it? I have not seen it
since I was born."[^2]

In the beginning when the vision is weak, it is called a state and its
occurrence is beyond the control of the devotee. But when as a result of
continued meditation and by the grace of Allah this state becomes a
permanent feature, then it is called a station. Now the state of vision
gets under the control of the spiritual traveler or devotee.

Obviously a strong spiritual traveler is he who along with viewing these
states keeps an eye to the world of plurality also and maintains well
his relations to the world of unity and to the world of plurality at the
same time. This is a very high position and cannot be attained easily.
Perhaps this position is reserved for the Prophets and some other chosen
people who are favorites of Allah and who can say: "The state of my
relation to Allah is such that the most favorite angel cannot attain to
it."[^3] and at the same time declare: "I am a human being just like
you." [^4]

Somebody may say that only the Prophets and the Imams can attain to
these high positions. How is it possible for others to attain to them?
Our reply is that Prophethood and Imamate are undoubtedly the special
assignments to which others cannot reach. But the station of 'absolute
Oneness' and passing away in Allah which is called wilayat is not
exclusively reserved for the Prophets and the Imams, who have themselves
called upon their followers to try to attain to this station of
perfection.

The Holy Prophet has asked his Ummah (Muslim nation) to follow in his
footsteps. This shows that it is possible for others also to advance to
this position, or else such instructions would have no meaning. The
Qur'an says:

***Surely in the Messenger you have a good example for him who looks to
Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah much. (Surah al-Ahzab,
33:21)***

There is a report in the Sunni books that once the Holy Prophet said:
"Had you not been talkative and of uneasy hearts you would have seen
what I see and would have heard what I hear."

This report shows that the real cause of not attaining to human
perfection is fiendish thoughts and vicious acts. According to a report
from the Shi'ah source also, the Holy Prophet has said: "Had not the
satans been roaming around their hearts, the human beings would have
seen the whole kingdom of the heavens and the earth."

One of the characteristics of this high human position is that it
enables the individual holding it to comprehend the divine kingdoms
according to his capacity. He gains the knowledge of the past and the
future of the universe and can dominate and control everything,
everywhere.

The famous gnostic, Shaykh Abdul Karim al-Jili writes in his book, the
'Perfect Man' that once he was overcome by such a condition that he felt
as if he had been unified with all other existing things and could see
everything. This state did not last more than a moment.

Obviously it is because of the devotees' preoccupation with their
physical needs that this state does not last long.

A well known sufi says that a man gets rid of the traces of material
development only 500 years after his death. This period is equivalent to
half a day of the divine days. Allah has said:

***Surely a day with your Lord is like one thousand years of your
reckoning. (Surah al-Hajj, 22:47)***

It is evident that the next worldly blessings and divine bounties and
favors are innumerable and unlimited. The words expressing them have
been coined on the basis of human needs and new words need to be coined
with the expansion of human requirements. That is why it is not possible
to express all divine truths and favors by words.

Whatever has been said is only symbolical and metaphorical. It is
impossible to express the higher truths in words. It has been said: "You
are in the darkest world." According to this tradition man is living in
the darkest of the worlds (earth) created by Allah.

Man coins words to meet his daily requirements on the basis of what he
sees and feels in this material world. He has no knowledge of the
relations, blessings and spirits of the other worlds and, therefore, he
cannot coin words for them. That is why there do not exist proper words
in any language of the world which may express higher truths and
concepts. Now when our knowledge is limited and our thinking faulty, how
can this problem be solved?

There are two groups of people who have talked about higher truths. The
first is that of the Prophets. They have direct contact with the
non-material worlds, but they also say: "We, the Prophets, have been
ordered to talk to the people according to their intellectual capacity."
That means that they are compelled to express the truths in a way
intelligible to the common people.

Therefore they have avoided to describe the nature of the spiritual
lights and their brilliance. They have not talked about the truths
unintelligible to man. They have only used such words as paradise,
houries and palaces for the truth about which it has been said: "No eye
has seen, no ear has heard and no one has thought about it". They have
even admitted that the truths of the other worlds are indescribable.

The second group is of those who advance along the path prescribed by
the Prophets and perceive the truths according to their capability. They
also use a figurative style.

Sincerity of Devotion
---------------------

It must be remembered that without being sincere in the way of Allah it
is not possible to attain to spiritual stations and stages. Truth cannot
be unraveled to a spiritual traveler unless he is fully sincere and
single-minded in his devotion.

There are two stages of sincerity. The first stage is of carrying out
all religious injunctions for the sake of Allah only. The second stage
is of devoting one’s entire self exclusively to Allah. The first stage
is indicated by the following verse:

***They are ordained nothing but to worship Allah keeping religion pure
for Him. (Surah al-Bayyinah, 98:5)***

The second stage is indicated by the following verse:

***Save single minded slaves of Allah. (Surah as Saffat, 37:128)***

There is a well known Prophetic tradition to the effect that he who has
kept himself pure for Allah for 40 days, fountains of wisdom flow from
his heart to his tongue.

This tradition also alludes to the second stage of sincerity. The Qur'an
has at certain places described a deed as salih (virtuous and pious).
For example it said: "Whoever did a salih (virtuous and pious) deed",
And at some other places it describes some men as salih. For example at
one place it says: "Surely he was one of the salih (pious)."

Similarly it has sometimes described a deed as sincere and sometimes a
man as sincere. It is obvious that man's sincerity depends on his deeds
and he cannot be sincere unless he is sincere in all his deeds and in
all that he does or says. Allah says:

"***To Him ascends good word and the good deed raises it. (Surah
al-Fatir, 35:10)***

It may be remembered that a man who attains to the grade of personal
sincerity, is endowed with certain other characteristic qualities which
are not possessed by others.

An important characteristic which he acquires according to a text of the
Qur’an he becomes immune from the domination of Satan. The Qur’an quotes
Satan as saying:

***My Lord, I swear by Your honor, I shall adorn the path of error for
them in the earth and shall mislead all of them, except such of them as
are your sincerely devoted slaves. (Surah al-Hijr, 38:82)***

It is clear that Allah’s sincerely devoted slaves have been excluded
here not because Satan was forced by Allah to do so. They have been
excluded because owing to their attaining to the station of ‘unity’,
Satan can no longer gain control over them. As these people made
themselves pure for Allah, they see Allah wherever they cast their eyes.

Whatever shape Satan may assume, they see the manifestation of Allah’s
glory in it. That is why Satan has admitted from the beginning his
helplessness against them. Otherwise, it is his job to seduce the
children of Adam and to lead them astray. He can have no mercy on
anyone.

The second point is that the sincerely devoted slaves of Allah will be
exempted from reckoning on the Day of Judgment. The Qur’an says:

***And the trumpet is blown and all who are in the heavens and the earth
swoon away save him whom Allah wills. (Surah az-Zumar, 39:68)***

This verse definitely shows that an unspecified group of people will be
saved from the horrors of the Day of Judgment. When we match this verse
with another verse which reads:

***They will surely be produced save sincerely single-minded people,
(Surah as Saffat, 37:39 - 40)***

it becomes clear what that group will be. The sincerely devoted people
need not be brought up for reckoning. They have already secured eternal
life as the result of their meditations, self-annihilation and ceaseless
acts of devotion. They have already passed the reckoning and judgment
and as having been slain in the way of Allah, they have provision with
their Lord.

***Think not of those who are slain in the way of Allah as dead. Nay,
they are living. With their Lord they have provision (Surah Ali Imran
3:169)***

Moreover, only that one is produced who is not present. These people are
already present even before the beginning of the Day of resurrection,
for Allah says that they have a provision with their Lord.

The third point is that on the Day of Judgment people will generally be
rewarded and recompensed for their deeds. But these sincerely single-
minded people will be favored with rewards beyond their deeds. Allah
says:

***You are not requited but what you did, save sincerely single-minded
slaves of Allah. (Surah az-Zumar, 39:40)***

If it is claimed that this verse means only that the sinners will be
punished for their sins, but the reward given to the virtuous will
purely be a favor bestowed on them by Allah, we will say that this verse
is general in its connotation and does not exclusively refer to the
sinners. Moreover, there is no contradiction between Allah's favor and
His recompense, for Allah's favor means that He sometimes rewards a
great deal for small deeds.

In spite of this kind of favor the reward still remains for the deeds
performed. But what this verse says is quite a different thing. It says
that what Allah will bestow on His sincerely single-minded slaves, will
be a pure favor, not a reward for any deeds at all. Another verse says:

***There they have all that they desire and there is more with Us (Surah
Qaf, 50:35)***

This verse means that the inmates of Paradise will have all that man can
desire or wish Not only that, but Allah will bestow on them what they
cannot imagine or think of. This point is worth considering.

The fourth point is that this group holds such a high position that its
members can glorify Allah in the most appropriate manner. Allah says:

***Glorified be Allah from what they attribute to Him, except what the
sincerely single-minded slaves of Allah say of Him (Surah as -Saffat,
37:159 - 160)***

This is the highest position that a man can occupy.

The above mentioned details show what the blessings of this last stage
of gnosis are. But it must be kept in mind that these blessings can be
obtained only when a spiritual traveler’s ceaseless devotion reaches the
stage of self-annihilation so that he may be called to have been slain
in the way of Allah and may become eligible for the reward reserved for
martyrs.

Just as in the battlefield the sword cuts off the connection between the
body and soul of a martyr, similarly a spiritual traveler snaps off the
connection between his body and soul by fighting against his appetitive
soul. For this purpose he acquires the help of his spiritual power
instead of using his physical force.

In the beginning of his spiritual journey a devotee should lead an
ascetic life and should constantly contemplate on the worthlessness of
the vanities of the world and thus should break off his relation to the
world of plurality. When he would cease to be interested in the world,
no material gain will ever please him nor will any material loss grieve
him.

***So that you grieve not for what you have missed and exult not for
what you have been given. (Surah al-Hadid, 57:23)***

Indifference to the happiness and sorrow does not mean that the
spiritual traveler does not feel happy even about the bounties of Allah
or does not grieve at anything which may distress Him, for happiness
about Allah's favors is not the result of his love for worldly
trivialities such as wealth, rank, honor, fame etc. He loves the
bounties of Allah because he finds himself overwhelmed by His mercy.

After passing this stage the devotee feels that he still loves himself
ardently. Whatever spiritual effort and exercises he makes is the result
of his self-love. Man is selfish by nature. He is always ready to
sacrifice everything else for his own self. He would be willing to
destroy anything for the sake of his own survival. It is difficult for
him to do away with this natural instinct and to overcome his
selfishness.

But so long as he does not do so, he cannot expect the divine light to
manifest itself in his heart. In other words unless a spiritual traveler
annihilates his individual self he cannot establish his connection with
Allah. Therefore it is necessary for him first to weaken and ultimately
to smash the spirit of selfishness so that whatever he may do, is done
purely for the sake of Allah and his sense of self-love may turn into
love for Him.

For this purpose ceaseless effort is necessary. After passing this stage
the devotee's attachment not only to his body and every other thing
material ceases to exist, but even his attachment to his soul is
finished. Now whatever he does, he does for Allah alone. If he eats to
satiate his hunger or provides for the bare necessities of life, he does
so only because his Eternal Beloved wants him to continue to live.

All his wishes become subject to the Will of Allah. That is why he does
not seek any miraculous power for himself. He believes that he has no
right to undertake any sort of spiritual exercise with a view to know
the past or predict future events or to practice thought-reading or to
cover very long distances in a very short time or to make any changes in
the universal system or to invigorate his libidinous faculties, for such
acts are not performed for pleasing Allah, nor can they be motivated by
sincere devotion to Hirn.

They mean only self-worship and are performed for the satisfaction of
one's licentious desires, although the person concerned may not admit
this fact and although he may apparently be sincerely devoted to Allah.
But according to the following verse he only worships his desire.

***Have you seen him who makes his desire his god? (Surah al-Jathiyah,
45:23)***

Therefore the spiritual traveler should pass all these stages cautiously
and do his best to gain complete control over his vanity. We shall
further talk on this subject later.

When a devotee reaches this final stage, he gradually begins to lose
interest in himself and ultimately forgets himself totally. Now he sees
nothing except the eternal everlasting beauty of his True Beloved.

It must be borne in mind that it is essential for the spiritual traveler
to gain complete victory over the fiendish horde of licentious desires,
love for wealth, fame and power, pride and conceit. It is not possible
to attain perfection if any trace of self-love is left, that is why it
has been observed that many a distinguished man even after years long
spiritual exercise and ceaseless acts of devotion could not attain
perfection in gnosis and was defeated in his battle against his
phenomenal self.

The reason was that his heart was not fully purified, and petty desires
still lurked in some corner of his heart, though he was under the
impression that all his evil qualities had been uprooted. The result was
that at the time of test the suppressed desires once again raised their
head and began to thrive, with the result that the poor devotee fell on
evil times.

Success against the lower self depends on the favor of Allah and cannot
be achieved without His help.

It is said that one day the late Bahrul 'Ulum was very cheerful. On
being asked about the reason of that, he said: "After performing
ceaseless acts of devotion for 25 years now I find my deeds free from
ostentation." The lesson in this story is worth being remembered well.

It is to be remembered that a spiritual traveler must abide by the
Islamic injunctions from the very beginning of his embarking on the path
of gnosis to the end of it. Even the slightest digression from the law
is not allowed. If you find that anyone in spite of claiming to be a
gnostic, does not follow all the rules of Islamic law and is not
strictly pious and virtuous, he may be regarded as a hypocrite and
impostor. But if he commits a mistake and has some valid reason to
justify his wrong action, then it is a different thing.

It is a big lie and calumny to hold that the Islamic code of law may be
disregarded by a wali (Muslim saint). The Holy Prophet held the highest
position among all living beings, but he still abided by the injunctions
of Islam till the last moments of his life.

Therefore it is absolutely wrong to say that a wali is not obligated to
observe the law. Anyhow, it is possible to say that an ordinary man
worships Allah in order to consummate his potentialities, but a wali
worships Him because his high position requires him to do so. Aisha is
reported to have said to the Holy Prophet: "When Allah has said about
you:

***So that Allah may forgive you of your sin, that which is past and
that which is to come, (Surah al-Fath, 48:2) then why do you exert
yourself so much to perform the acts of worship?"***

The Holy Prophet said: "Should I not be a thankful slave of Allah?"

This shows that certain individuals worship Allah not for the
consummation of their personality, but to show their gratitude to Allah.

The states which a spiritual traveler experiences and the lights which
he beholds, should be a prelude to his acquisition of certain traits and
qualities. Otherwise a simple change in his condition is not enough. The
spiritual traveler must completely get rid of all remnants of the lower
world in himself by means of meditation and ceaseless acts of devotion.

It is not possible to acquire the position of the virtuous and the pure
without acquiring their qualities. A little slip in the matters of
meditation and acts of devotion may cause a spiritual traveler a
tremendous loss. The following verse throws light on this point:

***Muhammad is but a messenger. Other messengers have passed away before
him. Will it be that, when he dies or is slain, you will turn back on
your heels? (Surah Ali Imran, 3:144)***

Therefore the spiritual traveler must cleanse his heart and purify
himself inwardly and outwardly so that he may be graced with the company
of the pure souls. Allah says:

***Forsake outward as well as inward sins. (Surah al-An'am, 6:120)***

Acting according to this verse the spiritual traveler must pass all
those stages which enable him to arrive at the stage of sincere
devotion. These stages have been briefly enumerated in the following
verse:

***Those who believe, and have left their homes and strive with their
wealth and their lives in Allah's way, are of much greater worth in
Allah's sight. These are they who are triumphant. Their Lord gives them
good tidings of mercy from Him, and acceptance, and Gardens where
enduring pleasures will be theirs. There they will abide forever. Surely
with Allah there is an immense reward. (Surah at-Tawbah, 9:20-22)***

According to this verse there are four worlds preceding to the world of
sincere devotion: (i) World of Islam, (ii) World of faith, (iii) World
of emigration, and (iv) World of Jihad in the way of Allah. According to
the Prophetic tradition in which it has been said: "We have returned
from a minor holy war to a major holy war", the spiritual traveler’s
struggle is a major holy war (major jihad), and as such his Islam also
should be a major Islam and his faith also a major faith.

After passing the stages of Islam and faith he should muster enough
courage to be able to emigrate in the company of the inward messenger
with the help of the outward messenger or his successor. Thus he should
undertake self-mortification, so that he may gain the status of a person
slain in the way of Allah.

The spiritual traveler must keep it in mind that from the beginning of
his spiritual journey till the stage of self-mortification he has to
face many obstacles, which are created either by man or the Devil. He
has to pass through the worlds of major Islam and major faith before
reaching the stage of self-mortification and gaining the status of a
martyr.

In the spiritual journey major Islam, major faith, major emigration and
major holy war are preliminary stages preceding the final stage. The
major obstacles in the way to these stages are called major infidelity
and major hypocrisy. At this stage the junior devils can do no harm to
the spiritual traveler, but Satan who is their supreme head still tries
to obstruct his progress.

Therefore, while passing through these stages he should not think that
he is out of danger. So long as he does not pass out of above-mentioned
"major worlds", Satan will continue to obstruct his way.

The spiritual traveler should keep up his spirit and beware of Satan,
lest he be involved in major infidelity or major hypocrisy. After
passing through the worlds of major Islam and major faith the spiritual
traveler undertakes major emigration and then by means of
self-mortification he passes through major self-resurrection and then
passes into the valley of those who are sincerely devoted to Allah. May
Allah grant us all this success.

[^1]: Countenance of Allah signifies the Divine names and attributes
through which Allah manifests Himself in all existing things. All things
will perish but their countenance will remain because that is the
manifestation of Allah. In simpler words it may be said that the 'basis'
on which depends the existence of things does not perish.

[^2]: The biography of Baba Faraj, the enraptured is available in Tarikh
Hashari. It is about the learned men and the sufis and gnostics of
Tabriz. There is a couplet in it regarding the above words of Baba
Faraj. There are similar versified sayings of Hãfiz and the renowned
Arab mystical poet, ibn Fãriz.

[^3]: A tradition of an Imam.

[^4]: In the Qur'an Allah asks the Holy Prophet to tell the pagans: "I
am a human being just like you, except that I receive revelation."


