Part 2.2: The Twelve Worlds
===========================

On the basis of what has been said above, a devotee, making a spiritual
journey has to pass through 12 Worlds before reaching the world of
sincerity. The names of these worlds are:

Minor Islam, major Islam, greater Islam, minor faith, major faith,
greater faith, minor emigration, major emigration, greater emigration,
minor jihad, major jihad and greater jihad. It is necessary to know the
characteristics of these worlds and to be aware of the obstacles and
barriers which a devotee has to face while advancing towards them. To
make our point clear we describe these worlds briefly.

Major Islam means complete submission to Allah, not to criticize any
action of His and to believe with full conviction that what is happening
is not without some advantage and what is not happening was not
advisable. Imam Ali hints at this point when he says that 'Islam means
submission and submission signifies conviction.' A devotee not only
should have no objection against any Divine directives or decrees but
also should not feel even in his heart unhappy about any of them. Allah
says:

***But nay, by your Lord, they will not be faithful unless they make you
judge of what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no
dislike of that which you decide, and submit with full submission.
(Surah an-Nisa, 4:65)***

This is the stage of greater Islam. At this stage Islam should
infiltrate the soul of the devotee and truly overwhelm his heart and
life.

When the devotee's heart is illuminated by the light of greater Islam,
not only his heart testifies that everything is from Allah, but he also
physically observes this truth. In other words, he often sees with the
eyes of his heart that Allah is omnipresent and omniscient.

This stage is called that of vision and greater Islam. Rut as the
spiritual traveler has not yet attained to perfection, he has to face
many material obstacles, especially when he is busy with his natural
needs, and a state of unmindfulness overcomes him.

Therefore it is necessary for him to use his will power so that the
state of vision may become a permanent feature for him and may not be
disturbed by his other activities. For this purpose it is necessary to
push the state of greater Islam from the heart to the soul so that this
elementary state may become a fully developed state governing all
internal and external faculties. This is the stage which is called by
the gnostics the station of well doing (ihsan). The Qur'an says:

***As for those who strive in Us, we surely guide them to Our path.
Surely Allah is with those who do well. (Surah al-Ankabut, 29:69)***

As such a striver in the way of Allah cannot find the way of guidance
and proximity of Allah until he reaches the stages of well doing. An
eminent companion of the Holy Prophet Abu Dharr Ghifari once asked him
what well doing signified. The Holy Prophet said: "That you worship
Allah as though you see him. If you do not see Him, He surely sees you".

In other words, man should worship Allah as if he was seeing Him. If he
is unable to worship Him in this way, then there is a lower grade of
worship. He should worship Allah as though Allah was seeing him. So long
as the devotee does not reach the stage of greater faith, he is only
occasionally invested with the state of well-doing.

In this state he performs the acts of worship with zeal and fervor. His
soul having been imbued with faith, puts all his organs and faculties on
their proper job. The organs and faculties once controlled cannot
disobey the soul even for a moment. Concerning the devotees who have
attained to the stage of greater faith Allah says:

***Successful indeed are the believers, who are humble in their prayers
and who shun all that is vain. (Surah al-Mu'minun, 23:1-3)***

Only that man that is interested in trivial things will busy himself
with them. A spiritual traveler who has attained to the stage of greater
faith and for whom well doing has become a habit cannot be fond of
anything vain, for no heart can love two contradictory things at one and
the same time. Allah Himself has said:

***Allah has not assigned to any man two hearts within his body. (Surah
al-Ahzab, 33:4)***

If we find any devotee flittering away his time in amusements, we can
easily conclude that he is not fully devoted to Allah and that his heart
is not free from the hypocrisy which is called in this context greater
hypocrisy and which is the opposite of greater faith. As a result of
this hypocrisy man does not act according to his inner incitement, but
is guided by reason, expediency or apprehensions. The following verse
refers to this kind of hypocrisy:

***When they stand up to offer prayers, they perform it languidly.
(Surah an-Nisa', 4:142)***

When the spiritual traveler attains to the stage of greater faith, no
trace of hypocrisy is left in him. His actions and deeds are no longer
guided by unreliable directives of reason nor by any apprehension,
expediency or conservatism. All his actions are then motivated by inner
zeal, hearty inclination and real love.

Once the spiritual traveler attains to the stage of greater faith, he
should be ready for greater emigration. There are two sides of this
emigration: one is bodily emigration which means giving up social
dealings with the wicked, and the other is emigration of heart which
means not making friends with them. A spiritual traveler not only has to
abandon all habits, customs and usages which prevent him from pursuing
the path of Allah, but has also to dislike them from the core of his
heart.

Such customs and usages have been mostly imported from the countries of
the infidels. A man living in a material society becomes a prisoner of
many customs and habits prevalent among the worldly people forming the
basis of their social dealings. For example it has become customary to
regard a person keeping quiet at an academic discussion as ignorant.
Many people consider it a mark of their eminence to sit at the head of a
meeting or to go ahead of others while walking in company.

Fine talk and flattery are called good manners, and a behavior contrary
to these customs is described as bad manner and vulgarity. The spiritual
traveler should with the help of Allah ignore such odd customs and
whimsical ideas. In this regard he should not fear anybody and pay no
attention even to the criticism of those who call themselves great
scholars.

There is a report in Kulayni's Jami' on the authority of Imam Ja'far
Sadiq that the Holy Prophet has said: "There are four pillars of
infidelity: greed, fear, resentment and anger". In this tradition fear
means an apprehension that people would be angry if their wrong ideas
and wrong customs were opposed.

In short the spiritual traveler should say good-bye to all those habits
and traditions, customs and usages which obstruct his advancement
towards Allah. The gnostics call this attitude 'madness', because mad
people also take little interest in and pay little attention to the
popular habits and traditions and do not care what the other people
would say. A mad man sticks to his own ways and does not fear any
opposition.

Following his success in emigration and getting rid of the prevailing
customs, the spiritual traveler enters the field of major jihad, which
means a fight against the devilish hordes. Even at this stage the
spiritual traveler is still a captive of his lower self, overwhelmed by
his passions, and low desires and perplexed by apprehensions and
worries, anger and disappointments. If anything that is not to his
liking happens, he is upset and feels hurt.

In order to overcome all his worries, grief's and pains, the spiritual
traveler should seek Divine aid and crush the forces of apprehension,
anger and lust. On getting rid of worldly botherations and worries he
will enter the world of greater Islam.

Then he will feel as if he was prevailing over the whole world, was safe
from death and effacement and was free from every kind of conflict. He
will find in himself a purity and glamour not connected with this humble
world. At this stage the devotee becomes totally unconcerned with this
transient world, as if he was dead. Now he begins a new life. He lives
in the world of humanity, but sees everything in the shape of the
angelic world. Material things can no longer do him any harm.

As he has reached the middle stage of self-resurrection, veil is
gradually lifted from before his eyes and he can see many hidden things.
This station is called that of greater Islam. The Qur'an clearly refers
to it in the following words:

***Is he who was dead and We have raised him to life, and set for him a
light wherein he walks among men, like him who is in utter darkness
whence he cannot come out? Thus is their conduct made fair-seeming for
the disbelievers. (Surah al-Anfal, 6:122)***

***Whosoever does right, whether male or female, and is a believer, we
shall surely quicken him with good life and We shall pay them a
recompense in proportion to the best of what they used to do. (Surah
an-Nahl, 16:97)***

It should be kept in mind that what the devotee views in this state may
create in him a sense of false pride and as a result of that, his worst
enemy, which is his lower self may begin to resist him. There is a
tradition which says: "The most deadly enemy of yours is your lower self
which is within you."

In these circumstances the devotee is in danger of being involved in
greater infidelity unless he is helped and protected by Allah. The
following tradition refers to this kind of infidelity. "The lower self
is the greatest idol". It was this idol-worship for being protected from
which the Prophet Ibrahim prayed to Allah when he said: "Save me and my
sons from worshipping idol".

Evidently it is unimaginable that Prophet Ibrahim would ever worship any
fabricated idols. It was this kind of idol-worship from which the Holy
Prophet also sought refuge when be said: "Allah, I seek refuge in you
from hidden polytheism".

Therefore the devotee should whole-heartedly acknowledge his humbleness
and completely do away with the idea of self-conceit from his heart so
that he may not commit greater infidelity and may succeed in attaining
to greater Islam.

Some gnostics have throughout their life avoided even the use of the
word 'I'. Some others attributed all that is good to Allah and only what
could not be attributed to Allah, they attributed to themselves. They
used first person plural pronoun while talking of a thing that could be
attributed to themselves and to Allah both. They derived this method
from the story of the Prophet Musa and Khizr. Khizr said:

***As for the boat, it belonged to poor people working on the river, and
I wished to mar it, for there was a king behind them who was taking
every boat by force. (Surah al-Kahf, 18:79)***

As the act of marring could not be attributed to Allah, he attributed it
to himself and used a first person singular pronoun.

***And as for the lad, his parents were believers and we feared lest he
should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief And therefore we intended
that their Lord should change him for them for one better in purity and
nearer to mercy. (Surah al-Kahf, 18:80-81)***

In this case as the act of slaying the lad could be attributed both to
Allah and Khizr, the plural pronoun was used.

***And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and
there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them. Their father had been
righteous, and your Lord intended that they should come to their full
strength and should bring out their treasure as a mercy from their Lord.
(Surah al-Kahf, 18:82)***

As the intention of doing good to someone is attributable to Allah, it
has been attributed to Him.

We find Prophet Ibrahim also employing this style of speech. He said:

***It is He Who created me and Who does guide me, and who feeds me and
waters me, and who heals me when I get sick. (Surah ash-Shu'ara,
26:78-80)***

Here Prophet Ibrahim attributes sickness to himself and healing to
Allah.

A devotee should leave no stone unturned to attain to the stage of major
Islam and to do away with self-conceit.

Haji Imam Quli Nakhjawani was the teacher in gnosis of Agha Sayyid
Husayn Agha Qazi, the father of the late Agha Mirza Ali Qazi. He
completed his training in morality and gnosis at the hands of Sayyid
Quraysh Qazwini. He says that when he got aged, one day he saw that he
and Satan were standing on the top of a hill. He passed his hand on his
beard and said to Satan: "Now I am an old man please spare me if you
can." Satan said: "Look this side."

Sayyid Qazwini says that when he looked that side, he saw a ditch so
deep that it sent a cold wave into his spine. Pointing to that ditch
Satan said: "I have no sympathy or mercy for anybody. If I could lay my
hands on you once, you would fall into the bottom of this ditch from
which you would never have an escape."

Next to greater Islam is the stage of greater faith, which means such an
intense upsurge of major Islam that it may transform the knowledge of
truth into a clear view of it, In the meantime the spiritual traveler
moving from the angelic world ('Alam Malakut) enters the souled world
('Alam Jabarut). For him greater self-resurrection would have already
taken place and he can now see the sights of the souled world.

Thereafter the spiritual traveler should emigrate from his own existence
which is to be totally rejected by him. This journey of his will be from
his own existence to the absolute existence. Some saints have expressed
this idea by saying: "Leave your self and come." The following verses of
the Qur'an hint at it:

***O contented soul, return to your Lord in His good pleasure. Enter
among My bondmen! Enter My Garden. (Surah al-Fajr, 89:27 - 30).***

In this verse the soul has been described as contented and addressed as
such. It has been asked to join the ranks of the chosen people of Allah
and enter the paradise.

The spiritual traveler has now completed the stage of major jihad and
entered the world of victory and conquest which is the headquarters of
contentment, but as some traces of his existence still remain, he has
not yet completed the process of self-annihilation and hence needs
embarking on greater jihad. Because of this deficiency he is not yet
absolutely free. His place is still in the compound hinted at in the
Qur'anic verse,

"***in the nice sitting place with the Powerful Potentate". (Surah
al-Qamar, 54:55)***

Here 'Powerful Potentate' refers to Allah.

After this stage the spiritual traveler should wage a war against the
remaining traces of his existence and remove them completely, so that he
may step forward into the field of absolute 'unity'. This world is
called the world of victory and conquest. The spiritual traveler has to
pass through twelve such worlds before he succeeds in passing the stages
of greater emigration and greater jihad and enters the field of
sincerity. Then he will be called successful and victorious and will
enter the world of sincerity and the compound of:

***We belong to Allah and We will surely return to Him (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:l56).***

For him the greater self-resurrection will already have taken place. He
will enter the stage of total passing away from self after crossing the
curtains of bodies, souls and every thing fixed and appointed. He will
have one foot in the world of divinity, and he will have passed the
stage of :

***Everybody has to taste death (Surah Ali Imran, 3:185).***

Such a person being at the stage of passing away from self though
consciously alive, yet in one sense will be dead. That is why concerning
Imam Ali the Holy Prophet said: "Whoever wants to see a dead man
walking, let him see Ali ibn Abi Talib."

Explanation
-----------

The spiritual excellences and their signs and consequences which have
been briefly mentioned above, are the favors which have been bestowed by
Allah exclusively on the followers of the Last Prophet, Muhammad, peace
be on him. The merits and the perfections which the spiritual travelers
of the previous ummahs (nations) could gain, were of limited nature.
After reaching the stage of passing away from self they could view the
Divine Names and Attributes, but could not advance any further.

The reason was that the highest stage of their gnosis was the maxim,
"There is no deity, but Allah" which meant the version of Allah's most
Beautiful Names and Attributes. On the other hand the spiritual
travelers of the Islamic ummah have reached several higher stages which
cannot be described in words.

The reason is that the guiding light of all Islamic rules is the maxim,
"Allah is far above being described', The spiritual progress of a Muslim
devotee being connected with this maxim, the stages which he can
traverse, are too high to be explained.

That is why even the former Prophets could think of no station higher
than that of the vision of the Divine Names and Attributes, with the
result that they had to face many difficulties and hardships, and were
able to get rid of them only by invoking the station of the spiritual
guardianship of the Holy Prophet, Imam Ali, Fatimah Zahra and their
progeny.

It was the spiritual guardianship of these personalities that delivered
the former Prophets from their worries and grief. Although the former
Prophets were to a certain extent conscious of the high position of the
Imams and that is why they invoked it, but till the end of their life
they did not know all its characteristics. Some Qur'anic verses show
that only Prophet Ibrahim once or twice viewed these higher truths, but
only momentarily. The permanent vision of them will be in the other
world only.

Before quoting the Qur'anic verses in support of our point it may be
mentioned that the text of the Qur'an clearly shows that the position of
sincerity also has several grades, for a number of Prophets who held
this position to a certain extent, could not attain to its higher
grades, for which they used to pray to Allah. For example the Qur'an
says about Prophet Yusuf that:

***Surely he was of Our single minded slaves (Surah Yusuf, 12:24).***

Still he prayed to Allah saying:

***You are my protecting friend in this world and the Hereafter. Make me
to die submissive to you and join me to the righteous (Surah Yusuf,
12:101)***

The prayer shows that he did not attain the position he was praying for
during his life time and so he prayed that he might be granted it after
his death. Whether his prayer would be fulfilled in the hereafter, the
Qur'an is silent on this point. Prophet Ibrahim held a high position in
the station of sincerity, yet he prays saying:

***My Lord, vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous (Surah
ash-Shu'ara, 26:83)***

This shows that the station of the righteous is higher than that of
sincerity. That is why Prophet Ibrahim wanted to be joined to those who
occupied this position. Allah did not accede to his prayer in this
world, but promised to grant him the position he asked for in the
hereafter:

***Surely We chose him in this world and he will be among the righteous
in the hereafter (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:130).***

It may be noted that the position of righteousness for which the former
Prophets craved, is different from that which was conferred on Prophet
Ibrahim and his descendants according to the following verse:

***We bestowed upon him Ishaq and Ya'qub as a grandson. Each of them We
made righteous. (Surah al-Anbiya, 21:72)***

This kind of righteousness they all enjoyed including Prophet Ibrahim
himself. But he was still praying to be joined to the righteous. That
shows that he wished something higher than what he had already been
granted.

As for the fact that the Holy Prophet and some other persons during
their lifetime occupied this higher position, is clear from the
following verse:

***Surely my Guardian is Allah who revealed the Book. He befriends the
righteous. (Surah al-A'raf, 7:196)***

According to this verse, first the Holy Prophet admits that Allah is his
Guardian and then declares that his guardian is He who befriends and
protects the righteous. This shows that at that time there existed
certain individuals occupying the position of righteousness, whom Allah
befriended. This also shows why the former Prophets made their prayers
through the medium of the Imams and what a high position was held by
those righteous individuals whom even great Prophets like Ibrahim wished
to join.

As for the fact that the great Prophets attained to the position of
sincerity, it can be inferred from a number of Qur'anic verses in
different ways. The Qur'an expressly says that only the people of
sincerity can eulogize Allah in a befitting manner. Allah says:

***Glorified be Allah from what they attributed to Him, except the
single minded slaves of Allah, whose case is different (Surah as Saffat,
37:160).***

Ordering the Holy Prophet to eulogize Him, Allah says:

***Say; Praise be to Allah and peace be on His slaves whom He has
chosen. Is Allah best or all that they ascribe to Him as partners?
(Surah an-Naml, 27:59).***

The Qur'an cites Prophet Ibrahim praising Allah in the following words:

***Praise be to Allah who has given me in my old age Isma'il and Ishaq.
My Lord is indeed the hearer of prayer. (Surah Ibrahim, 14:39)***

Prophet Nuh was ordered to glorify Allah in the following words:

***Then say: Praise be to Allah who has saved us from the wrong doing
people. (Surah al-Mu'minun, 23:28)***

Concerning certain eminent Prophets the Qur'an expressly says that they
held the position of sincerity. About Prophet Yusuf the Qur'an says:

***Surely he is of Our single minded slaves. (Surah Yusuf, 12:24)***

About Prophet Musa it says:

***And make mention in the Book of Musa. He was single minded, and he
was a messenger of Allah, a Prophet. (Surah Maryam, 19:51)***

About Prophets Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya'qub the Qur'an says:

***And make mention of Our slaves, Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya'qub, men of
parts and vision. We purified them with a pure thought, remembrance of
the Home of the hereafter (Surah Sad, 38:45)***

According to the following verse Satan can do no harm to the men
sincerely devoted to Allah: He said:

***Then by Your might, I surely will beguile every one of them, save
Your single-minded slaves among them. (Surah Sad, 38:82)***

Only those who are not thankful to Allah are seduced by Satan:

***I shall come upon them from before them, and from behind them and
from their right hands and from their left hands, and You will not find
most of them thankful to You. (Surah al-A'raf, 7:17)***

Concerning several Prophets the Qur'an says that they were chosen by
Allah:

***We bestowed upon him Ishaq and Ya'qub, each of them We guided; and
Nuh We guided before. From among his descendants We guided Dawud,
Sulayman, Ayyub, Yusuf, Musa and Harun. Thus do we reward the good, And
We guided Zakariyah, Yahya, Isa and Ilyas. Each one of them was
righteous. And We guided Isma'il, Alyasa', Yunus and Lut. We gave each
of them precedence over the rest of the people. And We guided some of
their forefathers, children and brothers. We picked them and guided them
to a straight path. (Surah al-An'am, 6:84-87)***

From these verses it may be inferred that all the Prophets held the
position of sincerity, whereas in the verses mentioned earlier only a
few Prophets were mentioned. In these verses Allah has said that He
'picked them', that is He chose them from so many people.

Those who are beguiled and seduced by Satan are those who are not
thankful to Allah. Therefore we can say that those who are thankful to
Him cannot be entrapped by Satan for they are sincerely devoted to
Allah. Whenever the Qur'an describes anyone as thankful, we can easily
conclude that he is one of Allah's single-minded and sincere slaves. For
example, the Qur'an says about Prophet Nuh:

***They were the descendants of those whom We carried (in the ship)
along with Nuh. Surely he was a thankful slave. (Surah Bani Isra'il,
17:3)***

About Prophet Lut it says:

***We sent a storm of stones upon all of them, except the family of Lut
whom We rescued in the last watch of the night as a grace from Us. Thus
we reward him who is thankful (Surah al-Qamar, 54:34-35)***

About Prophet Ibrahim it says:

***Surely Ibrahim was a nation, obedient to Allah, by nature upright and
he was not one of the idolaters. He was thankful for Allah's bounties.
Allah chose him and guided him to a straight path. (Surah an-Nahl,
16:120)***

All the other Prophets who have been described as thankful are in
principle men of sincerity.

In the above verse Allah says: We picked them from amongst all men as if
they were taken up carefully and put somewhere safely. On this basis the
case of those who have been picked is different from all other men.

They are the people who are exclusively devoted to Allah and are
especially favored by Him. This picking by Allah applies to the people
of sincerity only because they have attached themselves exclusively to
Him and have severed their relations from everything else. Besides,
picking in this verse is not related only to those mentioned in it by
name, for Allah says:

"***We guided some of their forefathers, children and brothers. We
picked them and guided them to a straight path".(6:87)***

Here the word brothers means moral and spiritual brothers, of these
Prophets, that is those who share spiritual knowledge with them.
Therefore the statement appears to be applying to all Prophets, and it
may safely be argued that all Prophets are the people of sincerity.

Seeking Allah's Guidance
------------------------

The first thing that a spiritual traveler has to do is to inquire into
various religions as far as possible so that he may become conversant
with the unity and guidance of Allah. He should try to acquire at least
as much knowledge as be enough for practical purposes.

Having carried out this kind of investigation into the unity of Allah
and the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet he will come out of the domain
of infidelity and enter that of minor Islam and minor faith.

This is the knowledge about which there is unanimity of opinion among
the jurists that its acquisition is essential for every obligated person
for the purpose of acknowledging the fundamental beliefs on the basis of
proofs and arguments.

If a person cannot get the required degree of satisfaction despite his
best efforts he should not lose heart and should pray for obtaining it
with humility and submissiveness. This is the method that is reported to
have been followed by the Prophet Idris and his followers.

The prayer with humility means that the spiritual traveler should admit
his weakness, and earnestly seek guidance from Allah who always helps
those who seek the truth earnestly. The Qur'an says'.

***Those who strive in Us We will surely guide them to our path. (Surah
al-Ankabut, 29:69)***

I remember when I was in Najaf receiving spiritual and moral training
from Haji Mirza Ali Qazi, one morning I fell dozing while I was sitting
on the prayer rug. All of a sudden I saw as if two persons were sitting
in front of me.

One of them was Prophet Idris and other was my brother, Muhammad Husayn
Tabataba’i. Prophet Idris began talking. He was speaking to me, but I
was hearing what he said through the medium of my brother. He said:
"During my life I faced many knotty problem which appeared to be too
difficult to be resolved, but they were resolved automatically.

It seemed that they were resolved by some supernatural hand from the
unseen world. These events for the first time revealed to me the
connection between this world and the metaphysical world, and
established my relation to what is beyond this world."

I felt at that time that the problems and difficulties to which Prophet
Idris was referring were the events which he experienced during his
childhood. What he meant was that if anybody sought guidance from Allah
earnestly, Allah would surely help him. While seeking help from Allah
chanting of some appropriate verses of the Qur'an repeatedly will be
very useful. Allah says:

"***Remember that with the remembrance of Allah the hearts are
satisfied."(13:28)***

The repeated chanting of "***Ya Fattahu***" "***Ya dalilal
Mutahayyirin***" will also be found useful. Anyhow, the chanting must be
with full attention and concentration.

One of my friends relates that once he was going by bus from Iran to
Karbala. A sturdy young man was sitting near him. No conversation had
taken place between them. Then all of a sudden the young man began to
cry. My friend was astonished. He asked the young man what was the
matter.

He said: "I will certainly tell you my story. I am a civil engineer.
Since my childhood I was so brought up that I became an atheist. I did
not believe in resurrection, but I had a feeling of love for the
religious people, whether they were Muslims, Christians or Jews. One
night I was attending a party of my friends where some Bahais[^1] were
also present. For some time we all took part in games, music and dance,
but soon I began to feel ashamed of myself and so I went upstairs and
began to weep.

I said: O' God! Help me if you really do exist! After a few moments I
came downstairs. At dawn we all dispersed. In the evening while I was
going on some professional duty along with my team in-charge and some
officers, I suddenly saw a religious scholar with an illuminated face
coming towards me. He greeted me and said that he wanted to have some
talk with me. I told him that I would see him next day in the afternoon.

After he had left some people objected to my giving a cold reception to
quite a well known holy man. I said that I thought he was some needy
person, who wanted my help. By chance it so happened that my team
in-charge asked me to be present next day in the afternoon at a
particular place and do a certain job.

The time which he gave me was exactly which I had given to that
religious scholar. I said to myself that there was no more any
possibility of going to him. Next day at the appointed time I felt that
I was not feeling well. In a few moments I had a high fever and it
became necessary to call a doctor. Naturally I was unable to go for the
job entrusted to me by my in-charge. But as soon as the representative
of the in-charge went away, I felt myself relieved. My temperature had
become normal. I thought over my condition and was convinced that the
incident had some secret. Therefore I got up immediately and went to
that scholar's place.

When I saw him, he began to talk of fundamental principles and proved
each one of them to my entire satisfaction. Then he asked me to come to
him next day again. For several days I went to him daily. Each day when
I visited him he told me so many things in detail about my private
affairs about which nobody other than me alone knew at all. A lot of
time passed in this way. One day my friends pressed me to attend one of
their parties.

There I had to take part in gambling also. Next day when I called on
that scholar he at once said: "Don't you feel ashamed? How come that you
committed such a grave sin?" Tears flowed down from my eyes. I admitted
my mistake and said that I was sorry. He said: "Have a bath for
repentance, and don't do such a thing again". Then he gave me some other
instructions. Thus he changed the program of my life. All this happened
in Zanjan. Later when I was going to Tehran he asked me to call upon
certain scholars there. At last he asked me to go on a pilgrimage to the
holy places. Now I am going on the journey which he asked me to
undertake."

My friend said: "When we approached Iraq. I saw that young man weeping
again. On my inquiry he said: "It appears that we have entered the land
of Iraq, for Abu Abdillah (Imam Husayn) has welcomed me."

This story has been narrated to show that anybody seeking guidance from
Allah earnestly is bound to succeed in his objective. Even if he is
skeptical about Monotheism - the unity of Allah, he will receive
guidance.

Having successfully completed this stage the spiritual traveler should
strive for attaining to major Islam and major faith. In this connection
the first thing to do is to know the rules of Islamic law. This
knowledge should be acquired from some competent jurist.

Next to acquiring the knowledge of law comes the turn of practicing it.
It is very necessary to always act according to Islamic law, for
knowledge is the best incentive to action, and action produces
conviction. If a person is certain about the veracity of his knowledge,
he is bound to act according to it. If he does not, that means that he
is not convinced of the correctness of what he knows, and that his
knowledge and belief are no more than a sort of mental impression.

For example, if somebody is sure of Allah's absolute providence, he will
never desperately try to earn money at all costs. He will be satisfied
with what the Islamic injunctions allow him and will try to earn with
tranquil happiness what is necessary for him and his family. But if a
man is always worried about his livelihood, that means that he does not
believe in the absolute providence of Allah or thinks that it is
conditional on his trying hard, or he believes that providence is
limited to earning cash or salary.

That is what is meant when it is said that knowledge is an incentive to
action. The following similitude shows how action enhances knowledge.
When a person says from the core of his heart: "Glory and praise be to
my exalted Lord", he acknowledges his helplessness and humbleness.
Naturally, power and glory cannot be conceived without there being a
conception of humbleness and helplessness.

Conversely no one can be powerless without there being a powerful.
Therefore the mind of the person saying: "Glory and praise be to my
exalted Lord" while prostrating himself in prayers, is naturally
diverted to the absolute power and glory of Allah.[^2] This is what is
meant by saying that action promotes knowledge. The Qur'anic verse,

***The good deed He promotes it*** ***(Surah al-Fatir, 35:10)***

also refers to this fact. It is necessary for the spiritual traveler to
do his best to abide by all that is obligatory and to refrain from all
that is forbidden, for doing anything against Islamic injunctions is
absolutely contrary to the spirit of his spiritual journey. It is no use
to perform commendable deeds and spiritual exercises if the heart and
soul are polluted, just as it serves no useful purpose to apply
cosmetics if the body is dirty.

Besides being very particular about performing what is obligatory and
abstaining from what is forbidden, it is also imperative for the
spiritual traveler to take interest in performing commendable deeds and
avoiding obnoxious ones, for attaining to major Islam and major faith
depends on doing that.

It is to be remembered that every deed has a corresponding effect and
contributes to the completion of faith. The following tradition reported
by Muhammad bin Muslim refers to this point: "Faith depends on the deeds
for the deeds are essential part of faith. Faith cannot be firmly
established without good deeds."

Therefore the spiritual traveler must perform every commendable act at
least once so that he may attain that part of faith also which depends
on the performance of that particular act. Imam Ali has said that it is
deeds that produce perfect faith.

Hence it is necessary for the spiritual traveler not to overlook
commendable deeds while advancing towards the stage of major faith, for
his faith will be incomplete in proportion to his lack of interest in
the performance of good deeds. If a devotee purified his tongue and his
other organs but at the time of spending money was negligent of his
duty, his faith would not be perfect. Every bodily organ must get that
part of faith which is related to it.

The heart which is the chief of all organs should be kept busy with
remembering the Names and Attributes of Allah and pondering over the
Divine signs in men and the universe. That is the way how man's heart
imbibes the spirit of faith. The Qur'an says:

***It may be noted that with the remembrance of Allah the hearts become
satisfied. (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:28)***

When every organ has obtained its due share of faith, the devotee should
intensify his spiritual effort and enter the domain of certainty and
conviction by completing the stages of major Islam and major faith.

***Those who believe and obscure not their belief by wrong doing, theirs
is safety; and they are rightly guided. (Surah al-An'am, 6:82)***

As a result of doing spiritual exercises the spiritual traveler will not
only be placed on the right path, but will also become safe from the
assaults of Satan.

***Remember that no fear shall come upon the friends of Allah, nor shall
they grieve. (Surah Hud, 10:62)***

Fear means apprehension of impending danger or evil that causes worry
and alarm. Grief means mental distress and sorrow caused by the
occurrence of something evil and unpleasant. The spiritual traveler has
no apprehension nor sorrow, for he entrusts all his affairs to Allah. He
has no objective other than Allah.

Such people as they enter the domain of certainty have been described by
Allah as His friends. Imam Ali hinted at this stage when he said: "He
sees Allah's path, walks on His way, knows His signs and crosses the
obstacles. He is at such a stage of certainty that it seems as if he was
seeing everything by the light of the sun".

Imam Ali has also said: "Knowledge has given them real insight; they
have imbibed the spirit of conviction; they consider easy what the
people living in ease and luxury consider difficult; they are familiar
with what the ignorant have aversion to; their bodies are in the world
but their souls are in high heaven."

At this stage the doors of vision and inspiration are opened before the
spiritual traveler.

Evidently there is no inconsistency between passing through these stages
and the spiritual traveler's being busy with his basic necessities in
the world. His inner experience has nothing to do with his external
activities such as his marriage, earning his livelihood and being
engaged in trade or cultivation.

The spiritual traveler lives bodily in this mundane world and takes part
in worldly activities, but his soul goes round the angelic world and
talks with its inmates. He is like a bereaved person whose some close
relative has died recently. Such a person lives among the people, talks
to them, walks to various places, eats and sleeps, but his heart is
always lamenting over the memory of his relative.

Whoever looked at him, could understand that he was in a wretched state
of mind. Similarly a spiritual traveler despite his being engaged in
fulfilling his natural needs, maintains his contact with Allah. A fire
of love is always burning in his heart. The pain of separation keeps him
restless, but no one except Allah knows his inner condition, though the
onlookers also can in general discern that love for Allah and for truth
has befallen him.

It is clear from this explanation that the wailing, weeping and prayer
of the Imams were not fake, nor were the supplications which have come
down from them purely for instructional purposes. Such a notion is based
on the ignorance of facts. It is below the dignity of the Imams to say
anything unrealistic or to call people to Allah by means of fake
prayers.

Will it be proper to say that the heart-rending wailings of Imam Ali and
Imam Zaynul 'Abidin were fake and had no reality or they were for
teaching purpose only? Not at all. This group of the leaders of religion
have attained to the stage of passing away from self and abiding in
Allah after completing all the stages of spiritual journey and hence
combine in themselves the qualities relating to the world of unity as
well as the world of plurality. They receive Divine light in every walk
of life and are required to maintain their attention to the higher world
and not to violate any rule relating to that world even slightly.

When the spiritual traveler has traversed all the above mentioned worlds
successfully and overcome Satan, he enters the world of victory and
conquest. At that time he will have passed the material world and
entered the world of souls. Hence forward his great journey will be
through the angelic world and the spiritual world and ultimately he will
succeed in reaching the world of Divinity.

[^1]: A hundred year old religious community like Qadyanis.

[^2]: The supplications which have come down to us from the Holy Prophet
and his Household provide the best means of our moral and spiritual
training. They strengthen faith; create a spirit of self- sacrifice and
promote a taste for performing acts of worship and praying to Allah. The
Supplication of Mujir, the Supplication of Kumayl, the Supplication of
Abu Hamzah Thumali and the Supplication of 'Arafah may be mentioned in
this connection.


