Part 3.2: Relationship between Allah and His Creation
=====================================================

We were talking as to which word the word '*ism*' in '*bismillah*' is
connected. In this regard there are several possibilities as I have
mentioned.

The Creator and the Created
---------------------------

We cannot understand certain questions in this regard unless we know
what sort of relationship there exists between Allah and the creation.
We talk about this relationship either parrot-like and repeat some set
words, or occasionally in addition to that advance some arguments also.
A stage higher than this is the privilege of some other people.

Anyhow the relationship between Allah and the creation is not of the
sort that exists, for example, between father and son, that is between
two things existing independently but related to each other. The sun and
its rays are an example of a closer relationship. In this case also the
sun and its rays are two different things, each having a separate
existence to some extent. Man and his mental and physical faculties are
an example of another kind of relationship.

Even in this case man and his faculties are not identical, though they
are closely related. Unlike all these examples, the relationship between
the existing things and Allah, Who is the source of their existence, is
of quite a different kind and cannot be compared to any of the
relationships mentioned above. At several places in the Qur'an and the
traditions the relationship between Allah and His creation has been
described as Allah's glory. The Qur'an says:

***When his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain. (Surah al-A'raf,
7:143).***

There is a sentence in the Samat Supplication which says:

'By the light of Your glory You revealed to the mountain and thus sent
it down crashing…’

At another place the Qur'an says:

***Allah takes away the souls at the times of their death. (Surah
az-Zumar, 39:42)***

while it is known that taking away the souls is the job of the Death
Angel. If somebody kills a person, in that case also it is said that he
has put him to death. At another place the Qur'an says:

***You did not throw when you threw (the pebbles), but Allah threw.
(Surah al-Anfal, 8:17)***

All this is the description of a light and a glory. If we ponder over
this concept, certain questions occur to our mind.

Meanings of Al-Hamd
-------------------

We said earlier that the first possibility about the definite article in
al-Hamdu is that it might be denoting comprehensiveness. In that case
hamd (praise) would mean all praises, and the word 'hamd' as well as the
word, 'ism' will have a sense of multitude. From this point of view
'al-hamdu lillahi' would mean that every praise that is made is that of
Allah, for it is always the praise of some aspect of His manifestation
or glory.

The sun manifests itself in its rays. Man is manifested in his seeing
and hearing faculties. Allah manifests Himself far more clearly in every
creation of His. Therefore, when anything is praised actually a
manifestation of Allah's glory is praised.

As all the existing things are the signs of Allah, they are His names.
According to the second possibility we mentioned, the meaning would be
diametrically different, and 'al-hamdu lillahi' would signify that no
praise made by any praiser was that of Allah, although in this case also
His glory is revealed in all the objects which are praised. But our
praise cannot be absolute, nor are we capable of praising the Absolute
Being.

Anyhow, as all pluralities are lost and absorbed in the unity of the
Absolute Being, it may be said that from one angle even in this case it
is the Absolute Being that is praised. The only difference is of the
angle from which you look at this issue. If you look at it from the
angle of plurality, then every praise would be that of Allah, every
existing thing would be His name and every name would be different from
other names.

According to this possibility the meaning of bismillah will be different
from its meaning according to the other possibility. The main feature of
this possibility is that a sense of numerousness is implied in the
conception of 'ism' or name. Allah is the name in which the stage of
multitude and detail is taken into consideration. This name is the
'Exalted Name' in which Allah's glory is revealed.

Divine Glory in Everything
--------------------------

The glory of Allah's Exalted Name is revealed in everything. Allah's
name Rahman (Beneficent) is the reflection of His beneficence in the
state of action and His name Rahim (Merciful) is the reflection of His
mercy in the state of action. The same applies to 'rabbil 'alamin' (Lord
of the Universe), 'iyyaka na'budu' (You we worship) etc.

According to the second possibility, hamd (praise) in 'al-hamdu lillah'
signifies absolute and unqualified praise. In this case the conception
of Allah, Rahman and Rahim will also be a little different. According to
the first possibility 'ism' (name) means every existing thing with
reference to its function.

In other words, as the function of anything changes, it becomes a
different ‘ism’ or name. But according to the second possibility 'hamd'
in 'al-hamdu lillah' signifies unqualified and absolute ‘hamd’ with the
names of Allah, Rahman and Rahim.

Allah alone can perform such a ‘hamd’ or praise and He does so with a
name that is the name of the manifestation of His glory at the stage of
self. In other words, He praises Himself with some of His names at this
stage. Allah is the comprehensive name at the stage of self, not at the
stage of manifestation.

Allah's every name at this stage is His glory. Rahman (Munificent) is
the name of His munificence at the stage of self. Rahim (Merciful) is
the name of His mercy at the stage of self. The same is the case with
such other names as Rab (Sustainer) etc.

These conceptions can be proved by means of higher philosophy which is
different from commonly known ordinary philosophy. But the case of the
holy men, the friends of Allah is quite different. They have perceived
and grasped these things by traversing the stages of spiritual journey.

Prophets' Observations and Experiences
--------------------------------------

The holy men cannot tell others what they see. Even in the Holy Qur'an
many sublime truths have been mentioned in a simplified and diluted form
so that they may be communicated even to the ordinary people not yet
free from their low and base desires.

In this respect the hands of the Holy Prophet himself were tied. He was
not allowed to explain the truths to the people in clear terms and
therefore he stated the truths in a weakened form. The Qur'an has many
degrees of meanings and has been revealed in 70 or 70,000 layers.

Having been reduced in intensity in each layer it has come to us in a
form which we may be able to understand with our limited intellect.
Telling us about Himself Allah says:

***Will they not regard the camels how they have been created?***
***(Surah al-Ghashiya, 88:17)***

It is our bad luck that while describing lower creations like sun, sky,
earth and man, the Prophets felt that there was a knot in their tongue
and that they could not express the truth in clear words**:**

***O my Lord! Open my chest for me; make the matter easy and untie the
knot in my tongue. (Surah Taha, 20:25)***

Other Prophets also had knots in their tongues as well as their hearts,
and for that reason they could not express the truths exactly as they
perceived them. They tried to a certain extent explain them to us
through examples and illustrations.

When an example of camel is used to explain to us the existence of
Allah, it should not be difficult to understand where we stand. In fact
we are no better than animals, and as such the knowledge we can obtain
must be very defective. As for the Prophets the Qur'an says at one
place:

***And when his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain, He sent it
crashing down. And Moses fell down senseless*** ***(Surah al-A'raf,
7:143).***

When Allah imparted special spiritual training to Moses he said to
Allah: '*My lord, let me see you.*' Obviously an eminent Prophet cannot
ask for seeing Allah with his physical eyes. Therefore his request must
have been for a kind of seeing appropriate to the seer and the object to
be seen. But even this kind of seeing was not possible, Moses said to
Allah: '*My Lord! Let me see you.*' The answer was: '*you will not see
Me.*' Allah further said: '*But gaze upon the mountain*.’

What is meant by the mountain here? Does it signify Mount Sinai? Was it
that the glory that could not be revealed to Moses, could be revealed to
this mountain? If some other people had been present at the Mount Sinai
at that time, could they also see the revelation of Allah's glory? The
sentence, '*Gaze upon the mountain*' implies a promise. Allah said:

***'You cannot see Me. But gaze upon the mountain. If it stands still in
its place, then you will see Me.' (Surah al-A'raf, 7:143)***

There is a possibility that the mountain here might have meant the
remnant of egoism still left in Moses. As the result of the revelation
of glory the mountain was smashed. In other words egoism of Moses was
completely done away with. '*And Moses fell down senseless*.' That means
that Moses reached the stage of completely passing away of his human
attributes.

What happened to Moses is a story for us, but for the Prophets it is an
experience. This experience has been narrated to us in the form of a
story because we are not yet free from egoism. The mention of the
mountain or the Mount Sinai is only for our sake.

Meaning of Glory
----------------

People like us think that the glory revealed to Prophet Moses was a
light seen by him. It might have been seen by others too. What a novel
idea! As if it was a light that could be seen by everybody. Jibra'il
(Gabriel), - the Holy Ghost used to recite the Qur'an before the Holy
Prophet. Could others hear him? We do not have the slightest idea of the
reality and our knowledge is confined to hearsay.

The Prophets can be compared to a person who saw a dream or witnessed
something, but is unable to describe what he saw and others are also not
fit to understand what he says. The same is the case with the Prophets.
Neither they can describe what they see, nor can we understand what they
say.

No doubt the Prophets have said something, but we can understand only
that which is comprehensible to us. The Qur'an contains everything. It
has the rules of law as well as the stories, to the underlying idea of
which we do not have access, but we can understand what they apparently
mean.

There are certain things in the Qur'an by which everybody can be
benefited to some extent, but in the real sense the Holy Qur'an could be
understood only by him to whom it was addressed. Of course those Holy
men, who were both trained and instructed by the Holy Prophet direct or
later imbibed his teachings, also understand the Qur'an.

Through the Holy Ghost the Qur'an was revealed to the heart of the Holy
Prophet. The Qur'an itself says:

***The Holy Ghost descended with it on your heart*** ***(Surah
ash-Shu'ra, 26:193)***

The Qur'an was revealed many a time and each time it was revealed in a
more diluted form. The Qur'an says:

***We revealed it on the Night of Power. (Surah al-Qadr, 97:1)***.

On each Night of Power the same glory is revealed, but on a reduced
scale.

In short the Qur'an was revealed to the heart of the Holy Prophet many a
time. It was revealed in stages, grades and layers till it finally
assumed the form of words.

Nature of the Qur'an
--------------------

The Holy Qur'an is not a collection of words, nor is it a thing that
could be seen, heard or expressed in words. Nor is it a mode or a
quality. It has been accorded an easy form for the benefit of us, who
could neither hear it nor see it. Those who were really benefited by the
Qur'an, were trained on different lines.

Their method of deriving benefit from the Qur'an was quite different.
They had a special way of attending to the source from which the Qur'an
has emerged. Glory of Allah is revealed from the hidden world and
reaches the physical world after having been reduced gradually in
intensity.

As there is a vast difference between the various grades of the hidden
world and the corresponding grades of the physical world, similarly
there is a vast difference between our perception and the perception of
those who are superior to us and then between their perception and the
perception of those who are still higher.

The Prophets and the Imams enjoy the highest grade of perception. Only
they can have that divine glory revealed to them which was witnessed by
Prophet Musa and which is mentioned in the Qur'an when it says:

***When his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain. ..(7:143)*** This
even has been hinted at in the Samat Supplication also. The Qur'an says:

***…a voice was heard saying: 'Moses, surely I am [Allah] your
Lord…(20:11-12)***

Each of these things is perfectly all right in itself. As for the
question what should we do if we want to learn the Qur'an, it must be
remembered that these things are not a subject for learning and
teaching.

Exegesis of the Qur'an
----------------------

If we are interested in the interpretation of the Qur'an, we have to
study those commentaries which are well-known and commonly available.
Some of these commentaries occasionally mention some of these subjects,
but all that they say amounts to leading the blind by the blind. The
Qur'an deals with all these questions, but only for him who can
understand them. It has been said: 'Only he to whom it is addressed,
knows the Qur'an.' This fact has been alluded to in the following
verses:

***The Holy Spirit descended with it on your heart.(26:193)***

***We revealed it on the Night of Power (97:1)***

Nobody can witness the reality of the Qur'an except the Holy Prophet,
who was the first addressee of the Qur'an. Here there is no question of
intellectual perception nor of any proof or argument. It is a question
of witnessing the truth, not with the eye or with the mind, but with the
heart, and for that matter, not an ordinary heart, but the heart of the
Holy Prophet, who himself was the heart of the world.

The Holy Prophet witnessed the reality of the Qur'an. As its first
addressee he knew the Qur'an well. But even he expressed the truth in
veiled words and by means of examples. How can we explain sunlight to a
blind man? What language should we use for this purpose? Where can we
find the appropriate words?

All that we can say is that sight is possible in the light only. What
can he who has seen the divine light tell the one who has not seen it?
What can he who has a knot in his tongue tell him who has a knot in his
ears. The Prophets had a knot in their tongues because their listeners
lacked the capacity of understanding what they said.

The Holy Prophet's Embarrassment
--------------------------------

This knot was causing a great deal of worry and inconvenience to the
Holy Prophet who wondered to whom he should explain the Qur'an which was
revealed to his heart. Perhaps there were a good number of things which
could not be told to anybody except the person who was occupying the
position of absolute Wilayat.

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said: 'No Prophet has been tortured
so much as I have been.' If this report is correct, it might have
implied among other things that the Holy Prophet was unable to convey to
others what he wanted to convey. His position in this respect was that
of a father keen to show the sun to his blind child. His frustration can
easily be imagined.

The father wants to explain the sunlight to his child, but on account of
child's blindness he is unable to do so. He does not find suitable words
to convey what he wants to convey.

It is said that knowledge is a great hurdle. It prevents people from
undertaking gnostic journey and instead involves them into intellectual
questions and scientific theories. For the Holy men knowledge is the
greatest barrier and veil.

The more the knowledge, the bigger hurdle it will prove. Man being
egoistic and self-centered, feels elated by his limited knowledge and
thinks that there is nothing beyond what he knows. Only a few persons
guided by the help of Allah refrain from such false notion and silly
thinking.

Tendency of Monopolization in Knowledge
---------------------------------------

Everybody thinks that knowledge is confined to what he has learnt and
all achievements depend on it. The jurist holds that the only branch of
knowledge that exists is jurisprudence. The gnostic thinks that there is
nothing except gnosis.

The philosopher is of the opinion that everything other than philosophy
is useless. The engineer maintains that only engineering is important.
Nowadays, it is said that knowledge is only that which can be proved by
experiment and observation. Everything else is unscientific. Thus
knowledge is a big hurdle. There are other hurdles too, but this is the
biggest.

Knowledge, which was expected to be a beacon light and a guide has
became a hurdle, an obstacle. That is true of all kinds of formal
knowledge. Formal knowledge does not allow man to become what he should.
It makes him egoistic. Its adverse effect on an untrained mind leads man
backward.

As knowledge accumulates, its disadvantages and harmful effects grow. It
is no use sowing seeds in a barren soil. A barren soil and untrained
mind averse to the name of Allah are alike. Some people are scared by
philosophical questions, although philosophy is a branch of formal
knowledge. Similarly philosophers shy of from gnosis, while the gnostics
consider all formal knowledge to be an idle talk.

Formal Knowledge is a Hurdle in the Way of Remembering Allah
------------------------------------------------------------

I do not know what we should become, but I know that our training should
be such that our formal knowledge should not be a hurdle in the way of
remembering Allah. This is an important question. Our pre-occupation
with knowledge should not make us forget Allah.

Our pride on account of our knowledge should not make us self-conceited
and away from the source of all perfection. Such a pride is common among
the scholars and intellectuals irrespective of the fact whether they are
the scholars of medical sciences, Islamic sciences or rational sciences.
If heart is not purified the emergence of such a pride is natural. It
keeps man away from Allah.

How is it that the study of a book often absorbs man's entire attention,
but prayer does not? I had a friend who is dead now. Whenever he forgot
something and could not recollect it, he used to say: 'Let me stand up
for offering prayers. I hope I'll immediately recollect it.'

He thought as if while offering prayers man was not required to pay
attention to Allah and was free to think of anything on the face of
earth, even to try to solve any scientific question if he wanted.
Knowledge which was meant to help man reaching his goal can thus prevent
him from doing so. Religious law and other branches of religious
knowledge are only a means, which enable us to act according to Islamic
injunctions.

Even action according to Islamic injunctions is not an end in itself.
The real objective is to awaken our conscience so that we may be able to
reach the veils of divine light after crossing the veils of darkness.
According to a tradition there are 70,000 veils of divine light. The
number of the veils of darkness is also stated to be the same. Further,
the veils of divine light are also after all veils or screens. We have
not yet come out of the veils of darkness, to say nothing of the veils
of light. We are still wriggling in the veils of darkness.

As the luck would have it, the sciences whether religious or rational,
have affected us adversely.

Mental and Concrete
-------------------

Some of those who are wandering about in darkness call the rational
sciences mental sciences. Probably what they mean is that these sciences
have no concrete existence. Anyway, all sciences are a means of reaching
a goal. Any science that does not serve that purpose is not fit to be
called a science.

Any knowledge which does not allow man to achieve the objective for
which the Prophets have come, is darkness and a barrier. The Prophets
came to take the people out of the darkness of this world and to lead
them to the sole source of light. They wanted man to pass away in
absolute light. They want the drop of water to be mingled in the ocean
and lose its existence. (It must be remembered that the simile does not
represent the position fully.)

All Prophets came for this very purpose and all sciences are a means of
achieving this goal. The real existence is of that Light only. We are
but nonentity. All Prophets came to pull us out of all sorts of darkness
and to lead us to the sole and absolute Light, the source of all
existence.

Sometimes even scholastic theology becomes a hurdle and a barrier. In
this branch of knowledge arguments are adduced to prove the existence of
Allah, but in some cases even these arguments lead people away from Him.
The method followed by scholastic theology is not that of the Prophets
and the Holy men who never adduced arguments. Of course they were aware
of the arguments, but did not use them, because they did not like this
method of proving the existence of Allah.

Imam Husayn addressing Allah once said: 'When were You not there?' When
Allah has always existed, where is the necessity of proving His
existence? It is a different thing that a blind eye does not see Him.

Rising for Allah
----------------

The Qur'an mentions the first stage of rising in these words:

***Say: I advise you to do one thing: that you rise for Allah. (Surah
Saba, 34:46)***

The gnostics say that this verse describes the first stage of spiritual
journey. The Manazil al-Sa’irin[^1] also says so. But what the verse
mentions may be only a prelude, not a stage. Anyhow, what is important
is that Allah through his well-beloved Prophet offers an advice and asks
people to rise.

This is the starting point. Those who are sleeping have been told to get
up and rise for Allah only. This is the only piece of advice which we
have not so far listened to. We have not yet begun walking for Allah. We
do walk, but for our own sake. Those who are good and pious, are also
good for their own sake only. Yes, there are some friends of Allah whose
ways are different.

The advice given in the verse is for us who are sleeping. Those friends
of Allah have gone to the higher world. We will also be carried there.
Nobody can claim that he would forever stay here. We are being pushed
away by the angels controlling our organs. We will go there, but shall
we go with all our veils and darkness's?

Love of the World is the Root Cause of all Troubles
---------------------------------------------------

Besides being the source of all things, love of the world is the main
cause of all mistakes, as a well-known maxim says: 'Love of the world
sometimes makes a man so irresponsible that if he feels that Allah has
withdrawn something from him, he, in spite of being a believer, gets
offended'.

It is said that when a person is about to die the devils who do not want
him to die as a believer bring before him certain things to which he was
very much attached. For example, if he was a student and loved books,
the devils would bring before him his favorite books and would threaten
him to set them on fire if he would not deviate from his faith. The same
way the devils threaten the person who loves his child or is strongly
interested in something else.

It is not correct to think that a worldly person is he who possesses
wealth. One may possess a lot of wealth, but still may not be worldly.
On the other hand, a student possessing only one book may be worldly if
he was too much attached to it. Attachment to worldly things is the
criterion of being worldly.

Because of this attachment a person may become hostile to Allah when he
finds himself at the time of his death forced to quit his favorite
things and thus may die as an enemy of Allah. Therefore, we must lessen
our attachment to worldly things. Obviously we have to quit this world
one day or other. So it does not make any difference whether we are
attached to the world or not.

Suppose you owned a book. Whether you were attached to it or not, it
would remain with you. You could use it and could get benefited by it.
Similarly if a house was yours, you could use it in every case.
Therefore diminish attachment as much as you can, and if possible, give
it up altogether, for it is this attachment that causes trouble. It is
because of self-love that man gets attached to the world. Love of self,
power and position ruins man.

Love of chair and love of pulpit both show attachment to the world. All
these are veils, 'some of them above others.' Instead of saying worldly
people are those who possess such and such things, we should see how far
we are attached to the things we possess. It is only because of this
attachment that we criticize others.

A man who is not egoistic, does not criticize others. If some of us find
fault with others, it is because they consider themselves to be cultured
and perfect and regard others imperfect and faulty. There is a couplet
which I would not recite because it is liable to some objection. Anyway,
it says: 'I am just what you say, but are you what you pretend to be!'

Here in the seminary we show that we have come here for the sake of
Allah. We call ourselves 'Allah's troops'. Are we really so? At least we
should not pretend to be what we are not.

Is hypocrisy something else? Hypocrisy is not merely that a man pretends
like Abu Sufyan to be religious while he is not so. It is also hypocrisy
that a man claims to be what he is not. Anyway, hypocrisy has degrees,
some of which are more severe than others.

Another important thing is that when a man departs this world it should
not be said about him that he was merely inviting people to the next
world and was indifferent to the present one. The Prophets invited
people to the next world, but in this world also they used to set up
justice and fair play.

The Holy Prophet was very close to Allah, but he used to say that he
sought the forgiveness of Allah seventy times every day as he felt his
heart somewhat perturbed. Naturally for a man who wants always to be
with his beloved, it is perturbing to meet other people and talk to
them. Suppose a man came to you to ask you about a rule of law. He is a
very good man, and you know that it is your duty as well as a
meritorious act to answer his question, but you still feel perturbed
because at that time you wanted to be with your beloved.

'Because of the perturbation of my heart I seek the forgiveness of Allah
seventy times every day.' The Holy Prophet is reported to have said some
such thing. But for us it would not be proper to involve ourselves in
such things. At least we should be as we give ourselves out. If we have
a mark of prostration on our forehead, we must not be showy in our
prayers. If we profess to be pious, we must not deceive anybody, we must
not take usury.

Those who say that spiritual sciences make a man idler, are mistaken.
The man who taught these sciences to the people and who next to the Holy
Prophet knew the spiritual truths more than anybody else, according to
history, took up his shovel and went out to work the same day as he
pledged his allegiance to the Holy Prophet. There is no contradiction
between spiritual sciences and physical work.

Those who, in order to keep people busy with their worldly affairs,
prevent them from praying and saying liturgy etc., are not aware of real
facts. They do not know that it is prayer that builds human character
and teaches man how to live in this world respectably. The Prophets
prayed and said liturgy etc. and it were they who established justice in
the world and rose against the wrongdoers. Imam Husayn also did the same
thing. Just see his Supplication of the Day of Arafah and ponder over
it.

All their achievements were due to this prayers. It is prayers that make
man attentive to Allah. If man recites them properly, then as the result
of divine favor brought about by them, his self-attachment is
diminished, but his efficiency is in no way affected adversely. Not only
that but he becomes more active and ever ready to render service to his
fellow human beings.

Some ignorant people criticize the books containing supplications. They
do not know what kind of men these books build. Some of these
supplications such as Munajat Sha'biniyah, Dua' Kumayl, Dua' Yawmul
'Arafah, Dua' Samat etc. have come down to us from our Imams. What kind
of men do these prayers build. Those who recited the Munajat Sha'biniya,
wielded the sword also.

According to reports all Imams recited Munajat Sha'biniya. I have not
read anywhere about any other prayer or supplication that it was recited
by all Imams. Those who recited this prayer, also fought against the
unbelievers.

These prayers take man out of darkness and he who comes out of darkness
becomes the real man. Then he does everything for Allah's sake. If he
wields the swords, he does so for the sake of Allah; if he fights, he
does so for the sake of Allah and if rises, he does so for the sake of
Allah. It is absolutely wrong to say that prayers make man idle and
useless.

Those who say such things, to them this world is everything. They
believe everything beyond this world to be fantastic. But one day they
will find that the things they thought to be fantastic were real and the
things they thought to be real were fantastic. In fact prayers, sermons
and the books like Nahjul Balaghah and Mafatihul Jinan help man in
building his personality.

When one becomes a real man, he automatically begins to act according to
true Islamic principles. He cultivates land, but his cultivation is for
Allah. He fights but only against the infidels and wrongdoers. Such
people are the monotheists and pious prayerers. Those who accompanied
the Holy Prophet and the Commander of the Faithful were devoted
worshippers.

Imam Ali himself used to offer prayers while fighting was going on.
Fighting and praying went on side by side. Once while fighting was going
on somebody asked him a question. He immediately rose and delivered a
sermon. Somebody said: 'Sermon even on this occasion?' He said: 'It is
for what we fight.' According to a report he added: 'We do not fight
against Mu'awiyah to capture Syria. Syria has no importance to us.'

The Holy Prophet and Imam Ali were not keen to conquer Syria and Iraq.
They wanted to deliver the people from the oppressors and to reform them
morally. It was they who were ardent worshippers. Dua' Kumayl was taught
by Imam Ali to Kumayl, who himself was a warrior.

Effect of Prayer on Heart
-------------------------

To prevent people from praying and reciting prayer books one day some
wicked people, the followers of Kasrawi etc. collected gnosis and prayer
books and set them on fire. These people did not understand what prayer
was and what effect it produced on heart. They did not know that all
good things in the world were due to the pious prayerers who prayed and
remembered Allah. Although some people repeat their prayer simply
parrot-like, yet it produces some effect, for the people who pray are
better than those who do not.

A man who offers prayers, of howsoever low quality his prayers may be,
is better than a man who does not offer prayers. The former is more
cultured. He does not commit theft. Look at the list of the offenders
and criminals. How many of them are the students of religious sciences?
How many mullas drink wine, commit theft or perpetrate other crimes?

It is true that the smugglers include some unreal mullas and sufi
looking persons, but those wicked people neither offer prayers nor do
they perform any other meritorious acts. They have assumed this disguise
just to achieve their vicious ends. Among those who recite prayers and
observe Islamic injunctions, there are few who have ever been
charge-sheeted for any serious crime.

The world order rests on the people who pray. Praying must not be done
away with. It will be wrong to divert the attention of our young men
from prayer on the plea that instead of prayer the recitation of the
Qur'an should be popularized. What paves the way for the Qur'an must not
be given up. It is a diabolic insinuation that the Qur'an should be
recited and the tradition and supplications to Allah should be
abandoned.

The Qur'an Without Traditions and Prayer
----------------------------------------

Those who say that they do not want supplications, would never be able
to popularize the Qur'an. Their deceptive ideas are mere devilish
insinuations. The young men should consider who have rendered better
service to society, those who took keen interest in traditions,
supplication and liturgy or those who said that the Qur'an was enough
for them. All these charitable institutions and religious endowments are
the works of those who offered prayers and recited the Qur'an, not of
others.

All the religious schools and hospitals were built by those members of
the rich nobility of the previous era who offered prayers. This system
should continue. People should be encouraged to keep their attention to
the good works. Besides helping in the achievement of spiritual
excellence, these prayers and supplications help in the administration
of the country also.

Those who attend the mosques and pray do not violate the law of the
country nor do they breach the public order. This in itself is a great
service to society. Society consists of individuals. Even if fifty per
cent individuals in a society, being busy with prayers and
supplications, did not commit crimes, it would be a happy situation!

A craftsman who does his job honestly and earns his livelihood, does not
commit sins. Similarly those who commit murders and robberies, are not
interested in spiritual matters. If they had been interested in them,
they would not have committed such crimes.

Prayers and supplications play a significant role in training society.
These supplications have been taught by Allah and His Prophet. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***Say: My Lord would not have cared for you, if you had not been
calling Him. (Surah al-Furqan, 25:77)***

If you read the Qur'an, you will find that Allah Himself urges people to
pray to Him and says that ‘He would not have cared for you if you had
not been calling Him.’ It appears that those who oppose supplications,
do not believe even in the Qur'an. If anyone says that he does not want
supplications, that means that he is neither interested in the Qur'an,
nor does he believe in it. He does not know that Allah says:

***Call Me, I will respond to you. (Surah Ghafir, 40:60)***

May Allah include us among those who are keenly interested in
supplications, prayer and the Qur'an.

[^1]: The name of a book.


