Part 3.3: Allah and His Glory
=============================

It is clear from what we have so far said about 'bismillah' that the
'ba' in it is not for causation, as some grammarians say. In fact in the
matter of doings of Allah there is no question of cause and effect. The
best way of expressing the relationship between the Creator and the
created is that which is found in the Qur'an.

At some places this relationship has been described as glorification:
'Your Lord revealed His glory' and at some others as 'manifestation'. It
has been said about Allah that 'He is the First and the Last, the
Explicit and the Implicit'.

This relationship is different from that of cause and effect, which
implies a sort of tendency that is not appropriate to Allah, and
therefore it is not a proper expression of the relationship between
Allah and the existing things.

For this purpose we have either to expand the meaning of causation to
include glorification and manifestation or to say that the 'ba' in
bismillah is not for causation and that 'with the name of Allah' means
with His manifestation or with His glorification. Therefore Bismillah
al-Hamdu lillah' does not mean that Allah's name is the cause and his
praise is the effect.

Anyway, as far as I remember the words, sababiyyat or 'illiyat (cause,
effect, causation) are not mentioned anywhere in the Qur'an and the
sunnah (traditions). These words are merely philosophical terms used by
the philosophers. In this sense the Qur'an and the sunnah have used the
words of Khalq (creation), Zuhur (manifestation) Tajalli (glorification)
etc.

There is another aspect of bismillah. We have a report about the dot
under the 'baâ€™. I wonder whether this report is mentioned in any
authentic book. Apparently it is not. Anyway, Imam Ali is reported to
have said: 'I am the dot under the 'ba' of bismillah.

If this report is mentioned anywhere, it may be interpreted in the
following way: The 'ba' signifies absolute manifestation. The dot
signifies its first specification or determination, which lies in the
state of wilayat. If this report was true, the Commander of the Faithful
might have meant that as the dot determined the 'ba', similarly the
state of universal 'wilayat' is the first determination of the Absolute
Manifestation.

The name is synonym with absolute glory. It is primarily determined by
the Wilayat of the Holy Prophet, Imam Ali etc.

This fact is true even if it is not mentioned in any authentic book. The
first and primary determination of absolute glory is the highest stage
of existence and this highest stage of existence is the same as the
stage of absolute wilayat. As a matter of fact a divine name is
sometimes a symbol of the state of self.

The comprehensive name of this state of self is Allah. Sometimes a
divine name is the symbol of the manifestation of some divine attribute
such as beneficence, mercy etc. All these names are the reflections of
the Exalted Name. Some of these names are the names of the state of
self, some of the reflections of the glory of names and some of the
reflections of the glory of doings.

The names of the first category are called the state of uniqueness; the
names of the second category are called the state of oneness and the
names of the third category the state of will. All these are the terms
used by the mystics. The last three verses of the Surah al-Hashr
(59:22-24) perhaps hint at this division of the divine names:

(i) He is Allah, there is no other deity but He, the Knower of the
invisible and the visible. He is the Beneficent, the Merciful.

(ii) He is Allah, there is no other deity but He, the Sovereign Lord,
the Holy One, Peace, the Keeper of Faith, the Guardian, the Majestic,
the Compeller and the Superb. Glorified be Allah from all that they
ascribe as partners to Him.

(iii) He is Allah the Creator, the Shaper out of naught, the Fashioner,
His are the most beautiful names. All that is in the heavens and the
earth glorifies Him and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

Possibly these three verses hint at the three states of the divine names
as mentioned above. The first mentions the names appropriate to the
state of self. The second verse contains the names appropriate to the
reflections of the glory of names. The third verse has the names
suitable to the reflection of the glory of doings.

Thus there are three stages of divine glorification: the stage revealing
self-glory for self, the stage of revealing glory at the stage of divine
names and the stage of revealing glory at the stage of manifestation. He
is the First and the Last is perhaps the negation of the existence of
any other being. He is the First and the Last, the Explicit and the
Implicit. This shows that it is He who is manifestation, not that
manifestation is from Him, for 'He is the First and the Last, the
Explicit and the Implicit.'

Glory is Not Separate From the Glorious
---------------------------------------

There are several degrees of the revealing of glory, but in no case
glory is separate from the master of glory. It is an idea difficult to
conceive, but once you conceive it, it is easy to believe it. It is also
possible that Allah is the name of divine glory at the state of divine
attributes. In this case 'ism' in bismillah will denote the revealing of
overall manifestation of glory.

Even in this case it will not be difficult to apply the two
possibilities mentioned by us earlier, for Allah's attributes are not
separate from His self or essence. In this connection it is to be
pointed out that sometimes we look at an event from the point of view as
to what our perception says; sometimes from the point of view as to what
our intellect says; sometimes from the point of view as to what
impression our heart has formed; and sometimes we witness the event at
the stage of its actual reality. This rule applies to all spiritual
matters.

The farthest limit of our perception is either intellectual perception
or argumentative or semi-argumentative perception. We perceive things
according to our intellectual capacity. In spiritual matters the lowest
degree of our perception should be that we come to understand that there
is Allah and His glory. As a matter of fact whatever method of
perception we use, we cannot go beyond this limit.

The utmost limit of our perception is either rational perception or
argumentative and semi-argumentative perception. We perceive things
according to our intellect only. As far as the questions relating to the
knowledge of Allah are concerned, the main stage of knowing Him is just
to understand that there is Allah and His glory. In fact whatever method
of perceiving Him we employ, our perception cannot go beyond this limit.

His Being And His Glory Are the Real Truth
------------------------------------------

That is the main question. As for the nature of His glory at the various
stages of His essence, His attributes and His actions, the verses we
have quoted above indicate only that "He is the First and the Last and
He is the Explicit and the Implicit". The real truth is only that there
is no existence besides Allah.

In fact it is meaningless to imagine that besides Allah there can be any
existence. Sometimes we calculate according to our understanding what
our perception is, what our intellect says, whether our rational
perception has so firmly been established in our heart that it may be
named faith, and whether we have started our spiritual journey in the
right direction so that it may be called irfan or gnosis. Anyhow, it is
all a matter of our perception rather than that of actualities.

The Real Truth Is Nothing But He
--------------------------------

If we look into the question deeply, we come to the conclusion that
there is nothing but Allah and that His glory is not but He himself. To
illustrate this truth we cannot conceive of any example which may
exactly fit in with it. The simile of shadow and the thing casting
shadow is defective.

The relation between Allah and His glory can best be illustrated by the
example of Sea and its waves.

Perhaps this is the closest similitude. As we know, the waves of the sea
are not separate from the sea itself, but still the sea is not the
waves, although the waves are the sea. When the sea vibrates, the waves
rise in it. At that time the sea and its waves appear to us to be
separate from each other. But the waves are a temporary phenomenon. They
are again merged in the sea. In fact the waves do not exist
independently.

This world is also like a wave. Anyhow, even this similitude is not
perfect, for no similitude can properly illustrate the relation between
Allah and His creation. We talk only as we perceive. There are two
aspects of this question. On the one hand there are some general
conceptions like the names of Allah, the names of His attributes and His
actions and some stages and stations.

These are the conceptions we can perceive. The second stage is that of
adducing arguments to prove that Allah and His glory are not separate
from each other. To prove this it is said that Allah is pure and
absolute existence that can in no way be qualified or limited, for an
existence qualified or incomplete in any way cannot be absolute.

The absolute existence must be perfect, unlimited and free from all
restrictions and deficiencies. The attributes of Absolute Existence must
also be absolute and unspecified. Neither Allah's mercifulness is
specified or limited nor His compassionateness nor His divinity.

Lack of Any Excellence Means Limitation
---------------------------------------

As Allah is absolute light and unqualified existence, He must
automatically combine in Himself all excellences, for the lack of any
excellence would mean specification and restriction. If there were a
slightest deficiency or defect at the stage of His essence, the term
absolute would not be applicable to Him. He would be imperfect and as
such would not be self-existing, because absolute excellence and
absolute perfection are essential for being self-existent.

When we think about Allah according to our imperfect mental capacity, we
find that Allah is the name of that Absolute Being who has all beautiful
names and attributes and who combines in Himself all excellences, and
that everything else is nothing but a reflection of His glory.

He is Absolute and unqualified perfection. If there were slightest
deficiency in Him, He would become a possibly existing being instead of
being an essentially existing Being, as He is. He combines in Himself
all the excellences and meritorious qualities.

He is pure and unspecified existence. Every existence is His. He is
everything but in an unspecified manner and by the way of absolute
perfection. As His names are not separate from His Being, the names of
His attributes are also the names of His essence.

All the characteristics pertaining to Allah, pertain to Rahman
(Merciful) also. Rahman being absolute perfection and absolute mercy,
has all the excellences of existence. The Qur'an says:

***Call Allah or call Rahman (Surah al-Isra', 17:110).***

In another verse it says:

***Call Him by any name, for all the beautiful names are His. (Surah
al-A'raf, 7:180)***

 Allah, Rahman, Rahim and all other names of Him are good and beautiful.
Each of them combines all His attributes. He being Absolute, there is no
disparity between Him and His names or between one of His names and
another.

Allah's beautiful names are not like the names we give to different
things for different considerations. His glory and His manifestation are
not two different aspects of Him. His manifestation is exactly His glory
and His glory exactly His manifestation.

Even this expression is defective. Absolute existence means Absolute
perfection and Absolute perfection must be absolute in every respect.
Therefore, all His attributes are absolute. No disparity of any sort can
be imagined between His essence and His attributes.

Observation is a Step Further than All Arguments and Proofs
-----------------------------------------------------------

It is often said: "There is no proof of such and such thing" or "Reason
says so". A gnostic is reported to have said: "Wherever I went, this
blind man also arrived there with his stick. By 'the blind man' this
gnostic meant Abu Ali Sina (Avicenna).

What he wanted to say was that the person who perceived truth by means
of his arguments and cold reasoning could be compared to a blind man who
found out his way by means of his stick. This gnostic meant to say:
"Wherever I reached by means of my vision and gnosis, this blind man
(Avicenna) also reached there rattling his stick, that is by means of
his logical arguments".

People Depending On Arguments Are Blind
---------------------------------------

The people depending on arguments are blind because they lack the power
of vision. Although they have proved unity of Allah and other questions
relating to it by means of their arguments and have also proved that the
source of Existence is Absolute Perfection, yet what they say is still a
matter of arguments, behind the walls of which these people are unable
to see anything.

With a great deal of effort the heart perceives that the Essentially
Existing Being is pure existence and that He is everything. Still the
heart remains like a child who needs to be spoon-fed at every step. He
who perceives the rational questions by means of arguments, need,
repetition of these arguments and has to make strenuous struggle before
his findings are firmly established in his heart.

Faith Means Cordial Perception
------------------------------

When it is cordially accepted that Allah is pure existence as well as
all perfection, this conviction becomes a faith. Prior to that it was
only a rational idea obtained by means of arguments. Later it produced a
particular conception.

When the heart accepted that conception as a truth either by means of
rational arguments or through Qur'anic teachings, it became a faith.
Intellect discovers the truth and teaches it to the heart. When as the
result of repetition and mental exercise it is firmly established in the
heart that there is nothing in this world except Allah, that idea
becomes a faith or an implicit belief.

Although the stage referred to in the Qur'an by the words: so that my
heart may be at ease", is a stage lower than the vision of the Prophets,
yet it is a stage. But the vision of the beauty of Allah is a far higher
stage. Glory of Allah was revealed for Prophet Musa. The Qur'an says:

***When his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain. (7:143)***

In connection with the story of Prophet Musa the periods of 30 days and
40 days and the subsequent events are significant and worth
consideration. When Prophet Musa departed from the house of his
father-in-law, Shu'ayb, after traversing a little distance he said to
his wife: "I feel that there is a fire". His wife and children did not
see at all the fire which he felt. Prophet Musa said: "I am going so
that I may bring a live coal from it for you."

When he approached the fire, he heard a call saying: "Surely I am
Allah." He heard this voice from the fire which was ablaze in a tree.
This sort of vision was acquired by the blind man by means of his stick
and the gnostic by means of his heart. But Prophet Musa had that vision
with his eyes.

The Truth is Higher than What We Say and Hear
---------------------------------------------

We speak about the truths, but they are higher than what we can say
about them. "Surely I am Allah". Nobody except Prophet Musa could see
the Light of the divine glory that was revealed to the tree.

Similarly nobody could know the nature of the revelation that was
received by the Holy Prophet, Muhammad. The whole Qur'an used to be
revealed to his heart at one time. How? Who knows? If the Qur'an is what
we have, consisting of 30 parts, then it cannot be revealed all at once
to an ordinary heart.

Heart Also Means Something Quite Different from What We Understand
------------------------------------------------------------------

In this content heart is different from what we ordinarily understand.
The Qur'an is a truth and this truth is revealed to the heart. The
Qur'an is a secret - a guarded secret. It must descend from its high
position so that it might be revealed to the heart of the Holy Prophet.

Then it must come down further so that it could be understood by others
also. The same is true of man. Man is also a closed secret. From what we
can see man appears to be an animal and for that matter, an animal lower
than many other animals.

But the distinguishing feature of this animal is that it can attain
humanity and by traversing various stages of perfection can reach the
stage of absolute perfection. Man before his death can become what is
difficult even to imagine.

What We Feel Are Qualities and Forms
------------------------------------

The whole man is a secret. It is difficult to say what we apparently see
in this world, for we cannot perceive bodies or substances. All that we
perceive are forms and qualities only. For example, our eyes see a
color. Our ears hear a sound. Our tongue feels a sensation of taste. Our
hands feel the things by touching them.

All these are forms and qualities. But the actual body is nowhere. When
we describe a thing, we mention its length, breadth and depth. Length,
breadth and depth are all forms only. We say that such and such thing
has attraction. But attraction is also a quality only. Whatever
qualities of a thing we may describe, they are all mere forms.

Then where is the body? The body is a secret - a shadow of the divine
secret. What we know is only names and qualities, otherwise everything
in this world in unknown. Perhaps it is this conception a degree of
which has been described by the gnostics as ''invisible though
apparently visible'', for in this world things are visible and invisible
at one and the same time.

Only those things are invisible which we can neither see nor can we
perceive. If we want to describe a thing we can do no more than
mentioning its name, qualities and characteristics. Man cannot perceive
a thing which is a shadow of the Absolute Secret, for human perception
is defective.

Only that man can perceive things fully who through his 'Wilayat' has
attained that position where glory of Allah is fully revealed to his
heart. The question of visibility and invisibility is present
everywhere. That is why such expressions as the invisible world, the
angelic world and the world of the intellects are on the lips of
everybody.

The Holy Prophet is the Exalted Name of Allah
---------------------------------------------

All the names of Allah are a secret as well as a known thing. They are
implicit and explicit. That is what the following Qur'anic verse means:
"He is Explicit and Implicit." What is explicit is implicit as well and
what is implicit is explicit as well.

That is how all the names of Allah imply all the grades of existence.
Every name covers the concepts of all other names. It is not that Rahman
is a name or an attribute different from Rahim. The same is true of all
other names of Allah. For example Muntaqim (Avenger) is not the opposite
of Rahman (Merciful).

The Qur'an says: Call Him by any name for He has all the beautiful
names. All these beautiful names are of Rahman as well as of Rahim. It
is not that one name means something and some other name signifies
something else. Had it been so Rahman would have signified one aspect of
Allah and Rahim another aspect of Him, while the Absolute Existence
cannot have many aspects.

The Absolute Existence as such is Rahman as well as Rahim, Nur (Light)
and Allah. His being Rahman is not different from His being Rahim. A
person occupying that highest position of gnosis in which his heart is
enlightened by Allah Himself, not by His glory, will himself be an
'exalted name' of Allah and at the same time will be enlightened by the
light of the 'exalted name'.

Such a person could only be he to whose heart the Qur'an was revealed
and to whom Gabriel used to come. The glory revealed to his heart
comprised all glories. This person was the Holy Prophet who personally
was the most exalted name of Allah. The Imams are also reported to have
said: "We are the beautiful names of Allah."

Even Our Existence is A Revelation of the Glory of Allah
--------------------------------------------------------

The topics we have discussed today included the question of causation.
We said that it was wrong to raise the question of causation in respect
of Allah. In our authentic texts we do not find any mention of it. Some
far-fetched examples do not serve any purpose.

Another question we mentioned was that of a dot under the letter 'ba'. I
explained the meaning of this tradition in case it was really reported
anywhere. Furthermore, some such questions were also discussed as the
name at the stage of divine essence, the name at the stage of
attributes, the name at the stage of the revelation of glory of action,
revelation of the glory of essence to essence, revelation of the glory
of essence to attributes, and revelation of the glory of essence to all
existing things.

When we talk of the revelation of divine glory, we say that even our
existence is the revelation of glory. To illustrate this fact it may be
said that if you put 100 mirrors in a place all reflecting the light of
the sun, it may be said that there are one hundred lights, but actually
there would be only one light reflected in all mirrors. But the light of
the sun being limited, even this example is far-fetched.

All Existing Things Are the Result of Divine Glory
--------------------------------------------------

It is the light of Allah's glory that is being reflected in all existing
things. It is the same light that is reflected everywhere. For each and
every thing there is no separate light. All the existing things are the
concomitant result of the same one light. As such in 'bismlllah' the ism
or the name means the name of divine essence and Allah is the glory of
divine essence which includes all glories.

It is this comprehensive glory the name of which is Allah, as well as
Rahman, Rahim etc. It is wrong to say that Rahman is the name of one
divine attribute and Rahim is the name of another attribute. In fact
Allah, Rahman and Rahim are the names of the same divine glory. The
whole of that glory is Allah as well as Rahman and Rahim. That is the
only possibility. Otherwise Allah will become a limited being, and a
limited being is a possibly existing being, not an essentially existing
one.

According to the details we mentioned earlier, praise (hamd) will be of
Allah and Allah is the name of the Comprehensive divine glory or divine
manifestation. Rahman and Rahim are also the names of exactly the same
glory. Hamd means either every praise or praise in general. There are
three possibilities about the name, Allah.

It can either be the name of the comprehensive divine glory at the stage
of essence or at the stage of attributes (This is the stage of will.
Every thing is produced by it) or at the stage of action. When we apply
these possibilities to the verse of â€˜bismillah,â€™ a different style of
expression emerges in every case.

We talked about Allah on this very basis and said that it is the
Comprehensive name at the stage of essence as well as at the stage of
attributes and at the stage of the revelation of divine glory producing
action. While discussing 'bismillah' we said a few things briefly about
the letter 'ba' its dot and the names of Allah, Rahman and Rahim.

The Belief Is Essential
-----------------------

We hope that it will be admitted that the discussion of such problems is
necessary. Some people totally deny their importance. Not only that,
there are some people who do not believe in gnostic questions at all.
Those who are at the stage of animals cannot understand that there is
something beyond what they know.

We must have belief in spiritual matters. This is the first step. The
foremost thing is that man should not deny everything he does not know.
Shaykh Abu Ali Sina says that anybody who denies a thing without any
reason, behaves against human nature.

Belief Must Be Based On Reason
------------------------------

As there must be a valid reason to prove a thing, there must also be a
valid reason to deny a thing. If you do not have a reason in favor or
against a thing, then simply say: "I don't know". But there are some
obstinate people who deny everything. As these people do not understand,
they behave inhumanly.

Whatever you hear you should normally admit that at least there is some
possibility of its being correct. Do not reject anything outright
without any reason. We do not have access to what is beyond this world.
Even about this world our knowledge is defective and limited. At present
we have a certain amount of knowledge. In future we will know much more.
So many things which we now know, about this world, were totally unknown
till a hundred years ago. In future many more discoveries will be made.

When man is still unable to know and perceive this world fully, how does
he dare to deny what the saints (Awliya') of Allah know and see. A man
denies the spiritual truths, because his heart lacks the spiritual
light. He says that spiritual truths do not exist, but does not admit
that he is unaware of them. He alleges that what the believers in
spiritual truths say are all fables.

He dares to say so because he is ignorant. He does not know that the
things he rejects as fables have been mentioned in the Qur'an too. What
the Muslim gnostics say has been derived from the Qur'an and sunnah
(traditions). Then how can he deny what the Qur'an confirms?

To Deny What One Does Not Know Is Unbelief
------------------------------------------

If not legally unbelief, at least it is a sort of unfaithfulness. The
root-cause of man's misfortune is that he denies the truths he does not
perceive. He rejects these truths because he has not reached the stage
that has been reached by the 'Saints of Allah'. This is the worst kind
of negationistness.

The foremost thing is that one must not deny what is contained in the
Qur'an and sunnah, what is acknowledged by the Imams and what is
admitted by the philosophers. If somebody has not perceived the truth
himself, he should frankly admit that he does not know. But it is all
humbug if some idiot says that he would not believe in Allah unless he
himself has dissected Him with his sharp knife.

The most important thing is that we must not deny what we have been told
by the Prophets and the Imams. This is the first step. We cannot take
the next step if we deny the things in the very beginning. If anybody
wants to go forward he should as a first step admit that the spiritual
things he does not know, may possibly he correct. Then he should pray to
Allah to open for him a way that might lead him to the place where he
should reach.

We Must Not Deny the Qur'an and Sunnah
--------------------------------------

If a man will not deny the Divine things and will pray to Allah, Allah
will certainly help him and will gradually open the way for him.

I hope that we will not deny what is in the Qur'an and sunnah. It often
happens that a man believes in the Qur'an and sunnah, and does not deny
even when he does not understand what is in them, but when somebody else
tells him that the Qur'an and sunnah say so, he instead of admitting his
lack of knowledge, rejects that outright as nonsense.

### Total Denial is a Stumbling Block

Total denial deprives man from acknowledging many truths and prevents
him from proceeding on the right path. The veracity of the facts which
have been affirmed by the saints of Allah should be acknowledged at
least tacitly if not expressly. A man who denies them totally and
describes them as nonsense, can never succeed in proceeding further.

We Must Do Away With Negative Attitude
--------------------------------------

I hope that we will give up the negative attitude and will pray to Allah
to make us familiar with the diction of the Qur'an which is of a special
type. Like man the Qur'an also has many potentialities. It is a large
table on which many dishes of various tastes have been placed by Allah.
From it everybody can have food of his choice, provided he has not lost
his appetite, which happens in the case of heart patients.

The Qur'an like this world is a vast dining table. This world is also
used by different people differently according to their requirements and
taste. Man utilizes it in one way, animals in another and the men who
are on the same level as the animals in a third way. As the level goes
up, the way of utilization improves. The same is true of the Qur'an. It
is for all. Everybody can be benefited by it according to his taste and
choice.

Its highest beneficiary is he who is its first addressee and to whom it
was revealed. "Only he knows the Qur'an to whom it was addressed."

Denial of Prophethood
---------------------

We need not be disappointed. Instead we must try to be benefited by the
Qur'an. For this purpose it is essential that first of all we remove
from our mind the idea that there exists nothing besides physical and
material problems and that the Qur'an also has been revealed only to
deal with these problems and is exclusively concerned with this worldly
life.

This way of thinking amounts to total denial of Prophethood. In fact the
Qur'an has come to make man a real human being and all this is a means
to an end.

Supplications and Worship Are Means
-----------------------------------

Worship is a means. Supplications are a means. They are a means to
develop real human qualities and to awaken dormant human potentialities
so that man becomes a real human being, a godly man, able to see what is
right and understand what is right.

Prophets have come for this very purpose. Prophets are also a means.
They did not come merely to set up a government. The government has its
own place, but the Prophets did not come only for the sake of obtaining
power and administering worldly affairs. This is what the animals also
do. They also have their own world and they administer the affairs of
it.

Justice is a Quality Appropriate to Allah
-----------------------------------------

Those who have an insight look at the discussion of justice as the
discussion of a characteristic of Allah. The administration of divine
justice is one of the functions of the Prophets. They set up a
government as a means of leading man to that position which is the real
aim of the Prophets' coming. May Allah help us in all affairs!

Before dealing with the remaining points perhaps it is necessary and
useful to point out that the scholars often disagree because they do not
understand the language of each other properly. The reason is that each
group of scholars has its own language.

A Dispute About Grapes Between An Iranian, A Turk And An Arab
-------------------------------------------------------------

I wonder whether you have ever heard this story. There were three men.
One of them was an Iranian; another was a Turk and the third was an
Arab. They were discussing what they should have for lunch. The Iranian
said that angur would be quite suitable. The Arab said: "No, we would
have inab." The Turk said: "No, I don't like either. We would have
uzum." As they did not understand the language of each other, they
differed. At last someone of them went out and brought grapes. Then they
realized that all of them wanted the same thing.

To express the same thing there are different words in different
languages. For example, the philosophers have a particular diction. They
have their own terminology. Similarly the sufis have their own language.
The jurists have their own terms. The poets have their own poetic
diction. The Imams have their own separate style.

Now we have to find out which one out of these three or four groups has
a language closer to the language of those who are infallible and to the
language of revelation. I do not think that any sensible person will
deny that Allah exists and that He is the source and cause of all that
exists. Nobody believes that you with your coat and pants are God, nor
can any sensible person imagine that any man with a turban, a beard and
a staff is Allah. Everybody knows that all men are creatures.

Anyhow the way in which the cause and effect are described and the
impression that such description creates, often gives rise to
disagreement. We should find out what those who belonged to the gnostic
class actually wanted to say and what induced them to use questionable
words and a vague style.

How To Reconcile Different Groups And Their Ways Of Expression?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Now I want to reconcile these different groups for they all say the same
thing. I do not want to condone all philosophers or to defend all
gnostics or all jurists. That is not my intention. I know that many of
them are shopkeepers. They say only that which may promote their
business. What I mean to say is that in all these groups there are
people who are pious.

The differences which exist between them are due to the scholars of to
which they belong. Their differences may be compared to the difference
existing between the Usulis and the Akhbaris (traditionalists).
Sometimes some Akhbaris condemn the Usulis as infidels and unbelievers,
and Usulis condemn the Akhbaris as ignorant. They do so despite the fact
that the objective of both the groups is the same.

Now the main point of our discourse is that a group of philosophers uses
such terms as the primary cause, first effect, second effect,
causativeness etc. Such terms as causativeness, source and consequence
are some of the favorite terms of the ancient philosophers.

Even our jurists do not refrain from using terms like causativeness and
effectiveness nor have they any objection against using such words as
creatorness and createdness. There is a class of the Muslim gnostics,
who because of difference they have with other classes, use quite
different expressions, such as manifest, manifestations, glory etc.

In addition, they use certain other words to which the literalists take
exception. Now let us see why they use such words and why some of these
words have been used by the Imams also. I do not remember to have seen
such words as illiyat, ma'luliyyat, sababiyyat and musabbibiyat
(causativeness and effectiveness) being used by the Imams, but other
such words as khallaqiyyat (creatorness) makhluqiyyat (createdness)
tajalli (revelation of glory) zahir (manifest) and mazhar
(manifestation) are found in what they have said.

Now let us see why the Muslim gnostics and sufis have refrained from
using the terminology of the philosophers as well as the language of the
common people. They have invented a style of their own to which the
literalists usually object. Let us know the reason.

Cause and Effect
----------------

On the basis of causation one thing is considered to be the cause and
another to be the effect. As a rule the cause should be on the one side
and the effect on the other. In other words they should be in two
different places. Take the example of the sun and the sunlight.

There is light in the sun, but it also emits light. The sun and its
light have two separate identities and are located at two different
places. As the sun emits its light, the sun is the cause and its light
is its effect. But the question is whether it is possible in the case of
the self-existing being also to imagine such relationship of cause and
effect as is found in nature.

For example, fire is the cause of heat and the sun is the cause of
light. In nature the effect is a consequence of the cause and the cause
and effect are usually found in two separate places.

In nature the cause and the effect are also usually located at two
different places. But we cannot say about the Creator and the created
that they are in two separate places or exist at two different times.
Even it is difficult to say how AIlah exists, because He is Absolute and
His existence is abstract.

Whatever the way of expression you may adopt, it is impossible to say
how Allah exercises His eternal and ceaseless power of creating and
sustaining every thing. The Qur'an says:

***He is with you wherever you are. (57:4)***

What does "with you" mean in this verse? Is Allah by the side of every
man?

### Meaning of "with you"

This way of expression has been chosen because it is impossible to
express the truth exactly. Therefore, words as close to the reality as
possible, have to be chosen. It is very difficult to understand where
the Creator is and how He is with the created. Is the relation between
the Creator and the created the same as between fire and its effect? Or
is the relation between them similar to the relation between soul and
eyes, ears, nose and other organs?

The second similitude may be closer to the reality. Anyhow it also
cannot express the meaning clearly. The Creator is encompassing the
whole creation and this encompassing is related to His eternal
attributes of creation and sustenance. It is difficult to say anything
more. All that may be added is that this encompassing is such that there
is no place where Allah may not be.

A tradition says: "If you were dropped to the lowest earth by means of a
rope, you would find Allah even there." This is only a way of
expression. For example if it is said: "All that exists is Allah". This
does not mean that any particular man wearing a gown and a turban is
Allah. No man who is mentally normal would ever say so. We can only use
words which may be as close to the reality as possible. Only to draw the
attention of a man not conversant with the reality, to the relation
between the Creator and the created it is said that it is true that "All
that exists is Allah".

But that does not mean that any particular man or a particular thing may
be called Allah. That is why the Muslim philosophers say that Allah is
pure existence, and He is all things, but not anything particular out of
them. This statement may appear to be somewhat contradictory. But what
is meant is that Allah is free from every shortcoming. He is pure
existence and has no deficiency or defect. He is characterized with
every perfection, whereas all other things are defective.

Therefore He 'is not anything particular out of them'. As Allah is free
from every defect and deficiency, He consequently enjoys every
perfection. Any perfection found in any creation of His is a reflection
of His own perfection. As every perfection is a revelation of His glory,
He Himself is all perfection. In the above quoted tradition "all things"
means all kinds of perfection and "not anything particular out of them"
means that He is free from every defect and deficiency. "All things"
does not mean that you are also Allah.

That is why it is said that "He is not any thing particular out of
them." In other words He is all perfection while no one else is
characterized with every perfection. There is another example of this
kind. There is a well-known Persian poetical line that means: 'Because
non-attachment became confined to attachment.' This line has nothing to
do with any question of divinity.

But those who are not conversant with this topic, often confuse its
meaning. This line in fact is concerned with the hostility between two
persons. But those who do not understand its meaning say that it amounts
to infidelity. In fact it has been misunderstood and misinterpreted. It
actually deals with quite a different question, which is why the wars
occur in the world.

Why Do the Wars Occur?
----------------------

Why are the wars fought? What is the basis of the wars? In the above
mentioned line and in Persian the word, â€˜rungâ€™ (color) is used in the
sense of attachment and 'berungi' (colourlessness) in the sense of
non-attachment. Some other poets have also used these words in this
sense.

If one is not attached to any thing, there can be no quarrel. All
quarrels are caused by somebody's attachment to some thing, which he
wants to obtain for himself. The poet who wrote the above mentioned line
wants to say that attachment to any particular thing or things is not a
part of real human nature and if this attachment to worldly things is
done away with there will no longer be any quarrel.

In the story of Prophet Musa and Fir'awn, if Fir'awn had been as
indifferent to worldly things as Prophet Musa was, there would have been
no trouble. If all the Prophets gathered together at a place there would
be no dispute at all, for all disputes and quarrels are due to
attachment.

Nature was unattached, but when it became a captive of attachment,
quarrels arose. Even Prophet Musa and Fir'awn would make friends, if the
sting of attachment was removed. This topic has no concern with
divinity. It did not occur to him who objected to this line, that it
related to two men quarreling between themselves.

Words in Imam's Supplications
-----------------------------

You are already familiar with the words used in Imams' supplications.
Now let us see whether the words and phrases used by Muslim gnostics for
which they have been charged with unbelief by those who are unaware of
reality, are similar to those used by the Imams or the gnostics have a
different vocabulary. This topic relates to spiritual journey.

The following words have come in the Sha'baniyah supplication:

"O my Lord! Grant me complete withdrawal to You and enlighten the eyes
of our heart with the light of looking towards You so that the eyes of
heart may tear off the curtains of light and reach the source of
grandeur and our souls get suspended in the honorable chamber of your
sanctity."

Further the text says: "O my Lord! Grant me that I may be one of those
whom you called and they responded, and at whom You looked and they were
dumb-founded."

What do these words signify? Now what do the critics of the gnostics
say? The gnostics have not said anything different from what the Imams
have said. Why did all our Imams use to recite this supplication? What
does "complete withdrawal" mean?

Imams pray for complete withdrawal
----------------------------------

The Imams ask Allah to grant them complete withdrawal to Him, while it
was up to them to undertake the spiritual journey themselves, but still
they prayed to Allah for it. Why so? They asked Allah to enlighten the
eyes of their hearts. What did they mean by the eyes of the hearts with
which they wished to see Allah? What does heart mean in this context,
and what is the meaning of the eye of the heart?

Thereafter, the aim of all this has been stated in these words: "So that
the eyes of our heart may tear off the curtains of light and may reach
the source of majesty and our souls may become suspended in the
honorable chamber of Your sanctity". Here the question arises what is
meant by becoming suspended? The next prayer is:

"O my Lord! Make me one of those whom you called and who responded to
You and who were dumbfounded by Your majesty." The Qur'an also has said
about Prophet Musa that he fell down senseless. Are these expressions
different from what is called fana' or passing away in the terminology
of the Muslim gnostics. Thus climbing up higher and higher the spiritual
traveler reaches the stage where the eyes of his heart tearing off all
curtains reach the source of majesty.

What is this source of majesty and what does reaching this source mean?
Does this not mean gaining that proximity to Allah of which the gnostics
talk? Can anything other than Allah be the source of majesty? Only that
can be this source of majesty from whom all the favors and blessings can
be contained. Only after reaching this source of majesty "our souls will
become suspended in the honorable chamber of Your sanctity".

Anybody who looks over the relationship between Allah and His creation
will never use the words, cause and effect for this relationship. The
use of these words, wherever it has been made, shows only that this
relationship is such that it cannot be expressed in exact terms.

The use of the words Creator and creation is nothing but following the
taste of the common people. A far better expression is revealing the
glory. The Qur'an says:

***Then his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain. (Surah al-A'raf,
7:143)***

This is also only a way of using the closest words to state a
relationship that cannot be expressed exactly.

A Question Difficult To Conceive, But Easy to Believe
-----------------------------------------------------

The relationship between Allah and His creation is a question that is
difficult to conceive but after having been conceived, is easy to be
believed. The difficulty is how to conceive a Being who is everywhere,
but still it cannot be said that He is at such and such place.

He is outside of everything as well as the inside of everything.
Everything is caused by Him. Nothing is devoid of Him. Now where can we
find appropriate words to express these concepts? Whatever words we
choose, they will be inadequate. All that can be done is that those who
are fit to do so pray to Allah and pray in the style of the Shabaniyah
Supplication that He may enlighten them on this subject.

Anyhow, it is not a thing for which one group may declare another group
infidel or ignorant, for it is not possible for anyone to express
himself clearly on this subject. Try to understand the sentiments of
others and what they want to say. Sometimes it happens that as light
surges in the heart of somebody, he involuntarily exclaims that he is
everything.

Imam Ali is the Eye of Allah, He is the Light of Allah's Eye
------------------------------------------------------------

You read in the supplications that Imam Ali is the eye of Allah. What
does that signify? Imam Ali is often described as the eye of Allah,
light of Allah and the hand of Allah. What does the Hand of Allah mean?
Such words are used by the Muslim gnostics also. It is reported in our
traditions that the alms given to a poor-man reaches the Hand of Allah.
The Qur'an says:

***You did not throw the pebbles, when you threw them, but Allah threw.
(Surah al-Anfal, 8:17)***

What does this mean? This is what you all repeat, but you do not allow
the gnostics to mention the Hand of Allah. When these poor people cannot
say expressly, they say the same thing in a roundabout way. But such
expressions are common even in the Qur'an and especially in the Imams'
supplications.

Therefore there is no reason why we should suspect the gnostics
especially. Try to understand what they mean and why they do not use the
diction commonly used by other people. Although they have not used the
familiar words and phrases, they have not sacrificed the truth, but have
sacrificed themselves for the sake of truth. If we could understand that
truth, we might have used the same diction.

The Qur'an has used the same way of expression. The Imams also have used
similar words. If somebody says: "This is the truth", no sensible person
will think that he means that this is Allah. Now just see how
manifestation of Allah can be interpreted?

In regard to the Imams in a supplication the following words have been
used: "There is no difference between You and them, except that they are
your bondsmen; their creation is in Your Hand and their restoration is
in Your Hand." This sentence also shows the inadequacy of expression.
That is why the Imams use the words which are closer to the Qur'an than
to the words used by others.

About gnostics anyone could say that they were nobody. But there were
some other people whom we knew intimately and knew that they had a
thorough knowledge of all Islamic sciences. They also used similar
words. For example they used to say: "That reveals Allah's glory". In
the 'Samat' Supplication there is a word, â€˜tal'atukaâ€™. This word also
means glory. Similarly there is another word nur (light) in the phrase,
'binuri wajhika' (by the light of Your Countenance).

That is why I say: Make peace with the gnostics. I do not mean to say
that all of them are good. What I mean is that all of them must not be
rejected. When I support the scholars and jurists, I do not intend to
support all kinds of scholars and what I mean is that all of them should
not be rejected. The same is the case with the gnostics. Do not think
that whosoever talks in gnostic terms is an infidel.

Every Thing Must Be Investigated
--------------------------------

First of all it must be understood what the other man is saying. If that
is understood, perhaps there will be no need of rejecting him.
Everywhere it is the same story of grapes â€“ â€˜inab, angur and uzum.â€™

One man states a thing in one way; another man uses the terms of cause
and effect while saying the same thing; the third man uses the word,
mover and consequence; while the fourth man says manifest and
manifestation. At some time or other all of them reach a stage where
they realize how to describe the Being who is everywhere but is not any
of the things we perceive. That is why sometimes someone ever says:

"Ali is Allah's hand; Ali is Allah's eye."

The Qur'an says:

***You did not throw when you threw, but Allah threw***. It also says:
***Surely those who pledge their allegiance to you, really pledge their
allegiance to Allah. Allah's hand is above their hands. (Surah aI-Fath,
48:10)***

Does this verse mean that Allahâ€™s Hand is literally placed on their
hands? Obviously it does not. 'Above' here means at a higher point
spiritually. Actually we lack words to express this position properly.

As Allah is far above that he may be mingled with anything or that he
may be related to anything in a general sense, similarly he is above
that we may be able to understand the nature of His glory. His glory is
unknown to us. But we believe that there is certainly something of this
sort. We cannot deny its existence.

When we believe that such things exist, we have to admit that they are
mentioned in one way or another in the Qur'an and Sunnah. In the Qur'an
wherever there is a mention of the glory of Allah, the words revealing
or manifesting have been used. In the Surah al-Hadid a verse says: He is
Explicit and Implicit.

A report says that the last six verses of the Surah al-Hadid are for the
people who will appear "in the last era." Only they will be able to
understand these verses which give some account of creation etc. It is
in these verses that Allah says:

***He is the First and the Last and the Explicit and the Implicit and He
is with you wherever you are. (Surah al-Hadid, 57:3-4)***

Nobody can easily understand what is meant by 'the last era'. Only one
or two persons in the world may be able to understand the significance
of this phrase.

Misunderstandings Must Be Removed
---------------------------------

The main point which I want to emphasize is that misunderstanding must
be removed and there should be an end to the differences between the
pedagogues and the scholars. The way to gnosis must not be blocked.
Islam is not the name of the rules of law only. The basis of these rules
is something else.

The basis should not be considered to be superfluous, nor should it be
sacrificed for the sake of derivatives. We must not say that gnosis is
not required or has no importance. Someone told me that a person was
mentioned before the late Shaykh Muhammad Bahari. He says: "That man is
a righteous infidel."

â€˜How can that beâ€™ we said: 'Is he righteous and at the same time an
infidel?' Shaykh Muhammad Bahari said: 'Yes, he is righteous because he
acts according to the law of Islam and does not commit any sin. And he
is an infidel because the god which he worships is not true God.'

Even the Ant Loves Itself
-------------------------

According to our traditions perhaps the ant thinks that Allah has two
horns. This is due to self-love which an ant also apparently harbors.
The ant is a very funny creature. It thinks that it is a mark of
grandeur to have horns. When we think about our virtues and merits, we
also think almost in the same way. It is the same ant which thought that
Prophet Sulayman (Soloman) and his troop could not understand anything.
The Qur'an says:

***An ant exclaimed: 'O ants: Enter your dwellings lest Sulayman and his
troops crush you because they do not understand.' 'And he (Sulayman)
smiled laughing at her speech. (Surah an-Naml, 27:17-19)***

The case of the ant is not a solitary one. Everybody thinks the same
way. Even the hoopoe, according to the Qur'an, said:

***I know what you do not. (Surah an-Naml, 27:22).***

The hoopoe said so to Prophet Sulayman who was a Prophet and who had a
companion who brought to him the throne of Bilqis in the twinkling of an
eye. How could he do that, is not known. Was there any electric system
of transportation, or was it a case of annihilating a thing and then
bringing it back into existence, or was the throne of Bilqis transported
after having been converted into electric waves?

According to a report one of the companions of Prophet Sulayman knew a
letter of Allah's Exalted Name and by virtue of it could bring anything
desired to Prophet Sulayman before the twinkling of an eye. To such a
prophet the hoopoe said: 'I know what you do not.'

Anyway, what Shaykh Muhammad Bahari meant to say was that that
particular scholar said what he understood and he acted also
accordingly.

It Is Bad Luck To Be Unaware of Some Important Questions
--------------------------------------------------------

I think that it is unfortunate that a group of scholars which includes
some very good and pious persons, is unaware of some important
questions. When I came to Qum, Mirza Ali Akbar Hakim was there. He had
established an Islamic Academy at his house.

The scholars used to receive education there. Such outstanding persons
as the late Agha Khawansari and the late Agha Ishraqi used to attend
Mirza Ali Akbar's lectures. On that occasion a pious and prominent
personality, who is no longer amongst us, remarked: 'Look, to what level
has the condition of Islam gone down?

Now the business of Islam is being transacted at the house of Mirza Ali
Akbar.' He made this remark despite the fact that personally he was a
pious man. Even after his death one of his representatives said on the
pulpit: 'I have myself seen Mirza Ali Akbar reciting the Qur'an.' The
late Agha Shah Abadi was very much offended by this remark. Such
misunderstandings are regrettable, and keeping oneself aloof from good
work is also deplorable.

What a pity that this scholar did not take part in the meritorious act
of setting up a learned academy! Philosophy is a common place thing, but
some people object to it also. In fact these people do not understand
each other and that is why all the disputes arise. A scholar declares
another scholar infidel simply because he does not understand what the
other man says.

The fault of the other man is that he uses such terms as cause, effect
etc., which in the eyes of the former are contrary to the facts. I said
earlier that divine name is not separate from the named. The name is a
manifestation and a sign, but not such a sign as a milestone is.
Therefore it is difficult to say that such and such thing is a sign of
Allah. The words used in the Qur'an are closest to the reality but still
do not represent it fully. The difficulty is that better words do not
exist.

I said earlier that the Qur'an was like a dining table with many dishes
placed on it. Everybody can have food according to his choice. No group
has a monopoly of the Qur'an. All have a right to be benefited by it
equally. The supplications of the Imams are full of spiritual knowledge.
But some individuals try to deprive the people of these supplications
which impart knowledge and convey the views of the Qur'an. Imams'
supplications interpret the Qur'an and explain the questions to which
others do not have access.

It is Wrong To Persuade People To Give Up Supplications
-------------------------------------------------------

It is wrong to say that as we want to concentrate on the Qur'an, the
supplications are not required. People should cultivate a liking for the
supplications so that they may develop an attachment to Allah. Those who
do so, give no importance to worldly things.

They are not self-conceited, and keep themselves busy with the tasks
liked by Allah. Such people include those who used to fight for the sake
of Allah, and at the same time used to recite the supplications.

Their circumstances were not different from ours, but still they managed
to wield the sword and pray at the same time. Just as the Holy Prophet
and the Holy Qur'an are not separate from each other, similarly the Holy
Qur'an and the supplications are also not separate from each other.

We cannot say that as we have the Qur'an, we do not need the Holy
Prophet. The Qur'an and the Holy Prophet go together. "They will always
remain together till they arrive together at the Fountain of Kawthar."
There is no question of their parting.

If some of us take them separately and want the Qur'an to be separate,
the Imams to be separate and the supplications to be separate; or if
some of us say that the books of supplication are not required, and as
such they may be set on fire; or if some of us want the books of the
gnostics to be burnt, the reason is simply that the people who say and
do such thing are ignorant. A man who exceeds his limit always falls
into error.

Kasrawi And Hafiz
-----------------

Kasrawi was an historian. His knowledge of history was good. He was a
fine writer also. But he was self conceited. In the end he began to
claim to be a prophet. He, however, believed in the Qur'an, but he was
totally against supplications. He lowered Prophethood and brought it
down to his own level. As he himself could not rise up, he lowered
Prophethood.

The supplications and the Qur'an all go together. The gnostics, the sufi
poets and the philosophers all say the same thing. Their points of view
are not different. The difference is only that of their diction and the
style of expression. Hafiz Shirazi (the Celebrated Persian Poet) has his
own individual style. He mentions the same points as others do, but in a
different manner.

Their choice of words may be different, but the people should not be
deprived of the blessings of the subject matter. It is essential to call
people to the vast treasure of knowledge contained in the Qur'an, sunnah
and supplications so that everybody may be benefited by them according
to his capacity.

This was a prelude to the points I intend to put forward later. If I am
spared and mention any expression used by the gnostics as a possibility,
it should not be said that I was trying to revive their expressions. In
fact their expressions are worth being popularized.

Some craftsmen used to call on the late Agha Shah Abadi, who used to
narrate gnostic problems in front of them as in front of others. One day
I said: 'Do you narrate these things in front of these people also?' He
said: 'Never mind! Let these heresies be heard by them too'.

We also had some such people. I cannot say who they were. It will be
wrong to mention anybody by name. Now the topic of discussion is that
"***Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim***" has al-Rahman al-Rahim and
"***Al-hamdu lillahi Rabbil 'alamin***" is also followed by the same
words, viz. al-Rahman al-Rahim.

The words al-Rahman and al-Rahi'm may in bismillah either relate to ism
or Allah. Both the possibilities are there. God-willing we will see
later which of these two possibilities appears to be more reasonable.


