Appendix: The Invocation of Shabaniyah
======================================

My Lord, bestow Your blessings on Muhammad and his descendants; respond
to my prayer when I pray to You; listen to my call when I call You; and
turn to me when I make my submission to You in confidence. I have come
running to You and am standing before You imploring You in humility and
hoping to get the reward You have for me.

You know what is in my heart, and You are aware of what I need. You know
my mind and are not unaware of my future and of my present, of what I
want to begin my speech with; of the request I would utter, and of the
hopes I have in regard to my ultimate lot.

My Lord, whatever You have destined for me up to the end of my life,
whether concerning the open aspect of my life or the hidden aspect of
it, is bound to come. What is to my advantage and what is to my
disadvantage - all my losses and gains are in Your hand, not in the hand
of anybody else.

My Lord, if You deprive me, who else will provide me; and if You let me
down, who else will help me?

My Lord, I seek Your protection from Your anger and from earning Your
displeasure. If I am not fit for gaining Your Mercy, You are certainly
fit to be generous to me by virtue of Your Magnanimity.

My Lord, I see as if I am standing before You protected by my trust in
You. You said what befitted You and covered me with Your forgiveness.

My Lord, if You forgive me, then who is more suited than You to do that?
If the time of my death has come near and my deeds have not still
brought me close to You, I make this confession of my sins a means of
approaching You. I have been unjust to my soul for I have not looked
after it. It will certainly be doomed if You do not forgive it.

My Lord, You have always been kind to me during my life time. Therefore
do not cut off Your favor from me at the time of my death.

My Lord, how can lose the hope of Your looking kindly, in me after my
death, when you have always been good to me during my life.

My Lord, in my case do what befits You and bestow Your favor on me - a
sinner enwrapped in his ignorance.

My Lord, You have concealed many of my sins in this world. I am in a
greater need of their being conceded in the next. As You have not
revealed my sins even to any of Your pious bondmen, do not expose me on
the Day of Resurrection before everybody.

My Lord, Your generosity has expanded my aspiration, and Your
forgiveness is superior to my deeds. Therefore gladden my heart by
allowing me to meet You on the day You administer justice to Your
bondmen.

My Lord, my apology to You is the apology of him who cannot afford his
apology being not accepted. Therefore accept my apology, You the Most
Magnanimous of those to whom the evildoers tender their apology.

My Lord, do not turn down my request; do not foil my desire; and do not
cut off my hope and expectation of You.

My Lord, if You had wanted to disgrace me, You would not have guided me;
and if You had wanted to expose my faults and vices, You would not have
kept me safe and sound.

My Lord, I do not think that You will turn down my request for that in
asking You for which I have spent my whole life.

My Lord, all praise is due to You, always and forever, growing not
diminishing, as You like and please.

My Lord, if You condemn me for my crimes, I will cling to Your
forgiveness, and if You hold me for my sins, I will cling to Your
granting pardon. If You haul me into the hell, I will tell its inmates
that I love You.

My Lord, if my deeds are too small in relation to how I should obey You,
my aspirations are high enough as compared to what I should expect of
You.

My Lord, how can I go away from You unsuccessful and disappointed, when
I had a high hope that You will be kind enough to send me away enjoying
safety and deliverance.

My Lord, I have wasted my life committing the crime of forgetting You
and played havoc with my youth, intoxicated with keeping myself away
from You.

My Lord, I did not wake up when I was under a delusion about You and was
inclined to earn Your displeasure.

My Lord, I am Your bondman, son of Your bondman. I am standing before
You, trying to use Your own magnanimity as a means of approaching You.

My Lord, I am a bondman of Yours, I want to rid myself of the sins I
used to commit in Your presence because I lacked the sense of feeling
ashamed that You were looking at me. I request You to forgive me,
because forgiveness is a characteristic of Your Kindness.

My Lord, I was not strong enough to move away from Your disobedience,
except when You awakened me to Your love. I was exactly as You wanted me
to be. I am thankful to You for introducing me to Your Kindness and
purging my heart of the impurities of being inattentive to You.

My Lord, look upon me as the person whom You called and he responded to
You, whom You helped by using his ser-vices, and he obeyed You. You Near
One, Who is not far from one who is away from You. You Munificent, Who
does not withhold His reward from one who hopes for it.

My Lord, provide me with a heart, the passion of which may bring it near
You, with a tongue the truth of which may be submitted to You, and with
a vision the nature of which may bring it close to You.

My Lord, whoever gets acquainted with You, is not un-known; whoever
takes shelter under You, is not disappointed; and one to whom You turn,
is not a slave. One who follows Your path is enlightened; and one who
takes refuge in You, is saved.

My Lord, I have taken refuge in You. Therefore do not disappoint me of
Your Mercy and do not keep me secluded from Your Kindness.

My Lord, place me among Your friends in the position of one who hopes
for an increase in Your love.

My Lord, inspire me with a passionate love of remembering You so that I
may keep on remembering You, and by Your Holy Name and Pure Position
cherish my cheerful determination into a success.

My Lord, I invoke You to admit me to the place reserved for those who
obey You, and to attach me to the nice abode of those who enjoy Your
good pleasure. . .I can neither defend myself nor do I control what is
advantageous for me.

My Lord, I am Your powerless sinning slave and Your repentant bondman.
So do not make me one of those from whom You turn away Your face, and
whom his negligence has secluded from Your forgiveness.

My Lord, grant me complete severance of my relations with everything
else and total submission to You. Enlighten the eyes of our hearts with
the light of their looking at You to the extent that they penetrate the
veils of light and reach the Source of Grandeur, and let our souls get
suspended by the glory of Your sanctity.

My Lord, make me one of those whom You call and they respond; when You
look at and they are thunderstruck by Your majesty. You whisper to them
secretly and they work for You openly.

My Lord, I have not allowed my pessimistic despair to overcome my good
opinion about You, nor did I ever lose my hope of Your benevolence.

My Lord, if my errors have degraded me with You, You may forgive me in
view of my unqualified reliance on You.

My Lord, if my sins have made me unfit to receive Your tender affection,
my firm belief has reminded me of Your Compassion.

My Lord, if my disregard for preparations to meet You has put me to
sleep, my knowledge of Your kind bounties has awakened me.

My Lord, if Your severe punishment calls me to Hell, the abundance of
Your reward invites me to Paradise.

My Lord, I ask You and pray to You earnestly, I desire and request You
to show Your favor to Muhammad and his descendants, make me one of those
who always remember You and never violate the pledge they make to You,
who do not fail to show You their gratitude and do not take Your orders
lightly.

My Lord, let me be attached to the Light of Your Majestic Glory, so that
I may know You alone, be away from others, and have a heart fearful of
You and an eye watchful of You. May Allah's blessing and peace be on
Muhammad and those of his descendants who are pure.

Arabic text
-----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ شَجَرَةِ
النُّبُوَّةِ وَ مَوْضِعِ الرِّسَالَةِ وَ مُخْتَلَفِ الْمَلائِكَةِ وَ
مَعْدِنِ الْعِلْمِ وَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِ الْوَحْيِ اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الْفُلْكِ الْجَارِيَةِ فِي اللُّجَجِ
الْغَامِرَةِ يَأْمَنُ مَنْ رَكِبَهَا وَ يَغْرَقُ مَنْ تَرَكَهَا
الْمُتَقَدِّمُ لَهُمْ مَارِقٌ وَ الْمُتَأَخِّرُ عَنْهُمْ زَاهِقٌ وَ
اللازِمُ لَهُمْ لاحِقٌ اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ الْكَهْفِ الْحَصِينِ وَ غِيَاثِ الْمُضْطَرِّ الْمُسْتَكِينِ
وَ مَلْجَإِ الْهَارِبِينَ وَ عِصْمَةِ الْمُعْتَصِمِينَ اللَّهُمَّ
صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلاةً كَثِيرَةً تَكُونُ لَهُمْ
رِضًى وَ لِحَقِّ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ أَدَاءً وَ قَضَاءً
بِحَوْلٍ مِنْكَ وَ قُوَّةٍ يَا رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الطَّيِّبِينَ
الْأَبْرَارِ الْأَخْيَارِ الَّذِينَ أَوْجَبْتَ حُقُوقَهُمْ وَ فَرَضْتَ
طَاعَتَهُمْ وَ وِلايَتَهُمْ اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَ اعْمُرْ قَلْبِي بِطَاعَتِكَ وَ لا تُخْزِنِي
بِمَعْصِيَتِكَ وَ ارْزُقْنِي مُوَاسَاةَ مَنْ قَتَّرْتَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ
رِزْقِكَ بِمَا وَسَّعْتَ عَلَيَّ مِنْ فَضْلِكَ وَ نَشَرْتَ عَلَيَّ
مِنْ عَدْلِكَ وَ أَحْيَيْتَنِي تَحْتَ ظِلِّكَ وَ هَذَا شَهْرُ
نَبِيِّكَ سَيِّدِ رُسُلِكَ شَعْبَانُ الَّذِي حَفَفْتَهُ مِنْكَ
بِالرَّحْمَةِ وَ الرِّضْوَانِ الَّذِي كَانَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صَلَّى
اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ وَ [سَلَّمَ‏] يَدْأَبُ فِي صِيَامِهِ وَ
قِيَامِهِ فِي لَيَالِيهِ وَ أَيَّامِهِ بُخُوعا لَكَ فِي إِكْرَامِهِ وَ
إِعْظَامِهِ إِلَى مَحَلِّ حِمَامِهِ اللَّهُمَّ فَأَعِنَّا عَلَى
الاسْتِنَانِ بِسُنَّتِهِ فِيهِ وَ نَيْلِ الشَّفَاعَةِ لَدَيْهِ
اللَّهُمَّ وَ اجْعَلْهُ لِي شَفِيعا مُشَفَّعا وَ طَرِيقا إِلَيْكَ
مَهْيَعا وَ اجْعَلْنِي لَهُ مُتَّبِعا حَتَّى أَلْقَاكَ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ عَنِّي رَاضِيا وَ عَنْ ذُنُوبِي غَاضِيا قَدْ أَوْجَبْتَ
لِي مِنْكَ الرَّحْمَةَ وَ الرِّضْوَانَ وَ أَنْزَلْتَنِي دَارَ
الْقَرَارِ وَ مَحَلَّ الْأَخْيَار
  </p>
</blockquote>


