Chapter 5: Hazrat Fatima (S.A): An Ideal Woman
==============================================

HAZRAT FATIMA (S.A) AS AN EXAMPLE FOR ALL WOMEN
-----------------------------------------------

For man, the Prophet, Hazrat Mohammad (S.A.W.W), was a perfect example
to be followed in all matters of this life.

Allah calls him in the Qur'an "Uswatun Hasana" (CH 33 V 21) or a perfect
example. For the Muslim women Hazrat Fatima (S.A) was the perfect
example; for says the Prophet (S.A.W.W), 'The best of your men is Ali
Ibn Abu Talib and the best of your women is Fatima Bint Muhammad."

This idea is also found in the famous Sunni book "Mustadrak" (the writer
was Malik Naishapuri) which reports the Prophet (S.A.W.W) addressing
Hazrat Fatima (S.A) as "The leader of the Women of the World, this Ummah
and the believing women."

Though she lived a very short life of only eighteen years (some say she
lived for twenty eight years) yet she left behind her, excellent
examples for Muslim women to follow and thereby lead a pure life.

HAZRAT FATIMA (S.A) AS A DAUGHTER
---------------------------------

Of all the children of the Prophet born from Hazrat Khadija, she was the
only child to survive. At the time of her mother's death she was only
five years.

But she was a great help to her father She comforted him when the whole
world was against him. She helped him clean himself for the dirt the
enemies of Islam had thrown on him When these enemies hurt him and blood
was flowing from his wounds, she would dress these wounds.

The care and comfort that this little girl of not even nine gave to her
father made him call her "Umm Abiha" or the "Mother of your Father."

Normally, once a girl is married, she thinks very little of her parents.
But this was not so with Hazrat Fatima (S.A). Whereas she was the best
mother to her children UK! the best wife to her husband, she remained a
very devoted daughter to her father.

The Prophet also married other women and had another child, Hazrat
Ibrahim from Maria Kibtia. He was a good husband to them and a good
father to Ibrahim But his love for his daughter Fatima remained as
before.

Examples are given below to show how the daughter and the father
continued to love each other although times changed.

When the battle of Ohad took place, Hazrat i attma (S.A) was already a
married woman. But when she heard that her father was wounded, she
hurried to the battle field She noticed that the Prophet's forehead had
been badly cut.

his tooth broken and his face covered with blood. She cleaned his face
and dressed the wounds with ash obtained by burning a piece of rope. As
for the Prophet (S.-YW.W), he visited her everyday.

Whenever he went out of Medina, he would visit her the last and upon
coming back he would visit her first Tabari, the famous Sunni historian,
reports Abu-Thalabah as saying, "Everytime the Prophet of Allah came
back from a journey, or a war, he would go to the Mosque. There he would
pray two-Rakah prayers. Then he would go to Fatima (S.A) and then he
would visit his wives."

He loved her to call him "Father". When the verses of Qur'an saying "Do
not call the Prophet (S.A.W.W) like you call each other", was revealed,
she started calling him ""Messenger of Allah".

The Prophet then said, "Fatima, this verse is not for you and your
family, for you are from me and I am from you Call me Father; it surely
is better for my heart and more pleasant to Allah."

HAZRAT FATIMA (S.A) AS A HOUSEWIFE
----------------------------------

She was an excellent wife to Imam Ali (A.S) and he A as an excellent
husband to her. Imam All himself is reported to have said, "By Allah. 1
never made Fatima S A) angry or forced her to do something she did not
like 10 do up to the day she died. Nor did she ever make me angry or
disobeyed me. In fact, when I looked at her, worries and sadness would
get out of me."

Hazrat Fatima (S.A) had taken upon herself to do all the work inside the
house whereas Imam Ali (A.S) was doing all outside the house work such
as working to earn the bread for his family. She worked very hard. She
carried water in waterskin so often that the weight left marks on her
body.

To make bread, she ground barley with her handmill so much that her
hands were sore and often bled She swept her house and made cooking fire
herself till her clothes became dark. When she was given a maid, called
Fizza, to help her, she used her services only on every alternate day.

Imam Ali (A.S) would, from time to time, help her with doing the
housework. Once, the Prophet (S.A.W.W) paid Hazrat Fatima (S.A) a visit.
He saw her and Imam Ali (A.S) working at the grinding stone.

The Prophet (S.A.W.W) asked, "Whom among you should I relieve from this
work?" Imam AH (A.S) suggested that Hazrat Tatima (S.A) he relieved as
she was already tired She therefore left her share of work to the
Prophet (S.A.W.W) who joined Imam Ali (A.S) to complete the job of
rinding barley.

Sometimes the Prophet's beloved companions, too, would offer their
services to her. It is reported that one day Bilal, the Muazzin of the
Prophet, went to the Mosque late. The Prophet asked him why he was late.

Bilal said, "I passed by Fatima's house and found her working on her
handmill. Hasan was crying beside her. I offered to help her either at
the mill or by taking care of Hasan. She preferred to take care of Hasan
so I helped her grinding. That's why I m late."

The Prophet was pleased with Bilal and he prayed for Bilal saying, '"You
showed mercy on her; may Allah have mercy on you.‚Äù

Although her life was hard it was peaceful The family lived a life of
satisfaction and happiness. Imam Ali (AS) remembered this life for so
long as he lived. On the death of Hazrat Fatima (S.A) Imam Ali (A.S)
said, "She was the everlasting soul of paradise.

Her sweet smell is in my heart and soul, even though she is no more with
me."

FATIMA (S.A) AS A MOTHER
------------------------

In her short life, she had four childien: Imam Hasan (A.S), Imam Husain
(A.S), Hazrat Zainab (A.S) and Um-Kulthum (AS). Her fifth child, Mohsin,
died at the time of birth, just a few days before she passed away from
this world. But in those few years she was a perfect mother.

She gave her children the best upbringing that made them all be the best
people in the world. Besides teaching them how to spend their entire
lives in the way of Allah, she also taught them to develop an excellent
character.

She brought them up with love and kindness but also prepared them to
face the hardship of life.

Asma Binti Umays reports that one day the Prophet (S.A.W.W.) came to
Hazrat Fatima's house and inquired for Imam Hasan (A.S) and Imam Husain
(A.S). As they were not home, she said, "Today morning, when they woke
up there was no food to give to them.

Ali therefore took them with him so that they do not remain at home
crying for food." The Prophet (S.A.W.W) went where the two children
were.

Imam Ali left the children under the care of the Prophet (S.A.W.W) and
went to fetch water for a Jew who paid him with one piece of date for
every pail of water he drew from the well Having collected a handful of
dates they all returned home to share it with Hazrat Fatima. Such was
the training that the children of Hazrat Fatima received.

It is not surprising that Hazrat Zainab and Um-Kulthum were the most
educated persons in the knowledge of Islam and Qur'an. Hazrat Fatima
herself taught her daughters for as long as she lived.

Hazrat Zainab and Um-Kulthum were scholars of their times. Many
authentic "Ahadith" have been quoted from them.


