The Causes Responsible For Materialist (lecture 1)
==================================================

The topic of the present study are the causes that lie behind
materialist tendencies. Before we proceed with the discussion it is
necessary that we first define the word 'materialism,' as a term current
in common usage, and specify its exact meaning for the purpose of the
present discussion.

The word 'materialism' has various usages and all of them are not
relevant to our study while studying the cause for materialist
inclinations. For example, at times 'materialism' is used to refer to
the school of thought which asserts the principiality of matter in the
sense that matter is something fundamental (asil) and real in the realm
of existence and not something imaginary and mental, an appearance and a
product of the mind. In this sense it is opposed to 'idealism' which
negates the real existence of matter and considers it a mental
construct.

In this sense of materialism, we would have to categorize all theists,
both Muslims as well as non-Muslims, as 'materialists,' because all of
them consider matter-as a reality existing in space and time and subject
to change, transformation, and evolution, and which is also perceivable
and tangible-as an objective reality existing externally and
independently of the mind and having its own properties. Being a
'materialist' in this sense does not contradict with the concept of God
or monotheism. Rather, the material world and nature as a product of
creation constitute the best means for knowing God. The workings of
Divine will and wisdom are discovered in the transformations which take
place in matter, and the Holy Qur'an, too, refers to material phenomena
as the 'signs' of God.

Sometimes this word is used to imply the negation of supra-material
being, as an exclusivist school of thought which considers existence and
the realm of being as confined to matter, confining being to the realm
of the changeable and limiting it to space and time. It negates the
existence of all that does not fall within the framework of change and
transformation and is not perceivable by the sense organs.

Our present discussion centres around the causes for inclining towards
this exclusivist school of thought, and the reasons why a group of
people became protagonists of this exclusivist and negative theory,
negating God and imagining anything outside the ambit of the material
world as non-existent. Is Man by Nature a Theist or a Materialist?

This manner of posing the issue, i.e with the question 'What are the
causes for inclining towards materialism?,' suggests that we claim that
man by nature would not incline towards materialism, and that
materialism is an unnatural tendency opposed to human nature (fitrah).
And since it goes against the rule, it is necessary to seek its cause
and to investigate the reasons which have led to the violation of the
rule.

To put it more simply, it implies that faith in God is equivalent to
the state of health, and the materialist tendency is equivalent to
disease. One never asks about the reasons of health, because it is in
accordance with the general course of nature. But if we come across a
person or a group which is sick, we ask as to why they are sick. What is
the cause of their illness?

This viewpoint of ours is completely opposed to the view usually
expressed in books on history of religion. The writers of these books
generally tend to pursue the question, 'Why did man develop the
religious tendency?'

In our opinion, the religious tendency does not need to be questioned,
because it is natural; rather, the question that needs to be examined is
why do human beings develop tendencies towards irreligion?

Presently we do not intend to pursue the argument whether being
religious is something natural and the lack of religion unnatural, or if
the converse is true, because we see no need for doing so from the point
of view of the main topic of our discussion.

However, it is worth noting that we do not mean that, as the
monotheistic tendency is natural and innate (fitrah), no questions arise
when the issue is dealt with at the intellectual and philosophical
level. This is certainly not meant. This matter is just like every other
issue that naturally- and despite affirmation by natural instinct-gives
rise to questions, objections and doubts in the mind of a beginner when
posed at the rational level, and satisfying answers to them are also
available at that level.

Therefore, we neither intend to disregard the doubts and ambiguities
which do in fact arise for individuals, nor do we consider them
consequences of an evil disposition or ill-naturedness. Not at all. The
emergence of doubts and ambiguities in this context, when someone seeks
to solve all the problems related to this issue, is something natural
and usual, and it is these doubts that impel human beings towards
further quest. Accordingly we consider such doubts which result in
further search for truth as sacred, because they constitute a prelude to
the acquisition of certitude, faith, and conviction.

Doubt is bad where it becomes an obsession and completely absorbs one's
attention, as with some people whom we find enjoying the fact that they
are able to have doubt concerning certain issues and who consider doubt
and uncertainty to be the zenith of their intellectual achievement. Such
a state is very dangerous, contrary to the former state which is a
prelude to perfection. Therefore, we have said repeatedly that doubt is
a good and necessary passage, but an evil station and destination.

Our present discussion concerns the individuals or groups who have made
doubt their abode and final destination. In our opinion, materialism,
although it introduces itself as a dogmatic school of thought, is in
fact one of the sceptic schools. The Qur'an also takes this view of the
materialists, and according to it they are, at best, beset with a number
of doubts and conjectures, but in practice they flaunt them as knowledge
and conviction. [^2] The Historical Background:

This mode of thinking is not new or modern. It should not be imagined
that this mode of thought is a consequence of modern scientific and
industrial developments and has emerged for the first time during the
last one or two centuries, like many other scientific theories which did
not exist earlier and were later discovered by man. No, the materialist
thinking among human beings is not a phenomenon of the last few
centuries, but is one of the ancient modes of thought. We read in the
history of philosophy that many ancient Greek philosophers who preceded
Socrates and his philosophical movement, were materialists and denied
the supra-material.

Among the Arabs of the Jahillyyah contemporaneous to the Prophet's
ministry there was a group with a similar belief, and the Qur'an, while
confronting them, quotes and criticizes their statements:

They say, 'There is nothing but our present life; we die, and we live,
and nothing but time destroys us.' (45:24). This statement, which the
Qur'an ascribes to a group of people, involves both the negation of God
as well as the Hereafter. Materialism in Islamic History:

The word 'dahr' means time. Due to this verse and the term dahr
occurring in it, those who negated the existence of God were called
'dahriyyah' during the Islamic period. We encounter such people in
Islamic history who were dhari and materialists (maddi), especially
during the reign of the Abbassids, when various cultural and
philosophical trends entered the Islamic world.

Due to the freedom of thought which prevailed during that period with
respect to scientific, philosophical and religious ideas (of course, to
the extent that it did not contradict the policies of the Abbassids),
some individuals were formally known as materialists and atheists. These
individuals debated with Muslims, with the adherents of other religions,
and with believers in the existence of God, and presented their
arguments and raised objections concerning the arguments of the
monotheists. Thus they did enter into dialogue and freely expressed
their beliefs, and we find their accounts recorded in Islamic works.

During the lifetime of Imam Sadiq, may Peace be upon him, there were
certain individuals who used to gather inside the Prophet's Mosque and
express such views. The book al-Tawhid al-Mufaddal is a product one of
such episodes.

A companion of Imam Sadiq ('a) named al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar narrates:
"Once I was in the Prophet's Mosque. After prayer I became engrossed in
thought about the Prophet (S) and his greatness. Just then 'Abd al-Karim
ibn Abi al 'Awja', who was an atheist (zindiq), came and sat down at
some distance. Later another person holding similar views pined him, and
both of them started uttering blasphemies. They denied the existence of
God and referred to the Prophet (S) simply as a great thinker and a
genius and not as a Divine emissary and apostle who received revelations
from an Unseen source. They said that he was a genius who presented his
ideas as revelation in order to influence the people; otherwise there
was no God, nor any revelation or resurrection."

Mufaddal, who was greatly disturbed on hearing their talk, abused them.
Then he went to Imam Sadiq, may Peace be upon him, and narrated the
incident. The Imam comforted him and told him that he would furnish him
with arguments with which he could confront them and refute their views.
Thereafter Imam Sadiq ('a) instructed Mufaddal in the course of a few
long sessions and Mufaddal wrote down the Imam's teachings. This was how
the book al-Tawhid al-Mufaddal came to be compiled. Materialism in the
Modern Age:

As we know, during the 18th and 19th centuries materialism took the
form of a school of thought which it did not have earlier. That which is
ascribed to some schools of ancient Greece does not have a proper basis.
Usually the writers of history of philosophy do not know philosophy, and
when they come across certain statements of some philosophers concerning
the pre-eternity of matter or some other opinions of the kind, they
imagine that this amounts to the negation of God and the supra-natural.
It has not been established for us that there existed a materialist
school of thought before the modern age. Rather, what did exist earlier
in Greece and elsewhere were individual tendencies towards
materialism.

However, this is what has led many people to suppose that perhaps there
is some direct relation between the emergence of materialism as a school
of thought and science and scientific advancements.

Of course, the materialists themselves make a great effort to present
the matter as such, and they try to convince others that the cause of
the growth and prevalence of materialism during the 18th and 19th
centuries was the emergence of scientific theories and that it was the
spread of science which resulted in mankind being drawn towards it. This
observation resembles a joke more than any noteworthy fact.

The inclination towards materialism in ancient times existed both among
the educated as well as the illiterate classes. In the modern age, too,
the case is similar. Materialists can be found in all classes, and
likewise there are theistic, spiritual and metaphysical inclinations in
all classes and sections, especially among the learned. If what the
materialists claim were true, in the same proportion that advances are
made in science and great scientists are born in the world, there should
be an increase in the inclination towards materialism among the
scholarly class, and individuals possessing more scholarship should be
greater materialists, while in fact this is not the case.

Today, we see on the one hand some well well-known personalities like
Russell, who, to a large extent, present themselves as materialists. He
says, "Man is the product of causes which had no prevision of the end
they were achieving; that his origin, his growth, his hopes and fears,
his loves and his beliefs, are but the outcome of accidental
collocations of atoms." [^3] Thus Russell rejects the existence of a
conscious and intelligent power ruling the universe, although at other
places he avers to be a skeptic and an agnostic. [^4]

On the other hand, we find Einstein, the twentieth century scientific
genius, expressing an opinion opposed to that of Russell; he says "You
will hardly find one among the profounder sort of scientific minds
without a religious feeling of his own ... His religious feeling takes
the form of rapturous amazement at the harmony of natural law, which
reveals an intelligence of such superiority that, compared with it, all
the systematic thinking and acting of human beings is an utterly
insignificant reflection. This feeling is the guiding principle of his
life and work, in so far as he succeeds in keeping himself from the
shackles of selfish desire. It is beyond question closely akin to that
which has possessed the religious geniuses of all ages." [^5]

Can it be said that Russell is familiar with the concepts of modern
science whereas Einstein is ignorant of them? Or that a certain
philosopher of the 18th or l9th century was familiar with the scientific
concepts of his age whereas the theist Pasteur was unaware and ignorant
of them?!

Or can we say that William James, the monotheist or rather the mystic
of his time, Bergson, Alexis Carrell and other such thinkers were
ignorant of the scientific ideas of their time and their thinking was in
tune with the ideas of a thousand years ago, while a certain Iranian
youth who does not possess a tenth of their knowledge and does not
believe in God is familiar with the scientific ideas of his age?!

At times one sees two mathematicians, one of whom believes in God and
religion while the other is a materialist, or for that matter two
physicists, two biologists, or two astronomers, one with a materialist
and the other with a theistic bent of mind.

Therefore, it is not that simple to say that the advent of science has
made metaphysical issues obsolete. That would be a childish
observation.

We need to centre our discussion more on the question as to what were
the factors that led to the emergence of materialism as a school of
thought in Europe, attracting a large number of followers, even though
the 20th century, in contrast to the 18th and 19th centuries, saw a
decline in the advance of materialism and in it materialism even met
with a kind of defeat?

This large-scale drift has a series of historical and social causes
which require to be studied. I have come across some of these causes
during the course of my study which I shall mention here. Perhaps those
who have done a closer study of social issues, especially in the area of
European history, would identify other reasons and factors. Here I only
intend to discuss the results of my study. Inadequacies in the Religious
Ideas of the Church The Church, whether from the viewpoint of the
inadequacy of its theological ideas, or its inhuman attitude towards the
masses, especially towards the scholars and freethinkers, is one of the
main causes for the drifting of the Christian world, and indirectly the
non-Christian world, towards materialism.

We will analyze this factor in two sections:

1. Inadequacies in the ideas of the Church relating to God and the
metaphysical.
2. The violent conduct of the Church. Section 1:

In the Middle Ages when the clerics became the sole arbiters of issues
relating to divinities, there emerged amongst them certain childish and
inadequate ideas concerning God which were in no way consonant with
reality. Naturally, these not only did not satisfy intelligent and
enlightened individuals, but created in them an aversion against theism
and incited them against theist thought. Anthropomorphic Conceptions of
God:

The Church painted a human picture of God and presented Him to the
people in an anthropomorphic form. Those who were brought up to conceive
God with these human and physical features under the influence of the
Church, later, with advances in science, came to find that these ideas
were inconsistent with scientific, objective, and sound rational
criteria.

On the other hand, the vast majority of people naturally do not possess
such power of critical analysis as to reflect over the possibility that
metaphysical ideas might have a rational basis and that the Church was
wrongly presenting them.

Thus when they saw that the views of the Church did not conform to the
criteria of science they rejected the issue outright.

There is a book titled The Evidence of God in an Expanding Universe,
consisting of forty articles by forty scientists belonging to various
fields of specialization, wherein each scholar has presented arguments
proving the existence of God in accordance with has own specialized area
of study. This book has been translated into Persian.

Among these scholars is Walter Oscar Lundberg, who presents a
scientific argument for the existence of God. In the course of his study
he examines why some people, including scholars, have developed a
materialist tendency.

He mentions two causes of which one has been already mentioned by us,
inadequate ideas taught on this subject to the people in the church or
at home.

Our singling out the churches in this regard does not mean to imply
that those who give instruction on religious issues from our pulpits
(manabir) and mosques have always been informed and competent
individuals who know what is to be taught and possess an in-depth
knowledge of Islam. One reason why we mention only the church is that
our discussion is about the causes behind materialist inclinations and
these tendencies existed in the Christian world and not in the Islamic
environments. Whatever materialism is found in Islamic societies has
been, and is, the result of copying and imitating the West. Secondly,
there existed in the Islamic milieu a school of thought at the level of
philosophers and metaphysicians, which satisfied the intellectual needs
of the researchers and saved the scholars from the fate of their
counterpart in Europe, while there existed no such school within the
Church.

In any case this is what Walter Oscar Lundberg says There are various
reasons for the attention of some scholars not being drawn towards
comprehending the existence of God while undertaking scientific studies;
we will mention just two of them here. The first (reason) is the general
presence of oppressive political and social conditions or governmental
structures which necessitate the negation of the existence of God. The
second (reason) is that human thinking is always under the impact of
some vague ideas and although the person himself may not undergo any
mental and physical agony, even then his thinking is not totally free in
choosing the right path. In Christian families the children in their
early years generally believe in an anthropomorphic God, as if man has
been created in the image of God. These persons, on entering a
scientific environment and acquiring the knowledge of scientific issues,
find that this weak and anthropomorphic view of God does not accord with
scientific concepts. Consequently, after a period of time when the hope
of any compromise is dashed, the concept of God is also totally
discarded and vanishes from the mind. The major cause of doing so is
that logical proofs and scientific definitions do not alter the past
sentiments and beliefs of these persons, and it does not occur to them
that a mistake had taken place in the earlier belief about God. Along
with this, other psychic factors cause the person to become weary of the
insufficiency of this concept and turn away from theology. [^6]

Summarily, that which is observable in certain religious teachings-and
regrettably is also found amongst ourselves, to a more or less extent-is
that a characteristic concept is projected in the minds of children
under the name and label of 'God.' When the child grows up and becomes a
scholar, he finds that this concept is not rational and such a being
cannot exist, whether it be God or something else.

The child on growing up, without reflecting or critically concluding
that perhaps there might exist a valid conception, rejects the idea of
divinity altogether. He imagines that the concept of God he is rejecting
is the same as the one accepted by theists, and since he does not accept
this creature of his own mind, which is the product of popular
superstition, he does not believe in God. He does not notice that the
concept of God which he is rejecting is also rejected by the theists,
and that his rejection is not the rejection of God but is the rejection
of something that ought to be rejected.

Flammarion in the book God and Nature observes: "The Church presented
God in this manner: 'The distance between his right and left eye is
12000 leagues.' " It is obvious that persons with even a meagre
knowledge of science cannot believe in such a being. Auguste Comte's
Conception of God:

Flammarion quotes a statement of Auguste Comte, the founder of
positivism and what is known as scientism, which offers a good view of
the way God was pictured by such scholars as Auguste Comte living in the
Christian environment of that time. Flammarion says: Auguste Comte has
said: "Science has dismissed the Father of nature and the universe from
his post, consigning him to oblivion, and while thanking him for his
temporary services, it has escorted him back to the frontiers of his
greatness."

What he means is that earlier every event that took place in the world
was explained by relating it to God as its cause. For example, if
someone got a fever, the question why the fever had come about and from
where it came had the answer that God had sent the fever. That which was
commonly understood by this statement was not that it is God who governs
the universe and that to say that He had caused the fever implied that
He was the real and ultimate mover of the world. Rather, this statement
meant that God, like a mysterious being, or a magician engaged in
sorcery, had all of a sudden decided to cause fever without any
preparatory cause, and so the fever came about. Later science discovered
its cause and it was observed that fever was not brought about by God,
but by a certain bacteria.

Here God retreated one step. Henceforth the theist was forced to say
that we will shift our argument to the bacteria: Who created the
bacteria?

Science also discovered the cause of bacteria by identifying the
conditions in which they come to exist. Again God had to retreat one
step, and the argument proceeded by asking the cause of that cause.
God's retreat continued, and, at last, with the spread and expansion of
science the causes of a large number of phenomena were discovered. Even
those phenomena whose causes were not yet discovered were known for
certain to possess causes belonging to the category of causes already
known. Thereat man had to dismiss God for good with an apology, because
there no longer remained any place and post for Him.

The state of God at this stage was that of an employee in an office in
which he was initially given an important post, but with the recruitment
of more competent individuals his responsibilities were gradually taken
away, and eventually, when he was divested of all his earlier
responsibilities, there remained no post and place left for him. At this
time the manager of the office approaches him, thanks him for his past
services, and with an excuse hands him the dismissal orders and bids him
farewell once and for all.

Auguste Comte uses the term 'Father of nature' for God. His use of this
term for God shows the influence of the Church in his thought. Although
he was against the teachings of the Church, his own concept of God was
derived from the Church's ideas, from which he was not able to free
himself.

Taken together, the observations of Auguste Comte suggest that in his
opinion God is something similar to a part and factor of this world,
albeit mysterious and unknown, by the side of other factors. Moreover,
there are two types of phenomena in the world, the known and the
unknown. Every unknown phenomenon should be linked to that mysterious
and unknown factor. Naturally, with the discovery of every phenomenon
and its becoming known as a consequence of science, the domain of
influence of the unknown factor is diminished.

This mode of thinking was not characteristic of him, but it was the
thinking that prevailed in his environment and era. The Station of
Divinity:

Hence the main thing is that we ascertain the station of Divinity and
comprehend the place, position and 'post' of God. Is the position of God
and the Divine in the realm of being such that we may consider Him to be
one of the beings in the world and a part of it? May we allot Him a
certain function among the various functions that exist in the world,
thereby affecting a division of labour, and then, for determining God's
special function, examine the various effects whose causes are unknown
to us, so that whenever we come across an unknown cause we have to
attribute it to God? The consequence of such a mode of thinking is to
search for God among things unknown to us. Naturally, with an increase
in our knowledge, the area of our ignorance will continually diminish
and the domain of our theism, too, will diminish to the point where if
some day, supposedly, all the unknown things become known to mankind,
there would remain no place for God or any theism.

In accordance with this line of reasoning, only some of the existing
realities are signs of God and manifest and mirror His existence, and
they are those whose causes are unknown. As to those things whose causes
have been identified, they lie outside the realm of signs and
indications of the Divine Being.

Hallowed be God! How wrong and misleading this kind of thinking is, and
how ignorant it is of the station of the Divine! Here we should cite the
words of the Qur'an, which observes in this regard:

They measured not God with His true measure. (6:91)

The ABC of theism is that He is the God of the entire universe and is
equally related to all things. All things, without any exception, are
manifestations of His Power, Knowledge, Wisdom, Will, and Design, and
are the signs and marks of His Perfection, Beauty and Glory. There is no
difference between phenomena whose causes are known and those whose
causes are unknown in this regard. The universe, with all its systems
and causes, is in toto sustained by His Being. He transcends both time
and space. Time and time-bound entities, and similarly space and spatial
objects, irrespective of their being finite or infinite-that is, whether
they are temporally limited or extend from pre-eternity to eternity, and
regardless of whether the universe is limited in its spatial dimensions
or infinite, and, ultimately, whether the entire expanse of existents is
finite or infinite in time and space-all these are posterior to His
Being and Existence and are Considered among His emanations (fayd.)

Hence it is extreme ignorance to think in a Church like manner and to
imagine, like Auguste Comte, that while looking for the cause of a
certain phenomenon in some corner of the universe we would suddenly
discover the existence of God, and then celebrate and rejoice that we
have found God at a certain place. And if we do not succeed and are
unable to so find Him, we should become pessimistic and deny God's
existence altogether.

On the contrary, it is precisely in this sense that we must reject the
existence of God, that is, a God who is like any other part of the world
and is discoverable like any other phenomenon in the course of inquiry
into the world's phenomena is certainly not God, and any belief in such
a God is aptly rejected.

In more simple terms, we should say that this kind of quest for God in
the universe is like the conduct of someone who when shown a clock and
told that it has a maker wants to find its maker within the wheels and
parts of the clock. He searches for a while and on finding nothing
except its different parts, says: 'I did not find the maker of the clock
and this proves that he does not exist.' Or it is like one who on being
shown a beautifully stitched dress and told that this dress was stitched
by a tailor, says, 'If I find the tailor in the pockets of this dress I
will accept his existence, otherwise I won't.'

This kind of thinking is totally wrong from the Islamic point of view.
From the viewpoint of Islamic teachings, God is not on a par with the
natural causes so that the question should arise whether a certain
external entity has been created by God or by a certain natural cause.
This kind of dichotomy is both wrong and meaningless, because there
cannot be a dichotomy or an intervening 'or' between God and natural
causes for such a question to be posed. This form of thinking is
anti-theist. Theism means that the whole of nature in its entirety is a
unit of work and an act of God in its totality. Hence it is not correct
to ask concerning a part of it whether it is a work of God or nature,
and then to consider it to be a work of God on failing to identify its
cause, and as related to nature and with no connection with God when its
natural cause is known. Auguste Comte's Three Stages of Human History:

Auguste Comte suggests a classification of the stages of the historical
development of the human mind, which, most regrettably, has more or less
been accepted, though from the point of view of those acquainted with
Islamic philosophy it is mere childish talk. He says that mankind has
passed through three stages:

**1. The Theological Stage:**

In this stage man explained phenomena by resorting to supernatural
forces and considered God or gods to be the cause of every phenomenon.
In this stage man discovered the principle of causality, but was not
able to identify the causes of things in a detailed manner. Since he had
grasped the principle of causality, he considered the cause of every
event to lie within Nature. In this stage he postulated the existence of
forces in Nature with the judgement that certain forces exist in Nature
which are ultimately responsible for the occurrence of phenomena.

**2. The Metaphysical Stage**

In this stage, in view of the fact that man thought in metaphysical and
philosophical terms, he could not go beyond the assertion that a certain
event had a cause without having any answer to the question about the
nature and character of the cause itself.

**3. The Positive Stage:**

In this stage man identified in detail the causes of things in Nature.
During this stage, man turned away from thinking in general
philosophical terms and adopted the experimental approach to the study
of phenomena, discovering the causal links between them. It became
completely evident to him that the phenomena are related to one another
in a chain. Today science considers this approach to be correct, and,
therefore, we call this stage 'the scientific stage.'

These three stages suggested by Auguste Comte could be possibly correct
when viewed from the angle of the common people and the masses, in the
sense that at one time the common people considered the cause of an
event, such as a disease, to be some invisible being such as a demon or
a jinn, and there are such persons and groups even today among educated
Europeans. At a later stage they were able to recognize the order
present in Nature and henceforth they attributed the cause of illness to
the causes surrounding the sick person, believing that natural factors
were responsible for it. Also, all those who have not studied medicine
and have no medical knowledge but believe in the general order of nature
have a similar kind of understanding.

During another stage the relationships between the various phenomena
was discovered by the means of scientific experiments. This was not a
new thing in itself and existed in the ancient period as well, although
the eagerness to study natural phenomena and their causal relations is
greater in the modern era.

However, this manner of classification of human thought is incorrect,
because if we were to divide human thought into stages, our criterion
should be the ideas of thinkers and not the thinking of the masses and
common people. In other words, we should take into consideration the
world view of outstanding individuals. Here it is that we find the
classification of August Comte to be wrong through and through. Human
thought, whose real representatives are the thinkers of every age, has
certainly not passed One of the eras or stages of thought is the stage
of Islamic thought. From the standpoint of the Islamic method, all these
ways of thinking can possibly be present simultaneously in a certain
form of thought.

That is, in the form of thought which we call 'Islamic,' all these
three kinds of thought are capable of coexisting. In other words, a
single person can at the same time have a mode of thought which is
theological, philosophical, and scientific. From the point of view of a
thinker cognizant with Islamic thought, the question does not arise as
to whether the cause of an event is that which science tells us, or that
which philosophy explains in the form of a force, or that which is named
God. Hence, those like Auguste Comte need to be reminded that there
exists a fourth mode of thought in the world of which they are unaware.
The Violence of the Church:

To this point we have pointed out the role of the Church in the process
of inclination towards materialism from the point of view of the
inadequacy of its theological concepts. Yet in another way, which was
more effective than the inadequacy of its theological ideas, the Church
has played an important part in driving people towards adopting an
anti-God stance. This was its coercive policy of imposing its peculiar
religious and scientific doctrines and views and depriving the people
from every kind of freedom of belief in both these areas.

The Church, apart from its peculiar religious beliefs, had incorporated
a set of scientific doctrines concerning the universe and man, which had
mostly their philosophical roots in Greece and elsewhere and had
gradually been adapted by major Christian scholars into its religious
dogma. It not only considered any dissent in regard to the 'official
sciences' impermissible, but also vehemently persecuted those who
disagreed with these dogmas.

Presently, we are not concerned with the issue of freedom of religion
and religious belief and that religious beliefs should inevitably be
studied freely because otherwise that would go against the very spirit
of religion, which is to guide to the truth. Islam supports the thesis
that belief in religious doctrines ought to be based on research and not
on conformity or compulsion, in contrast to Christianity which has
declared religious dogma a prohibited zone for reason.

There were two other aspects in which the Church committed a major
mistake. Firstly, it placed certain scientific notions inherited from
the earlier philosophers and Christian theologians in the rank of its
religious tenets, considering opposition to them to be heresy. Secondly,
it did not stop at exposing the heretics and excommunicating those whose
heresy had been proven and confirmed, but instead, like a violent police
regime, it investigated the beliefs and convictions of persons by
employing various tactics and tried to detect the faintest signs of
dissent to religious beliefs in individuals and groups and persecuted
them in an indescribably ruthless manner. As a result, scholars and
scientists did not dare entertain any ideas opposed to what the Church
considered as science; that is, they were constrained to think in
accordance with the Church's thinking. This intense repression of ideas
which was a common thing from the 12th to the 19th century in countries
like France, England, Germany, Holland, Portugal, Poland and Spain,
naturally resulted in the development of a general extremely negative
reaction towards religion. The tribunals held by the Church and known as
the Inquisition were initiated with an objective reflected in the very
name given them. Will Durant says:

The Inquisition had a special procedure of inquiry and prosecution.
Before the inquisition held its tribunal in a city, the summons of faith
were communicated from the church pulpits. The people were asked to
inform the inquisitors of any heretics or pagans that they knew of. They
were encouraged to denounce and accuse their neighbours, friends and
relatives. The informers were promised total secrecy. Anyone who knew a
heretic and would not denounce him or hid him in his house faced
denunciation and excommunication ... The methods of torture varied from
time to time and from one place to another. Sometimes the accused was
left to hang with his hands tied behind his back. Or he would be bound
in say a way that he could not move, then water was poured into his
throat so as to suffocate him. Or his arms and fists were so tightly
bound with ropes that they cut into his flesh and reached the bones.
[^7]

He also says The number of victims between the years 1480-1488, that is
in eight years, exceeded 8800 burnt on stakes, and 96,494 condemned to
severe punishments According to estimates, from the year 1480 to 1808
more than 31,912 were condemned to death by fire and 291,450 were
condemned to severe penalties. [^8]

George Sarton, the distinguished scholar and famous authority on
history of science in his book Six Wings: Men of Science in the
Renaissance, has a discussion under the caption 'witchcraft,' where he
relates the crimes committed by the Church in the name of campaign
against witchcraft: Divines and religious scholars, consciously or
otherwise, considered apostasy to be the same as witchcraft. Men quickly
conclude that those who disagree with them are bad people. Magicians
were men and women who had sold their souls to the Devil. On the
assumption that heretics and irreligious persons also communed with the
Devil, their persecution and torture were readily permitted and those
who were orthodox in their faith could say to themselves: These
trouble-making and disruptive people are magicians and they should be
dealt with in this way, because they are neither capable of a straight
faith nor eligible for pardon.

George Sarton refers to the book Hammer of the Magicians, which was
written by two Dominican priests on the instructions of Pope Innocent
VIII (r. 1484-1492) and which was, in fact, a practical manual on how to
conduct the Inquisition of those accused of heresy and witchcraft. He
says: The book Hammer is a practical handbook for the Inquisitors and in
it are found the details of the methods of detection, prosecution and
punishment of magicians.... The fear of the magician was the real cause
for killing them and these killings themselves became the reason for a
heightened fear. In that period, a psychic epidemic had developed the
like of which has not been seen until the present age of
enlightenment.

The proceedings of some trials of the Inquisition recorded in precise
detail have survived. The Inquisitors were not bad people. They imagined
themselves to be better at least than the ordinary people, because was
it not that they were ceaselessly striving to uphold the word of truth
and the name of God?! Nicolarmy, the inquisitor of Lourn was the cause
of 900 magicians being burnt to death during a period of fifteen years
(1575-1590). He was a conscientious man, and during the last years of
his life he had a sense of guilt for having overlooked to kill some
children. Has anyone the right to desist from killing the young of a
viper? Bishop Tersepeter Binzfold issued verdicts for the death sentence
of 6500 people.

He goes on to observe:

When the Inquisitors arrived in a new region, they used to announce
that anyone suspecting someone of being a magician should provide
information about it. Anyone concealing information was liable to exile
and fine.

Providing information in this regard was considered a duty, and the
names of those who provided information were not disclosed. The
accused-among whom were possibly persons whose enemies had slandered
them-were not informed of the crime they were accused of and were kept
in the dark concerning the evidence of their culpability. It was assumed
that these people were sinners and criminals, and the burden of proof
lay upon them to prove their innocence. The judges adopted all kinds of
mental and physical means for exacting a confession of sin and
identifying collaborators. For encouraging the accused to confess, they
were promised pardon or extenuation. But the judges imagined that
honouring a promise given to magicians and heretics involved no moral
obligation and the promise was kept for the short time which the accused
took to say what had to be said. Every act falling outside the limits of
honourable behaviour was committed against the accused and was justified
as it was done for a holy cause. The more they tormented and tortured
the people, the more they thought it necessary. What we have said can be
easily confirmed by referring to the Hammer and other books and can also
be pictured more vividly by studying the proceedings of the trials, of
which there are plenty. [^9]

After discussing this issue for three or four pages, George Sarton
observes:

Belief in magic was truly a mental illness more dangerous than
syphilis, and was the cause of the terrible death of thousands of
innocent men and women. Apart from that, an attention to this matter
reveals the dark side of the Renaissance, less appealing than other
things which are usually said about this period, but knowing which is
necessary for a correct understanding of the events of this age.
Renaissance was the golden age of art and literature, but at the same
time it was also a period of religious intolerance and cruelty. The
inhuman character of this period is such that, excepting the present
age, it has no parallel in history. [^10]

Religion, which should have been a guide and a harbinger of love,
acquired this kind of countenance in Europe. The very notion of religion
and God came to be associated in everyone's mind with violence,
repression, and tyranny. Obviously, the reaction of the people against
such an approach could hardly be anything except the rejection of
religion and the negation of that which constitutes its very basis, God.
The severest blow is struck on religion and to the advantage of
materialism whenever religious leaders, whom the people consider as the
real representatives of religion, put on a leopard's skin and wear a
tiger's teeth and resort to excommunication and accusations of heresy,
especially when private motives take this form.

**Notes:**

[^1] That which appears here is a translation of 'Ilal e gerayesh beh
maddigari, 8th edition (Qum: Intesharat e Sadra, 1375 H. Sh.) There is a
long introduction, dated rajab 1, 1398 H by the author written for the
8th edition of the book titled 'Materialism in Iran', this will appear
at the end of the serial.

[^2] ... they follow only surmise, merely conjecturing. (6:116)

[^3] Irving William Knobloch, The Evidence of God in an Expanding
Universe, cf. Russell, Mysticism and Logic (Penguin Books 1953), "A Free
Mans Worship"

[^4] See Russell, Mysticism and Worship, (Penguin Books 1953), "A Free
Mans Worship", pp.50-59

[^5] As the original source of Einsteins statement quoted by the author
was not accessible to the translator, a parallel statement of his has
been cited here from Ideas and Opinions by Albert Einstein (Calcutta:
Rup & Co, 1984, first published by Bonanza Books, New York), based on
Mein Weltbild, edited by Carl Seerling, trans and revised by Sonja
Bargmann, pp. 40 (Tr.)

[^6] Irving William Knobloch, op. Cit, the article by Walter Oscar
Lundberg

[^7] Will Durrant, The Story of Civilization, Persian transl. Tarikhe
Tamaddun, v18 p350

[^8] Ibid., p360

[^9] George Sarton, Six Wings: Men of Science in the Renaissance
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1957), Persian transl. Shish
Bal, pp296-8

[^10] Ibid, p303


