The Causes Responsible For Materialist (lecture 3)
==================================================

The second reason of importance in the large-scale inclination towards
materialism in the West lies in the inadequacy of its philosophical
ideas. In fact, that which is called 'divine philosophy' (hikmat-e
ilahi) is in a very backward state in the West, though perhaps some
people may not concede that the West has not reached the level of the
divine philosophy of the East, especially Islamic philosophy.

Many philosophical ideas which raise a hue and cry in Europe are among
the elementary issues of Islamic philosophy. In translations of Western
philosophical works we come across certain ridiculous observations cited
from major European philosophers. We also find some statements which
show that these philosophers were confronted with certain insuperable
difficulties while dealing with theological issues. That is, their
philosophical criteria were not satisfactory. It is obvious that these
inadequacies created an intellectual climate conducive to materialism.
The Problem of the First Cause:

One of the things that may appropriately be mentioned for the sake of
example is the story of the 'First Cause' in Western philosophy.
Although it is somewhat a difficult issue, we hope that our readers will
show some patience.

Hegel is one of the great and famous philosophers of the world whose
greatness is certainly undeniable. There is much that is true in his
works. We will first quote a statement of this great philosopher
concerning one of the most important issues of metaphysics and then
compare it with what Islamic philosophy has to say in this regard. This
statement is about the 'First Cause,' i.e. about the Necessary Being,
from the standpoint of Its being the first cause of existents. Hegel
observes:

In solving the puzzle of the world of creation we should not go after
the efficient cause ('illat-e fa'ili), because, on the one hand, the
mind is not satisfied with infinite regress (tasalsul) and continues to
look for the first cause. On the other hand, when we consider the first
cause, the puzzle is not solved and the mind is not satisfied; the
problem remains as to why the first cause became the first cause. For
solving the puzzle, we should find the end or the purpose and reason for
being, because if we know for what it has come into existence, or in
other words, when it is known that it is something rational, our nature
is satisfied and does not seek another cause. It is obvious that
everything requires a justification by reason while reason itself does
not require any justification.

The commentators of his works have been unable to explain his intent,
but perhaps a close examination might reveal what troubled this man.

If we wish to express this matter in our own philosophical idiom, in a
manner that would accord with Hegel's viewpoint, or at least would come
near it, we might say, [the conception of] God should be accepted in a
form which is directly acceptable to the mind and not as something which
the mind is constrained to accept under some compulsion. There is a
difference between a notion whose teleology (limmiyat) the mind directly
apprehends-and this apprehension is a natural one-and a notion which is
only accepted because there is a proof which negates its contradictory
and compels its acceptance. In fact, the basis of its acceptance is that
one is left without an answer to the proof negating its contradictory.
On the other hand, when the contradictory of a particular proposition is
negated and proved to be false, naturally and necessarily that
proposition has to be accepted because it is not possible for both
contradictories to be false and one of them has to be necessarily
accepted, considering that the falsity of one of the two contradictories
is proof of the correctness of the other.

Accepting a notion due to the falsity of its contradictory compels and
constrains the mind, without really convincing it, and there is a
difference between compelling and constraining the mind and convincing
and satisfying it. Often one is silenced by a proof while in the depth
of one's consciousness there lingers a kind of doubt and hesitation with
respect to the matter proved.

This difference is observable between 'a direct proof' and reductio ad
absurdum (burhan-e khulf). At times, the mind travels naturally and
consciously from the premise and the middle term to the conclusion. The
conclusion is the direct product of the middle term, as in a deductive
argument (burhan-e-limmi). In this type of proofs the mind spontaneously
deduces the conclusion from the premises, and the conclusion, to the
mind, is like a child born naturally from its parents. But in reductio
ad absurdum-or even in burhan-e inni for that matter-this is not the
case. In reductio ad absurdum, the mind accepts the conclusion as a
compulsion. The state of the mind here is similar to that of a person
encountering a coercive force before which he is helpless. He accepts it
because he cannot reject it.

In these types of proofs, as one of the two possibilities is
invalidated by proof, the mind is forced into accepting the other. The
other alternative that is accepted by the mind is accepted only because
its contradictory has been rejected, and one from among a pair of
contradictories has to be necessarily accepted, for it is impossible for
both contradictories to be false. Hence it accepts the other possibility
under constraint and compulsion. This acceptance of one side is due to
compulsion and not spontaneous.

Hegel wants to say that our going after the first cause and our
acceptance of it belongs to the latter category. The mind does not
directly apprehend the first cause, but accepts it to avoid infinite
regress. On the other hand, it sees that although it cannot refrain from
accepting the impossibility of infinite regress, it also cannot
understand the difference between the first cause and the other causes
that makes these causes require a cause while the first cause can do
without it. In his own words, one cannot understand why the first cause
became the first cause. But if we seek the teleology and end [of being]
we arrive at an end and purpose whose being an end is essential to it
and does not require any other end and purpose.

Statements similar to Hegel's with respect to the first cause have been
made by Kant and Spencer as well. Spencer says, "The problem is that, on
the one hand, human reason seeks a cause for every thing; on the other,
it rejects both the vicious circle and the infinite regress. Neither
does it find an uncaused cause nor is capable of understanding such a
thing. Thus when a priest tells a child that God created the world, the
child responds by asking, 'Who created God?' "

Similar, or even more baseless, are Jean-Paul Sartre's remarks in this
regard. He, as quoted by Paul Foulquie, says -concerning the first
cause: It is self-contradictory that a being be the cause of its own
existence. [^1]

Paul Foulquie, while explaining Sartre's statement, says, "The above
argument which Sartre has not elaborated is usually presented in this
manner: If we contend that we have originated our own existence, we have
to believe that we existed before our existence. This is the obvious
contradiction which unravels itself. [^2]

Let us now look at the true picture of the theory of the first cause
from the philosophical point of view. Is it as what Sartre and others
say-a thing bringing itself into existence and laying the foundations of
its own being, so as to imply that a thing is its own cause and its own
effect?

Or is the meaning of the first cause what Kant, Hegel and Spencer have
imagined, i.e. a being whose case involves an exception to the law of
causation? That is, although every thing requires a cause and it is
impossible for it to be without a cause, the first cause, an exception,
is not such?

And is it the case that the impossibility of infinite regress, which
makes us accept the first cause, actually compels us to accept a thing's
being its own cause? Is it the case that our mind, in the process of
avoiding one impossible, is forced into accepting another? Why? If the
basis is that the mind should not accept what is impossible, then it
should not accept any impossible whatsoever. Why should there be any
exception?!

In accordance with the picture presented by Sartre, the first cause,
like all other things, is in need of a cause, except that it itself
fulfils its own need. According to the conception of Kant, Hegel and
Spencer, we are compelled for the sake of avoiding infinite regress to
allow an exception among things which are logically similar, and say
that all things require a cause except one, the first cause. As to the
difference between the first cause and other causes that makes all other
existents depend upon a cause while this one is an exception, the answer
is that there is no logical difference. It is only for the sake of
avoiding the impossibility of infinite regress that we are forced to
assume one of them as not being in need of a cause.

In this interpretation, the first cause is not assumed to require a
cause and to meet its own need (as in Sartre's interpretation); rather,
it is assumed that the first cause does not require a cause to bring it
into existence. That is, the first cause is an exception to the law of
causality. But as to why it does not require a cause, and why is it an
exception, this interpretation gives no answer.

The first interpretation is very childish. No philosopher, or even an
half-philosopher or laymen, would conceive God in this manner.
Therefore, we will discuss briefly only the second interpretation and
present the correct picture while doing so.

In our view, the doubt of the likes of Kant, Hegel and Spencer
concerning the first cause derives from two basic philosophical issues,
both of which have remained unsolved in Western philosophy. Of these,
the first is the issue of fundamentality of existence (asalat al-wujud),
and the second that of the criterion for requiring a cause (manat-e
ihtiyaj bi 'illat). It is not appropriate here to discuss and explain
the issue of fundamentality of existence, or the contrary doctrine of
the fundamentality of essence (asalat al-mahiyyah).

However, we shall confine ourselves to giving a brief explanation. On
the basis of the notion of fundamentality of essence-to give a very
elementary and superficial picture of it, that is, one based on the
assumption that God also, like all other existents, has an essence and
an existence (which is an invalid idea even from the viewpoint of the
proponents of the theory of fundamentality of essence, because they too
consider God as pure existence)-the question arises as to why everything
requires a cause while God doesn't. Why is one being Necessary and
others contingent? Is it not that all beings are essences which come
into existence?

But on the basis of the theory fundamentality of existence-whose
principal architect in regard to its philosophical demonstration and
providing the proofs is Sadr al-Muta'allihin Shirazi-the pattern of
thinking changes radically.

On the basis of the former theory (fundamentality of essence) our
conception of things will be that their essence is something which is
intrinsically different from existence. Existence should be given to it
by another being. We name this other being 'cause.' But in accordance
with the theory of fundamentality of existence, the real being of things
is what they partake of existence. Existence is not an essence to which
another being may bestow existence. Hence if it be necessary that an
external cause bestow something, that thing would be the very being of
things, which happens to be existence itself, not something accidental
and additional to the essence of things.

There is another question which arises at this point. Is it necessary
that existence as such-that is, regardless of its form, manifestation
and plane-requires to be bestowed by another being, implying that
existence qua existence is identical with being a gift and emanation [of
something else with dependence, relation, being an effect, and being
posterior [to that which gives it existence], and hence is necessarily
finite? Or is there some other perspective?

The answer is that the reality of existence, despite its various planes
and manifestations, is no more than a single reality. It does not
necessarily entail need and dependence upon another thing. That is
because the meaning of dependence and need with respect to existence (in
contrast to the dependence and need which were assumed earlier in
relation to essences) is that existence should itself be needy and
dependent. And if the reality of existence were need and dependence, it
implies that it will be related to and dependent upon something other
than itself, while no 'other' is conceivable for existence, because
something other than existence is either non-existence or essence,
which, as presumed, is derivative (i'tibari) and a sibling of
non-existence. Hence the reality of existence qua reality of existence
necessitates independence, self-sufficience, and absence of need for and
relation with something other than itself.

It is also necessarily absolute, unconditioned, and unlimited. That is,
it entails the impossibility of non-existence and negation finding a way
into it. Need, want, and dependence, and similarly finitude and mingling
with non-existence, derive from another consideration, which is
different from the consideration of pure existence: these derive from
posteriority and being an effect (ma'luiyyat). That is, existence qua
existence and regardless of all other considerations necessitates
self-sufficience and independence from cause. As to the need for a
cause-or in other words, that a being at a particular plane and stage
should require a cause-that derives from its not being the reality of
existence and its reliance upon God for coming into existence through
emanation. And the logical consequence of being an emanation is
posteriority and need, or rather, it is nothing except these.

From here we come to understand that according to the theory of
fundamentality of existence, when we focus our intellect upon the
reality of existence, we find there self-sufficience, priority, and the
absence of need. In other words, the reality of existence is equivalent
to essential necessity (wujub-e dhati), and to use an expression of
Hegel's liking, the rational dimension of the reality of existence is
absence of need for a cause. Dependence upon a cause derives from a
consideration (itibar) other than the reality of existence, and this
consideration is posteriority and finitude. In other words, the need for
a cause is the same as existence at a plane posterior to the reality of
existence, and, in Hegelian terminology, the need for a cause is not the
rational dimension of existence.

This is the meaning of the statement that 'The Truthful, when they
contemplate the reality of existence and observe it sans every condition
and relation (idafah), the first thing which they discover is the
Necessary Being and the First Cause. From the Necessary Being they infer
Its effects which are not pure existence, being finite beings bearing
non-being within.' This is what is meant when it is said that in this
logic there is no middle term for proving the existence of God; the
Divine Being is the witness of Its existence.

God bears witness, and those possessing knowledge and upholding
justice, and the angles, that there is no God but He. (3:18) The proof
of the sun is the sun (himself): if you require the proof, do not avert
thy face from him! If the shadow gives an indication of him, the sun
(himself) gives spiritual life every moment.

This discloses the baselessness of the statements of those who say that
the notion of the first cause involves a contradiction because it
implies that a thing is the originator of its own existence and hence
exists before coming into being.

Similarly baseless is the statement of those who say: 'Supposing that
we prove that every thing has been brought into existence by the first
cause, the question remains as to what has brought the first cause into
existence; hence the first cause remains an unjustifiable exception.
Explaining the Universe by Means of Reason and not Cause:

Hegel believed that explanation of the universe on the basis of the
first cause, irrespective of whether we consider it to be mind, matter,
or God, is impossible because the concept of the first cause itself is
inexplicable. Therefore, a different way should be found for an
explanation of the universe. First we should see what is meant by
'explanation,' he said.

Now an isolated fact is usually said to be explained when its cause has
been discovered. And if its cause cannot be ascertained, it is said to
be an unexplained fact. But we cannot explain the universe in this way.
If the universe could be said to have a cause, then either that cause is
the effect of a prior cause, or it is not. Either the chain of causes
extends back in an infinite series, or there is somewhere a 'first
cause' which is not the effect of any prior cause. [f the series is
infinite, then no final and ultimate explanation is to be found. If
there is a first cause, then this first cause itself is an unexplained
fact .... To explain the universe by something which is itself an
ultimate mystery is surely no explanation. [^3]

Later on Hegel observes that the concept of causality not only cannot
provide an explanation of the universe but is also incapable of
explaining particular things, because explaining involves the
description of the logical relationship between a thing and something
else. Whenever a thing is logically 'inferred' from something else it is
said to have been explained.

For example, when we know that angle A is equal to angle B and that
angle B is equal to angel C, we arrive at the logical conclusion that
angles A and C are equal. The mind necessarily concludes that it has to
be so and it cannot be otherwise, that it is logically impossible. Here
the equality of angles A and C has been explained with the help of two
premises. These two premises are the reason or ground for the equality
of angles A and C, not its cause.

But causality does not explain a thing. Causality simply states an
existential proposition (qadiyyah wujddiyyah) and not a necessary
proposition (qadiyyah daruriyyah). This is because the concept of
causality is arrived at by experience and not through logical inference.
For example, we find by experimenting that water turns into steam due to
heat and freezes due to cold. Consequently we say that heat is the cause
of vaporization and cold the cause of freezing of water. But our mind
does not make a judgment that it should be so necessarily and logically.
Supposedly, if we arrived at the opposite conclusion by experiment,
finding that water freezes due to heat and turns into steam on being
exposed to cold, this would make no difference to the mind. Hence this
assumption is not something logically impossible, whereas in contrast
the assumption of inequality of angles A and C in the earlier example is
a logical impossibility. Causality does not explain that an effect
should be an effect logically, and that which is a cause should
logically be a cause. Therefore, the universe should be explained
through reason and not by resorting to causes. The difference between
reason and cause is that a cause is something isolated; that is, it has
an existence separate from that of its effect, whereas a reason is not
isolated and separate existence from what it explains.

For example, the equality of angles A and B, and similarly of B and C,
is the reason for the equality of angles A and C. But these reasons do
not have an existence isolated and separate from what they prove, as in
the case of causes which have an existence independent of their effects.
Identity of Mind and Reality:

Hegel then discusses another principle, the principle of the identity
of knowing and being, or the identity of mind and reality, or the mental
realm and external reality. He is trying to remove the wall of dualism
separating the mind from external reality. In Hegel's view, the mind and
external reality are not two isolated realities alien to each other.
That is, they are not two totally different entities opposing each
other. They are identical because they are but two different aspects of
a single reality. And the ground for this assertion is that the problem
of how knowledge is possible appears to be insoluble if we do not accept
it. [^4]

Hegel launches his philosophical project on the basis of these two
principles. The first is that reason and not cause can provide an
explanation of the universe, and the other, the identity of knowing and
being. He starts with being which he considers to be the first reason.
From being he derives non-being, and from that he arrives at 'becoming'
which is a concept denoting motion. In this manner he proceeds with his
dialectic.

It is not possible for us to provide here a critique of Hegelian
philosophy and to investigate the mainspring of his errors by applying
the criteria of Islamic philosophy, which in itself would be a long and
interesting account. Here it will suffice to point out that according to
the theory of fundamentality of existence (asalat al-wujud) and with
attention to the special 'Argument of the Truthful' (burhan-e Siddiqin),
Hegel's imagined dichotomy between cause and reason, between the why and
wherefore (limm-e thubiti and limm-e ithbati) vanishes. The first cause
in this philosophy is both self-sufficient and without the need of a
cause, as well as self-explanatory and requiring no ground. It is the
cause as well as the ground of all things, as well as their explainer.

For solving the problem of epistemology, too, there is no need to
resort to the identity of knowing and being as conceived by Hegel. The
problem of knowledge, which is one of the most difficult and complicated
issues of philosophy, has another solution. An elaborate discussion of
these two issues has to wait for some other occasion.

We explained that according to the doctrine of fundamentality of
existence the question as to why the first cause became the first cause
becomes totally meaningless. Now we may observe that this question also
does not arise on the basis of the doctrine of fundamentality of
essence, because it arises only when we necessarily assume that the
Necessary Being possesses an essence like all other existents which is
additional to its existence.

But we are not compelled to make such an assumption. Rather we are
compelled to assume the contrary; that is, after conceding the
impossibility of an infinite regress we have no alternative except
accepting the existence of the first cause, the Necessary Being.
Similarly, since the Necessary Being cannot be an entity composed of
essence and existence, we make the assent that It is pure existence and
sheer ipseity (inniyat-e sirf). Naturally there remains no room for our
question.

The proof is also valid on the basis of the theory of fundamentality of
essence (aalat al-mahiyyah). Philosophers like Ibn Sina have taken the
same path. If there remains any question, it relates to another point,
that if the reality of the Necessary Being is pure existence, what is
the reality of other things? Is essence the reality of other things,
existence being something derived (i'tibari) in relation to them,
implying that the realm of being is a duality? Or is it that the reality
of all things is what they partake of existence?

A correct answer to this question lies in opting for the second
alternative, which is the theory of fundamentality of existence.

Certainly the likes of Ibn Sina did not reject the fundamentality of
existence. At that time the issue of fundamentality of essence and that
of existence had not been posed among philosophers or others. Therefore
this question, in the context of Ibn Sina's exposition, is one which had
not been raised during that time, and it does not amount to an objection
against his exposition. In any case, the objection raised by those like
Kant, Hegel and Spencer is not valid even aside from the fundamentality
of existence. Now we shall provide an explanation about the criterion
for an effect's need for a cause. The Criterion for a Thing's Need for a
Cause:

The law of causality and the cause-effect relationship between things
form one of the most definite notions of human knowledge. The link and
relation between the effect and its cause is not an apparent and
superficial one; it is profound and permeates the very reality of the
effect. That is, the effect, with all its being, is so dependent upon
the cause that if the cause didn't exist, it would be impossible for the
effect to come into being. All the sciences developed by man are founded
upon this law. We have proved in its appropriate place that disregarding
this law is tantamount to rejecting the presence of any order in the
realm of being as well as negating every scientific, philosophical,
logical and mathematical law. Here we do not consider it necessary to
discuss this principle any further.

In this regard Islamic philosophers have posed an issue [^5] which in a
some respects precedes the principle of causality. This issue is: What
is the criterion of the need for a cause? On this basis, in every
case-for example concerning the causal relationship between A (the
cause) and B (A's effect)-two questions come to the mind:

First, why did B come into existence? The answer to this question is
that the existence of A required that B come into existence, and had A
not existed, B too would not have come into existence. Therefore, the
existence of A is itself the answer to this question. Suppose a house is
destroyed by flood and someone asks, 'Why was this house destroyed?' We
reply that there was a flood.

The second question is, why does B need A and why cannot it come into
existence without it? Why is not B independent of A? Obviously, the
answer to this question is not that, 'That is because the existence of A
required it.' We need to find another answer to this question.

The reply to the first question can be given on the basis of science,
which is the product experimentation, because it is the function of
science to discover causal relationships between things [^6]. Hence if we
are asked as to what is the cause of B, we reply by relying on science
that the cause of B is A.

But as to why B needs A and why it is not independent of A or any other
cause, the answer to this question lies outside the domain of science
and it is not possible to answer it by experimentation, analysis,
synthesis or by distilling or grinding in a laboratory. It is here that
philosophical analysis and precise rational inference come in. That is
because the question does not relate to any concrete phenomenon, because
although the effect's need for a cause is an undeniable reality, it is
not a phenomenon isolated from the cause and the effect; that is, we do
not have three external phenomena, the cause, the effect and the
effect's need for a cause. On the same basis, science, whose function is
to study phenomena, is incapable of answering this question, while
philosophy, which is capable of discovering these relationships and
penetrating into the depth of realities, is the only discipline
competent to answer such questions.

From the point of view of philosophy the matter is not that B needs A
because B has never been observed empirically to come into existence
without A, and therefore B requires A and that the same is true of every
effect with respect to its cause. From the philosophical viewpoint it is
impossible for an effect to be not an effect and to be independent of
the cause. The effect's dependence on the cause is inseparable from the
reality of the effect, or, rather, it is the very reality of the effect.
This is the reason why philosophy poses the issue in a general manner
without discussing the particular causal relationship between some B and
A:

What is the basis of causal dependence and where does the effect's need
for a cause arise? Do things need a cause just because they are things
and existents? Are thingness and existence the criteria of causal
dependence, so that every thing and every existent should be dependent
upon a cause just because of its being a thing and an existent? Or is it
the case that mere thingness and existence are not the criteria of this
dependence, because, if thingness and existence were the criteria of
something they should in principle be the criteria of self- sufficience
and independence, not the criteria of need and dependence. That which
can appropriately serve as the criterion of neediness and dependence is
some kind of deficiency in thingness and existence, not thingness and
existence as such and ontic perfection.

Islamic philosophers, as well as the theologians (mutakallimun), who
were the first ones to have started this debate, never considered
thingness and existence per se as the criteria of neediness and
dependence because that would imply that an existent needs a cause
merely because it is existent. Rather, they were definite that there is
another aspect of things deriving from their aspect of deficiency and
nonbeing wherein lie the roots of this neediness and dependence.
Altogether three theories have been advanced in this regard.


