1. the Theory of the Mutakallimun
=================================

The mutakallimun considered the criterion of neediness and dependence
of effects upon causes and their lack of independence to be ,hududth,
that is, their previous non-existence. They considered the absence of a
thing's need for a cause to lie in its being eternal (qidam). They said
that if the existence of a being was preceded by non-existence ('adam),
or if, in other words, a thing did not exist at a time and came into
existence at another time such an existent, on the basis that it was
non-existent earlier and came into being later, needs a cause to bring
it into existence, and its existence will depend upon something other
than itself. But if there is a being which is eternal and there was
never a time that it did not exist, such a being will be independent and
without the need for a cause; it would not be dependent upon something
else by any means.

The mutakallimun held that the causal relationship between two things,
for example, A in relation to B, is that A brings B into existence from
a state of non-existence, and this is only possible where B's existence
is preceded by non-existence. But if B is assumed to be eternal and
there was never a time that it did not exist, then the causality of A
with respect to it makes no sense.

In fact, the mutakallimun identified the [ontic] deficiency that is the
basis of neediness and dependence of things upon something else to lie
in previous non-existence, that is, in the temporal precedence of
non-existence over existence. And they considered the source of
perfection, self-sufficience and absence of dependence upon something
else to be eternity or non- precedence by non-existence. Therefore, from
the point of view of the mutakallimun, a being is either deficient,
needy, preceded by non-existence (hadith) and dependent upon another, or
it is perfect, self-sufficient, eternal and not dependent upon
anything.

**2. The Theory of Early Islamic Philosophers, such as Ibn Sina, down
to the Era of Sadr al-Muta'allihin**

These philosophers raised basic objections against the theory of the
mutakallimun wherein huduth and previous non-existence were considered
the criteria of ontic deficiency, need and dependence upon something
else. However, this is not the place to mention their objections. They
said that though it is true that everything which is hadith (preceded by
non-existence) needs a cause, but the criterion for the hadith's need
for a cause is not its huduth but something else. They also said that
eternity is in no way the criterion of self-sufficience, perfection and
absence of dependence. The philosophers claimed that the criterion of
ontic deficiency and perfection, and of need and self-sufficience,
should be sought in the essence and quiddity (mahiyyah) of beings, not
in previous non-existence, huduth, or eternal existence, qidam.

Things in their essence (dhat), from the point of view of being, are of
two kinds-or at least can be assumed to be of two kinds. The first is
the case where their being is their actual essence, that is, they do not
have any essence (mahiyyah) apart from their existence. In other words
their essence and their existence are one and the same. The second case
is where the essence of a thing is something distinct from its existence
and nonexistence.

We call the first kind necessary being (wajib al-wujud), and the
second, contingent being (mumkin al-wujud). The Necessary Being, from
the standpoint of being existence itself-it being senseless for a thing
to be devoid of itself, and impossible for it not to exist while being
existence itself-is not in need of a cause, because causality implies
that the cause brings the being of the effect into existence, and when
the essence (dhat) of a thing is actual existence and there is no vacuum
in it in this regard, the need for a cause does not exist. But a
contingent being, from the viewpoint that it is neither existent nor
non-existent in itself, being equally indifferent with respect to both
the sides and having a vacuum in relation to both of them, needs
something else to fill this vacuum, and that something is the cause. The
existence of the cause fills that vacuum with existence, and that which
is contingent-existent-in-itself (mumkin al-wujud bi al-dhat) becomes
necessarily-existence-through-another (wajib al-wujdd bi al-ghayr). The
nonexistence of a cause fills that vacuum with non-existence and a
contingent-existent-in-itself becomes impossible due to the absence of
its cause (mumtani' al-wu jad bi al-ghayr).

The philosophers call this [ontic] vacuum "essential contingency"
(imkan dhati) and consider it to be the criterion for requiring a cause.
Similarly, they name [ontic] plenitude "essential necessity" (wujub
dhati).

In fact, from the point of view of philosophers, the essential
deficiency which makes existents needy, deficient, and dependent upon
something else is that essential vacuity (khala' dhati), and the
essential perfection (kamal dhati) which is the source of perfection of
an existent and makes it needless with respect to dependence upon
another is that 'essential plenitude' (mala' dhati), that is the
identity of essence (dhat) and existence.

As these philosophers consider the root and criterion of dependence to
be essential vacuity and not previous non-existence, if there were to
exists a being in the world which is eternal, there being no time that
it did not exist and without ever being preceded by non-existence, it
would still be a contingent existent (mumkin al-wujud), that is, its
essence is not identical with its existence and it has a vacuity of
existence at the plane of its essence.Such a being is an effect, a
creature, and dependent upon another despite being eternal and
everlasting. The philosophers believe that such existents do exist and
they name them 'uql-e qahirah (the Supreme Intellects).

**3. The Special Theory of Sadr al-Muta'allihin and His Followers:**

Sadr al-Muta'allihin conceded that every hadith existent depends upon
something else. He also accepted that every contingent being is in need
of a cause. He considered valid the objections raised by the
philosophers against the theologians, and agreed with the philosophers
that there is nothing to prevent an existent from being temporally
eternal, existing since preeternity and everlasting, while being
dependent, a creature and an effect. Similarly he endorsed the view of
the philosophers that the criterion of neediness and dependence should
be sought within things themselves and not in their previous
non-existence. However, he proved that in the same way that huduth
cannot be the criterion of neediness, so also essential contingency
(imkan dhati), or in our words 'essential vacuity,' too, cannot be the
criterion of dependence and neediness because essential contingency is
an attribute of essence, and it is essence which is said to be
essentially indifferent to being and non-being and something hollow and
empty, requiring something else to fill it. But considering that essence
is derivative (istibari) and not fundamental, it lies outside the realm
of neediness and self-sufficience causing and being caused, efficiency
and receptivity. Rather essence lies outside the domain of existence and
non-existence. Essential contingency (imkan mahuwi) cannot be the
principal basis of this neediness.

All these characteristics such as existence and non-existence, causing
and being caused, neediness and self-sufficience, can be attributed to
essence, but only accidentally (bi al-'arad), metaphorically, and
secondarily, that is following existence, from which essence is derived
and abstracted. Therefore, the real basis of intrinsic neediness and
intrinsic self-sufficience should be sought in existence itself.

In the same way that Sadr al Muta'allihin proved the fundamentality of
existence (asalat al-wujud), he also proved the gradation of existence,
that is the hierarchy of different planes of existence. Accordingly, in
the same way as self-sufficience does not lie outside the reality of
existence, similarly neediness too is not external to the reality of
existence, and in the same way as perfection is not something extraneous
to the reality of existence but is identical with it, so also deficiency
is not external to it. It is the reality of existence which receives
perfection and deficiency, plenitude and poverty, self-sufficience and
neediness, intensity and weakness, necessity and contingency, infinitude
and finitude or is rather identical with them. The reality of existence
in its purity and at the plane of its own essence is equivalent to
perfection, self-sufficience, independence, intensity, necessity and
infinitude, while deficiency, need, dependence, contingency, and the
like are posterior to the plane of the essence and derive from being an
effect (ma'luliyyat) with its implied deficiency.

From Sadr al-Muta'allihin's point of view, the notion of essential
vacuity of essence in respect of existence and the need for something
else to fill this vacuum is correct only on the basis of fundamentality
of essence, not on the basis of fundamentality of existence. On the
basis of fundamentality of existence, attributing need and essential
vacuity to essence and the notion that something else called 'cause' is
required to fill this vacuum, are only correct as a loose philosophical
metaphor. Causing ('illiyyat) and being caused (ma'luliyyat), as well as
self-sufficience and need, all pertain to something which is concrete
and real, and that is existence. The roots of an existent's dependence
on another existent lie in its essential deficiency and its essential
finitude.

In contrast to the opinion of the theologians and the vast majority of
philosophers, according to Sadr al-Muta'allihin's view, need, the needy,
and the criterion of neediness are not different things; need, the
needy, and the criterion of neediness, all the three are a single thing.
Certain planes of existence are identical with actual need with respect
to another plane by virtue of their essential deficiency and essential
posteriority (ta'akhkhur dhati) to the principal source of existence,
.

Sadr al-Muta'allihin also follows the classical approach of such
philosophers as Ibn Sina while discussing the issue of criterion for the
need of a cause, but elsewhere he expresses his own opinion on this
issue, which is a definite and inevitable result of the principles he
has propounded. As he has dealt with the issue in the classical manner
by adopting the approach of his predecessors, later scholars and the
followers of his school, like the late Hajji Sabzawari, have imagined
that Sadr al-Muta'allihin does not have a distinct opinion of his own on
this issue. We have for the first time highlighted this fact in the
footnotes of Usul-e falsafeh wa rawish-e riyallsm ('The Principles and
Method of the Philosophy of Realism') and have presented it for the
benefit of others.

In any case, that which is definite in accordance with the views of all
the schools is that the roots of dependence upon a cause do not lie
simply in being a thing or being an existent. Things, just because they
have existence, do not require a cause. Existence, more than being
indicative of dependence, is indicative of self-sufficience.

From what we have said two facts come to light: 1. That which is often
said that 'Every thing, or every existent, requires a cause,' is not
only incorrect but also a grave error. The correct thing to say is that
'Every deficient being is in need of a cause.' As we have seen, the
different schools which have discussed this topic differ in their
determination of the deficiency which makes the criterion for dependence
on a cause, but they concur that every deficient thing requires a cause,
not every thing whether it is deficient or perfect. 2. Our conception of
the First Cause has now become clear. It became evident that the First
Cause, which is the same as the eternal, perfect, infinite Essence
(dhat) of the Necessary Being, is the first cause because existence
itself is Its essence, and existence in itself is perfect, not
deficient, and limitless, not limited, thus ruling out any dependence
upon a cause. The meaning of the First Cause is neither that it is its
own cause-in the sense that it lays the foundation of its own existence
and brings itself into being-nor that the First Cause does not differ
from all other existents with regard to the need for a cause and that it
is an exception to the law of causality.

Here it is possible that a doubt may arise in the minds of those who
are not trained in these issues, that although it is correct that the
First Cause, because of its being eternal, perfect, infinite and
necessarily existent, is free from all forms of dependence, while all
other things on account of their not possessing these qualities are
dependent and in need, but why did the First Cause become the first
cause? That is, why did only the First Cause, from among all existents,
become eternal (qadim), perfect, infinite and necessarily existent? Why
didn't It become hadith and deficient? Why didn't another existent,
which is presently deficient and dependent, not take the place of the
Necessary Being?

In view of the explanation provided, the answer to this question is
obvious. It has been presumed in this question that it was possible for
the Necessary Being not be a necessary being and that it was through the
interference of a cause that It became a necessary and not a contingent
being. It has also been assumed that it is possible for a contingent
being not to be a contingent being, and that it became such due to the
intervention of some cause. In other words, it was possible for an
essentially perfect and infinite being to be deficient and finite, and
for a deficient and finite being to be essentially perfect and infinite,
and it was due to the intervention of some factor that one became
essentially perfect and infinite while the other became essentially
deficient and finite. Yes, this is the basis of the question.

The questioner is oblivious of the fact that the plane of existence of
each existent is the essence (dhat) of that existent, in just the same
manner as the plane of each number is the actual essence of that number.
Therefore, if an existent becomes independent of a cause as a result of
essential self- sufficience and essential perfection, the consequence is
that no cause can interfere with it in any manner, no cause has brought
it into existence, and no cause has placed it at the plane at which it
subsists. The question as to why the First Cause became the first
cause-which is considered unanswerable in Western philosophy-is actually
a meaningless question. For the First Cause, Its existence is Its
reality and Its very essence (dhat), and being the First Cause is also
identical with Its essence, and in both capacities it has no need of a
cause.

This question is just like saying, 'Why is the number one, one? Why
didn't it not become two? Why did two become number two and not one, and
why it didn't take the place of one?' Since we have discussed the matter
that the plane of existence of each existent is actually the very
essence of that existent in greater detail in our book 'Adl-e Ilahi
('Divine Justice'), we shall refrain from repeating it here.

As a conclusion to this part of the discussion it would be appropriate
to cite the remarks of Bertrand Russell, a contemporary philosopher,
about the First Cause for ascertaining the character of his
philosophical views concerning this profound issue.

Russell has a small book by the name Why I am not a Christian. In it he
does not simply limit his criticism to Christianity, but rather
criticizes religious ideas in general, and the idea of God in
particular, which is accepted even by some non-religious persons.

Among the things he objects to in that book is 'the First Cause
argument.' In order to know how Mr. Russell, this great Western
philosopher whose fame has spread everywhere, has conceived these issues
in his mind we shall quote him here. He says:

It is maintained that everything we see in this world has a cause, and
as you go back in the chain of causes further and further you must come
to a First Cause, and to that First Cause you give the name of God. Then
Russell goes on to refute the argument in these words:

I may say that when I was a young man and was debating these questions
very seriously in my mind, I for a long time accepted the argument of
the First Cause, until one day, at the age of eighteen, I read John
Stuart Mill's Autobiography, and I there found this sentence: 'My father
taught me that the question, "Who made me?" cannot be answered, since it
immediately suggests the further question, "Who made God?" ' That very
simple sentence showed me, as I still think, the fallacy in the argument
of the First Cause. If everything must have a cause, then God must have
a cause. If there can be anything without a cause, it may just as well
be the world as God, so that there cannot be any validity in that
argument. Our previous observations highlight the fallacy in Russell's
argument. The argument is not about whether everything must have a cause
or if it is possible for a being to exist without a cause as an
exception, that if it is possible for one thing to exist without a
cause, what difference would it make whether it is God or the
universe.

The issue involved is that [the thingness of] every thing and [the
existence of] all that exists is neither the criterion of dependence
upon a cause nor that of non-dependence in respect of its being
something and having some kind of existence, so that the question may
arise as to what difference is there among these things in this respect.
The issue at hand is that among things and existents there exists an
entity and a being which is pure existence and absolute perfection, and
every perfection derives from it and is directed towards it, and it,
being identical with existence, is in no need of a cause-as against
things which have a borrowed existence-and such a being neither lacks
existence nor any of its perfections for it to either seek them, or
hasten to acquire them, nor does it lose them.

On the other hand, we live in a world in which everything has a
transient nature and is in search of something which it lacks, and
everything at another time loses what it presently possesses. We live in
a world in which everything is subject to decline, annihilation, change
and transformation, and all the signs of poverty, need, dependence,
indebtedness and having a borrowed existence are evident on the face of
every thing. Therefore, such a world cannot be the First Cause and the
Necessary Being. And this is the Abrahamic argument mentioned in the
Noble Qur'an: So We were showing Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and
earth, that he might be of those having sure faith. When night outspread
over him he saw a star and said, 'This is my Lord.' But when it set he
said, 'I love not the setters.' When he saw the moon rising, he said,
'This is my Lord.' But when it set he said, 'If my Lord does not guide
me I shall surely be of the people gone astray.' When he saw the sun
rising, he said, 'This is my Lord; this is greater!' But when it set he
said, 'O my people, surely I am quit of that you associate. I have
turned my face to Him who originated the heavens and the earth, a man of
pure faith; I am not of the idolaters.' (6:75-79)

The summary of the argument is that, in consonance with primordial
nature and self-evident judgement of the intellect, he considers himself
a being that is servile and subject to and sustained [by something
else], and dedicates himself to the search of his lord and sustainer.
The star, the moon, and the sun-which are the most luminous existents
and which the people of Abraham's time considered as power that
regulated and ruled the world-by turns capture his attention, but after
a moment's contemplation the signs of subjugation, subjection, and being
sustained by something else become evident in them as well as other
existents in the world of nature. Thereat Abraham sets everything aside
and turns his heart towards the mighty power which is the absolute
sustainer and absolutely supreme, and in which there is no sign of
subjugation, subjection, huduth, annihilation, need and poverty. From
the presence of need and annihilation, transience and decline,dependence
and subjection, he discovers the existence of that subjugating power and
perfection. God and Evolution:

Among the various issues which in my opinion have had a great impact on
materialistic tendencies is the false notion that there is a
contradiction between the principle of creation on the one hand and the
theory of evolution, especially the evolution of living organisms, on
the other. In other words, the fallacy is that creation amounts to
instantaneous coming into existence of things, while evolution means
that things do not have a creator.

As history indicates, the idea existed, especially in the Western
world, that the implication of the universe being created by God is that
all things should be unvarying and fixed, and that there should be no
change in the universe, especially in the principles of the universe,
that is, the species. Hence evolution is impossible, especially where it
relates to the essence and necessitates a change in the essence of a
thing and a mutation of its species. On the other hand, we observe that
with the development of the sciences the notion that things, especially
living creatures, show an ascending evolutionary movement becomes ever
more confirmed and established. The conclusion that is drawn from these
two premises is that the sciences, especially biological sciences, are
moving in an anti-theistic direction.

As we know, the views of Lamarck and Darwin, especially those of the
latter, raised a storm in Europe. Although Darwin was himself a believer
in God and religion, and as related, sat the time of his death he held
the Bible pressed to his chest,' and repeatedly in his writings declared
his faith in God, his ideas were introduced as being totally anti-God.

Someone might say that evolutionism in general (especially Darwinism,
in view of the hypothesis that the origin of man is from the ape, which
was later abandoned) was considered anti-God because it went against the
contents of the holy scriptures. In religious scriptures the creation of
man has been usually traced back to a single human being named Adam, and
this apparently implies that he was directly created from dust.
Accordingly, it was both correct and proper that Darwin and the
Darwinists, or rather all the proponents of evolution, be branded as
anti-God, because in no way is it possible to reconcile faith in
religion with belief in the theory of evolution. There is, therefore, no
alternative to accepting one from among these two and rejecting the
other.

The reply to this is that, firstly, what the sciences have opined in
this regard are hypotheses which are either constantly changing,
modified, or even abandoned and replaced by other hypotheses. On the
basis of such hypotheses, it is neither possible to reject some idea
stated explicitly and without any room for interpretation in a divine
scripture, nor is it possible to consider such hypotheses a proof of the
baselessness of religion as such and the baselessness of religion as a
proof for the non-existence of God.

Secondly, scientific opinion has moved in a direction which shows that
the basic changes occurring in living creatures, especially at stages
where their species changes and their essence undergoes mutation, are in
the form of a leap, swift and sudden. Therefore, the concept of very
gradual, intangible and cumulative changes is no longer relevant. When
science considers it possible for an infant to cover a distance of
hundred years in a single night, what evidence is there that it cannot
cover the distance of hundreds of million years in forty nights? Even if
that which has been mentioned in religious texts be presumed to imply
explicitly the creation of the first man directly from dust, it has been
expressed in a manner that shows that it involved some kind of action
and reaction in nature.

It is stated in religious texts that Adam's clay was formed in forty
days. Who knows, perhaps all the stages which the first living cell had
to cover in the natural course in billions of years for it to eventually
give rise to a human being, may have been covered in forty days by
Adam's clay in extraordinary conditions which the hand of Divine power
had brought about, in the same way as the human ovum, in a period of
nine months in the womb, is said to cover all the stages the animal
predecessors of man took billions of years to cover.

Thirdly, suppose that what the sciences say in this regard is more than
a mere hypothesis and is a confirmed scientific fact, that it is not
possible to create natural conditions so that matter may swiftly and
speedily cover the stages which it covers slowly under a different set
of conditions, and that it is a scientifically confirmed fact that man
had animal ancestors. In the light of these assumptions, are the
relevant religious texts such that they cannot be interpreted
accordingly? If we specifically take the Noble Qur'an as the criterion,
we find that the Qur'an has narrated the story of Adam in a symbolic
manner.

I do not mean to say that the Adam mentioned in the Qur'an is not a
person's name but a symbol representing the human species. I don't mean
to say that. To be certain the first Man (Adam) was an individual and a
person having concrete existence. What I mean is that the Qur'an has
narrated the story of Adam in a symbolic way from the point of view of
his stay in heaven, his seduction by Satan, greed, and jealousy, his
expulsion from heaven, his penitence, and so on. The conclusion the
Qur'an derives from this story is not from the standpoint of the
wonderful creation of Adam and it does not play any role in drawing any
theological conclusion.

Rather, the Qur'an narrates the story of Adam solely from the point of
view of man's spiritual station and from the viewpoint of certain
ethical issues. It is fully possible for a person who believes in God
and the Qur'an to retain his faith in God and the Qur'an while
interpreting the story of Adam's creation in some manner. Today, we know
religious persons who have faith in God, the Prophet (s) and the Qur'an,
and who interpret the story of Adam's creation in a manner consonant
with the modern sciences. No one has claimed that these views contradict
with faith in the Qur'an. I myself, while studying these views in books
on this subject, find in them many points worthy of attention and
reflection, although I am not totally convinced about them.

However, to consider such issues a pretext for rejecting the Qur'an and
religion is far from scientific justice, to say nothing of using them as
an excuse for negating belief in God.

Fourthly, suppose we accept that the literal meanings of religious
texts are not susceptible to an alternative interpretation and that
man's descent from animals is scientifically definite. At the most it
would mean that one will lose faith in religious scriptures. But why
should one lose faith in God? Firstly, it is possible that new religions
may emerge which do not subscribe to the idea of man's direct creation
from dust as explicitly as the Torah. Secondly, does the rejection of a
single, some, or all religions logically imply the rejection of belief
in God? There have always been individuals who have had faith in God
without adhering to any religion.

From all that we have said it is known that the assumed contradiction
between the contents of religious texts and the theory of evolution
cannot be considered a reason for inclining towards materialism; the
reason must be something else. The fact is that the European
materialists imagined the hypothesis of evolution to be rationally and
logically incompatible with the issue of God, irrespective of its
compatibility with religion. Accordingly, they proclaimed that belief in
God is negated by acceptance of the theory of evolution.

Let us now examine this argument, to see whether there is any rational
and logical contradiction between these two issues, or if the inadequacy
of the concepts of European philosophy is responsible for an imagined
contradiction. Whatever it may be, we need to examine the approach taken
by the materialists in taking this contradiction for granted.

We can explain their statements in two ways. Firstly, in the sense that
the theists are deprived of their most important argument with the
emergence of the theory of evolution. A major argument of the theists
for proving the existence of an omniscient and wise creator was the
presence of a perfect order of existents. This perfect order is more
evident in the plant and animal kingdoms. If the creation of plants and
animals had been instantaneous, the argument based on the perfect order
of existents would have been correct, because it was not rationally
acceptable that a being could come into existence instantaneously and
all of a sudden without any intelligent plan, especially where it
possesses such structures which show that its formation, design, and
organism has been created with a planned purpose. But if the creation of
the existents was gradual and extended in time, that is, if it has taken
place in the course of hundreds of millions of years and the structure
of existents has acquired the present form little by little with the
passing of centuries and generations, there is no obstacle to regarding
these intricate systems as entirely unplanned. That is, no intelligent
power has supervised it and only coincidences and forced conformity with
the environment have been the cause of these systems and organisms.

Therefore, with the acceptance and confirmation of mutation the main
argument of the theists is taken away from them, and this by itself is
sufficient to tilt the balance in favour of the materialists and make a
group incline towards that side.

But this interpretation is in itself incorrect. If such views are
presented before a vigorous theistic school of thought it will
immediately reply that, firstly, it is a mistake to consider the
perfection of design as the only argument for the existence of God, and
to mention it as the main argument is indeed an exaggeration. Secondly,
the whole order of creation is not limited to the structure of animal
organs for it to be said that the gradual evolution of species is enough
to explain their accidental existence. Thirdly, the important and also
the principal reply to this criticism is that the gradual emergence of
and accidental changes occurring in the structure of plants and animals
are not at all sufficient for explaining the precise systems of their
bodies.

Accidental changes can be considered sufficient only when we presume
that there occurs a change in the body of a living creature as a result
of an accident or an aimless act, or an act meant for some purpose other
than the consequence produced; for instance, when a web is formed
accidentally on a duck's feet and proves helpful in swimming and is
transferred to later generations as a result of heredity.

But, firstly, from the viewpoint of heredity, the transfer of acquired
and individual characteristics, especially acquired characteristics, is
highly improbable or rather ruled out. Secondly, all organs and members
of the body are not like the web of a duck's foot. Generally, every part
is itself a part of an elaborate and complicated system, such as those
relating to digestion, respiration, vision, hearing, and so on. Each of
these systems is an organized and interlinked apparatus in which the
related function and characteristic is not achieved unless all its parts
come into existence. For example, the membranes of the eye are not such
that each of them be assumed to perform a separate function of the body
and as having come into existence gradually in millions of years. Rather
the eye, along with all its membranes, fluids, nerves and muscles with
their astonishing number, variety, organization and formation performs a
single function. It is not admissible that accidental changes, even in
billions of years, would gradually give rise to the ocular or auricular
system.

The theory of evolution more than anything points towards the role of
an intelligent and guiding force in the being of living creatures and
demonstrates the principle of teleology.

Darwin himself propounded the principle of adaptation to environment in
such terms that he was told that he spoke of it as if it were a
metaphysical principle. It is a reality that the capacity of living
organisms to adapt to the environment, which is a very mysterious and
astonishing power, is something metaphysical; that is, it is subject to
a kind of guidance and consciousness of purpose, and is in no way a
blind and aimless power.

The principle of evolution implies the presence of an unseen regulating
power in the universe no less than any other theory. The reason that
Darwin and many other later biologists are theists and religious persons
is this that they have not considered the principles and laws of
nature-such as the principles of struggle for survival, heredity,
selection of the fittest, and adaptation to the environment (if
interpreted solely as an ordinary blind natural reaction to the
environment)-by any means sufficient for explaining the emergence of
living organisms. Of course, we do not say that they did not consider
them necessary and reverted to the theory of instantaneous creation of
living organisms. All that we are saying is that they did not consider
them sufficient.

Actually, the reason why the theory of evolution was considered
contradictory to the famous theist argument for the existence of God
based upon perfect design was doubtlessly the weakness of the systems of
philosophy and metaphysics. Instead of utilizing the emergence of the
theory of evolution to the advantage of the theist school, they
considered it as antithetical to theist thought, because they imagined
that only an instantaneously created universe needed a cause and
creator, and if the universe or any species were to come into existence
gradually, the gradual natural factors were sufficient to explain their
existence. Such assumptions indicate the weakness of the Western systems
of philosophic thought.

Apart from the assumption that the theory of evolution weakens the
argument by design and perfection of creation, there existed another
reason why the evolutionary school was considered antithetical to
theism, thus assisting the spread of materialism. This was the
supposition that if there were a God, things must have come into
existence according to a prior plan; that is, the existence of things
should have been anticipated in God's knowledge and then created by His
irresistible will.

The presence of a prior plan implies the total absence of chance,
because chance contradicts foreknowledge, being something unexpected and
unpredictable. But we know that chance plays an extraordinary important
and effective role in the creation of the universe. Even if we suppose
that chance is not sufficient for the initial existence of things, we
cannot deny its existence and effective role in the process of creation
For example, the earth, which is the cradle of living organisms, was a
fragment which came into existence due to a chance, for instance, due to
the sun's nearing a big spherical body and coming under its
gravitational pull. Had there existed a prior plan, or a fate
predetermined since eternity, chance would have no role. The conclusion
is that if God exists things should come into existence in a manner
preplanned and foreknown in His eternal knowledge, and had things been
foreknown in God's eternal knowledge there would be no chance. And since
chance has an effective role in creation, the creation of things was
unpredictable, and since it was unpredictable, there is no God.

Apart from this, if things came into existence due to the eternal
Divine will, it was necessary for them to do so instantaneously at one
stroke, because God's will is absolute, irresistible and unconditional.
The implication of God's absolute, irresistible and unconditional will
is that everything He intends to create comes into existence without a
moment's delay. Hence it is mentioned in religious texts that God's
command is such that when He wills something He says, 'Be', and it comes
into existence immediately. Therefore, if the world and things existing
in it have come into existence by God's will, it follows that the world
must come into existence from the very beginning in whatever form or
state it would eventually assume.

The conclusion derived from these two points-one of which relates to
God's eternal knowledge and the other to the Divine will-is that if God
exists, there exist both an eternal Divine knowledge and an eternal
will, and eternal knowledge and eternal will require that things come
into existence instantaneously.

The reply is that neither God's eternal knowledge nor His eternal will
require that things come into existence instantaneously. Further,
neither the theists the world over nor the religious texts have posed
the issue in this manner.

It is mentioned in religious texts that God created the universe in six
days. Regardless of whatever may be implied by 'six days,' be it six
periods, or six days of God, each of which is equal to a thousand years,
or six ordinary days amounting to 144 hours, that which is understood
from this statement is gradualness. The theists have never said that the
eternal knowledge of God and His absolute will necessitate that the
heavens were created in a single moment and instantaneously. The
scriptures say that they were created gradually during a certain period
of time.

And the Noble Qur'an also states very explicitly the gradual
development of the foetus in the womb and considers it as a pointer to
the knowledge of God. Nobody has ever said that the necessary
implication of God's eternal knowledge and will-which is such that when
it relates to a certain thing and He says, 'Be,' the thing comes into
being-is that the foetus develops momentarily. This was from the
viewpoint of the scriptures.

From the point of view of philosophy, the claim that God's eternal
knowledge implies that chance does not play any effective role
whatsoever, requires a bit of explanation.

From the philosophic viewpoint, fortuity and accident, or in other
words chance, does not exist at all, and that which men calls chance is
not chance in reality and does not essentially differ in the least from
all other causes and effects, prerequisites and consequences.

The word 'chance' is used in two different senses. The first sense is
where something comes into being without any efficient cause, that is, a
thing that supposedly did not exist comes into existence without the
interference of any factor. This kind of chance is rejected by all
schools of thought irrespective of their being theists or materialists,
because even the materialists do not accept such a hypothesis about the
origin of the universe. This kind of chance is also not related to the
topic of our present discussion, because even those who claim that
organic changes in animals are due to chance factors do not imply this
kind of chance.

The other sense in which this word is used is where a consequence
follows from conditions which are not its prerequisite, or when
conditions give rise to a consequence which does not follow from them.
For example, if you get into a car in Tehran and drive on the Tehran-Qum
highway you will reach Qum after two or three hours. You never say that
I drove on this highway and accidentally reached Qum, because the
natural outcome of this journey is your reaching Qum. Now suppose you
have an old friend whom you have not seen for years.

While travelling to Qum you are neither thinking about him nor looking
around for him, but as soon as you reach 'Aliabad on the Tehran-Qum
highway, you get off the car to relax for a while at an inn. Finding an
empty chair at a table, all of a sudden you find your friend whom you
had not seen for twenty years. You come to know that he was living in
Shiraz and had come to Tehran, that he too had stopped there to relax
for a while when he saw you. Here each of you will say, 'We met by
chance on the Tehran-Qum highway.' The reason why both of you consider
this meeting accidental is that in the general course of nature
travelling between Tehran and Qum does not necessarily result in such a
meeting.

Were it necessary, it would mean that such a meeting should occur
whenever you travel from Tehran to Qum whatever the circumstances, while
it is not so. This event took place only during this particular journey
which took place at a particular time under its particular
circumstances. That is why this meeting was not foreseeable for you or
your friend or anyone in your place, and neither you nor your friend
would have been able to include this meeting in his plans while planning
his journey. Things which can be foreseen and included in an itinerary
are those which occur in the natural course of journey between Tehran
and Qum.

But if you turn your attention from the general character of the
journey from Tehran to Qum and focus your attention on this particular
journey which was made at a particular time under particular conditions,
and if you take it into consideration with its accompanying
circumstances and conditions and other accompanying events, you will
find that your meeting your friend at that specific point and at that
moment was not at all accidental; rather it was necessary, natural and
inevitable consequence of your journey towards Qum, and was also totally
predictable for someone who was aware of all the movements and
circumstances of both of you.

This meeting is accidental in the eyes of someone who takes into view
the general nature of the journey from Tehran to Qum. Obviously this
journey has a set of general implications, and that which lies outside
them, from the point of view of its general nature, will be considered
chance. But that which exists is not just the general nature; that which
exists is that general nature along with a set of condition, and the
notion of chance vanishes on taking into consideration these conditions
and additional facts .

Here we give another example to further elucidate how accident and
chance are subjective in nature; that is, it is an accident or chance
from the viewpoint of a person who is ignorant of the causes, whereas
from the standpoint of one who has knowledge of the causes involved
there is no chance or accident.

Imagine two persons employed in a certain institution and who receive
their instructions from a single source. One of them, Mr. A, is employed
in Khurasan and the other, Mr. B, works at Isfahan. Instructions are
received from the headquarters ordering Mr. A to leave on a certain date
for a disaster-stricken area to perform some specific task, and soon
afterwards instructions are received by Mr. B ordering him to go on the
same day to the same place for performing another task. Obviously Mr. A
and Mr. B meet each other at that place and their meeting is accidental
for each of them. Both of them will say that they met each other
accidentally on a certain day and at a certain place. Each of them
separately views the nature of his task and finds that this meeting was
not a necessary consequence of his task and that it was not predictable
for either of them. But from the viewpoint of the headquarters, which
ordered both of these apparently separate and unrelated assignments that
were carried out under its instructions, this meeting was not at all
accidental.

For the headquarters, which determined the courses of the two journeys
from Isfahan and Mashad to that point and arranged both of them in such
a manner that the two individuals reached that point on a specific date,
their meeting and coming together was very natural and inevitable. The
headquarters cannot say that it sent these two and they accidentally met
each other at a certain place. Therefore, accident and chance are
relative; it is an accident in relation to one who is unaware of the
happenings, whereas for one who knows the details of events and has a
complete knowledge of the circumstances and conditions there is no
accident or chance involved. This is why they say: that which is called
'chance' is such only in relation to one who is ignorant of the causes,
not for one who has complete knowledge of the events.

From this we come to know that for God, the Exalted, and in fact from
the viewpoint of reality and what actually takes place, there is no
question of accident or chance. Hence, to say that 'if we accept God we
must also accept that the events in the universe occur in accordance
with a plan and are therefore predictable and involve no accident or
chance, whereas the sciences believe in an effective and important role
of chance and accident,' is something baseless.

The accidents are such with reference to us who are ignorant of the
totality of causes, not with reference to God, who is the Creator and
Originator of every thing and encompasses all causes, conditions, and
circumstances.

Now something regarding [God's] eternal will.

This objection is weaker than the first one. Strangely enough, has been
imagined that God's absolute and eternal will implies that all existents
come into being instantaneously! What a big blunder! The implication of
God's absolute will is that everything should come into existence in the
manner He desires and in the form He intends without facing any
opposition and obstacle, that there be no gap between His will and the
thing willed, not that everything which He desires should come into
existence in an instantaneous manner.

To explain, if we, who have a deficient and finite will, will
something, we have to rely upon things other than our own will, and
unless we obtain those means our will by itself can achieve nothing.
Also we need to remove certain obstacles, because our will cannot be
realized with their presence. But since God's will encompasses all
things and everything is the result of His will, the means and
hindrances too are the creation of His will. Thus at the plane where His
will prevails there exists nothing by way of a precondition, means, or
obstacle:

all conditions, means, obstacles and their absence are subservient and
subject to His will. Therefore, that which He wills exists in the manner
willed by Him, without the least delay. If the existence of a thing
depends upon the fulfillment of certain conditions, it is proper to say
from the viewpoint of that thing that it depends on these conditions,
but it is not correct to say about God's will that it depends upon
certain conditions. That is, the execution of Divine will is not
dependent upon anything; rather it is Divine will which ordains the
thing with those conditions and it comes into existence in the manner
willed by Him without any departure.

Thus the meaning of God's possessing an absolute will is that whatever
He wills takes place in the manner He wills, without His will depending
upon anything beyond Himself for its execution. Therefore, if He wills a
thing's existence to be instantaneous that thing comes into being
instantaneously. But if He wills that a thing's existence be gradual it
comes into being gradually. It depends upon the mode of the thing's
existence and the manner in which God has willed its existence.

If Divine will and wisdom so ordain that living creatures should come
into existence gradually in a span of billions of years, they will
naturally come into existence in this manner. Therefore, it is wrong to
say that God's absolute will requires that everything come into
existence instantaneously. The logical implication of the absolute
Divine will is that everything comes into existence in the manner
decreed by Him, instantaneously or gradually, without depending upon
anything beyond the Divine will.

Apart from this, the philosophers have proved that things having a
gradual character have an existence that can only be gradual; it is
impossible for them to have any other kind of existence, either static
or instantaneous. Hence the receptivity (qabiliiyyah) of the receiver
(qabil) also necessitates gradualness.

Sadr al-Muta'allihin has proved that there is a kind of motion in the
world called 'substantial motion' (harkat jawhariyyah). According to the
theory of substantial motion there is nothing static in nature nor can
possibly be. All things existing in nature have a gradual existence and
it cannot be otherwise. This philosopher, who is also a divine 'arif
(gnostic), never thought that there might be people in the future who
would imagine that the instantaneous creation of all things was implied
by God's eternal knowledge or will.

A few years ago I wrote an article "Monotheism and Evolution" ("Tawhid
wa Takamul") for the monthly Maktab-e Tashayy'u in which I have
discussed the errors in the approach of Western philosophers in
considering theism to be incompatible with the concept of evolution.
Notes:

[^1] Paul Foulique, L'Existentialisme, Persian trans., p96
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Walter Terrace Stace, The Philosophy of Hegel, Dover Publications,
pp50-1
[^4] Ibid., pp71-2
[^5] This was a problem posed for the first time in Islamic Philosophy,
and like many other problems it was the result of the criticisms of the
mutakallimun. The criticisms of the mutakallimun led to the emergence of
certain problems in philosophy, and in this sense philosophy is greatly
indebted to them.
[^6] These remarks invoke a loose kind of speech. Science is incapable
of proving the casual relationship that is the effects needs for a
cause. The most sciences can establish is an association or succession
between phenomena. We have clarified this topic fully in the footnotes
to the Usule falsafeh wa rawish e riyalism, volume 2.


