The Causes Responsible For Materialist (lecture 3)
==================================================

Another example of the inadequacy of Western philosophy is to imagine
the concept of eternity of matter to be incompatible with faith in God,
while in fact there is no such logical implication between this view and
denial of God. Rather the divine philosophers believe that faith in God
necessarily implies faith in His eternity and continuous creativity
(fayyadiyyat), and it is the continuity of His creativity that implies
the eternity of creation.

A Russian scholar had written in an article whose Persian translation
was published by a magazine few years ago that Ibn Sina vacillated
between materialism and idealism.

Why did this scholar express such a view concerning Ibn Sina while one
of Ibn Sina's hallmarks is that he has consistently followed a single
line in expressing his views and doctrines and there is no wavering and
contradiction in his statements. Maybe his powerful and extraordinary
memory which made it possible for him not to forget any of his thoughts
was one of the causes of this characteristic.

This Russian scholar, since he saw on the one hand that Ibn Sina
believed in the eternity of matter and did not believe that time had a
beginning, thought him to be a materialist. On the other hand, he found
him speaking of God, creation and the First Cause and concluded that Ibn
Sina is an idealist. Hence Ibn Sina kept wavering between the two poles
of materialism and idealism and had no fixed opinion in this regard.

This Russian scholar had such a view about Ibn Sina because he
considered the concept of eternity of matter to be incompatible with the
idea that matter and the universe were of Divine creation.

However in Ibn Sina's reasoning, where he has discussed the 'criterion
for dependence upon a cause' and identified it to be 'essential
contingency' (imkan e-dhati), there exists no such contradiction between
these two. Earlier we have discussed the topic of criterion for
dependence upon a cause, which happens to be one of the most important
of philosophical issues and has been only dealt in Islamic philosophy.
It was made clear that the logical implication of being caused and
created is not coming into existence in time (huduth-e-zamani); there is
nothing to stop an existent from having an eternal and everlasting
existence while deriving its existence from a being other than itself.
We will have more to say on this issue later on. God or Freedom?

Predetermination and freedom of will (jabr wa ikhtiyar) is a well-known
issue of philosophy, theology and ethics. The discussion is about
whether man is compelled in his actions and has no freedom of choice, or
is free in his actions. There is another issue discussed in metaphysics
which is named qada wa qadar' (Divine ordainments and determinations).
Qada' and qadar implies the decisive Divine command which determines the
course of the world's events and their limits and extent.

The topic of qada and qadar involves the question whether Divine qada'
and qadar is general and covers all things and events or not. In the
case of its being general, what is the position of human freedom and
free will? Is it possible for Divine qada and qadar to be general and
all-inclusive and for man to have a free role at the same time?

The answer is, yes. I have myself discussed this topic in a treatise
written on this subject and published under the title "Man and Destiny"
(Insan wa sarnawisht) and have proved that there is no incompatibility
between God's general qada' on the one hand and man's freedom of will on
the other. Of course, that which I have mentioned therein is not
something which has been said for the first time by me; whatever I have
said is inferred from the Noble Qur'an and others before me have done
the same, especially Islamic philosophers, who have adequately discussed
this topic.

But today when we look at Europe we find persons like Jean Paul Sartre
lost in the labyrinths of this issue, and since they have based their
philosophy on choice, freewill and freedom, they do not want to accept
God. Jean Paul Sartre says: Since I believe and have faith in freedom I
cannot believe and have faith in God, for if I accept God I will
necessarily have to accept fate, and if I accept fate I cannot accept
individual freedom, and since I want to accept freedom and I love it and
have faith in it, I cannot have faith in God.

From the Islamic point of view, faith and belief in God is equivalent
to man's freedom and freewill. Freedom in the real sense is the essence
of man. Although the Noble Qur'an introduces God as very great and His
will as all- pervasive, it also strongly defends human freedom. There
has certainly come on man a period of time when he was nothing worthy of
mention. We created man of a mingled sperm so as to try him; and We made
him hearing and seeing. Surely We guided him upon the way, whether he be
thankful or unthankful. (76:1-3) This implies that man is free, and he
may choose the right path or the path of ingratitude (kufran) of his own
will.

The Qur'an further states:

Whosoever desires this present world, We hasten for him therein what We
will unto whomsoever We desire; then We appoint for him the hell wherein
he shall roast, condemned and rejected. And whosoever desires the world
to come and strives after it as he should, being a believer, those,
their striving shall be thanked. Each We succour, these and those, from
thy Lord's gift; and thy Lords gift is not confined. (17:18-20). Yes,
this is the Qur'anic logic. The Qur'an does not see any incompatibility
between God's general qada and man's freedom and freewill.

From the philosophical point of view, too, conclusive proofs which
negate any incompatibility between the two have been provided.

However, these philosophers of the twentieth century have imagined that
they can be free only if they do not accept God, and that too in the
sense that they can in that case break the relation of their will from
the past and the present, that is with history and the environment, and
with a will severed from history and society choose and build the
future, although the issue of determinism and freewill is not related to
the question of acceptance or negation of God. By accepting God, too, it
is possible to envisage an active and free role for the human will, as
it is also possible to negate God and at the same time to challenge the
concept of freewill on the basis of the universal law of causation.

That is, the root of determinism, or the imagined implication of
determinism, lies in the belief in a definite system of cause and effect
acknowledged both by the theists as well as the materialists. If there
is no incompatibility between a definite system of cause and effect and
human freedom and freewill, which in fact there is not, belief in God,
too, does not entail negation of freewill. For more details on this
issue refer to the book Insan wa sarnawisht. Here we intend to mention a
few more examples of the philosophical errors of the West in the field
of metaphysics. Chance, God, or Causation?

For a better understanding of Western thought, both theist and
materialist, concerning God, it is proper that we discuss the following
topic:

Some imagine that proving God's existence depends on casting doubt on
the law of causation and the concept of causal necessity, that is the
very thing which constitutes the most basic foundation for proving God's
existence. Not only is it the basic foundation for proving God's
existence but also the foundation for accepting any scientific and
philosophical theory.

Bertrand Russell has assigned a chapter in his book The Scientific
Outlook under the heading "Science and Religion." He has posed in this
chapter certain issues which in his opinion form the area of conflict
between science and religion. One of them is this very issue which he
discusses under the heading of "Free Will." The reason he has mentioned
it under this heading is that the Westerners imagine freewill and
freedom in the human context to imply freedom from the law of causality
and causal necessity. Therefore, if we reject the laws of causation and
causal necessity in nature, we will be admitting to the presence of some
kind of choice in nature. Accordingly Russell raises this issue under
the heading "Free Will."

In our opinion, the raising of this issue under this caption is by
itself another indication of the level of Western thought on such kind
of topics. In any case this is what Russell says:

Until very recent times theology, while in its Catholic form it
admitted free will in human beings, showed an affection for natural law
in the universe, tempered only by belief in occasional miracles ...

One of the most remarkable developments in religious apologetics in
recent times is the attempt to rescue free will in man by means of
ignorance as to the behaviour of atoms ... It is not yet known with any
certainty whether there are laws governing the behaviour of single atoms
in all respects, or whether the behaviour of such atoms is in part
random ... In the atom there are various possible states which do not
merge continuously into each other, but are separated by small finite
gaps. An atom may hop from one of these states to another, and there are
various different hops that it may make. At present no laws are known to
decide which of the possible hops will take place on any given occasion,
and it is suggested that the atom is not subject to laws at all in this
respect, but has what might be called, by analogy, "free will."
Eddington, in his book on the Nature of the Physical World, has made
great play with this possibility. [^1]

Russell then goes on to given an outline of the history of the
principle of non-necessity and adds:

I am surprised, I repeat, that Eddington should have appealed to this
principle in connexion with the question of free will, for the principle
does nothing whatever to show that the course of nature is not
determined. [^2] Then he states that that which is understood from
quantum mechanics is not the negation of causality but the negation of
the principle of necessity (principle of the necessity of an effect's
dependence upon a cause). He says:

There is nothing whatever in the Principle of Indeterminacy to show
that any physical event is uncaused ... Returning now to the atom and
its supposed free will, it should be observed that it is not known that
the behaviour of the atom is capricious. It is false to say the
behaviour of the atom is known to be capricious, and it is also false to
say the behaviour is known to be not capricious. Science has quite
recently discovered that the atom is not subject to the laws of the
older physics, and some physicists have somewhat rashly jumped to the
conclusion that the atom is not subject to law at all ... It is very
rash to erect a theological superstructure upon a piece of ignorance
which may be only momentary. There is, moreover, a purely empirical
objection to the belief in free will. Wherever it has been possible to
subject the behaviour of animals or of human beings to careful
scientific observation, it has been found, as in Pavlov's experiments,
that scientific laws are just as discoverable here as in any other
sphere. It is true that we cannot predict human actions with any
completeness, but this is quite sufficiently accounted for by the
complication of the mechanism, and by no means demands the hypothesis of
complete lawlessness, which is found to be false wherever it can be
carefully tested. Those who desire caprice in the physical world seem to
me to have failed to realize what this would involve.

All inference in regard to the course of nature is causal, and if
nature is not subject to causal laws all such inference must fail. We
cannot, in that case, know anything outside of our personal experience;
indeed, strictly speaking, we can only know our experience in the
present moment, since all memory depends upon casual laws. If we cannot
infer the existence of other people, or even of our own past, how much
less can we infer God, or anything else that the theologians desire
...

There is, in fact, no good reason whatever for supposing that the
behaviour of atoms is not subject to law. It is only quite recently that
experimental methods have been able to throw any light on the behaviour
of individual atoms, and it is no wonder if the laws of this behaviour
have not yet been discovered. [^3]

We endorse Russell's opinion that a satisfactory proof has not been
provided to prove the lawlessness of atomic movements, and further
contend that it is impossible that such a proof exist or be produced in
the future. Similarly, we affirm his view that if the law of causation
were not valid and the universe were lawless, all our inferences about
the universe, God, and everything else would be in vain.

That which Russell has said in answer to those who claim the universe
to be lawless (or lawless at least in subatomic particles) is the same
as what Islamic philosophers have said in reply to the Ash'arites who
tried to deny causal necessity. I have expressed my view about this
principle in the footnotes of "The Principles of Philosophy and the
Method of Realism" and in the book 'Man and Destiny'.

But here I cannot refrain from expressing my surprise at the following
two points. The first that a group of so-called theists have tried to
prove the existence of God by negating causation, or in their own words,
through freewill and negation of causal necessity and congruence between
cause and effect (i.e. the notion that a certain cause can produce only
a certain kind of effect). Anyone even with little acquaintance with
Islamic metaphysics knows that acceptance of the principle of causation
and causal necessity and congruence between cause and effect is part of
the ABC of Islamic metaphysics.

The second point is that Mr. Russell imagines that the only blow
delivered to science by the negation of the law of causality is our
inability to generalize the results of scientific experiments, for the
generalization of an experiment is dependent upon the theory that 'like
causes in like circumstances act in a similar manner.' He is unaware of
the fact that by negating the principle of causation, even in cases
where all aspects of a thing have been experimented we cannot acquire
the knowledge of it within the experimented limits, because our
knowledge of external reality acquired through the senses and
experimentation is itself dependent upon the law of causation. If the
law of causation were not there, we would arrive at nothing. Mr. Russell
repeatedly emphasizes this point in his book The Scientific Outlook that
modern physics is advancing towards the concept of lawlessness of the
universe.

The basic point is that the law of causation is not a physical law but
a law of philosophy; consequently physics can neither prove it nor
refute it. But Mr. Russell does not believe in philosophical laws
independent of the achievements of the sciences and is therefore forced
to remain bewildered in this quagmire.

In the footnotes of 'The Principles of Philosophy and the Method of
Realism' in the article, "The Origins of Multiplicity in Cognition," I
have discussed the source of the concept of causality and the manner in
which the mind arrives at this concept and affirms its validity. The
reader is referred to that book. The Concept of Creation:

Among the confusions present in Western philosophical thought
concerning the problem of causation is the analysis of the concept of
creation. What is meant by creation? Does it mean that the Creator gives
existence to a non-existent? Or does it imply that He brings an existent
into existence? None of the two alternatives is rational and a third
alternative is also unimaginable.

In other words, that which is created by a power either exists or is
non-existent. If it exists, creating it amounts to 'acquiring the
acquired' (tahsil e hasil), because creating what exists implies giving
a thing something which it already possesses, like a straightening a
straight line. And if it is non-existent, creating it amounts to kind of
a contradiction, because creating a non-existent implies changing
non-existence into existence, and this involves the conversion of
non-existence into existence and non-being into being, and this is a
contradiction.

Hence creation is either the changing of existence into existence or
the changing of non-existence into existence. The former involves
acquiring the acquired and while the latter results in a contradiction,
and both are impossible. This is the well-known paradox in this regard.
Among Islamic scholars, the one to develop this paradox more than anyone
else is Imam Fakhr al-Din Razi.

Islamic philosophers have devoted a separate chapter to this issue,
known as the 'problem of making' (mas'alah-ye ja'l) and have provided an
excellent and precise analysis of the concepts of causation, creation,
and the like, thereby resolving this paradox.

First, they have demonstrated that if this argument were correct we
will have to set aside completely the notion of causation regardless of
whether it is natural causation-that is, bringing about motion and
changing a thing into something else, or Divine causation-that is,
generation and creation.

Secondly, they have established that there are two possible kinds of
causation and making (ja'l). One of them is simple making (ja'l-e basit)
and the other compound making (ja'l-e murakkab). All those paradoxes
have risen because all instances of creation and causation have been
imagined as belonging to the class of compound making and causation.
Here we do not intend to study this problem which needs an elaborate
treatment, and to discuss all its various aspects will greatly prolong
this discussion. Here our sole purpose is to point out the causes
responsible for materialist tendencies from the viewpoint of the West's
philosophical inadequacies, and so we are forced to discuss this issue
to the extent necessary to reveal one of the roots of these tendencies.
One of these roots pertains to the remaining unsolved of the concept of
creation, or in other words, the absence of an accurate analysis of the
concept of causation, which has taken place in Islamic philosophy in the
well-known discussion on ja'l.

Here I will again cite Russell in this regard in his capacity as a
materialist Western philosopher. In the aforementioned book and chapter,
Bertrand Russell has discussed a topic under the heading "God the
Creator." There he has mentioned the famous theory of modern physics
based on the world's gradual disintegration and running down and hence
having a end. This in turn proves that the world has a beginning from
the point of view of time, because that which has no beginning has no
end, and that which has an end must have a beginning, although it is
possible that a thing may have a beginning without having an end. From
here it has been concluded that the world has been created by a power
and that the view of the materialists is wrong.

Russell, while trying to explain that this new theory does not
corroborate the theist thesis, says:

One of the most serious difficulties confronting science at the present
time is the difficulty derived from the fact that the universe appears
to be running down. There are, for example, radio-active elements in the
world. These are perpetually disintegrating into less complex elements,
and no process by which they can be built up is known. This, however, is
not the most important or difficult respect in which the world is
running down. Although we do not know of any natural process by which
complex elements are built up out of simpler ones, we can imagine such
processes, and it is possible that they are taking place somewhere. But
when we come to the second law of thermodynamics we encounter a more
fundamental difficulty.

The second law of thermodynamics states, roughly speaking, that things
left to themselves tend to get into a muddle and do not tidy themselves
up again. It seems that once upon a time the universe was all tidy, with
everything in its proper place, and that ever since then it has been
growing more and more disorderly, until nothing but a drastic
spring-cleaning can restore it to its pristine order. [^4]

Russell, after giving clarifications in this regard, goes on with his
explanation:

As we trace the course of the world backwards in time, we arrive after
some finite number of years (rather more than four thousand and four,
however), at a state of the world which could not have been preceded by
any other, if the second law of thermodynamics was then valid. This
initial state of the world would be that in which energy was distributed
as unevenly as possible. [^5] Then he goes on to quote Eddington and
speaks about his hesitation and bewilderment concerning which theory
should be eventually chosen. Eddington says:

The difficulty of an infinite past is appalling. It is inconceivable
that we are the heirs of an infinite time of preparation; it is not less
inconceivable that there was once a moment with no moment preceding it.
[^6] Finally Russell himself expresses his opinion in this manner The
second law of thermodynamics may not hold in all times and places, or we
may be mistaken in thinking the universe spatially finite; but as
arguments of this nature go, it is a good one, and I think we ought
provisionally to accept the hypothesis that the world had a beginning at
some definite, though unknown, date. Are we to infer from this that the
world was made by a Creator? Certainly not, if we are to adhere to the
canons of valid scientific inference. There is no reason whatever why
the universe should not have begun spontaneously, except that it seems
odd that it should do so; but there is no law of nature to the effect
that things which seem odd to us must not happen.

To infer a Creator is to infer a cause, and causal inferences are only
admissible in science when they proceed from observed causal laws.
Creation out of nothing is an occurrence which has not been observed
[^7]. There is, therefore, no better reason to suppose that the world was
caused by a Creator than to suppose that it was uncaused; either equally
contradicts the causal laws that we can observe. [^8] That which has been
quoted consists of two parts. The first is about modern physics, and
expressing any opinion about it is outside the competence of
metaphysics. From the metaphysical viewpoint, creation cannot be limited
and have a beginning in time. Similarly it cannot stop at a particular
limit. Divine effusion is interminable and infinite with respect to both
its beginning and end.

The present universe as conceived by physics could be a single link in
the chain of Divine effusion which comprises of numerous inter-connected
links, but it cannot be the only link. From the standpoint of
metaphysics, the meaning of the statement that the universe came into
existence in finite time is that this part of creation has a beginning
in time, not that the process of creation itself began in finite time.

The second part consists of the philosophical ideas of this twentieth
century philosopher. The real purpose of our citing the above-mentioned
passages was for the sake of this part. Now that modern physics affirms
the theory of gradual disintegration and running down of the universe,
he prefers to accept that the universe came into being at a finite
though unknown point in time. And now that we are compelled to accept
that the universe began in finite time, there are two possibilities:
first that the universe was brought into existence by a creator at the
point of its beginning, the other is that it came into existence
spontaneously at that point without the interference of any agent. He
claims that from the point of view of causal laws there can be no
preference of any kind between the two possibilities considering; both
equally contradict causal laws. The coming into existence of the
universe as an act of a creative power is also against causal laws
because the causal laws which we are able to observe only justify
conclusions which follow from the principle of causation. That is, it
recognizes causality and being caused (ma'luliyyat) only in cases where
the cause itself is in turn an effect of another cause. But if a cause
and effect are assumed where the cause itself is not an effect, this
contradicts the principle of causality recognized by science.

If a cause and effect are assumed wherein the cause in its turn is not
an effect of another cause this implies that creation has taken place
from non- existence, and creation from non-existence is impossible by
experience.

Firstly, Mr. Russell imagines that the law of causation belongs to the
category of observable and sensible things. He has not paid attention,
or has not wished to do so, that causality is not something based on the
sense perception. That which is perceived is succession of events and
not causality, nor the general laws of cause and effect. Rather, even
succession and sequence are also not perceived by the senses but are
inferred and abstracted.

Secondly, he says that the law of cause and effect only endorses such
causation in which the cause is in turn an effect of another cause, and
the idea of a causation wherein the cause is not an effect of another
cause contradicts the law of causation.

We ask, 'Why'? Suppose we even consider the law of causation to be an
empirical law; where is such a limitation in this law? Does our notion
of causation imply anything except this that every phenomenon needs an
agent to bring it into existence? But what experiment leads us to
conclude that this agent itself must be something which has come into
existence with the help of another agent, and similarly the latter
agent, and so on ad infinitum?

Thirdly, what is meant by saying that 'observation shows that creation
from nothing is impossible'? Are necessity and impossibility empirical
concepts? Is impossibility or necessity a phenomenon and a physical
condition susceptible to experimentation and perceivable by the senses?
At the most that which can be said is that creation from nothing has not
been empirically observed, but what is meant by the statement that its
impossibility has been empirically proved?

Fourthly, what is the difference between a causation wherein the cause
is itself an effect of another cause and a causation in which the cause
is not an effect of another cause so as to conclude that in the former
instance creation is not from non-being while in the latter it amounts
to creation from nothing? In both the cases there is a a being dependent
upon another being and originating from another existent. If creation
has taken place from nothing, it has done so in both the cases, and if
it has not taken place from nothing it has not done so in both the
cases.

Fifthly, according to this philosopher, in any case modern physics has
declared the law of causation to have exceptions, because this physics
compels us to accept a starting point for the universe and there are no
more than two possibilities for the origin of the universe, and both the
possibilities violate the law of causation with equal force.

Therefore, we must accept that all our inferences concerning nature and
the universe are invalid, because earlier Mr. Russell has himself
conceded that all inferences derived by us concerning nature are founded
upon the law of causation, and if nature is not subject to law these
inferences in their entirety would be unreliable.

The realm of nature is either subject to the law of causation or it is
not If it is, then its coming into existence must also be subject to the
law of causation; if it is not, it is not possible that nature should
come into existence in an arbitrary manner and then become orderly.

The following words of Russell are just as true of himself. He says:

The principle of causality may be true or may be false, but the person
who finds the hypothesis of its falsity cheering is failing to realize
the implications of his own theory. He usually retains unchallenged all
those causal laws which he finds convenient, as, for example, that his
food will nourish him and that his bank will honour his cheques so long
as his account is in funds, while rejecting all those that he finds
inconvenient. This, however, is altogether too naive a procedure. [^9]


