Supplement
==========

It appears that these remarks are more true of Mr. Russell than anyone
else. What we have observed concerning Mr. Russell's approach to the
subject of God is that it is not logic and reasoning that have led him
to deny God. Instead a kind of disinclination or rather a negative
prejudice is apparent in him. An elaborate psychological analysis of his
is required to disclose the source of this disinclination. The
metaphysics and the knowledge of the supernatural which he acquired
during childhood from his grandmother which he repeatedly mentions in
his works, should not be ignored in this psychological analysis Argument
from Design:

The simplest and the most popular argument provided for the existence
of God is the argument from design. The Noble Qur'an refers to the
world's existents as 'ayat,' that is, signs of God. It is generally said
that the presence of design and order in things is a proof of the
existence of an ordering power. Unlike other arguments such as the
argument of the First Mover, the argument of necessity and contingency
(burhan-e wujub wa imkan), the argument of coming into existence and
eternity (burhan-e huduth wa qidam), and the argument of the Truthful
(burhan-e siddiqin), which are essentially philosophical, theological
and rational, this argument is a natural and essentially empirical
argument. It resembles all other arguments and proofs which are products
of man's experience.

In the West, David Hume, the eighteenth-century English philosopher,
cast doubts upon this argument and since then to our present times many
Westerners believe that the argument from design, which is the greatest
support of the theists, has lost its credibility. The loss of
credibility of the arguments for God's existence, especially the
argument from design, is one of the causes responsible for materialist
tendencies in the West. Now we will examine the criticism of Mr. Hume.

Hume has written a book by the name Dialogues concerning Natural
Religion in which a fictitious person named Cleanthes defends the
argument from design while another fictitious character called Philo
attacks it, and in this manner a dialogue takes place between the two.
Although Hume himself is not a materialist, he tries to prove that the
argument presented by the theists do not have a scientific basis, and
that the same is true of the arguments of the materialists. He believes
that faith is a matter of the heart, and if the argument from design is
adopted as a rational criterion, it can be only said that:

The order in nature, in spite of all that has been said, suggests, if
it does not Prove "That the cause or causes of order in the universe
probably bear some remote analogy to human intelligence." Beyond this,
we have no way to extend the argument in order to establish anything
about the characteristics of this cause or these causes. [^10] Hume
himself is philosophically a skeptic and an agnostic, but he insists on
proving that the argument from design is incomplete, or rather
untenable. It is said about him that:

All his life, David Hume was concerned with the merits of various
arguments which purported to establish the existence of a Divine Being.
In his early notebooks and letters, he continually reflected about the
problem, pointing out flaws or fallacies involved in the arguments of
various religious writers. In various works, Hume made some incisive
criticism of the reasoning employed by some of the religious
philosophers. Possibly because of its currency in his day, one of his
major undertakings was a thoroughgoing critique of the argument from
design. He worked on this, off and on, for about twenty-five years,
perfecting his famous Dialogues concerning Natural Religion. [^11]

Hume states the argument from design in Cleanthes's words in the
following manner:

Look around the world, contemplate the whole and every party of it, you
will find it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided into an
infinite number of lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions to
a degree beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain.
All these various machines, and even their minute parts, are adjusted to
each other with an accuracy which ravishes into admiration all men who
have ever contemplated them. The curious adapting of means to ends,
throughout all nature, resembles exactly, though it much exceeds, the
productions of human contrivance of human design, thought, wisdom and
intelligence. Since therefore the effects resemble each other, we are
led to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also
resemble, and that the Author of nature is somewhat similar to the mind
of man, though possessed of much larger faculties, proportioned to the
grandeur of the work which he has executed. By this argument a
posteriori, and by this argument alone, do we prove at once the
existence of a Deity and his similarity to human mind and intelligence.
[^12]

Hume, speaking through Philo the skeptic, refutes Cleanthes's argument
in the following words:

If we see a house, Cleanthes, we conclude, with the greatest certainty,
that it had an architect or builder because this is precisely that
species of effect which we have experienced to proceed from that species
of cause. But surely you, will not affirm that the universe bears such a
resemblance to a house that we can with the same certainty infer a
similar cause, or that the analogy is here entire and perfect. The
dissimilitude is so striking that the utmost you can here pretend to is
a guess, a conjecture, a presumption concerning a similar cause.

For aught we can know a priori, matter may contain the source or spring
of order originally within itself, as well as mind does; and there is no
more difficulty in conceiving that the several elements, form an
internal unknown cause, may fall into the most exquisite arrangement,
than to conceive that their ideas, in the great universal mind, from a
like internal unknown cause, fall into that arrangement.

And will any man tell me with a serious countenance that an orderly
universe must arise from some thought and art like the human because we
have experience of it? To ascertain this reasoning it were requisite
that we had experience of the origin of worlds; and it is not
sufficient, surely, t hat we have seen ships and cities arise from human
art and contrivance ....

Can you pretend to show any such similarity between the fabric of a
house and the generation of a universe? Have you ever seen nature in any
such situation as resembles the first arrangement of the elements? Have
worlds ever been formed under your eye, and have you had the leisure to
observe the whole progress of the phenomenon, from the first appearance
of order to its final consummation? If you have, then cite your
experience and deliver your theory ... [^13]

Secondly, you have no reason, on your theory, for ascribing perfection
to the Deity, even in His finite capacity, or for supposing Him free
from every error, mistake, or incoherences, in His undertakings ... At
least, you must acknowledge that it is impossible for us to tell, from
our limited views, whether this system contains any great faults or
deserves any considerable praise if compared to other possible and even
real systems. Could a peasant, if the Aeneid were read to him, pronounce
that poem to be absolutely faultless, or even assign to it its proper
rank among the productions of human wit, he who had never seen any other
production?

But were this world ever so perfect a production, it must still remain
uncertain whether all the excellences of the work can justly be ascribed
to the workman. If we survey a ship, what an exalted idea we must form
of the ingenuity of the carpenter who framed so complicated, useful, and
beautiful a machine? And what surprise must we feel when we find him a
stupid mechanic who imitated others, and copies an art which, through a
long succession of ages, after multiplied trials, mistakes, corrections,
deliberations and controversies, had been gradually improving? Many
worlds might have been botched and bungled, throughout an eternity, ere
this system was struck out; much labour lost, many fruitless trials
made, and a slow but continued improvement carried on during infinite
ages in the art of world-making. In such subjects, who can determine
where the truth, nay, who can conjecture where the probability lies,
amidst a great number of hypotheses which may be proposed, and a still
greater which may be imagined? [^14]

We have no data to establish any system of cosmogony (a theory about
the origins of the universe). Our experience, so imperfect in itself and
so limited both in extent and duration, can afford us no probable
conjecture concerning the whole of things. But if we must needs fix on
some hypothesis, by what rule, pray, ought we to determine our choice?
Is there any other rule than the greater similarity of the objects
compared? And does not a plant or an animal, which springs from
vegetation or generation, bear a stronger resemblance to the world than
does any artificial machine, which arises from reason and design? [^15]

[Hume pointed out that] the analogical reasoning employed in the
argument does not provide a basis for any conclusion about the moral
attributes of the designer of nature, even if one concludes that there
is such a designer. The conception of a moral, just, good, deity does
not follow from the comparison of natural and human effects. If the
designer is supposed to be like the human designer, then we would have
no reason to suppose that there is any special moral quality belonging
to the author of nature. When one examines the product, i.e., nature,
and observes all its unpleasant features, e.g., hurricanes, earthquakes,
the wars of one part of nature upon another, can we conclude that the
planning was that of a just and good intelligence? [^16] The summary of
the argument from design as stated by Hume is as follows:

a. The argument from design is not a purely rational argument based
upon necessary axioms; it is an empirical argument which is derived by
natural experience and must therefore fulfil the conditions of empirical
proofs.

b. This argument claims that extensive experience of nature shows that
a perfect similarity exists between nature and human artifacts such as
machines, ships and houses and it becomes evident that the universe is
exactly like a big machine from the viewpoint of the relationship of its
constituents with one another and the harmony that exists between the
structure of the universe and the effects and consequences deriving from
it.

c. In accordance with the general principle employed in empirical
arguments, the likeness of effects is a proof of the likeness of causes,
and considering that human artifacts are the creation of a spirit, mind
and thought it follows that the universe too is a creation of a great
spirit, intelligence, and thought.

Following is the summary of his criticism of this argument:

a. The basis of the argument, that is, the similarity between the works
of nature and human artefects, is founded upon the idea that the
universe, from the viewpoint of the composition of its parts, is like a
house or a car whose parts have been assembled by an external
intelligent power, mind and spirit, for a series of aims. But this
similarity is not complete; that is, it is not certain and definite,
only probable. It cannot be said that the resemblance of the universe
with a car is greater than the former's resemblance with a plant or an
animal, which has an internal regulating power and is in no way
controlled from outside.

b. This would have been an empirical proof if it had been repeatedly
experimented with, that is, if worlds had been created repeatedly in the
same form and conditions by conscious and humanlike beings, and we had
found through experimentation a connection between this kind of effect
and a humanlike cause. After seeing a world resembling the experimented
worlds we could rule that this world, too, like those worlds, has a
humanlike cause. However, such is not the case. The experience we have
of making a ship, house, or a city is not the same as our experience
about the world. The origin and formation of the world, which has taken
place gradually during billions of years, does not resemble the building
of a ship or a house.

c. Furthermore, this argument seeks to prove the existence of God, the
Exalted, Who represents ultimate wisdom, infinite power, and absolute
perfection. Even if supposedly it is proved that the source of this
world is a humanlike being, it is insufficient for the purpose. This
argument would have been sufficient for proving the existence of God had
we found by experience that this world is the most perfect of possible
worlds and conforms to ultimate wisdom. However, for us who know only
this world and have not seen any other to compare and contrast it with
our own, it is not possible to understand whether this world has been
created on the basis of ultimate wisdom and that it is the best possible
world. It is just like asking a villager who has just read one book in
his life (even if it is the greatest masterpiece) to declare that the
only book he has read is the best book ever written.

d. Supposing that this world is the best possible world and a better
world is not possible, even then it will not prove the existence of God,
the Exalted, Who (as presumed) is absolute perfection, self-sufficient
and the necessary existent, because this argument would be a proof of
the existence of God if it proves, over and above that this is the best
possible world and a better world is unimaginable, that this is the
first world which God has created, that He had no previous experience of
creation and has not gradually developed His craftsmanship, and that He
has not copied any other creation. But none of these matters are
provable. How can it be ascertained that the world's creator has not
imitated another creations? How do we know that He has not been
repeatedly experimenting with the technique of world-making since
eternity and has gradually achieved this great progress in the craft?

e. Apart from all this, in our present world, we find deficiencies,
evil, and ugliness, such as floods, earthquakes, diseases, etc., which
do not accord with perfect Divine wisdom.

This was a summary of Hume's criticisms rendered in a relatively
Eastern idiom.

Now we may proceed to examine these criticisms:

1. Mr. Hume's idea concerning the argument from design being
essentially an empirical argument is mistaken. Empirical arguments are
involved in cases where we want to discover the relationship of a
particular empirical phenomenon with another empirical phenomenon.

In other words, an empirical argument is valid only when an enquiry
concerns discovering the relationship between two natural phenomena, and
not when it is meant to discover the relationship between nature and the
supranatural. To put it differently, experimentation is possible where
we observe a certain phenomenon in nature and want to discover its cause
or causes through experimenting, or intend to ascertain the consequences
and effects of that phenomenon. For example, by experimenting we
discover the relationship between heating water and its transformation
into steam and between its cooling and its transformation into ice. When
we see two things taking place one after another and are also certain
that nothing else is involved, we conclude that one of the two is the
cause of the other. Hence the criterion for an empirical relationship is
that both sides of the relationship be observable.

Now let us see whether the argument from design in the world for
proving the existence of a conscious designer is an emperical argument
or not. But before we examine the nature of the argument from design, it
is necessary that we examine the nature of another common argument which
Hume regards as totally empirical and considers the argument from design
to be somewhat similar to it. This argument involves inferring existence
of thought and intellect in man from the artifacts created by man.

Is this common inference of ours regarding persons wherein we discover
their intelligence, thought, and level of knowledge by observing their
artifacts, in fact an empirical proof of the kind employed in
discovering the relationship between natural phenomena, such as the
relationship between heat and vaporization or between cooling and
freezing? In other words, is the discovery of intelligence,
consciousness and knowledge of human creatures from observing their
artifacts an empirical inference, or is it a rational inference
(burhan-e 'aqli)?

How do we know, for example, that Ibn Sina was a philosopher or a
physician, or that Sa'di was poet and a writer of taste? How do we, who
always come across various friends, teachers, students and classmates,
know that one of them is bright, the other dull, another knowledgeable
and a fourth ignorant? Obviously from the effects which derive from
them, from their speech that we hear, from their behaviour that we
observe, and their works and writings which we study.

We cannot directly see or touch their intelligence, minds and
knowledge. Basically things such as thought and knowledge are incapable
of being sensibly perceived and felt. Supposing that we dissect their
brains or take a scan of their contents, we may possibly see certain
structures in them, but we cannot observe their thoughts. Rather, we do
not have a direct perception of these qualities except what we
personally possess of thought, intelligence, and consciousness. We have
a direct access only to our own knowledge, intelligence and thought, and
that is all. Accordingly no intelligence and thought is accessible to us
for experimenting so that we may determine the relationship between it
and some other factor through experimentation. Rather, from an empirical
point of view we are unaware of the existence of any other intelligence
or thought apart from our own.

But why and on what basis do we affirm the existence of intelligence
and thought in all other human beings and do not entertain any doubt
about it? Further, on what basis do we, through observing man-made
objects, artifacts and the manifestations of their work, infer the level
of their intelligence, their consciousness, thought, knowledge, tastes
and feelings. Didn't Descartes say that all animals with the exception
of man were unconscious machines which have been so created that they
react like living creatures? How do we know that the same is not true of
other people? And how do we know that only animals are machines, without
souls and consciousness, that show signs similar to those of living
creatures and that all human beings except myself are not such?

I am not directly aware of the existence of any intelligence, thoughts
and feelings except my own, and may be that they exist only in me and
none else. What empirical proof is there that it is not so? The presence
of intelligence and thought within me is not sufficient for concluding
that something exactly similar to what is in me is present in others.
Because in logical terminology this is reasoning by analogy, that is,
considering an individual as the criterion for other individuals, not an
empirical proof which involves experimentation with a large number of
individuals of a certain species to the point of acquiring certainty
that the properties identified are not particular to the individuals
involved in the experiment but belong to all the individuals of that
species.

As a matter of fact, the inference of intelligence and consciousness in
human beings from their effects and artifacts is neither by way of
analogy nor by way of empirical inference; rather it is a kind of
rational proof. It is true that man directly experiences the presence of
such existents as intelligence, will, and thought only within himself
and becomes aware of their action, which is to think, decide and to
choose, that is to select from among a large number of alternatives one
most appropriate to his goal. But where he studies the activities of
others, although he does not observe their intelligence and
consciousness, he does observe their action of selecting in their
activities. That is, on studying their activities he finds that they
constantly select from among the various kinds of activities, or,
rather, from among a thousand different options of which only one gives
the desired result. While the other options are fruitless that
particular one leads to the desired result. They also make their
selection in a way to obtain the desired result and disregard the
rest.

For example, if a person holds a pen in hand and intends to draw it on
a piece of paper to sketch some figure, there are thousands of possible
figures which may be drawn, for example the shape of the alphabet mim If
he continues to move the pen on the paper, there are a thousand possible
shapes which may be drawn of which one may be the alphabet nun. Again if
he continues this act, out of a thousand possible figures one could be
in the shape of the alphabet ta'. Now, if he holds a pen and its
movements give shape to the word, it may be said that the shape drawn
had one in a billion (1000 x 1000 x 1000) chance of materializing. Now
if he continues this act and writes a few lines and together they takes
the form of the following passage:

It is the favour of God, the Glorious and the Mighty, that His
obedience results in nearness to Him, and gratitude to Him a double
blessing. Every breath that is drawn prolongs life and when exhaled
brings delight to the soul; thus in each breath are two blessings and
for each blessing thanks are due ...

the chance that all these alphabets have come together accidentally and
not as a result of selection, that is, as a result of attention and
choice, is so remote as to be unimaginable. That is, human reason
normally considers it impossible. It is on this basis that it makes the
judgement affirming the existence of a power of selection, which is the
same thing as intelligence and will.

This is the reason why we say that the inference of intelligence and
thought in man from human artifacts and effects is neither based on
analogical reasoning-which merely involves making oneself the criterion
for others, like someone who having felt a stomach pain concludes that
all people have stomach pains-nor on the basis of empirical evidence.
Because such evidence here would be the establishment of the relation of
such artifacts to human intelligence by repeated experiments, that is,
by directly observing intelligence and its effects and discovering their
connection. Rather this argument is a kind of rational inference which
is similar to the inference which the mind makes for affirming the truth
of historical reports received from numerous sources (mutawatir). [^17]

Thus we see that our knowledge of the intelligence and consciousness of
other people is not the result of empirical evidence, to say nothing of
the argument from design, which establishes the relationship between the
universe and God, the Exalted.

Recently this fallacy has found fancy with some Muslim Arab writers and
their Iranian followers. They have imagined that the Qur'anic call for
studying the signs of creation (ayat) is in fact an invitation to an
empirical knowledge of God. They have imagined that when we know God
through the study of the signs of creation, our knowledge of God is
based on empirical evidence. From here they arrive at another ridiculous
conclusion: "The method to be followed in theological issues is the same
as the one followed by natural scientists in studying nature, and that
there is no need for us to resort to those complicated and subtle
philosophical discussions dealing with theological issues. Instead of
bearing the stigma of ignorance or failure to understand them, we
declare all of them to be baseless."

They are ignorant of the fact that the limits of experience only extend
up to the knowledge of God's creation. The knowledge of God with the
help of the understanding of the creation acquired by empirical means is
a kind of a pure rational inference.

2. Mr. Hume has imagined that the theists want to prove that the world
has a complete resemblance to human artifacts, and on the basis that
similarity of effects is proof of similarity of causes, want to prove
that since the world is totally similar to a car or a house, it too has
a maker similar to the maker of a machine or a house.

Mr. Hume tells them that this is not the case; the world, more than its
resemblance to a ship or a car, resembles the systematic and
self-regulating mechanism of a plant or animal.

Firstly, in reply to Mr. Hume it may remarked that the meaning of his
words is that the world is not like a car or a ship, but is rather like
itself! Did he expect the world to be unlike itself? Are not plants and
animals a part of this world? In fact, the discussion is all about the
plants and animals which in his own words have been so created that they
are self-regulating like a most advanced machine, a thousand times more
complicated than man-made ships and machines. Therefore, the signs of
creation in a plant or an animal are more evident than in a ship or a
machine. Consequently, if the maker of the ship and the machine is
endowed with intelligence and thought, there is a greater reason that
the creator of the universe, whose creative power is manifested in
plants and animals, should possess intelligence and wisdom.

Secondly, the remark of Mr. Hume about this argument that it
essentially involves a kind of analogy (tashbih) and its purpose is to
prove the presence of perfect resemblance between the works of the
Creator of nature and human artifacts, is wrong. It is impossible that
the works of the Creator of nature (God) perfectly resemble products of
human make; rather, as the Creator of nature is beyond resemblance to
man from the point of view of essence and attributes, so also He is
beyond likeness from the angle of act and creation.

Man is a part of nature, and being such he is an existent which is in a
continuous state of becoming and moving towards perfection (takamul).
All his efforts are directed towards moving from the state of
potentiality (quwwah) to that of actuality (fi'l), and from deficiency
towards perfection. All the efforts of the human being are a kind of a
movement from potentiality to act, and from deficiency towards
perfection.

Similarly, man being a part of nature and not its creator, his
dispensations concerning nature are of the form of establishing an
artificial (unnatural) relation between the parts of nature. Human
artifacts like cities, houses and ships consist of natural materials
arranged in an artificial order with an aim and purpose which is the aim
and purpose of the maker himself and not the aim of the thing made. That
maker wants to achieve his goal and purpose through this artificial
order.

Thus the two essential characteristics of human artifacts are:

a. The relationship between its parts is artificial and not natural.

b. The aim and objective involved in making it is the aim and objective
of the maker. That is, it is the maker who achieves a certain aim and
removes a deficiency from himself and moves from potentiality to
actuality through the means of the artifact.

None of these two characteristics can be possibly present in the
creation of God, the Exalted. Neither is it possible for the connection
between the parts of the creation to be an unnatural one, nor is it
possible that the purpose of the creation be the purpose of the Creator.
Rather, the connection between the various parts of the creation will
have to be natural, just like the one seen in the different parts of the
solar system or the atom, or the elements of a natural compound, or the
constituents of plants, animals and man.

This is what the metaphysicians imply when they say that 'the final
causes of God's acts are all final causes of the act (fi'l), and not
those of the Agent (fail) or when they say: Human wisdom implies the
selection of the best means for the best of purposes, while Divine
wisdom implies bringing the existents to reach their own purposes.

The requirement of wisdom and providence,
is to direct all contingents to their ultimate ends.

This is the meaning of their words when they say:

The higher does not turn towards the lower.

A station belonging to a higher ontic realm does not seek its end in
the lower realms. And this is what they imply when they say that the
necessary implication of the creation of existents and their issuing
forth from the Absolutely Perfect Essence is that all of them have an
end and it is love which pervades all existents; and the end of all ends
(ghayat al-ghayat) is the Exalted Divine Essence.

This again is the meaning of their statement that human agency is an
agency by intention (failiyyah bil-qasd), whereas the agency of God, the
Exalted, is agency by providence (fa'liyyah bi al-inayah). In reality,
the ideas of Hume and all Western philosophers from the earliest times
to the present day concerning the argument from design are childish and
amateurish, basing as they do upon the notion that this argument
supposes God to be a craftsman like human craftsmen and arguing
concerning the existence and non-existence of such a creator. Whereas by
proving the existence of such a creator we would not have proved God but
a creature of the level of man.

An examination of Hume's rhetorical rendition of the argument from
design, which has overshadowed Western philosophy for about three
centuries, brings to light once again the weak foundations of philosophy
in the West, whether religious or materialist. It shows that the Western
notion of the argument from design is not at all philosophical. That
which has been discussed in Islamic philosophy under the title 'inayah
(providence) has been unknown in the West. The Westerners' conception of
this argument has been that of the common man, or at the most of the
level of Ash'arite and Mu'tazilite theologians, and not of the order of
that of Islamic philosophers and metaphysicians.

3. Mr. Hume says: Supposing this argument proves that the Creator of
the world possesses an intelligence and consciousness similar to those
of man, even then the claim, which is to prove God's infinite
perfection, remains unproved.

Hume's mistake here is that he has imagined that those who consider God
as absolute and infinite perfection do so on the basis of the argument
from design, which in his opinion is an empirical proof.

We have mentioned in the fifth volume of 'The Principles of Philosophy
and the Method of Realism' that the value of argument from design is
solely limited to the extent of carrying us up to the frontiers of the
supranatural. This argument only proves that nature has something beyond
itself to which it is subject and that beyond is conscious of itself and
its acts. Regarding whether this transcendent is necessary or
contingent, eternal or emergent (hadith), one or multiple, finite or
infinite, omniscient and omnipotent or not, lie outside the limits of
this argument. These are issues which wholly and solely belong to the
domain of metaphysics, and metaphysics proves them with the help of
other arguments.

4. Mr. Hume says: Supposing that our world is the most perfect world
possible; but how do we know that the creator of the world has not
copied it from some other place or that he has not perfected his
craftsmanship gradually through practice?

This criticism too arises from Hume's ignorance of the limits of the
application of the argument from design. He has imagined that all the
issues of metaphysics are derived from a single argument which is the
argument from design. In the second and fifth volumes of 'The Principles
of Philosophy and the Method of Realism' we have remarked that the
application of argument from design involves proving that nature is not
something left to itself and that the forces of nature are subject.
Nature, in the terminology of the philosophers, is an agent by
subordination (fa'il bil- taskhir).

In other words, nature has a supranatural transcending it which rules
and administers it. The argument from design, whosc application is
limited to this extent, is both clear and sufficient within its own
llimits. But as to what is the state of the supranatural, whether its
perfection is essential or acquired, whether it has been acquired
gradually or is eternal like its essence, and so on-all these issues are
capable of being researched with the help of a separate set of
arguments. And supposing that they are incapable of being researched
with the help of other arguments and are among issues which will always
remain unknown to man-though certainly it is not so and they are capable
of being researched-this does not decrease the value of the argument
from design. The objective of the argument from design is to lead us
from nature to the threshold of the supranatural. That which lies beyond
this threshold lies outside the scope of this argument.

5. Mr. Hume has mentioned the matter of evil, epidemics, floods and
earthquakes as a negation of the presence of a rational pattern in the
world.

Considering that we have discussed this topic in detail in the book
'Adl-e Ilahi ('Divine Justice'), we shall refrain from taking it up here
and refer the reader to that book.

**Notes:**

[^1] Bertrand Russell, The Scientific Outlook, (New York: W.W Norton &
Co. 1931) 1st ed., Persian transl. By Hasan Mansur, Jahanbini ye 'Ilmi,
pp82-8
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Ibid., pp92-3
[^5] Ibid., 94
[^6] Ibid., p94

[^7] This sentence in the Persian translation of this passage from
Russell cited by the author has been translated as follows: "Observation
shows that creation out of nothing is impossible." This error in the
translation affects the author's criticism relating to this part of
Russell's statements. Editor

[^8] Ibid., pp96-7
[^9] Ibid., pp87-8
[^10] Richard H. Popkin & Avrum Stroll, Philosophy Made Simple, p106
[^11] Ibid., p103
[^12] Ibid., p102
[^13] Ibid., p103
[^14] Ibid., p104
[^15] Ibid., p105
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] Authors note: We have studied and discussed this topic in greater
detail in our studies on epistemology (shenakht), which we hope to
publish in the future.


