The Role of Ijtihad in Legislation
==================================

The terms 'mujtahid' and 'ijtihad' are nowadays among those which have
acquired great currency, even sanctity, among the Shi'ah. One would be
surprised to know that the term ijtihad was formerly, from the times of
the Prophet (S) and for several successive centuries, a Sunni term. It
became Shia after undergoing a change of meaning, or what would be more
precise to say, the term remained specifically Sunni for several
centuries and became 'Muslim', in the wider sense, that is, after
undergoing a change of meaning and dissociating itself from its earlier
particular sense.

As to its not being a Shi'i term formerly, there is no doubt; if there
is any uncertainty, it is about the date of its acceptance by the
Shi'ah. It is not improbable that this term like several groups of
people in the seventh century was converted to Shi'ism at the hands of
the absolute Ayatullah, al-'Allamah al-Hilli. However, as we shall
presently explain, the conversion came after its undergoing a change of
meaning.

Apparently, there seems to be no doubt that this term was never used by
any of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A). The terms ijtihad and mujtahid,
in the sense in which they are used by Shi'ah and Sunni fuqaha', have
not been used in any of their ahadith. Neither they themselves were ever
known by the epithet 'mujtahid' nor did they ever use it for the
scholars and legists from among their companions. Otherwise the root
relating to such terms as fatwa and ifta, which convey approximately the
modern sense of ijtihad, and its derivatives do occur in the ahadith.
For instance, al-'Imam al-Baqir (A) is reported to have said to Aban ibn
Taghlib:

Sit in the mosque of al-Madinah and give fatwas for the people . Indeed
I love more like you to be seen amongst my Shi'ah.

And in a famous hadith, al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said
to 'Unwan al-Basri:

Avoid giving fatwa in the way you would run away from a lion; do not
make your neck a bridge for the people. The reason for the former
unpopularity of the word is that during the early centuries of the
Islamic era - that is also the period in which the Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A) lived - the word, due to the specific meaning it carried,
was not acceptable to the Imams (A). Naturally, it could not have played
any role in their teachings. However, after undergoing a gradual change
of meaning, when it came to be used in a different sense by Sunni
fuqaha' themselves, it was also adopted by Shi'ite fiqh. Now we shall
briefly describe the background of the Sunni usage of this term.
'Ijtihad' in the Sunni Tradition:

Sunni scholars narrate a hadith that the Prophet (S), while sending
Mu'adh to Yemen, asked him as to on what he would base his judgement.
"In accordance with the Book of Allah", replied Mu'adh, "But what if you
don't find it there?" inquired the Prophet (S). "According to the Sunnah
of the Apostle of Allah", replied Mu'adh. "But what if you don't find it
there too?" asked the Prophet (S) again. 'I will exert my own opinion',
replied Mu'adh.

The Prophet (S) put his hand on Mu'adh's chest and said: "Thank God for
assisting His Apostle with what he loves." They have narrated other
traditions on the subject to the effect that either the Prophet (S)
directly commanded his Companions to exercise ijtihad in case they could
not find a rule in the Book and the Sunnah, or to the effect that he
approved of the practice of his Companions that practised ijtihad. To
the Sunnis, this is something definite, confirmed by consensus
(ijma').

About the Holy Prophet (S) himself, they have said that some of his
injunctions were purely based on personal ijtihad not on revelation.
Even in their works on jurisprudence ('ilm al-'usul) the problem is
raised whether or not the Prophet (S) could make errors in his personal
ijtihad. They have narrated traditions in this regard and transmitted
reports of the Companions as to how they justified their own actions or
those of others on the basis of ijtihad. We abstain from quoting any of
them here for the sake of brevity.

It is evident that in all the above instances the term ijtihad is not
used in its current sense, that is, making the utmost effort in deducing
rules of the Shari'ah from the related sources (adillah). The meaning of
ijtihad there is 'exercising of one's opinion or judgement' (al-'amal bi
al-ra'y). It means that in a case where the Divine dicta are absent or
implicit, one should see what would be more acceptable to one's
intelligence and taste, or nearer to truth and justice, or analogous to
other Islamic laws, and to adopt it for his judgement. Accordingly,
ijtihad is also accounted as one of the sources of Islamic legislation,
like the Quran and the Sunnah, although not as a source parallel to
these two. So long as a rule is to be found in the Quran and the Sunnah,
the need for ijtihad does not arise. However, in absence of relevant
dicta in the Quran, the Sunnah or ijma', ijtihad becomes a source of
legislation. On this basis, they have said that the sources of
legislation are four: the Book, the Sunnah, ijma', and ijtihad (i.e.
qiyas).

Also, according to this approach, ijtihad is not synonymous with
expertise in Islamic law (faqahah), nor is the term mujtahid synonymous
with faqih. Rather, ijtihad is one of the functions of the faqih. The
faqih should have knowledge of the Quran and the hadith corpus; he
should be able to distinguish the nasikh from the mansukh, the 'amm from
the khass, the mujmal from the mubayyan, and the muhkam from the
mutashabih. He should be familiar with the Quranic vocabulary and
terminology, know the circumstances in which a particular verse was
revealed (sha'n al-nuzul), and have knowledge of the successive
generations of narrators and transmitters of hadith. He should also be
able to reconcile the apparently conflicting traditions. In addition to
all that, he should practise ijtihad and exercise his personal
judgements in particular cases.

What was the character and basis of that ijtihad? Did the term ijtihad
found in hadith mean exercising qiyas? Did the Prophet (S) and his
Companions practise ijtihad in this sense. Did it also apply to other
practices such as istihsan? Al-Shafi'i, in his famous Risalah, has a
chapter on ijtihad, which follows the one on ijma', and is itself
followed by one on istihsan. In his discussion of the subject,
al-Shafi'i draws the conclusion that the ijtihad prescribed by the
Shari'ah is confined to qiyas and that other types of ijtihad, such as
istihsan, do not have any canonical grounds. Al-Shafi'i believes that
the canonical grounds for qiyas are identical with those for ijtihad.

There were other questions that were debated by Sunni fuqaha', such as:
Are ijtihad and al-'amal bi al-ra'y confined to cases where there is no
express text (nass) or whether one may do ijtihad (called ta'awwul in
this case) and exercise his judgement despite the presence of express
texts? What are the conditions applicable to Sunnah if it is to
preponderate ijtihad? Are all traditions narrated from the Prophet (S)
to be relied upon and given precedence over ijtihad? Is reliable hadith
confined to those which are mashhur and mustafid, as Abu Hanifah
believed? Who are those who had the right of ijtihad and whose ijtihad
was binding (hujjah) for the others? On what grounds have the others no
right to go against their ijtihad? Evidently, to go into the details of
each of these questions is outside the scope of this paper. However, it
is necessary to mention some relevant points here:

1. The position of the fuqaha' and imams of the Ahl al-Sunnah with
respect to the acceptability of ijtihad, in the above-mentioned sense,
is not the same. Some of them give a wider scope to ijtihad and qiyas
and some restrict it. Some altogether reject qiyas and ijtihad.

Abu Hanifah, who lived in Iraq and was considered the jurist of the
Iraqis, because of the many conditions he required for a tradition to be
acceptable, and also on account of being distant from the centre of
hadith, which was the Hijaz, had lesser knowledge of hadith. Also due to
other reasons, including his background of kalam and logic, he took
greater recourse to qiyas and on this account was strongly opposed by
the Sunni jurists of his time and those who came after him.

Malik ibn Anas spent his life in al-Madinah and made lesser use of
qiyas. Reportedly, he did not use qiyas except in a few cases, and,
according to a report of Ibn Khallikan, was greatly repentant at the
time of his death of having taken recourse to qiyas in his fatwas even
in those few cases.

Al-Shafi'i, who belonged to the Iraqi school and had studied under Abu
Hanifah's pupils and had as well studied under Malik in al-Madinah, took
a middle road between Malik and Abu Hanifah.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal was more a muhaddith than a faqih and avoided qiyas
even to a greater extent than Malik Ibn Anas. Dawud ibn Ali al-Zahiri
al-'Isfahani, the founder of the Zahiri school, was altogether opposed
to the practice of qiyas and regarded it as an innovation (bid'ah) in
the faith.

As a consequence of these differences there emerged among the Ahl
al-Sunnah two general trends: one of them was represented by the Ahl
al-Hadith and the other by the Ahl al-Ra'y. The Ahl al-Hadith, or the
Traditionists, attached lesser or no significance to qiyas and ra'y and
the Ahl al-Ra'y in turn relied to a lesser extent on ahadith.

2. Concurrently with the emergence of the Ahl al-Ra'y and the Ahl
al-Hadith, a problem that arose among the contemporary circles of kalam
was that of the rational basis of legal judgements (al-husn wa al-qubh
al-'aqliyyan). Although at first sight there seems to be no link between
these two developments, because one of them belonged to fiqh and took
place in juristic circles and the other belonged to the circles of
kalam, but, as pointed by some historians, the theory of rational basis
of judgement - which was raised by the Mu'tazilah and who staunchly
defended it - was also intended to find some kind of basis for ijtihad,
i.e. qiyas and the practice of ra'y. According to this theory, the laws
of the Shari'ah were based on a series of real benefits and harms and
that human reason was capable of independently discovering those
benefits and harms inherent in things; therefore reason was capable of
discovering the purposes and criteria of the laws of religion through
ijtihad and ra'y.

This conjecture is further strengthened if we remember that the Ahl
al-Hadith, who later, in the fourth/tenth century, came to be known as
Asha'riah, represented the chief opposition to the Mu'tazilah.

3. Right from the first century, from the time when groups of people
gathered in mosques for the purpose of study and debate, some persons
debated about the issues of halal and haram. They gathered around them
pupils and adherents from among the common people, who regarded their
fatwas as authoritative and referred to them their questions about halal
and haram. Such was the beginning of the gradual development of a class
of scholars who later came to be called fuqaha'. Every region, city and
group followed a certain individual, and the rulers had not yet adopted
the policy of following the fatwas of a certain jurist as official
law.

The emergence of this class of jurists did not require any special
conditions. Occasionally, social conditions demanded that one prominent
individual should be recognized by the people and followed in religious
precepts. Gradually, this resulted in the emergence of diverse legal
approaches and schools, which in turn were preserved and perpetuated by
the pupils of the originator after his death. In this way, various legal
schools and sects emerged amongst the Sunnis, the most famous of them
being the Hanafi, the Shafi'i, the Maliki, the Hanbali and the Zahiri
schools. Of course, the founders of these schools were not the only
early jurists and mujtahidun that were there. There were others who held
their own legal opinions and were not followers of anyone. However, this
independence gradually disappeared after the fourth/tenth century and no
independent mujtahid emerged after this time in the Sunni tradition.
Apparently, the last person to have been an independent mujtahid with
his own independent approach in legal issues was the well-known
historian and exegete Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari (d. 310/922), who
although famous for his work on history, is considered a Sunni faqih of
the first rank.

The later Sunni mujtahids were either al-mujtahid al-mutlaq al-muntasib
or mujtahid al-fatwa (also occasionally known as mujtahid al-madhhab).
'Al-mujtahid al-mutlaq al-muntasib' means a mujtahid who is attached to
one of the well-known schools and follows the juristic approach of its
founder but in deducing legal rules, on the basis of the school's
juristic principles, he may formulate his own independent legal opinions
which may be different from the legal opinions of the founder. For
instance, while being a Shafi'i or a Hanafi in jurisprudence, he may
differ with al-Shafi'is or Abu Hanifah's express fatwas in legal
matters. A number of eminent Sunni jurists are considered to belong to
this class, such as: Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwaym, Abu Hamid Muhammad
al-Ghazali, Ibn al-Sabbagh, and others.

Mujtahid al-madhhab' or 'mujtahid al-fatwa' is someone who follows the
founder of the school in all matters in which the founder has expressly
given his views. However in issues in which he does find an opinion of
the founder, he may exercise his own Ijtihad and give fatwa .
Accordingly, Ijtihad is of three kinds: independent Ijtihad,
semi-independent Ijtihad (al-'ijtihad al-mutlaq al-muntasib), and
Ijtihad within the framework of the juristic and legal positions of a
school (Ijtihad al-fatwa).

In any case, the mujtahids who came after the fourth century did not
find any followers. On the other hand the mujtahids who came before this
period were not limited to the four imams of the popular schools; there
were nine other eminent jurists of whom some lived before the four
imams - such as al-Hasan al-Basri - some were their contemporaries -
such as Sufyan al-Thawri - and some who came after them - such as Dawud
al-Zahiri and Muhammad Ibn Jarir al-Tabari - and all of them had more or
less followers among the people. However, there was a gradual rise in
the followers of the four imams, for, according to al-Maqfizi in
al-Khitat, al-Malik al-Zahir, the ruler of Egypt, officially declared in
the year 665/1257 that except the four schools - Shafi'i Maliki, Hanafi
and Hanbali - other schools had no official recognition and that no
judge had the right to give judgement except on the basis of the four
schools. The people were also strictly forbidden to follow any except
the four schools. This was the beginning of the restriction of the
official schools to four.'

This brief description shows that when we talk of the closure of the
door of Ijtihad in the Sunni tradition, we refer to the Ijtihad of the
first kind, i.e. independent ijtihad. As to the second kind (al-Ijtihad
al-mutlaq al-muntasib) and the third kind (ijtihad al-madhhab), their
doors have remained open.

Why should the doors of independent ijtihad have been closed after the
fourth century and no one should have right to complete independence and
be bound to follow one of the imams in jurisprudence? Why and for what
reason is it not permissible today to follow anyone except the four
imams? Why should one who follows any one of the imams follow him in all
issues and have no right to follow the other three by exercising
discretion in some issues? Sunni scholars have given various answers to
all of these questions and none of them is convincing.

Shah Wali Allah Dehlawi (d. 1180/1765), in a treatise (risalah) called
"al-'Insaf fi bayan sabab al-'ikhtilaf" - which has been quoted by Farid
al-Wajdi under jahada in the Da'irat al-Ma'arif, with the remark that it
is the best treatise written on the topic - acclaims the closure of the
door of independent ijtihad and the latter scholars' imitation of one of
the early imams and says: that is, 'It is a secret that God Almighty has
inspired in the scholars with' to safeguard Islam and protect the
religion from disintegration. Farid al-Wajdi himself does not approve of
the prohibition on Ijtihad and does not confirm those words of Shah Wali
Allah.

Two years ago, according to what we have read in papers and have heard,
the great 'Allamah Shaykh Mahmud Shaltut, the mufti and rector of
Al-'Azhar University, with great courage characteristic of great
reformers, broke this thousand-year-old spell and officially announced
that the door of ijthad is open and that there is nothing objectionable
about a follower of one school referring to the judgements of another
school in case they are supported by firmer arguments. He also announced
in an official fatwa that it is correct to follow the Ja'fari school of
fiqh, just like the other schools. Subsequently, a chair of comparative
legal studies was established at al-'Azhar. Undoubtedly this was the
greatest step that was taken since the beginnings of Islamic
jurisprudence for the sake of the benefit and general welfare of
Muslims. Its worth will be better recognized in the future.

4. Another problem related to the subject of Ijtihad is that of
takhti'ah (admission of the possibility of error in the judgements of
the mujtahid) and taswib (confirmation of the mujtahid's infallibility
and denial of any possibility of error), which has throughout been a
topic of debate in books on kalam and usul al-fiqh. Generally, it is
mentioned in books on usul that the Shi'ah fuqaha' admit possibility of
error in the mujtahid's fatwas and are accordingly called mukhatti'ah
(derived from khata': error), whereas the Sunni fuqaha' believe that the
mujtahid is always right in his judgements, and are hence called
musawwibah (derived from sawab:

that which is right). However, it is not the case that all the Sunni
fuqaha' support taswib; rather, only a small number of them have
accepted this view. In any case, for the Shi'ah, who define Ijtihad as
'the effort to deduce the real law from the sources of the Shari'ah', it
is difficult to imagine that every mujtahid should be always right. It
is not possible that whatever any mujtahid may judge should be correct
and his judgement should be the real law; for it is possible that
different mujtahids may hold divergent opinions simultaneously about a
certain subject and the same mujtahid may hold different opinions at
different times about the same issue. How is it possible that he should
always be right?

The roots of the theory of taswib lie in a certain theory of Ijtihad
which is held by those who define ijtihad as the practice of qiyas and
ra'y . They claim that the laws received by the Prophet (S) through
revelation are limited, whereas issues and problems which require
legislation are unlimited in number. Therefore, the laws given by the
Divine Lawgiver are not adequate to meet the requirements. Accordingly,
God has given the right to the scholars of the Ummah, or a group of
them, to employ their personal taste and intelligence in cases where
there are no religious dicta and select something which resembles other
Islamic laws and is closer to the criteria of justice and truth. In
accordance with this reasoning, they accept the theory of taswib, for,
according to this view of ijtihad, it is itself one of the sources of
the Divine Law.

The idea of taswib was unimaginable to the minds of Shi'ah
jurisprudents, because they had taken for granted the principle that
every event or problem should have a real Divine law related to it.
Ijtihad, to them, meant inquiry and effort to discover that law with the
help of reliable canonical sources. Of course, in the light of such an
outlook of ijtihad it is impossible that every mujtahid should be
right.

The theory of taswib, however, does not rest on such an outlook of
Ijtihad. It rests on an outlook which regards it as impossible that God
should have legislated laws regarding every kind of situation. Because,
if such were the case, they should have been set forth in the Book and
the Sunnah; but the laws given in the Book and the Sunnah are limited in
number, whereas situations are innumerable and unlimited. Hence God has
given the 'ulama' of the Ummah the right to legislate through Ijtihad
such laws as have not been given through revelation. Since this right is
God-given, the judgements of the mujtahid are the actual laws of God.

The problem of taswib and takhti'ah has been debated a lot in books on
kalam and usul, and here our purpose was just to refer to the
abovementioned point. The above discussion related to the Sunni
background of the term ijtihad; now we shall turn to the change of
meaning that this term underwent, which resulted in its acceptance by
the Shi'ah.

'Ijtihad' in the Shi'ah Tradition:

Until the fourth/tenth and the fifth/eleventh centuries we observe that
whenever the word is used by a scholar it carries the sense of qiyas and
ra'y. For instance, Shaykh Abu Ja'far al-Tusi (d. 460/1067), in his
'Uddat al-'usul, devotes a chapter to qiyas. He devotes another chapter
to Ijtihad where he discusses one of the issues related to ijtihad, i.e.
the problem of taswib and takhti'ah. The book has another chapter
entitled "Did the Prophet practise ijtihad, and whether it was
legitimate for him to practise it? Was it legitimate for the Companions
of the Prophet to practise ijtihad when they were away from him or were
in his presence?" Later, in the course of his discussion, he says: "This
controversy is basically uncalled for according to our doctrines,
because, as we have proved earlier, qiyas and ijtihad are absolutely
impermissible in the Shari'ah. ''

This remark of al-Shaykh al-Tusi shows that until his age the word
Ijtihad was still used in the sense of ra'y and qiyas.
'Ijtihad' lexically means 'putting in utmost effort' in doing
something. In the earliest days, the term in accordance with the
traditions ascribed to the Prophet (S) and the Companions, was taken to
mean ijtihad bi al-ra'y, or putting in utmost effort in the exercise of
ra'y and qiyas. However, gradually it took a wider meaning and came to
mean putting in utmost effort in discovering the laws of the Shari'ah
from its reliable sources. Thus we see that al-Ghazali (d. 505/1 111) in
his al-Mustasfa - although he uses the word recurringly in its earlier
sense of qiyas, for instance, when he says:

They have differed as to the permissibility of practising qiyas and
ijtihad during the days of the Prophet ... (vol. 2, p. 354) He also uses
it in the general sense of scholarly effort on the part of a faqih It
(ijtihad) means putting in of the utmost effort in doing something. But
the term has come to be used in the terminology of scholars specifically
for the mujtahids putting in of the utmost effort in acquiring the
knowledge of the laws of the Shariah. (vol. 2, p. 350)

From this time onwards we see that the term is used less frequently in
the special sense of ra'y and qiyas and takes on the sense of scholarly
effort in discovering the laws of the Shari'ah. With this change, the
term found way into the Shi'ite fiqh also, for earlier the Shi'ah had
opposed it on account of their opposition to Ijtihad bi al-ra'y, not
because they were opposed to scholarly diligence. In any case, they did
not resist its use after it changed its meaning. Probably the first to
use this term among the Shi'ah Imamiyyah scholars was al-'Allamah
al-Hilli (d. 726/1326), who accepting it used it in its second sense in
his work Tahdhib al-'usul. In that work he devotes a chapter to Ijtihad
and uses it in the sense current today. It seems that it was from this
time that the Shi'ah accepted the word or the word embraced Shi'ism.

We said earlier that the opposition to qiyas was not limited to the
Shi'ah and there were schools among Sunnis who either altogether
rejected it and regarded it as a heresy or avoided it as much as
possible. The Mu'tazilah, who advanced the doctrine of al-husn wa
al-qubh al'aqliyyan, backed qiyas and ra'y in their fight against the
Ahl al-Hadith who rejected it. The Ahl al-Hadith, who later came to be
called Asha'irah due to their approach in kalam, rejected the doctrine
of al-husn wa al-qubh al-'aqliyyan, claiming that the desirability or
undesirability of things is derived from the commands and prohibitions
of the lawgiver and not vice versa. As a result, they denied reason any
role in legislation of Divine laws. The controversies between the
Mu'tazilah and supporters of qiyas and ra'y on one side and the
Asha'irah and the Ahl al-Hadith on the other side revolve around the
role of reason and its share in legislation.

It must not be concluded from the above discussion that the Shi'ah
opposition to ra'y and qiyas was also based on the same reasons as those
of the Asha'irah and the Ahl al-Hadith, which was outright opposition to
the role of reason in deduction of the laws of the Shari'ah. The Shi'i
opposition to qiyas and ra'y had two reasons. The first was that the
claim of the supporters of qiyas that the Book and the Sunnah are not
adequate sources of legislation was not acceptable to the Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (A). In the sermons of the Nahj al-balaghah and other Shi'i
compilations of hadith the idea that the Book and the Sunnah are not
adequate has been vehemently rejected. In the Usul al-Kafi, the chapter
followed by another entitled:

The chapter about referring to the Book and the Sunnah, and that verily
there is no haram or halal and nothing needed by the people that is not
present in the Book or the Sunnah.

The second reason advanced by the Shi'ah against qiyas was that it was
based on conjecture and led very frequently to error. These two reasons
clearly stand out in the books of early Shi'ah scholars, and we shall
abstain from further details for brevity's sake.

The best evidence of the fact that the Shi'ah opposition to qiyas and
ra'y was not based on a hostility to the role of reason in canonical
matters is that, from the very beginning that the Shiah jurisprudence
was committed to writing, reason was considered one of the sources
(adillah) of law. The Shi'ah jurisprudents stated that the sources of
the Shari'ah are four: the Book, the Sunnah, ijma' and 'aql (reason),
whereas the Zahiris and the Ahl al-Hadith confined the adillah to the
Book, the Sunnah and ijma', and the support'ers of ra'y and qiyas
regarded them as four: the Book, the Sunnah, ijma' and qiyas.

The Shi'ah jurisprudents, while opposing qiyas and ra'y, accepted the
Mu'tazilah viewpoint about the rational basis of ethico-legal
judgements, defended it and did not oppose it like the Asha'irah and the
Ahl al-Hadith. The concurrence of views between the Shi'ah and the
Mu'tazilah regarding this doctrine and its corollaries - such as the
doctrine of Divine justice - led the Shi'ah among the Mu'tazilah to be
known as 'Adliyyah and the Shi'ah left behind the Mu'tazilah in their
support of the doctrine of Divine justice. As a result, it came to be
said in scholarly circles that: "justice and tawhid are 'Alawid and
fatalism and anthropomorphism are Umayyad."

The reason for calling justice 'Alawid was that the supporters of the
Ahl al-Bayt (A) were also defenders of the doctrine of al-husn wa
al-qubh al-'aqliyyan and the doctrine of justice was a corollary to it.
As to tawhid being 'Alawid, it was on account of the belief in the unity
of Divine Essence and Attributes. The Umayyads supported jabr (fatalism)
and tashbih (anthropomorphism) due to political exigencies. The issue of
the independent capacity of reason to perceive the good and evil of
things, and the subsidiary doctrine of justice, became so much a
characteristic of the Shi'ah that justice came to be recognized as one
of the principal tenets of the Shi'ite creed.

That the Shi'ite opposition to ra'y and qiyas is not to be taken to
have been an opposition to the role of reason in ijtihad becomes
completely obvious when we examine the extant documentary evidence. At
the present the Shi'ah state the principle of the interrelation of
Divine laws and actual benefits and harms and the principle of harmony
between reason and religious law in these words:

Whatever is the judgement of reason, is also the judgement of the
Shari'ah.

This is an incontrovertible axiom of Shi'ite jurisprudence. The above
discussion makes it clear that the Shi'ah Imamiyyah approach to ijtihad
was an independent one: it was neither bound to ra'y and qiyas, nor did
it impose any bounds on reason in the manner of the Ahl al-Hadith. The
Imamiyyah jurists on the one hand recognized the rights of reason and
regarded it as one of the sources of law, on the other hand they
rejected qiyas and ijtihad bi al-ra'y in their books on jurisprudence,
in chapters devoted to qiyas. However, it would have been in order if
the latter scholars had followed the ancient ones in discussing qiyas
and ra'y in their works. It would have helped to define the exact limits
of the prohibited form of qiyas, which would have been better
understood. This would have prevented some individuals from waging a
battle against reason under the pretext of opposition to qiyas. In fact
it would have been better for scholars to devote a separate chapter to
reason and rational grounds in their works on jurisprudence, in which
they could delineate more precisely the role of reason and also discuss,
secondarily, the inadmissibility of qiyas. In view of this author, the
absence of any discussion by the latter scholars about the inadmissible
form of qiyas and the limits of the role of reason in legislation has
been more or less detrimental to Shi'ah fiqh and ijtihad.

We should know that the great secret of Islam, from the viewpoint of
the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A), is the principle that the general laws
of the Book and the Sunnah are sufficient for satisfying the religious
needs of Muslims for all time, and that they have no need of ra'y and
qiyas. It is characteristic of all Islamic laws that they are not only
not hindersome to human progress in any era, but are conducive to it by
guiding and directing it in the right direction. All that is needed to
grasp this great secret is to have an enlightened and firm grasp of the
vital issues. This great secret of the resourcefulness of Islam can also
be called 'the great secret of ijtihad'. To be certain, if an
independent chapter were devoted to the above topic in books on
jurisprudence, some of the existing contradictions and constraints in
the relationship between fiqh and progress would have been eliminated.
This problem requires an independent study and here we shall abstain
from going into further details.

In the course of history, those Sunni schools of fiqh which were more
rigid and formalistic and allowed lesser role to reason in deduction of
laws, either disappeared gradually or the number of their followers
diminished. The Zahiris, who followed Dawud ibn 'Ali, became altogether
extinct. The Hanbali school, which after the Zahiri is the most rigid
and formalistic of Sunni schools, gradually lost followers, and had it
not been for the appearance of Ibn Taymiyyah, who provided the material
on which Wahhabism was later to thrive, perhaps today the number of
followers of the Hanbali school would have been very small.

The school of Malik spread only in North Africa and Maghrib, away from
the centres of Islamic culture, and, as Ibn Khaldun says, the cause of
the spreading of the school of Malik in North Africa and Maghrib was
that the inhabitants were Beduins who lived away from the centres of
science and culture. In any case, the rigid and formalistic Sunni
schools declined and lost followers with the passage of time. Akhbarism
in the Imamiyyah Tradition:

One of the most surprising as well as regrettable phenomena was the
emergence of Akhbarism among the Shi'ah in the early
eleventh/seventeenth century. Akhbarism was a hundred times more rigid
and formalistic than either the Zahiri or the Hanbali school. Its
emergence must be considered a great catastrophe in the Shi'ah world
whose effects more or less survive to the present day, causing
stagnation and obscurantism in the Shi'ah Muslim society.

The founder of Akhbarism was Mulla Amin Astarabadi, who expounded his
beliefs in his famous book Fawa'id al-madaniyyah. Mulla Amin, as his
book shows, was a brilliant and learned man. In general, those who found
a school, no matter how baseless, rigid and false its teachings may be,
are brilliant and intelligent men. A dullard cannot found a school and
gather followers around himself. The dullards, however, are influenced
by those brilliant individuals and become their loyal followers.

Amin Astarabadi claims to have discovered some truths which nobody
before him had succeeded in knowing. Also, he claims a kind of Divine
inspiration for himself; in the introduction to the Fawa'id al-
madaniyyah, he says:

And you (i.e. the reader), after having gone through our book, will
find in it truths untouched by any of the early or latter philosophers,
legists, scholastics, and jurisprudents, and yet they are only a sample
of what my Lord, the Almighty and the Supreme, has granted to me. In
this book he challenges even the philosophers and the mutakallimun, as
occasionally he has to discuss some issues related to philosophy and
kalam. In the book's tenth chapter, he discusses the meaning of nafs
al-'amr. The eleventh chapter is named by him "Fi bayan aghlat
al-'Asha'irah wa al-Mu'tazilah fi awwal al-wajibat" ("On the mistakes of
the Ashai'rah and the Mu'tazilah about the first obligations"). In the
twelfth, he cites the mistakes of Muslim philosophers and theologians.

Amin Astarabadi under different pretexts, tried to deny the legal
authority (hujjiyyah) of three of the four well-known sources of law,
that is, the Quran, ijma', and 'aql, thus recognizing only the Sunnah as
the reliable source. As to the Quran, he claimed that no one has the
right to refer directly to the Quran and to interpret it. Only the
Infallible Imams have such a right. Our duty is to refer to their
ahadith.Only those parts of the Quran that have been explained in hadith
may be referred to for legal purposes; other parts whose exegesis does
not exist in hadith may not be acted upon. Also in order to deny the
authenticity of the text of the Quran, Amin Astarabadi raised the issue
of its corruption (tahrif).

As to ijma', he denied its validity, considering it an innovation
(bid'ah) of the Sunnis. He also offered many arguments to deny the
authority of reason. On the contrary, with respect to ahadith he went to
the other extreme and claimed that all the traditions, especially those
of al-Kafi, Man la yahdruruhu al-faqih, al-Tahdhib and al-'Istibsar are
of certain authenticity and legally binding. He ferociously attacked al-
'Allamah al-Hilli, who had classified traditions into sahih, muwaththaq,
hasan, and da'if, and occasionally insults the 'Allamah and his
followers in his book.

He categorically rejected the very principle of Ijtihad (even in its
latter sense in which the Shi'ah fuqaha' had accepted it) and regarded
it as an innovation in the faith. No one has any right to follow anyone
except an infallible Imam, he claimed. He brought the entire force of
his opposition to bear against reason and its authority. He claimed that
all innovations involving reason - such as regarding Ijtihad as
legitimate, considering the zawahir (apparent meanings of the Quranic
verses) to be of binding authority, classifying ahadith into weak and
strong, inquiring into the reliability of transmitters of ahadith and
the like - came into vogue because the fuqaha' have followed the
practitioners of qiyas, the scholastics, philosophers, and logicians to
rely upon reason. Now, if Mulla Amin were to prove that reason is liable
to error except in matters relating to objects of sense - experience or
those which are derived from it (such as the concepts of mathematics),
the fuqaha' would no longer go after Ijtihad and reason. Accordingly, he
advanced rather forceful arguments to disprove the authority of reason
in matters which are not perceptual or derived from sense-experience. He
is especially keen to prove that metaphysics and theology, since they
are based on pure reasoning, are devoid of any value; hence the title of
the twelfth chapter of the Fawa'id al-madaniyyah:

On part of the errors of philosophers and Muslim theosophers (hukama')
in their sciences and that their cause-as we have proved earlier-is that
no one who deals with the issues whose preliminaries are extra-sensible
is secure from error except the Infallible Ones (the Prophet [S],
Fatimah [A], and the twelve Imams [A]). There, he discusses some
well-known problems of philosophy, such as the necessity of an
intervening rest between two reciprocating straight line motions, that
something which is necessarily associated with some impossibility is
also impossible, the problem of precedence, and the problem of the
preponderance of will.

On the whole, he is of the opinion that reason can be a guide only in
the study of problems related to the natural sciences, which are based
upon sense-experience, and in that of mathematics, whose concepts are
derived from such experience or are closely related to it, but not in
problems of theology and metaphysics. This view agrees totally with the
outlook of the European empiricists of the sixteenth century.
Incidentally, the period in which Astarabadi lived approximately
coincides with that of the emergence of empiricism in Europe. It is not
known whether his views were original or he had borrowed them. All that
we know about him at the present is that he lived in Makkah for nearly
ten years where he studied under Muhammad Astarabadi, to whom he refers
as a faqih, a mutakallim, and philosopher. After that he had spent
several years at al-Madinah. But we know nothing about how he came to
adopt those views, whether he had innovated them or had borrowed them
from someone else ...

Amin Astarabadi himself, and his followers as well, do not consider him
as the founder of a new school called Akhbarism. Rather they consider
him a revivalist who restored the way of the early Shi'ah scholars of
hadith. They claim that their way is the same as that of the early
Shi'ah that was followed until the times of al-Shaykh al-Saduq and from
which the people were gradually led astray by such scholars as Ibn Abi
'Aqil, Ibn Junayd, al-Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Sayyid al-Murtada, and
al-Shaykh al-Tusi, who brought in reason and ijtihad to temper with
Divine commands. Shaykh Yusuf ibn Ahmad al-Bahram (d. 1186/1772), the
author of al-Hada'iq al-nadrah, who was himself a moderate Akhbari, in
the tenth muqaddimah of al-Hada'iq al-nadrah, under a heading style "Fi
hujjiyyat al-dafiil al-'aqli" (On the legal validity of rational
grounds), cites the following words of Sayyid Ni'mat Allah al-Jaza'iri
from the latter's work Anwar al-nu'maniyyah:

To be certain, a majority of our companions (i.e. the Shi'ah) followed
a group of our opponents, among them philosophers. naturalists, or Ahl
al-Ra'y and others, who, relying upon reason and its arguments. cast
away the teachings of the prophets when they did not agree with their
intellects. In these words, which hint at excommunication, Sayyid Ni'mat
Allah al-Jaza'iri considers the majority of Shi'ah scholars - and along
with them the philosophers, the naturalists, and those who follow ra'y
and qiyas to be heedless of the teachings of prophets, merely on the
ground that they recognize the authority of reason. By the 'majority' he
means all the scholars who came after al-Shaykh al-Saduq, as if until
that time all Shi'ah had been Akhbaris.

In fact Akhbarism had never existed before as a school with distinct
doctrines such as those based on the denial of the authority of the
zawahir of the Quran, the denial of the authority of reason,
impermissibility of the taqlid of anyone except the Ma'sum and so on. It
is true that there were some who seldom went beyond quoting traditions
in their books - even quoting them verbatim in their fatawa. But the
fact is that the abundance of ahadith on the one hand, and the
accessibility to the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) on the other, had been
the major cause that the need for ijtihad and the need to deduce
particular rules from general laws had not yet been felt.

Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, in the introduction to al-Mabsut, says: "I had heard
from the 'Ammah (i.e. the Sunnis) the criticism that our fiqh is limited
because we do not practise qiyas and ra'y and is therefore also
inadequate for answering all the problems. For years I had been desirous
of writing a.work on legal deduction without having recourse to qiyas
and ra'y, deducing in it particular rules (furu') from the fundamental
general principles (usul) that we have been taught in traditions.
However, various preoccupations and hindrances prevented it." Then he
adds: My determination was weakened further by the absence of any desire
on the part of this sect (i.e. the Imamiyyah) towards it and their
indifference in this regard; because they have compiled the traditions
which they relate with their familiar vocabulary, to the extent that if
in a problem different words to which they are not used to are employed
to convey the same sense, they consider it as an odd thing.

Al-Tusi makes it clear that the biggest impediment in his writing of
such a book was that it was not yet customary among the Shi'ah to
practise ijtihad and to deduce particulars from universals.

As said before, there had not emerged any great jurist until that time
who could officially practise ijtihad and deduce particular rules from
the general principles. There had been some - such as al-Shaykh
al-Saduq, Ibn al-Walid, and others - whose method was based on narration
of traditions, not on a discursive study of the subject. Even if they
wrote any book on kalam, their argument consisted mainly of traditions.
It was they whom al-Shaykh al-Tusi calls 'muqallidah' (imitators) and
criticizes them. Al-Sayyid al-Murtada - as quoted in the introduction to
al-Sara'ir by Ibn Idris - refers to them as ashasb al-hadith min
ashabina (the 'ahl al-hadith' from among our companions), and
al-'Allamah al- Hilli, in Tahdhib al-'usul, calls them 'al-'akhbariyyun
min ashabina' (the 'akhbaris'-traditionists-from among our
companions).

Perhaps it is on this account that al-Shahristani, in al-Milal wa al-
nihal,divides the Imamiyyah into the subsects of mu'tazilah and
akhbaris. In the first volume of his work, he says: When there came to
be divergence in the traditions narrated from their Imams, as time
passed every group of them took its own way, and some of the Imamiyyah
became either Mu'tazilah, or Waidiyyah, or Tafdiliyyah, or Akhbariyyah,
or Mushabbihah, or Salafiyyah. However, it is quite certain and definite
that in the early era there was no school opposed to that of ijtihad and
legal deduction amongst the Shi'ah to have challenged the authority of
the zawahir of the Quran or the authority of reason in order to defend
hadith.

The appearance of Akhbarism, as I have said before, was a catastrophe
for the scientific and intellectual life of the Shi'ah. Many individuals
came to adopt its teachings and came to look down upon reason and
rationalism. They made reflection upon the Quran a taboo and, instead of
making the Quran the criterion for the acceptability of hadith, made
hadith a criterion for the Quran. Fortunately there emerged eminent
personalities among the mujtahidun and usulis who fought the influence
of the Akhbaris. Among them the names of Wahid Behbahani and Shaykh
Murtada al-'Ansari - may God elevate their station - stand high. To
describe in detail the services of these two personages is beyond the
scope of the present study.

By the way, it should not remain unsaid that the struggle against
Akhbarism was a difficult and complex matter because its teachings took
a deceptive and self-righteous stance which misled the public. It was
for this reason that they rapidly gained influence and popularity after
Amin Astarabadi ...

As is known, there broke out severe and bloody conflict towards the end
of the second/eighth century and the beginning of the third/ninth
between the Ahl al-Hadith wa al-Sunnah, who resemble the Shi'ah
Akhbaris, and the Mu'tazilah, who believe in the role of reason and the
validity of rational arguments. Al-Ma'mun (r. 198-218/813- 833), who was
personally a man of learning, supported the Mu'tazilah and backed them
in the controversy about the createdness of the Quran. He sent out a
circular declaring those who denied the creaturehood of the Quran as
heretics, who had no right to be judges and preside over the courts of
law nor was their testimony to be accepted in the courts. As a result
the Mu'tazilah attained great power during al-Ma'mun's reign. More
philosophical works than at any other time were translated into Arabic
during al-Ma'mun's reign and rationalism became prevalent When
al-Mutawakkil (r. 232-247/846-861) came to power, he reversed the tide
by throwing the weight of his support behind the Ahl al-Hadith. The
Mu'tazilah were proscribed and the publication of philosophy was banned.
Al-Mas'udi, in Muruj al-dhahab, writes:

When the caliphate fell to al-Mutawakkil, he ordered the people to
abstain from discussion and debate and whatever they were used to in the
days of al-Mu'tasim and al-Wathiq. He directed them to adopt compliance
and imitation. Al-Mutawakkil's support for the Ahl al-Hadith wa
al-Sunnah - who like the Shi'ah Akhbaris had a deceptively
self-righteous stance, spoke untiringly of submission and devotion and
persistently chanted the phrase qala Rasul Allah ('so said the Apostle
of Allah') - had an extraordinary effect on the people, to whom it
appeared to be a defence of the Prophet. For this reason, al-Mutawakkil,
despite his tyranny and debauchery, came to assume saintly image in the
popular mind.

The Mu'tazilah could never recover from that blow. And we, the Shi'ah,
should thank God that there arose no Mutawakkil in the era of the
emergence of the Shi'ah Akhbaris, who were a hundred times more
obscurantists and formalistic than the Ahl al-Hadith wa al-Sunnah, in
their defence. However, we should note the point that even though the
Akhbari onslaught was defeated through the courageous resistance of a
number of the followers of the school of ijtihad, but the Akhbari
thinking was not completely destroyed. Whenever the champions of ijtihad
have made any headway and wherever they have put their feet, Akhbari
thinking had to recede and disappear. But Akhbari obscurantism still
rules in those places where they were not able to reach.

How often we come across mujtahids who do ijtihad with an Akhbari
brain. Many of the kind of things which are published in the name of the
'teachings of the Ahl al-Bayt' and come to the market, but which strike
dagger into the back of the Ahl al-Bayt of the Prophet (S), are no more
than the remnants of the thought of Mulla Muhammad Amin Astarabadi.


