First- How Can One Be Effective Among People?
=============================================

Good morals and sound relations can be a common and general language of
the world, but one can rarely find a society that hates truth and
justice or likes theft, injustice and aggression. Even if you find a
society like this, it would be a backward and primitive society that
lives outside the realm of humanity and civilization; an abnormal
society, which can never be taken into consideration.

Thus, all sermons, regulations, recom-mendations, and advises in
different religions are one or are close to each other, this is because
man is one even though individual approaches differ. And the source of
all messages is one, even though its teachings differ - and its aim and
objectives are one, bringing good morals into the life of people.

Therefore, it is not surprising to see the aim of the Last Divine
Message being what was reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that: "I
was sent to complete good morals." Thus, we must try our best to
practice these laws of morals in all our undertakings. The following are
ways of deriving social respect and consideration:

1- Smiling: It is a magic key with which we open people's heart. This
shinning and attractive act, which moistens the lips and lightens our
face, speaks the sound word saying to others: I love you, I want you to
be my friend, I want to have a good relationship of love and affection
with you.

It is charming because the other fellow - whether he likes it or not -
will answer it in kind like or even better. It is reported in a
prophetic narration that: "Smiling at the face of your friend (brother)
is an alms."

The general moral law states: "Smile and the world will smile with you.
When you smile you are using thirteen parts of your face, whereas you
are using 74 parts when you frown!!" Thus, why do you suffer your body
in something which has no benefit, or in something whose result will be
harmful?!"

It is also stated in this law that: " The parts of the face are the
best indicators of the feelings of its possessor." The smiling face is
the best source of attracting friendship and relations with others. It
is better than a gift presented by someone. Then, what is the need for
stinginess?

Smile for all, be they young and old. In this way, you will surely
motivate others for smiling and spread a warm and friendly atmosphere
among them. In this respect, a well-known Chinese proverb says: "The one
who does not know smiling well, should not open a shop." because smiling
is a successful seller.

2- Handshaking: It is a great hearty expression of love of the hand
giver to the hand receiver; indeed, it is a general language of love and
kindness that doesn't need a translator. Whenever you put your hand into
the hand of your friend, both of you will feel the sense of love and
affection for each other.

It was reported in a narration encouraging handshaking to the extent
that whenever two people shake hands their sins will fall away the way
the dried leaves of a tree fall. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said:
"When two people meet and shake hands, Allah will turn to them, and
their sins will fall as the leaves of the tree fall."

3- Greetings: Greetings between people is an expression of love and
affection. But, the Islamic greeting "Assalamu Alaikum" (i.e. peace be
upon you) is full of greater expression than the one mentioned above. It
is an expression of peace, which the whole world is looking for.

From this, we can understand what was reported in a narration. "The
Almighty Allah likes he who starts greeting." Whenever you extend your
greetings to whomever you meet, whether you know him or not, you are
extending flowers of love and peace on people's way, as well as, putting
peace and tranquility into their hearts.

The great achievement, for a person, is when others feel secure and
have peace of mind whenever they meet him. And what a good behavior,
when peace is exchanged with peace, while answering greetings in kind
with what is better than that.

Based on general moral laws, a poet has said:

"In every hour of the day
You can give something as a gift.
It might be smiling,
And it might be extending hands in hand shaking.
And it might be a word;
Through which you strengthen others' determinations."

4- Embracing: If smiling is a key to a bright meeting and greetings are
a source of tranquility and handshaking is a greeting from a heart to
another heart, then embracing is a source of expressing what smiling,
greetings and hand shaking were unable to express.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) is reported to have embraced Ja'far al-Tayyar
and kissed his face. And, likewise, his grandson Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq
(a.s.) was reported to have said: "The best and most complete greeting
of he who is at home is handshaking, and the best and complete greeting
for a traveler is an embrace." There is no difference whether he is
going or coming back from the journey.

5- In our daily life, a name has a great role to play more the story of
naming someone on the day of his birth…it is our companion who may leave
his effect on us positively or negatively. It is in view of this that
Islam enjoins on us to call people by their best name. If he wants us to
call him with his real name we must call him by it, and if he wants us
to use his surname we must call him by it. It is good even to add more
phrases in the names to show our respect for him.

It is said in the moral laws that: "If you want people to love you,
call them by their names because the name of a person is the most
loveable thing to him. When you address a person and call him by his
name, you are giving him respect, which he will thank you for in return.
But, when you forget his name, he will regard it as disrespect to
him."

6- Paying attention to what others are saying is a good habit, which
expresses love and respect to the speaker so as to make him feel at ease
in saying all that is on his mind without interruption. A prophetic
narration has enjoined us not to cut a speaker off while speaking,
because it is a form of disrespect.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "Whoever cuts his own Muslim brother
off while he is speaking - it is as if he scratched his face." This is
because what a speaker requires is that all ears should be turned to
what he is saying. But if he has finished his speech, you have the right
to ask, shed more light on or repute his sayings.

Apart from the fact that disrupting a speaker doesn't give one a chance
to hear what is in the heart of the speaker, it also hurts his feelings
to the extent that he may misunderstand. Most speakers respect those who
listen to them even if their speech is of not much importance. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said: "In the past, I had a brother- in- faith, …he was more
eager for keeping quiet than speaking…"

It is said in the general moral law that: "The best of speakers is he
who listens attentively to others. He who talks about his own
personality, and doesn't think except about his own self is egoistic. A
person with such a habit is an ignorant fellow who drags himself to
pity. If you want to earn an efficiency in talking, and people to love
you, you must be a good listener and encourage the other side to express
him."

One of the philosophers said: "I have never learned anything while I
was talking."

7- It might be possible that you will not know that I love you unless I
tell you, or you might know it in a general form, but you will not know
it deeply if I don't tell you, or I express it with good words,
feelings, sincerity, or by presenting a valuable gift; etc...

It is one of the Islamic morals that if you love someone you should
reveal it to him and not hide it from him so that to make him feel that
you love him and do everything to repay the love. Indeed, loving words
have achieved desirable results that cannot be expressed.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) was reported to have said: "If you love
someone tell him, because that will make your relationship firm." It is
also among moral behavior to: "Make it your habit to narrate to others
the sweetness of what you have heard or read. Do not forget your
courteous behavior which expresses sincerity,

grant others good and sincere assessment of all the services they have
rendered to you, be it material or spiritual, because it is one of the
factors that brings confidence and firm love in the heart. The
difference between assessment and adulation is that there is sincerity
in assessment while adulation is just lies and destruction."

8- A word of thanks and assessment is a good and beautiful expression
of concern and assessing the good habit done to you. It is hoped that it
will continue. Thus, it is compulsory to thank the doers of good. It is
reported in one narration that: "Whoever doesn't thank his fellow beings
doesn't thank the Creator." The Almighty Allah has combined thanking Him
and parents in one verse to show the importance of thanksgiving to the
one did good to you, whether He is the Lord, a father or a mother. "Be
grateful unto Me and unto your parents" Holy Qur'an (31: 14) It is also
narrated in a hadith that: "Thanks giving which exceeds the limit is
adulation, while the shortening of thanks from the limit is
faltering."

Among the methods of thanks giving is revealing the special peculiarity
of the thing that is worthy of thanks. You should know that an
individual giving thanks, that is to every sincere helper, is more
beneficial than the general thanks, because everyone will be pleased
with, and may turn all the thanks and assessment, to the person
concerned. Indeed, all thanks, encouragement, good words that express
thanks and assessment and praying for his success and rewards, are all
forms of thanksgiving that we ought to abide by, if we want to create
good human relations between people.

It is said in general moral laws to: "Spend your day thanking people,
in the afternoon thank many people, and before you go home at night, you
must thank as many people as you can. Because thanking people is part of
their environment that surrounds them and it shows your concern for them
and, likewise, it has its own role in human health."

9- There is nothing superior in heart and intellect than to find an
excuse for a mistake done to me by someone, because by this it lifts the
heaviness of the mistake and gives me self-confidence, as well as,
educates me on how to deal with others peacefully and, also, seek their
apology whenever I make a mistake.

It is reported in one hadith to: "Give your brother seventy
possibilities. If you didn't find an excuse for him, seek an excuse for
him." Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "Do not regard the word that comes out of
the mouth of someone as evil, while you can find a possibility of good
in it." This shows the importance of building anything on its positive
possibility and takes the mind away from any negative interpretation,
even if we exhaust all possibilities and there remains only one negative
possibility, we should try to find an excuse to clear our brothers from
blame.

It is said in the method of morals to: "Try to gain the power of
clearing shame and incapability in the mind of your fellow
brother…because the words 'you have made a mistake' is the fastest way
of attracting enmity." We have already mentioned ways to draw the
attention of the one who made a mistake without hurting his feelings.

10- Indeed, there is a great difference between those who assess others
and make them feel that they are important to the society and do not
withhold from people the things that are their due, and those who make
them their source of laughter and mockery. The first group attracts
people while the second one makes people away from them. The Almighty
Allah had prohibited this in His saying:

"Let not a people laugh at (another) people (to scorn) who happily may
be better than them; nor let women laugh at other women who happily may
be better than these…" Holy Qur'an (49: 11)

It was narrated in a hadith that: "The Almighty Allah has hidden His
most pious servants among His servants." This narration explains to us
that there is a possibility that the man we are mocking might be greater
and more superior, in the sight of Allah, than us. Thus, this narration
that teaches us how to treat people as great is not only a moral
narration, rather it, also, teaches us a lesson; the art of social
relations and value.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "If you see someone who is older than
you, you should say: He has passed me in greatness. And if you see
someone who is your junior, in terms of age, say: I have passed him in
sinning, and if you see someone who is your age, then say: I am
knowledgeable with myself but I do not know what is in his mind." In
every circumstance, you should give less importance to your self and
think good of others. Is there any moral teaching, which encourages its
followers to go high, better than the moral teachings of Islam?!

It is said in the moral laws: "Do not mock and laugh at others, rather
make them feel that you have concern for them. If you want people to
love you, show them concern and assessment that will give them more
hope… leave them to feel their importance… find something in them that
is good and talk about it;

do not destroy that beautiful condition. Indeed, people differ, but you
must find something good in them, if not in their creation, in their
spirit. As you are hoping for yourself bliss and respect, make others,
who are your brothers in humanity, also feel the same… indeed men -
including me, you and the rest - are sentimental first, then later in
the second stage become rational."

11- Have a glance at your surroundings… look at them carefully… you can
never find someone who is free from some form of goodness even those
whom at first sight you think are lacking in it. If we consider the
positive features of others, we can draw them to our side.

It is reported that one day Prophet Jesus (Isa) (a.s.) and one of his
followers passed by a dead and rotten dog. The man said: "This dog
smells bad." But, Jesus (a.s.) only looked at the whiteness of its teeth
and said: "This dog has white teeth." He looked at the positive side of
the dog even though we see nothing attractive in the dog.

When Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) wanted to blame Safwan al-Jammal (one
of his followers) for renting his camel to Harun Rashid, the Abbasid
ruler, he started by approaching him mildly and said: "Oh! Safwan!
Everything in you is good except one thing", it is renting the camel to
Harun, but we see how Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) used a good method of
refutation. First, he praised the good qualities of Safwan, so when he
made mention of the negative side of him (Safwan), he felt the sense of
blame and asked, What is it, Oh my Lord?" trying to repair it and add it
to his good qualities.

A psychologist said: "We should remember that we have common qualities,
with our differences, and they are that each and every one of us has
good and superior qualities."

Others have said: "If you want to refute, then consider it with
intimacy and felicity." It is said in a prophetic narration that: "May
Allah bless the one who guides me toward my shortcomings." Guidance can
never be achieved except by a good approach.

12- The best person to attract people's love and respect to himself is
he who benefits them. It is said in a narration that: "The best of men
is he who benefits people." The more the benefit grows the more the love
and respect of people grows.

Abdul-Aziz al-Qaratisi reported from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) that: "One
day Abu Abdullah said: Oh Abdal-Aziz! Belief (iman) is like a ladder
that has ten steps, therefore, he who is on the second step should not
say to the one on the first that he is nothing until he reaches the
tenth. Do not intimidate he who is under you; he who is above you will
intimidate you. If you see someone who is under you, try and raise him
up mildly. Do not make him do what is above his capability, you will
break him, and he who breaks a believer, will take the
responsibility."

It is among the necessities of good companionship to find a good friend
who stays with you with all sincerity and is beneficial both spiritually
and materially. There is no stinginess and pride; friendship must be
only for Allah's sake.

In order to attract your friend towards you, you must try and raise him
to your standard, and this is what is said and emphasized by those who
have experience in the field of education that: "Do not exceed the limit
in praising your values, because it is possible that those who you think
are inferior to you, might be superior to you, and what you are proud of
may be something useless in the sight of others."

Therefore, some psychologists have said: "Encouragement makes people
successful, and you can make someone like what you want him to do if you
work in order to achieve what you want from him." 13- It is our common
nature that we give more care and concern to big issues only. We tend to
forget about small issues or we give them less concern.

Regarding the saying of the Almighty Allah; "Verily we see you of the
doers of good (to all)." Holy Qur'an (12: 36), Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq
(a.s.) is reported to have said: "He used to widen the gathering,
lending to the needy and helping the destitute."

The Imam (a.s.) is, also, reported to have said: "He is not from us who
doesn't control himself at the time of sadness, nor makes good his
relationship with his companion, who disagrees with he who disagrees
with him, nor follows he who follows him, who isn't close to the one who
becomes closer to him, and who doesn't eat with the one who eats with
him." All these are considered as ways of making relationships good and
making the tree of love grow and benefits from its fruits and flowers.

It is said in the moral laws that: "Do not neglect a little concern,
because it has a great issue and benefit."


**Secondly: How Can We Proceed Socially?**

After being acquainted with some moral laws through prophetic hadiths
and sayings of psychologists, then, we will come to the answer of the
second question on how to proceed socially.

Morals play an important role in the art of social relations. It is
good, before we go further to state that none of these morals are final
and conclusive. Whatever the case may be, if we are talking about art,
it is possible that each and every one of us will add something.


