1- the Manners of Greeting
==========================

A- Among the etiquette of greetings is that a rider should greet the
one who is on foot, a passer-by should greet the one who is standing, a
small group should greet a larger one, little ones should greet the
elders, a man should greet a woman, a child should greet his parent, and
the one who enters a place should greet those whom he meets inside.

The art of social relations we have learned from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.), and his teachings require us to be the first to say the
Islamic greeting, that is, "Assalamu Alaikum", because he used to be the
first to say the greeting.

B- We should use the Islamic greeting "Assalamu Alaikum", so as to show
our identity. It is not right for us, as Muslims, to use other people's
greetings while we have our own, which is beautiful and perfect.

C- To welcome your friend and visitor with all of your existence, so
that he will feel your concern for him. It is not good to shake ones
hand while your other hand is in your pocket, or you are resting on your
car, a wall or tree. This will reduce your value in the sight of your
friend.

D- To reply to the greetings with the best of it, these are the Islamic
morals that do not repay good with good only, rather it repays it with
what is better than it, "When you are greeted with a greeting, then
greet you with a better (than it), or return it." (Holy Qur'an (4: 86)
The best reply for "Assalamu Alaikum" "Peace be upon you" is "Wa alaikum
al-Salam wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuhu" (And peace be with you and the
mercy and blessings of Allah be with you."

E- It is obligatory for Muslims to greet women with Islamic greetings
and show for them our concern, but it is not permissible to shake their
hands; because Islam considers such action as part of an Islamic
chastity and security.

**2- The Manners of Phoning:**

It is true that you can not see your friend while phoning him, nor he
sees you, but this doesn't mean that you should indulge with manners of
phoning. Among them are:

A- First, you should greet your friend and show him your concern and
love as if you are talking to him face to face.

B- You should introduce yourself when you phone your friend, because
some voices may be similar and in order not to put your friend in a
dilemma, you should introduce yourself, first, by telling him your name
directly after greeting.

C- You should be sure that the number you are dialing is correct and
that the time you are phoning is the right time. You should hastily
redial the number of your friend if it cuts off while you are talking,
to avoid any misunderstandings.

D- Try to summarize your talking to the required standard. And if you
recorded a message on your telephone telling your friend that you will
call him back, while you are away, you must call, because it is the
habit of a believer that he fulfills his promise.

E- You should, at least, telephone at the time of ceremonies and
occasions, to say your greetings and good lucks to your friends and
relatives; as many as you can, even though to visit them in person is
better, but telephoning them, as correspondence, is half of direct
meeting.

F- If your friend or neighbor wants to use your telephone, leave the
place for him until he finishes, because he might have some secrets he
does not want others to be acquainted with them.

G- Do not reply to those that disturb you with harsh words. Use mild
words that will make them feel shy and have a guilty conscience. This
way will keep them away from doing it again.

**3- The Manners of Thanks Giving:**

We have mentioned before that the reward of good is good and that the
repaying of beauty is beauty or what is better than that, therefore, it
is not good for me to repay good with showing no concern or even evil.
Thus, thanksgiving has its own manners, among them are:

A- Do not be slow in thanking those who did good to you.

B- While thanking the one who did good to you, you should hope to repay
the service(s) rendered to you in the future. This is a practical thanks
giving which deepens friendly relations and encourages towards doing
more good.

C- Thanks giving is not only meant for a particular group of people,
rather it is meant for every doer of good, no matter what the rate of
good he did. As it is meant for father, mother, brother, sister, friend,
teacher and director, it is also meant for postmaster, metropolitan
worker, waiter, door keeper, shoe shiner and others.

**4- The Manners of Friendship and Companion-ship:**

A prophetic hadith calls us to live with our friends and relatives with
goodness and to prefer them on our own selves; we should not let them
see any corruption or cheating on our part. We should be kind with them
or we should not show them any sign of stinginess. We should keep their
secrets in their presence and absence; we should not allow anybody to
cheat them. We should give them advice and encourage them to obey to
Allah; and we should help them in overcoming their wrongdoing and
sins.

All these are summarized in the saying: "Be a source of mercy to them,
not a source of punishment." However, companionship has some manners
that must be respected, among them are:

A- We must not deceive our friends in any affairs; rather we should be
frank with them in any matter. We should not cheat them; rather we
should be sincere with them.

B- We must not lie to them; rather we should be truthful and sincere.
There is nothing better than finding a friend who is truthful and
sincere in all fields of our companionship.

C- We should not do anything to degrade them whatever the case may be;
degrading a brother or a friend is degrading ones self, because the
position of a friend or a brother is our own position. Instead of
degrading them you should work for the purpose of completing their
personality, this is the best for friendship and the most loveable in
the sight of Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.).

D- If you stay with your friend, be soft to him in choosing appropriate
words and feelings that show love and affection. It is said, "Softness
reduces loneliness." How beautifully the Holy Qur'an explains this: "and
lower your wing (be gentle) unto the believers." Holy Qur'an (15:88) You
should make yourself inferior in your relation with your brother, but it
must be inferiority of love, not disgrace.

Among the desirable things are: Coping with things that are not
prohibited; and you should not force your opinion on your friend that
has different opinion as yourself. You should not stand up from where
you are sitting unless with his permission; and you should not let him
hear anything except good, because "there is evil in bad words and good
is a suppression of evil"; and you should thank him for his good.

E- The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "Companionship must be with
faithfulness," i.e., we should not disclose the secrets of our friends
unless with his permission.

F- If any friendly meeting contains more than two and are sitting in
one place, it is not suitable for me to whisper to one of them something
that I don't want others to hear, because such action will surely make
him (them) unhappy, even whisper doesn't concern him. But, if I do so,
he will surely feel that I did not regard him sincerely and honestly.

**5- The Manners of Giving a Gift:**

A gift has a great effect on the heart of he whom the gift is given to,
because when you give me a gift - with its real meaning not its material
value- you are sending me a message of your love and affection. Thus, it
is upon me to be happy and put it in mind that it is also your right
upon me to repay that gift (not necessarily with a material gift but
with thanks and, etc).

However, being the fact that a gift is an expression of a feeling that
can never be expressed in words, therefore, it has its own manners:

A- We must be careful in choosing it, because the choice of a man - as
it is said- is part of his intellect. The gift might be small in its
quantity but great in its value. The books liked by your friend might be
the best gift to him than anything else.

B- As some are saying that a gift must be presented on a certain
occasion, but there is a possibility that a gift should be given without
any occasion, because your zeal for the growth of your friendship with
your friend, itself, is an occasion. Nevertheless, choosing a particular
occasion for presenting a gift, like the success on anything, marriage,
buying a house or returning from a journey, has a great effect on
people's relationships. It was reported in a hadith to: "Present gifts,
you will be loved."

C- Covering a gift with a nice and attractive cover is an expression of
felicity and good wishes that will make the gift talk more than the
tongue.

D- He who presents the gift must look into the practical effects of the
gift before giving it. This is because some gifts have a small life
span, while others have a long life span, or some have a limited effect,
while others have unlimited effects.

E- It is not good to refuse a gift or to degrade it. Even if it is of
little value, we must thank those who present them to us and accept them
with respect. It is narrated that one day a student presented cucumbers
as a gift to his teacher. The teacher ate one and found it bitter.

He took the second one and found it the same, nevertheless he ate it
all without inviting the other students to join him in eating. The
students were surprised with their teacher's deed. The student who
presented the gift went out happy because of the gift he presented to
his teacher. After he went out, the teacher turned to the rest of the
students and said:

"Maybe you were surprised at what I did, but the cucumbers were bitter.
If I presented them to you, you would not eat them and the presenter of
the gift would not be happy. That is why I kept quiet without inviting
you."

F- It is not good to give someone a gift given to you as a gift by
someone else, because it is said that a gift cannot be given twice. The
presenter of the gift wanted it to be your personal belonging. What can
you tell him when he see it (the same gift) in the hand of another
fellow? It might hurt him.

**6- The Manners of Visiting:**

One thing that has a great effect on strengthening social relationships
is the exchange of visits, which is encouraged in many narrations to the
extent that it is stated that whoever visits his brother, it is as if he
visited Allah and His Messenger. Among the manners of visits are the
following:

A- Making arrangements and stating a particular time before a visit. It
is not good to break the arrangement made or to arrive late, except if
something that is above someone's control happens. In such a case, you
must extend your apology to whom you want to visit, so that he may not
be waiting for you.

B- If you visit a friend or a brother in religion without prior
arrangement and he apologizes for not been able to attend to you due to
some problems best known to him, as "The owner of the house knows better
what is going on in it", do not become angry and do not feel offended,
rather, it is his right that must be respected.

C- It is good to arrange for the time the visit will take, because it
might be that your host may have another arrangement with someone or
something else to do. Thus, if you leave the end of the visit without
any limit, it might be a burden or can hurt your host.

D- If you enter the house of your friend, do not be curious and
inquisitive in the affairs of the house or the family or anything that
doesn't concern you. It might be that your host doesn't want you to know
everything that's going on in his house. This means that you should also
protect your eyes and tongue.

E- It is good to underline the aim of the visit and discuss it
immediately when you arrive. Do not make your visit a chance of too much
talking and spending unnecessary time.

Nevertheless, being the fact that there are different kinds of visits,
therefore, each and every one of them has their own manners and morals.
In addition to the visit of friends, there is also the visiting of the
sick, or of a neighbor. Below is the manner of each and every one of
these:


