Fadak
=====

Fadak is a very important and crucial episode in Islamic history.
Situated north of Medina, at a distance of 2 or 3 days journey, it was a
very fertile land, where according to the report of Ibn Abil Hadid,
date-groves were not less than those of Kufa of 13th century[^1] and
whose income was between 24,000 and 70,000 dinars.[^2] It was inhabited
by a Jewish tribe.

In 7 A.H., the Prophet waged a war against the Jews of Khaibar, because
they had broken a treaty with the Muslims. Some of their fortresses were
taken; two or three were besieged. At last, they proposed a deal that
their life, religion, honour etc. would be safe, and they would leave
their fortresses and land for the Muslims. The agreement was concluded;
the Jews were allowed to work on the land on behalf of the Muslims, and
the produce was shared between the Jews and the Muslims half and half.

According to the 'Aaya of Qur'an (8:41), one-fifth of the fortresses and
land was given to the Prophet as Khumus, and the remaining four-fifths
to the Muslims.

When the Jews of Fadak heard of the battle of Khaibar and the resulting
agreement, they began thinking about themselves. At the same time a
messenger came to them from Medina inviting them to Islam. They refused
to accept Islam, but, on their own accord, offered peace on following
terms:-

a) They would give half of their land to the Prophet, the other half
remaining in their possession.

b) They would work on the land of the Prophet, sharing in its produce.

c) The Prophet would have authority to turn them out of Fadak whenever
he so wished, but he would have to pay them full price of their share of
land and property.

The Prophet accepted these terms.[^3] Some Muslims thought that Fadak
also was Muslims property, like Khaibar. But it was their
misunderstanding, because long before that, in the case of Banu Nazir,
the law was promulgated that whatever comes to the Prophet without
military expedition, was the Prophet's personal property, for him to use
or divide as he thought appropriate, as the Qur'an says:

***"And whatever Allah restored to His Messenger from them, you did not
press forward against it any horse or a riding camel but Allah gives
authority to His Messengers over whom He pleases, and Allah has power
over all things." (Qur'an, 59:6)***

Banu Nazir were banished from Medina in the beginning of the 3rd year of
hijrah. They were allowed to take whatever their camels could carry
except arms.

On arriving at Medina, the Prophet had created fraternal relationships,
making a muhajir brother of an ansari; and every ansari shared all his
property half and half with his muhajir brother; so much so that if an
ansari's inheritance was divided among his brothers and sisters, the
muhajir "brother" was included in it.

Abu Bakr was made brother of Kharijah bin Zayd; 'Umar and 'Utban bin
Malik Ansari were made brothers, as were 'Uthman and Aws bin Thabit
Ansari; and so on.[^4] Only 'Ali was left out of this fraternity, the
Prophet declaring that 'Ali was the brother of the Prophet himself.[^5]

On acquiring the property of Banu Nazir, the Prophet on his own decided
to divide it among the muhajirin and release Ansar from this burden. He
did so, and included two extremely poor Ansar in the list - Abu Dajjanah
and Sahl ibn Haneef.[^6]

So all mahajirin, including Abu Bakar, 'Umar and 'Uthman, got their
shares from that land and it became their personal property. It was not
for their "maintenance" only.

In the same way Fadak became a personal property of the Prophet; and he
managed it himself.[^7]

Then another 'Aya came:-

***"Andgive to the near of kin his due ..." (Qur'an, 17:26).***

The Prophet asked Jibril the meaning of this revelation. He said: Give
Fadak to Fatimah; it will be a source of income to her and her
children.[^8]

The Prophet gave Fadak to Fatimah; and she was using it as her own
property; her agent was there to look after her interests. This
continued till the Prophet died and Abu Bakr took the possession of
Fadak by force.

Now Fatimah protested against this usurpation of her property, saying
that the Prophet had given it to her. Abu Bakr asked her to produce
witnesses to prove it.

Now Fatimah was already in possession of the property; and according to
the Islamic principles, possession itself is a sufficient proof of
ownership. If Abu Bakr claimed that property for himself or for Muslim
nation, then it was he, as claimant, who should have produced witnesses
to support his claim. But he put the onus of proof on Fatimah,
disregarding Islamic Law.

Again, as he was a claimant, he should not have judged the case himself.
But he did not care for judicial niceties so long as his purpose was
served.

Anyhow, Fatimah brought 'Ali and Umm Ayman (widow of Zaid b. Haritha).
Abu Bakr said that there should be either two males or one male and two
female witnesses.[^9]

Now in family matters- and gift of a father to his daughter is a family
matter - only one witness is enough; but Abu Bakr conveniently forgot
it. Also Islam accepts one witness coupled with the oath of the claimant
as a sufficient proof.[^10]

Fatimah was obliged to bring other witnesses, among them her two sons,
Hasan and Husain and one woman, Asma' d/o 'Umais (wife of Abu Bakr
himself).

Now there were more witnesses than the minimum required. So Abu Bakr
started discrediting all the witnesses:-

**A)** 'Ali, Hasan and Husain were Fatimah's husband and sons, and they
were liable to be moved by self-interest.

Remember that Fatimah, 'Ali, Hasan and Husain were the only ones who
were selected by the Prophet to prove his truth against the Christians
of Najran - who were to say ''Amen'' to the prayer of the prophet
seeking curse of Allah "against the liars:'

They were the only people alive at that time who were purified by Allah
from all sins and mistakes.

And there is not a single Muslim in the world who can say that they
could tell lies.

But Abu Bakr rejected their evidence explicitly saying that their
evidence was motivated by self-interest - in other words, they were
lying!!

**B)** Asma' d/o 'Umais was previously married to Ja'far, brother of
'Ali; and therefore, she would support the claim of Banu Hashim.

He forgot that she was his wife and therefore her evidence against his
views was more telling.

And, by the way, is it necessary that a witness should not be a friend
of the party for whom he is appearing - that only the evidence given by
an enemy should be accepted?

**C)** Umm Ayman was a non-Arab and she could not speak Arabic fluently.
(Umm Ayman was a slave-girl of 'Abdullah, father of the Prophet. The
Prophet had inherited her, married her to Zaid b. Haritha and, according
to the Prophet she was one of "the people of virtue': "people of
Paradise':)

Does it mean that only Arabic-speaking people can be accepted as
witness? Or only Arabs are truthful and trustworthy?

This ruthlessness of the Khalifa prevented others to come forward and
give evidence on behalf of Fatimah. When the Khalifa had no hesitation
in degrading and insulting 'Ali and his sons, how could they be sure
that their honour would not be tarnished if they appeared to support
Fatimah?

The purpose of witness is to establish veracity or otherwise of a claim.
If one is satisfied of the truth of a claim, the number of witnesses
becomes a mere formality, which in some cases was dispensed with even by
Abu Bakr. Jabir b. 'Abdullah Ansari, a companion of the Prophet, claimed
that the Prophet had promised him so much from the revenue of Bahrain.
Abu Bakr accepted the claim without asking for any witness.[^11]

Anyhow, when Fatimah saw that Abu Bakr was bent upon taking away Fadak
from her, she said that, if not by gift, then Fadak was hers by
inheritance.

Now, Abu Bakr came with an ingenious reply. He said: "I have heard the
Messenger of Allah saying. "We, the group of the prophets, are not
inherited from; whatever we leave is 'Sadaqah' (charity):'

Now, this supposed saying of the Prophet is against many 'Ayat of Qur'an
and all the accepted principles of Islam, as Fatimah herself pointed out
in her address, in which she says inter alia:-

''And now you hold out falsely that I have no inheritance from my
father. Do you want the custom of (the days of) ignorance?[^12] And who
is better than Allah, in giving the Law, for the people who do believe?
Don't you Know? Surely, it is clear for you like the midday sun that I
am his daughter. Would I be prevailed over my inheritance? O Son of Abu
Qahafa! Is it in the book of Allah, that thou shouldst inherit from thy
father, and I would not inherit my father? Surely, thou hast brought a
slanderous thing.[^13]

Is it intentionally that you have discarded the Book of Allah and thrown
it behind your backs? As Allah says: 'And Sulaiman inherited
Dawud.'[^14]; and he said narrating the advent of Yahya b. Zakariya:
(When called he, i.e., Zakariya his Lord ... , when he said 'O my Lord!
Verily my bones are weakened and my head does glisten with grey
hoariness ... , and verily I fear my kindred after me, and my wife is
barren, so grant me from Thyself an heir who shall inherit me and
inheritfrom thefamily of Yaqub ...."[^15]; and He said ***' ... and the
relatives of blood*** ***have more right upon each other in the book of
Allah'***[^16] and He said: ***“Allah enjoins you about your children,
the male shall have the equal of the shares of two
females."***[^17]***;*** and He said: ***“(It is prescribed for you when
death approaches one of you) if he leaves behind anygoods that he makes
a bequestfor parents and the (near) kinsmen, ingoodness; (it is) a duty
incumbent upon the pious ones."***[^18]

"And you hold out falsely that there is no right for me nor any
inheritance for me from my father. Well, has Allah sent any 'Ayat
especially for you, and from which my father was excluded? Or do you say
that people of two different religions do not inherit from each
other?[^19] Are not my father and I people of one religion? Or are you
more knowledgeable of the particularity and generality of the Qur'an
than my father and my cousin ('Ali)?"

These arguments were and are irrefutable, but the Khalifa did not pay
any head to them. Here one must mention a few points before going
further:

The supposed hadith was against so many verses of the Qur'an (some of
which have been mentioned just above): Now we have a universally
accepted hadith of the Prophet that 'Verily, there have appeared many
who tell lies attributing them to me; so when a narration attributed to
me comes to you, refer it to the Book of Allah; and what is in
conformity with the Book of Allah, accept it and what is against it,
throw it upon the wall:' Therefore, that hadith must be thrown to the
wall.

Abu Bakr was the claimant, and he produced a hadith which up to that
time no companion of the Prophet had ever heard. As he was so fond of
formalities and procedures, why did not he produce two male witnesses to
vouch his narration?

Let us accept, for the sake of argument, that it was a genuine hadith.

Now, who should have been informed of it by the Prophet, his would be
heirs (daughter, wives, uncle, cousin etc.) or a stranger who could
never think of inheriting anything from the Prophet? Common sense says
that it was the family-members who should have been told by the Prophet
that "Look, when I die, all that I leave shall become charity; you will
not inherit anything because I am a Prophet and prophets are not
inherited from.

So, be careful to give all my worldly belongings to Sadaqah:' How was it
that he did not tell any of his would-be heirs and told it to Abu Bakr,
who had no claim in his inheritance? Why did he keep his daughter, wives
and uncle in dark, thus starting a bitter quarrel between Khalifa and
his family-members?

Even when Fatimah's claim was rejected with the help of this ready-made
hadith, the wives of the Prophet sent 'Uthman to Abu Bakr asking their
shares in the inheritance of the Prophet in Khaibar.[^20] It clearly
shows that the wives of the Prophet did not believe that hadith, nor was
it believed by 'Uthman (who later became 3rd Khalifa); otherwise; he
would not have taken that message to Abu Bakr.

One may wonder why Abu Bakr did not accept the valid and irrefutable
arguments of Fatimah? Apparently it could have done him no harm if he
had accepted the claim of Fatimah.

The first and basic cause has been mentioned by Ibn Abil Hadid in his
Sharh of Nahjul-Balaghah:-

"I asked Ali b. Fariqi, a teacher in Madrasa Gharbiyah at Baghadad, 'Was
not Fatima most truthful?' He said, 'Certainly!:I said: 'Then why did
not Abu Bakr return Fadak to her when he knew that she was most
truthful?'

The teacher smiled and said: 'Had he given her Fadak today just because
of her claim, she would have returned next day and claimed Khalifat for
her husband, and removed him from his position; and then he would have
had no excuse, because he had already accepted that she was most
truthful in her claim, whatever it may be, without any need of proof or
witnesses:'[^21]

This much about not returning the property. But why did they usurp it in
the first place? Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) told his desciple, Mufaddal b.
'Umar: "When Abu Bakr became Khalifa, 'Umar advised him to deprive 'Ali
and his family from Khumus, booty and Fadak, "because when his partisans
will know it, they will leave him and will turn towards you, for
material gains:' It was for this reason that Abu Bakr deprived them from
all their rights:'[^22]

It is interesting to note that Fadak had the same legal position as the
land of Banu Nazir which was given to the muhajirin (including Abu Bakr
and 'Umar themselves). But while Fadak was taken away from Fatimah,
muhajirin's properties were not touched.

Be as it may. The high-handedness used in this case totally negated the
two legacies which the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had left behind for the
guidance of his ummah: He had repeatedly said in his sermons: I am
leaving among you two weighty things, the Book of Allah and my
family-members who are my progeny; as long as you will hold fast to them
you will not go astray; and they will not separate from each other until
they reach me at the reservoir (Kawthar).

But Abu Bakr and 'Umar destroyed the credibility of both.

1. They degraded the Progeny of the Prophet in the public eyes. People
saw that in spite of all the verses of the Qur'an and traditions of the
Prophet extolling the virtues of 'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husain, they
had less weight in the eyes of the Khalifa than many ordinary companions
of the Prophet, like Jabir b. 'Abdillah and Khuzaima b. Thabit.

2. They destroyed the sanctity and supremacy of the Qur'an, making it
subservient to the rulers' expediencies; a system was established that
the caliphs' words could change/abrogate clear rules of the Qur'an.

In this way they deprived the ummah of the guidance of Qur'an and Ahlul
Bayt for ever, and the two safeguards against going astray were
destroyed.

Itwas because of this intentional discarding of the two weighty things,
Ahlul Bayt and Qur'an, in process of which the laws of inheritance,
jurisprudence and evidence were corrupted, that Fatimah was extremely
angry with these two persons. Bukhari and Muslim have narrated: "Verily
Abu Bakr refused to give anything to Fatimah, so she was angry with him
about this matter, and she forsook him and did not talk with him till
her death:'[^23]

Details may be seen in Sharh of Nahjul Balaghah of Ibn Abil Hadid,
Vol.16; Siratun-Nabi of Al-Halabi, al-Imamah Was-Siyasah of Ibn
Qutaibah; Wafa'ul- Wafa' of Al-Samhudi and many other books of
traditions and history. "Fadak" of Sayyid Mohammad Hasan Al-Musawi
Qazwini throws light on all important aspects of this incident in short
chapters. It has been published by an-Najah Publishers, Cairo, in 1397
A.H. (1977 C.E.) with footnotes of Baqir Muqaddasi and Preface of
Professor 'Abdul-Fattah.

[^1]: Ibn Abil-Hadid, Sharh of Nahjul-Balaghah, vol.16, p.236; Halab
Publishing House, Cairo.

[^2]: Ibn Tawus, Kashful-Mahajjah, p.94

[^3]: Yaqut Al-Hamawi, Mu'jamul-Buldan; Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh of
Nahjul-Balaghah, Vol. 16, p.210; al-Tabari, Annals, Vol. p. ; Ibnul
Athir, Tarikhul Kamil.

[^4]: Tarikh Abul Fida, vol.l p.127

[^5]: Samhudi, Khulasatal-wafa', vol.l, p.109; Ibn 'Abdil Birr,
al-lsti'ab, Hyderabad, vol, 2, p. 473

[^6]: Tafseer Ad -Durru 'l-mauthur,vol. 6 pp.187-190.

[^7]: Ar-Razi, Tafsir Kabir; Az-Zamakhshari, Tafsir Al-Kashshaf

[^8]: Suyuti, Ad-Durru 'l-Manthur; vol.IV p.177; Suyuti, Lubabun-Nuqul,
printed on margin of Tafsir al-Jalalain, vol. II , p.l9. Virtually all
commentaries of Qur'an record it.

[^9]: Fakhruddin Ar-Razi, Tafsir Kabir Vol.VIII, p.386

[^10]: Kanzu 'l-Ummal, vol.3, pp. 178-9

[^11]: Bukhari, Sahih, Muslim, Sahih. The same thing happened with
another companion, Abu Shaibah Mazini, as narrated in Kanzu 'l-Ummal.

[^12]: In Pre- Islam Arabia, woman had no right of inheritance; she
herself was treated as a property to be inherited See Ameer Ali,
Mohammedan Law. vol. II.

[^13]: If a daughter is prevented from inheriting her father, it is a
slander.

[^14]: Qur'an, 27:16; Here a prophet inherits and another's property is
inherited. Thus, the supposed tradition is manifestly against the
Qur'an.

[^15]: Qur'an, 19:3-6. It is said that Zakariya meant inheritance of
prophethood. If so, than what is the sense of his fear ("and verily I
fear my kindred after me")? Was he afraid that his kindred would become
prophet after him?

[^16]: Qur'an, 8:75

[^17]: Qur'an, 4:11

[^18]: Qur'an, 2:180

[^19]: In Islam, an unbeliever is not entitled to inherit from a Muslim.
She asks if they claim that she or her father, the founder of Islam, was
not a Muslim.

[^20]: Yaqut Al-Hamawi, Mu'jamul-Buldan (Later on a hadith was
attributed to 'Ayeshah in which she supports her father.)

[^21]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh of Nahjul-Balagha; vol.16, p.284.

[^22]: Haidar Al- 'Amidi, Al-Kashkul. It is the only Shi a reference in
this article.

[^23]: Bukhari, Sahih, Babu Farzil Khumus (Arabic Text with English
Translation) Beirut, n.d. vol.4, p, 208; Muslim, Sahih, vol.5 p.154


