Temporary Marriage in Islam (part Vi)
=====================================

**Similarities and Differences of Mut'a and Regular Marriage**

Some people assume that some of the Shia practices are not Islamic
because they haven't heard about it before, or they do not know the
justifications behind it. What I tried to prove by the previous parts of
the discussion was:

1. Temporary marriage was NOT invented by the Shia.
2. Allah made it legal in the Quran (4:24).
3. There are authentic Sunni references which indicate that various
companions did NOT agree on being it abolished. This happens to agree
with the Shia point of view.

4. It was also indicated that there are few allegations for its
banning, but they are inconsistent and are weaker claims. Their variety
is sufficient indication of the fact that they are based on
opinion-only, mainly to justify the present situation.
Also, not to mention their obvious conflict with above three points.
Moreover, the Hadith is always tested against the Quran and not the
other way around. The Quran is always in the higher authority.

In that effort, I was not trying to convince the Sunnis that Mut'a is
permitted for them as a "Sunni", as much as, I was trying to show that
the Shia point of view in this issue has a very strong basis in Quran
and Hadith, and is not inconsistent with Islam and its documented
history. I also tried to illuminate the fact that Mut'a can be legal,
depending on which companion's point of view we take.

In this part and the next two parts, however, I would like to talk More
about Mut'a itself, its specifications, regulations, advantages, and to
answer some the questions which I received from the Sunnis on this
issue.

WARNING: What follows in this and the next parts is only a scientific
discussion and in NO way it should be considered as some kind of
verdict. Interested readers may contact the Shia scholars or read books
on Shia Jurisprudence to learn more about this issue, its terms, and its
restrictions.

Fixed-Term/Temporary/Pleasure/Mut'a Marriage is a contract between a
man and woman, much in the same way the Long-Term/Conventional Marriage
is. The same vows are exchanged by the partners or their authorized
representatives in both cases, including stating the dowry. In temporary
marriage a fixed period of time (like one year, four years of college,
etc.) should be clearly specified.

After the expiration date of the marriage, the couple must either
extend it to another specified time or they will automatically separate
without divorce, and the woman must count the "Iddah" (waiting period)
before which she can not marry any one else.

The dowry (Mahr/Sidaq) should be specified at the time of contract. It
may be a calculated sum of money, or a certain work like teaching a
certain science, or something like a ring or bracelet by specifying or
showing them.

As for the dower which are not present at the time of contract, it is
sufficient that the dower be described in such a manner that the woman's
misunderstanding will be removed, i.e., that it be described exactly as
it is.

Usually in this type of marriage, the couple do not plan to have any
child. But it becomes accidentally the case, then the kids from this
marriage are the legal sons/daughters of their parents. All regulations
of permanent marriage will apply to the children.

The man and woman are husband and wife till the expiration date of the
contract, much in the same way as the normal marriage is. In fact the
author of al-Jawahir (the biggest Shia Encyclopedia in Jurisprudence)
said:

"Originally the same rules apply to permanent and temporary marriage,
except what was excluded by certain proofs."

For instance, similar to the permanent one, in the temporary marriage
it is necessary for the virgin girl to get the permission of her
guardian (which is usually her father) before accepting such offer. Imam
al-Ridha said: "A virgin may not be married temporarily without her
father's permission."

(Wasa'il al-Shia, v14, p458). As for a non-virgin, she can make her
decision alone without getting the agreement of her guardian or any
other person, but it is still encouraged to get the permission.

Temporary marriage is valid with the Muslim women and the woman of the
People of the Book like the Christians and the Jews. And if the
Christian/ Jewish girl is virgin, the prosper should still seek the
permission of her guardian even if that guardian is not a Muslim.

Under very extraordinary circumstances, if it is proved that her
guardian does not care about her benefit, a Muslim scholar (or the judge
when the government is truly Islamic) can let her marry.

In this case the necessity of the permission of the father is lifted
and will be shifted to the permission of the scholar/judge. This is true
for permanent marriage as well.

Marriage with a woman who is atheist, or blasphemer, or apostate, or a
woman who declares animosity against Ahlul-Bayt, or the extremist (one
who believes Ali is God) is not allowed; and the same applies to man
with the addition that marriage of Muslim woman with a non-Muslim man is
not allowed either.

It is undesirable/discouraged (Makrooh) that one temporarily marries
the fornicatress who is not famous for practicing fornication.
Conservative way is to avoid marrying her at all. As for the woman who
is famous for committing fornication like a prostitute, it is forbidden
to do Mut'a with her, unless she repents.

Her repentance is known if she was called to commit sin and she
refused; then that should indicate her trustworthiness, and an
indication for the possibility that she may revive her soul with the
opportunity of temporary marriage and being in the company of a person
who can guide her to the right path.

Nonetheless, it is highly encouraged that the wife in both temporary
and permanent marriage to be modest and temperate, not reckless or
cheap.

It is recommended that a Muslim man contract a temporary marriage only
with a chaste ('Afifa) Muslim woman. Here chaste means someone who has
never committed fornication and who follows the Shari'ah in her
activities, and in general is honest and upright. The two attributes
'Muslim' and 'chaste' are mentioned in the following two tradition:

Imam al-Ridha (AS) was asked: "Is it possible for a man to contract a
temporary marriage with a Jew or a Christian?" He (AS) answered: "I
would prefer that he engage in Mut'a with a free Muslim woman." (Wasa'il
al-Shia, v14, p452).

To a question about performing Mut'a, the Imam Ja'far replied: "It is
permissible. So marry none but a chaste woman, for God says, 'And those
who guard their private parts' (23:5). Hence you should not put your
private parts where you do not feel safe with your dirhams." (Wasa'il
al-Shia, v14, p452).

How to distinguish a modest and temperate woman? In the case that one
may have suspicious to the unknown woman who want to offer the temporary
marriage, one way is to test her, yet this is not necessary as we will
discuss shortly.

It was reported that a modest woman was astonished when a believer
asked her to commit the sin of fornication. She thought the man
committed sin by saying such thing. She did not know that it was a test
with no lying meant.

That was a question and not a decision to do wrong. For it was Abdullah
Ibn Ya'fur who asked the Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) that if she can
temporarily marry an unknown woman. The Imam answered: "One could invite
her to commit sin, and if she accepted he should not marry with her."

If someone makes an accusation against a woman, it is recommended that
before contracting of Mut'a with her the man ask her about her
situation, i.e., as to whether or not she has a husband and whether or
not she is chaste. However, in general, asking is not a condition of the
contract (Jawahir, v5, p165).

The rule of Jurisprudence regarding to "the principle of correctness of
the acts of a Muslim" demands that one consider the act of a woman who
has declared herself ready to enter into Mut'a as correct. According to
this principle, whenever we are in doubt concerning the correctness of
the act of a Muslim, we preserve the social and legal order by judging
that his/her act was correct, unless otherwise proven by chance.

Several traditions are related which demonstrate the reprehensibility
of asking about the woman's situation AFTER the contract has been
made.

The temporary marriage is NOT encouraged when the permanent one is
available. Ali Ibn Yaqtin (RA) who was married, asked Imam al-Ridha (AS)
about pleasure marriage. The Imam said to him:

"Why do you want to bother with it while God has provided you what's
better (i.e., permanent wife)."

Another one also asked him about Mut'a, and the Imam (AS) said:

"It is absolutely permissible and allowed to whom is not provided with
(permanent) marriage, then he may act decently by resorting to pleasure
marriage. If he was provided with a (permanent) wife, then it is allowed
for him (to engage in temporary marriage) when he is away from his wife
(e.g., like a traveler)."

Also Imam al-Ridha (AS) wrote to one of his followers:

"You should revive the Islamic law, but do not persist on pleasure
marriage where it would keep you occupied from your permanent wives, for
they (permanent wives) might reject the faith and then accuse us."

The scholars consider such restricted allowance only as undesirable,
but not forbidden. This is due to other traditions which makes it
permissible, but yet undesirable/discouraged in the case of having a
permanent wife.

As we mentioned earlier, there are some differences between the
temporary marriage and the permanent marriage which I now briefly
pinpoint here:

**1) Temporary marriage is NOT necessarily a relationship**

The couple who want to enter in temporary marriage contract may put a
condition at the time of contract that the marriage shall not be
consummated.
Such condition can NOT be put in permanent marriage and it is the
religious obligation of the permanent wife to be sexually available to
her husband and should be responsive to his sexual requests; and at the
same time, man should not avoid intercourse for more than four month and
should sleep with his permanent wife at least once each four nights.

Such sexual necessities do not apply in temporary marriage, because it
has been designed for wider purposes which will be explained later. In
the case that the couple put a condition that they do not have sex, then
they can only enjoy other things in a couple life. If, later, the woman
agrees to have sex, the condition is resolved, and the marriage can be
consummated.

This is due to the fact that the obstacle to sexual relations was the
woman's unwillingness to permit anything more than what was agreed upon
in the contract.

But the marriage contract warrants intercourse, i.e., the marriage
contract itself establishes the permissibility of intercourse. Thus if
the obstacle is removed, the default contract will come into play,
unless such obstacle could not be removed by the woman (e.g., permission
of the father of a virgin girl). (see Matajir, v2, p300; Riyadh, v2,
p116)

In other words, if the condition of non-intercourse is laid down, that
is the woman's right over the man. So if she chooses to waive the
condition, union is lawful.

**2) Mut'a with is strongly discouraged for a virgin girl**

Although a virgin girl can temporarily marry if her guardian permits,
such marriage is strongly discouraged (Makrooh Muakkad) for a virgin
girl \* if \* having sex is to be involved. Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) in
one tradition mentioned this and gave the reason that "it may bring
shame for her family."

In practice, most Muslim parents do not allow such thing either. But
there is no problem for a virgin girl to temporarily marry if they put
the condition at the time of the contract that the marriage can not be
consummated, by saying for instance: they can just visit each other
under the supervision of the parents.

However, under some circumstances, the temporary marriage (with no
restriction) may become necessary even for a virgin girl if her guardian
feels that there is a great possibility of committing sin for her girl
due to personal and or environmental situation, and if no qualified man
proposed her permanent marriage.

**3) Inheritance**

In temporary marriage the wife and the husband don't inherit each
other, while their kids inherit from their parents. According to the
Imam Ja'far (AS): "Among the regulations of Mut'a is that you do not
inherit from the woman, nor does she inherit from you." (Wasa'il
al-Shia, v4, p486).

However man and woman can inherit each other if it is made a condition
at the time of contract. Also it is possible that only one of the
spouses may be named heir to the other, in which case the inheritance is
one-sided.

The reason that inheritance is permissible provided that the condition
is entered into the contract is first the universal applicability of the
prophetic Hadith: "The believers hold fast to their promises." (Sahih
al- Bukhari, v3, p120). Second, according to the Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq:
"If they should stipulate the condition of inheritance [in the contract
of Mut'a], they must hold fast to this condition." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v4,
p486).

**4) Financial Support**

In this type of marriage, man is not required to financially support
his wife, yet he is required to support the kids if any. However, man
should financially support his wife if it is made a condition at the
time of contract.

**5) The length of the waiting period (Iddah)**

After the expiration of marriage woman should wait for a specific
amount of time before which she can not marry any one else. This is the
case if the couple had intercourse, otherwise there is no waiting
period. This rule also applies for permanent marriage in the case of
divorce.

However the length of this waiting period is slightly different. The
waiting period of a temporarily married woman is equal to that of
slave-girl which is different from the permanent married woman since
temporary marriage is a "weaker" marriage much the same as marriage with
slave-girl is a "weaker" marriage.

The length of waiting period for woman is two complete menstrual
periods (about two month) for temporary marriage, if she menstruates. If
the woman is of menstruating age but for some reason does not
menstruate, her waiting period is 45 days. (It should be emphasized that
having intercourse with a girl who has not reached to the age of puberty
is forbidden in Islam).

Imam al-Baqir (AS) said:

"The waiting period of a divorced (free) woman is three months, ... and
what is required of a wife by Mut'a is the same as what is required of a
slave." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14, p484)

It has been narrated from both Imam Baqir (AS) and Imam Musa (AS) that:
"To divorce a slave, one must pronounce the formula of divorce twice;
her waiting period is two menstrual periods." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v15,
p469).

If the woman is pregnant, her waiting period is the remaining time it
takes to give birth, provided that this time is not shorter than her
regular waiting period in this case. (See al-Fiqh ala al-Madhahib
al-Khamsah, by Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah).

As for the case of free permanent married woman who is divorced, it is
the clear text of Quran that her waiting period of three complete
menstruation (about three month). In temporary marriage the couple will
separate from each other automatically after the expiration date without
divorce, and it is the consensus of the scholars that there is no
divorce in Mut'a.

Even for the permanent marriage, the waiting period is not three month
if the separation is not due to divorce. For instance see 2:234 where it
prescribes a different waiting period for the case of death of
husband.

The Holy Quran only provided some general regulations and left behind
many specific regulations to be specified by the Prophet himself. For
instance Quran does not say that we should pray two units in Fajr or how
we should pray. It was the Prophet (PBUH&HF) who explained all these
regulations which were all revelations but were not a part of Quran.
This is the Sunnah of the Prophet which has been transmitted by his
Ahlul-Bayt (peace be upon them all).

The fact is that we do NOT need to know the reasons behind the
religious regulations set by Allah and His Prophet in order to obey
them. These regulations are based on the infinite wisdom of Allah.
However, using logic, one may find some of the reasons behind them. Yet,
one can never claim these findings are the only reasons behind those
regulations. Allah mentioned in Quran that "You have not been granted
knowledge but little."

Logically speaking, the waiting period for woman has many advantages:

1. If woman is pregnant she will realized this fact within the first
two months.

2. If not, this waiting period will serve as preparation time for woman
to adopt a new lifestyle. It is neutral interval for rest, psychological
relaxation, and the transition from one state to another.

3. In most cases in permanent marriage, the divorce is the result of
dispute between the couple, and they separate from each other with
broken heart and tragic feelings. It is likely that after a period of
isolation,

they soon realize that they need each other and they still love one
another, and what they did was wrong. This period provides enough time
for both couple to rethink about their behavior which may lead to
re-uniting before the woman marries a different man.

However, in the temporary marriage the problem mentioned in Item 3,
does not exist. The couple know from the beginning that they will
separate from each other after a fixed period of time, and with that
understanding they entered to such contract.

Therefore there is no surprises nor is any hard feelings when the
marriage period expires. They need no extra time to rethink about
returning to each other or to pass the period of hard feelings and
mistreatments which is the case when permanently married couples
divorce. Thus it seems reasonable why in the temporary marriage, the
waiting period is a little shorter.

Moreover, as we mentioned, the waiting period for temporary marriage is
equal to that of the slave-girls which does not follow the rule of
permanent marriage in this regard.

According to a Sunni report:

Ibn Abbas was asked: "Is Mut'a fornication or marriage?" He answered:
'Neither the one nor the other.' The questioner then asked: "Well then,
what is it?" Ibn Abbas replied: "It is Mut'a', just as God has said."
The questioner continued: "Is there a waiting period in Mut'a?" He
replied: "Yes, a menstrual period." He was also asked: "Do the husband
and wife inherit from each other?" He answered: "No."

Sunni reference: Tafsir al-Kabir, by Fakhr al-Razi, v3, p286

In the above Sunni tradition, it is attributed to Ibn Abbas that the
waiting period for Mut'a is only one menstrual period. However, this is
not acceptable for us due to more accurate traditions from the Imams of
Ahlul- Bayt which explain that it is two menstrual periods.

**6) The Time-period of Marriage**

The time period of a temporary marriage must be expressed at the time
of contract in a manner which allows no possibility of increase or
decrease. According to the Imam al-Ridha (AS): "...(Mut'a must) be a
stipulated thing for a stipulated period." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14,
p479).

The Imam was once asked if it is possible to conclude a contact of
Mut'a for 'one or two hours'. He replied, "No exact time limit is
understood from 'one or two' hours." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14, p479).

Based on the opinion of some of the scholars, if the stipulated period
is not mentioned at all in the text of the contract, the marriage cannot
take place and the contract is invalid. (Matajir, v2, p299; Sharh
al-Lum'a, v5, p287; Jawahir, v5, p169). Some scholars, however, are in
the opinion that if the time period is not specified then the marriage
reverts to a long- term marriage and separation can only happen by death
or by divorce. In this case, all the rules of the regular marriage
apply.

They base their opinion on a tradition from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (AS) who
said: "If a time period is stated, the marriage is Mut'a; if it is not
stated, it is permanent." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14, p469).

al-Shahid al-Thani comments that the above tradition does not state
explicitly that the desire of the two parties to the contract was to
establish a marriage of Mut'a, but then they fail to mention the time
period. On the contrary, the purport of the Hadith is that marriage with
a stated period is Mut'a while marriage without a stated period is
permanent marriage. (Sharh al-Lum'a, v5, p287).

There is no upper or lower limit to the duration of the time period. It
makes no difference if the period is extremely long, so that one doubts
whether the parties will survive its duration; or if it is extremely
short, so that there is no possibility of consummation.

In other words, any time period is permissible, so long as it is
specific and both sides are aware of the situation and are satisfied.
(Sharh al-Lum'a, v5, p285).

There are traditions which indicate that it is permissible for the
agreed upon time period either to be joined to the moment of
establishing the contract or to be postponed. (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14,
p446). As for the possibility of postponing the beginning of Mut'a, this
is conditional upon the stipulation of the day and the month in which it
is to begin.

For example, if the man states that the contract will be for one month
but fails to stipulate exactly when that month is to begin, the contract
is invalid because the exact time is not stated. But if the contract is
meant for both sides to be in effect immediately, without any mention of
a postponement, then the marriage begins as soon as the contract is
made, and the marriage is valid. (Matajir, v2, p300; Jawahir, v5,
p171).

**7) The Due Dowry vs. Consummation**

In the permanent marriage the consummation of marriage is only due to
sexual act. But the temporary marriage is different from the permanent
marriage because there is AN EXTRA FORM OF CONSUMMATION, that is the
consummation of the time period. Therefore the consummation of the time
period also must also be taken into account for the issue of dowry.
(Masalik, v1, p538).

The above explanation follows that once the Mut'a contract is made the
wife receives the whole dowry, whether or not the husband consummates
the marriage before the time period expires.

Starting the Mut'a marriage means consuming the time period which
requires full dowry. The wife is entitled to the dowry as long as she
places herself at her husband's disposal and does not present him with
any obstacles to consummating the marriage. When the time period is
over, the wife is freed from the obligations of the contract. (Matajir,
v2, p300; Jawahir, v5, p170).

If the couple made a condition at the time of contract to avoid or
limit sex, then the woman is not religiously obliged to be sexually
available to her husband and she is still entitled to the dowry.

The woman may ask for the whole amount of the dower at the beginning of
the marriage. In this case, the man may not take back any of the dower
under any circumstances, unless for some reason the contract turns out
be invalid from the beginning. Several traditions are recorded which
establish this point without question. (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14, pp
482-483).

In a situation where a contract is made, but BEFORE THE BEGINNING of
the time period the man decides not to go through with the marriage but
to 'give back' to the woman the contracted time, she is entitled to
one-half the dower. The situation is similar to divorce before
consummation in permanent marriage. (Sharh al-Lum'a, v5, p285; Shara'i,
v2, p24; Matajir, v2, p300; Masalik v1, p538).

Since the consummation of time is taken into account in the issue of
dowry for Mut'a, it follows that if a woman who has made a contract of
Mut'a separates from her husband on her own free will before the end of
the time period, whether before or after consummation, the man is
allowed to reduce the dower in proportion to the amount of time by which
the time period of the Mut'a has been reduced, provided that he has not
already paid her the full dower. (Sharh al-Lum'a v5, p285).

Thus, for example, if the woman's dower is $300 and the time period 30
days; and if the woman decides to avoid her husband after 20 days, her
husband would reduce the dower by one-third. Hence, if the woman should
fail to fulfill any of the conditions of the marriage for the whole time
period, she forfeits the whole dower.

Numerous traditions have been recorded concerning this particular
point. For example, the Imam Ja'far (AS) was asked if it is permissible
to hold back part of the dower if the woman fails to put herself at her
husband's disposal.

He replied: 'It is permissible for you to hold back what you can [i.e.,
what you have not already given her]. so if she goes back on her word,
take from her [in proportion to] the amount she has broken the contract.
(Wasa'il al-Shia, v14, p481).

However, if the woman fails to provide the man with conjugal rights
because of an excuse sanctioned by the Shari'ah, such as menstruation or
'fear of an oppressor', then the dower can not be reduced. A man came to
the Imam Ja'far and said: "I contracted Mut'a marriage with a woman for
one month for a given amount.

But the woman only came to me for part of the month, and part she
stayed away." The Imam replied: "An amount should be held back from her
dower equivalent to the amount she avoided you, except for the days of
her menstruation, for those belong to her." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14,
p481).

If the marriage has been consummated and the woman was aware of the
contract's invalidity, she can have no claim to a dower, since she is a
fornicatress, and there is no dower for fornication. In this case, if
the man has already given the woman the whole dower, she must return it
as soon as the invalidity of the contract becomes apparent.

If she no longer possesses the amount which must be returned, she is
liable for it, no matter how it may have left her hands, whether, for
example, she has spent it or it was stolen. (Matajir, v2, p301; Sharh
al-Lum'a v5, pp 287-288).

If the woman passes away during the period of the Mut'a, even if it be
before consummation, her dower may in no way be lessened, exactly as is
in permanent marriage. (Sharh al-Lum'a, v5, p286).

In the next part, we will discuss the necessities and the advantages of
the Temporary marriage, Insha Allah.


