Temporary Marriage in Islam (part Vii)
======================================

**The Necessities and the Advantages of Mut'a**

Sexual feelings are strong forces within human beings which are created
by God, and like any other force or instinct, should be directed and
supervised. Marriage is God's legislation to direct this very strong
force which might otherwise destroy the human being's prosperity and
salvation.

Permanent marriage is the most recommended form of marriage, however,
there are situations in which for different reasons permanent marriage,
where the intention is to construct a family, is NOT possible. Then what
should be done in these cases?

Can we accept that God has left us on our own in this important issue,
or should we expect some legislation in this case as well? If we do not
accept temporary marriage, there are two options left:

1) Sexual promiscuity and licentiousness, with all it's results. This
is what happens (and is promoted by media, Hollywood, etc.) openly in
the West, and not very openly in other cultures.

2) Suppressing all sexual feelings and instincts until a permanent
marriage is possible. There are, however, a few problems with this
choice:

A) It is not possible to enforce it in any large scale form, as a
general rule for society.

B) Even if we assume that it can be enforced, it may cause
psychological disorders, and many other complexities. Suppressing
natural needs and instincts (sexual or otherwise) is not a healthy
practice and Islam does not approve of it either.

It is evident that permitting temporary marriage (until a permanent
marriage becomes possible) is the best solution. Mut'a is just a
sanctification of the boyfriend/girlfriend relationship. Two people may
also live together all their lives without marrying. But a marriage
ceremony sanctifies the relationship.

The couple acknowledge their actions as fulfillment of God's will and
not merely their personal desires. They are under an obligation to God
to fulfill their commitment. In a similar way, Mut'a sanctifies what
would otherwise be just a boyfriend/girlfriend relationship.

One person mentioned that the Imam Ali's (AS) narration: "If it were
not for Umar's prohibition of temporary marriage no one would commit
adultery except a wretched" is not acceptable because it draws a
distorted picture of men's sexuality!

Well, I must say that it is not just men who commit adultery, and Imam
Ali (AS) is referring to both men and women. Temporary marriage, as well
as permanent marriage, has two sides, and BOTH sides are supposed to
benefit from it. Consequently, depriving them for these benefits may
cause both men and women to go wrong.

It seems that some people have no problem with what is promoted in the
West, with a culture of nudity and nakedness, with using women as
adverting objects, with reducing the sexual values and ethics to the
garbage and obscenity we see everyday on TV, media, etc.

There is nothing humiliating and unethical about using a young, pretty,
half-naked girl (the ideal woman!) as a sex object to sell bear. A woman
selling her beauty to a magazine or show is considered to have a
"respectable" career and is called a "model"! What a meaningful
terminology!

On the contrary, playing the role of a "mother" in a family is
considered to be unimportant, if not humiliating. Being
boyfriend-girlfriends is accepted as a sign of freedom, culture, and
growth. However, if we talk about temporary marriage suddenly these
people start to cry!

Some also believe that the spread of pre-marital relationships in the
West is not completely a result of moral breakdown, rather it is also
due to changed socio-economic conditions. In older times, marriage was
simpler and the average age of marriage was much lower.

In today's complex society, it is no longer possible to be economically
self-sufficient enough to get married until one is nearly thirty years
old. This means that the only option to avoid pre-marital relationships
is to extend the period of pre- marital celibacy to as much as 15
years.

Education is another obvious example. The man and woman usually can not
find a job if they are unskilled or uneducated, and therefore financial
independence is not feasible in the early stages of their life.

Such prolonged celibacy is unnatural and cannot be sustained in any
society for long. This is one reason why the traditional marriage
customs broke down in the west during the last 30 years.

Today, most Muslim countries are also rapidly modernizing. It is
inevitable that they will also face many of the pressures that most
Western countries are facing. They have a choice to make.

They can either try to mount a futile struggle against inevitable
change and face a chaotic breakdown of their traditional customs. Or
they can courageously take the initiative and revive the Islamic values
such as Mut'a to respond to changing needs of the society in the true
spirit of Islam.

Choosing the second option will be a satisfying answer to the problem
of prolonged pre-marital celibacy. Allowing an open and honest
relationship committed to in the name of God with best of intentions,
will discourage secret or promiscuous sexual behavior which is much more
harmful to the moral fabric of a society.

Below I have summarized few reasons, out of many, for the necessity of
Temporary Marriage, and the advantages associated with it:

1) As I mentioned, temporary marriage is not necessarily a sexual
relation, and it could be for many other reasons. One purpose could be:
getting to know each other closely.

In the Shia communities it is even widely applied for a virgin girl to
enter into such temporary marriage WITH the condition that the marriage
is NOT to be consummated. This is actually for done a boy and girl want
to permanently marry, but they don't know much about each other, and to
familiarize themselves to each other, they will enter to such contract
few months before the official permanent marriage.

This period is what is known as "engagement". The engagement for the
Shia Muslims means that they have contracted Mut'a marriage. (There is
no other way for engagement in Islam!) In this period the boy regularly
visits the girl in the house of the girl's parents and he is considered
as a part of their family.

They are "Mahram" to each other (i.e., boy can see the girl and her
mother without head-cover, as a result of temporary marriage contract).
They talk, study, have fun, go to picnic along with their parents, and
so on. The boy and girl are husband and wife, but the only thing that
they can't do, is to sleep together.

This gives an opportunity to the boy and the girl in order to know each
other more closely and to see if they can live together for the rest of
their life and if their personal feelings are sort of compatible.
Usually if something is found to be wrong, they will break up before the
time when they want to permanently marry. This helps to decrease the
rate of divorce in permanent marriage (when the permanent marriage may
have been consummated and they may even have children) which is the
worst thing in the family life.

2) Another justification about temporary marriage is that, in Islam,
the right of divorce has been given to the husband and not the wife.
Also according to the Islamic teaching, a girl and a boy can not be with
each other before marriage.

So if the only way in Islam was to permanently marry, then this would
be unjust towards a woman who does not know his husband before marriage.
What if the woman later finds out that she does not have a very happy
life with her husband because they are not morally compatible?

Is she is bound to live with the husband that she didn't know and she
does not like him to the extent that she desires? The answer for
permanent marriage is Yes. She can not get divorced unless her husband
wants to divorce her.

(Under some circumstances, a Muslim scholar/Judge can divorce her if
she can prove that she is being harassed and is deprived of her rights
or her man is sexually impotent, etc. But this is not likely to happen
if she just does not like her husband too much or if she finds that she
does not have too much compatibility and interest with her husband.
Moreover, such procedure is risky, since the verdict of judge may be
different than the wish of woman).

The option of temporary marriage removes this unjust look of authority.
In Temporary marriage a girl and a boy have opportunity to live together
for sometime to find if they will see a good future for their permanent
marriage. As I said, the couple entered in temporary marriage contract
may put the condition at the time of contract that the marriage is not
to be sexually consummated. The guardian of the girl can also enforce
such condition and the couple can just visit each other during the day
to talk, study, and take part in any other non- sexual activities.

3) Temporary marriage is a conditional marriage. The purpose of such
contract can be even only for talking to each other. Although necessary
talks between two sexes in order to get along with daily life, without
evil intention and without possible evil consequences, is not forbidden
in Islam, but a man and woman who are presently unmarried and who are in
close contact with each other due to the job, study or whatever, are
encouraged to enter to such contract. This removes any possibility of
sin.

4) In another case, a boy and a girl may NOT have reached to a point to
manage a family life with all financial and legal responsibilities. Or
they might be able to manage it financially but they are in a temporary
situation where they can't plan for permanent marriage,
like bachelor students who come to other countries to study where they
may not be able to find a good match for the permanent life in the
foreign country as a result of cultural differences. If they feel they
can't stand emotionally, they may enter to such contract for the few
years that they are away from home.

In any situation, if one can not control himself/herself, it is
necessary to either temporarily or permanently marry. Obviously,
temporary marriage is more practical in such situations.

5) In each community, there are some women who have lost their husbands
either by death or divorce, and no body had offered them a permanent
marriage proposal after their first husband. She will have to do one of
the three things:

First to imprison the calls of nature in her body and bury her
feelings, and then become like a nun. Sometimes this happens when the
society tries to keep her as a prisoner of injustice, cultural
traditions, and priesthood which Islam has made illegal.

Second, she also could fight back and run towards indecency and
immorality which is what happened in the western societies. Third, she
could also become poor, weak, and homeless if she could not find a job
to support herself.

Islam should have a solution for such problems and emotional needs, and
that is temporary marriage which she could benefit to the time she finds
a qualified permanent husband. Of course, she can refuse to marry either
way, and agree to a life of piety and loneliness away from any
marriage,

then that's no problem! The problem occurs when the matter becomes one
of the two: whether she would fall into indecency as what happened in
the western societies, or whether she would preserve her chastity from
sin through temporary marriage, based on the rule of Almighty God and
His Messenger (PBUH&HF).

6) According to the Islamic teaching, although the permanent marriage
of a Muslim man with a woman from the People of the Book is not
forbidden, but it is discouraged (Makrooh). Because permanent marriage
is a plan for the whole lifetime while there is no guarantee that such
woman will change her belief in future.

Islam is not a custom but is a complete way of life. Such marriage
could not be a successful marriage if the opposition in beliefs and
practices wants to continue for the whole lifetime.

In contrary, temporary marriage is a plan which expires after its
period, and by that time, it would be apparent if the non-Muslim woman
is really interested in the teaching of Islam, and whether she is a
suitable match for the whole lifetime.

7) A nice aspect of temporary marriage is that the couple can extend
the period of their contract or even can convert the temporary marriage
into a permanent marriage if they find that they both wish to live with
each other permanently.

They can do this only after the expiration of the first contract, or
else the man can wave the rest of time period to his wife, so as to
finish the temporary marriage earlier, and he should give her the dower
(if it has not been paid yet), and then start a new contract with her
with another specified period with a new dower. When the woman remarries
the same man, she has no waiting period.

This latter method of renewing the contract is established by a
tradition related from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS). He was asked about a
man who married a woman for a period of one month, but then found that a
love for her was developing in his heart.

Before the period expires, could he renew the contract and increase the
time period and dowry? The Imam answered that such a course of action
was not permissible so long as the first contract remained in effect.
Therefore: "He must return to her the remainder of the days [of the
contract] and then set up a new contract." (Wasa'il al-Shia, v14,
p478).

This way guarantees that woman has free choice without any pressure or
temptation to decide if she would like to renew the marriage after she
has fully received the dower of the previous marriage contract and after
the previous marriage has ended.

In any way, it is necessary that the contract be repeated all over
again, with specifying dowry (Mahr; Sidaq), new permission of the father
of virgin girl (if the case), and also the marriage sentences ('Aqd)
need to be spoken literally again.

The acceptance in heart is not enough, and some specific words should
be uttered. One of the requirements of any kind of marriage is verbal
offer and equal acceptance by the other party or their authorized
representatives.

8) Temporary marriage is not like polygamy which should be rare. It can
be widely applied in an ideal Islamic society. Temporary marriage will
result in less divorce rate, less rate of the youth committing unlawful
sex, less eye-contact sins and so on.

There are many more advantages for this Sunnah of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF), but here we are limited by space. Tawfiq al-Fukaiki in his
book "The Mut'a and its effect/benefit on society", in Arabic, discusses
some of the would- be benefits.

However, we emphasize that the allowance of temporary marriage should
not cause the importance of the institution of permanent marriage and
family to be overlooked.

All efforts should be made to promote permanent marriage, to eliminate
the barriers and problems in its way. Therefore, temporary marriage, in
general, should be looked upon as a secondary measure to protect both
society and the individuals from the effects which otherwise would rise.
It is not very difficult to see these problems both in the West and in
the "Islamic" countries.


