Society's Need For Religion
===========================

"Alif Lam Ra. (This is) a Book which We have revealed to you that you
may bring forth men, by their Lord's permission, from utter darkness
into lighç, to the way of the Mighty, the Praised One. " Holy Qur'an
(14:1)

"0 followers of the Book! indeed Our apostle has come to you making
clear to you much of what you concealed of the Book and forgiving much;
indeed, there has come to you light and a clear Book from Allah. With it
Allah guides him who seeks His good pleasure into the ways of peace and
brings them out of utter darkness into light by His will and guides them
to the right path. " Holy Qur'an (5:15-18)

"He said: 0 my people! have you considered if I have a clear proof from
my Lord and He has given me a goodly sustenance from Himself ; and I do
not desire that in opposition to you I should betake myself to that
which I forbid yow I desire nothing but reform so far as I am able, and
with none but Allah is the direction of my affair to a right issue; on
Him do I rely and to Him do I turn. " Holy Qur'an (11:88)

"And to Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. He said: 0 my people!
serve Allah, you have no Allah other than Him; clear proof indeed has
come to you from your Lord, therefore give full measure and weight and
do not diminish to men their things, and do not make mischief in the
land after its reform; this is better for you if you are believers. "
Holy Qur'an (7:85)

"There is no good in most of their secret counsel except (in his) who
enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation between people; and
whoever does this seeking. Allah's pleasure, We will give him a mighty
reward. " Holy Qur'an (4:114)
"They who turn (to Allah), who serve (Him), who praise (Him), who fast,
who bow down, who prostrate themselves, who enjoin what is good wad
forbid what is evi4 and who keep the limits of Allah, wad give good news
to the believers. " Holy Qur'an (9:112)

"Ta this then go on inviting, and go on steadfastly on the right way as
you are commanded, and do not follow their low desires, and say: I
believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book, wad I am commanded to do
justice between you... " Holy Qur'an (42:15)

"…and help one another in goodness and piety, and do not help one
another in sin wad aggression; but keep your duty to Allah; surely Allah
is severe in punishment. " Holy Qur'an (5:2)

"And hold fast by the covenant of Allah all together and be not
disunited, and remember the favor of Allah on you when you were enemies,
then He united your hearts, so by His favor you became brethren; and you
were on the brink of a pit of fire, then He saved you from it; thus does
Allah make clear to you His communications that you may follow the rigid
way. And from among you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is that shall be
successful.'' Holy Qur'an (3:103-104)

"Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and that
when you judge between people you judge with justice; surely Allah
admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing; Hearing.
'' Holy Qur'an (4:58)

The above mentioned Qur'anic verses are rich with their concepts, alive
in their spirit and contents, full of meanings and ideas, and prolific
in organizing and guiding notions and values. By combining these
concepts and ideas, and by connecting them to the objectives stated
through their letters and expressed by their texts, we realize that they
are a clear statement inviting people to organize, reform and protect
the society, and to draw a program for it according to the best possible
legislative and cultural forms.

This can be discerned by scrutinizing the words of the verses and the
details of Qur'anic texts, so that their implications and contents can
be comprehended. If we do so, we will be able to discover the
following:

1.The Glorious Qur'an is the torch of light and guidance for humanity
and guides it on the road to safety and righteousness. It prevents
humanity from going astray,

through its principles, its laws and its values for the purpose of
organizing the society, building its structure and basing its being on
the foundation of truthfulness, justice and order. Allah the Exalted
says:

"...indeed, there has come to you light and a clear Book from Allah.
With it Allah guides him who seeks His good pleasure in the way of
peace, wad brings them out of utter darkness into Light by His Will; wad
guides them to the right path. '' Holy Our'an (5:15-18)

2. The call of religion is the call for reforming and rejecting
mischief, and for fighting against destruction, as well as against those
practices borne by mankind's ignorance during diverse ages and
generations as a distinguishing characteristic and a historic indication
showing its culture.

"Therefore, fear Allah and obey me, and obey not the command of the
prodigal who spread corruption in the earth wad do not reform. '' Holy
Qur'an (28:150-152)

3. Religion calls upon people to do good and to forbid evil, mischief,
wickedness and tyranny. Allah, the Exalted says: "Surely, Allah enjoins
justice wad kindness, and giving to kinsfolk, and forbids lewdness and
abomination and wickedness. He admonishes you in order that you may take
heed. '' Holy Qur'an (16.90)

4. According to Islam, injustice, deviation and crime in this life are
man-made, and man is responsible for them; but these devious phenomena
are not imposed on man as inevitable; and thus Islam urges man to refuse
injustice, mischief and deviation, stirring in him the spirit of
resistance, to block the way of evil and error. By this man rejects the
theory of compulsion and fate that leads to acceptance of injustice and
submission.

The Qur'an is quite explicit in communicating this fact and in placing
it before man's eyes: "Corruption has appeared on land and sea because
of (the evil) which men's hands have done, that He may make them taste a
part of that which they have done, in order that they may return. ''
Holy Qur'an (30:41)

''…It was not for Allah to wrong them, but they wronged themselves. ''
Holy Qur'an (29:40)

5. Islam tries to establish a unified and cooperative society dominated
by the spirit of brotherhood and equality. "...help one another in
goodness and piety, and do not help one another in sin and aggression...
'' Holy Qur'an (5:2)

6. The invitation of religion is to establish a state of truth and
justice, and to make them the foundation of the law as justice is the
most sacred symbol and the loftiest truth that Islam discerns in the
world. To make certain the sanctity of justice, and to demand it to be
implemented, it suffices to note that Allah, the Exalted describes
Himself as Just, and acquits Himself from injustice, and He commands His
apostle to rule with justice, equality and to adhere to truth and
equity. Allah the Exalted says:

"To this, then go on inviting and go on steadfastly on the right way as
you are commanded, and do not follow their low desires, and say: I
believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book, and I am commanded to do
justice between you... '' Holy Qur'an (42:15)

"0 David! Surely We have made you a ruler in the Land; so judge between
mankind with justice, and do not follow desire... Holy Qur'an (38:28)

So, the Glorious Qur'an defines the most obvious social aims of
religion, and explains man's need for them, and states the most
important measures to be taken to build the society and to organize and
preserve it. These measures are: First: Individual Education:

Islam set a sound educational program for the individual so that he may
be prepared to live in society and to hold fast to the principles of
ordered life. Allah the Exalted says: ''And as for him who fears to
stand in the presence of his Lord and restrains his soul from low
desires, surely the garden will be his home.'' Holy Qur'an (19:40-41)
"He is indeed successful who purifies it, and he is indeed a failure
who corrupts it.'' Holy Our'an (91.-9-lO)

"0 you who believe! Observe your duty to Allah with right observance,
and die not unless you become Muslims (unto Him). '' Holy Qur'an
(3:102)

Second: Organizing the Society:

The second step taken by Islam in this respect is to move from
educating the individual to organizing the society, through adherence to
the law and keeping it, in order to protect social life and Islam's
teachings. Allah the Exalted says: "...these are the limits (imposed by)
Allah, so do not exceed them, and whoever exceeds the limits of Allah,
these it is that are the unjust.'' Holy Qur'an (2:229)

"And whoever disobeys Allah and His messenger and goes beyond His
limits, He will cause him to enter fire to abide in it, and he shall
have an abasing chastisement. '' Holy Qur'an (4:14)

Third: Building the State:

The third step taken by Islam after building society is to construct
the state and to implement justice, as a sacred principle in life, which
is the foundation for a good government through which the rights are
observed, the duties are carried out, and the regime is protected.

Fourth: Preserving the Safety of the Social Structure: The fourth and
last stage in an Islamic society is to make reforms and prevent mischief
and corruption from creeping in after the society has been constructed,
organized and reformed. Allah the Exalted says quoting prophet Hud
(a.s.): "...I desire nothing but reform m far as I am able. '' Holy
Qur'an (11:88)

''...and do not make mischief in the earth after its reformation. ''
Holy Our'an (7:58)

When the disease of deviation and decay creeps into society's body, and
there appear the signs of injustice, mischief and confusion, Islam
imposes on every individual the obligation to do his duty of reforming
both the individual and the society, and to resist corruption and pluck
out the roots of evil and transgression, so as to guide the progress of
society on the straight path, and merge with the procession of truth and
justice. Allah the Exalted says:

"And from among you there should be a party who invite to good, and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it as that shall be
successful.'' ( 24 )

Holy Qur'an (3:104)

Accordingly, the construction of society, and measures for its welfare
and safety are implementable only through religion. Therefore, the
message of religion and the principles of belief are indispensable to
the society. This discernable cultural reality is confirmed by man's
social experience and by his sufferings from deviated principles,
systems and theories.


**Religion and Physical Care**

As religion has its moral, spiritual and mental programme and plans, it
similarly has its exact and complete program for taking care of the body
and meeting its physical and instinctive needs. This bodily care is in
harmony with that of the mental, psychological and spiritual programmes,
since man is regarded as one complete unit of inseparable soul and body.
The religious laws and values have been formulated to satisfy,
coordinate and guide all the human inclinations and activities. So,
Islam legislated laws for economy, matrimony, food, drink, worship,
cleanliness, etc.., in order to meet these needs within the limits of
the law.

Islam has founded its special plan for taking care of the body and the
instinctive activities, on the following basic principles:

1. Accepting the physical needs of the body and man's inborn instincts,
and the necessity to satisfy them in a natural way so as to keep the
body balanced. This admission has been met by the laws and teachings
which provide for man all his needs of food, drink, shelter, clothes,
marriage, medical treatment, etc.. Allah the Exalted says:

"And seek by means of what Allah has given you the abode of the
hereafter, and do not neglect your portion of the world and be kind as
Allah has been kind to you, and do not seek corruption in the earth.
Sure& Allah does not love mischief-makers.'' Holy Qur'an (28:77)

2. Islam has offered a complete programme for the protection of the
body and its energy against diseases, vanity and waste. It prohibits
whatever is harmful and immoral, such as wine, adultery, sodomy,
extravagance, lust, etc. It also purifies and protects the body against
sickness, filth and impurity which attack the body and destroy health
and cleanliness. Allah the Exalted Says:

"Say: My Lord forbids only indecencies, those apparent of them and
those concealed, and sin and rebellion without justice and that you
associate with Allah that for which He has sent down no a authority, and
that you say concerning Allah that which you do know not.

Holy Our'an (7:33)

3. Islam has a plan for utilizing man's energy and bodily effort in the
fields of construction, production and innovation. Allah the Exalted
says:

"...he brought you into being from the earth, and has made you dwell in
it... '' Holy Qur'an (11:81)

"And do not make mischief in the earth after its reformation... '' Holy
Qur'an (7:58)

4. Islam has given man the right to enjoy the beauties and the
adornments of life, and to make use of its good things. "Say: Who has
forbidden the adornment of Allah which He has brought forth for His
servants, and the good provisions?'' Holy Qur'an (7:32)

By these practical and scientific measures, Islam protects the health
of the body, provides man with physical happiness, keeps his natural
right to live, and saves his sanity and energy from uselessness, from
being completely lost and from the destruction imposed upon him by the
ignorant programmes, the man- made laws and dogmatic theological
calls.


**Can Religion Be Substitled?**

Can man reject religion and replace it by the discoveries and the
knowledge to which he could attain in the fields of social organization,
in morals and behaviour, and in ideological explanations?

Would man be happy, dignified and comfortable if he took that as a
substitute for religion?

This must be studied carefully so as to find an objective and correct
answer, since the advocates of ignorance have one answer, and the
believers in Allah have another. All the ignorants, notwithstanding
their different materialistic and infidel philosophies,

sects and secular trends, reject religion and advocate its replacement
by man's scientific and theoretical achievements, with an argument based
on a deformed idea and a disordered concept about the origin of
religion, its message and aims - the concept which takes religion to be
nothing but a mythical legend or an imagery created by a superstitious
mind during the backward and primitive ages. According to them in those
ages man tried to interpret the appearance of the universe and life.

Having failed to discover the scientific laws of nature and life, he
attributed. that to an unknown creator. He saw the rain, observed the
sunrise and the sunset, and discerned the growth of plants and animals,
their multiplication,

their birth and death; yet he did not know how those events happened,
because he was ignorant of their scientific explanation. He, therefore,
invented an imaginary theory, fabricated by his illusions, telling of
the existence of a god behind this physical existence, and of an unseen
divine power that was behind the movement and direction of all these
things.

Then, as man gradually started discovering the laws of nature, he came
to obtain a materialistic answer to eveiy event; so, now he has no need
of religion and he would not like it.

Prophets, from the viewpoint of this ignorant concept, are men
representing the thought of their communities, backward in their beliefs
and knowledge. They are distinguished because of the class - struggle
and an inclination to reform. So, they are movedby economic and social
factors to enact social reforms according to their thinking and the
conditions of their communities. As for Allah, revelation and
prophethood, they say they do not exist except in the minds of those who
believe in them.

Such are the calumnies of the modern ignorant mind and the
materialistic, infidel thought which rejects religion, revelation and
prophethood, and which is founded on denial, infidelity and disbelief in
the existence of a Creator of this universe, refusing to accept
revelation and prophethood as being true and real.

These religious facts are regarded by this ignorant and denying
interpretation as ideas expressing peoples' low understanding, and
illustrating their inferior level of knowledge. This ignorant argument
is the idea which is being repeated by the infidel seculars, according
to which they demand the abolition of religion, replacing it with the
materialistic interpretation and organization, which man reached through
researches and experiments, announcing that man is in no need of
religion, and thus severing his ties with Allah.

Religion, likewise, presents its own answer to the question: (Can
religion be substituted?), and explains its point of view. Religion's
answer is derived as we shall see, from intellect and human experience.
The answer is: There is no substitute for religion. This answer is based
on numerous scientific and known facts which prove that man cannot do
without religion.

They confirm the scientific discoveries which pave the way for
organizing social life and coining laws to govern behaviour - such as
the discoveries in the science of economy, finance, statistics,
psychology, sociology, health, etc. But without divine guidance these
are incapable of offering the legislative prescription that may cure the
disorder and the abnormality from which man is suffering in respect to
his conduct, legislation, systematizing, thinking, etc.

There are before the contemporary man enough facts and events to break
down his scientific conceit which he acquired in the wake of his
achievements in technology and invention. These made him believe that he
was the god on earth, and that he could do without adhering to religion,
and that what he obtained of knowledge and scientific achievements was
enough to organize life and lead mankind's progress to happiness.

This conceited allegation is not novel in man's history, nor is it
alien to the human thinking. In fact, it is a sickness of ignorance that
has been accompanying man throughout the stages of his history and the
chapters of his life.

The divine invitation has in every generation been confronted by the
accusations of the ignorant opponents of guidance and faith, of being
superstitious and mythical who allege that they can do without religion,
since they possess knowledge, wealth, power, etc. The inseparability
between ignorance and this accusation (religion being a legend, and
man's knowledge is able to take its place), is but a proof of its
deficient comprehension, and of how far it lags, in its spirit, mind and
conduct, behind the procession of religion and its invitation to catch
up with it.

As a matter of fact, this accusation is not new nor discovered in man's
age of knowledge and learning, as otherwise, the accusers would have
provided themselves with an excuse, and refuted their opponents by
arguing that man's knowledge of facts and achievements could discover
the mythical aspect of religion, and avoid resorting to, or depending
on, it.

But the tragedy of the modern ignorant mind is that it has been blindly
repeating what has originally been said during man's most ignorant,
backward and reactionary period - a fact which confirms that the
accusation is a mere justification for man's ignorance concealed behind
it - for his rejection of the message of religion, and for his
discordance with it, spiritually and psychologically. It has not been a
scientific discovery, nor has it been an objective estimation of
religion.

Here the Qur'an presents us with text telling about the disputes of the
nations and the perished ignorant people. These texts spotlight the
painful and bitter fact that man is diverged from admitting the truth;
justifying it by abuse, self-deceit and proud and empty allegations.
Allah the Exalted says:

"And when Our revelations are recited to them, they say: We have heard.
If we wish we can speak the like of this; this is nothing hut the
stories of the ancients. '' Holy Qur'an (8:31)

"And when it is said to them: What is it your Lord has revealed? They
say: Stories of the ancients. '' Holy Qur'an (16:24)

Then the Qur'an continues, elsewhere, to talk about man's pride and his
illusive belief of his having no need for religion. It illustrates the
result of this proud and empty haughtiness of the time of ignorance - it
is a tragic result of arrogance and is the proof of truth and Allah's
message.

Thus arrogance and pride, the main characteristics of nations and
peoples in the time of ignorance, were the cause of their own down -
fall and closed the deformed register of their historical existence.
Allah the Exalted says:

"Have you not traveled in the land to see the nature of the consequence
for those before them? They were more (numerous) than these, and
mightier in power and (in the) trace (which they left behind them) in
the earth. But all that they used to earn did not avail them, and when
their messengers brought them clear proofs (of Allah's sovereignty) they
exulted in the knowledge they (themselves) possessed. And that which
they used to mock befell them. '' Holy Qur'an (40:82-83)

This is how the Qur'an brings to us over generations, pictures of the
Conscience and thoughts of the time of ignorance, to show us a
phenomenon that accompanies man on this path through the history of his
life, so that the advocates of faith may not be taken by surprise by
this invalid accusation synchronized with deviated thought and the
imagination of the ignorant. It may suffice, by reviewing the Holy
Qur'an, to unearth the roots of this accusation and write the pages of
its history along man's procession, and to come to an important
conclusion; i.e. the argument of those of the time of ignorance - which
can be summarized as:

religion is mythical, and man can replace it by the knowledge and
discoveries he has attained - was not a scientific fact discovered by
the scientific mind; it is rather a repetition of ignorant, deviated and
ancient theory, whose existence synchronizes with the existence of human
ignorance and the very old backward ages. Besides this historical proof
exposing the fabrication of the said allegation, there are further facts
confirming the need for religion, and that the scientific achievements
cannot enrich human life with belief, concepts and systems capable of
explaining life, its order and its arrangement.

Hereunder are some of these proofs:

Firstly, the shortcomings of the scientific discoveries, and their not
covering the whole truth in man's world, both in its individual
scientific facts and in its unified and correlated wholeness.

Science failed to find out the laws that govern man and his society,
and was unable to recognize their correlation and the extent of their
interaction and effectiveness.

There is a correlation between human motives and the constitution of
the human body; between economic laws and society, politics, ethics,
health, ways of thinking, etc. But science failed to recognize and
define it in its complete objective form. So, man was left in his own
reality, his social laws, still in an unknown world which science could
neither discover nor define. Therefore, man has become an object of
experiment for those who have theories, principles, philosophies, but
they lost their lives at the alter of those severe and bitter
experiments.

Secondly, the effect of man's will on the scientific discoveries of
social trends: Man's free will to choose is the essence of humanity and
its far-reaching truth evident in every act and position, which science
cannot tame and force to accept and adopt its results, unless man
responds to it. So, the most that science can do and offer to man, is to
uncover knowledge and laws and place them before man so that he may make
use of them and define his attitude towards them.

Here is where the task of science comes to an end, and the task of man,
with all his emotional and voluntary being, begins, the task to choose
his method of handling these facts, positively or negatively.

Consequently, the role of religion is quite important in guiding
mankind and in putting him on the road leading to goodness and
happiness. It is religion that is capable of making a free will in
accordance with the will of goodness and truth, scientific knowledge is
incapable of attaining this goal, because a scientific fact is of man's
discovery, and he, therefore, is not obliged to observe it or to turn
against it. He finds in himself the power of accepting and implementing
such information, as well as the power of omitting them from his life,
since he is their owner and master, and has the will to ignore them. For
this there is much evidence and many examples.

For example, man has discovered the dangers of alcohol, adultery and
drugs, nevertheless millions of people are still falling victims to
these dangers, subjected to deadly diseases and insanity under the
psychological, nervous, and financial chaos.

Man-made laws still regard lawful such practices, and grant abnormal
individuals full freedom to practice them. So, man's knowledge availed
him not, nor did it save him from his disastrous fate.

Man has realized the dangers of usury, monopoly economic exploitation,
unlawful speculations in money and goods, and their bad effects on human
society and its security and welfare. But this knowledge was unable to
solve man's economic crisis, nor did it put an end to poverty and
fulfilled his needs. Millions of people still cannot find enough food to
keep them alive, nor do they have means to protect themselves against
poverty; and thus, hundreds of thousands of them die every day from
hunger and undernourishment, whereas, a small number of the elite enjoy
diverse kinds of luxury and excessive wealth.

Therefore, scientific discoveries, knowledge and social experience
cannot help man to force the implementation of those findings, unlike
the laws, the values and the ethics of religion, as these have the power
to direct man's will, to omit personal effect and to curb his inner
desires and whims.

This is because a believer believes that the principles of religion are
divine and must be carried out, and he is responsible for their
implementation, for which he is promised reward. This faith gives the
message of religion - besides the support of the law and scientific
facts-the authority to implement and to educate. This prepares man to
obey these principles and put them into effect, through the spiritual
and moral immunity of the religion. They work as a guaranteed
confirmation of the purpose of their application and their
fulfillment.

Analyzing the motives which induce the supporters of ignorance and
secular principles to advocate breaking away from religion and
abolishing its role in life, we come to locate three major reasons:

1.The backwardness of the materialistic and ignorant man and his weak
personality which is unable to ascend to the level of adhering to the
message of religion - the message of normal and straight forward men.
This causes man to accept his lowliness and stick to the bottom of the
swamps, and to defend this debased situation of his, he accuses religion
of being inert, reactionary, legendary, etc., trying to justify his
degrading position and his submission to be in such an immoral
situation. The Qur'an is quite exact in analyzing these types of people
and rebuking them:

"...Is it ever so, that, whenever then a messenger came to you (from
Allah) with that which your souls did not desire, you grow arrogant, and
some you disbelieve and some you say?'' Holy Qur'an (2:87)

"Among them are some who give ear to you, (Muhammad) till when they go
forth from you, they say to those who have been given knowledge: What
was it that he said just flow? Those are they whose hearts Allah has
sealed, and they follow their own Lust. '' Holy Qur'an (47:16)

This factor - of psychological backwardness and moral deviation - is
the first of the three reasons for pronouncing the ignorant secular
call.

2.The second reason that encourages the call for abolishing religion
and seeking a substitute, is the distorted picture drown about religion
and learning by the Church, the Jewish concepts and paganism. These
twisted concepts and beliefs which place faith in opposition and
hostility towards learning and man, have been encountered with rejection
and disdain, and man, with all his mighty culture and modern ideas,
stands against these backward and legendary tendencies.

In fact these distorted tendencies are to blame for man's lack of
understanding of religion and of the messages of faith and of the
invitations of guidance, not knowing that it was religion that first
called for fighting such legendary concepts, and was at the head of the
objectors against those ideas and beliefs, contradictory to the logic of
science and mind. It was religion that pioneered the announcement of the
slogans calling unity among faith, mind and science. The Qur'an, which
is the soul of divine legislation and constitution of the Islamic
religion, advocates this slogan by saying:

''…Allah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who have
knowledge to high ranks... '' Holy Qur'an (58:11)

"He grants wisdom to whom He wills, and whoever is granted wisdom, he
truly has received abundant good. But none remember except men of
understanding.'' Holy Qur'an (2:269)

And this, the apostle of religion, Muhammad, (s.a.w.)2, the spokesman
of the apostles, raises his voice saying: "The honor of knowledge is
dearer to me than the honor of worship and the best of your religion is
piety.'' "Whoever desires this world let him learn, whoever desires the
other world let him leant, and whoever desires both Let him learn . ''
Tohaful Uqool p.34

3.The third and last reason is the endearment of scientific
achievements, and the lack of distinguishing between social experience
and being able to discover and

make use of its laws, on one hand, and the natural experiments and
man's ability to discover the natural laws and utilize them, on the
other. This mixing between the nature of the two experiences, and man's
connection to them without being able to distinguish between the two,
the social and the natural, encouraged the call for satisfaction with
man's achievements in the social field, as it sufficed him to be content
with his natural discoveries,

without taking into consideration the differences between the two
cases. By scrutinizing both practices, the social and the natural, their
basic differences can be detected, and then we may clearly discern the
grave mistake in treating the two practices on the same level. It is a
mistake committed by materialistic thought when it regards the social
experience as equal to the natural one, ignorant of the differences
between the two. These differences are:

a. Concerning the natural experience:

In this experience man deals with matter, which possesses no will to
refuse or to resist. It responds to the law, and is forced to submit
exactly to the movement of that law.

Whereas in the social experience, the dealing is with the human will
which has the power to refuse or accept, and it is the will which
handles the law, not the contrary.

b. As for the natural laws, man utilizes them to his interests as soon
as he discovers them. He cannot forge these interests or falsify the
results. But he can fabricate the social laws, motivated by his
selfishness and the benefits thereof, in order to take hold of the
results.

Whereas in the case of the social laws, knowing them does not
inevitably imply carrying them out and utilizing them. Actually, man's
desires and selfish interests affect the law and misinterpret it or even
cancel it.

c. In relation to the law, man can live without having to know or to
discover most of the natural laws, or to continue the search for
discovering them, and apply those already discovered to serve his
purpose. Man, in encountering failure in his natural experiments, or
being short of comprehending them, (or knowing very little about them),
does not harm himself whatsoever. Whereas in respect to the social law,
to ignore it, or to neglect to comprehend it, inevitably causes disorder
and chaos in the society, and man himself would be the victim of this
deficiency and failure in his social experiment. What can man win if he
loses himself and his happiness? True is Allah's saying:

"...say: the losers will be those who lose themselves and their
house-folk on the Day of Resurrection. Ah, that will be the manifest
loss!'' Holy Qur'an (39:15)

So many social experiments proved disappointing! So many systems that
were applied failed! And man was the victim, and suffered much torture
and misery. When a human society lacks the social system that
establishes 3ustice, equality and respect for peoples' rights, it loses
much more than what it loses in being ignorant of the laws of the
atom,or of the planets, or of the depths of the oceans.

Man can do without that kind of knowledge. There is no harm in his
failing to discover these laws, or in their incorrect application; but
the case is not so with the concepts of justice, truth, equality, etc.

d. There is still another difference. The natural facts can be
discovered through observation and laboratory-experiments; whereas this
is not the case with the concepts of truth, equity, goodness, etc., by
which the social laws and values are measured. These measures, the
legislative and moral values, ate not the results of laboratory
experiments, nor are they something tangible in as much as a social
experiment can explicitly distinguish. They are moral and spiritual
values or measures, or evaluating facts that need knowledge,
understanding and estimation, outside the limits of an experiment, and
an objective treatment of man. They are general facts that man tries to
attain, but in reality he is always short of them, while their
contraries have always been there during his bitter experience at the
time of ignorance. So, how can man attain them? How can he make them?

Thus, in light of the above reasons, it is a grave mistake to equate a
social experiment with a natural one and, consequently, give up religion
as a social legislator. Our scientific discoveries and experiments,
though satisfying us from the natural and materialistic viewpoint,
miserably fall short of solving our social life and organizing In fact,
we have but to open wide the doors of learning and the windows of the
intellect, in order to accept the word of Allah, and to respond to the
preachings of the Qur'an and look into them carefully:

"0 you who believe! Obey Allah and the Messenger when He calls you to
that which gives you life and know that Allah intervenes between the man
and his heart, and to Him you will be gathered. '' Holy Qur'an (8:24)

At the end of our essay, we should not forget to say that the errand of
the religion is not only organizing life and guiding it; but the
ultimate goal is the other world, a much bigger reality in the message
of religion. Preparing for the afterlife is a basic and most important
task of every religion and divine message.

Man should think of that world before thinking of the transient travel
of this life. The other life is a real fact, and it is the inevitable
end at whose shores man will have to anchor. Science is incapable of
guaranteeing safety for man in the afterlife, nor can it make him
believe in it and work for it, away from the message of religion and the
guidance of faith.


