Islamic Teachings On Non-violence in Combat
===========================================

I would add: It is evident from the above quote that the Muslims did
not have a sense of vengeance against their oppressors, as taught by the
Messenger of Allah (S). This was the kind of behaviour and attitude the
Messenger of Allah (S) had sho wn towards his enemies whether during war
times or any other times. For the benefit of the reader some of the
reports are presented here.

In a tradition it is reported that Imam Saadiq (A) said :

"Before dispatching a squadron, the Messenger of Allah (S) used to call
everyone involved to a meeting and brief them about their duties and
responsibilities saying: "Advance in the name of Allah, by the name of
Allah, in the cause of Allah and in accordance with the religion of the
Messenger of Allah (S). .

. . Do not handcuff or tie up (the prisoners), Do not mutilate, Do not
use trea cherous means (with the enemy), Do not kill the old, Nor the
young, Nor the women, Do not cut down the trees;

unless you are forced to do so. If any of the Muslims, whether high
ranking or otherwise, give temporary refuge to any of the infidels to
hear the message of Allah (to accept Islam), (let him do so). If he
follows you, (i.e. accepted Islam) then he is your 7 2 Shamanism is a
primitive religion practiced in northern Siberia. It believes in a
hidden world belonging to the gods, devils and the spirits of the
ancestors and that their priests, Shaman, practice magic to cure illness
amongst others. Some sects of the red Indians in the Americas also
practiced shamanism.

brother in religion, and if he refuses, secure his safety, and seek
help from Allah.""

In another tradition, Imam Saadiq (A) is also quoted as saying:

"Before their mission the Messenger of Allah (S) used to order the
squadron leader in particular, and the whole company in general, to fear
Allah. The Messenger of Allah (S) then used to say to them: "Advance in
the name of Allah and in the way of Allah.

Fight any system who denies Allah, Do not use treacherous means (with
the enemy), do not handcuff or tie up (the prisoners), do not mutilate,
do not kill the young, nor he who has sought refuge to the peak of the
mountain, do not burn the palm trees, nor flood them, do not cut down
fruit-bearing trees, do not burn the crops, you may even need them, do
not kill the animals except those you need to eat.

Then when you meet the enemies of the Muslims invite them to one of
three. If they respond (positively) to these, accept (their response)
and stay your hands from them. 1. Invite them to Islam, and if they
enter Islam accept it from them and stay your hands.

2. Invite

them to emigrate (to Islamic cities73) after they have accepted Islam.
If they do, accept it from them and refrain from any measures against
them, and if they refuse to emigrate to such centres, they will be
treated like any other Bedouin faithful; they will not qualify for Fay'
and Qassma74 rewards unless they emigrate in the cause of Allah.

3. If they refuse these two

options, invite them to pay tribute submissively7 5. If they agreed to
pay tribute, accept it from them, and if they refuse, then seek
assistance from Allah the Almighty against them." While addressing the
people in (preparation for the battle of) Siffeen, Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A)
said,

"Allah the Almighty has shown you a trade which delivers you from
painful punishment and guides to the good; (That is) belief in Allah and
struggle in the cause of Allah. He has made his 7 3 This is so that they
will have access to the sources of learning in those cities to educate
themselves to an acceptable level. In rural and remote locations such
opportunities of learning were not available at the time being.
7 4 These are government income from spoil of war and land rent.
7 5 The holy Qur'an: Repentance (9): 29.

reward the forgiveness of sin and beautiful dwellings in the heavens.
The Almighty said: "Allah loves those who fight in His cause arrayed in
battle, as though they were a compact structure." So make your arrays
like compact structures.

Amir-ul-Mu'min een (A) continued until he said: "Do not mutilate the
dead, and if you overwhelm the enemy do not violate their properties
(i.e. respect their privacy), Do not enter a house, do not take anything
from their property (belongings) except what you find in their
barracks.

Do not agitate any woman, even if they swear at you or insult your
leaders or your reverend people. For they lack the maximum physical,
psychological or mental strength. We used to be instructed to refrain
(from causing harm to them) even when they were idolaters. Even (at that
time) if a man hit a woman he would have been rebuked and ridiculed by
others (and branded as coward for using force against the weaker sex) as
well as his sons.

After the battle of the 'Camel' was started and headed by A'ishah
against Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Imam Ali (A), during which A'ishah and her
army were defeated, Imam Ali (A) announced:

"Do not kill the injured, Do no t p ursue those fleeing , Who ever puts
down his weapon is safe (from being attacked)."

Imam Ali (A) then rode on the mule o f the Messenger of Allah (S) and
called a number of individuals by name. Some 60 elders, all of whom were
from the Hamdaan tribe, gathered around him wearing their protective
helms, swords and shields. They followed Imam Ali (A) until he reached a
big house. He asked for the door to be opened. Once inside Amir-ul-
Mu'mineen saw women wailing and weeping.

When they saw Imam Ali (A) they all shouted with one voice:

He is the killer of our beloveds. Imam Ali did not say anything to
them. He only asked for A'ishah's apartment. When Imam Ali entered her
room, their conversation could be heard. A'ishah was apologising to Imam
Ali (A). As Imam Ali (A) left the room he saw a woman who he recognised
and said to her: If I were the killer of the loved o nes I would have
killed those in this room, and in this room, and in this room, pointing
to three different rooms.

The woman, Safeyyah, went to the wailing women to convey what Imam Ali
had said. Then they all ceased wailing.

Al-Asbagh, the narrator of this report, said: In one of the three rooms
was A'eshah and her entourage, in the second was Marwaan ibn al-Hakam
and the youths of Quraysh, and the in the third Abdullah ibn al-Zubair
and his relatives resided. Al- Asbagh was asked; "Why did you not arrest
them?

Were they not the cause of this conspiracy and the war? Why did you
leave them free?" Al-Asbagh replied: "We had reached for our swords,
with our eyes focused on him (Imam Ali), a waiting his command . . . but
he did not issue any order except a general amnesty."

There are countless cases like this, but we only mentioned the above
few cases to hint at this point that it is imperative for the Islamic
government, and the Islamic movement before that, to adhere to
non-violence, even when in power.

**Weapon of Non-Violence vs. Violence**

Just as violence is a weapon, non-violence is a weapon too. However,
the weapon of non-violence is more effective than the weapon of
violence. Just as the soul is stronger than the body, so too is non-
violence, since it is the weapon of the soul, and so it is more powerful
than the weapon of the body which is made of matter.

For this reason, the non-violence of the prophet Abraham (A) defeated
King Nimrod's violence, and Moses' non-violence defeated Pharaoh's
violence, and Jesus' non-violence defeated Herod's violence, and the
non-violence of the Messenger of Allah (S) defeated the violence of the
pagans' great knights.

If an individual is able to use the weapon of non-violence then it is
inevitable that his adversary would succumb to him no matter ho w strong
or ferocious his enemy may be. So we see that Jesus (A) ordered his
followers to offer the right cheek of their face to he who slaps them on
the left. In doing so he does not want to encourage the offender but he
wants to draw the offender to the territory of justice and virtue.

Since such a reaction would create a powerful storm in the soul of the
offender in sympathy with the victim, which in turn leads the oppressor
to be humble before the oppressed. What a transcendental wisdom it is
that one can sustain a continuous and satisfactory victory by enduring a
little suffering and attract the intelligent foe to one's principles.

In the book "Towards Islamic System of Government" I have discussed
this issue as follows:

Non-violence is the third stand upon which the Islamic movement bases
its call for an Islamic government, and this is of utmost importance.
Non-vio lence requires a very strong and resilient character, which can
withstand any assault with total tolerance, and without retaliating,
even if the opportunity is there to do so.

Non-violence is manifested in the hand, in the to ngue, and in the
heart. Each is easier than the other. Non-violence of the hand is easier
than that of the tongue and non-violence of the tongue is easier than
that of the heart.

The meaning of non-violence is that an individual puts things right,
whether constructive or destructive, with total leniency so that no one
is harmed by this cure. It is in fact like the Balsam that is placed on
an aching part of the body so that it is healed.

**Physical Non-violence**

As for physical non-violence, it is that an ind ividual would not
attempt to hurt another individual even with respect to the strongest of
his adversaries and even if had the right to do so. Allah the Almighty
states: "and if you forgive, it is closest to righteousness"76.

Therefore one should not slap back his adversary if he did, and should
not strike back if he did so, or use any tool or weapon in response. Of
course, non-violence does not mean not protecting one's body from an
incoming assault. This is self-defence and not violence, and
self-defence is part of non-violence. This physical non-violence is a
definite necessity for one who has no other means of ensuring the
success of his mission.

In fact this was the approach of every great reformer or any
intellectual aiming at a particular goal or principle. According to the
teachings of Jesus (A), as well as the teachings of the infallible imams
(A), one should not return a slap with a slap; but if slapped 7 6 The
holy Qur'an, The Heifer (2): 237.

on the right cheek, one should be ready to receive another on the left.
Some might say that this may encourage the offender. The reply (to this
argument) would be that this would deter him. Do you see what reaction
this response creates in the offender himself? Imagine that you hit
someone and in response to this action, an d with total tolerance, he
says to you that you can hit him again if you wish. Imagine what
psychological reaction would result.

For anyone who is doubtful about this great wisdom, needs to go no
further than to consider the state of Jesus (A) who was surrounded by
his adversaries while he had no option but to pursue his mission.

Furthermore, what do you say about the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad
(S)? Did he want to harm the people of Makkah? History bears witness
that the Messenger of Allah (S) used to fully tolerate all the insults
and deplorable treatments at the hands of his opponents. Abu Lahab used
to pour sheep's fat on the Prophet's head while he was praying; another
infidel spits in his face; another used to throw filth into his food. On
one occasion, Abu Jahl's slave fractured the prophet's head with a bow;
and another; and another; . .

. After all this the Messenger of Allah (S) used to pray for these
people saying "O Allah, guide my people for they are ignorant." And this
is how Noah, Lot, Abraham, and Ismael (A) were. Have you ever heard that
Noah raised his hand to hit back at he who had beaten him unconscious?

Or have you seen anywhere in the pages of history books that Lot
responded to his people's aggression with aggression? Or that Abraham
hit back in response to his uncle's attack? Or that Ismael raised his
hand to hit back at he who sliced off some of his scalp? This is none
other than because their mission required the adoption of a non-violent
approach, the first and most immediate manifestation of which is
physical.

The physical non-violence is a weapon that attracts the hearts and
minds to he who advocates it, and incites the people against his
adversaries. Imagine that you see someone hitting another person but the
latter does not respond likewise.

Who would your sympathies lie with? Siding with the oppressed is a
universal reality that the great reformers have adopted in order to
achieve their ultimate goal, which is reform.

Ghandi, one of the activists in the liberation of India, used to say:
"I learnt from Imam Hussain (A) how to attain victory while being
oppressed."

Not responding to an aggression on the reformer's side not only creates
sympathy in the hearts of all other people, but it also brings about
compassion in the heart of the aggressor. When someone assaults an
individual and the aggressor does not see a similar response from his
victim, his heart will be filled with mercy and leniency after being
filled with anger and violence.

The invitation (to Islam) needs peace extensively, specially if
superpowers opposed their call, whereas the movement possesses nothing
but the truth.

Consider if an individual, who is armed with a sword, slaps an
activist. If the latter were to respond in a similar manner, what is
there to prevent the aggressor from using his sword to attack the
activist? Which of the two scenarios are more desirable? To tolerate an
assault in order to save his life and his mission, or to return the
assault and lose his life and fail his mission?

Therefore we see that the Messenger of Allah (S) used to exemplify
Bilaal, Sumayyah, Ammar, and others who tolerated numerous assaults from
the pagans. This is not because it is wrong to return aggression, but
since to return aggression for a man with a mission would defeat its
cause. Therefore when Islam resorted to force, this was to prevent chaos
and aggression, even though it normally offered forgiveness on many
occasions when deemed not harmful.

It has been mentioned previously that this (forgiveness) is based on
the question of priorities. Suppose that you are in dispute with an
aggressive opponent who has taken over your house. If he assaults you
and you know that if you respond similarly, you would lose your argument
against him and with that the possibility of getting back your house.
Would it not be more prudent to keep your nerve and deal with him
rationally rather than returning his assault with an assault? Rational
reasoning would certainly opt fo r the former. This is the common ground
between the verses:

"There is no coercion in religion" 77 and "(This is) A declaration of
immunity from Allah a nd His Messenger, to those of the Pagans with whom
you have made trea ties."78 as well as other verses concerning fighting.
7 7 The holy Qur'an: The Heifer (2): 256.

When a system-of-belief (religion) does not possess power or it aims to
progress (to spread its message) then it would be absurd if it were to
compel anyone to accept that belief, as this will bring about its prompt
failure. On the other hand if it possessed power or it were preoccupied
with important issues, then it would also be absurd to ignore those who
engage and encourage corruption and tyranny.

**Verbal Non-violence**

As for verbal non-violence, it is far more difficult to manage than the
physical non-violence. Therefore it can b e seen in many cases that
someone is not prepared to hit anyone or to assault him physically but
he is prepared to assault him verb ally and sland er him.

This is because often verbal (assault) is less prone to prosecution in
this world, for the culprit to fear the outcome, and therefore the
tongue is free to say anything unchecked. Fearing the consequences, the
hand is tied since it is subject to more control then the tongue. More
often than not, an individual verbally criticises the ruling regime
endlessly but when in detention he receives the beatings, he does not
return the assault.

Needless to say, there is a difference between non-violence on
principle and for the protection of belief and mission, and that of
fearing more violence and assault. The latter is the condition of any
weak individual in the claws of a powerful one, with the exception that
only the weak individual would respond if he loses his rational
reasoning, since no one in their right mind would do anything to cause
himself more harm. Whereas the former is a spiritual virtue which an
individual uses to save his mission and not out of fear of punishment.

A non-violent individual will have a stronger character; a more
composed, and in control of his conduct and has higher moral value and
conscience than the aggressor. In any case, verbal non-violence is to
curb one's tongue and check one's words in order to make sure one's
words do not damage the aggressor, whether his aggression was physical
or verbal. 7 8 The holy Qur'an: Repentance (9): 1.

This kind of non-vio lence is a great virtue and it is imperative that
those involved in the invitation to (Islam) practice it however rough a
ride it may prove to be and however difficult it may be to control. The
strongest of all those who respond likewise to aggression is he who,
when faced with a barrage of insults and accusation, seeks refuge in
silence and abstains from responding likewise, in the interest of the
cause and progress of Islam.

Allah states in the holy Qur'an:

"Respond with that which is better, so that he, between whom and you
there was animosity, shall be like an intima te friend. And none shall
be accorded this rank except those who have stood fast, and none shall
be accorded it except one blessed with great good fortune."79

Such a fortune is called a 'great fortune' by the Lord of existence.
Otherwise how can an individual respond to insult with praise (for the o
ffending individual concerned), and to slander with commendation, and to
b elittlement with extolment, except if he was an individual who has
stood fast, tolerated and persevered. Imam al-Sajjaad (A) in his prayer,
known as Makaarem al-Akhlaaq, or the Most Noble of Ethics, says:

"O Lord have Mercy on Muhammad and his descendants . . . and help me to
tender with sincerity whoever cheated me, and to reward with kindness
whoever abandoned me, and to repay generously whoever denied me, and to
recompense by making bond with whoever broke off with me, and to praise
whoever backbite against me. Enable me to appreciate the good deed and
forgive the bad deed."80

That is, Islam commissions a Muslim, for being a muslim, to give good
counsel to he who cheats him, be kind to he who boycotts him, to give
generously and extensively to he who denies him, to bond with he who cut
him off, to praise he who slanders him. This duty is more so for a
Muslim reformer who wants to clean and revive his country from
intellectual, military, economical, and cultural tyranny 7 9 The holy
Qur'an: Well-Expounded (41): 34-35.

8 0 Extracts from the supplications of Imam al-Sajjaad (pbuh) known as
Makaarem al- Akhlaaq or "The most Noble of Ethics".

and corruption. He needs this weapon (of non-violence) more than any
other p erson. In fact this is the only weapon for the unarmed who is
confronted by those who have armed themselves to the extent that they
have drowned themselves in metal, fire, nuclear and Hydrogen bombs.

It is reported that Jesus (A) along with some of his follower came
across a group of Jews, the latter insulted Jesus (A). In response to
them, Jesus (A) praised them. His followers said to Jesus, "O Spirit of
Allah! They swear at you and you praise them!?" Jesus (pbuh) replied;
"Yes. Every one gives whatever he has." What a great word and
magnificent wisdom. He who is filled with insult and filth, nothing
comes out of him except swearing and slander.

And he who embodies goodness, wisdom, virtue and high moral values,
emits nothing but kindness, praise and compassion. Thus was the teaching
of the prophets with no difference between Abraham, Moses, Jesus and
Muhammad as well as all other prophets (peace be upon them).

With such a policy, their calls of reform succeeded and managed to open
a way in the material wo rld of position and p ower and establish
themselves for as long as man has existed. When wealth and power have
vanished, those teachings remain as the torch of guidance for mankind in
the dark world that the tyrant and arrogant powers bring about.

If the prophets were not to arm themselves with the weapon of non-
violence, their calls and missions would have been buried in their
infancy by the lords of wealth and power. Consider, for example, the
well-known story of Imam Hassan (A) when a man from Shaam81 came across
the Imam and started swearing at and cursing the Imam and his father
(A).

Imam Hassan (A) did not respond to the man and remained silent until he
finished what he had started. When the man stopped his barrage of
insults, Imam Hassan addressed the man a smile:

"O' Sheikh! I guess you are a stranger in this territory and you might
have mistaken (me). For if you seek contentment from us, we would
gratify you, and if you ask us for anything we shall give it to you, if
you seek any guidance from us we shall guide you, and if you seek
vehicle from us we shall arrange one for you, if you are hungry we shall
feed you, if you need any clothes we shall give you them, if 8 1 Shaam
was the district that included today's Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and
Jordan.

you are poor we shall give you money, if you have been expelled (from
your hometown) we shall accommodate you, and if you have any need we
shall fulfil your need."

On hearing this response from Imam Hassan (A), the man was so ashamed
of his behaviour towards the Imam that he broke into tears and said: "I
testify that you are Allah's Deputy on this earth, Allah knows best
where He places His message8 2".

Similar events have been reported in the traditions of the prophets and
the infallible Imams (A) where they return insult and aggression with
kindness, but are naturally beyond the scop e of this brief work.

However we can see the Qur'an puts forward a good framework for a
philosophical and practical call to peace and non-violence:

"Invite (all) to the Way of thy Lord with wisdom and beautiful
preaching; and argue with them in ways that are best and most
gracious."83

"And when the ignorant address them, they say, "Peace!""84 "Do not
dispute with the people of the Book but in the fairest way."85

"And if they turn their backs, say: "Bear witness that we are Muslims"8
6

"Hold to forgiveness; enjoin the good and turn away from the
ignorant."87

"Do not curse those [deities] whom they call up on besides Allah, lest
they wrongfully curse Allah without knowledge."88 "It is b y a mercy
from Allah that you dealt leniently with them; for had you been
hard-hearted, they would have dispersed from

8 2 The holy Qur'an: The Cattle (6): 124.
8 3 The holy Qur'an: The Bee (16): 125.
8 4 The holy Qur'an: The Criterion (25): 63.
8 5 The holy Qur'an: The Spider (29): 46.
8 6 The holy Qur'an: The Family of 'Amraan (3): 64.
8 7 The holy Qur'an: The Heights (7): 199.
8 8 The holy Qur'an: The Cattle (6): 108.

around you. So pardon them and ask Allah's forgiveness for them."89

"Let them forgive and overlook: do you not wish that Allah should
forgive you?"90

**Non-Violence by Heart**

The third category of non-violence is that of the heart, which is the
hardest of the three, (non-violence o f the hand, tongue and heart).
Imam Saadiq (A) said:

'Removing and elimination of a mountain is easier than that of a heart
from its position.'

The meaning of the non-violence of the heart is that one does not fill
his heart with violence towards foes and adversaries. And it is normal
for what is in the heart to seep through to facial expression, and body
language. "One does not make any intention, but it shows in the slips of
his tongue or features of his face.", as stated in a hadith from Imam
Ali (A). So one may take care to eradicate physical and verbal
non-violence but not of the heart. Depicting such a condition a poet
states:

**As of the tongue, it is coated with honey But the hearts (are) wasps
and snakes**

Furthermore is he who has violence in his heart able to hide his
violence forever? Surely no. It is inevitable that his violence will
come to the surface, even if under unusual circumstances. Hinting at
this aspect, a poet states:

Secret has two windows: drunkenness and fury. Since keeping what is in
the heart hidden forever is normally impossible, according to the poet
who states: No matter what character an individual may have, 8 9 The
holy Qur'an: The Family of 'Amraan (3): 159.
9 0 The holy Qur'an: The Light (24): 22.


If he wanted it hidden from the people, it would (eventually) be found
out.


