Significance of the Heart
=========================

In order to recognise the importance of the non-violence of the heart,
it is important to appreciate the significance of the heart and its role
in shaping the character of the individual and his daily behaviour and
conduct. In this respect many traditions have been stressed in Islam, as
reflected by the teachings of the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S) and
his impeccable descendents, the Ahl-ul- Bayt (A).

The Messenger of Allah (S) used to say:

"The heart is (like) a king who has troops. If the king turns out to be
a good one, then his troops will be good too, and if the king is
corrupt, his troops would follow suit."

He (S) also used to say:

"If a person's heart is healthy, his body would be in comfort, and if
the heart is malicious, the body would be malevolent."

In this respect Imam al-Saadiq (A) said:

"Verily, the status of the heart to the body is that of the leader to
the people."

On this basis the impeccable Imams of the Ahl-ul-Bayt (A) used to
emphasise upon the people in general, and their followers in particular,
the significance and imperative need to maintain the purity of the heart
from any evil; material and spiritual, and they used to caution them
about hardheartedness and its consequences on one's conduct in life and
therefore the harmful affects on the society in which he lives in.

Imam Baaqir (A) is reported as saying:

"Allah's punishment could be for the heart or the body . . . and a
person could not receive a worse punishment than hardheartedness."

Examples of the guidance given in terms of practical advice in this
respect are many. The Messenger of Allah (S) is reported as saying:
"Beware of dispute and discord, for they disease the hearts . . . "
Narrated from Imam al-Saadiq (A) who said:

"I forbid you from burying your own relatives (even by throwing a
handful of earth on the body of the deceased during burial) for this
brings about hardheartedness, and he whose heart is hard is distant from
his Lord."

It is reported that a man complained to the Prophet (S) about his
hardheartedness, and the Prophet (S) said to him: "If you wish to see
your heart (become) lenient, then feed the poor, and wipe over the head
of the orphan." Narrated from Imam Ali (A) who said:

"Companionship of the nobles gives vitality to the hearts."


**Intention and Conduct**

Islamic teachings strenuously emphasise on the importance of purifying
the hearts as well as the intentions within them. In this respect Imam
Ali (A) states:

"He whose intention is good, his conduct would be pleasant." He also
states "Good conduct (throughout one's life), is indicative of one's
good intentions."

Furthermore Imam Ali (A) stresses that there is a direct relationship
between the purity of one's heart and the so undness of his thoughts and
insight, by saying:

"The goodness of the hearts and intentions is evidence for the
soundness of visions." Imam al-Saadiq (A) states:

"What benefit is to he who presents a pleasant (behaviour) and hides a
vile (intention)? Is it not that if he goes back to himself, he knows
that that is not the case? Allah Almighty states: 'Rather, man shall
witness against himself, even though he may put forth his excuses.'91
Truly if the intention is valid, the conduct would be justified."

The Imam emphasises that one cannot escape from the results and
consequences of what he has hidden from others regardless of the passage
of time when he says:

"No one intends or commits something good unless Allah brings forth
(something) good for him (even) after the passage of time, and no one
intends or commits something evil unless Allah brings forth (something)
bad for him after the passage of time."

**Jihad of the Self**

The hardhearted and the ill-intended individual is primed to transgress
upon others and therefore non-violence in his conduct is not p ossible
without purifying his heart and maintaining that s tatus. For this
reason, Islam devoted considerable attention to planting in the heart of
the faithful Muslim all the various virtues, among which are
non-transgression upon others' rights and refraining from any kind of
violence in the treatment of others. Such qualities require such
determined self-training and practice that are no less difficult than
the hardships and dangers of the battlefields. Imam al-Saadiq (A)
states:

"The Messenger of Allah (S) despatched a squadron and when they
returned, he (S) said 'welcome to those who have accomplished the minor
jihad and have to achieve the major jihad.' He was asked 'What is the
major jihad?' The Prophet (S) said 'It is the jihad of the self.'"

In this respect Imam Ali (A) is reported as saying:

"Jihad of the self is the quality of the nobles." Relating the jihad of
the self to social affairs, as well as emphasising its role in this
domain, the Messenger of Allah (S) states: 9 1 The Holy Qur'an:
Resurrection (75): 14-15.

"The best of the jihad is to ensure that one does not even consider
transgressing against others." On another o ccasion, and along the same
line, the Messenger of Allah (S) states: "Through jihad one can overcome
one's bad habits." And also:

"Wage jihad against the desires of your selves, (and as a result) your
hearts will be occupied by wisdom." Since the resident contents of the
hearts are reflected in the appearances of the faces, the Messenger of
Allah (S) used to warn of the fate and destiny of he who hurts other
even by the gesture of a single look:

"He who, by a single look at a believer, causes him anxiety, will be
apprehended by Allah on a day when there is no protection except His.
(i.e. on the Day of Judgement.)

**Vice and Virtue**

In a nutshell, whatever one harbours in his heart, will be manifested
in his conduct and behaviour. If one wishes to lead a happy and
prosperous life respecting others and being respected by them, one must
ensure to avoid detestable traits, in particular those such as hatred,
jealousy, rage, etc. The least results of such traits, which originate
from the heart, manifest in various conducts such as clashing with
others, and violent confrontations; whether physical, verbal or by
heart. Imam Ali (A) states "Jealousy does not attract anything except
harm and fury, languishing your heart and sickening your body."

And

"Fury is the fire of the hearts." Imam Saadiq (A) states, "Rage is an
annihilator of the heart of the wise man." Imam Ali (A) states,

"The cause of commotion is hatred", And

"The weapon of evil is hatred." Outlining the cure for these social
diseases Imam Ali (A) sates: "He who abandons hatred will have a
relieved heart."

Thus Islamic teachings clearly identify the material and spiritual
consequences of harbouring disparaged attributes, and actively encourage
the individ ual to attain virtuous qualities, one of the most important
of which is forbearance. Imam Saadiq (A) is reported as saying
"Forbearance is a sufficient victor."

**Imam Ali (A) states**

"I found forbearance and tolerance better victors for me than brave
men."

He also says "Peace is the fruit of forbearance."

Non-vio lence by heart is an extremely praiseworthy q uality, but it
requires resolute determination and continuous effort to attain, giving
praiseworthy results to he who harbours it. If there is a starting point
to everything, then the starting point for this momentous task is the
guidance of Imam Ali (A) who says "Eliminate evil from the heart of
others by uprooting it from your heart."

The Author

Ayatollah al-Udhma Imam Muhammad Shirazi is the Religious Authority, or
Marje', to millions of Muslims around the glo be. A charismatic lead er
who is known for his high moral values, modesty and spirituality, Imam
Shirazi is a mentor and a source of aspiration to Muslims; and the means
of access to authentic knowledge and teachings of Islam.

He has tirelessly devoted himself, and his life, to the affairs of
Muslims in particular, and to that of mankind in general. He has made
extensive contributions in various fields of learning ranging from
Jurisprudence and Theology to Politics, Economics, Law, Socio lo gy and
Human Rights.

Muhammad Shirazi was born in the holy city of Najaf, Iraq, in 1347 AH
(Muslim calendar), 1927 AD. He settled in the holy city of Karbala,
Iraq, at the age of nine, alongside his father. After primary education,
the young Shirazi continued his studies in different b ranches of
learning under his father's guidance as well as those of various other
eminent scholars and specialists. In the course of his training he
showed a remarkable talent and appetite for learning as well as a
tireless commitment to his work and the cause he believed in.

His extraordinary ability, and effort, earned him the recognition, by
his father and other Marje's and scholars, of being a Mujtahid; a
qualified religious scholar in the sciences of Islamic jurisprudence and
law. He was subsequently able to assume the office of the Marje' at the
early age of 33 in 1960. His followers are found in many countries
around the globe.

Imam Shirazi is distinguished for his intellectual ability and ho
listic vision. He has written various sp ecialized studies that are
considered to be amo ng the most important references in the Islamic
sciences of beliefs o r doctrine, ethics, politics, economics,
sociology, law, human rights, etc. He has enriched the world with his
staggering contribution of more than 1000 books, treatise and studies on
various branches of learning.

His works range from simple introductory books for the young
generations to literary and scientific masterpieces. Deeply roo ted in
the holy Qur'an and the Teachings of the Prophet of Islam, his vision
and theories cover areas such as Politics, Economics, Government,
Management, Sociology, Theology, Philosophy, History and Islamic Law.
His work on Islamic Jurisprudence (al-Fiqh series) for example
constitutes 150 volumes, which run into more than 70,000 pages.

Through his original thoughts and ideas he has championed the causes of
issues such as the family, human right, freedom of expression, political
pluralism, non-violence, and Shura or co nsultative system of
leadership. Imam Shirazi b elieves in the fundamental and elementary
nature of freedom in mankind. He calls for freedom of expression,
political plurality, debate and discussion, tolerance and fo
rgiveness.

He strongly believes in the consultative system of leadership and calls
for the establishment of the leadership council of religious
authorities. He calls for the establishment of the universal Islamic
government to encompass all the Muslim countries. These and other ideas
are discussed in detail in his books.


