Towards a Comprehensive Peace
=============================

It is then necessary, for the sake of a general and comprehensive
peace, to transfer the weapons making factories into those of peaceful
motives. It should not be argued that warfare pro vides work for
millions of workers for many of these workers could be absorbed by works
with peaceful intent.

Projects for the housing, health and the other needs of the people of
the world could be put into action as well as projects to conquer space.
If it was inevitable that a surplus of workers were left without any
work this does not necessitate that they be idle. They can occupy
themselves with seeking knowledge or in acts of worship or in recreation
after the work had been distributed to them and others.

For example, let us suppose that there are ten million workers each one
occupied eight hours per day in the different areas of manufacturing and
agriculture and half of them - five million - were working in the arms
industry. If they were put to work in works of a peaceful nature there
might remain two million without any work the other three million being
absorbed by the works of a peaceful motive.

In this case the available work could be distributed amongst the ten
million and the length of the working day reduced. So in the example
given, rather than having ten million working eight hours per d ay so
that five million may work in the arms industry,

each worker would work six and two fifths hours per day and for the
rest of the time they could spend it in science and knowledge - teaching
or learning or experimenting, or in acts of worship which bring about
the good in this life and the next, or with recreation like travelling
etc.

It is not right to say that we should manufacture weapons and kill the
people just so that there is no unemployment. It is as if there was a
family half of whom had work and half of whom did not and we said that
the half who did not have work should occup y themselves in killing the
other half who do have work just so that the half who did not have work
were busy doing something. This kind of logic is neither reaso nable nor
lawful; it is nothing but co rrupt.

It is necessary then for us to bring forth peaceful work for the
workers in arms factories as well as fo r those who are occupied in
military matters like the officers, leaders, and soldiers and others.
Naturally, there should remain a small number for possible emergencies,
and the others if trained should be trained to an extent and will fo rm
a reserve army rather than a full time one.

We have already mentioned in other books that Iran, in the days of the
reformer al-Shirazi and the story of the prohibition of tobacco, had
around ten million reserve soldiers - all of the population - and ten
thousand men at arms for the times of peace. In any case, it is
imperative that the problem of war be solved in this way or in another
way. This is as regards the amount of weapons.

As regards to the type of weapons, it is imperative that weapons be
reduced. That is, there should be committees to change the advanced
weapons into light weapons like the rifle, then to substitute these
light weapons for primitive weapons like the sword and the spear for it
is a grave error for humanity to prepare weapons which will annihilate
both the fighter and his enemy.

This is possible if we enable a general mobilisation for peace. Then
the arms factories will become obsolete and the workers can be employed
in other fields. Large armies will be demobilised and complicated
weapons will be destroyed and there will b e a return to light weapo
ns.

It is likely that the world will end with the sword as a weapon for it
is found in certain traditions about the Imam al-Mahdi7 (May Allah
hasten his appearance) that he will carry a sword and in some accounts
it will be the sword 'Dhulfiqar' the same as was carried by
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Imam 'Ali ibn Abu Talib (A)8 in the battles of Islam.
It is related in some hadith that this sword descended from the heavens
upon the Messenger of Allah (S).

He then gave it to Imam 'Ali (A) after which it became part of the
sacred inheritance of the impeccable Imams peace be upon them until it
ended up with the Imam al-Mahdi (A). It is also found in the hadith that
the area of the battle of the Imam and his companions will be between
Makkah and al-Kufa, a very small area indeed. As for the rest of the
lands, they will unite under the flag of the Imam without warfare.

**Cutting the roots of war**

In our book 'al-Fiqh series: Sociology' we have said that the
maintenance of peace is no t possible through only the media and peace
organisations, for peace is not merely a superficial issue just as war
is not a superficial issue. The roots of war must be cut so that peace
reigns. The roots of war are human deprivation, which brings about
revolutio n Al-Mahdi, the Guided, the Saviour. The Prophet (S) promised
that al-Mahdi will appear to spread peace and justice throughout the
world after it has been filled with tyranny and oppression. Imam
al-Mahdi is the twelfth, and last, infallible Imam from the household of
the Prophet Muhammad (S).

8 Alayh-es-Salam meaning peace be upon him. This is always stated after
the mention of the name of one the infallible Imams out of respect for
the Imam (A).

against the group causing this deprivation. The causes of this
deprivation are colonialism, exploitation, and despotism in government,
in economics, or in science and education. It is necessary for one
seeking to sever the roots of war to prevent those who stir up war from
attaining their goals and this through spreading political,

economic, and social awareness. Political awareness brings about the
non-surrender and defiance of people to dictators whether the
dictatorship be open like inherited and coupe de tat governments or
disguised like the governments who claim to Democracy but are in fact in
the claws of Cap italism or of the single party like America, Britain,
France, Russia, and China.

Economic awareness prevents the capital from being in the hands of a
certain group whether that group has control of government as well - as
in the former Soviet Union, or not - as in America.

Social awareness brings abo ut the knowledge of the equality of society
regarding education, power, and wealth. Indeed:

{Every person is responsible for what he has earned.} 9 {Man will get o
nly that for which he has strived.} 1 0 It also brings about the
knowledge that there is no 'chosen' class. If it is seen that education
is particular to a certain group because th ey are wealthy or have power
or are the ruling political party then it will be known that the society
is corrupt and that it must be realigned until education is general to
everyone. The same should be said for power and wealth.

The world has begun to head gradually toward s this kind of awareness.
The world power was held for a time in the hands of Britain, then
America, then between the two powers America and Russia. However, the
power now is distributed amongst a larger number of states - America,
Russia, Europe, and China. It is true that in the area of military
strength there are only two powers but there are numerous other centres
of po wer in the political arena each of which has a treaty
organisation.

In the economic arena there are the two main states as well as Western
Europe, China and Japan. In the nuclear field there is India and other
states which has caused the world to come out gradually from being under
a monopoly.

9 The Holy Qur'a n: The Mountain of Sinai (52): 21.
1 0 The Holy Qur'an: The Star (53): 39.

Communism began to break up because of the splitting of China and the
attempted split of Poland and the unrest of other states under the
banner of Communism. It has also brought great ignominy upon itself,
particularly when it invaded Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Afghanistan.

Capitalism has begun to break up bit by bit. Bo th Jap an and France
have lost their empires, and British and American colonialism have here
and there started tottering, especially in the Middle East, with the
advent of the dirty policies of the state of Israel.

To continue, it has become an easier matter to increase the awareness
of humanity. It is true that neutrality is not possible nor would it be
correct, as a person should not stay silent in front of the oppressor.
However, uneasy awareness has begun to work to bring about the proper
kind of neutrality.

As for the neutrality of twenty years ago, it was in reality a
camouflage for agents of other regimes. For was Castro the agent of the
east non-aligned? Or was Nasser the agent of America non-aligned?

In any case, an increase in awareness is required so that the roots of
war may be extirpated; the roots being the confinement of knowledge and
education, power, and wealth in the hands of a minority in the face of a
deprived majority. This awareness as well as putting these three things
in the hands of all will also bring people closer together and will
create more relationships.

Then corrupt partisans may not exploit the rest of humanity for their
own personal goals. It is our opinio n that whenever awareness increases
nationalisms and corrupt group lo yalties decrease in importance and
matters of race, colour and geographical area are buried.

**Exposing 'War by proxy'**

It is also imperative before reaching the final result of a
comprehensive peace to expose 'wars by proxy' and prevent them from
occurring by a number of means:

a. Changing the relationships between the smaller states and the larger
states so that the larger cannot make the smaller proxy in wars as is
the custom now.

b. Exposing the military bases of the large states on the land of the
smaller states.

c. Exposing the military pacts amongst the small states, which are
under the sp here of influence of the large state, and making it clear

that the small states in the pact only want the services of the larger
states.

d. Strengthening the relations b etween neighbouring states so that the
large states may not cause a war to occur between them.

e. (Most importantly) Bringing about the awareness of the people of the
smaller nations so that they do not become as puppets in the hands of
their governments which execute the orders of their masters.

It is indeed imperative that awareness is brought about for the people
of nations in general so that they do not fall victim to the greed of
Cap italists and Dictatorial rulers be they open Dictators like the
former Soviet Union, or Dictators clothed in the flimsy robe of
Democracy like Britain, France and America. It is these two groups -
Dictators and Capitalists - who ignite wars always, backed up by corrupt
religious scholars, or civilian experts.

The Messenger of Allah (S) spoke truly when he says:

'There are two groups from my nation who if righteous, my nation will
be righteous and if corrupt, my nation will be corrupt.' He was asked:
Who are they? O Messenger of Allah.' He said: 'The scholars and the
commanders.'

The Messenger of Allah (S) did not mention wealth in this hadith as it
had a very small role in the past before the appearance of the corrupt
capitalistic practices that play no part in Islam in the least. Those
who ignited wars then were corrupt commanders and counterfeiting
scholars who used to collaborate in oppressing the populace. Hence the
Prophet (S) was alerted to the dangers of these two groups.

It should also be made clear that the Prophet (S) was alerted in Islam
to the danger of wealth only "revolving amongst the rich." We have
discussed this topic in the chapter on wealth.


**War is an extraordinary situation**

Islam calls to peace and considers peace to be normal and war to be
extraordinary and exceptional emergency entered into only out of
desperation and as a last resort. Allah Almighty says:

{O ye who have faith, enter into peace all of you, and do not follow
the footsteps of Satan.} 11 {And if they incline to peace then incline
to peace and put yo ur trust in Allah.} 12

{They will not cease fro m fighting you until they cause you to turn
away from your religion if they are able.} 13 {There was in them indeed
an excellent example for you to follow of one who seeks Allah and the
last day. But if any turn away, then know that Allah is Free of all
wants, Worthy of all praise.

It may be that Allah will establish friendship between you and those
whom ye hold as your enemies. Allah has power, and Allah is Oft
Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Allah does not forbid you from dealing kindly and justly with those who
do not fight you for your religion or drive you from your homes. Allah
loveth those who are just. Allah only forbids you from taking as allies
tho se who fight you for your religion and turn you out from your homes
and aid others in turning you o ut from your homes. Whoever takes them
as allies, they are the wrongdoers.} 14

So we can see that Islam orders that those who persist in fighting the
Muslims and seek enmity be fought back, and prohibits making friends
with these types of people. As for those people who do not fight the
believers or expel them from their homes, Allah indicates that they
should be treated kindly and with fairness even though they may be
infidels.

There are many other Qur'anic verses which if collected would show that
jihad and war are secondary and extraordinary and that peace is the
primary ruling as we have already indicated.

In a hadith, Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Imam 'Ali (A) spoke to his troops before
meeting the enemy at the battle of Siffin:

"Do not fight them until they begin to fight, for you by the grace of
Allah have the just cause, and by leaving them until they start on you,
you will have another just cause over them."

1 1 The Holy Qur'an: The Heifer (2): 208.
1 2 The Holy Qur'an: Public Estates (8): 61.
1 3 The Holy Qur'an: The Heifer (2): 217.
1 4 The Holy Qur'an: The Woman Tested (60): 6-9.

In a letter, Imam Ali (A) relates what took place in the battle of
Siffin: "Initially, it was that we and the group from the people of
Syria (the army of Mu'awiyah) faced one oth er on the battlefield. It is
obvious (for both sides) that our Lord is One and our Prophet is one and
our call to Islam is one and we do not seek to increase their faith in
Allah and belief in His Prophet nor do they seek to increase ours.

Everything is common between us except for our difference over the
blood of 'Uthman in which we are innocent.

So we said: Come let us solve what may not be achieved today by
extinguishing the uprising and calming the general populace so that the
rule may become firm and consolidated. Then we will become stronger in
putting the truth in its rightful place.

They said: 'No, we will solve it by seeing who will have the upper hand
in battle and they refused all but war. When both them and us had been
torn by war and it had put its claws in them and us, then they responded
to that which we had called them to previously.

We accepted this and hurried to meet their requests so that they might
have no complaint or cause against us."

He also said to his son al-Hassan: "Do not call to combat." Look also
at this hadith related by Imam al-Saadiq (A) who said:

"The Messenger of Allah when he wanted to send out a troop he called
them and bid them sit before him. He then said to them: Go out in the
name of Allah and by Allah and in the way of Allah and according to the
religion of the Messenger of Allah. Do not handcuff or tie up (the
prisoners of war), do not mutilate (even the dead), and do not betray
people.

Do not kill the old man, the child or the woman, and do not cut down a
single tree except when you are forced to do so. And if any Muslim be he
lofty or lowly gives a man of the Polytheists sanctuary, then his safety
must be secured so that he hears the word of Allah. If he follows you
then he is your brother in religion. If he refuses then give him his
sanctuary and seek the help of Allah regarding him."

In an account on the occasion of war, Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A)
advised the Muslims saying:

'Commit yourselves to prayer and guard your prayers and pray much. Seek
nearness to Allah through it for it is a duty of the Muslims at
prescribed times.' He also used to say: 'Do not fight them until they
begin to fight you.'


**Islam's Guidance on War**

War is something resorted to only in dire emergency, and whether or not
it is resorted to come from an evaluation, which in the case of war is
particularly important as it involves d estruction, annihilation and the
termination of life.

Hence, Islam has laid down conditions and terms for war despite it
having made either offensive or defensive jihad obligatory, as is well
known in the books of jurisprudence. These many terms and cond itions
have been laid down so that war only o ccurs in cases of dire emergency.
Then if the war ends, Islam grants a general amnesty and grants the
freedom of the wrongdoers wherever possible, as we shall see in the
following sections.

**The condition of parental permission**

Related by Imam Ja'far al-Saadiq (A) who said:

'A man approached the Messenger of Allah (S) and said: 'O Messenger of
Allah, I wish to take part in the jihad 15.' The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: 'Then strive in the way of Allah and if you are killed you will
find yourself with Allah and be given sustenance16, and if you die then
your reward will be with Allah, and if you return then you will be as
free from sin as the day you were born.' The man said: 'O Messenger of
Allah, I have two aged parents who wish that I spend my time in their
company and would not like me to go out to battle.' The Messenger o f
Allah (S) said:

'Then stay with your parents, for by He in whose hands my soul lies,
spending a day and a night in their company is better than one year's
jihad." Related by Jabir who said: 'A man approached the Messenger of
Allah (S) and said: 'I am a strong man and I wish to fight jihad but my
mother does not like this.' The Prophet (S) said: 'Return and be with
your mother, for by He who sent me with the truth, you spending one
night in her company is better than one year's jihad in the way of
Allah.'

1 5 Translator's note: The literal meanin g of jihad is to strive,
struggle and exert some effort in some matter. There are two main types
of jihad. The lesser jihad which can be fighting, defending borders, and
spreading the rule of Islam (this does not include forced conversions to
Islam as these are untenable. It rather means bringing the justice and
wisdom of Allah's laws in place of the injustice and fallibility of man
made laws.) Then the greater jihad as mentioned by the Prophet (S) is
that internal struggle to comb at the baseness and evil of one's own
self.

1 6 Translator's note: This is a reference to the Qur'anic verses
(3:169) which state that those who are killed while striving in the way
of Allah are not to be considered dead but rather alive with their Lord
and receiving sustenance.

Ibn 'Abbas relates that the Prophet (S) was approached by a man who
said: 'O Messenger of Allah shall I do jihad?' (Meaning going into
battle). The Prophet said: 'Do you have parents?' The man said: 'Yes.'
So the Prophet said: 'Then do jihad1 7 for them.' Related by Abu Sa'id
al-Khudari:

'A man emigrated from Yemen to the Messenger of Allah (S) who said to
him: 'Have you anyone in Yemen?' The man replied that he had two parents
there. The Prophet (S) asked: 'Have they given permission to you?' The
man replied: 'No.' The Prophet (S) said: 'Then return and seek their
permission and if they give you their permission then fight jihad, and
if not then obey them and be kind to them.'

**Jihad is not incumbent upon certain groups**

In a hadith related by al-Hassan ibn Mahboub, from some of his
companions who said:

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) in his letter to one of the Umayyad Caliphs
wrote rebuking those Caliphs who had tasked people with things that had
not been enjoined by Allah Almighty saying:

' . . . the blind and the lame have been wrongly obligated as well as
those who do not have the funds to spend on jihad, and this after Allah
has granted them exemption.' This is according to what is to be found in
the Holy Qur'an regarding this matter where the Almighty has said:

{Those of the believers who sit (do not go to fight), other than those
who have injuries, are not equal to the mujahidin who fight in the way
of Allah with their wealth and their selves.

Allah favours those mujahidin who strive in the way of Allah with their
wealth and their selves, a degree over those who sit it out. Allah has
promised both parties a goodly reward but Allah has favoured those
mujahidin over those who sit it out with a great reward and by degrees.
From Him is a

1 7 Translator's note: The actual wording in Arabic is 'Fa-Jaahid fii
himaa.' (Then 'do jihad' for the two of them.') The Prophet (S) here is
telling the man that looking after his parents is a kind of jihad and a
better kind than the kind of jihad that involves fighting.' forgiveness
and mercy. Allah is Oft Forgiving Most Merciful.}

{Say to those Bedouin Arabs who lag behind: You will be called to a
people of might who you will fight or they will enter Islam. If you
obey, then Allah will give you a goodly reward and if you turn away as
you turned away before then,

Allah will torment yo u with a painful torment. There is no blame upon
the blind man nor upon the cripple nor upon the sick. Whoever obeys
Allah and His Messenger will be given entry to gardens below which
rivers flow, but whoever turns away will be tormented a painful
torment.} 1 9

In our book 'al-Fiqh series: volume 48, Jihad' We have mentioned that
six groups are exempt from the duty o f jihad: The blind, the cripple,
the sick, the person who cannot cover his expenses, the person to whom
jihad would be injurious, and the person impeded from jihad in general.
The duty of jihad is not incumb ent upon the insane, the slave, or the
elderly person.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'The pen2 0 is lifted from the
youngster until he reaches maturity and from the insane until he regains
his mind.' Related from Imam 'Ali (A) that he said: 'Jihad is not
incumbent upon the slave.'

There are many other traditions in this regard.

**Jihad is not incumbent upon women**

Related from al-Asbagh ibn Nabatah who said: 'Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali
(A) said:

'Allah has prescribed jihad for both men and women. The jihad of the
man is to spend of his wealth and of his self until he is killed in the
way of Allah. The jihad of the woman is to remain patient in the face of
problem from her husband."

1 8 The Holy Qur'an: The Women (4): 95-96.
1 9 The Holy Qur'an: The Victory (48): 16.
2 0 Translators note: the expression the pen is lifted means one would
not held accountable for the particular aspect in question.

In another hadith: 'The jihad of the woman is to make a good wife for
her husband.'

Related from Imam 'Ali (A) who said: 'The duty of jihad does not fall
upon the slave when they can be dispensed with, nor upon the woman, nor
upon he who has not reached maturity.'

Also from Imam 'Ali (A) who said:

'The Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'Allah has prescribed jihad for the
men of my nation (Islam) and jealousy upon the women of my nation. And
whoever of the women is patient and seeks a reward, Allah will give her
the reward of a martyr.'

Related by Sayyid 'Ali ibn Tawous who said: 'I saw a hadith which said
that Wahab was a Christian . . . until it mentioned his death and that
his mother entered the battle. Then Imam al-Hussein (A) said to them
both: 'Go back O mother of Wahab, you and your son are with the
Messenger of Allah (S) for the duty of jihad has been lifted from
women.' Imam Saadiq (A) was asked about how it came to be that the
burden of the Jizyah tax has been lifted from women. He (A) said:

'Because the Messen ger of Allah (S) proh ibited the killing of women
and children in dar al-harb21 except when they take part in the fighting
and even when they take part in the fighting then one should restrain
oneself from fighting them as far as is possible. Because this is the
case in dar al-harb then this is even more appropriate in dar
al-Islam22. If they were to refuse to pay the Jizyah tax then killing
them is not possible and this being the case, th en th e Jizyah is
lifted from them. If the men were to refuse to pay the Jizyah tax then
they would be breaking the treaty and therefore killing th em would b e
allowed because the killing of men is allowed in the lands of
polytheism. The crippled, the blind, the old man, the women and children
of the lands of war are not to be killed and because of this the burden
of the Jizyah tax has been lifted from them.

2 1 Meaning 'the land of war', this is a reference to non-Muslim
country engaged in a war with the Muslims.
2 2 Meaning 'Muslim country'.

**War is not permitted in the absence of the just Imam**

Related from Yunis who said: 'I was with Imam al-Kaadhem (A) when a man
asked the Imam (A): 'One of your followers has heard that a man is
giving out swords and bo ws in the way of Allah so he went to him and
took a sword and a bow from him (not knowing the proper way in this
matter). He then met some of his companions who told him that this was
not allowed and ordered him to return them (the sword and the bow). Imam
al-Kaadhem (A) said: 'Then let him do so.'

But he replied that he had sought the man but was unable to fin d him
and he was told that the man had died.

Imam al-Kaadhem (A) said: 'Then let him defend but not to fight.' The
man said: 'and in places like Qazwin, or Ashkelon, or al-Daylam or other
citad els?'

Imam al-Kaadhem (A) said: 'Yes.'

The man said: 'And if the enemy comes to where he is attached, what
should he do?'

Imam al-Kaadhem said: 'He should defend the territory of Islam.'

The man asked: 'Should he fight jihad?'

Imam al-Kaadhem (A) said: 'No, unless he fears for the safety of the
territory of Islam.'

The man said: 'Are you saying that if the Romans should enter upon the
Muslims, they should not prevent them from doing so.'

Imam al-Kaadhem (A) said: "He should defend and if he should fear for
the safety of Islam and the Muslims then he should fight and his
fighting would be for himself (to protect his life, and those of other
Muslims) and not for the government (of the time) for if Islam were to
be obliterated then the reminder of Muhammad (S) would be
obliterated."

Also related that Imam Saadiq (A) was asked his opinion about a man who
entered the land of war safely and then deluded a people who were
subject to another people. He (A) said:

'The Muslim should defend himself and fight to establish the rule of
Allah and His Prophet. It is not allowed that he fight the unbelievers
under the authority of a tyrannical rule (in a Muslim country) or their
traditions.'

Related by Abu 'Urwah al-Sulami, from Imam Saadiq (A) who was asked by
a man who said: 'I used to go on frequent military excursions and would
travel far in seeking reward and would be absent for long periods of
time. This began to be hard on me. Then I was told that there is to be
no military campaigns in the absence of the just Imam. What is your
opinion?' He (A) said: 'Shall I be brief or in detail?' He said:

'Why, in detail.' He (A) said: 'Alla h will bring the people before him
on the Day of Resurrection according to their intentions . . .' (as if
man wished the Imam to be brief.) The man said: 'Tell me in brief.' He
(A) said: 'Ask your question.' The man said: 'If I went on a raid and
battled the Polytheists is it necessary to call them to Islam before I
fight them?'

He (A) said: 'If they raid and fight and are fought then you can fight
them. If they are however, a people who have not raided or fought then
you may not fig ht them until you call them to Islam.'

The man said: 'I called them and one answered and entered Islam in his
heart. When he was in the Muslim country, he was treated unjustly, his
dignity was violated and his possession was taken from him, and his
rights abused. Am I responsible for this, as I had called him to Islam?2
3 Imam Saadiq (A) said: "You are both rewarded for what has happened.

It is better that he is with you defending you, your family, your
Qiblah and your Book, rather than being against you, fighting you,
violating your dignity, spilling your blood and burning book."


