The Invitation To Islam Firstly
===============================

Related by al-Sukuni, from Imam Saadiq (A) who said:

'Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali said: 'The Messenger of Allah sent me to Yemen
and said: 'O 'Ali, do not fight anyone until you have invited him to
Islam for if Allah should give his guidance to one man through your
hands it would be better for you than the whole Earth and you would have
his loyalty O 'Ali.'

Related in the book Da'aim al-Islam from Imam 'Ali (A) who said: 'A
people should not be fought until they have been invited to Islam.'

2 3 It should be noted that save the first Imam, Imam Ali (A), all
other imams did not officially assu me the office of government. Instead
the Muslim were governed tyrants and despots . . . If the call to Islam
has not reached them then you may not fight them, and if even they have
been invited to Islam before, to reconfirm the invitation once more is
even better.

Related in the book Ghawali al-Layali from the Prophet (S) who said:
'The infidels should not be fought until after the invitation to Islam.'
Also from the book Da'aim al-Islam: Related from Imam al-Saadiq (A),
from his forefathers, from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A) that whenever the
Messenger of Allah (S) sent an army or a raiding party, would enjoin God
fearing piety up on its leader personally and then upon the rest of the
troops in general and would say: 'Fight in the name of Allah and in the
way of Allah and according to the creed of the Messenger of Allah (S).

Do not figh t the people until you have the justifica tion by inviting
them to testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is his
messenger and to confirm what he (Muhammad) has brought from Allah.

If they respond then they are your brothers in faith and you should
then invite them to move from their territory to the town s of the Mu
slims . . .' (This is so that they can learn more about Islam in Muslim
populated cities where there are centres of learning of Islamic
sciences.) Limiting (fighting) to the least amount necessary Related by
Imam Saadiq (A) who said:

"The Messenger of Allah (S), when he wanted to send a troop, he would
summon them and bid them sit by him. Then he would say: 'Go in the name
of Allah and in the way of Allah and according to the creed of the
Messenger of Allah. Do not handcuff or tie up (prisoners) and do not
mutilate (even the dead) and do not use treacherous means and do not
kill old men or children women. Do not cut down trees unless you are
forced to do so.

If any Muslim man be he lowly or lofty should look towards one of the
Polytheists then he should be given sanctuary so that he might hear the
words of Allah. If he follows you then he is your brother in faith and
if he refuses then grant him sanctuary and seek succour in Allah."

Also related from Imam Saadiq (A) who said:

"When the Prophet (S) assigned a leader to an expedition squadron, he
would enjoin upon him God fearing piety for his own person and for his
companions generally. He would then say: 'Fight in the name of Allah and
in the way of Allah. Fight those who disbelieve in Allah. Do not use
treacherous means, do not plunder and do not mutilate. Do not kill
children or hermits and do not set fire to date palms or drown them with
water.

Do not cut down a fruit-bearing tree and do not burn crops for you
never know when you might be in need of them. Do not slay animals whose
meat is edible except what is necessary for you to eat.

If you should meet an enemy to the Muslims then invite them to one of
three things. If they respond to you accordingly then accept them and
refrain from any action. Call them to Islam and if they enter Islam then
accept them and refrain from any action.

Having accepted Islam, then invite them to emigrate to the lands of
Islam2 4 and if they do this then accept them and refrain from any
action. If they refuse to emigrate and favour their own homes and refuse
to enter into the land of the hijra (i.e. the land of Muslim emigrant)
then they will have the station of the Bedouin Muslims and have the same
rights afforded to them as the Bedouin Muslims. They will not have
rights of a share of booty until they emig rate in the way of Allah.

If they refuse these two things then call them to pay the Jizyah from
their wealth and in a state of humiliation (to contribute to their
protection by the Islamic state). If they pay the Jizyah then accept it
from them and refrain from any action. If they refuse then seek succour
from Allah Almighty against them and fight them in the way of Allah to
the utmost.

If you lay siege to a fortress and the people therein wish you to let
them surrender on the basis of the rule of Allah then do not accept
that. But rather let them surrender according to your terms and
condition, then judge what you will regarding them according to the
criteria you know best.

For if you let them surrender according to the rule of Allah you will
not know whether you will be able to fulfil the rule of Allah regarding
them or not. If you lay siege to a fortress and the people wish you to
let them surrender on the basis of the covenant and assurance of Allah
then do not agree to this. Rather let them surrender on the 2 4 This is
in order to for them to be close centres of Islamic learning and
therefore learn more about Islam in the various domains of life.

basis of your own covenant and guarantee and that of your fathers and
your brothers. For if you break your covenant and the covenant of your
fathers and your brothers it will be easier for you on the Day of
Resurrection than if you had broken the covenant of Allah and His
messenger."

Related from Imam Saadiq (A) from his father, from his forefathers,
from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A) who said:

"The Messenger of Allah (S), when he sent out an army or a raiding
party would enjoin God fearing piety upon its leader personally and on
the rest of the Muslims who were with him. He (S) would say: 'Fight in
the name of Allah and in the way of Allah . . . and do not kill children
or the elderly or women (meaning as long as they do not fight you), and
do not mutilate and do not tie up or handcuff, and do not use perfidious
means."

Related by al-Sukuni, from Imam Saadiq (A) who said :

'Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A) said: 'The Messenger of Allah (S) forbade the
letting loose or deploying of poison in the lands of the Polytheists.'

Related from Ja'far ibn Muhammad , from his father, from his
grandfather 'Ali ibn al-Hussein, fro m his father from Imam 'Ali (A) who
said:

'The Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'In battle do not kill (anyone)
except those who have exposed themselves to the blades. (i.e. those who
have come to fight with you.)

Related in the book Da'aim al-Islam that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: 'Do not kill children or the elderly or women.'

Related in a hadith is that Sa'd ibn Mu'adh judged regarding the clan
of Qureidah "that their fighters be killed and that their children be
captured. He ordered that the male amongst the captured to have their
garments removed. Whoever's had grown was considered to be a fighter and
whoever's had not gro wn then he was considered to be one of the
children"25 . The Prophet (S) accepted this.

2 5 The clan of Qureidah had signed a binding agreement with the
Muslims that they be allowed to stay in Madinah and have the protection
of the Muslims, on the condition that they would not aid the enemies of
the Muslims, the Polytheists, against the Muslims. This came about after
a number of aggressions and assaults by the clan against the Muslims

**No war when sanctuary is given**

Related from Imam Saadiq (A) who was asked: 'What is the meanin g of
the Prophet's saying: 'The lowliest of them strives for their
protectorate.' He (A) answered: "If a Muslim army were to lay siege to a
group of Polytheists and a man looked out from the fortress and said:
'Give me sanctuary so that I may meet your leader and discuss with him.'
If then the lowliest of the Muslims gives the pledge of sanctuary then
it is binding also upon the most high-ranking of them."

Related from Imam Saadiq (A) who said:

'If a group laid siege to a city and the people ask for sanctuary but
they are told 'No', but they thought that they have been told 'Yes' and
come down to them then they have sanctuary.'

Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A) said:

'If someone promises another a truce on his blood then betrays th at
truce then I disa ssociate myself from the killer even thou gh the o ne
killed may be destined for the fire.' In the covenant of
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen, Imam 'Ali (A), to al-Ashtar (May Allah have mercy
upon him) states:

directly, as well as aiding their enemies against them. In the year 5
Hijra (after the Prophet's migration from Mecca to Madinah), all the
different Polytheist groups and clans started to mobilise their forces
against the Muslims in order to finish them off, once and for all. The
subsequent battle that took place between the confederation of the
various clans and the Polytheist groups, and the Muslims became known as
the Battle of al-Ahzab (the Confederates).

Leading up to the battle, and after seeing the size of the mobilised
forces against the Muslims, the Qureidah clan considered it to be a good
opportunity to join ranks with the confederates against the Muslims, in
order to succeed in obliterating them.

Therefore the elders and warriors of the clan decided to break th e
agreement they had signed with the Muslims and side with Polytheists
against them. According to the agreement, this act in itself constituted
a declaration of war by the Qureidah clan against the Muslims. At the
end of the day, the Muslims were the victors of the Battle of al-
Ahzab.

According to the agreement, the Muslims had the right to wage war
against the Qureidah clan, but instead asked the Qureidah clan for their
suggestion as to how to settle this matter. They proposed that a third
party judges this matter and his judgment would be final. The Muslims
asked the Qureidah clan to propose a candidate that might be acceptable
to both sides.

The Qureidah clan proposed Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, the Muslims accepted the
proposed candidate. Sa'd ibn Mu'adh was known to be have been a long
time friend of the Qureidah clan, and he was known to have accepted
Islam. He was then invited by both sides to make judgment on the matter,
according to the agreement between the two parties. He accepted and made
the above judgement.

"Do not reject outright a truce called for by your enemy and in it is
the pleasure of Allah. For the truce is an occasion of respite for your
troops and a rest for you from your worries and concerns and a security
for your lands. But remember be on your guard to the utmost after making
a truce, for it may be that the enemy seeks to draw close to you in
order to take you unawares. Therefore be judicious and do not give them
the benefit of the doubt.

If you should form a treaty between you and your enemy which gives him
your protectorate and word of honour, then honour this treaty, proclaim
your word of honour and make yourself as a shield guarding what you have
given, for there is no commandment of Allah (Almighty is He) more
acknowledged in the eyes of the people despite the difference of their
ideas and opinions than the honouring of pledges. Even the Polytheists
have practised this amongst themselves because they realise the evil
consequences of treachery.

Do not betray your covenant and do not break your contract and do not
double cross your enemy for Allah has made His covenant and protectorate
a sanctuary for his servants through His mercy and none but the ignorant
wretch would go against Allah in this way. Therefore there should be no
interpolation, forgery or betrayal in this matter.

Do not formulate a treaty in which there is room for ambiguity. When
the treaty has been ratified and concluded do not try to take advantage
of any grammatical errors that may be in it.

Do not let a critical situatio n arising from the treaty of Allah cause
you to rescind it without just cause, for your patience in this
situation seeking relief from it and the best outcome is better than
treachery the dire consequences of which you fear and that you will be
overcome by, and liable to that (treachery) and therefore be called upon
by Allah to account for it and hence you will not be able to seek
forgiveness for it in this world or in the hereafter."

Related from Imam 'Ali (A) who said:

'The Messenger of Allah (S) gave a sermon in the mosque of al- Hanif
saying: 'May Allah have mercy on the person who hears this speech and
remembers it and then passes it on to one who has not heard it. For many
a person who bears knowledge is not a scholar but may transmit that
knowledge to one more knowledgeable than him. The heart of the Muslim
will never cheat after the knowledge of three thing s: Dedicating one's
actions to Allah only, giving good counsel to the leaders of the
Muslims, and being bound to the fact that the Muslims are a brotherhood.
For with unity, the call of the Muslims will be overwhelming (on the
non-Muslims).

The blood of Muslims is equal, the lowliest of them may offer their
protectorate, for if any of the Muslims should give sanctuary to any of
the heathens then this is binding.'

Also related from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali (A) who said:

'If a Muslim should make a gesture of truce or sanctuary to any of the
Polytheists and he descends (from a fortress) accordingly then he has
the truce.' Related from Imam Saadiq (A) who said: 'Truce is allowed in
whatever language it may be in.'

Related from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali (A) who said: 'Fulfil your promises
if you make a promise.' He (A) also said: 'If any Muslim makes a gesture
of truce to any of the enemy then he has a truce.'

Related from Imam Saadiq (A) who was asked about two towns in enemy
territory each with their o wn king. These towns fight one another and
then make peace. Then one of the kings betrays the other and comes to
the Muslims and makes a truce with them on the condition that they raid
the other city. Imam Saadiq (A) said:

'It is not fitting for the Muslims to use treachery or to order others
to be treacherous, nor to fight alongside those who are treacherous.
They should fight the Polytheists whenever possible (according to the
specified conditions), provided there are no binding peace treaties
between them and the Infidels.' Also related from Imam Saadiq (A) who
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'Each traitor will come on the
Day of Judgement mouth-twisted until he enters the fire."

Related by al-Asbagh ibn Nabatah who said: 'Amir-ul-Mu'mineen (A) one
day when he was giving a sermon on the pulpit of Kufa said: 'O people.
Were it not for the vileness of treachery, you would find me to be the
craftiest of people. But with each act of treason there is an depraved
act and with each depraved act there is an act of infidelity and indeed
treason, depravity, and betrayal are for the fire.'

Related from Imam 'Ali (A) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said
regarding a treaty of his:

'Beware of breaking the treaty of Allah and His protectorate. For Allah
has made His treaty and protectorate a sanctuary for all His servants by
His mercy. Having patience in a time of strife in which you seek relief
is better than any treachery in which you fear its repercussions and
evil consequences.' Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali (A) said in a hadith:

'The fulfilment of promises is a concomitant of sincerity and I do not
know of a shield more efficient than it (fulfilment). No one who is
aware of the return (to Allah) would ever commit treachery. But we now
live in a time when most of the people have taken up treachery as the
clever and crafty way of conduct. The ignorant people would attribute
this as a good conduct. What is the matter with them? May Allah curse
them.

The truly intelligent one knows the ways and has the means to attain
whatever he wishes, but the thing that prevents him from doing so, is
the order of Allah. He refrains from committing (anything which is
against the pleasure of Allah) even though he is able to do it. Whereas
the one who has no fear of Allah or no bound to religion would not loose
the opportunity to grab it."

He (A) also said: 'Fulfilling promises to the people of treachery is
treachery in the sight of Allah. Likewise treachery towards the people
of treachery is as the fulfilment of promises in the sigh t of Allah.'
Author's note: Here Imam 'Ali (A) alludes to the principle of degrees of
importance, and the meaning here is not treachery but rather that the
command of Allah is more important than being trustworthy towards the
treacherous by excusing oneself from being on the side of the
treacherous for one's own protection.

Related from the Prophet (S) who said:

There are four things which if found in a person then he is a hypocrite
. . . (and one of them is that) if he makes a promise he breaks it.'
Related from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali (A) who said:

'The swiftest of things in th eir consequences is when you make a
contract with a person and you intend to keep it but he intends to break
it.'


**Cease fire during the Sacred Months**

Related fro m 'Ala' ibn al-Fudail who said: 'I asked him Imam Saadiq
(A) about whether the Muslims should initiate fighting with the
Polytheists during the Sacred Months. He (A) said:

'If the Polytheists initiate things by considering fightin g allowed
during these months and the Muslims see that they are being vanquished
then they should fight and this because of Allah Almig hty's words: {The
Sacred Month for the Sacred Month and the law of equality applies for
the sacred things}. 26 The Romans were in this regard in the same
position as that of the Polytheists because they did not recognise
sanctity for the Sacred Months and would initiate fighting during these
months.

The Polytheists did however know about the sanctity of the Sacred
Months but th ey considered fighting to be allowed as d id the unjust
who used to initiate fighting.

Related from 'Ali ibn Ibrahim in his exegesis: 'The Sacred Months are
the months of Rajab on its own and then Dhul-Qa'dah, Dhul-Hijjah, and
Muharram consecutively in which Allah has prohibited fighting and the
effects of sins are multiplied and also good deeds.'

**Prisoners of war are not to be killed**

Related from al-Zuhri, from Imam 'Ali ib n al-Hussein (A) who said (in
a hadith):

'If you take a prisoner and he is incapable of walking and you do not
have a carriage then send him on his way (set him free) and do not kill
him for you do no t know what the Imam will rule regarding him.' He also
said: 2 6 The Holy Qur'an: The Heifer (2): 194.

'The prisoner, if he enters Islam will be spared his life and he will
become part of the group.'

Related from 'Abdullah ibn Maymo un who said: "Imam 'Ali (A) was
brought a prisoner on the day of the battle of Siffin and the prisoner
pledged allegiance to him. Imam 'Ali (A) said: 'I will not kill you for
I fear Allah Lord of the worlds.' So he sent him on his way and returned
to him the booty that he had come with.'

Related from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Imam 'Ali (A) who said:

"The Messenger of Allah (S) took some prisoners on the day of the
battle of Badr and took ransom in exchange for their freedom. (similarly
there were exchanges of prisoners of war.) For the Imam has the choice,
if Allah grants him victory over the Polyth eists, to kill the warriors
from them or to take them as prisoners and count them amongst the spoils
of war and to divide them up. And if the Imam see it to be in the
general interest, he could set them free."

Related from Bashir, who said to Imam Saadiq (A): 'I had a dream in
which I said to yo u: 'Fighting without an Imam to whom ob edience is
mandatory is prohibited in the same way that eating the flesh of animals
not slaughtered (according to the Islamic law), or blood, or swine flesh
is prohibited.' Then you said to me (in the dream): 'Yes, this is the
case.' Imam Saadiq (A) said: 'Yes this is indeed the case.'

Related from Sama'ah, from Imam Saadiq (A) who said: 'Abbad al- Basri
met Ali ibn al-Hussein (A) on the road to Makkah and said to him: 'O Ali
son of al-Hussein, you have left jihad and its difficulties and turned
to the Hajj and its easiness for indeed Allah Almighty and Exalted is He
has said:

{Surely Allah has bought from the Believers their own selves a nd their
wealth in return for Paradise, that they fight in the way of Allah . .
.}27

Ali ibn al-Hussein (A) said: 'Read on.' He said: {Those who turn in
repentance and do acts of worship . . .}28 Then Ali ibn al-Hussein (A)
said:

2 7 The Holy Qur'an: Repentance (9): 111.
2 8 The Holy Qur'an: Repentance (9): 112.
"If we see those people who are described thus, then jihad with them is
better then the Hajj."

Related from Muhammad ibn 'Abdullah al-Samandari who said: 'I said to
Imam Saadiq (A): 'If I was by the gate (meaning the main gate) and there
was a call to arms should I go with them?' He (A) said:

"Do you think that if you went out with them and you took a man
prisoner then granted him sanctuary and gave him the same treaty that
the Messenger of Allah (S) used to give to the Polytheists, would they
fulfil the covenant?"

I said: 'No they would not fulfil it.' He (A) said: "Then do not go out
with them." Related form Abu Basir, from Imam Saadiq (A), from his
forefathers (A) who said:

"The Muslim should not go out for jihad if he does not safeguard the
rule or implement the command of Allah Almighty. If he were to die in
that place he would be an aide to our enemy in limiting our right and
putting our blood in danger. His death would be a death as of the days
of ignorance.'

Related from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (A) in the hadith of the sharai'a al-
din who said: 'Jihad is mandatory with the just Imam, and whoever is
killed defending his wealth is a martyr.' Related from Bashshara
al-Mustapha, from Komeil, from Amir-ul- Mu'mineen 'Ali (A) who said: 'O
Komeil, there is to be no military raids without a just Imam.'

Related from Sayyid 'Ali ibn Tawous in the book Kashf al-Yaqin with the
chain of narration to the Prophet (S) regarding the blessed night
ascension to Heaven: Allah Almighty revealed to the Prophet (S):
'Walking on foot to jihad is only with you or with the Imams from your
progeny.'

Related from al-Sha'bi who said: 'When Imam 'Ali (A) took prisoners on
the day of Siffin he set them free. 'Amr ibn al-'Aas had said (to
Mu'awiyah): "Kill the prisoners you have taken." In the mean time the
freed prisoners started to arrive at Mu'awiyah's camp. Mu'awiyah then
said to 'Amr ibn al-'Aas: 'O 'Amr, if we were to follow what you say
then we would indeed fall into a foul state o f affairs and our
reputation would be worsened. Do you not see that our prisoners have
been released? Then he ordered that the prisoners from Imam 'Ali's men
be released. When Imam Ali (a) had taken a prisoner from the Syrian
camp,

he would released him except when one of his own men had been killed in
which case he would kill him for that.

Also if Imam Ali (A) released a prisoner and he returned once more to
fight, he would kill him then. Author's note: The killing of the
prisoners was o nly in extraordinary cases because the Imam release of
prisoners is well recorded in the chronicles. The account of Asbagh ibn
Darar, presented later, is one example of this.


**Those who were forced to fight should not be killed**

In the book Da'aim al-Islam, related from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen 'Ali (A)
who said: 'The Messenger of Allah (S) said on the day of the battle of
Badr: 'Whoever you capture of the Clan of 'Abd al-Muttalib, then do not
kill them for they have been forced to fight against their wills.'


