Building Blocks of Peace Within the Movement
============================================

To have peace within the Islamic movement requires the presence of two
things without which the movement will not end with a good result but
will remain weak and ineffective as have many movements in the past who
have come to the fore then disappeared because they did not have
realistic building blocks for the movement.

This applies to both the Islamic and non-Islamic worlds. Hence the
Islamic movement should observe these two matters from the initial
stages of its formation so that it may reach the desired goal. These two
matters are:

Firstly: Free and fair elections within the movement itself and a
balance of power. Naturally splits will form in the movement. This is
customary in life. However between these splits there must be equality,
balance and competence so that a single group is not able to take
control of the movement and derail the movement towards dictatorship.

Any movement can be taken from reality to dictatorship simply by one
group gaining authority over the other groups. This spells death for the
movement even if the movement remains alive superficially.

Before the western military coups in Iraq and although British
colonialism was in authority at that time, it was not as powerful and
sharp as the colonialism that those who called themselves repub licans
brought. They were not in fact republicans, not al-Karim, nor al-Salaam,
nor his brother, nor al-Bakr, nor those who came after him.

They were nothing but agents of Britain, Israel and America. In any
case, at the time of the monarchy, many political parties whether they
called themselves the National Party or the Progressive Party, or even
the Islamic Party, all failed for the reason that at the very beginning
a colonialist or despotic group gained control over them and there were
no free elections, equalities o r distribution of power.

This should be a lesson to us. The Islamic movement must have power b
ases within it, which are both equal and competitive, b ut the
competition should be towards the good and not the bad, towards decisive
action and attracting the people and raising standards. As Allah has
said in three verses from the Holy Qur'an: { . . . and for this let the
competitors compete for.} (3:133), and { . . . and race each other for
forgiveness from your Lord.} (2:148), and { . . . and race for the good
things.} (5:48).

Whatever the case may be, it is imperative that the Islamic movement
should observe peace between the different groups of the movement and if
dictatorship should gain power over the movement then there will be no
peace, for peace is bred from equal power bases. If dictatorship were to
gain po wer it would not change and the movement would not be able to
change it. Then this group would act despotically with the finances,

the rep utation of the mo vement and with the will of the mo vement. We
have seen how easy it was for colonialism to take the reins of power
from the dictators because the public was taken out of the equation and
the power was present in four, five or ten people only. However, if the
movement had been a popular movement then colonialism would not have
been able to take the reins of power from the people.

It is then imperative that the movement observe the following two
points. First, the movement should comprise of different branches,
equally balanced powers, and different groups each with their own
currents and trends even though the framework is one, which is the
popular Islamic movement.

It is only natural that people's tastes are different and each person
should be allowed to propose his own opinion in a climate of complete
freedom be that in speech, writing, in gatherings or on travels. Every
person should work according to his own opinion as we see in action
amongst religious jurists.

Their framework is the Qur'an and the Sunnah, consensus and intellect
but they still differ in the particularities in all the areas of
jurisprudence. This is the case for doctors, engineers, and astronomers
in the gatherings of the free or semi- free nations.

Seco ndly, the movement should also hold free elections annually or
biennially. The mark o f free elections is a complete change fro m top
to bottom not fraudulent elections as in some nations, parties and
organisations where the leaders do not change and only a few things
change as a tactic.

Another mark of fair elections is that the number of votes ranges from
small to large like 51% or 55% or 60%. As for forged elections like
those of the Ba'thists or the Nationalists we see 99% of the votes going
to the former president and 1% going to his opponent or even less. This
is no thing but fraud, lies, and does nothing but compound the
dictatorship. A p olitical scientist has laid do wn two criteria for
assessing whether a country is free or not. The first is to see whether
the leaders change once every four years.

The second is to see whether the people are able to speak freely in the
streets or write what they wish or publish magazines and newspapers as
they wish. These two criteria must be observed within the movement
itself so that the movement can be fully free on the condition that this
freedom be within an Islamic framework.

Through this, the movement may be able to continue to expand and
progress and will be accompanied by peace. In this way the movement will
end in the government of one billion Muslims by the leave of Allah.


**Instilling Peace**

The process of instilling and instructing the self has a great effect
on the human psyche. Humans are by nature prone to anger and revolt, to
seeing the faults o f others, to entering into wrangles and fights with
others, and to hatred, disdain, enmity and cutting off relationships. It
is imperative that the roots of these things are extirpated from the
heart of the individual and following on from that the rest of his
limbs.

This can be achieved through instilling into the self that the human
being is a harmoniser, a peace-maker, decisive, intelligent, a thinking
being, a purposeful b eing, and an administrator. If the individual
instils this into his self day and night and throughout his life he will
eventually develop a peaceful nature and he will be able to help to
advance the Islamic movement even in an environment of wars, revo lts
and revolutions.

In a hadith it is said: 'The most worthy of things to be imprisoned is
the tongue.' Hence the individual must customise himself to guarding his
tongue and his heart.

In another hadith it is said: 'If you see the believer silent then draw
near to him for he is receiving wisdom.'

The individual must also guard his hand and his pen, his movements and
his pauses in fact everything so that he may move the Islamic nation
forward. Those who say: 'We are nervous characters and we cannot bear
pressure', or they say: 'So-and-So has belittled our opinion', or they
say: 'We think he is in the wrong so how can we remain silent?' These
types of people are not able to advance the movement.

Hence we see in the history of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the
history of successful movements many of this type of person. The hadith
report that an ill-mannered man of the infidels came to the Messenger of
Allah (S) and cursed him while the Messenger was in the sacred mosque
reciting the Qur'an. The Messenger of Allah did not say a word to him
but the man obviously wanted to provoke a fight with the Messenger of
Allah (S).

The Messenger remained calm and quiet but the man cursed him and cursed
him. Then he spat in the face of the Messenger of Allah (S). The man
himself continues the account saying that: 'Muhammad (S) did no more
than wipe the spit off his face and did not say a thing.' What was it
that made the Messenger of Allah do this when he was justified in at
least returning what he had received with like as in the Qur'anic
verse:

{ . . . and whoever attacks you then attack them in the same way that
they attack you.} (2:194). It was because the Messenger of Allah (S) saw
that entering into a squabble with this infidel was not important and it
would not serve his goal.

Hence he returned to peace and carried on in the way that Allah had
marked out for him. In this way the Islamic movement succeeded because
of the clemency, patience and peacefulness of the Messenger of Allah
(S). The poet says: 'You will never be able to be clement until you
adopt clemency.' Meaning that if there is revolution in your heart then
do not let it surface but rather adopt clemency and patience and control
yourself so that you are able to be a peace-maker even in the worst
times of excitement and breakdown.

There is another account about the Messenger of Allah (S) that he
passed by the family of Yasir; Yasir and Sumayyah and 'Ammar, when the
Polytheists were torturing them. He looked at them with kindness and
said: 'Patience O family of Yasir for you have been promised
paradise.'

He did no more than this. This was because the Messenger of Allah (S)
knew that if he entered into a marginal dispute with the torturers he
would lose his main impetus and he would not reach his main goal, which
was to establish the pillars of Islam. In this way, the Messenger, his
righteous companions and his impeccable family were characterised with
the most amount of peacefulness and peace, self control and control of
the tongue, hand and reaction. They were then ab le to make advances
because of this peace.

We can also see that some reformers who were able to rescue their
countries from the grip of colonialism were able to control themselves.
One who was not able to do this and would get irritated at the slightest
thing began to instil in himself every day the qualities of a
peace-maker who loves the good for all people. He used to say: 'Every
day when I awoke in the morning I would instil these things in myself
and also when I wanted to sleep until I was able to carry pressure and
insults.'

The Muslim instils in himself peace every morning, noon, afternoon, at
sunset, and evening in the obligatory prayers when he repeats in every
prayer: 'Peace be upon you O Prophet and the Blessings and Mercy of
Allah, Peace be upon you O righteous servants of Allah, Peace be upon
you and the blessings and mercy of Allah.

' Peace to the leader namely the Messenger of Allah (S), p eace to
himself and peace for everyone else. This symbolises the peacefulness of
the leader, the peacefulness of the person, and the peacefulness of the
Islamic community or greater than the Islamic community because saying
'Peace be upon you' encompasses everyone to enter into peace.

In this way the Muslim instils peace into himself every day at least
fifteen times. If the individual instils peacefulness into himself he
will have the peace which will enable him to lead, to progress, to bear
difficulties, not to become irritated with others through insulting
words or slander and backbiting and cu rsing. There is a hadith in which
the Messenger of Allah saw two people cursing each other so he said:
'They are two Satans reviling each other.'

Whatever the case may be, the Islamic movement which seeks to bring
about an international Islamic government must adopt peace as its
mantra, and strive for peace. Not the peace of the communists for this
is the peace of infidelity and killing. What we seek is an Islam in the
shade of Peace meaning in the shade of Allah for one of His names is
al-Salam (Peace):

{He is Allah, there is no god but He, The King, The Holy, The Peace,
The Faithful, The Protector, The Almighty, The Omnipotent, The
Imperious.} (59:23)

What we seek is a peace in the shade of peace, which is in the shade of
Allah and in the shade of Islam. Hence we should always try to instil in
ourselves peace and compassion, even for the enemy, so that we may draw
them to the straight path. It has been related that the Messenger of
Allah (S) if the harm he suffered from his people became great would
say: 'O Allah, guide my people, for they have no knowledge.

' He did not seek to invoke Allah against them but rather called upon
Allah to guide them. In the end the Messenger of Allah achieved that
success which has no parallel in the entire world. We ask Allah to grant
us such success in this. Surely He is the granter of success and the
best helper.


