Part Three : Non-violence in the Teachings of Islam
===================================================

In this paper the author addresses the issue of non-violence as
prescribed in the teachings of Islam; that violence is severely
condemned and non-violence is encouraged. The author then goes on to c
lassify violence, and non-violence, into three categories.

The author shows how non-violence produces the desired results in all
aspects of life, and it is therefore incumbent for the Islamic reform
movement to adhere to non-violence if they want to achieve reforms in
their societies successfully. This paper is an ex tract from Imam
Shirazi's book, The Islamic Government, pp 66-88, volume 102 of the
"Al-Fiqh series.

Translated by Z. Olyabek

One of the most important princip les that the forthcoming Islamic
government, as well as the Islamic movement, must adhere to is the
condition of non-violence. A substantial body of the holy tradition and
reports condemns violence as may be found in "The Shi'a Guide to
Shari'ah (Islamic Law)"58 and "Supplement to The Shi'a Guide to the
Shari'ah"59 .

It is also reported "Violence is also part of the army of ignorance".
Furthermore, there is eq ually substantial evidence in the holy
traditions and reports encouraging and promoting non-violence, leniency
and kindness.

To show the correlation between violence and non-violence the following
introduction is presented.

Ancient philosophers considered the universe to be composed of four
elements; namely water, earth, fire and air. Furthermore all four
elements were consid ered to be the derivatives of one entity called
primordial matter. The four elements were considered to have
interchangeable states, just as different shapes and structures can be
made from clay whereas the basic substance, clay, remains the same.

Sociologists make similar statements in relation to power. To them
power is an essence that may manifest itself in a tribe, wealth,
knowledge, the natio n state, or public op inion and so on, all o f
which may transform from one state to another.

For example the tribal chief may transfer his power and influence to
the domain of public opinion, and from there to the nation state. As
seen in the case of an individual who gains power through the support
and vote of public opinion.

The legislators state a similar argument regarding law and custom. They
are both of the same essence, and one may be transmuted into the other
and vice versa. For example if it was a custom to drive on the right
hand side of the road, members of parliament are pressured to make that
convention a law.

On the other hand, if the traffic regulatio n states that cars must
stop at the red traffic light, people would abide by that and it becomes
common custom.

5 8 Compiled by Hassan al-Hurr al-Aameli as "Wasaa'el al-Shi'a le
Tasheel Masaa'el al- Shari'ah". 5 9 Compiled by Mirza Hussain al-Noori
as "Mostadrak al-Wasaa'el". As for Islamic law, Allah states; "Allah
will change their evil (deed) into good."6 0

This is because the essence is one. Another example is the concept of
the tree in heaven and in hell. They both are of the same essence but
one gives dates and grapes and the other gives fire and fruits like the
heads of demons.

The example of this (transmutability) in this world is: "Have you not
seen those who have changed the favour of Allah into blasphemy?"6 1
where grapes are turned into wine or, on the other hand, wine is turned
into vinegar.

Having given this introduction I would state that vio lence and non-
violence are of the same essence. They reflect the human will in
repelling harm and attracting good, whether in wealth, honour, or the
self. The human will may be released either through violence or non-
violence and the latter is the desirable of the two options.

Therefore it is imperative upon Islamist activists and the Islamic
government to opt for non-violence to reach their objectives, which are
the establishment of the Islamic government, as far as the activists are
concerned, or its survival as far the established government is
concerned, so that it (the state) may expand and develop quantitively
and qualitatively.

As for the kind of non-violence that must be adopted, it must be the
kind adopted 'by nature' and not that adopted 'by coercion'.
Non-violence may be categorised in three classes:

**Non-violence by nature**

In this category an individual is by nature non-violent, just as he may
have other character traits such as bravery, nobility, justness,
chastityâ€¦

Non-violence by coercion

This is a kind of non-violence that is adopted by an individual due to
his weakness. The weak person resorts to non-violence 6 0 The holy
Qur'an: The Criterion (25): 70.
6 1 The holy Qur'an: Abraham (14): 28.

to achieve his objectives. Therefore if a bullying tyrant slaps an
individual in the face, the latter would not respond because he is
unable to do so as he is no match to the former. This is the worst kind
of non-violence. This is similar to the case of one who refrains from
swearing back since he is dumb.

**Non-violence by design**

In this case non-violence is adopted in preference to violence on the
basis of priorities. In this case one is able to resort to violence,
unlike the one in the second kind above, but non- violence is not his
'second nature' as in the first case. Here non-violence is preferred
over violence since it serves as a strategy to achieve his ob
jectives.

It may be argued that the second category should not be called non-
violence as it is not applicable! For example, can we say that an infant
baby who is unable to respond back if hit is a case of non-violence? The
answer would be that this is not what it is meant by the second
category. What is meant is the capacity for violence, where th e use of
violence would bring about the downfall of one's aims. For example
swearing at someone who had slapped him or slapping someone who had shot
him.

Just as non-violence is defined in three categories, violence is also
classified in three categories, according to the law of pairs. And given
that the probability that nonentity is one, therefore there cannot be
several nonentities versus many existences, absolute existence is
opposed by absolute nihility. As for external existences, they are
opposed by specific nihility. Therefore the existence of X is opposed by
the non-existence of X, but not opposed by absolute nihility.

Just as absolute existence is opposed by absolute nihility and not the
non- existence of X. Either of the two absolutes have respective
entities; just as they (the absolutes) oppose one another, their
entities do too.

Needless to say, two opposing entities should be equal in every aspect
except in existence and non-existence. Therefore the existence of X is
not opposed by the non-existence of Y. This is a philosophical debate
that is beyond the scope of this writing.

The purpose of this debate is that it is imperative for the Islamic
movement and government to be characterised by non-violence of the first
category, i.e. non-violence by nature. This is because in addition to
reaching the pleasant goal that will be characterised by continual
existence, non-violence is a virtue that comforts the soul too. And what
a difference there is between one who does something or refrains from
something willingly and one who does so reluctantly.

It may be asked, "If this is the case, then why do we see that the
prophets and imams engaged in violence, as stated in the Qur'an? "How
many of the Prophets fought (in Allah's way), and with them (fought)
large bands of godly men?"62 and "O Prophet! Fight the Unbelievers and
the Hypocrites, . . ."63 ,

And why did the imams Ali, Hassan and Hussain (A) participate in wars?"
The reply to this is that this was based on a question of priorities.
The issue was to choose the lesser of two evils; just as when a patient
reluctantly agrees to undergo a surgical operation to amputate a limb in
order to prevent greater harm to his body and health.

If the Messenger of Allah, (S), had ignored the pagans and their
mischievous deeds and had left them to their own accords, that would
have resulted in the loss of thousand s, if not millions, of lives,
whereas the given resp onse of the Messenger of Allah (S) limited it to
less than fourteen hundred.64 So on the one hand we have violence with
tens of thousands or million s, and on the other violence with less than
fourteen hundred. Clearly the latter would not be called violence
compared to the first.


**Acquiring a Non-violent Discipline**

The virtue of non-violence requires a substantial and, very often, a
strenuous psychological and character forming education and training.
"None shall be accorded this rank except one blessed with great good fo
rtune."65

Non-violence has many manifestations. It is not merely to refrain from
swearing back at someone who swore at you, or to abstain from hitting

6 2 The holy Qur'an: The Family of 'Emran (3): 146.
6 3 The holy Qur'an: Repentance (9): 73.
6 4 This figure includes the casualties on both sides throughout the
campaigns.
6 5 The holy Qur'an: Well-Expounded (41): 35.

back at whoever hit you or shot you. To stubbornly hold on to your
views when amongst a group who have opposite views to yours, refusing
the majority opinion, is also a manifestation of violence. Stubbornness
is a kind of violence. Another kind of violence is to frown at others,
and another is to pass by someone without greeting him.

All of these, amongst others, are manifestation of violence. Hence
Islam actively encourages desirable behaviour and practices such as
"making a bond with whoever severed with yo u, and giving generously to
he who denied you". Examples of some of the reported traditions that
encourage such virtues are as follows:

The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted as saying, "Shall I inform you of
the best morals of this world and the hereafter? (They are) To forgive
he who oppresses you, to make a bond with he who severs from you, to be
kind to he who insults you, and to give to he who deprives you."

Imam Zayn el-Abidin66 (A) is quoted as saying: "On the day of Judgement
Allah the Almighty assembles all the people in one location and then it
is announced, "Where are the noble people?" A group of people rise, who
are then asked,

"What distinguishes you from the rest?" In reply they say: "We used to
make bonds with he who broke off with us, We used to give to he who
deprived us, We used to forgive he who used to oppress us." They are
then told; "You have said the truth, so enter the heaven."

In another tradition, Imam Saadiq67 (A) is reported as saying: "Three
noble qualities belong to this world and the hereafter: To forgive he
who oppresses you, To make bonds with he who breaks off with you, To
forbear when insulted."

In another tradition Imam Baaqir68 (A) is reported as saying: "Allah
the Almighty gives nothing but honour and esteem to the Muslim who has
three qualities: Forgiving he who has oppressed him, Giving to he who
has deprived him, and Making bonds with he who has severed links with
him."

6 6 Imam Zayn el-Aabedeen, also known as Imam al-Sajjad, is the fourth
infallible imam of the Muslims after the Messenger of Allah (S).
6 7 Imam Saadiq is the sixth infallible imam of the Muslims after the
Messenger of Allah (S).
6 8 Imam Baaqir is the fifth infallible imam of the Muslims after the
Messenger of Allah (S).

In another tradition, Imam Ridha (A) quotes the Messenger of Allah (S)
as saying: "Let it be a duty upon you to observe the most noble of
ethics, for my Lord has sent me to teach them. Of them are: To forgive
he who has oppressed you, To give to he who has deprived you, To make
bonds with he who has severed from you, and to visit he (when ill) who
does not visit you (when you are ill)"

Imam Ali69 (A) in his will to Muhammad ibn al-Hanafeyyah states: "Make
sure that your brother is not stronger in his abandonment of you than
your endeavour to keep your bond with him, and that he is not more
persistent in his insult to you than your kindness to him." Imam Saadiq
(A) is reported as saying: "The magnanimity of us the Ahl- ul-Bayt is to
forgive he who oppresses us."

The above is a small sample of the enormous collection of traditions
reported in this respect.


**War Conducts: Islam vs. Others**

As an insight into the "Islamic wars", with a view to study the
violence or the non-violence of them, a quote is made from the book "The
Phenomenon of the Spread of Islam".

The author of this book states: "History books which study the battles
and wars over the course of history reveal that violence is an inherent
phenomenon in wars. When the armies invade a country, atrocities are
their normal practice. They know no mercy or compassion, they do not
respect women, they do not distinguish the young from the old, and even
animals and trees are not spared. This is because their aim is vengeance
and revenge, and to quell any voice which opposes them. And these are
not only the characteristics of invading armies, who act for economical
and political objectives, but that kind of violence has even prevailed
in some pre-Islamic religions.

In Deuteronomy 13:15-16 we read: 6 9 Imam Ali (A), also known by his
exclusive title Amir-ul-Mu'mineen, is the first infallible imam of the
Muslims after the Messenger of Allah (S).

"15 Thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge
of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the
cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword. 16 And thou shall gather all
the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shall burn
with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the LORD
thy God: and it shall be a heap for ever; it shall not be built
again."

And in Deuteronomy 20:11-16 we also find:

"11 And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall
be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee. 12 And if it will
make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shall
besiege it:

13 And when the LORD thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou
shall smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword:

14 But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is
in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shall thou take unto thyself;
and thou shall eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God
hath given thee.

15 Thus shall thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from
thee, which are not of the cities of these nations. 16 But of the cities
of these people, which the LORD thy Go d doth give thee for an
inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breathe:"

In chapter 58 of his momentous book "The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire", Edward Gibbon states:

"The First Crusade recorded, in the history of mankind, the most brutal
prejudice not only against the Muslims, but also against the Eastern
Christians and Jews. Once they took control of the holy city of
Jerusalem, the Crusaders, who saw themselves as the servants of the
Lord, decided to honour their Lord by offering a bloody sacrifice to the
God of the Christians . . . they slaughtered more than 70,000 Muslims!
In the process

neither age nor sex could mollify their implacable rage: the savage
heroes of the cross indulged themselves three days in a promiscuous
massacre; and the infection of the dead bodies produced an epidemical
disease.

They smashed the heads of the children against the walls, threw the
infants from the top of the city walls, grilled the men o n fire and the
Jews had been burnt in their synagogue. They ripped the bellies of
pregnant women to check if they had swallowed their gold. They did not
stop until they were totally exhausted.

The papal envoy witnessed this genocide as he too took part in this
victory."70 The famous historian, Ibn Atheer, 1160-1234, reports: "Th e
Europeans slaughtered more than 70,000 in the al-Aqsa mosque. Many of
those murdered were women and children, as well as many Muslim imams and
scholars, worshipers and pilgrims who had come from far a field to this
holy site. In the rampage, the Crusaders then plundered the mosque of
its countless precious jewellery."

This kind of barbarity in war continues to this day. The wars of this
(twentieth) century are gruesome examples of death and destruction. What
happened in Hiroshima and Nagasaki are evidence to that, and the
Zionists' atrocities in Palestine and the Lebanon are other proofs that
in the mind of non-Muslims war means annihilation and destruction, which
knows no mercy and kills the combatant and the civilian population
alike.

As for the Muslims, the meaning of war and their understanding of it is
based upon the teachings of their religion; the religion of brotherhood,
equality, truth, justice and respect for the humanity of mankind.

Therefore, in their wars they - the Muslims - were furthest of all
people from violence and destruction. This is because a true religion
does not instruct its followers to practice vengeance and revenge, but
it teaches them to defend themselves and their values within the limits
of humanity. The Islamic history is full of examp les of Islamic ethics
in war.

In these scenes one can see the manifestation of humanity in the full
meaning of the word, and can see mercy in various forms. In fact those
scenes were, amongst many others, the reasons that attracted the people
to accept Islam in their 7 0 Edward Gibbon, 1737-1794, "The Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire", Chapter 58.

masses. See how the people of Jordan addressed the Muslim army when it
arrived and camped in Jordan. They wrote:

"O Muslim folk! We prefer you to the Romans and like you more than
them, despite the fact that they have the same religion as we do. You
are more faithful to us and kinder to us than them. You are least
oppressive and better guardian over us. But they (the Romans) invaded us
and deprived us of our rights and of our houses."

The objective of the Muslims was not to force others to accept Islam,
and if the Messenger of Allah (S) wanted to adopt such a policy, he
would not have sanctioned treaties and signed agreements with the Jews
in Medina. What would have prevented him (S) from forcing the Jews to
accept Islam or from exterminating every one of them? He (S) was the
head of state, and the Muslims were the strongest force in the Arabian
Peninsula. There was nothing to prevent him from doing so except the
divine instruction:

"There is no coercion in religion."71

When the Messenger of Allah (S) arrived in Medina he sanctioned a
treaty with the Jews there which states: " . . . The Jews of 'Bani Awf'
tribe are (part of) one community (together) with the (Muslim) faithful.
The Jews practice their religion a nd the Muslims practice their own.
For them shall be their own wealth, property and their persons. Except
for he who has committed oppression or transgression . . ."

This is the freedom of belief in Islam, which is manifested in the
conduct of the Messenger o f Allah (S). Another example is the pact that
the Messenger of Allah (S) gave to the Christians of the Najraan
district of Yemen.

According to this pact, the Messenger of Allah (S) promised them that
they may live in the care of Allah and the protection of His messenger
with their wealth, land, religion and selves fully safeguarded.
Furthermore there will be no interference with the positions and
appointments of bishops, monks, and ministers. In any dispute amongst
themselves, if raised to the prophet, they will be dealt 7 1 The holy
Qur'an: The Heifer (2): 256.

with according to fairness and justice without any injustice being
incurred on any side.

One of the best proofs and strongest evidences that Islam spread
through persuasion, conviction and through reason, and that the sword
had no role to play in the spread of Islam, is the events of the seventh
century Hijri (13 th century AD). These events destroyed the Islamic
entity and existence and demolished the Islamic government. These were
the consequences of the invasions of the Muslim state by the Moguls and
the Ta tars.

They killed and mutilated whomever they came across, and plundered
everything they could get their hands on. They destroyed every city,
town, and village that they entered and annihilated every sign and
symbol o f civilisation that the Islamic state had instituted. These
colo ssal events were the greatest catastrophe ever seen by the Muslims
if not b y humanity at large.

The famous historian Ibn Atheer, 1160-1234, states: "Several years
passed by and I could not find the strength to write about the colossal
catastrophe for it is not within the power of any writer to write about
these atrocities. There are simply not enough words to describe these
horrendous events.

It is not possible to give graphic details of these most horrific
sufferings of Islam and Muslims. Is there anyone who can write about
this? I wish I was not born or I wish I had died before this
catastrophe.

However, many friends insisted that I write at least a few words about
this greatest tribulation. I was hesitant at first, but I thought that
ignoring their advice would be of no use, this attempt (to write)
constitutes writing about a momentous event and an almighty catastrophe
the like of which the days and nights would never see again.

It affected humanity in general and the Muslims in particular. If
someone said that from the time that Allah created Adam until now the
world had not suffered such genocide, he would be right. History books
do not show any event which come anywhere near this mass murder and
destruction."

Despite the fact that the Moguls slaughtered many millions of Muslim
people and razed several hundred cities, towns and villages, they did
not manage to quench the flame of Islam in the hearts of the remaining
Muslims.

In fact, and this is the point of this article, these very Muslims, who
had been severely defeated, managed to beat the Buddhist and Christian
missionaries to win over the hearts and minds of those nomads who
practiced Shamanism.72

It only took a few years filled with debates and discussion which took
place between the supporters of each religions until those few whose
power and might, and very existence had been b roken by the Moguls were
able to attract to Islam those ferocious conquerors. In doing so they
(the Muslims) destroyed all the myths and accusations propagated b y the
adversaries of Islam that it is a religion th at spread and survived by
the sword."


