Arrogance
=========

Arrogance is a mental state causing self-admiration and haughtiness
against others in words or deeds. It is censured and dispraised in many
texts in the Quran and Sunna:

***“Do not scornfully turn your face away from people. Do not walk
around puffed-up with pride; Allah does not love arrogant and boastful
people (31:18).”***

***“Do not walk proudly on the earth; your feet cannot tear apart the
earth nor are you as tall as the mountains (17:37).”***

***“He does not love the proud ones (16:23).”***

***“Is not hell the dwelling of the arrogant ones? (39:60)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “The most favorable of you and the nearest to me
on the Day of Resurrection will be the most well-mannered and the most
modest. The remotest of you to me on the Day of Resurrection will be the
bigmouth and the proud[^1].”

As he passed by some people, the Prophet (S) asked them about the reason
of their gathering. They answered that they were gathering on an insane
epileptic person. He (S) commented: “This is not insane. He is afflicted
with a disease. May I tell you about the true insane?” “Yes, you may,”
they answered. He said: “The true insane is he who walks swaggeringly,
looks to his sides, moves his shoulders through his sides, and hopes for
Paradise of Allah while he acts disobediently to Him. His evil cannot be
trusted and good is not expected from him. That is the true insane and
this one is inflicted with a disease[^2].”

While a wealthy man with a clean garment was sitting with the Prophet
(S), a poor man with dirty garment came and sat next to the wealthy who
pulled his garment. The Prophet (S) said to the wealthy: “Have you been
afraid that his poverty would inflict you?” “No, I have not,” answered
the man. “Have you been afraid that he would soil your garment?” asked
the Prophet. “No, I have not,” answered the man. “Why did you then do
so?” asked the Prophet. “God’s Messenger,” said the man, “I have a
companion who shows me my evildoings as righteous and my righteous ones
as evildoings. As penance, I offer the half of my fortune to this man.”

The poor man refused this offer and answered the wealthy who asked him
about the reason, “Well, I refuse because I am afraid I will be
inflicted with the same feeling of arrogance that you had.”

In one of his sermons, Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “You should take a
lesson from what Allah did with Satan; namely He nullified his great
acts and extensive efforts on account of the vanity of one moment,
although Satan had worshipped Allah for six thousand years whether by
the reckoning of this world or of the next world is not known. Who now
can remain safe from Allah after Satan by committing a similar
disobedience? None at all. Allah cannot let a human being enter Paradise
if he does the same thing for which Allah turned out from it an angel
and seek Allah’s protection from the dangers of vanity, as you seek His
protection from calamities. Certainly, if Allah were to allow anyone to
indulge in pride, He would have allowed it to his selected prophets and
vicegerents. But Allah, the Sublime, disliked vanity for them and liked
humbleness for them[^3].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: In the heavens, there are two angels whose
mission is to oversee the servants. They advance him who behaves
modestly, and humiliate him who behaves proudly[^4].”

“Any behavior of arrogance or haughtiness is inevitably the result of
the feeling of humility in the mentality of the arrogant or the
haughty[^5].”

A quarrel broke out between Salman al-Farsi[^6] and a man who addressed
to him: “Who are you and what are you?” Salman answered: “The first of
you and me is a dirty sperm. The last of you and me is a stinking
carrion. On the Day of Resurrection, the scales will be maintained.
Those whose good deeds will weigh heavier on the scale will be the true
noble men, but those whose good deeds will be lighter on the scale, will
be the true inglorious[^7].”

Disadvantages of Arrogance
--------------------------

Arrogance surrounds with a ring of vanity and pride and inflicts with
the fondness of selfishness and showiness to the degree that nothing
will satisfy the arrogant except false flattery and fake praise. The
arrogant, then, can no longer see his defects and shortcomings, care
about self- discipline, or remedy his flaws. The result will be that he
becomes the target of criticism and the subject of malice and revulsion.
Furthermore, the arrogant is the remotest from the right and justice.
The arrogant, too, excites people’s malice and loathing in such a way
that nobody else can do.

Incentives of Arrogance
-----------------------

Self-esteem is one of the incentives of arrogance, which occurs only
when one feels that he bears abundant knowledge, high position, big
fortune, or the like stimulants of selfishness.

It may also be arisen from enmity, envy, or pride that may urge to
challenge the ideal individuals for belittling their qualities of honor
and daring them through various sorts of verbal and active practices.

Levels of Arrogance
-------------------

Levels of arrogance vary according to the intensity of its signs.

The first level is that which is treated with modesty without allowing
its signs and disadvantages to appear.

The second level is that when arrogance grows and allows its signs to
appear through vain behaviors with people.

The third level is that in which arrogance prevails so aggravatingly
causing megalomania and excessive fondness of high rank and showiness.
Hence, you see the affected ones go on referring to their merits and
disparaging others. This is in fact the worst level of arrogance.

Sorts of Arrogance
------------------

• Arrogance against God: This stands for the abstention from believing
in Him and the vanity against obeying Him. This is definitely the worst
kind of atheism and the most hideous sort of arrogance.

• Arrogance against the prophets: This stands for the vanity against
believing and submitting to them. Though the two are very close to each
other, this sort is, to some extent, less horrible than the first.

• Arrogance against people: This is achieved by showing contempt against
people and regarding one’s being too far above them in words and deeds.
Arrogance against the scholars by regarding oneself too high for asking
them or seeking their knowledge, is a subclass of arrogance against
people.

Treatment of Arrogance
----------------------

The arrogant should recognize his reality: his origin is a dirty sperm
and his end is stinky carrion. Between these two, man is weak and
feeble. Hunger and thirst exhaust him, ailment and sickness overcome
him, poverty and harm afflict him, and death and wear will inevitably
befall him. Man cannot provide benefits and cannot save himself from
misfortunes:

***“There is the life hereafter which we have prepared for those who do
not want to impose their superiority over the others in the land nor
commit evil therein. The happy end certainly belongs to the pious ones.
(28:83)”***

Hence, the best people are the most well-mannered, helpful, pious, and
righteous.

Man should keep in mind the advantages of modesty as well as the
disadvantages of arrogance. He should also remember the words of praise
that were said about modesty and these of dispraise that were said about
arrogance. It is said: “For people of reason, modesty with ignorance and
stinginess is better than arrogance with mannerism and openhanded.
Modesty, then, is such a great good feature covering two bad qualities,
and arrogance is such a bad quality screening two good traits[^8].”

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 2 page 209 (quoted from
Qurb ul-Isnad.) There is a similar narrative that is recorded in Sheikh
as-Saduq’s Ilal ush-Sharaayi.

[^2]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 3 page 125 (quoted from
Sheikh as-Saduq’s al-Khissal.)

[^3]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3:87 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3:150 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^6]: Salman al-Farsi (born in 7th century) is a great figure in Islam.
He was a companion of the Prophet Muhammad (S) and a close friend of
Imam Ali Amir ul-Mu'minin (a) who supported him during the tragedy of
the usurpation of his right of leadership after the Prophet. During his
caliphate, Imam Ali (a) gave him a governmental office.

[^7]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 3 page 124 (quoted from
Sheikh as-Saduq’s al-Amali.)

[^8]: Quoted from ar-Raghib; Muhadharat ul-Udabaa.


