Satisfaction
============

Satisfaction is to please oneself with the minimal necessities that meet
the needs and to neglect everything additional. It is a noble trait
revealing dignity and high moral standard:

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said to the man who complained about his increasing
greed: “If you think it is fortunate for you to have only what suffices
you, then you will be sufficed with the least needs of this world. If
you think it is not sufficient for you to have the minimum needs of this
world, then all the worldly pleasures will not suffice you[^1].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “Beware of aspiring after that who is higher
than you are. You should regard sufficient for you what Allah said to
His Prophet: ‘Do not be admired by their fortunes or sons.’ ‘Do not
extend your eyes to the pleasures of the worldly life which we had given
as enjoyment to some of them.’ If you are afflicted with such feelings,
you should then remember the lifestyle of the Prophet (S). His food was
barley, sweets were the dates, and firewood was the leaves of date-palm
trees if found[^2].

“He who satisfies himself with that which Allah has given to him is
surely the richest of people[^3].”

The satisfied is surely the richest of people because richness, in
reality, is not to need for people. The satisfied is content and
convinced with that which God has given to him; therefore, he does not
need people and does not ask anyone except God.

It was related that when Galen, the famous Greek physician, was dead,
people found in his pocket a sheet of paper with the following script:

“Everything that you earn moderately is for the good of your body.
Everything that you give as alms is for the good of your spirit.
Everything that you leave behind you is for the good of others. The
charitable is alive even if he is taken to the other abode. The
wrongdoer is dead even if he is in this world. Satisfaction covers the
defects. Moderation increases the much amount. For son of Adam, there is
nothing more helpful than trust in God[^4].”

Advantages of Satisfaction
--------------------------

Satisfaction has a remarkable influence on the individuals’ lives. It
achieves physical and mental relaxation, and breathes the spirits of
honor, disdain, and chastity. The satisfied is in fact happier, more
tranquil, and meeker than the greedy. Furthermore, satisfaction supplies
with spiritual awakening and discerning, and urges to ready for the life
to come, practice righteous deeds, and gain the incentives of happiness.

It is related that al-Khalil Ibn Ahmed al-Farahidi[^5] was suffering
starvation among the poor people of Basra while others were benefiting
by the profits of his writing works. Once, Sulaiman Ibn Ali the Abbasid
summoned him to attend in al-Ahwaz for teaching his son. Al-Khalil
served the messenger of Sulaiman few pieces of dry bread and said: “You
can eat this because I do not have anything else. As long as I can find
such pieces of bread, I am not in need for Sulaiman.”

When the messenger asked al-Khalil for an answer for Sulaiman, the
latter said as poetic verses--: “Tell Sulaiman that I am not in need for
him since I am rich but without possessing any fortune. The true poverty
lies in one’s spirit, not in the scarce of money. The true richness, as
well, lies in one’s spirit, not in the abundance of fortune. Sustenance
is measured and already decided. Weakness will not decrease the
sustenance, and frequent movements will not increase it[^6].”

Othman Ibn Affan, once, sent a bag of dirhams to Abu Dharr and told the
slave who would carry them that he would be manumitted if Abu Dharr
would accept it. Abu Dharr, however, did not accept that present in
spite of the slave’s importunate insistence. “Please,” said the slave,
“accept it, for I will be manumitted if you do.” Abu Dharr answered:
“But I will be enslaved if I do[^7]!”

Deoganes al-Kelbi was one of the famous wise men of Greece. He was so
ascetic. He did not possess anything and did not live in a house.
Alexander, once, summoned him. He said to the messenger of Alexander:
“Tell him: the same thing that prevented you from coming to me has
prevented me from coming to you. You did not come to me because you are
not in need for me out of your power, and I will not come to you because
I am not in need for you out of my satisfaction[^8].”

Al-Mansour, the Abbasid caliph, wrote a missive to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(a): “Why do you not visit us like the others?” The Imam answered: “We
do not have any worldly pleasure that we anticipate you to stop, nor do
you have any matter of the world to come for us that we expect to gain
from you, nor are you enjoying bliss on which we should congratulate
you, nor are you suffering a misfortune for which we should console
you.” Al-Mansour wrote: “You may accompany us so that you will advise
us.” The Imam answered: “He who seeks the worldly pleasures will not
advise you, and he who seeks the world to come will not accompany
you[^9].”

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 79 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 78 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 79 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Bahaai; al-Kashkul page 371.

[^5]: Al-Khalil ibn Ahmed al-Farahidi was the founder of prosody and the
compiler of the best Arabic-Arabic dictionary; namely Kitab ul-Ayn.

[^6]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 426.

[^7]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 483

[^8]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 2 page 451.

[^9]: Quoted from al-Bahaai; al-Kashkul.


