Greed
=====

Greed is the excess fondness of money and fortune. It is one of the bad
manners that draw to various evils and sins.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “Know with certainty that you cannot achieve
your desire and cannot exceed your destined life. You are on the track
of those before you. Therefore, be humble in seeking and moderate in
earning because often seeking leads to deprivation. Every seeker of
livelihood does not get it, nor is everyone who is moderate in seeking
deprived.”[^1]

Imam al-Hasan (a) said: “People’s perdition lies in three things:
arrogance, greed, and envy. Arrogance is the perdition of the religion.
Because of arrogance, Eblis[^2] was cursed. Greed is the enemy of the
soul. Because of greed, Adam was dismissed from Paradise. Envy is the
pioneer of evil. Because of envy, Cain killed Abel the two sons of
Adam--.”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “In his love for the world, the greedy is like
the silkworm: the more it wraps in its cocoon, the less it has of
escaping from it, until it dies of grief[^3].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “If son of Adam were to possess two valleys of
gold and silver, he would long for a third. Son of Adam, your stomach is
but an ocean or a valley that cannot be filled in with anything except
dust[^4].”

“The destruction that the fondness of fortune leaves on a man is more
effective than the deed of two ravenous wolves that attack a shepherd
less herd one from the front and the other from the back. The Muslim’s
honor, however, lies in his religiosity[^5].”

Disadvantages of Greed
----------------------

Greed enslaves man and causes him grief. The greedy cares only for
collecting fortunes without stopping at any limit. Whenever he achieves
a goal, he works for achieving another and, so, he becomes the slave of
avidity until death strikes him. He, also, exerts laborious efforts for
collecting riches, but he is the less beneficiary. He tires for gaining
fortunes, but death comes unexpectedly upon him to deprive him of
enjoying that fortune. The heirs, then, enjoy his fortune so easefully.
Furthermore, greed takes to the slips of sinful matters that produce
problematic situations in the world to come. It also hinders from doing
charity.

Treatment of Greed
------------------

• It is necessary to keep in mind the disadvantages and the worldly and
religious inconveniences of greed and to remember that man will be
interrogated about the legally gotten pleasures of this world, punished
for the illegally gotten, and blamed for the suspicious.

• It is necessary to ponder over the aforementioned virtues of
satisfaction, contemplating the life accounts of the great
personalities, such as the prophets, their successors, and the saints,
especially in the field of asceticism.

• It is advisable to avoid looking enviously to the richer ones and
those who enjoy false luxuries of this world, and to consider the less
rich.

• It is necessary to achieve living moderation, for it is the most
important factor that contributes in alleviating the tension of greed.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “I guarantee for the moderate that he will not
see poverty.”

[^1]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^2]: Eblis is the name of the Devil.

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 152 (quoted from al-Kafi.)

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/154 (as quoted from as-Saduq’s Men la
Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih.)

[^5]: Quoted from Mir’aat ul-Uqoul; 2 (The Explanation of al- Majlisi’s
al-Kafi) as quoted from al-Kafi; page 303.


