Generosity
==========

Generosity is the opposite of stinginess. It stands for offering money,
food, or any other lawful gaining out of one’s free will. It is in fact
the worthiest nature. As a sign of the unprecedented virtue of
generosity is that you see every precious and appreciable thing is
described as generous. For example, God says:

***“This is a generous Quran (56:77).”***

***“A generous messenger came to them (44:17).” “And corn-fields and
generous mansions (44:26).”***

The The Ahlul-Bayt (a) therefore praised generosity laudably:

Imam as-Sadiq related that the Prophet (S) said:

“The best men in view of faith is the most openhanded[^1].”

“The generous is close to Allah, close to people, and close to Paradise.
The stingy is remote from Allah, remote from people, and close to
Hell[^2].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “A generous young man who is plunging in sins is
favorable, in the sight of Allah, to a niggardly old man who plunges in
worship[^3].”

“Spend and be sure that Allah will recompense you. Any male or female
servant of Allah who behaves stingily in a field that pleases Allah will
surely spend many folds in a field that displeases Him[^4].”

Advantages of Generosity
------------------------

A society cannot feel happy or tranquil unless its individuals feel the
spirit of mutual sympathy and harmonize with each other in feelings and
senses. Such being the case, the society will be just like a compact
building. Mutual sympathy has a bright picture that shines with beauty
and brilliance. Undoubtedly, the noblest, most beautiful, and most
everlasting picture of mutual sympathy is the feelings of the wealthy
individuals for the poor. Such feelings will surely ease the pains of
poverty.

By the application of this noble humane principal, (namely, the
principals of mutual sympathy) the poor will bear the feelings of
amicability towards the wealthy, and this will help the community live
happily.

From this cause, the Islamic Sharia has called for openhandedness and
sympathy with the poor, and condemned the societies whose individuals
suffer starvation and deprivation without finding any one who extends
the hand of help towards them. It has also regarded the wealthy who do
not help the poor as being very far-off Islam.

The Prophet (S) said: “He who begins his day without caring for the
affairs of the Muslims is not a Muslim.”

“He who passes a night satiated while his neighbor is hungry has never
believed in me. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah shall not look at the
inhabitants of a village one of whose individuals is hungry[^5].”

Fields of Generosity
--------------------

Virtues of generosity vary according to its fields. The noblest virtue
of generosity, however, is carrying out the obligations of the Sharia,
such as the zakat[^6], khums[^7], and the like.

The Prophet (S) said: “The most generous is he who fulfills that which
Allah has deemed obligatory upon him[^8].”

Then comes the second criterion of generosity, which is the settlement
of the dependents’ needs. In addition to its being obligatory in the
sight of both the Sharia and traditions, this matter is very important
because, naturally, a man’s family members are the worthiest of his
charity and kindness.

Some individuals may behave abnormally in this regard. They may ignore
this genuine natural principal and go on conferring generously on the
strangers for seeking reputation, while they behave stingily with their
family members who, such being the case, will live in neediness and
suffer poverty. Such irregular behaviors are originated from meanness
and foolishness.

Imam al-Kadhim (a) said: “Man’s dependents are his prisoners. Anyone
upon whom Allah confers with graces should be generous towards his
prisoners. If he does not, he will soon be deprived of these
graces[^9].”

Imam ar-Rida (a) said: “Man should save the requirements of his family
members’ lives, so that they will not hope were he dead[^10].”

It is a big mistake to deprive the relatives of such emotions and pour
them on the foreigners, because such behavior is regarded as barefaced
disgrace that arouses the relatives’ hatred and deprives of their
sympathy. The true generous should begin with the nearest and the most
beneficiary in his endowments, such as friends, neighbors, and people of
virtue, because such classes are worthier of being treated generously.

Incentives of Generosity
------------------------

The incentives of generosity vary according to individuals and reasons
of openhandedness. The noblest incentive in this regard is that which is
offered for the sake of God. The incentive may be the desire for gaining
praise and glory and, in this case, the generous is regarded as the
merchant who bargains with his generosity. The incentive may, also, be
the desire for gaining something or being saved from a fearful harm.
These two matters encourage generosity.

Love plays the greatest role in the encouragement on openhandedness for
attracting and drawing the emotions of the beloved.

It is worth mentioning that the results and fruits of generosity will
not be sweet unless it is freed from the reproachful reminding of the
favor, the blemishes of procrastination, and the appearances of
exaggeration.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Favors are worthless unless they are
disregarded, veiled, and provided immediately. If you disregard your
favors, you will surely revere the one to whom you have done that favor.
If you cover up the favors that you do, you will surely accomplish your
deeds. If you offer your favor as soon as possible, you will surely give
it pleasantly; otherwise, you will destroy and give unpleasantly[^11].”

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 67 (quoted from al-Kafi

[^2]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 3 (quoted from al- Imama
wat-Tabssira).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 68 (quoted from al-Kafi and
al-Faqih).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 68 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^6]: Zakat is the obligatory payment made annually under Islamic law on
certain kinds of property and used for charitable and religious objects.

[^7]: Khums is obligatory payment of one-fifth of the wealth made once
under Islamic laws.

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 67 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^9]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 61 (as quoted from al-Kafi and
al-Faqih).

[^10]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 61 (as quoted from al-Kafi and
al-Faqih).

[^11]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16 quoted from Kitab ul- Ahsara; 116
and Ilal ush-Sharaayi.


