Altruism
========

Altruism is the noblest concept of generosity. Not everyone can adorn
himself with this trait, because it is dedicated to the few ideal
persons whom are characterized by openhandedness and who attained the
climax of generosity as they gave liberally while they are in urgent
need. They therefore preferred charity to the settlement of their needs.
The holy Quran praises the virtues of such persons:

***“They give preference to them over themselves - even concerning the
things that they themselves urgently need (59:9).”***

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The best almsgiving is that which is given by
the needy. Allah says: ***“They give preference to them over
themselves - even concerning the things that they themselves urgently
need (59:9)***[^1]***.”***

The Prophet (S) was the highest example of altruism: Jabir Ibn Abdullah
said: The Prophet (S) had never refused anyone’s request.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated: In al-Jirana, the Prophet (S) distributed
the treasury among people. He gave every single individual who asked
from him. As people crowded around him, they pushed him until he had to
lean on a tree that scratched his back. People kept on pushing him until
they took him away from that tree and his garment was hanged to one of
its branches. He was shouting: “People, let me have my garment! By Allah
I swear, even if I have treasures as many as the trees of Tuhama, I will
distribute among you. You shall never find me coward or stingy[^2].”

The Prophet (S) used to prefer the poor to himself. He used to give them
his food while he suffered hunger to the degree that he, once, tied the
stone of hunger on his stomach so as to share the pains of hunger with
the poor.

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “The Prophet (S) had never eaten his fill for
three consecutive days since Allah gave him the Divine Mission[^3].”

The The Ahlul-Bayt (a) were copies of the Prophet in the fields of
generosity and altruism.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated: Ali was the most similar to the Prophet. He
used to eat bread with oil and serve people with bread and meat[^4].

The following holy Verse was revealed for Ali and his family:

“They feed the destitute, orphans, and captives for the love of Allah,
saying: We only feed you for the sake of Allah and we do not want any
reward or thanks from you (76:9).”

The disciples of The Ahlul-Bayt have unanimously agreed that the
previous holy Verse was revealed for Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and
al-Hussein (a). Moreover, a good deal of ulema of other sects have also
asserted so.

Interpreting Sura of al-Insan, az-Zamakhshari records the following
narration in his book titled Tafsir ul- Keshaf:

Ibn Abbas narrated:

The Prophet (S), with some of his companions, visited al-Hasan and
al-Hussein who were sick. They suggested that Imam Ali should vow a
three-day fasting if they would recover their health. The Imam, as well
as their mother Fatima and Fudda their bondwoman implemented that
suggestion. When al- Hasan and al-Hussein were healed, the group fasted.
The Imam had no food at that time; therefore, he had to borrow three
measures of barley from Shimon the Jew. In the first day, Fatima (a)
milled and baked one of these measures. In the very time of breaking
fast, a poor man knocked their door and said: “Peace be upon you; the
family of Muhammad. I am a poor Muslim. Serve me with food and God may
serve you from the food of Paradise.” The Imam gave him his share. The
others pursued him and gave their shares. They passed that night without
eating anything.

On the second day of their fasting, an orphan complaining hunger knocked
their door in the time of breaking fast. They offered their shares and
passed the second night without having anything except water.

On the third day and in the very time of breaking fast, a prisoner
complaining hunger knocked their door asking for some food. They all
offered him their shares before having anything of it.

On the fourth day, Imam Ali took al-Hasan and al- Hussein to the Prophet
while they were trembling because of hunger. “I am very touched for what
I see,” said the Prophet who walked with them to their house. There, he
saw Fatima standing in her place of prayer while her belly was stuck to
her back and her eyes were deep-set. He was affected by such a view. In
the meantime, the Archangel Gabriel descended and said: “Muhammad, enjoy
it. Allah may please you in connection to your household.” He then
recited the Sura[^5].

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 6 page 58 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^2]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; 1/607 (as quoted from Ilal
ush-Sharayi). Jirana is a place between Mecca and Ta’if.

[^3]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 194 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 9 page 538 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from Sayyid A. Sharafuddin’s al-Kalimat ul-Gharraa; page
29.


