Gluttony
========

Gluttony is the opposite of chastity. It stands for the excessive
desires for food and sex. It is a mean tendency indicating
self-feebleness, greedy nature, and slavery of instincts.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “He who wants to survive, yet no one will
survive forever, should ease his back from the burdens of debts-, have
the food as early as possible, and reduce copulation with women[^1].”

Once, Amirul-Mu'minin (a) ate some dates, drank water, and then beat on
his stomach with his hand and said: “Away with him who lets his stomach
cause him to be in Hell.” He then recited the poetic verse:

Whenever you respond to the desires of your stomach and genitals, they
both will give nothing but the extreme dispraise[^2].

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Gluttony is the source of every malady except
fever, which appears to the body[^3].”

“The sated stomach overdoes[^4].”

“Allah hates the overeating[^5].”

Abu al-Hasan (a) said: “If people have moderate food, their bodies will
be healthy[^6].”

Disadvantages of Gluttony
-------------------------

It is not unacceptable to say that gluttony, charms of the falsities of
life, and attraction of luxury and lavish expenditure have been the main
elements of retardation. All these elements have taken the nations into
corruption. Overeating, for example, has many bad results. Modern
medicine has proved that most of the diseases, curls, lines on the skins
that deform the attractive lineaments of men and women, accumulation of
fats, deepness of eyes, exhausting powers, and ailed mentalities the
reason of all these defects is the continuous gluttony and the fatty
foods. It has been also proved that overeating exhausts the stomach and
creates various sorts of healthy troubles, such as arteriosclerosis,
angina pectoris, hypertension, and diabetes.

The sexual gluttony also causes similar defects, such as impotence of
the public health, disappearance of nervous power, and vanishing of
vitality.

Treatment of Gluttony
---------------------

• It is necessary for the overeater to keep in mind the advantages of
chastity and ponder over the disadvantages of gluttony.

• It is necessary for the overeater to try his best to train himself on
moderate food. The protective and remedial constitution of health is the
moderation of food and the avoidance of overeating. This constitution is
summarized in the holy Verse:

***“Eat and drink but do not be excessive.” (7:31)***

The treatment of the sexual gluttony is as follows:

• Keeping in mind the dangers of sexual excess and moral and material
corruptions.

• Striving the simulative of sexual desires, such as looking at the
beauties of women, mixing of the sexes, excessive sexual imagination,
and daydreams.

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 14 page 545 (as quoted from Tibb
ul-Ayimma).

[^2]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 1 page 27.

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 11 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 11 page 67 (as quoted from al-Faqih).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 11 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 14/876 (as quoted from al- Barqi’s
al-Mahasin).


