Faithfulness and Breach
=======================

Faithfulness is the fulfillment of the deposited rights. It is the
opposite of breach and one of the noblest traits and most dignified
qualities that achieve admiration and success.

The opposite of faithfulness is breach, which stands for the seizure and
usurpation of rights. It is one of the meanest qualities and nastiest
manners that cause indignity, failure, and disappointment.

Therefore, reports and traditions urged faithfulness and warned against
breach:

***“Allah commands you to return that which had been entrusted to you to
the rightful owners. Be just when passing judgment among people. Allah's
advice is the most noble. (4:58)”***

***“Believers, do not be dishonest to Allah and the Messengers or
knowingly abuse your trust. (8:27)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “My umma will be kept in goodness so long as they
do not breach the trusts of each other, keep on fulfilling their trusts,
and defray the zakat; otherwise, they will be inflicted with famine and
harsh years of draught[^1].”

“The fulfillment of the trusts brings sustenance, while treachery causes
poverty[^2].”

“He who breaches the trust is not one of us.”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Do not be deceived by their very much offering
of prayers and observance of fasting. In fact, prayers and fasting have
become habits that they feel desolate if they omit them. You should test
them by their truthfulness and fulfillment of trusts[^3].”

“Abide by God-fearing and fulfillment of the trusts of them who deposit
things with you. If the killer of Ali Ibn Abi Talib deposits with me a
trust, I will surely keep it for him[^4].”

***Advantages of Faithfulness and Disadvantages of Breach***

Faithfulness plays a great role in the lives of nations. It is the
system of their deeds, the support of their affairs, the title of their
nobility, and the way to their moral and material development. The
faithful individuals win the others’ admiration, trust, love, and
confidence. Besides, such individuals will win shares in people’s
fortunes and profits.

This fact is applicable to all nations whose lives cannot advance
without the surroundings of confidence. Through faithfulness, the Arabs
could control the reins of economy and keys of industry and commerce
that brought abundant profits. Unfortunately, Muslims, thereafter,
neglected faithfulness; therefore, they failed and were disappointed.

Thus, breach of trusts is one of the major reasons of failure. It is a
serious factor causing mutual mistrust, enmity, and fear. Such factor
results in social corruption, loose of ties, waste of interests, and
dissipation of energies.

Forms of Breach
---------------

There are many forms of breach that vary in the scope of its cruelty,
crimes, and results. The evilest form is treason that is committed by
the thinkers and writers who violate the sacred facts of science by
means of distortion and misrepresentation. The divulgement of Muslims’
secrets is another form of breach. A third one is the breach of the
deposits. To confiscate such deposits is surely a double crime of
breach, larceny, and usurpation. There are many other repulsive forms of
breach that injure both the individuals and communities, such as
trickery, cheating, deficient measurements, fraud, and dishonesty.

[^1]: Quoted from as-Saduq’s Thawab ul-A’mal.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 10 page 112 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 82 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 10 page 112 (as quoted from al- Kafi and
Tahdhib).


