Fraternity
==========

Spiritual Fraternity
--------------------

The pre-Islamic era was a stage of tragedies in the various mental and
material fields. Moral dissolution and disorder were the most horrible
tragedies that caused people to practice natures of beasts, law of
jungle, disagreement, fighting, killing, usurpation, and declamation of
revenge and retaliation.

When the dawn of Islam rose to spread its lights over humankind, it
could, through its immortal principles and unparalleled constitution,
stop these tragedies and cut off these combats. Then, it changed these
ignorant herds into “the best nation that ever existed among
humanity[^1].”

Faith replaced atheism, order replaced disorder, knowledge replaced
ignorance, peace replaced war, and mercy replaced retaliation.

Thus, these concepts faded away and were replaced by the new Islamic
principles. The Prophet (S) began to establish that ideal nation whose
individuals were unique in order, morals, and perfection. As they
progressed under the pennon of the holy Quran and the leadership of the
Prophet (S), Muslims flew in the horizons of generosity until they could
achieve the principle of fraternity in such a method that could not be
achieved by any other code. Moreover, the ties of belief became stronger
than those of kinship, and, likewise, the bonds of faith exalted over
the tribal and national bonds. Muslims, hence, became a united nation of
compact lineup, high edifice, and fluttering pennon:

***“People, we have created you all male and female and have made you
nations and tribes so that you would recognize each other. The most
honorable among you in the sight of Allah is the most pious of you.
Allah is All-knowing and All-aware (49:13).”***

The holy Quran went on implanting the concepts of spiritual fraternity
in the mentalities through numerous Verses compacted by a remarkable and
wise style.

The Quran, once, legislates fraternity as a law that should be applied
by Muslims:

***“Believers are each other's brothers. Restore peace among your
brothers. Have fear of Allah so that perhaps you will receive mercy
(49:10).”***

On another occasion, the Quran confirms the law of fraternity and warns
against factors of disagreement, reminding of the grace of the Islamic
fraternity and harmony after long periods of disagreement and fighting:

***“All of you united hold fast to the rope of Allah, and recall how He
favored you when your hostility to each other had torn you apart. He
united your hearts in one faith and through His grace you became
brothers (3:103).”***

In abstract, Islam has exerted all efforts for strengthening the
spiritual fraternity among Muslims and protecting it against trends of
disagreement and separation through the constitution of the social ties.

As a model, we provide the following:

 The Islamic constitution of the social ties took Muslims’ emotions and
feelings far above the slavery of the tribal sectarianism to guide them
to the noblest aim; namely, the obedience to God and the seeking of His
satisfaction. Love, hate, giving, deprivation, support, and
disappointment all these should be for the sake of God. Such being the
case, the handles of fraternity will become firmer and Muslims will
become the like of the well-established building each part of which
strengthens the other.

The Prophet (S) said: “The mutual love of the believers that is intended
sincerely for the sake of Allah is one of the greatest classes of faith.
He who loves, hates, gives, deprives all for the sake of Allah is surely
one of the choices of Allah[^2].”

Imam as-Sajjad (a) said: “When Allah will gather the past and the late
generations on the Day of Resurrection, a caller that everybody will
hear will cry out on those who loved each other for the sake of Allah. A
few people will stand up. They will be sent to Paradise without being
rendered to judgment. In their way to Paradise, the angels will meet and
ask them. ‘We are going to our abodes in Paradise without being rendered
to judgment,’ they will answer. As the angels ask them about their
class, they will answer, ‘We loved each other for the sake of Allah.’ As
the angels ask them about their deeds due to which they have gained such
a rank, they will answer, ‘We loved and hated for the sake of Allah.’
The angels then will say: Very well is the reward of the doers of
charity[^3].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “If you want to know whether you are to the good
or not, you should test your heart: if it loves the people of obedience
to Allah and hates the people of disobedient to Him, you are then to the
good and Allah loves you. If your heart hates the people of the
obedience to Allah and loves the people of the disobedience to Him, you
are then not to the good and Allah hates you. Certainly, man will be
attached to the one whom he loved[^4].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “On the Day of Resurrection, those who love each
other purely for the sake of Allah will be on luminous stages; the light
of their faces, bodies, stages, and everything will be shining so that
shining will be their distinctive feature and everybody will point to
them and say those loved each other for the sake of Allah[^5].”

“He who does not love or hate for the sake of the religion is not
Muslim[^6].”

The Islamic constitution of the social ties enjoined Muslims to adhere
to the factors of coalition, dignity, and luxury, such as exhorting each
other to the right, helping each other in fields of piety, supporting
each other for the achievement of justice, and joining the forces in the
economical fields of life. According to the Islamic Sharia, all Muslims
are one family whose matters of happiness and unhappiness are the same.
The constitution of such a family is:

***“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and those with him are stern to
the disbelievers yet kind among themselves. (48:29)”***

And the slogan is the saying of the Prophet (S):

“He who begins his day without caring for the affairs of the Muslims is
not a Muslim.”

The Islamic constitution of the social ties warned Muslims against all
factors of separation, hostility, obscenity, backbiting, tale bearing,
breach, and cheating as well as all other matters that arouse seditions
and rancor. The Muslims’ principal in this point is the Prophet’s
saying:

“The true believer is only he whom Muslims can trust in regard with
their estates and souls. The true Muslim is only he whom Muslims are
saved from his hand physical harm- and tongue- verbal harm-. The true
Muhajir[^7] emigrant- is that who deserts the sins[^8].”

 The Islamic constitution of the social ties granted the opportunities
of improving friendly relations between Muslims, such as exchanging
visits, frequenting religious circles, and witnessing Islamic gatherings
such as collective prayers, hajj[^9], and the like.

[^1]: Quoted from the holy Quran; 3:110.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 89 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 1 page 283 (as quoted
from al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 90 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 89 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 90 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^7]: Muhajirs: The emigrants. The early Muslims of Mecca who had to
flee their homeland to Medina.

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 99 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^9]: Hajj is the pilgrimage to the Sacred Mosque at Mecca undertaken in
the twelfth month of the Hijri year and constituting one of the
religious duties of Islam.


