Justice
=======

Justice is the master of virtues and the course to peace. Islam has
glorified justice and encouraged it through numerous texts of the Quran
and the Sunna:

***“Allah commands (people) to maintain justice, kindness, and proper
relations with their relatives. (16:90)”***

***“Be just in your words, even if the party involved is one of your
relatives. (6:152)”***

***“Allah commands you to return that which had been entrusted to you to
the rightful owners. Be just when passing judgment among people.
(4:58)”***

As he was asked about the codes of the religion completely, Imam
as-Sajjad (a) said: “They are to say the right, judge with justice, and
fulfill the pledge[^1].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Justice is more delicious than honey, softer
than butter, and more sweet- smelling than musk[^2].”

Imam ar-Rida (a) said: “The application of justice and charity is sign
of the continuance of graces[^3].”

Forms of Justice
----------------

### (1) Man’s justice towards God

This is the brightest form, the highest concept, and the title of
credibility of justice. How is it possible for anyone to fulfill the
obligations of God so justly since God is the All-benefactor whose
graces are innumerable and favors are incalculable? It is impossible to
achieve justice towards the Lord who is absolutely Self-Sufficient
except through confessing of shortcoming.

Justice towards God stands for the believing in Him, being sincere with
Him, believing in His messengers and representatives, and responding to
the necessities, such as the love for Him, having the honor of
worshipping Him, persisting on the obedience to Him, and being away from
the acts of disobedience to Him.

### (2) Man’s justice towards the society

This form of justice can be achieved by observing the individuals’
rights, refraining from maltreating them, dealing with them through
noble traits, and courtesy, and sympathizing the poor as well as the
other matters of social justice.

In the holy Quran, God summarizes the factuality of the public justice
by saying:

***“Allah commands (people) to maintain justice, kindness, and proper
relations with their relatives. He forbids them to commit indecency,
sin, and rebellion. Allah gives you advice so that perhaps you will take
heed. (16:90)”***

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) depicted the course of the social justice so briefly
and eloquently:

“My son, make yourself the measure for dealings between you and others.
Thus, you should desire for others what you desire for yourself and hate
for others what you hate for yourself. Do not oppress as you do not like
to be oppressed. Do good to others, as you would like good to be done to
you. Regard bad for yourself whatever you regard bad for others. Accept
that (treatment) from others, which you would like others to accept from
you. Do not talk about what you do not know even though what you know be
very little. Do not say to others what you do not like to be said to
you.”

### (3) Justice towards the dead

The alive should be just towards the dead who departed this life leaving
fortunes and gaining nothing in their everlasting journey except a few
yards of clothes and narrow spans of the inside of the earth.

It is just for the alive to feel sympathetic to the dead and reward them
equitably by implementing their wills, defraying their debts, doing
charitable and righteous deeds for their sake, and seeking God’s
forgiveness to them.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The dead feels happy for seeking Allah’s mercy
and forgiveness for him in the same way as the alive feels happy for the
presents gifted to him.”

“As for Muslims who do a charitable deed for the sake of a dead, Allah
will double their rewards and will reward the dead for that deed,
too[^4].”

### (4) Justice of the rulers

Because of their being the leaders of people and the guardians of
nation, the rulers are the worthiest of being characterized by justice.
On that account, the rulers’ justice represents the highest concept of
justice and the most influential. Through the rulers’ justice, security
is achieved, peace predominates, luxury prevails, and the subjects
become happy.

Advantages of Justice
---------------------

The sound souls are created on the nature of the love for justice and
hate for wronging. Over the existence on this earth, all human beings
agreed unanimously, despite their different trends and courses, on
glorifying justice. Furthermore, they have gone on praising its virtues
and dedicating themselves to the doing of justice. It is then the secret
of the existence of nations and the symbol of virtues. Only was it
because the loss of justice, the great powers collapsed and the glorious
civilizations reduced to rubble.

The Ahlul-Bayt (a) were high examples of justice. Their deeds and words
were immortal lessons that light for humanity the courses of justice,
right, and guidance:

In his final disease, the Prophet (S) asked people to retaliate upon him
if he had made mistake with any of them intentionally or
unintentionally. Suwada Ibn Qays said: “O God’s Messenger, once, you
were riding your she-camel and having a cane in the hand when I received
you after you had been in Ta’if. As you were trying to beat your riding
animal with your cane, you hit my belly.” The Prophet (S) ordered him to
retaliate. “Show me your belly,” asked Suwada, and the Prophet did. “May
I put my mouth on your belly, God’s Messenger?” asked Suwada. The
Prophet permitted, and Suwada said: “I seek the guard of the Prophet’s
place of retaliation against fire of Hell.”

The Prophet then asked him to retaliate or forgive. “I will certainly
forgive, God’s Messenger,” said Suwada. The Prophet prayed: “Allah,
forgive Suwada Ibn Qays, for he forgave You Prophet Muhammad[^5].”

Abu Saeed al-Khidri narrated the following:

A Bedouin asked the Prophet (S) importunately to defray the debt that he
owed him. The companions interfered and reproached the Bedouin, saying,
“Woe is you. Do you know to whom are you addressing?” “I am only
demanding with my right,” said the Bedouin. The Prophet (S) said to his
companions: “You should have been with the right party.”

He then summoned Khawla bint Qays and asked her to loan him some dates
and promised he would repay her when his share would come to his hand.
She did, and the Prophet (S) gave the Bedouin his due in full after he
had invited him to a meal. The Bedouin said: “You have given the due in
full. God may give you your due in full.” The Prophet commented: “Those
who give the due in full are the best of people. Woe to the nation whose
individuals do not give the weak his due in full.”

It is said that the Bedouin embraced Islam after he had seen the high
morality of the Prophet, and said: “God’s Messenger, I have never seen
such a fair individual[^6].”

Thus was Amirul-Mu'minin Ali (a). Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated the
following.

When he hold the position of caliphate, Ali (a) scaled the mimbar and
said: “All praise and thanks be to Allah. I will not seize a single
dirham from your shares so long as a single bunch of my dates in Yathrib
is available. Be sure. Do you think I will prefer you to myself?”
Aqil[^7] stood up and said: “This means that you will put me and the
black ones of Medina on the same level, does it not?” The Imam (a) asked
him to sit down, and said, “You have no preference to the black ones of
Medina except by means of a virtue in Islam or piety[^8].”

The following narration in recorded by Ibn Hagar in his book titled
‘As-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa’ page 79:

(Ibn Asakir narrated that) Aqil asked Amirul- Mu'minin (a) to give him
some money because he was poor. The Imam told him to wait until his
share of the public treasury would come out. As Aqil insisted, the Imam
asked a man to take Aqil to the market and lead him to the locks of the
stores so that he would unlock and take from them. “Do you want me to be
thief?” asked Aqil. The Imam (a) said: “And do you want me to be thief
as you ask me to give you the shares of Muslims?” Aqil then threatened
he would join Muawiya.

As soon as Aqil asked him, Muawiya gave him one hundred thousand dirhams
and asked him to take the mimbar and tell people his story with his
brother.

Aqil ascended the mimbar and said: “People, when I tried to make Ali
give up his religion, he refused and preferred his religion to me. But
when I asked Muawiya to prefer me to his religion, he did[^9].”

Ibn Abbas narrated the following:

I, once, visited Amirul-Mu'minin (a) and found him repairing one of his
old slippers. As he finished, he added it to the other and asked me to
evaluate. “It is valueless,” I answered. As he insisted, I said: “They
may be half a dirham.” He (a) commented: “By Allah I swear, these
slippers are favorable for me to my leadership to you unless I
constitute the right or reject the wrong[^10].”

On another occasion, Imam Ali (a) said: “By Allah, I would rather pass a
night in wakefulness on the thorns of as-Sadan (a plant having sharp
prickles) or be driven in chains as a prisoner than meet Allah and His
Messenger on the Day of Judgment as an oppressor over any person or a
usurper of anything out of worldly wealth. And how can I oppress any one
for (the sake of a life) that is fast moving towards destruction and is
to remain under the earth for a long time[^11].”

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 16 (as quoted from Kitab
ul-Ahsara; page 116 and as-Saduq’s al-Khissal).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 89 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 16 (as quoted from Kitab
ul-Ahsara; page 116 and Uyounu Akhbar ir-Ridha).

[^4]: These two narratives are quoted from Sheikh as-Saduq’s Men La
Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih.

[^5]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 671.

[^6]: Quoted from Fadhaail ul-Khamsa Mines Sihah is-Sitteh, part 1 page
122 (as quoted from Ibn Madgeh’s Sahih).

[^7]: Aqil ibn Abi Talib is the brother of Imam Ali, peace be upon him.

[^8]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 9 page 539 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^9]: Quoted from Fadhaail ul-Khamsa Mines Sihah is-Sitteh, part 3 page
15.

[^10]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 2 page 570.

[^11]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 2 page 606.


