Sincerity
=========

Sincerity stands for purifying one’s deeds from blemishes of ostentation
in order to make them purely intended to God Who says:

***“Whoever desires to meet his Lord should strive righteously and
should worship no one besides Him. (18:110)”***

***“Worship Allah and be devoted to His religion. The religion of Allah
is certainly pure. (39:2-3)”***

***“They were only commanded to worship Allah, be uprightly devoted to
His religion, steadfast in prayer and pay the zakat. This is truly the
eternal religion (98:5).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “As for anyone who works to Allah sincerely for
forty days, Allah will make the springs of wisdom come out of his heart
and tongue[^1].”

“Man cannot be full knowledgeable before he considers people as camels
with regard to relation with Allah, and considers himself the
meanest[^2].”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “This world is wholly ignorance except the
situations of knowledge. Knowledge is wholly ignorance except that which
is practiced. All the practices are showiness except those which are
done heartily. Sincerity, likewise, is insecure before the end result is
realized[^3].”

Imam al-Jawad (a) said: “Sincerity is the best worship[^4].”

Virtue of Sincerity
-------------------

Values of deeds vary according to their purposes. The measure of decency
and acceptance of deeds depends upon the nobility of purpose and purity
from blemishes of cheating, defraud, and hypocrisy. In view of the
Islamic Sharia, the only incentive is the intention that stirs the deed.
Whenever such an intention is heartily provided to God and purified from
the blemishes of showiness, it will be honored by the acceptance of God.
Conversely, if cheating and showiness is mixed with the intention, the
wrath and refusal of God will befall it. On that account, sincerity is
the cornerstone of the beliefs and the factual stipulation that is
specified for the validity of deeds. Sincerity, also, frees from
inducements and deceptions of the Devil:

***“He (the Shaitan) said, ‘By Your Glory, I shall seduce all of them
(children of Adam) except Your sincere servants among them’
(38:82-3).”***

Obstacles of Sincerity
----------------------

Since sincerity is the brilliant lodestar that shows the courses of true
obedience and honest worship of God, the Devil has used all snares for
inducing people through a great variety of deceptive expectations, such
as fondness of reputation and wealth, attainment of glory, and seeking
for material desires. Sometimes, the devilish inspirations may come in
the form of soft, deceptive whispering. Accordingly, one may practice
acts of obedience to God with the intention of sincerity, but if he
examines them closely, he will find them mixed with showiness. This is
in fact one of the most dangerous slips that nobody can evade except the
genuine disciples.

It is related that a man said: “For thirty years, I used to offer my
prayers collectively in the mosque in the first row. One day, I was late
because of something and I had to join the second row. As soon as I
stopped, I felt embarrassed. Only then, I discovered that my previous
prayers had been my source of pleasure.”

It is also narrated that a worshipper used to fast for forty years
without letting anyone, including his relatives, notice so. He used to
take his food to give it as alms in his way to the market so that his
family member think that he would have his food in the market and the
people in the market think that he had his food at home.

How to Obtain Sincerity?
------------------------

The most important incentive of showiness is to attract people’s
admirations and obtain their satisfaction. As a matter of fact, the
obtainment of people’s satisfaction is an unattainable purpose, because
people are unable to satisfy themselves; therefore, they cannot be
satisfied with others. The only One Whose satisfaction should be sought
is God Who possesses the reins of the affairs completely and can do
everything. Hence, the true men of reason should direct towards Him and
obey Him completely heartily.

Showiness and cheating cannot continue for a long time. They are soon
revealed before everybody, and the showy will soon become the subject of
loathing and disrespect.

It is narrated that a man from the Israelites decided to worship God so
that people would praise him. For a long period, he observed an
excessive worship to God, but every individual who passed by him
realized that he was ostentatious. One day, he said to himself that he
had tired himself and wasted his lifetime for nothing; hence, he should
work heartily from now on. As he did, every individual who passed by him
was admired by his worship and said that he was pious man.

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/87 (as quoted from Ibn Fahad’s
Oddat ud-Daee).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 14/54 (within the Prophet’s commandment for
Abu Dharr).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/85 (as quoted from Al- Amali and
at-Tawhid).

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/87 (as quoted from Ibn Fahad’s
Oddat ud-Daee).


