Showiness
=========

Showiness stands for seeking high rank and respect of people by
flaunting charity:

***“The hypocrites try to deceive Allah but He, in fact, deceives them.
They stand up in prayer lazily just to show that they pray, but, in
truth they remember Allah very little. (4:142)”***

***“Whoever desires to meet his Lord should strive righteously and
should worship no one besides Him. (18:110)”***

***“ Like the one who spends his property to show off and who has no
faith in Allah or belief in the Day of Judgment. (2:264)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “A time will come upon people in which their
intentions will be evil and their appearances will be deceiving all out
of their greediness for the worldly pleasures. Their deeds will not be
heartily intended for the sake of Allah. Their religion will be
showiness. They will not feel fearful at all. Then, Allah will inflict
upon them with such harsh punishment that they will not be responded
even if they pray for Him like the drowned[^1].”

The Prophet (S) said: “(On the Day of Resurrection,) some people will be
taken to Hell. The Lord will order Malik[^2] to tell Hell not to burn
those individuals’ feet, because they used them for walking to the
mosques, not to burn their faces, because they used to perform the
(ritual) ablution so perfectly, not to burn their hands, because they
used to raise them in supplications, and not to burn their tongues,
because they used to recite the Quran very frequently. Then, the angel
in charge of Hell will ask them about their manners. They will answer:
We used to do all these things not for the sake of Allah. Hence, we were
told to take the rewards of our deeds from those for whom we used to
do[^3].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Any form of showiness is polytheism. Certainly,
he who does something for the sake of people should take the reward from
people, but whoever does purely for the sake of Allah will take his
reward from Allah[^4].”

“As for anyone who keeps secret a good deed, Allah will sooner or later
reveal a good reputation for him. As for him who keeps secret an evil,
Allah will sooner or later reveal an ill reputation for him[^5].”

Categories of Showiness
-----------------------

### 1. Showiness of the Belief

This category of showiness stands for pretending faith and concealing
disbelief. It is hypocrisy, which is the most serious and the gravest
danger on Muslims.

### 2. Showiness of Acts of Worship

This category stands for practicing acts of worship openly before people
so as to show them, while the same acts of worship are neglected in
seclusions. As example of this category is to offer prayers openly, show
the signs of fasting, prolong the gestures of the prayer, recite in a
distinguishable way, frequent to the mosques, witness the collective
prayers incessantly, and practice similar acts pretentiously. The showy,
in this case, is considered as more sinful than the neglector of worship
because he does so out of his disregarding God and trying to deceive
people.

### 3. Practical Showiness

Under this category lie the pretence of being pious, having the beard
unshaved, branding the forehead as a sign of frequent prostration,
dressing hard clothes, and the like false appearances of ascetics.

### 4. Verbal Showiness

Under this category lie the false declamation of wisdom, pretence of
enjoining good and forbidding evil, and mentioning the divine reward and
punishment.

Incentives of Showiness
-----------------------

• Fondness of high rank is the most important incentive of showiness.

• The anticipation of criticism is a reason that pushes man to pretend
to show acts of worship and charity in order to avoid censure.

• Greed is a strong incentive urging showiness.

• The criminals try to dress themselves with false appearances of piety
so as to cover up themselves.

Some Facts
----------

For the purpose of completing this discussion, it is suitable to refer
to some facts:

Scholars have had different opinions regarding the preference of the
concealment or exposure of the acts of obedience. In abstract, deeds are
subject to intentions, and each will be rewarded according to his
intention. Thus, there is no difference between concealed or open
showiness. Likewise, the semi- showiness does not differ, whether it is
hidden or shown. In definite situations, it is preferable for those who
cannot stand their showiness, because of its intense incentives in their
inner selves, to conceal it. On the other hand, if one’s deed is
purified from blemishes of showiness and intended for a good purpose,
such as enjoining charity, it is, in this case, preferable to show the
appearances of piety.

 In case sincerity is heartily intended in the acts of worship, it is
inoffensive to show people such appearances and to be pleased by them
provided that the source of such pleasure is the expectation of God’s
favor.

Once, Imam al-Baqir (a) was asked whether it is acceptable to be pleased
by showing one’s good deeds before others. He answered: “This is not
unacceptable. As a matter of fact, every single individual likes that
Allah reveals his good deeds before others provided that such good deeds
are not intended for showing off.”

 Since the Devil uses all trickeries for inducing people so as to
prevent them from going on in the plans of charity and obedience, it is
necessary to beware of him. The Devil urges to neglect the acts of
worship. If he fails in this regard, he induces eagerly to show off. If
he fails in this regard too, he casts in minds the idea that they are
showing off and that all the deeds are mixed with showiness. Such being
the case, it is necessary to reject the devilish inspirations and pay no
attention to the inducements and insinuations of the Devil. The true
sincere, however, cannot be cheated by such ill inspirations.

On the authority of his fathers, Imam as-Sadiq narrated that the Prophet
(S) said: “If the Shaitan inspires you, during your prayers, that you
are showing off, you should then offer your prayers as long as you like
unless the time of another obligatory prayer begins. The same thing is
said about any other act that is done for sake of the life to come. But
if the act was for a worldly benefit, you should then rest
yourselves[^6].”

Disadvantages of Showiness
--------------------------

Showiness, being mere cheating and deception, is undesirable manner
indicating self-humbleness. The fickle and the deviant take showiness
for achieving their goals without feeling embarrassed. The showy,
however, commits two grand sins: he first challenges God because he
prefers the servants to their Lord and, second, cheats people by means
of hypocrisy and pretense.

Regarding his impudence and foolhardiness, the showy looks like an
individual stopping before a great king showing false loyalty, while he,
in the meantime, is cheating that king by courting the bondmaidens or
flirting with the servants. It is very appropriate for that king to
punish such an individual so harshly for his disparagement and ridicule.
The showy deserves a harsher punishment, because he disparages God and
cheats His servants. Moreover, care is the share of the showy in the
end: as he flatters for gaining the impossible; that is the content of
all people, he gains nothing but disappointment.

In truth, ill-heartedness very soon floats on the surface to show the
reality. Referring to this fact, the Prophet (S) said:

“As for anyone who keeps something in the mind, Allah will dress him
with that thing. If it is good, the dress will be good, but if it is
bad, the dress, likewise, will be bad[^7].”

Treatment of Showiness
----------------------

Practical Treatment of Showiness:

• To challenge the Devil and frustrate his trickeries and insinuations
by using logical method of self- satisfaction.

• To reject the devilish inspirations of showiness completely by relying
upon sincerity.

• To avoid the fields and appearances of showiness by concealing the
acts of worship until self-confidence and sincerity are gained.

Within the anecdotes of showiness, it is narrated that a Bedouin, as he
entered a mosque, was highly admired by the prayer offered by a person.
‘I was highly admired by your prayer,’ said the Bedouin. ‘What is more,
I am fasting,’ said that person, ‘the prayer of the fasting people are
rewarded doubly.’ The Bedouin then handed the reins of his camel to that
person as a trust because he had something to do for a while. As the
Bedouin left, that person took the camel and ran away. As he was back,
the Bedouin did not find his camel or that person. He searched for him
for a long time, but uselessly. He then left showing his grief for his
camel that he lost because of that man’s showiness.

ï It is also narrated that Ali (a) threatened the Bedouin who did not
offer his prayer properly with the stick[^8] that he had in the hand.
The man repeated his prayer and, when he finished, asked whether this
one had been better than the previous. ‘No,’ answered Ali, ‘the first
one was better, because it was offered for the sake of God, while this
one was offered out of fear of the stick.’

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 147 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^2]: Malik is the angel in charge of Hell.

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Chapter: Showing off, page 53 (as
quoted from Ilal ush-Sharayi and Thawab ul-Aamal).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 137 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 147 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 page 53 (quoted from Qurb
ul-Isnad.).

[^7]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 147 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^8]: ((It is unfamiliar to read that Amir ul-Mu'minin Ali, peace be
upon him, who was famous of his extraordinary humanity and kindness used
to have a stick in the hand for threatening or punishing people As a
matter of fact, it was Omar ibn al- Khattab who used to have a stick in
the hand about which tens of narrations were reported.)) The Translator


