Conceit
=======

Conceit stands for self-importance for a good trait or a noble quality,
such as knowledge, wealth, high rank, or righteous deed. The difference
between conceit and arrogance is that the previous is to regard oneself
highly important without the feeling of being proud, while arrogance is
conceit plus feeling of pride. Conceit, however, is a detestable manner
implying self- humbleness, narrow-mindedness, and impudence:

***“Do not consider yourselves very great. Allah knows best who is the
most righteous person (53:32).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “Allah knew that sin is better for the believer
than self-conceit; lest, He will never let the believers commit
sins[^1].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “Three things are exterminating: to regard the
deeds are very much, to neglect the sins, and to be conceited[^2].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The conceited shall perish[^3].”

“Eblis the cursed said to his troops, ‘If only I could impose three
things upon son of Adam, I would not care for whatever he would do then,
because his deeds will not be accepted: to regard his deeds as very
much, neglect his sins, and be controlled by conceit[^4].’”

“A knowledgeable man asked the worshipper about his prayers. ‘How can a
person like me be asked about his prayers?’ said the worshipper. ‘How
about your weeping (out of fear of God)?’ asked the knowledgeable man.
‘I weep so heavily that my tears flow on my cheeks,’ answered the
worshipper. The knowledgeable commented, ‘To laugh while you are truly
fearful of God is surely better than weeping while you are conceited. No
single item of the deeds of the conceited will be raised (i.e.
accepted).’”

One of the Imams (a) narrated that two men; a worshipper and sinful,
entered a mosque. When they went out, the sinful was faithful and the
worshipper sinful. The worshipper offered the rites of worship while he
was conceited; therefore, his mind was engaged in his conceit. The
sinful offered the acts of worship because he was regretful for his
sins; therefore, he was seeking God’s forgiveness as he remembered his
sins[^5].

It is worth mentioning that the discommended conceit is to consider the
good deed as very much. To feel pleased for the good deed along with
modesty for sake of God this is not included with the discommended
conceit.

Disadvantages of Conceit
------------------------

Conceit causes selfishness and vanity, which are the causes of people’s
detestation and humiliation. It turns one’s eyes away from noticing his
own defects. The conceited forgets his sins and causes himself many
damages, since negligence of sins stops against repentance to God and
exposes to His wrath.

Treatment of Conceit
--------------------

Because conceit and arrogance are of the same origin, though they differ
in trend, their treatment is the same. It is important for the
self-conceited to realize that all virtues that arouse in himself
conceit are the graces of God that He grants to whom He wills. Hence, He
should be shown gratitude for them.

In the field of avoiding self-conceit, it is related that one of the
righteous people, once, left his house after midnight for visiting one
of the holy shrines and offering the rites there. In his way, he was
controlled by conceit and thought that he was in his way for offering
rites of worship in such a cold hour while others were enjoying warmth
and sleep in their houses. Meanwhile, he saw one of the hawkers who was
selling round rape. He pushed himself towards him and asked how much he
would earn from that job. ‘Two or three dirhams,’ said the hawker. The
man then thought with himself, ‘Why should I be so conceited? The value
of my sleepless and wandering in such an hour is only two or three
dirhams.’

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/3 (as quoted from al-Amali).

[^2]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 3 (as quoted from
as-Saduq’s al-Khissal).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 151 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 3 (as quoted from
as-Saduq’s al-Khissal).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 151 (as quoted from al- Kafi).


