Conviction
==========

Conviction is the constant believing in the principles of the religion.
Such believing should conform to the reality and not be shaken by
suspicions. If it does not, it is then compound ignorance.

The Islamic Sharia has taken a special notice of conviction and showered
people of conviction with glorious items of praise:

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) used to say: “No one can find the true taste of
faith before he believes that whatever befell him would never miss him
and whatever missed him would never befall him. The real source of harm
and benefit in only Allah[^1].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Faith is preferable to being Muslim. Conviction
is preferable to faith. In fact, there is nothing more powerful than
conviction[^2].”

“The little permanent deed with conviction is favorable in the sight of
Allah to the many deeds that are lacking conviction[^3].”

“To avoid pleasing anyone and discontenting Allah and reproaching anyone
for something that Allah has not given to you these are parts of the
trueness of Muslim’s conviction. The sustenance cannot be obtained
through (any sort of) niggardliness and will not be ceased when someone
hates it. If you escape your decided share of sustenance in the same way
as you escape death, it will surely catch you in the same way as death
will inevitably catch you. Out of His justice and equality, Allah has
made pleasure and rest lie in conviction and content, and has made care
and grief lie in suspect and dissatisfaction[^4].”

Once, Imam ar-Rida (a) was asked to identify the best of two men one of
whom says only the truth, but he commits wrongdoings, consume wines, and
perpetrates the grand sins, while the other is less in conviction but he
does not commit such evildoings. The Imam said: “The first one is just
like a man who sleeps on the right course; as soon as he is awaken, he
will take it. The other is like a person who sleeps on the wrong course;
when he is awaken, he cannot realize the right course to take[^5].”

Imam as-Sadiq narrated that the Prophet (S) once, noticed a young man,
in the mosque just after the Fajr prayer, nodding his head with his face
pale, his body thin, and his eyes sunken in his head. ‘How is your
morning?’ the Prophet asked the young man. ‘God’s Messenger,’ answered
the man, ‘I begin this morning with full conviction.’

The Prophet (S) was admired by this answer; hence, he said, ‘There is a
proof for every conviction. What is the proof of yours?’

The young man said, ‘God’s Messenger, my conviction is the reason of my
grief, sleeplessness, and thirst in midday. Hence, I disdain this world
along with its pleasures so completely, as if the Throne of my Lord is
prepared for the judgment, all people, including I myself, are gathered
there for interrogation, and as if people of Paradise are there enjoying
the bliss and introducing themselves to each other and leaning on the
sofas, and as if people of Hell are there tormented and lined up, and
now I can hear the sound of fire in my hearings.’

The Prophet (S) said to his companions, ‘Surely, Allah has illuminated
the heart of this man with faith.’ He (S) then asked him to keep on such
faith and conviction. The young man asked the Prophet to pray to God for
martyrdom, and the Prophet did.

Not before long time, that young man participated in one of the
Prophet’s campaigns and was martyred[^6].

Qualities of People of Conviction
---------------------------------

People of conviction, as they are flourished and lightened by the
glittering rays of conviction, acquire various colors of mental
perfection that exalt them to a lofty spiritual standing. Thus, they are
characterized by high moral standards and moral conducts as they avoid
vices and bad manners. The illusions of this world cannot divert them
from exalting their spiritual qualifications for gaining the lofty ranks
and the expected endless pleasures of the life to come.

They exert all efforts for offering acts of obedience to God for sake of
attaining His satisfaction. They trust in Him completely in sorrow and
in joy. They neither fear nor hope for anything except God because they
are convinced of His well management and wisdom. Their prayers therefore
are responded and their charismata are shown. Finally, they find favor
with God.

Ranks of Faith
--------------

There is a great variety in the scope of people’s faith. Some are
forerunners in the field of faith while others are too tardy. The
following holy text may cast shadow on such a variety.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Like stairs, faith is often ranks that should
be taken one by one. The owner of two ranks of faith should not accuse
the owner of one rank of having nothing of faith until he climbs the ten
ranks successfully. Hence, you should not throw him who is lower than
you are down, lest he who is higher than you are will throw you down.
You should also raise him who is lower than you are so leniently and you
should avoid burdening him with heavy things that break his back. In
fact, he who breaks a believer should set him[^7].”

Categories of Faith
-------------------

### Natural Faith

Natural faith is that which God grants, such as faith of the prophets
and their successors, because those individuals are the highest examples
of faith and nobility of conviction. Neither doubts nor can the devilish
inspirations influence them.

### Transient Faith

Transient faith is the artificial that is only said without having any
reality in the inner self. Such category of faith is very soon
influenced by doubts and ill inspirations.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “A man may begin his day with faith but ends it
with disbelief or the opposite. Some people borrow faith then dress it.
Those are the borrowers[^8].”

“Allah created prophecy in the prophets; hence, they never apostatize.
Likewise, He created succession of prophecy in the prophets’ successors;
hence, they never apostatize. For some believers, He created faith in
them; hence, they never apostatize. For others, they are given faith as
loans; but if they pray and supplicate to Allah importunately, they keep
on that faith[^9].”

After these two sayings, Imam as-Sadiq (a) adds a third one as the
criterion of constant and transient categories of faith. He says:

“Regret, sorrow, and woe all will be to him who does not benefit by that
which is shown to him and does not realize whether his belief is for his
good or bad he whose deeds conform to his words will be saved (since he
enjoys constant faith), while he whose deeds do not conform to his words
enjoys the transient faith[^10].”

### Acquisitive Faith

Acquisitive faith is the slight natural that has been grown and
increased until it is exalted to a considerable level. This category of
faith, however, has different ranks.

Now, let us provide some advices that help in protecting the natural
part of faith and saving the acquisitive:

 It is recommended to associate with the faithful, pious individuals
and avoid the sinful, wicked ones. It is well known that the associate
plays a great role in acquiring moralities. Referring to this fact, the
Prophet (S) said:

“A man follows his associate’s beliefs. Hence, you should care for
choosing your associates.”

 It is recommended to avoid looking in and listening to the books of
deviation and sayings of the misleading people whose main concern is to
poison the others’ pure ideas in order to take them away from the
Islamic creed and to corrupt the values and concepts of faith in their
mentalities.

 It is recommended to practice pondering over God’s creatures that are
characterized by beautiful made, accurate organizing, and fascinating
wisdom of management:

***“In the earth, there is evidence (of the Truth) for those who have
strong faith. There is also evidence of the Truth within your own
selves. Will you then not see? (51:20-1)”***

 It is highly recommended to strive oneself and practice acts of
obedience to God. It is recommended to avoid acts of disobedience to God
so that one’s mentality will be established correctly by the concepts of
faith. As a matter of fact, the soul is as pure as fresh water unless it
is blemished by pollutions. Were it not for the rust of sins and the
dirt of wrongdoings that raid at the souls to seize their beauties and
abate their lights, most of people would benefit by the illumination of
faith:

***“(I swear) by the soul and that (Power) which designed it and
inspired it with knowledge of evil and piety, those who purify their
souls will certainly have everlasting happiness and those who corrupt
their souls will certainly be deprived (of happiness) (91:7-10).”***

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “When a man commits a sin, a black spot emerges
to his heart. If he repents, that spot will disappear. But if he keeps
on committing sins, that spot will increase in area until it covers the
whole heart. That man will never see success[^11].”

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 54 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 2 page 57 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 2 page 60 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; part 3 page 54 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; 2/734 (as quoted from Fiqh ul- Imam
ir-Ridha).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 33 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^7]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 30 (as quoted from al-Kafi

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 30 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^9]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 30 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^10]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 30 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^11]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 167 (as quoted from al- Kafi).


