Gratitude
=========

Gratitude stands for thanking the conferrer for his graces and using
them in the fields that he accepts. It is one of the qualities of
perfection that grow and perpetuate the graces. Because of His absolute
self-sufficiency, God does not benefit by one’s thanks. As a matter of
fact, the benefits of thanks are due to the thankful himself, since he
expresses his appreciation for the divine graces and uses them in the
fields that achieve the contentment of God. So, the thankful person’s
happiness lies in his acts of obedience to God.

The Islamic Sharia, through texts of the holy Quran and Sunna, has
called people to be characterized with gratitude:

***“Thank Me and do not show ingratitude to Me. (2:152)”***

***“Eat of the sustenance of your Lord and give thanks to Him.
(34:15)”***

***“Remember when your Lord said to you, 'If you give thanks, I shall
give you greater (favors), but if you deny the Truth, know that My
retribution is severe’ (14:7).”***

***“Very few of My servants are grateful. (34:13)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “He who eats and gives thanks will have the reward
of him who fasts purely for the sake of Allah. He who gives thanks and
enjoys good health will have the same reward of him who practices
patience in his illness. He whom is conferred with graces and gives
thanks will have the same reward of him whom is deprived and
satisfied[^1].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “If you look at an ailed person, you should say,
but not let him hear you, ‘All praise is due to Allah Who protects me
from that which inflicted you, but if He wills, He shall do.’ He who
says so will never be befallen by that ailment[^2].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “He who is conferred with thanks will be granted
increase. Allah says: ‘If you give thanks, I shall give you greater
(favors)[^3].’”

“The thanks of every grace, no matter how big it is, is to praise Allah
for it[^4].”

“The gratitude that is shown to Allah for any grace, no matter how big
it is, is surely better and weightier than the grace itself[^5].

“Verily, one of you drinks water and Allah assigns Paradise to him on
that account. Verily, one who takes the vessel (containing water),
brings it to his mouth, then takes Allah's name, then drinks from it,
then draws it away while desiring it, then praises Allah, then drinks
from it again, then takes it away while he desires it, then praises
Allah, then drinks from it again, then sets it aside and praises Allah,
Allah makes the paradise obligatory for him.”

Categories of Gratitude
-----------------------

Gratitude can be classified into three categories:

1. Gratitude of the heart,

2. Verbal gratitude, and

3. Gratitude of the organs.

Once the heart is full of the recognition of the graces of the Conferrer
Lord, the tongue expresses thanks. Once the heart and the tongue unite
in the feelings of gratitude, they inspire the organs to express their
gratitude by submission and response to the acts of obedience to Him.

Thus, there are various categories and methods of showing gratitude:

• Gratitude of the heart is to recognize the grace and recognize that
its source was God.

• The verbal gratitude is to express thanks to the Conferrer.

• Gratitude of the organs is to engage them in acts of obedience to God
and save them from plunging in acts of disobedience to Him.

Hence, it is necessary to thank each of the graces of God in a suitable
form:

To thank for a fortune is to spend some of it in the fields of obedience
to God.

To thank for the knowledge is to publicize and expose its beneficial
concepts.

To thank for a high rank is to support the weak and the persecuted and
save them from the oppression that befall them.

The true gratitude of any grace cannot be attained whatever efforts are
exerted, because showing gratitude is one of the graces and items of
success that God confers. Consequently, man is too short to show the
proper gratitude for any grace.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated that Allah revealed to Prophet Moses: “Moses,
thank Me so properly.” “Lord,” asked Moses, “How can I thank You so
properly while I cannot find any method of showing gratitude to You
other than that which You have conferred upon me?” The Lord answered:
“Moses, as long as you realize this fact, you are thanking Me so
properly[^6].”

Virtue of Gratitude
-------------------

The appreciation for graces and acts of kindness and thanks for the
conferrers of favors are within the properties of the noble
personalities. As the graces are increased, they should be thank
worthier and more appreciative so that they may attain the level of the
divine favors that man can never evaluate and thank properly.

As a matter of fact, every single twinkling of the eye, every single
word that is produced by the mouth, every single movement of an organ,
and every single breathe all these are great favors of the Lord that
none can evaluate except those who are deprived of them.

If it is obligatory to thank the favor of the creatures, how will it be
then if the favorer is the Creator whose graces are countless and favors
are innumerable?

Finally, showing gratitude takes nearly to the Lord and achieves His
contentment and His endowments of more graces and favors.

Ingratitude, on the other hand, is the trait of the humble
personalities. The holy Quran tells that ingratitude is a direct reason
of the collapse of nations and the eradication of their blessings:

***“Allah tells a parable about a secure and peaceful town surrounded by
abundant sustenance. Its inhabitants rejected the bounties of Allah and
He caused them to suffer hunger and fear as a result of their deeds
(16:112).”***

As he was asked about the explanation of God’s saying,

***“And they said: our Lord! Make spaces to be longer between our
journeys; and they were unjust to themselves so We made them stories and
scattered them with an utter scattering; most surely there are signs in
this for every patient, grateful one, (34:19)”***

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Those were some peoples whose villages were
connected to each other. They had flowing rivers and many fortunes, but
they showed ingratitude to Allah and changed what is in their hearts;
therefore, Allah changed the graces that they enjoyed. As a matter of
fact, ‘Allah does not change the condition of a nation unless it changes
what is in its heart.’ He then sent upon them a torrent that scattered
their villages, ruined their territories, and wasted their fortunes. In
place of their two gardens, Allah gave to them two gardens yielding
bitter fruit and (growing) tamarisk and a few lote-trees. ‘This We
requited them with because they disbelieved; and We do not punish any
but the ungrateful[^7].’

“When the people of Tharthar were given great graces, they baked the
core of wheat and used it for cleaning their babies from feces. That
bread was put on each other until it took the form of a high mountain.
As a man passed by a woman who was using that bread for the same
purpose, he said, ‘Woe to you! Fear Allah and do not cause your graces
to be eradicated and taken away from you.’ She answered, ‘Are you
threatening us with starvation? As long as our lake is flowing, we do
not fear famine.’ Allah did not accept so; therefore, He blocked their
lake and stopped rainfall and planting. They, first, consumed all that
which they had stored. Then, they had to consume that mountain of bread
to the degree that it was distributed among them by measure[^8].”

Imam ar-Rida narrated on the authority of his fathers that the Prophet
(S) said: “The quickest in punishment is ingratitude[^9].”

How to Acquire Thankfulness?
----------------------------

To acquire thankfulness, it is recommended:

• To ponder over the great variety of graces, good turns, and acts of
kindness that God has conferred.

• To neglect considering the luxurious people who enjoy excessive means
of living and false pleasures of this world, and to look at the
miserable people as well as those who are in less levels of livelihood.
Amirul- Mu'minin (a) said:

“Try to look very frequently at those who are less than you are in the
levels of livelihood, for this is a sort of showing gratitude[^10].”

• To keep in mind the calamities from which God has saved and the
diseases that God has changed into good health and the hardships that He
has changed into luxury, and

• To think of the advantages of showing gratitude, some of which are the
attracting of the conferrer’s contentment and increase of his favors,
and to ponder over the disadvantages of ingratitude, some of which are
attracting the conferrer’s dissatisfaction and decrease of his graces.

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; 15/2/135 (as quoted from Thawab
ul-A’mal).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 68 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^7]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 68 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^8]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar (as quoted from al-Barqi’s al-
Mahasin).

[^9]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar (as quoted from al-Amali).

[^10]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.


