Trust In God
============

Trust in God means to rely upon Him and to commend all affairs to Him by
diverting from anyone or anything else. The source of trust in God is
power of heart and conviction. Likewise, loss of trust in God is
originated from feebleness of heart and conviction and influence of
apprehensions and illusions:

***“Allah is Sufficient for the needs of whoever trusts in Him.
(65:3)”***

***“Allah loves those who trust Him. (3:159)”***

***“(Muhammad), say, ‘Nothing will happen to us besides what Allah has
decreed for us. He is our***

***Guardian. In Allah alone do the believers trust.’(9:51)”***

***“If Allah is your helper, no one can defeat you. However, if He
abandons you, who would help you? The true believers trust in Allah.
(3:160)”***

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “Regarding all of your affairs, seek the
refuge of your Lord, for you are seeking the refuge of a sheltering
haven and powerful sanctuary[^1].”

“Within his sermons to his son, Luqman said: Son, for him who is
unconvinced and ill-intentioned in the matter of seeking earnings, he
should learn lessons from the fact that Allah has created him and
guaranteed his sustenance in three states; He secured him and gave him
his decided shares of sustenance without exerting any efforts or
planning for any proposal in gaining them. First, when he was in
mother’s womb, Allah was giving him his sustenance without being exposed
to coldness or heat. Then, Allah caused him to go out to this world and
gave him his shares of sustenance, which were sufficient and nutrient,
from the mother’s breast while he had no power to earn. Then, when he
was weaned, Allah gave him his share of sustenance out of the earnings
of his parents who were very kind to him to the degree that they
preferred him to themselves in many situations. When he attained
maturity and went on seeking earnings for himself, he became unable to
stand it, mistrusted his Lord, denied the rights that he should defray
from his earnings, and behaved stingily with his dependents and himself.
All that was because of his expecting scarcity, mistrusting Allah and
suspecting His promised recompense in this world and the world to come.
See, my son, how evil such man is!”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Richness and honor are wandering. They settle
only when they find a situation of trust in Allah[^2].”

He (a) also narrated that Allah revealed to Prophet David (a): “For any
one of My servants who relies upon Me heartily exclusively, then the
heavens and the earth plot against him, I will surely grant him an exit
between them to escape their plots. But for the servant who relies upon
any of My creatures, I will cut the rope that links him to the heavens
and will sink the earth under his feet and, then, I will not care where
he will perish[^3].”

***“He who is given three things will not be deprived of three others:
he who is granted supplication to Allah will not be deprived of
response; he who is granted thankfulness will not be deprived of
increase; he who is granted trust in Allah will not be deprived of His
security.” Read in the Book of Allah: ‘Allah is Sufficient for the needs
of whoever trusts in Him. (65:3)’***

***‘If you give thanks, I shall give you greater (favors) (14:7).’***

***‘Pray to Me for I shall answer you prayers. (40:60).’”***

Reality of Trust in God
-----------------------

Trust in God does not mean to neglect the means that achieve benefits
and to lift no single hand for facing events and crises. As a matter of
fact, trust in God is to confide in and depend on Him exclusively,
because He being the source of goodness, the originator of reasons, the
predominant over the creatures, and the only able to give success. To
have such trust in God should not conflict with the reliance on the
natural means and the outward reasons for achieving the aims, such as
supplying for traveling, armament for fighting against the enemies,
treatment against diseases, and guard against dangers. All these are
necessary for protecting man and achieving his aims. God has decided to
make all matters proceed according to their natural reasons.
Notwithstanding, it is necessary to depend upon and trust in God for
achieving the purposes.

As he noticed a Bedouin neglecting hobbling his camel for he had relied
upon God exclusively, the Prophet (S) instructed him: “Hobble your camel
then trust in Allah exclusively.”

Ranks of Trust in God
---------------------

Like the variety of faith, there is a great variety among people in
ranks of trust in God. Some are forerunners in this regard: they devoted
themselves completely to God and neglected everything except Him. Those
are the prophets, their successors, and the saints.

As an example on the best picture of trust in God, it is narrated that
when Prophet Abraham (a) was in his way to the fire, the angel Gabriel
met him in the air and asked whether he would do him anything. He
answered: “For you, you can do me nothing. I depend on God Who is the
best Guardian.” Then the angel Michael met him and suggested that he
would extinguish that fire since rain and water had been under his
disposal. The prophet also rejected. Then the angel of wind met him and
suggested that he would cause that fire to fly away, but the prophet
also rejected. Then the angel Gabriel came to him again and asked him to
supplicate to God. Abraham said: “My supplication is worthless so long
as He knows my current state best[^4].”

Advantages of Trust in God
--------------------------

Man, in this life, is exposed to calamities, problems, and crises
against which he fights. He, once, overcomes, and is overcome in other
situations. In most cases, such calamities knock man down and make him
helpless and brokenhearted. Thus, man lives in permanent worry because
he anticipates loss, poverty, and ailment. It is true that modern
civilization has helped in alleviating burdens of life by the
availability of means of comfort, but it has failed to supply
mentalities with tranquility. Worry is still casting its shadows on
people and collaring the necks resulting in multiplication of mental
diseases and events of suicide and insanity in the most civilized
countries.

Through its moral constitution, the Islamic Sharia could alleviate the
worries of people and supply them with huge spiritual energies, such as
tolerance, steadfastness, trust, and confidence. To adhere to this fact
achieves peace of mind and replaces fear with security.

After all, trust in God is one of the most important factors that attain
self-dignity, self-respect, and peace of conscience. People that are
worthiest of adhering to trust in God are the celebrities and
reformists. They are in need for willpower and self-determination for
facing others’ obstinacy and overstepping many obstacles and barriers.

How to Acquire Trust in God?
----------------------------

We can acquire trust in God by:

• Keeping in mind the Verses and traditions that confirm the virtues of
trust in God.

It is narrated that Imam al-Hussein (a) composed the following: “If
calamities of time bite you, do not seek the refuge of the creatures. Do
not ask anybody except God the Distributor of the sustenance. If you
live for a long time and wander in this world from the west to the east,
you will not find anybody who is able to give you happiness or remove
your unhappiness.”

It is also narrated that Amirul-Mu'minin (a) composed: “I have satisfied
myself with that which God has decided for me, and I have entrusted my
affairs with my Creator. As He used to treat me charitably in the past,
He will keep on in the rest.

• Strengthening belief in God, trust in His good turn, and considering
His being the source of goodness, originator of reasons, and able to do
everything.

• Paying attention to the nice doing of God and His outstanding care for
man all over stages of life, and keeping in mind that God will surely
guard him who depends upon Him and save him who seeks His help.

• Learning lessons from the changeability of this life.

Many poor people have become rich, many rich people have become poor,
many celebrities have become paupers, and many paupers have become
celebrities.

Finally, to gain true trust in God is to satisfy oneself with His acts
in situations of joy and misery.

[^1]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 56 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 56 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; 2/683 (as quoted from Bayan
ut-Tanzil).


