Moral conduct
=============

Moral conduct is a mood arousing good behavior with others by showing
happy mien, nice wording, and kind manners. As he was asked about the
limit of moral conduct, Imam as-Sadiq (a) answered:

“It is to be modest, speak honorably, and meet your brother cheerfully.”

One of the expectations that every judicious individual exerts efforts
for achieving is to have an attractive personality. It is surely a noble
aim that cannot be attained by everyone except the virtuous and those
who are characterized by knowledgeability, liberality, courage, and the
like good traits.

All virtues, however, cannot be true matters of admiration unless they
are connected to moral conduct. On that account, moral conduct is the
core and pivot of virtues. The Ahlul-Bayt (a) used a variety of
instructive methods in favor of glorifying the moral conduct so
remarkably:

The Prophet (S) said: “The best of you are the most well-mannered and
generous ones who go on intimate terms with people and people go on
intimate terms with them, and whose places of residence are frequently
trodden on by guests[^1].”

“He who has a good nature will have the reward of those who observe
fasting in days and keep awake praying at nights[^2].”

“You cannot treat people by means of your wealth; hence, you should
treat them by means of your moral conduct[^3].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “The most perfect believers[^4], in the sight of
faith, are the most well-mannered[^5].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “After the fulfillment of the obligatory
religious duties, the most favorable thing that a servant offers to
Allah is to extend the moral conducts over people[^6].”

“Allah gives a servant for his moral conduct the same reward that He
gives to the mujahid[^7].”

“The moral conduct dissolves sins in the same way as the sun dissolves
snow[^8].”

“Piety and moral conduct construct the countries and prolong the
ages[^9].”

“If you want to be respected, you should be lenient, and if you want to
be disrespected, you may be severe[^10].”

God did not send any messenger to people before He had adorned him with
moral conduct, which is, then, the symbol of the prophets’ virtues and
the title of their personalities.

The Prophet Muhammad (S) was the ideal example of moral conduct, as well
as the other high moral standards. By means of his ideal moralities, he
could seize the hearts, and deserved, worthily, the praise of God:

***“Most surely, you conform yourself to sublime morality. (68:4)”***

Imam Ali (a), describing the moralities of the holy Prophet (S), said:

“He was the most generous, the bravest, the most truthful and the most
faithful, and in terms of temper, the most lenient and in terms of
association, the most honorable. Any one seeing him for the first time
is filled with awe, and any one associating with him loves him. I have
never seen his like before and after him[^11].”

As a picture of the Prophet’s moral conduct, it is sufficient to refer
to his story with people of Koreish[^12] who allied each other against
him and showed him various sorts of bitterness that obliged him to flee
his hometown. When God gave him victory against them, they were quite
sure he would revenge himself upon them. He said nothing to them but,
‘what do you think I am going to do with you?’ ‘Only the good, for you
are a noble brother and the son of a noble brother,’ answered they. He
said: ‘I will repeat the same wording of my brother Joseph the prophet:
(Today, you are not condemned.) Go, you are released.’

Anas narrated: I was with the Prophet who was putting a garment of a
tough margin when a Bedouin pulled him so violently that the margin of
his garment left an effect on his neck. ‘Muhammad,’ said the Bedouin,
‘load on my two camels with the fortune of God that is in your
possession, because it is neither yours nor your father’s.’

The Prophet (S) kept silent for a while before he said, ‘The fortune is
Allah’s, and I am His servant.’ He then added, ‘Do you, Bedouin, not
think you will be retaliated for you deed?’

‘No, I do not,’ answered the Bedouin.

‘Why?’ asked the Prophet.

The Bedouin said, ‘Because you do not set evil for an evil.’

The Prophet laughed and ordered to load on the back of the Bedouin’s
camel with barley and wheat[^13].

Amirul-Mu'minin[^14] (a) narrated:

The Prophet (S) told the very rich Jew whom he had owed a few
dinars[^15] that he had nothing to pay him back at that time. The Jew
decided not to leave the Prophet before he would pay him. The Prophet
therefore sat with him. In the same place, he offered the Dhuhr, Asr,
Maghrib, Eshaa, and Fajr prayers. As he noticed that his companions were
threatening that Jew, the Prophet (S) looked at them and said, ‘What are
you doing?’ ‘God’s Messenger,’ said they, ‘he is detaining you.’ The
Prophet answered, ‘Allah has not sent me to wrong any person, including
the followers of other religions.’

As soon as the day broke, the Jew declared, ‘I declare there in no god
but Allah and that Mohamed is His servant and messenger. I will dedicate
half of my fortune to the cause of God. By God I swear, I only did so to
notice the conformity of your descriptions to these that are mentioned
in the Torah. I have seen your characteristics in the Torah: Muhammad
son of Abdullah, the born in Mecca, will emigrate to Teeba. He is
neither rude nor coarse nor abusive nor adorned with obscenity. I
declare there is no god but Allah and you are surely the messenger of
God. This is my fortune: I offer it to you so that you will apply to it
the rules that God has revealed[^16].’

Thus were the sinless Imams with regard to the excellence of moralities:

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a) related:

Amirul-Mu'minin (a), once, received the two faithful men who visited him
so warmly, honored them, and asked them to sit in the head of his
session. They were a father and his son. After they had finished the
meal that the Imam served to them, Qanbar his servant brought a washtub,
a wooden pitcher, and a handkerchief. Amirul-Mu'minin (a) took the
pitcher to pour water on the hands of the guest. The man refused so
intensely, but Amirul-Mu'minin insisted on pouring water on his hand and
asked him to behave as if it was Qanbar who would do so to him. The man
did. Amirul-Mu'minin, then, handed the pitcher to his son Muhammad Ibn
al-Hanafiyya and said, ‘son, if that son had visited me alone without
his father, I myself would have poured water on his hand. Allah does not
accept to put fathers and sons on the same level when they are in the
same place. Since the father poured on the hands of the father, the son
then should pour on the hands of the son.”

Hence, Muhammad poured on the hands of the son. On this event, Imam
al-Askari (a) commented:

“He who copies Ali in this deed is the true Shiite[^17].”

It is related that Imams al-Hasan and al-Hussein once noticed an old man
performing the ritual ablution incorrectly. They avoided stating to him
directly; hence, they agreed on making him the arbiter who should rule
of the most accurate ablution. As they performed the ablution before
him, the old man said, “Sirs! You both have performed the very accurate
ablution, but it seems that the old man can master nothing. He now
declares his repentance out of your blessing and mercy to the members of
your grandfather’s community[^18]”

It is also related that, once, a servant of Imam al- Hussein (a)
committed a mistake that caused him to be punished. The Imam therefore
gave the orders of beating him.

“Sir,” said the servant, “(Remember God’s saying) those who refrain the
anger.”

The Imam, hence, ordered to release him.

“Sir,” said the servant, “(Remember God’s saying) and those who forgive
people.”

The Imam, hence, forgave him.

“Sir,” said the servant, “(Remember God’s saying) and Allah loves those
who do good.”

The Imam said, “Go, you are free for the sake of

Allah. I will also double your payment[^19]”

As-Sawli narrated the following:

A disagreement occurred between al-Hussein and Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyya
who wrote to his brother: “So then, brother! Your and my father is the
same. You are not preferred to me and I am not preferred to you in this
point. Regarding your mother Fatima the daughter of the Messenger of
God, if my mother possesses gold that is filling the earth, she will
never reach the standing of your mother. If you read this missive, you
may visit me so that I will please you. You are surely worthier of
virtue than I am. Peace and God’s grace and blessings be upon you.”

Al-Hussein did, and they were no longer engaged in any disagreement.

Muhammad Ibn Ja’far and others narrated the following:

A kinsman of Ali Ibn al-Hussein (a) stood in front of him and insulted.
The Imam, however, did not reply. When the man went away, the Imam said
to his companions: “You have heard what that man had said. I want you to
come with me so that you may hear my reply.”

“We will,” we replied, “we, however, wanted you to answer him.”

The Imam took his shoes and went reciting (God’s saying): (Those who
refrain from anger and those who forgive the people. Allah loves those
who do good.)

We understood that he would not say anything to that man.

When the Imam was in front of that man’s house, he shouted (at the
servants), “Tell him that it is Ali Ibn al-Hussein.”

The man rushed out towards us with evil intent. He had no doubt that the
purpose of the Imam’s attendance had been to repay him for some of his
evil deeds.

“Brother,” said Ali Ibn al-Hussein, “you stood proudly over me and over
spoke. If you have said what is really in my character, I then seek
Allah’s forgiveness. If you have said what is not in my character, Allah
may forgive you!”

The man kissed the Imam between the eyes and confessed: “I said what was
not in your character. In fact, I am worthier of seeking God’s
forgiveness[^20].”

Ali Ibn al-Hussein (a) narrated: Amirul-Mu'minin (a) went for facing the
three individuals who had sworn by Lat and Uzza[^21] and took upon
themselves the pledge of killing the Prophet (S) He could kill one and
capture the others. When he carried out the Prophet’s order of advancing
one of them before him, the Prophet (S) asked him to declare that there
is no god but Allah and that he is His messenger. The man answered: “To
move the unshakable Mount Abu Qubays is easier for me than uttering this
statement.” Hence, the Prophet (S) asked Amirul- Mu'minin (a) to behead
him.

The same thing was said to the other man whose answer was, “Attach me to
the previous.” The Prophet (S), also, asked Amirul-Mu'minin (a) to
attach him to the previous. In this very time, the Archangel Gabriel
descended and said to the Prophet (S): “Muhammad, your Lord sends His
salaams to you and asks you not to kill this one, because he was
well-mannered and openhanded with his people.” The Prophet (S) shouted
at Amirul-Mu'minin: “Ali, stop it. The messenger of my Lord has just
told me that this man was well-mannered and openhanded with his people.”
As he heard the Prophet’s statement, the man who was under the edge of
the sword wondered: “Was it the messenger of your Lord who told you of
this?” The Prophet (S) said: “Yes, it was.”

The man said: “By God I swear, I have never possessed a single
dirham[^22] while a brother of mine does not have it. I also have never
frowned my face in warfare. I now declare that there is no god but Allah
and you are surely the messenger of God.” The Prophet (S) commented:
“This is a man whose moral conduct and openhandedness have drawn him to
the gardens of bliss.”[^23]

[^1]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^3]: Quoted from Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih.

[^4]: Believer stands for every individual who believes in the
fundamental beliefs of Islam. It differs from Muslim in the point that a
Muslim is everyone who utters the shahada (The Muslim profession of
faith: La ilaha illa (A)llah, Muhammadun rasul Allah, 'there is no god
but Allah, [and] Muhammad is the messenger of God') verbally, even if he
does not believe in it, while the believer is the individual who utters
the shahada and believe in it in heart.

[^5]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^6]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^7]: Mujahid is the performer of jihad.

[^8]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^9]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^10]: Quoted from Tuhaf ul-Uqoul.

[^11]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar.

[^12]: Koreish is the tribe that inhabited Mecca in the time of the
Prophet Muhammad (S) and to which he belonged.

[^13]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar.

[^14]: Amir ul-Mu'minin (the commander of the faithful) is a name that
the Prophet (S) gave exclusively to Ali ibn Abi Talib (a). However, all
the leaders that ruled the Islamic states had it to themselves.

[^15]: Dinar is the golden currency of the Arabs and the Islamic states.

[^16]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 6

[^17]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar

[^18]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 10, quoted from Uyoun ul-
Mahasin; p. 89

[^19]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 10, quoted from Keshf ul-
Ghumma.

[^20]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 11/17, quoted from I’lam ul- Wara and
al-Irshad.

[^21]: Lat and Uzza are the two major idols the Arabs were regarding as
gods before Islam.

[^22]: Dirham is the currency of the Arabs as well as the Islamic states

[^23]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 2 p. 210.


