Fear Of God
===========

Fear of God stands for the mental pains arisen from the anticipation of
God’s punishment for the commitment of acts of disobedience to Him. It
enjoins holding on straightforwardness and forbids vices and sins. For
that reason, the Sharia has paid a considerable attention to fear of
God:

***“Only Allah’s knowledgeable servants fear Him. Allah is Majestic and
All-pardoning. (35:28)”***

***“Those who fear their Lord in secret will receive forgiveness and a
great reward (67:12).”***

***“However, those who had feared their Lord and restrained their souls
from acting according to their desires, Paradise will be their dwelling
(79:41).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “For those who avoid acts of disobedience or the
illegal desire that is shown before them out of fear of Allah, Allah
will prevent the fire of Hell from consuming them, save them on the Day
of the Grand Horror, and fulfill His promise to them that He cites in
His Book as He says:

***“Those who fear their Lord will have two gardens (55:46)***[^1].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Fear Allah as if you can see Him before you. If
you cannot see Him before you, then it is surely that He can see you. If
you think that He cannot see you, then you disbelieve Him. If you
realize that He can see you and, yet, you commit acts of disobedience to
Him, then you consider Him as the humblest among those who can see
you[^2].”

“The believer should live between two fears the past sin that he does
not know what Allah will do about it and the remaining days that he does
not know what misfortunes he will encounter through them. Thus, the
believer begins his day fearfully and ends his day fearfully. Except
fear, nothing mends the believer[^3].”

“You will not be true believer unless you are fearful (of God’s
punishment) and hopeful (for His reward). You will not be true fearful
and true hopeful unless you avoid what you fear and work for what you
hope[^4].”

A wise man said: “How poor man is! Had he feared the fire of Hell in the
same way as he feared poverty, he would have been saved from the both.
And had he desired for Paradise in the same way as he desired for the
worldly pleasures, he would have won the both. And had he feared God
secretly in the same way as he feared people openly, he would have
achieved happiness in this world and the world to come.”

A wise man said to al-Mahdi the Abbasid caliph who asked for an advice:
“This seat that you are in now was occupied by your father and uncle
before you, was it not?” “Yes, it was,” answered the caliph. “They had
done some acts because of which you expect they will be saved, had they
not?” asked the wise man. “Yes, they had,” answered the caliph. “They
also had done some acts for which you are afraid they will be punished,
had they not?” asked the wise man. “Yes, they had,” answered the caliph.
“Now,” said the wise man, “you should do these acts because of which you
expect they will be saved and you should avoid these acts for which you
are afraid they will be punished.”

Fear between Ebb and Flow
-------------------------

The previous texts have depicted the importance of fear and its
contribution in rectifying man and qualifying him to have the honor of
God’s contentment. Like the other noble traits, fear does not deserve
praise unless it is characterized by moderation away from shortage and
excess. Excess fear impoverishes the personality and deprives of hope.
Moreover, it causes despair, which, in turn, brings about perpetual
deviation. Shortage of fear, also, causes negligence, shortcoming, and
rebel against acts of obedience to God. By the balance of fear and hope,
one’s self nourishes, conscience towers up, and the spiritual energies
go forward. Referring to this point, Imam as-Sadiq (a) said:

“Hope for Allah in a form that does not draw you to the commitment of
acts of disobedience to Him, and fear Him in such a way that does not
make you despair of His mercy[^5].”

Advantages of Fear
------------------

The values of the noble traits depend on levels of the virtuous concepts
and principals of righteousness that they leave on personalities.
Accordingly, fear occupies the first place among the noble traits. It
has played a big role in the fields of belief since it is the main
reason encouraging acts of obedience to God. Feelings of fear enhance
the souls and take them to a lofty angelic position that imparts to the
ideality of the angels. As he compared among angels, human beings, and
animals, Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said:

“Surely, Allah has characterized the angels by intellect without sexual
desire, and characterized animals with desire without reason. He exalted
man by bestowing upon him both qualities. Accordingly, if man’s reason
dominates on his desire, he rises to a state above that of the angels
(because this state is attained by man in spite of the existence of
hurdles which do not vex the angels), and if man’s desire dominates on
his reason, he drops to a state below that of the animals[^6].”

Consequently, we notice that the fearful deem easy the sufferings they
encounter because of acts of obedience to God and deem bitter the
sweetness of the sins and acts of disobedience to Him, because they fear
His wrath.

This in fact achieves mental and physical happiness in the same way as
this cosmos, along with its components, is organized because of its
submission to God:

***“All righteously believing male or female will be granted a blessed
happy life and will receive their due reward and more. (16:97)”***

All the current calamities, such as commonness of disorder, spread of
crimes, prevalence of mental perplexity, that humankind is suffering is
only the result of going away from the course of the Creator and
neglecting His constitution:

***“Had the people of the towns believed (in Our revelations) and
maintained piety, We would have certainly showered on them Our blessings
from the sky and the earth. But they called Our revelations lies, thus
Our torment struck them for their evil deeds. (7:96)”***

**How to Feel Fearful?**

 It is necessary to fix the belief in God as well as the concepts of
the Judgment Day, divine rewards, punishment, Paradise, and Hell. Fear
is in fact one of the fruits of faith:

***“When Allah is mentioned, the true believers begin to feel fear of
Him in their hearts and when His revelations are recited to them their
faith strengthens. In Allah alone do they trust (8:2).”***

 It is necessary to listen to the touching sermons and words of wisdom
that creates fear and reverence.

 It is necessary to survey the manners of the fearful, including their
states of reverence and submission.

Let us now provide the most fascinating picture of fear of God that is
painted by Imam as-Sajjad (a) in one of his supreme supplications:

“I weep, and why do I not weep, while I do not know what will my destiny
be? And I see my soul cheat me and my days deceive me and the wings of
death are flapping near my head. Why then do I not weep? I weep for the
departure of my soul, for the gloomy of my grave, for the narrowness of
my sepulcher, for the interrogation of Munkar and Nakeer[^7], for my
going out of my grave naked, humble, and overburdened. I will look once
to my right and another to my left while the creatures each will have
his own concern:

***“For on that day everyone will be completely engrossed in his own
concerns. Some faces on that day will be radiant, laughing and joyous,
but others will be gloomy and covered by darkness (80:37-41).”***

Stories of the Fearful
----------------------

Imam al-Baqir (a) narrated:

“A very charming prostitute could charm some young Israelites one of
whom said, ‘Had the worshipper so-and-so seen this lady, she would have
surely seduced him.’ As she heard this statement, she decided to visit
that worshipper for seducing him. That night, she went to his house. He
refused to let her in, but she claimed that some young people were
chasing her, and that they would rape her if they would catch her.
Because of this claim, the man let her in. As soon as she entered his
house, she undressed herself. When he saw her beauty and charm, he was
seduced. He therefore struck her with his hand. Suddenly, he regained
his conscience; hence, he ran to the hearth and put his hand in fire.
‘What are you doing?’ she cried. ‘I am burning my hand because it
committed an ill deed,’ answered he. The woman left him hurriedly and
told some people that she met of that worshipper’s deed. They ran to
him, but found his hand was burnt[^8].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated:

“One of the ladies of the Israelites tried to seduce the worshipper who
hosted her. He wanted to reach her, but whenever he tried to do it, he
was putting one of his fingers in fire. He kept on doing so until
morning. ‘Go out,’ he dismissed her, ‘you were the worst guest I have
ever had.’”

[^1]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 15 part 2 page 113 (as quoted
from al-

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 57 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 57 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 57 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/2/188 (as quoted from as- Saduq’s
al-Amali).

[^6]: Quoted from Ilal ush-Sharaayi

[^7]: Munkar and Nakeer: The two angels who interrogate the dead in
graves.

[^8]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 5 (as quoted from ar- Rawandi’s Qassas
ul-Anbiyaa).


