Hope For God
============

Hope is the expectation of a dear thing the arrangements of which are
already done, such as hope for the yield of a land after it was seeded,
watered, and superintended. In case the arrangements of a thing are not
done, hope for it will be foolhardiness, just like hope for the yield of
a derelict land that was not superintended properly. Hope, furthermore,
is the second wing with which, along with fear, the believers fly in the
horizons of the obedience of God. Although fear and hope support each
other in disciplining the believers, hope is sweeter and fresher than
fear, because its source is trust in God and the assurance of the extent
of His mercy. To obey out of hope is better than obeying out of fear. In
view of that, good tidings of hope are carried through numerous texts
from the Quran and Sunna:

Warning against Despair
-----------------------

***“(Muhammad), tell my servants who have committed injustice to
themselves, ‘Do not despair of the mercy of Allah. Allah certainly
forgives all sins. He is All-forgiving and All-merciful.’ (39:53)”***

***“And do not despair of receiving comfort from Allah; only the
unbelievers’ despair of receiving comfort from Him. (12:87)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will gather the
despondent of His mercy with their faces blackened. They will be given
the name of ‘the despondent of Allah’s mercy[^1].”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said to the man who was prevailed by despair of
God’s mercy out of his many sins: “You, to despair of the mercy of Allah
is the greatest sin that you have ever committed[^2].”

Vastness of God’s Mercy and Pardon
----------------------------------

***“Your Lord's mercy is completely overwhelming. (6:147)”***

***“Your Lord, certainly, has forgiveness for the injustice of the
people. (13:6)”***

***“Allah does not forgive the sin of considering others equal to Him,
but He may choose to forgive other sins. (4:48)”***

***“When the faithful come to you, say to them, "Peace be upon you. Your
Lord has decreed for Himself to be All-merciful. Anyone of you who
commits a sin out of ignorance, then repents, and reforms himself will
find that Allah is All-forgiving and All- merciful." (6:54)”***

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will extend
His mercy so vastly that even Eblis will expect himself to be included
with that mercy[^3].”

“On the Day of Resurrection, the guilty believers will be stopped before
Allah Who will personally interrogate him. He will display before him
his sins in details, and the believer will confess of them all. The Lord
will then say: ‘In the worldly life, I covered these sins and, now, I
will cover them for you.’ He then will order to change them into
virtues. As the record of that believer will be shown to people, they
will say, ‘How admirable this man is! He did not commit a single sin!’
This is the meaning of God’s saying:

***But only those who repent and believe and act righteously will have
their sins replaced by virtue, (25:70)***[^4]”

Favorable Judgment about God
----------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The last servant who will be sent to Hell will
turn his face towards Allah. The Lord then will order the angels to
bring him back. ‘Why did you turn your face, servant?’ the Lord will
ask. ‘Lord,’ the servant will say, ‘I had another idea about you.’ ‘What
did you think of Me, servant?’ the Lord will ask. The servant will
answer, ‘I thought You would forgive me and allow me to live in Your
Paradise.’ The Lord then will say, ‘My angels, I swear by My power,
majesty, favors, tests, and exaltation, this servant had never thought
good about Me for a single hour of his lifetime. Had he done so, I would
not have sent him to Hell. Nevertheless, I will regard the lie that he
has just told as true and allow him to be in Paradise.’ Allah will live
up to the servant who thinks well of Him:

***‘This was how you considered your Lord, but He knows you better than
you know yourselves. Thus, you are now lost (41:23)***[^5].’”

Imam ar-Rida (a) said: “Have favorable judgment about Allah, for He
says: I am as My servant thinks of Me, whether good or bad[^6].”

Intercession of the Prophet and the Imams for their Adherents

The Prophet (S) said: “On the Day of Resurrection, we will be
responsible for interrogating our adherents. Regarding the wrongdoings
that are committed against Allah, we will issue a judgment about them
and Allah will accept it for us. Regarding the wrongdoings that are
committed against people, we will interfere so that the wronged party
will forgive for our sake. Regarding the wrongdoings that are committed
against us, we are the worthiest of forgiveness[^7].”

“He who dies on the love for Muhammad’s family will be treated as
shahid. He who dies on the love for Muhammad’s family will be forgiven.
He who dies on the love for Muhammad’s family will be (regarded as)
repentant. He who dies on the love for Muhammad’s family will be
perfectly faithful believer. He who dies on the love for Muhammad’s
family will be given the good tidings of being in Paradise by the angel
of death, first, and Munkar and Nakeer, second.

He who dies on the love for Muhammad’s family will be carried in
procession to Paradise like brides. He who dies on the love for
Muhammad’s family will have two doors taking to Paradise opened from his
grave. As for him who dies on the love for Muhammad’s family, Allah will
make the angels of mercy visit his grave regularly. He who dies on the
love for Muhammad’s family will be regarded as follower of the Sunna and
community of Muslims. But for him who dies on the hatred for Muhammad’s
family, he will attend on the Day of Resurrection with the script,
written on his forehead-- ‘This one is excluded from the mercy of
Allah[^8].”

The Prophet (S) once, came to his companions with bright face like the
halo of the moon. When Abdurrahman Ibn Awf asked him, the Prophet said:
“I have just received the good tidings about my brother and cousin and
about my daughter. I have just been told that Allah gave my daughter
Fatima in marriage to Ali and ordered Ridwan; the doorkeeper of
Paradise, to shake the Tree of Tuba, which carried muniments as many as
those who have love for my family. Under that tree, Allah has created
angels of light and given each one of them one of these muniments. When
the Day of Resurrection will come and the angels will call at all the
creatures, they will give each of those who have love for The The Ahlul-
Bayt one of these muniments that will be documents of acquittance from
Hell. Hence, my brother and my daughter will set many men and women of
my umma free from Hell[^9].”

When God’s saying,

***“The righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures,
(98:9)”***

was revealed, the Prophet (S) said to Ali: This is you and your
Shia[^10]. On the Day of Resurrection, you will be content and pleased,
while your enemies will be angry and depressed[^11].

Calamities and Diseases Cancel the Believers’ Sins
--------------------------------------------------

The Prophet (S) said: “God says: By My power and majesty I swear, I will
not make the servant upon whom I want to have mercy depart this world
before I punish him for every sin that he committed. I will punish him
by means of an ailment that inflicts him, poverty that befalls him, or a
state of fear that controls him. If this is not enough, I will make him
suffer the agonies of death[^12].”

“Depression and grief will not depart the believer before they eradicate
all of his sins[^13].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Mufaddal, beware of committing sins and warn
our adherents against so. By God I swear, you are the most targeted by
sins. You may suffer the persecution of the ruling authorities. This is
because of your commitment of sins. You may be ailed. This is because of
your commitment of sins. Your sustenance may be stopped. This is because
of your commitment of sins.

You may suffer the agonies of death so severely. This is also because of
your commitment of sins.”

As the Imam noticed that al-Mufaddal was highly touched by these words,
he (a) commented: “You suffer all the previous in order that you will
not be interrogated about your sins on the Day of Resurrection, since
the punishment for such sins befall you in this world[^14].”

“The believer may suffer troubles in sleep as a punishment for his
commitment of sins. He also may suffer a physical defect as a punishment
for his commitment of sins[^15].”

Reality of Hope
---------------

Hope is meaningless unless reasons of its success are available. It is
hence foolish to leave the courses of obedience and take in the courses
of deviation and depend totally on hope. Such hope is surely void. It is
noticeable that the great personalities, such as prophets, their
successors, and the saints, spared no efforts in the fields of the
obedience to God and devoted themselves to the acts of worship while
they were the most favorable to God:

As he was told that some people were engrossed in the acts of
disobedience to God while they claim that they hope for the mercy of
Him, Imam as-Sadiq (a) said:

“They are liars. They are not our Shia. Those are the people whom are
deceived by false hopes. He who hopes for something should work for it,
and he who fears something should escape it[^16].”

Purpose of Hope and Fear
------------------------

Some people can be mended only by means of hope while others can be
rectified by means of fear. The disobedient who have felt regret for
their excessive sins but they have despaired of His pardon should be
treated by means of hope for God’s immense mercy. Those who destroyed
themselves because of excessive performance of acts of worship should
also be treated by means of hope for God. On the other side, the sinful
tyrants who are plunging in acts of disobedience to God and are deceived
by false hope should be treated by means of fear of God as well as
severe reproach and painful punishment.

[^1]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; 2/451 (as quoted from ar- Rawandi’s
an-Nawadir).

[^2]: Quoted from Jami us-Sa’adat; part 1 page 246.

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 3/274 (as quoted from Sheikh
as-Saduq’s al-Amali).

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 3 page 274 (as quoted from
al-Barqi’s al-Mahasin).

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 3/301 (as quoted from as- Saduq’s
Thawab ul-Aamal).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 59 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^7]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 3/301 (as quoted from Uyounu Akhbar
ir-Ridha).

[^8]: In his exegesis of the Verse, “(Muhammad), say: I do not ask you
for any payment for my preaching to you except (your) love of (my near)
relatives, (42:23)” Az-Zamakhshari judges that this narration is
uninterruptedly related and that it is beyond suspicion. Furthermore,
many compilers of the books of the merits and virtues record this
narration in different ways. (Excerpted from Sayyid Abdul-Hussein
Sharafuddin’s al-Fusoul ul-Muhimma.)

[^9]: Excerpted from Sayyid Abdul-Hussein Sharafuddin’s al- Fusoul
ul-Muhimma; page 44. (In his book titled as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa, p. 103,
Ibn Hagar records this narration.)

[^10]: Shia (lexicographically, adherents, party) is the other major
religious group of Muslims, differing from the Sunni in the
understanding of the Sunna and in their acceptance of Imam Ali (a), the
Prophet’s son-in-law and the fourth caliph, to be the first true
successor of the Prophet (S). Hence, they are called the Shia of Ali.

[^11]: Excerpted from Sayyid Abdul-Hussein Sharafuddin’s al- Fusoul
ul-Muhimma; page 39. (In the book titled as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa, p. 96,
this narration is recorded)

[^12]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 172 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^13]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 172 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^14]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 3 page 35 (as quoted from Ilal
ush-Sharayi).

[^15]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 172 (quoted from al-Kafi).

[^16]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 57 (as quoted from al- Kafi).


