Envy
====

Envy stands for the wish that amenities of others were to lapse and move
to the envious. To hope for having the same amenities of somebody is
called emulation, and it is not ill-favored. It is a hideous vice that
leaves the worst influence on morals. The envious in fact lives in
incessant grief since he dissatisfies himself with acts of God. As the
envious feels horrible malice towards the envied, all his endeavors came
to nothing. He therefore encounters the results of his envy alone:

***“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. (Muhammad), say,
"I seek protection from the Lord of the Dawn against the evil of
whatever He has created. I seek His protection against the evil of the
invading darkness, from the evil of those who practice witchcraft and
from the evil of the envious ones (113:1-5).”***

The Prophet (S) said to his companions: “Surely, the malady of the past
nations has crept to you. It is envy. It is shaving not the hair, but
the religion. To be saved of it, you should control your hand power- and
tongue wording-, and you should not insinuate evil into your faithful
brother[^1].”

“Envy consumes the good deeds in the same way as fire consumes wood[^2]”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “I have never seen like the wrong envious who
is most similar to the wronged. The envious lives in endless care with
grieved heart and inherent sorrow[^3].”

Incentive of Envy
-----------------

### (1) Malignity

Some individuals have ill will and malignity as natures. Thus, you
notice them feel miserable when others are happy, and feel happy when
others are grieved. They envy the others for that which God has given to
them out of His graces, even if there is no hostile situation between
the two the envious and the envied, but only because of ill will.

### (2) Enmity

Enmity is within the strongest incentives of envy.

### (3) Competition

The competition of the owners of common interests and purposes is
another incentive that arouses envy. Under this title lies also the envy
among sons for the favor that one, or some, of them enjoy with fathers.
The retinue of the ruling authorities also envy each other for the favor
that some of them enjoy with the authorities. In few words, envy is
common among the individuals of the same goals. It is absent among the
individuals of divergent trends. The merchant, for instance, does not
envy the engineer or the farmer.

### (4) Selfishness

Envy may control some people because of their feelings of precedence and
selfishness that prompt them to precede others and enjoy exclusive
standings.

### (5) Contempt

Envy may be arisen in the inner self of a person who despises others and
regards as too much the graces that God confers upon them.

It happens that all the previous incentives of envy gather in the
personality of an individual to change him into a volcano of oppression.

Disadvantages of Envy
---------------------

Exclusively, envy is the most serious moral defect that inflicts the
religion and the life of the individuals that they carry.

The worldly disadvantage of envy is that it roils the life and brings
about care and grief. This is because the envious is disturbed when he
notices graces of God shade people. Moreover, such scenes inflict him
with disastrous mental and physical defects. Envy, too, influences badly
the dignity and reputation; therefore, we notice that the envious are
the subject of dispraise. Besides, envy inflicts the moralities; hence,
it is noticed that the envious does not refrain from trapping others by
various nasty means of false accusations. The envious, also, does not
spare any effort for arising seditious matters.

The famous and excelling personalities are the subjects of envy, because
their standings are resented by the envious. This is the secret beyond
the wrong treatment and deprivation of appreciation that most of the
virtuous individuals have to suffer. It frequently happens that the
envious does not hit the target; therefore, his share becomes only agony
and grief, while the targeted individual wins good reputation and
respect.

The religious disadvantage of envy is that the envious uses all wrong
and nasty means for trapping the envied so as to impute dishonor to him.
This will certainly make him encounter the wrath and punishment of God.
In addition, the behaviors and feelings of the envious, such as rage and
dissatisfaction with acts of God, are spiteful spunk.

Treatment of Envy
-----------------

(1) One must avoid looking forward to gaining the graces enjoyed by
those who are of higher ranks than he is, so that he will feel the
divine care. Such feelings will surely alleviate the tendencies of envy.

(2) It is necessary to keep in mind the worldly and religious
disadvantages of envy in addition to the various sorts of crises and
misfortunes that it results.

(3) It is also necessary to keep God in mind, believe in the wisdom
beyond His acts, submit to His plans, and beware of the initiatives of
envy.

Fathers must avoid making any distinction among their sons in fields of
custody so as to avoid seeding envy in their mentalities.

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/3/131 (as quoted from al- Majalis
and al-Amali).

[^2]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/3 (as quoted from al- Majazat
un-Nabawiyya).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/3/131 (as quoted from al-
Karajaki’s al-Kenz).


