Talebearing
===========

Talebearing is to inform against people matters that they dislike to
divulge, for the purpose of entrapping them. The talebearer is in fact
the meanest and most malicious individual since he is characterized by
backbiting, betrayal, hypocrisy, spoiling the mutual amicability, and
seeding divergence among people:

***“Do not yield to one persistent in swearing, backbiting, gossiping,
obstructing virtues, a sinful transgressor, ill-mannered, and morally
corrupt or that because he may possess wealth and children. When Our
revelations are recited to him. (68:14)”***

***“Woe to every slanderer and backbiter. (104:1)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “May I tell you of the evilest of you? They are
the talebearers who sow enmity between associates and stick defects to
those who are acquitted of defects[^1].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “It is forbidden for the revilers and the
talebearers to be in Paradise[^2].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said to al-Mansour; the Abbasid caliph: “Do not accept
the wording of those whom Allah forbid to be in Paradise and whom Allah
decided to make Hell their eternal abode if they speak ill of your
relatives and folks whose right is obligatory upon you. The talebearers
are surely perjurers. They are the partners of Eblis in his efforts of
exciting enmity between people. Allah says:

***“Believers, if one who publicly commits sins brings you any news,
ascertain its truthfulness carefully, lest you harm people through
ignorance and then regret what you have done. (49:6)***[^3]”

Incentives of Talebearing
-------------------------

There are two incentives of talebearing:

• To defame the one against whom information are said, or

• To curry favor with and to flatter slavishly the one to whom
information are carried.

Disadvantages of Talebearing
----------------------------

Talebearing is the result of two serious vices: backbiting and tattling.
Every item of backbiting is tattling, but not every tattling is
backbiting. Hence, the disadvantages of talebearing are more serious
than those of backbiting, since it includes the divulgement of secrets
and defamation of the one against whom tales are born. In certain cases,
talebearing result in bloodshed, usurpation of properties, violation of
sanctities, and abuse of dignities.

How to Deal with the Talebearer?
--------------------------------

Because the talebearer is the most dangerous corruptive, it is necessary
to beware of him, as well as his plots and corruption. This may be
achieved by following the advices bellow:

• It is obligatory to belie the talebearers, because they are sinful and
distrustful.

• It is necessary to avoid mistrusting one’s faithful brother just
because some information are told against him:

***“Believers, stay away from conjecture; acting upon some conjecture
may lead to sin. (49:12)”***

• One must not spy and inspect the talebearers’ news:

***“Do not spy on one another or backbite. (49:12)”***

• One must avoid bearing the tales of the talebearers, lest he becomes
talebearer and backbiter in the same time.

It is related that, once, a man bore some tales about another before
Amirul-Mu'minin (a) who said to him: “We will inspect that which you
have born to us. If it is true, we will hate you. If it is not, we will
punish you. If you like, now, we may overlook the matter.” The man asked
Amirul-Mu'minin (a) to overlook it[^4].

Muhammad Ibn al-Fudhayl narrated that he asked Imam al-Kadhim (a) what
he should do if trustworthy people inform him against a man, but that
man would deny when he is faced. The Imam (a) instructed: “You should
belie even your hearing and sight if they tell you something wrong about
your believing brother. Moreover, if fifty swearing witnesses testify
before you against your believing brother, but he would deny their
testimonies, you should believe him and disapprove the fifty witnesses.
Never inform against your believing brother anything that he dislikes to
divulge or anything that defames his personality, lest you are one of
those about whom Allah says:

***“Those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face
painful torment in this world and in the life to come. Allah knows what
you do not know. (24:19)***[^5]”

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 164 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 164 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara, 190 (as quoted from
al-Amali).

[^4]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 2 page 613.

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara, 188, as quoted from
Thawab ul-A’mal.


