Obscenity, Revilement and Defamation
====================================

Obscenity is the expression that is offensively and grossly indecent,
such as the shameless and improper words used by the ignorant and
avoided by the noble. Such expressions may be used metonymically by the
respectful people. In the same manners, authors and polite people used
to avoid using obscene expressions out of their civility and decorum;
therefore, they use metonymy instead.

Revilement is to insult and curse others, such as calling bad names.

Defamation is to impute dishonor to others by definite expressions.

These three qualities, however, are the most hideous products of the
tongue:

The Prophet (S) said: “For every obscene, indecent, and shameless
individual who does not care for his speech or for what is said to him,
Allah has banned him from being in Paradise. If you search for the
family of such individuals, you will find them bastards or semi-sons of
devils. There are devils among people. Listen to Allah’s saying (as an
address to the Shaitan): And share with them in wealth and children[^1],
[^2].”

“The evilest servants of Allah are those whose association is hated
because of their obscenity[^3].”

“To revile at the believers is defection, to fight them is atheism, to
backbite them is act of disobedience to Allah, and their wealth is as
sacred as their blood (soul)[^4].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “He who defames a believer shall suffer violent
death and will not be in good manner at all[^5].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Hell is the abode of him whose wording is
avoided by people[^6].”

“Shia! Be good examples as you represent us (by doing good deeds). Do
not represent us in ill behaviors. Say good wording to people and have
control over your tongues (i.e. wording). Stop uttering curious and
obscene language[^7].”

Imam al-Kadhim (a) said about two men who were showering insults on each
other: “The originator of such revilement is the unjust party. He
burdens his as well as the other’s sin, unless the other party
transgresses[^8].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) had a friend who was so close to him that he did not
depart him at any situation. One day, they were walking in a mart and
followed by a slave from Sind[^9]. The Imam’s friend turned his face
three times to find his slave, but he could not. In the fourth, he could
see the slave; so, he shouted at him: “son of a, where were you?”

As soon as Imam as-Sadiq (a) heard that expression from his friend, he
slapped his forehead with the hand and said with astonishment:
“Subhaanallah[^10]!

How strange is that! How do you defame his mother?

In the previous, I thought you were pious. Now, I have known that you
are impious.”

The man said: “May God make me your sacrifice. His mother is only a
polytheist woman of Sind.”

The Imam said: “You should have known that every nation has a legal form
of marriage.” He (a) then asked the man to leave him. After that
situation, Imam as-Sadiq (a) did not accompany that man at all[^11].

Disadvantages of Obscenity
--------------------------

Vituperations are mostly resulted from enmity, envy, rage, and
immorality, in addition to illiteracy and impoliteness. They divest man
of the polite human traits to impute lowliness and savagery to him. They
also originate enmity, instigate alienation, and expose to God’s wrath.

Amirul-Mu’minin (a) said: “The tongue is a beast. It will raven if it is
set free.”

[^1]: The Holy Quran, Sura of Al-Israa (17) Verse (64): The whole
meaning (that is mentioned in three Verses) is as follows: ((God said to
the Shaitan, "Go away. All those who follow you will have hell as ample
recompense for their deeds. Draw anyone of them you can into sin by your
voice and by your cavalry and infantry, share their property and
children with them and make promises to them. Your promises are all
lies. You have no authority over My servants. Your Lord is a Sufficient
Protector." 17:63-5))

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 160 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 160 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 160 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 160 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 160 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^7]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 15/2/192 (as quoted from al- Amali).

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 160 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^9]: Sind is a province of South East Pakistan, traversed by the lower
reaches of the Indus.

[^10]: Subhanallah (Glory to God) is an expression of astonishment.

[^11]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 161 (as quoted from al- Kafi).


