Ill-Temper
==========

Ill-temper is a mental aberrance that causes depression and truculence.
It is the opposite of moral conduct. Often the repercussions of
ill-temper intensify to the degree that it results in a variety of
tragedies and physical and mental crises. The meanness of ill-temper
appears clearly through God’s words addressed to the Prophet (S):

“And had you been rough, hard-hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you.”

Let us now refer to some texts in this regard:

The Prophet (S) said: “Hold fast on moral conduct, for it will
unquestionably be in Paradise. Beware of ill-temper, for it will
unquestionably be in Hell.”

“Allah does not allow the ill-tempered to repent whenever the
ill-tempered repents from a sin, he engages himself in another greater
one.”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “If you want to be respected, you should be
lenient, and if you want to be disrespected, you may be severe.”

“Ill-temper ruins good works, in the same way as vinegar ruins honey.”

“The mentality of the ill-mannered individuals is always bad.”

Morals between Rectitude and Deviation
--------------------------------------

In the same way as bodies are subject to illnesses that cause certain
symptoms, such as paleness and weakness, morals are subject to definite
illnesses that cause certain symptoms in a form of moral frailty and
mental collapse that vary according to the dimensions of the symptoms.
The ailed bodies are treated so as to regain activity. The ill morals,
too, are treated so as to recover and resume moderation.

Had it been impossible to treat the morals, all the efforts of prophets
would have been meaningless, and, furthermore, man would have been just
like animals or even worse. Animals, in fact, could be tamed. The unruly
horse, for instance, could be made docile through taming, and wild
beasts could be domesticated by means of taming, too. How is it then
impossible for man, who is the noblest creature, to be disciplined? It
happens that the moralities of an individual are ailed, and change him
into a frowning, quarrelsome person. This occurs because of:

1. Either feebleness that is resulted from a physical ailment or
symptoms of senility or the like, and cause the infected person to be
weak-nerved, intolerant, and unable to treat people courteously,

2. Griefs and distresses that astound the intelligent and the
well-mannered and take them away from noble traits,

3. Poverty that causes frowning and rudeness,

4. Office that may cause loss of good temper and impudence against
people, or

5. Isolation that results in feelings of disappointment and humility.
Such feelings are the causes of frown and grimace.

Treatment of Ill-Temper
-----------------------

The disadvantages and gross damages of ill-temper should be kept in
mind. It should be always remembered that ill-temper brings about the
wrath of God.

Self-control should also be practiced, and the motives of ill-temper
should be suppressed through taking enough time before saying or doing
anything. The Prophet (S) said:

“The best jihad[^1] is self-control.”

[^1]: Jihad is religious warfare or a war for the propagation or defense
of Islam.


