Righteous Deed
==============

In the previous discussion we referred to the invaluableness of time and
proved that lifetime is more precious than the worldly pleasures. Such
being the case, the rational must exploit time properly and spend it
with matters that are as precious and significant as the age, such as
righteous deeds:

The Prophet (S) said: “The intelligent should not take care for anything
except three: seeking the worldly earnings, getting supplies for the
life to come, and gaining a legal pleasure[^1].”

Because man’s whims prompt him, in nature, towards gaining earnings and
tangible pleasures as well as the affairs that preclude him from acting
righteous deeds and readying for the life to come, many texts from the
Quran and hadith have enjoined him to arrange for his life to come:

***“Whoever has done an atom's weight of good, will see it and whoever
has done an atom's weight of evil, will also see it (99-8).”***

***“All righteous-doers among the believing male or female will be
granted a blessed happy life and will receive their due reward and more.
(16:97)”***

***“Whoever commits evil deeds will be recompensed to the same degree.
The righteously striving believer, male or female, will enter Paradise
wherein they will receive their sustenance without any account being
kept (40:40).”***

***“One who acts righteously does so for his own benefit and one who
commits evil does so against his own soul. To your Lord you will all
return (45:15).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “Abu Dharr, with the passing of days and nights,
your age decreases and your deeds are recorded. Death comes suddenly.
One who sows good will soon harvest good, and one who sows evil will
soon harvest regret. In fact, each sower will gain that which he
sows[^2].”

”Qays, with dignity there is certainly humility, with life there is
certainly death, and with this world there is certainly the world to
come. Likewise, there is an interrogator for everything, there is a
supervisor over everything, there is a reward for every good deed, there
is punishment for every evildoing, and there is a deadline for every
age. Moreover, Qays, there will definitely be a companion who will be
buried with you alive and you will be buried with him when you are dead.
If he is respectful, he will certainly respect you, and if he is
disrespectful, he will certainly disrespect you. He will be resurrected
with you and you will be sent with him, and you will be interrogated
about nothing but him. Hence, you must make him righteous, because, if
he is so, you will find pleasure with him, but if he is ill, you will
feel an aversion for him. This is your deed[^3].”

“He who acts righteously in the coming of his age will not be punished
for his past sins, but he who acts disobediently in the coming of his
age will be punished for the past, as well as the coming, sins.”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “When a servant is on his last day in this
world and first step to the life to come, his wealth, sons, and deeds
are presented before him. As he turns to his wealth, he says, ‘I was
very stingy and niggardly for you, what do you have for me, today?’ His
wealth will answer, ‘Well, you can take from me only your coffin.’ He
then turns to his sons and says, ‘I have loved you very much, and I have
protected you so excessively, what do you have for me, today?’ His sons
will answer, ‘Well, we will see you off to your hole to bury you there.’
He then turns to his deeds and says, ‘By Allah, I have neglected you and
you were so unwelcome for me, what do you have for me, today?’ His deed
will answer, ‘Well, I am your companion in your grave and on the day of
your resurrection until you, as well as I, will be stopped before your
Lord (for interrogation).’

If that servant has acted righteously in this world and has been one of
the disciples of Allah, his deed will come to him in the form of a
sweet-smelling handsome man and will say to him, ‘I bear to you the good
tidings of enjoying rest, happiness, and the beautiful Paradise, and you
are coming to the best abode. When that servant asks about his
personality, his good deed will answer, ‘I am your righteous deed, and I
will move you from this world to the world to come[^4].’”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “As soon as a dead is put in his grave, a person
comes to him and says, ‘we were three; one was your sustenance who
ceased when your age was ceased. The other was your family who left you.
The third was I; your deed, and I will stay with you. Nevertheless, I
was the most disrespectful in your sight[^5].”

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi part: The Prophet’s Commandments for Imam Ali.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi (within the commandment of the Prophet (S) for
Abu Dharr).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 15 part 2 page 163 (as quoted
from Meaani al-Akhbar, al-Khissal, and al-Amali.)

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 13 page 92 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 13 page 94 (as quoted from al- Kafi).


