Perseverance on Principles
==========================

Regulations and principles play a great role in the lives of societies
and nations. The highness of the principles of any nation proves its
civilization. Likewise, any feebleness that affects the principles
implies the ignorance of that nation. The most favorable principles are
those which contribute in normalizing the individuals’ lives and
protecting their freedoms and dignities. Nevertheless, principles, no
matter how great they are, cannot achieve the expectations of a nation
unless there are individuals who embrace, protect, and carry them out in
the various fields of life. Otherwise, they become of no value. On that
account, perseverance on the principles is the holiest inevitable
obligation, since it raises the morale, empowers values, and achieves
expectations.

All over history, humankind has never known any principles more perfect
than the Islamic, which obtained all virtues of mortality. They are the
one and only principles befitting the sound natures and achieving the
pleasure of this worldly life as well as the life to come. In a period
of less than twenty-five years, the Islamic principles could achieve
matters that none else could do, through the conquests of faith and
miracles of reformation. They also changed the Arab nation that was
sinking in ignorance into the best nation ever seen by humankind in
civilization, glory, knowledge, and morality.

Perseverance on principles is the only reason beyond the prevalence of
the scientific civilization and leadership of the precedent Muslims who
exerted all efforts and lost themselves in their principles. Likewise,
the present disasters and incessant collapse of Muslims are the result
of the negligence and going astray from their principles.

The holy Quran glorifies Muslims who show perseverance on principles and
cling to the high values of faith:

***“To those who have said, "Allah is our Lord,” and who have remained
steadfast to their belief, the angels will descend saying, "Do not be
afraid or grieved. Receive the glad news of the Paradise which was
promised to you. We are your guardians in this world and in the life to
come, where you will have whatever you call for, a hospitable welcome
from the All-forgiving and All-merciful Allah" (41:30-2).***

Giving the best examples of steadfastness for the sake of God, the
Prophet Muhammad (S) was facing bravely and overcoming the increasing
hurricanes of disasters and powers of unbelief. In this regard, he (S)
said:

“If the sun is put in my right hand and the moon in the left so that I
may leave this matter (i.e. the divine mission), I will not do it until
Allah will give me victory or I will die in this cause.”

Like the Prophet (S), Amirul-Mu'minin (a) was the ideal in the field of
perseverance on principles. When the leadership was given to him
provided that he would follow the Book of God, the Prophet’s Sunna, and
the way of the two Sheikhs[^1], he ejected because he adhered to his
lofty opinion and genuine principle. He said:

“No, I rule on the bases of God’s Book, the Prophet’s Sunna, and my own
elicitations.”

As some of his retinue, on another occasion, suggested to him
importunately to ‘give some of these treasures exclusively to the
celebrities of the Arabs and the Koreishites as well as every person
that you anticipate he will leave you and join the camp of Muawiya,’
Amirul- Mu’minin refused their suggestion out of his perseverance on the
principles and said:

“Do you command me that I should seek support by oppressing those over
whom I have been placed? By Allah, I will not do so as long as the world
goes on, and as long as one star leads another in the sky. Even if it
were my property, I would have distributed it equally among them, then
why not when the property is that of Allah[^2].”

This unparalleled ideality crept into his choice friends to change them
into nonesuch models of perseverance on principles in spite of suffering
various sorts of terror and persecution:

One day, al-Hajjaj Ibn Yousuf ath-Thaqafi[^3] said that he would like to
arrest one of the companions of Abu Turab[^4] so that he would seek
nearness to God through shedding his blood! The attendants said, ‘As
much as we know, Qanbar the servant had spent the longest period with
Abu Turab.’ Hence, al-Hajjaj ordered to arrest Qanbar.

When Qanbar was brought before him, al-Hajjaj asked: “Are you Qanbar?”

He answered: “Yes, it is I.”

Al-Hajjaj asked: “Are you called Abu Hamdan?”

He answered: “Yes, I am.”

Al-Hajjaj asked: “Ali Ibn Abi Talib was your master, was he not?”

Qanbar answered: “God is my Master and Ali was my benefactor.”

Al-Hajjaj then asked Qanbar to declare his disavowal of the religion of
Imam Ali (a), but Qanbar asked: “If I do, will you find me a religion
better than his?”

Out of his anger, al-Hajjaj told Qanbar that he would kill him and that
he might choose the kind of killing that he would inevitably encounter.
Qanbar said: “I give you this right of choice. You should choose for
me.”

Al-Hajjaj wondered: “Why is that?”

Qanbar answered: “That is because I will certainly kill you in the same
way you are going to kill me. Amirul- Mu'minin foretold me that I will
be slain wrongfully.”

Hence, al-Hajjaj ordered to slay him[^5].

To Abu al-Aswad ad-Du’ali[^6], Muawiya sent candy as a present so as to
make him leave the wing of Amirul-Mu'minin (a) and join his. A little
girl of Abu al- Aswad took a bite from that candy and swallowed. His
father shouted at her to throw that bite away, and told her that candy
was poison sent to them by Muawiya to take them away from their love and
support for Ali Ibn Abi Talib and the Ahlul-Bayt (a). The little girl
tried her best to vomit that bite until she could. She, then, said: “God
may condemn Muawiya. Does he want us to leave the purified master
through sending us such saffroned candy?

Woe to him who sends and who will eat such candy.”

She then composed:

Son of Hind[^7], is it by means of saffroned candy You want us to sell
our religion and Islam to you? God forbid it! This will never occur so
long as our master is Amirul-Mu'minin  
 Rashid al-Hajari was one of the intimate friends of Imam Ali (a). Ziyad
the cursed (the governor of Kufa in the reign of Yazid Ibn Muawiya; the
second Umayyad caliph) ordered to arrest him. When he was brought before
him, Ziyad asked: “What did your friend (i.e. Amirul-Mu'minin) foretell
you regarding our deed to you?”

Rashid answered: “He foretold that you would cut my hands and legs and
would crucify me.”

Ziyad said: “By God, I will belie this foretelling.”

Hence, he ordered them to set Rashid free.

When Rashid was about to leave, Ziyad shouted: “Take him back to me. The
best thing that I see as punishment for him is that which was foretold
by his friend. This is because he will not stop doing evil to us so long
as he is alive.”

They took Rashid and cut his legs and hands. However, he did not stop
declaring the right of Amirul-Mu'minin (a); hence, Ziyad the cursed
ordered to be crucified[^8].

Let us now listen to the magnificent words of the companions of
Amirul-Mu'minin (a) that express their great love for him, perseverance
on their principles, and losing themselves for his sake.

Addressing to Amirul-Mu'minin (a), Amr Ibn al- Hamq said:

“By God I swear, Amirul-Mu'minin, I have loved you and declared
allegiance to you, not because of a family relationship that links me to
you, or because of expecting a fortune that you would confer upon me, or
because of expecting a leading authority that you would give to me. I
have loved you for five traits: you are the cousin of the Messenger of
God, the first man who believed in his mission, the husband of the
mistress of the women of this umma; namely, Fatima the daughter of the
Prophet (S), the successor of the Prophet, the father of the Prophet’s
progeny that remained among us, the foremost to Islam, and the best
mujahid among Muhajirs. Even if I move the unshakable mountains and dry
out the oceans so that I may achieve a matter that contributes in
strengthening one of your disciples or humiliating one of your enemies,
I will not consider myself I have fulfilled my obligations towards you.”

Having listened to these words, Imam Ali (a) supplicated to God: “O
Allah, illuminate his heart with piety and guide him to Your straight
path. Had I had one hundred soldiers like you[^9]!”

It is related that Amirul-Mu'minin (a), one day, asked Hijr Ibn Edi
at-Taee: “What will you say if you are ordered to disavow me?”

Hijr answered: “By God I swear, Amirul-Mu'minin, if I am torn to pieces
by swords and thrown in flaming fire I will prefer so to declaring
disavowal of you.”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) answered: “Allah may lead you to every good matter
and reward you on behalf of the Ahlul-Bayt with good[^10].”

Hashim al-Mirqal, who was the commander of the left wing of
Amirul-Mu'minin’s army during the battle of Siffeen[^11], said:

“By God I swear, I do refuse to have in possession this earth along with
all that which is on its surface and the heavens with all that which is
under them if this leads me to support one of your enemies or antagonize
one of your supporters.”

As an answer, Amirul-Mu'minin (a) supplicated God to bestow upon him
with martyrdom for His cause.

It is related that a black man confessed before Amirul-Mu'minin (a) that
he had committed larceny.

Imam Ali (a) tried to provide excuses that may exempt him from the
punishment of larceny. But, the black man insisted and confessed
completely; hence, Amirul-Mu'minin (a) had to subject him to the
doctrinal provision, which was cutting of the hand.

In his way back, that black man was murmuring, “My hand has been cut by
the commander of the faithful believers, the leader of the pious, the
chief of the white-forheaded honorable, the master of the religion, the
head of the prophets’ successors” As al- Hasan and al-Hussein heard
these words, they conveyed them to their father, who summoned that black
man to ask him about that praise. The black man said:

“Amirul-Mu'minin, you have purified me. Your love has been mixed with my
flesh and blood so composedly that it cannot depart my heart even if you
cut me into pieces[^12].”

In the same field of perseverance on principles, Imam al-Hussein, his
noble family members, and his decent companions elevated to the highest
peak in spite of the criticality of their situation and the sufferance
of the grossest disasters and terrors.

On the day of Ashura[^13], Imam al-Hussein, while was surrounded by
thirty thousand warriors intending to humiliate and kill him, stood so
bravely and shouted in their faces with that great reverberating cry,
declaring his disdain and highness, through these everlasting words that
are still rattling in the hearing of time and still adopted as a
thriving constitution by the disdainful and free individuals:

“The bastard, son of the bastard, has forced me to choose one of two
things either the religion or ignominy. Ignominy is impossible for us.
Allah, His Apostle, the (faithful) believers, chaste laps, jealous noses
individuals-, and noble souls personalities- refuse for us to prefer the
obedience to the mean to the death of the honorable.”

Preferring killing and sacrifice for the sake of the principles to the
life of humility, Imam al-Hussein (a) said:

“By Allah I swear, I will not give you with my hand like the humble, and
will not submit to you like slaves.”

“In my sight, death is only pleasure, while the life with the wrongdoers
is only misery.”

Like their leader, the companions of Imam al-Hussein (a) provided the
most ideal examples of steadfastness and perseverance on principles when
they sacrificed their souls for their leader.

With a splendid wording of love, admiration, and pity, Imam al-Hussein
(a) addressed a speech to his companions:

“So then, I have never known any companions more loyal or favorable than
my companions are, and I have never known any family members more
regardful and pious than my family members are. Allah may reward you in
the best manner on behalf of me. I am sure that we will face these
enemies very soon, and I permit you all to leave me and I release you
from your obligations towards me. This night has covered you; therefore,
you may use it as screen and each of you may put his hand in the hand of
one of my household, then you can reach your hometowns until Allah
relieves this ordeal. These people want me in particular, and if they
can capture me, they will not pursue anyone else.”

Muslim Ibn Awsaja stood up to answer these words of the Imam (a). He
said:

“How is it that we leave you alone? What is the excuse that we will
provide justifiably before God with regard to the fulfillment of your
right that is imposed upon us if we leave you? No, by God, I will not
leave you before I stab my spear in the chests of the enemies and strike
them with my sword so long as I can catch something in my hand. Even if
I have no weapon to fight them with, I will throw stones at them. By God
I swear, we will never leave you alone so that God will know that we
have respected your representation of the Messenger of God (S). By God I
swear, if I am foretold that I will be killed, then revived, then
killed, then burnt, then scattered in the wind, then the same thing is
redone to me seventy times, I will not leave you before I face death for
your sake. I will surely face death for your sake when it is only a
single time of death followed by the grandest never-ending honor.”

When it was his turn to speak, Zuhair Ibn al-Qain said:

“By God I swear, I wish I would be killed, then revived, then killed,
then the same thing is redone to me thousand times, if it is that God
will save you as well as these youths from your household from death.”

All the other companions spoke alike wordings. They said:

“We, by God, will never leave you alone. We sacrifice our souls for you.
We will protect you with our necks, foreheads, and hands, so that we, if
we are killed, will prove our being loyal to you and will fulfill the
rights that are imposed upon us concerning you.”

We, Muslims of today, are in urgent need for learning lessons of jihad
from such great personalities and pursuing their examples in the fields
of clinging to the religion and perseverance on principles as well as
self- denial for the sake of supporting the right, so that we will be
able to regain our seized rights and our usurped dignities, and will be
able to save ourselves from the humility of the scandalous defeats and
frequent losses.

[^1]: The two Sheikhs, in this regard, are Abu Bakr and Omar ibn
al-Khattab.

[^2]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 9 page 533.

[^3]: Al-Hajjaj ibn Yousuf ath-Thaqafi (born in 661 in at-Ta'if and died
in June 714, in Iraq), was the most despotic personality all over the
history of Islam. In the reign of Abd ul-Melik ibn Marwan, the Umayyad
caliph, he was appointed as the governor of Iraq, because this province
was known of the frequent movements of rebellion against the Ummayads.
He exceeded all the limits in persecuting and mistreating the people of
Iraq. Unfortunately, some modern writers honor and regard him as an
administrative personality in the history of Islam. As a proof on the
excessive criminality of al-Hajjaj, Omar ibn Abd ul-Azeez; the fair
Umayyad caliph said about him: “If every nation in this world presents
the most criminal person for competition of criminality, we will
certainly overcome when we present al-Hajjaj.”

[^4]: Abu Turab (father of dust) is one of the names of Imam Ali (a).
The Prophet (S) used this name for him because, as traditionists said,
he found him taking dust from the earth to disperse on his head, out of
his fear of God, as he was acting a rite of worship.

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 9 page 630.

[^6]: Abu al-Aswad ad-Dauali is the originator of the syntax of Arabic.
He was famous grammarian, poet, and man of virtue. He was one of the
intimate companions of Amir ul-Mu'minin (a).

[^7]: Hi Hind (the daughter of Utba) was the mother of Muawiya. She was
one of the well-known most notorious prostitutes in Mecca. In the battle
of Uhud, she tried to swallow the liver of Hamza ibn Abd ul-Muttalib
(a), out of her rage and malice, after she had given a great prize to a
slave if he would kill him.nd (the daughter of Utba) was the mother of
Muawiya.

[^8]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 1 page 522.

[^9]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 8 page 475.

[^10]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 226.

[^11]: When Muawiya, governor of Syria, refused to recognize Imam Ali
(a) as the new caliph, calling instead for vengeance for the blood of
his murdered kinsman, the third caliph, 'Uthman, Imam Ali (a) responded
by invading Syria. The two armies met along the Euphrates River at
Siffin (near the Syrian-Iraqi border), where they engaged in an
indecisive succession of skirmishes, truces, and battles, culminating in
the appearance of Muawiya's troops with copies of the Qur'an impaled on
their lances--supposedly a sign to let God's word decide the conflict.

[^12]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 2 page 716.

[^13]: Ashura: The tenth of Muharram, celebrated as a day of mourning
(the anniversary of the martyrdom of Imam Al- Hussein (a).)


