Preface
=======

**In The Name Of Allah, The Compassionate, The Merciful**

**Peace And Blessings Be Upon Muhammad And His Pure Immaculate Family**

Man is naturally civilized and cannot dispense with, isolate himself
from, or fall behind others. As soon as he secludes himself, he feels
loneliness, alienation, and disability to face the vicissitudes of time.
Man is one of the elements of social construction; therefore, he is
attracted by various relations, such as belief, friendship, education,
profession, and the like. Such social correlation necessitates a
constitution that regulates the individualsâ€™ lives, strengthens the
ties, and achieves justice through social and individual rights and
obligations. By achieving so, a society becomes prosperous. But if such
constitution is neglected, it becomes miserable.

Through its various reformative miracles, the Islamic Sharia has
provided a constructive moral constitution that regulates the lives of
individuals and societies so completely. On that account, it is
essential for every Muslim to derive from that constitution so as to
realize his rights and obligations and work for applying it to his
conducts. Thus, he becomes a good example of ideal behavior.

All these goals have prompted me to write this book and plan for its
concepts in the light of the holy Quran and the ethics of the Ahlul-Bayt
(a). I will refer to a group of the most significant rights that play
big roles in the societies and individuals, beginning with the rights of
the Lord, the Prophet (S), the Sinless Imams (a), the scholars,
teachers, students, parents, sons, spouses, relatives, and the other
social rights that the reader will notice in the book.


