The Divine Rights
=================

Rights vary from one to another according to values of favors. A friend
has his own familiar rights that are a degree lower than these of the
affectionate brother who joins the tie of relation to the tie of
kindness. The right of the brother, in a like fashion, comes after that
of parents, because of their superior favors to sons.

Through such standard, we can realize the grand value of the divine
rights that excel any other rights, because God is the grandest
Benefactor Who created man and has conferred upon him with innumerable
varieties of graces:

***“Have you not seen that Allah has made all that is in the heavens and
the earth, subservient to you (human beings), and has extended and
perfected for you His apparent and unseen bounties? (31:20).”***

***“Had you wanted to count the bounties of Allah, you would not have
been able to do it. (14:34)”***

Anyhow, we now have to refer to some of these infinite rights that come
after the belief in God, His Oneness, His having the attributes of
perfection, and His being too far above everything that does not befit
Him.

1. Worship
----------

Imam as-Sajjad (a) said:

“The greatest of Allah’s right against you is that you should worship
Him and should avoid associating anything with Him. If you have applied
this sincerely, Allah will grant you the characteristic that He will
save your needs of this worldly life and your life to come and will keep
for you that whichever you desire from the both[^1].”

Semantically, worship is the utmost servility and submission. On that
account, except the Grandest Benefactor God, no one deserves to be
worshipped. Terminologically, worship is to carry out the orders
diligently.

As a proof on the greatness of worship that leave prominent effects on
man’s life is that God has made it the grand purpose beyond the
creation:

***“We have created jinn and human beings only that they might worship
Me. I do not expect to receive any sustenance from them or that they
should feed Me. It is Allah Who is the Sustainer and the Lord of
invincible strength (51:56-8).”***

Undoubtedly, God is completely Self-Sufficient as He dispenses with the
worship of His creatures neither the obedience of the pious serves Him
nor does the disobedience of the defiant harm Him. He has imposed
worship upon the creatures for their own interests so that they will
benefit by the traits and advantages of worship, which is one of the
strongest incentives that concentrate the beliefs and build up faith in
the spirits since it reminds of God and His rewards and warns against
His punishment and reminds of the Prophet (S).

The concepts of faith fade away in the mentality of the servant who
neglects, and, subsequently, forgets worship of His Lord. Belief is the
large tree whose blooming shadows cover all Muslims. Worship is the
factor that protects and supplies that tree with elements of growth. It
is the strongest factor that achieves balance between the spiritual and
material powers that pull man back and forth.

Man, however, cannot attain pleasure unless these two elements are
equal. To prove this, we say that the prevalence of the material
elements on man causes him to be slaved by false authorities of
materiality and to be inclined towards selfishness, egotism all for
achieving his material desires. Such being the case, it is necessary to
rein the defiance of materiality by strengthening the spiritual aspects
and supplying man with mental energies guarding against evils and
guiding to righteousness. Through its spiritual rays and incessant
reminding of God, worship can achieve the previously mentioned
necessities.

Worship, after all, is a test examining the dimensions of faith, which
is a hidden secret that nothing can divulge except rites of worship.

Because worship requires suffering of efforts, the fulfillment of its
rites has become a sign of firmness of faith. To neglect such rites, on
the other hand, has become a sign of frailty of faith. Prayer, for
example, is indeed a difficult task, but not for the submissive to God.
Fasting requires self-control against desires of food and sex. The hajj
requires expenditure and suffering of efforts. The Zakat is to give from
the wealth that you love and maintain. Jihad is to sacrifice oneself for
the sake of the duty. All these are difficult missions.

2. Obedience
------------

Obedience stands for submitting to God and carrying out all His
instructions. It is an honorable trait that brings about pleasure:

***“One who obeys Allah and His Messenger will certainly achieve a great
success. (33:71)”***

***“Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger will be admitted to the
gardens wherein streams flow. Allah will make whoever turns away suffer
a painful torment (48:17).”***

Imam al-Hasan (a) said: “If you seek power without the need for a clan
and dignity without the need of authority, you should leave the humility
of the disobedience to Allah to the honor of the obedience to Him.”

3. Thankfulness
---------------

Thankfulness is to appreciate the graces and use them in fields
satisfying the benefactor. It is an ideal trait that is blessed by
reason and law and necessitated by conscience. For the All-benefactor
Whose graces are innumerable and favors are infinite, gratitude should
be expressed more meaningfully:

***“Remember when your Lord said to you, 'If you give thanks, I shall
give you greater (favors), but if you deny the Truth, know that My
retribution is severe’ (14:7).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “Verily, he who serves food and thanks Allah for
so will be rewarded as same as those who fast just for gaining the
rewards of Allah, and he who is cured and thanks Allah for curing him
will be rewarded as same as the diseased who is steadfast against that
disease for the sake of Allah, and he who gives alms and thanks Allah
for so will be rewarded as same as him who is deprived of sustenance,
but he shows patience for the sake of Allah[^2].”

4. Trust in God
---------------

Trust in God is to rely upon Him and commend all affairs to Him by
diverting from anyone or anything else:

***“If Allah is your helper, no one can defeat you. However, if He
abandons you, who would help you? The true believers trust in Allah.
(3:160)”***

***“Allah is Sufficient for the needs of whoever trusts in Him.
(65:3)”***

[^1]: Quoted from Imam Ali ibn al-Hussein’s Treatise of Rights.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 67 (as quoted from al- Kafi).


