Truth
=====

Truth stands for the conformity between word and deed. It plays a great
role in the lives of both the individuals and communities. Truth is the
beauty of speech and ground of success. From this cause, the Islamic
Sharia[^1], in both the Quran and Sunna[^2], glorified and urged telling
truth:

***“Those who have brought the truth and those who have acknowledged it
are those who have fear of Allah. They will receive whatever they want
from their Lord. Thus is the reward of the righteous ones.”*** (39:33-4)

***“Allah will say, “This is the Day when the truthful ones will benefit
from their truthfulness.”*** (5:119)

***“Believers! Have fear of Allah and always be friends with the
truthful ones.”*** (9:119)

The Prophet (S) said: “Truth is the adornment of speech.”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Do not be deceived by their very much offering
of prayers and observance of fasting. In fact, prayers and fasting have
become habits that they feel desolate if they omit them. You should test
them by their truthfulness and fulfillment of trusts.”

“The deeds of the truthful are growing.”

This means that the deeds of the truthful are ongoing and their rewards
are, too, growing. Thus, God accepts only the deeds of the pious ones.
Truth, then, is one of the most significant characteristics of piety.

Achievements of Truth
---------------------

The publicity of mutual understanding between individuals is a social
necessity. If they commit themselves to so, they will have the ability
to shoulder the burdens of life and enjoy a peaceful coexistence. It
goes without saying that tongue is the instrument of mutual
understanding and the translator of the various concepts that rove in
people’s minds. It therefore plays a serious role in the existence of
communities and the harmony of individuals’ feelings and ideas.

The happiness or distress of any society depends upon verbal
truthfulness or falsehood. If tongue is truthful in interpreting the
emotions, it will fulfill the mission of communication. If it, on the
other hand, is characterized by mistranslation and misrepresentation, it
will be the guide to evil and the means of social destruction. Hence,
truth, whose effects and reflections play the greatest role in the
individuals’ lives, is a social necessity.

Parties of transactions, for instance, can save themselves and times
from the fatigue of bargain if they adhere to truthfulness. If all
people observe truthfulness, they will gain its innumerable benefits and
advantages. If untruth, on the other hand, becomes a common phenomenon
in a society, the moral principles will be flimsy, mutual understanding
will be missing, and the society will be the subject of disarrangement.

Parts of Truth
--------------

• **Truth of speech**: It stands for telling the very reality of a thing
without falsification or concealment.

• **Truth of deeds**: It stands for the conformity of deeds with words,
such as the commitment to oath and fulfillment of pledges.

• **True determination**: It stands for the determination to do good.

• **True intention**: It stands for purifying the intent from blemishes
of showiness.

[^1]: Sharia: The Islamic code of religious law, based on the teachings
of the Koran and the traditional sayings of Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^2]: Sunna is the body of Prophet Muhammad’s words, deeds, and
confirmations.


