Rights of the Prophet
=====================

Our great Prophet Muhammad (S) was the ideal in all aspects of
perfection. God selected him among the creatures and conferred upon him
with the loftiest traits that He gave to the prophets. All glories and
dignities are gathered in the personality of Prophet Muhammad (S);
therefore, he became the head and the seal of the prophets.

In less than twenty-five years, he, out of his giant efforts and eternal
principles, could achieve splendid spiritual victories and religious
attainments that cannot be achieved by others even if they take the
period of many centuries. He came with the most perfect divine code that
is best befitting the stages of life and achieving the worldly and
religious spiritual and material pleasures to humankind.

Hence, he could take people out of the murk of disbelief to the light of
Islam. Besides, he made his nation the most perfect in religion, the
most knowledgeable, the highest in fields of ethics, and the most
elevated in fields of civilization. In the cause of achieving all these,
the Prophet (S) suffered such unprecedented forms of terrors and
ordeals. On that account, any author is too short to calculate the
favors and rights of the Prophet (S) that are done and imposed upon
Muslims, whatever he writes. Nevertheless, we can, in such a brief
essay, refer to some of these rights.

First of all, the rights of the Prophet Muhammad (S) are to believe in
his prophecy and all that which he conveyed on behalf of God, and to
believe that he is the chief of the messengers of God and the seal of
the prophets. Then come the following rights:

1. Obedience to the Prophet
---------------------------

Like the obedience to God, the obedience to Prophet Muhammad (S) is an
obligation since he is the representative of God. The meaning of this
obedience is to follow his code and apply his eternal principles that
achieved happiness and success for Muslims so long as they adhered to
them. Thus, Muslims became the target of humility when they rejected
these principles.

Enjoining to the compliance with the Prophet Muhammad (S) and warning
against the disobedience and defiance to him, God says:

***“Take only what the Messenger gives to you and desist from what he
forbids you. Have fear of Allah; Allah is severe in His retribution
(59:7).”***

***“The believing men and women must not feel free to do something in
their affairs other than that which has been already decided for them by
Allah and His Messenger. One who disobeys Allah and His Messenger is in
plain error. (33:36)”***

***“Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger will be admitted to the
gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. This is
the greatest triumph. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger and
breaks His rules will be admitted to the fire wherein they will live
forever, suffering a humiliating torment. (4:13-4)”***

***“Disgrace will strike those who oppose Allah and His Messenger. Allah
has decreed, "I and My Messenger shall certainly triumph." Allah is All-
powerful and Majestic (58:20-1).”***

2. Love for the Prophet
-----------------------

Reasons of love and admiration vary according to the tendencies of
lovers. Some people love beauty, others love heroism, others love
liberality, and so on. In the personality of Prophet Muhammad (S), one
can find all factors of love and admiration. He was an unparalleled
model and a unique example. God gathered all signs of beauty and
perfection and all secrets of attraction in his personality. In front of
Prophet Muhammad (S), man can do nothing but expressing his love and
respect to him.

Describing the features of the Prophet Muhammad (S), Amirul-Mu'minin (a)
said:

“The Prophet of Allah was white-reddish, black-eyed, lank-haired,
bushy-bearded, hairy, and his neck was as same as a silver pitcher in
whose clavicles gold is flowing. Like a bar of thread, his hair extends
from the upper part of his chest to his navel. Other than this, he has
no hair on his belly or breast. He is big- handed and big footed. His
walking is as same as pulling the feet from rocks. His coming is as same
as descending a slope. When he turns his face, his whole body turns. He
is neither short nor tall. His sweat on the face glitters like pearls
and smells sweeter than musk[^1].”

“He was the most openhanded, the most broad- minded, the most truthful,
the most faithful, the most tractable, and the most sociable. He who
sees him from far away stands in awe of him, and who associates with him
from near loves him. I have never seen, and I will not see, his
like[^2].”

Because of the aforesaid features and moralities, all people, despite
their variant trends of love, have loved him for his unmatched heroism,
heroes have loved him. For his being the ideal example of generosity,
the generous have loved him. For his unique worship, worshippers have
loved him. For his supreme ideality in nature and ethics, his sincere
companions loved him.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) narrated that, once, one of Ansar[^3], said to the
Prophet (S): “God’s Messenger, I cannot depart you! As soon as I enter
my house, you jump in my mind. I therefore leave my home and come to see
you, out of my love for you. A question has occurred to me. How can I
see you when you will be elevated to the highest point of Paradise?”

Hence, God revealed His saying:

***“One who obeys Allah and the Messenger is the friend of the Prophets,
saints, martyrs, and the righteous ones to whom Allah has granted His
favors. They are the best friends that one can have (4:69)”***

The Prophet (S) summoned that man and recited this Verse before him, as
good tidings[^4].”

ïAnas narrated: A Beduin came to the Prophet (S) we were happy whenever
a Beduin asks the Prophet to ask him when would the Hour of Resurrection
fall. Before answering the man, the time of a prayer fell; therefore,
the Prophet (S) came to offer it. After the prayer, the Prophet (S)
asked about the man who had asked about the falling of the Hour of
Resurrection. When the man came before him, the Prophet (S) asked: “What
have you prepared for encountering that Hour?” The man answered: “I, in
fact, have not prepared many prayers and days of fasting. I, however,
love God and His Messenger.” The Prophet (S) commented: “Man will be
attached to the one he loves.” This prophetic statement was the
second-most gladdening thing after Islam[^5].

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated: An oilman loved the Prophet (S) very much to
the degree that he used to come to look at him before he would do any
job. As he realized this thing from that oilman, the Prophet used to
raise himself when he was sitting so that the man would see him.

One day, the man, as usual, took a look at the Prophet (S) before he
would go to his job. He, very soon, came back. When the Prophet (S)
noticed that, he waved to him to sit down. The man sat before the
Prophet (S), who asked him about his unusual coming back. The man said:
“God’s Messenger, by Him Who has sent you with the right I swear, your
picture covered my heart totally that I could not go for my job;
therefore, I came back to you.” The Prophet (S) addressed nice words to
that man and supplicated to God for his good.”

For several days, the Prophet (S) could not see that man. When he missed
him, the Prophet (S) asked the others about him, and they answered that
they, too, could not see him several days ago. The Prophet (S),
accompanied by his companions, came to the market to ask about him. He
found his shop locked, and the others informed him that the man had
died. They also told that he was trustworthy and truthful, but he had
one bad manner he used to look covertly at women.

The Prophet (S) commented: “He loved me very much. Allah will surely
forgive him even if he was fraudulent in weighing and measuring[^6].”

3. Blessing the Prophet
-----------------------

God says:

***“Allah showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the angels, too,
do. Believers, pray for the Prophet and greet him thoroughly.
(33:56)”***

People used to show different styles of reverence towards the great
personalities for their efforts for the sake of their nations. Such
being the case, it is not strange to show respect whenever the holy name
of the Prophet (S), who is the most reverent and venerable of all, is
said or heard.

The holy Verse expresses the utmost honoring of God and the angels to
the Prophet (S) God showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the
angels, too, do , and then it addresses to the believers to reverence
him by seeking God to bless and greet him believers, pray for the
Prophet and greet him thoroughly .

Using such a thrilling, attractive style, the words of the Ahlul-Bayt
(a) go on explaining the merits of seeking God’s blessings for the
Prophet (S).

His son narrated that Abu Hamza said: I, once, asked Imam as-Sadiq (a)
about the exegesis of God’s saying:

***“Allah showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the angels, too,
do. Believers, pray for the Prophet and greet him thoroughly.
(33:56)”***

He answered: “The blessing of Allah is mercy to the Prophet (S), and the
blessing of the angels is purification to him, and the blessing of
people is supplication for him. To ‘great him thoroughly,’ means to
submit to that whichever is authentically- related to him.”

I asked: “How should we bless Muhammad and his family?” The Imam (a)
replied: “You should say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلَواتُ اللهِ وصَلَوات مَلاءِكَتِهِ وَأنْبِياءِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجَميعِ
خَلْقِهِ عَلى مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمّدٍ وَالسّلامُ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَيْهِمَ
وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The blessings of Allah and the blessings of His angels, prophets,
messengers, and all creatures be upon Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad. And peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon him and
them.’”

I asked: “What is the reward that one will win if he utters such
blessings for the Prophet and his family?”

The Imam (a) answered: “The reward is that he will be acquitted from all
of his sins, as if he has just left his mother’s womb[^7].”

“For him who utters the blessings for Muhammad and his family ten times,
Allah and His angels will bless him one hundred times, and if he utters
the blessings one hundred times, Allah and His angels will bless him one
thousand times. This is the significance of Allah’s saying:

***“It is He who forgives you and His angels pray for you so that He
will take you out of darkness into light. Allah is All-merciful to the
believers. (33:43)***[^8]***”***

“Before blessing the Prophet and his family, every supplication is
prevented to reach the heavens[^9].”

“The heaviest thing in the balance of a servant’s deeds will be the
blessings for the Prophet and his family. As a man’s evildoings are
heavier than his good deeds, the Prophet (S) comes to add the blessings
for him and his family to the scale in which his good deeds are put.
Thus, his good deeds become heavier than the evildoings[^10].”

Imam ar-Ridha (a) said: “He who fails to expiate his sins should give
much of the blessings for Muhammad and his family, for they destroy the
sins.”

The Prophet (S) said: “Do not utter the imperfect blessings for me.”

They asked: “What is the imperfect blessings?”

He answered: “The imperfect blessings is to say ‘Lord, bless Muhammad,’
and keep silent. You must say, ‘Lord, bless Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad.[^11]’”

4. The Love for the Ahlul-Bayt
------------------------------

In His Book, God makes obligatory on everybody to love the Prophet’s
household as the wage for his conveying the divine mission, and makes it
one of his rights:

***“(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching
to you except (your) love of (my near) relatives." Whoever achieves
virtue will have its merit increased. Allah is all-forgiving and
appreciating. (42:23)”***

The Ahlul-Bayt (a) are characterized by all qualities of admiration and
incentives of love and loyalty. They are the choice people, the
arguments against the creatures, the ships of salvation, and preceded by
their father the Prophet (S) the best of everyone who ever lived on this
earth in lineage, value, merits, and glories.

It is impossible for the sound conscience to accept to love the Prophet
(S) apart from his immaculate family who are worthy of the best concepts
of love. To love the Prophet (S), but not his immaculate family, is
falsity originated from hypocrisy and meanness.

Abdullah Ibn Mas’oud narrated:

One day, we were accompanying the Prophet (S) in one of his journeys
when a Beduin with an orotund voice shouted at us, “Muhammad!” “What do
you want?” answered the Prophet (S). “What is it if an individual loves
a people but he does not imitate them in deeds?” asked the Beduin. “One
will be attached to the one he loves,” replied the Prophet (S).
“Muhammad,” shouted the Beduin, “Call me to Islam.” The Prophet (S)
said: “You should declare that there is no god but Allah and that I am
the Messenger of Allah, offer the prayer, defray the zakat, fast during
the month of Ramadan, and perform the hajj to the Holy House.”

“Muhammad,” asked the Beduin, “Do you ask for wage for so?” “No,”
replied the Prophet (S), “I do not take any wage except that you must
regard the relatives.” “Whose relatives? Mine or yours?” asked the
Beduin. “It is my relatives,” answered the Prophet (S). The Beduin said:
“Give me your hand so that I will declare allegiance to you. No good is
expected from him who loves you, but not your relatives[^12].”

The Imamite[^13] Shia have agreed unanimously on the fact that the
Immaculate Imams of the Ahlul-Bayt (a) are the intendeds in the Verse:

***“(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching
to you except (your) love of (my near) relatives." Whoever achieves
virtue will have its merit increased. Allah is All-forgiving and
appreciating. (42:23)”***

A good number of great exegesists and traditionists of the other sects
of Islam, such as Ahmed Ibn Hanbal, at- Tabarani, and al-Hakim[^14] (as
quoting the opinion of Ibn Abbas[^15]) agreed with the Shia on this
fact.

Ibn Hagar, in Chapter One of Section Eleven of as- Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa,
narrates the following:

When the Verse (intended) was revealed, they asked: “God’s Messenger,
who are your relatives whom we must love and regard?” The Prophet (S)
answered: “They are Ali, Fatima, and their two sons[^16].”

Consider how the Prophet (S) urged people to regard his family through
the aforementioned narration. However, many texts concerning the
Prophet’s assertion on the obligatory love and regard for his relatives
are related by the two major schools of Islam i.e. Shia and Sunna-.

Regarding the Shia, let us cite the following narrations: On the
authority of his fathers, Imam as-Sadiq narrated that the Prophet (S)
said: “He who loves us the Ahlul-Bayt should thank Allah for the
foremost grace. It is the legal birth. Only will the legal sons love
us[^17].”

Imam al-Baqir narrated on the authority of his father and grandfather
that the Prophet (S) said: “The love for my household and me will help
in seven situations whose horrors are enormous: at death, in the grave,
in the Resurrection, in the Recorded Account, in the Judgment, in the
Balance, and on the Path[^18].”

“Any servant who worships Allah for one thousand years and then is
slaughtered (wrongfully) like a sheep, but he attends before Allah
bearing malice against us the Ahlul-Bayt, Allah will certainly reject
all his acts of worship[^19].”

“On the Day of Resurrection, a servant’s feet will not move before he is
asked about four matters: He will be asked how he had spent the age of
his youth, how he had finished his age, what earnings he had got and
where from he had got them and how he had spent them, and he will be
also asked about his affection to us the Ahlul-Bayt[^20].”

Al-Hakam Ibn Utaiba related the following:

I was with Imam al-Baqir (a) in his house, which was suffocated by his
people when an old man came leaning on a stick. As he stopped at the
door of the house, he said: “Peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be
upon you, son of God’s Messenger.” Abu Ja’far (a) replied: “Peace and
Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you, too.” The old man turned his
face to the others and said: “Peace be upon you,” and each one answered
him. He then turned his face towards Imam al-Baqir (a) and said:

“Son of God’s Messenger, let me approach you, God may make me your
sacrifice. By God I swear, I do love you and love everyone who loves
you. By God I swear, my love for you and my love for him who loves you
is not purposed for a worldly desire. I also hate and disavow your
enemy. By God I swear, my hatred and disavowal of your enemy is not for
a previous personal enmity between him and me. By God I swear, I deem
lawful all that which you decide as lawful, deem unlawful all that which
you decide as unlawful, and expect your Affair. Do you may God make me
your sacrifice- accept me, then?”

Having heard these words, Imam al-Baqir (a) said to him: “Come to me,
come to me.”

When the man sat next to him, the Imam (a) said: “Old man, my father Ali
Ibn al-Hussein (a), once, was visited by a man who asked him the same
question that you have just put. My father’s answer was, ‘If you die
bearing these beliefs, you will be received by the Messenger of Allah,
Ali, al-Hasan, al- Hussein, and Ali Ibn al-Hussein (a), and you will be
pleased, delighted, and cheerful. And when your soul reaches your mouth
i.e. about to depart your body-, you will be greeted with rest and
happiness by the Honorable Recording Angels. And if you live, Allah will
show you delighted things, and you will be with us on the Highest Peak
etc[^21].

Regarding narrations that are recorded in the reference books of our
Sunni brothers, we cite the following as examples:

Ibn Hanbal and at-Tirmithi, as recorded in as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa; page
91, narrated the following:

The Prophet (S), once, took al-Hasan and al-Hussein from the hands and
said: “He who loves me, these two, their father, and their mother will
stand in a rank as same as mine on the Day of Resurrection[^22].”

Ibn Abbas narrated that the Prophet (S), once, looked in the face of Ali
(a) and said: “You are sayyid in this world as well as the world to
come. Your disciple is my disciple, and my disciple is Allah’s disciple.
And your enemy is my enemy, and my enemy is Allah’s enemy. Woe unto him
who will hate you after my departure[^23].”

In his book titled Kitab ul-Wilaya, At-Tabari records the following:

Ali (a) said: “Three persons will never love me: the bastards, the
hypocrites, and those whom were composed during their mothers’ periods
of menstruation.”

At-Tabarani, in his book titled al-Mu’jam ul-Awsat, as- Suyouti, in his
book titled Ihyaa ul-Meyt, and Ibn Hagar, in his as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa;
Chapter: Urging on the love for the Ahlul-Bayt, recorded the following
hadith:

The Prophet (S) said: “Cling to the love for us the Ahlul-Bayt, for
anyone who meets Allah bearing love for us will be in Paradise due to
our Right of Intercession. I swear by Him Who prevails on my soul,
unless our right is recognized, none’s deed will be useful (for
him)[^24].”

The term of the Ahlul-Bayt includes the twelve sinless Imams (a),
because such lofty characteristics are deserved by no one at all except
them, since they are the representatives of God and the auspicious
successors of the Prophet (S).

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 6 (Chapter: Moralities and Physical
features of the Prophet).

[^2]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 2 page 414.

[^3]: Ansar (the supporters) are the people of Medina who received,
welcomed, and protected the Prophet (S) and the Muhajirs.

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 6 (Chapter: The Obligation of the
love for and the obedience to the Prophet).

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 6 (Chapter: The Obligation of the
love for and the obedience to the Prophetóas quoted from Ilal
ush-Sharaayi).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 pages 143-4.

[^7]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 19/78 (as quoted from Meaani
al-Akhbar).

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 5 pages 228 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^9]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 5 pages 227 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^10]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 5 pages 228 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^11]: Quoted from Fadhaail ul-Khamsa min as-Sihah is-Sitta. (This
narration is recorded in as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa; page 87).

[^12]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 7/389 (as quoted from Sheikh
al-Mufid’s al-Majalis).

[^13]: Imamite Shia are those who believe in the divine leadership of
the twelve Imams (a).

[^14]: Ahmed ibn Hanbal was the founder of the school of Hanbalism; one
of the four major schools of Islamic jurisprudence. Besides, he was one
of the most master traditionists. At-Tabarani was also one of the most
master traditionists whose books are considered as references of
narrations and traditions. Al-Hakim (of Nisapuróa city Northern Persia)
was also a famous traditionist whose books are considered as references
of narrations and traditions.

[^15]: Abdullah ibn Abbas (the Prophet’s cousin) is renowned for his
knowledge of both sacred and profane tradition and for his critical
interpretations of the Quran. From his youth, he gathered information
concerning the words and deeds of the Prophet (S) from other companions
and gave classes on interpretation of the Quran.

[^16]: For more, refer to Sharafuddin’s al-Kalimat ul-Gharraa fi
Tafdheel iz-Zahraa, 18.

[^17]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 7 page 389 (as quoted from Ilal
ush-Sharayi, Meaani al-Akhbar, and al-Amali).

[^18]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 7 page 391 (as quoted from
al-Khissal).

[^19]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 7/397 (as quoted from al- Barqi’s
al-Mahassin).

[^20]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 7/389 (as quoted from Sheikh
al-Mufid’s al-Majalis).

[^21]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 139 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^22]: Quoted from Imam Sharafuddin’s al-Fussoul ul-Muhimma; page 41.

[^23]: Quoted from Fadhaail ul-Khamsa min as-Sihah is-Sitta; part 1 page
200. (In the book titled al-Mustadrak ala as-sahihayn; part 3 page 127,
this narration is recorded).

[^24]: Quoted from Sharafuddin’s al-Muraja’at.


