Rights of Teachers and Students
===============================

Rights of teacher
-----------------

Faithful teachers who enjoy good traits occupy a high position in the
society because of the appreciative efforts they exert for educating and
supplying individuals with knowledge and moralities. Besides, they are
the pioneers of culture and guides of the coming generation. On account
of that, they must enjoy definite rights against their students. First
of all, students must respect their teachers in the same way as they
respect their fathers so as to express their appreciation to them.

Alexander, once, was asked why he used to respect his teacher in a way
better than his respecting his father. He answered: “My father is the
founder of my transient life while my teacher is the founder of my
changeless life.”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “He who teaches an item of knowledge that leads
to the right guidance will be having the same rewards of them who apply
that item to themselves, without any decrease in their rewards. And he
who teaches an item of deviation will be having to burden the same
punishment that is decided for those who practice such an item without
any decrease in their punishment[^1].”

Students must appreciate their teachers’ efforts and reward them by
means of showing gratitude and respect and following their
recommendations. They also must pardon and neglect any situation of
strictness or discipline that are intended for their good educationally
and morally. The best comprehensive word that gathered the rights of
teachers is the following saying of Imam as- Sajjad (a):

“The right of the one who trains you through knowledge is magnifying
him, respecting his sessions, listening well to him, attending to him
with devotion, avoiding raising your voice against him, avoiding
answering any question before he answers, avoiding talking to anyone
during his instructions, avoiding backbiting anyone before him, doing
your best to defend him when he is backbitten and cover his flaws and
publicize his good traits. Do not sit with his enemy and do not
antagonize his friend. If you do so, the angels will testify for you
that you have attended to him and received his knowledge for the sake of
Allah, not people[^2].”

Rights of Students
------------------

Seekers of studies enjoy particular standings of virtue and honor
because they exert diligent efforts for seeking, retaining, and
conveying knowledge to the coming generations.

The Prophet (S) said: “The like of students among the ignorant is the
alive among the dead[^3].”

“Seeking knowledge is a duty that is imposed upon every male and female
Muslim. It is most surely that Allah loves seekers of knowledge[^4].”

“The scholar and the seeker of knowledge are partners in the same
rewarding: two for the scholar and one for the seeker of knowledge. Any
other class is worthless[^5].”

Such merits traits are dedicated to the sincere students who aim at
achieving self-discipline and moral conduct. The students who are empty
of such intentions are deprived of such memorable traits and will have
nothing more than transitory goals. Let us now refer briefly to some of
the students’ rights:

First of all, fathers should choose well qualified, faithful, and
well-mannered teachers for their sons, so that they will be good
imitable examples.

Students are generally characterized by fondness of following the
examples of their instructors whose qualities affect the students’
personalities very soon.

Second, students must be treated with kindness and compassion. Teachers
are required to treat their students as if they are their sons and avoid
humiliating and persecuting them, because such behaviors may make them
disregard studying. To instruct and encourage students on studying, it
is wise to reward the good-doers by words of praise and reproach the
negligent by means of reprimand taking in consideration the condition
that such matters must not injure their emotions or abuse their
dignities.

Addressing to seekers of knowledge, Imam as-Sajjad (a) said in his
Treatise of Rights:

“The right of your subjects through knowledge is that you should know
that Allah made you a caretaker over them only through the knowledge He
has given you and His storehouses, which He has opened up to you. If you
do well the missions that Allah has chosen you for, treat them as same
as the treatment of the merciful caretaker who respects his master in
the affairs of the slaves and the clement steadfast one who always
offers money for the needy ones, then Allah will increase His graces to
you and you will be on the right way faithfully, otherwise you will be
regarded as betrayal, unjust to the creatures, and expose yourself to
encounter Allah’s seizing His graces and power from you.”

Third, it is necessary for teachers to take in consideration the
intellectual levels of the students and their readiness to receive
knowledge. This consideration will help teachers choose the appropriate
levels of study that befit each student and avoid providing information
that are too high for them to understand. Furthermore, it is important
for teachers to realize each student’s main concern so as to guide him
to the fields that best suit his interest, since it is improper to
coerce a student on definite fields of study, which he does not like.

Fourth, to secure an ideal rise for students, it is important to keep on
guiding them incessantly in the scientific and moral fields. This is the
only way to guarantees their being examples of decency.

Student must understand that the main purpose beyond studying is to
achieve self-control and good sense so as to attain the honor of the
obedience to God and, subsequently, the eternal pleasures will be won.

Neglecting such noble goals, a student fails to exploit science, loses
all aspects of spirituality, and becomes the subject of the barren
worldly whims.

The best example of such shortcomings is the current civilized nations
whose individuals, though preceded others in fields of science and
inventions, live humble lives suffocated by disintegrated morals, loose
spiritual values, and prevalent evils all because they pursue wholly
material trends and free themselves completely from the religious and
moral values. Owing to so, they have competed with each other using the
most fatal weapons for terminating each other and, hence, they have
turned this world into a volcano threatening ruination and perdition to
humankind.

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 1 page 42 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from The Treatise of Rights; Imam as-Sajjad (a).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 1/58 (as quoted from at-Tusi’s
al-Amali).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 1 page 36 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 1/56 (as quoted from Bassaair
ud-Darajat).


