Rights of Parents and Sons
==========================

Rights of Parents
-----------------

It is absolutely impossible for any writer to depict the parents’
grandeur and favors on their sons, since they are the supports of merits
and success. Parents have done their best and suffered a variety of
difficulties for sake of supervising their sons. Mothers, for instance,
have suffered the burdens of pregnancy, giving birth, suckling, and the
troubles of education. Fathers, on the other hand, have stood the
hurdles of seeking earnings for sake of saving the means of good
livelihood for their sons.

They have also engaged themselves in the troubles of educating and
bringing up sons and preparing comfortable lives. Suffering all these
difficulties, parents have been feeling happy, without expecting praise
or reward from their sons. Out of their abundant love for their sons,
parents have worked diligently for making them precede others in fields
of virtue so that they will be the objects of admiration. This nature is
in violation of man’s tempers. From this cause, parents’ favors are
regarded as the greatest after God’s, and their rights against their
sons are very considerable.

### Filial Piety

It is binding on noble sons to appreciate their parents’ favors by
rewarding them with the most deserved form of loyalty, reverence,
respect, piety, good turn, nice treatment, and suitable honoring:

***“(Concerning his parents), We advised the man, whose mother bears him
with great pain and breast-feeds him for two years, to give thanks to Me
first and then to them, to Me all things proceed. If they try to force
you to consider things equal to Me, which you cannot justify, equal to
Me, do not obey them. Maintain lawful relations with them in this world
and follow the path of those who turn in repentance to Me. To Me you
will all return and I shall tell you all that you have done.
(31:14-5)”***

***“Your Lord has ordained that you must not worship anything other than
Him and that you must be kind to your parents. If either or both of your
parents should become advanced in age, do not express to them words
which show your slightest disappointment. Never yell at them but always
speak to them with kindness. Be humble and merciful towards them and
say, "Lord, have mercy upon them as they cherished me in my childhood."
(17:23-4)”***

The two aforementioned Quranic texts have expressed the parents’
favoring and lofty standing and the necessity of rewarding them by means
of many thanks and treating them with suitable piety and kindness. In
the first Verse, God, after thanking Him, orders to show gratitude to
them, and in the second Verse, He attaches kindness to them to
worshipping Him. This is in fact the highest degree of endearment and
honoring.

The Prophet (S) said to the man who asked him for advice: “Do not
associate anything with Allah (in worship) even if you are burnt with
fire and tortured unless your heart is full of faith. You should, too,
obey your parents whether they are alive or dead, even if they order you
to leave your family and your property. This is surely a part of
faith[^1].”

“If you are pious (to parents), Paradise will be your share. If you are
impious (to them), Hell will be your share[^2].”

“Sons’ looking at their parents, out of love for them, is a sort of
worship[^3].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “Allah does not give permission in three things:
keeping the trust of both the pious and the sinful, fulfilling the
pledge that is given to both the pious and the sinful, and treating
parents kindly whether they are pious or sinful[^4].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “He who desires that Allah will save him from
agonies of death must regard his relatives and treat his parents
obediently. Allah will surely save him who carries such traits from
suffering the agonies of death and will also save him from harshness of
poverty as long as he is alive[^5].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated that one of the Prophet’s foster sisters
visited him. He received her so warmly, laid his personal quilt, asked
her to sit on it, and went on facing her and smiling in her face. When
she left, her brother came. The Prophet (S) did not treat him as same as
his sister. When the man left, the attendants asked him why he had
treated the woman so warmly, but had not done the same with her brother.
He answered: “She was more obedient to her parents than he was[^6].”

Since mothers exert giant efforts and suffer insensitive ordeals for
sake of their sons, the Islamic Sharia has conferred upon them with
greater deal of obligatory care and piety:

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated that, once, a man asked the Prophet (S),
‘whom must I treat piously first, God’s Messenger?’ The Prophet (S)
answered, ‘you must first treat your mother piously.’ ‘Then?’ asked the
man. ‘Your mother,’ answered the Prophet (S). ‘Then?’ asked the man.
‘Your mother,’ answered the Prophet (S). ‘Then?’ asked the man. ‘Your
mother,’ answered the Prophet (S). ‘Then?’ asked the man. ‘Then comes
your father,’ answered the Prophet (S).

Ibrahim bin Muhazzim narrated:

After I had left Imam as-Sadiq, one night, I came to my house in Medina
and quarreled with my mother who was living with me. The next morning, I
visited him after I had offered the Fajr Prayer. He addressed to me,
before I said anything, “Abu Muhazzim, what was your matter with
Khalida? Last night, you addressed bad words to her. You should have
known that her womb was the abode in which you resided, her lap was the
cradle in which you slept, and her breast was the bowl from which you
drank.”

“Yes,” I answered, “I have known all these.”

“Then,” said the Imam (a), “You should not be coarse with her any more.”

Imam as-Sajjad (a) said in his Treatise of Rights:

“The right of your mother is that you know that she carried you where no
one carries anyone, she gave to you the fruit of her heart that which no
one gives to anyone, and she protected you with her hearing, sight,
hand, leg, hair, and skin as well as all her organs. She was highly
delighted, happy, eager, and enduring the harm, pains, heaviness, and
grief until the hand of power saved her from you and took you out to
this earth. She did not care if she went hungry as long as you ate, if
she was naked as long as you were clothed, if she was thirsty as long as
you drank, is she was in the sun as long as you were in the shade, if
she was miserable as long as you were happy, and if she was deprived of
sleeping as long as you were resting. Her abdomen was your container,
her lap your seat, her breast your container of drink, and her soul was
your fort. She protected you from heat and cold. You should thank her
for all that. You will not be able to show her gratitude unless through
Allah’s help and giving success.”

Filial piety becomes nicer and more influential when it is done to the
aged parents who are in exigent need for affection:

***“If either or both of your parents should become advanced in age, do
not express to them words which show your slightest disappointment such
as ‘ugh’-. Never yell at them but always speak to them with kindness. Be
humble and merciful towards them and say, "Lord, have mercy upon them as
they cherished me in my childhood." (17:24)”***

It is related that a man asked the Prophet (S), “God’s Messenger, I am
treating my aged parents as same as their treatment to me when I was
child. Have I now performed their rights that are imposed upon me?” The
Prophet (S) answered: “No, you have not, because, when they treated you
kindly during your childhood, they wanted you to live. But, now, while
you are treating them kindly, you wish they would die[^7].”

Ibrahim Ibn Shuaib narrated: I told Imam as-Sadiq (a) that I used to
carry my aged and weak father when he wanted to relieve nature. The Imam
commented: “If you can do more than this, you must do it. You should
feed him bit by bit, because he will guard you (from Hell) in the
morrow[^8].”

Filial piety is not restricted to the living parents. It becomes more
necessary for the dead parents, because they are in need for piety more
than the alive do.

The Prophet (S) said: “On the Day of Resurrection, a man who treats his
parents piously after their departure of life will be regarded as the
chief of the pious[^9].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “A servant who is pious to his parents during
their lifetimes may be, later on, decided as impious. This may occur
when such a servant neglects settling the debts of their dead parents
and neglects seeking Allah’s forgiveness for them. Likewise, a servant
who is impious to his parents during their lifetimes may be decided as
pious. This occurs when such a servant settles the debts of their
parents, after their death, and seeks Allah’s forgiveness for
them[^10].”

Imam as-Sadiq said: “Nothing of the rewarding follows the dead except
three: a continuous alms that was dedicated during lifetime, an
instruction of right guidance that is followed by others, and a
righteous son who supplicates to Allah for him[^11].”

### Filial Impiety

Ingratitude and bad turn are ill manners denied by reason and law and
disapproved by sound conscience. Through this criterion, we can feel the
hideousness and horribleness of filial impiety, which is a crime taking
to Hell. In addition to its being in violation of human principles,
reason, and law, filial impiety is an indication to emotionlessness,
faithlessness, and fading of human values. Parents exert giant efforts
for educating and securing every means that achieves material and mental
prosperity for sons who, whatever they do, cannot appreciate their
endeavors. How is it then possible for sons to neglect such emotions and
repay with mistreatment and impiety?

The Prophet (S) said: “The punishment for three sins are immediate and
not postponed to the Hereafter: filial impiety, oppression against
people, and ingratitude[^12].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “My father, once, saw a man leaning to his
father’s arm while they were walking. Out of his detestation of this
scene, my father did not speak to him forever[^13].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “If Allah had known something more trivial than
‘ugh[^14]’, He would have used it in warning against filial impiety. To
look at parents sharply is a sort of impiety to them.”

### Disadvantages of Filial Impiety

Serious disadvantages are expected from filial impiety. One of these is
that the impious son will unavoidably be the subject of his sons’
impiety.

Al-Asmaee conveyed the following story from a Beduin: I, once, decided
to wander in the quarters searching for the most pious of people and the
most impious (to his parents).

One day, I passed by an old man in whose neck there was a rope, and he
was trying to pull a bucket from a well, while it was so hot that even
camels were trying to find shadows to sit in. Furthermore, a young man
with a rope as thick as a strap in the hand was beating that old man on
the back so cruelly. Astonished by such a scene, I shouted at the young,
“Do you not fear God when you treat this weak old man so cruelly? The
rope that is in his neck is a sufficient suffering for him, why do you
then add to it the suffering of your beating?”

The young man answered: “What is more is that this man is my father!”

I replied: “God may show you no goodness for this!”

He said: “Keep silent! He used to do the same thing that you see to his
father. Likewise, his father used to do the same thing to his father,
and so on.”

I said to myself: “This is unquestionably the most impious to his
parents,” and went on wandering.

One day, I saw a young man hanging a frail to his neck, and saw in that
frail an old man who was as small as a young bird. That young man used
to take down that old man from time to time and feed him like birds. I
asked the young man: “What is this?”

He answered: “He is my father. As he became senile, I am taking care of
him.”

Hence, I said to myself, “This is surely the most pious to his parents.”

One of the disadvantages of filial impiety is that the impious
individuals live in incessant unhappiness and discomfort because their
parents curse them.

The Prophet (S) said: “Beware of fathers’ imprecations, for they are
sharper than swords.”

The impious, also, will certainly suffer horrible agonies of death.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated: One day, the Prophet (S) attended before a
young man who was suffering death struggles. He tried severally to
instruct him to say ‘la ilaha illa (a)llah there is no god but Allah’,
but the man became tongue-tied.

The Prophet (S) asked the lady who was standing nearer to him: “Is this
man’s mother present?”

She answered: “Yes, it is I.”

The Prophet (S) asked: “Are you dissatisfied with him?”

She answered: “Yes, I am. I have not talked to him for six years.”

The Prophet (S) then asked her to be pleased with him.

She answered: “As long as the Messenger of God is pleased with him, I am
pleased, too.”

Then, the Prophet (S) instructed the dying man to say ‘la ilaha illa
(a)llah’, and, finally, he could speak it.

The Prophet (S) asked him: “What is before you, now?”

The dying man said: “I now can see an ugly black man with dirty clothes
and bad smell. He is prevailing over me.”

The Prophet (S) instructed: “Say: O You Who accepts the few and pardons
the much, accept my few (deed) and pardon my very much (evildoing). You
are surely the All-forgiving the All-merciful[^15].”

The young man said it.

Then the Prophet (S) asked: “Now, what do you see?”

The man said: “I now can see a white, pretty, sweet- smelling man come
to me, while the black one left.”

The Prophet (S) ordered him to repeat reciting the previous
supplication, and the man did.

The Prophet (S) then asked him what he could see. The man answered: “I
can see only the white man coming to me.”

Few moments later, the man departed life[^16].”

Filial impiety is a grand sin for which God threatens hell.

It is worth mentioning that fathers are required to train and educate
their sons by means of wisdom so as to save them from impiety to them.

The Prophet (S) said: “Like their sons, parents are required to avoid
treating their righteous sons impiously[^17].”

“Allah may curse the parents who cause their sons to treat them
impiously. Allah may have mercy upon the parents who cause their sons to
treat them piously[^18].”

**Rights of Sons**

The righteous sons are the adornment of this life and the dearest and
most precious hopes. Thus, the Ahlul- Bayt (a), as well as people of
wisdom and letters, praised them.

The Prophet (S) said: “The righteous son is one of the roses of
Paradise[^19].”

“To have a righteous son is a sign of happiness[^20].”

Referring to a dead, a wise man said: “If this dead has a son, he is
alive then, lest he is surely dead.”

Not only do parents benefit by their righteous sons during their
lifetimes, but also they are advantageous for them after their death.

(Imam as-Sadiq (a) related: ) The Prophet (S) said: Jesus (a), once,
passed by a grave whose occupant was tortured. A year later, he passed
by the same grave, but found that torture was ceased. He asked the Lord
about this, and he was answered that the son of the occupant of this
grave paved a public way and had the custody of an orphan; therefore,
Allah forgave the father for the son’s good deeds.

(The Prophet commented) The heritage that Allah gains from the believer
is a son who worships Him after the father’s death.

(Imam as-Sadiq (a) then recited the Quranic Verse that tells the words
of Zechariah the prophet)

***“I am afraid of what my kinsmen will do after (my death) and my wife
is barren. Lord, grant me a son who will be my heir and the heir of the
family of Jacob. Lord, make him a person who will please you"
(19:5-6)***[^21]***.”***

Righteousness of sons requires excessive attention in fields of
education. On that account, it is obligatory upon fathers to train their
sons on bases of virtue so that they, later on, will harvest pleasure
through their commitment to good behavior. In this regard, Imam
as-Sajjad (a) said:

“The right of your child is that you should know that he is from you and
will be ascribed to you, through both his good and his evil, in the
immediate affairs of this world. You are responsible for what has been
entrusted to you, such as educating him in good conduct, pointing him in
the direction of his Lord, and helping him to obey Him. So, act toward
him with the action of one who knows that he will be rewarded for good
doing toward him and punished for evildoing. In his affairs, act like
the actions of those who adorn their children with their good deeds and
those who are justified before their Lord as long as they did well in
the discipline and the custody of their sons[^22].”

Fathers are responsible for disciplining their sons righteously,
otherwise they expose them to various dangers of social and religious
corruption. Fathers are recommended to begin with guiding their sons to
uprightness from tender age, because they, in such ages, are more
responsive than being older. Moreover, fathers must begin educating
their sons before their eyes are opened on ill habits and immoralities,
lest the mission becomes very complicated.

Wisdom of Discipline
--------------------

Fathers are required to be moderate with their sons. They should neither
subject them by means of excessive rudeness since this may cause them to
suffer mental complexities, nor should they neglect punishing them when
they show shortcomings, since this may lead them to disobey. It is said
that ‘he who feels safety from punishment will behave improperly.’

The best method of education then is to rectify sons step by step, by
way of encouraging them doing charity through words of praise and
rewarding, and advising them not to misbehave. If this is useless,
fathers should move to the stage of reproach. If this is also useless,
then comes the role of punishment and harsh reproach.

The Child’s First School
------------------------

The child’s first school is home, where he grows up, his personality
rises to perfection, and traits mature. The parents’ behavior and morals
have the greatest role in the child’s perfection and maturity of
personality. As a result, they must behave as ideal examples of their
children so that their traits will reflect on the children’s
mentalities.

Course of Education
-------------------

The first step in educating children is to lead them to the etiquettes
of sitting to the dining-tables, such as washing the hands before and
after each meal, eating with the right hand, chewing the food properly,
avoiding looking in the faces of the other eaters, satisfying themselves
with the available sustenance, and the like morals. Then, children
should be trained on the rules of speech and should be trained to avoid
obscenity, backbiting, gossip, and the like indecencies. They should
also be trained on good attention and not to interrupt speakers.

The most important point in educating children, however, is to plant the
religious concepts in their mentalities and bring them up on belief
through teaching them the principles and branches of the religion in
such a style befitting their intellectual levels, so that they will have
acquaintance of their creed and doctrine and they will be immunized
against the deviant suspects arisen by the enemies of Islam:

***“Believers, save yourselves and your families from the fire which is
fueled by people and stones and is guarded by stern angels who do not
disobey Allah's commands and do whatever they are ordered to do
(66:6).”***

Fathers must also train their children on practicing the high moral
standards, such as truthfulness, faithfulness, patience, and
self-reliance, and to observe manners of intimate association with
people, such as regarding the old, compassioning the young, thanking the
favorer, overlooking the wrongdoer, and treating kindly the poor.
Besides, children must be prevented from associating with the evils and
the deviant and encouraged associating with the polite. Children in fact
imitate their friends’ moralities and natures shortly.

The Prophet (S) said: “Man imitates his friend. You therefore must
consider the one you befriend.”

People have witnessed and suffered many tragedies that occurred to the
young who went astray and fell in depths of vices and corruption just
because they befriended impolite and evil individuals. Consequently,
fathers must search for the talents and qualifications of their sons
and, then, guide them in the fields of life that best befit their
physical and mental abilities and skills. This will certainly contribute
in helping them face burdens of life and save comfortable livings.

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 91-2 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 155 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16/4/24 (as quoted from Keshf
ul-Ghumma).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 93 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16/4/24 (as quoted from al- Amali).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 92 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^7]: Quoted from Sharh us-Sahifat us-Sajjadiyya.

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 92 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^9]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16/4/26 (as quoted from al- Imama wat
Tabssira).

[^10]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 93 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^11]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/92 (as quoted from al-Kafi and
at-Tahtheeb).

[^12]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16/4/23 (as quoted from Sheikh
at-Tusi’s al-Amali).

[^13]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 155 (as quoted from al- Kafi).
This is an indication to God’s saying: “If either or both of your
parents should become advanced in age, do not express to them words
which show your slightest disappointment ñsuch as ‘ugh’-. Never yell at
them but always speak to them with kindness. Be humble and merciful
towards them and say, "Lord, have mercy upon them as they cherished me
in my childhood." (17:24)”

[^14]: This is an indication to God’s saying: “If either or both of your
parents should become advanced in age, do not express to them words
which show your slightest disappointment ñsuch as ‘ugh’-. Never yell at
them but always speak to them with kindness. Be humble and merciful
towards them and say, "Lord, have mercy upon them as they cherished me
in my childhood." (17:24)”

[^15]: This is a famous supplication whose original text is as follows:
يا من يقبل اليسير ويعفو عن الكثير إقبل مني اليسير واعف عني الكثير إنك
أنت الغفور الرحيم.

[^16]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16/4/23 (as quoted from al- Amali).

[^17]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; 16/4/22 (as quoted from al- Khissal).

[^18]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 14 page 50 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^19]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 196 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^20]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 196 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^21]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 197 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^22]: Quoted from Imam Ali ibn al-Hussein’s Treatise of Rights.


