Matrimonial Rights
==================

Merits of Marriage
------------------

Marriage is the holy legal tie between man and woman through which they
share the same life and reciprocate definite rights and obligations. God
has passed the law of matrimony so as to keep humankind on this earth
and keep the earth constructed and prosperous.

***“Marry the single people among you and the righteous slaves and
slave-girls. If you are poor, Allah will make you rich through His
favor; He is Bountiful and All-knowing (24:32).”***

***“His creating spouses for you out of yourselves so that you might
take comfort in them and His creating love and mercy among you re
evidences (of the truth) for the people who (carefully) think
(30:21).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “The most favorable thing to Allah that is ever
constructed in Islam is marriage[^1].”

“He who gets married wins the half of his religion. Hence, he should
fear Allah in questions regarding the other half[^2].”

“Marriage is my custom; therefore, he who rejects my custom is not
belonged to me[^3].”

“Get married, for I will take pride in your great numbers on the Day of
Resurrection. The immature fetus, even, will stop on the door of
Paradise saying angrily, ‘unless my parents will be with me, I refuse to
be in Paradise[^4].’”

“The two-rakaa prayer offered by the marrieds is preferred to the night
worship and the fasting of the bachelors[^5].”

“The evilest dead are the bachelors[^6].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “A two-rakaa[^7] prayer offered by the marrieds
is preferred to a seventy- rakaa prayer offered by bachelors[^8].”

### 1. Advantages of Marriage

Because of the great variety of merits of marriage, many texts confirm
persistently on it by way of awakening the desires and warning against
its negligence. Marriage is the only means by which righteous progeny is
gained. Through sons, fathers feel dignity, power, and extent of
existence, good reputation, and great rewarding of God.

### 2. Benefits of Marriage

Marriage achieves chastity and immunity against corruption. From this
cause, the punishment of the marrieds who commit fornication is stoning
to death, because they are immunized by marriage and they despise the
holiness of the honors and dignities.

### 3. Results of Marriage

Marriage secures easeful subsistence, tranquility, and freedom from
worry. Naturally, man alone spends his day encountering the crises of
life and striving for seeking earnings. He can find relief nowhere
except in the shadows of his darling, sincere wife who, trying to ease
his troubles, encompasses him with kind treatment and affectionate
conduct. Referring to this fact, God says:

***“His creating spouses for you out of yourselves so that you might
take comfort in them and His creating love and mercy among you re
evidences (of the truth) for the people who (carefully) think
(30:21).”***

The Prophet (S) said: “Subsequent to the embracement of Islam, the best
thing that a Muslim can profit is a Muslim wife who pleases him when he
looks at her and has loyalty to him in honor and property[^9].”

Marital Happiness
-----------------

Marital happiness is achieved when it is known how to choose the
suitable partner. There are certain standards in the light of which
spouses must be chosen. Such standards strengthen the marital ties and
make peace of mind cover all the corners of the spouses’ lives. Bad
choice, on the other hand, exposes marriage to failure and
disappointment.

Treating this important aspect that plays a great role in people’s life,
the Ahlul-Bayt (a) referred to the advantages and disadvantages of both
men and women so that each will know how to choose a spouse.

The Ideal Husband
-----------------

The ideal husband is the qualified man who achieves happiness to his
wife and ensures tranquil marital life. Unlike the false idea of most of
people, the qualifications of a spouse have nothing to do with material
vanities, such as handsome house, comely means of transportation, or big
fortune. The true qualifications are high certificate, respectful
office, high morality, and the like matters. Material vanities may be
found with many spouses; still, they are unable to achieve marital
happiness or achieve their wives’ pleasure and expectations.

Listen to the following words uttered by the wife of Muawiya the Umayyad
caliph who could no longer stand the life of luxury, lavish expenditure,
and wealth in the laps of her husband, and longed for her love’s young
dream, though he cannot secure luxury, lavish expenditure, and wealth:

A house in which souls are roaming is favorable, in my sight, to a
handsome palace. To have a single cloak with delight is favorable, in my
sight, to wearing diaphanous clothes. A clumsy, but highborn, cousin of
mine is favorable, in my sight, to a stern unbeliever.

Hence, the true qualification is the mixture of three things: true
embracement of the religion, well mannerism, and capacity to maintain
and guard the wife materially and morally. Having these three qualities,
a man becomes, in the sight of Islam, an ideal competent husband.

The Prophet (S) said: “If a man whose morals and religiosity are
accepted in your sight proposes to your daughter, you must agree;
otherwise, there will come into being widespread idolatry and great
evil[^10].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The well-qualified husband is the chaste who
can save good living[^11].”

Thus, it is discommended, as an Islamic ruling, to give one’s daughter
in marriage to the sinful, alcoholic, effeminate, ill-tempered, and the
like individuals whose religiosity and morality are not guaranteed.

The Ideal Wife
--------------

The ideal wife is the faithful, chaste, highborn, well- mannered,
good-looking woman who is well-behaved with her husband.

The Prophet (S) said: “The best of your ladies are the fertile, the
amiable, the chaste, the proud with her family, the humble with her
husband, who adorns herself for her husband, behaves decently with
others, listens and carries out her husbands’ instructions, provides
herself for him when they are alone, and avoids violating good manners,
like men.

The worst of your ladies are the humble with her family and proud
against her husband, the barren, the spiteful, who does not care if she
does something hideous, adorns herself when her husband is absent,
behaves chastely with him when he is present, does not listen and does
not carry out his instructions, abstains from providing herself to him
when they are alone just like a riding animal that prevents the rider
from riding it, does not accept his apologies, and does not forgive his
flaws[^12].”

“The best women of my umma are the most bright- faced and the askers for
the less dowry[^13].”

“He who chooses a wife for her beauty only will not have his aim
achieved. As for him who chooses a wife for her wealth only, Allah will
leave him with that wealth. Hence, you should choose the religious women
for marriage[^14].”

“Beware of the green-looking women It is the beautiful women of evil
source[^15].”

This prophetic tradition warns against marrying the beautiful women
whose families are disreputable.

Observance of Rights
--------------------

Spouses cannot obtain marital happiness before they apply the law of
give and take to themselves through observing each other’s rights.
Considering it as the first cell of society, the Islamic Sharia has paid
a great deal of attention to the marital life through regulations and
common rights of spouses and special rights of each. The common rights
that each spouse should perform towards the other are honesty,
confidence, trust, sympathy, and cooperation. These are the genuine
supports of successful marital life.

Rights of Husbands
------------------

By virtue of their obligatory and guardianship on their wives, husbands
enjoy definite rights:

### 1. Obedience to Husbands

A wife is fully responsible for responding to the husband’s acceptable
desires, and avoiding any matter that harms him, such as leaving the
house before obtaining his permission, spending his wealth wastefully,
neglecting the domestic duties, and the like matters.

Imam al-Baqir narrated that the Prophet (S) answered the woman who asked
him about the husbands’ rights against their wives by saying:

“Women should obey and avoid defying their husbands. They should not
give alms out of the husbands’ wealth before obtaining their permission,
avoid observing recommendable fasting before they obtain their
permission, respond to their sexual call every time and in every manner,
even if they were on the backs of camels, and not leave their houses
before obtaining their permission. If they do, they are cursed by the
angels of the heavens, angels of the earth, angels of wrath, and angels
of mercy until they come back to their houses.”

The woman then asked: “God’s Messenger, who is the owner of the greatest
right against man?” The Prophet (S) answered: “His father is.”

She asked: “Who is the owner of the greatest right against woman?” The
Prophet (S) answered: “Her husband is[^16].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated that a woman, whose husband had ordered her
not to leave her house until he would be back from his journey, sent a
messenger to the Prophet (S) to ask him a permission to visit her
diseased father.

“No,” answered the Prophet (S), “She should sit in her house and obey
her husband.”

As her father became intensely ill, she sent a messenger to the Prophet
(S) asking for permission to visit him.

“No,” answered the Prophet (S), “She should sit in her house and obey
her husband.”

As her father was dead, she sent a messenger to the Prophet (S) asking
for permission to attend his funeral ceremony.

“No,” answered the Prophet (S), “She should sit in her house and obey
her husband.”

When her father was buried, the Prophet (S) sent a messenger to tell her
that Allah forgave her father and her because of her observance of the
obedience to her husband[^17].

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “As for any wife who passes a night while her
husband is angry with her for a question in which he is right, her
prayers will not be admissible unless her husband is pleased with
her[^18].”

### 2. Compliance with Husbands

Wives are recommended to encompass their husbands with nice sociability,
pleasant attention, and kind compliance by means of observing their
affairs, securing means of their physical and mental tranquility, doing
well the housekeeping, and caring for the family members. Carrying out
so, wives will certainly be dear and lovable by husbands. Moreover,
wives, by following such instructions, become good examples for their
sons and become the sources of high moral standards. The most
significant form of the wives’ compliance with their husbands is to
avoid exhausting them by expensive charges that injure their economical
capacities. This causes confusion to husbands who, subsequently, begin
to have an aversion to their wives.

Imam al-Kadhim (a) said: “Jihad of women is their compliance with their
husbands.”

The wives’ good behavior and compliance with their husbands raise their
spirits and supply them with huge physical and mental energies helping
in going on exerting all efforts for seeking earnings and encouraging on
standing ordeals and crises of life. The wives’ quarrelsomeness and
disobedience, on the other hand, enfeeble the husbands’ entities and
bring to them senility earlier.

The following story is a good example:

A group of people went to ask the three brothers of Banu Ghannam for a
solution for their complicated question. As they met the first one, who
was old man, and asked him for a solution, he referred them to his
brother saying, ‘You may find a solution with him because he is older
than I am.’ When they went to meet his brother, they found a middle-aged
man having sought a solution from him, he said, ‘You may see my third
brother and, because he is older than I am, you can find a solution with
him.’ Hence, they went to the third brother to meet a young man. As they
could no longer conceal their astonishment, they asked him about his two
brothers and his manner.

He answered: ‘My brother whom you first met is the youngest among us.
Unfortunately, he had to suffer the misbehaviors of his ill-tempered
wife because he anticipated an intolerable matter if he would divorce
her. His wife therefore has been the main reason beyond his growing old
at an earlier time. The second one you met is the middle among us. His
wife has gathered both good and bad mannerism. She sometimes pleased
him, but she also displeased him. Hence, you can see him as middle-aged
man. I have a well-mannered wife who never shows misbehavior with me.
Hence, I could keep my youth with her[^19].’

Let us now listen to the following words of a wise Beduin mother who
provides some instructions to her daughter on her wedding night:

“Daughter, you will very soon leave the house in which you came to this
world and the nest in which you grew up to join a nest that you have not
known yet, and a companion with whom you have not familiarized yourself
yet. Thus, you should behave as his bondmaid so that he will behave as
your slave. Observe for him the following ten points:

The first and second are that you should live with him with satisfaction
and associate with him with obedience.

The third and fourth are that you should observe the places where his
eye and nose notice. Hence, he should not see anything ugly and should
not smell anything bad from you.

The fifth and sixth are that you should observe the times of his sleep
and food. Continuous feelings of hunger arouse fiery and continuous
disturbance of sleep arouses rage.

The seventh and eighth are that you should observe his wealth and
respect his family. To observe his wealth is to opt for moderation, and
to respect his family can be achieved through good management.

The ninth and tenth are that you should avoid disobeying his orders and
divulging his secrets. You will certainly arouse his malice against you
if you disobey him, and you will certainly expose yourself to his
unexpected punishment if you divulge his secrets.

Beware of showing happiness before him when he is sad or showing
depression when he is happy, because the earlier is a sign of negligence
and the latter is a sign of annoyance.

Glorify him more than anyone else does, so that he will honor you more
than anyone else. You must know that you cannot obtain that which you
like before you prefer his satisfaction to yours and prefer his desires
to yours in any matter. Finally, God may choose for you the good[^20].”

### 3. Observance of Husbands’ honor

The most important obligation that is imposed upon a wife is to protect
her husband’s honor and reputation and exert all efforts for avoiding
any matter that deforms them, such as profligacy, garishness, or
divulgement of secrets, especially matters that husbands try to conceal.
Any negligence of this right will waste away confidence and threaten
with disagreement.

Rights of Wives
---------------

The Islamic Sharia has paid the greatest attention to wives and granted
them, opposite to the rights of husbands, all their material and ethical
rights that are based on wisdom, justice, and the good and interests of
both spouses:

### 1. Disbursement

It is obligatory upon husbands to save their wives’ essentials material
requirements, such as clothing, food, and residence as well as other
requisites that meet their ranks and way of living. From the viewpoint
of the Islamic Sharia, disbursement is a familiar right that husbands
must carry out for their wives, no matter how wealthy they are. This
right, however, does not cease to be valid unless the wife is decided as
recalcitrant. Furthermore, husbands are not allowed to coerce their
wives to do the household managements or nurse the babies unless they
themselves do such matters voluntarily.

### 2. Good Companionship

Wife is the husband’s intimate companion and partner of his life. She
shares him in good days and bad days, consoles him in sorrow and in joy,
and does alone exhausting efforts, such as the household managements,
care for the family affairs, and maternal functions. Hence, it is
necessary for husbands to associate with their wives nicely and treat
them with leniency. Out of their boasting and arrogance, some husbands
misunderstood that manhood cannot be achieved unless they control,
mistreat, insult, and disgrace their wives.

As a matter of fact, such qualities are detestable since they indicate
the complexity and feebleness of personality. They also create disorder
of marital life and eradicate family pleasure. In view of her emotions
and functions, woman is sensitive and quick- tempered; therefore, she
may, sometimes, utter an unbecoming word or stinging reproach originated
from a mental excitement or emotional agitation. In such cases, husbands
are required to control themselves and turn in kind forgiveness so that
the family march will go on peacefully.

The Prophet (S) said: “The like of woman is a crooked rib. If you leave
it crooked, you will benefit by it. But if you try to fix it, you will
break it.”

This means that man, when his wife exceeds the limits of disobedience to
him, must treat her, first, by means of advice. If such means prove
futility, he must follow the method of ignoring her and avoiding
sleeping with her. If this is also useless, he may then beat her, but
not severely:

***“Admonish women who disobey, do not sleep with them and beat them. If
they obey, do not try to find fault in them. Allah is High and Supreme.
(4:34)”***

### 3. Protection

Because wives are under the guardianship of them, husbands are
responsible for defending them against any matter that may cause them
moral or material injury or may defame or soil their dignities, such as
dissoluteness and suspicious association with the other sex or immoral
women. How ugly those men who shove their wives in mixed clubs and
dissolute parties and allow them to dance with whomsoever they want are!
They try to close their eyes before the serious religious, moral, and
social dangers of such mixing that threatens the family entities with
disorder and disintegration.

Man, too, must be jealous and protect his wife and family against the
trickeries and misleading rumors of the invasions that could deceive
many male and female Muslims who, lacking enough knowledge of the
principles and concepts of their religion, repeated these rumors just
like parrots. It is important for such individuals to learn enough about
their religion, each according to his intellectual and cultural level,
so that they will be saved from the evils and trickeries of such
invasions.

***“Believers, save yourselves and your families from the fire which is
fueled by people and stones and is guarded by stern angels who do not
disobey Allah's commands and do whatever they are ordered to do
(66:6).”***

False Rights
------------

Intending to extinguish the luminous light of Islam, the anti-Muslims
have dedicated all efforts to invading the Islamic world by weapons of
delusions and false principles. Unfortunately, the inexperienced and the
dull responded to such strange concepts, and went on imitating and
calling for them as if they are within their untouchable values.

Because of that, curtains covered the Islamic portrait that has been
shining with beauty, illumination, and ideality and a new deformed,
hideous portrait came out. Islam, thus, began to feel strange and
alienated among its people, while the non-Islamic concepts occupied
large positions in the intellects and feelings of Muslims to clear them
out of values and idealities.

Moreover, many calls and hireling writers raced in demanding with more
non-Islamic traditions so as to spread them in the Islamic environment
through false claims of defending, releasing, and equalizing women with
men, in addition to similar fake statements. Let us now refer to some of
these deceptive rumors:

Removal of the Veil
-------------------

As they could not stand seeing Muslim women guard themselves from
dissoluteness and lechery through veiling themselves with hijab[^21],
the propagandists of liberalism tried to seduce them by means of
removing the veil and grooming themselves so as to take them away from
the highness of their dignities and boudoirs.

Having been deceived by such false calls, some women, unfortunately,
responded and began to remove their veils and show their beauty and
charms so as to prepossess eyes and hearts shamelessly. All over their
extensive history, Muslim women, who ignored the dangers and slips that
were plotted against them, have never been seduced in such a mean and
illusory way.

Unlike the idea of the dissolute, hijab is not an aspect of retardation
or reactionism, it is in fact an aspect of modesty and chastity since it
guards women against indecorum and deterioration, protects them from the
snooping of the aberrant, and keep them away from the slips of vices and
seductions.

Finally, Muslims must learn lessons from the Western nations that have
suffered many misfortunes of immorality as well as ethical, physical,
and social tragedies all because they allowed removal of veiling,
primping up, and mix of the sexes to prevail on their societies.

Moral Defects
-------------

Primping up and mixing of the sexes have created moral complications in
the Western milieus. Thus, they have no longer denied the sexual vices
or felt ashamed of their sins. Accordingly, they have become the
subjects of moral diseases that massacred them so heavily that the
honorable personalities have had to declare their denial and complaint
and warned against the horrible dangers of such dissolution.

Depicting the collapse of morality in his country, Paul Beaudre the
French author said that it had no longer been odd to hear about the
existence of sexual relations between the relatives, such as fathers and
daughters and brothers with their sisters in some French provinces as
well as the crowded quarters of cities.

The Fourteen Committee, whose task is to inspect the ambushes of lechery
reported that most of the nightclubs, dance halls, manicure places,
stores of cosmetics, massage rooms, and coiffures have become brothels
or, perhaps, something too horrible to be mentioned.

Ben B. Lindsey the judge of Los Angeles in 1934- predicted that
forty-five per cent of girls of schools profane their honors before they
leave schools. In the higher stages of study as the judge added- this
rate raises vastly.

In his book titled ‘History of Lechery’, George Scat, referring to the
common state in his country, said that numbers of the non-professional
prostitutes have come to an unprecedented rate. Among almost all the
social classes, you can find such prostitutes. In the sight of girls
nowadays, sexual intercourse, lechery, and even abnormality have become
within the modern styles of living. Such moral corruption can be found
even with the children of both sexes because they have been affected by
the crooked environment and the sexual incentives.

In his book titled ‘Sexual Regulations,’ Dr. Rodet Hugo said that it had
not been odd or abnormal to see the seven or eight-year-old girls play
sexually with boys or, even, practice sexual intercourse with them.

A physician from the city of Baltimore reported that in a period of one
year, more than one thousand suits of committing fornication with less
than twelve-year-old girls were brought before the courts in that city
alone. Moral corruption has not stopped at such lowly levels, but it has
exceeded all limits of normal sexual relations to reach a stage of
perversion and sexual deviation. It has become familiar, under the
encouragement of the law, to see a boy get married to a boy of his same
sex and to see some people congratulate for such marriage!

Dr. Hooker says that it has been common, in the faculties, nursery
schools, and even religious schools, to hear about the commitment of
sodomy among the students most of whom have completely lost any desire
for the other sex.

Let us now ask the parrot-like propagandists of liberalism whether this
is the very goal that they want for the Islamic nation and themselves,
or whether they do not understand the results of their liberalism!

Beyond dispute, every individual who calls for liberalism and primping
up is no more than an axe deconstructing the entity of the Islamic
society, and a pioneer of evil and dissolution in his nation and
country.

***“Those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face
painful torment in this world and in the life to come. Allah knows what
you do not know. (24:19)”***

Physical Defects
----------------

Any nation that lacks religious and moral values and is predominated by
deviation must encounter the results of its individuals’ aberrance and
corruption. Like the collapse of moralities, individuals of such a
nation must suffer physical collapse.

This is what has exactly occurred in the Western milieus that have
become the target of venereal diseases, which caused great losses,
socially and economically. Hence, physicians, through numerous reports,
have gone on declaring the dimensions and dangerous tragedies of such
diseases.

A French physician declared that, because of syphilis and venereal
diseases, more than thirty thousand persons die annually. After hectic
fever, syphilis occupies the second position in the list of the
deadliest diseases in France.

In Britannica Encyclopedia, it is recorded that, as an annual rate,
200,000 persons affected by syphilis and 160,000 persons affected by
gonorrhea are treated in the official hospitals of the U.S.A. 650
hospitals have been specialized in treating these diseases. In addition,
61% of the diseased with syphilis and 89% of the diseased with gonorrhea
see official physicians.

In the book titled ‘Sexual Regulations’, it is recorded that
30,000-40,000 babies die in the U.S. annually because of hereditary
syphilis, and that the number of mortalities because of the other
diseases except tuberculosis- is as same as the number of mortalities of
syphilis.

Thus, the Western nations, because of their dissoluteness, have paid all
these losses as taxes collected from the health and life of their
individuals.

Social Defects
--------------

In addition to the material and physical losses, the dissolute nations
have suffered serious social defects. Because they neglected principles
of chastity and sincerity and closed the eyes to the conditions of true
matrimony, these nations have terminated their family and social lives.
Thus, you find the spouses each wandering in the glooms of deviation.
The wife, being dissolute and adorning herself with maximum appearance
of beauty and seduction, breaks froth in a direction, and the husband
wander in the hotbeds of vice and depravity. As soon as one of them
finds a personality that is more attractive or seductive than his/her
other half, he/she slips in the depths of vice with him/her. As this
circle goes on, the family entity will unquestionably destroy and the
matrimonial relation will split for the most tasteless reason. Reports
of experts in this field have confirmed this fact.

About the divorcement in the town of Donor in 1922, Ben B. Lindsey says
that separation was the result of every marriage and the courts received
a file of divorcement of every two states of marriage. The judge also
confirmed that this was not in the town of Donor only, but also all
towns all over the U.S., almost, witnessed such cases. Such states of
divorcement or separation, the judge added, are still increasing

The other nations that authorized illegitimate sexual relations were not
better than the U.S. in encountering bad results of abnormality and
mixing of the sexes. Most of the individuals of such societies rejected
marriage and preferred bachelorhood so as to satiate their sexual mania
and to free themselves from the bounds and costs of marriage.

An essay issued in a newspaper in Detroit said that the common states of
the decrease in the rates of marriage, the increase in the rates of
divorce, and the illegitimate relations between men and women all these
indicate that ‘our’ society is retarding to the depths of bestiality.
The natural desire of sexual reproduction has faded away, the newborns
are left without judgment, the feeling of the importance of family
structure has been relying upon the persistence of civilization, and
self-judgment has been null. The negligence of the results of
civilization and free government has been prevalent on the society.

A deep look at the tragedies that invaded the Western world proves that
they have been the results of primping up, dissoluteness, mixing of the
sexes, and commonness of the sexual incentives, such as the sexy movies,
stories, and songs, that deformed the moral values and rumored
corruption in the Western societies.

In his report advanced before the General Committee of the Association
of ban of adulteries, Emil Porissi said that the sexy photographs have
affected people’s feelings with the highest degrees of excitement and
disorder and urged the miserable customers to commit unimaginable
crimes. Besides, they have affected boys and girls so tremendously.
Because of the existence of such seductive photographs, the moral and
physical states of many schools and colleges have been null. Finally, it
is incredible to find anything more destructive to girls than these
photographs[^22].

From the previous presentation, we conclude that the Islamic Sharia has
ordered Muslim women of hijab and warned them against primping up and
suspicious mixing with the other sex so as to guard their dignities and
chastity from the incentives of offense and seduction, and protect the
Islamic society from the tragedies and misfortunes that affected the
Western societies, deformed their morals and consciences, and caused
them misery and perdition:

***“Prophet, tell your wives, daughters, and the wives of the believers
to cover their bosoms and breasts. This will make them distinguishable
from others and protect them from being annoyed. Allah is All- forgiving
and All-merciful. (33:59)”***

This is one of the holy Quranic texts that enjoin hijab and urge Muslim
women to adhere to it in such a frank, serious style.

First, God orders the Prophet (S) to convey the divine command to his
wives, daughters, and wives of the believers that they must cover their
bosoms and breasts. He then shows the importance of hijab by expressing
that it will save them from harm and annoyance. This is because hijab
covers the charms of women and encompasses them with rings of immunity
and protection against the spying and criminal intrusions of the
dissolute individuals who try to play with the chastity and dignity of
women.

***“Wives of the Prophet, you are not like other women when you have
fear of Allah; hence, do not be tender in your speech lest people whose
hearts are sick may lust after you. Speak a good word. Stay in your
houses and do not display yourselves after the manner of the
(pre-Islamic) age of darkness. Be steadfast in the prayer, pay the zakat
the religious tax, and obey Allah and His Messenger. (33:32-3)”***

God addresses to the wives of the Prophet (S), because they are not like
ordinary women in fields of honor and ranking, for their belonging to
the pioneer personality of Muslims the Prophet (S). He orders them to
fear Him and avoid the disobedience to His Messenger and Him. This very
statement proves that the honor of their belonging to the Prophet (S)
relies upon the stipulation that they must fear God and obey His
Messenger and Him.

He then warns them against speaking with people in tender style so as
not to arouse the lusts of the ill-hearted ones. He then orders them to
speak in a style indicating modesty, chastity, dignity, and gravity. He
then orders them to stay in their houses and avoid displaying themselves
before the non-relatives, as women in the period before Islam used to
do. These matters, if applied, secure women’s chastity and dignity and
protect them from the slips of sins and obsessions of suspect.

Through its high idealities and ethics, the holy Quran goes on planting
virtue and chastity in the mentalities of Muslim women:

***“(Muhammad), tell the believing men to cast down their eyes and guard
their carnal desires; this will make them more pure. Allah is certainly
aware of what they do. Tell the believing woman to cast down their eyes,
guard their chastity, and not to show off their beauty except what is
permitted by the law. Let them cover their breasts with their veils.
They must not show off their beauty to anyone other than their husbands,
father, father-in-laws, sons, step-sons, brothers, sons of brothers and
sisters, women of their kind, their slaves, immature male servants, or
immature boys. They must not stamp their feet to show off their hidden
ornaments. All of you, believers, turn to Allah in repentance so that
perhaps you will have everlasting happiness. (24:30-1)”***

In the previous holy Verse, God orders the Prophet (S) to convey the
moralities of the Quran the divine revelation, to the believers who,
through so, can be guided constructively. He orders the Prophet (S) to
convey the instruction that the believing men must cast down their eyes
before women so as to save themselves from serious dangers. It
frequently has happened that a single aspirant look at beauty resulted
in long regret, and a single look has frequently captured with the traps
of love. A sinful view may also shove in the depths of vice. The Lord,
then, orders the believing men to guard their carnal desires against
sexual sins or guarding them against being seen by others .

By issuing the two instructions of casting down the sights and guarding
the carnal desires, God has closed the most dangerous doors to moral
evils. He then guards the believing men with chastity and honesty as He
tells that such practices secure purity of souls and moralities and
benefit for the religion and the worldly life. He then refers to His
absolute prevalence, supervision, and awareness of the believers’ sights
and carnal desires as well as everything else, so that this will lead to
the enlightenment of the senses and the raising of the ethical values.

He then refers to the believing women by ordering them, like men, of
casting the sights before the non- relatives and controlling the carnal
desires, since both the sexes have equal instincts and tendencies that
attract each other.

He then dedicates definite instructions to the believing women so as to
regulate their behaviors and kindle in their mentalities feelings of
modesty, chastity, and dignity. He orders them not to display their
aspects of beauty before anyone except the relatives except the external
appearances and those which are allowed by the Islamic Sharia namely,
the clothes, face, and palms of the hands. He also orders them to lower
their veils on their necks and breasts so as to keep them unseen. He
then permits women to show off their aspects of beauty before their
relatives as well as the individuals who are not expected to be charmed
or seduced by such aspects of beauty.

Hence, the Verse nominates their fathers, fathers- in-law, sons,
stepsons, brothers, nephews, bondmaids, men who are not expected to have
any desire for women, such as the insane and the righteous old men, and
the boys who are immature or too innocent to realize women’s private
parts. He then warns women against stamping their feet to show off or to
make others hear the sounds of their anklets. Finally, God instructs all
believers to repent to Him so that they will see success in this world
and the life to come.

The Prophet (S) said: “Every eye will be weeping on the Day of
Resurrection except three: an eye that wept out of fear of Allah, an eye
that was cast down against scenes that are forbidden by Allah, and an
eye that passed night sleepless for sake of Allah[^23].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The (forbidden) look is one of the poisonous
arrows of Eblis. It has frequently happened that a single look caused a
long-termed regret[^24].”

“The first look is yours, the second is against you, and the third
causes you perdition[^25].”

“The Prophet (S) warned men against seeing women before they obtain
their guardians’ permission[^26].”

“Every individual may commit a deal of fornication. The forbidden- look
is the fornication of the eye, backbiting is the fornication of the
mouth, and touching is the fornication of the hands, whether it affects
sexually or not[^27].”

“Anyone who casts his sight upward to the heavens so as to avoid looking
at a woman will be given one of the Paradisiacal women in marriage by
Allah before he is back to his normal sighting[^28].”

Woman in Islam
--------------

While discussing the marital rights, I feel it is important to refer to
women’s ranks in Islam and to tell how this religion cares for and treat
women with utter kindness. This is the reason beyond women’s being happy
and respectful under the shades of Islam. To prove so, it is essential
to compare between women of the first age of Islam and women of other
ages in the light of the divine principles and genuine standards, away
from capricious and ignorant tendencies and control of the customs and
traditions that are unsuitable to be considered as true criteria in
examining, evaluating, and distinguishing the genuine facts from the
false, since some facts may take the color of their surroundings or
circumstances. As a matter of fact, custom, sometimes, regards evil
manners as good and good traits as evil. It can be trusted and accepted
as arbiter only when it agrees with the wise guidance of God. Only then,
custom will not misjudge and will not go astray from justice.

Woman in the Ancient Ages
-------------------------

The social standard of women’s evaluation in the different ancient ages
varied to great extent and swing between negligence and excessiveness,
deprived of any state of moderation. Woman, first, was regarded as
lowly, imperfect creature. Then, she was regarded as a devil that
inspires with sinning and evil. Then, she was regarded as the mistress
of the society who has absolute control over everything. Then, she was
regarded as a worker that must be exerting all efforts for saving her
livelihood.

During most of these ages, woman used to suffer misery and humiliation,
since her rights were usurped and her soul was enslaved by man who had
the right to use her for any purpose.

During the Roman civilization, woman’s values were unstable. First, she
was decided as a slave and servant of man, who had all the freedom to
domineer her. Then, she was overestimated when she was freed from the
fist of fathers and husbands and granted all rights of possession,
heritage, divorce, indecorum, and indecency to the degree that a Roman
woman used to marry a number of men shamelessly.

A Roman writer mentioned the story of a woman who moved in the laps of
eight men in less than five years. Another saint referred to the story
of that woman whose last marriage was the twenty-third to the man who
married twenty times before her[^29].

Furthermore, the Roman woman was allowed to practice sexual deviation
freely, and that was the main reason beyond the corruption that affected
the Roman society.

In the custom of the Greek civilization, woman was added to the rubbish.
She was sold, purchased, and regarded as devilish infection.

The ancient codes of India decided that epidemic, death, hell, poison,
snakes etc. are better than woman. Hence, the Indian women’s rights to
live were ceased with the death of their husbands who were their
absolute masters and lords. Hence, they had to throw themselves in the
fire in which the bodies of their husbands were thrown; lest, the
eternal curse would befall them.

From the viewpoint of the Torah, the rank of woman can be noticed
through the following words that are recorded in the Exodus, Chapter 14,
and paragraph 17:

“My heart and I wandered so as to know, search, and seek wisdom and
reason, and to know that evil is ignorance and idiocy is insanity. I
found that woman who is snare and whose heart is trap and hands are
fetters, is bitterer than death[^30].”

Christianity, in the middle Ages, considered woman as a devilish,
profane creature that should be kept away.

In his book titled ‘History of Ethics of Europe’, Liki says that people
used to escape women’s shadows and deem sinful to approach or meet them.
They also believed that to meet by chance in the way or talk to any
woman, including mothers, wives, or sisters, abort righteous deeds and
spiritual efforts.

Thus, the Western society used to underestimate women. In 586 A.D., a
conference was held in France to decide whether woman is human being or
not! After discussions, they decided that woman is human being that is
created for serving man!

In England, Henry VIII deemed unlawful for women to recite the Holy
Scriptures. Until 1850 A.D., women were not regarded as citizens, and
until 1882, they had no personal rights and had no right to possess
anything. Hence, women were dissolved in the personalities of their
fathers or husbands[^31].

Woman in the Pre-Islamic Arab Society
-------------------------------------

Mr. An-Nadawi could summarize the life of women in the pre-Islamic Arab
society by the following words:

“Women were the subjects of wronging and oppression. Their rights were
violated and properties were extorted. They were deprived of their
heritage, prevented after being divorced or widow- from choosing
husbands, and inherited just like properties or riding animals.

They were also given deficient measures. Man could enjoy all of his
rights, while woman enjoyed nothing. Even in food, there were definite
meals allowable for men, but forbidden for women. Man also had the right
to marry any number of women. They also hated the newborn girls to the
degree that they used to bury them alive. They also used to kill girls
so savagely. It happened that a newborn girl was kept alive until her
father would come back from a journey that took, sometimes, months or
even more. When that father came back, he would kill that girl who began
to grow up mentally and physically! Some, furthermore, used to throw
girls from tremendous heights.”

Woman in the Modern Western Civilization
----------------------------------------

After long strife and big sacrifices, woman could win her freedom and
rights when the modern Western civilization came to its climax. Woman,
hence, have been able to feel her being equal to man and share him in
offices, shops, industries, and various social activities. The Western
woman has been glad at these gains that she could obtain after centuries
of shedding tears and suffering misfortunes.

Unfortunately, she has ignored the reality of the wrong and loss that
she has to encounter in this field. If woman used the criterion of logic
for comparing the gains that she has achieved with the losses that have
befallen her, she would feel grief, disappointment, and damage. The
propagandists of liberalism in this material civilization have certainly
deceived, beguiled, and exploited women’s innocence so meanly and
cunningly.

First, they exploited her to compete with man who demanded with raising
the wages and decreasing the working hours, and she was deceived when
she accepted to do men’s jobs with fewer wage. Because she has the
ability to attract customers, they exploited her femininity in
commercial fields so as to double their material profits, deriving
benefit from the sexual potentials. After that, she has to do her
feminine tasks, such as pregnancy, giving birth, education, and
household management in addition to her strife for seeking earnings so
as to get rid of ghosts of hunger, because man, in most cases, had
deserted his mission of securing her living.

In spite of the achievements of the European woman, she is, still,
decided as loser according to the logical standards. This is because, as
she sought freedom, lost her religion, morality, and dignity, and became
in such a disgusting state of dissoluteness and degradation. We have
previously shown that the Western scholars themselves have testified to
this fact. Let us focus more light on this fact through the following
discussions:

Woman’s Liberation in Islam
---------------------------

With the rising of the dawn of Islam, the inconsiderate traditions and
the ragged customs were thrown away. Instead, an everlasting
constitution befitting the intellects and sound nature and escorts
humankind all over ages was issued. One of the reformations of that
constitution was rectifying and rehabilitating the values of women, by
granting them all their material and moral rights in such a wise,
moderate style away from negligence and exaggeration. During the
luminous age of Islam, woman occupied a high rank that has never been
achieved by women of any other nation.

Islam has shed lights on women’s reality and equality to man in the
human concepts, principles, sanctity of soul, honor, and property, and
gain of the afterlife rewarding. Thus, Islam has canceled all the
pre-Islamic allegations of woman’s coming after man in these fields:

***“People, We have created you all male and female and have made you
nations and tribes so that you would recognize each other. The most
honorable among you in the sight of Allah is the most pious of you.
Allah is All-knowing and All-aware (49:13).”***

***“All righteously believing male or female will be granted a blessed
happy life and will receive their due reward and more. (16:97)”***

As some of the Arabs used to bury their newborn girls alive and kill
them wrongfully, Islam, granting girls dignity and right to live,
reproached the committers of such a crime and threatened them with
painful punishment:

***“And when the female infant buried alive is asked for what sin she
was killed? (81:8-9)”***

***“Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We will give
sustenance to all of you. To kill them is certainly a great sin.
(17:31)”***

The pre-Islamic customs decided to control woman so wrongfully by
coercing her to marry the one she does not like, preventing her from
marriage, or inheriting her just like properties and giving the right to
the heir to do anything with her such as giving her in marriage and
seizing her dowry or preventing her from marriage until she redeemed
herself or died so that he would inherit her. Islam freed woman from all
these forms of slavery and granted her the right to choose for her
marriage the one she sees well-qualified. As an Islamic law, it is
inadmissible to give a woman in marriage before obtaining her
satisfaction. Islam, also, deemed forbidden to inherit a woman
coercively:

***“Believers, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against their
will as part of the legacy. Do not create difficulties for your wives in
order to force them to give-up part of what you had given to them to set
themselves free from the bond of marriage, unless they have clearly
committed adultery. Always treat them reasonably. If you dislike them,
you could be disliking that which Allah has filled with abundant good.
(4:19)”***

One of the customs of the Arabs before Islam, and even some of the
Western societies in recent times, was depriving women of ownership.
Claiming that inheritance is a right dedicated to men of the tribe who
defend it with their swords, the Arabs before Islam deprived woman of
right of inheritance.

When Islam prevailed, these false traditions were cancelled and women
were granted all their rights of possession and inheritance. Islam,
also, decided their shares of inheritance, as mothers, wives, sisters,
daughters, or other titles:

***“Men and women will both be rewarded according to their deeds, rather
pray to Allah for His favors. Allah knows all things. (4:32)”***

***“Male and female are entitled to their legal share in the legacy of
their parents and relatives, whether it be small or large. (4:7)”***

Islam has also imposed upon husbands to cover the needs of their wives
even if they are rich and wealthy.

Thanks to the principles and ethics of Islam, Muslim woman could be the
ideal examples of rationality, faith, and high nobility. Islam has also
raised women’s social ranks to the degree that they could dispute with
even the caliphs the highest authority in the Islamic state:

Omar Ibn al-Khattab, once, was addressing to people not to exaggerate in
dowries, but an ordinary woman opposed him saying: “You have no right to
say so.”

He asked: “Why?”

She answered: “This is because God says:

***‘Do not take back the dowry which you had paid even if what you paid
was a large amount of gold. To do this is a slanderous act and a
manifest sin (4:20).’”***

Hence, Omar unsaid declaring: “Omar was wrong, and a woman was right.”

History has recorded bright pages about the glories and heroic
situations of Muslim women, and narrators could not hide their
admiration of such situations; therefore, they related them with
fascinating styles showing their esteem and wonder:

Naseeba al-Maziniyya used to participate in the campaigns of the Prophet
(S) with her son. In one of the battles, her son wanted to flee, but she
attacked him saying: “Son, do you want to leave God and His Messenger?”
Hence, her son was back to the battle, but a man attacked and killed
him. As she saw this situation, she took the sword from her son’s hand
and attacked that killer and could kill him. Referring to her situation,
the Prophet (S) addressed to her: “God bless you, Naseeba.”

This lady used to stop in front of the Prophet (S) so as to protect him.
Because of that, she was injured heavily[^32].

The following is another story showing heroic situations of a lady:

During his reign, Muawiya the Umayyad caliph- performed the hajj and,
during his stay in Mecca, he asked about a black, fat lady from the
tribe of Banu Kinana. She was residing in al-Hujoun and was named
‘Daramiyya al-Hujoun.’ When he was informed that she was still alive, he
summoned her, and she was brought before him.

He said: “How are you, daughter of Ham[^33]?”

She answered: “You should not have dishonored me for my belonging to
Ham. I am a woman from the tribe of Banu Kinana, and from the tribe of
your father.”

He said: “You have said the truth. Do you know why I summoned you?”

She answered: “None but God knows the unseen?”

He said: “I summoned you to ask you why you have loved and supported Ali
and hated and antagonized me.”

She requested: “Will you allow me not to answer you?”

He said: “No, I will not.”

She said: “Well, you have insisted. I have loved Ali for his justice
among the subjects and for his equitable distribution. And I have hated
you for you fought those whom are more deserving than you are of this
position and for you asked for that which it is not rightful for you to
ask. I have supported Ali for the obligation of the loyalty to him that
was declared by the Prophet (S), and for he loved the poor and
reverenced the religious. And I have antagonized you for you shed the
respectful blood, sowed discord among Muslims, ruled unfairly, and
issued judges according to your own caprices.”

Muawiya said: “Therefore, your belly is puffed up, is it not?”

She said: “Listen you, it is Hind whom is cited as example of puffed
bellies, not me[^34].”

Muawiya said: “Listen you, stop it. I have not meant something
disgraceful. I have only intended goodness.”

Hence, she stopped.

Muawiya then asked her: “Did you see Ali?”

She answered: “Yes, by God, I did.”

He asked: “How was he?”

She answered: “He was not seduced by the authority that seduced you and
was not engaged by the grace that engaged you.”

He asked: “Did you ever hear his words?”

She answered: “Yes, by God, I did. His words polished hearts from
blindness in the same way as oiling polishes rust.”

He commented: “You have said the truth. Do you have any need that I can
settle for you?”

She wondered: “Will you really settle my need if I say it to you?”

He answered: “Of course I will.”

She said: “Then, I want one hundred red she-camels with their male and
cameleer.”

He asked: “What do you intend to do with these?”

She answered: “I will feed the babies with their milk and feed the
adults with their meat, win noble deeds through them, and use them for
reconciling the disagreeing tribes.”

Muawiya said: “Well, if I give you these camels, will I occupy the same
position that Ali occupied in your heart?”

She answered: “This will never happen. A great difference lies between
Ali and you.”

He said: “By God I swear, Had Ali been alive, he would not have given
you a single camel.”

She answered: “Of course he would have never done it. Furthermore, he
would not have given a single hair of a camel so long as they are within
the public treasury[^35].”

Let us now mention another story in this regard:

Az-Zarqaa bint Edi was a strong lady from Kufa who stopped, during the
battle of Siffeen, among the rows of Imam Ali’s army calling loudly at
them with statements of the highest degree of encouragement on fighting.
Her words were so affective that they urged even the coward to fight,
the absconder to attack, the peaceable to go into battle, the fugitive
to assail, and the unstable to resist.

A long time after the battle, Muawiya summoned her. When she attended,
he asked her: “Do you know why I summoned you?”

She answered: “Except God, nobody knows the unseen.”

He asked: “It was you who rode the red camel during the battle of
Siffeen and stopped between the rows of the soldiers kindling the fire
of war and urging on fighting, were you not?”

She answered: “Yes, it was I.”

He asked: “What for did you do so?”

She answered: “Chief of the believers, the head died, the tail was
amputated, that which departed will never come back, time is changeable,
he who thinks will realize the truth, and matters will surely be
followed by others.”

He said: “You have said the truth. Now, do you still remember your words
in that situation?”

She answered: “No, by God, I do not. I have forgotten.”

He said: “How excellent you are! I do remember you when you said: ‘O
people! Pay attention and think well. You have been engaged in a
seditious affair. You have been covered by the gowns of gloom that took
you away from the very course. It is surely a blind, deaf, and mute
ordeal that does not respond to the whooping and does not become mild to
its leader. A lantern cannot shine in sunlight, stars cannot shine in
moonlight, and mules cannot win over mares. Likewise, nothing can cut
the iron except the iron. We will surely lead him who seeks guidance and
we will surely answer him who has questions.

O people! The right has certainly gained its long-sought goal. O
Muhajirs and Ansar! Be steadfast against difficulties, for the
reunification shall very soon be achieved, the word of justice shall
very soon prevail, and the right shall very soon overcome the wrong. For
sure, the right and the wrong are not the same. (Is he then who is a
believer like him who is a transgressor? They are not equal.) Go on
fighting and be steadfast. It is certainly that women’s dye is henna,
while men’s is blood. Patience surely achieves the best result. Wage war
without regression, for this day will be followed by other alike days.’

These were your words of urging on fighting, were they not?”

She answered: “Yes, they were.”

Muawiya said: “You are the partner of Ali in every single drop of blood
that he shed during that war.”

She answered: “Chief of the believers, God may reward you excellently
and keep you in safety for such great tidings that you have born to me.
You are, now, surely worthy of telling good news and pleasing the
sitters.”

He wondered in astonishment: “Has my accusation been great tidings in
your sight?”

She answered: “Yes, by God, it has. Had I been actually participating
him!”

Muawiya laughed and said: “Verily, your loyalty to Ali after his death
is more astonishing than your love for him during his lifetime[^36].”

Let us now cite a third story in this field:

On the day of Ashura, the mother of Wahab Ibn Abdullah Ibn Khabbab
al-Kelbi said to her son: “Son, stand up to support the son of the
Prophet’s daughter.”

He responded: “Of course, mother, I will do without showing any
neglect.”

Hence, the son proceeded for fighting, reciting his famous rajaz[^37].
When he attacked, he could kill a number of the enemies. He then
returned to his mother and wife, saying proudly: “Mother, are you
satisfied?”

She answered: “I will not be satisfied before you fight until you will
be killed before al-Hussein (a).”

When his wife shouted at him, ‘By God, do not distress me,’ his mother
said: “Son, do not listen to her words. Go to fight in front of the son
of the Prophet’s daughter so that he will intercede for you before God
on the Day of Resurrection.”

He listened to his mother’s words and went on fighting. He could kill
nineteen horsemen and twelve soldiers before his hands were cut. Seeing
this, his mother took a post and came towards him shouting: “I may
sacrifice my father and mother for you, fight for protecting the
Immaculate the harem of the Prophet (S).” When the son tried to convince
her to go back with the other women, she hanged to his clothes saying:
“No, I will not go back before I will be killed with you.”

Imam al-Hussein (a) intruded in the situation to say: “God may reward
you and your family excellently. Join the other women.”

Only then, she went back, and her son went on fighting until he was
martyred[^38].

How great the difference between such honorable, virtuous women and the
modern Muslim ones, most of whom call to primping up, casting away the
Islamic traditions, and imitating the Western women in their showing off
and dissoluteness, is!

Equality of the sexes
---------------------

Among the various heresies that invaded the East was the idea of the
complete equality of man and woman in political, economic, and social
fields. The naÔve Muslims, having been deceived by this fallacy, went on
calling to it, ignoring its being in violation of the principles of
nature and conscience, because of the great differences between the two
sexes and the dissimilarity of their qualifications in this life. By
proving the great differences between man and woman, it becomes easy to
realize the falsity of this idea that is full of negligence and waste of
the characteristics of both sexes.

Generally, man is huger, stronger, and more steadfast against ordeals
than woman is. He is also more broad- minded, sagacious, and
experienced.

Woman, on the other hand, is, generally, more handsome, less physically
powerful, more sensitive, and more delicate than man is, since she is
prepared for her maternal tasks.

Symptoms of menstruation, pregnancy, and suckling that occur to women
and influence effectively their lives and physical states are factors
that increase the difference between the two sexes. During their
monthlies, women suffer symptoms that cause them to be unfamiliar.

Dr. Jebb Hard says that it is infrequent to find a woman who does not
suffer a disorder during her menstrual period. Most women, however,
suffer headache, exhaustion, pain under navels, and anorexia. They also
become aggressive and sleepers. Because of these symptoms, it is
possible to say that women become ill during their monthlies and that
they have to suffer such illness once a month. Hence, such physical
changes naturally affect women’s intellectual faculties and bodily
processes.

Thus, many researchers have proved the impossibility of the equality of
the sexes.

In his book that proved the inequality of the sexes through natural
experiments and observations, Antoine Namilav; the Russian physician,
records that ‘we must not deceive ourselves by claiming that it is easy
to equalize between man and woman in the practical life. In fact, none
in this world exerted the efforts that we, the Soviet, had exerted for
making the equality of the sexes practical, and none enacted such
innocent, but fanatical, laws that we have enacted in this field.
Nevertheless, woman’s familial position has hardly ever changed.
Moreover, woman’s social position has also hardly ever changed. The
conception of the impossibility of the equality of the sexes is still
deep-rooted in the minds of all the classes of the Soviet society[^39].’

Dr. Alexis Carrel, who received the 1912 Nobel Prize for Physiology,
says that it is essential for educationists to pay a great deal of
attention to the mental and organic characteristics as well as natural
functions of both male and female since there are innumerable
differences between the sexes. Hence, it is necessary, for constructing
a civilized world, to take in consideration these differences.

As a matter of fact, we cannot consider man’s surpassing woman in the
scientific and theoretical fields as a standard that is applied to all
men. It happens that woman surpasses man in such fields. This, however,
cannot deny the fact that woman, in most cases, falls behind man. Some
people claim that woman’s falling behind man has been the reason of
social traditions and educational systems that prevailed on her life.
This is not accurate because most of such traditions and systems have
ceased to exist in most of the dissolute nations where the difference
between the sexes faded away and woman have enjoyed all opportunities
that are gained by men. Yet, woman, in these societies, has still
occupied the second position after man. This is another evidence on the
impossibility of the equality of the sexes, which is, such being the
case, considered as a sort of idiocy and silliness.

As the propagandists of equality of the sexes are completely incapable
of developing man’s qualifications so as to make him fit to do the
female tasks, they cannot make women assume masculine manners and do the
jobs that are purely men’s.

The Divine Wisdom has prepared each sex for definite function and tasks
in this life. Hence, it is unavoidable to distribute jobs among them
according to each one’s qualifications and abilities. It is said that
‘everything is prepared for doing its job.’

Man’s task is to practice the arduous works and the out- of-house
affairs, work hard for securing means of livelihood for the family
members, and guarantee material and moral protection and pleasure for
them. Women, however, are unqualified enough to do such tasks so
expertly.

Woman’s task, on the other hand, is to be good housewife and bring up
well-qualified men. None but woman can change her house and society into
a paradise where man can find release of the life difficulties and
children can feel the warm affection and factors of growth and
prosperity. To insert women in men’s fields and encourage her competing
with him in his own tasks is regarded as forfeiture of their
qualifications. It also plays the role of immobilizing men’s right to
practice their vital activities that, nobody except him, can do, as well
as his right to create a family.

The results of modern women’s competition with men in the fields of
their specialization have been dangerous moral, social, and mental evils
whose disadvantages have surpassed greatly their advantages.

Because women have failed to do their genuine tasks and joined the mixed
society, the family structure has become the victim of loss, immorality,
and misery, and has suffered the commonness of moral deviation and
collapse.

On another page of his aforementioned book, the Russian researcher
records that ‘symptoms of sexual disorder have disappeared on all the
workers. This is in fact serious danger that threatens termination to
socialism. Hence, we must fight with every weapon such symptoms.
However, fighting at this front has many problems and difficulties. I
can refer to thousands of events that demonstrate the fact that the
infection of sexual libertinism spread into the educated individuals of
the proletariat in addition to the ignorant ones[^40].’

It is however acceptable for women to practice certain jobs pertaining
to and befitting their sex, such as teaching girls or treating women. In
case a woman does not have a family provider or when the breadwinner is
incapable of securing her essential requirements, it becomes acceptable
for her to practice a job that saves her from the charms of the mixed
association and saves others from her charms.

Islam, having protected her dignity, has saved the earnings of the needy
women without letting them need for such suffering. If Muslims defray
the zakat, poverty will find no place in the Islamic society. Thus, what
do the propagandists of the equality of the sexes want? If they intend
to dignify and free women from social wronging, Islam has certainly
freed women, raised their ranks, and granted them their moral and
material rights. They in fact intend to deceive and humiliate women so
as to approximate them from the eyes and flirts of the wolves. What do
the liberalist women want? Do they seek the absolute equality with man,
or do they seek the freedom of dissoluteness and indecorum?

Because they all are immoral purposes, Islam has forbidden both man and
woman to respond to such calls so as to save them from the slips of
charms and the tragedies of the mixing of the sexes.

Distinction between the Sexes
-----------------------------

Islam has freed women from the offensive traditions and customs of the
pre-Islamic era, honored them, raised their ranks, and decided their
being equal to man in humanity, principles, sanctity of blood, honor,
and property, and the deserving of the rewards and penalties of the life
to come. On bases of fairness and wisdom, it has identified women’s
values and standings to men. In some situations, Islam, depending upon
advisability and rightness, has deemed women as same as men, but it,
because of the different qualifications and responsibilities in the
various fields of life, has also made a distinction between them through
nominating certain rights, duties, and rulings for each.

In all these affairs, Islam has aimed at achieving wisdom, uprightness,
and fair evaluation of humankind’s natures and traits. By preferring man
in certain rulings, Islam has not aimed at humiliating or wronging
woman. It’s one and only purpose has been the achievement of justice
through granting each sex the rights that befit the qualifications and
responsibilities.

We, hereinafter, will refer to the most significant points of
distinction between the two sexes so as to realize the reasons of the
Islamic rulings in this regard:

### 1. Maintenance

Each society, no matter how small it is, is in need for a well-qualified
guardian whose mission is to supervise its affairs and achieve
prosperity and development. From this cause, each family is in an
inevitable need for a guardian and supervisor who, though engaged in
serious task requiring sagacity, practice, willpower, and enough
experience in this life, must govern his family member with well
management and secure means of acceptable livelihood.

Now, which one is the worthiest of supervising and maintaining the
family? Is it man or woman?

Owing to his qualifications, man is more experienced in the life
affairs, more competent of supervising the family morally and
materially, and more capable of achieving means of good living than
woman is. This matter has been decided by the eternal constitution of
Islam:

***“Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them
to excel others and because they spend out of their property. (4:34)”***

Maintenance, however, does not mean absolute dominance and policies of
severity and violence against the family members, since such practices
are in violence of the ethics of Islam. The true maintenance relies upon
mutual understanding, cooperation, and emotional and intellectual
consent between the paterfamilias and his family members:

***“Women have benefits as well as responsibilities. Men have a status
above women. (2:228)”***

In view of her femininity, woman is tenderhearted, sensitive, and
touchy. Frequently, women’s emotions prevail on their minds. All these
matters qualify her to fulfill the mission of maternity whose functions
require such feelings, and take her way from the leadership of family
that requires sagacity, emotional balance, tolerance, and firmness. All
these traits are found with man; therefore, he is more qualified than
woman is in fields of maintaining the family.

Finally, positive woman usually disrespects the inactive, feeble husband
and honors the husband of great and attractive personality.

### 2. Man’s Preference to Woman in Inheritance

The Islamic Sharia has decided that man should enjoy the double of
woman’s share of heritage. Some simple- minded people misunderstood that
such a law is considered as mortification and wronging for woman. In
fact, Islam has never degraded or wronged woman. Because of man’s big
responsibilities, Islam has decided for him double share of heritage so
that fairness and equity can be achieved.

Unlike woman, man is responsible for securing his family members’ food,
clothing, house, education, and medical treatment. He is, unlike woman
too, responsible for protecting Islam by all possible means. Finally,
man is responsible for many social obligations that require spending. In
the light of this comparison, it is fair to decide for man a double
share of heritage. Woman, however, is luckier than man is, since she is
not responsible for many family and social obligations. Hence, Islam has
decided:

***“Let the male inherit twice as much as the female. (4:11)”***

Finally, woman’s possessive and vested rights are completely saved for
her alone, and man has no right to do anything to such properties before
her satisfaction and permission are obtained. Woman, in this field, is
equal to man.

### 3. Testimony

The Islamic Sharia has considered two women’s testimony as one man’s so
as to protect woman’s testimony from falsity and to guard the litigants’
rights from wronging and waste.

As she is prevailed by agitated emotions, sensitivity, and passivity
towards a definite party, woman deviates from justice and neglects the
right and the obligation of providing exact testimony. Evading so, Islam
has decided the joining of two women in testimony so that one may remind
the other and prevent her from false testifying:

***“Let two men or one man and two women whom you choose, bear witness
so that if one of them makes a mistake the other can correct him.
(2:282)”***

Modern medical experiments have proved that some women, during their
monthlies, suffer symptoms causing their mental powers to be enfeebled.
Hence, they become oblivious[^41]. Such experiments support the
necessity of joining two women during bearing testimonies.

### 4. Polygamy

The enemies have waged wrong campaigns against Islam using various forms
of bitter criticism and empty censure one of which is their vituperating
Islam’s permitting polygamy, which is, as they have claimed, considered
as injury and confusion for the marital life.

First of all, Islam was not the originator of polygamy. Many centuries
before Islam, polygamy was decided by the divine religions and positive
laws.

“Polygamy was not forbidden in the most ancient code. Likewise, it was
not forbidden in the Torah and the Gospel. Since the reign of Prophet
Abraham up to the Nativity, none of the prophets forbade polygamy. In
the Gospel, we cannot find a single text telling the illegality of a
matter which was decided as legal in the Old Testament. Everything that
is mentioned in the Gospel asserts the legality of polygamy in every
situation except one: the bishop who shows failure in standing
monasticism must satisfy himself with a single wife

Edward Westermarck, whose major interests were history of marriage, says
that ‘polygamy, as the Church confesses, perpetuated until the
seventeenth century. Moreover, it occurred frequently beyond the sights
of the Church and the ruling authorities.’

Hence, Islam, allowing polygamy, has not brought something heretic.
However, the new thing that Islam has brought in this regard was
reforming the disorder created by absolute polygamy and taking in
consideration the necessities that God does not neglect. In some
circumstances, or even general social circumstances, the allowance of
polygamy is more beneficial than its forbiddingness[^42].”

As a matter of fact, those who denied Islam’s allowing polygamy have
certainly practiced it by means of deviation and sinful relations. Had
they thought about the matter perceptively and impartially, they would
have found that polygamy is the one and only solution for the problems
and crises that befall individuals and societies.

#### Justifications of Polygamy

In the light of the following justifications, we may refer to the
purposes beyond Islam’s allowing polygamy:

First, it happens that a wife may be affected by a physical or mental
defect that impedes her from doing her duties, responding to her
husband’s desires, or paying attention to the family members. Such
crises may create disorder; therefore, it is essential to find
acceptable and firm solution. This solution must be that:

(a) Either the husband, suffering the deprivation of his marital rights,
is neglected without treatment and left slipping in the depths of vice,
and the family members, as well, are left for disorder. This is in fact
wrongness against the husband and the family members,

(b) Or the husband leaves the diseased wife, by means of divorcement,
suffering the agonies of ailment in addition to the bitterness of
rejection and loneliness. This is absolutely denied by sound sense, for
it contradicts the principles of humanity,

(c) Or the husband, after obtaining the diseased wife’s permission,
marries another wife who can respond to his desires, reunite the
scattered family, and encompass the diseased wife with kindness.

This is in fact the best and most acceptable solution.

Second, in some circumstances, it happens that a wife is incapable of
giving birth. Husbands, in such cases, have to choose one of two either
deprive themselves of sons or stand the burning feelings of being
heirless. This is however nobility. Or marry another woman capable of
giving birth. The second is in fact more logic since it is decided by
nature and instincts. Very rare are those who deny this fact.

Third, women, as a rule, are more numerous than men because, practicing
dangerous and deadly jobs in factories, mines, and the like, men
encounter fatal dangers. Men, naturally, are less immunized and more
subjected to the infections of diseases and epidemics than women are.
Biologists, referring to this fact, say that women enjoy physical
abilities that men lack and nearly all diseases affect men, not women.
On this account, there are 7,700,000 widows living, currently, in the
U.S.A. The office of American Census predicts that numbers of this class
will raise in the rate of two million per one decade.

Dr. Marion Langer, the sociologist, says that there are two solutions
only for covering the reduction in the numbers of men either polygamy or
inventing a method that elongates men’s ages!

War is another reason beyond women’s being more than men in numbers.
Wars in fact terminate great numbers of men and cause horrible decrease
in their rates in proportion to women. In the First World War, the
number of the casualties was 21,000,000. The Second World War consumed
about 50,000,000 men. This huge number of casualties caused a big space
in the numbers of men and created an international crisis that needed a
decisive treatment.

The Western nations, because they prohibited polygamy, faced this
problem with puzzlement; therefore, they had to treat it by means of
moral corruption that rumored profanity, prostitution, and bastards as
well as moral disorder.

Using such a unique, nonesuch method befitting the nature of humankind
and requirements of circumstances, Islam has treated this problem with
polygamy through which individuals and societies are saved from many
tragedies:

***“Marry such women as seem good to you, two and three and four; but if
you fear that you will not do justice between them, then marry only one.
(4:4)***

Having allowed polygamy, Islam has not opened its door at random.
Protecting women’s rights and dignity, it has specified justice and
equality between wives as stipulations for the validity of polygamy.
Nevertheless, the stipulation of justice is dedicated to the material
requisites of life. The other emotional aspects are not controlled by
human beings. Hence, man is incapable of achieving fairness among wives
in the emotional matters:

***“You will never be able to maintain justice among your wives, no
matter how hard you try. (4:129)”***

Some people may claim that the Western woman does not need marriage
since she is able to practice jobs and seek earnings. This claim is
untrue. The actuality of the human nature and the inner instincts prove
the opposite. Woman’s need for man is not restricted in material aspects
only. It is in fact an urgent mental need without which woman cannot
perfect her entity. The same thing can be said about man.

Fourth, some men are characterized by excessive sexual energy that
requires extreme carnal need. This energy can be controlled by polygamy;
otherwise, it may find a deviant course. This is the very thing that
occurred in the societies that banned polygamy and, in return, were
affected by poly-girlfriends or poly-paramours.

Divorce in Islam
----------------

Islam has been also criticized nonsensically for allowing divorce,
which, from the viewpoint of the criticizers, threatens woman’s entity
with ruination. Hence, for a single state of stupidity of the husband,
the wife may change into homeless, heartbroken woman.

This is in fact one of the false accusations against Islam. Since the
most ancient ages, divorce was enacted in such an improvised form that
wasted the wife’s rights and dignity. Unconditional divorce was common
among the Greek. The Romans, though their first generations forbade it,
allowed divorce in their religious and governmental laws. The Jewish
code narrowed the zone of divorce and made it lawful in three cases
only: fornication, barrenness, and moral or physical defect.
Christianity forbade divorce except in two cases: fornication of one or
both spouses and barrenness.

These were the reasons that urged the modern Western nations
importunately to codify the civil divorce, even if this may contradict
the religion.

When Islam emerged with its prosperous reign and inclusive legislation,
it has enacted divorce and encompassed it with a number of precautionary
measures that contribute in reducing its problems.

In sight of Islam, divorce is the most discommended legal matter to God.
There are certain states in which the disagreement between spouses
reaches climax to make any association and mutual understanding
impossible. Treating such cases, Islam provides solutions step by step.
It does not hurry to untie the sacred matrimonial bond at first blush,
but it tries the best to fasten it. First of all, Islam repeats the
words of God:

***“Always treat them reasonably. If you dislike them, you could be
disliking that which Allah has filled with abundant good. (4:19)”***

This is an invitation to wait and be patient even in case of dislike.

If the matter surpasses the question of like or dislike to reach to
alienation, divorce is still not the first solution that Islam advances.
It should be preceded by efforts of other parties who intend
righteousness:

***“And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint judge from
his people and a judge from her people; if they both desire agreement,
Allah will effect harmony between them, surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.
(4:35)”***

***“And if a woman fears ill-usage or desertion on the part of her
husband, there is no blame on them, if they effect reconciliation
between them, and reconciliation is better. (4:129)”***

If this mediation is of no use, too, then the matter has reached a
considerable stage of seriousness, and there must have been
impossibility to continue. Such being the case, it is futile to coerce
the two spouses to stand such a situation, and it is wise to put an end
for this manner of life so long as there is no other way.

Such separation may create in the mentalities of the two spouses the
desire to begin anew. It frequently happens that we feel the advantages
of a thing after we lose it. Hence, there is still an opportunity:

***“A marital relation can only be resumed after the first and second
divorce, otherwise it must be continued with fairness or terminated with
kindness. (2:229)”***

There is also the term of waiting for the consummated wives. During this
term, it is obligatory upon the divorcing husbands to meet the material
needs of their divorcees generously. During this term, also, it is
permissible for the regretting husbands to reassume marriage and begin
new marital life without being in need for any matrimonial procedures.

If the term of waiting passed without reconciliation between the
spouses, they, also, can reassume their matrimonial life, but with a new
matrimonial contract.

This is, so far, the first experiment for both the spouses to realize
the reality of their feelings towards each other and the seriousness of
the reasons that led to separation. If these reasons, or any others,
rise again to cause the husband to declare a second divorcement, he then
will lose the second opportunity, and will have to encounter a very
difficult situation, because of his frivolity, if he repeats the divorce
for a third time:

“After a divorce for the third time, it is not lawful for the husband to
resume marital relations with her or remarry her until she has been
married and divorced by another husband. 2:230”

Why then are the blabbers criticizing Islam for allowing divorce? Do
they want to annul the law of divorce so that the tragedies that have
been suffered by the Catholic nations whose laws of forbidding divorce
and polygamy obliged people to take numbers of girlfriends and commit
fornication do they want such tragedies to prevail on the Islamic
society?

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 11 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 11 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 23 page 51 (as quoted from
at-Tabirsi’s Mekarim ul-Akhlaq).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 11 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 11 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 11 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^7]: Rakaa: The unit of a prayer.

[^8]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/11 (as quoted from al-Faqih and al- Kafi).

[^9]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/16 (as quoted from al-Faqih and al- Kafi).

[^10]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 17 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^11]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/18 (as quoted from al-Kafi, al- Faqih,
and at-Tahtheeb).

[^12]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/14 (as quoted from al-Kafi and at-
Tahtheeb).

[^13]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/15 (as quoted from al-Faqih and al-
Kafi).

[^14]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 13 (as quoted from at-
Tahtheeb).

[^15]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/12 (as quoted from al-Faqih and al-
Kafi).

[^16]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/114 (as quoted from al-Faqih and
al-Kafi).

[^17]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 115 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^18]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 12/114 (as quoted from al-Faqih and
al-Kafi).

[^19]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 133.

[^20]: Quoted from al-Manfaloutti’s Mukhtarat, page 240.

[^21]: Hijab, generally, is the way of veiling that is ordained by the
Islamic Sharia, and, particularly, the manner of dress for Muslim women,
which involves wearing loose, modest clothing and covering the hair.

[^22]: All the previous indications are quoted from Mr. Al- Mawdoudi’s
book titled al-Hijab.

[^23]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; vol. 23 page 101 (as quoted from
al-Khissal).

[^24]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 127 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^25]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 127 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^26]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 127 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^27]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 127 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^28]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 12 page 127 (as quoted from al- Faqih).

[^29]: Quoted from Mr. Al-Mawdoudi’s book titled al-Hijab; page 22.

[^30]: Quoted from Dr. Ahmed Chalabi’s Comparison of Religions; 3/196.

[^31]: Quoted from Dr. Ahmed Chalabi’s Comparison of Religions; 3/200.

[^32]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 2 page 585.

[^33]: Ham is one of the sons of Noah the prophet. He is regarded as the
father of the black.

[^34]: Hind (daughter of Utba) was the mother of Muawiya. She was one of
the well-known most notorious prostitutes in Mecca. In the battle of
Uhud, she tried to swallow the liver of Hamza ibn Abd ul-Muttalib (a),
out of her rage and malice, after she had given a great prize to a slave
if he would kill him.

[^35]: Quoted from Qissas ul-Arab; part 2.

[^36]: Quoted from Qissas ul-Arab; part 2.

[^37]: Rajaz is a sort of Arabic poetry used to be including an
introduction of the fighters during battles.

[^38]: Quoted from Sheikh Abbas al-Qummi’s Nafas ul-Mahmoum.

[^39]: Quoted from Mr. Al-Mawdoudi’s book titled al-Hijab.

[^40]: Quoted from Mr. Al-Mawdoudi’s book titled al-Hijab; page 257.

[^41]: We have referred to this topic in details during discussing the
equality of the sexes.

[^42]: Quoted from Abbas Mahmoud al-Aqqad’s haqaaiq ul-Islam.


