Rights of Friends
=================

Merits of Friends
-----------------

Man has longed for making friendships so that he can obtain individuals
supporting him, alleviating his troubles, and sharing in his sorrow and
joy.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “Try to have as many as possible true friends,
for they are the supplies in joy and the shelters in misfortunes[^1].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “A friend occupies a great position to the
degree that even the inhabitants of Hell will seek his help before the
relatives. In this regard, Allah, conveying the words of the inhabitants
of Hell, says:

***‘so, we have no intercessors, nor a true friend. (26:100-1)’”***

A wise man said: “The true friends are the most favorable gain in this
world. They are adornment in luxury, support in misfortune, and aid for
acquiring good living and good deeds.”

As a wise man was asked whether he prefers his brother or friend, he
answered: “I prefer my brother when he is a friend of mine.”

Reality of Friendship
---------------------

Some people may think that the true friend is the one who treats them
courteously and bright-facedly, but if such one is tested, his falsity
is proved. Old and modern writers have gone on complaining about
friends’ alienations in spite of the love that is born for them. This is
because of:

• The ignorance of the reality of friendship and the incapability of
making distinction between the true and false friends, or

• Most of the friends are characterized by common social weak points,
such as changeableness and disloyalty.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “There are two classes of friends: friends of
confidence and friends of grimace. The friends of confidence represent
the hand, the wing, the family, and the wealth. Regarding your relation
with the friends of confidence, you should offer your wealth and body to
them, act with sincerity towards him who acts with sincerity towards
them, antagonize him who antagonizes them, conceal their secrets and
flaws, and publicize their nice qualities

You should know that friends of confidence are as rare as red sulfur.
Friends of grimace are those from whom you can gain pleasure; therefore,
you should not prevent them from gaining pleasure through you. Do not
expect anything more from them. As long as they show you good humor and
good wording, you must show them the same[^2].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Friendship is nil unless its limits are kept.
He who does not keep these limits should not be regarded as friend. The
first limit is that the inner self and the appearance should be
identical. The second limit is that the friend should regard your
goodness as his goodness and your evil as his evil. The third limit of
friendship is that a position or fortunes should not change the relation
with the friends. The fourth limit is that the friend should not deprive
his friend of anything that he is capable of doing. The fifth limit
which is the most comprehensive-, is that the friend should never leave
his friend alone in calamities[^3].”

Friends’ Selection
------------------

The characteristics of friends move between them very quickly. The bad,
however, move in greater speed. It frequently happens that well-behaved
individuals have gone astray because of the influence of their bad
friends. So, it is important for every man of reason to choose friends
that are characterized by good mannerism and behavior.

The Ideal Friend
----------------

The first characteristic of the ideal friend is intelligence. In fact,
the companionship of the foolish is vicious and malicious because the
foolish injures his friend when he intends to benefit him:

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “The foolish does not advise you of good and
is not expected to save you from any problem even if he does his best.
Moreover, he may harm you as he intends to benefit you. His death is
better than his life, his silence is better than his words, and his
remoteness is better than his closeness[^4].”

Friends must be characterized by faith, uprightness, and well mannerism.
Friends who are empty of such traits are insignificant since they are
anticipated to mislead their associates:

***“It will be a hard day for the unbelievers. It will be a day when the
unjust will bite their fingers, (regretfully) saying, "Would that we had
followed the path of the Messengers. Woe to us! Would that we had not
been friends with so and so. He led me away from the true guidance after
it had come to us. Satan is a traitor to people." (25:27-9)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “Man imitates his friends. Hence, you must
consider them whom you want to befriend[^5].”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “To sit with the evils causes mistrust in the
good. To sit with the good attaches the evils to the good. The sinful
ones’ sitting with the good ones attaches the sinful ones to the good
ones. If you cannot discern the belief of somebody, you should
investigate his associates. If they are following the right creed, he
will inevitably be on the right creed. If they are not, he then has no
share in the religion of Allah. The Prophet (S) used to say: He who
believes in Allah and the Final Day should not fraternize with any
disbeliever or associate with any sinful. He whoever fraternizes with a
disbeliever or associates with a sinful one is certainly regarded as
disbeliever and sinful[^6].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: My father Ali Ibn al- Hussein, once, advised me:
‘O son, do not associate, talk, or accompany five classes of people.’
‘Who are they, father?’ asked I, and he (a) answered: ‘Beware of
associating with the liar, for he is as same as mirage: he shows you the
near as remote and shows you the remote as near. Beware of associating
with the sinful, for he will disappoint you for a single bite or even
something less valuable. Beware of associating with the stingy, for he
will let you down when you are in urgent need of his property. Beware of
associating the foolish, for he harms you when he intends to do you
favor. Beware of associating with the disregardful of his relatives, for
I found him cursed in the Book of Allah[^7].’

Friends should exchange expressive desires of affection and fraternity
so that their handle of friendship will be firmer. But if such
tendencies fade away, the relation will be enfeebled, and the alienated
party will expose himself to criticism and revulsion.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “To alienate the one who desires for making
friendship with you is diminution of reason, and to desire for him who
does not want you is humility[^8].”

Standards of Love
-----------------

Aspects of love may be confused among people in general and friends in
particular. Suspect may creep into the relations of friendship. Solving
this problem, the Ahlul-Bayt (a) identified definite mental standards
that reveal the actual feelings and hidden.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) answered the man who asked him how he would realize
the real feelings of those who claim bearing love towards him: “You
should test your heart. If you really love him, he will really love
you[^9].”

Imam al-Baqir narrated that, while he was dying, Amirul-Mu'minin (a)
gathered al-Hasan, al- Hussein, Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyya, and the other
sons and commanded them: “ Sons, you should associate with people in
such a way that they will long for you when you are absent and will weep
for you when you depart this life. Sons, hearts are well-mobilized
troops; they recognize each other by means of amiability as well as
hatred. Hence, you should expect good from the one whom you love without
seeing any good from him. Likewise, you should beware of the one whom
you dislike although you have not seen any ill behavior from him[^10].”

Friendship between Ebb and Flow
-------------------------------

“Which is better: to have many friends or to be friendless?”

Answering this question, people of reason have had various opinions.
Anticipating the pleasures of sociability and benefits of solidarity,
some people have preferred having many friends to being friendless.
Others, however, have opted for the opposite, claiming the many problems
of friendship that originate hatred an enmity.

In fact, the question has nothing to do with the number of friends. It
is related to the traits of nobility and sincerity that friends must
bear. However, the noble, sincere friends are, unfortunately, very few.
A single sincere friend is of course better than thousand insincere
ones. In this regard, Alexander said: “He who has many friends
arbitrarily is as same as him who has many stones, and he who has few,
but selective, friends is as same as him who has selective pearls.”

Rights of Friends
-----------------

### 1. Material Care

It is incumbent to help the friend who suffers an economic crisis. This
is in fact one of the obligatory rights of friendship and one of the
proofs of loyalty. God, in the holy Quran, praises some peoples who
showed altruism:

***“They give preference to them over themselves - even concerning the
things that they themselves urgently need. (59:9).”***

Imam al-Kadhim (a), once, asked one of his close companions: “How do you
behave concerning your mutual association and relief?” The man answered:
“We are in the best manner in this regard.”

The Imam (a) asked: “Are you pleased when one of your needy associates
come to your shop or house to take that which they need?” The man
answered: “No, we are not.”

The Imam (a) commented: “Now, you are not behaving as I want you to do
in this regard[^11].”

Abu Ismaeel narrated that he told Imam al-Baqir (a) that numbers of the
Shia were great. The Imam (a) said: “Do the rich ones among them act
with kindness toward the poor, the good-doers overlook the evildoers,
and they help each other?” I answered: “No, they do not.” The Imam (a)
commented: “They are not Shia. The true Shia are only those who do these
acts[^12].”

Al-Waqidi related the following story:

The Eid day was about to come while I had no single dirham in
possession. My wife, noticing this manner, asked me to do something
since our children would be very depressed if they saw the other
children with new clothes. Hence, I had to send a letter to my Hashemite
friend asking him for help. He therefore sent me a bag of one thousand
dirhams. As soon as I received them, another friend of mine sent me a
letter complaining about neediness. I had to send him that very bag.
Because I was embarrassed to see my wife, I spent that night in the
mosque. The next morning, I went home and told her of the story. She did
not blame me for so. In fact, she praised me for such a doing.

After a while, my Hashemite friend came to me bearing the very bag of
one thousand dirhams. He asked me to tell him the truth; therefore, I
told the whole story. He said: “When I received your letter, I had
nothing at all but that bag. Nevertheless, I sent it to you. I, then,
wrote a letter to our friend asking for help, and he sent me the very
bag. Hence, we may distribute that sum among us.”

This story was told before al-Ma’mun the Abbasid caliph- who summoned me
and gave seven thousand dirhams. The share of each of us was two
thousand, and my wife was given one thousand.

### 2. Moral Care

Mental crises and misfortunes may befall some people who, in such cases,
become in urgent need for aid and relief. The loyal friends are the
first people who must hurry in providing such help by means of words and
authorities. This is in fact the true standard of love and the
distinctive mark between genuine and false friends.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “The true friend is only he who regards his
friend in three situations: ordeal, absence, and death[^13].”

### 3. Excusation

Like all people, friends, even if they enjoy the highest ranks of
mannerism, are subjects to erring. Therefore, one must overlook and
excuse so long as one trust their love and loyalty. Such overlooking
will perpetuate the relation of friendship since excessive criticism
leads to reluctance.

Amirul-Mu’minin said: “Bear yourself towards your brother in such a way
that if he disregards kinship, you keep to it; when he turns away, be
kind to him and draw near to him; when he withholds spend for him; when
he goes away approach him; when he is harsh be lenient; when he commits
wrong think of (his) excuse for it, so much as though you are a slave of
him and he is the benevolent master over you.

But take care that this should not be done inappropriately, and that you
should not behave so with an undeserving person. Do not take the enemy
of your friend as a friend because you will thus antagonize your friend.
Never use trickery. It is the manner of the evil ones. Give true advice
to your brother, be it good or bitter. Help your brother in any case,
and go with him wherever he goes, and never retaliate him even if he
throws dust in your mouth. Prevail your enemy by doing favor to him.

This is more successful. You will save yourself from people by good
manners and swallowing the anger. I did not find a sweeter thing than
swallowing one’s anger in the end, and nothing more pleasant in
consequence. Never suspect in your brother and never leave him without
blaming. Be lenient to him who is harsh to you for it is likely that he
will shortly become lenient to you. Rupture of relations is very ugly.
What an ugly thing is the alienation after brotherhood, enmity after
affection, betraying those who trust you, disappointing those who expect
your good, and cheating those who confide in you!

If you intend to cut yourself off from a friend, leave some scope for
him from your side by which he may resume friendship if it so occurs to
him some day. If anyone has a good idea about you prove it to be true.
Do not disregard the interests of your brother depending upon your terms
with him, for he is not your brother if you disregard his interests.
Your family should not become the most miserable people because of you.

Do not lean towards him who turns away from you. Do not turn away from
him who leans towards you when he deserves association. Your brother
should not be firmer in his disregard of kinship than you in paying
regard to it. You should exceed in doing good to him than is evil to
you, giving to him than is withholding, and favoring him than is
ceasing. Do not feel too much the oppression of a person who oppresses
you, because he is only busy in harming himself and benefiting you. The
reward of him who pleases you is not that you displease him. Livelihood
is of two kinds -a livelihood that you seek and a livelihood that seeks
you, which is such that if you do not reach it, it will come to
you[^14].”

Imam al-Hasan (a) said to one of his sons: “O son, do not befriend
anyone before you know his means and sources. When you try him and
please to associate with him, you should then befriend him on bases of
pardoning his faults and consoling him in misfortunes[^15].”

It is recommended to neglect the friend’s offense so as to show trust in
him. This will certainly cause the offensive friend to admire his friend
and try to keep good relations with him.

It is also required to accept the friend’s apologies without strictness
or obstinacy so as to achieve the high moral standard.

Gentle reproof is recommended in this regard, because negligence of
reproof may make the friend feel his friend’s negligence or hidden rage.
Unless it is characterized by gentleness and sensation, reproof is
useless and unappealing. Excessive reproof may lead to the friend’s
alienation and dissatisfaction.

***“Only through the Divine Mercy have you (Muhammad) been able to deal
with your followers so gently. If you had been stern and hardhearted,
they would all have deserted you a long time ago. Forgive them and ask
Allah to forgive (their sins) and consult with them in certain matters.
But, when you reach a decision, trust Allah. Allah loves those who trust
Him. (3:159)”***

***“And not alike are the good and the evil. Repel (evil) with what is
best, when lo! He between whom and you was enmity would be as if he were
a warm friend. And none are made to receive it but those who are
patient, and none are made to receive it but those who have a mighty
good fortune. (41:34-5)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “In the same way as He has ordered me of
performing the religious duties, my Lord has ordered me to treat people
courteously[^16].”

“The most intelligent are the most courteous with people[^17].”

It is worth mentioning that within the strong factors of prosperity of
friendly relations is that each party should avoid giving credence to
the backbiters and talebearers who, according to the description of the
Prophet (S), are the evilest of people.

Moderation with Friends
-----------------------

It is wise to choose moderation in dealing with friends. Excessive love
and confidence in friends are unacceptable since it happens that a
friend may change into an enemy and use the secrets that he had shown as
weapons.

Imam Ali (a) said: “When you cherish someone you should cherish him
moderately for he may be your enemy someday, and when you hate someone
you should hate him moderately for he may be your friend someday[^18].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a): “The secrets that you must show before your friends
are only those through which your enemies cannot harm you, for a friend
may change into an enemy.”

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara; 51 (as quoted from
al-Amali).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 104 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 104 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara 56 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara; 52 (as quoted from
al-Amali).

[^6]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara; 53 (as quoted from
Sifat ush-Shia).

[^7]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 105 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^8]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^9]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 106 (as quoted from al- Kafi).

[^10]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara page 46 (as quoted
from al-Amali).

[^11]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara; 46 (as quoted from
Qadhaa ul-Huqouq).

[^12]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara 56 as quoted from
al-Kafi.

[^13]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^14]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha: Imam Ali’s commandment for Imam
al-Hasan.

[^15]: Quoted from Tuhaf ul-Uqoul.

[^16]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 86 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^17]: Quoted from Sheikh as-Saduq’s Meaani al-Akhbar.

[^18]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.


