Rights of Neighborhood
======================

Cooperation and Mutual sympathy
-------------------------------

Islam has used all means for enjoining Muslims to cooperate and
sympathize with each other so that they will be an ideal nation able of
achieving its aims and defending its individuals against dangers. Islam
has also worked diligently for planting such noble concepts in Muslims’
mentalities so as to be powerful bearing the feelings of love and
fraternity:

***“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and those with him are stern to
the disbelievers yet kind among themselves. (48:29).”***

***“Cooperate with each other in righteousness and piety, not in sin and
hostility. (5:2)”***

Within the aspects of cooperation and mutual sympathy is good
neighborhood on which Islam has stressed for sake of changing neighbors
into a united group exchanging feelings of kindness and cooperating for
gaining benefits and preventing dangers:

***“Worship Allah and consider no one equal to Him. Be kind to your
parents, relatives, orphans, the destitute, your near and distant
neighbors, your companions, your mates, wayfarers, and your slaves.
(4:36)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “Forty houses from the front, the back, the right,
and the left are neighbors[^1].”

“The Archangel Gabriel continued in instructing me to keep the neighbor
so importunately that I thought the neighbor will be given a share of
the heritage[^2].”

“Good neighborhood constructs the countries and postpones the deadline
of ages[^3].”

“He that passes a single night with satiation while his neighbor is
hungry has not believed in me. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will
not regard the inhabitants of a town one of whose individual passes a
night with hunger[^4].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “He that violates neighborhood is not one of
us[^5].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated: When he lost his second son, Benjamin,
Prophet Jacob supplicated to the Lord: “O Lord, is it not time to have
Your mercy upon me? You have taken my sight and taken my sons away from
me.” Hence, Allah revealed to him: “Even if I cause them dead, I will
certainly give them new life so as to gather you all in one situation.
But, you should remember that ewe, which you slaughtered, fried, and
ate, while you did not give anything of it to your neighbor who was
observing fasting.”

After that, Prophet Jacob used to call his neighbors, including those
who lived more than one mile away from him, to every meal he would
make[^6].

Rights of Neighbors
-------------------

Neighbor must be treated with kindness and courtesy, such as greeting
him, visiting him during ailment, congratulating him in joys, consoling
him in sorrows, casting the eyes down against his harem, overlooking his
flaws, abstaining from harming him, aiding him if he his needy,
borrowing him the household tools, and advising him when he goes astray
from the right path.

It is related that one of the neighbors of Abu Dalaf, in Baghdad, had to
sell his house because of debts and crises that had befallen him. ‘I
sell it with one thousand dinars,’ he said to the purchasers. ‘But the
real value of your house is only five hundred dinars,’ they said. ‘This
is true,’ he asserted, ‘but the neighborhood of Abu Dalaf is the other
five hundred dirhams.’

When Abu Dalaf heard this story, he defrayed the debts of his neighbor
and aided him so as to save him from selling his house.

[^1]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 97 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 96 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 96 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 96 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 96 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 96 (as quoted from al-Kafi).


