Rights of the Islamic Society
=============================

Merits of the Islamic Society
-----------------------------

Because of its remarkable qualities, the Islamic society, in the reign
of its prosperity, was nonesuch and ideal among the international
civilized nations. Its individuals composed one compact family of
virtues and dignities.

It has been a nonesuch example of belief that included secrets of
monotheism, showed true traits of divinity, declared the reality of
prophesy, and explained the dimensions of the Judgment. Hence, it has
become the divinely selected religion:

***“No religion other than Islam (submission to the will of Allah) will
be accepted from anyone. Whoever follows a religion other than Islam
will be lost on the Day of Judgment. (3:85)”***

It has been a nonesuch example of the enactment of laws, because the
Islamic Sharia has been the comprehensive among the other divine codes
and has been the most ideal constitution to humankind.

It has been a nonesuch example of moralities. The ethical values have
been perfect and prosperous only during the reign of the Islamic society
that is described by the Prophet’s words:

“The true believer is only he whom Muslims can trust in regard with
their estates and souls. The true Muslim is only he whom Muslims are
saved from his hand physical harm- and tongue- verbal harm-. The true
Muhajir[^1] emigrant- is that who deserts the sins[^2].”

It has been a nonesuch example of social moralities. Amirul-Mu’minin
said: “O my child, make yourself the measure (for dealings) between you
and others.

Thus, you should desire for others what you desire for yourself and hate
for others what you hate for yourself. Do not oppress as you do not like
to be oppressed. Do good to others as you would like good to be done to
you. Regard bad for yourself whatever you regard bad for others. Accept
that (treatment) from others, which you would like others to accept from
you. Do not talk about what you do not know even though what you know be
very little. Do not say to others what you do not like to be said to
you[^3].”

Islam has been a nonesuch example of fraternity. It has declared the
principle of fraternity among its individuals in such an unprecedented
way:

***“Believers are each other's brothers. (49:10)”***

Accordingly, the Islamic society has become one family applying
fraternal terms with each other. That was surely the greatest
reformative conquest of Islam.

Islam has been also a nonesuch example of liberality and solidarity.
Muslim individual must take interests in the social affairs and benefits
and must look kindly at the miserable.

The Prophet (S) said: “He that begins a day without taking an interest
in the affairs of the Muslims is not one of them[^4].”

“The creatures are subjects of Allah; therefore, the most favorable in
the sight of Allah are those who best benefit His subjects and please
His household[^5].”

Rights of the Islamic Society
-----------------------------

Individuals are the bricks of society whose happiness is achieved when
they are pleased and granted their social rights. In the same way,
social depression occurs when they are depressed and deprived of their
rights:

### 1. Right of Life

In the sight of Islam, right of life is natural and sacred and it is
obligatory to be guarded. Violence of this right is a big crime the
punishment of which is immortal abiding in Hell:

***“The punishment for one who purposely slays a believer will be to
live in hell fire forever. (4:93)”***

Not only has Islam settled for the immortal abiding in Hell as
punishment for murderers, but also has enacted the retaliation for
murder and the undergoing of blood money for unintentional killing so as
to guard Muslims’ souls and stop crimes of homicide:

***“People of understanding, the law of the death penalty as retaliation
grants you life so that perhaps you will have fear of Allah. (2:179)”***

Moreover, man is not permitted to put an end to his own life by
committing suicide. He must protect and guard his soul against dangers
and harms:

***“Do not push yourselves into perdition. (2:195)”***

In the field of sacredness of souls, Islam has reached the climax when
it forbade killing the fetuses by abortion and imposed on those who
commit such crimes to undergo the identified blood money.

### 2. Right of Dignity

God has honored the faithful believer and covered him with colors of
respect and support. He therefore has respected the believer’s dignity,
guarded his honor, forbidden any sort of violence to his property or
soul, guaranteed his right, conferred upon him with favors, and declared
His divine care for him in this life as well as the life to come:

***“To those who have said, "Allah is our Lord," and who have remained
steadfast to their belief, the angels will descend saying, "Do not be
afraid or grieved. Receive the glad news of the Paradise which was
promised to you. We are your guardians in this world and in the life to
come, where you will have whatever you call for, a hospitable welcome
from the All-forgiving and All-merciful Allah" (41:30-2).***

***“Those who have faith and fear Allah will receive glad news both in
this life and in the life hereafter. (10:64)”***

***“We shall help Our Messengers and the believers, in this life and on
the day when witness will come forward. (40:51)”***

For cleaning the society from factors of divergence and dispersing the
concepts of dignity among its individuals, Islam has forbidden any
matter that may humiliate the believer, such as backbiting, spying, and
sarcasm.

***“Believers, stay away from conjecture; acting upon some conjecture
may lead to sin. Do not spy on one another or backbite. Would any of you
like to eat the disgusting dead flesh of your brother? Have fear of
Allah; Allah accepts repentance and is All- merciful. (49:12)”***

***“Believers, let not a group of you mock another. Perhaps they are
better than you. Let not women mock each other; perhaps one is better
than the other. Let not one of you find faults in another nor let anyone
of you defame another. How terrible is the defamation after having true
faith. Those who do not repent are certainly unjust. (49:11)”***

Moreover, Islam has guarded the believer’s reputation in his life and
after his death in the same standard. Hence, it is obligatory upon
Muslims to hold the funeral rites of the dead Muslims and it is
forbidden to do any matter that may dishonor even the dead body of
Muslim. It has also enacted the law of the doctrinal provisions and
blood money so as to guard the believers’ souls, properties, and honors.

***“People of understanding, the law of the death penalty as retaliation
grants you life so that perhaps you will have fear of Allah. (2:179)”***

***“The only proper recompense for those who fight against Allah and His
Messenger and try to spread evil in the land is to be killed, crucified,
or either to have one of their hands and feet cut from the opposite side
or to be sent into exile. These are to disgrace them in this life and
they will suffer a great torment in the life hereafter. (5:33)”***

Because fornicators despise the sacred honors of people and violate
their dignities, Islam has enacted a severe punishment for them:

***“Flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each.
Let there be no reluctance in enforcing the laws of Allah, if you have
faith in Allah and the Day of Judgment. Let it take place in the
presence of a group of believers (24:2).”***

To stop crimes of larceny that disturb peace, Islam has decided a strict
provision for the thieves:

***“Cut off the hands of a male or female thief as a punishment for
their deed and a lesson for them from Allah. Allah is Majestic and
All-wise. (5:38)”***

In the same manner, the Ahlul-Bayt (a) declared the honor of the
believer:

The Prophet (S) said: “To revile at the believers is defection, to fight
them is atheism, to backbite them is act of disobedience to Allah, and
their wealth is as sacred as their blood (soul)[^6].”

“Allah said: He who dishonors one of My disciples is waging war against
Me. The best thing through which My servant seeks nearness to Me is
performing that which I have imposed on him. The servant may seek
nearness to Me through performing a supererogatory prayer, and I will
love him for so. If I love him, I will act as his hearing, sight,
tongue, and hand. I will certainly respond to him when he calls upon Me,
and I will certainly give him when he asks from Me. The most difficult
thing for Me is grasping the soul of My believing servant who hates
death and I hate injuring him[^7].”

“Oh you who declared being Muslims by tongues but did not have sincere
faith in hearts! Do not dispraise Muslims and do not inspect their
flaws, for Allah will surely inspect the defects of those who inspect
the flaws of Muslims, and will dishonor them even if they are in their
own houses[^8].”

“He who publicizes an ill matter is regarded as him who originated it,
and whoever disregards a faithful believer for a matter will not die
before that very matter sticks to him[^9].”

### 3. Right of Freedom

Freedom stands for man’s manumission from slavery and enjoyment of his
legal rights. It is the most sacred right of humankind; therefore, Islam
has declared and decided protecting and spreading this right in the
Islamic society.

Unlike the idea of the simple-minded, freedom does not mean release from
all regulations that contribute in systematizing, reforming, and
protecting the societies. This sort of freedom is the freedom of
jungles. The true freedom is to enjoy all the legal rights that are not
in violation of others’ rights:

#### A. Freedom of Religion

It is rightful for a Muslim to have full freedom in matters relating to
his beliefs, rituals, and rulings of Sharia. It is illicit to coerce him
to desert or act violently towards the constitution of Islam since such
coercion is regarded as flagrant violence to the most sacred freedoms.
Muslims, however, are required to be steadfast in matters relating to
the belief and against the misleading campaigns aimed at deceiving them.

#### B. Civil Freedom

It is rightful for a Muslim to enjoy latitude and practice all his civil
affairs. Hence, it is rightful to reside in any country he chooses, do
any job he prefers, study any field of science he likes, and make any
contract he wants. Hence, he is free to do all these things in the light
of the Islamic Sharia.

#### C. Freedom of Propagation of Islam

This freedom is dedicated to the well-qualified Muslims who are able to
publicize the Islamic edification. Such efforts contribute in developing
the Islamic society doctrinally, culturally, and socially, and help in
purifying it from vices.

***“Let there be a group among you who will invite others to do good
deeds, command them to obey the Law, and prohibit them from committing
sins. These people will have eternal happiness. (3:104)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “People will live in perpetual goodness so long as
they enjoin good, forbid evil, and cooperate on charity. If they stop
acting these deeds, blessings will be taken away from them, some of them
will rule the others tyrannically, and they will not find any supporter
in the earth or in the heavens[^10].”

### 4. Right of Equality

Selfishness and class privileges prevailed on the life of the past
nations. Class differentiation was the most distinctive feature in the
lives of the Arabs in the pre- Islamic era. They used to persecute the
weak and treat them as slaves and used not to criticize the celebrities
for offenses so as to make distinction between ordinary people and them.

Omar Ibn Hind; the Arab king, for instance, used to talk to people from
behind a screen and used to oblige mothers of the chiefs to act as
servants in his house.

Annu’man Ibn al-Munthir was another example. He classified his days into
days of pleasure and days of rage. He used to endow anyone who meets him
on a day of pleasure liberally, and kill every one who visits him on the
days of rage.

Until the French Revolution; 1789, which called to and aroused
egalitarianism in the mentalities of the Western people, racial
discrimination was a common feature in the Western nations. Casteism,
however, have lived in the mentalities of most of them. The German Nazi
movement, for instance, has preferred the Aryan to others. In the
American society, struggles between the white and the black are still
current because of the selfishness of the white who disdain associating
with the black. Britain, likewise, sowed the seeds of casteism in South
Africa where the white are masters and the black are acting as slaves.
In the shadows of communism that claims eradication of casteism, the
distinction between social classes is clearly noticed.

#### Equality in Islam

Islam has enacted the principle of equality in a nonesuch method. All
individuals of the society, whether male or female, white or black,
Arabs or non-Arabs, celebrities or ordinary, or rich or poor are the
same, just like the teeth of a comb. The one and only measurement of
preference is God-fearing and righteous deed:

***“O People, We have created you all male and female and have made you
nations and tribes so that you would recognize each other. The most
honorable among you in the sight of Allah is the most pious of you.
Allah is All-knowing and All-aware. (49:13)”***

All are subject to the Islamic laws and duties, without any distinction.

The Prophet (S) kept on confirming on the principle of equality so as to
achieve the noble fraternity among Muslims:

***“Believers are each other's brothers. (49:10)”***

As kings used to claim their being preferred to others, God, in the holy
Quran, teaches the Prophet (S) to declare his reality among people:

***“Say: I am only a mortal like you but I have received revelation that
there is only one Lord. (18:110)”***

Hence, the Prophet and his immaculate progeny were the ideal examples of
the application and the call to the principle of equality.

The Prophet (S) said: “by way of Islam, Allah took away the arrogance
and taking pride in ancestors that were followed in the pre-Islamic era.
All people are (the offspring) of Adam who was created from dust. The
honorable among them in the sight of Allah is the most pious of
them[^11].”

One day, Omar Ibn al-Khattab asked: “If the caliph notices a lady
committing fornication, is his testimony regarded as sufficient for
subjecting her to the doctrinal provision?”

Imam Ali (a) answered: “Just like other Muslims, his testimony will be
refused and he will be subjected to the lashing that is decided as
doctrinal provision of defamation if he does not bring four witnesses.”

Jebb; the Western author, was astonished by the Islamic principle of
equality. He therefore expressed his admiration in his book titled ‘With
Islam’, saying that there is no single association can achieve the
success that Islam has achieved in field of combining the disagreeing
races of humankind under the principle of egalitarianism. If
disputations of the West and the East are decided to be studied, it will
be obligatory to depend upon Islam for solving them.

Having decided equality, Islam has used such a logic style befitting
reason and sound nature and corresponding to immortal principles of
justice and giving equal opportunities to everybody. Hence, the standard
of distinction has been a matter that is within everybody’s capacity:

***“The most honorable among you in the sight of Allah is the most pious
of you. (49:13)”***

Meanwhile, Islam has decided distinction according to one’s values and
worthiness:

***“Say: Are those who know equal to those who do not know? (39:9)”***

On this standard, too, God made a distinction between the prophets, each
according to his efforts:

***“We gave some of Our Messengers preference over others. To some of
them Allah spoke and He raised the rank of some others. We gave
authoritative proofs to Jesus, son of Mary, and supported him by the
Holy Spirit. (2:253)”***

In the same manner, scholars were given preference to the ignorant and
the believers to each other according to standings of knowledge, piety,
and uprightness:

***“Allah raises the position of the believers and of those who have
received knowledge. (58:***11)”

People, in fields of sustenance, are preferred to each other, according
to abilities and qualifications, because it is not fair to put the
intelligent and the idiot on the same level:

***“It is We who have distributed their sustenance in this world and
raised the positions of some of them above the others so that they would
mock each other. The mercy of your Lord is better than what they can
amass. (43:32)”***

### 5. Right of Knowledge

In his capacity as a member of the society, an individual has his own
value and influence. According to the abilities and physical and mental
qualifications of individuals, degrees of development and civilization
of societies are estimated. From this cause, the civilized nations
exerted remarkable efforts for educating their sons by various means,
such as compulsory education and free education in the first stages of
schools.

In their golden age, Muslims were the ideal examples of spreading
knowledge and honoring the knowledgeable. Hence, they held the reins of
knowledge, constructed the Islamic civilization, and led the other
nations to progress and development.

In his book titled ‘History of the Arabs’, Sdew says that Muslims, in
the Middle Ages, stood alone in the fields of knowledge, philosophy, and
arts, and publicized them wherever they stepped. Therefore, these fields
of knowledge reached Europe and caused its renaissance and development.

In the Islamic society, the right of education was available and secured
for every individual, apart from race or social class. This was the main
reason beyond the prosperity and extensive scope of the Islamic
knowledge. The Islamic Sharia has ordained the scholars to publicize
their knowledge among Muslims in the same way as it has ordained every
male and female Muslim individual to seek knowledge.

### 6. Right of Ownership

The most seditious ordeal all over history is the ordeal of property and
ownership that has been originated in this age and caused the world to
divide into two disagreeing parties: one allows the private capital
unconditionally (namely, the capitalists), and the other forbids it
totally (namely, the communists).

Islam has settled this problem and treated it so wisely. It neither
forbids private capital nor allows it unconditionally. Because man is
naturally disposed to love possession and self-benefit, though the
imaginary theories that do not believe in man’s natural instincts and
tendencies ignore this, Islam does not prevent the private capital,
which is a natural right achieving the individuals’ dignities and
existence and frees them from authorities that control people’s
sustenance. The private capital, too, causes talents of man to blow up
and encourages him to increase his productive energies.

Meanwhile, Islam, unlike modern capitalism, has not permitted the
private capital unconditionally. It has defined definite legal ways for
gaining wealth so that it will not be collected by a small group of
people, while the majority whose efforts are exploited by the
capitalists, are deprived of it:

Islam has identified certain ways for gaining wealth and forbidden other
ways, such as usury, bribe, monopoly, or usurpation.

Islam has enacted the law of inheritance so as to distribute the wealth
on a number of heirs of every generation.

Islam has ordained the taxes, such as the zakat, khums, and expiations,
which are collected for securing good livelihood for the needy.

Through such economic principles, Islam has been able to sow the spirits
of mutual sympathy and achieve social justice among Muslims.

### 7. Right of Islamic Interests

Mutual sympathy, fraternal ties, and harmony are the distinctive
features of the Islamic society. According to Sharia, Muslims have no
right to overlook the social affairs and to avoid participating in the
social prosperity and development.

Showing their high ranks in the sight of Islam, the Ahlul-Bayt (a),
through their numerous commandments that achieve social and economic
perfection if they are applied, urged to respect and settle all the
needs of the believing individuals:

#### A. Feeding and Watering the Believer

The Prophet (S) said: “As for anyone who serves a believer with water,
although he can obtain it, Allah will give him seventy thousand merits
for each drink. As for anyone who serves water to a believer who cannot
obtain water, Allah will give him the reward of the one who manumitted
ten individuals from the offspring of Ishmael the prophet[^12].”

Imam as-Sajjad (a) said: “As for him who feeds a hungry believer, Allah
will feed him from the fruits of Paradise, and as for him who waters a
thirsty believer, Allah will water him from the Sealed Pure Drink[^13].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “As for him who feeds a believer to satiation,
Allah will reward him, in the Hereafter, in such a way that none of His
creatures, including the angels and the prophets, can estimate it. To
feed the hungry Muslim achieves the forgiveness of Allah. Listen to
Allah’s saying: (It is the setting free of a slave or, in a day of
famine, the feeding of an orphaned relative and downtrodden destitute
person.)[^14]”

#### B. Clothing the Believer

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “As for anyone who provides the winter or summer
clothing to his friend, Allah will, incumbently, clothe him with the
dress of Paradise, alleviate his agonies of death, and enlarge his
grave. Moreover, the angels will receive him, as soon as he is
resurrected, with glad news. This is the meaning of Allah’s saying: (The
angels will come to them with this glad news:

***"This is your day which was promised to you." 21:103)***[^15]***”***

“As for anyone who provides clothing, or supports by any means, to a
needy Muslim, Allah will appoint seven thousand angels for seeking
forgiveness for him up to the day on which the Trumpet will be
blown[^16].”

#### C. Settling the Believers Need

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said “For anyone who settles the need of his believing
brother, Allah, on the Day of Resurrection, will settle for him one
hundred thousand needs the easiest of which is that he, as well as his
believing family members, relatives, and friends, will be taken to
Paradise.[^17]”

“Any Muslim individual who settles a need for a Muslim will be called by
Allah, ‘I am responsible for your reward, and I will not give you
anything less than Paradise[^18].’”

“On the day of Resurrection, a man will be lead by an angel to Hell. In
his way, he passes by a believing individual whom he knew in the worldly
life and asks him for help since he used to do him favors and settle his
needs in the worldly affairs. The believer then asks the angel to
release that man. As Allah hears the believer’s order, He orders the
angel to release that man[^19].”

#### D. Gladdening the Believer

The Prophet (S) said: “The most favorable deed in the sight of Allah is
gladdening the believers[^20].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “For anyone who gives pleasure to a believer,
Allah will create a being from that pleasure to meet him at his death
and bear to him the glad tidings of winning Allah’s honor and
satisfaction. That being will accompany him in his grave and repeat the
same glad tidings. When he will be resurrected, that being will
accompany him and repeat the same glad tidings. With every horror that
he has to encounter, that being will accompany him to repeat the same
glad tidings. Hence, he will ask, ‘who are you?’ That being will answer,
‘I am the pleasure that you gave to so-and-so[^21].’”

#### E. Visiting the Believer

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “For anyone who visits his ill or healthy friend
purely for the sake of Allah, without being cheating him, Allah will
appoint seventy thousand angels calling him from behind, ‘Blessed be
you. Enjoy Paradise. You are surely the visitor and the delegation of
Allah the All- beneficent[^22].’”

“Hajjis and performers of Umrah are the delegations to Allah until they
are back home. The performers of prayers are in the guardianship of
Allah until they finish. Those who visit their believing friends are
visiting Allah. Hence, they enjoy the rewards and favors of Allah.”

[^1]: Muhajirs: The emigrants. The early Muslims of Mecca who had to
flee their homeland to Medina.

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 99 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha: Imam Ali’s commandment for Imam
al-Hasan.

[^4]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 99 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^5]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 99 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^6]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/160 (as quoted from al-Kafi and al- Faqih).

[^7]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; part 1 page 41 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^8]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara 177 (as quoted from
al-Kafi).

[^9]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara, 177 (as quoted from
Thawab ul-A’mal and al-Mahassin).

[^10]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 9/29 (as quoted from at-Tahtheeb).

[^11]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 14 (quoted from the Prophet’s commandment
for Imam Ali).

[^12]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/121 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^13]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/120 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^14]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/120 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^15]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/121 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^16]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/121 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^17]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/117 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^18]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/117 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^19]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara; 86 (as quoted from
Thawab ul-A’mal).

[^20]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/117 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^21]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/117 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^22]: Quoted from al-Wafi; 3/117 (as quoted from al-Kafi).


