Obligations of the Rulers
=========================

All over history, rulers, according to their qualifications, have played
influential roles in the development and retardation of nations. The
ideal, sincere ruler is he who governs his subjects on bases of
leniency, justice, and equality.

The absolute ruler, on the other hand, is he who enslaves, humiliates,
and exploits the subjects for his own interests:

The Prophet (S) said: “On the Day of Resurrection, a caller will cry
out: where are the unjust rulers and their supporters, including those
who provided them an inkpot, those who untied one of their bags, and
those who sharpened a pencil for them. Join all these individuals to
those rulers[^1].”

The unjust rulers will sooner or later suffer punishments that befit
their acts of oppression. History is full of stories showing the bad
results of the absolute rulers.

Al-Hajjaj Ibn Yousuf ath-Thaqafi is the most hideous example of the
unjust rulers. He ruled for twenty years during which he killed 120,000
individuals besides those whom were killed during his campaigns. In his
cells, there were fifty thousand men and thirty thousand women etc.
Finally, this dictator was affected by canker and severe frost until he
perished.

Rights of Subjects against Rulers
---------------------------------

### (A) Justice

The absolute authority of the unjust rulers, in most cases, is the
result of people’s rebellion against and disobedience to the Lord:

The Prophet (S) said: “Allah says: I am Allah. There is no god but I. I
have created the kings whose hearts are in My hand. I will make the
hearts of the kings full of mercy towards the people who obey Me, but I
will make them full of rancor towards the people who disobey Me. Do not
engage yourselves in reviling at the kings. You must repent to Me so
that I will make their hearts full of compassion towards you.”

### (B) Righteousness

Because most people try to imitate them, it is obligatory upon rulers to
be characterized by righteousness and well behavior so as to act as good
examples for their subjects. Likewise, the rulers’ deviation and
misconduct push most people towards deviation.

### (C) Lenience

Rulers are required to govern people with means of lenience and avoid
persecution because despotism is the most disreputable manner of the
rulers and the most injurious act towards the subjects.

The Prophet (S) said: “Lenience will beautify anything it accompanies
and will disfigure anything it leaves[^2].”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “Habituate your heart to mercy for the
subjects and to affection and kindness for them. Do not stand over them
like greedy beasts who feel it is enough to devour them, since they are
of two kinds, either your brother in religion or one like you in
creation. They will commit slips and encounter mistakes. They may act
wrongly, willfully, or by neglect. So, extend to them your forgiveness
and pardon, in the same way as you would like Allah to extend His
forgiveness and pardon to you, because you are over them and your
responsible Commander (Imam) is over you while Allah is over him who has
appointed you through what He has given to you of the knowledge of His
Book and the practices of His Prophet (S).”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The lenient can win anything he wants from
people[^3].”

Lenience is of no value unless it is done to the virtuous people. The
evildoers who disturb the social peace do not deserve any sort of
lenient treatment.

#### Aspects of Lenience

Aspects of lenience can be shown through the words and deeds of the
rulers. Hence, the ruler must use good wording and avoid obscenity. He
must treat the subjects with kindness through sympathizing with their
pains and tragedies and hurrying for helping them in misfortunes and
crises. Finally, the ruler must try his best to save the subjects from
heavy taxes.

#### Results of Lenience

Lenience creates the subjects’ love for their rulers and save them from
the need for flattering and hypocrisy.

God praised His Messenger Muhammad (S) for his lenience:

***“Only through the Divine Mercy have you (Muhammad) been able to deal
with your followers so gently. If you had been stern and hardhearted,
they would all have deserted you a long time ago. (3:159)”***

### (D) Selection of the Retinue

A ruler, no matter how well-qualified he is, cannot dispense with
supporters who help him do his duties properly. Such supporters, in
fact, have a great effect in guiding and conditioning the ruler’s morals
and opinions. From this cause, it is important for the ruler to select
well- qualified and decent retinue so that they will positively help him
and contribute in achieving the subjects’ pleasure.

### (E) Settlement with the Officials

Because most of them take pride in their authorities, officials usually
challenge and treat people arrogantly and neglect their duties. Such
behaviors will surely dissatisfy people with the ruling authorities.
From this cause, it is necessary for rulers to supervise and call the
officials to accounts so as to reward the dutiful and punish the
negligent. By doing so, each individual will perform his duty towards
the society properly, tragedies and varieties of flattering to the
official will be eradicated, and all the social affairs will he
prevailed by justice.

### (F) Achievement of Social Happiness

The ruler is responsible for the moral and material development of the
subjects. This happiness can be achieved when the ruler supervises the
subjects, pays attention to their interests, secures their rights of
security, justice, and luxury, raises their scientific, physical,
social, moral, and structural levels, cares for the industrial,
agricultural, and commercial development, and encourages the talents and
abilities.

Rulers’ Rights against Subjects
-------------------------------

The ruler, in his capacity as the pioneer or the national development
and civilization, enjoys definite rights imposed upon the subjects.

In the following words, Amirul-Mu'minin (a) refers to the rights of the
rulers:

“The ruled cannot prosper unless the rulers are sound, while the rulers
cannot be sound unless the ruled are steadfast. If the ruled fulfill the
rights of the ruler and the ruler fulfils their rights, then right
attains the position of honor among them, the ways of religion become
established, signs of justice become fixed and the Sunna gains currency.
In this way time will improve, the continuance of government will be
expected, and the aims of the enemies will be frustrated.

But if the ruled gain sway over the ruler, or the ruler oppresses the
ruled, then difference crops up in every word, signs of oppression
appear, mischief enters religion and the ways of the Sunna are forsaken.
Then desires are acted upon, the commands (of religion) are discarded,
diseases of the spirit become numerous and there is no hesitation in
disregarding even great rights, nor in committing big wrongs. In such
circumstances, the virtuous are humiliated while the vicious are
honored, and there are serious chastisements from Allah onto the
people[^4].”

### (1) Obedience

Rulers enjoy the right of obedience against their subjects in the fields
that achieve satisfaction of God. Obedience encourages rulers to treat
their subjects sincerely while rebellion and disappointment are
detestable manners that excite the rulers’ rage and punishment.

Imam al-Kadhim said: “O Shia, do not humiliate yourselves by acting
disobediently to the rulers. You should pray to Allah to perpetuate the
just rulers and rectify the unjust. Your rectification will be achieved
when your rulers are rectified. The just ruler is as same as the
compassionate father. Hence, you should love for him that which you love
for yourselves and reject for him that which you reject for
yourselves[^5].”

### (2) Support

A ruler cannot dispense with the support of his subjects who help him do
his duties properly by means of intellectual and mental efforts.

### (3) Advice

People of reason are encompassed by the duty of providing advices to the
rulers when they tend to despotism enthralling the subjects. If such
advices prove futility, then the intellectuals are not blamed.

The Prophet (S) said: “The ruler is Allah’s shadow on this earth and the
shelter of the wronged. If the ruler governs with justice, he will be
rewarded and the subjects must thank. If the ruler governs unjustly, he
will be punished and the subjects must show tolerance until they are
relieved[^6].”

Nowadays, the rulers have no longer accepted advices; therefore, the
civilized governments have permitted criticizing the rulers by way of
parliaments, press media, and memoranda.

[^1]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara; 218 (as quoted from
Thawab ul-A’mal).

[^2]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 86 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^3]: Quoted from al-Wafi; part 3 page 87 (as quoted from al-Kafi).

[^4]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^5]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara page 218 (as quoted
from al-Amali).

[^6]: Quoted from Bihar ul-Anwar; Kitab ul-Ashara page 214 (as quoted
from al-Amali).


