Anger
=====

Anger is a mental condition that provokes the excitement of man in words
and deeds. Because of the dangers and sins --such like mocking, gibe,
obscenity, beating, killing, and the like evildoings that are resulted
from anger, it has been considered as the door to every evil:

Imam as-Sadiq narrated on the authority of his father that a Bedouin
came to the Prophet (S) and said: “I live in the desert; hence, I want
you to instruct me the comprehensive of speech.” The Prophet said: “I
instruct you not to be angry.” As the Bedouin repeated the same request
three times, the Prophet (S) repeated the answer three times. The
Bedouin commented: “I will not ask you for anything anymore. Certainly,
the Messenger of God has instructed me the best[^1].”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “Keep off anger because it is one large army
from the Shaitan’s armies.”

“Anger is a stroke of madness, for the angry, later on, feels sorry. If
he does not, his madness then is inclusive[^2].”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said: “A man often becomes so angry that he is never
pleased until this causes him to be in Hell[^3].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “Anger is the key to every evil[^4].”

Incentives of Anger
-------------------

• The incentive of anger could be a physical disorder, such as illness
or neuropathy that cause hypersensitiveness.

• It could be a psychological defect that is arisen from mental stress,
excessive selfishness, or feeling of insult or inferiority.

• It could be ethical, such as habituation of quarrelsomeness and quick
anxiety.

Damages of Anger
----------------

Anger causes gross damages that harm individuals and communities,
physically and mentally, materially and morally. A single state of anger
often injured the emotions, charged the spirits with hatred, and split
the handles of mutual amicability. Moreover, it often threw people in
jails, exposed them to perditions, aroused wars, and shed blood of
thousands of innocent people. What is more is the mental crises and
tragedies most of which end with sudden death.

After all, anger changes man into a furious volcano whose flames are
rage and evils. Thus, you see the tongue of the angry speak vulgar
language and words of disgracing, and see his hands set for beating or
even killing. This is in case the angry controls his rival completely.
If not, the calamities of anger reflect on the angry; therefore, you see
him tear his dress, slap his head, and, in some cases, practice insane
deeds, such as reviling at beasts and beating on the solid things.

Anger between Praise and Censure
--------------------------------

Anger is a significant instinct that excites in man the spirit of zeal
and disdain and stirs up the spirits of sacrifice for the sake of the
noble aims, such as defending the belief and protecting the souls,
fortunes, and dignities. When a man misses such an instinct, he becomes
the subject of humility. It is said: “He who does not feel angry when
infuriated is surely donkey.”

As a conclusion, the abominable anger is the excessive that takes away
from moderation and challenges the regulations of the intellect and the
Sharia. The moderate anger, on the other side, is an honored virtue
strengthening man and restoring the morale.

Treatment of Anger
------------------

• If the incentive of anger is a physical disorder or a nervous
depression, such like the states of the sick, the old, and the
emaciated, the treatment should be clinical means, strengthening of the
public health, and availability of the physical and mental rest, such as
following a certain regime of nutrition, commitment to cleanness, and
practice of suitable physical exercises and muscular relaxation.
Finally, such individuals should keep off any matter that exhausts the
mentality or the body, such as mental stress, sleeplessness, submission
to depression, and other incentives of agitation.

• Anger does not occur arbitrarily. There are definite reasons that
agitate it, such as excessive selfishness, disputation, mocking, gibing,
and injurious joking. In such cases, the treatment should be to avoid
such reasons as much as possible.

• To remember the disadvantages, dangers, and sins of anger, and to keep
in mind that anger harms the angry more than the others this may help in
its treatment. It may happen that a trivial matter arouses an
uncontrollable state of anger. A psychoanalyst says: “Leave the idea of
retaliating on your enemies, because this causes you harm more than that
which you intend for your enemies. When we bear malice against our
enemies, we grant them the opportunity to overcome us. In fact, our
enemies would dance delightedly if they knew the scope of worry that
they cause to us. The malice that we bear against them does not harm
them. As a matter of fact, it harms us and changes our days and nights
into hell.” Hence, it is necessary to keep in mind the advantages of
clemency:

***“If you replace evil habits by virtuous ones, you will certainly find
that your enemies will become your intimate friends. Only those who
exercise patience and who have been granted a great share of Allah's
favor can find such an opportunity.”*** (41:34-5)”

• The influence and criminal motives of anger expose to the wrath and
punishment of God. Imam as-Sadiq (a) said:

“Allah revealed to one of His prophets: Son of Adam[^5]! Remember Me in
your states of anger so that I will remember you in My wrath and will
not crush you with those whom I will crush. Consider Me as your
supporter, for My support to you is better than your own support[^6].”

• It is better to postpone the temporary inducements of anger until its
vehemence fades away. This may achieve relaxation and regain reason. It,
however, can be achieved only by means of self-control and temperance.

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “If you are not clement, you should try to be
it. He who imitates a people shall be one of them[^7].”

• The following practices help in the treatment for anger: seeking God’s
guard against the Devil, sitting or laying down when standing or
sitting, practicing the ablution or washing the face with cold water,
and touching the hand of the relative who is the object of anger.

[^1]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^2]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^3]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^4]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^5]: Son of Adam is a famous expression that refers to man.

[^6]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^7]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.


