Modesty
=======

Modesty is to regard the others’ standings and avoid behaving arrogantly
with them. It is an attractive quality that draws the hearts and
provokes admiration. God ordered His Prophet Muhammad (S) to cling to
modesty:

***“And be modest with him who follows you of the believers.
(26:215)”***

The Prophet (S) said: “The most favorable of you and the nearest to me
on the Day of Resurrection will be the most well-mannered and the most
modest. The remotest of you to me on the Day of Resurrection will be the
bigmouth and the proud[^1].”

Amirul-Mu'minin (a) said: “It is very nice for the rich to behave
modesty with the poor, out of seeking that which is with Allah. A nicer
thing is the arrogance of the poor towards the rich, out of their trust
in Allah[^2].”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “In the heavens, there are two angels whose
mission is to oversee the servants. They advance him who behaves
modestly, and humiliates him who behaves proudly[^3].”

“Modesty is to accept to sit in a place other than the first row of a
session, to greet whom you meet, to avoid disputation even if you are
right, and to detest to be praised for the acts of God-fearing[^4].”

It is worth mentioning that the recommended modesty is characterized by
moderation and free from negligence and excess. Excessive modesty causes
meanness, and negligence of modesty is a motive of arrogance.

A proverb says: The modesty of a high-positioned one will save him from
the malicious enjoyment at his falling.

We now forward some models of the virtues of The Ahlul-Bayt (a)
regarding their unique and ideal modesty: The Prophet (S) was the most
modest. When he was attendant in a house, he sits in the last place. In
his house, he helped his wives. He also used to milk his ewe, patch his
garment, repair his slippers, serve himself, carry his goods from the
mart, sit with the poor, and eat with the needy.

When someone wanted to whisper in his ear, he used not to nod his head
so that the other party would not nod the head. When someone shook hands
with him, he used not to pull his hand unless the other party would do.
When somebody sat with him, he used not to leave that meeting unless the
other party would leave. He used to greet everyone he met and extend his
hand before the other would do. He had never extended his legs among his
sitters.

He used to honor everyone who would visit him. In most cases, he used to
spread out his garment so that his guest would sit on it, and used to
give the cushion on which he had sat to his guest. He used to call his
companions with their most preferable nicknames. He had never
interrupted a speech. He used to divide his looks fairly among his
companions. He was always smiling and good- humored[^5].

Abu Dharr al-Ghifari[^6] narrated:

“The Prophet (S) used to sit among his companions. Any stranger who
visited him for the first time would not distinguish him among the
others unless he would ask. We therefore asked him to choose a special
place so that the strangers would recognize him. We then made a muddy
bench on which he used to sit while we were beside him.”

It was also narrated that he was, once, in a journey when he ordered his
companions to cook a ewe. A man volunteered to slaughter it, another
volunteered to skin it, and a third volunteered to cook it. The Prophet
(S) volunteered to gather firewood. When his companions told that they
would do that mission instead of him, he answered: “I know you can do
it, but I do not like to be distinguished. Allah dislikes to see His
servant distinguish himself from his companions.”

It was also narrated that the Prophet (S) went to bathe in a spring.
Huthaifa Ibn al-Yeman, who accompanied him, took a piece of cloth to
screen him. When he finished, the Prophet (S) took a piece of cloth so
as to screen Huthaifa who began to bathe. Huthaifa refused and asked him
not to do, but the Prophet insisted. When Huthaifa finished, the Prophet
said: “For the two persons who accompany each other, Allah will prefer
and love more the one who is more lenient to his companion.”

Describing Amirul-Mu'minin, the ideal example of modesty, Dhirar said:

“Among us, he was just like one of us. He used to approximate us when we
visited him, answer us when we asked him, respond to our invitations,
and answer our questions. Along with this, we could not speak to him
because of fear of him. When he smiled, his teeth were the like of
well-organized pearls. He used to honor the religious and favor the
needy. The strong could not exploit him and the weak were not despaired
of his justice.”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated: Amirul-Mu'minin (a) was, once, riding an
animal and his companions were walking after him. He turned his face
towards them and asked why they were following him. They answered that
they had just liked to walk after him. He asked them to leave, and said:
“To walk with a rider corrupts the moralities of that rider and causes
humility to the walker[^7].”

As he passed by a group of needy people who were having bits of bread
that was put on a shirt, Imam al-Hussein (a) greeted them. When they
invited him to their meal, he responded and sat with them. He said: “I
would like to eat with you except that your food is alms[^8].” He
invited them to his house, served them food, and gave them dresses and
some money[^9].

In his journey to Khurasan, Imam ar-Rida (a) ordered to make a dining
table and gathered all his servants, including the black ones, to eat
with him. I suggested to him to use another dining table for the slaves.
He answered: “What is this wording? The Lord is one, mother is one,
father is one, and each one will be rewarded according to his own
deeds[^10].”

[^1]: Quoted from Qurb ul-Isnad. A similar narrative is recorded in Ilal
ush-Sharaayi.

[^2]: Quoted from Nahj ul-Balagha.

[^3]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^4]: Quoted from al-Kafi.

[^5]: Quoted from Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 1 p. 415.

[^6]: Abu Dharr al-Ghifari was one of the heroes of Islam and the four
closest friends of Amir ul-Mu'minin (a) who supported him in the tragedy
of the usurpation of his leadership. He was well known of his courage
and revolutionary. Othman ibn Affan, the third caliph, banished him to a
village because of his public protestation against the caliph’s policy
of preferring his relatives and kinsmen to the others where he died in a
tragic situation, and that was an assertion of the Prophet’s prediction
to him.

[^7]: Quoted from al-Barqi; al-Mahasin

[^8]: According to the Islamic Sharia, it is unallowable for the
Prophet’s family to have or possess anything that is given as alms.

[^9]: Quoted from Ibn Shahrashoub; al-Manaqib.

[^10]: Quoted from al-Kafi.


