Final Points To Ponder About
============================

 The Bohras and the Ithna Ashari Shias are common in their belief up
until Imam al-Sadiq (as), then how come the Bohras do not consider the
sayings of the Holy Prophet (sawa) where he talked about having twelve
successors and also the traditions of the Holy Prophet (sawa) regarding
jurisprudence, for example the tradition on moonsighting that is found
in their own book, ‘Da’aimul Islam’ that was quoted earlier?

 If the Bohras believe in Imam al-Baqir (as) and Imam al-Sadiq (as),
then why do they not follow the authentic traditions of Imam al-Baqir
(as) and Imam al-Sadiq (as) found in the authentic books of Ithna Ashari
Shias? Why do the Bohras insist on following just one book ‘Da’aimul
Islam’ for deriving their rulings, knowing that Da’aimul Islam does not
have the chain of narrators, so there is no way of knowing if the
tradition being quoted is authentic or not?

 One must believe in the principles of religion (Divine Unity, Divine
Justice, Prophethood, Imamate and The Day of Judgment) in order to be a
believer; one cannot believe in four out of five tenets and still
consider himself a believer. Among the five tenets is Prophethood, one
must believe in all 124,000 Prophets in order to be a believer, and
similarly, the Imamate; one must believe in all the divinely appointed
Imams in order to be a believer. We proved earlier that the
Fatimid/Ismaili Imams could not have been divinely appointed.

 There are traditions of the Holy Prophet (sawa) regarding twelve
successors found in the books of Shias as well as Ahle Sunna. However
not a single tradition regarding 21 successors is found in any books.
Why?

 There are traditions of the Holy Prophet (sawa) regarding twelve
successors found in the books of Shias as well as the books of Ahle
Sunna. However not a single tradition regarding 21 successors or 49
successors is found in any books. Why?

 I challenge if one can find one authentic hadith of the Holy Prophet
(sawa) regarding 21 Imams (Bohra belief) or 49 Imams (Agha Khani
belief).


