Abstract
========

This book has been divided into 5 segments which have been further
divided into different parts.

The first segment defines **the meaning of Shia** and talks about the
different sects within the Shias and further divides Ismailis and talks
about the sects within them. It also discusses some of the
Ismaili/Fatimid Imams (**the Ismaili Imams** after Imam al-Sadiq
(as))[^1] and it questions the authenticity of the Ismaili Imams and
questions the fact if they were divinely appointed.

The second segment of the book deals with **the importance of following
the right chain** and the need to follow the rightful Imams after the
Holy Prophet (sawa) [^2]. Also discusses the **traditions of the Holy
Prophet (sawa) regarding his successors** (as) and his traditions
regarding Imam al-Mahdi, the twelfth Holy Imam (May Allah hasten his
reappearance). Also clarifies some doubts that one may have regarding
the occultation of Imam al-Mahdi (as).

The third segment discusses about an ideal Imam and the qualities we
should expect from him and then addresses two of the Ithna Ashari Imams
after Imam al-Sadiq (as), their designation, what has been said about
them not only by Shias but also by Ahle Sunna.

The fourth segment deals with the effect of following the wrong chain
and its consequences on their deeds. In addition, one of the Bohra
Jurisprudential issues (Bohra Calendar and the moon sighting) is
scrutinized in detail.

Finally, the fifth segment discusses the importance of having faith in
all of the Prophets, all of the Holy books and all of the Imams. It
concludes --as per the Holy Quran-- about the end result of the deeds
performed without having true faith.

[^1]: (as) indicates Alaihis Salaam meaning peace be upon him.

[^2]: (sawa) indicates Sallallahu Alaihi wa Aâ€™alihi meaning peace be
upon him and his progeny


