Following the ‘Right’ Imam
==========================

Importance of following the ‘Right’ chain
-----------------------------------------

First of all, we all accept that we are the slaves (Ibaad) of Allah
(swt). As Muslims, we must submit and obey Him, as He is our Master. We
know that as Muslims, we must believe in all of the Prophets and all of
the books that were sent by Allah (swt) in order to be Muslims. If one
believes in **some** Prophets only, then he is not a Muslim. For example
if one does not believe in Yusuf (as) or Nuh (as), then he is not a
Muslim. In other words, we must believe in **all** the Prophets in order
to be a Muslim, whether we know all of their names or not. In Quran,
only a few names of the prophets are mentioned.

The Holy Quran informs us only about some of the Prophets.

Quran clearly says in Surah Ghafir verse 78:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ اَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلًا مِّنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْہُمْ مَّنْ قَصَصْنَا
عَلَيْكَ وَمِنْہُمْ مَّنْ لَّمْ نَقْصُصْ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We have sent apostles before you. Of them are those We
have recounted to you and of them are those We have not recounted to
you….”***[^1]

In order to be a Muslim, one must believe in all the prophets, the whole
chain of prophets; **one cannot pick and choose and only believe in
some.**

As Muslims, we believe that the last messenger of Allah (swt) was our
Holy Prophet (sawa) and there are not going to be any more prophets
after him. Does this mean that there is no divine guidance after the
Holy prophet (sawa)?

After the Holy Prophet (sawa) what?
-----------------------------------

As Muslims, we believe that Allah (swt) has never left humanity without
a divinely appointed guide as His representative on earth.

Holy Quran, Surah Ra’ad verse 7 says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَّلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ ہَادٍ۝۷ۧ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There is a guide for every nation.***[^2]

Who is the guide after the demise of the last messenger of Allah (swt)?

The Shias believe that an Imam is the guide after the demise of the Holy
Prophet (sawa). As per the belief of the Ithna Ashari Shias (The
Twelvers), the Holy Imams, the successors of the Holy Prophet (sawa),
are divinely appointed and are infallible. Shias believe that Imamate is
one of the Usool e Deen[^3]; it is an essential part of the religion.

Imamate, as per the Twelvers, has all the characteristics of
prophethood, except that the Imams do not bring any changes in the
religion. They preserve the religion that was brought by the Holy
Prophet (sawa), and they need to be obeyed at the same level as we obey
the Holy Prophet (sawa).

The Holy Quran Surah Nisa verse 59 says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٰٓاَيُّھَا الَّذِيْنَ اٰمَنُوْٓا اَطِيْعُوا اللہَ وَاَطِيْعُوا
الرَّسُوْلَ وَاُولِي الْاَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and Obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you”.***[^4]

This verse obliges the Muslims to obey three entities: First, to obey
Allah; second, to obey Messenger **and** those vested with authority
(Ulil-Amr). The arrangement of the words shows that the obedience of
Ulil-Amr is as much obligatory as is the obedience of the Messenger
because Quran uses just one verb for both of them without repeating the
verb again. Naturally, it means that Ulil-Amr should be of the same
importance as the Messenger in terms of obedience to them; otherwise,
Allah would not have joined them together in this verse under one verb.

It is interesting to note that Allah (swt) uses a separate verb for
Himself before mentioning the Messenger and Ulil-Amr, which shows that
Allah has higher authority than that of the Messenger and Ulil-Amr. It
is also clear from the above verse that Ulil-Amr does not mean
messengers, Ulil-Amr and the Messengers are not the same. Otherwise,
Allah would only have said: “Obey Allah, and Obey Messenger only.” But
He added Ulil-Amr (those who are given authority by Allah). This is one
of the places where the concept of Imamate and the necessity of
obedience to them come from.[^5]

The brothers of Ahle Sunna (the Sunnis) translate this word Ulil-Amr as
rulers because the rulers have authority over their subjects. But this
translation makes the ruler come and stand on the same platform as of
the Holy Prophet (sawa), because as per Arabic grammar, the ayah uses
one verb for the Prophet and Ulil-Amr. This cannot be possible because
the rulers tend to sin and oppress. The Holy Prophet (sawa) never
sinned, and the Ulil-Amr (the ones vested with authority) also cannot
sin. Why? Simply because if Allah wants us to follow and obey someone,
then He cannot obviously order us to obey sinners. So, as per the Shia
belief, the word Ulil-Amr in this ayah is referring to the
infallible/sinless Imams.

As per the ayah Surah Nisa ayah 59, it is the command of Allah (swt) to
obey Him and obey the Holy Prophet (sawa) and the Ulil-Amr (those vested
with authority). Shias say that the Ulil-Amr are the infallible Imams.

Need to follow all the ‘Rightful Imams’
---------------------------------------

There is a famous Hadith of the Prophet (sawa) “Whoever dies without
knowing his Imam dies a death of ignorance”.[^6] Imam al-Baqir (as) also
said something similar, the gist of what he said; whoever dies without
having an Imam dies a death of a nonbeliever and a hypocrite.[^7]

Now, since we believe in the concept of Imamate, we need to follow the
right chain of Imams, the ones that are divinely appointed by Allah
(swt)… Otherwise, if we follow any leader /guide without doing any
research, we will end up going astray.

One might say, “I believe in Imamate. To me, it does not matter if the
imams were 12 or 21 or 49, as long as I am a good person and I pray five
times a day, etc….” This is wrong! Why? This is because we need to
believe and have faith in the right chain of all the prophets and the
imams. This is a very serious condition! For instance, if a person says,
*“We believe in prophethood, but we do not follow the prophets after
Prophet Moses (as), it is the same thing, and it does not matter.”* This
person is not a believer then, as he refuses to accept the Prophets
after Prophet Moses (as).

Now, if a Muslim says, “I believe in all the prophets; I believe in
Allah (swt), and that He is one, I believe in the last messenger, Holy
Prophet Muhammad (sawa), and I believe in Quran. That is all I need, and
I do not care about the other disputed issues.” Will this justification
carry any weight on the Day of Judgment?

Satan worshipped Allah (swt) for thousands of years, and disobeyed Allah
(swt) only once by saying that he will not prostrate to Adam (as). Just
because of one act of disobedience, he was thrown out of the kingdom of
mercy. So the ones who claim that prayers are enough, should know that
Satan worshipped Allah (swt) so much that Allah moved him up, brought
him and placed him above the ranks of Angels. Then after all of that
worship, just because of one act of disobedience, he was thrown out of
the kingdom of mercy. We should not forget that we are the slaves of
Allah. **We need to obey and worship Him the way HE wants us to, not the
way we like.** A slave should submit totally. Allah (swt), in Surah Nisa
Ayah 59, is clearly ordering us to obey Allah and obey the Apostle and
those vested with authority …

Going back to our discussion, In order to be Momins (True faithful
believers), we need to believe and follow the **whole chain** of the
Imams. Like in the case of the Prophets, we also must believe and follow
all the rightful Imams. The question that arises now is, how many Imams?
Who are the rightful Imams? Who are the Imams who are vested with
authority?

Who are the rightful Imams?
---------------------------

Let us look into Imams: let us see if there are any ahadith (traditions
of the Prophet) regarding the number of Imams who will succeed the
prophets.

A number of ahadith (traditions) are found in the books of Shias, and
surprisingly enough in the books of Sunni brothers too, that say that
the Holy Prophet (sawa) had said that there would be twelve Khulafa
(Successors) after him. This hadith matches the belief of the Ithna
Ashari Shias, but does not match the belief of the Sunni brothers. Yet,
at least a few ahadith of this kind are found in the books of Sunni
brothers.

Not a single hadith is found where the Holy Prophet (sawa) ever said
that he will have 21 Imams after him, or 49 Imams after him! This is a
challenge if one can find one authentic hadith regarding 21 Imams (Bohra
belief) or 49 Imams (Agha Khani belief).

Since the Shia books will, of course, have the twelve Imams mentioned,
allow me to quote a couple of ahadith from the books of Sunni brothers:

Narrated Jabir Ibn Samura: *I heard the Prophet saying*,

*“There will be twelve commanders (Amir).” He then said a sentence which
I did not hear. My father said, the Prophet added, “All of them will be
from Quraish.”*[^8]

*The Prophet (sawa) said:*

*“There shall be twelve Caliphs for this community, all of them from
Quraish.”* [^9]

Narrated Jabir Ibn Samura: *The Prophet (sawa) said:*

*“The matter (life) will not end, until it is passed by twelve Caliphs.”
He then whispered a sentence. I asked my father what the Prophet said.
He said, the Prophet added: “All of them will be from Quraish.”*[^10]

The above traditions that I quoted are from the books that are deemed as
very authentic by the Sunni brothers, especially ‘Sahih al-Muslim’ and
‘Sahih al-Bukhari’, which are considered to be the most authentic after
the Holy Quran by the brothers of Ahle Sunna.

We have traditions where the Prophet (sawa) indicates the names of his
12 successors, one after another - they match the Ithna Ashari (The
Twelvers) Shia belief. However, I think that these three traditions
above are sufficient to prove my point.

Who are the ‘Twelve Caliphs’?
-----------------------------

Now a question arises, who are the 12 caliphs/leaders/imams?

Obviously, the above traditions do not fit the first four Caliphs (as
per the belief of Sunni brothers), since they were less than twelve. The
belief of our Sunni brothers does not match with the hadith of our Holy
Prophet (sawa).

And the Umayyad Caliphs were more than twelve and almost all of them
were oppressors, so they cannot be applied to them. Also, they cannot be
applied to the Abbasid Caliphs, because they were more than twelve; they
were tyrants too; and they persecuted the descendants of the Prophet
everywhere, meaning that they did not comply with the Quranic verse: “I
don’t ask you any wage except to love my family.”[^11]

The ahadith (traditions) about twelve successors that we talked about
earlier are found in the books that are claimed by the Sunni brothers as
the most authentic books after the Holy Quran. The ahadith clearly state
that there will be 12 successors of the Holy Prophet (sawa) and the
scholars of Ahle Sunna do consider these traditions authentic. This is
why they tried their level best to come up with the number twelve, but
unfortunately, they all differed in their opinion.

As per Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti (Great Sunni Scholar):

**There are only twelve Caliphs until the Day of Judgement.** And they
will continue to act on truth, even if they are not continuous.

We see that from the twelve, four are the Righteous Caliphs, then Hasan,
then Muawiyah, then Ibn Zubayr, and finally ‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-’Aziz.
They are eight. Four of them remain. **Maybe Mahdi,** the Abbasid could
be included as he is an Abbasid like ‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-’Aziz was an
Umayyad, and Tahir ‘Abbasi will also be included because he was a just
ruler. **Thus two more are yet to come.** **One of them is Mahdi,
because he is from the AhlulBayt (as).**[^12]

As per Ibn al-Jawzi (Sunni Scholar):

The first Caliph of Bani Umayya was Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah and the last,
Marwan al-Himar. Their total is thirteen. ’Uthman, Mu’awiyah and ibn
Zubayr are not included as they were among the Companions of the Holy
Prophet (s).

If we exclude Marwan bin al-Hakam because of the controversy about his
being a Companion, or that he was in power, even though Abdullah ibn
Zubayr had the support of the people. **Then we can get the figure of
Twelve.** …[^13]

As per Al-Bayhaqi another Sunni scholar:

**This number (twelve) is found till the period of Walid ibn ‘Abd
al-Malik. After this, there was chaos and disturbance.** Then came the
Abbasid dynasty. This report has increased the number of Imams. If we
neglect some of their characteristics which came after the disturbance,
then their number will be much higher.”[^14]

As per Ibn Kathir another Sunni scholar:

Whosoever follows Bayhaqi and agrees with his assertion that Jama’ah
means those Caliphs who came intermittently till the time of **Walid ibn
Yazid ibn ‘Abd al-Malik, the transgressor** comes under the purview of
the tradition quoted by us criticising and denouncing such people.

And if we accept the Caliphate of Ibn Zubayr before ‘Abd al-Malik, **the
total shall be sixteen**, whereas their total should be twelve before
‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz. **In this method, Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah will be
included, and not ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz. **However, it is established
that the majority of the ‘ulama accept ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz as a
truthful and a just Caliph**.**[^15]

It could be concluded that the Sunni scholars did take seriously the
traditions of the Holy Prophet (sawa) regarding him having twelve
successors after him. This is why they tried their level best to come up
with twelve successors. The traditions regarding twelve successors are
found in the books of Ithna Ashari Shias too, and they match with their
belief of twelve Imams**. When one looks into the lives of the twelve
Imams that the Ithna Ashari Shias (Twelvers) follow, they** **have led
impeccable lives** and their traditions are full of wisdom. They were
all martyred, except the last Imam, Imam Mahdi (atfs), who went into
occultation.

Imam al-Mahdi (atfs) the twelfth Holy Imam of the Twelvers
----------------------------------------------------------

Regarding al-Mahdi, the twelfth Imam of the Ithna Ashari Shias, there
are many traditions that are found in Shia books and in the books of
Ahle Sunna. Some of them are as follows:

The Prophet (sawa) said:

*“Al-Mahdi is one of us, the members of the household
(Ahlul-Bayt).”*[^16]

It is evident from the above tradition that Imam al-Mahdi (as) is from
the Ahlul-Bayt of Prophet Muhammad. The following tradition clearly
mentions that Imam al-Mahdi is one of descendants of the daughter of
Prophet Muhammad (sawa):

The Prophet (sawa) said:

*The Mahdi will be of my family, of the descendants of Fatimah (the Holy
Prophet’s daughter).* [^17]

Another hadith:

The Prophet (sawa) said:

*“Even if the entire duration of the world’s existence has already been
exhausted and only one day is left (before the day of judgment), Allah
will expand that day to such a length of time, as to accommodate the
kingdom of a person from my Ahlul-Bayt, who will be called by my
name.*[^18] *He will fill out the earth with peace and justice as it
will have been full of injustice and tyranny (by then).”*[^19]

Another Hadith:

The Messenger of Allah (sawa) said to Ali (as):

*“An issue will be born to you whom I have gifted him with my name and
my nickname.”*[^20]

Look at all these references where these ahadith /traditions are found.
There are more, but I think this is sufficient to make my point.

The interesting thing is that these ahadith are found in the well-known
books of our Sunni brothers. They do not believe in Imamate, and yet,
they believe that Imam Mahdi (as) will come. I would like to pose this
question to the brothers of Ahle Sunna: “If you believe that Quran and
Hadith are enough, and you do not need an Imam after the Holy Prophet
(sawa), then why are you too waiting for Imam Mahdi (as)?” Then, I would
like to add, ‘Your books have all kinds of ahadith regarding Imam Mahdi
(as), so you cannot deny this fact”.

Some people find it hard to believe how Imam Mahdi (as) can still be
alive. How can a person live for so long? They find this concept
unbelievable. Well, it is possible if Allah wishes. There are many
incredible stories in Quran, which of course are all true and we are
obliged to believe in them. For example: Quran states that Prophet Noah
(as) preached for 950 years (Just imagine how many years he might have
lived, as per ahadith he lived 2500 years!).[^21] Quran speaks about the
people of the cave - they slept in the cave for 309 years! [^22] Prophet
Jesus (as) spoke when he was a baby[^23], as per Quran. Furthermore, we
have the story of Prophet Uzair[^24] who was dead for 100 years and then
was brought back to life. He also saw his donkey come back to life
again, all by the leave of Allah (swt).[^25] Prophet Jesus (as) is still
alive[^26] and is more than 2000 years old, and will come back. There
are many more stories that are incredible in Quran that we believe in.
If Allah (swt) wishes, then anything is possible, hence, one should not
doubt about the long life of Imam Mahdi (atfs).

As per the traditions, it could further be proven that the Ithna Ashari
Imams are the rightful chain of Imams. All the traditions found in the
books of Ahle Sunna and the Shia books say that the Holy Prophet (sawa)
will have twelve successors. As discussed earlier, the Agha Khani
Ismaili Imams are 49 and the Bohra Ismaili Imams are 21 therefore these
numbers do not match the traditions of the Holy Prophet (sawa).

[^1]: Surah Ghafir (40), Ayah 78

[^2]: Surah Ra’ad (13), Ayah 7

[^3]: Roots of religion

[^4]: Surah Nisa (4), Ayah 59

[^5]: The status of the Holy Prophet (sawa) was much higher than our
Imams, the rightful successors to him. Please do not misunderstand me,
as far as obedience to them is concerned, we are required to obey them
equally, as per the ayah

[^6]: Al-Hilali, Sulaym ibn Qays Kitab Sulaym ibn Qays Al-Hilali, vol.
2, p. 932, H. 71

[^7]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 183, H. 8

[^8]: Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 9.329 (Arabic-English version)

[^9]: Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 5, p. 106

[^10]: Sahih Muslim, Arabic version, Kitab al-Imaara, 1980 Edition Pub.
In Saudi Arabia, vol. 3, p. 1452, Tradition \#5. Sahih Muslim, English
version, Chapter DCCLIV (titled: The People are subservient to the
Quraish and the Caliphate is the Right of the Quraish), vol. 3, p. 1009,
Tradition \#4477

[^11]: Surah Shura (42), Ayah 23

[^12]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p. 12

[^13]: Ibn al-Jawzi, Kashf al-Mushkil, as quoted in Ibn Hajar
al-’Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:340 from Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi

[^14]: Ibn Kathir, Ta’rikh, 6:249; Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p. 11

[^15]: Ibn Kathir, Ta’rikh, 6:249-250

[^16]: Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2, Tradition \#4085

[^17]: Sunan Abu Dawud, English version, Ch. 36, Tradition \#4271
(narrated by Umm Salama, the wife of the Prophet); Sunan Ibn Majah, vol.
2, Tradition \#4086; al-Nisa’i and al-Bayhaqi; al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah,
by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1, p. 249

[^18]: The actual name of the twelfth Imam is Muhammed his title is Al
Mahdi, Al Qaim.

[^19]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, vol. 2, p. 86, vol. 9, pp. 74-75; Sunan Abu
Dawud, vol. 2, p. 7; Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, pp. 84,376; vol.
3, p. 63; al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn, by al-Hakim, vol. 4, p. 557;
Jami’ al-Saghir, by al-Suyuti, pp. 2, 160; al-Arful Wardi, by al-Suyuti,
p. 2; al-Majma’, by al-Tabarani, p. 217; Tahzeeb al-Tahzeeb, by Ibn
Hajar al-Asqalani, vol. 9, p. 144; Fat’h al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari, by Ibn Hajar Asqalani, vol. 7, p. 305; al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1, p. 249;
al-Tathkirah, by al-Qurtubi, p. 617;al-Hawi, by al-Suyuti, vol. 2, pp.
165-166; Sharh al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah, by al-Zurqani, vol. 5, p. 348;
Fat’h al-Mugheeth, by al-Sakhawi, vol. 3, p. 41; Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 7,
p. 186; Iqd al-Durar Fi Akhbar al-Mahdi al-Muntadhar, vol. 12, Ch. 1;
al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman, By Ganji al-Shafi’i, Ch. 12;
al-Fusool al-Muhimmah, by Ibn Sabbagh al-Maliki, Ch. 12; Arjahul
Matalib, by Ubaidallah Hindi al-Hanafi, p. 380; Muqaddimah, by Ibn
Khaldoon, p. 266; and also in the works of Ibn Habban, Abu Nua’ym, Ibn
Asakir, etc.

[^20]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, vol. 5, p. 137; Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 4, p.
292; al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, vol. 4, p. 278 who said it is authentic
based on the criteria of the two Shaikhs (i.e., al-Bukhari and Muslim);
Ma’arifat Ulum al-Hadith, by al-Hakim, p. 189; Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal,
vol. 1, p. 95; Fadha’il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 2, p. 676,
Tradition \#1155; al-Tabaqat, by Ibn Sa’d, vol. 5, p. 91

[^21]: Holy Quran, Suratul Ankabut ayah 14 talks about it

[^22]: Holy Quran, Suratul Kahf ayah 25 talks about it

[^23]: Holy Quran, Suratul Maryam ayahs 30-33 talk about it.

[^24]: Biblical name Ezra

[^25]: Holy Quran, Suratul Baqarah (2), Ayah 259

[^26]: Holy Quran, Suratun Nisa (4), Ayahs 157 and 158 talks about it,
it says that they say they killed Jesus but they did not.


