Conclusive Points
=================

In the discussion so far a few examples and some extracts from the lives
of the Ismaili Imams and some of the Ithna Ashari Imams were discussed.
When we look at the history of Ismaili Imams, it is apparent that they
were not divinely appointed. They sinned and oppressed, like in the case
of al-Hakim. How can we follow someone who sins? The Fatimid/Ismaili
Imams had no traits in their lifestyles to show that they were spiritual
Imams. They have no noble sayings and their life history has nothing in
it that one can say, by looking and following their lifestyle, one could
get closer to Allah (swt). The goal of the Prophets and the Imams was to
lead mankind closer to Allah (swt), but the Fatimid/Ismaili Imams had no
traits that would lead someone closer to the Almighty.

On the other hand, the Imams of the Ithna Ashari Shias were full of
knowledge, had impeccable characters, their sayings, their lifestyles
and supplications, all lead towards seeking closeness to Allah (swt).

Yes, the Fatimid period was a golden period. Egypt was flourishing; nice
mosques and university like al-Azhar were built, I agree that this was a
great achievement but this does not mean that the Fatimid were the
rightful Imams. Right now, when we go to Saudi Arabia, the Masjid
ul-Nabi and the Masjid ul-Haraam are very nicely built. The Saudi’s are
working very actively in propagating their opinion of Islam. This does
not mean that they are on the right path. Let us go a step further,
right now the western countries are flourishing and they have very good
universities, and they are highly developed nations but this does not
mean that they are on the right path.

Bohras are very organized, so this is one of the arguments that Ismaili
Bohras give to prove the authenticity of their beliefs. Being organized
does not mean that they are on the right path! There are other religions
that prevail in the Gujarat region of India and those people are very
organized too; does it mean that they are on the right path? Even the
Aga Khani Khojas are very organized; does it mean that they are on the
right path? Moreover, if the Bohras are on the right path then how come
we do not see people accepting their religion? How come the Bohras do
not propagate their religion? Dai is supposed to invite people towards
the religion, is he doing his job?

When the youth question the Bohra Mullas about the inconsistencies,
**they are told to follow just like their fathers.** There are ayahs in
the Quran that condemn following the religion of your forefathers
blindly, for example; “When they are told ‘Follow what Allah has sent
down,’ they say, ‘We will rather follow what we have found our fathers
following,’ “what even if their fathers neither applied reason nor were
guided?!” [^1] This Ayah tells us not to follow blindly what our fathers
and forefathers followed. Also tells us, that our fathers and
forefathers could have been following the wrong path.

I was told, ‘What is the big deal, if one follows 12 Imams or 21 Imams?’
They further added by saying ‘we follow Imamate too, like we are
supposed to. So, what is the big deal?’ Well, it is a big deal. Allah
(swt) orders us to follow His Prophet (sawa) and the ones vested with
authority**. If we follow the ones** **not** **vested with authority by
Allah (swt), then we will go astray.** For example: I buy very
sophisticated equipment. It comes with an instruction booklet that asks
me to call an authorized agent for a demonstration. If I just follow the
instruction booklet and not call the authorized agent, then I am not
following the instructions of the manufacturer. The manufacturer knows
its product and knows that just following the instruction booklet is not
enough. Along with the instruction booklet, an authorized agent is
necessary. Mind you, it must be an authorized agent, not any leader. In
the same way, Allah (swt) knows us. Along with the book, He sent the
Messenger (sawa) and the Imams (as). We must follow them all. We must
follow the ones He gave the authority to.

It is very important to follow the chain. Yes! It is a big deal. Please
take this issue very seriously and do some research. This world as we
know is temporary. We are being tested. The real life is the hereafter.
I know that work keeps us busy. We need to have a balance. We need to
take out time for Allah (swt). We need to seek closeness to Allah (swt).
In order to seek closeness to Him, we need to believe in all the
Messengers and follow our Prophet (sawa) and all the Imams (as). As we
know, Risalat[^2] and Imamat are both important, because they both are
part of the principles of religion.

As per our belief, on the Day of Judgment, we will be called with our
Imams; if in this world, we believed in the rightful Imams, the ones
that the Holy Prophet (sawa) declared by the order of Allah, then we
shall be called with them. Otherwise, God forbid, if we had followed the
wrong imams, then we will be in their group. So we definitely do need to
do some serious research and use our intellect and decide.

We should research without any bias and we should be careful when we
encounter the truth because people react to the truth in different ways.
Some know the truth, but due to social pressures, they do not accept the
truth. To them, society is more important than the word of the Almighty.
They think that they will live in this world forever and look at the
worldly things and cling to the earth.

Some say these things do not matter as long as we pray and fast and go
to Hajj etc. This is a wrong belief! I repeat that Satan worshipped
Allah (swt) like no one else. The only wrong thing he did was to disobey
one command of Allah (swt), when he refused to do Sajda[^3] to Adam
(as). Satan refused to obey only one command of Allah (swt), and all the
years of his worship were nullified and he was thrown out of the kingdom
of mercy. Allah (swt) wants us to worship Him the way he wants to be
worshipped. We should really ponder on this. The problem with us,
Muslims, is that we pick and choose. The things that are easy to do or
are socially acceptable, or are profitable, we accept them; the ones
that we do not want to do for some reason, we reject or justify. The
problem with us Muslims is that we do not submit to His laws.

Some say that it does not matter what we believe as long as we do
righteous deeds. If one does righteous deeds without belief, is that
sufficient? What are the righteous deeds?

In the Holy Quran, whenever we see the mention of righteous deeds, it is
accompanied by belief in almost all the ayahs.

For example in Suratul Bayyinat verse 7:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الَّذِيْنَ اٰمَنُوْا وَعَمِلُوا الصّٰلِحٰتِ۝۰ۙ اُولٰۗىِٕكَ ہُمْ
خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّۃِ۝۷ۭ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who have faith and do righteous deeds, - they are the best of
creatures.***[^4]

Another example, Suratul Baqarah verse 82:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِيْنَ اٰمَنُوْا وَعَمِلُوا الصّٰلِحٰتِ اُولٰۗىِٕكَ اَصْحٰبُ
الْجَنَّۃِ۝۰ۚ ھُمْ فِيْہَا خٰلِدُوْنَ۝۸۲ۧ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who have faith and do righteous deeds, they shall be the
inhabitants of paradise; they shall remain in it (forever).***[^5]

And there are many other places where faith and righteous deeds come
together. Bottom line: righteous deeds are almost always with faith
(Imaan) in Quran.

If one does righteous deeds only, without having faith (Imaan), then it
is not enough; these deeds which are apparently good deeds will not help
this person in the hereafter.

The Holy Quran, Surah Nur verse 39, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِيْنَ كَفَرُوْٓا اَعْمَالُہُمْ كَسَرَابٍؚبِقِيْعَۃٍ يَّحْسَبُہُ
الظَّمْاٰنُ مَاۗءً۝۰ۭ حَتّٰٓي اِذَا جَاۗءَہٗ لَمْ يَجِدْہُ
شَـيْــــًٔـا وَّوَجَدَ اللہَ عِنْدَہٗ فَوَفّٰىہُ حِسَابَہٗ۝۰ۭ وَاللہُ
سَرِيْعُ الْحِسَابِ۝۳۹ۙ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for the faithless, their works are like a mirage in a plain, which
the thirsty man supposes to be water. When he comes to it, he finds it
to be nothing; but there he finds Allah, who will pay him his full
account, and Allah is swift at reckoning.***[^6]

What is imaan? If one says the Shahadatain (I bear witness that there is
no god but Allah, and I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah), is that enough? Does it mean that this person has faith?

The answer is no! As per Quran Suratul Hujurat verse 14:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتِ الْاَعْرَابُ اٰمَنَّا۝۰ۭ قُلْ لَّمْ تُؤْمِنُوْا وَلٰكِنْ
قُوْلُوْٓا اَسْلَمْنَا وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلِ الْاِيْمَانُ فِيْ
قُلُوْبِكُمْ۝۰ۭ وَاِنْ تُطِيْعُوا اللہَ وَرَسُوْلَہٗ لَا يَـلِتْكُمْ
مِّنْ اَعْمَالِكُمْ شَـيْـــــًٔا۝۰ۭ اِنَّ اللہَ غَفُوْرٌ رَّحِيْمٌ۝۱۴
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Bedouins say, “We have faith.” Say, “You do not have faith yet;
rather say, “We have embraced Islam,” for faith has not yet entered into
your hearts. Yet if you obey Allah and His Apostle, He will not stint
anything of (the reward of) your works. Indeed Allah is all-forgiving,
all-merciful.”***[^7]

This ayah is clearly saying that if one embraces Islam, it does not mean
that this person has faith. This tells us that more is needed to say
that we have faith! One cannot just say that he has faith when he
embraces Islam.

Then, what is faith? When can one say that he has faith? Imam Ali (as)
in Nahjul Balagha says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَالَ ؑ وَ [قَدْ] سُئِلَ عَنِ الْاِيْمَانِ فَقَالَ الْاِيْمَانُ
مَعْرِفَةٌ بِالْقَلْبِ وَ اِقْرَارٌ بِاللِّسَانِ وَ عَمَلٌ
بِالْاَرْكَانِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He was asked about faith so he said; faith is to know with one’s heart
and affirm with* *one’s tongue and to act with one’s limbs.*[^8]

He (as) is saying that: Imaan is made up of three elements (Rukn),
Tongue (Say), Heart (Belief) and Amal (Practice).

Let us ponder on this hadith: If one says the Shahadatain using his
tongue but does not believe in it and nor practices it, then what good
is it? If one says it and believes in it but does not practice, then
what good is it? If one says it, practices it and does not believe in
it, he is a hypocrite. Therefore, what Imam Ali (as) had rightly said in
order for one to have Imaan, he should say it and believe in it from the
bottom of his heart and practice.

What are the righteous deeds? The righteous deeds are those that are
required by the divine law. Once a person has Imaan in the true sense
(say it, believe in it and practice it), then he will do righteous
deeds.

In order to practice and do righteous deeds, then it is important to
follow the rightful divine leaders. Otherwise, if we follow the ones who
are not divine then we will end up doing deeds that we are assuming are
righteous but are like mirages, just like what the ayah of Surah Nur
that I quoted above, says.

Following the ones who are not divinely appointed will end up in deeds
that are null and void.[^9] Some people say that intention counts, if
the intention is good then that is all that matters. A good deed, in
order to be accepted, must be done right. Otherwise, it will not be
accepted, whether the intention was pure or not. I will give a worldly
example: Let us take computers for instance; when we are supposed to hit
‘enter’ and we hit ‘back space’ instead, the computer will not accept
the command. We will go no place, no matter how good our intention is.
From this worldly example, we see the results of worldly things right in
this world. But we believe in Allah (swt), who is Unseen. We believe in
the heaven and hell, which are unseen. We believe in the hereafter,
which is unseen, and the rewards or punishment that we accumulate for
the deeds we do for the hereafter are unseen. So we do need to be
careful and perform the deeds as per the requirement of our Lord the
Almighty. We can do that only when we follow the rightful divine
representatives sent or appointed by Allah (swt). If we follow any Tom
Dick and Harry, we will err.

Enough information was provided in this little booklet for one to
seriously ponder about and use the intellect and scrutinize without any
bias, in order to seek closeness to the Almighty Allah (swt).

I myself was a Bohra once, I had many questions and after I got my
answers I converted to Ithna Ashari Shia sect, and I wanted to share my
findings with others. If anyone has any arguments against what I wrote
or my beliefs, I am willing to listen. I believe that we should never be
biased and we should always leave the lid of our heart open, so that the
guidance could seep in.

I would like to conclude with the saying of Nabi Shoayb (as) to his
people which is in Qur’an In Suratul Hud verse 88:

***He said, “O my people! Have you considered, should I stand on a
manifest proof from my Lord, who has provided me a good provision from
Himself? I do not wish to oppose you by what I forbid you. I only desire
to put things in order, as far as I can, and my success lies only with
Allah: in Him I have put my trust, and to Him I turn
penitently.”***[^10]

[^1]: Surah Baqarah (2), Ayah 170

[^2]: Prophethood

[^3]: Prostrate

[^4]: Suratul Bayyinat (98), Ayah 7

[^5]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Ayah 82

[^6]: Suratul Nur (24), Ayah 39

[^7]: Suratul Hujurat (49), Ayah 14

[^8]: Nahjul Balagha, Saying \# 227

[^9]: The Bohra calendar discussed earlier proves this point inshaAllah

[^10]: Suratul Hud (11), Ayah 88


