A Word From the Foundation
==========================

"We have honoured the sons of Adam; provided them with transport on
land and sea; given them for sustenance things good and pure; and
conferred on them special favours, above a great part of the Crea-
tion." Holy Qur'an (Isra\` 17:70)

Surely, the Almighty Allah has deposited His blessings and wealth in
this world, exceeding human needs, in order for man to live in
problem-free comfort and has, also, created him in the most appropriate
form and given him a mind and body which helps him utilize these
bestowed blessings; like, day and night, the earth and heaven, rivers
and trees, the sun and the moon...etc.

But, with all these blessings and great treasures surrounding us,
existing on the surface of the earth and beneath it, one-fifth of the
world population, i.e., one billion and two hundred million people, are
living on the verge of poverty.

In light of all the technological advancement in the present era with
diversification of industrial products and services, obsessive fear is
still in the mind of man from the West to the East, where the present
man may be more anxious than yesterday's man, because of what is
threatening him from the dangers of polluting the environment, nuclear
radioactivity, lack of natural resources, as well as, wars.

In this, our present world, a person who has abundant food to eat,
cannot be regarded as someone who lives comfortably, because it is
possible that an epidemic, diseases or other destructive elements, like
hidden micro radiators, will attack him under conditions he is familiar
with and those of which he is not, and which can enter his home through
contaminated and polluted bottles of milk or through the poisonous air
of which he breathes.

Therefore, it is not surprising for the chairman of the \`Conference
for Social Development', which was conducted in March, 1995, in
Copenhagan, Denmark, to announce to world leaders that the aim of the
conference "is to reduce the unrest and insecurity which threatens
people all over the world and put more effort on securing a suitable
life for society".

And, prior to this, another conference was held, which emphasized the
lack of possibility of dividing the factor of development and
environment under whatever circumstances.

Then, there are the dangers of environmental pollution, the penetration
of harmful and destructive solar rays to the ozone layers, the danger of
deformity in children and the spreading of cancer by nuclear pollution,
and, likewise, the dryness of rivers and the deforestation and cessation
of thousands of plants and animals is not confined to a particular
region, north or south, in developed countries or underdeveloped ones.

Thus, there is a serious need for a collective effort toward achieving
the international resolutions for protecting the environment and the
plant and animal species, so as to protect and guarantee the existence
of man, which is also the resolution of the United Nations, UNESCO, and
the 12th Earth Conference.

But, unfortunately, some countries, especially the industrially
developed countries, are not respecting these resolutions by continuing
their nuclear tests and producing other destructive products for their
own selfish, material interests, without the least consideration for
human beings and the future of the world.

This is what UNESCO confirms in its analysis on world environmental
problems, thus: "Surely, the problem of production and consumption of
the industrial countries carries a preference on all those problems,
where the effort and striving toward a great and quick profit means
overlooking the trouble and hardship of environmental disorder...and
this kind of act and behaviour will create and give way to a great and
tremendous damage, which will cause stress on the exhaustion of natural
factors in the developing countries,..."

The evidence of this inhumane act and the selfishness of those
developed countries can be seen in the insistence of France testing her
nuclear power in the Carribean Sea, the continuance of nuclear testing
by the American government after all the agreements against this had
been signed, or the danger of the spreading of nuclear weapons.

There are the events of leaking nuclear plants, occuring in America in
1985, which only confirms the occurence of 2,300 events, the exportation
of nuclear wastes, as well as, dumping them in some third world
countries and the ugly exploitation of natural wealth in some African
countries without paying heed to the environmental dangers.

And, still, the British exportation of beef to other countries,
affected with mental disorders, and other unaccounted examples witnessed
by us, are causing great damage and discomfort to human existence on
this planet.


Al-Balagh Foundation


**Definition Of Environmen
**
"Environment is the complex of physical, chemical and biotic factors
(as climate, soil, and living things) that act upon an organism or an
ecological community and ultimately determine its form and survival; the
aggregate of social and cultural conditions that influence the life of
an individual or community."

The environment is the natural conditions and circumstances in which
people, animals and plants live, and in turn, they are referred to as
the natural environment, social environment and political environment.
Therefore, environment means those conditions and circumstances which
surround a particular thing.

The natural environment is a natural surrounding, and it refers to the
natural conditions, atmosphere and circumstances which are related to
man, and this includes plants, forests, water, air, sea, animals and
other living things, the nature of the earth and what it contains, like
mountains, rivers, swamps, deserts, and, also includes hot and cold
weather, rain and clouds, rays of the sun,...etc.

All creatures and entities are interrelated and have reciprocal
effects, some having an effect on the conditions of others, and it has
its positive, as well as, negative effects on the life of man,
especially in our present day after industrial advancement and the
increase of man's interference in the natural condition and changing its
direction.

Other scientific sources have defined environment as "the condition in
which man lives and obtains the components of his life, like food,
shelter and medicine and conducts his relations with his fellow human
beings in it."1 So, this is the definition of environment considering
man a pivot point in it.


**Man and The Natural Environment**

Man is part of the natural world in his formation, growth and the
continuity of his existence on this earth; interacting with the natural
components and their environmental conditions, continuously. The Holy
Qur'an, in many instances, has referred to man's relationship with
nature and the environment. Here, we quote some of the verses
locations:

"And Allah has made you grow out of the earth as a growth." Holy Qur'an
(Nuh 71:17 "...and We have made of water every thing living,..." Holy
Qur'an (Anbiya 21:30) "And to Samood (We sent) their brother Salih. He
said: O my people! serve Allah, you have no god other than He; Hee
brought you into being from the earth, and made you dwell in it,
therefore ask forgiveness of Him, then turn to Him; surely my Lord is
Nigh, Answering." Holy Qur'an (Hud 11:61)

"He created the heavens without pillars as you see them, and put
mountains upon the earth lest it might convulse with you, and He spread
in it animals of every kind; and We sent down water from the cloud, then
caused to grow therein (vegetation)) of every noble kind." Holy Qur'an
(Lukman 31:10)

"Do you not see that Allah has made what is in the heavens and what is
in the earth subservient to you, and made complete to you His favours
outwardly and inwardly? And among men is he who disputes in respect of
Allah though having no knowledge, nor guidance, nor a book giving
light." Holy Qur'an (Lukman 31:20)

"...and sent down upon you water from the cloud that He might thereby
purify you, and take away from you the uncleanness of Satan,..." Holy
Qur'an (Anfal 8:11)

"...and We send down pure water from the cloud." Holy Qur'an (Furqan
25:48)

"...and He has made the ships subservient to you, that they might run
their course in the sea by His command,..." Holy Qur'an (Ibrahim
14:32)

"And He it is Who has made the sea subservient that you may eat fresh
flesh from it..." Holy Qur'an (Nahl 16:14)

"From it We created you and into it We shall send you back and from it
will We raise you a second time." Holy Qur'an (Taha 20:55)

"And when he turns back, he runs along in the land that he may cause
mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock,..." Holy Qur'an
(Baqara 2:205)

The above Qur'anic texts talk about man as a part of the natural
environment he interacts with; gaining from it and, likewise, giving to
it. He is, also, responsible for its growth, as well as, preventing
vices and corruption in it.

Man, this living creature, represents a part of the natural system
which activates its components toward understanding and the coordination
between each other. Thus, the natural world can be defined as the
balance and the accurate, scientific, calculated equilibrium from the
most learned and knowledgeable being.

The amount of hard water, the salinity of a sea, the sweetness of a
river, the ratio of oxygen, the grade of light rays, the degree of heat
and the quantity of rain, fish, animals, plants,...etc., all this, is
well calculated without the least error. The earth and its gravitational
force, rate of movement, and power of absorption, has an effect on the
life of man, animals and plants, and its continuous existence in this
universe shows that the knowledgeable Creator has arranged it
accurately.

Consequently, the above quoted verses have discussed the reality in the
life of man, naturally and environmen- tally, viz:

Man was created from the earth and he grows by way of it, as the plants
also grow from it, that water is a fundmental of life, and that the
Almighty Allah has colonized man in this world, i.e., He entrusted him
with the building of it by using its natural resources and its good,
environmental conditions, so as to understand the power of the Almighty
Allah and His blessings to him. And that the natural environment of this
world, like mountains, is meant for protecting the equilibrium of the
earth and its living creatures, by production and consumption, which
live under the system of life's equilibrium.

Thus, the rains which fall, the plants which grow, all this, is a proof
of Allah's greatness, His power, knowledge and wisdom, and any action of
the Wise Knower must be accurately calculated without the least
contradiction, and even if it is abused it will act in accordance with
the natural system and protect the environmental equilibrium, which, in
one way or the other, is evidence of the greatness of the Creator and
His wisdom.

Everything in this world and its natural surroundings, such as, water,
animals, forests and plants, the aquatic living creatures, solar rays,
heat, rain, the salinity of the sea and the sweetness of the rivers, was
created for man, in order to make his life better.

In view of this fact, the Holy Qur'an enjoins man to reflect on the
blessings of Allah to him and call him toward monotheism, thanksgiving
and worshipping Him alone. This is how the Holy Qur'an places man in the
natural environment as part and parcel of it.

However, after explaining this relationship between life, intellect and
nature, the Holy Qur'an discusses the activities, responsibilities and
social systems which protect the well being of the environment, as well
as, protecting the divine will of the world of existence under the power
of Shari\`a.


**ORGANIZATION AND NATURAL EQUILIBRIUM IN THE ENVIRONMENT**

The environmental world is an accurate and balanced world which is
built on experience, knowledge and wisdom. So, nature, environment and
life is a complete and interrelated unit, as if one body, thus, water
and earth, air and weather...etc., are all created with an aim and
purpose.

There is nothing created on this earth without aim, or incomplete, or
with contradictory aims; glory be to Allah Who created all things,
shaped them and made them accurately balanced.

Theologians have discussed two fundamental issues in Islamic principles
which deal with Allah's actions and wisdom, viz.: 1. Allah has
predestined the creation of every thing, which is beneficial to the
creatures, and life cannot do without them. 2. Allah's actions are
puposive (He cannot do something without an aim) and that all His
actions are built on wisdom.

In view of this, the Ahlul-Bait's (a.s.) school of thought entered a
hot debate with other Islamic schools of thought concerning this
controversial issue in the natural, intellectual and social world, which
human knowledge and researchers confirm. For further clarification of
the Islamic analysis on this issue, we should review ideological books
that deal with these two ideological issues:

"Allah's actions are founded on goal and purpose, because He is Wise,
and the actions of a wise one must not go against wisdom. Whoever acts
uselessly without a purpose is a foolish and stupid fellow; Allah is far
above this." "We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between
them, merely in (idle) sport:" Holy Qur'an (Dukhan 44:38)

"...\`Our Lord! Not for naught hast You created (all) this! Glory to
Thee! ...'" Holy Qur'an (Al-i-Imran 3:191) All this purpose and benefit
return not to the Almighty Allah, because He stands not in need of
anything from His creatures, rather it returns to themselves through the
acquisition of Paradise and (Allah's) contentment, as well as, saves
them from punishment and loss without the least decrement on the side of
Allah, the Almighty, because He is perfect and complete in His essence
and from all angles.

But, the Asha\`irite claim that: "It is impossible for Allah to do
something for a purpose, and not for any interest. It is possible and
permissible for Him to hurt His servants without any benefit and
interest."2

The Asha\`irites had repudiated the principles of finality and
misinterpreted the fact that anyone who performs an act for purpose
needs that very action, but we have already seen that the purpose and
the aim are for the interest of the creatures, and He, the Most High, is
too exalted from need.

The Islamic philosopher, Nasirudden Tusi, wrote emphasizing the
neccessity of interest (maslaha): "The interest may be necessary due to
the existence of reason and the absence (non-existence) of what
restrains its achievement.

" and Allamah Hilli comments on this by saying: "People differ, Abu Ali
and Abu Hashim and their companions say, \`Interest is not necessary
upon the Almighty Allah ', but Balkhi contradicts them saying, \`It is
necessary and this is the path of the people of Baghdad and some people
of Basra', while Abul-Hassan Basri concludes: \`It is necessary under
certain circumstances, but not all circumstances.' This is, also, the
opinion of the writer."3

Thus, we can deduce that ideological thought, in Islam, has already
confirmed the ideological principle, and this is: The Almighty Allah
doesn't do or create anything in this natural universe or in the human
world except with a purpose and interest which returns to man and other
creatures.

And, of course, scholars and researchers in different scientific fields
have supported this ideological opinion, which, in one way or the other,
affirms the authenticity of this opinion and idea. For further
elaboration of the matter, let's quote what the chemist, Thomas David
Parkison, wrote: "But the system we are witnessing in our surroundings
is not a sign of the power of things, rather, it is above that with
wisdom and moving forward toward the establishment of man's interests,
which confirms that the Lord's concern over His servants is not less
than His concern over the systems and laws which govern the universe."

Have a glance at the perfect wisdom which is attached to your
surroundings, which sometimes contradict the accustomed procedures, for
instance, water. Man will expect to see its molecular weight (18) to be
gaseous under the cooling point, and for example, ammonia's molecular
weight (17) to be gaseous under the imperfect boiling point (73) in the
normal atmosphere, and hydrogen sulfide, which nearly has the same
characteristics of water, with the molecular weight of (53), to be
gaseous under the imperfect boiling point (53), in view of this, the
liquidification state of water under the contrast boiling point, will
make man confused.

In addition to this, water has another important characteristic which,
by merely looking at it, man will understand that it is well planned.
Consequently, water covers 3/4 of the earth's surface, and in view of
this, it has a great effect on the general atmosphere and the degree of
temperature, which if reduced, a great and undesirable change will
occur.

Likewise, water has another precious characteristic, which indicates
that the Creator of this universe has designed it in order to serve the
interests of His creatures, hence, water is the only known element of
which its density decreases when it solidifies, and this feature has a
great effect and importance on life.

And so, ice, which floats on the surface of the water when the
temperatures become frigid, instead of sinking under the water, becomes
a solid block which will neither melt nor split, therefore, the ice, in
its solid state, which floats on the surface of a river, creates a
buffer layer that protects the water under it. With this, the fishes and
other aquatic creatures will continue their lives and in the spring the
ice will melt quickly."4

On his part, Dr. Christie Morrison in his book "Science calls for
faith" while discussing the natural equilibrium and the coordination
between its compon- ents, and the accuracy of the environmental system
and its perfectness, so as to protect the system of life, as well as,
the greatness of the Creator, wrote:

"The thick air, having the necessary magnitude taken from the passing
of chemical rays, needed by plants, and which kills microbes and
produces vitamins, without the least harm to man, except if he exposes
himself to it for long, unnecessary periods, will remain uncontaminated
or unpolluted, and without change in its necessary equilibrium toward
man's existence.

The great equili- brium is that surface of water, i.e., the surrounding
of which life, food, rain, balanced climate, plants and man, himself,
grows. Surely, whoever comprehends this, will stand in awe of His
greatness, and bow to His command."

Also, Dr. Lawrence Kolinon Woker, a botanist and physiologist, as well
as, a lecturer at the University of Georgia, wrote that: "I am writing
this article as an expert in forest research, as well as, someone who
gives great concern to environmental studies and plant physiology, so as
to show the importance of the forest as a proof of Allah's existence.

Furthermore, we will discuss more on that while discussing on the Holy
care and Divine power which is manifested in the restoration of the
earth's fertility.

In a virgin forest which undergoes no human activity, the trees
increase and its different species grow from generation to generation
until their numbers increase; except if man's activities interfere with
it, or it is destroyed by fire, or any calamity befalls it.

The interruption by man's activities, however, against the natural
forest, its plants and its fertility, will lead to the reduction of its
fertility and, in the end, we will loose the trees and the soil, which
will give way to the occurrence of floods."

Then, he adds: "Man spends a huge amount of money for constructing big
dams in order to prevent the danger of floods, but, this is just a
temporary solution to this gigantic power which neither stone barriers,
nor big buildings can repel. Therefore, it is necessary to find a real
solution to this problem from its source, and this cannot be achieved
through the construction of dams, rather it can only be achieved through
afforestation, and this is something which nature, itself, can do."5

Dr. Christie Morison, while discussing the natural and environmental
system between earth, man, plants and animals, wrote:

"Surely, the marvellous relationship, which exists between oxygen and
carbon dioxide II with regard to the animal, as well as, plant worlds,
will attract the attention of every sensible person."

And he continues: "This is how every plant and tree, and likewise, all
bryophytes, etc., grow from carbon and water. In addition, atmospheric
oxygen is converted to carbon dioxide in animal respiration and
regenerated by green plants in photosynthesis. Hence, without this
cordial relationship, the life of both the animals and plants will be
exhausted, i.e., whenever this life equilibrium changes, the condition
of both of them will be completely changed."6

**What Surprises the Equilibrium System:**

"The following fact is a clear example of an important criterion in
regard to man's existence. Some few years back, a type of cactus was
planted in Australia and, in no time, this plant covered a large tract
of land to the extent that it disturb the whole community and their
farming activites. All efforts to prevent the spread of this plant
proved fruitless, and Australia continued to be plagued by this plant.

Consequently, the research conducted by some entomologist found that an
insect, which cannot live without this cactus, reproduces rapidly,
unhindered in the whole of Australia. In no time, this insect invaded
and destroyed the cactus. Therefore, this is how this criterion and
balance was changed."7


