The Environment and Destructive Practices
=========================================

A survey and a close look at the natural world and its components, and
the relationship, balance and changes that occur in it, will show the
wisdom, accuracy and perfection that surrounds it, because, there is
nothing created uselessly or to hurt anyone, and even if it harms human
beings, it is rather a relative harm, due to the fact that the human
being was prohibited from practicing it in the first place.

And often this harmful element is changed by natural processes to be
useful to the plants, earth and even to man, himself. Surely, if the
natural laws are left to work as they are created by their Creator, they
will protect the healthy, natural and environmental beauty and good life
for all.

The distribution of water, mountains and forests, and the nature of
weather, climate and earth, and the ratio of gases, light rays...etc.,
works under a well equipped, interrelated system, as bacteria and dead
bodies of an animal and plant enters the natural chemical processes in
order to be well acquainted with the environmental interests, as well
as, ensuring the welfare of the surroundings.

But, when humans, due to ignorance and destructive activities,
interrupt and enter the environmental system, they cause a great damage
to this very system. The Holy Qur'an, while elaborating on the
environmental, as well as, the natural perfection, and likewise, the
destructive role of man, says:

"When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle..." Holy Qur'an ((Baqara
2:205)

"And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order, but
call on Him with fear and longing (in your hearts): For the Mercy of
Allah is (always) near to those who do good." Holy Qur'an (A\`raf
7:56)

The Holy Qur'an emphasizes that the earth and all its natural and life
components are perfect and healthy; it is man who plays with its
perfectness and destroys it. In view of this, we see this scenario
elaborating on man, in the suitablity of the earth in its natural form,
as the destructive element to the earth; destroying plants and killing
animals and human beings.

Surely, our present world has witnessed the most dreadful kind of
corruption on earth and environmental, as well as, natural destruction
which man was enjoined to protect and take care of it.

Allah creates man from earth as one of its components and commands him
to protect it. The Almighty Allah, with emphasis on this responsibility,
through Prophet Salih says:

"To the Thamud people (We sent) Salih, one of their own brethren. He
said: \`O my People! Worship Allah: You have no other god but Him. It is
He Who has produced you from the earth and settled you therein: Then ask
forgiveness of Him, and turn to Him (in repentance): for my Lord is
(always) near, ready to answer." Holy Qur'an (Hud 11:61)

So, this is the Qur'anic warning of the corruption on earth and
environmental destruction, as well as, the call for the building up and
protection of its balanced laws. The dreadful, environmental,
destructive work of man is manifested in the manufacturing of chemical,
nuclear and biological weapons, which cause great damage to the world,
as also his destruction of nature is manifested in cutting down trees
and polluting the atmosphere with burning and waste products.

Scientific studies and statistics conducted by arch- aelogists, show
that man's interference in the natural laws by destroying the
environment and life, and even those that he thinks are beneficial to
him, like using chemical fertilizers and other poisonous substances used
to kill large numbers of insects and plants; all cause great damage to
the environmental balance and life stability in the world.

The most obvious problem of our present era is pollution, which is
caused by domestic industries, as well as, wars. Thus, pollution,
through the use of carbon and carbon dioxide II, and the destruction of
the ozone layers or chemical pollution caused by poisonous and harmful
chemical substances, or the nuclear rays pollution, or water pollution
by crude oil or man's waste products, or pollution by the use of
agricultural fertilizers, like phosphate compounds, nitrate
compounds...etc., are all clear proofs and meaning to what the Almighty
Allah prohibits in His saying:

"And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order,..."
Holy Qur'an (A\`raf 7:56)

However, everything in the natural world acts accord- ing to the system
of purity, perfection and balance. Hence, the natural ratio of carbon is
fixed and balanced, so plants absorb a large amount of natural carbon
dioxide II for thier growth.

The scientific studies confirm that the average amount of carbon in the
natural world is approximately 300 parts in every 10,000 parts of air,
but this ratio has increased in 1984 to 345 parts in every 10,000 parts.
And this ratio will double its present rate by the year 2020, if
combustion and burning of forests continues.8

(We mention, here, that there is great increments in the ratio of
carbon dioxide II in the atmosphere, and this is due to the atmospheric
heat of the sun, which can be sensed, as well as, bring a great damage
in the near future. And this will cause the melting of artic ice and a
great rise in the level of rivers, which will harm the natural
equilibrium, and change the natural composition of the earth, which in
turn, will cause great harm to man and his inventions, forever.)9

In its report on natural destructive practices to the Conference of
Earth's Climax and Human Rights, the Arab League for Human Rights wrote:
"Statistics show that 160 thousand poisonous gases are endangering the
atmospheric layer in the U.S.A. alone. For instance, the U.S. is using
350 million tons of Hydro-floro carbons, which are used in the
manufacturing of Air-solate, i.e., the average of 25% of the world's
usage which reaches 1400 million tons.

This act, alone, will cause the weakness of the ozone layer.

And at the same time, the developed countries, alone, produce 800
thousand tons of toxic waste, which is approximately 30% of the world's
waste products, and later they dispose of it in the Sahara and rivers of
underdeveloped countries."

The League continues in its report that 600 million people live below
the poverty line, 100 million Africans are dying from hunger, and 43
million acres of forest are destroyed, annually. As also 80% of the
world's population will face disability and difficulties in terms of
earth, food or water in the next century.

But, upon this painful reality, the general line of earth's climax put
the blame and burden of this natural, atmospheric and ozone layer
destruction to the poor countries.

In addition to what was mentioned before, the conference shows that the
Third World countries import goods from northern countries, which causes
environ- mental pollution. And at the same time, it emphasizes that
foreign hands undertake this project in those countries in view of their
need for industrial work, lower wages and taxes, crude resources and
free, as well as, easy laws, where no one will be questioned or forced
to protect the environment or face hard penalties for abusing it.

What can these poor countries do, to face this drastic problem, in view
of their poverty, underdevelopment and day to day problems, and the
hunger which inflicts its citizens? Can they overcome their problems,
alone?

In order to face this dreadful danger, the sum of approximately 600
billion dollars was presumed to be able to cure this problem, but most
of the industrial countries refuse to comply with the U.N.'s proposal,
which states that the rich countries should sacrifice 7% of their annual
income until the year 2000, so as to help the poor countries in their
development projects.

But, the organization became more concerned when the American
government declined to sign the agree- ment reached in order to stop the
spreading of biological weapons.

Indeed, the American government not only refuses to sign the said
agreement, rather it also declined to commit itself to the decreasing of
carbon dioxide II gas products in the environment at the end of this
century. And, in fact, it emphasizes that these products may increase in
the range of 1.7 - 6 % in eight years to come.

Surely, the human activities presently are the causative factors that
produce approximately 7.5 million tons of carbon dioxide II into the
environment, which, without any doubt, is the main factor in the
changing of the world's climate and causes air pollution.

Although the protection of the environment and its safeguarding were
regarded as the major and basic factors in the process of economic, as
well as, social development, human activities, which include
deforestation, marine pollution, chemical farming and other modern
inventions, turn this biological source, plants, animals and other
natural phenomenon to a dangerous stage, which may threaten their very
existence.

However, man is alledged to be responsible for the crime of polluting
the air, water, earth and the atmosphere, in general, but, who is this
man? Is it the man of Somalia, India, Sudan and Yeman, or that man that
is living in America, Canada and Japan? A closer look and thought on the
statistics conducted will give us more light on the importance of the
Qur'anic injunction regarding environmental destruction and pollution.

And it will, also, give us a good understanding of the difference
between Islamic civilization and Western (material) civilization which
threatens the healthiness of the environment and human existence,
uncovering Islamic legislative tendency and its accurate solution to the
social and cultural matters and its concern to man's, as well as, the
environmental issues.


**How To Protect The Human Environment**

Protecting the natural and social environment are among the most
important Islamic goals of existence, and explaining the sign of its
care and concern with human welfare and natural protection, as well as,
its adherence to the life system, man's well-being and his continuous
existence. This is because the well-being of man's species and the
living and nonliving things around him, like earth, water and air
depends on its protection from pollution and destruction.

Islam has chosen some steps for protecting health and the environment.
Some of which are as follows:

1. Enlightening and educating man on how to take care of health and
nature, as well as, protecting the living creatures on this earth. And
this is based on the principle that whatever the Almighty Lord creates
is perfect, accurate and is meant for reformation, and there is nothing
created in vain and for amusement. Surely, the Qur'an has elaborated on
this point, when it says:

"...the handiwork of Allah Who has made every thing in perfect
order..." Holy Qur'an (Naml 27:88) However, when man becomes egoistic
and aggressive, these acts will influence him toward the destruction of
the environment and polluting the natural surroundings. In this regard,
the Holy Qur'an holds man responsible for environmental pollution, by
saying: "Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of
what the hands of men have wrought..." Holy Qur'an (30:41)

And, also, it addresses man and encourages him to protect nature and
lead the healthiest of lives, when it says: "And do no mischief on the
earth, after it has been set in order,..." Holy Qur'an (A\`raf 7:56)
"When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle..." Holy Qur'an (Baqara
2:205)

2. Exhortation on purity: The most clear process of protecting the
human environment is Islamic guidance toward educating man on purity,
cleanness and the call for purifying the body, clothes, utensils, etc.;
the Almighty Lord says: "And your garments keep from stain!" Holy Qur'an
(Muddathir 74:4)

"...and if you are under an obligation to perform a total ablution,
then wash (yourselves)..." Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida 5:6)

"...Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty, but He wishes
to purify you and He wishes to purify you and that He may complete His
favour on you so that you may be grateful." Holy Qur'an (Ma\`ida 5:6)

From this, purity and the protecting of the environment against
pollution is regarded as Allah's blessing, and which must be
appreciated. From here, we will understand that blessings, for instance,
the blessing of health, good life and wealth, etc., are incomplete
without the cleanliness of the environment and its protection against
pollution and destruction, because, if not, it will continue to be under
the danger and threat of destruction and cessation.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) talking on health protection, environmental
sanitation and the purity of man's surroundings, says: "Surely, your
body has a right over you."10 And he (s.a.w.) also says, while
elaborating on the importance of protecting nature: "Sweep your
courtyard, and don't be like the Jews."11

Imam Ali bn Musa al-Ridha (a.s.) while talking on purity and
cleanliness says: "Purification is among the morals of the prophets."12
Jabir bn Abdullah Ansari reported the repudiation of the Holy Prophet's
(s.a.w.) to uncleanliness, and says: "One day the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
came to us and he saw a man in a shaggy state; his hair uncombed. Then,
he said: \`Does not this one have what his hair needs?'"13

And it was also reported from him (s.a.w.) this saying when he saw
another man with dirty clothes: "Does not this one have water to wash
his clothes?"14

Surely, the Islamic thought and civilization is far above others, when
it emphasizes that the Almighty Allah wants for His servant a pleasant
life and a purity and environment which is not polluted. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) elaborated on this point in his saying: "Surely Allah
is good and He likes goodness; He is Pure and He likes purity."15

And while talking about Islam's pureness and cleanliness and its call
toward environmental sanitation, He (s.a.w.) says: "Surely, Islam is
pure, therefore be pure, because he can never enter Paradise who is not
pure.16

3. Prohibiting environmental pollution: As Islam exhorts its followers
toward purification, likewise, it prohibits environmental pollution and
destruction. On this matter, it was reported from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) that he prohibited spitting on the earth, because of its
harmful effects on the health, and its contradiction to human nature.

However, as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) prohibits spitting, he also
prohibits and warns against defecating under a fruit tree and urinating
in stationary or flowing water and, also, on the road, so as to protect
the environment from pollution and, also, as a protection to health and
purity.

We can outline the importance of this advice, if we understand the
danger of human waste products to our health and to the environment,
especially the role which these contaminates of water play in spreading
diseases to the community through drinking, bathing and the fruits which
are watered by this water.

It was reported from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) that: "The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) prohibited defecation on the edge of a well, river or under a
fruit tree."17

And it was also reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that: "It is
prohibited for a man to urinate in stationary water..."18 And he (a.s.)
also quoted the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that he said: "Surely, the
Almighty Allah warns you, Oh, my ummah!, against twenty four things and
prohibits you from them," and he recited them until he said, "He warns
against urinating on the edge of a running river."19

4. Prohibition on staying in a state with "najasah" (unclean things)
and their purification: When we read the philosophy of Islamic laws, we
will be able to detect the concern and care of these laws toward man's
protection.

The Jurists (Fuqaha\`) have summarized the philosophy of the Islamic
laws and analyzed them in a simple formula, i.e., "attracting to the
best interest (masalih) and repelling evil (corruption) (mafasid)."

Hence, "masalaha" and "mafasada" are the two criterion of a particular
law and the cause of its legislation. And, of course, at the time of
practicing this legislative principle on things which Islamic laws
prescribe, like the impurity of some things, and the prohibition of
eating and selling them and the necessity of purifying them before
praying, one will, then, understand the value and worthiness of the
Islamic laws and their exhortation against evil which is harmful to the
health.

It is in view of this that the Islamic Shari\`a terms the following
things as "najis" and necessitates its purification before praying and
circumambulation (Tawaf, ritual circling of the Ka\`ba) and they are:

1. Human urine and feces, and likewise, the urine and feces of those
animals forbidden for us to eat.
2. The dead body of humans, and animals whose blood gushes out when
slaughtered.
3. Human sperm, as well as, that of animals whose blood gushes out when
slaughtered.
4. Human blood, as well as, that of animals whose blood gushes out when
slaughtered.
5. Alcholic liquors
6. Terrestrial dogs and pigs

Undoubtedly, the present man's problem, especially in big cities, is
how to get rid of human and animal waste products, as well as, their
dead bodies. This is because they are the most clear and wide range
source of microbes and other dangerous diseases, which afflict man.

However, as the aforementioned "najasah" were outlined and the use of
them in polluting the environment has been prohibited, man was also
commanded to be free from them, as Almighty Allah says:

"...Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty, but He wishes
to purify you and He wishes to purify you and that He may complete His
favour on you so that you may be grateful." Holy Qur'an (Ma\`ida 5:6)

Indeed, whoever makes a close examination and contemplation of these
purification laws, will understand that the Islamic purification method
is the most perfect system of purification, health and protecting the
environment from dirty things and "najasah". It terms water, earth and
sun as natural purifiers which purify "najasah" like man's waste
products, dead bodies, blood and semen and some animals' waste products.
It also regards transformation (istihala) from a particular state to
another, like the transformation of a dead animal to ashes after
burning, as among the purifiers.

In addition, the purification method in Islam is composed of different
steps, which are among the most perfect processes and environmental
protection practic -es; they are:

a. Islam, after regarding the dead body, blood, semen and waste
products of man and some other animals as "najis", being confirmed by
scientific researches that they are the sources of some diseases and
environmental pollution, it commands that their purification and removal
from the human's body and other things like clothes, utensils, carpets,
etc., by using water or other purifiers is mandatory.

It also legislates the purification of some "mutanajjisat" (things
which become impure through contacting "najis") by earth and the rays of
the sun, which has been proven, scientifically, to be a power in killing
microbes. Through this step, Islam strives towards the purification of
the environment and protecting it from the dangers of pollution.

b. Burying a dead body: Islam has made the burying of a human dead body
compulsory, which is among the most important steps in getting rid of
microbes and diseases, as well as, protecting the human environment
against pollution.

c. Bathing: Islam has legislated different types of bathing (ghusl) for
cleaning man and protecting his body from dirty things and other sources
of diseases, thereby, making some compulsory (wajib) "ghusl" and others
recommended (mustahab). The compulsory ones are:

1. Ghusl al-Janabah: It is obligatory (wajib) on a "junub" (a person
who has janabah-in a state of ritual impurity due to sexual intercourse
or ejaculation) to clean himself from it through ritual bathing to ready
the self for prayer (salat) and to be in a state of purity to have a
valid fast (sawm). Islam has made it "makruh" (undesirable) for a
"junub" to sleep without performing ghusl, and, likewise, eating and
drinking without ghusl in this state.
2. Ghusl al-Haidh
3. Ghusl al-Istihadhah
4. Ghusl-e-Massil-e-Mayyit
5. Ghusl an-Nifas

The "mustahab ghusul", which Islam exhorts people to perform, are many,
but the most important one is: The Friday "ghusl", which is the weekly
"ghusl" for safeguarding the purity of the body.

d. Ablution (wudhu): Ablution, in the Islamic perspective, is the most
clear method of actualizing man's daily purification. Islam has made
five daily prayers incumbent upon all Muslims, (starting from 9 years
old for girls and 15 years old for boys) and those prayers cannot be
said unless in a state of ablution, thus, one has to clean himself every
day five times or at least three times daily, because prayer, whether
compulsory or recommeded, will not become valid without ablution.
Consequently, ablution is regarded as purification because it considers
washing the face and hands compulsory and rinsing the mouth and drawing
water into the nostrils as a recommended act.

As Islam legislates the compulsory ablution, likewise, it exhorts on
being in a state of purity when performing some recommended acts of
worship like reading the Holy Qur'an, and it also recommends performing
ablution before sleeping.

e. Cleaning furniture and other household appliances: Islam's concern
and care for environmental cleanliness and its protection can be
detected through its command of prohibiting the eating and drinking of
"najis" and "mutanajjis" things.

Therefore, it becomes compulsory on the one who wants to eat or drink
from a plate or cup that has become "najis" to purify it with water or,
in some instances water with earth, before using it. Surely, the
jurisprudence books have discussed how to purify these items when they
come in contact with najis (for details, please refer to books regarding
this subject).

5. Prohibiting some foods and drinks and some other practices, like
eating dead animals, drinking blood, liquor and using unlawful drugs,
which serve as destructive elements to the health, as well as, polluting
the well being of the society. 6. Prohibiting illegal sexual relations;
like adultery, homosexuality, lesbianism, masturbation, etc... 7.
Creating the concepts of "no injury and no malicious damage" (la dharara
wa la dhirara).

With this great legal concept or principle which gives the right of
freezing and blocking any act or practice which has any harmful result,
we can say that Islam has prohibited anything which is harmful to the
environment. So, it is left for the experts and religious scholars or,
in other words, it is their responsibility to specify those harmful
acts, items and practices. Afterwards, it may become the responsibility
of the government to prohibit the use of those harmful items and
activities, so as to protect the well-being and peaceful coexistence of
their citizens.

8. The responsibility of "enjoining the good and prohibiting evil"
(al-Amru bil ma\`rufi wan Nahayi anil Munkar): The injuction of "Amru
bil Ma\`rufi wan Nahayi anil Munkar" and, likewise, the right and
jurisdiction given to a ruler by Islam for the smooth discharging of his
duties, forms a good reformative atmosphere in the Islamic society. And
this comprises all the necessary requirements which can guarantee the
protection of the environment and its development for the interest of
man.

Thus, the Islamic laws are based on this formula: "Attracting interests
and repelling corruption".

And that the principle of "and help one another in goodness and piety,
and do not help one another in sin and aggression" is a broad foundation
of environmental protection and preserving the natural system. Because
the verse prohibits aggression on nature and life, as well as, calls for
a collective relationship toward good and reformation.


