Section 1 : the Qur'an Contains Signs From the All- Wise Commentary : Verse 1
=============================================================================

The object of the revelation of the Qur'an to the Apostle(Muhammad)The
believers and the disbelievers in the Turah and the reward and the
punishment.

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحيمِ
</p>

(1) الر تِلْكَ آياتُ الْكِتابِ الْحَكيمِ

In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

1. " Alif 'A', Lam 'L', Ra 'R'. These are the verses of the Book of
Wisdom. "

**Commentary :** It is noteworthy that six consecutive suras of the
Qur'an begin with abbreviated letters which are recited: Alif, Lam, Ra.
These Suras are: Yunus, Hud, Yousuf, Ar- Ra'd(with an exception, of
course), 'Ibrahim, and Al- Hijr. Each of these letters is an indication
to the Names of Allah or to some other things which have been explained
at the beginning of Sura Al- Baqarah.

The Arabic word/ tilka/ refers to the verses that are found in this
Sura.

The objective meaning of the Qur'anic phrase/ al kitab il h akim/ is
the "Protected Tablet" or the Qur'an. Since it contains wisdom and
teaches by means of wisdom, it is therefore Wise.

In other words; the Qur'an has a high rank, because the Holy Book
itself is Wise. Simultaneously, while it contains both teachings of
wisdom and is wise in content, it is a judge and an arbitrator as well.
It remains intact from hostile elements and history and the passage of
time can leave no impact upon it. It is "the Book of Wisdom".


**Commentary : Verse 2**

(2) أَ كانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَباً أَنْ أَوْحَيْنا إِلى‏ رَجُلٍ مِنْهُمْ
أَنْ أَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ وَ بَشِّرِ الَّذينَ آمَنُوا أَنَّ لَهُمْ قَدَمَ
صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ قالَ الْكافِرُونَ إِنَّ هذا لَساحِرٌ مُبينٌ

2. "Was it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man from among
themselves that he should warn mankind and give good tidings to those
who believe that they have before their Lord the rank of Truth(While)the
unbelievers say: 'This is indeed an evident sorcerer! '"

**Commentary :**

‏The verses of wisdom of the Qur'an are composed of the same letters
and sounds that are just like Alif, Lam, and Ra. Their differences with
other statements lie in the fact that they are intermingled with divine
wisdom, the sort of which is so encompassing that it exposes the truth,
and drags mankind to guidance, but the people do not believe this fact
that a man, selected from among themselves, can receive revelations from
Allah. This matter is not surprising, since the aim of revelation is to
warn the people and give glad tidings to the believers notifying them of
the high esteem in which they are being held with their Creator. If they
believe firmly in Him, He guides them and rewards them accordingly (1)!
The verse says:

"Was it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man from among
themselves that he should warn (1) In Islamic quotations, whether those
of the Sunnis or those of the Shia'h, the Prophet of Islam(p.b.u.h.) has
been known as the Propagator of Truth.(See the Commentary of Qurtubi and
Al- Borhan).

mankind and give good tidings to those who believe that they have
before their Lord the rank of Truth "

The idolaters, however, said that "this man"(meaning the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) , must have obviously been a sorcerer and a magician
since he brought something that could not be brought by others. The
verse continues saying:

"... (While)the unbelievers say: 'This is indeed an evident sorcerer!
'"

The disbelievers considered prophecy as sorcery and, because of their
short sightedness, dark heartedness, and lack of understanding, they
could mostly not grasp the truth and distinguish the difference between
miracles and the work of magicians.


**Commentary : Verse 3**

(3) إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذي خَلَقَ السَّماواتِ وَ الْأَرْضَ في‏
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوى‏ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُدَبِّرُ الْأَمْرَ ما
مِنْ شَفيعٍ إِلاَّ مِنْ بَعْدِ إِذْنِهِ ذلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ
فَاعْبُدُوهُ أَ فَلا تَذَكَّرُونَ

3. Verily, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the Earth in
six Days. Then He established Himself on 'Arsh(the Throne), directing
the affair. No intercessor can there be except after(obtaining)His
leave. This is Allah your Lord; Him therefore worship you: will you not
remember "

**Commentary :**

The objective meaning of 'Six Days' is six periods of time in the
course of creation.

The 'throne'('arsh)alludes to power and omnipotence. When one says
someone was enthroned or overthrown, he implies that he was elevated in
power or stripped of his power. Allah's comprehensive authority extends
all over existence both before the creation of the earth and the heavens
and after their creation. The Qur'an says: "And His 'Arsh(throne)was
over the water. " (1)

Even next to the end of the world and during the Resurrection, Allah's
omnipotence over all existence will remain intact, too. The Qur'an says:
" and above them eight shall bear on that Day your Lord's 'Arsh(throne).
" (2)

(1) Sura Hud, No. 11, verse 7

(2) Sura Al- H aqqah, No. 69, verse 17

**Messages:**

1. Acquiring knowledge about Allah(s. w. t.)should precede worshipping
Him.

2. Worship must be kept exclusively for Him Who has the power to create
and administer all the affairs of creation and to no one else.

3. The creation of the world has been accomplished according to a plan
and an arranged program,(in six days). When there are pre- ordaining
plans for all beings in the system of creation, how can one think of
human beings, who are the outstanding achievements of the creative
process, to be without any planned destiny The verse says:

"Verily, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the Earth in
six Days. Then He established Himself on 'Arsh(the Throne), directing
the affair. ..."

4. Allah has created the entire existence and is in full command,
administering it with wisdom while leaving no one in charge of any part
without His prior approval.

5. Any effort at mediation by any being must meet with His approval.
Thus one, such as idols, cannot be unduly appointed as an intercessor.
The verse says:

" No intercessor can there be except after(obtaining)His leave. ..."

6. Extremists might try to introduce the Creator as Allah, nevertheless
they consider themselves as competent policy- makers and able to
separate religion from politics. It says:

"... This is Allah your Lord; Him therefore worship you: ..."

Man believes in his Creator. He only needs to be reminded. The verse
concludes:

"... will you not remember ..."

7. Deity is not separate from Lordship.


**Commentary : Verse 4**

(4) إِلَيْهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَميعاً وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقًّا إِنَّهُ
يَبْدَؤُا الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعيدُهُ لِيَجْزِيَ الَّذينَ آمَنُوا وَ
عَمِلُوا الصَّالِحاتِ بِالْقِسْطِ وَ الَّذينَ كَفَرُوا لَهُمْ شَرابٌ
مِنْ حَميمٍ وَ عَذابٌ أَليمٌ بِما كانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ

4. "To Him will be your return, all together. The promise of Allah is
true. Verily He originates the(process of)creation, then He causes it to
return, that He may reward with justice those who believe and do
righteous deeds; but those who disbelieve, for them shall be a drink
from the boiling fluids and a painful chastisement for what they used to
reject. "

**Commentary :**

This verse puts forth both the principle of Resurrection(to Him will be
your return), and its probability,(He originates the(process
of)creation, then He causes it to return,). This meaning is just like
verse 91 of Sura Al- 'A'raf, No. 7 which states: " As He brought you
forth in the beginning, so shall you return. " And it also refers to the
aim of Resurrection which involves punishment and reward. The verse
continues saying:

"... that He may reward with justice those who believe and do righteous
deeds; but those who disbelieve, for them shall be a drink from the
boiling fluids and a painful chastisement for what they used to reject.
"

Therefore, those who are believers and have done good deeds will be
rewarded in a just manner, leading them to Paradise. The share of the
unbelievers will be a burning liquid made of boiling water that will
torture them painfully and they will be kept in Hell forever.


