Section 7 : No Fear Or Grief For the Friends of Allah Commentary : Verse 61
===========================================================================

Everything in the earth and the heavens is contained in the Open Book
There shall not be any fear or grief for any friend of Allah.

(61) وَ ما تَكُونُ في‏ شَأْنٍ وَ ما تَتْلُوا مِنْهُ مِنْ قُرْآنٍ وَ لا
تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَلٍ إِلاَّ كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُوداً إِذْ تُفيضُونَ
فيهِ وَ ما يَعْزُبُ عَنْ رَبِّكَ مِنْ مِثْقالِ ذَرَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَ
لا فِي السَّماءِ وَ لا أَصْغَرَ مِنْ ذلِكَ وَ لا أَكْبَرَ إِلاَّ في‏
كِتابٍ مُبينٍ

61. " And you are not(engaged)in any affair, nor do you recite any part
from the Qur'an, and nor any deed you(mankind)may be doing, but We are
Witnesses over you when you enter into it. Nor is there hidden from your
Lord(so much as)the weight of an atom on the earth or in the heaven, not
anything lesser than that or greater but are(recorded)in a Clear Book.
"

**Commentary :**

The "Clear Book" is the 'Preserved Tablet' or Allah's Comprehensive
Knowledge which covers the entire cosmos including not only the actions
of human beings but also the smallest details of everything in the
heavens and the earth. With the utmost subtlety and eloquence, this
verse announces that Allah is not only fully aware of the minutest facts
in the heavens and the earth but He is also fully aware of the minutest
details of the actions of his subjects. Whatever the mood or state of
meditation or an important affair you might be in, whatever part of the
Qur'an you might be engaged in reciting, and whatever action you begin,
you can do nothing which cannot be seen or noticed by Allah when you
start it. The verse says:

" And you are not(engaged)in any affair, nor do you recite any part
from the Qur'an, and nor any deed you(mankind)may be doing, but We are
Witnesses over you when you enter into it. ..."

Then more emphatically, it continues by saying that not slightest thing
in the heavens and on earth, even that of an insignificant particle or
greater than it can be hidden from Allah. All of these are recorded and
registered in the Preserved Tablet and in the Open Book of Allah. It
continues saying:

"... Nor is there hidden from your Lord(so much as)the weight of an
atom on the earth or in the heaven, not anything lesser than that or
greater but are(recorded)in a Clear Book. "

All Muslims are taught a great lesson by this verse, which can place
them on the right track, leading them toward the Truth and preventing
them from going astray.

It calls our attention to the fact that not only does the Almighty
comprehend our every thought, word and deed, but His angels are also
carefully watching every step we take, every word we utter, every
thought we entertain in our heads, wherever we cast our eyes, and in
whatever state we are in.

It is not without proper grounds that Imam Sadiq(a. s)said: "The
Prophet of Islam(p. b. u. h)whenever reading this verse, used to weep
greatly". If the Prophet of Islam(p.b.u.h.) , with all his sincerity and
gratitude, with all the services he had rendered human beings, and with
all his unparalleled worship of the Creator could be so concerned about
his imperfections before Allah, how then, can we determine our state ?


**Commentary : Verse 62.63.64**

(62) أَلا إِنَّ أَوْلِياءَ اللَّهِ لا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَ لا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ

(63) الَّذينَ آمَنُوا وَ كانُوا يَتَّقُونَ

(64) لَهُمُ الْبُشْرى‏ فِي الْحَياةِ الدُّنْيا وَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ لا
تَبْديلَ لِكَلِماتِ اللَّهِ ذلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظيمُ

62. " Behold! Verily no fear shall be upon the friends of Allah, nor
shall they grieve; "

63. " Those who believe and constantly keep from evil. "

64. " For them are Glad Tidings in this world's life and in the
Hereafter. There is no change in the Words of Allah. That is the great
success. "

**Commentary :**

In the previous verses, some of the characteristics of the polytheists
and non- believers were explained, from now on, the characteristics of
the true believers and those who struggle and strive, who constantly
guard against evil and who are the exact opposite of the first group
will be described. The verse attracts the attentions implying that there
is no fear among the men of Allah and they will have no sorrows. The
verse says:

" Behold! Verily no fear shall be upon the friends of Allah, nor shall
they grieve; "

Here sorrows and fears are those that relate to worldly matters for
Allah's worshippers are imbued with the owe of Him. This kind of fear is
concerned with one's failure to carry out ones duties and
responsibilities and that kind of sorrow which one feels towards his
lack of achievements during the course of his life. Here fear and sorrow
have spiritual connotations, which help in man's perfection and
development. This is quite contrary to the fear and sorrow that have a
material basis and is the source of degradation and deviations.

The friends of Allah are those whose position requires no boundaries
between them and their Lord and they are not distant from Him. Their
hearts are open and unveiled and they see Him with all their hearts
through the light of knowledge, faith, and good deeds which leaves them
with perfect sincerity. It is because of such an acquaintance with Allah
that, in their views, anything else other than Him is insignificant, of
little value, and ephemeral. The verse says:

" Those who believe and constantly keep from evil. "

They are those who have become believers, continuously strive after
virtue and make continence their habit. For them there is good news both
in this world and in the Hereafter, because there are no changes in the
Divine words and promises, for Allah always fulfils the promises He has
made to His friends. This is a great victory and happiness for the
person concerned. The verse says:

" For them are Glad Tidings in this world's life and in the Hereafter.
There is no change in the Words of Allah. That is the great success. "


**Commentary : Verse 65**

(65) وَ لا يَحْزُنْكَ قَوْلُهُمْ إِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَميعاً هُوَ
السَّميعُ الْعَليمُ

65. " And let not their speech grieve you. Verily the glory is wholly
Allah's; He is All- Hearing, All- Knowing. "

**Commentary :**

As a good end awaits those who observe continence, the attainment of
this goal requires one to pass through some great difficulties. Among
them is that one can cite the struggle which the faithful experience
within their hearts in the process of overthrowing and revising their
aspirations. This can tend to make them feel hopeless, giving them the
impression that the oppressors can overcome them. But this is not so,
Allah, the Exalted in Majesty informs us that we must not let the
oppressors make us sorrowful. The Majesty is entirely His. It is He Who
is All- Hearing and Omniscient. This good news only applies to those
whose existence embodies the characteristics of the friends of Allah.
The verse says:

" And let not their speech grieve you. Verily the glory is wholly
Allah's; He is All- Hearing, All- Knowing. "

In the Islamic texts one reads that:

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali- ibn- Abi- Talib(a.s.)once was asked about the
meaning of Allah's words when He says: "Behold! Verily no fear shall be
upon the friends of Allah, nor shall they grieve", and who the friends
of Allah were.

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen answered: "The friends of Allah are those who are
sincere in their worship, they are cognizant of the depth of those
matters that are of the world, whereas others attach importance to the
outward appearance of the world. These believe in the idea of the
permanent character of the ‏world while the others do not believe in its
lack of permanence. "(1)

It is also narrated from Imam Baqir(a.s.)who said that it is written in
Imam Sajjad's(a.s.), book concerning the friends of Allah that they are
those who accomplish their religious obligations, and act according to
the practice of Allah's Messenger(p.b.u.h.) . They are those who abstain
from all that is forbidden, and have let the transient world go by,
while they are only interested in what is dear to Allah. They make a
living in accordance with the laws which consider these ways of earning
a livelihood lawful. They abhor arrogance, shun the hoarding of wealth
and pay all the obligatory religious dues. Allah has blessed them all
for what they earn, and He has also fixed a great reward for what they
have saved in advance for their life in Hereafter.


(1) The Commentary of Al- Mizan, the explanation upon the verse


