Commentary : Verse 66
=====================

(66) أَلا إِنَّ لِلَّهِ مَنْ فِي السَّماواتِ وَ مَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَ
ما يَتَّبِعُ الَّذينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ شُرَكاءَ إِنْ
يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ الظَّنَّ وَ إِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ يَخْرُصُونَ

66. " Behold! Verily to Allah belongs whoever is in the heavens and
whoever is in the earth, and they do not follow any associates, who call
on others besides Allah, they do not follow(anything)but conjectures,
and they only lie. "

**Commentary :**

Be aware that whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth belongs to
Allah and is under His domination. The use of word/ man/, mentioned in
this holy verse(and we translated it as whoever), signifies wise and
intelligent men.

That is, those who have been provided with intelligence and live in the
heavens and on the earth are all under Allah's power and control. When
the rule is that all intelligent people, as individuals among His
creation, must belong to Him, it follows that other existing beings
should also follow the rule and they also belong to Allah. The fact that
He specializes "the intelligent" as a separate category signifies their
elevation and magnification in that position. The verse says:

" Behold! Verily to Allah belongs whoever is in the heavens and whoever
is in the earth, ..."

Those who follow idols are those who consider them as partners with
Allah. The verse continues saying:

"... and they do not follow any associates, who call on others besides
Allah, ..."

Those who select partners for Allah, follow nothing but their own
conjectures simply following their forefathers in this case or it is
because of mistake they have made thinking that they approach Allah
therewith. If they think they can elevate themselves and approach Allah
in this way, they do nothing but lie. The verse says:

"... they do not follow(anything)but conjectures, and they only lie.
"


**Commentary : Verse 67**

(67) هُوَ الَّذي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فيهِ وَ النَّهارَ
مُبْصِراً إِنَّ في‏ ذلِكَ لَآياتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ

67. " He it is Who appointed for you the night that you rest in it, and
the day giving light. Verily there are signs in it for people who
hearken. "

**Commentary :**

After rejecting all the partners of the polytheists, in calling the
polytheists' attention to His magnitude and His blessings, the Qur'an
implies that Allah made the night dark and the day illuminated so that
they may find silence and comfort during the night and make their living
and earn their sustenance during the day. The verse says:

" He it is Who appointed for you the night that you rest in it, and the
day giving light. ..."

Truly, these are clear proofs and reasons attesting to the Unity of
Allah, the Glorified, for no one else is able to do all this. The verse
continues saying:

"... Verily there are signs in it for people who hearken. "


**Commentary : Verse 68**

(68) قالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ وَلَداً سُبْحانَهُ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ لَهُ ما
فِي السَّماواتِ وَ ما فِي الْأَرْضِ إِنْ عِنْدَكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطانٍ بِهذا
أَ تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ ما لا تَعْلَمُونَ

68. " They say, 'Allah has begotten a son! ' Glory be to Him! He is
Self- Sufficient! His is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in
the earth! No warrant have you for this! Do you say about Allah what you
do not know '"

**Commentary :**

'To beget a son' signifies 'to be the father of someone, which differs
from giving birth and having children. The polytheists considered the
angels as the daughters of Allah, and the Jews took "Ezra" as an
offspring of Allah, while the Christians called Jesus the Son of
Allah.

Allah is neither afraid of being lonely so as to want to adopt an
offspring, nor does He need any heir to adopt a son. He also does not
need any help so that He chooses an assistant, nor does He need to
ensure the survival of His species, so He does not need a son. The verse
says:

" They say, 'Allah has begotten a son! 'Glory be to Him! He is Self-
Sufficient! ..."

This phrase, means that Allah is absolutely self sufficient and He is
absolutely far from what they say, because whatever is in the heavens
and on the earth are His and fall under His command. The verse says:

"... His is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth!
..."

Thus He absolutely does not need to have a son, for begetting offspring
is to relieve oneself from one's lack of ability and weakness or to
enrich oneself and get rid of poverty, but Allah is free from all this.
If it is impossible for Him to have a real son, it is also impossible
for Him to adopt a stepson and there are no reasons to support the
authenticity of this claim. It says:

"... No warrant have you for this! Do you say about Allah what you do
not know '"

If one wants to know about Allah, these words are to be regarded as
blame, a censure and a threat from Allah, the Magnificent, to those who
have made these unsanctioned and atrocious claims.


**Commentary : Verse 69.70**

(69) قُلْ إِنَّ الَّذينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لا
يُفْلِحُونَ

(70) مَتاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذيقُهُمُ
الْعَذابَ الشَّديدَ بِما كانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ

69. " Say: 'Verily those who forge a lie against Allah will not
prosper. '"

70. "(They have)a little enjoyment in this world, then to Us will be
their return, then shall We make them taste the severe penalty because
they used to disbelieve. "

**Commentary :**

Here the Holy Qur'an mentions the ultimate disastrous end for all those
who ascribe belies and false concepts to Allah. He addresses His
Prophet(p.b.u.h.)that he should tell those who make false ascriptions to
Him and those who make them only lie that they will not be saved. The
verse says:

" Say: 'Verily those who forge a lie against Allah will not prosper.
'"

They might be able to attain worldly wealth through lies and false
claims for a few days, but it is only a passing phenomenon in this
world.(1) They will eventually return to Allah and He will punish them
vigorously for their disbelief and their associating partners with Him.
The verse says:

"(They have)a little enjoyment in this world, then to Us will be their
return, then shall We make them taste the severe penalty because they
used to disbelieve. "

(1) The Arabic words/ mata'/ and/ mut'ah/ are employed for short- term
use. As man's use of the world and its blessings are short- lived, the
Qur'an then applies the word/ mata'/ cornering worldly affairs.


