Section 8 : the Ministries of Noah and Moses Referred To Noah's Exhortation and the Punishment Meted Out To Those Who Rejected Noah Reference To the Other Apostles of Allah and the Encounter of Moses With Pharaoh Commentary : Verse 71
==========================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

(71) وَ اتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ نُوحٍ إِذْ قالَ لِقَوْمِهِ يا قَوْمِ
إِنْ كانَ كَبُرَ عَلَيْكُمْ مَقامي‏ وَ تَذْكيري بِآياتِ اللَّهِ فَعَلَى
اللَّهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ فَأَجْمِعُوا أَمْرَكُمْ وَ شُرَكاءَكُمْ ثُمَّ لا
يَكُنْ أَمْرُكُمْ عَلَيْكُمْ غُمَّةً ثُمَّ اقْضُوا إِلَيَّ وَ لا
تُنْظِرُونِ

71. " And recite to them the story of Noah when he said to his people:
'O my people! if my stay(with you)and my reminding you of the Signs of
Allah is grievous to you, yet I have put my trust in Allah, so resolve
on your affair, with your partners, so that your affair be not dubious
to you. Then make decision on me, and give me no respite. '"

**Commentary :**

Allah the Exalted had commissioned His prophet that he should relate
the news of the people of Noah to them, because this verse indicates
that Noah(a.s.)used to receive support and encouragement from Divine
sources, which made him not fear the threats and strategies of the
enemy. Noah announces if listening to his useful instructions and advice
with demonstrations and reasoning concerning the authenticity of
Monotheism, Justice, prophethood and Resurrection are difficult and
unbearable for them, and thus they have decided to kill him or they
intend to cast him out, he does put all his hopes and trust in Allah, in
which case, he will leave his fate in His will, with the conviction that
He will save him from their wickedness and vice. The verse says:

" And recite to them the story of Noah when he said to his people: 'O
my people! if my stay(with you)and my reminding you of the Signs of
Allah is grievous to you, yet I have put my trust in Allah, ..."

Had rat Noah then threw out a powerful challenge saying that they
should collect their thoughts and invite their idols to participate in
their decision- making so that nothing should be left hidden from them,
there should be no ambiguity remaining in their plans, they should make
the appropriate decisions and come up with the best stratagem concerning
him. The verse continues saying:

"... so resolve on your affair, with your partners, so that your affair
be not dubious to you. ..."

Noah(a.s.)added telling them if they were able, they should go ahead
and put an end to his life, and not spare him a single moment. Here is
his statement:

"... Then make decision on me, and give me no respite. '"

It has been narrated that before noon on the Day of Ashura Imam
Hussein(a. s.)also recited this very verse to the Kufan army.

This is a lesson for all Islamic leaders who might feel daunted when
confronted by a multitude of enemies, rather; they must, by taking
recourse to Allah and appealing to Him, with utmost decisiveness
challenge them and humiliate them their power which would reinforce the
morale of their followers and lower that of their enemies.


**Commentary : Verse 72**

(72) فَإِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ فَما سَأَلْتُكُمْ مِنْ أَجْرٍ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ
إِلاَّ عَلَى اللَّهِ وَ أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمينَ

72. " But if you turn back, I have not asked you for any recompense, my
recompense is only upon Allah, and I am commanded to be of those(who)
surrender(unto Him). "

**Commentary :**

Anxieties often revolve around either one's life or one's wealth. In
the foregoing verse, the issue in question centers on the conspiracy of
their enemies with regard to the lives of the prophets. The issue dealt
with in this verse relates to the prophets' lack of expectations for
reward and wealth from the side of people.

Noah(a.s.)in this verse announced that if the unbelievers were to turn
away from the truth, not accepting or following it, he did not expect
any rewards for bringing them the message. This was his mission, so they
should not balk at acceptance for fear of feeling that they would end up
owing him something, which would be burdensome to them. The verse
says:

" But if you turn back, I have not asked you for any recompense, my
recompense is only upon Allah, ..."

The verse also implies that if they turn away from accepting his words,
he would not be at a disadvantage for he was not after their wealth(he
did not covet)so that their turning away would put him at a loss, on the
contrary, their rejection would turn out to be at their own
disadvantage.

He emphasized that his reward for the prophetic mission and its
accomplishment lay with Allah alone.

And Allah, the Gracious, had commissioned Noah(a.s.)to be among those
who had submitted themselves to His commandments for, indeed, the best
of what the servants of Allah can practice is to obey and submit to Him.
The verse continues as follows:

"... and I am commanded to be of those(who)surrender(unto Him). "


**Commentary : Verse 73**

(73) فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَنَجَّيْناهُ وَ مَنْ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ وَ
جَعَلْناهُمْ خَلائِفَ وَ أَغْرَقْنَا الَّذينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآياتِنا
فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كانَ عاقِبَةُ الْمُنْذَرينَ

73. " But they rejected him(Noah), So We delivered him and those with
him, in the Ark, and We made them successors(in the earth), and We
overwhelmed those who rejected Our Signs. Then see what was the end of
the warned ones. "

**Commentary :**

The Holy Qur'an presents the final destiny of Noah's enemies and
veracity of his prediction in the following way. The enemies refuted
Noah while Allah saved him and all those who were with him in the Ark.
Not only did He save them but He also replaced the oppressors by them
and drowned all those who had denied His Signs. The verse says:

" But they rejected him(Noah), So We delivered him and those with him,
in the Ark, and We made them successors(in the earth), and We
overwhelmed those who rejected Our Signs. ..."

Turning to the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) , Allah finally commands him that he
should consider the ultimate destiny of those who did not heed the
divine warning and threats and were swept away. The verse says:

"... Then see what was the end of the warned ones. "

Noah's companions were only eighty in number whilst the numbers of the
unbelievers were manifold, however, by the grace of Allah, the Almighty,
the unbelievers were annihilated and the faithful became the inheritors
of the earth.


**Commentary : Verse 74**

(74) ثُمَّ بَعَثْنا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ رُسُلاً إِلى‏ قَوْمِهِمْ فَجاؤُهُمْ
بِالْبَيِّناتِ فَما كانُوا لِيُؤْمِنُوا بِما كَذَّبُوا بِهِ مِنْ قَبْلُ
كَذلِكَ نَطْبَعُ عَلى‏ قُلُوبِ الْمُعْتَدينَ

74. "Then, after him, We sent messengers to their people; they brought
them the clear evidences, but they would not believe in what they had
already rejected beforehand. Thus do We seal up the hearts of the
transgressors. "

**Commentary :**

In these verses, Allah, the Gracious, recounts the stories of those
prophets who had been appointed after Noah(a.s.).

After Noah and the annihilation of his people, several prophets were
dispatched to their peoples who, as a result of marriage and
reproduction, had multiplied by that time. The purpose here is prophets
'Ibrahim, Hud, Saleh, Lot, and Shu'ayb(Jethro).

These prophets went to those people with clear proofs and miracles that
testified to their prophecy and provided reasons for their truthfulness.
The verse says:

" Then, after him, We sent messengers to their People; they brought
them the clear evidences, ..."

However, none of them any longer believed in what their divinely guided
forefathers had believed. Just like the idol worshippers before them,
they were also rebellious and stood in opposition to Divine guidance.
The verse continues saying:

"... but they would not believe in what they had already rejected
beforehand. ..."

The holy phrase saying: 'Thus do We seal the hearts of the
transgressors' means that Allah(s. w. t.)impresses the symbol of
infidelity upon the hearts of those who do injustice against themselves
and violate the Divine limits and laws laid down by the Almighty, so
that they become condemned to reprimand, and are recognized by the
angels. The verse says:

"... Thus do We seal up the hearts of the transgressors. "


**Commentary : Verse 75**

(75) ثُمَّ بَعَثْنا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ مُوسى‏ وَ هارُونَ إِلى‏ فِرْعَوْنَ
وَ مَلاَئِهِ بِآياتِنا فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَ كانُوا قَوْماً مُجْرِمينَ

75. " Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his
chiefs with Our Signs, but they were arrogant, and they were a guilty
people. "

**Commentary :**

The meaning of the Arabic word/ mala'/ is the eye- caching splendour of
the courtiers and palace residents who were among the Pharaoh's
entourage.

Pharaoh had divided the society into two categories: The Coptic palace-
dwellers and the Sebti paupers. He had enslaved one group and the other
group resided in wealth and luxury.

The primary crime of Pharaoh was his claim to being a god, and of
putting innocent boys to death and letting the girls live.

Fighting against arrogant autocrats has been a major activity of the
prophets, for they fight the causes of corruption not only what is
caused by it.

The verse says: "

Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs
with Our Signs, but they were arrogant, and they were a guilty people.
"


