Preface
=======

***In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

Blessings of Allah be on you, O Saaheb al-Amr, help me and forsake me
not

All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and blessings and
salutations be on the trustworthy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the chief of the
messengers, our master, Abi al-Qasim Muhammad, and his pure progeny,
Allah’s blessings be on him and on the twelve Imams, his successors, the
guides, the guided ones.

There is no doubt that after the Holy Quran – which is the strong rope
and no falsehood touches it from in front of it and from behind it, a
descent from the Wise, the Praiseworthy – what is available with the
Muslims of the Prophetic traditions and the noble quotations on the
authority of his sinless family, who are one of the two heavy things
(ثقلين) that the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) has ordered us to follow,
is a great treasure-chest of knowledge and a voluminous, majestic
heritage.

It is replete with real cognition, training programs, ethical, political
and social teachings, principles of development, progress and human
rights, civic obligations, etc from the true and correct teachings and
intelligent laws, strong and powerful ways, which if fastened on to by
mankind, will prevent it from falling in the abyss of corruption,
oppression, conceit and slavery. Moreover, no powerful tyrant or
oppressor can ever subdue and weaken them.

Muslims certainly did not fall in their present state of social
corruption, discord, dispute, disharmony, authority of the evil,
domination of the unbelievers, and a straitened life except for the fact
that they turned away from this wise, divine path and the ignorance of
some of them regarding the strength of these constructive, guided
teachings. They preferred to opt for anything offered by the East or the
West.

Therefore, their state was like that of a trader, whose treasure was
full of precious stones and jewelry but he is neither aware of them and
nor their value. Instead, he buys sand and stones in lieu of the price
of pearls, thereby costing him his respect, majesty, freedom and
independence. But he does not open his treasure-trove to check the
varieties of precious stones and jewelry available with him, whose like
can neither be found in the markets nor with any trader.

Yes, the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) informed, “Nothing takes you
closer to paradise and distances you from hell except that I have
ordered you to do it. And nothing takes you nearer to hell and makes you
further from paradise but that I have refrained you from it.[^1]”

Surely the traditions comprise of what man needs. Hence, it is
obligatory on us to make the requisite preparations for them i.e. to
learn them and ponder deeply over them universally, in societies,
gatherings, at all appropriate places, in books, magazines, radio,
television, etc. By Allah! I don’t know anybody who has learnt these
traditions and their contents, and thought of them as paralleled except
by Allah, that in his heart was some disease.

Indeed the politics of the day did not deem it preferable that the
Muslims should benefit from the traditions and that they should be
attentive towards this great scientific wealth and prudent systems due
to their (politicians) being distant from the true life of the Muslims
in beliefs, politics, governance and ethics. Consequently, the Muslims
became seekers after being the sought ones, they became servants after
being masters just as the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) had prophesied
“They will serve but they will not be served.”

In the first era, tragedy was afflicted (on the Muslim nation) through
the prohibition on the compilation of the traditions, while on the other
hand, they had to encounter the disasters inflicted by the Jews. People
like Ka’b al-Ahbaar became the confidantes of the rulers and their
reference in the interpretation of Quran, stories of the prophets,
history and other important issues.

This was despite the fact that when the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.)
saw some of them reading or researching the books of the people of the
book[^2], he (s.a.w.a.) remarked: “Had Musa been alive today he would
have but followed me.”[^3] And despite the presence of an Imam like Ali
ibne Abi Talib (a.s.), who was the door of the city of knowledge, a
truth endorsed by the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) himself. And his
(s.a.w.a.) saying: “Ali is with the truth and truth is with Ali and it
will not separate from him.” And despite the presence of his (s.a.w.a.)
pure progeny (Ahlebait a.s.) amongst them regarding whose relationship
with the Quran the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) remarked: “Surely these
two will not part from each other till they meet me at the Hauz-e-Kausar
(on the day of Judgement).”

In the second era, which commenced with the Umayyad dynasty and ended
with the reign of Abbasides particularly Ma’moon al-Rasheed, the
politics of the governance aimed at opposing the Islamic laws was the
order of the day. The proponents of these policies, intending to weaken
the Muslims in governance, control, wealth, etc. introduced Greek
Philosophy whose atheistic views and basics were in total contrast with
the teachings of the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and the guidance of
the prophets (a.s.) concerning the recognition of Allah, His excellent
names, His perfect attributes and His prudent actions. Notwithstanding
the fact that some of those who were involved in these heresies insisted
that there existed complete consonance between the two schools of
thought (that of the prophets (a.s.) and philosophy).

The school of the prophets (a.s.) and their call for monotheism as
explained by the Holy Quran in the most eloquent manner and complete
style and on whose strong principles there is total agreement, one
cannot find any difference of opinion even on one single issue. While
the school of the philosophers who have numerous differences in their
basics and principles could neither compile a basic set of laws
unanimously, nor present before mankind a specific path based on theory
as well as practice which could guide it to prosperity.

Indeed the philosophers differed in their views on creation and
resurrection to such an extent that you cannot find two amongst them
agreeing completely on any one principle. Each one of them has his own
way that he treads and a path that he traverses. Except those amongst
them who fastened to the rope of revelation of prophets (a.s.) and
relied on their guidance and followed the directions of the infallible
Imams (a.s.) were not deceived by the views of the philosophers and did
not deliberate on issues prohibited by the Islamic canon.

One who probes their books and their terminologies will realize that the
language, tone and tenor of the philosophers is in direct contrast with
that of the prophets (a.s.) and the followers of their shariah.

Allah the Almighty, the Creator of all things, does what He pleases. He
raised the Messengers, compensates the servants for their deeds,
sustains them, listens to their supplications and answers them. He is
described with only those attributes which He has used for Himself and
not those names by which the philosophers have named Him like the First
Cause.

Those names which are not appropriate to be used for Allah instead of
the beautiful and real names of Allah like Creator (خالق), Sustainer
(رازق), Forgiving (غفّار), Oft-turning (توّاب), etc. except with the
help of some interpretation, justification and elaboration. For, none of
the beautiful names of Allah are synonymous with the First Cause, nor is
there any conceptual similarity between them and the names used by the
philosophers.

The one who researches their works will also know that the concept of
the Creator, the created and creation which sets apart Allah from His
creation, is completely different from the terms used by the
philosophers like cause, effect and causation, on which depends the
explanation of the relation between the temporal (حادث) and the eternal
(قديم). Of course, the various details and elaborations of the
aforementioned discussions can be found in various philosophical books.

It is not our case whether it is possible or not to reconcile between
the call of the prophets (a.s.), the Quranic knowledge, the traditions
of the Ahlebait (a.s.) (equals of Quran) and whatever our Islamic sages
(whose steadfastness on their path and their reliance in their way as
per the guidance of the Quran and the traditions is established) have
explained and elucidated. The fact remains without doubt that the
Muslims during the lengthy course of history and prolonged centuries
were involved in debates and disputes concerning the problems, which
were impossible to comprehend and to reach to their reality was
unattainable and a duty that was not imposed by the Shariah. Moreover,
they did not seek guidance from the light of Quran nor from the
traditions as was the right of these two lights.

Had it not been for a group of single minded devoted scholars of Quranic
interpretation, traditions and Islamic sciences, those who did not study
except in the school of Quran and traditions and did not benefit but
through the knowledge of the Ahlebait (a.s.) and did not ask save the
people of remembrance (Ahle Zikr) and did not question except from those
whose knowledge was from the knowledge of Allah, the High and those who
possessed the revelation of the prophets (a.s.) specially what the
Archangel Jibraeel (a.s.) brought to the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.),
certainly and surely all the effects and inheritance of the prophethood
would have been destroyed.

Yes, these great scholars, who were the students of the Islamic
teachings and the school of Quran, the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.),
Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and all other Imams (a.s.),
enjoy a great right upon us. Indeed, they have protected the traditions
and Islamic knowledge through the centuries and eras till it has reached
to us in its original form, with its message carrying the strongest,
real, divine and most beautiful Islamic understanding.

Today, in our times, the Muslims are being tested with modern,
materialistic, secular philosophy. A group of Muslims became inclined
either towards the materialistic civilization of the West or towards the
atheist East. Consequently, most believed in the West while a few
subscribed to the East.

Behind these inclinations too, Eastern as well as Western political
influences played a dominating role. Their propagandists advertised as
to what the non-Muslims had achieved of industrial development and
technological progress. As a result, some of them thought that these
progress and development was due to their scientific basics.

So, they began to propagate materialistic teachings and Marxist
principles and encouraged the youth to do away with Islamic manners and
teachings. A number of those who considered themselves amongst the
civilized and the enlightened supported this move. These so-called
intellectuals, civilized and enlightened people had nothing in them but
extreme obeisance for the materialistic societies and scorn for
thought-provoking Islamic principles. They attempted to interpret
Islamic doctrines and its values on the basis of materialistic ideology
or even the atheistic Marxism.

Briefly, these self-styled intellectuals transformed the entire scenario
in the field of management, politics, economics, training, art,
technology, etc. Surely, the calamity inflicted by them and the
deviations propagated in the name of civilization was a great tragedy
indeed.

Islam, with its solid divine laws withstood all the deviations in all
its modes in every era and time. History has recorded these ideological
victories over a period of time.

Its great book (the Holy Quran) guides towards that which is most
upright as it was at the time of its revelation. It has continued to
remain so over numerous eras and centuries till the present fifteenth
century and shall remain so till the Day of Judgment. For, Islam is a
divine religion and a heavenly revelation. It has come for humanity of
all centuries till Allah inherits the earth and whatever is in it. It
has come for survival and eternity for the guidance of all the nations
and realization of justice amongst them because it is not satisfied with
the domination of one nation over another or of one country over the
other and does not deem fit to lower a nation before another.

It has come to bring an end to life on earth by the establishment of a
divine and just government at the hands of the seal of successors and
proofs (peace be upon them all) so that the religion, all of it, be for
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. That all the nations be united and there
remains no difference between the white and the black, the red and the
yellow. All of them will be equal before the Truth.

Today humanity has lost faith in all materialist schools and ideologies
and secular systems. Therefore, it is obligatory and essential upon the
Muslims, specially the scholars of the day, to present the principles of
the Divine Upright religion for the confused mankind. They must explain
for them the immense social power and strength, desperately needed by
mankind, available in the teachings and explanations of Quran and the
Sunnah, as expounded by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and his holy progeny
(a.s.).

O Muslims! Be grateful for this great bounty and don’t be negligent
about it or God forbid, neither turn away from it nor disbelieve in it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَكُونُواْ كَالَّذِينَ قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَ هُمْ لاَ
يَسْمَعُونَ. إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابَّ عِندَ اللهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ
الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And be not like those who said, We hear, and they did not obey.
Surely the vilest of animals, in Allah’s sight, are the deaf, the dumb,
who do not understand.*** ( Surah Anfaal (8): Verses 21, 22)

Be careful from becoming apostates concerning the signs of Allah and His
religion. Surely Allah, the High says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُلْحِدُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا لَا يَخْفَوْنَ عَلَيْنَا
أَفَمَن يُلْقَى فِي النَّارِ خَيْرٌ أَم مَّن يَأْتِي آمِنًا يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ اعْمَلُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ إِنَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely they who deviate from the right way concerning Our
communications are not hidden from Us. What! is he then who is cast into
the fire better, or he who comes safe on the day of resurrection? Do
what you like, surely He sees what you do.*** (Surah Fusselat (41):
Verse 40)

Therefore, ponder over the oceans of these divine sciences and extract
from it priceless pearls. It is necessary for you to travel and wander
in its gardens whose vastness is more than the distance between the
heavens and the earth. So, pluck from its beautiful and fragrant flowers
and its delicious spiritual fruits. From this Islamic heritage, derive
that which is the soul of your life, the correctness of your vision, the
safety of your thought, the regulation of your living, your world and
your hereafter. Do not seek any alternative for it and be a student of
the school of traditions (hadith) and be a disciple of the institution
of Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and his holy progeny, the truthful Imams (a.s.).
Allah, the High, admonishes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللهَ وَكُونُواْ مَعَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with the
true ones. (Surah Taubah 9: 119)***

[^1]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 2, p. 74, H. 2

[^2]: Old Testament (Taurah), the Psalms (Zaboor) and New Testament
(Injeel)

[^3]: Tafseer-e-Qurtubbi, vol. 13, p. 355.


