Chapter 2: Documented Traditions Concerning the Twelve Imams Elaborating Those Brought in the First Chapter
===========================================================================================================

**Chapter Two:** **Documented Traditions Concerning the Twelve Imams
(a.s.), Elaborating Those Brought in the First Chapter** [^1]

149. Yanaabi al-Mawaddah[^2]: Abu Tufail Aamir Ibn Waathelah – he is the
last companion of the Prophet to die as per the consensus of the Ulema –
narrates from Ali (a.s.) who said, “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
declared, ‘O Ali! You are my successor. Your war is my war and your
peace is my peace. You are an Imam and the father of eleven Imams, pure
and infallible.

From them is the Mahdi, one who will fill the earth with justice and
equity. Then woe unto those who bear malice against them! O Ali! If a
person loves you and your progeny for the sake of Allah, indeed Allah
will raise him with you and with your progeny while all of you are with
me in the highest levels. You will be the distributor of the Paradise
and the Hell. You will make your lovers enter the Paradise while your
enemies will go to Hell.’”

150. Muqtazab al-Asar[^3]: Ma’roof Ibn Kharbudh al-Makki narrates from
Abu Tufail Aamir Ibn Waathelah al-Kenaani says that I heard Ali (a.s.)
say, “Every year in the Night of Power (Lailah al-Qadr), descends on the
successors after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) what descends.” He
(a.s.) was asked, ‘And who are the successors, O Ameer al-Momineen?’

He (a.s.) replied, ‘I and eleven of my offspring. They are the Imams,
the addressed ones (محدّثون)[^4].’ Ma’roof says, ‘I met Abu Abdillah,
the slave of Ibn Abbas in Mecca and conveyed to him the contents of this
tradition.’ He responded, ‘I have heard the same tradition from (my
master) Ibn Abbas and he recited ‘And We have not sent down before you
any prophet or messenger or muhaddath”.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا اَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ نَبِىٍّ وَ لاَ رَسُوْلٍ وَ لاَ
مُحَدَّث
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he said, ‘By Allah! They are the Muhaddathoon.’

151. Al-Irshaad[^5]: Zuraarah narrates that I heard Imam Abu Jafar
al-Baaqer (a.s.) state, “All the twelve Imams from the progeny of
Muhammad are Muhaddath, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib and eleven of his
descendants. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and Ali (a.s.), they are
the two fathers.”

152. Kitaab Sulaim Ibn Qais[^6]: Sulaim narrates from Ali (a.s.) that he
said, “O Sulaim! Surely, my successors are eleven Imams from my progeny.
All of them are Muhaddathoon.” I asked, ‘O Ameer al-Momineen! Who are
they?’ He (a.s.) replied, “He, my son, Hasan, and he, my son, Husain.”
Then he (a.s.) took the hand of his grandson Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) who
was then a suckling child and said, “Then eight descendants from his
progeny one after the other. They are those about whom Allah has
promised in His book

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ وَالِدٍ وَمَا وَلَدَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘And a father and what he begets.’(Surah Balad (90): Verse 3)***

So, the term ‘father’ (in this verse) implies the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) and myself and ‘what he begets’ connotes eleven of my
successors.’ I asked, ‘O Ameer al-Momineen! Is it possible for two Imams
to be present at the same time?’ He (a.s.) replied, ‘Yes, except for the
fact that one has to remain silent and not speak till the other dies.’

153. Faraaed al-Simtain[^7]: Abdullah Ibn Abbas narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘Surely, my caliphs, my successors
and the proofs of Allah upon the creatures after me are twelve. The
first of them is my brother and the last is my son.’ He (s.a.w.a.) was
asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who is your brother?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib.’

Again he (s.a.w.a.) was questioned, ‘And who is your son?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
responded, ‘The Mahdi, who will fill the earth with justice and equality
as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. I swear by the one
Who raised me as a giver of glad tidings with truth! If only one day
remains for the world to come to an end, Allah will prolong this day
till He brings forth in it my son Mahdi. The Spirit of Allah, Eesa, the
son of Maryam, will descend and pray behind him. The earth will light up
with the resplendence of its Lord. His (Mahdi) government will encompass
the east and the west.’

154. Faraaed al-Simtain[^8]: Abdullah Ibn Abbas narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘I am the chief of the messengers
while Ali is the chief of the successors. Surely my successors after me
are twelve, first of them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib and the last of them is
Al-Qaem (a.s.).’

155. Yanaabi al-Mawaddah[^9]: Imam Zain al-Aabedin (a.s.) narrates from
his father Sayyed al-Shuhada al-Husain (a.s.) from his father the chief
of the successors Ameer al-Momineen Ali (a.s.) that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘The Imams after me are twelve. The first of them
is you O Ali and the last of them is the Qaem through whom Allah, Mighty
and Glorified be He, will conquer the east and the west.’

156. Kamaal al-Deen[^10]: Ali (a.s.) narrates that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘The Imams after me will be twelve. The first of
them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib and the last of them is the Qaem. They are my
caliphs, my successors, my friends and the proofs of Allah upon my
nation after me. The one who accepts them is a believer and the one who
denies them is an unbeliever.’

157. Al-Amaali of Saduq (a.r.)[^11]: Ameer al-Momineen Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.) narrates that I requested the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), ‘Kindly inform me of the number of Imams after you.’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, ‘O Ali! They are twelve. The first of them is you
and the last of them is the Qaem.’

158. Meah Manqebah[^12]: Ibn Abbas narrates that I heard the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, ‘O people! Know that for Allah there is a door.
One who enters it will be safe from the hell-fire and the great fear
(الفزع الاكبر).’ At this, Abu Saeed al-Khudri stood up and
requisitioned, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Guide us to this door
that we may recognise it.’

He (s.a.w.a.) responded, ‘He is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib, the chief of the
successors, the leader of the believers, the brother of the Messenger of
Lord of the worlds (s.a.w.a.) and his caliph on the people, all of them.
O people! Whoever loves to fasten to the strong rope, which will never
split, must hold on to the mastership (ولاية) of Ali Ibn Abi Taalib
(a.s.) because his mastership is my mastership and his obedience is my
obedience. O people! Whoever desires to take Allah and His messenger as
his master, he must follow Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the Imams from
my progeny for surely, they are the treasurers of my knowledge.’

Here Jaaber Ibn Abdullah Ansari stood up and enquired, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)! What is the number of these Imams?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
replied, ‘O Jaaber! May Allah have mercy on you, you have asked me about
Islam, the whole of it. Their number is equal to the number of months
and these with Allah are twelve months in the Book of Allah (since) the
day He created the heavens and the earth. Their number is equal to the
number of the springs that gushed for Moosa Ibn Imraan (a.s.) when he
struck the stone with his staff and their gushed twelve springs from it.
Their number is equal to the chiefs of Bani Israel. Allah the High says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ اَخَذَ اللهُ مِيْثَاقَ بَنِى اِسرَائِيلَ وَ بَعَثْنَا
مِنْهُمْ اِثْنى عَشَرَ نَقِيْبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘And indeed We took the covenant from the Bani Israel and raised from
them twelve chiefs.’ So, O Jaaber, the Imams are twelve. First of them
is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the last of them is al-Qaem al-Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.).’

159. Al-Ikhtesaas[^13]: Ibn Abbas narrates that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) declared, “The remembrance of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be
He, is worship, my remembrance is worship, the remembrance of Ali is
worship and the remembrance of the Imams from his progeny is worship. I
swear by the One Who raised me with prophethood and made me the best of
creatures! Surely my successor is the most superior of all the
successors. Indeed, he is the proof of Allah upon His servants and His
caliph upon His creation. From his progeny are the guided Imams after
me.

Due to them, Allah restrains the punishment from the people of the earth
and prevents the sky from falling on the earth. Due to them He prevents
the mountains from being moved, through them He provides rainwater to
His creation and causes the growth of vegetation. They are the true
friends of Allah and my real caliphs. Their number is equal to the
number of the months and these are twleve. Their number is equal to the
number of the chiefs of Moosa Ibn Imraan (a.s.).” Then he (s.a.w.a.)
recited the following verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَآءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوْجِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘I swear by the mansions of the stars.’***

(Qur’an Surah Buruj 8: 1)

Then he (s.a.w.a.) said, “O son of Abbas! Do you think that when Allah
swears by the sky the bearer of constellations, does He only imply the
sky and its constellations?” I asked, ‘Then what is it, O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) retorted, “As for the sky, it’s me. And
as for the constellations, they imply the Imams after me. The first of
them is Ali and the last of them is Mahdi (a.s.).”

160. Al-Ghaibah of No’maani[^14]: Ameer al-Momineen (a.s.) narrates that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) told me, “O Ali! The rightly guided,
infallible Imams from your progeny are eleven. You are the first of them
and the last of them will bear the same name as that of mine. When he
emerges, he will fill the earth with justice as it would be filled with
injustice and oppression. A man will come to him while the wealth is
hoarded near him and implore, ‘O Mahdi! Grant me.’ He will reply, ‘Take
(as much as you like)’.”

161. Yanaabi al-Mawaddah[^15]: Ali Ibn Moosa ar-Reza (a.s.) narrates on
the authority of his forefathers reaching to Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.)
who quotes the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), “Allah has not created any
creature more superior and more honoured in front of Him than me.” Ali
(a.s.) asked, “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Are you superior or
Jibraeel?” He (s.a.w.a.) responded, “O Ali! Surely Allah, Blessed and
High Be He has granted His messengers superiority over the close angels
and granted me superiority over all the prophets and messengers. After
me superiority is for you and for the Imams from your progeny after you.
O Ali! Surely the angels are our servants and the servants of our
lovers.

These angels are those who carry the throne (عرش) and are around it,
glorifying Allah with His praise and seeking forgiveness for those who
believe in our mastership. O Ali! If we were not there, Allah would not
have created Adam, Hawwa, Paradise, Hell, Sky and Earth. Then how we are
not superior to the angels while we have preceded them in the
recognition of our Lord, His glorification, His praise and His holiness?
For certainly, the first thing that Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He,
created were our souls and He made them speak about His Oneness and His
Praise. Thereafter, He created the angels.

When they saw our souls in the form of one light, they were overawed
with our affair. Immediately, we glorified Allah (تسبيح) that the angels
may know that we are created and that surely He, the High, is
transcendent of our attributes. The angels emulated our glorification
and purified Allah from our attributes.

When the angels observed the greatness of our position, we declared
‘there is no god but Allah’ (تهليل) that they may know that there is no
god except Allah and that we are His servants and not gods who are to be
worshipped with Him or other than Him. When they witnessed the loftiness
of our state, we said, ‘Allah-o-Akbar’ (تكبير) that the angels be
informed that Allah is the Greatest and no creature can attain a lofty
position but through Him.

When they saw what Allah has made for us from the might and the
strength, we confessed, ‘There is no power or strength except that of
Allah’ لاَ حَوْلَ وَ لاَ قُوَّةَ اِلاَّ بِالله that the angels may know
that there is no power and strength except that of Allah. When they
witnessed the bounties that Allah has conferred on us and our obedience,
which He has made obligatory for His creatures, we praised Allah (تحميد)
that the angels may become aware that all praise is for Allah on His
bounties. The angels said, ‘All praise is for Allah.’ So, through us,
they receive guidance to the recognition of Allah’s Oneness,
Glorification, Greatness, Praise, etc. And surely Allah, Blessed and
High be He, created Adam (a.s.) and placed us in his offspring.

Then how we are not superior to the angels while they all prostrated
before Adam? When I was taken to the heavens during ascension (me’raj),
Jibraeel said the Azaan and the Iqaamah twice and requested, ‘Go ahead,
O Muhammad!’ I asked, ‘Should I go ahead of you O Jibraeel?’ ‘Yes.
Surely Allah, Blessed and High Be He, made His prophets superior to all
His angels. He has granted special superiority to you over all of them.’

So, I went ahead, led the prayers (with the angels behind me) and am not
proud about it. When I reached to the veils of light, Jibraeel implored
again, ‘Go ahead, O Muhammad!’ And he stepped behind me. I asked, ‘O
Jibraeel! Are you forsaking me in such a place?’ He retorted, ‘O
Muhammad! This is my limit, which Allah has defined for me. If I exceed
it, my wings will be burnt on account of the transgression of the orders
of my Lord, Majestic is His Majesty.’ The veil of light was removed for
me; I reached till where Allah pleased, to the loftiness of His kingdom.

Then I was called out, ‘O Muhammad! You are my servant and I am your
Lord. Then worship only Me and rely only on Me. I created you from My
Light. You are My messenger to My creation and My proof upon My
creatures. I created My paradise for you and for the one who follows
you. I created My hell for the one who opposses you. I made My honour
obligatory for your successors.’ I asked, ‘O Lord! Who are my
successors?’ It was said, ‘O Muhammad! Your successors are transcribed
on the canopy of My Throne (arsh).’ I looked and I saw twelve lights and
in each light there was a green line on which was the name of one of my
successors. The first of them was Ali and the last of them was the Qaem
al-Mahdi.’

I enquired, ‘O Lord! Are these my successors after me?’ I was told, ‘O
Muhammad! These are My friends, My lovers, My chosen ones and My proofs
upon My creatures after you. They are your successors. By My Might and
My Majesty! Certainly I will clean the earth of injustice with the last
of them, al-Mahdi. I will make him rule the east of the earth and its
west and make the wind subservient to him. I will make him dominate the
skies and overcome the causes.

I will help him with My army and assist him with My angels till My call
is prevalent and the creatures gather on My Oneness (tauheed).
Thereafter, I will prolong his kingdom and will alternate my friends as
the rulers of the earth one after the other till the day of judgement.”

162. Yanaabi al-Mawaddah[^16]: A lengthy tradition narrated from
Al-Manaaqeb from Abu Tufail Aamir Ibn Waathelah in the incident of the
arrival of a Jew of Madina to Ali (a.s.) and his questions from him.
(The Jew) asked, ‘Inform me as to how many Imams will be in this
(Muslim) Ummah after its Prophet (s.a.w.a.)? And inform me about the
position of Muhammad, where is he in Paradise? And inform me who will
stay with him in Paradise?’

Ali (a.s.) replied, “After its Prophet, this Ummah will have twelve
Imams. Whoever opposes them (Imams) will not harm them.”

Jew: You have spoken the truth.

Ali (a.s.): Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is placed in Jannah Al-Adn in Paradise,
which is centrally located, is its highest position and is closest to
the Throne of the Beneficent, Majestic be His Majesty.

Jew: You have spoken the truth.

Ali (a.s.): And as for those who will stay with him in Paradise, then
these are the twelve Imams, first of them is me and the last of them is
the Al-Qaem Al-Mahdi.

Jew: You have spoken the truth.

Ali (a.s.): Ask anything that you desire.

Jew: Inform me as to how much will you live after your Prophet and will
you die a natural death or will you be martyred?

Ali (a.s.): I will live after him (s.a.w.a.) for thirty years and
this-indicating towards his beard- will be dyed with this- pointing to
his head (i.e. prophesying his martyrdom).

Jew: I witness that there is no god but Allah and I witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). I also witness that
surely you are the successor of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).

163. Sharh-o-Ghaayah al-Ahkaam[^17]: Abu Abdillah al-Husain Ibn Ali Ibn
Abi Taalib (a.s.) said, “From us are the twelve guided (Imams). First of
them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the last of them is Al-Qaem
(a.s.)”.

164. Rauz al-Jenaan Fi Tafseer al-Quran[^18]: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) declared, “The Imams after me are twelve. First of them is
Ali, the fourth of them is Ali, the eighth of them is Ali, the tenth of
them is Ali and the last of them is Mahdi.”

165. Al-Manaaqeb[^19]: Imam Sadeq (a.s.) cites on the authority of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), who said, “Surely Allah, the High, has
taken my covenant and the covenant of the twelve Imams after me. They
are the proofs of Allah upon His creatures. The twelfth of them is
al-Qaem, through whom Allah will fill the earth with justice and
equality as it would be fraught with injustice and tyranny.”

166. Faraaed al-Simtain[^20]: Asbagh Ibn Nubaatah narrates on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Abbas, who says, ‘I heard the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “I, Ali, Hasan, Husain and nine descendants of
Husain are purified and infallible.”’

167. Kefaayah al-Asar[^21]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri narrates that I heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “My Ahle Bait (a.s.) are (a cause
of) protection for the people of the earth like the stars are for the
inhabitants of the skies.” He was asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)! The Imams after you are from your Ahle Bait (a.s.)?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, “Yes. The Imams after me are twelve, of which nine
will be from the offspring of Husain (a.s.), trustees and infallible.
From us is the Mahdi of this Ummah. Beware! Surely they are my Ahle Bait
(a.s.) and my progeny, from my flesh and my blood. Those who will hurt
me concerning them, I will not intercede to Allah on their behalf (on
the day of judgement).”

168. Kefaayah al-Asar[^22]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri narrates that I heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “The Imams after me are twelve,
nine of them are from the descendants of al-Husain (a.s.) and the Mahdi
is from them.”

169. Kefaayah al-Asar[^23]: Ataa narrates that we visited Abdullah Ibn
Abbas at Taaef during the illness in which he expired. We were a group
of thirty people from the elders of Taaef. He looked very frail. We did
salaam to him and sat down. He asked me, ‘O Ataa! Who are these people
with you?’ I replied, ‘They are the elders of this city. Among them are
Abdullah Ibn Salmah Ibn Hazrami al-Taaefi, Ammarah Ibn Abi al-Ajlah and
Thaabit Ibn Maalik. So I enumerated them for him one by one.

Thereafter, they came forward and said to him, ‘O cousin of Allah’s
Messenger (s.a.w.a.)! Surely you have seen the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) and heard from him what you heard. Then inform us about the
dispute of this Ummah as some have given preference to Ali (a.s.) over
others, while some have placed him after three (caliphs).’ Ibn Abbas
sighed and said, ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, ‘Ali is
with Truth and Truth is with Ali.

He is the Imam and the Caliph after me. So, whoever fastens unto him,
will be successful and saved. And whoever turns away from him, will
stray and be deviated. Nay! (After my death) he will shroud me, give
bath to my corpse and pay off my debts. He is the father of my two
grandsons, al-Hasan and al-Husain. There will be nine Imams from the
offspring of Husain and from us is the Mahdi of this nation.’

At this Abdullah Ibn Salmah Hazrami asked him, ‘O cousin of Allah’s
Messenger! Why have you not introduced these things to us before?’ He
replied, ‘By Allah! Indeed I have conveyed to you what I had heard and
advised you. But you don’t like those who advise.’ Then he continued, ‘O
servants of Allah! Fear Allah like the one who takes lessons while he is
prepared, really dreads, proceeds slowly, is inclined towards seeking
and fears from fleeing.

Then act for your hereafter before your death comes upon you and fasten
to the strong rope from the progeny of your Prophet (s.a.w.a.). For
surely, I have heard him (s.a.w.a.) say, ‘He who fastens to my progeny
after me, will be from the successful ones’.’ Then he (Ibn Abbas)
started wailing. People asked, ‘Why are you crying while you enjoy such
a high status near the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’

He told me, ‘O Ataa! I am crying for two things: The fear of the one who
sees things at the time of death and the separation of the loved ones.’
Thereafter, the people dispersed and he told me, ‘O Ataa! Hold my hand
and take me to the courtyard of the house.’ I and Saeed held his hands
and took him to the courtyard, where he raised his hands towards the sky
and said, ‘O Allah! Surely I seek closeness to you through Muhammad and
his progeny. O Allah! Surely I seek closeness to you through the
mastership of (my) teacher, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib.’ He kept repeating these
prayers till he fell on the ground. We waited for a while, after which
we picked him up but he was dead (may Allah have mercy on him).’

170. Kefaayah al-Asar[^24]: Abu Hurairah narrates that I asked the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) concerning the saying of Allah,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ جَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِىْ عَقِبِه لِعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he made it a word to continue in his posterity that they may
return.***

(Qur’an Surah Zukhruf 43: 28)

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “He (Allah) has placed Imamat in the progeny of
Husain (a.s.). Nine of the Imams will emerge from his offspring and from
them is the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) of this nation.” Then he (s.a.w.a.) warned,
“If a person stands on one feet between the Rukn and the Maqaam
(-e-Ibraheem) but dies in a state bearing hatred against my Ahle Bait
(a.s.), he will enter the fire.”

171. Kefaayah al-Asar[^25]: Umar Ibn Khattaab narrates that I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “O people! Certainly, I am about to
depart from you and surely you will meet me at the Hauz (pond of
Kausar), whose breadth is like the distance between San’aa (in Yemen) to
Basraa. In it are silver goblets equal to the number of stars. Surely, I
will ask you as to how you have dealt with my will concerning the two
weighty things (Saqalain).

Thus, beware as to how you treat them after me. The greater heavy thing
is the Book of Allah, whose one side is in the hands of Allah and
another is in your hands. Therefore, fasten unto it and do not distort
it. (The second is) my progeny, my Ahle Bait (a.s.), for indeed, the
Gracious, the Knower has informed me that these two will not separate
from each other till they meet me at the Hauz.” I (Umar) asked, ‘O
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who is your progeny?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
replied, “My Ahle Bait (a.s.) from the children of Ali (a.s.) and Fatema
(s.a.), of which nine righteous Imams from the offspring of Husain
(a.s.), are my progeny. They are from my flesh and my blood.”

172. Al Manqebah al Meah[^26]: Ameer al-Mumineen (a.s.) says, “By Allah!
Indeed the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) appointed me as his successor
in his nation. So, I am the proof of Allah upon them after him. My
mastership is obligatory on the inhabitants of the heavens like it is on
the people of the earth. Surely, the angels discuss my virtues and this
is their glorification (تسبيح) with Allah.

O people! Follow me that I guide you to the path of guidance and do not
stray right or left, lest you be misguided. I am the successor of your
prophet, his heir, the Imam of the believers, their master and their
chief. I am the leader of my followers to Paradise and I will drag my
enemies to hell. I am the sword of Allah upon His enemies and His mercy
on His friends. I am the owner of the pond of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), his flag, his station and his intercession. I, Hasan, Husain
and nine from the progeny of Husain are the caliphs of Allah in His
earth, His trustees upon His revelation, the Imams of the Muslims after
their prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the proofs of Allah upon His creatures.”

173. Kefaayah al-Asar[^27]: Zaid Ibn Arqam narrates that I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Ali (a.s.), “You are the Imam and
the successor after me. Your two sons are my grandsons, the two Imams
and the leaders of the youth of Paradise. Nine from the offspring of
Husain are the infallible Imams and from them is the Qaem of us Ahle
Bait (a.s.).” Then he (s.a.w.a.) said, “O Ali! There are no riders on
the day of judgement except the four of us.” At this juncture, a person
from the Ansaar stood up and asked, ‘May my father and my mother be
sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who are they?’

He (s.a.w.a.) retorted, “I will be on Allah’s carrier Buraaq, my brother
Saleh (the prophet) will be on Allah’s she-camel which was slayed, my
uncle Hamzah will be on my she-camel al-Azbaa and my brother Ali will be
on a she-camel from the camels of paradise. In his hand, will be the
standard of praise (lewaa al-hamd).

He will call out ‘There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah.’ (On seeing him) the humans will proclaim, ‘He is
not but a proximate angel or a sent prophet or a carrier of the Arsh.’
An angel from beneath the Arsh will reply to them, ‘O people! He is
neither a proximate angel nor a sent prophet nor a carrier of the Arsh.
He is the most truthful (الصّدّيق الاكبر), the greatest distinguisher
(الفاروق الاعظم), Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.).”

174. Kefaayah al-Asar[^28]: Zaid ibn Arqam narrates that I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), “You are
the chief of the successors and your two sons are the leaders of the
youth of paradise. From the progeny of Husain, Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, will bring out nine Imams. After I die, a group of
people will bear hatred against you in their hearts, deprive you of your
rights and join forces against you.”

175. Kefaayah al-Asar[^29]: Usmaan Ibn Affaan narrates that his father
said to him, ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “The Imams
(a.s.) after me are twelve, nine are from the progeny of Husain (a.s.).
From us is the Mahdi of this nation. Whoever fastens unto them after me
then indeed he has fastened to the rope of Allah and whoever leaves them
then he has left Allah.”

176. Kefaayah al-Asar[^30]: Abi Amaamah cites on the authority of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), “The Imams after me are twelve. All of
them will be from Quraish. Nine will be from the offspring of Husain
(a.s.) and the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from them.”

177. Kefaayah al-Asar[^31]: Ammaar (al-Yaasir) recounts, ‘When the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) was about to die, he called Ali (a.s.) and
had a lengthy secretive conversation with him. Thereafter, he (s.a.w.a.)
remarked, “O Ali! You are my successor and my heir. Indeed, Allah has
granted you my knowledge and my understanding. After I die, some people
will bear hatred against you in their hearts and usurp your right.” On
hearing this, Fatemah (a.s.) started crying and so did Hasan and Husain
(a.s.).

He (s.a.w.a.) enquired, “O chief of the womenfolk! Why do you cry?” She
(a.s.) expressed, “O my father! I fear destruction after you.” He
(s.a.w.a.) consoled, “I give you glad-tidings O Fatemah! You will be the
first of the Ahle Bait (a.s.) to meet me. So, neither cry nor grieve.
You are the chief of the women of paradise, your father is the chief of
the prophets, your cousin is the chief of the successors and your two
sons are the chiefs of the youth of paradise. From the offspring of
Husain (a.s.), Allah will bring out nine pure and infallible Imams. And
from us is the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) of this nation.”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) turned to Ali (a.s.) and informed, “O Ali! None will
bathe me and shroud me but you.” Then Ali (a.s.) asked, “O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who will hand me the water (while I bathe you)? For
surely, you are heavy and I cannot change your positions (during the
bath) singlehandedly.” He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Surely, Jibraeel will be
with you and Fazl will hand over water to you.”’

He (Ammaar) continues, ‘When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) expired,
Fazl was handing over the water during the ceremonial bath while
Jibraeel helped Ali (a.s.). When the bathing and shrouding was complete,
Abbas (Prophet’s uncle) came to Ali (a.s.) and said, “O Ali! The people
have gathered to bury the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in the graveyard of Baqi
and one person is leading them.”

Ali (a.s.) came out to the people and said, “O people! Certainly, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) was our leader, in life as well as in
death. Are you aware that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has cursed
the one who performs salaat on the graves, who takes another god with
Allah, who breaks his dentures and ruptures his gums.” They replied,
‘The affair is in your hands; do as you like.’ He (a.s.) said, “Then I
am burying the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in the piece of land where
he expired”.’ Ammaar says, ‘He stood on the door and performed the
funeral prayers. Thereafter, he ordered the people to perform the
prayers in groups of ten and leave.’

178. Kefaayah al-Asar[^32]: Sa’d Ibn Maalik says that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “O Ali! You are unto me as Haroon was to Moosa
(a.s.) except that there is no prophet after me. You will repay my debts
and fulfil my promises. You will fight after me for the exegesis of the
Quran like I battled for its revelation. O Ali! Your love is faith and
bearing malice against you is hypocrisy. Indeed, the Gracious, the
Knower has informed me that nine infallible and pure Imams (a.s.) will
emerge from the progeny of Husain (a.s.). From them is the Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) of this nation who will establish religion in the last era
just as I did it in the beginning.”

179. Kefaayah al-Asar[^33]: Imam Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “Certainly, twelve Imams will rule
this affair (Islam) after me. Nine will be from the progeny of Husain
(a.s.). Allah will grant them my knowledge and my understanding. Those
who hurt me concerning them, Allah will prevent my intercession from
reaching unto them.”

180. Kefaayah al-Asar[^34]: Moosa Ibn Abd Rabbeh says that I heard
Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.) say in the Mosque of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.),
during the lifetime of his father (a.s.), ‘I heard the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) stake, “The first thing that Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, created were His curtains.

Then, He wrote on its pillars, ‘There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah, Ali is his successor’. Thereafter, Allah created
the Tablet (lauh) and wrote on its sides, ‘There is no god but Allah,
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, Ali is his successor’. So, whoever
thinks that he loves the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) but does not love the
successor (Ali), then indeed he has lied. And whoever thinks that he
recognises the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) but does not recognise the successor,
then again he has disbelieved.

Then he (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘Know that my Ahle Bait (a.s.) are source of
security for you, then love them for the sake of my love and fasten unto
them that you may never be deviated.’ He (s.a.w.a.) was asked, ‘Who are
your Ahle Bait (a.s.), O Prophet of Allah?’ He (s.a.w.a.) responded,
‘Ali, my two grandsons and nine descendants from the progeny of Husain.
They are the Imams, trustees and infallible. Beware! They are my Ahle
Bait (a.s.) and my progeny, from my flesh and my blood.”’

181. Kefaayah al-Asar[^35]: Abu Hamzah Sumaali narrates from Abu Khaled
Kaabuli from Imam Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) from his father Husain Ibn Ali
(a.s.), who said, “I went to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) while he
was in deep thought and sorrowful.

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! What are you thinking so
deeply about?’ He replied, ‘Son! Ruh al-Ameen (Jibraeel) came to me and
informed, ‘O Messenger of Allah! The High, the Highest (Allah) conveys
salutations to you and says, ‘Indeed I am about to bring your
Prophethood to an end and your life to an end. Thus, hand over the
greatest name (الاسم الاكبر), the heritage of knowledge and the effects
of the knowledge of Prophethood to Ali Ibn Abi Taalib.

For certainly, I don’t leave the earth except in it is a learned man
through whom My obedience is known and My mastership is recognised.
Surely, I did not cut off the knowledge of Prophethood from the Unseen
from your progeny just as I did not terminate it from the progenies of
the Prophets between you and your father Adam (a.s.).’

I (Husain) asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who will rule over
this affair after you?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, ‘Your father Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.), my brother and my caliph. After Ali, Hasan will rule and
you will follow him. Thereafter, there will be nine descendants from
your offspring and altogether, twelve Imams will rule this affair.
Finally, our Qaem will rise and fill the earth with justice and
equality, as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. He (the
Qaem) will cure the hearts of the believers from his followers.”

182. Kefaayah al-Asar[^36]: Umm Salmah (r.a.) narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) used to say, “The Imams after me are
(twelve) equal to the number of the chiefs of Bani Israel. Of these,
nine will be from the descendants of Husain. Allah will grant them my
knowledge and my understanding. So woe unto those who bear grudge
against them!”

183. Kefaayah al-Asar[^37]: Umm Salmah (r.a.) recounts that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to Ali (a.s.), “Surely Allah, Blessed
and High be He, has granted you the love of the destitute and the weak.
So you are satisfied with them being your brothers and they are
satisfied with you as their Imam. Congratulations to you and to the one
who loves you and testifies in you and woe unto the one who bears hatred
against you and denies you. O Ali! I am the city of knowledge and you
are its gate. No city is approached but through its gate. O Ali! Your
lovers are those who turn to Allah and protect (their faith). Your
followers are those who are unkempt and in rags (implying the very
poor). If I ever swear on Allah, I will do so in good faith. O Ali! Your
brothers will rejoice in four places:

• When their souls are captured, and you and I will be their witness.

• During questioning in their graves.

• At the Hauz, and

• On the Seraat

O Ali! War with you is war with me and war with me is war with Allah.
Whoever is at peace with you, is at peace with me, and whoever is at
peace with me, is at peace with Allah. O Ali! Give tidings to your Shias
that certainly Allah is satisfied with them and satisfied with you being
their leader and they are satisfied being your follower. O Ali! You are
the master of the believers and the leader of the simple, handsome ones.
You are the father of my two grandsons and the father of the nine Imams
from the offspring of Husain (a.s.). And from us is the Mahdi of this
nation. O Ali! Your Shias are the chosen ones. But for you and your
Shias, Allah’s religion would not have been durable.”

184. Kefaayah al-Asar[^38]: Abu Zarr (r.a.) states that I heard Hazrat
Fatemah (s.a.) say, ‘I asked my father concerning the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَلَى الاَعْرَافِ رِجَال يَعْرِفُوْنَ كُلاً بِسِيْمَاهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the dwellers of the most elevated places shall call out to men
whom they will recognize by their marks saying*** (Qur’an Surah A’raaf
7: 46)

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “They are the Imams after me, Ali, my two
grandsons and nine descendants of Husain. They are the men on the
heights (الاعراف). None will enter paradise except he who knows them and
they know him. And none will enter the hell except he who denies them
and they deny him. Allah is not recognized but through the path of their
recognition.”

185. Al-Amaali[^39]: Imam Sajjad (a.s.) narrates that somebody asked
Ameer al-Momineen (a.s.), ‘O Abul Hasan! You are addressed as Ameer
al-Momineen. Who has enjoined this authority for you upon them?’ He
(a.s.) replied, “Allah, Majestic is His Majesty, has appointed me over
them.” Later, the same person went to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
and enquired, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Is Ali (a.s.) speaking
the truth when he (a.s.) says that Allah has appointed him as Ameer
al-Momineen (a.s.) over the people?’

On hearing this, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) became angry and shot
back, “Surely, Ali is Ameer al-Momineen through the mastership granted
to him by Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, a promise made by Him beyond
His Throne (عرش) and His angels have witnessed the same. Surely Ali
(a.s.) is Allah’s caliph and His proof and certainly, he is the Imam of
the Muslims. His obedience is joined with the obedience of Allah and his
disobedience implies the disobedience of Allah. Whoever is ignorant
about him is indeed ignorant about me and whoever recognises him has
indeed recognised me.

Whoever denies his Imamat has in fact refuted my Prophethood and whoever
rejects him as Ameer al-Momineen has in reality repudiated my
Messengership. Whoever refutes his superiority has indeed reduced my
position, whoever fights against him, fights against me and whoever
abuses him has indeed abused me. For, surely, he is from me, created
from my soil (طينت). He is the husband of my daughter Fatemah (a.s.) and
the father of my two sons, Hasan and Husain (a.s.).” Then he (s.a.w.a.)
delcared, “I, Ali, Fatemah, Hasan, Husain and nine descendants of Husain
are the proofs of Allah upon His creatures. Our enemies are the enemies
of Allah and our friends are the friends of Allah.”

186. Al-Kaafi[^40]: Sulaym Ibn Qais recounts that I heard Abdullah Ibn
Ja’far Al-Tayyaar say, ‘I, Hasan, Husain, Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Umar Ibn
Umm Salmah and Osaamah bin Zayd were with Moawiyah, when there broke an
argument between us and Moawiyah. I said to him that I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “I have more authority on the
believers than they have on themselves. After me, my brother Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.) has more authority on the believers than themselves. When
Ali (a.s.) is martyred, Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) will have more authority on
the believers than themselves, followed by my son Husain (a.s.) who will
have more authority on the believers than themselves.

When Husain (a.s.) is martyred, his son Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) will have
more authority on the believers than themselves. O Ali! Soon you will
meet him. Then his son Muhammad Ibn Ali will have more authority on the
believers than themselves and O Husain soon you will meet him.
Thereafter, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) completed the list of
twelve Imams, nine of whom will be from the descendants of Husain
(a.s.).”

Abdullah Ibn Ja’far continues, ‘I sought testimony from Hasan, Husain,
Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Umar Ibn Umm Salmah and Osaamah Ibn Zaid and they
all verified my statement before Moawiyah.’ Sulaym says, ‘And indeed I
heard the same from Salmaan, Abu Zarr and Miqdaad and they in turn had
heard it from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).

187. Manaaqeb Ahlebait (a.s.)[^41]: Jaaber Ibn Abdullah al-Ansaari
narrates from Salmaan al-Faarsi, ‘One day we asked, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who are the Caliphs after you that we may know?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, “O Salmaan! Call Abu Zarr, Miqdaad and Abu Ayyub
Ansaari to me,” while Umm Salmah the wife of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was
standing behind the door.

Then he (s.a.w.a.) said, “All of you testify and seek to understand from
me: Surely, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) is my successor and my heir. He
will repay my debts and fulfil my promises. He is the distinguisher
between truth and falsehood. He is the head of the Muslims, the Imam of
the pious and the leader of the simple, handsome ones. Tomorrow (on the
day of judgement) he will carry the standard of the Lord of the Worlds.
He, his two sons and nine Imams from the descendants of Husain are the
guides, the guided ones till the day of judgement. I will complain to
Allah my nation’s denial of my brother and their oppression on him…”
(till the end of the tradition).

188. Al-Amaali of Shaikh Mufeed[^42]: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
said to Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), “O Ali! I, you, your two sons – Hasan
and Husain – and nine descendants from Husain (a.s.) are the pillars of
religion and supports of Islam. Whoever follows us will be saved and
whoever turns away from us will go to hell.”

189. Al-Ghaibah by No’maani[^43]: Sulaym Ibn Qais narrates that Ali
(a.s.) said to Talha – in a lengthy tradition while mentioning the
superiority of the Muhaajireen and Ansaar with their virtues and merits
– ‘O Talha! Did you not witness the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) when
he ordered us to bring the skin of an animal that he (s.a.w.a.) may
write on it by which the nation would neither deviate nor differ, your
companion remarked, ‘Surely the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) is not in
his senses,’ he (s.a.w.a.) became angry and left it?’ He (Talha)
replied, ‘Yes, I witnessed it.’

Ali (a.s.) continued, ‘Certainly, when you all left, the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) informed me what he (s.a.w.a.) had intended to write on
it but the Ummah would go against it. Jibraeel (a.s.) had informed him
that indeed Allah knew that the nation would differ and dispute about
it. Therefore, he (s.a.w.a.) had ordered us to bring a book that he may
dictate what he had intended to be recorded on the animal hide. I have
three witnesses for this: Salmaan, Abu Zarr and Miqdaad.

Thereafter, he (s.a.w.a.) named the Imams of guidance whose obedience
has been made obligatory upon the beleivers till the day of judgement.
He (s.a.w.a.) named me as the first of them followed by my son Hasan,
then by Husain and then the nine descendants of my son Husain. Isn’t it
so, O Abu Zarr and O Miqdaad?’

Both of them said, ‘We witness (that we had heard this) from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).’ Talha remarked, ‘By Allah! Indeed I have
heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Abu Zarr, ‘There is
nobody on the face of the earth and in the shades of the trees more
truthful and correct in speech than Abu Zarr and I witness that both of
them will not testify but the truth and you (O Ali) are more truthful
and correct near me than both of them.’

190. Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais[^44]: (Extracted from a lenghty tradition)
The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “…O people! Surely Allah looked
for the third time and selected from them after me twelve successors
from my Ahle Bait (a.s.). They are the chosen ones of my nation. From
them are the eleven Imams who will succeed my brother (Ali a.s.) one
after the other. Whenever one passes away, the other will replace him.
Their likeness is that of the stars in the sky, just as one star
disappears, another appears because they are Imams, guides and guided
(by Allah). Whoever conspires against them or forsakes them will not
harm them.

Nay, Allah will impair the one who conspires against them and forsakes
them. They are the proofs of Allah in His earth and His witnesses upon
His creation. Whoever obeys them has obeyed Allah and whoever disobeys
them has defied Allah. They are with the Quran and the Quran is with
them, they will not separate from it nor will it split from them till
they meet me at the hauz. The first of the Imams is Ali (a.s.), (who is
also) the best of them. Then my son, Hasan (a.s.), followed by my son,
Husain (a.s.) and then the nine descendants of Husain (a.s.). Their
mother is my daughter.”

191. Kefaayah al-Asar[^45]: Zohri says that I asked Imam Ali Ibn Husain
(a.s.), ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! Then as per the promise of your
Prophet to you, how many successors will follow him?’ He (a.s.) replied,
“We found in the Sahifah and the Tablet (لوح) twelve names written with
their Imamat and the names of their fathers and mothers.” Then he (a.s.)
informed, “From the offspring of my son Muhammad, there will be seven
successors and amongst them is the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).”

192. Al-Kaafi[^46]: Zuraarah narrates that he heard Imam Muhammad
al-Baaqer (a.s.) say, “We are twelve Imams. From them are Hasan and
Husain, followed by the Imams from the descendants of Husain (a.s.).”

193. Kefaayah al-Asar[^47]: Asbagh Ibn Nabaatah narrates that he heard
Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) say, “The Imams (a.s.) after the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) are twelve, of which, nine are from the offspring of my
brother Husain and from them is the Mahdi of this nation.”

194. Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais[^48]: Salmaan al-Faarsi (in a lengthy
tradition) recounts that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to (his
daughter) Fatemah (s.a.), “Surely Allah, Blessed and High be He, glanced
at the earth, chose me from them and appointed me as a Messenger and a
Prophet. Then, He glanced at the earth for a second time, chose your
husband and ordered me that I should get you married to him only.

Also, that I should take him as a brother, minister and successor. And
that I should appoint him my caliph in my Ummah. So, your father is the
best of Allah’s Prophets and His Messengers (a.s.) and your husband is
the best of the successors and viziers. You are the first of my family
to join me after my death.

Thereafter, Allah glanced for a third time at the earth and chose you
and eleven of the offspring from you and my brother, your husband. You
are the chief of the women of paradise and your two sons are the chiefs
of the youth of paradise. Me, my brother and the eleven Imams and my
successors till the Day of Judgment, all of them are the guides and the
guided. The first of the successors after my brother, Hasan, then
Husain, followed by the nine descendants of Husain, will be in one level
in paradise. (The tradition being lengthy continues till)…By Him in
whose hands is my life, from us is the Mahdi of this nation, through
whom Allah will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be
replete with injustice and oppression.”

195. Kamaal al-Deen[^49]: Saalem, the slave of Saaburi, informs that I
asked Imam Sadeq (a.s.) concerning the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَ فَرْعُهَا فِىْ السَّمَآءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Its root is firm and its branch is in the sky. (***Qur’an Surah
Ibraheem 14: 24)

He (a.s.) elucidated, “Its root is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.),
its branch (in the sky) is Ameerul Momineen (a.s.), Hasan and Husain are
its fruits, the nine descendants of Husain (a.s.) are its twigs and the
Shias are its leaves. By Allah! Surely when a person from them (Shias)
dies, a leaf from this tree falls.” I asked regarding the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its Lord?***
(Surah Ibraheem 14: 25)

He (a.s.) clarified, “Whatever comes out from the Imam’s knowledge to
you every year from the Hajj and the Umrah.”

196. Kamaal al-Deen[^50]: Mufazzal Ibn Umar relates that I asked Imam
Ja’far Ibn Muhammad al-Sadeq (a.s.) about the Quranic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ ابْتَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when your Lord examined Ibraheem with some words, then he completed
these[^51] what were these words? He (a.s.) replied, “These were the
words that Adam (a.s.) received from his Lord due to which Allah
accepted his repentance. These words were as follows, ‘I ask You for the
sake of Muhammad, Ali, Fatemah, Hasan and Husain that You accept my
repentance, so Allah accepted his repentance. Surely He is the
Oft-turning, the Merciful.” I asked, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! What
is the meaning of ‘he completed these’?’

He (a.s.) explained, “It implies that he completed the words till the
Qaem, twelve Imams, of whom nine are the descendants of Husain (a.s.).”
Mufazzal requested, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! Please inform me about
the saying of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, وَ جَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً
بَاقِيَةً فِِيْ عَقِبِه ‘And He made it as a lasting word in his
posterity.’[^52]

He (a.s.) elaborated, “By this, He implies the Imamate. Allah, the High,
has made it in the posterity of Husain till the Day of Judgment.” Again
I inquired, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! How is it that the Imamate
continued in the posterity of Husain and not in Hasan’s, although both
are the sons of Allah’s Messenger, his grandsons and the chiefs of the
youths of paradise?’

He (a.s.) clarified, “Certainly Moosa and Haroon were Prophets,
Messengers and brothers but Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, made
Prophethood in the posterity of Haroon and not in that of Moosa (a.s.)
and it does not befit anybody to question Allah’s action. Surely Imamate
is the Caliphate of Allah in His earth and nobody can dispute His action
as to why He has done so. For surely, Allah, Blessed and High be He, is
Prudent in His actions. He is not questioned about what He does but the
people will be questioned.”

197. Faraaed al-Simtain[^53]: Sulaym Ibn Qais recounts, ‘I saw Ali
(a.s.) in the mosque of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) during Usman’s
reign while a group of people were talking and discussing about
knowledge and jurisprudence. Then, they mentioned about the Quraish,
their virtues, their past, their migration, etc. (and the tradition
continues till) the people turned to Ali (a.s.) and said, ‘O Abul Hasan!
What restrains you from speaking?’ He (a.s.) retorted, “There is none
from the living but that he has mentioned the virtue and spoken the
truth.

I ask you, O Quraish and Ansaar! Because of whom Allah has granted you
superiority? Due to your own selves, or your close relatives, or your
family members, or due to somebody other than you?” They responded,
‘Nay! Allah has granted us and obliged us due to Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and
his close relatives. All these virtues are not because of us or our
relatives or our family members.’

He (a.s.) appreciated, “You have spoken the truth, O Quraish and Ansaar!
Were you not knowing that the one through whom you reached the good of
this world and the hereafter is from us Ahle Bait (a.s.)?” (Thereafter,
he (a.s.) commenced listing the virtues and merits of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) and his Ahle Bait (a.s.) and the people affirmed each
one of these saying, ‘Yes, by Allah!’

He also proved his point through Quranic verses and the tradition of
mastership in Ghadeer-e-Khumm). (In Ghadeer) Salman stood up and asked,
‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! What kind of mastership?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) responded, “Mastership like my mastership. Whoever considers
me to have more authority on him than his own self must also deem Ali
(a.s.) to be having more authority on him than his own self. After this,
Allah, His remembrance be high, revealed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعْمَتِي وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمُ الإِسْلاَمَ دِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My
bounties upon you and am satisfied with Islam as your religion.***
(Qur’an Surah Maaedah 5: 3)

On this, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) proclaimed, “Allah is Great
(الله اكبر) is the completion of my Prophethood and the mastership of
Ali after me is the completion of Allah’s religion.”

At this juncture, Abu Bakr and Umar stood up and asked, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Are these verses concerning Ali only?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
replied, “Nay! These are for Ali and for my successors till the Day of
Judgment.” They two requested, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)!
Elaborate them for us.’

He (s.a.w.a.) consented, “Ali, my brother, my minister, my heir, my
successor and my caliph in my nation and after me, the master of every
believer. His son, Hasan will follow him, then Husain will succeed him
and then the nine descendants of Husain shall follow one after the
other. The Quran is with them and they are with the Quran. Neither it
will separate from them nor shall they separate from it till they meet
me at the Hauz.”

On hearing this tradition from Ali, they all proclaimed, ‘Yes, by
Allah!’ (The tradition continues till he (s.a.w.a.) said)

“Then Ali (a.s.) said, ‘O people! Do you know that Allah has revealed in
His Book,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah intends to keep all the filth away only from you, O Ahl
al-Bait, and purify you, a purification.”*** (Qur’an Surah Ahzaab 33:
33)

On this, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) gathered me, (my wife)
Fatemah (s.a.) and my two sons Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), and put a
cloak on us, saying, ‘O Allah! These are my Ahle Bait (a.s.) and my
flesh. Whatever pains them pains me, whatever hurts them hurts me and
whatever distresses them causes anguish to me as well. So, You keep away
from them all uncleanness and purify them as they ought to be purified.’

Umm Salmah inquired, ‘Can I enter, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) retorted, “You are on goodness. (But this verse has only been
revealed in particular for me, my daughter (Fatemah), my brother Ali Ibn
Abi Taalib (a.s.), my two sons and the nine descendants of my son Husain
(a.s.).” (The tradition continues till Ali (a.s.) started talking about
the descent of the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَكُوْنَ الرَّسُوْلُ عَلَيْكُمْ شَهِيْدًا وَ تَكُوْنُوْا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شُهَدَاء عَلَى النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That the Messenger may be a witness on you and you may be a witness
upon the people.”*** (Qur’an Surah Hajj 22: 78)

(Explaining the above verse), the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,
“It implies only thirteen people in particular, other than this Ummah.”
Salman (r.a.) begged, ‘Explain them for us, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)!’ He (s.a.w.a.) responded, “I, my brother Ali and eleven of
my sons.”

They all said, ‘By Allah! Yes.’

Ali (a.s.) said, “I ask you for the sake of Allah. Did you know that
when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) stood up for his final sermon,
after which he never sermonized again, he (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘O people!
Surely I leave behind you two weighty things (ثقلين), the Book of Allah
and my progeny my Ahle Bait (a.s.). Then fasten unto both of them and
you will never deviate. For surely, the Gracious, the Knower has
informed and promised me that these two shall not separate from each
other till they meet me at the Hauz’.”

Umar Ibn Khattaab stood up and asked angrily[^54], ‘O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)! All of your Ahle Bait (a.s.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “No.
Only my successors from amongst them. The first of them is Ali, my
brother, my vizier, my heir, my caliph in my Ummah and the master of
every believer after me. He is the first of them, followed by my son
Hasan, then my son Husain and then the nine descendants of Husain, one
after the other till they meet me at the Hauz. They are the witnesses of
Allah in His earth, His proofs on His creation and the treasurers of His
knowledge and wisdom. Whoever obeys them, has in fact obeyed Allah and
whoever disobeys them has defied Allah.”

{On hearing the testimony of Ali (a.s.)}, they all said, ‘We bear
witness that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said so.’ Thereafter,
they continued asking Ali (a.s.) questions and he did not leave anything
but that he kept asking them for the sake of Allah and informed them
till he (a.s.) came to the last of his virtues. He (a.s.) said many a
thing about what the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) had said about him
and for each testimonial, they verified and bore witness that it is the
truth.

198. Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais[^55]: Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) narrates on
the authority of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) that he (s.a.w.a.)
said concerning the virtues and merits of Ali (a.s.) (after mentioning a
few virtues and merits of Ali (a.s.)), “Know that he is my friend, my
vizier, my chosen one, my caliph after me and the master of every
believing man and woman after me.

After he dies, my son will succeed him, followed by my son Husain and
the nine successors from Husain’s posterity. They are the guides and the
guided (by Allah). They are with the truth and the truth is with them.
They will not part from it and it shall not part from them till the Day
of Judgment. They are the buttons of the earth to whom the earth is
tied. They are the strong rope of Allah (حبل الله المتين) and His
powerful cord (عروة الوثقى), which shall never wither away.

They are the proofs of Allah in His earth, His witnesses upon His
creation, the treasurers of His knowledge and the mines of His wisdom.
They are like the ark of Nooh (a.s.), whoever boards it, will be saved
and whoever forsakes it will be drowned. Their likeness is that of the
Door of Hittah among the Bani Israel, whoever entered it was a believer
and whoever came out of it became an unbeliever. Allah has made their
obedience obligatory in the Book (Quran) and ordered for their
mastership. Whoever obeys them has obeyed Allah and whoever defies them,
disobeys Allah.”

199. Muqtazab al-Asar[^56]: Abdullah Ibn Khabbaab has narrated a
tradition from both Shia as well as Sunni sources concerning the
successorship of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). Although, there are
variations in the terms of the tradition but there is no difference as
far as the number twelve is concerned. In this book, he has brought the
tradition from the Sunni sources because that was a necessary condition
to establish the mastership of the twelve Imams from Sunni documents.
Here, he has mentioned a lengthy tradition in which he has presented
some of the proofs of Imamat and established the Imamat of Imam Ali
(a.s.), Hasan (a.s.), Husain (a.s.) and the nine descendants of Husain
(a.s.).

200. Al-Masaael al-Jaarudiyah[^57]: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
has stated, “Surely, Allah chose me as a Prophet, selected Ali (a.s.) as
my successor and chose Hasan (a.s.), Husain (a.s.) and the nine
descendants of Husain (a.s.) as successors till the Day of Judgement.”

201. Isbaat al-Hudaat[^58]: Ibn Abbas narrates that when the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) was on his deathbed, he (s.a.w.a.) advised the
children of Abd Al-Muttalib as follows, “Certainly, Islam is built on
five things: Mastership (الولاية), Prayers (الصلاة), Poor-rate (الزكاة),
Fasting of the month of Ramazaan (الصوم) and Pilgrimage (الحجّ). As for
the Mastership, it is for Allah, for His Messenger and for the
believers…” Salmaan (r.a.) asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Is
the Mastership for all the believers or some of them in particular?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, “Nay, it is only and specially for those whom Allah
has included alongwith Himself and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in a number of
Quranic verses.”

He implored, ‘Who are they, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) responded, “The first of them, the most superior of them and
the best of them is this brother of mine, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) –
and he (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on the head of Ali (a.s.). Followed by
this son of mine after him – and he (s.a.w.a.) put his hand on the head
of Hasan (a.s.). This son of mine will succeed Hasan (a.s.) – and he
(s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on the head of Husain (a.s.) – and nine
descendants from the posterity of Husain (a.s.) will follow him, one
after the other. They are the strong rope of Allah and His powerful
cord. They are the proofs of Allah upon His creation and His witnesses
in His earth. Whoever obeys them, has indeed obeyed Allah and obeyed me,
and whoever disobeys them has defied Allah and defied me.

They are with the Book and the Book is with them. Neither will it part
company with them nor will they part company with it till they meet me
at the Hauz. O children of Abd Al-Muttalib! Soon you will face
oppression of Quraish from their ignorants and their devils as a revolt,
calamity, their rallying against you, intending to degrade you and
destroy you due to their jealousy and sedition against you. So, be
patient till you meet me. (The tradition continues till he (s.a.w.a.)
said) And from my Ahle Bait (a.s.) are twelve guided Imams (a.s.), each
one of them calling towards Paradise. (They are) Ali (a.s.), Hasan
(a.s.), Husain (a.s.) and nine descendants of Husain (a.s.), one after
the other. Their Imam and their father is Ali (a.s.) and I am the Imam
of Ali (a.s.) and their Imam.”

202. Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais[^59]: Ameer al-Momineen (a.s.) said, “O
Sulaym! Certainly my successors are eleven of the descendants, all of
them are Imams, the spoken ones (محدّثون).” I asked, ‘O Ameer
al-Momineen (a.s.)! Who are they?’ He (a.s.) replied, “My son Hasan
(a.s.), followed by my son Husain (a.s.).” Then, he (a.s.) took the hand
of his grandson Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) who was then a suckling child and
said, “He will succeed Husain (a.s.) and eight of his descendants will
follow him, one after the other. They are the ones on whom Allah has
sworn,ووالد وما ولد

Therefore, ‘the father’ in this verse implies the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) and ‘whatever he gives birth’ refers to me. That is, these
are the eleven successors.” I inquired, ‘O Ameer al-Momineen (a.s.)! Can
two Imams exist at one time?’ He (a.s.) replied, “Yes but one of them
will be silent and will not speak till the first one expires.”

203. Al-Arbaeen[^60]: The author has narrated a tradition from the book
of ‘Tanaaqozaat al-Bukhaari’ by Emaad al-Deen Ibn Safrawah al-Hanafi
which goes as follows, ‘Certainly, the Imams are twelve, Ali (a.s.),
Hasan (a.s.), Husain (a.s.) and the nine descendants of Husain (a.s.).

204. Manaaqeb Ahle Bait (a.s.)[^61]: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
informed, “Surely, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) is my successor. He (a.s.)
is the chief of the Muslims, the leader of the pious ones and his
children after him. Nine Imams will follow him from the progeny of
Husain (a.s.), guides, guided, till the Day of Judgement.”

205. Kamaal al-Deen[^62]: Abdullah Ibn Abbas cites on the authority of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) who said, “Surely, Allah, Blessed and
High be He, glanced at the earth, chose me from it and appointed me as a
Prophet. Then He glanced for the second time, selected Ali (a.s.) and
made him an Imam. Thereafter, He ordered me that I take Ali (a.s.) as a
brother, friend, successor, caliph and vizier.

So, Ali (a.s.) is from me and I am from Ali (a.s.). He is the husband of
my daughter and the father of my two grandsons, Hasan (a.s.) and Husain
(a.s.). Know that surely Allah, Blessed and High be He, has appointed me
and them as proofs upon His servants. From the offspring of Husain
(a.s.), He has designated Imams who will stand by my affair and will
protect my will. The ninth of them will be the Qaem (a.s.) of my Ahle
Bait (a.s.).

He will be the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) of this nation and the most similar to
me in traits, words and deeds. He will appear after a prolonged
occultation and a deviating confusion. After that, he will announce the
command of Allah and manifest the religion of Allah, Mighty and Majestic
be He. The assistance of Allah and His angels will help him. He will
fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be replete with
injustice and tyranny.”

206. Kefaayah al-Asar[^63]: Abdullah Ibn Mas’ood narrates from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), “The Imams after me are twelve. Nine are
from the offspring of Husain (a.s.) and the ninth of them is their Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.).”

207. Kefaayah al-Asar[^64]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri narrates that he heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Husain (a.s.), “You are the
Imam, son of Imam and brother of Imam. Nine from your offspring will be
Imams, good doers. The ninth of them is their Qaem.”

208. Kefaayah al-Asar[^65]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri recounts that he heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “The Imams after me are twelve.
Nine will be from the descendants of Husain (a.s.) and the ninth of them
is their Qaem. Then congratulations to the one who loves them and woe
unto him who bears malice against them.”

209. Kefaayah al-Asar[^66]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri narrates that I heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Husain (a.s.), “O Husain! You
are an Imam, the son of an Imam. Nine from your descendants are Imams
and righteous. The ninth of them is their Qaem (a.t.f.s.).” He
(s.a.w.a.) was asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! How many Imams
are there after you?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Twelve, nine of them will
be from the offspring of Husain (a.s.).”

210. Kefaayah al-Asar[^67]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri recollects that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “The Imams after me are twelve. Nine
will be from the progeny of Husain (a.s.) and the ninth is their Qaem
(a.t.f.s.).” Then he (s.a.w.a.) said, “None will bear malice against us
but a hypocrite.”

211. Kefaayah al-Asar[^68]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri narrates that he heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “The Imams after me are twelve.
Nine of them are from the posterity of Husain (a.s.) and the ninth of
them is their Qaem.”

212. Kefaayah al-Asar[^69]: Abu Saeed al-Khudri recounts that he heard
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “The Caliphs after me are twelve,
nine of them are from the progeny of Husain (a.s.). The ninth of them is
their Qaem and their Mahdi. Congratulations to their lovers and woe unto
those who bear malice against them.”

213. Kefaayah al-Asar[^70]: Abu Zarr al-Ghaffaari narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) informed, “The Imams after me are twelve,
nine will be from the progeny of Husain (a.s.) and the ninth will be
their Qaem. Know that their example is that of the ark of Nooh (a.s.),
whoever boards it, will be saved and whoever turns away from it will be
drowned. Their likeness is also like that of the Door of Hittah of the
Bani Israel.”

214. Kefaayah al-Asar[^71]: Salmaan al-Farsi (a.r.) narrates that I went
to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) while Hasan (a.s.) and Husain
(a.s.) were with him and were dining. The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was putting
one morsel in the mouth of Hasan (a.s.) and the next one in the mouth of
Husain (a.s.). When they finished eating, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) put Hasan (a.s.) on his shoulder and Husain (a.s.) on his lap
and asked, “O Salmaan! Do you love them?” I replied, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)! How can I not love them while their status is like
your status?’

He (s.a.w.a.) informed me, “O Salmaan! Whoever loves them has indeed
loved me and whoever loves me has loved Allah.” Then he (s.a.w.a.) put
his hand on the shoulder of Husain (a.s.) and said, “He is an Imam, the
son of an Imam. Nine of his descendants are Imams, righteous,
trustworthy, infallible and the ninth of them is their Qaem.”

215. Maqtal al-Husain by Khwaarazmi[^72]: Salmaan al-Muhammadi (r.a.)
narrates that he went to the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), while Husain (a.s.) was
sitting on his thigh and he (s.a.w.a.) was kissing his eyes and lips,
saying, “Certainly, you are a Chief (sayyad), the son of a chief and the
father of chiefs. Surely, you are an Imam, the son of an Imam and the
father of Imams. Indeed, you are a proof, the son of a proof and the
father of nine proofs from your posterity, the ninth of them is their
Qaem.”

216. Kefaayah al-Asar[^73]: Salmaan al-Faarsi narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) stated, “The Imams after me are equal to
the number of the chiefs of Bani Israel and they were twelve.” Then he
(s.a.w.a.) put his hand on the back of Husain (a.s.) and said, “Nine
will be from his posterity. The ninth of them will be their Mahdi, who
will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be filled with
injustice and oppression. Then woe unto those who bear malice against
them!”

217. Kefaayah al-Asar[^74]: Jaaber Ibn Abdullah al-Ansaari (r.a.)
recounts, ‘I was with the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in the house of Umm Salmah
(r.a.) when the verse descended, ‘Surely Allah has kept away from you
all uncleanness, O people of the House, and purified you, a thorough
purification.’[^75] The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) called out to Hasan (a.s.),
Husain (a.s.) and Fatemah (s.a.) and made them sit before him.
Thereafter, he called out to Ali (a.s.) and making him sit behind him
(s.a.w.a.), he (s.a.w.a.) prayed, “O Allah! These are my Ahle Bait
(a.s.). So, dispel all uncleanness from them and purify them, a thorough
purification.” Umm Salmah inquired, ‘Am I with them, O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) retorted, “You are on goodness.”

I (Jaaber) said, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Indeed Allah has
honored this pure progeny and blessed offspring by dispelling
uncleanness from them.’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “O Jaaber! They are my
progeny, from my flesh and my blood. My brother is the chief of the
successors, my two sons are the best of grandsons, my daughter is the
leader of all women and from us is the Mahdi.”

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! And who is the Mahdi?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) clarified, “Nine of the Husain’s (a.s.) descendants are
righteous Imams. The ninth of them is their Qaem, who will fill the
earth with justice and equity, as it would be replete with tyranny and
injustice. He will fight for the exegesis (of the Holy Quran) as I had
struggled for its descent.”

218. Kefaayah al-Asar[^76]: Zaid Ibn Saabit chronicles that Hasan (a.s.)
and Husain (a.s.) became ill. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) paid a
visit to them. He took them, kissed them, raised his hands towards the
sky and prayed, “O Allah! Lord of the seven heavens and whatever they
shadow! Lord of the winds and whatever they pollinate! O Allah! Lord of
everything! You are the First, so there is nothing prior to You. You are
the Hidden, so there is nothing hidden from You. Lord of Jibraeel
(a.s.), Mikaaeel (a.s.) and Israafeel (a.s.)! God of Ibraheem (a.s.),
Ishaaq (a.s.) and Yaqoob (a.s.)! I ask You that you oblige both of them
through Your relief. Place them beneath Your shelter and Your
protection. For the sake of Your mercy, do away all kinds of evils and
harms from them.”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on the shoulder of Hasan (a.s.) and
said, “You are Imam, the son of Allah’s friend.” Then, he (s.a.w.a.) put
his hand on the back of Husain (a.s.) and remarked, “You are Imam, the
father of nine Imams. From your offspring are nine righteous Imams. The
ninth of them is their Qaem. Whoever fastens unto them and the Imams
from your progeny will be with us on the Day of Judgment. He will be
with us in paradise at our levels.” Jaaber (a.r.) narrates that due to
the supplications of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), both of them
were cured of their illnesses.

219. Kefaayah al-Asar[^77]: Zaid Ibn Saabit recounts that the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) sermonized, “O people! Shall I guide you to the
grandfather and the grandmother of the best of people?” We replied,
‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)!’ He (s.a.w.a.) commenced, “Hasan
(a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), I am their grandfather, while their
grandmother is Khadijah, the lady of the women of paradise. Shall I
guide you the mother and father of the best of people?” We replied,
‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).’

He (s.a.w.a.) informed, “Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), their father is
Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and their mother Fatemah, the chief of the
women of the universe. Shall I guide you the paternal uncle and paternal
aunt of the best of people?” We exclaimed, ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)!’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.),
their uncle is Ja’far al-Tayyaar (the son of Abu Taalib) and their aunt
is Umm Haani, the sister of Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (and the daughter of Abu
Taalib). O people! Shall I guide you the maternal uncle and maternal
aunt of the best of the people?” We said, ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)!’

He (s.a.w.a.) informed, “Their maternal uncle is Qasem, the son of
Allah’s Messenger, and their maternal aunt is Zainab, his daughter.” At
this juncture, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) started crying and
invoked, “The curse of Allah, His angels and all the people be on the
killers of these two (Hasan and Husain-a.s.).

Surely, from the offspring of Husain (a.s.) shall emerge Imams,
righteous, trustworthy, infallible and just. And from us is the Mahdi of
this Ummah, behind whom Eesa (a.s.), the son of Maryam, will pray.” We
asked, ‘Who is he, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
informed, “He is the ninth from the offspring of Husain (a.s.). There
will be nine righteous Imams from the offspring of Husain (a.s.) and the
ninth of them will be their Mahdi. He will fill the earth with justice
and equity, as it would be replete with injustice and tyranny.”

220. Kefaayah al-Asar[^78]: Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.) informs that an Arab
(Bedouin) came to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) with the intention
of accepting Islam. He had a lizard with him in his bag, which he had
captured in the desert. The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) began presenting Islam to
him.

He argued, ‘I will not believe in you, O Muhammad, till this lizard
believes in you’ and taking the lizard out of his bag, he flung it on
the ground. It started running out of the mosque.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) demanded, “O lizard! Who am I?”

It answered, ‘You are Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Ibn Abd al-Muttalib Ibn
Haashim Ibn Abd Munaaf.’

He (s.a.w.a.) asked, “O lizard! Whom do you worship?”

It rejoined, ‘I worship the Allah, Who split the grain, created the
breeze, took Ibraheem (a.s.) as a friend, conversed with Moosa (a.s.)
during (his) supplications and chose you, O Muhammad.’

The Bedouin declared, ‘I witness that there is no god but Allah and
surely you are the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) with truth. So, inform
me, will there be a Prophet after you?’

He (s.a.w.a.) clarified, “No. I am the seal of the Prophets but after
me, there will be just Imams from my progeny equal to the number of the
chiefs of Bani Israel. The first of them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.)
and he is the Imam and the Caliph after me. Nine Imams will be from his
offspring” placing his hand on my (Husain) chest. “The Qaem is their
ninth. He will stand with religion in the last era just as I stood with
it in the first.”

Instantly, the Bedouin recited a few verses glorifying the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.). He (s.a.w.a.) inquired, “O Brother of Bani Sulaym! Do
you have any money with you?” He answered, ‘I swear by the One Who
honored you with Prophethood and revered you with Messengership! There
are four thousand houses in Bani Sulaym and there is none poorer than
me.’

On hearing this, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) gave him his own
camel. When the Bedouin returned to his people, he informed them about
the entire event. They said, ‘The Bedouin accepted Islam in the greed of
the camel!’ Aggrieved by what they said, he spent the remaining part of
the day in a hill and did not eat anything. On the morrow, he came to
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and recited another poem glorifying
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and expressing his state (of hunger and want).
When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) heard his verses, he (s.a.w.a.)
requested Ali (a.s.), “O Ali! Give the Bedouin what he needs.” Ali
(a.s.) took him to the house of Fatemah (s.a.), satiated his hunger, and
gave him a camel and a few dates.

221. Kefaayah al-Asar[^79]: Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.) narrates, “The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) used to say to me while giving me
glad-tidings, ‘O Husain! You are the leader, the son of a leader, the
father of leaders, nine of your descendants will be the righteous Imams.
The ninth of them will be their Mahdi. You are an Imam, the son of an
Imam and the father of nine Imams from your offspring. The ninth of them
will be their Mahdi, who will fill the earth with justice and equity. He
will rise in the last era as I stood in the first’.”

222. Kefaayah al-Asar[^80]: Fatemah (s.a.) recounts, “The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) visited me when my son Husain (a.s.) was born. I handed
him over to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) while he was wrapped in
yellow diapers. He (s.a.w.a.) replaced them with white diapers and told
me, ‘O Fatemah! Take him. Surely, he is the Imam, son of an Imam and the
father of nine Imams from his posterity. They will be righteous Imams
and the ninth is their Qaem’.”

223. Kefaayah al-Asar[^81]: Imam Husain (a.s.) chronicles that my mother
Fatemah (s.a.) told me, “When you were born, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) visited me. I handed you to him (s.a.w.a.) in yellow diapers.
He (s.a.w.a.) replaced them with white diapers, recited the Azaan in
your right ear and the Eqaamah in your left ear. Then he (s.a.w.a.) told
me, ‘O Fatemah! Take him. Indeed he is the father of Imams, nine of his
descendants will be righteous Imams and the ninth of them will be their
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)’.”

224. Kefaayah al-Asar[^82]: Mahmood Ibn Lubaid narrates, “When the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) expired, Fatemah (s.a.) used to visit the
graves of the martyrs, the grave of Hamzah (a.s.) in particular, and
cry. After a few days, I went to the grave of Hamzah (a.s.) and saw her
(s.a.) crying there. I waited for a while, until she stopped crying.
Thereafter, I approached her, did salaam to her and beseeched, ‘O chief
of the woman-folk! By Allah, your crying has ripped my heart apart.’ She
(s.a.) retorted, “O Aba Amr! I have the right to cry because I have lost
the best of fathers, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). How eager I am
to join the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)!’ Then she recited an elegy in
memory of her father”.

I said, ‘My lady! I want to ask you a question that has been troubling
me for quite some time.’ She (s.a.) said, “Ask.” I inquired, ‘Did the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) appoint Ali (a.s.) for Imamat before his
demise?’ She (s.a.) exclaimed, “Amazing! Have you all forgotten the day
of Ghadeer-e-Khumm?” I answered, ‘Certainly that was there but you
inform me of that in which he (s.a.w.a.) had made you a confidante.’

She (s.a.) elaborated, “I hold Allah the High as Witness that I have
heard him say, ‘Ali is the best that I am appointing amongst you. He is
the Imam and the caliph after me. My two grandsons and nine from the
progeny of Husain (a.s.) are righteous Imams. If you follow them, you
will find them guides and guided (by Allah). But if you oppose them,
differences will plague you till the Day of Judgement’.” I asked, ‘My
lady! Then why did he (a.s.) sit upon his right?’ She (s.a.) shot back,
“O Aba Amr! Indeed the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) declared, ‘The
example of an Imam is like that of Ka’bah, people go to it but it does
not go to the people’.”

Then she (s.a.) said, “By Allah! Had they left the truth to whom it
belonged and followed the progeny of their Prophet (s.a.w.a.), no two
individuals would have disputed about Allah, the High. Generations would
follow in the same manner until our Qaem (a.t.f.s.), the ninth from the
descendants of Husain (a.s.), reappeared. But they brought ahead whom
Allah had kept behind and they kept back whom Allah had advanced. When
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) expired and they laid him in his grave, they
chose with their desire and acted whimsically. Woe unto them! Did they
not hear the sayings of Allah,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَبُّكَ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَ يَخْتَار مَا كَانَ لَهُمُ
الْخِيَرَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Qur’an Surah Qasas 28: 68)

‘***And your Lord creates what He pleases and chooses. There is no
choice for them.’ Nay! They heard but they were as Allah,***

Glorified be He, has described

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَعسًا لَهُمْ وَ اَضَلّ اَعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Qur’an Surah Hajj 22: 46)

***‘For surely their eyes were not blind but it was their hearts in
their chests that had become blind.’***

How wrong were they! They unfolded their hopes in this world and they
forgot their deaths.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّهَا لَا تَعْمَى الْأَبْصَارُ وَلَكِن تَعْمَى الْقُلُوبُ الَّتِي
فِي الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (as for) those who disbelieve, for them is destruction and He has
made their deeds ineffective.***

(Qur’an Surah Muhammad 47: 8)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعُوْذُ بِكَ يَا رَبِّ من الحور بعد الكور
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Lord! I seek refuge in You from loss after profit.***

225. Kamaal al-Deen[^83]: Abd al-Rahmaan Ibn Samarah narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “The disputers in the religion of
Allah have been cursed on the tongues of seventy prophets (a.s.).
Whoever disputes concerning the signs of Allah, has indeed disbelieved.
Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يُجَادِلُ فِى آيَاتِ اللهِ اِلاَّ الَّذِيْنَ كَفَرُوْا فَلاَ
يَغْرُرْكَ تَقَلّبُهُمْ فِى الْبِلاَد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***None dispute concerning the communications of Allah but those who
disbelieve, therefore let not their going to and fro in the cities
deceive you.*** (Qur’an Surah Gaafir 40: 4.)

Whoever explains the Quran whimsically, he has forged a lie against
Allah and whoever passes a judgment amongst the people without
knowledge, upon him is the curse of the sky and the earth.” I requested,
‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Guide me to salvation.’ He (s.a.w.a.)
advised, “O son of Samarah! When desires differ and opinions vary, then
fasten unto Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.). For surely, he (a.s.) is the Imam
of my Ummah and my caliph upon them after me. He (a.s.) is the
distinguisher, who will differentiate between truth and falsehood.

Whoever asks him (a.s.), he will answer him and whoever seeks guidance
from him (a.s.), he will guide him. Whoever searches for truth in him
shall find it. Whoever requests guidance from him, will find it. Whoever
seeks refuge in him, will be secure. Whoever fastens unto him, will be
saved. Whoever follows him, he (a.s.) will guide him.

O son of Samarah! Whoever amongst you is at peace with him and takes him
as a master will be safe. However, whoever rejects him and bears enmity
against him, will be destroyed. O son of Samarah! Surely Ali (a.s.) is
from me. His soul is from my soul and his soil (teenat) is from my soil.
He is my brother and I am his brother. He is the husband of my daughter
Fatemah (s.a.), the chief of the women of the Universe, from the
beginning to the end. From him are the two Imams of my Ummah and the two
chiefs of the youth of Paradise, Hasan and Husain (a.s.), and the nine
descendants of Husain (a.s.). The ninth of them is the Qaem of my Ummah,
who will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be filled
with injustice and oppression.”

226. Kamaal al-Deen[^84]: Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) narrates from his
forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.), “O Ali! None will love you but the one whose birth is
pure and none will hate you but the one of impure birth. None will
befriend you but a believer and none will bear enmity against you but a
disbeliever.”

Abdullah Ibn Masood stood up and asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)! We came to know the sign of impure birth and a disbeliever
in your life by malice and enmity against Ali (a.s.). But what is the
sign of impure birth and disbelief after you, when Islam will appear
only on the tongues while its essence shall remain concealed?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) answered, “O son of Masood! Surely, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.)
is your Imam after me and my caliph upon you. After he expires, my son
Hasan (a.s.) is your Imam after him and my caliph upon you. When he
dies, my son Husain (a.s.) is your Imam after him and my caliph upon
you.

Thereafter nine descendants of Husain (a.s.), one after the other are
your Imams and my caliphs upon you. The ninth of them is the Qaem of my
nation, who will fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression. None shall love them save the one
whose birth is pure and none shall hate them but the one with impure
birth.

None will befriend them but a believer and none will bear enmity against
them but a disbeliever. Whoever denies any one amongst them has indeed
denied me and whoever denies me has indeed denied Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He. Whoever rejects even one from them, then indeed he has
rejected me and whoever rejects me has rejected Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He. For certainly, their obedience is my obedience and my
obedience is the obedience of Allah.

(Similarly), their disobedience is my disobedience and my disobedience
is the disobedience of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He. O son of
Masood! Keep away from any skepticism in your heart concerning their
judgments, lest you become a disbeliever. By the Might of my Lord, I am
not indulging in pretense nor am I speaking from my desire concerning
Ali and the Imams from his descendants.”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) raised his hands towards the sky and prayed, “O
Allah! You take him as Your slave whoever takes my caliphs and the Imams
of my Ummah after me as their masters, and You take as enemy whoever
takes them as enemy. You help him who helps them and You forsake him who
forsakes them. Do not leave the earth without a proof from them, either
he is apparent, or occult and fearful that Your religion, Your proof and
Your arguments may not be nullified.” Then he (s.a.w.a.) said, “O son of
Masood! I have told you now, all those things which if you leave them,
you will be destroyed but if you fasten unto them, you will be saved.
And safe is the one who follows the guidance.”

227. Kamaal al-Deen[^85]: Asbagh Ibn Nubaatah chronicles that one day
Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) came out, holding the hand of
his son Hasan, while he (a.s.) was saying, “The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) met us in a similar fashion one day. That is, my hand was in
his hand and he (s.a.w.a.) was saying, ‘The best of creatures after me,
and their chief is this brother of mine and he is the Imam of every
Muslim and the master of every believer after my death.

Beware! And certainly I declare, ‘The best of creatures after me, and
their chief is this son of mine and he is the Imam of every Muslim and
the master of every believer after my death. Beware! He will be
oppressed after me just as I was oppressed after the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.). The best of creatures and their chief after Hasan is my son
and his brother Husain (a.s.), the oppressed after his brother and the
martyr at Karbala. Know that he and his companions are the chiefs of the
martyrs on the Day of Judgment. After Husain (a.s.), nine of his
descendants are Allah’s Caliphs in His earth, His proofs upon His
servants, His trustees upon His revelation, the Imams of the Muslims,
the leaders of the believers and the pilots of the pious.

The ninth (of the Imams) is the Qaem through whom Allah will fill the
earth with light after its darkness, justice after its oppression and
knowledge after its ignorance. By the One Who sent my brother Muhammad
with Prophethood and chose me for Imamat, revelation has descended from
the sky in this regard on the tongue of the Trustworthy Spirit Jibraeel
(a.s.). Indeed, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) was asked while I was
with him (s.a.w.a.), concerning the Imams after him. He (s.a.w.a.)
replied to the questioner,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوْج
  </p>
</blockquote>

***By the sky, the possessor of constellations***! (Qur’an Surah Buruj
85:1)

Certainly, their number is equal to the number of the constellations, by
the Lord of the nights, days and months and their number is equal to the
number of the months!” The questioner asked, ‘Who are they, O Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on my head and said,
“He is the first of them and the last of them is Mahdi. Whoever
befriends them has befriended me and whoever bears enmity against them
bears enmity against me. Whoever loves them loves me and whoever bears
malice against them, bears malice against me. Whoever denies them denies
me and whoever recognizes them, recognizes me.

Through them, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will protect His
religion, inhabit His cities and sustain His servants. Due to them,
rains descend from the skies and the earth throws up its bounties. They
are my chosen ones, my caliphs, the Imams of the Muslims and the masters
of the believers.”

228. Kamaal al-Deen[^86]: Ali Ibn Moosa al-Reza (a.r.) narrates from his
forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “Whoever
desires to fasten unto my religion and board the ark of salvation after
me, he must follow Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), bear enmity against his
enemies and befriend with his friends. For surely, he (a.s.) is my
successor and my caliph on my nation in my life and after my death. He
(a.s.) is the chief of every Muslim and the chief of every believer
after me. His saying is my saying, his command is my command, his
prohibition is my prohibition, his follower is my follower, his helper
is my helper and one who forsakes him has forsaken me.”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) continued, “Whoever separates from Ali (a.s.) after
me, shall not see me and I will not see him on the Day of Judgment.
Whoever opposes Ali (a.s.), Allah will make Paradise forbidden for him,
his abode will be the Hell-fire, and evil will be his fate. Whoever
forsakes Ali (a.s.), he will be forsaken on the Day of Presentation, and
whoever helps Ali (a.s.) Allah will help him on the day he will meet
Him. Allah’s Hujjah (a.s.) will prompt his answers to him on the day of
questioning.”

Thereafter he (s.a.w.a.) said, “Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) are the
two Imams of my Ummah after their father and the leaders of the youth of
Paradise. Their mother is the chief of the women of universe, and their
father is the chief of the successors. From the descendants of Husain
(a.s.), there will be nine Imams, and the ninth of them will be the Qaem
of my progeny. Their obedience is my obedience and their defiance is my
defiance. I will complain to Allah against those who challenge their
superiority and deny their sanctity after me. Allah suffices as a Master
and as a Helper for my progeny and the Imams of my Ummah, and as an
Avenger for those who have denied them their rights.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنقَلَبٍ يَنقَلِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back***. (Qur’an Surah Shuara 26: 227)

229. Kamaal al-Deen[^87]: Ali Ibn Moosa al-Reza (a.r.) narrates from his
forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “I am the chief
of the creation of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He. I am better than
Jibraeel, Mikaaeel, Israafeel, the carriers of the Throne (arsh), all
the close angels of Allah and the messengers of Allah (s.a.). I am the
owner of the Intercession (شفاعة) and the honorable Hauz. I and Ali are
the fathers of this Ummah.

Whoever recognizes us has indeed recognized Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He. And whoever refutes us has indeed refuted Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He. From Ali are the two grandsons of my Ummah and the
chiefs of the people of Paradise, Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.). From
the descendants of Husain (a.s.) are nine Imams (a.s.), their obedience
is my obedience and their disobedience is my disobedience. The ninth of
them is their Qaem and their Mahdi.”

230. Kamaal al-Deen[^88]: Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) recounts, “I and
my brother (Husain) went to my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.). He (s.a.w.a.) made me sit on one lap and made my brother sit
on the other. Then he (s.a.w.a.) kissed us and said, ‘By my father! You
two are Imams, grandsons and virtuous. Allah has chosen you from me,
from your father and your mother. He has also chosen from your progeny,
O Husain, nine Imams. The ninth of them is their Qaem and all of them
are equal before Allah in superiority and status’.”

231. Kamaal al-Deen[^89]: Imam al-Sadeq (a.s.) narrates from his
forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “Surely Allah,
Mighty and Glorified be He, chose Friday from the days, the month of
Ramazaan from the months, the Night of Power (ليلة القدر) from the
nights, chose me from all the Prophets and chose Ali (a.s.) from me. He
granted him (Ali (a.s.)) superiority over all the successors. From Ali
(a.s.) He chose Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) and from Husain (a.s.),
He chose the successors from his descendants. They (descendants) will
dispel the distortion of the exaggerators (غالين) from the Quran, the
plagiarism of the liars and the interpretation of the deviated ones. The
ninth of them is their Qaem (a.t.f.s.) and he is their apparent and
their concealed.”

232. Al-Ikhtesaas[^90]: Salmaan al-Faarsi (r.a.) recounts, ‘I saw Husain
Ibn Ali (a.s.) in the Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) room, who was kissing his
eyes and lips, saying, “You are a chief, the son of a chief and the
father of chiefs. You are a proof, the son of a proof and the father of
proofs. You are an Imam, the son of an Imam and the father of nine Imams
from your progeny. The ninth of them is their Qaem (a.t.f.s.)”.’

233. Kefaayah al-Asar[^91]: Imam Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.) informs that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) declared, “O Husain! You are an Imam, the
brother of an Imam, the son of an Imam and nine of your descendants will
be trustees, infallible. The ninth of them is their Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).
Then congratulations to the one who loves them and woe unto the one who
bears malice against them.”

234. Al-Ghaibah of Fazl Ibn Shaazaan[^92]: Imam Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.)
chronicles, “Ameer al-Momineen (a.s.) was asked concerning the saying of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), ‘Surely I leave amongst you two
weighty things, the Book of Allah and my progeny’, who is the progeny?
He (a.s.) replied, ‘I, Hasan, Husain and the nine Imams from the
descendants of Husain (a.s.). The ninth of them is their Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.). They shall not separate from the Book of Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, and it shall not separate from them till they call upon
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) at his Hauz’.”

235. Kefaayah al-Asar[^93]: Abu Maryam Abd al-Ghaffaar Ibn al-Qasim
narrates, ‘I went to my master, al-Baaqer (a.s.), while there were a
number of his companions with him. When the discussion of Islam arose, I
asked, ‘O my master! Which Islam is the best?’

He (a.s.) replied, “In which the believers are safe from the tongue and
hands of the Muslim.”

‘Which of the ethics is the best?’

“Patience and forgiveness.”

‘Which believer is the most complete in belief?’

“The best of them in morality.”

‘Which is the best struggle?’

“Where generosity is a habit and blood is spilled.”

‘Which is the best prayer?’

“Prolonging the Qunoot (supplication in prayers).”

‘Which is the best charity?’

“That you abstain from what Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has
prohibited for you.”

‘What is your opinion vis-à-vis calling upon the rulers?’

“I don’t deem it proper.”

‘But I travel quite often to Syria and pay a visit to (governor)
Ibraheem Ibn al-Waleed.’

“O Abd al-Ghaffaar! Certainly your paying a visit to the rulers invites
three consequences: (a) the love of the world, (b) forgetting death and
(c) decrease in satisfaction of what Allah has destined for you.”

‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! I have a large family and I go to them only
to obtain some benefits for myself. What is your view in this regard?’

“O servant of Allah! For sure, I don’t order you to forsake the world. I
am only commanding you to abstain from sins, because forsaking the world
is a virtue (recommended) but abstaining from sins is obligatory. You
are more in need of performing the obligations than acquiring the
virtues.”

I kissed his (a.s.) hands and his feet and asked, ‘May my father and my
mother be sacrifice for you, O son of Allah’s Messenger! We do not find
correct knowledge but from you (Ahle Bait a.s.). Now I have become old,
my bones have become fragile and the state I see you (Ahle Bait a.s.)
in, does not please me. I see you being killed, expelled and fearful
while I have been waiting for your Qaem (a.t.f.s.) since a long time,
thinking he will appear today or tomorrow.’

“O Abd al-Ghaffaar! Surely our Qaem, he is the seventh from my
descendants and now is not the time of his emergence. Indeed, my
ancestors have narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,
‘Certainly the Imams after me are twelve, equal to the number of the
chiefs of Bani Israel. Nine of them are from the progeny of Husain
(a.s.) and the ninth of them is their Qaem (a.t.f.s.). He will appear in
the last era and shall fill the earth with justice and equity as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppression.”

‘So, if this is the case, O son of Allah’s Messenger, who will be your
successor?’

“Jafar (my son). He is the chief of my sons and the father of Imams. He
is truthful in word and deed. Indeed, you have asked a big question O
Abd al-Ghaffaar, and you deserves to be answered. For sure, the keys of
knowledge are questions.” Then he (a.s.) recited a couplet whose theme
runs as follows:

The cure of blindness is prolonging the question and

all of blindness is to keep quiet despite being ignorant.’

236. Al-Kaafi[^94]: Abu Baseer narrates from Imam Baaqer (a.s.), “After
Husain (a.s.), there will be nine Imams. The ninth of them is their
Qaem.”

237. Kamaal al-Deen[^95]Abu Baseer narrates from Imam Sadeq (a.s.),
“After Husain (a.s.), there will be nine Imams. The ninth of them is
their Qaem.”

238. Muqtazab al-Asar[^96]: Salmaan al-Faarsi (r.a.) recollects, ‘We
were with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) while Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.)
was sitting on his lap. Then the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) became a
mount for him (a.s.) and said to him, “O Aba Abdillah (Husain)! You are
the chief from the chiefs and you are an Imam, the son of an Imam, the
brother of an Imam and the father of nine Imams. The ninth of them is
their Qaem, their Imam, the most knowledgeable of them, the most
judicious of them and the most superior of them”.’

239. Kashf al-Yaqeen[^97]: Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad records that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said for Husain (a.s.), “This son of
mine is an Imam, the brother of an Imam and the father of Imams. The
ninth of them is their Qaem (a.t.f.s.).”

240. Muqtazab al-Asar[^98]: Jaaber Ibn Abdullah al-Ansaari narrates,
‘The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) informed, “Surely, Allah chose Friday
from the days, the Night of Power from the nights and the month of
Ramazaan from the months. Then He chose me and Ali (a.s.) and selected
from Ali (a.s.), Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.). Thereafter, He chose
from Husain (a.s.), the proofs of the universe, the ninth of them is
their Qaem (a.t.f.s.) who is the most knowledgeable and the most
judicious amongst them”.’

241. Al-Nukat al-Eteqaadiyyah[^99]: The author of this book, while
talking about Imamate argues, ‘The proof of their Imamate is that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has successively endorsed their caliphate
like his saying for Husain (a.s.), “This son of mine is an Imam, the son
of an Imam, the brother of an Imam and the father of Imams. Their ninth
is their Qaem who will fill the earth with justice and equity as it
would be filled with injustice and oppression”.’

242. Faraaed al-Simtain[^100]: Ibn Abbas (r.a.) chronicles that a Jew
named Na’sal came to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and said, ‘O
Muhammad! I want to ask you a few things that have been troubling me for
quite some time. If you answer me concerning them, I will accept Islam
at your hands.’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Ask, O Abu Amaarah!” He
requested, ‘O Muhammad! Describe unto me your Lord.’ He (s.a.w.a.)
responded, “Surely the Creator cannot be described except by what He has
described Himself. How can the Creator be described, Whom the attributes
are helpless from comprehending, imaginations from reaching Him,
thoughts from confining Him and intellects from encompassing Him? He is
more Majestic than the description of those who describe Him. He is Far
in His nearness and Near in His remoteness. He has made ‘how’ so the
question ‘how’ is not applicable for Him. He has made ‘where’ so the
question ‘where’ cannot be used for Him. He is distinct from ‘how-ness’
and ‘where-ness’. Then, He is One, He is Needless as He has described
Himself. Those who describe Him cannot reach unto His attribute. He is
neither born nor does He give birth. And none is equal to Him.”

He said, ‘You have said the truth, O Muhammad! Inform me about your
statement, ‘He is One, there is nothing similar to Him’. Is not Allah,
the High, One like man is one?’ So, surely, His Oneness is similar to
the oneness of man.’

He (s.a.w.a.) explained, “Allah, the High, is One in the actual meaning
of oneness. But man is one in the meaning of compound i.e. he is made of
substance, accident, soul and body. So, the similarity is only literal,
nothing more.”

He confessed: You have spoken the truth, O Muhammad! Inform me about
your successor, who is he? For, there has been no Prophet but that he
had a successor. Indeed, our Prophet Moosa Ibn Imran (a.s.) appointed
Yoosha’ Ibn Nun (a.s.) as his successor.’

He (s.a.w.a.) clarified, “Yes. Surely my successor and caliph after me
is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), followed by my two grandsons, Hasan (a.s.)
and Husain (a.s.), who will be followed by nine of his descendants,
righteous Imams, from his progeny.”

He requested, ‘O Muhammad! Name them for me.’

He (s.a.w.a.) agreed, “Yes. When Husain (a.s.) dies, his son Ali (a.s.)
will succeed him. And when Ali (a.s.) dies, his son Muhammad (a.s.),
then his son Ja’far (a.s.), then his son Moosa (a.s.), then his son Ali
(a.s.), then his son Muhammad (a.s.), then his son Ali (a.s.), then his
son Hasan (a.s.) and then, al-Hujjah Ibn al-Hasan (a.t.f.s.). These are
the twelve Imams, their number being equal to the chiefs of Bani
Israel.”

He asked, ‘So, where is their place in Paradise?’

He (s.a.w.a.) retorted, “With me at my level.”

He acknowledged, ‘I witness that there is no god but Allah and that
surely you are the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). I also witness that
they are the successors after you. Indeed, I have found them in the
previous books. In his covenant unto us, Moosa Ibn Imran (a.s.)
prophesied, ‘With the advent of the last era, there will emerge a
Prophet named Ahmad, the seal of the Prophets. There will be no Prophet
after him. From his progeny, nine righteous Imams will come forth, equal
to the number of the grandsons.’

He (s.a.w.a.) inquired, “O Abu Amaarah! Do you know the grandsons?”

He replied, ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! They were twelve. The
first of them was Laavi Ibn Barkhiyaa and he is the one who had gone
into a prolonged occultation from the Bani Israel. Then he returned and
Allah manifested His Shariah through him after its learning. He fought
against the King Firishtiaa till he killed him.’

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) responded, “Whatever occurred in the
Bani Israel will happen in my Ummah, step by step, in toto. The twelfth
of my successors will go in occultation till he is not seen. A time will
come upon my Ummah when nothing will remain from Islam except its name,
and nothing shall remain from Quran but its image. Only then will Allah
permit him to reappear, and (after his reappearance), he will make Islam
prevail and renew religion.”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) declared, “Congratulations to the one who loves them
and woe unto the one who bears malice against them. Congratulations to
the one who fastens unto them.”

Shivering, Na’sal stood up before the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and
started recited a poem in his glorification.

243. Kefaayah al-Asar[^101]: Abdullah Ibn Abbas narrates, ‘I went to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), while Hasan (a.s.) was sitting on his
shoulder and Husain (a.s.) was on his lap. He (s.a.w.a.) was kissing
both of them and praying, “O Allah! Befriend him who befriends these two
and be enemy of the one who takes them as enemy.”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) prophesied, “O Ibn Abbas! As if I am seeing his
(Husain) beard being dyed in his blood. He will call out (for help) but
none will respond to his call. He will seek help but nobody will come to
his help.” I asked, ‘Who will do this, O Messenger of Allah?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) responded, “The worst of my Ummah. Allah will not make my
intercession reach unto them. O Ibn Abbas! Whoever visits him (his
grave), while being cognizant of his rights, a reward of a thousand Hajj
and a thousand Umrah will be recorded for him. Know that whoever visits
him, it is as if he has visited me, and whoever visits me it is as if he
has visited Allah. And the right of Allah’s visitor (on Him) is that He
will not punish him with hell-fire. Know that prayers will be answered
beneath his tomb and cure will be found in the soil of his grave and
that of the Imams (a.s.) from his progeny.”

Ibn Abbas says, ‘I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah! How many Imams will be
there after you?’’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “They will be equal to the
number of the companions (حواريّون) of Hazrat Eesa (a.s.), the grandsons
of Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) and the chiefs of Bani Israel?” I enquired, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! How many will they be?’ He (s.a.w.a.) informed,
“They were twelve and the Imams after me will be twelve in number. The
first of them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), followed by my two
grandsons, Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.). When Husain (a.s.) will die,
his son Ali (a.s.) will succeed him, followed by his son Muhammad
(a.s.). When Muhammad (a.s.) expires, his son Ja’far (a.s.) will succeed
him, followed by his son Moosa (a.s.). After the martyrdom of Moosa
(a.s.), his son Ali (a.s.) will succeed him, followed by his son
Muhammad (a.s.). When Muhammad (a.s.) expires, his son Ali (a.s.) will
be his heir, followed by his son Hasan (a.s.), who finally, will be
succeeded by his son al-Hujjah (a.t.f.s.).”

Ibn Abbas recounts, ‘I questioned, ‘O Messenger of Allah! These are
names that I have never heard before!’’ He (s.a.w.a.) prophesied, “O Ibn
Abbas! They are the Imams after me even if they are subjugated and
oppressed. They are trustees, infallible, chosen ones and the best
(among the people). O Ibn Abbas! One who comes on the day of judgement
cognizant of their rights, I will take his hand and make him enter the
paradise. O Ibn Abbas! Whoever denies them or rejects even one of them,
then it is as if he has denied and rejected me. And, whosoever denies
and rejects me, then he has denied and rejected Allah.

O Ibn Abbas! Soon the people will be divided into factions. When this is
the case, you follow Ali (a.s.) and his party for surely, he is with
truth and truth is with him and they will not separate from each other
till they meet me at the Hauz. O Ibn Abbas! Their mastership is my
mastership and my mastership is the mastership of Allah. War with them
is war with me and war with me is war with Allah. Their peace is my
peace and my peace is Allah’s peace.” Then the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) recited the Quranic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ أَن يُطْفِؤُواْ نُورَ اللهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَيَأْبَى اللهُ
إِلاَّ أَن يُتِمَّ نُورَهُ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They intend to extinguish Allah’s light with their mouths and Allah
will not allow but to complete His light even if the unbelievers dislike
it***. (Qur’an Surah Taubah 9: 32)

244. Kefaayah al-Asar[^102]: Salmaan al-Faarsi chronicles, ‘The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) addressed us thus, “O people! Soon I will
depart from you and go into the unseen (world). I advise you to be good
to my progeny. Keep away from innovations, for surely, every innovation
is a deviation and every deviation and its initiator will be in
hell-fire.

O people! O whoever loses the sun must fasten to the moon, and whoever
loses the moon must hold on to the two bright stars of the Ursa Minor.
And whoever loses the two bright stars of the Ursa Minor must fasten to
the brilliant stars after me. I say this unto you and seek forgiveness
from Allah for me and for you.’ When he (s.a.w.a.) descended from the
pulpit, I trailed him (s.a.w.a.). He (s.a.w.a.) entered the house of
Ayesha and I followed suit.

Then I asked, ‘May my father and my mother be sacrificed for you, O
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! I heard you say that whoever loses the
sun, must fasten to the moon, and whoever loses the moon must hold on to
the two bright stars of the Ursa Minor. And whoever loses the two bright
stars of the Ursa Minor must fasten to the brilliant stars after me. So,
who is the sun, the moon, the two bright stars of the Ursa Minor and the
brilliant stars?”

He (s.a.w.a.) elaborated, “As for the sun, then it’s me, while the moon
is Ali (a.s.). So if you lose me, then fasten unto him after me. Hasan
(a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) are the two bright stars of the Ursa Minor, so
if you lose the moon, then hold on to these two. The brilliant stars are
the nine infallible Imams (a.s.) from the progeny of Husain (a.s.) and
the ninth of them is their Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).”

Then he (s.a.w.a.) continued, “They are the successors and the caliphs
after me, the Imams, the righteous, equal to the grandsons of Yaqub
(a.s.) and the companions of Eesa (a.s.).” I requested, ‘Name them for
me, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)!’ He (s.a.w.a.) complied, “The first
and the chief of them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) followed by my two
grandsons. After them is Zain al-Aabedeen Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.),
followed by Muhammad Ibn Ali al-Baaqer (a.s.), the splitter of the
knowledge of the Prophets (a.s.). He will be succeeded by Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad, his son al-Kaazem (a.s.) the namesake of Moosa Ibn Imran
(a.s.), who will be followed by his son, who will be martyred in
Khorasan while being away from his homeland. His son Muhammad and the
two truthful ones, Ali and Hasan will succeed him. Finally the Hujjah,
the Qaem, the Awaited One during his occultation, will succeed them.
Surely, they are my progeny from my blood and my flesh. Their knowledge
is my knowledge and their judgement is my judgement. Whoever tortures me
concerning them, Allah will not make my intercession reach unto them.”’

245. Kamaal al-Deen[^103]: Jaaber Ibn Yazeed al-Jo’fi narrates that I
heard Jaaber Ibn Abdullah Ansaari say, ‘When Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He, revealed upon His Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger and those
possessing authority among you***. (Qur’an Surah Nisaa 4: 59)

I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! We know Allah and His Messenger. But who
are the possessors of authority whose obedience Allah has accompanied
with your obedience?’ He (s.a.w.a.) explained, “They are my caliphs, O
Jaaber, and the Imams of the Muslims after me. The first of them is Ali
Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), then Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), then Ali Ibn
Husain (a.s.), then Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.) the one who is famous as
al-Baaqer in the Old Testament. Soon, you will meet him, O Jaaber, so
when you face him, convey my salutation to him.

He will be followed by Sadeq, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, then Moosa Ibn
Ja’far, then Ali Ibn Moosa, then Muhammad Ibn Ali, then Ali Ibn
Muhammad, then al-Hasan Ibn Ali, then the one who will be my namesake
and bear my agnomen, the proof of Allah in His earth and His remainder
among His servants, the son of Hasan Ibn Ali. He (a.t.f.s.) is the one
at whose hands Allah, High be His remembrance, will open the east of the
earth and its west.

He (a.t.f.s.) is the one who will be concealed from his Shias and his
friends, an occultation in which none will be steadfast on the belief of
his Imamate except the one whose heart has been tested by Allah for
faith.”

Jaaber says that he asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Will the
Shias benefit from him during the occultation?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied,
“Yes, by the One Who sent me with Prophethood! Surely they will benefit
with his light and gain from his mastership in his occultation like the
people derive benefit from the sun when the clouds hide it. O Jaaber!
This is from the hidden secrets of Allah and the treasures of His
knowledge, so hide it except from the ones worthy of it.”

Jaaber Ibn Yazeed recounts: When Jaaber Ibn Abdullah Ansaari paid a
visit to Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) and was conversing with him, Muhammad Ibn
Ali al-Baaqer (a.s.) emerged from the ladies room while he was a small
boy and a forelock was dropping on his forehead. The moment his eyes
fell on him, Jaaber trembled all over with every strand of hair on his
body being raised in amazement. Jaaber stared at him for a long time and
then asked, ‘Son! Come forward’, he came forward. Then he said, ‘Go
back’ and he duly obliged. Jaaber exclaimed, ‘By the Lord of the Ka’bah!
His traits are exactly like those of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.).’

Jaaber stood up and going near him, asked, ‘Son! What is your name?’ He
replied, “Muhammad.” ‘Whose son?’ “Ali Ibn Husain” was the response.
Jaaber queried, ‘Son, may my life be sacrificed for you, are you
al-Baaqer?’ He replied in the affirmative and said, “Convey to me what
you are carrying from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).” Jaaber
responded, ‘O my master! The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) gave me glad
tidings of survival till I meet you and to convey his salutations to
you. O my master! The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) conveys salutations
to you!’ Abu Ja’far (a.s.) remarked, “O Jaaber! May the salutations be
on the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) till the heavens and the earth
subsist. And may the salutations be on you for conveying the
salutations.”

Thereafter, Jaaber used to frequent him and learn things from him. Once,
Imam Baaqer (a.s.) asked him some question. At this, Jaaber pleaded, ‘By
Allah! I don’t intend to violate the prohibition of Allah’s Messenger
(s.a.w.a.). For certainly, he (s.a.w.a.) has informed me that you are
the Imams, the guides from his Ahle Bait (a.s.) after him (s.a.w.a.).

The most forbearing of the people in childhood and the most
knowledgeable of them in old age. And he (s.a.w.a.) warned, “Don’t teach
them for they are more knowledgeable than you.” Hearing this, Abu Ja’far
(a.s.) retorted, “Indeed my grandfather (s.a.w.a.) has spoken the truth.
Certainly, I am more informed than you of what I asked you, as I have
been granted wisdom in childhood. All this is due to the grace of Allah
and His mercy upon us Ahle Bait (a.s.).”

246. Kefaayah al-Asar[^104]: Jaaber Ibn Abdullah Ansari narrates that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to Husain (a.s.), “O Husain! Nine
Imams will emerge from your loins. From them, is the Mahdi of this
Ummah. So, when your father is martyred, Hasan will succeed him and when
Hasan is poisoned, you will follow him. When you will be martyred, your
son Ali will succeed you. When Ali dies, his son Muhammad, and when
Muhammad dies, his son Ja’far will succeed him. When Ja’far dies, his
son Moosa, and when Moosa dies, his son Ali will follow him. When Ali
dies, his son Muhammad and when Muhammad expires, his son Ali will be
his heir. When Ali dies, his son Hasan will take charge and when Hasan
departs, his son, al-Hujjah will succeed him. He will fill the earth
with justice and equity as it would be filled with injustice and
oppression.”

247. Kefaayah al-Asar[^105]: Anas Ibn Maalik recounts, ‘I, Abuzar,
Salman, Zaid Ibn Saabit and Zaid Ibn Arqam were with the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) when Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) entered. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) kissed them. Then Abuzar turned
enthusiastically towards them, kissed their hands, returned and sat with
us. We whispered to him, ‘O Abuzar! You are an old companion of the
Prophet, yet you stand up for the two children of Bani Hashim, move
enthusiastically towards them and kiss their hands?!’ He retorted, ‘Yes.
Had you heard what I heard concerning these two from the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.), you would have done more than what I do.’

We inquired, ‘What did you hear, O Abuzar?’ He replied, ‘I heard him
(s.a.w.a.) say to Ali (a.s.): O Ali! By Allah, if a person prays and
fasts till he becomes like a decomposed skin waterbag, yet his prayers
and fasting will not benefit him without your love and hatred towards
your enemies. O Ali! Whoever pleads to Allah through the medium of your
love, it becomes a right upon Allah not to return him disappointed. O
Ali! Whoever loves you and fastens unto you, then indeed he has fastened
unto the strong rope’.’ Thereafter Abuzar stood up and left.

We went to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and verified, ‘O Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Abuzar has narrated to us from you such and such
things.’ He (s.a.w.a.) confirmed, “Abuzar has spoken the truth, indeed
he has spoken the truth, by Allah. There is nobody on the face of the
earth more truthful than Abuzar.” He (s.a.w.a.) continued, “Allah,
Blessed and High Be He, created me and my Ahle Bait (a.s.) from one
light, seven thousand years before He created Adam (a.s.). Thereafter,
He transferred us from his loin to the loins of the pure men and the
wombs of the pure women.”

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Where were you and in which
form were you?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “We were shadows of light beneath
the Throne (arsh), glorifying Allah and declaring His Majesty.” He
(s.a.w.a.) proceeded, “When I was taken to the heavens for ascension
(معراج) and reached the lotus tree (سدرة المتنهي), Jibraeel left me
alone. I cried, ‘My friend, Jibraeel, are you forsaking me in such a
place?’ He (a.s.) replied, ‘O Muhammad! I am not permitted to cross this
limit lest my wings be burnt.’ From there, I was taken to in the light
till Allah pleased, when Allah revealed unto me, ‘O Muhammad! I glanced
through the earth, selected you from it and appointed you as a Prophet.
For the second time, I glanced through the earth, chose Ali from it and
nominated him as your successor, the inheritor of your knowledge and the
Imam after you. I will bring forth from the loins of you two, pure
progeny and infallible Imams and the treasurers of My knowledge. Had you
not been there, I would not have created the world, the hereafter, the
paradise and the hell. O Muhammad! Do you like to see them (the Imams)?’
I replied in the affirmative. I was called, ‘O Muhammad! Raise your
head! I raised my head and I saw the lights of Ali, Hasan, Husain, Ali
Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali
Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and
al-Hujjah. The last named was shining amongst them like a brilliant
star.’

I asked, ‘Who are these and who is he?’ He replied, ‘O Muhammad! They
are the Imams after you, the infallible from your progeny. He is the
Hujjah, who will fill the earth with justice and equity and pacify the
hearts of the believers’.” We (the companions) remarked, ‘May our
fathers and mothers be sacrificed for you! Indeed you have said a
strange thing, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)!’ He (s.a.w.a.) retorted,
“Stranger than this is the fact that some people will hear these things
from me and yet turn their backs after Allah has guided them and trouble
me concerning these Imams. May Allah not make my intercession reach unto
them!”’

248. Kefaayah al-Asar[^106]: Anas Ibn Maalik chronicles that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “When I was taken to the heavens
(معراج), I saw transcribed on the leg of the throne (عرش), ‘There is no
god but Allah. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I have assisted and
helped him through Ali.’ I saw twelve names written with light. They
were of Ali Ibn Abi Taalib, my two grandsons and nine names after them,
of which three were Ali, two were Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa, Hasan and
al-Hujjah, who shone from amongst them. I asked, ‘O Lord! Whose names
are these?’ My Lord, mighty be His Majesty, called out, ‘They are the
successors from your progeny. Through them, I will reward and I will
chastise.’”

249. Kefaayah al-Asar[^107]: Abu Hurairah reports, ‘I, Abu Bakr, Umar,
Fazl Ibn Abbas, Zaid Ibn Haaresah and Abdullah Ibn Mas’ood were with the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) when Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.), (a child
learning to walk) entered. The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) held him and kissed
him, saying, “Come on, come on, take small steps.”

Then, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) placed his mouth on his mouth and prayed,
“O Allah! Surely I love him, so you love him too, and love the one who
loves him. O Husain! You are an Imam, the son of an Imam and the father
of nine Imams from your righteous progeny.”

At this, Abdullah Ibn Masood asked, ‘Who are these Imams, O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.), whom you just mentioned, from the progeny of Husain?’
He (s.a.w.a.) bowed his head for a long time, then he (s.a.w.a.) raised
it and said, “O Abdullah! You have asked a great question but I will
inform you of it. Certainly, this son of mine - and he (s.a.w.a.) placed
his hand on the shoulder of Husain - will have a son who will be the
namesake of his grandfather, Ali (a.s.). He will be called as Abid and
the light of the puritans. Allah will bring forth from the loin of Ali,
whose name will be my name[^108] and he will bear utmost similarity to
me from the people. He will split the knowledge, as it ought to be
split, speak with truth and command only for the right things.

Thereafter, Allah will cause to emerge from his offspring the word of
right and the tongue of truth[^109], the truthful in his word and
speech. He who doubts about him is like the one who has doubted about me
and the one who rejects him is as if he has rejected me.” At this
juncture, Hassaan Ibn Saabit entered, recited a few poems glorifying the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the tradition was discontinued.

On the morrow, we prayed along with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).
After the prayers, he (s.a.w.a.) entered the house of Ayesha. Ali Ibn
Abi Taalib (a.s.) Abdullah Ibn Abbas and I (Abu Hurairah) followed him.
It was his (s.a..w.a.) habit that when he was asked, he answered and
when he was not questioned, he initiated the talk. I asked him, ‘May my
father and my mother be held your ransom, O Messenger of Allah! Will you
not inform me of the remaining Caliphs from the progeny of Husain
(a.s.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) said, “Yes, O Abu Hurairah! Allah will bring
forth from the progeny of Ja’far, a pure, immaculate son, a namesake of
(Prophet) Moosa Ibn Imran (a.s.).”

Ibn Abbas inquired, ‘Then who, O Messenger of Allah?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
responded, “From the offspring of Moosa will emerge his son Ali, called
Reza (a.s.). He will be the place of knowledge and the mine of
forbearance. By my father! He will be martyred as a stranger (far away
from his homeland). From the progeny of Ali will come out his son
Muhammad (a.s.), the praised one, the purest of the people in creation
and the best of them in ethics.

Then, from the progeny of Muhammad will emerge his son Ali, pure of
heart and truthful in speech. From the loin of Ali will come out Hasan,
the blessed, the pure, the immaculate, the speaker from Allah and the
father of His proof. Finally, from the offspring of Hasan, the Qaem of
us Ahle Bait (a.s.) will emerge. He will fill the earth with justice and
equity, as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. He will
bear the awe of (Prophet) Moosa, the judgement of Dawood and the
brightness of Eesa. Then he (s.a.w.a.) recited the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِن بَعْضٍ وَاللّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Offspring, one of the other. And Allah is the Hearing, the
Knowing.*** (Qur’an Surah Aale Imran 3: 34)

Here, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) asked him, “May my father and my mother
be sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah! Who are these whose names
you have just mentioned?” He (s.a.w.a.) informed, “O Ali! These are the
names of the successors after you, a pure progeny and a blessed
offspring.”

He (s.a.w.a.) continued, “I swear by the One in Whose hands is the life
of Muhammad! Even if a person worships Allah for a thousand years, then
another thousand years between the Rukn (al-Yamaani) and the
Maqaam(-e-Ibraheem) but comes to me denying their mastership, Allah will
throw him in the hell-fire, whoever he may be.”’

Abu Ali Ibn Humaam (one of the links in the chain of narrators of this
tradition) remarks, ‘Amazing, very amazing, indeed from Abu Hurairah! He
narrates such traditions but denies the virtues of the Ahle Bait
(a.s.).’

250. Kefaayah al-Asar[^110]: Abu Amaamah recounts that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “When I was taken to the heavens (معراج), I saw
written with light on the leg of the throne (عرش), ‘There is no god but
Allah. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I assisted him with Ali and
helped him with Ali. After him, will be Hasan and Husain. I saw Ali
written thrice, Muhammad twice, Ja’far, Moosa, Hasan and Hujjah; twelve
names written with light. I asked, ‘O Lord! Whose names are these that
you have accompanied with me?’ I was called out, ‘O Muhammad! They are
the Imams after you and the best ones from your progeny.’”

251. Kefaayah al-Asar[^111]: Yazeed Ibn Haroon reports that our teachers
and our scholars informed us from Abd al-Qays (in a lengthy tradition in
which the Battle of Jamal is discussed) that, ‘…then the woman (Ayesha)
was caught and taken to the fort of Bani Halaf where Ali, Hasan, Husain,
Ammaar, Zaid and Abu Ayyub Khalid Ibn Zaid al-Ansaari arrived.

When Abu Ayyub went to the houses of the Hashemiites, thirty of us from
the elders of Basrah gathered, went to him, saluted him and asked, ‘You
have fought with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in (the battles of)
Badr and Ohod against the polytheists and now you have come to fight
against the Muslims?’ He replied, ‘By Allah! I have heard the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Ali (a.s.), “Surely you will fight against
the Naakeseen (the people of Jamal- Ayesha, Talha, Zubair, etc.), the
Qaaseteen (the people of Siffeen viz. Moaviyah and his sycophants) and
the Maareqeen (the people of Naharwan- the Kharijiites).”

We asked, ‘By Allah! Did you hear this from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) concerning Ali?!’ He said, ‘I heard him (s.a.w.a.) say, “Ali
is with the truth and truth is with Ali. He is the Imam and the Caliph
after me. He will fight for the interpretation of the Quran as I fought
for its revelation. His two sons, Hasan and Husain, my two grandsons
from this Ummah, are Imams, whether they stand or sit, and their father
is better than they are. The Imams after Husain are nine from his
progeny and from them is the Qaem, who will rise in the last era just as
I stood up in its beginning and he will conquer the forts of deviation.”

We asked, ‘Who are these nine (Imams)?’ He replied, ‘They are the Imams
after Husain, one after the other.’ We inquired, ‘How many Imams did the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) promise you that would succeed him
(s.a.w.a.)?’ He retorted, ‘Twelve.’ We requested, ‘Can you name them for
us?’ He responded, ‘Yes. Surely the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
informed us, “When I was taken to the skies for ascension, I looked at
the leg of the Throne (arsh) where it was written with light: There is
no god but Allah. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I have supported
him with Ali and assisted him with Ali. Moreover, I saw eleven names
transcribed with light on the leg of the Throne after Ali. They were
Hasan, Husain, Ali (thrice), Muhammad (twice), Ja’far, Moosa, Hasan and
Hujjah. I asked, ‘My Lord and my master! Whose are these whom You have
honoured and associated their names with Your Name?’ I was told, ‘O
Muhammad! They are the successors after you and the Imams. So,
congratulations to their lovers and woe unto those who bear malice
against them…”’

252. Kefaayah al-Asar[^112]: Huzaifah Ibn Yamaan reports that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) prayed with us. Then he (s.a.w.a.) turned
towards us and addressed us thus, “O my companions! I advise you to fear
Allah and act in accordance with His obedience. Whoever does so will be
successful and triumphant. But whosoever forsakes it will regret and
lament. So, fasten unto piety and you will be safe and secure from the
fears of the Day of Judgement. I have been called for (i.e. I am going
to die) and I have responded. Thus, I leave behind you two weighty
things, the Book of Allah and my progeny the Ahle Bait (a.s.). If you
hold on to them, you will not deviate. And whoever fastens unto my
progeny after me will be among the successful ones. But whoever lags
behind will be from the destroyed ones.”

I asked, “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Whom will you depute among
us?” He (s.a.w.a.) questioned, “Whom did Moosa Ibn Imran (a.s.) depute
among his nation?” I said, ‘His successor, Yoosha’ Bin Nun.’ He
(s.a.w.a.) retorted, “Then certainly my successor and my caliph after me
will be Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), the leader of the righteous and the
killer of the transgressors. Who helps him will be helped (by Allah) and
who forsakes him will be forsaken.”

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! How many Imams will succeed
you?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Equal to the number of Bani Israaeel, of
which, nine will be from the descendants of Husain (a.s.). Allah will
give them my knowledge and my understanding. They will be the treasures
of Allah’s knowledge and the mine of His revelation.” I inquired, ‘O
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Then what about the descendants of Hasan
(a.s.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) argued, “Indeed, Allah, Blessed and High be He,
has placed Imamat in the progeny of Husain (a.s.) and this is His
saying, Mighty and Glorified be He,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He made it a remaining word in his posterity.*** (Qur’an Surah
Zukhruf 43: 28)

I pleaded, ‘Will you not name them for me, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Yes. When I was taken to the
heavens for ascension (me’raaj), I saw that it was transcribed with
light on the leg of the throne: There is no god but Allah. Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah. I have assisted him and helped him with Ali. I
saw the lights of Hasan, Husain and Fatemah. I observed Ali written in
three places, Muhammad in two places, Moosa, Ja’far, Hasan and Hujjah,
who was shining amongst them like a brilliant star.

I asked, ‘O Lord! Who are these whose names You have associated with
Your Name?’ He answered, ‘O Muhammad! Surely these are successors and
Imams after you. I have created them from your soil (طينت). Then
congratulations to the one who loves them and woe unto the one who bears
enmity against them. For, due to them I send down the rains and through
them I reward and I punish.”’ Thereafter, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) raised his hands towards the sky and prayed a few
supplications. I heard him (s.a.w.a.) say, “O Allah! Place information
and deep knowledge in my posterity and the posterity of my posterity, in
my progeny[^113] and the progeny of my progeny.”

253. Kamaal al-Deen[^114]: Imam Ja’far Sadeq (a.s.) narrates on the
authority of his ancestors that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,
“Jibraeel (a.s.) has reported to me from the Lord of the Might, may His
Majesty be Mighty, that He said, ‘Whoever knows (believes) that there is
no god but Me alone, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is My servant and My messenger,
Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) is My caliph and that surely the Imams form
his progeny are My proofs, I will make him enter the paradise on account
of My mercy, save him from My hell due to My forgiveness and allow him
to reside in My neighbourhood. I will make My honour obligatory on him,
complete My bounties on him and make him from My special and pure
(servants). If he calls Me, I will answer him, if he invokes Me, I will
accept his invocation and if he asks Me, I will grant him. If he is
silent, I will initiate the talk with him and if he errs, I will have
mercy on him. If he flees from Me, I will call him and if he returns
unto Me, I will accept him. If he knocks on My door, I will open it.

But one who does not witness that there is no god but Me alone; or bears
testimony for the same but does not bear witness that Muhammad is My
servant and My messenger; or testifies for the above two but does not
acknowledge that Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) is My caliph; or witnesses
for all the above but refuses to confess that the Imams (a.s.) from his
progeny are My proofs, then indeed He has denied My bounties, belittled
My greatness and disbelieved in My signs and My books.

If he desires Me, I will veil Myself from him and if he asks Me, I will
deprive him. When he calls Me, I will not hear his call and when he
invokes Me, I will not accept his invocation. If he expects from Me, I
will disappoint him. This is my retribution for him and I am not unjust
unto My servants.’”

At this juncture, Jaaber Ibn Abdullah Ansaari stood up and asked, ‘O
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who are the Imams from the progeny of Ali
Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.) informed, “Hasan and Husain, the
two leaders of the youth of paradise. Then, the chief of the worshippers
in his time, Ali Ibn Husain, then Baaqer, Muhammad Ibn Ali; soon you
will reach unto him O Jaaber, so when you meet him, convey my
salutations unto him. He will be followed by Sadeq, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad,
then Kaazem, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, then Reza, Ali Ibn Moosa, then Taqi,
Muhammad Ibn Ali, then Naqi, Ali Ibn Muhammad, then Zaki, Hasan Ibn Ali,
then his son, the one who will rise with the truth, the Mahdi of this
Ummah. He will fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression.

These, O Jaaber, are my caliphs, my successors, my descendants and my
progeny. Whoever obeys them has obeyed me and whoever disobeys them has
defied me. Whoever denies them or denies even one of them, then indeed
he has denied me. Through them, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will
prevent the skies from falling on the earth, of course, with His
permission. Due to them, Allah protects the earth from swallowing up its
inhabitants.”

254. Kefaayah al-Asar[^115]: Ali (a.s.) chronicles, “I was with the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in the house of Umm Salmah (r.a.) {and the
tradition is a lengthy one concerning the successors of the Prophets
(a.s.) and it reaches till} when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,
‘And I am handing over the succession to you and you hand it over to
your son Hasan, who in turn will hand it over to his brother Husain. He
will hand it over to his son Ali, Ali to his son Muhammad, Muhammad to
his son Ja’far, Ja’far to his son Moosa, Moosa to his son Ali, Ali to
his son Muhammad, Muhammad to his son Ali, Ali to his son Hasan and
Hasan will hand it over to his son al-Qaem.

Thereafter, their Imam will disappear from them till Allah pleases and
he will have two occultations, of which one will be greater than the
other.’ Then he (s.a.w.a.) turned to us and addressed us in a raised
voice, ‘Beware! Beware! When the fifth descendant of my seventh
offspring goes in occultation!” I asked, “O Messenger of Allah! What
will happen after his occultation?” He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “He will be
patient till Allah grants him permission to emerge. He will reappear
from a village called ‘Kar’ah’. He will wear a turban (amaamah) on his
head, sport my armour and don my sword the Zulfiqaar. Then, a caller
will call out, ‘This is Mahdi, the Caliph of Allah, so obey him.’

He will fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be fraught
with injustice and oppression. This will be at a time when the world
will become a place of confusion, chaos and disorder and people will
envy each other. Neither the elder will have mercy on the younger nor
will the strong deal the weak with compassion. Only then will Allah
permit him to reappear.’”

255. Kefaayah al-Asar[^116]: Imam Sadeq (a.s.) cites on the authority of
his ancestors till Ameer al-Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “When I was taken to heavens, my
Lord, mighty be His Majesty, revealed unto me, ‘O Muhammad! I scanned
the earth thoroughly, selected you from it, appointed you as a Prophet
and derived for you a name from My Name.

So I am Mahmood while you are Muhammad. Then, I scanned for the second
time, chose Ali from it, made him as your successor and your caliph, the
husband of your daughter, the father of your progeny and derived his
name from among My Names. So I am al-Ali al-A’laa while he is (named)
Ali. I have made Fatemah, Hasan and Husain from the lights of you two
and presented their mastership to the angels.

So, whoever accepted it (mastership) became among My close angels. O
Muhammad! If a person worships Me till he breaks down and becomes like a
decomposed skin waterbag but approaches Me denying their mastership, I
will not make him reside in My Paradise nor will I grant him a shadow
beneath My Throne (عرش). O Muhammad! Do you love to see them?’

I replied in the affirmative. He, Mighty and Glorified be He, ordered,
‘Raise your head.’ So I raised my head and saw the lights of Ali,
Fatemah, Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn
Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and Muhammad (م.ح.م.د.), the son of Hasan, the
Qaem was standing between them like a brilliant star.

I asked, ‘O Lord! Who are these?’ He replied, ‘These are the Imams and
this is the Qaem who will make My permissible, permissible and My
prohibited, prohibited. Through him, I will take revenge from My
enemies. He will be a source of comfort for My friends. He is the one
who will cure the hearts of your Shias from the oppressors, the deniers
and the unbelievers’.”

256. Kefaayah al-Asar[^117]: Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) recounts, “I
went to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in the house of Umm Salmah
(r.a.) when the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah intends to keep all the filth away only from you, O Ahl
al-Bait, and purify you, a purification***. (Qur’an Surah Ahzaab 33:
33.)

was revealed. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘O Ali! This verse
was revealed concerning you and my two grandsons, who are the Imams from
your progeny.’ I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah! How many Imams will be
there after you?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied, ‘You, O Ali, then your two sons
Hasan and Husain, after Husain his son Ali, after Ali his son Muhammad,
after Muhammad his son Ja’far, after Ja’far his son Moosa, after Moosa
his son Ali, after Ali his son Muhnammad, after Muhammad his son Ali,
after Ali his son Hasan and the Hujjah is the son of Hasan. Thus I found
their names written on the leg of the Throne (arsh). I asked Allah,
Mighty and Glorified be He, about them. He informed, ‘O Muhammad! These
are the Imams after you, pure and infallible, and their enemies are
cursed’.”

257. Kefaayah al-Asar[^118]: Imam Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) chronicles, “The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) addressed us thus, after praising and
glorifying Allah, ‘O people! I have been invited (to die) and I have
accepted the invitation. Surely, I leave behind you two weighty things,
the Book of Allah and my progeny, my Ahle Bait (a.s.). If you fasten
unto both of them, you will never go astray. Learn from them and do not
teach them because they are more learned than you. The earth cannot be
devoid from them. If it ever does, it will be destroyed along with its
inhabitants.’

Then he (s.a.w.a.) invoked, ‘O Allah! I know that knowledge is neither
destroyed nor terminated. You will not leave Your earth without a proof
upon Your creation, whether he is apparent but disobeyed or fearful and
concealed, so that Your proof is not invalidated nor do Your friends go
astray after You have guided them. They are (Your friends) less in
number but high in value before Allah.’ When he (s.a.w.a.) descended
from the pulpit, I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Aren’t you
the proof (of Allah) upon the creation, all of them?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
replied, ‘O Hasan! Verily Allah says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّما اَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَ لكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and for every nation there is a guide***.
(Surah Ra’d (13): Verse 7)

So, I am the warner while Ali is the guide.’ I inquired, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Then what about your saying that the earth cannot
exist without a proof?’ He (s.a.w.a.) retorted, ‘Yes, Ali is the Imam
and the proof after me and you are the proof and the Imam after him.
Husain is the Imam and the proof after you. Indeed, the Gracious, the
Knower, has informed me that He will bring forth from the loin of
Husain, a son called Ali, the namesake of his grandfather. When Husain
dies, his son Ali will succeed him and he will be the proof and the
Imam.

Then, Allah will bring out from the progeny of Ali a son, who will be my
namesake and the most similar of the people to me. His knowledge is my
knowledge and his judgment is my judgment. He is the Imam and the proof
after his father. Thereafter, Allah will bring forth from his posterity
a son called Ja’far. He will be the most truthful of the people in word
and deed and he is the Imam and the proof after his father. Then Allah,
the High, will cause to emerge from the loin of Ja’far a son, who will
be the namesake of (Prophet) Moosa Ibn Imraan.

He will be the best of worshippers among the people and he is the Imam
and the proof after his father. Later, Allah will bring forth from the
progeny of Moosa a son called Ali. He will be the mine of Allah’s
Knowledge and the station of His Wisdom. He is the Imam and the proof
after his father.

Thereafter, Allah will cause to emerge from the posterity of Ali a child
called Muhammad. He is the Imam and the proof after his father. Then,
Allah will bring out from the posterity of Muhammad a son called Ali. He
is the Imam and the proof after his father. Later, Allah will bring
forth from the progeny of Ali a son called Hasan. He is the Imam and the
proof after his father. Finally, from the progeny of Hasan, Allah will
bring forth the Hujjah, the Qaem, the Imam of his time and the liberator
of his friends. He will go in occultation and remain unseen. A group of
people will turn away from believing in him while others will remain
steadfast

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَقُوْلُوْنَ مَتى هذَا الْوَعْدُ اِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say when is this promise, if you were truthful? (***Qur’an
Surah Yunus 10: 48; Qur’an Surah Anbiya 21: 38; Qur’an Surah Naml 27:
71; Qur’an Surah Sabaa 34: 29; Qur’an Surah Yaasin 36: 48.)

Even if one day remains for the world to come to an end, Allah, Mighty
and Glorified be He, will prolong this day till He brings forth our
Qaem. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression. So, the earth cannot exist
without you. Allah has given you my knowledge and my understanding.
Indeed, I had prayed to Allah that He should place the knowledge and
understanding in my posterity, the posterity of my posterity, my progeny
and the progeny of my progeny.”

258. Muqtazab al-Asar[^119]: From the most precise, strange and amazing
traditions, and from the protected, unseen (knowledge) concerning the
number of the Imams and their names from the Sunni channel, without the
chain of narrators (مرفوعًا) is the narration of al-Jaarood Ibn
al-Munzir from Qass Ibn Saaedah {then its chain is mentioned till
al-Jaarood and it is stated that he was a scholar before the Prophet’s
(s.a.w.a.) declaration (بعثت), who was aware of the names of his
(s.a.w.a.) successors.

The narration is lengthy, in which it is mentioned that al-Jaarood
al-Abdi was a Christian and accepted Islam in the year of the treaty of
Hudaibiyyah. His Islam was sincere and he used to recite the heavenly
books. He narrated this tradition for us during the caliphate of Umar
Ibn Khattaab, till it reaches to this point}.

I requested, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Please inform me- may
Allah inform you with goodness- of these names which we have not seen
but only in the narration of Qass.’ The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
replied, “O Jaarood! The night in which I was taken to the heavens,
Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, revealed unto me, ‘Ask the Messengers
whom We have sent before you on what were they raised?’

I asked them, ‘On what were you raised?’ They replied, ‘On your
prophethood and the mastership of Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the
Imams from you two.’ Then it was revealed to me that I should turn to
the right of the Throne (arsh). I turned and there I saw Ali, Hasan,
Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn
Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali
and the Mahdi in the flickers of light, praying.’ The Lord, the High,
informed me, ‘These are the proofs, My friends. And he (Mahdi) is the
avenger from My enemies’.”

259. Kefaayah al-Asar[^120]: Imam Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) narrates, “I
heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) say to Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali! You
are the heir of my knowledge, the treasure-chest of my wisdom and the
Imam after me. When you will be martyred, your son Hasan (will succeed
you). When Hasan is martyred, then your son Husain and when Husain is
martyred, his son Ali will succeed him. Nine infallible Imams will come
successively from the progeny of Husain.’

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! What are their names?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, ‘Ali, Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa, Ali, Muhammad, Ali,
Hasan and the Mahdi from the posterity of Husain. Allah, the High, will
fill the earth through him (Mahdi) with justice as it would be replete
with injustice and oppression’.”

260. Kefaayah al-Asar[^121]: Imam Husain (a.s.) chronicles that the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said, “Jibraeel informed me, ‘When Allah, Blessed and
High be He, transcribed the name of Muhammad on the leg of the Throne, I
asked him, ‘O Lord! This name that I see written on the leg of the
Throne is the most honourable of Your creatures.’ He (s.a.w.a.) says,
‘Then Allah showed him (Jibraeel) twelve shadows, bodies without souls
between the heaven and the earth.’

He requested, ‘O Lord! For the sake of their right upon You, inform me
about them.’ Allah responded, ‘This is the light of Ali Ibn Abi Taalib
(a.s.), this is the light of Hasan (a.s.), this is the light of Husain
(a.s.), this is the light of Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.), this is the light of
Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.), this is the light of Ja’far Ibn Muhammad
(a.s.), this is the light of Moosa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.), this is the light
of Ali Ibn Moosa (a.s.), this is the light of Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.),
this is the light of Ali Ibn Muhammad (a.s.), this is the light of Hasan
Ibn Ali (a.s.) and this is the light of the Hujjah, the Qaem, the
awaited one.’ Imam Husain (a.s.) says, ‘The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) used to say that none shall gain proximity and closeness to
Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, through these people but that Allah
will free his neck from the fire’.”

261. Kefaayah al-Asar[^122]: Imam Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.) recounts, “When
the verse of the Holy Quran

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اُوْلُوْا الْاَرْحَامِ بَعْضُهُمْ اَوْلي بِبَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the possessors of relationships, some of them are worthier than
the others, (***Qur’an Surah Anfaal 8: 75)

was revealed, I asked the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) about its
interpretation.’ He (s.a.w.a.) explained, ‘By Allah! It does not imply
anyone but you (Imams) and you are the possessors of relationships. When
I die, your father Ali is the closest to me and my position. When your
father dies, your brother Hasan is closest to him and when he dies, you
will be most worthy to take his position.’

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Then who will be worthy (of
this position) after me?’ He (s.a.w.a.) elaborated, ‘Your son Ali will
be the most worthy after you. When he dies, his son Muhammad will be the
most worthy after him. When Muhammad dies, his son Ja’far will be the
most worthy after him to take his place (of Imamat). When Ja’far dies,
his son Moosa will be the most worthy after him. When Moosa dies, his
son Ali will be the most worthy after him. When Ali dies, his son
Muhammad will be the most worthy after him.

When Muhammad dies, his son Ali will be the most worthy after him. When
Ali dies, his son Hasan will be the most worthy after him. When Hasan
dies, your ninth descendant will go in occultation. These are the nine
Imams from your progeny. Allah has granted them my knowledge and my
understanding, their soil (teenat) is my soil. As for the nation that
troubles me concerning them, may Allah not make my intercession reach
unto them!’”

262. Kefaayah al-Asar[^123]: Imam Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.) narrates that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to Ali (a.s.), “I have more
rights on the believers than they themselves. Then you, O Ali, have more
rights upon the believers than they themselves. After you, Hasan has
more rights upon the believers than they themselves. After him, Husain
has more rights upon the believers than they themselves. After him, Ali
has more rights upon the believers than they themselves.

After him, Muhammad has more rights upon the believers than they
themselves. After him, Ja’far has more rights upon the believers than
they themselves. After him, Moosa has more rights upon the believers
than they themselves. After him, Ali has more rights upon the believers
than they themselves.

After him, Muhammad has more rights upon the believers than they
themselves. After him, Ali has more rights upon the believers than they
themselves. After him, Hasan has more rights upon the believers than
they themselves. And al-Hujjah Ibn al-Hasan has more rights upon the
believers than they themselves. They are the righteous Imams. They are
with the Truth and the Truth is with them.”

263. Kefaayah al-Asar[^124]: Umm Salmah (r.a.) recounts that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “When I was taken to the skies
(me’raj), I saw written on the Throne, ‘There is no god but Allah,
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I supported him with Ali and helped
him with Ali.’ I saw the lights of Ali, Fatemah, Hasan and Husain. And
the lights of Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad,
Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad,
Hasan Ibn Ali and I saw the light of al-Hujjah shining amongst them like
a brilliant star.

I asked, ‘O Lord! Who is this? And who are these?’ I was told, ‘O
Muhammad! This is the light of Ali and Fatemah and this is the light of
your two grandsons, Hasan and Husain and these are the lights of the
Imams after you from the progeny of Husain, purified and infallible. And
this is the Hujjah who will fill the earth with justice and equity.’”

264. Kefaayah al-Asar[^125]: Sahl Ibn Sa’d al-Ansaari says, ‘I asked
Fatemah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), about the
Imams.’ She replied, “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) used to say, ‘O
Ali! You are the Imam and the caliph after me and you have more right
upon the believers than they themselves. After you die, your son Hasan
will have more right upon the believers than they themselves. After
Hasan dies, your son Husain will have more right upon the believers than
they themselves. After Husain dies, his son Ali will have more right
upon the believers than they themselves. After Ali dies, his son
Muhammad will have more right upon the believers than they themselves.
After Muhammad dies, his son Ja’far will have more right upon the
believers than they themselves. After Ja’far dies, his son Moosa will
have more right upon the believers than they themselves. After Moosa
dies, his son Ali will have more right upon the believers than they
themselves. After Ali dies, his son Muhammad will have more right upon
the believers than they themselves. After Muhammad dies, his son Ali
will have more right upon the believers than they themselves. After Ali
dies, his son Hasan will have more right upon the believers than they
themselves. After Hasan dies, the Qaem, the Mahdi will have more right
upon the believers than they themselves. Through him, Allah, the High,
will conquer the easts of the earth and its wests. Then they are the
rightful Imams and the truthful tongues. Whoever helps them will be
helped and whoever forsakes them will be forsaken’.”

265. Al-Fazaael[^126]: Abdullah Ibn Aufaa narrates on the authority of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) that he said, “When Allah created
Ibraheem (a.s.), His friend, He removed the veils of his vision. Hence,
when he looked towards the Throne, he saw a light and asked, ‘My God and
my Master! What is this light?’ He replied, ‘O Ibraheem! This is
Muhammad, My chosen and selected one.’

Ibraheem (a.s.) enquired, ‘My God and my Master! I see next to him
another light.’ He replied, ‘O Ibraheem! This is Ali, the helper of My
religion.’ Again he asked, ‘My God and my Master! I see next to these
two a third light, following the two lights.’ He replied, ‘O Ibraheem!
This is Fatemah following her father and her husband. I have separated
her followers from the fire.’ Ibraheem (a.s.) asked, ‘My God and my
Master! I see two lights following the third light.’ He replied, ‘O
Ibraheem! These two are Hasan and Husain following their father, their
mother and their grandfather.’

He asked, ‘My God and my Master! I see nine lights encircled by these
five lights.’ He replied, ‘O Ibraheem! These are the Imams from their
progeny.’ He asked, ‘My God and my Master! Through whom are they
recognized (i.e. How should I know them)? He replied, ‘O Ibraheem! The
first of them is Ali Ibn Husain then Muhammad the son of Ali, Ja’far the
son of Muhammad, Moosa the son of Ja’far, Ali the son of Moosa, Muhammad
the son of Ali, Ali the son of Muhammad, Hasan the son of Ali and the
Muhammad the son of Hasan, the Qaem, the Mahdi.’

He asked, ‘My God and my Master! I see a number of lights around them
that cannot be enumerated except by You.’ He answered, ‘O Ibraheem!
These are their Shias and their lovers.’ Ibraheem asked, ‘My God and my
Master! How will their Shias and their lovers be recognized?’ He
informed, ‘They will perform fifty-one rak’ats of namaz (everyday),
recite بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم loudly (in their prayers), read the Qunoot
before the ruku’ (of the second rak’at), perform two prostrations of
thanks giving (sajdatayy al-shukr) and will wear their rings in their
right hands.’ Ibraheem (a.s.) implored, ‘My God! Make me from their
Shias and lovers.’ Allah responded, ‘I have made you.’ Thereafter,
Allah, the High, revealed concerning him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وان من شيعته لابراهيم. اذ جاء ربه بقلب سليم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely from his Shias is Ibraheem. When he came to his Lord with
a secure heart***. (Qur’an Surah Saaffaat 37: 83-84)

Allah, the High, and His Messenger have spoken the truth. Mufazzal Ibn
Umar narrates, ‘When Ibraheem felt death approaching him, he narrated
this tradition, went into prostration and his soul was captured in this
very state’.”

266. Muqtazab al-Asar[^127]: Abu Salmaa, the caretaker of the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.)’s camel narrates that he heard the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “When I was taken to the skies, (Allah) the
Mighty, majestic be His praise, said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمن الرسول بما انزل اليه من ربّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Messenger believed on what was revealed to him from his Lord***.
(Qur’an Surah Baqarah 2: 285.)

I said, ‘And the believers (also believed).’ He affirmed, ‘You spoke the
truth, O Muhammad. Who did you depute (as your caliph) for your nation?’
I replied, ‘The best of them.’ He enquired, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib?’ I
answered, ‘Yes, O Lord.’ He said, ‘O Muhammad! I scanned the earth as it
ought to be scanned, chose you from it and derived for you a name from
My names. So, I am not remembered in any place but that you are
mentioned with Me.

Thus, I am the Mahmood while you are Muhammad. Later, I scanned (again)
and chose from it Ali. I derived for him a name from My names. So, I am
the Highest (al-A’laa) while he is Ali. O Muhammad! Surely I have
created you and created Ali, Fatemah, Hasan and Husain from the type of
My light. I presented the mastership of you (all) to the people of the
heavens and the earths. Then whoever accepted it was a believer before
Me and whoever denied it was from the unbelievers before Me.

O Muhammad! If a person from My slaves worships Me till he is cut into
pieces or becomes like a decomposed skinbag but comes to Me denying your
mastership, I will not forgive him unless he confesses to your
mastership. O Muhammad! Do you like to see them?’ I replied, ‘Yes, O
Lord.’ He ordered me, ‘Look to the right of the Throne.’ I turned and
there were Ali, Fatemah, Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn
Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn
Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and the Mahdi.

They will be in the flickers of light, standing and praying. The Mahdi
will be right in the middle amongst them shining like a brilliant star.’
He declared, ‘O Muhammad! These are the proofs and he (Mahdi) will
avenge the blood of your progeny. I swear by My Might and My Majesty, he
is the essential proof for My friends and the avenger from My enemies’.”

267. Al-Manaaqeb[^128]: Abdullah Ibn Umar informs on the authority of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) who said, “O Ali! I am the warner of
my nation, you are its guide, Hasan is its leader, Husain is its
impeller, Ali Ibn Husain is its gatherer, Muhammad Ibn Ali is its
knower, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad is its writer, Moosa Ibn Ja’far is its
enumerator, Ali Ibn Moosa is its interpreter, saviour and the repeller
of its enemies, and who will bring its believers nearer, Muhammad Ibn
Ali is its leader and its impeller, Ali Ibn Muhammad is its traveler and
scholar, Hasan Ibn Ali is its announcer and its endower and the Qaem,
the (last) successor is its quencher, implorer and its witness. Surely
in these are the signs for the believers.” Ibn Shahr Aashob says that a
group of narrators has narrated this tradition from Jaaber Ibn Abdullah
Ansaari on the authority of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).

268. Meah Manqebah[^129]: Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “I will meet you at the Hauz (pond
of Kausar) while you, O Ali, will be its distributor, Hasan will be the
protector, Husain will be the commander, Ali Ibn Husain will be the
allocator, Muhammad Ibn Ali will be the dispenser, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad
will be the impeller, Moosa Ibn Ja’far will be the enumerator of the
lovers and the malicious and the uprooter of the hypocrites, Ali Ibn
Moosa will adorn the believers, Muhammad Ibn Ali will take the people of
paradise to their levels, Ali Ibn Muhammad will address his Shias and
get them married to the Hoor al-Een, Hasan Ibn Ali will be the lamp of
the people of paradise from which they gain light and the Qaem, the
Haadi, the Mahdi will be their intercessor on the Day of Judgment when
Allah will not permit except whomsoever He pleases and is satisfied
with.”

269. Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Toosi (r.a.)[^130]: Imam Ali Ibn Muhammad
al-Naqi (a.s.) narrates on the authority of his ancestors that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.),
“Whoever desires that he should meet Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He,
in a state of safety and purity and that the Great Fear (فزع اكبر), then
he must befriend you and befriend your sons Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn
Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn
Moosa, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and the Mahdi, who will be their seal. In
the last era, there will be a group who will befriend you, O Ali. People
will hate them although had they loved them (the Shias), it would have
been better for them, if they were knowing. They (Shias) will give
preference to you and your sons over their fathers, mothers, brothers,
sisters, relatives and kin, blessings of Allah be on them, the best of
blessings. They will be gathered beneath the Standard of Praise (Lewaa
al-Hamd), their sins will be overlooked and their grades will be raised
as a reward for what they were doing’.”

270. Muqtazab al-Asar[^131]: Abdullah Ibn Umar recounts that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a) said, “Surely Allah, the High, revealed to
me when I was taken to the sky, ‘O Muhammad! Whom did you depute (as
your representative) in the earth, who is the most knowledgeable about
that? I replied, ‘My brother.’ He asked, ‘O Muhammad! Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib?’ I answered, ‘Yes, O Lord.’ He informed, ‘O Muhammad! Indeed I
scanned the earth as it ought to be scanned, then chose you from it.

So, I am not remembered till you are remembered with Me. I am the
Mahmood and you are Muhammad. Again, I scanned the earth as it ought to
be scanned, then chose from it Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.). I made him
your successor. So, you are the chief of the Prophets while Ali is the
chief of successors.

Then I derived for him a name from My Names. Thus, I am the Highest
(al-A’laa) and he is Ali. O Muhammad! Verily, I created Ali, Fatemah,
Hasan and Husain and the Imams from one light. Thereafter, I presented
their mastership for the angels. So, whoever accepted, was from the
proximate ones and whoever denied, was from the disbelievers. O
Muhammad! If a person from My slaves worships Me till his last breath
but meets Me in a state of denial of their mastership, I will make him
enter My fire. O Muhammad! Would you like to see them?’ I replied in the
affirmative.

He ordered me to come forward. I came forward and there were Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib, Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn
Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and the Hujjah, the Qaem who was like a
brilliant star in their midst.

I asked, ‘O Lord! Who are these?’ He replied, ‘These are the Imams and
this is the Qaem. He will make My permissible, permissible and My
prohibited, prohibited and take revenge from My enemies. O Muhammad!
Love him and love the one who loves him’.”

271. Al-Arbaeen of Al-Haafez Abu al-Fath Muhammad Ibn Abi
al-Fawaares[^132]: Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) informs
that my brother, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to me, “One who
loves that he should meet Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, while He is
turning to him and not away from him, then he should befriend Ali
(a.s.).

Whoever desires that he meets Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, while
He is satisfied with him, then he should befriend your son Hasan (a.s.).
Whoever loves that he meets Allah, while he is absolutely fearless, then
he should befriend your son Husain (a.s.). Whoever loves that he meets
Allah, while He is purified and cleansed of his sins, then he should
befriend Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.). For surely, it is like Allah, the High,
has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِيمَاهُمْ فِي وُجُوهِهِم مِّنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their marks are on their faces due to the effects of prostration***.
(Surah Fath (48): Verse 29)

Whoever loves that he meets Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, while his
eyes are soothed, then he should befriend Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.).
Whoever loves that he meets Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, while his
book is given in his right hand, then he should befriend Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad al-Sadeq (a.s.).

Whoever loves that he meets Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, pure and
purified, then he should befriend Moosa Ibn Ja’far, the light, the
Kaazem (a.s.). Whoever loves that he meets Allah, while he is laughing,
then he should befriend Ali Ibn Moosa al-Reza (a.s.). Whoever loves that
he meets Allah, while his grades are raised and his sins are replaced
with good deeds, then he must befriend his son Muhammad (a.s.). Whoever
loves that he meets Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, while his
accounting is done very lightly and he enters the paradise whose breadth
is equal to the heavens and the earth, prepared for the pious ones, then
he must befriend his son Ali (a.s.).

Whoever loves that he meets Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, while he
is from the successful ones, then he must befriend his son Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.). And whoever loves that he meets Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, while his belief is complete, his Islam is excellent,
then he must befriend his son Saaheb al-Zamaan, the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).
These are the lamps in darkness, the Imams of guidance and the standards
of piety. Then whoever loves them and befriends them, I am his guarantor
before Allah for paradise’.”

272. Kefaayah al-Asar[^133]: Alqamah Ibn Qais chronicles that when
Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) was delivering a beautiful sermon in Masjid
al-Kufa, he (a.s.) remarked, “Know that soon I will depart from you…” A
person called Aamer Ibn Kaseer stood up and pleaded, ‘O Ameerul Momineen
(a.s.)! You have informed us about the Imams of disbelief and the
caliphs of falsehood. Please inform us about the rightful Imams and
truthful tongues after you.’

He (a.s.) responded, “Yes. Certainly it is a covenant which the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has promised to me that this affair
(Islam) will be ruled by twelve Imams. Nine of these will be from the
progeny of Husain (a.s.). Indeed, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has
informed, ‘When I was taken to the sky, I looked at the leg of the
Throne, where it was written, ‘There is no god but Allah. Muhammad is
the messenger of Allah. I have supported him with Ali and helped him
with Ali.’ I saw twelve lights and asked, ‘O Lord! Whose lights are
these?’ I was told, ‘O Muhammad! These lights are the Imams from your
progeny.’ I (Ali a.s.) requested, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Name
them for me.

He said, ‘Yes. You are the Imam and the caliph after me. You will repay
my debts and fulfil my promises. After you, your two sons Hasan and
Husain (will be the Imams). Husain will be succeeded by his son, Ali,
after him, his son Muhammad called as Baaqer, after Muhammad, his son
Ja’far, called Sadeq, after Ja’far, his son, Moosa called al-Kazem,
after Moosa, his son Ali called Reza, after Ali, his son Muhammad called
Zaki, after Muhammad, his son Ali called Naqi, after Ali, his son Hasan
called Ameen, Askari. The Qaem will be from the descendants of Husain.
He will be my namesake and the most similar of the people to me. He will
fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be replete with
injustice and oppression…’”

273. Kefaayah al-Asar[^134]: Yahya Ibn No’maan narrates, ‘I was with
Husain (a.s.) when a veiled dark-brown skinned Arab entered and saluted
him. Husain (a.s.) replied to his salaam.

The Arab said, ‘O son of Allah’s messenger! (I have a) question.’

He (a.s.) said, “Bring it forth.”

The Arab enquired, ‘How much is the difference between belief (ايمان)
and certitude (يقين)?’

He (a.s.) responded, “Four fingers.”

‘How?’

“Belief is what we hear, while certitude is what we see and the distance
between the eyes and the ears is four fingers.”

‘What is the distance between the sky and the earth?’

‘An accepted prayer.”

‘What is the distance between the east and the west?’

“The distance of a day for the sun.”

‘What is the respect of a man?’

“His needlessness from the people.”

‘What is the most evil thing?’

“Sins by an old man is evil, anger by a king is evil, lies by a noble is
evil, miserliness by a wealthy person is evil and greed by a scholar is
evil.”

‘You have spoken the truth, O son of Allah’s messenger. Then inform me
about the number of the Imams after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).’

“Twelve, equal to the number of chiefs of Bani Israael.”

‘Name them for me.’

Imam Husain (a.s.) lowered his head for a while, then raised it and
said, “Yes. I will inform you, O Arab brother. Surely, the Imam and the
caliph after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) was my father, Ameerul
Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), my brother Hasan, myself and nine of
my descendants. From them is Ali, my son followed by his son, Muhammad.
After him, his son Ja’far followed by his son, Moosa, his son, Ali, his
son, Muhammad, his son, Ali, his son, Hasan and after him the Caliph,
the Mahdi. He is the ninth of my descendants and he will establish the
religion in the last era.”

The Arab stood up and left, glorifying the Prophet and his ancestors.

274. Kefaayah al-Asar[^135]: Ghaalib al-Johni narrates that Abu Ja’far
Muhammad Ibn Ali, al-Baaqer (a.s.) said, “Surely the Imams after the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) are like the number of the Bani Israel
chiefs and they were twelve. Whoever takes them as their masters will be
successful and whoever bears enmity against them will be destroyed.
Indeed, my father has narrated from his ancestors that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘When I was taken to the skies, I looked at the
leg of the Throne where it was written, ‘There is no god but Allah.
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I have supported him with Ali and I
have helped him with Ali.’ I saw written in places Ali, Ali, Ali,
Muhammad, Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa, Hasan and Husain and the Hujjah. I
have enumerated them for you and they are twelve. I asked, ‘O Lord! Who
are these whom I am seeing?’ He replied, ‘O Muhammad! This is the light
of your successor and your two grandsons and these are the lights of the
Imams from their progeny. Through them I will reward and through them I
will punish’.”

275. Kefaayah al-Asar[^136]: Kumayt Ibn Abi Al-Mustahil narrates, ‘I
went to my master, Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibn Ali al-Baaqer (a.s.) and
asked, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! I have written a few poems in your
eulogy. Do you permit me to recite them for you?’ Imam (a.s.) replied,
“These are the days of Beez.”[^137] I argued, ‘But these (verses) are
exclusively for you.’ Imam (a.s.) said, “Bring them forth.”

The first four verses that I recited were on the changing of times, the
fickleness of fortunes and that the ultimate robe of every man is his
shroud (كفن). Hearing these two couplets, Imam (a.s.) cried and so did
his son, Imam Sadeq (a.s.) and I also heard his slave girl sobbing from
behind the curtain.

The next two couplets talked as to how even their close ones had
forsaken the Imams and how their remembrance stimulates grief and
restlessness in our existence. Again, Imam (a.s.) cried and said, “When
a person remembers us or we are mentioned before him and tears flow from
his eyes, even if they are equal to the size of a fly’s wing, Allah will
build a house for him in paradise and will make it as a barrier between
him and the hell.”

The following two couplets were about the joy of being associated with
the Imams (a.s.) and about the injustices meted out to them.

Imam (a.s.) took my hand and prayed, “O Allah! Forgive all the sins of
Kumayt, past and present.”

The last couplet went as follows

When will the truth be established concerning you and

When will your second Mahdi uprise.

Imam (a.s.) exclaimed, “Soon, Inshallah, soon. O Aba Mustahil! Our Qaem
is the ninth descendant of Husain (a.s.). For, the Imams after the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) are twelve and the twelfth is the Qaem.” I
asked, ‘Master! Who are these twelve?’ He (a.s.) replied, “The first of
them is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) followed by Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn
Husain and myself. After me, this son of mine – and he kept his hand on
the shoulder of Imam Sadeq (a.s.) – Ja’far.” I enquired, ‘And after
him?’ He (a.s.) explained, “His son Moosa followed by the son of Moosa,
Ali, then the son of Ali, Muhammad, followed by the son of Muhammad,
Ali. Then the son of Ali, Hasan and he is the father of the Qaem, who
will emerge and fill the world with justice and equity and cure the
hearts of our Shias.” I asked, ‘When will he reappear, O son of Allah’s
Messenger?’ He (a.s.) answered, “Indeed, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) was asked the same question and he (s.a.w.a.) had replied
that the likeness of Mahdi is the likeness of the Hour. It will not come
to you but suddenly.”

276. Kefaayah al-Asar[^138]: Jaaber Ibn Yazeed al-Jo’fi reports, ‘I
asked Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibn Ali al-Baaqer (a.s.), ‘O son of Allah’s
Messenger! Verily, a group thinks that Allah, the High, has placed
Imamat in the posterity of (both) Hasan and Husain.’ He (a.s.) denied,
“They lie, by Allah, did they not hear Allah, high be His remembrance,
says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجعلها كلمة باقية في عقبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he made it a word to continue in his posterity. (***Qur’an Surah
Zukhruf 43: 28.)

Then, did he make it but in the posterity of Husain (a.s.)? O Jaaber!
Surely the Imams are those whose Imamat has been documented by the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). They are those about whom the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) says, ‘When I was taken to the sky for ascension, I
found their names written on the leg of the Throne with light, twelve
names. From them were Ali, his (Prophet’s) two grandsons, Ali, Muhammad,
Ja’far, Moosa, Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and al-Hujjah, al-Qaem.

These are the Imams from the chosen and purified Ahle Bait (a.s.). By
Allah! None can claim Imamat except us but that Allah, the High, will
gather him alongwith Iblees and his army.’ Then Imam (a.s.) took a deep
breath and said, ‘May Allah not observe the rights of this nation as
they have not observed the rights of their Prophet. By Allah! Had the
truth been left for those worthy of it, no two persons would have
disputed concerning Allah. Then Imam (a.s.) recited a couplet whose
meaning went as follows,

‘Surely the Jews for the love of their Prophet believed in the
calamities of various eras, but the believers due to the love of
Muhammad’s progeny were thrown in the fire as punishment.’

I asked, ‘Master! Is not this affair for you?’ Imam (a.s.) replied in
the affirmative. I enquired again, ‘Then why are you sitting upon your
rights and your claims, while Allah, Blessed and High be He, orders,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و جاهدوا في الله حق جهاده هو اجتباكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And strive hard in the way of Allah, a striving as is due to Him. He
has chosen you***. (Qur’an Surah Hajj 22: 28.)

He (a.s.) retorted, “Why did Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) sit upon his
right? Because he did not find any helper. Did you not hear Allah say in
the story of Lut,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال لو ان لي بكم قوة او آوي الي ركن شديد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: Ah! That I had power to suppress you, rather I shall have
recourse to a strong support***. (Qur’an Surah Hud 11: 80)

Or did you not hear Allah say in the incident of Nuh,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فدعا ربّه اني مغلوبٌ فانتصر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then he called out to his Lord, I have been overpowered, so grant me
victory***. (Qur’an Surah Qamar 54: 10.)

And He says in the story of Moosa,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربّ انيّ لا املك إلاّ نفسي و اخي فافرق بيننا و بين القوم الفاسقين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: My Lord! Surely I have not control but my ownself and my
brother; therefore make a separation between us and the nation of
transgressors***. (Qur’an Surah Maaedah 5 : 25.)

So, when this is the state of the Prophet, then the successor is
definitely more excusable. O Jaaber! Surely, the likeness of the Imam is
the likeness of the Ka’bah, the people go to it and it does not go to
the people.”

277. Kefaayah al-Asar[^139]: Yunus Ibn Zibyaan has narrated a lengthy
tradition from Imam Sadeq (a.s.) containing plenty of Divine Realities
and true knowledge. In a part of that tradition, Imam (a.s.) says, “O
Yunus! If you desire correct knowledge, then it is with us, Ahle Bait
(a.s.). For surely, we have inherited and have been granted the path of
wisdom (شرع الحكمة) and the desicive statement (فصل الخطاب).’

I enquired, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! Has everybody, who is from the
Ahle Bait (a.s.), inherited like you, the children of Ali (a.s.) and
Fatemah (s.a.), have done?’ Imam (a.s.) replied, “None has inherited it
except the twelve Imams.” I requested, ‘Name them for me, O son of
Allah’s Messenger.’ He (a.s.) answered, “The first of them is Ali Ibn
Abi Taalib, followed by Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali,
then myself and after me, my son, Moosa, followed by his son Ali, then
his son Muhammad, then his son Ali, then his son Hasan and after Hasan,
the Hujjah. Allah has chosen us, purified us and granted us what none in
the universe has been granted.”

278. Kefaayah al-Asar[^140]: Muhammad Ibn Abi Umair narrates from
Heshaam, ‘I was with Imam Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Sadeq (a.s.) when Moawiyah
Ibn Wahb Ibn Abd al-Malik Ibn A’yan entered. (This tradition comprises
of the discussions of Allah’s recognition and other extremely important
topics, till it reaches to.)

Then Imam (a.s.) said, “Verily, the most obligatory and essential of the
duties on mankind is the recognition of the Lord and acknowledgement of
slavery to Him. The (minimum) limit of recognition is to know that there
is no god but Him and there is none similar or like Him. Also, he should
know that Allah is Eternal, Present, Existent, not absent, Described but
without any similar or parallel. There is nothing like Him and He is the
Hearing, the Seeing.

After this, he should have the recognition of the Messenger and testify
for his prophethood. The minimum recognition of the Messenger is to
confess to his prophethood, and whatever he has brought from the Book or
the commands or the prohibitions are all from Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He.

After this, he should have the recognition of the followed Imam, by his
attributes, characteristics and his name in the states of difficulty and
comfort. The minimum recognition of the Imam is that he is equal to a
prophet, except the status of Prophethood, and his heir. And that his
obedience is the obedience of Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.a.).

And that one should submit to him in every affair, refer to him and take
from his sayings. Also, one should know that the Imam after the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) is Ali Ibn Abi Taalib followed by Hasan,
Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, myself, then after me my son
Moosa, after him his son, Ali, after him his son, Muhammad, after him
his son, Ali, after him his son, Hasan and the Hujjah is the son of
Hasan…”

279. Kamaal al-Deen[^141]: Tameem Ibn Bohlool reports that I asked
Abdullah Ibn Abi Huzail about Imamat on whom is it obligatory and what
are the signs of an Imam? He said to me, ‘Surely, its evidence is that
he is the proof upon the believers, the establisher of the affairs of
the Muslims, speaks with the Quran, knower of Divine Laws, brother of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), his caliph upon his nation, his
successor upon them and his administrator who is unto the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) as Haroon (a.s.) was to Moosa (a.s.). His obedience is
obligatory as per the saying of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Obey Allah, obey the Messenger and those in
authority amongst you***. (Qur’an Surah Nisaa 4: 59)

And Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Only Allah is your Master and His Messenger and those who believe,
who establish prayer and give zakaat while they are in a state of
genuflection (ruku’). (***Qur’an Surah Maaedah 5: 55)

He is entitiled for mastership and Imamat was confirmed for him on the
day of Ghadeer-e-Khumm by the saying of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) on the command of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, “Do I
not have more authority upon you than you yourselves?” They all replied
in the affirmative. He (s.a.w.a.) declared, “Then, of whomsoever I am
his master, Ali is his master. O Allah! Take him as Your slave, who
takes him (Ali) as his master and take him as Your enemy, who takes him
as his enemy. Help him who helps him and forsake him who forsakes him.
Honour him who supports him.”

This was Ali Ibn Abi Taalib, the chief of the faithfuls, the leader of
the pious, the chief of the handsome, the most superior of the
successors and the best of all creation after the Messenger of the Lord
of the worlds. After him are Hasan and Husain, the two grandsons of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the sons of the best of the women.
They will be followed by Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn
Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and Muhammad Ibn Hasan (peace be upon them all),
one after the other.

They are the progeny of the Messenger (s.a.w.a.), the known ones through
successorship and Imamat. The earth cannot exist without a proof from
them in every era and in every time. They are the strong rope, the Imams
of guidance, and the proof upon the people of the world till Allah
inherits the earth and whoever is on it. Whoever opposses them, is
deviated and has left the truth and guidance. Indeed, they have been
talked about by the Quran and the Messenger has spoken concerning them
elaborately.

Surely, one who dies without recognizing them dies the death of
ignorance. Verily, in them their religion are the traits of precautious
piety, chastity, truthfulness, betterment (of the people), striving hard
(in the way of Allah), repaying the trust to the good doer as well as
the transgressor, prolonging the prostration, performing the night
prayers, abstaining from the prohibited, awaiting the reappearance with
patience and keeping good company and good neighbourhood.

280. Amaali al-Sadooq[^142]: Shah Abdul Azeem al-Hasani (r.a.) narrates,
‘I went to meet my master (the tenth Imam) Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Naqi
(a.s.).’ When he (a.s.) saw me, he (a.s.) remarked, “Welcome, O Aba
Qaasim! You are our real follower.”

I asked, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! I intend to present my religion
before you. If it is right, then I will remain steadfast on it till I
meet Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He (i.e. till my death).’

Imam (a.s.) ordered, “Come forth with it, O Abul Qaasim.”

I said, ‘Verily, I believe that Allah, the High, is One. There is
nothing like Him. He is removed from the two limits, the limit of
negation (ابطال) and the limit of immanence (تشبيه). He does not have a
body or form or accident[^143] or substance. Nay! He is the Maker of
bodies, the Creator of forms, the Originator of the accidents and the
substances and the Lord of everything, its Owner, its Maker and its
Initiator.

Indeed, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is His servant and His Messenger, the seal
of the Prophets and there is no Prophet after him, till the Day of
Judgment. His Shariah is the last Shariah and there is no Shariah after
it till the Day of Judgment.

I also believe that the Imam, the Caliph and the Master of the affair
after him is Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) followed by
Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad,
Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, then you O my Master.

He (a.s.) informed, “After me is my son Hasan (al-Askari). How difficult
will be the condition of the people concerning his successor (i.e. the
twelfth Imam)?”

I asked, ‘Why will that be so, my master?’

He (a.s.) explained, “This is because he will be hidden and it will not
be permitted to use his name till he reappears. And when he does so, he
will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be fraught with
injustice and oppression.”

I said, ‘I believe.’

Then I said, ‘I also believe that their friend is the friend of Allah
and their enemy is the enemy of Allah. Their obedience is the obedience
of Allah and their defiance is the defiance of Allah. I also believe
that the ascension (معراج) is the truth, the questioning in the grave is
the truth, paradise is truth, hell is truth, path (صراط) is truth,
weighing scale (ميزان) is truth and that the Hour (قيامة) will come and
Allah will raise all those in the graves.

I also believe that the obligations after the mastership of the Ahle
Bait (a.s.) are prayers, zakaat, fasting, hajj, jehaad, enjoining good
and prohibiting evil.’

Thereafter, Imam Ali Ibn Muhammad (a.s.) remarked, “O Aba Qaasim! By
Allah! This is the religion of Allah, which He has chosen for His
servants. Then be steadfast on it, may Allah keep you steadfast through
firm beliefs in this world as well as the hereafter.”

281. Al-Khesaal[^144]: Saqr Ibn Abi Dalf al-Karkhi reports, ‘When
Mutawakkil took away our master Abul Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), I came to
ask about his well being. Mutawakkil’s doorkeeper, Raazeqi, saw me and
ordered that I should come to him. I obliged. He asked, ‘O Saqr! How are
things with you?’ I answered, ‘Fine, Sir.’ He asked me to sit down and
talked about the past as well as the future. I thought unto myself that
I had erred in coming. After dispersing the people from around him, he
asked me, ‘Why have you come?’ I retorted, ‘Just like that.’

He enquired, ‘Perhaps you want to know about the well being of your
master.’ I said, ‘My master? My master is Ameerul Momineen
(Mutawakkil).’ He reprimanded, ‘Keep quiet. Your master is the truthful
master. Don’t be shy before me because I am on your religion (i.e. I am
also a Shia).’ I exclaimed, ‘All praise is for Allah.’

He asked, ‘Do you want to see him?’ I replied in the affirmative. He
said, ‘Sit till the courier leaves him.’ I did so. When the courier
left, Raazeqi told his slave, ‘Catch the hand of Saqr and take him to
the room where the Alavi (implying Imam Ali Naqi a.s.) is imprisoned and
leave them alone.’ He took me to the room in which the Alavi was
imprisoned and directed me to his cell. I went and saw Imam (a.s.)
sitting on a mat and infront of him was a dug grave. I saluted him, he
(a.s.) responded to my salutation and ordered me to sit down. I sat
down.

He (a.s.) asked, “O Saqr! What has brought you here?” I said, ‘Master! I
came to enquire about your well being. Then I looked at the grave and
cried.’ He (a.s.) pacified me saying, “O Saqr! Don’t cry because no harm
is going to reach unto us for the time being.” I heard a sigh of relief,
‘All praise is for Allah.’

Then I asked, ‘Master! There is a tradition narrated on the authority of
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) whose meaning I cannot understand.’ He (a.s.)
asked, “What is it?” I said, ‘His (s.a.w.a.) saying, ‘Do not commit
aggression agaisnt the days, lest they assail you.’ What does it mean?’

He (a.s.) replied, “Yes. We are the days. The heavens and the earth
subsist due to us, hence, Saturday refers to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), Sunday refers to Ameerul Momineen, Monday refers to Hasan
and Husain, Tuesday belongs to Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far
Ibn Muhammad, Wednesday is of Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad
Ibn Ali and myself. Thursday belongs to my son, Hasan Ibn Ali and Friday
is of my grandson, around whom the groups of truth will gather. He will
fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be filled with
injustice and oppression. This is the meaning of the days. So, do not
commit aggression against them in this world, lest they do so against
you in the hereafter.” Then he (a.s.) said, “You can leave and I don’t
guarantee your safety.”

282. Kefaayah al-Asar[^145]: Yahya Ibn Zaid[^146] says, ‘I asked my
father about the Imams.’ He informed, ‘The Imams are twelve, four have
passed away and eight remain.’ I requested, ‘O Father! Name them.’ He
retorted, ‘As for the past Imams, they are Ali Ibn Abi Taalib, Hasan,
Husain and Ali Ibn Husain. As for the remaining, they are my brother
Baaqer followed by Ja’far al-Sadeq, his son Moosa, his son Ali, his son
Muhammad, his son Ali, his son Hasan and finally his son Mahdi.’ ‘O
Father! Are you not from them?’ He answered, ‘No. But I am from the
progeny.’ I enquired, ‘Then how did you know their names?’ He explained,
‘It is a promised covenant, which the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
pledged to us.’

283. Kamaal al-Deen[^147]: Imam Husain (a.s.) chronicles, ‘I went to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) while Ubayy Ibn K’ab was with him.’ The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) exclaimed, “Welcome! O Aba Abdillah! O
adornment of the heavens and the earth.”

Ubayy asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! How somebody other that
you can be the adornment of the heavens and earth?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “O Ubayy! I swear by the One, Who raised me as a
Prophet with truth. Verily, Husain Ibn Ali, in the heaven enjoys a
greater position than in the earth. Surely, it is written on the right
side of the Throne that he is the light of guidance, the ark of
salvation, the untiring Imam, might, pride, the ocean of knowledge and
the treasure-chest. (Is he still not the adornment of the heavens and
the earth?).

Certainly, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has carried in his loins
pure, blessed and chaste sperm, which was created before the creation
came into existence in the wombs of the mothers, or semen flowed in the
backs of the fathers, or even before day and night existed. Indeed,
Allah inspired the creatures the prayers by which they would invoke but
that Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, would gather them with him
(Husain). He will be their intercessor in his hereafter and Allah will
remove from him, his difficulty, repay his debt, ease his affair, expand
his path, strengthen him against his enemy and will not rip apart his
veil (i.e. conceal his sins).”

Ubayy enquired, ‘What are these prayers, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)?’

He (s.a.w.a.) answered, “When you are sitting after finishing your
prayers say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك بكلماتك ومعاقد عرشك وسكان سماواتك (وأرضك) وأنبيائك
ورسلك (أن تستجيب لي) فقد رهقني من أمري عسر، فأسألك أن تصلي على محمد
وآل محمد وأن تجعل لي من عسري يسرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Certainly I ask You for the sake of Your Kingdom, the
contracting parties of Your Might, the residents of Your heavens (and
Your earth) and Your Prophets and Messengers (that You answer me)
because difficulty has overcome my affair. Thus, I ask You that You
bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad and that You make my affair
easy for me.

Then surely Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will ease your affair,
expand your heart for you and inspire unto you the testimony لا إله إلا
الله There is no god but Allah’ at the time of your death.’

Ubayy questioned, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! What is this sperm,
which is in the loin of my beloved Husain (a.s.)?’

He (s.a.w.a.) elucidated, “The likeness of this sperm is like that of
the moon, which throws light and shows the way; whoever follows it will
be guided and whoever deviates from it will be led astray.”

He asked, ‘Then, what is his name and what is his supplication?’

He (s.a.w.a.) explained, “His name is Ali and his supplication is,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا دائم يا ديموم، يا حي يا قيوم، يا كاشف الغم ويا فارج الهم، ويا باعث
الرسل، ويا صادق الوعد
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Eternal! O Everlasting! O Living! O Controller! O Reliever of sorrows!
O Remover of grief! O Sender of Messengers and O Truthful in His
promise!

Whoever invokes through this supplication, Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He, will raise him alongwith Ali Ibn Husain and he (a.s.) will be his
guide to paradise.

Ubayy enquired, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Will he have any
caliph or successor?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Yes. For him will be the inheritances of the
heavens and the earth.”

Ubayy asked, ‘What does ‘the inheritances of the heavens and the earth’
mean?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Decreeing the truth, ordering righteousness,
interpretation of the laws and explanation of what will be.”

Ubayy asked, ‘What is his name?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “His name is Muhammad. Verily, the angels will
soon be acquainted with him in the heavens and invoke with his
invocation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إن كان لي عندك رضوان وود فاغفر لي ولمن تبعني من إخواني وشيعتي
وطيب ما في صلبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! If there is any satisfaction or love near You for me, then
forgive me and whoever follows me from my brothers or my followers, and
purify what is in my loin, O the most Merciful of all mercifuls.

Then, Allah will place in his loin a blessed, pure and immaculate sperm.
Jibraeel informed me that surely Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has
purified this sperm and named it Ja’far and made him a guide, the guided
one, he is satisfied with Allah and Allah is satisfied with him. He
prays to his Lord and says in his supplication,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ديان غير متوان يا أرحم الراحمين اجعل لشيعتي من النار وقاء، ولهم
عندك رضاء، فاغفر ذنوبهم، ويسر امورهم، واقض ديونهم، واستر عوراتهم، وهب
لهم الكبائر التي بينك وبينهم، يا من لا يخاف الضيم ولا تأخذه سنة ولا
نوم، اجعل لي من كل (هم) وغم فرجا
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Untiring Provider! O the most Merciful of all mercifuls! Grant
protection for my Shias from the fire and satisfaction near You for
them. Then, forgive their sins, ease their affairs, repay their debts,
conceal their secrets and forgive their major sins which are between You
and them. O He, Who does not fear injustice nor does sleep and slumber
overtake Him! Grant salvation for me from every grief and sorrow.

Whoever prays with this supplication, Allah will raise him with a white
(bright) face along with Ja’far Ibn Muhammad to the paradise, O Ubayy!
Surely Allah, Blessed and High be He, has placed in this sperm a pure,
blessed and immaculate sperm, upon which He has sent mercy. He named it
Moosa and made him an Imam.

Ubayy asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Have each one of them
been described in detail, procreate, inherit and describe each other in
the aforementioned manner?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Jibraeel (a.s.) has described them for me on the
authority of Allah, the Lord of the worlds, Mighty be His Majesty.”

Ubayy asked, ‘Did Moosa (Ibn Ja’far) have any specific supplication,
which he (a.s.) prayed, other than the supplications of his
forefathers?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, “Yes. He will say in his supplications

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا خالق الخلق، ويا باسط الرزق، ويا فالق الحب (والنوى)، ويا بارئ النسم
ومحيي الموتي ومميت الاحياء، و (يا) دائم الثبات، ومخرج النبات افعل بي
ما أنت أهله
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Creator of creation! O Giver of sustenance! O Splitter of grain! O
Creator of winds! O Giver of life to the dead and Who causes death to
the living! O Everlasting and Who brings forth the vegetation! Do unto
me as You are worthy of doing.

One who invokes in this manner, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will
fulfill his needs and raise him on the Day of Judgment along with Moosa
Ibn Ja’far. Surely, Allah has placed in his loin a pure and immaculate
sperm with which He is satisfied. He has named it Ali and Allah, Mighty
and Glorified be He, in His knowledge and His wisdom, was satisfied with
his creation. He made him a proof for his Shias, through which they will
demonstrate on the Day of Judgment. He has an invocation by which he
invokes

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم أعطني الهدى، وثبتني عليه، واحشرني عليه آمنا أمن من لا خوف عليه
ولا حزن ولا جزع، إنك أهل التقوى وأهل المغفرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Grant me guidance, make me firm on it, and raise me on it in a
state of security, like the safety of the one who has neither fear nor
grief nor sorrow. Surely, You are Worthy of fear and Worthy of
forgiveness.

And verily, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has put in his sperm a
blessed, pure and immaculate sperm, with which He is satisfied and named
him Muhammad Ibn Ali. He is the intercessor of his Shias and the
inheritor of his grandfather’s knowledge. He has clear signs and
apparent arguments. When he will be born, he will declare, لا إله إلا
الله محمد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله There is no god but Allah.
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. And he will recite in his
supplications

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا من لا شبيه له ولا مثال، أنت الله لا إله إلا أنت ولا خالق إلا أنت
تفني المخلوقين وتبقي أنت، حلمت عمن عصاك، وفي المغفرة رضاك
  </p>
</blockquote>

O the One Who has neither any similar nor any example. You are Allah,
there is no god but You and there is no creator but You. You will
annihilate the creatures while You will remain. You are forebearing with
the one who disobeys You and in forgiveness is Your satisfaction.

Whoever prays with this supplication, Muhammad Ibn Ali will be his
intercessor on the Day of Judgment. Surely Allah, Blessed and High be
He, has placed in his loin a pure, bright, blessed, immaculate and clean
sperm. He has named it Ali Ibn Muhammad. He has clothed him with
contentment and dignity, and deposited in him sciences and secrets of
every hidden thing. Whoever meets him, he will inform him of what is in
his heart and caution against his enemy and he will supplicate in this
manner

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا نور يا برهان يا منير يا مبين يا رب اكفني شر الشرور وآفات الدهور،
وأسألك النجاة يوم ينفخ في الصور
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Light of all lights! O Proof! O Illuminator! O Explanator! O Lord!
Protect me from the evil of the evil ones and the calamities of the
times. I ask You salvation on the Day when the trumpet is blown.

Whoever recites this supplication, Ali Ibn Muhammad will be his
intercessor and his leader to paradise. Surely Allah, Blessed and High
be He, has placed in his loin a sperm and named it Hasan Ibn Ali. He
made him a light in His cities, a caliph in His earth, an honour for His
nations, a guide for His Shias, an intercessor for them near their Lord,
a punishment for those who oppose him, a proof for whoever befriends him
and a clear argument for whoever takes him as an Imam. He will say in
his supplication,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عزيز العز في عزه، يا عزيزا عزني بعزك، وأيدني بنصرك وأبعد عني همزات
الشياطين، وادفع عني بدفعك وامنع عني بمنعك واجعلني من خيار خلقك، يا
واحد يا أحد يا فرد يا صمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Mighty of reverence in His Might! O Mighty! Grant me might for the
sake of Your Might, assist me with Your help, keep far from me the
whisperings of the devils, defend me with Your defence, protect me with
Your protection and make me from the chosen ones of Your creatures. O
One! O Unique! O Singular! O Needless!

Whoever invokes with this supplication, Allah, the High, will raise him
with him (Hasan Ibn Ali) and for him is salvation from hell even if it
was obligatory on him. Surely Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has
placed in the loin of Hasan, a blessed, pure, clean, immaculate and
purified sperm. Every believer from whom Allah has taken the covenant of
mastership (ولاية) is satisfied with it and only the deniers will
disbelieve in him.

He is the pure, immaculate, righteous, guide and guided Imam. He is the
beginning of justice and its end. He will verify Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, and Allah will verify him in his saying. He will emerge
from Mecca till the proofs and signs are manifested. In Taaleqaan[^148],
he will have treasures that are neither gold nor silver but beautiful
war-horses and imposing men. Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will
gather for him three hundred and thirteen men from distant cities equal
to the number of the Muslim soldiers in Badr.

With him is a sealed book, which comprises the number of his companions
along with their names, their geneology, their cities, their business,
their speech and their agnomen. They will be steadfast and will strive
hard in his obedience.

Ubayy asked, ‘And what will be his proofs and his signs, O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’

He (s.a.w.a.) replied, ‘He will have a standard. When the time of his
reappearance nears, this standard will unfurl on its own and Allah,
Blessed and High be He, will give it the power of speech. The standard
will call out, ‘Emerge, O friend of Allah, and kill the enemies of
Allah.’ He will also have two flags and two marks, besides a sheathed
sword, which will call out, ‘Come forth, O friend of Allah, as it is not
permitted for you to sit (quietly) before the enemies of Allah.’

Then he will reappear and kill the enemies of Allah wherever he will
find them. He will uphold the laws of Allah and judge by the judgment of
Allah. Jibraeel will appear from his right side, Mikaaeel from his left,
(Prophets) Shoaib and Saaleh infront of him. Soon, you will remember
what I am telling you and I entrust my affairs to Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, even if it is after a long time. O Ubayy!
Congratulations to the one who meets him, congratulations to the one who
loves him and congratulations to the one who believes in him.

Allah will save him from destruction because of his acknowledgement in
Him, in the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and in all the Imams (a.s.).
Allah will open for them the paradise. Their likeness in the earth is
like that of the (perfume) musk, the fragrance of which never diminishes
after diffusion. Their similarity in the heavens is like that of an
illuminated moon, the light of which never extinguishes.

Ubayy asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! How has Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, explained the condition of these Imams?’

He (s.a.w.a.) answered, “Surely Allah, Blessed and High be He, sent down
upon me twelve seals and twelve books. The name of each Imam is on his
seal and his attribute is in his book, may Allah bless them all.

284. Kamaal al-Deen[^149]: Ibn Abbas reports, ‘I heard the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) say, “Surely for Allah, Blessed and High be He, there
is an angel called Dardaaeel {the tradition has a lengthy narration
about this angel, the greatness of the world of creation, its expanse,
the virtues of our master Imam Husain (a.s.) and the gravity of the
crime of his murder, etc. till it reaches to}… the Imams after me are
Ali – the guide, Hasan – the recipient of guidance, Husain – the helper,
Ali Ibn Husain – the helped one, Muhammad Ibn Ali – the intercessor,
Ja’far Ibn Muhammad – the benefactor, Moosa Ibn Ja’far – the trustee,
Ali Ibn Moosa – the satisfied one, Muhammad Ibn Ali – the active, Ali
Ibn Muhammad – the trusted one, Hasan Ibn Ali – the knowing and the Qaem
– behind whom Eesa Ibn Maryam (a.s.) will pray…”.’

285. Kefaayah al-Asar[^150]: Alqamah Ibn Muhammad al-Khuzrami chronicles
that Ja’far Ibn Muhammad al-Sadeq (a.s.) said, “The Imams are twelve.” I
requested, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! Name them for me.’ He (a.s.)
obliged, “From the past, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), Hasan, Husain, Ali
Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali and myself.” I asked, ‘And after you, O son
of Allah’s Messenger?’ He (a.s.) answered, “Verily, I have willed unto
my son, Moosa and he is the Imam after me.”

I questioned, ‘Who will succeed Moosa?’ He (a.s.) replied, “His son Ali,
called as Reza. He will be buried in the land of Khurasan, a stranger.
His son Muhammad will succeed him followed by his son Ali. After Ali,
his son Hasan will succeed him followed by Mahdi the son of Hasan.”

Then he (a.s.) stated, “My father has narrated to me from his ancestors
that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘O Ali! When our Qaem
emerges three hundred and thirteen men, equal to the number of Muslim
soldiers at Badr, will gather around him. When the time of his
reappearance nears, his sheathed sword will call out, ‘Stand up, O
friend of Allah and kill the enemies of Allah’.”

286. Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.)[^151]: Abu Baseer reports that Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) said, “My father (a.s.) said to Jaaber Ibn Abdullah
Ansaari, ‘I have some work with you. So, when is it possible for you to
give me some time that I may ask you something?’ Jaaber replied,
‘Whenever you wish.’

Thus, when my father (a.s.) met him in privacy, he (a.s.) asked him, “O
Jaaber! Inform me about the Tablet which you saw in the hand of my
mother, Fatemah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and
what did she tell you as to what was written in it?” Jaaber replied, ‘I
hold Allah as Witness that I went to visit your mother, Fatemah (a.s.)
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) to congratulate
her for Husain (a.s.)’s birth. I saw in her hand a green Tablet, which I
thought to be of emerald and its writing was as bright as sunlight.

I asked her, ‘May my father and my mother be sacrificed for you, O
daughter of Allah’s Messenger (s.a.w.a.)! What is this Tablet?’ She
(s.a.) replied, “This is the Tablet, which Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He, has gifted to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). In it is the
name of my father, the name of Ali, the name of my two sons and the
names of the successors from my progeny. In turn, my father gave it to
me that I may rejoice through it.”

Jaaber said, ‘Thus, your mother Fatemah (a.s.) gave it to me. I read it
and copied it.’ My father (a.s.) asked, “O Jaaber! Can you show it (the
copied manuscript) to me?” He replied in the affirmative. My father
(a.s.) accompanied Jaaber to his house where he took out a book from a
parchment and giving it to my father he said, ‘I hold Allah as Witness
that this is what I saw written in the Tablet:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a Book from
Allah, the Mighty, the Wise to Muhammad, His light, His ambassador, His
veil and His proof. The trustworthy spirit (Jibraeel) has descended with
it from the Lord of the worlds. O Muhammad! Magnify my names, be
grateful for My bounties and do not deny My endowments.

Verily I am Allah, there is no god but Me, the Destroyer of the
oppressors, the Degrader of the tyrants and the Establisher of the Day
of Judgment. Verily I am Allah, there is no god but Me. Whoever expects
grace from other than Me or fears other than My justice and My
punishment, I will punish him in such a way that I will not punish
anybody in this manner in the worlds. Hence, worship only Me and rely
only on Me. Indeed, I did not raise a messenger, completed his days and
terminated his duration but that I appointed for him a successor.

Certainly, I made you superior over all other Prophets and made your
successor superior over all other successors. After him, I honoured you
with your two grandsons, Hasan and Husain. I made Hasan the mine of My
knowledge after the end of the days of his father and I made Husain the
treasurechest of My revelation, honoured him with martyrdom and sealed
it for him with eternal bliss. So, he is the best of the martyrs and the
highest of them in grade before Me. I have placed My perfect word with
him and the complete proof near him. Through his progeny, I shall reward
and I shall punish.

The first of them is the chief of the worshippers and the adornment of
My past friends, then his son (Muhammad) who resembles his grandfather
al-Mahmood[^152], the splitter of My knowledge and the mine of My
wisdom. Soon, those who doubt concerning his son Ja’far will be
destroyed. He who rejects him has rejected Me. I speak the truth, I will
indeed honour the position of Ja’far and make him happy vis-à-vis his
Shias, his helpers and his friends. After him, I have selected Moosa and
there will be a blinding, dark corruption so that the spark of My
obedience is not terminated, My proof is not hidden and My friends are
not afflicted with misfortune.

Beware! Whoever denies even one of them, he has denied My bounty.
Whoever changes one verse from My Book, then indeed he has attributed a
lie unto Me. Then woe unto the liars, the deniers with the termination
of the duration of My servant, My beloved and My chosen one, Moosa.
Verily, the one who denies the eighth is as if he has denied all My
friends (Imams). Ali is My friend, My helper and the one upon whom I
have placed Prophethood’s burden of proof and conferred upon him
mastership.

An arrogant devil[^153] will murder him. He will be buried in a city,
which the righteous servant[^154] has built, next to the worst of My
creatures. I speak the truth, I will soothe his eyes with Muhammad, his
son and his successor after him. He is the heir of My knowledge, the
mine of My wisdom, the place of My joy and My proof upon My creatures.

None shall believe in him but that the paradise will be his abode and I
will allow him to intercede for seventy of his family members, even if
all of them are eligible for hell. I will complete his bliss with his
son Ali, My friend, My helper, My witness amongst My creatures and My
trustee upon My revelation. From him, I will bring forth Hasan, the
caller to My path and the treasurer of My knowledge.

Thereafter, I will complete this (chain of Imamat) with his son,
م.ح.م.د. mercy for the worlds. He will possess the perfection of Moosa,
the brightness of Eesa and the patience of Ayyub. Soon, My friends will
be humiliated in his time and their heads will be gifted as trophies
like the heads of the Turks and the Dylamites.

They will be killed, they will be burnt, they will live in a state of
fear, terror and trepidation. The earth will be coloured with their
blood and wailing and sobbing will be commonplace among their womenfolk.
They are My true friends! Through them I will repel all blinding and
dark mischief, remove the earthquakes and do away with the burdens and
the chains.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَـئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ
وَأُولَـئِكَ هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are those upon them is the blessings of their Lord and mercy.
And they are the guided ones***. (Qur’an Surah Baqarah 2: 157)

Abu Baseer says, ‘If you do not hear in your time anything but this
tradition, it will suffice for you. Hence, conceal it except from those
who are worthy of it.’

287. Muqtazab al-Asar[^155]: Salmaan narrates, ‘One day I went to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). When he (s.a.w.a.) looked at me, he
(s.a.w.a.) said, “O Salmaan! Surely Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He,
did not raise a Prophet or a Messenger but that He has placed in him
twelve successors.” I acknowledged, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! I
came to know about this from the People of the Book’

He (s.a.w.a.) questioned, “O Salmaan! Do you recognise my twelve
successors, whom Allah has chosen for Imamat after me?” I answered,
‘Allah and His Messenger know the best.’ He (s.a.w.a.) informed, “O
Salmaan! Allah created me from His chosen Light. He called me and I
obeyed Him. From my light, He created Ali. He called him to His
obedience, so he obeyed Him. From my light and the light of Ali, He
created Fatemah. He called her and she obeyed Him. From my light and the
from the lights of Ali and Fatemah, He created Hasan and Husain. He
called both of them and they obeyed Him. So, Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He, named us with five names from His names.

Hence, Allah is Mahmood and I am Muhammad; Allah is al-Ali (the High)
and he is Ali. Allah is Faatir (Creator) and she is Fatemah. Allah is Zu
al-Ehsaan (the Owner of goodness) and this is Hasan. Allah is Mohsin
(Obliger) and this is Husain.

Thereafter, He created from us and from the light of Husain, nine Imams.
He called them and they obeyed Him. Before Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He, created the established sky, the vast earth, the air, the water,
the angels and the humans, we were in His knowledge lights, glorifying
Him, listening to and obeying Him.”

Salmaan asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! May my father and my
mother be sacrifice for you, what is the reward of the one who
recognizes them?’ He (s.a.w.a.) prophesied, “Whoever recognizes them as
they ought to be recognized, follows them, befriends their friends and
bears enmity against their enemies, then by Allah, he is from us, he
will enter where we enter and he will reside where we reside.”

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Is it possible to believe in
them without knowing their names and geneology?’ He (s.a.w.a.) replied,
“No, O Salmaan!”

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Please introduce them unto
me.’ He (s.a.w.a.) elaborated, “You know till Husain. After him is the
chief of the worshippers Ali Ibn Husain followed by his son, Muhammad
Ibn Ali, the splitter of the knowledge of the Prophets and the
Messengers, from the beginning till the end. After him will be Ja’far
Ibn Muhammad, the truthful tongue of Allah. Then, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, the
controller of anger, the forbearing in the way of Allah.

Then, Ali Ibn Moosa, the one who is satisfied with the command of Allah.
Then, Muhammad Ibn Ali, the generous, the chosen one of Allah’s
creation. Then, Ali Ibn Muhammad, the guide towards Allah. Then, Hasan
Ibn Ali, the silent, the trustee of Allah’s secret. Then his son, the
proof of Allah, so and so and he took his name, the son of Hasan, the
Mahdi, one who will speak and rise with Allah’s right…”

288. Dalaael al-Imaamah[^156]: Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) reports, “The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to me, ‘The night when I was taken
for ascension, I saw palaces made of ruby, green chrysolite, pearls,
corals and pure gold. Its floors were of pungent musk and its soil was
of saffron. In them were fruits, dates, pomegranates, fairies, beautiful
women, rivers of milk, rivers of honey flowing on pearls and jewels.

There were domes on the two shores of these rivers and rooms, tents,
servants and young ones. Its carpets were of brocades and silk and birds
were in it. I asked, ‘O my friend Jibraeel! For whom are these palaces
and what’s their status?’ Jibraeel (a.s.) informed me, ‘These palaces
and whatever are in them, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has created
them thus and prepared in them as you see and their multiples, for the
Shias of your brother, Ali, your caliph after you upon your nation.

They (Shias) will be called in the last era as ‘Raafezis’[^157], an
appellation more apt for other (than them). Yet, it will be an adornment
for them because they will abandon falsehood and fasten unto truth. They
are the real majority. (Also, these palaces are created) for the Shias
of his son Hasan after him, for the Shias of Husain after him, for the
Shias of his son Ali Ibn Husain after him, for the Shias of his son
Muhammad Ibn Ali after him, for the Shias of his son Ja’far Ibn Muhammad
after him, for the Shias of his son Moosa Ibn Ja’far after him, for the
Shias of his son Ali Ibn Moosa after him, for the Shias of his son
Muhammad Ibn Ali after him, for the Shias of his son Ali Ibn Muhammad
after him, for the Shias of his son Hasan Ibn Ali after him and for the
Shias of his son Muhammad al-Mahdi after him.

O Muhammad! These are the Imams after you, the standards of guidance and
the lamps in darkness. Their Shias and the Shias of your progeny and
their lovers are the truthful Shias. They are the friends of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), who will abandon falsehood and keep away
from it. They will aim for the truth and follow it. They will befriend
them (the Imams) in their lives, visit their graves after their death,
support them and strive for their love. Allah’s Mercy is upon them.
Surely, He is the Forgiving, the Merciful’.”

289. Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Toosi (r.a.)[^158]: Jaaber al-Jo’fi
chronicles, ‘I asked Abu Ja’far (Imam Baaqer) (a.s.) concerning the
interpretation of the saying of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِدَّةَ الشُّهُورِ عِندَ اللّهِ اثْنَا عَشَرَ شَهْرًا فِي
كِتَابِ اللّهِ يَوْمَ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَات وَالأَرْضَ مِنْهَا
أَرْبَعَةٌ حُرُمٌ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ فَلاَ تَظْلِمُواْ
فِيهِنَّ أَنفُسَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the number of months with Allah is twelve months in Allah’s
ordinance since the day He created the heavens and the earth, of these
four being sacred; that is the right reckoning; therefore be not unjust
to yourselves regarding them.*** (Qur’an Surah Taubah 9: 36)

My master (a.s.) heaved a deep sigh and said, “O Jaaber! As for the
year, it is my grandfather the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and its
months are twelve months. They are from Ameerul Momineen till myself,
and from me to my son Ja’far, followed by his son Moosa, then his son
Ali, then his son Muhammad, then his son Ali, then his son Hasan and
then his son Muhammad, al-Haadi, al-Mahdi.

These are the twelve Imams, the proofs of Allah upon His creation and
the trustees of His revelation and His knowledge. As for the four
sacrosanct[^159] months, which are the strong religion, they are the
four (of the twelve) who bear one name Ali and they are Ameerul Momineen
Ali, my father Ali Ibn Husain, Ali Ibn Moosa al-Reza and Ali Ibn
Muhammad (al-Naqi). Acknowledging the Imamat of these four, it is a
strong religion. ‘And do not oppress yourselves’ means believe in all of
them that you may be guided.”

290. Taweel al-Aayaat al-Zaaherah[^160]: Jaaber Ibn Yazeed al-Jo’fi
enquired from Imam Ja’far Ibn Muhammad al-Sadeq (a.s.) regarding the
interpretation of the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ مِن شِيعَتِهِ لَإِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely from his Shias is Ibraheem.*** (Qur’an Surah Saaffaat 37:
83)

He (a.s.) explained, “Verily, when Allah, Glorified be He, created
Ibraheem (a.s.), the veil from his vision was raised and he saw a light
on the side of the Throne.” He asked, ‘My God! What is this light?’ He
was told, ‘This is the light of Muhammad, the chosen one of My
creation.’ He saw a light next to him (s.a.w.a.). Again he enquired, ‘My
God! What is this light?’ He was told, ‘This is the light of Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.), the helper of My religion.’

Again, he saw three lights next to them and asked, ‘My God! What are
these lights?’ He was told, ‘This is the light of Fatemah (s.a.), I have
separated her followers from the hell-fire and the lights of her two
sons, Hasan and Husain.’ He exclaimed, ‘My God! I also see nine lights
encircling them.’ He was told, ‘O Ibraheem! These are the Imams from the
progeny of Ali and Fatemah.’

Ibraheem (a.s.) pleaded, ‘My God! For the sake of these five, let me
know who are these nine (Imams)?’ He was told, ‘O Ibraheem! The first of
them is Ali Ibn Husain, then his son Muhammad, then his son Ja’far, then
his son, Moosa, then his son Ali, then his son Muhammad, then his son
Ali, then his son al-Hasan and then his son, the Hujjah, the Qaem.’
Ibraheem (a.s.) remarked, ‘My God and my Master! I also see more lights
that are encircling these lights and who cannot be enumerated but by
You.’

He was told, ‘O Ibraheem! These are their Shias, the Shia of Ameerul
Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.).’ Ibraheem (a.s.) enquired, ‘How will
their Shias be recognized?’ He (Allah) replied, ‘They will perform
fifty-one rakats of prayers (daily), recite ‘In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful’ loudly (in their prayers), recite Qunoot
before Ruku’ (genuflection)[^161] and wear their rings in their right
hand.’ Hearing this, Ibraheem (a.s.) pleaded, ‘O Allah! Make me from the
Shias of Ameerul Momineen!’” Imam (a.s.) says, “Then Allah, the High,
informed about this in His Book through the verse, ‘And surely from his
Shias is Ibraheem.”

291. Al-Kaafi[^162]: Imam Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Naqi (a.s.) narrates,
‘Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) was in Masjid al-Haraam (Kaabah) along with his
son, Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Salmaan. He was reclining on the shoulder of
the latter, when a handsome and well-dressed man entered and saluted
him. Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) replied to his salutation.

The person sat down and said, ‘O Ameerul Momineen (a.s.)! I ask you
three questions. If you answer them correctly, I will know that people
have failed in their duty concering you, which was imposed upon them and
that they will not be safe in this world as well as the hereafter. But,
if you fail to answer my questions, I will understand that you and they
are both one and the same.’ Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) told him, “Ask
whatever you desire.” He said,

‘Inform me that when a person sleeps, where does his soul go?

What is the cause of remembrance and forgetfulness?

How come one person resembles his paternal uncles while another is
similar to his maternal uncles?

Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) turned to his son, Hasan and ordered, “O Aba
Muhammad! Answer him.” Imam Hasan (a.s.) answered his questions. Hearing
the answers, the man exclaimed, “I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah and I always believed this. I bear witness that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah and I always believed this. I bear witness that you
are the successor of Allah’s Messenger and the upholder of His testimony
and I always believed it.”

Then he turned to Imam Hasan and said, ‘I bear witness that you are his
successor and the upholder of His testimony and I bear witness that
Husain Ibn Ali is the successor of his brother. I bear witness that Ali
Ibn Husain is the successor of Husain after him. I bear witness that
Muhammad Ibn Ali is the successor of Ali after him. I bear witness that
Ja’far Ibn Muhammad is the successor of Muhammad after him. I bear
witness that Moosa Ibn Ja’far is the successor of Ja’far after him. I
bear witness that Ali Ibn Moosa is the successor of Moosa after him. I
bear witness that Muhammad Ibn Ali is the successor of Ali after him.

I bear witness that Ali Ibn Muhammad is the successor of Muhammad after
him. I bear witness that Muhammad Ibn Ali is the successor of Ali after
him. I bear witness that Hasan Ibn Ali is the successor of Ali after
him. I also bear witness that a person from the progeny of Hasan will
neither have an agnomen nor will he be named till he manifests his
affair. He will fill the earth with justice as it would be filled with
injustice. Salutations be upon you, O Ameerul Momineen and the mercy of
Allah and His blessings.’

Then he stood up and went away. Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) said, “O Aba
Muhammad! Follow him and see where he goes.” Imam Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.)
went after him, and reports, ‘The moment he kept his foot out of the
Mosque, I did not comprehend where he disappeared from the earth of
Allah. I returned to Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) and upprised him of the
same.’ He (a.s.) asked, “O Aba Muhammad! Did you recognize him?” I
retorted, ‘Allah, His Messenger and Ameerul Momineen know the best.’ He
(a.s.) answered, “He was (Prophet) Khizr.”

292. ManLaa Yahzoroh al-Faqih[^163]: Abdullah Ibn Jandab reports that
Imam Moosa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) said, “You pray in the prostration of
thanksgiving (sajdah al-shukr) thus,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أللّهمّ إنّى أُشهدك و اُشهِدُ ملائكتَكَ وَ أنبياءَكَ وَ رُسُلك و جميعَ
خَلْقِكَ اللهَ رَبّى وَالإسلامَ دينى و محمدًا نبيّى و عليًّا والحسن و
الحسين و علي بن الحسين و محمد بن على و جعفر بن محمد و موسى بن جعفر و
على بن موسى و محمد بن على و على بن محمد والحسن بن على و الحجّة بن
الحسن بن على أئمتي، بهم اتولّى و من اعدائهم اتبرا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Verily, I hold You as a witness and I hold Your angels, Your
Prophets, Your Messengers and all Your creation as witnesses that Allah
is my Lord, Islam is my religion, Muhammad is my Prophet, Ali, Hasan,
Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn
Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali
and al-Hujjah, the son of Hasan are my Imams. I take them as my masters
and express disgust from their enemies.

293. Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.)[^164]: Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.) narrates, “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘When I
was taken to the heaven for ascension, my Lord, mighty is His Majesty,
revealed unto me, ‘O Muhammad! I glanced to the earth, chose you from
it, appointed you as a Prophet and derived your name from My Name.

So, I am the Praised One (المحمود) while you are Muhammad. I glanced for
the second time, chose Ali from it, appointed him as your successor,
your caliph, the husband of your daughter and the father of your
progeny. I derived his name from My Name. So, I am the High (العلى), the
Highest (الاعلى) while he is Ali. I created Fatemah, Hasan and Husain
from the lights of you two. Thereafter, I presented their mastership
before the angels. Whoever accepted it became from My close ones.

O Muhammad! If a person worships Me till he breaks and becomes like a
decomposed skin-bag but comes to me denying their mastership, I will not
allow him to stay in My paradise nor will I provide him shadow beneath
My Throne (arsh). O Muhammad! Do you like to see them?’ I replied, ‘Yes,
O my Lord!’ Then He, Mighty and Glorified be He, ordered, ‘Raise your
head.’ I raised my head and saw the lights of Ali, Fatemah, Hasan,
Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn
Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, al-Hasan Ibn
Ali and al-Hujjah Ibn al-Hasan, the Qaem, was right in the middle
amongst them like a brilliant star.

I asked, ‘My Lord! Who are they?’ He informed, ‘They are the Imams and
he is the Qaem, who will implement My permitted and prohibit My
prohibitions. Through him I will take revenge from My enemies. He is the
comfort for My friends and he is the one who will cure the hearts of
your Shias from the oppressors, the deniers and the unbelievers…’”

294. Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.)[^165]: Fazl Ibn Shaazaan reports,
‘Mamoon asked Ali Ibn Moosa al-Reza (a.s.) to write for him the core of
Islam in a brief and eloquent manner. Imam (a.s.) wrote to him thus,
“Verily, the core of Islam is the testimony that there is no god but
Allah, there is no partner for Him, the Lord, the One, the Unique, the
Solitary, the Needless, the Controller, the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing,
the Powerful, the Eternal, the Existing, the Surviving, the Knowing Who
is not ignorant, the Powerful Who is not helpless, the Self-Sufficient
Who is not needy and the Just Who does not oppress. He is the Creator of
everything and there is nothing like Him. He has neither any similar nor
opposite nor alike nor equal. He is the objective of worship,
supplication, inclination and fear.

And that verily Muhammad is His servant, His messenger, His trustee, His
purified one and His chosen one from among His creation, the chief of
the Messengers, the seal of the Prophets and the most superior in the
entire universe. There is no prophet after him, there is no change in
his nation (ملّت) and there is no alteration for his shariat.

And (to believe) that whatever Muhammad Ibn Abdullah (s.a.w.a.) has
brought is the clear truth.

To testify for him (s.a.w.a.) and for all the past Prophets, Messengers
and Proofs of Allah (peace be on them all), who preceded him.

To testify for his truthful, mighty Book which, ‘Falsehood cannot reach
unto it from in front or from behind, a descent from the Wise, the
Praiseworthy.’[^166] And that it (the Holy Quran) is dominant over all
the books and it is the truth from its beginning till its end. We
believe in its clear as well as ambiguous verses, particular as well as
general verses, promises as well as threats, abrogating as well as
abrogated verses, its stories and its news. None among the creatures has
the power to bring its like.

The guide after him (s.a.w.a.), the proof upon the believers, the
upholder of the affairs of the Muslims, the interpretor of the Quran and
the cognizant of its laws, is his brother, his caliph, his successor and
his friend, the one who was unto him as Haroon was unto Moosa (a.s.),
Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), the chief of the faithfuls, the leader of the
pious, the guide of the handsome (in faith), the most superior of the
successors and the heir of the knowledge of the Prophets and the
Messengers.

After him are his two sons, Hasan and Husain, the chief of the youth of
paradise. After him is Ali Ibn Husain, the adornment of the worshippers,
Muhammad Ibn Ali, the splitter of the knowledge of the Prophets, Ja’far
Ibn Muhammad, the heir of the knowledge of the successors, Moosa Ibn
Ja’far al-Kaazim, Ali Ibn Moosa al-Reza, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn
Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and the Hujjah, the Qaem and the awaited one
(blessings of Allah be on them all).

I bear witness for them vis-à-vis successorship and Imamat. And that the
earth will not be devoid of a proof of Allah, the High, upon His
creatures in every time and era. They are the strong rope (al-urwah
al-wusqaa), the Imams of guidance and the proof upon the people of the
world till Allah inherits the earth and whosoever is upon it. Whoever
opposes them is the deviator, who leads others astray, false and the
forsaker of truth and guidance. They (Imams) speak from the Quran and
explain on the authority of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). One who
dies without recognizing them has died the death of ignorance.

And that from their religion is precautious piety, chastity,
truthfulness, righteousness, steadfastness, struggle, repaying the trust
to the good as well as the transgressor, prolonging the prostration,
fasting during the day, praying during the night, abstaining from the
prohibited, awaiting salvation with patience, being a good neighbour,
being a noble friend and (finally, always being with) ablutions (وضو)
like Allah, the High, has commanded in His Book…’

295. Kitaab al-Fazl Ibn Shaazaan[^167]: Sulaym Ibn Qais al-Hilaali
reports, ‘I enquired from Ameerul Momineen (a.s.), ‘Surely I have heard
from Salmaan, Miqdaad and Abuzar things vis-à-vis the interpretation of
Quran and the tradition of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), other than what is
available with the people. I also heard from you things that endorse
what I have heard from these three.

I see many things concerning the exegesis of the Quran and the
interpretation of the Prophetic traditions while you oppose them in
these and consider all of these as false and incorrect. Do you think
that the people are attributing lies unto Allah and His Messenger
(s.a.w.a.) deliberately and are indulging in the whimsical
interpretation of the Holy Quran?’’

Ali (a.s.) replied, “Since you have asked, then understand the answer.
Certainly, in the hands of the people, there is right as well as wrong,
truth as well as lies, abrogating as well as abrogated, particular as
well as general, clear as well as the ambiguous, and preserved as well
as the imaginary. Indeed, lie was attributed unto the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) during his lifetime so much so that he (s.a.w.a.) had to
deliver a sermon saying, ‘O people! Many lies have been attributed unto
me. So, whoever ascribes anything falsely unto me intentionally, his
seat will be in the hell fire.’ Therefore, (obviously) the lies
attributed to him (s.a.w.a.) after his death will be much more than
those ascribed to him (s.a.w.a.) in his lifetime.

Any tradition that comes to you can originate only from four sources and
there cannot be a fifth source for it:

A hypocrite, who professes faith apparently and feigns to believe in
Islam, does not consider it as a sin or does not hesitate to attribute a
lie to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) deliberately. Had the people
known that he is a hypocrite, a liar, they would neither accept from him
nor verify in him. But they said, ‘He is from the companions of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), he has seen and heard him (s.a.w.a.).
Hence they took from him without being aware of his condition. While
Allah has informed about the hypocrites and described them in no
uncertain terms as follows,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ تُعْجِبُكَ أَجْسَامُهُمْ وَإِن يَقُولُوا تَسْمَعْ
لِقَوْلِهِمْ كَأَنَّهُمْ خُشُبٌ مُّسَنَّدَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when you see them, their persons will please you, and If they
speak, you will listen to their speech; (they are) as if they were big
pieces of wood clad with garments***. (Qur’an Surah Munaafeqoon 63: 4)

After him, they became close to the leaders of deviation and the callers
towards the hell fire through vanity, lies and slander, who ordained
actions for them, imposed them on the necks of the people and acquired
the world through them. The masses merely follow the rulers and the
world except the one whom Allah, the High has protected. This was the
first of the four.

The second is the one who has heard a thing from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), could not memorize the exact wordings and developed a wrong
notion about it but did not lie deliberately. So, he believes in
whatever is with him, acts upon it, narrates it and says, ‘I have heard
it from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).’ Had the Muslims known that
this is just his notion, they would not accept it. Even if he himself
had known that this is his own imagination, he would have rejected it.

The third is he who heard that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has
ordered something and later prohibited it or prohibited a thing and
later ordered for it, but he is not aware of it. Hence, he has memorized
only the abrogated part but is ignorant of the abrogating command. Had
he known that this order has been abrogated, he would have rejected it
and had the Muslims known, when they heard it from him, that it is
abrogated, they too would have dispelled it.

The fourth is he who did not ascribe a lie to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) as he hates lies due to fear of Allah, the High, and respect
for His Messenger (s.a.w.a.). He did not forget, rather, he memorized
the exact wordings. Whenever he reproduced it, he did it in toto without
adding anything to it or reducing a part of it. He was aware of the
abrogating as well as the abrogated, while keeping away the abrogated
one. He also knew that the tradition of the prophet is like the Quran,
bearing the abrogating as well as the abrogated, the particular and the
general and the clear and the ambiguous. Indeed, the sayings of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), like the Holy Quran, were of two kinds,
general and particular. Allah, Blessed and High be He, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back***. (Qur’an Surah Hashr (59): Verse 7.)

Thus whoever did not know and did not follow what Allah and His
Messenger (s.a.w.a.) implied with it became confused. All the companions
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) were not asking questions about
everything. Whoever asked him, understood and whoever understood
preserved it.

There was a group amongst them who never asked him (s.a.w.a.) a
question. They preferred that a bedouin or a desert-folk comes and asks
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) a question and they listen to the
answer. But I used to go to him (s.a.w.a.) everyday atleast once and
every night atleast once, when he (s.a.w.a.) used to give me an
absolutely private hearing. He (s.a.w.a.) answered what I asked and I
went with him (s.a.w.a.) wherever he (s.a.w.a.) went. The companions of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) were aware that he (s.a.w.a.) did not
treat anybody from the people in this manner as he (s.a.w.a.) dealt with
me.

Often, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) used to come to my house. I
too, used to go to some of his (s.a.w.a.) houses, when he (s.a.w.a.)
used to ask his wives to leave that we could talk in private, and none
remained there but me. On the other hand, when a visitor came and
demanded privacy, he (s.a.w.a.) did not ask me, Fatemah or our two sons
to leave. Whenever I asked him (s.a.w.a.) a question, he (s.a.w.a.)
answered and when I was silent or my questions were exhausted, he
(s.a.w.a.) commenced talking with me.

So, no single verse of the Holy Quran descended upon the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) but that he (s.a.w.a.) read it for me and dictated it
to me. I wrote it in my own hand-writing. He (s.a.w.a.) taught me its
exegesis, its interpretation, its abrogating and abrogated verses, its
clear and ambiguous verses, its particular and general verses, its
apparent and concealed. He (s.a.w.a.) invoked Allah to grant me its
understanding and its memorization.

Consequently, I did not forget a single verse from the Book of Allah or
any knowledge which he (s.a.w.a.) dictated to me. Whatever Allah taught
him (s.a.w.a.) from the permissible or prohibited, command or
prohibition, obedience or disobedience, past or present or any other
book that was revealed before us, he (s.a.w.a.) taught it to me and I
memorized it. I did not forget a single alphabet from it.

Whenever the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) informed me of these things,
he (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on my chest and prayed that He fills my
heart with knowledge, understanding, wisdom and light. He used to
supplicate, “O Allah! Teach him, make him memorise and do not cause him
to forget anything of what I have informed him and taught him.”

One day, I said to him (s.a.w.a.), “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! May
my father and my mother be held ransom for you, from the time you have
invoked Allah what you invoked, I did not forget anything nor whatever
you have taught me, has escaped from me. Whatever you taught me, I wrote
it down. Did you fear forgetfulness on my part?” He (s.a.w.a.) replied,
“O brother! I did not fear forgetfulness on your part. I only loved to
pray for you for, Allah, the High, had informed me that He will answer
my prayers concerning you and your partners, whose obedience He has
associated with my obedience, when He ordered concerning them,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you***. (Qur’an Surah Nisaa 4: 59)

I asked, ‘Who are they, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?’ He (s.a.w.a.)
answered, ‘They are the successors after me. One who forsakes them will
not harm them. They are with the Quran and the Quran is with them,
neither will they part from it nor will it separate from them till they
meet me at the Hauz (of Kausar).

Through them, my nation shall gain victory, and through them, it will
rain. Through them, calamities will be repelled and supplications will
be accepted.’ I requested, ‘Name them for me, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)!’ He (s.a.w.a.) obliged, ‘O Ali! You are the first of them,
then this son of mine – and he (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on the head of
Hasan. Then, this son of mine - and he (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on the
head of Husain, followed by his son, your namesake, Ali, the adornment
of the worshippers. O brother! He will be born in your lifetime, so
convey my salutations unto him. He will be followed by his son, Muhammad
al-Baaqer, the splitter of my knowledge and the treasurer of the
revelation of Allah, the High.

Then his son, Ja’far al-Sadeq, then his son, Moosa al-Kazem, then his
son, Ali al-Reza, then his son, Muhammad al-Taqi, then his son, Ali
al-Naqi, then his son, Hasan al-Zaki and finally his son the Hujjah, the
Qaem, the seal of my successors and my caliphs and the avenger from my
enemies. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it will be
replete with injustice and oppression.” Then Ameerul Momineen (a.s.)
says, “O Sulaym! By Allah, I recognize him when he is taking allegiance
between the Rukn and the Maqaam. I also know the names of his helpers
and the names of their tribes…”

296. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid[^168]: In a supplication (it has come)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رباّه يا سيّداه يا غاية رغبتاه أسألك بك و بمحمّد و علي و فاطمة و
الحسن و الحسين و علي بن الحسين و محمد بن علي و علي بن محمد والحسن بن
علي والقائم المهدي الائمّة الهادية عليهم السلام أن تصلّي على محمّد و
آل محمّد، وأسألك يا الله أن لا تشوّه خلقي بالنّار و أن تفعل بي ما أنت
أهله
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘O Lord! O Chief! O Pinacle of desire! I ask You for Your sake and for
the sake of Muhammad, Ali, Fatemah, Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain,
Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa,
Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and the Qaem, the
Mahdi, the guiding Imams (peace be on them all) that You bless Muhammad
and the progeny of Muhammad. I ask You, O Allah, that You do not roast
me in the hell fire and deal with me as You are worthy of.’

297. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid[^169]: Amongst the supplications that are to
be recited after the morning prayers, the following has been highly
recommended.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رضيت بالله ربّا و بالإسلام ديناً و بمحمد صلّى الله عليه و آله و سلّم
نبيّا و بالقرآن كتاباً و بعلي إمامًا و بالحسن و الحسين و علي بن الحسين
و محمّد بن علي و جعفر بن محمّد و موسى بن جعفر و علي بن موسى و محمّد بن
علي و علي بن محمّد و الحسن بن علي والخلف الصالح ائمَّة وقادة...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘I am satisfied with Allah as (my) Lord, with Islam as (my) religion,
with Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) as Prophet, with Quran as Book, with Ali as
Imam and with Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far
Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn
Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and the righteous successor as Imams and
leaders…’

298. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid[^170]: Aasim Ibn Humaid reports that Abu
Abdillah Imam Sadeq (a.s.) used to recite the following supplication
after the prayers of need (صلاة الحاجة) on Friday:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهم و أتقرّب إليك بوليّك و خيرتك من خلقك و وصيّ نبيّك مولاي و مولى
المؤمنين والمؤمنات قسيم النار و قائد الابرار
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I seek proximity to You through Your friend, the chosen one
from Your creation, the successor of Your Prophet, my master and the
master of the believing men and women, the separator from the hell fire
and the leader of the righteous – till he (a.s.) said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهم و أتقرّب إليك بالوليّ البارّ التقيّ الطيّب الزكيّ الإمام ابن
الإمام، السيّد ابن السيّد الحسن بن علي و أتقرّب إليك بالقتيل المسلوب
قتيل كربلاء الحسين بن علي، و أتقرّب إليك بسيّد العابدين و قرّة عين
الصالحين علي بن الحسين، و أتقرّب إليك بباقر العلم، صاحب الحكمة و
البيان و وارث مَن كان قبله محمد بن علي، و أتقرّب إليك بالصادق الخير
الفاضل جعفر بن محمد، و أتقرّب إليك بالكريم الشهيد الهادي المولي موسى
بن جعفر، و أتقرّب إليك بالشهيد الغريب الحبيب المدفون بطوس علي بن موسى،
وأتقرّب إليك بالزكيّ التقي محمد بن علي، و أتقرّب إليك بالطهر الطاهر
النقي علي بن محمد، و أتقرّب إليك بوليّك الحسن بن علي، و أتقرّب إليك
بالبقية الباقي المقيم بين أوليائه الذي رضيته لنفسك الطيّب الطاهر
الفاضل الخيّر نور الارض و عمادها و رجاء هذه الاُمّة و سيّدها الآمر
بالمعروف والناهي عن المنكر الناصح الامين المؤدّي عن النبيّين و خاتم
الاوصياء النجباء الطاهرين صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين...
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! I seek proximity to you through the master, the virtuous, the
pure, the good, the immaculate, the Imam and the son of an Imam, the
Sayyid and the son of a Sayyid, Hasan Ibn Ali. And I seek nearness to
You through the Martyr, the crucified and the martyr of Karbala, Husain
Ibn Ali. And I seek nearness to You through the chief of the worshippers
and the beloved of the righteous, Ali Ibn Husain.

And I seek nearness to You through the splitter of knowledge, the owner
of wisdom and explanation, and the inheritor of what was before him,
Muhammad Ibn Ali. And I seek nearness to You through al-Sadeq, the
virtuous and the scholar, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad. And I seek nearness to
You through the noble, the martyr, the guide and the master, Moosa Ibn
Ja’far. And I seek nearness to You through the martyr, the stranger, the
beloved who is buried in Toos[^171], Ali Ibn Moosa.

And I seek nearness to You through the pure and the immaculate, Muhammad
Ibn Ali. And I seek nearness to You through the clean, the pure and the
immaculate, Ali Ibn Muhammad. And I seek nearness to You through Your
friend, Hasan Ibn Ali.

And I seek nearness to You through the remainder, the surviving one, the
resider amongst his friends with whom You are satisfied, the pleasant,
the pure, the scholar, the chosen one, the light of the earth and its
pillar, the hope of this nation and its chief, the enjoiner of good, the
prohibitor of evil, the advisor, the trustworthy, the conveyer from the
Prophets and the seal of the successors, the chosen ones and the
purified ones, blessings of Allah be on them all…’

299. Mohij al-Da’waat[^172]: A supplication which Abu Hamzah al-Sumaali
heard from Imam Zain al-Abedin (a.s.) contained the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... و أتوسّل إليك و أستشفع إليك بنبيّك نبي الرحمة محمد صلى الله عليه
وآله و سلم تسليمًا و بأمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب و فاطمة الزهراء و
الحسن والحسين و عبديك و أمينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘…and I seek to reach unto You and Your intercession through the medium
of Your Prophet, the Prophet of mercy, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and through
Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.),
Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), Your servant and Your trustee (and in it
are the names of the Imams, all of them, till he (a.s.) said)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و بحقّ خلف الائمة الماضين و الامام الزكي الهادي المهديّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And for the sake of the caliph of the past Imams, the Imam, the pure,
the guide and the guided.’

300. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid[^173]: Abaan Ibn Taghlib reports that Abu
Abdillah Imam Sadeq (a.s.) used to recite the following supplication
after the prayers of need (صلاة الحاجة)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و بالاسم الذي جعلته عند محمد صلواتك (ورحمتك) عليه وآله و عند علي و
الحسن والحسين و علي و محمد و جعفر و موسى و علي و محمد و علي و الحسن و
الحجّة عليهم السلام أن تصلّي على محمد وآل محمد و أن تقضي لي حاجتي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘And for the sake of the name which You have placed with Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) and with Ali, Hasan, Husain, Ali, Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa,
Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and Hujjah (peace be on them all) that You
bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and that You fulfil for me my
need…’

301. Jamaal al-Usboo’[^174]: Shaikh Toosi (a.r.) narrates through his
chain of narrators that Imam Sadeq (a.s.) used to recite the following
supplication

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بمحمد يا الله بعلي يا الله بفاطمة يا الله بالحسن يا الله بالحسين يا
الله بعلي يا الله بمحمد يا الله بجعفر يا الله بموسى يا الله بعلي يا
الله بمحمد يا الله بعلي يا الله بالحسن يا الله بحجّتك و خليفتك في بلدك
يا الله صلِّ على محمّد و آله محمّد...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘For the sake of Muhammad, O Allah! For the sake of Ali, O Allah! For
the sake of Fatemah, O Allah! For the sake of Hasan, O Allah! For the
sake of Husain, O Allah! For the sake of Ali, O Allah! For the sake of
Muhammad, O Allah! For the sake of Ja’far, O Allah! For the sake of
Moosa, O Allah! For the sake of Ali, O Allah! For the sake of Muhammad,
O Allah! For the sake of Ali, O Allah! For the sake of Hasan, O Allah!
For the sake of Your Proof and Your Caliph in Your city, O Allah! Bless
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad…’

302. Al-Iqbaal[^175]: Abu Muhammad Haroon Ibn Moosa al-Tal’akbari
narrates through his chain of narrators that when the month of Ramazaan
approached, Abu Abdillah Imam Sadeq (a.s.) used to recite the following
supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهم هذا شهر رمضان المبارك الذي أنزلت فيه القرآن و جعلته هدى للناس
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! This is the blessed month of Ramazaan in which You have sent
the Quran and made it (Quran) as a guidance for the people – till he
(a.s.) said after a lengthy invocation

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأسألك بحقّ محمد و علي و فاطمة و الحسن و الحسين و علي بن الحسين و محمد
بن علي و جعفر بن محمد و موسى بن جعفر و علي بن موسى و محمد بن علي و
عليّ بن محمّد و الحسن بن عليّ و الحجّة القائم بالحقّ صلواتك يا ربّ
عليهم أجمعين...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then I ask You for the sake of Muhammad, Ali, Fatemah, Hasan, Husain,
Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa Ibn Ja’far,
Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan Ibn Ali and the
Hujjah, the upriser with truth. O Lord! Your blessings be on them all…’

303. Al-Iqbaal[^176]: In the supplications of the thirteenth day of Imam
Zain al-Abedin (a.s.), it has been reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهم إنّ الظلمة جحدوا آياتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Surely the oppressors denied Your signs – till he (a.s.) said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهم إنّي أدينك يا ربّ بطاعتك و لا ننكر ولاية محمد صلّى الله عليه و
علي أهل بيته و ولاية أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام و ولاية
الحسن و الحسين عليهما السلام سبطي نبيّك و ولدي رسولك عليهما السلام و
ولاية الطاهرين المعصومين من ذرية الحسين علي بن الحسين و محمد بن علي و
جعفر بن محمد و موسى بن جعفر و علي بن موسى و محمد بن علي و علي بن محمد
و الحسن بن علي سلام الله و بركاته عليهم أجمعين و ولاية القائم السابق
منهم بالخيرات المفترض الطاعة صاحب الزمان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Surely I believe in Your obedience, O Lord, and we do not deny
the mastership of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), the mastership of Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.), the mastership of Hasan and Husain (a.s.), the two
grandsons of Your Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the sons of Your Messenger, the
mastership of the pure and infallible (Imams) from the progeny of Husain
(a.s.), (namely) Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad,
Moosa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammd,
Hasan Ibn Ali (salutations of Allah and His blessings be on them all)
and the mastership of the Qaem, the foremost amongst them in goodness,
the one whose obedience is obligatory and the master of the time.

304. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid[^177]: Ibraheem Ibn Umar al-San’aani reports
that in frightening circumstances Abu Abdillah Imam Sadeq (a.s.) used to
recite a supplication after prayers. It is the same supplication that
was recited by Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) and it is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسألك أن تصلّي على محمد و آله و أن تقضي لي حوائجي و تُسمع محمدًا و
عليّا و فاطمة و الحسن و الحسين و عليّا و محمّدا و جعفرًا و موسى و
عليًا و محمدًا و عليّا و الحسن والحجّة صلواتك عليهم و رحمتك و بركاتك و
رحمتك صوتي، فيشفعوا لي إليك و تشفّعهم فيّ و لا تردّني خائبًا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

I ask You that You bless Muhammad and his progeny, fulfil my needs, make
Muhammad, Ali, Fatemah, Hasan, Husain, Ali, Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa,
Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and the Hujjah (Your salutations, Your
blessings and Your mercy be on them all)hear my voice that they may
intercede on my behalf before You and You accept their intercession for
me and do not return me disappointed…

305. Kitaab al-Fazl Ibn Shaazaan[^178]: Abu Khalid al-Kabuli chronicles,
‘I went to my master Ali Ibn Husain Ibn Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and
saw a book in his hand which he was looking at and crying profusely.’ I
enquired, ‘May my father and my mother be held ransom for you, O son of
Allah’s Messenger! What is this book?’

He (a.s.) informed, “This is the copy of the tablet which Allah, the
High, gifted to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). In it is the name of
Allah, the High, His Messenger, Ameerul Momineen (a.s.), my uncle Hasan
Ibn Ali and my father (peace be on them all), my name, the name of my
son Muhammad al-Baaqer, his son Ja’far al-Sadeq, his son Moosa al-Kazem,
his son Ali al-Reza, his son Muhammad al-Taqi, his son Ali al-Naqi, his
son Hasan al-Zaki and his son the proof of Allah, the upriser with the
command of Allah, the avenger from the enemies of Allah and the one who
will go into a long occultation. Thereafter, he will reappear and fill
the earth with justice and equity as it would be filled with injustice
and oppression.”’

306. Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem[^179]: On the day of Shura, Ibn Abbas
argued, ‘How much of our rights will you prevent? By the Lord of the
Ka’bah, surely Ali is the Imam and the Caliph. Eleven Imams from his
descendants will rule, judging with truth. The first of them is Hasan
(nominated) by the will of his father in his favour, followed by Husain
by the will of his brother in his favour. Then his son Ali by the will
of his father in his favour, then his son Muhammad by the will of his
father in his favour, then his son Ja’far by the will of his father in
his favour, then his son Moosa by the will of his father in his favour,
then his son Ali by the will of his father in his favour, then his son
Muhammad by the will of his father in his favour, then his son Ali by
the will of his father in his favour, then his son Hasan by the will of
his father in his favour. When he (Hasan) expires, the awaited, the
occult (will rule).’

Aleem asked Ibn Abbas, ‘Where did you get this information?’ He replied,
‘Verily, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) taught Ali (a.s.) one
thousand doors (of knowledge). From each door, another thousand doors
opened. Surely, this (what I am saying) is from there.’

307. Kitaab al-Fazl Ibn Shaazaan[^180]: Muhammad Ibn Muslim reports on
the authority of Abu Ja’far (Muhammad al-Baaqer a.s.) that the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said to Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), “O Ali! I have
more right over the believers than they themselves. Then you, O Ali,
have more right upon the believers than they themselves. Then Hasan has
more right on the believers than they themselves. Then Husain has more
right on the believers than they themselves. Then Ali Ibn Husain has
more right on the believers than they themselves. Then Muhammad Ibn Ali
has more right on the believers than they themselves. Then Ja’far Ibn
Muhammad has more right on the believers than they themselves. Then
Moosa Ibn Ja’far has more right on the believers than they themselves.
Then Ali Ibn Moosa has more right on the believers than they themselves.
Then Muhammad Ibn Ali has more right on the believers than they
themselves. Then Ali Ibn Muhammad has more right on the believers than
they themselves. Then Hasan Ibn Ali has more right on the believers than
they themselves. Finally, (the affair will reach unto) al-Hujjah Ibn
al-Hasan, at whom caliphate and successorship will terminate and who
will go into prolonged occulation. Thereafter, he will reappear and fill
the earth with justice and equality as it would be fraught with
injustice and tyranny.”

308. Kitaab al-Fazl Ibn Shaazaan[^181]: Saeed Ibn Jubair reports that
Ammaar Ibn Yaasir was asked, ‘What makes you love Ali Ibn Abi Taalib
(a.s.)?’ He retorted, ‘Allah and His Messenger have made me love him.
Indeed Allah, the High, has revealed a number of verses concerning him
and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has related numerous traditions in
his favour.’ He was asked, ‘Can you convey to us a few traditions that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has stated in his favour?’ Ammar
replied, ‘Why won’t I? Indeed, I hate those who conceal the truth and
spread falsehood.’

He continued, ‘I was with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) when I saw
Ali (a.s.) kill a number of the elite of Quraish in some of the battles.
I asked the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), ‘O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)! Certainly Ali fights in the way of Allah as one should
fight.’ He (s.a.w.a.) responded, “And why shouldn’t he? He is from me
and I am from him. He is my heir, the repayer of my debts, the fulfiller
of my promises and my successor after me. Had he not been there, a pure
believer could not be recognized during my lifetime and after my death.
His war is my war and my war is Allah’s war. His peace is my peace and
my peace is Allah’s peace. Allah will cause to emerge from his loin the
rightly guided Imams. O Ammar! Know that Allah, Blessed and High be He,
gave me a covenant that He will grant me twelve caliphs. From them is
Ali and he is the first of them and their chief.”

I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)! Who are the others?’ He
(s.a.w.a.) replied, “The second from them is Hasan Ibn Ali Ibn Abi
Taalib (a.s.), the third from them is Husain Ibn Ali Ibn Abi Taalib
(a.s.), the fourth from them is Ali Ibn Husain, the adornment of the
worshippers, the fifth from them is Muhammad Ibn Ali, followed by his
son Ja’far, then his son Moosa, then his son Ali, then his son Muhammad,
then his son Ali, then his son Hasan and then his son who will be hidden
from the people, a prolonged occultation. This is the saying of Allah,
Blessed and High be He,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل ارأيتم أن اصبح ماؤكم غورا فمن ياتيكم بماء معين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Have you considered if your water should go down, who is it then
that will bring you flowing water? (***Qur’an Surah Mulk 67; 30.)

Thereafter, he will emerge and fill the earth with equality and justice
as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. O Ammar! Soon
after me, there will be a discord. In this situation you follow Ali and
his party because he is with the truth and the truth is with him. Soon
you will fight against the ناكسين (the people of Jamal) and the قاسطين
(the people of Siffeen) along with him. A rebellious group will murder
you. Your last provision of this world will be a glass of milk that you
shall drink.”

Saeed Ibn Jubair says, ‘It happened exactly as the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) had prophesied.’

309. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid[^182]: Imam Sadeq (a.s.) used to recite the
following supplication after the prayers of need (صلاة الحاجة)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واسئلك بالحقّ الّذي جعلته عند محمّد وآل محمّد و عند الائمّة عليّ و
الحسن و الحسين و علي و محمّد و جعفر و موسى و علي و محمّد و علي والحسن
والحجّة أن تصلّي على محمّد و أهل بيته و أن تقضي حاجتي و تيسّر عسيرها و
أن تكفيني مهمّاتها
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I ask You for the sake of the right, which You have reposed with
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and with the Imams Ali, Hasan,
Husain, Ali, Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa, Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and the
Hujjah that You bless Muhammad and his Ahle Bait (a.s.), fulfil my
needs, ease its difficulty and protect me from its sorrows.

The author Ayatullah Lutfullah Saafi Golpaygani (may Allah prolong his
life) says: Documents concerning the Imamat of our leaders, the twelve
Imams (a.s.), abound to the extent that it is not possible to bring all
of them in this book. If we bring all the reliable traditions only,
quoted in our books, it would require many volumes. Hence, we have
confined ourselves to only a few of these traditions. Those who are
interested in acquiring further knowledge on the subject may refer to
the books written on the subject.

For the benefit of our readers, we cite the names of a few books written
by acclaimed scholars, like Abu Abdillah Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abdullah
al-Ayyaash (exp. 401 A.H.), the author of Muqtazab al-Asar Fi Al-Nusoos
Alaa al-Aimmah al-Isna Ashar; Shaikh Kamaluddin Maisam Ibn Ali Ibn
Maisam al-Bahraani, author of Isteqsaa al-Nazar Fi Imaamate al-Aimmah
al-Isna Ashar; Sharho Nahj al-Balaagah (major, medium and minor); Sharho
al-Meah Kalemah; Risaalah Fi al-Imaamah; and a number of other books.

Moreoever, quite a few poems had been read in their eulogy, in their
lifetime, which is a further proof for their truthfulness like the poems
of al-Abdi in the era of Imam Sadeq (a.s.). Those who are interested may
refer to Al-Ghadeer by Allamah Amini (a.r.), vol. 2, Ghadeeriyah
al-Abdi, pg. 290; and other similar books.

310. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid: There is another supplication, which Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) used to recite on Friday after the prayers of need (صلاة
الحاجة). It is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واسئلك بالحق الذي جعلته عند محمد و آل محمد و عند الائمة علي والحسن و
الحسين و علي و محمد و جعفر و موسى و علي و محمد و علي والحسن والحجّة
عليهم السلام ان تصلّي على محمّد و أهلبيته و ان تقضي حاجتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

I ask You for the sake of the right which You have reposed in Muhammad
and the progeny of Muhammad and with the Imams, Ali, Hasan, Husain, Ali,
Muhammad, Ja’far, Moosa, Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and the Hujjah (peace
be on them all) that You send blessings on Muhammad and his Ahle Bait
(a.s.) and fulfil my need…

[^1]: It is clear for you that some of the traditions we have brought in
the previous chapter explain the fact that there will be twelve Imams
from the Bani Hashim, from the progeny of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.). The first of them is Ali (a.s.) and Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)
is from them and the last of them. Nine of these will be from the
descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.). The first of them is Ali (a.s.), the
second is Hasan (a.s.), the third is Husain (a.s.), the fourth is Ali
Ibn Husain (a.s.) and the seventh from them is from the offspring of
Muhammad Ibn Ali al-Baaqer (a.s.). When these holy and infallible Imams
(a.s.) will depart from this earth, it will be destroyed along with all
its inhabitants. These and other such attributes of the infallible Imams
(a.s.) can be found in the following traditions: 49, 62, 66, 70, 71, 72,
74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 82, 83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 94, 95, 97,
98, 102, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 113, 115, 117, 118, 120, 121,
125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137 and 147. They
reach to 52 traditions and in this chapter another 161 will be added,
making the sum total to 213 elucidative traditions.

[^2]: Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 85, Chap. 16

[^3]: Muqtazab al-Asar, p. 29, Tr. No. 18; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36,
pg. 382, Chap. 42, Tr. No. 9.

[^4]: The term muhaddathoon implies those who converse with the angels
but cannot see them – Translator.

[^5]: Al-Irshaad, vol. 2, pg. 375, Chap. 19, Tr. No. 5; Kash al-Ghummah,
vol. 2, pg. 448

[^6]: Kitaab Sulaim Ibn Qais, pg. 227.

[^7]: Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 312, Chap. 61, Tr. No. 562; Kamaal
al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 280, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 27; Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg.
447, Chap. 78 (in brief); Ghaayah al-Maraam, pg. 692, Chap. 141, Tr. No.
6; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, pg. 71, Chap. 1, Tr. No. 12.

[^8]: Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 313, Chap. 61, Tr. No. 564; Kamaal
al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 280. Chap. 24, Tr. No. 29; Ghaayah al-Maraam, Chap.
141, Tr. No. 8; Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 258 & pg. 445, Chap. 77, & pg.
447, Chap. 78; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 226, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 1;
Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1, pg. 64, Tr. No. 31; Kashf
al-Astaar, pg. 74, Section 1.

[^9]: Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 492-493, Chap. 94; Kamaal al-Deen, vol.
1, pg. 282, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 35; Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1,
pg. 65, Tr. No. 34; Al-Amaali of Saduq (a.r.), pg. 97, Majlis No. 23,
Tr. No. 9; Al-Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr Ashob, vol. 1, pg. 298; Rawzah
al-Waaezin, vol. 1, pg. 102.

[^10]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 259, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 4; Oyoon
Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1, pg. 59, Tr. No. 28, Chap. 6; Kefaayah
al-Asar, pg. 145, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg.
244, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 57; Al-Insaaf, pg. 323, Tr. No. 296; Munaar
al-Huda, pg. 369.

[^11]: Al-Amaali of Saduq (a.r.), Majlis No. 91, Tr. No. 10; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 232, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 15.

[^12]: Meah Manqebah, pg. 71, Manqebah No. 41; Al-Yaqeen, pg. 60; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 263, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 84.

[^13]: Al-Ikhtesaas, pg. 223, Chap. 71; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg.
370, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 234.

[^14]: Al-Ghaibah of No’maani, pg. 92, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 23; Al-Ghaibah
of Shaikh Tusi (a.r.), pg. 135, Tr. No. 99; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36,
pg. 259, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 78 and pg. 281, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 101.

[^15]: Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 485, Chap. 93; Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1,
pg. 254, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 4; Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1, pg.
262, Chap. 22, Tr. No. 22; Elal al-Sharaae, pg. 13; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 26, pg. 335, Chap. 8, Tr. No. 1 and vol. 57, pg. 303, Chap. 39, Tr.
No. 16.

[^16]: Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 443, Chap. 76

[^17]: Kashf al-Astaar, pg. 109, Section 1 narrating from
Sharh-o-Ghaayah al-Ahkaam

[^18]: Rauz al-Jenaan, vol. 9, pg. 240 under the exegesis of Surah
Taubah, Verse 36

[^19]: Al-Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr al-Ashob, vol. 1, pg. 283

[^20]: Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 132, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 430 & pg.
313, Chap. 61, Tr. No. 563; Al-Manaaqeb by Ibn Shahr Aashob, vol. 1,
pg.209; Kamaal al-Deen, vol.1, pg. 280, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 28;
Oyoon-o-Akhabaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol.1, pg. 64, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 30;
Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 19, Chap. 1, Tr. No. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36,
pg. 286, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 50 & 108; Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 258
narrating from Mawaddah al-Qurbaa; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg.
110

[^21]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 29, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 291; Chap. 41, Tr. No. 114

[^22]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 34, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 10; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 293; Chap. 41, Tr. No. 121

[^23]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 20, Chap. 1, Tr. No. 5; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 287; Chap. 41, Tr. No. 109

[^24]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 86, Chap. 10, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 315, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 160; Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr Aashob,
vol. 4, pg. 46

[^25]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 91, Chap. 10, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 317, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 165

[^26]: Al Manqebah al Meah, 32nd Manqebah, pg. 59; Al-Istinsaar, pg. 21.

[^27]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 100, Chap. 13, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 319, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 17; Taarikh-e-Baghdad, vol. 11, pg.
112, Tr. No. 5805 and vol. 13, pg. 122, Tr. No. 7106; Kanz al-Ummaal,
vol. 13, pg. 153, Tr. No. 36478

[^28]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 101, Chap. 13, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 320, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 172.

[^29]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 93, Chap. 11, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 317, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 166.

[^30]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 106, Chap. 14, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 321, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 175.

[^31]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 124, Chap. 17, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 328, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 184.

[^32]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 134, Chap. 20, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 231, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 190

[^33]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 165, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 340, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 202; Al-Insaaf, pg. 140, Tr. No.
180.

[^34]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 170, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 341, Chap. 41, Tr. No.207; Al-Insaaf, pg. 304, Tr. No. 283

[^35]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 177, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 6; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 345, Chap. 41, Tr. No.212; Al-Insaaf, pg. 58, Tr. No. 48

[^36]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 183, Chap. 26, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 347, Chap. 41, Tr. No.215; Al-Seraah al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2,
pg. 122, Chap. 10, Section 4

[^37]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 184, Chap. 26, Tr. No. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 347, Chap. 41, Tr. No.216; Al-Insaaf, pg. 30, Tr. No. 26

[^38]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 194, Chap. 28, Tr. No. 2; Manaaqeb of Ibn
Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 296, Tr. No. 10; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36,
pg. 351, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 220

[^39]: Al-Amaali of Saduq (a.r.), pg. 116, 27th Majlis, Tr. No. 8;
Bashaarah al-Mustafa, pg. 24; Al-Nawaader, pg. 72, Chap. 41, Kitaab
al-Nabuwwah wa al-Imamah; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 227, Chap. 41,
Tr. No. 5; Mashaareq al-Anwaar al-Yaqeen, pg. 55 (briefly)

[^40]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 1; Kitaab al-Hujjah, pg. 529, Chap. 184, Tr. No.
4; Oyoon, vol. 1, pg. 47, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 8; Al-Khesaal, vol. 2, pg.
477, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 41; Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 270, Chap. 24,
Tr. No. 15; Al-Ghaibah by Shaikh Tusi, pg. 137, Tr. No. 101; Al-Ghaibah
by No’amaani, pg. 95, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 27; Al-Mo’tabar, pg. 4; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 231, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 13; Isbaat al-Hudaat,
vol. 1, pg. 456, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 75 and pg. 660, Tr. No. 848; Al-Waafi,
vol. 2, pg. 303, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 578; E’laam al-Waraa, pg. 154;
Al-Insaaf, pg. 165, Tr. No. 173; Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais, pg. 155 (1st
edn.) and pg. 231 (recent edn.); Hilyah al-Abraar, vol. 2, pg. 65, Chap.
17, Tr. No. 2; Kash al-Ghummah, vol. 2, pg. 508; Taqreeb al-Maarif, pg.
177; Miraat al-Oqool, vol. 6, pg. 216, Chap. 184, Tr. No. 4.

[^41]: Al-Yaqeen, Chap. 195, pg. 487-488; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, Chap.
10; Maraasid al-Irfaan, vol. 2, pg. 119, Sec. 3, Chap. 10.

[^42]: Al-Amaali of Shaikh Mufeed (r.a.), pg. 239, 25th Majlis, Tr. No.
4; Bashaarah al-Mustafa, pg. 48; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 271,
Chap. 41, Tr. No. 93.

[^43]: Al-Ghaibah by No’maani, pg. 81, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 11; Kitaab
Sulaym (recent edn.), pg. 123; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 277, Chap.
41, Tr. 97; Al-Insaaf, Tr. No. 177.

[^44]: Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais, pg. 140 (recent edn.); Al-Ghaibah by
No’maani, pg. 82, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 12; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg.
287, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 98; Al-Insaaf, Tr. No. 178; Mashaareq Anwaar
al-Yaqeen, pg. 191; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 657, Chap. 9, Sec. 71,
Tr. No. 840

[^45]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 241, Chap. 32, Tr. No. 7; Al-Insaaf, pg.
147, Tr. No. 142; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 46, pg. 232, Chap. 4, Tr. No.
9.

[^46]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 1, pg. 533, Chap. 184, Tr. No. 16; Oyoono Akhbaar
al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1, pg. 56, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 22; Al-Khesaal, vol. 2,
p. 478, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 25; Al-Irshaad, vol. 2, pg. 375, Chap. 59,Tr.
No.7; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 298, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 84; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 392, Chap. 45, Tr. No. 5; Al-Insaaf, Tr. No.
137; Al-Waafi, vol. 2, pg. 311, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 18, Mer’aat al-Oqool,
vol. 6, pg. 231, Chap. 16

[^47]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 233, Chap. 30, Tr. No. 1; Al-Insaaf, Tr.
No. 91; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 383, Chap. 43, Tr. No. 1.

[^48]: Kitaab Sulaym, pg. 8 (Old Edn.), pg. 70 (New Edn.); Kamaal
al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 262, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 10; Irshaad al-Quloob, vol.
2, pg. 276; Al-Insaaf, pg. 185, Tr. No.179.

[^49]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, pg.345, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 30; Al-Seraat
al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 134, Chap. 10, Sec. 5 narrating from Saaburi,
who asked Imam Sadeq (a.s.) concerning the verse, “….its root is firm
and its branch is in the sky.” (Surah Ibraheem (14): Verse 24), he
(a.s.) explained, “The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is its root, Ali (a.s.) is its
branch, Hasan and Husain are its fruits, the nine descendants (Imams)
are its twigs and the Shias are its leaves; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 24,
pg. 141, Chap. 44, Tr. No. 7.

[^50]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, pg. 358, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 57; Ma’ani
al-Akhbaar, pg. 126; Al-Khesaal, vol. 1, pg. 304, Chap. 5, Tr. No. 84;
Yanaabi al-Mawaddah,; Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 283;
Irshaad al-Quloob, vol. 2, pg. 280; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 358,
Tr. No. 178, Chap. 9 and vol. 3, pg. 84, Sec. 53, Tr. No. 783; Majma’
al-Bayaan from Kitaab al-Noboovat of Shaikh Sadooq (a.r.), vol. 1, pg.
200; Noor al-Saqalain, vol. 1, pg. 57, Tr. No. 145 and vol. 4, pg. 597,
Tr. No. 27; Taveel al-Ayaat al-Zaaherah, pg. 82, Tr. No. 57 and pg. 541;
Tafseer al-Saafi, vol. 1, pg. 138 and vol. 2, pg. 526.

[^51]: Surah Baqarah (2): Verse 124

[^52]: Surah Zukhruf (43): Verse 28

[^53]: Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 1, pg. 312, Simt I, Chap. 58, Tr. No.
250; Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 274, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 25; Al-Ghadeer,
vol. 1, pg. 163; Al-Ehtejaaj, pg. 145; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3, pg. 7,
Sec. 28, Tr. No. 596.

[^54]: Some ignoramuses don’t accept such quotes concerning about Umar
thinking that such a behavior is tantamount to the rejection of Allah’s
and His Messenger’s commands and prohibitions. Such defense shows the
lack of knowledge concerning Umar’s psychology and attitude. It should
be borne in mind that such defense holds no water considering Umar’s
past history of questioning the policies and decisions of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) on numerous occasions. He was the one who had objected to the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) during the Treaty of Hudaibiyyah, concerning the
Mut’ah of Hajj and when he (s.a.w.a.) had asked, ‘Bring me a pen and
paper that I may write for you by which you will never be led astray.’
On this, Umar passed a remark, which I cannot reproduce out of shame in
front of Allah, His Messenger and his Ummah. Such rude and undesirable
behaviour was not displayed by any of the companions of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) with the exceptions of people like Haarith Ibn No’man Fehri
(may Allah curse him and his ilk).

[^55]: Kitaab-o-Sulaym, pg. 171 (recent edn.)

[^56]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 18, Tr. No. 13; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 25,
pg. 185, Chap. 5, Tr. No. 6.

[^57]: Al-Masaael al-Jaarudiyah, pg. 7.

[^58]: Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 658, Chap. 9, Sec. 71, Tr. No. 844;
Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais (recent edn.), pg. 186.

[^59]: Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais, (recent edn.), pg. 227; Isbaat al-Hudaat,
vol. 1, pg. 659, Chap. 9, Sec. 71, Tr. No. 846.

[^60]: Isbaat al-Hudaat narrating from Al-Arbaeen by Muhammad Taahir
Al-Qummi, vol. 1, pg. 728, Chap. 9, Sec. 34, Tr. No. 234.

[^61]: Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 730, Chap. 9, Sec. 36, Tr. No. 251.

[^62]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 257, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 2; Kefaayah
al-Asar, pg. 110, Chap. 10, Tr. No. 1; Irshaad al-Quloob, vol. 2, pg.
272; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 282, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 105;
Al-Insaaf, pg. 155, Tr. No. 155; Munaar al-Huda, pg. 368.

[^63]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 23, Chap. 2, Tr. No. 1; Al-Manaaqeb by Ibn
Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 295, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg.
282, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 104; Al-Insaaf, pg. 153, Tr. No. 151.

[^64]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 28, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 1; Al-Manaaqeb by Ibn
Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 295, Tr. No. 3; Al-Insaaf, pg. 231, Tr. No.
222; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 290, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 113.

[^65]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 30, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 291, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 115; Al-Insaaf, pg. 230, Tr. No.
223.

[^66]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 30, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 291, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 116; Al-Insaaf, pg. 230, Tr. No.
224.

[^67]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 31, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 5; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 292, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 117; Al-Insaaf, pg. 158, Tr. No.
161.

[^68]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 31, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 6; Al-Insaaf, pg. 231,
Tr. No. 225; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 292, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 118.

[^69]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 32, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 8; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 292, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 119.

[^70]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 38, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 293, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 123

[^71]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 44, Chap. 5, Tr. No. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 304, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 143

[^72]: Maqtal al-Husain by Khwaarazmi, vol. 1, pg. 146, Sec. 7; Meah
Manqebah, pg. 124, the 58th Manqebah; Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 45, Chap. 5,
Tr. No. 5; Kamaal al-Deen, vol.1, pg.262, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 9;
Al-Khesaal, vol. 2, pg. 475, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 38; Al-Oyoon, vol. 1, pg.
52, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 17; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 43, pg. 295, Chap. 12,
Tr. No. 56; Al-Awaalem, vol. 17, pg. 73, Chap. 7, Tr. No. 1; Hilyah
al-Abraar, vol. 2, pg. 720, Tr. No. 128; Al-Insaaf, pg. 164, Tr. No.
172; Munaar al-Huda, pg. 370.

[^73]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 47, Chap. 5, Tr. No. 6; Manaaqeb of Ibn
Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 295, Tr. No. 6; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg.
290, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 112; Al-Insaaf, pg. 36, Tr. No. 38

[^74]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 65, Chap. 7, Tr. No. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 308, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 147; Al-Insaaf, pg. 149, Tr. No. 144

[^75]: Surah Ahzaab (33): Verse 33

[^76]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 95, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 317, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 167; Al-Insaaf, pg. 264, Tr. No. 248

[^77]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 98, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 5; Al-Insaaf, pg.
265, Tr. No. 249; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 319, Chap. 41, Tr. No.
170; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 116, Chap. 10, Sec. 4.

[^78]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 172, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 3; Al-Insaaf, pg.
328, Tr. No. 303; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 342, Chap. 41, Tr. No.
208; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 129, Chap. 10, Sec. 4

[^79]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 176, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 5; Al-Insaaf, pg.
221, Tr. No. 213; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 344, Chap. 41, Tr. No.
210; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 130, Chap. 10, Sec. 4.

[^80]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 193, Chap. 28, Tr. No. 1; Al-Insaaf, pg.
152, Tr. No. 150; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 350, Chap. 41, Tr. No.
219; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 123, Chap. 10, Sec. 3.

[^81]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 196, Chap. 28, Tr. No. 5; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 352, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 222; Al-Insaaf, pg. 330, Tr. No.
304.

[^82]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 197,Chap. 28, Tr. No. 7; Al-Insaaf, pg.
290, Tr. No. 263; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 352, Chap. 41, Tr. No.
224; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 123, Chap. 10, Sec. 3.

[^83]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 256, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 1; Al-Amaali,
7th Majlis, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 226, Chap. 41, Tr.
Nos. 2 & 3; Al-Insaaf, pg. 213, Tr. No. 210; Rauzah al-Waaezeen, vol. 1,
pg. 100, Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 115, Chap. 10, Sec. 3;
Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3, pg. 25, Sec. 35, Tr. No. 8645; Mashaareqo
Anwaar al-Yaqeen, pg. 56; Munaar al-Huda, pg. 367.

[^84]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 261, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 8;
Al-Ehtejaaj, pg. 69; Al-Insaaf, pg. 241, Tr. No. 232; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 246, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 59.

[^85]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 259, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 5; Al-Insaaf,
pg. 280, Tr. No. 257; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 379, Chap. 9, Tr.
No. 216; Qasas al-Anbiyaa, pg. 266, Sec. 16, Tr. No. 439; Munaar
al-Huda, pg. 369

[^86]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 260, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 6; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 254, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 70; Al-Insaaf, pg. 131,
Tr. No. 120; Munaar al-Huda, pg. 370

[^87]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 261, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 7; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 26, pg. 342, Chap. 8, Tr. No. 13 & vol. 36, pg. 255,
Chap. 41, Tr. No. 71; Al-Insaaf, pg. 132, Tr. No. 121; Munaar al-Huda,
pg. 370.

[^88]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 269, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 12; Dalaael
al-Imaamah, pg. 237; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 255, Chap. 41, Tr.
No. 72; Al-Insaaf, pg. 53, Tr. No. 43; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg.
654, Sec. 67, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 823 narrating from the “Book of Virtues”
by Husain Ibn Hamdaan.

[^89]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 281, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 32; Dalaael
al-Imaamah, pg. 240; Al-Ghaibah by No’maani, pg. 67, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 7;
Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Tusi (a.r.), pg. 140, Tr. No. 107; Isbaat
al-Wasiyyah, pg. 251; Al-Mo’tabar, pg. 24; Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 9, Tr.
No. 9; Taqreeb al-Maarif, pg. 176; Al-Mohtazar, pg. 159; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 25, pg. 363, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 22 & vol. 36, pg. 256,
Chap. 41, Tr. No. 74 & pg. 260, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 80 & pg. 372, Tr. No.
234.

[^90]: Al-Ikhtesaas, pg. 207; Kefaay al-Asar, pg. 45, Chap. 5, Tr. No.
5; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, pg. 508; Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 492,
Chap. 94; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3, pg. 64, Sec. 42, Tr. No. 745.

[^91]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 299, Chap. 40, Tr. No. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 360, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 231; Al-Insaaf, pg. 59, Tr. No. 49.

[^92]: Kefaayah al-Mahdi, pg. 82, Tr. No. 16; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3,
pg. 95, Chap. 9, Sec. 60, Tr. No. 812 narrating from the book of Isbaat
al-Raj’ah of Fazl Ibn Shaazaan; Oyoon-o-Akhbaar al-Reza, vol. 1, pg. 57,
Chap. 6, Tr. No. 25; Kamaal al-Deen, pg. 240; Maani al-Akhbaar, pg. 90
The chapter of the meaning of Saqalain and Etrat, Tr. No. 4; Isbaat
al-Hudaat, vol. 6, pg. 326, Chap. 9, Sec.4, Tr. No. 125; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 373, Chap. 42, Tr. No. 2; E’laam al-Waraa, pg.
375, Sec. 2; Al-Insaaf, pg. 260, Tr. No. 244.

[^93]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 250, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 5; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 358, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 228; Al-Insaaf, pg. 81, Tr. No. 74;
Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 132, Chap. 10, Sec. 4.

[^94]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 1, pg. 533, Chap. 184, Tr. No. 15; Al-Ghaibah by
No’maani, pg. 94, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 25; Al-Khesaal, vol. 1, pg. 419,
Chapter of Nine, Tr. No. 12 and vol. 2, pg. 80, Chapter of Twelve, Tr.
No. 50; Al-Ghaibah by Shaikh Tusi, pg. 140, Tr. No. 104; Al-Irshaad,
vol. 2, pg. 348, Chap. 59, Tr. No. 6; Al-Waafi, vol. 2, pg. 310, Chap.
31, Tr. No. 767/14; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, pg. 448; Manaaqeb of Ibn
Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 296; Dalaael al-Imamah, pg. 240; Isbaat
al-Wasiyyah, pg. 203; Al-Insaaf, pg. 20, Tr. No. 13; Al-Istinsaar, pg.
170; Taqreeb al-Maarif, pg. 183; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 460,
Chap. 9, Tr. No. 83 and pg. 533, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 312; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 392, Chap. 45, Tr. No. 3.

[^95]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, pg. 350, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 45; Al-Seraat
al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 134, Chap. 10, Sec. 4; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol.
36, pg. 391, Chap. 46, Tr. No. 5; Al-Insaaf, pg. 29, Tr. No. 24; Isbaat
al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 518, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 258.

[^96]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 8 & 9, Tr. No. 7; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol.
36, pg. 372 under tradition 234; Nafas al-Rahmaan, pg. 94.

[^97]: Kashf al-Yaqeen, pg. 118; Irshaad al-Quloob, vol. 2, pg. 33.

[^98]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 9, Tr. No. 8; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol.
2, pg. 120, Chap. 10.

[^99]: Al-Nukat al-Eteqadiyyah, pg. 35; al-Etemaad Fi Sharhe Risaalah
Wajib al-Eteqaad, pg. 397.

[^100]: Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 132, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 431;
Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 11, Chap. 1, Tr. No. 2; Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg.
440, Chap. 76, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 3, pg. 303 & vol. 36,
pg. 283, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 101; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 138, Chap. 1,
Tr. No. 78; Al-Insaaf, pg. 276, Tr. No. 255.

[^101]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 16, Chap. 1, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 285, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 107; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 140,
Chap. 1, Tr. No. 79; Al-Insaaf, pg. 202, Tr. No. 202.

[^102]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 40, Chap. 5, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 289, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 111; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 144,
Chap. 1, Tr. No. 83; Al-Insaaf, pg. 261, Tr. No. 246.

[^103]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 253, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 3; Yanaabi
al-Mawaddah, pg. 494, Chap. 94; Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 53, Chap. 7, Tr.
No. 1; Al-Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr Aashob, vol. 1, pg. 282 narrating from
the Tafseer of Jaaber al-Jo’fi from Jaaber al-Ansaari; E’laam al-Waraa,
pg. 397; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 11; Tafseer Rauz al-Jenaan, vol. 3,
pg. 423; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 23, pg. 289, Chap. 17, Tr. No. 16 & vol.
36, pg. 249, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 67; Al-Insaaf, pg. 114, Tr. No. 107;
Kefaayah al-Mohtadi, pg. 56, Tr. No. 5; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 278;
Ta’veel al-Ayaat al-Zaaherah, pg. 141; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, pg.
509; Tafseer al-Saafi, vol. 1, pg. 366; Ilzaam al-Naaseb, vol. 1, pg.
54; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, pg. 143, Chap. 10, Sec. 21; Tafseer Noor
al-Saqlain, vol. 1, pg. 414, Tr. No. 331; Tafseer Kanz al-Daqaaeq, vol.
2, pg. 393; Reyaaz al-Saalekeen, vol. 5, pg. 173, Rauzah No. 34.

[^104]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 61, Chap. 7, Tr. No. 3; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 306, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 145; Al-Insaaf, pg. 162, Tr. No.
168.

[^105]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 69, Chap. 8, Tr. No. 2; Irshaad al-Quloob,
pg. 272; Al-Insaaf, pg. 317, Tr. No. 291; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg.
301, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 140.

[^106]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 74, Chap. 8, Tr. No. 4; Behaar
al-Anwaar,vol. 36, pg. 310, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 151; Al-Insaaf, pg. 320,
Tr. No. 292.

[^107]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 81, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 2; Behaar al-Anwaar,
vol. 36, pg. 312, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 158; Al-Insaaf, pg. 210, Tr. No.
208.

[^108]: Imam Muhammad al-Baqer (a.s.)

[^109]: Imam Ja’far al-Sadeq (a.s.)

[^110]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 105; Al-Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr Aashob, vol.
1, pg. 296, Tr. No. 11; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 321, Chap. 41,
Tr. No. 174; Al-Insaaf, pg. 97, Tr. No. 83.

[^111]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 114, Chap. 16, Tr. No. 2; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 324, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 182.

[^112]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 136, Chap. 21, Tr. No. 1; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 331, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 191; Al-Insaaf, pg. 97,
Tr. No. 84.

[^113]: lit.: crop – Tr.

[^114]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 258, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 3; Kefaayah
al-Asar, pg. 143, Chap. 22, Tr. No. 1; E’laam al-Waraa, pg. 4, Section
2; Al-Ehtejaaj, vol. 1, pg. 68; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 251,
Chap. 41, Tr. No. 68; Qasas al-Anbiyaa, pg. 368, Section 17, Tr. No.
440; Munaar al-Huda, pg. 368; Al-Insaaf, pg. 238, Tr. No. 230.

[^115]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 146, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 3; Al-Insaaf, pg.
84, Tr. No. 76; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 333, Chap. 41, Tr. No.
195.

[^116]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 152, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 5; Kamaal al-Deen,
vol. 1, pg. 252, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 2; Oyoon-o-Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.),
vol. 1, pg. 58, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 27; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 245,
Chap. 41, Tr. No. 58; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 327, Chap. 9, Tr.
No. 126; Ghaayah al-Maraam, pg. 142, Tr. No. 3; Al-Insaaf, pg. 299, Tr.
No. 277

[^117]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 155, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 9; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 366, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 199; Al-Insaaf, pg. 258,
Tr. No. 242.

[^118]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 162 – 165, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 2; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 238-240, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 201; Al-Insaaf, pg.
125-127, Tr. No. 115.

[^119]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 31, Tr. No. 21; Kanz al-Fawaaed, pg. 256;
Kitaab al-Arbaeen of Allamah Majlisi (a.r.), pg. 239, under the
discussion of Tr. No. 20; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 15, pg. 241, Chap. 2,
Tr. No. 60; vol. 18, pg. 293, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 2; Vol. 26, pg. 298,
Chap. 6, Tr. No. 65; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3, Chap. 9, Section 62, Tr.
No. 818.

[^120]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 166, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 5; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 340, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 204; Al-Insaaf, pg. 34,
Tr. No. 34.

[^121]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 169, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 1; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 341, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 206; Al-Insaaf, pg. 222,
Tr. No. 212.

[^122]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 175, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 4; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 343, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 209; Al-Insaaf, pg. 101,
Tr. No. 88.

[^123]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 177, Chap. 25, Tr. No. 6; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 345, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 211; Al-Insaaf, pg. 229,
Tr. No. 221.

[^124]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 185, Chap. 26, Tr. No. 5; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 348, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 217; Al-Insaaf, pg. 31,
Tr. No. 270.

[^125]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 195, Chap. 28, Tr. No. 3; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 351, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 221; Al-Insaaf, pg. 191,
Tr. No. 188.

[^126]: Al-Fazaael, pg. 158; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 213-214,
Chap. 40, Tr. No. 15; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 417, Section 7,
Chap. 9, Tr. No. 278.

[^127]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 10, Tr. No. 10; Al-Ghaibah, pg. 147, Tr.
No. 109; Maqtal al-Husain by Khwaarazmi, vol. 1, Section 6, pg. 95;
Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 319, Tr. No. 571; Meah Manqebah, pg. 37;
Kefaayah al-Mahdi, pg. 60, Tr. No. 7; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 283;
Al-Taraaef, pg. 172, Tr. No. 270; Yanaabi al-Mawaddah, pg. 486, Chap. 93
& pg. 261, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 82; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 35-38,
Section 1, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 216-217, Chap. 40,
Tr. No. 18; Tafseer al-Furaat, pg. 5; Al-Insaaf, pg. 62, Tr. No. 56;
Ghaayah al-Maraam, pg. 695, Tr. No. 27 and many more books other than
what we have hinted at.

[^128]: Al-Manaqeb, vol. 1, pg. 292, Chap. Of what the sunnis have
narrated; Meah Manqebah, pg. 24; Behaar al-Anwaar,vol. 36, pg. 270,
Chap. 41, Tr. No. 91; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 150; Tabyeen
al-Mahajjah, pg. 243; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3, pg. 222, Chap. 9,
Section 27, Tr. No. 210; Al-Istinsaar, pg. 22; Al-Awaalem, vol. 153, pg.
134, Tr. No. 68.

[^129]: Meah Manqebah, pg. 23; Maqtal al-Husain, vol. 1, pg. 95, Section
6, Al-Manaqeb, vol. 1, pg. 292; Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 321,
Section 61, Tr. No. 572; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. pg. 150,
Chap. 10, Section 4; Kashf al-Astaar, pg. 110; Al-Taraaef, pg. 273, Tr.
NO. 271; Al-Najm al-Saaqeb, Chap. 50; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 134,
Tr. No. 69; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 26, pg. 316, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 80;
Al-Istinsaar, pg. 23; Al-Insaaf, pg. 14, Tr. No. 10; Ghayah al-Maraam,
Chap. 141, Tr. No. 2.

[^130]: Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Toosi, pg. 136, Tr. No. 100; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 258, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 77; Al-Manaaqeb, vol. 1,
pg. 293; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 460, Section 17, Chap. 9, Tr. No.
372 & vol. 3, pg. 224, Section 27, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 213.

[^131]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 23, Tr. No. 15; Al-Ghaibah of No’maani,
pg. 93, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 24; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 222, Chap.
40, Tr. No. 21; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 42, Tr. No. 8; Tabyeen
al-Mahajjah, pg. 286; Al-Insaaf, pg. 113, Tr. No. 106.

[^132]: Al-Arbaeen, Tr. No. 4; Al-Abaqaat, vol. 12, pg. 253, Tr. No. 2;
Kashf al-Astaar, pg. 60; Al-Fazaael, pg. 116; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36,
pg. 296, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 125.

[^133]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 213, Chap. 29, Tr. No. 1; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 354, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 225; Al-Insaaf, pg. 232,
Tr. No. 227; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 310, Tr. No. 20.

[^134]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 232, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 2; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 384, Chap. 43, Tr. No. 5; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah,
pg. 331, Tr. No. 27; Al-Insaaf, pg. 326, Tr. No. 301; Al-Awaalem, vol.
15/3, pg. 256, Chap. 214.

[^135]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 244, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 1; Al-Awaalem, vol.
15/3, pg. 262, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 1; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 390,
Chap. 45, Tr. No. 1; Al-Insaaf, pg. 259, Tr. No. 243.

[^136]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 248, Chap. 3, Tr. No. 4; Al-Insaaf, pg.
270, Tr. No. 254; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 390, Chap. 5, Tr. No.
2; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 262, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 2; Tabyeen
Al-Mahajjah, pg. 329, Tr. No. 26.

[^137]: The thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth of every month are
called as ‘Ayyam-e-Beez’. Apparently, Imam (a.s.) has hinted that
recitation of poems on these days are abominable (makrooh).

[^138]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 246, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 3; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 357, Chap. 41, Tr. No. 226; Al-Muhajjah, pg.
198, Verse 83, Tr. No. 1; Tabyeen Al-Mahajjah, pg. 287; Al-Awaalem, vol.
15/3, pg. 233, Tr. No. 223; Al-Insaaf, pg. 117, Tr. No. 108.

[^139]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 255, Chap. 34, Tr. No. 1; Al-Awaalem, vol.
15/3, pg. 278, Tr. No. 16; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 403, Chap. 46,
Tr. No. 15; Al-Insaaf, pg. 330, Tr. No. 105; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg.
348, Tr. No. 36.

[^140]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 256, Chap. 34, Tr. No. 2; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 406, Chap. 46, Tr. No. 16; Al-Awaalem, vol.
15/3, pg. 281, Tr. No. 18; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 334; Al-Insaaf, pg.
313, Tr. No. 288.

[^141]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, pg. 336, Chap. 33, Tr. No. 9;
Al-Khesaal, vol. 2, pg. 478, Chap. 12, Tr. No. 46; Al-Oyoon, vol. 1, pg.
54, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 20; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 396, Chap. 46,
Tr. No. 2; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 270, Tr. No. 2; Al-Insaaf, pg.
109, Tr. No. 103; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 346, Tr. No. 35.

[^142]: Amaali al-Sadooq, pg. 302, Majlis 54, Tr. No. 24; Kamaal
al-Deen, vol. 2, pg. 379, Chap. 37, Tr. No. 1; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3,
pg. 294, Chap. 11, Tr. No. 1; Al-Tawheed, pg. 81, Chap. 2, Tr. No. 37;
Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 286, Chap. 38, Tr. No. 1; E’laam al-Waraa, pg.
436; Chap. 2, Section 2; Kefaayah al-Muhtadi, pg. 101, Tr. No. 27;
Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 3, pg. 268, Chap. 10, Tr. No. 4 & vol. 36, pg.
412, Chap. 47, Tr. No. 2 & vol. 66, pg. 1, Chap. 28, Tr. No. 1;
Al-Insaaf, pg. 219, Tr. No. 212; Sifaat al-Shia, pg. 90, Tr. No. 68;
Rawzah al-Waaezin, vol. 1, pg. 31; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, pg. 525;
Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 542, Chap. 9, Section 13, Tr. No. 354.

[^143]: Philosophical term for the Arabic equivalent of ‘aradh’.

[^144]: Al-Khesaal, vol. 2, pg. 395, Chap. 7, Tr. No. 102; Kamaal
al-Deen, vol. 2, pg. 382, Chap. 37, Tr. No. 9; Ma’ani al-Akhbaar, pg.
123; Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 289, Chap. 38, Tr. No. 3; Jamaal al-Usboo’,
pg. 25, Section 3, Tr. No. 1; E’laam al-Waraa, pg. 437, Section 2;
Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 24, pg. 238, Chap. 60, Tr. No. 1, & vol. 36, pg.
412, Chap. 47, Tr. No. 3, & vol. 56, pg. 20, Chap. 15, Tr. No. 3; Rawzah
al-Waaezin, vol. 2, pg. 392; Al-Manaaqeb, vol. 1, pg. 308; Isbaat
al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 491, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 177; Al-Insaaf, pg. 200,
Tr. No. 201.

[^145]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 300, Tr. No. 10; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol.
46, pg. 198, Chap. 11, Tr. No. 72; Tanqeeh al-Maqaal, vol. 2, pg. 470;
Al-Insaaf, pg. 324, Tr. No. 298.

[^146]: Zaid Ibn Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.).

[^147]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 264, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 11; Al-Oyoon,
vol. 1, pg. 59, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 29; Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 1, pg.
155, Chap. 35, Tr. No. 447; Al-Insaaf, pg. 243, Tr. No. 233; Qasas
al-Anbiyaa, pg. 361, Section 1, Tr. No. 437; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36,
pg. 204, Chap. 40, Tr. No. 8; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 477, Chap.
9, Tr. No. 128; Ilzaam al-Naaseb, vol. 1, pg. 201; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah,
pg. 266, Tr. No. 4; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 58.

[^148]: A state in modern Iran.

[^149]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 282, Chap. 24, Tr. No. 36; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 42, pg. 248, Chap. 11, Tr. No. 24; Al-Awaalem, vol. 17,
pg. 15, Chap. 2, Tr. No. 5; Al-Insaaf, pg. 276, Tr. No. 256.

[^150]: Kefaayah al-Asar, pg. 262, Chap. 34, Tr. No. 5; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 409, Chap. 46, Tr. No. 18, & vol. 52, pg. 303,
Chap. 26, Tr. No. 72; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 269, Chap. 7, Tr. No.
1; Al-Insaaf, pg. 231, Tr. No. 226; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 333, Tr.
No. 29; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 603, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 587.

[^151]: Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1, pg 41, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 2;
Al-Kaafi, vol. 1, pg. 527, Chap. 184, Tr. No. 3; Miraat al-Oqool, vol.
6, pg. 210; Faraaed al-Simtain, vol. 2, pg. 136; Taqreeb al-Maarif, pg.
178; Al-Waafi, vol. 2, pg 296, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 755/1; Al-Ikhtesaas,
pg. 210; Mashaareqo Anwaar al-Yaqeen, pg. 103; Al-Manaaqeb of Ibn Shahr
Ashob, vol. 1, pg. 296; Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 308, Chap. 28, Tr.
No. 1; al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Tusi (r.a.), pg. 143, Tr. No. 108;
Al-Ghaibah of No’maani, pg. 62, Chap. 4, Tr. No. 5; E’laam al-Waraa, pg.
4, Section 2; Irshaad al-Quloob, vol. 2, pg. 108; Al-Ehtejaaj, pg. 67;
Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 195, Chap. 40, Tr. No. 3; Tafseer
al-Burhaan, vol. 2, pg. 123, Tr. No. 6; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg.
285, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 73; Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 137, Chap.
10; Isbaat al-Wasiyyah, pg. 29, Tr. No. 5; Al-Hidaayah, the Chapter of
Twelve Imams (a.s.), Tr. No. 5; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 68, Tr. No.
6; Al-Insaaf, pg. 21, Tr. No. 17; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 271; Tr. No.
5; Ilzaam al-Naaseb, vol. 1, pg. 213; Taaweel al-Aayaat al-Zaaherah, pg.
210.

[^152]: A title of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).

[^153]: Ma’moon al-Abbasi.

[^154]: Implying Prophet Zulqarnain (a.s.) as he was the one who had
built the city of Khorasan during his rule.

[^155]: Muqtazab al-Asar, pg. 6, Tr. No. 6; Dalaael al-Imaamah, pg. 237,
Tr. No. 11; Misbaah al-Shariah, pg. 46, Chap. 68-69; Al-Mohtazar, pg.
106; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, pg. 142, Chap. 29, Tr. No. 162;
Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 142, Chap. 10, Section 1, Tr. No. 2;
Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 708, Section 18, Tr. No. 145.

[^156]: Dalaael al-Imaamah, pg. 254, Tr. No. 53; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol.
1, pg. 655, Chap. 9, Section 69, Tr. No. 835 & vol. 1, pg. 724, Chap. 9,
Section 27, Tr. No. 211.

[^157]: Literally, Raafezi means one who discards and abandons religion.
– Translator.

[^158]: Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Toosi, pg. 149, Tr. No. 110; Al-Manaaqeb of
Ibn Shahr Ashob, vol. 1, pg. 284; Noor al-Saqalain, vol. 2, pg. 215, Tr.
No. 140; Al-Mahajjah, pg. 93, Chap. 24; Al-Burhaan, vol. 2, pg. 123, Tr.
No. 5 in the exegesis of Surah Taubah (9): Verse 36; Isbaat al-Hudaat,
vol. 1, pg. 549, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 375; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 24, pg.
240, Chap. 60, Tr. No. 2.

[^159]: Literally, Horom is the pl. of Haraam which means prohibited.

[^160]: Taweel al-Aayaat al-Zaaherah, pg. 485 under surah saaffaat (37):
Verse 83; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 151, Chap. 39, Tr. No. 131;
Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 3, pg. 85, Chap. 9, Section 53, Tr. No. 787;
Al-Mahajjah, pg. 181, Chap. 70, Tr. No. 1.

[^161]: In the second rakat of each prayer.

[^162]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 1, pg. 525, Chap. 184, Tr. No. 1; Al-Waafi, vol.
2, pg. 299, Chap. 31, Tr. No. 756/2; Al-Ghaibah of No’maani, pg. 58,
Chap. 4, Tr. No. 2; Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 313, Chap. 29, Tr. No.
1; Al-Oyoon, vol. 1, pg. 65, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 35; Elal al-Sharaae, pg.
96, Chap. 85, Tr. No. 6; Tafseer al-Qummi, vol. 2, pg. 44; Al-Ehtejaaj,
pg. 266; Al-Ghaibah of Shaikh Toosi, pg. 154, Tr. No. 124; Isbaat
al-Wasiyyah, pg. 121; Dalaael al-Imaamah, pg. 69, Tr. No. 21; Taqreeb
al-Maaref, pg. 177; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 414, Chap. 48, Tr.
No. 1 and Vol. 58, pg. 36, Chap. 42, Tr. No. 8 and pg. 39, Tr. No. 9;
Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 283, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 72; Al-Mahaasin, pg.
332; Hilyah al-Abraar, vol. 1, pg. 510, Chap. 6, Tr. No. 1;
Al-Istinsaar, pg. 31; Al-Insaaf, pg. 90, Tr. No. 81.

[^163]: ManLaa Yahzoroh al-Faqih, vol. 1, pg. 329, Tr. No. 1; Al-Kaafi,
vol. 3, pg. 325, Chap. 191, Tr. No. 17; Al-Tahzeeb, vol. 2, pg. 110,
Chap. 7, Tr. No. 416/184; Mishbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 168; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 83, pg. 235, Tr. No. 59; Lawaame’ of Sahebqaraani, vol.
4, pg. 176; Rawzah al-Muttaqeen, vol. 2, pg. 382.

[^164]: Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 1, pg. 58, Chap. 6, Tr. No.
27; Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, pg. 252, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 2; Kefaayah
al-Asar, pg. 152, Chap. 23, Tr. No. 5; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg.
326, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 126; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, pg. 245, Chap. 41,
Tr. No. 58; Al-Muhtazar, pg. 90; Tabyeen al-Mahajjah, pg. 283, Tr. No.
10; Al-Insaaf, pg. 299, Tr. No. 277; Al-Awaalem, vol. 15/3, pg. 44, Tr.
No. 9.

[^165]: Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.), vol. 2, pg. 121, Chap. 35, Tr. No.
1 and 3; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 10, pg. 352, Chap. 20, Tr. No. 1; Isbaat
al-Hudaat, vol. 2, pg. 354, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 157.

[^166]: Surah Fusselat (41): Verse 42.

[^167]: Kefaayah al-Mahdi, pg. 10, Tr. No. 1; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 2,
pg. 541, Section 14, Chap. 9, Tr. No. 357 and 358 narrating from
Al-Eteqaadaat of Shaikh Saduq (a.r.).

[^168]: Misbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 49.

[^169]: Misbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 145.

[^170]: Misbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 228.

[^171]: In Khorasan province in Iran, popularly known as Mashhad. –
Translator.

[^172]: Mohij al-Da’waat.

[^173]: Misbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 236.

[^174]: Jamaal al-Usboo’, pg. 165, Section 5.

[^175]: Al-Iqbaal, pg. 47.

[^176]: Al-Iqbaal, pg. 145.

[^177]: Misbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 211.

[^178]: Kefaayah al-Mahdi, pg. 55, Tr. No. 4; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1,
pg. 651, Chap. 9, Section 60, Tr. No. 810.

[^179]: Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem, vol. 2, pg. 151, Chap. 10, Section 4;
Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1, pg. 722, Section 27, Tr. No. 213.

[^180]: Kefaayah al-Mahdi, pg. 69, Tr. No. 10; Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 1,
pg. 651, Chap. 9, Section 60, Tr. No. 811.

[^181]: Kefaayah al-Mohtadi, pg. 8, Tr. No. 15; Kashf al-Haqq (famous as
al-Arbaeen of Khatoonabaadi), pg. 110, Tr. No. 17.

[^182]: Misbaah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 231.


