Appendix To Chapter Two: Who Are The Twelve Caliphs?
====================================================

Evidently, the greatest duty of every Muslim is the recognition and
knowledge of the established facts of the Holy Quran and the Sunnah, and
to learn them with maximum reflection and thorough study. Also, one must
seek from these two, guidance towards the goals of the strong religion
and the straight path of Allah. For, these only are the guides that
mankind needs to achieve bliss and success in his intellectual,
religious, ethical, social and political life.

Moreover, from the most important responsibilities of a researcher of
traditions that establish the caliphate of the twelve caliphs is to
indulge in deep deliberation over these that he may recognize the twelve
caliphs, whose caliphate and Imamat has been documented in these
traditions that surpass consecutivity. He must ask himself the following
questions:

Who are they?

Who are these caliphs?

What did the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) intend through these quotes?

With whom are these traditions compatible?

Why are the caliphs restricted to this number? And so on and so forth.

It is not proper for the one who studies these traditions to be content
with their reading and interpretation, and then moving on to the next
tradition. It is also not correct for him to simply glance through them
as this would lead to negligence in his learning. Yes, it is obligatory
on him to stop at them and not to simply speed through them that he
recognizes their purpose in detail and with certainty. For, being
careless and negligent towards them is tantamount to carelessness and
negligence towards the sayings of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), in
whose reverence Allah, Blessed and High be He, declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَنطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوَى. إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا وَحْيٌ يُوحَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed***. (Qur’an Surah Najm 53: 4-5.)

Here, in this treatise, in the company of our thoughtful, researching,
learning and cultured readers, we shall place these traditions before us
and investigate in it. We will also keep as standard the views that have
been expressed earlier concerning them.

It should also be known that the aforementioned traditions are not in
need of external or whimsical explanations because some of these explain
the others and make the researcher needless of interpretation from other
than these traditions.

A group of these traditions establishes that the first of them is
Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the last of them is the
Mahdi (a.s.).

Another group proves that the first of them is Ali (a.s.), the second
Hasan (a.s.), the third Husain (a.s.) and the remaining nine are from
the progeny of Husain (a.s.).

Yet another batch establishes that the ninth from the progeny of Husain
(a.s.), is the twelfth Imam, the Mahdi (a.s.).

A number of these traditions guide towards the names of the twelve
Imams, and introduction of their personalities.

There are numerous another traditions that explain, in brief or in
detail, tidings about the twelve Imams (a.s.).

Obviously, the wise and logical approach in comprehending the purpose of
these traditions is to derive their meanings and implications. The
weakness of the chain of narrators in a few of them shall not affect
their validity due to the strength and reliability of others. For, the
strong and reliable chains do away with the infirmness of the weak ones.
Often, we shall demonstrate this reality in the course of our
explanations, Inshallah.

Thereafter, we shall ponder on the group of traditions that establishes
that the number of Imams is twelve. With which Islamic sect is this
number compatible? Or, is compatibility found at all in any of the
sects? Or, shall we say, God forbid, that these traditions did not
actually occur in reality?

We say: Know that the discussion concerning this group of traditions is
divided into two levels:

First: The meanings and implications of these traditions.

Second: Determination of those on whom these traditions apply. In other
words, the recognition of the twelve caliphs along with their
personalities.

The First Level: The Meanings And Implications Of These Traditions
------------------------------------------------------------------

First: The number of the caliphs, who shall succeed the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) is confined to twelve. None can increase or decrease
any one of them. This is the gist of each one of these traditions.

Second: The endurance of the earth and its protection from disorder is
dependant on the survival of the Imams (a.s.).

Third: Non-termination of Islam before their (Imams a.s.) termination
i.e. the continuity of Islam depends on them. As long as even one of
them lives, Islam will continue to endure and prosper, which proves
their prolonged stay on the earth, even if it means the longevity of the
twelfth and the last one of them.

Fourth: Islam will continue to remain mighty and the devils will be
unable to erase it and destroy its effects as long as the twelve Imams
(a.s.) exist. Thus, it will always be mighty and lofty and none can
destroy it like the previous Divine laws and religions were ruined. For
example, the Shariah of Prophet Moosa (a.s.) and Prophet Eesa (a.s.), in
addition to being abrogated by the Shariah of Islam, were distorted in
principles and laws through occurrences, wars, Machiavellian politics,
manipulations, etc. Hence, whatever is presently available with the Jews
and the Christians is not the actual and original Shariah of Prophet
Moosa (a.s.) and Prophet Eesa (a.s.), particularly the principles of
religion and matters related to beliefs.

As for Islam, then indeed it has remained mighty, lofty and protected
from the distortions of the fanatics and the refutation of the deniers.
It will continue to be so till the reappearance of the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)
and the Day of Resurrection. For surely, Allah, the High, has placed it
in His fortified protection and appointed twelve Imams (a.s.) as guides
for it and those who will establish His command in all times till the
Day of Judgment.

The above point does not, by any means, contradict the domination of the
disbelievers over the Muslims in the past or in the present at some
times and in some places, because of their inability to destroy Islam.
The proof of this lies in the fact that Islam is still surviving even
after the passage of fourteen long centuries, notwithstanding its
enemies who with all their force, number and preparedness, were
unanimous in the destruction of Islam and weakening the Muslims with all
their material strength, military power and economic muscle. But their
conspiracies fail to extinguish the Light of Allah, the High. Nay, often
they dominated the Muslims apparently and ruled over their countries and
their wealth but miserably failed to prevent the seeds of this tree from
flowering. Nay, on a number of occasions, the prophecies of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) to his nation in the above traditions were
manifested, as also the promise of Allah to His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and
to the Muslims through His sayings like,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ لِيُطْفِؤُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَاللَّهُ
مُتِمُّ نُورِهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths but Allah
will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse. (***Qur’an
Surah Saff 61: 8.)

And He says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلاً كَلِمَةً طَيِّبَةً كَشَجَرةٍ طَيِّبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ
وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاء. تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ
رَبِّهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in
heaven, Yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its
Lord?*** (Qur’an Surah Ibraaheem 14: 24-25.)

Fifth: These traditions do not imply that the might of Islam will be
absolute and will not be achieved except through the rule of these Imams
(a.s.). Rather, they mean that Islam will continue to survive till they
survive, even if it does not enjoy the esteemed levels which it
deserves. Of course, absolute might will not actualize except in their
reign and during their apparent rule. This too will not materialize
through the governance of only one of them. When we talk of the might of
Islam, we mean the implementation of its laws throughout the universe, a
condition that will be achieved only gradually and during the governance
of the last of them.

Briefly, we are of the opinion that the might of Islam with some of its
levels shall survive, which will prevent the destruction of religion and
keep it preserved and protected, only through the twelve Imams (a.s.).
And only when its conditions are fulfilled through the government of the
twelfth Imam (a.t.f.s.) that absolute might will prevail. Allah, the
High, says

, **هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ**

***He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse. (***Qur’an Surah Taubah 9: 33.)

Sixth: Verily, the Imamat of these Imams (a.s.) will be in succession
and continuity uninterrupted. This reality can be easily deciphered from
the clear concepts of these traditions.

Here, there are a few important points that refer to the meanings of the
words, ‘Caliph’, ‘Imam’, and ‘Master’, which we shall state for
completing the discussion.

First

Raagheb Isfahaani, the renowned littérateur writes, ‘Caliphate means
representation of another, either due to the absence of the represented
one or due to his death or due to his inability or due to the eminence
of the representative. On account of the last mentioned meaning, Allah
has made His friends as His representatives in the earth.’[^1]

I say: Therefore, a Caliph is the representative of the other,
regardless of the represented person being absent, dead, unable or due
to the esteemed and lofty position of the representative in the eyes of
the represented person. Or the execution of some tasks, the
implementation of the authority of the represented one and the
manifestation of his position through the representative are appropriate
as per the wisdom, aims, purposes, etc. of the represented one. It is
irrelevant whether the representative and the represented one are Allah,
the High, His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) or a group of His servants or some of
them.

Hence, amongst all the literary applications, we cannot take the first
three i.e. the absence, death and inability of the represented person as
these cannot be applied for the Prophethood of a Prophet or the Imamat
of an Imam. Therefore, the term ‘Caliph of Allah’ is truly applicable in
its real sense on Adam (a.s.), Dawood (a.s.) and all other Prophets like
Nuh (a.s.), Ibraheem (a.s.), Moosa (a.s.), Isaa (a.s.), their chief
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and the twelve Imams about whose caliphate the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has given tidings to his nations.

Moreover, the term ‘Caliph’, as used in the Holy Quran and the
traditions, is not related to any added noun, displaying clearly that it
implies only for the Caliph of Allah, the High. So, a Prophet or an Imam
is a representative and heir of Allah, the High, and Prophethood and
Imamat are from the affairs of Allah, the High. None has got the right
to stake a claim to this status but with His permission.

Allah has used the word ‘Caliph’ in the Holy Quran, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الأَرْضِ خَلِيفَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I am going to place in the earth a khalif***.( Qur’an Surah Baqarah
2: 30.)

And He, Mighty and Glorified be He declared,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Dawood! Surely We have made you a ruler in the land*** . (Qur’an
Surah Suad 38: 26.)

It has come in the traditions that he was the Caliph of Allah, the High.
Then the caliphs are the representatives of Allah upon His servants and
His deputies for His creatures.

As for the rulers, they are the chiefs regardless of them being Caliphs
on earth. Consequently, every Caliph is a ruler and chief, but every
ruler and chief is not a Caliph.

The words ‘government’, ‘reign’ and ‘authority’ fall much short in
comparison with the concept of a ‘caliph’. Caliphate as used by Allah or
for that matter by the Prophet, covers all the aspects like majesty,
beauty, holiness, governance on the foundations of goodness, justice and
human values, handling the weak ones with kindness, etc., which no other
term covers. For, the authority of a caliph is connected to the
authority of Allah, the Wise, the Just, the Beneficent, the Merciful,
the Overpowering, the Subduer, the Generous, the Holy, the Kind, the
Forgiving and the Refuge.

A caliph cannot be deprived of his status nor does he divert from the
course that Allah has charted for him. He is not ordered but the
establishment of justice, repelling falsehood, purification of the souls
and acting upon the Holy Quran and the Sunnah. So, whoever digresses
from this path and aim will not be a caliph, as opposed to an emir, a
governor or a ruler.

Indeed, it’s clear for you now that caliphate is a divine position and
Allah’s representation, which cannot be completed nor realized save
through divine appointment and none partners Him in this regard.

Besides the rational argument that the appointment of Allah’s caliph in
the earth necessitates that he should be appointed by Allah only, the
verses of the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّى جاعِلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Qur’an Surah Baqarah 2: 30.)

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّا جَعَلناكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Qur’an Surah Suad 38: 26.)

are also evidence enough of the aforementioned fact. For, these two
verses clearly suggest that the appointment of a caliph is from the
affairs of Allah, the High, and His special acts, in which none partners
Him. Hence, nobody else has got any role whatsoever in the appointment
of a caliph in the earth.

Here, it will not be inappropriate to indicate that caliphate is a
general Grace (لطف) of Allah, the High, which is not confined to a
particular era. Thus, like all other general endowments, which demand
His absolute lordship, all encompassing mercy and perfect wisdom, His
grace too includes His servants at all times and in all places and is
not restricted to a particular time or region. Verily, the sole
prerogative of the caliph’s appointment lies with Allah, the Endower,
the Generous Who is not niggardly in His goodness nor does His treasures
exhaust and He is the Wise, the Knowing. When the emanation of this
Grace is proved to be obligatory in one era, its emergence is
automatically established at all times.

And there are proofs that the terms caliph and caliphate when used in
the Holy Quran and the traditions imply only Allah’s representation, the
great divine vicegerency and nothing else. There are a number of
traditions in this regard from both Shias and Sunnis like those
concerning Al-Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) that he is the caliph of Allah.[^2]

And like the advice of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) to Huzaifah,
“If there is for Allah a caliph in the earth, obey him even if he whips
your back or takes away your wealth.”[^3]

Kumail reports that Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) said,
“They are the caliphs of Allah in His cities (in His earth).”[^4]

While addressing those responsible for public trusts and wealth, Ameerul
Momineen (a.s.) advises them to exercise utmost caution in establishing
truth and following the principle of justice in all matters, big or
small, significant or otherwise. Then he (a.s.) orders them to say to
the people, “O servants of Allah! The friend of Allah and His caliph has
sent me to you.”[^5]

The great genius, the master in jurisprudence, tradition, literature and
a number of other sciences, Shaikh Bahauddin al-Aameli (a.r.), while
deriving from the above traditions, has written poems titled ‘Waseelah
al-Fauz wa al-Amaan fi madh Saaheb al-Asr wa al-Zamaan’. A couplet from
it goes as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خليفة ربِّ العالمين و ظلّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على ساكني الغيراء من كلّ ديار
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The caliph of the Lord of the worlds and His shade

On the inhabitants of the earth in every house.”

Objection: Why was the term ‘Caliph’ used for all the rulers after the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) till the recent rulers of the Ottoman
Empire, although they were neither appointed by Allah nor by the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)? Moreover, their governance were not the
carriers of the pure Islamic message nor were they having any legal
sanctions from Allah. They were also labeled as oppressive tyrants,
whose reign had nothing to do with Islam and who had no qualms in taking
the servants of Allah as their slaves and usurping their wealth.

Answer: The term ‘Caliph of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)’ was used
in early Islam for the rulers immediately after him (s.a.w.a.) by those
who were close to them. Later, the domain of its usage expanded and the
above term was used for the oppressive kings as well, fearing their
tyranny and barbaric oppressions. After sometime, this term was
curtailed to a singular word i.e. ‘The Caliph’.

There is no doubt that this term and its application does not lead to
the change of words of the Holy Quran and the traditions, from what
appears from them at the time of usage nor do they change the words to
their new meanings. Also, the usage of this term was historically
erroneous because the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) never appointed Abu
Bakr as his caliph. As for Umar, Abu Bakr appointed him[^6], so
logically he should be called as the caliph of Abu Bakr (and not the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)).

As for the status for the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and his rule
over the affairs, then it was not due to the selection of the people or
his domination over the affair or his oppression. Nay! It was only due
to the choice of Allah, the High. Hence, using the terms, ‘emir’,
‘ruler’ and ‘king’ for those called as caliphs would be more appropriate
than being called as a ‘caliph’, leave alone the terms ‘Allah’s caliph’
or ‘the caliph of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)’.

A right-thinking and sane person, not necessarily a follower of the Ahle
Bait (a.s.) can never permit, condone or overlook the usage of the term
‘the caliph of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)’ for the likes of
Usman, Moawiyah, Yazeed, Waleed, the tyrants of Bani Abbas and the
progeny of Usman, etc., who ruled over Syria, Iraq, Spain, etc.

Briefly, the epithet ‘Allah’s caliph’ is a lofty and elevated term. The
same applies for the term ‘caliph’. It cannot be used, and it is not
correct to use it except for Allah’s representative on the earth, whom
He has chosen to establish justice, be the highest role model for
mankind, implement His laws, inhabit His cities, spread goodness,
preserve the laws of Shariah and the signs of truth.

Its usage is incorrect for any other person either due to disregard or
carelessness. For the clarification of the falsity of this claim, when
he was addressed as, ‘O caliph of Allah!’ Abu Bakr said, ‘No, I am the
caliph of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)’ or ‘I am the caliph of Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.).’[^7]

Of course, his conferring the above titles on his own self has no
substance of truth in it because as you just read, caliphate is
representation of another, and this representation cannot be complete
without the appointment by the represented one. Unanimity prevails
concerning the fact that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) did not
appoint Abu Bakr as his caliph, nor did he (s.a.w.a.) make any will to
him. None of Abu Bakr’s actions like sitting in the place of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), going on the pulpit, praying in his (s.a.w.a.) prayer niche
(mehraab), were on his behalf and under his (s.a.w.a.) representation.

There is an opinion that governance and the appointment of a ruler is
the duty of the Ummah (Islamic nation), hence it is obligatory upon it
to appoint him. Also, there was consensus in the Ummah – which actually
never existed – for the appointment of Abu Bakr, without force or fear.
So, using the term ‘Caliph of the nation’ instead of ‘the caliph of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)’ will be more appropriate and correct.
For, in their view, Abu Bakr was the representative of the nation, whose
collective responsibility was to implement the laws and protect the
system. Needless to mention, the above idea has been formulated without
devoting the slightest of deliberations on the definition of ‘caliphate’
i.e. it’s representation of the other.

Second

Whatever we have discussed for the word ‘caliph’, is also applicable for
the word ‘Imam’ and ‘master’ (ولي), particularly the latter when it is
used for other than Allah, the High. So, an Imam implies the owner of an
elevated position appointed by Allah, the High, whether he is a Prophet
or the successor of a Prophet. This implication by no means contradicts
the literal meaning of the word Imam because literally, the word ‘Imam’
is used for anybody who is followed in knowledge, ethics or in any field
of art and technology. For example, it is said Khalil Ibn Ahmad is an
Imam in literature, Kulaini (r.a.) is an Imam in traditions, Shaykh Tusi
(r.a.) is is an Imam in exegesis, traditions, jurisprudence and
principles of jurisprudence, and Abu Ali Seena is an Imam in philosophy
and medicine. All these applications do not contradict the usage of the
word ‘Imam’ by Allah, the Holy Quran and the traditions, for the one
whom Allah has appointed as an Imam, made them standard for His
servants, the minaret in His cities, the one who is to be followed by
all and sundry. Thus, the word ‘Imam’ is normally used for the one who
is followed as a leader due to excessive usage in the Holy Quran and the
traditions and refers to this specially appointed person. Hence,
whenever the word ‘Imam’ is used independently, and the context does not
indicate otherwise, it automatically implies the representative of
Allah.

Due to this very special application of the word ‘Imam’ for Allah’s
proof and His appointee, a number of holy personalities refused to
attach this title (Imam) before their names despite being apparently
worthy of it in at least one context or more.

It is worth mentioning that the term ‘Imam’, notwithstanding its
numerous imports, is applicable only for the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) and his (s.a.w.a.) successors designated by Allah, the High.
But it appears that the excessive use of the word for the holy and
infallible Imams of the Ahle Bait (a.s.) in the traditions has led to
its application in the second meaning i.e. for the leaders in other
fields.

If someone refers to the Holy Quran and the traditions, he will find
plenty of testimonies endorsing the above theory. For example, the Holy
Quran says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ ابْتَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ قَالَ
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا قَالَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي قَالَ لاَ
يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled
them. He said: Surely I will make you an Imam men. Ibrahim said: And of
my offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust, said He.***
(Qur’an Surah Baqarah 2: 124.)

The above verse clearly indicates that Imamat is a covenant of Allah,
which does not reach to the oppressors. Moreover, it is an appointment
from the side of Allah. It is absolutely clear that the appointment of
Imam for the people is invalid and incorrect except from the side of
Allah, the High.

Some more verses of the Holy Quran that prove our point are cited
hereunder.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَأَوْحَيْنَا
إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We made them Imams who guided (people) by Our command, and We
revealed to them the doing of good. (***Qur’an Surah Anbiya 21: 73.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams (***Qur’an Surah Qasas 28: 5.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا لَمَّا صَبَرُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command when they were
patient***.( Surah Qur’an Sajdah 32: 24.)

There are a plenty of traditions that also support this argument. While
talking about his successors and the necessity of their recognition, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) declared,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات ولم يعرف إمام زمانه فليمت إن شاء يهوديًا و إن شاء نصرانياً
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who dies without recognizing the Imam of his time then he can die as
he wishes, either as a Jew or a Christian.[^8]

Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنا يستعطى الهدى و يستجلى العمى إنّ الأئمة من قريش غرسوا في هذا البطن
من هاشم لا تصلح على سواهم و لا تصلح الولاة من غيرهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Through us, guidance is granted and darkness is dispelled. Surely the
Imams from the Quraish are planted from the Hashemite wombs. None is
worthy of it (Imamat) but them and none is eligible for being the
masters except them.’[^9] In another place he (a.s.) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و إنما الائمة قوام الله على خلقه و عرفاؤه على عباده و لا يدخل الجنّة
إلاّ من عرفهم و عرفوه و لا يدخل النار إلاّ من أنكرهم و أنكروه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Certainly the Imáms are the vicegerents of Alláh over His creatures and
they make the creatures know Alláh. No one will enter Paradise except he
who knows them and they know him, and no one will enter Hell except he
who denies them and they deny him.[^10].

Therefore, there are numerous reliable and consecutive traditions in the
books of both Shias and Sunnis, specially the former, that suggest the
holy implication of the word Imam and its divine essence. And that
whenever it is used independently, it is done in this very meaning,
unless the context indicates otherwise. This was regarding the word
‘Imam’.

As for the word ‘Master’ (wali) then sometimes it is used as an additive
before Allah, the High, or with other than Him, while on other
occasions, it is used without any additive. Now, this additive (muzaaf
elaihe) has two applications:

Sometimes, the additive is the place of manifestation of the mastership
of the master and its execution. Like in the examples, ‘Allah is the
Master of the people’ or ‘Allah is the Master of those who believe’ or
‘The father is the master of his small son’ or ‘The ruler is the master
of the abstaining or absent ones’, the people and those who believe are
the place of manifestation of Allah’s mastership, the mastership of a
father is expressed through his son and the mastership of a ruler is
manifested through his subjects. In all the aforementioned examples, a
master (wali) is used as a subject (فاعل).

For instance, Allah, the High, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّما وليكم الله و رسوله و الذين آمنوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Only Allah is your Vali and His Apostle and those who believe***
(Qur’an Surah Maaedah 5: 55.)

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) declared, ‘Ali (a.s.) is the master of
every believer after me.’ Or ‘They are my Caliphs, O Jaabir, and the
masters of the affair after me.’

At other times, the word ‘wali’ is used to denote as an object (مفعول)
of the noun to which it is added. Like, when we say, ‘Ali (a.s.) is the
wali of Allah’, we mean that Ali is appointed as a master from the side
of Allah.

In all the examples cited above, the thing that comes to the mind that
the term ‘wali’, when used before the words ‘people’, ‘those who
believe’, ‘Allah’ etc., it carries the meaning of the words ‘Caliph’ or
‘Imam’ bearing some sort of holiness and spirituality. Its power
emanates from the absolute and perfect mastership of Allah, and this is
the meaning in which it is used when applied for the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) independently, without any
additive. When used for Allah, the High, the word ‘wali’ implies His
absolute perfection, which is not derived from the mastership of others,
with the exclusion of all other meanings like helper (ناصر) and lover
(محب).

Three

The terms, ‘Caliph’, ‘Imam’ and ‘Wali’, from the various meanings and
connotations expressed above, when used in the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah, bear only one external implication (i.e. all the three words are
used for one person). Nay, each one of them is perennially applicable to
the meaning of the other two except for the fact that each one of them
has a special meaning that comes to the mind instantly before the
others.

Therefore, the word ‘Caliph’ strikes the meaning of the one who is
appointed on the command of Allah, the High, as His representative to
judge between the people with truth, to establish justice and equity,
regulate the affairs, spread safety and security, etc. Similarly, the
word ‘Wali’ denotes the one who enjoys absolute control in the affairs
of creation as well as legislation from the side of Allah, the High, on
the basis of His power and legislation. The word ‘Imam’ implies the one
who has been appointed to be followed and obeyed. People receive
guidance by accepting his instructions because he is the standard for
those who tread the path (سالك), a guide towards divine satisfaction, a
protection for those who seek security and a strong rope to which the
people fasten. Each one of these terms suggests a special endowment and
a particular divine grace, covering His noble servants and confidantes
of His secrets, who have His special favours, do not precede Him in
saying and are cognizant of His affair.

All the three positions can be conferred on one person along with either
messengership or prophethood or both. For example, in the case of
Prophet Ibraheem (a.s.), Prophethood as well as Imamat were conferred,
while Prophet Adam (a.s.) and Prophet Dawood (a.s.), received
Prophethood and Caliphate both. There are instances of Prophets about
whose Imamat Allah has informed in the Holy Quran. All these elevated
divine positions were collectively found in the holy persona of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).

Separated from Prophethood, an Imam, Caliph and Wali follows the Prophet
like the twelve Imams (a.s.) because Prophethood and Messengership came
to an end with their great ancestors, the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad
Ibn Abdullah (s.a.w.a.) but Caliphate, Imamat and Wilayat remained in
his (s.a.w.a.) nation so that Allah’s proofs and arguments are not
invalidated. These are the caliphs who carried the burden of the divine
caliphate after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). This, by no means,
contradicts their being the caliphs of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
as has come in a few traditions like his (s.a.w.a.) saying, ‘They are my
caliphs, O Jaabir’, ‘O Allah! Have mercy on my caliphs’, ‘O Ali! You are
my successor’; ‘You are the caliph after me’ etc. Whatever we have
mentioned here vis-à-vis these terms are in their absolute and
independent applications, and not when used along with other additives
other than Allah. For, when they are used with an additive other than
Allah, undoubtedly it implies the representation of the other.

The caliphate of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), as mentioned in the
above traditions, denotes the representation in the conveyance of laws
and what Allah has revealed to him (s.a.w.a.) for the people. The caliph
is his successor in regulating the affairs of this nation, and it is not
permissible for the nation to oppose him at any cost. Thus, caliphate,
representation, deputation, etc. are only for those who have been
specially and exclusively appointed for these positions and nobody else
has got any right whatsoever to stake a claim without the requisite
permission and order of the represented one.

I wish I had known from where this nation has become the caliph and
representative of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and what is its
proof? How can the mastership of an entire ummah be established when the
mastership of any single individual from it cannot be proved? This is
nothing but audacity and impudence before Allah, the Almighty and His
Messenger (s.a.w.a.).

The Second Level
----------------

Determination of those Compatible with the Description of these
Traditions and Recognition of the Twelve Holy Personalities

Know that these traditions do not fit anybody except the Shiite belief.
For, some of these suggest that Islam will not come to an end till there
are twelve caliphs amongst the Muslims. Some others indicate that the
subsistence of Islam’s might depends on the existence of the twelve
caliphs. Yet others point out that the religion (of Islam) will survive
till the Day of Judgment and that the Imams (a.s.) will continue to
exist till the last era. Still some others specify that all the twelve
Imams are from Quraish, some of them have even stated that all of them
will be from the Bani Hashim and some others have stated that their
likes will not be seen.

The apparent of all these traditions has confined the number of the
caliphs to twelve and that they shall follow each other in rapid
succession. It is known that these characteristics are not found save in
the twelve Imams (a.s.), who are famous and well known among both the
major sects of Islam. No Islamic sect except the Shias can stake a claim
to this fact and it will not be inappropriate if we consider these
traditions as a miracle of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and his
(s.a.w.a.) information about the unseen.

There is no doubt that these traditions cannot be interpreted but on
this meaning, and a safe and straight mind, devoid of flaws and selfish
motives, will not explain it in any other manner. If we add a few more
traditions that have come down concerning the twelve Imams (a.s.), in
addition to whatever we have related in this book, we will be sure that
they are not applicable for anybody but the twelve Imams (a.s.) from the
Ahle Bait (a.s.).

Moreover, such traditions are supported by the famous and certain
tradition of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) called Hadis-e-Saqalain.
Apart from this, there are other equally known traditions like:

(1)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النجوم أمان لاهل السماء و أهل بيتي أمان لامّتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The stars are a cause of security for the inhabitants of the sky while
my Ahle Bait (a.s.) are the reason for the safety of my nation.’ The
author of Zakhaaer al-Uqbaa writes, ‘Abu Amr al-Ghaffaari narrates on
the authority of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النجوم أمان لاهل السماء فإذا ذهبت النجوم ذهبت السماء, و أهل بيتي أمان
لأهل الأرض فإذا ذهب أهل بيتي ذهب أهل الارض
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The stars are a security for the inhabitants of the sky. So when the
stars will be destroyed, the sky will follow suit. Similarly, my Ahle
Bait (a.s.) are the reason for the safety of the people of the earth.
When my Ahle Bait (a.s.) are finished, the people of the earth will
follow suit.’ He continues, ‘Ahmad (Ibn Hanbal) has recorded this
tradition in his Manaaqeb as well.

(2)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النجوم أمان لأهل الارض من الغرق، و أهل بيتي أمان لامّتي من الاختلاف
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The stars are the cause of security of the people of the earth from
drowning, while my Ahle Bait (a.s.) are the reason for the safety of my
nation from disputes.’[^11] The author of Al-Sawaaeq Al-Muhreqah has
stated that Haakem Neshaapuri has considered this tradition to be
correct as per the stipulations of the two Sheikhs (viz. Bukhaari and
Muslim).

(3)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مثل أهل بيتي كسفينة نوح...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The likeness of my Ahle Bait (a.s.) is like that of the ark of Hazrat
Nuh (a.s.) …’ which has been narrated through various chains of
narrators.

(4) Bukhari reports that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يزال هذا الأمر في قريش ما بقي من الناس اثنان
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘This affair (Islam) will continue in the Quraish even if there remain
two individuals amongst all the people.’[^12]

(5) The tradition used by Abu Bakr as an argument against the Ansaar in
Saqeefah narrating from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), who said,
‘The Imams are from Quraish.’[^13]

(6) Besides, the warning of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), ‘Whoever
dies without recognizing the Imam of his time, dies the death of
ignorance.’[^14] Al-Hameedi has also brought it in his Al-Jam’o bain
al-Sahihain.

(7) Haakem Neshaapuri reports on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Umar that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) cautioned, ‘One who dies without any
Imam ruling over him, his death is that of ignorance.’[^15]

(8) Suyuti quotes from Ibn Murdowayh, who reports on the authority of
Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) while
explaining the Quranic verse,

***‘On that day, We shall call every people with their Imam’*** (Qur’an
Surah Bani Israael 17: 71.)

informed, ‘Each nation will be called with the Imam of their time, the
Book of their Lord and the Sunnah of their Prophet (a.s.).’[^16]
Qurtubbi and Aaloosi have cited this tradition in their exegesis from
Suyuti, while Sa’labi has narrated it through his chain from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).

From all the above traditions, it becomes clear that the existence of
the twelve Imams (a.s.) will continue till the end of the world and that
all of them will be from Quraish. Significantly, no group from the
Muslims can boast of following this number of Imams from the Quraish,
which will continue till the Day of Judgment, save the Imaamiyyah Shias.

Allamah Muhammad Moin Ibn Muhammad Ameen al-Sindi, the author of
Deraasaat al-Labeeb, has written an exclusive book vis-à-vis these
traditions, naming it ‘Mawaaheb-o-Sayyed al-Bashar Fi Hadees al-Aimmah
al-Isnaa al-Ashar’ in which he has proved the Imamat of the twelve Imams
(a.s.) through Hadis-e-Saqalain. He has brought undefeatable arguments,
proving that the Imams (a.s.) were infallible in their knowledge and
that it is obligatory upon everybody to follow them in the acquisition
of knowledge. Readers can refer to Abaqaat al-Anwaar by Sayyed Mir
Haamid Husain al-Lucknowi al-Hindi (a.r.), vol. 2 and vol. 12, pg. 295,
296 & 304-307.

The renowned Haafiz Sulaiman al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi writes, “Some
researchers are of the view that the traditions suggesting the number of
Imams to be twelve after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) are well
known to be narrated from various chains. With the explanation of the
time and the description of the occurrence and the place, it became
known that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) implied from these
traditions, the twelve Imams from his Ahle Bait (a.s.) and his progeny.

For, it is not possible to interpret these traditions for the caliphs
among his companions who succeeded him immediately, due to the paucity
of their number.

It is also not probable to construe them for the kings of Bani Umayyah
because their number exceeded twelve and because of their vulgar tyranny
with the sole exception of Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz. Also, they did not
belong to the Bani Hashim while the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) had
categorically emphasized in the tradition of Abd al-Malik Ibn Jaabir,
‘All of them will be from the Bani Hashim’. The lowering of the voice by
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in this tradition gives more weight to
it because they (the majority of the people) did not approve of the
caliphate of Bani Hashim.

Also, it is not relevant for the Abbasi kings because their number
exceeded the above stipulation and their non-observance of the Quranic
injunction,

***‘Say: I don’t ask you of any reward except the love of my closest
relatives’*** (Surah Shoora (42): Verse 23.)

and other traditions like the Tradition of the Cloak (حديث كساء).

Therefore, it becomes essential and obligatory to carry this tradition
in the meaning of the twelve Imams (a.s.) from the progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) because they were the most learned, the
most majestic, the most pious and the most elevated in genealogy of all
the people of their time. They were the most superior in birth and the
noblest before Allah. Their knowledge was connected to that of their
ancestor, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), through inheritance and
endowment. This is the manner in which the people of knowledge,
investigation, illumination and grace recognize them.

This interpretation, that these traditions are applicable only for the
infallible Imams (a.s.) of the Ahle Bait (a.s.), is supported by
Hadis-e-Saqalain and numerous traditions repeated in this book and
elsewhere.

As for the saying of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.): ‘The nation will
form a consensus on all of them’ as has come in the narration of Jaabir
Ibn Samarah, he (s.a.w.a.) meant that the nation, whole of it, will
acknowledge their Imamat at the time of the reappearance of their Qaem
(a.t.f.s.).”[^17]

Therefore, the dominant political school stood up to deny the mastership
of the Ahle Bait (a.s.) and forsake the decisive texts and evidences
concerning their Imamat. They did so

either by refusing to bring forth these traditions,

or by creating doubts in their chains and rejecting their narrators on
account of their crime of the love of the Ahle Bait (a.s.) and narration
of their virtues,

or by interpreting them in other than their apparent meanings out of
perplexity and fear in front of these consecutive and reliable
traditions.

Hence, they indulged in wild and pathless interpretations, absurd
implications and false opinions. Not a single of these could withstand
the test of certainty. As a result, each one of these interpretations
led to the refutation, contradiction and rejection of the others. Being
completely confounded and out of sheer helplessness, they were forced to
interpret these traditions only for the Imams of the Ahle Bait (a.s.),
supported by other reliable and authentic evidences in this regard.

Of the discussions in Fath al-Baari, Ibn Battaal narrates from Mahlab,
‘I have not met anyone who has achieved certitude concerning this
tradition.’ It is also said that Ibn Jawzi had remarked in Kashf
al-Mushkil, ‘Arguments have prolonged with regards to the meaning of
this tradition. I searched a lot for its answers and asked about it but
to no avail.’

They have landed themselves in real difficulty on this subject due to
their stubbornness to accept the apparent and irrefutable application of
these traditions on the twelve infallible Imams (a.s.), perhaps, out of
greed or due to fear from the tyrannical governments and oppressive
rulers, who did not tolerate any expression of truth from these
scholars. They sold their ethics and concepts to acquire this world and
its base provisions.

Thus, the governments used them as pawns to achieve their political
ambitions founded on autocracy, oppression and enslaving Allah’s
servants. These so-called scholars ended up defending the tyranny,
oppression and despotic approach of these rulers. They interpreted the
evil actions of their masters as being beneficial and an opportunity for
the Muslims.

The numerous transgressions and sins like playing musical instruments,
dancing, etc. perpetrated by these kings in their courts, their
extravagance and misuse of public wealth in whatever Allah had
prohibited, their depriving the poor, the needy and the weak of their
rights, and all other barbaric acts were justified and defended on some
religious pretext or another by these scholars.

For example, they declared absolute immunity for the rulers, the
non-permissibility of questioning their actions and the necessity of
their obedience, notwithstanding the fact that these included the ilk of
Yazid, Waleed, the despots of Bani Umayyah and the tyrants of Bani
Abbas. These oppressors appropriated the wealth of Allah and took His
servants as slaves like some Muslim rulers of today, who are mere
puppets in the hands of arrogant Western superpowers. We have come from
God and to Him shall we return.

Now we shall cite some of these contradictory views concerning the
interpretation of the traditions vis-à-vis the twelve Imams (a.s.) for
you, the believer in Allah, His Book and the sunnah of His Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

First: Some commentators of Saheeh al-Tirmidhi and the author of Fath
al-Baari (the commentary on Saheeh al-Bukhari) have interpreted the
world ‘twelve’ to refer to the caliphs of Bani Umayyah, who followed the
companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). They suggest that this
tradition cannot be cited as a merit but is used only to indicate the
steadfastness of the Islamic kingdom. They include Yazid Ibn Muawiyyah
and his son, Muawiyyah Ibn Yazid but not Usmaan, Muawiyyah and Abdullah
Ibn Zubair because they were among the companions.

They also do not draft Marwan Ibn Hakam in the list because he took the
allegiance of the people after the people had paid fealty to Ibn Zubair
and hence consider him a usurper. Moreover, as per Fath al-Baari, there
is a dispute about his companionship. The list continues from Abd
al-Malik Ibn Marwan, followed by Walid till Marwan Ibn Muhammad.

I say: I wish I had known what made these writers interpret the
traditions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in this mischievous and
malicious manner! Is this how we reward the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) for his message? Is this not an insult to his (s.a.w.a.)
sayings?

If this was his (s.a.w.a.) purpose and intent, what is the benefit and
use of such traditions and what do they achieve?

From where do they know that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) intended
through these traditions the despotic rulers of Bani Umayyah with the
sole exception of Muawiyyah Ibn Marwan?

From where do they know that the companions are excluded from these
traditions? Then why did he (s.a.w.a.) not say, ‘after my companions’,
instead of ‘after me’ as has been reported by a number of narrators?

Any interpretation that includes Muawiyyah and his successors from the
Bani Umayyah is clearly false and unacceptable because they were not
chosen as caliphs through consensus. Rather, they were despots and the
worst of the despots at that.

When things reach to such a despicable state of interpretation, the
original quote is completely removed from its apparent meaning, fearing
the establishment of the truth of the Shiite faith. None of these
tyrants enjoyed any particularity over the other. In which case, a great
number of probabilities unfold. Possibly, it is an indication to the
caliphs after Abd al-Malik and when he (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘after me’, he
(s.a.w.a.) meant after Abd al-Malik.

Or it is an indication to the caliphs after Hesham. Or it could also
mean six caliphs each from the Bani Umayyah and the Bani Abbas or the
caliphs after Bani Umayyah. It could also imply the caliphs after
Saffaah or Mansoor or other despots of Bani Abbas. It could also mean
those from the Bani Umayyah who ruled over Spain or the Fatemids who
governed Egypt, and so on and so forth. Meanwhile, none of these
probabilities can be said to have an edge or preference over the others.

Moreoever, why these traditions should not be interpreted as a means of
merit and praise when the terms used in some narration clearly imply
glorification?

Is it correct to equate these oppressive tyrants and sinners with the
chiefs of the Bani Israel and the companions of Hazrat Eesa (a.s.), as
has come in a number of traditions?

This is in addition to the evidence of the number of caliphs being
restricted to twelve.

Second: Another interpretation is that after the demise of al-Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.), twelve rulers will govern, six from the progeny of Hasan
(a.s.), five from that of Husain (a.s.) and one from someone else.

I say: Such an exegesis is clearly against the evident texts of the
traditions, which mention in no uncertain terms, ‘twelve caliphs after
me’, ‘this religion will always be mighty and lofty’ etc., which proves
the connection of the caliphs’ era with that of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), their continuity till the final epoch and the confinement of
the caliphs to them as has been elucidated in the narration of Ibn
Masood.

This is in addition to the fact that these traditions are applicable for
the twelve Imams (a.s.), who are famous and renowned among all the
Muslim sects, thereby establishing the truth and validity of the
prophecy of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in clear terms. Then what
is the point in struggling to force these traditions to imply others,
who do not fit in its description by any means?

If you argue: Although these characteristics are not found in anybody
but the twelve Imams (a.s.), it is quite likely that they may be present
in the future in some other individuals.

I say: Amazing, indeed! How can we talk of something being present in
the future when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has prophesied them to
exist in his (s.a.w.a.) immediate successors, whose time is joined with
his (s.a.w.a.) time? Is not such an interpretation a clear violation? In
this case, we have to assume the impermissibility of the era of these
caliphs being joined with that of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and
the non-consideration of such traditions. But when there exists, a clear
interpretation on which these traditions fit, it is not allowed to
refute this claim with an argument of future probability.

Do you not see that Allah described the qualities of our Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) in the Old and the New testaments but when he (s.a.w.a.)
appeared with an appearance befitting the description, the Jews and the
Christians denied his (s.a.w.a.) prophethood, arguing that such a
prophet will emerge in the future. Allah has condemned them in the Holy
Quran and did not accept their argument that the prophesied advent will
occur in the future.

As for their reliance on the tradition, ‘twelve caliphs will succeed
al-Mahdi, of which six will be from the progeny of Hasan (a.s.)…’ to
lend credibility to this argument, we say that apart from its
contradiction to a number of traditions that have been narrated by both
Shias and Sunnis, it also goes against the peculiar characteristics of
these traditions. That is, the restriction of the number of caliphs to
twelve, the continuity of their existence and the joining of their era
with that of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). The apparent difference
between the two narrations is that while the original tradition says,
‘after me, there will be…’ this narration says, ‘after Mahdi, there will
be…’

Moreover, this tradition is considered to be weak and unreliable as has
been explicitly mentioned by Ibn Hajar, when he says in his al-Sawaaeqah
that this tradition is truly absurd and cannot be relied upon. He has
quoted this on the authority of his namesake Ibn Hajar, the author of
Fath al-Baari.

This is apart from the fact that in all likelihood such a probability is
derived from the Israaeliyyaat (i.e. the fabrications of the Jews in the
Islamic texts). They have resorted to such tactics to deviate these
traditions from their clear interpretations.

Ibn Munaadi writes, ‘We take notice of these traditions because we find
them in the Book of Daniel.’ If you want to know the background of this
book and what has been said about it, refer to the beginning of
al-Malaahem by Ibn Munaadi that you may know how a nation is afflicted
with superstitions, absurdities and junk when they refuse to take true
knowledge from its owners viz. the Imams (a.s.) of the Ahle Bait (a.s.).
They are the ones about whom Allah has ordered the Muslim nation to
fasten unto them along with the Holy Quran.

Third: Another view in this regard is that of Qazi Ayaaz. According to
him, the import of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) through this
tradition was that the twelve Imams (a.s.) will exist only during the
caliphs’ might, the strength of Islam and the steadfastness of its
affairs. This occurred when consensus was found among the people on this
issue till the decline of the Bani Umayyah when mischief arose amongst
them in the reign of Waleed Ibn Yazid. Ibn Hajar, in his Fath al-Baari,
has opted for this interpretation citing the tradition ‘All of them
(caliphs) will be the unanimous choice of the people’ as evidence for
the same. Thereafter, he proceeds to mention the names of the caliphs,
who enjoyed the consensus of the people: Abu Bakr, Umar, Usman, Ali,
Muawiyyah, Yazid, Abd al-Malik and his four sons, Waleed, Sulaiman,
Yazid and Heshaam.

He says, ‘Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz interrupted the chain between Sulaiman
and Yazid. These are the seven after the four rightly-guided caliphs and
when Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz is not counted amongst them. The twelfth of
them is Walid Ibn Yazid Ibn Abd al-Malik.

I say: This is the worst possible and most insulting interpretation of
the Prophetic tradition, even if Ibn Hajar says that it is the most
preferable of all interpretations. We will not argue about the
antecedents of the Bani Umayyah and the non-correctness of attributing
them to be from the Quraysh, as these traditions announce explicitly
that the twelve Imams (a.s.) will be from the Quraysh.

But we question: How on earth can such tidings, which were announced as
glorification of the twelve caliphs, be applicable for Muawiyyah’s
caliphate? For, he is the one who

Fought with Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), about whom the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, ‘War against you is war against me’

Organized speeches abusing Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) from the pulpits and,

Poisoned to death Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.), the chief of the youth
of Paradise.

How on earth can these traditions apply for a beast like Yazid Ibn
Muawiyyah, who fought against and martyred Imam Husain (a.s.), and who
was a transgressor who committed sins publicly and announced his
disbelief freely becoming a part of the renowned poems of Ibn
al-Zab’ari, which he (Yazid) recited in joy when the severed head of
Imam Husain (a.s.) was brought to him.

He was the one who ordered Muslim Ibn Aqabah to kill and plunder the
people of Medina on three occasions. During these attacks, he killed a
number of companions and the city of Medina was totally ransacked. It
was during these attacks that more than 1000 Muslim virgins were raped
and whenever a Muslim from Medina offered his daughter in marriage, he
did not guarantee her virginity saying, ‘Perhaps, she has lost her
virginity during the Tragedy of Hurrah.’ It is said that four thousand
illegitimate children were born after this incident.

Muslim, in his Saheeh, reports that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
warned, ‘Whoever frightens the people of Medina, Allah will frighten him
and upon him is the curse of Allah, the angels and all mankind.’[^18]

Waaqedi narrates on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Hanzalah, ‘By Allah!
We did not visit Yazid but that we feared a stone falling on our heads
from the sky (as a divine punishment) because he was a man who married
his mothers, daughters and sisters, drank wine, did not pray[^19] and he
is the one who had ordered the attack on the Holy Ka’bah.

Suyuti and others report on the authority of Nawfil Ibn Abi al-Furaat,
“I was with Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz, when a person while mentioning Yazid,
said, ‘the chief of the faithfuls, Yazid Ibn Muawiyyah’. On hearing
this, Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz (became angry) and asked, ‘You call Yazid as
Ameerul Momineen?’ and ordered that he be whipped 20 lashes.”[^20]

It is mentioned in Al-Sawaaeq that it was said to S’ad Ibn Hassaan, ‘The
Bani Umayyah claim that the caliphate is among them.’ He retorted, ‘The
sons of the blue-eyed (referring to Hind – the wife of Abu Sufyaan) are
lying. They are mere kings, nay, the worst of kings.’

How on earth can these traditions be applied for the caliphate of Abd
al-Malik, the treacherous, the one who prohibited the Islamic injunction
of enjoining good (امر بالمعروف).

Suyuti records, ‘Among the evil deeds of Abd al-Malik was the
appointment of Hajjaaj as a governor for the Muslims and the sahaabaa
(r.a.), who was degrading and insulting them through killings, assault,
abuse and imprisonments. Indeed, he killed innumerable sahaabaa and
great taabe’een, apart from the ordinary folks. He put a seal around the
neck of Anas and other companions with the intent of degrading them. May
Allah not have mercy on him and may Allah not forgive him.’[^21]

How on earth can these traditions be applied for a person like Waleed
Ibn Yazid Ibn Abd al-Malik, the sinner, the alcoholic and the one who
did not care for the prohibitions of Allah. He is the one who went for
Hajj to drink wine atop the Holy Ka’bah, for which he received outright
condemnation from the people.[^22] He is the one who opened the Holy
Quran and on seeing the verse, واستفتحوا و خاب كلّ جبّار عنيد And they
asked for judgment and every insolent opposer was disappointed [^23], he
flung it on the ground and shot it with an arrow, reciting,

Are you threatening me with the (words of) insolent oppressor?

Here, I am that insolent and oppressor

When you (Quran) are brought on the Day of Gathering by your Lord

Say, O Lord, Waleed has ripped me apart.[^24]

He continued to live in vulgar opulence and luxury till he was killed.

Is this the might and respect of Islam? Is this the representation of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?

It is reported that when he left for Hajj, he carried along with himself
dogs in trunks, got a dome fabricated as per the size of the Ka’bah to
place it on its top and carried a few trunks of wine. By this he
intended to place the dome on the Ka’bah and sit in it to drink wine.
But his advisors dissuaded him from doing so fearing the wrath of the
people. Waleed finally relented.[^25]

Masoodi reports on the authority of Mubarrad, ‘Waleed has recited some
poems in which he has overtly proclaimed disbelief, and while mentioning
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), he said:

The Hashemites played with the caliphate

(Actually) neither any revelation came, nor did any Book descend

And say to Allah to stop me, my food

And say to Allah to stop me, my drink.[^26]

Ishaaq Ibn Muhammad al-Azraq recounts, ‘I went to Mansoor Ibn Jahoor
al-Azdi after the murder of Waleed. He had two maids from the
slave-girls of Waleed… One of them said, ‘We were among his favorite and
most respected slave-girls. He went to bed with her (indicating to the
other slave girl), when the call for the prayer (azaan) was made. He
ordered her to lead the prayers of the people while she was drunk,
unclean and veiled.’[^27]

Suyuti brings a narration from Musnad-e-Ahmad: There will come a man for
this nation, called Waleed, who will be more oppressive to his people
than Fir’aun was for his nation.[^28] Therefore, it will be more apt to
name such persons as Fir’aun than Caliphs, as they resemble the
disbelievers and the apostates more than the companions of Hazrat Eesa
(a.s.) or the chiefs of the Bani Israel.

If we so desire, we can exhaust the discussion on the likes of the Bani
Umayyah but we intend to cut it short due to fear of prolongation. We
say: How can Qazi Ayaaz be satisfied with appointing these tyrants as
the caliphs of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), about whom he
(s.a.w.a.) has given tidings, and has informed that they will act with
guidance and that if they were not there, the world will be destroyed
with its inhabitants, and that till they exist, the Islamic nation will
continue to survive and that they are like the chiefs (نقباء) of the
Bani Israel.

Even more stunning is their omission of Imam Hasan (a.s.) from the
narration, despite the fact that he (a.s.) was clearly named as a caliph
in the traditions narrated from his grandfather, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), and the inclusion of Yazid, Moawiyah and Bani al-Aas, whom
he (s.a.w.a.) has cursed in these traditions.

And why did they not include Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz among these caliphs?

And as for his stubbornness in clinging on to the saying of Sahih Abi
Dawood, ‘The Ummah will be unanimous about them’,[^29] then it is weak
for the following reasons:

It is clear that an action is attributed to its subject only when it is
performed with freewill, without any force or compulsion. So, even if we
accept that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has said, ‘they will be
unanimous’, it only implies the unanimity of the nation with their own
freewill.

Don’t you think that it is incorrect for anybody to declare that the
Islamic Ummah, including the people of Mecca, Medina, great jurists,
renowned traditionalists, companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the
Taabein, at any given time, was unanimous on the appointment of Yazid as
the caliph of the Muslims? But he claims that they were unanimous in
this appointment and chose him for caliphate. He also goes on to claim
the consensus of the Muslims on the caliphate of Waleed Ibn Yazid.

If we rely on this theory, it will necessitate the exclusion of Ameerul
Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and Imam Hasan (a.s.) from the list
of the caliphs because of the opposition of the Syrians for these two,
and their unstinted support for their enemies.

This portion seems to have been interpolated as it is not found in a
number of reliable and consecutive traditions available on the subject.
Therefore, there exists a strong probability that this part ‘the Islamic
Ummah will be unanimous on all of them’ appears to have been added by
the narrator, possibly as an explanation for the tradition. Even if we
assume that this part did occur in the original tradition and when there
is a controversy between the added part and the missing part then, as a
rule, the added part is not relied upon. The same applies here because
the majority of the traditions do not comprise of the additional part
and only Abu Dawood has narrated it.

Hence, it is incorrect and improper to disregard the many traditions,
reliable and consecutive, narrated by a group of companions like
Abdullah Ibn Masood and Jaabir Ibn Samarah and a number of Taabein just
for the sake of one narration.

So, is it wrong to impute such a probability to this statement?

Even if we assume that this statement is correct and found in the
original, it is limited by the other sentences found in the numerous
other traditions like, ‘all of them will act with guidance and the true
religion’, ‘if they do not exist, the earth will be destroyed with all
its inhabitants’, ‘they are like the companions of Eesa (a.s.) and the
chiefs of the Bani Israel’, and ‘the caliphate is confined only to
them’. Thus, assuming that this statement does exist in the original,
its only correct interpretation and construction is that the Ummah will
be unanimous on the Imamat of the twelve Imams (a.s.) and acknowledge
their Caliphate after the reappearance of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

Fourth: Another interpretation of the tradition is that of Ibn Hajar in
Fath al-Baari as narrated by Suyuti in Tarikh al-Khulafaa and is as
follows: These traditions imply the existence of twelve caliphs during
the entire lifespan of Islam till the Day of Judgment, who will act with
truth, even if they will not rule in immediate succession of each other.
They support this idea with a narration reported in his Musnad from Abi
Al-Jild who said, ‘This nation will not be destroyed till there are
twelve caliphs in it. All of them will act with guidance and the true
religion. From them will be two persons from the Ahle Bait (a.s.) of
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)…’

Explaining the statement of Ibn Hajar, Suyuti remarks, ‘Hence, from the
twelve caliphs, four are the rightly guided caliphs[^30], followed by
Hasan, Moawiyah, Ibn Zubair and Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz, which makes it
eight. Probably, Mohtadi, the Abbasi caliph, can be added to this list
because he was amongst the Abbasi kings like Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz was
amongst the Bani Umayyah tyrants. This was on account of the apparently
insignificant oppression of Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz and Mohtadi. From the
remaining two, one is al-Mahdi since he is from the progeny of Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.).’ – End of Suyuti’s statement.

I say: This view or probability is also incorrect because plenty of
traditions have confined a number of caliphs to twelve. In fact, some of
these have also explicitly mentioned the names of these caliphs, like
the narration of Ibn Masood, which rules out all possibilities of
interpretations and conjectures. Moreover, these have stated in no
uncertain terms that they will follow each other successively and their
eras will be immediately after one another.

As for the narration of Abi al-Jild, which is cited as a support for
this probability, it is rejected outright because of the notoriety of
Abi al-Jild for presenting his own views and whimsical interpretations
as traditions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Therefore, his statement, ‘from
them are two men from the Ahle Bait (a.s.) of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)’ is
certainly an addition from his own side or from his source. Otherwise,
he should have reported, ‘my Ahle Bait (a.s.)’ and not ‘the Ahle Bait
(a.s.) of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).’

All this is assisted by the report available in the book of Khesaal,
through his chain of narrators that Abi Najraan reports that Abi al-Jild
has narrated to him and even taken an oath, ‘This nation will not be
destroyed till there are twelve caliphs in it. All of them will act with
guidance and true religion.’ Nowhere, in this report, has he mentioned
the additional part.

This is in addition to his view that three of them are from the Ahle
Bait (a.s.) of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) viz. Ali, Hasan and Mahdi (a.s.)
while Abi al-Jild says, ‘Two of them will be from Ahle Bait (a.s.) of
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).’

It is also worth mentioning that after some research concerning the
views of the scholars of rejaal, I found that Abi al-Jild, whose name
was Jailaan Ibn Farwah al-Asadi and is also called as Ibn Abi Farwah had
the habit of either saying things from his side or sourced his knowledge
from the Testaments. The author of Shamaael al-Rasool, pg. 484, writes,
‘Abi al-Jild used to refer to the Old Testament time and again.’ The
writer of Al-Jarho wa al-Ta’deel, vol. 2, pg. 547, tradition no. 2275,
pens, ‘Abi al-Jild al-Asadi al-Basri had command over the Old Testament
and its like.’

In any case, one cannot afford to neglect or be heedless towards all the
reliable and authentic traditions that talk about the continuity of the
eras of these caliphs and the limitation of their number to twelve,
notwithstanding the other consecutive traditions in this regard. For, if
we consider this tradition to be reliable, it will necessarily require
the conformity of the two kinds of traditions. While one talks about the
consecutivity of their eras and their number being twelve, the
aforementioned limits it’s severely as is clear from these two kinds of
traditions.

Yes, many consecutive traditions prove the caliphate of these twelve
(a.s.). But to interpret it in the manner as Suyuti has done is not
valid as demonstrated in the above discussions. Moreover, if we rely on
the narration of Abi al-Jild, it will seriously limit the applications
of the traditions that emphasize on continuity of eras.

Interestingly, Suyuti too has become a victim of amnesia and
forgetfulness. For, as per his own statement, three of these caliphs
must necessarily be from the Ahle Bait (a.s.) of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
because Ali (a.s.) and Hasan (a.s.) are undoubtedly from the Ahle Bait
(a.s.) in the light of the Verse of Purification[^31] and the clear
traditions from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). Moreover, he has
included the likes of Ibn Zubair and Moawiyah amongst those who act with
guidance.

These are absolutely disgusting and weak arguments, which show their
confusion and obscene helplessness in the exegesis of these traditions,
while turning their backs on their only and real interpretation i.e. the
twelve famous Imams (a.s.) from the Ahle Bait (a.s.).

Fifth: It talks about the presence of this number (of caliphs) in one
time, all of them, and each one of them claims governance and caliphate.
They say: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has informed us that the
strangest of things will occur after him (s.a.w.a.). Of which, is the
disunity among the people after him (s.a.w.a.) in one time concerning
the twelve chiefs. This is irresistibly comical and some of them have
also rejected it, saying, ‘This view is that of the one who is totally
unaware of the methods of traditions, apart from his ignorance of the
traditions present in Bukhari, Muslim, etc. That is, they have clearly
mentioned mastership as the attributes of these caliphs and that Islam
will remain mighty and lofty…

I say: Surely, the traditions have proved that their duration will be
the duration of Islam and its survival. Thus, these traditions support
the correctness of the occultation of the twelfth amongst them, his
longevity and his prolonged life as will be seen in the numerous
reliable traditions to follow.

Sixth: The interpretation of Ibn Taimiyyah, which states that these
Imams (a.s.) are dispersed and scattered in the Islamic Ummah.
Resurrection will not occur till they are found.

I say: It seems that they do not deem it necessary to benefit from the
actual implication of the traditions and to rely on their wordings and
their famous concepts as has been relied upon by those in the know and
the wise people. Specially when the words, with their apparent meanings,
clearly conform to the approach of the Ahle Bait (a.s.) and their Shias.
Consequently, they have said whatever wild and absurd thought that has
come in their minds in the interpretation of these traditions.
Otherwise, from where has Ibn Taimiyyah brought such a baseless
exegesis, which clearly opposes the wordings of the traditions?

Seventh: Another interpretation is the one propounded by our
contemporaries, who tread the modern approach with the support of the
colonialists and imperialistic powers. Thus, they have drummed up the
same beat but with another drum.

They consider these traditions to be applicable for the rulers of the
Muslims and whom they have listed as follows: Abu Bakr, Umar, Usman, Ali
(a.s.), Moawiyah, Abd al-Malik followed by other kings of Bani Umayyah
till Marwan. They say: Thereafter, Imamat was transferred to the Bani
Abbas, from them is Mansoor, his son Mahdi, Haroon al-Rashid till the
end of the dynasty. They have also counted Emaad al-Din al-Zanki, Noor
al-Din and Salaah al-Din saying, ‘It does not befit us that we be
miserly regarding their rights.’

I say: Under this explanation, those called as caliphs in these
traditions are the kings and rulers of the Muslims, most of whom
acquired this position through force, coercion and domination. Their
number far exceeds the limit of twelve. When it is permitted to apply
these traditions for all the rulers and kings, regardless, then why
should we restrict ourselves to only twelve and be niggardly about the
rights of the remaining? What is the purpose of such traditions, which
are invaluable words, uttered by as holy a person as the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)?

It is necessary for the one who has suggested this view that he should
not be niggardly and miserly of all the kings, including those of Spain
(the erstwhile Muslim dominion of Andalus), Ottoman and even the present
dictators and tyrants, whose breaches of Islamic trusts are known to one
and all.

By Allah! I do not know what to say about such writers and authors who
count themselves from the modern and civilized generation. They say
about the sunnah of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) as dictated to them by
their carnal desires, the desires of those who spend lavishly on them
from the public treasury of the Muslims and the desires of their western
imperialistic masters. These western colonialists intend to interpret
all that has come down in the Holy Quran and the Sunnah, which demand
belief in the unseen, as per their materialistic, imperialistic and
colonialist views.

There is no power and strength, except that of Allah, the High, the
Great.

Know that in reply to these absurd interpretations concerning these
prophetic traditions, we have relied only on the peculiarities derived
from them and their clear explicit meanings. We did not resort to the
other reliable and numerous traditions concerning the Imamat of the
twelve Imams (a.s.), which discuss their names and their
characteristics. Otherwise, the arguments would be much more elaborate.

If you desire further explanation on the subject, refer to the books
written in this regard and all your doubts and misgivings will be
repelled.

And Allah is the Guide to the truth and propriety.

[^1]: Al-Mufradaat fi Ghareeb al-Quran, p. 156.

[^2]: Sunan Ibn Maajah, vol. 2, pg. 519 The chapter of the Emergence of
al-Mahdi (a.t.f.s.); Musnad Ahmad, vol. 5, pg. 277.

[^3]: Sunan Abi Dawood, Kitaab al-Fetan, vol. 2, pg. 200. Musnad Ahmad,
vol. 5, pg. 430.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balagah, Saying No. 147; Tazkerah al-Huffaaz, vol. 1, pg.
11 & 12; Dastoor-o-Ma’lem al-Hekam, pg. 84; Al-Amaali al-Khamisiyyah,
vol. 1, pg. 66.

[^5]: Nahj al-Balagah, Letter No. 25.

[^6]: Even this appointment is debatable and not established because it
is said that when Usman became busy in writing the will of Abu Bakr, the
latter fainted. Usman thought that Abu Bakr had died and wrote the name
of Umar on his own. When Abu Bakr regained his senses, Usman informed
him of what he had done and Abu Bakr duly endorsed it. The thing which
confounds the researcher is that Abu Bakr died during this very illness
and Umar was appointed as his successor on the basis of the writing of
Usman. But on this occasion, notwithstanding the serious illness of Abu
Bakr, Umar never protested that this man is not in his senses! Nor did
he prevent Abu Bakr from dictating his will like he had prevented the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) from making known his will! Surely, we are
from Allah and unto Him shall we return.

[^7]: Musnad of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, pg. 10.

[^8]: Al-Masaael al-Khamsoon by Fakhruddin al-Raazi, Masalah No. 47.
This article was published in the year 1328 A.H. in Egypt along with
other articles. Its publisher had named it, ‘Majmooah al-Rasaael’. This
tradition can be found on pg. 348.

[^9]: Nahj al-Balagah, Sermon 142.

[^10]: Nahj al-Balagah, Sermon 150.

[^11]: Al-Mustadrak by Haakem Neshaapuri, vol. 3, pg. 149.

[^12]: Saheeh al-Bukhari, vol. 4, pg. 218, Kitaab-o-Manaaqeb-e-Quraish
in the Book of Ahkaam.

[^13]: Fath al-Baari, vol. 13, pg. 114.

[^14]: Sharh al-Maqaasid, vol. 2, pg. 275; Al-Jawaaher al-Muziah, vol.
2, pg. 509. There are numerous traditions that convey this concept or
are quite similar to it.

[^15]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 23, pg. 76, Tr. No. 3.

[^16]: Al-Durr al-Manthoor, vol. 4, pg. 184.

[^17]: Yanaabee’ al-Mawaddah, pg. 446.

[^18]: Murooj al-Zahab, vol. 3, pg. 69.

[^19]: Taarikh al-Khulafaa, pg. 209

[^20]: Al-Sawaaeq al-Mohreqah, pg. 219, printed at Cairo; Taarikh
al-Khulafaa, pg. 209, printed at Egypt

[^21]: Taarikh al-Khulafaa, pg. 220

[^22]: Taarikh al-Khulafaa, pg. 250; Taarikh al-Tabari, vol. 7, pg. 209

[^23]: Surah Ibraheem (14): Verse 15

[^24]: Murooj al-Zahab, vol. 3, pg. 216

[^25]: Al-Kaamil fi al-Taarikh, vol. 3, pg. 394

[^26]: Murooj al-Zahab, vol. 3, pg. 216.

[^27]: Al-Eqd al-Fareed, vol. 2, pg. 290.

[^28]: Taarikh al-Khulafa, pg. 251

[^29]: Tarikh al-Khulafaa, pg. 10.

[^30]: Implying Abu Bakr, Umar, Usmaan and Ali (a.s.).

[^31]: Surah Ahzaab (33): Verse 33.


