Bibliography
============

1. Al-Ibaanah

Abdullah Ibn Muhammad al-Akbari al-Hanbali, famous as Ibn Battah (exp.
387 A.H.)

2. Ithaaf al-Khaassah Be Sahih al-Khulaasah

Printed in the margins of the book ‘Al-Khulaasah’

3. Isbaat al-Raj’ah or Isbaat al-Ghaibah

Fazl Ibn Shaazaan al-Nishaapuri (exp. 260 A.H.)

4. Isbaat al-Hudaat

Shaikh al-Hurr al-Aameli (exp. 1104 A.H.)

5. Al-Ehtejaaj

Abu Mansoor Ahmad Ibn Ali Ibn Abi Taalib al-Tabarsi (exp. 588 A.H.)

6. Akhbaar-o-Isfahaan

Abu Noaim al-Isfahaani (exp. 430 A.H.)

7. Al-Ikhtesaas

Al-Shaikh al-Mufeed (exp. 413 A.H.)

8. Al-Arbaeen

Haafiz Abu al-Fath Muhammad Ibn Abi al-Fawaares (exp. 412 A.H.),
available in manuscript form in the Library of Aastaan-e-Quds, Mashhad,
Iran, under registration no. 8443, copied from the original in 947 A.H.

9. Al-Arbaeen (Kefayah al-Muhtadi)

Mir Muhammad Ibn Muhammad al-Mir Lawhi al-Husaini al-Isfahaani, a
contemporary of Allamah Majlisi (r.a.)

10. Al-Arbaeen

Muhammad Taher al-Qummi

11. Al-Irshaad

Al-Shaikh al-Mufeed (exp. 413 A.H.)

12. Irshaad al-Quloob

Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn Abi al-Hasan Muhammad Dailami

13. Isteqsaa al-Nazar

Kamaal al-Deen Maytham Ibn Ali Ibn Maytham al-Bahraani (exp. 679 A.H.)

14. Al-Istensaar Fi Al-Nass Alaa Al-Aimmah al-Athaar

Al-Karaajeki (exp. 449 A.H.)

15. Al-Eteqaadaat

Al-Shaykh al-Sadooq (exp. 381 A.H.)

16. Al-E’temaad Fi Sharh-e-Risaalah Waajib al-E’teqaad

Faazil Miqdaad (exp. 826 A.H.). Al-Risaalah was authored by Allamah
Hilli (exp. 726 A.H.)

17. E’laam al-Waraa

Ameen al-Islam Abu Ali Al-Tabarsi (exp. 548 A.H.)

18. Iqbaal al-A’maal

Sayyed Ibn Taawoos (exp. 664 A.H.)

19. Ilzaam al-Naaseb

Al-Haaj Shaykh Ali Yazdi al-Haaeri (exp. 1333 A.H.)

20. Al-Amaali

Al-Shaykh Al-Sadooq (exp. 381 A.H.)

21. Al-Amaali al-Khamisiyyah

Written by a scholar from the Zaidiyyah sect.

22. Al-Amaali

Al-Shaykh al-Mufeed (exp. 413 A.H.)

23. Anees al-A’laam

Muhammad Sadeq Fakhr al-Islam (exp. before 1330 A.H.)

24. Al-Insaaf

Sayyed Haashim al-Bahraani (exp. 1107 or 1109 A.H.)

25. Eezaah al-Ishkaal

Haafiz Abd al-Ghani Ibn Saeed (we have narrated from him via Abaqaat
al-Anwaar)

26. Behaar al-Anwaar

Allamah Muhammad Baaqer al-Majlisi (exp. 1111 A.H.)

27. Bashaarah al-Mustafa Le Shiah al-Murtaza

Emaad al-Deen Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Abu al-Qaasim al-Tabari, a sixth
century scholar.

28. Basaaer al-Darajaat

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Hasan Ibn Farrokh al-Saffaar (exp. 290 A.H.)

29. Al-Balad al-Ameen

Shaykh Taqi Al-Deen Ibraheem al-Kaf’ami (exp. 905 A.H.)

30. Bahjah al-Abraar Fi Ahwaal al-Masoomeen al-Athaar

Shaykh Muhammad Ali al-Zaahid, famous as Shaykh Ali al-Hazeen (exp. 1181
A.H.)

31. Taveel al-Aayaat al-Zaaherah

Sayyed Sharaf al-Deen Ali al-Husaini al-Astaraabaadi, a tenth century
scholar

32. Taareekh-e-Baghdad

Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn Ali al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi (exp. 463 A.H.)

33. Taareekh al-Khulafa

Jalaal al-Deen Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr al-Suyuti (exp. 911 A.H.)

34. Tabyeen al-Mahajjah Ila Taayeen al-Hujjah

Al-Haaj Mirza Mohsin Aqa al-Tabrizi (exp. 1352 A.H.)

35. Tahqeeq al-Firqah al-Naajiyah

36. Tazkerah al-Huffaaz

Abu Abdillah Shams al-Deen al-Zahabi (exp. 748 A.H.)

37. Tafseer Abu al-Futuh

Shaykh Abu al-Futuh al-Raazi, a sixth century scholar.

38. Tafseer al-Kashshaaf

Abu al-Qasim Jaarullah Mahmud al-Zamakhshari al-Kharazmi (exp. 528 A.H.)

39. Tafseer al-Saafi

Mulla Mohsin Faiz al-Kashani (exp. 1091 A.H.)

40. Tafseer al-Tabari (known as Jaame’ al-Bayaan)

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Jurair al-Tabari (exp. 310 A.H.)

41. Tafseer al-Furaat

Furaat Ibn Ibraheem al-Kufi, a third century scholar

42. Tafseer al-Qurtubbi

43. Tafseer Kanz al-Daqaaeq

Shaykh Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Raza al-Qummi al-Mashhadi, a twelfth
century scholar

44. Tafseer Noor al-Saqalain

Allamah Abd Ali Ibn Jum’ah al-Urusi al-Huwaizi (exp. 1112 A.H.)

45. Tafseer al-Neshapuri (famous as Gharaaeb al-Quran)

Hasan Ibn Muhammad al-Neshapuri, a ninth century scholar

46. Taqreeb al-Maaref

Abu al-Salaah al-Halabi (exp. 447 A.H.)

47. Tanzeeh al-Shariah

48. Tahzeeb al-Tahzeeb

Shahaabuddin Abu al-Fazl Ahmad Ibn Ali Ibn Hajar al-Asqalaani (exp. 852
A.H.)

49. Al-Tauheed

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

50. Al-Tawrah (Old Testament)

51. Tayseer al-Wusul Ila Jaame’ al-Usul

Abd al-Rahmaan Ibn Ali, famous as Ibn al-Badee’ al-Shaibaani al-Zubaidi
al-Shaafei (exp. 944 A.H.)

52. Al-Jaame’ al-Sagheer

Jalaal al-Deen Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr al-Suyuti (exp. 911 A.H.)

53. Al-Jarh Wa al-Ta’deel

Abu Muhammad Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abi Haatim al-Raazi (exp. 327 A.H.)

54. Al-Jawaaher al-Muzeeah

55. Jamaal al-Usboo’

Sayyed Ibn Taawoos (exp. 664 A.H.)

56. Al-Jam’ Bayn al-Sahihain

Al-Hameedi (exp. 488 A.H.)

57. Hilyah al-Abraar

Sayyed Hashim al-Bahraani (exp. 1107 or 1109 A.H.)

58. Al-Khesaal

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

59. Al-Durr al-Manthoor

Jalaal al-Deen Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr al-Suyuti (exp. 911 A.H.)

60. Dastooro Maalem al-Hukm

Qazi Abu Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Salamah al-Qazaaee, a Shafei jurist (exp.
454 A.H.)

61. Dalaael al-Imaamah

Abu Jafar al-Tabari, a fourth century scholar

62. Raamooz al-Ahaadith

Al-Kamooshkhaanei

63. Al-Raddo Ala al-Zaidiyyah

Abu Abdillah Jafar Ibn Muhammad al-Dureesti

64. Rawz al-Jenaan Wa Ruh al-Janaan

Shaykh Abu al-Futuh al-Raazi, a sixth century scholar.

65. Rawzah al-Muttaqeen

Mulla Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi (the father of Allamah Majlisi)

66. Rawzah al-Waaezeen

Al-Fattaal al-Neshapuri, martyred in 508 A.H.

67. Riyaaz al-Saalekeen

Sayyed Ali Khan al-Madani (exp. 1120 A.H.)

68. Sunan Ibn Majaah

Muhammad Ibn Yazeed Ibn Majaah al-Qazvini (exp. 273 A.H.)

69. Sunan Abi Dawood

Abu Dawood Sulayman al-Ash’ar al-Sajistani (exp. 257 A.H.)

70. Sunan al-Tirmidhi

Abu Eesa Muhammad Ibn Sawrah (exp. 278 A.H.)

71. Al-Sunan al-Waaredah Fi al-Fetan (Sunan al-Daani)

Umar Ibn Saeed al-Maqri al-Daani

72. Sharho Saheeh al-Muslim

Abu Zakariyah Yahya Ibn Sharaf al-Nauvee (exp. 676 A.H.)

73. Sharho Ghaayah al-Ahkaam

74. Sharh al-Maqaasid

Sa’d al-Deen al-Taftaazaani (exp. 793 A.H.)

75. Shamaael al-Rasool

Haafez Abu al-Fida Ismaael Ibn Kaseer al-Demeshqi (exp. 774 A.H.)

76. Shawaahed al-Tanzeel

Al-Haakim al-Haskaani al-Hanafi al-Neshapuri, a fifth century scholar

77. Shawaahed al-Nabuwwah

Abd al-Rahmaan al-Jaami

78. Saheeh al-Bukhaari

Abu Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Ismaael Ibn Mughairah (exp. 256 A.H.)

79. Saheeh Muslim

Abu al-Hasan Muslim Ibn Hajjaaj al-Qashteeri al-Neshapuri (exp. 261
A.H.)

80. Al-Seraat al-Mustaqeem

Shaykh Zain al-Deen Ali Ibn Yunus Al-Aameli al-Bayaazi (exp. 877 A.H.)

81. Sefaat al-Shiah

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

82. Al-Sawaaeq al-Muhreqah

Shahaabuddin Ahmad Ibn Hajar al-Haithami al-Shafei, a resident of Mecca
(exp. 974 A.H.)

83. Al-Taraaef

Sayyed Ibn Taawoos (exp. 664 A.H.)

84. Al-Iqd al-Fareed

Ibn Abd Rabbeh al-Aandalusi (exp. 328 A.H.)

85. Al-Umdah

Abu al-Hasan Yahya Ibn al-Hasan Ibn al-Hasan al-Bitreeq al-Hilli (exp.
600 A.H.)

86. Al-Awaalem

Shaykh Abdullah al-Bahraani al-Isfahani, a student of Allamah Majlisi

87. Oyoon Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.)

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

88. Ghaayah al-Maraam

Sayyed Hashim al-Bahraani (exp. 1107 or 1109 A.H.)

89. Al-Ghadeer

Al-Allamah al-Ameeni (exp. 1390 A.H.)

90. Al-Ghaibah

Shaykh al-Tusi (exp. 460 A.H.)

91. Al-Ghaibah

al-Fazl Ibn Shazaan (exp. 260 A.H.)

92. Ghaibah al-No’maani

Abu Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Ibraheem al-No’maani (a contemporary of Shaykh
Kulaini)

93. Al-Faaeq

Abu al-Qasim Jaarullah Mahmud al-Zamakhshari al-Kharazmi (exp. 528 A.H.)

94. Fath al-Baari Fi Sharh al-Bukhaari

Ibn Hajar al-Asqalaani (exp. 852 A.H.)

95. Al-Fetan

Noaim Ibn Hammaad, the teacher of the authors of the Sehaah (except
Nesaai) and a number of other students. (exp. 228 or 229 A.H.)

96. Faraaed al-Simtain

Shaykh al-Islam Sadr al-Deen Ibraheem Ibn Sa’d al-Deen Muhmmad
al-Hammuee (exp. 732 A.H.)

97. Firdaus al-Akhbaar

Haafez Shirwayh Ibn Shahardaar al-Dailami (exp. 509 A.H.)

98. Fasl al-Khetaab

Khwajah Muhammad Paarsaa

99. Al-Fazaael

Abu al-Fazl Shaazaan Ibn Jibraeel al-Qummi (he compiled this book in the
year 558 A.H.)

100. Al-Fauz Wa al-Amaan Fi Madh-e-Saaheb al-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

A collection of poems of Shaykh Bahaaee (exp. 1031 A.H.)

101. Al-Fehrist

Ibn Nadeem

102. Qasas al-Anbiyaa

Qutb al-Deen al-Raawandi (exp. 573 A.H.)

103. Al-Qaul al-Mukhtasar

104. Al-Kaafi

Abu Salaah al-Halabi

105. Al-Kaafi

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Yaqub al-Kulaini (exp. 329 A.H.)

106. Al-Kaamil Fi al-Taareekh

Izz al-Deen Abu al-Hasan Ali Ibn Abi al-Karam al-Shaybaani, famous as
Ibn al-Atheer (exp. 630 A.H.)

107. Kitaab Sulaym Ibn Qais

Abu Sadeq Sulaym Ibn Qais al-Hilaali al-Aameri al-Kufi al-Taabei (exp.
70 or 90 A.H.)

108. Kashf al-Astaar

Muhaddis al-Noori (exp. 1320 A.H.)

109. Kashf al-Haqq (al-Arbaeen)

Ameer Muhammad Sadeq Ibn Sayyed Muhammad Reza al-Khatoonabadi
al-Isfahaani (exp. 1272 A.H.)

110. Kashf al-Ghummah

Abu al-Fath Ali Ibn Eesa al-Erbeli (finished writing this book in 687
A.H.)

111. Kashf al-Yaqeen Fi Fazaael Ameeril Momineen (a.s.)

Allamah Hilli (exp. 726 A.H.)

112. Kefaayah al-Asar

Abu al-Qasim Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Khazzaaz al-Raazi al-Qummi, from the
students of Shaykh Saduq (a.r.)

113. Kefaayah al-Muhtadi (al-Arbaeen)

Mir Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Mir Lauhi al-Husaini al-Musawi al-Isfahaani, a
contemporary of Allamah Majlisi (a.r.)

114. Kamaal al-Deen

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

115. Kanz al-Ummaal

Alaa al-Deen Ali Ibn Hesaam al-Deen, famous as al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (exp.
975 A.H.)

116. Al-Lawaame’ al-Ilaahiyyah

Miqdad Ibn Abdullah al-Suyuri al-Hilli (exp. 826A.H.)

117. Lawaame’ Saaheb Qaraani

Mulla Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi (the father of Allamah Majlisi)

118. Lawaame’ al-Uqool (Fi Sharh Raamooz al-Ahaadis

Shaykh Zia al-Deen Ahmad Ibn Mustafa Al-Kamooshkhaanei (exp. 1311 A.H.)

119. Meah Manqebah

Ibn Shaazaan, a fifth century scholar

120. Mutashaabeh al-Quran Wa Mukhtalefohu

Rasheed al-Deen Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn Shahr Aashob al-Sarvi
al-Mazandarani (exp. 583 A.H.)

121. Al-Majaalis al-Saniyyah

Sayyed Ameen al-Aameli

122. Majma’ al-Bahrain

Shaykh Fakhr al-Deen al-Turaihi (exp. 1085 A.H.)

123. Majma’ al-Bayaan

Ameen al-Islam Abu Ali Fazl Ibn Hasan Ibn Fazl al-Tabarsi (exp. 548
A.H.)

124. Majma’ al-Zawaaed

Al-Haithami (exp. 807 A.H.)

125. Al-Mahalli

Ibn Hazm

126. Al-Mahaasin

Abu Jafar Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Khaled al-Barqi (exp. 274 or 280 A.H.)

127. Al-Muhtazar

Husain Ibn Sulayman al-Hilli, a student of al-Shaheed al-Awwal

128. Mukhtasar Saheeh Muslim

Haafiz Zaki al-Deen al-Munzeri al-Demeshqi (exp. 656 A.H.)

129. Miraat al-Uqool

Allamah Muhammad Baqer Majlisi (exp. 1111 A.H.)

130. Muruj al-Zahab

Masoodi (exp. 346 A.H.)

131. Al-Masaael al-Jaaroodiyyah

Shaykh Mufeed (exp. 413)

132. Al-Masaael al-Khamsoon

Fakhruddin al-Raazi

133. Al-Mustadrak Alaa Al-Sahihain

Abu Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Abdullah, famous as Haakem Neshapuri (exp. 405
A.H.)

134.Musnad Abi Awaanah

135. Musnad Abi Ya’laa al-Mosuli

Haafez Ahmad Ibn Ali al-Tamimi (exp. 307 A.H.)

136. Musnad Ahmad

Abu Abdillah Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Hanbal al-Shaibaani al-Mirvazi (exp.
241 A.H.)

137. Al-Musnad

Haafez Abu Bakr Abdullah Ibn Zubair al-Hameedi (exp. 219 A.H.)

138. Musnad Tayaalesi

139. Mashaareqo Anwaar al-Yaqeen

Haafez Rajab al-Barsi

140. Misbaah al-Mutahajjid

Shaykh al-Tusi (exp. 460 A.H.)

141. Misbaah al-Kaf’ami

Shaykh Taqi Al-Deen Ibraheem al-Kaf’ami (exp. 905 A.H.)

142. Al-Mataaleb al-Aaliyah Be Zawaaed al-Masaaneed al-Samaaniyyah

Ibn Hajar al-Asqalaani (exp. 852 A.H.)

143. Ma’ani al-Akhbaar

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

144. Al-Mo’tabar

Al-Muhaqqeq al-Hilli (exp. 676 A.H.)

145. Al-Mo’jam al-Awsat

Haafez al-Tabaraani (exp. 360 A.H.)

146. Al-Mo’jam al-Kabeer

Haafez al-Tabaraani (exp. 360 A.H.)

147. Maqaaleed al-Kunooz (Fi Sharh Musnad)

Ahmad Muhammad Shakir

148. Muqtazab al-Asar

Ahmad Ibn Ubaidullah Ibn Ayyaash al-Jawhari (exp. 401 A.H.)

149. Maqtal al-Husain

Haafez al-Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad al-Makki al-Hanafi, famous as Akhtab
Khwarazm (exp. 568 A.H.)

150. Al-Malaahem

Ibn al-Munaadi

151. Al-Malaahem Wa al-Fetan

Razi al-Deen Abu al-Qasim Ali Ibn Moosa Ibn Jafar Ibn Muhammad Ibn
Taawoos al-Hasani al-Husaini (exp. 664 A.H.)

152. Munaar al-Hudaa

Al-Muhaddith al-Shaykh Ali al-Bahraani (he finished writing this book in
1295 A.H.)

153. Al-Manaaqeb

Rasheed al-Deen Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn Shahr Aashob al-Sarvi
al-Mazandarani (exp. 583 A.H.)

154. Mukhtasar Basaaer al-Darajaat

155. Muntakhab Kanz al-Ummaal

Alaa al-Deen Ali Ibn Hesaam al-Deen, famous as al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (exp.
975 A.H.)

156. Man laa Yahzorohu al-Faqih

Abu Jafar Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn al-Husain Shaykh al-Saduq (exp. 381 A.H.)

157. Mohij al-Da’waat

Sayyed Ibn Taawoos (exp. 664 A.H.)

158. Mawaddah al-Qurba

Sayyed Ali Ibn Shahab al-Husaini, a resident of India (exp. 786 A.H.)

159. Al-Naafe’ Yawm al-Hashr Fi Sharh al-Baab al-Haadi Ashar

Al-Faazel al-Miqdad

160. Al-Najm al-Saaqib

Muhaddis al-Noori (exp. 1320 A.H.)

161. Al-Nukat al-E’teqaadiyyah

Shaykh Mufeed (exp. 413 A.H.)

162. Al-Nehaayah Fi Ghareeb al-Hadis Wa al-Asar

Ibn al-Aseer (exp. 606 A.H.)

163. Nehaayah al-Bedaayah Wa al-Nehaayah

Haafez Abu al-Fida Ibn Kathir al-Demeshqi (exp. 774)

164. Nahj al-Balagha

Shareef Sayyed Razi (exp. 404 A.H.)

165. Al-Nawaader

Mulla Mohsin Faiz al-Kashani (exp. 1091 A.H.)

166. Al-Hidaayah

Al-Husain Ibn Hamadaan

167. Al-Waafi

Mulla Mohsin Faiz al-Kashani (exp. 1091 A.H.)

168. Yanaabi al-Mawaddah

Shaykh Sulaiman Ibn Shaykh Ibraheem, famous as Khwajah Kelaan al-Husaini
al-Balkhi al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi (exp. 1294 A.H.)

169. Al-Yaqeen Fi Imrah al-Momineen (a.s.)

Razi al-Deen Ibn Taawoos (exp. 664 A.H.)


