Preface
=======

With the prophetic mission of Prophet Muhammad (s), the seal of the
prophets, the last and the most perfect divine religion was conveyed to
humanity and prophet hood came to an end.

The religion of Islam emerged in Mecca but after twenty three years of
arduous efforts made by the Messenger Allah (s) and a handful of his
loyal companions it spread all over the Arabian Peninsula.

The continuation of this divine mission was a task that was entrusted
publicly on Dhul Hijja, the eighteenth, by Allah, the Glorious, to Ali
(a.s), the commander of the faithful and the first personality after the
Holy Prophet (s) in the world of Islam.

With the proclamation of Hazrat Ali‟s guardianship and succession on
this day, divine blessings were completed and the religion of Islam was
perfected, being announced as the only religion chosen by Allah. That
was how unbelievers and pagans got disappointed from destroying Islam.

Soon after the demise of the Messenger of Allah (s), some of the
companions of the Holy Prophet (s) based on their pre-hatched
conspiracies, brought deviation in the course of guidance and
leadership. They closed the gate of the city of knowledge putting
Muslims in perplexity. From the very beginning of their rule, they
placed the truths of Islam – that were like shinning sun – behind the
dark clouds of doubt and skepticism by putting a ban on recording
prophetic traditions , spreading fabricated traditions , casting doubts
and using hypocrisy and deception.

Obviously, in spite of all conspiracies hatched by the enemies of Islam,
the truths of Islam and noble sayings of the Messenger of Allah (s) were
promulgated by the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.), his successors
and a few of his devout companions and those truths kept flowing and
manifesting themselves in one way or the other in the course of history.
By explaining the truths, they did away with the doubts, hesitation,
illusions,and unfounded beliefs inculcated by the enemies of Islam,
making truths clear to all.

In this respect, great scholars and men of knowledge such as Sheikh
Mufid, Sayyid Murtadha, Khaja Nasir, Allamah Hilli, Qadhi Nurullah, Mir
Hamid Husain, Sayyid Sharafuddin, Allamah Amini etc. are like shining
stars for they are the ones who defended Islamic truths, explained the
realities of the school of Ahlulbayt (a.s.) and dealt with spurious
arguments using their tongues and pens.

In our era, one of the of the scholars and researchers who has, with his
eloquent pen and expressive writing, explained the truths of the
religion of Islam and astutely defended the leadership and wilayah
(guardianship) of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) is Ayatollah
Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani.

The Islamic Truths Center is proud to embark on reviving the fruitful
and precious works of that great researcher by reviewing, translating
and publishing them in a bid to make them available to students,
scientific figures and those who are in search for Islamic truths.

The book in your hand is a translation of one of his works, intended to
acquaint the English audience with Islamic truths. It is expected that
this humble effort will earn the pleasure of the Remnant of Allah, the
Imam of Time [the twelfth Shiite Imam] may Allah hasten his
reappearance.

**Islamic Truths Center**


