Part 3: A reflection on the text of this tradition and its meaning
==================================================================

Fabricated Tradition
--------------------

Given the preceding discussions, it is clear that the tradition
containing the word ‘thaqalain’ (two weighty things) and its likes has
no originality and is not thus correct. This is because one cannot trace
any tradition containing any recommendation to ‘Book and Tradition’
under the heading ‘thaqalain’ in Sihah or Masanid.

The traditions that have appeared in some books – though they have
originally appeared in al-Muwatta and Hakim’s al-Mustadrak- have no
sound basis, particularly the rare versions of this tradition that is
together with this phrase: the Holy Prophet (s) made this comment in his
sermon in Farewell Hajj.

The motive and goal of the inventor
-----------------------------------

There is a strong probability that those who invented this tradition
with this text aimed at confronting and challenging the real „thaqalain‟
tradition by this invented tradition. The real thaqalain tradition is
the tradition that is a matter of consensus among Muslims and there
exists certainty that the Holy Prophet (s) has mentioned it.

The real ‘Thaqalain’ tradition
------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s) has presented thaqalain tradition in different
places, the most well-known of which is Ghadir where the Holy Prophet
(s) after performing his Farewell Hajj gave his well-known Ghadir
sermon. This is where he recommended his community to hold fast to the
Book and Tradition and ordered them to follow these two precious things
and stop opposing them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.... و قد ترکت فیکم ما ان اخذتم بهما لن تضلوا بعدی: کتاب هللا و اهل
بیتی
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“… I left something among you. As long as you hold fast to them, you
will never go astray after me: Allah’s Book and my progeny”.** [^1]

The Holy Prophet (s) in this sermon says emphatically that as long as
his community holds fast to the Holy Quran and the Holy Prophet’s
progeny (which do not separate from each other until they join him by
the pool), they will not go astray.

Thaqalain Tradition and its Narrators
-------------------------------------

Numerous narrators including hundreds of Hadith scholars and Huffaz
(memorizers of traditions), belonging to various centuries, have
narrated thaqalain tradition from around forty male and female
companions of the Holy Prophet (s) through innumerable channels, to the
extent that some great scholars have compiled a book in order to collect
the chains of the transmitters of this tradition. For instance scholars
including Muslim bin Hajjaj, Ahmad bin Hanbal, Tirmidhi, Abu Dawood, Ibn
Maja, Nisaee, Hakim Nayshaburi, Tabari, Tabarani etc. have related this
tradition.

Thaqalain Tradition and its Signification
-----------------------------------------

Thaqalain tradition clearly signifies that it is obligatory on Muslims
to follow Prophet’s progeny in every matter, religious or secular. There
is no doubt in the authenticity of its chain of transmitters and the
clarity of its content (in explaining the position of the Holy Prophet’s
progeny), though some have however, attempted in vain to question its
chain and signification or distort its words and text. Others have tried
to introduce the fabricated tradition of laying emphasis on holding fast
to Book and Tradition, as ‘thaqalain tradition’. They have taken refuge
to this fabricated tradition with the aim to replace it with the real
thaqalain tradition that is no doubt stated by the Holy Prophet (s)!

Based on the assessments made, we made it – thanks to God- clear that
the tradition of enjoining adherence to Book and Tradition is invented
and fabricated.

### A mere probability

The tradition of adherence to Book and Tradition is forged and invented.
If we suppose that this tradition is correct having a sound origin,
there is no incoherence between recommending adherence to Book and
Tradition and recommending adherence to Book and Prophet’s progeny. This
is because there is a consensus among Muslims that all is obliged to act
in accordance with the Book and prophetic tradition. The tradition of
adherence to the Book and Prophet’s progeny intends to say that it is
necessary to take the Holy Prophet’s tradition from Prophet’s progeny –
not anyone else. This is what the scholars of Hadith and the
commentators on this tradition have pointed out. As an instance, Muttaqi
Hindi has mentioned both of these traditions under the heading “holding
fast to Book and Tradition” - a thing that does not remain hidden from
the sight of those who read it.

Peace and blessing of Allah be upon Muhammad and his pure progeny.

All praise belongs to Allah.

[^1]: Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 13, p. 140, Tradition no. 36441.


