Chapter 9: The Battle of the Ditch
==================================

   
 Five years covering important events passed from the date of migration,
and these five years pushed Islam forward as much as five centuries in
the sense that during this short period the Prophet (S) humiliated
Quraysh and vanquished and made helpless the tribes of Ghatfan and
Huzayl and eventually by means of the entire strength, which he had at
his command, he put out the flames of the Arabian pride, at times in the
shape of attack and at times in the form of defence and broke up the
thorns of their communion. Of course, all this success was achieved by
him under the aegis of monotheism and through the propagation of peace
and security.  
    
 As a result of these activities and successes Islam gained strength and
became popular and the voice of the Holy Prophet (S) also reached far
and wide. Side by side with this the defeated elements joined hands
against the Prophet (S) and every enemy who felt even a small vigour
within himself rose to take revenge on the Prophet.  
    
 During the first thirteen years of his mission in Makkah, Quraysh, who
were the Holy Prophet's kinsfolk, had condemned his views and thoughts
and the obstinate members of this tribe called him a silly person and
waged a war against him. However, he continued his efforts as usual.  
    
 During this period of contention Quraysh often placed at his disposal
wealth and persons? So that he might abandon his call. He, however,
continued to pursue his path and sought aloofness from them, till at
last he migrated to Madina.  
    
 A few months after his migration, the Prophet (S) organized an army,
fought in Badr and at other places and returned to Madina after
achieving victory and acquiring war booty. Apparently Quraysh contended
and disputed with him as they condemned his mission, but later they rose
against him openly as well as secretly to avenge their financial losses
as well as loss of their lives, and to check his influence and
therefore, began to array troops.  
    
 The Jews who lived in the neighbourhood of the Prophet (S) and owned
vast lands and also benefited from craftsmanship, requested him to expel
the Jews of Bani Qaynuqa' and Bani Nazir from Madina not withstanding
all their wealth and position among the Jews.  
    
 This group of Jews, all of whom possessed property and wealth, had felt
on the very day of the Prophet's arrival in Madina that their influence
was in danger. For this reason they planned to create mischief and
thought, on account of their wealth and the influence which they wielded
in Madina, that they would be able to subdue the shelter less Prophet
(S) and his followers.  
    
 It is evident that the Prophet (S) could not yield to the enmity of the
Jews and if he had surrendered to their strength and influence, it would
have been as good as his having proclaimed his own defeat. In view of
this he, in the first instance, warned the Jews of Bani Qaynuqa and then
those of Bani Nazir to refrain from creating trouble. As, however, they
did not pay any heed to the warnings, he was obliged to give orders
regarding their expulsion and they left the city in a state of great
humiliation and helplessness and thus saved their lives. They were not
allowed to carry away anything except the provisions for their journey
up to Khayber (in the interior of the Hijaz) or Azra'at (situated in
Syria).  
    
 On the other side were the Arabs of Ghati'an and Huzayl and other
tribes of the suburbs, and similarly the tribes of Najd and the
frontiers of Syria, who were seeing the phantom of the new system, felt
that Islam had brought its own rules and was inviting people to work and
make efforts so that they might lead their lives in this manner, instead
of indulging in fighting and plundering. They had therefore, sharpened
their stings like a monster and were clutching at the face of the Holy
Prophet (S) and had become a barrier before his reforms. They were
afraid that the new system would eradicate the very foundations of their
tribal life and the ways of their plundering.  
    
 In short, Quraysh in Makkah, his neighbours the Jews of Madina, the
Arabs of Ghatfan and Huzayl, the tribes living in nearby places and
those belonging to Najd and the frontiers of Syria, and so to say the
entire Arab world had risen and mobilized against him.  
    
 Although Islam had become sufficiently strong, the enemies of Islam who
had cooperated with one another possessed a great strength. Apart from
that, in those days the Holy Prophet (S) was faced with a group of
hypocrites. The hypocrisy of these persons was reckoned to be a weak
point of Islam and a proof of the slackness of its authority, and the
enemy could break the fort of Islam through this way and enter it.  
    
 The proofs of the Prophethood of Muhammad (S) are many, but his
greatest miracle and sign was their peace of mind and confidence which
was firm in this critical situation and he was not afraid of the fire of
mischief and hypocrisy which had encircled him from all sides; rather he
gained more strength of mind every day to achieve his cherished goal.  
    
 Amidst all the brawls and uproars, and throughout his campaigns, and
also during the intervals of these dreadful events, in the course of
five years, in which the greatness and honour of Islam increased and at
the same time the number of the opponents of Islam also increased,
‘Ammar, the hero of our story, that tall and strong man, who had tasted
the flavour of death during summer as well as winter, and was not afraid
in any circumstances, had now achieved such a position that death feared
him. During the intervals of these campaigns death was under his control
and had made a covenant with him. At times he ordered death during
summer that it should fall upon and take the life of those enemies who
used to pull him to the point of annihilation with cruelty.  
    
 According to his old habit of going to the masjid to hear the address
of the Holy Prophet (S), ‘Ammar went to the masjid one day to learn
something from the Prophet (S) and act upon it or to execute an order
given by him. On that day, while on his way to the masjid, he observed,
contrary to the previous days, signs and marks which did not augur will
for victory and success, as the general conditions of the city had
assumed another shape. As soon as he entered the masjid he observed that
the condition of the masjid on that day differed from the previous day,
because in earlier days, when the companions of the Prophet were
relieved of campaigns and were resting under the auspices of his
kindness and support, he usually delivered sermons in regard to
regulation of the affairs of life and establishment of the rules of
discipline and good order. On that day, however, the atmosphere of the
masjid had assumed a new shape and the conditions indicated a different
outlook.  
    
 On observing these conditions ‘Ammar was somewhat worried and wished to
enquire about this change in the conditions. However, the wisdom of
Luqman i.e. wisdom of silence, which was his old habit prevented him
from doing so, and he waited till his turn to speak arrived. And then
the position became clear without unnecessary inquisitiveness on his
part.  
    
 ‘Ammar had not made a mistake in refraining from making enquires about
the matter, because he enjoyed such a position in the eyes of the
Prophet (S) that even the most confidential matter could not remain
hidden from him, not to speak of a secret, which had been disclosed now,
and the faces of the hypocrites became dark and gloomy on this
disclosure. The divulgence of this secret also haunted the entire Muslim
community of Madina like a nightmare.  
    
 After ‘Ammar had taken his seat amongst the esteemed companions, he
learned that the Jews of Bani Nazir tribe had revealed their malicious
nature, and had instigated all the tribes of Arabia to rise against the
Holy Prophet, and that the criminal minded Jews incited all the
opponents of Islam, who were in majority in Arabia, to fight against the
Muslims of Madina, who were in the minority, so that they might strike
them a final blow.[^1]  
    
 ‘Ammar came to know that Hay bin Akhtab and Salam bin Haqiq and a group
of the Jews belonging to the tribe of Bani Nazir as well as the leaders
of the Jews had instigated Quraysh to rise against the Prophet. Abu
Sufyan bin Harb had mobilized an army consisting of four thousand
warriors out of whom 300 hundred were horsemen and 1,500 were on camels
and the standard-bearer of this army was ‘Uthman bin Talha.  
    
 Similarly Bani Fazara had been instigated, and 'Uyayna bin Hisn Fazari
had mobilized 1000 men mounted on camels; and the tribe of Bani Ashja '
had also risen and 400 warriors of theirs were ready to march under the
command of Ma'r bin Rakhila; and the tribe of Bani Murra had despatched
Harith bin' Awf with 400 warriors, and the tribe of Bani Salim had also
sent 700 fighters against the Prophet of Islam.  
    
 Furthermore, Bani Asad and Bani Sa'd were also going to participate in
the attack and they and their allies had mobilized and despatched an
army the like of which had not been seen by Arabia before. And all these
groups had entrusted the supreme command to Abu Sufyan who was on his
way to Madina.  
    
 In the meantime it also became known that Hay bin Akhtab had undertaken
to rouse the Jews of Bani Qurayza against the Prophet (S) and to
persuade them to violate the pace concluded by them with the Prophet
(according to the pact, they were residing in Madina and were enjoyed
the support of the Prophet), and thus create trouble within Madina and
pave the way for the victory of their army, so that they might make a
sudden attack in the severe winter season and rout the Muslims.  
    
 When ‘Ammar learnt about these matters, he realized that the Muslims of
Madina were justified in being worried on account the serious situation
in which they were placed. However, on such occasions ‘Ammar used to
look intently at the face of the Prophet (S) and to judge his impression
and anxiety, before being impressed by the anxiety of others arriving at
a decision. He, therefore, fixed his eyes on the face of the Prophet.  
    
 As a result of this careful observation he felt that the Prophet (S)
was as cheerful as ever and he was enjoying perfect peace of mind. At
last, therefore, he concluded that the bright countenance of the Prophet
(S) showed that the mobilization of forces by Abu Sufyan and the Jews
fell under the category of the events which did not call for any worry
and that the Muslims should bold and brave. The Prophet (S) did not
consider the matter important enough to make others worry about it.  
    
 In view of this, ‘Ammar became contented like all those persons whose
souls acquire confidence with the strength of faith, and who do not
entertain fear on account of any event, however great and terrible it
may be.  
    
 The Prophet (S) called a meeting of his companions and consulted them
about the event which was likely to take place soon, and especially
invited their views about the Jews and the polytheists. In this meeting
thinkers and warriors from amongst the Muhajirs and the Ansar were
present. At the end of consultations two views emerged:  
    
 1. The Muslims should go out of the city and face the enemies at Uhud
or some other place.  
    
 2. They should fortify themselves within Madina and resist the enemies,
because by offering such resistance there was no danger of being
subdued.  
    
 The second view was considered to be the better one. It was supported
by the suggestion of Salman Farsi regarding digging a ditch, which was
endorsed by all those present. All of them praised Salman for his
originality.  
    
 On this occasion the Muhajirs claimed that Salman was one of them and
said: “Salman belongs to us.”  
    
 The Ansar also put forward a similar claim and said: "Salman belongs to
us.”  
    
 The Holy Prophet (S), however, intervened and said: "Salman is one of
the members of my family.”  
    
 Salman said: "My suggestion is that we should remain inside Madina and
close all the breaches. Thereafter we should dig a ditch round the city
which would prevent the entry of the enemies. And when their entry has
been blocked we shall overcome them and defeat them by military tactics.
In that event time will be in our favour, because we shall be in our own
places of safety and the wind, storm and rains will not do us much harm.
On the contrary the enemies will be very much harassed on account of
harsh winds and severe cold and it is quite possible that the storm may
pull down their tents. Further more, we have sufficient stocks and
provisions, and can face the enemy for quite a long time. In the
circumstances it would be better if we remain within the city and block
the entry of the enemies by digging a ditch, so that they may lose
patience and if some one of them attacks us he will be annihilated.”  
    
 Those present proceeded immediately and occupied themselves in digging
the ditch under the guidance of the Holy Prophet (S).  
    
 The Prophet (S) ordered a number of shovels, picks and other necessary
implements to be brought. The same were procured, and then in the name
of Allah he personally started the work. He was the first person who
struck the pick on the ground and was the first person on whose head and
face the dust settled; while digging the ditch he encouraged the Muslims
to work hard and prayed: "O Lord! Verily the life is life of the
hereafter. So, O Lord! Forgive the Ansar and the Muhajirs.”  
    
 The persons who were sincere and devout in Islam dug the earth as
expeditiously as possible and threw the soil out of the ditch, but the
hypocrites who were not inclined to work willingly dissimulated, and
whenever they found an opportunity they misled others, slipped away to
their houses and rested there. It was in relation to the condition of
these persons that Allah sent a revelation to the Holy Prophet (S) and
said:

***Do not address the Prophet as you address each other: Allah indeed
knows those of you who slip away surreptitiously and take shelter in
their houses. Let those who disobey Allah's command should fear that a
calamity may overtake them or a dreadful punishment may descend upon
them.*** **(Surah al-Nur, 24:63)**  
    
 But as regards the true believers, who gave up work on account of some
valid excuse, and left with the permission of the Prophet, the Almighty
Allah has said:

***The true believers are those who have faith in Allah and His Prophet
and as and when they cooperate with the Prophet in a particular work,
they do not go away without his permission. Surely those who take your
permission are the persons who believe in Allah and His Prophet. In this
case if they seek your permission (to go) to do some work, which they
may have to do, accord permission to whomever you like, and seek
forgiveness for them from Allah, because Allah is Forgiving and
Merciful.*** **(Surah al-Nur, 24:62)**  
    
 Anyhow, for six days the Muslims had been labouring hard to dig the
ditch, and eventually they constructed a fort for the city of Madina.
This fort did not resemble the forts which the Arabs used to construct,
because the forts which they constructed previously were on the ground,
but this fort had been dug in the earth and the unbelievers were stunned
by this sudden initiative of the Muslims  
    
 If we say that during this period of six days every other Muslim was
faced with one degree of toil and inconvenience we should say that
‘Ammar was faced with twice as much as that.  
    
 Again, during the continuous toils and efforts of these days the
Muslims observed that not even a single day passed when the Prophet (S)
did not wipe off dust from the head and face of ‘Ammar with his own
hands. He repeated this particular sentence: "Alas! O son of Sumayya! A
rebellious group will kill you! "  
    
 The day of the ditch was the most brilliant and effective factor for
the victory and success of Islam and simultaneously it was a period when
Islam was threatened with great dangers on account of the presence of
the hypocrites because it was these very hypocrites, who dispirited and
discouraged the people and said: "Muhammad used to promise us the
treasures of Kaiser and Kisra, whereas he is now digging our graves in
this ditch. Did he mean this Iranian innovation which will be of no
avail before the rush and attack of the, army of Abu Sufyan. He promises
us treasure and that too the treasure of gems. But that treasure won't
be anything other than our lifeless bodies ".  
    
 The hypocrites uttered these words with different tones and these very
gossips and rumours became the cause of the fear and worries of the
people of Madina.  
    
 The Holy Qur'an has described this state of affairs in a very subtle
and elegant manner. It says:

***When they (the enemies) came upon you from above and from below and
the eyes grew wild and hearts reached to the throats, and you were
imagining vain thoughts concerning Allah. There were the believers
sorely tried, and shaken with a mighty shock. And when the hypocrites,
and those in whose hearts is a disease, were saying: 'Allah and His
messenger promised us naught but delusion.’ And when a party of them
said: 'O folk of Yathrib! There is no stand (possible) for you,
therefore turn back'. And some of them (even) sought permission of the
Prophet, saying: 'Our homes lie open (to the enemy)'. And they lay not
open. They but wished to flee.***[^2] **(Surah al Ahzab, 33:10 13)**  
    
 In any case the tools of work and the means of victory and success in
this dreadful war were three things viz. planning by Salman, the sword
of ‘Ali and the war tactics of the Holy Prophet.  
    
 It goes without saying that from among thee three factors the most
important factor and tool of work was the war tactics employed by the
Prophet, because he sent Na'im bin Sa'd, whose embracement of Islam had
not yet been made public, to his tribesmen and he made them lose hope of
help from the Jews. By this means the morale of those people
deteriorated and the sense of mutual confidence and reliance which
previously existed between those two parties disappeared. Hence, the
tribes were faced with doubt, hesitation and anxiety and their united
strength became scattered and divided. As a result of this the Muslims
were victorious and the invaders retreated and fled during a dark night
when strong and cold winds were campaigning against them.  
    
 After having violated the pacts which they had concluded with the
Muslims, Bani Qurayza were left alone in their forts and Hay bin Akhtab
was also with them. In the circumstances, was it not necessary that they
should receive punishment for their treachery?[^3]  
    
    
  

[^1]: In the present century the descendants of this injurious germ have
instigated the authorities in power in England, France and America, to
annihilate Islam. They have made more than one million Muslims homeless
and usurped Palestine. It has been reported in a newspaper that the Pope
has pronounced a judgement that the Jews did not crucify Prophet 'Isa!

[^2]: Prof. Dr Muhammad Hamidullah says in his treatise entitled 'The
Holy Prophet in the battlefield: "Abu Bakr and ‘Umar were sitting near
each other in a tower situated by the bank of the ditch and were very
much frightened and ‘Umar wrote some words on a slab of stone in his own
hand. It clearly shows how frightened he was.”

[^3]: These treacherous people were executed in accordance with the
arbitration of Sa’ad bin Mu’az and the commands of the Torah.


