Chapter 2: Ammar, the Ally of Makhzum
=====================================

   
 The ally of Makhzum was a swarthy person whose nature had been kneaded
with musk. He was of tall stature, square built and awe-inspiring
person. He had dark eyes and scanty hair on his head. As has been
written by his contemporary narrator 'Zul-Idara' he had a few hairs in
the front part of his head and a few hairs on its back and that was all.
He was a quiet person as if the angels were conversing with him. He was
a man of firm will and determination. He was never deceived; and he
never deviated from the right path. He was always governed by reason and
he always followed logic. As A’isha says: "If ‘Ammar is doubtful about
two matters he chooses the easiest course. He is an intelligent,
generous, godly and brave person. He is a man who never turns away from
truth".  
    
 The great and noble person was born in the tribe of Bani Makhzum during
the 570 A.D. and as he has said himself that he was of the same age as
the Holy Prophet (S) and from the point of view of age none of the
companions was nearer to the Prophet (S) than he;  
    
 His mother was Sumayya, the daughter of Khayyat and the slave girl of
Abu Huzayfa, the chief of the tribe of Makhzum. Amongst the slave girls
of Quraysh none was as noble minded, intelligent, kind-hearted,
faithful, chaste and pure as she was.  
    
 Yasir bin Amir, the father of ‘Ammar, was an 'Unasi, Mazhaji Qahtini
Arab of Yemen who had left his home along with his two brothers named
Malik and Harith to find out his fourth brother who had wondered away
from Yemen on account of famine, drought and the deteriorating
conditions of the government.  
    
 It was not only this person who had wandered away from Yemen at that
time. A large number of persons were compelled to leave their homes to
find out employment and sustenance elsewhere.  
    
 Since the time the city of Saba had been ruined a large number of the
Yemenite Arabs had migrated to Makkah and Madina. The tribes of Unas and
Khazraj settled in Madina and a large number of groups got scattered in
Syria, Iraq, Yamama and Najd like ants and locusts. They settled in
different parts of the Arabian Peninsula and expanded their civilization
and culture to the region of 'Hilali Khasib'.  
    
 As the city of Makkah, was a place of peace, it enjoyed superiority
over all other places where the immigrants had settled and as it was
recognized to be the House of Allah ; the means of welfare, comfort and
sustenance were available there and the servants of the Ka'ba paid due
attention to the newcomers. For this reason the homeless persons were
living there in great comfort without any molestation from any side.  
    
 When the three brothers lost all hope of locating their brother, Malik
and Harith returned home, but Yasir stayed on in Makkah and became an
ally of Abu Huzayfa, the chief of Bani Makhzum. Abu Huzayfa looked after
Yasir, and on account of the fact that Abu Huzayfa was so kind and
benevolent to him, Yasir also showed great faithfulness and sincerity
for him.  
    
 Like his brother Hisham in the past and like his second brother Walid
afterwards, Abu Huzayfa was a kind and noble chief and leader and a
magnanimous guardian of his tribe. He also showed great love and
affection for his new ally and loved and respected this stranger 'Unasi
whom destiny had compelled to leave his home and country .It would
appear that this kind and noble hearted person could see his future to
be bright and felt that this man would acquire a high status in future
and would become one of the elders of the community. It was for this
reason that he becomes his ally and always respected him.  
    
 Yasir also valued the good opinion of Abu Huzayfa and did not take
undue advantage of his heartfelt love. And notwithstanding the fact that
he was nothing more than a stranger he preserved his self-respect and
freedom of thought with perfect purity and sincerity.  
    
 Such wise behaviour and noble conduct coupled with sincerity,
cordiality and faithfulness elevated the position of Yasir so much that
within a short time he came to be known as a Makhzumi, acquired all the
rights enjoyed by the tribe and was introduced as one of their notable
personalities. He also attended the assemblies of Quraysh and was highly
respected everywhere.  
    
 One day Abu Huzayfa thought of selecting a wife for his 'Unasi ally so
that he might get rid of loneliness and he also hoped that Allah might
favour him with a worthy child. He, therefore, gave him in marriage
Sumayya, daughter of Khayyat who was the noblest and the chastest of his
slave girls and decided that her children and her husband would be
treated to be freemen.  
    
 Notwithstanding the fact that Yasir had not made any such request, Abu
Huzayfa, who had realized his valuable personality carried out this plan
and made this favour to him. Evidently Yasir was also extremely happy
for acquiring this distinction.  
  


