Chapter 5: ‘Ammar and Abu Jahl
==============================

   
 ‘Ammar Yasir was busy offering his prayers in his house when suddenly
some one knocked at the door. The person who knocked at the door was a
man of short stature with a flat nose and a darkish swarthy
complexion.  
    
 ‘Ammar's mother went to the door of the house, welcomed the visitor and
said: "What a good thing it is that Abu Usama, the freed slave, son and
friend of the Holy Prophet (S) has come to see us! He has brought
blessings and bliss, and has perfumed our house with the fragrance of
the breaths of Prophethood".  
    
 The mother of ‘Ammar was saying these words and was guiding Zayd bin
Harith to the place of worship of ‘Ammar. She made the guest enter the
house and kept standing till he sat down in a corner of the room. Then
she began conversing with him so that ‘Ammar might, in the meantime,
finish the Nafela (recommended prayers) of his noon prayers.  
    
 The whether was cool and the atmosphere was bright. As soon as ‘Ammar
finished his prayers he ran towards Zayd and welcomed him and they
embraced each other. ‘Ammar had not yet occupied his seat when Zayd
began talking and said: 'O Abul Yaqzan! Do you feel inclined that we
should go out and peep into the gatherings of Quraysh?"  
    
 ‘Ammar said: "Why shouldn’t we go to Darul Islam so that during the
remaining time we may benefit from the words of the Holy Prophet (S) and
offer afternoon prayers along with him?"  
    
 Zayd said: "I am just coming from Darul Islam and have good news for
you from Abul Qasim (the Prophet). And now that I have come here I wish
that we should go to the "House" and present ourselves before the Holy
Prophet (S) after getting correct information about the meeting of
Quraysh.”  
    
 ‘Ammar said: "Excellent indeed! What is the good news? Has anyone
embraced Islam? What should I say?  I don't know why Allah is so patient
with these people.”  
    
 Zayd said: "We received the news in Darul Islam that Abu ‘Ammara
delivered a blow to Abu Jahl in public so that the earth became coloured
with his blood. He also warned him that if he maltreated the Prophet
again, he would give the same treatment in return to him; and declared
before Quraysh that from today he has embraced Islam.”  
    
 ‘Ammar, who was extremely happy on hearing this news, asked: "Has Hamza
done so? By Allah I expected this very thing from the 'unique brave man
of Arabia’ and hoped that he would not tolerate the ignorance of Abu
Jahl any longer. This malicious man has been inimical towards the Holy
Prophet (S) for years and has taken liberties which render him liable to
death punishment.”  
    
 Zayd said: "It is a matter of regret that these refractory persons
still exercise authority over Makkah and the Prophet (S) doesn't permit
that we should contend with them, because he has been ordered that as
far as possible he should not go beyond the limits of peace and it is an
undeniable fact that violence is not permissible in this religion except
when it ensures peace. Otherwise the easiest thing possible would have
been that one of us should have killed Abu Jahl and then might have been
killed himself.”  
    
 ‘Ammar said; "Let us go to the House. Now that Hamza has embraced Islam
and given a blow to Abu Jahl, our condition is different from the
previous one. At present the fire of war is blazing. Very good! O Abu
Usama! Tell me how Hamza hit Abu Jahl and where he hit him".  
    
 Zayd said; "According to our information when Hamza returned from
hunting today a slave girl of Abdullah bin Jud'an saw him and reproached
him for spending his time hunting in the mountains of Makkah while his
nephew was treated with insolence. Hamza asked her as to who had
insulted Muhammad. Thereupon she related to him the story of Abu Jahl
having molested and insulted Muhammad and said; "Abu Jahl instigated
some silly and unwise persons and they were rude and insolent to
Muhammad.”  
    
 "As soon as Hamza became aware of this incident he went to the Ka'ba
and performed 'tawaf' (circumambulation) as usual. After having
performed 'tawaf’ he went up to Abu Jahl who was sitting in the circle
of Bani Makhzum and said to him: "Do you abuse Muhammad and that also
when I am his follower and have embraced his religion? ' Having said
this he struck on his head a bow which he was holding in his hand.”  
    
 ‘Ammar asked: "Then what happened to him?' And what did Abu Jahl do
then? Besides this please let me know what effect this action of Hamza
had on the kinsfolk and relatives of Abu Jahl. Did they tolerate it or
showed some reaction?"  
    
 Zayd said: "Some persons belonging to Bani Makhzum got infuriated
against Hamza and stood up to take revenge on him but Abu Jahl acted
wisely and asked them to resume their seats. It is evident that when the
'unique brave man of Arabia' rises against Abu Jahl and fights openly,
he (Abu Jahl) is not in a position to do anything and must remain calm.
Is he not aware that to resist Hamza or to fight against him would mean
his (Abu Jahl’s) annihilation? And it would also create differences
among Quraysh which would become the cause of their destruction.  
    
 Anyhow there is no doubt about the fact that with the declaration of
war by Hamza the hands of Islam are now free and its arms have gained
strength. The polytheists have been overawed by this action and
acknowledge this one blow to be as good as one thousand blows. It is now
time that we should go and find out what impression this act has made on
the people. I am sure that this act must have made a deep impression on
them and the news must have become a topic of conversation.

I think all the people of Makkah have been shocked by this news and
consider this unprecedented event to be very important. As regards the
Muslims I imagine that they treat this incident to be very significant
for the victory of Islam and have become confident that all the dignity
of polytheism has been smashed. And in their own turn the polytheists
also consider it to be their defeat at the hands of the Muslims which
has confirmed the victory of the Muslims. At the same time I think that
both the Muslims and the polytheists agree that this event is a prelude
to the strife which has started between the two parties, and two
groups.  
    
 I swear by Allah that I don't know why these silly persons fail to
acknowledge the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S) and to express faith
in him when Allah has not created anyone who may be more good-natured,
kinder and more beneficial to mankind than Muhammad. And I once again
swear by Allah that He has not created anyone more becoming and more
worthy for guidance towards truth than Muhammad. In case, therefore,
these people come to their senses and make their intellect the arbiters
and arrive in the world in which we have arrived, they will live
comfortably in all respects.”  
    
 While ‘Ammar was holding the hand of Zayd and both of them were going
to the 'House' he said to Zayd: "O Abu Usama! May Allah grant you a
happy future! Have you any doubt about the intelligence, insight and
good under Standing of the elders of Quraysh? By Allah, I don't consider
their intelligence and understanding to be inferior to my own and am
also sure that the standard of their comprehension is not lower than
ours. They perceive the same things in Muhammad which we perceive and
recognize him in the same manner in which we do.

They know that he doesn't utter even a word of his own desire and also
know that he has been truly appointed by Allah. Furthermore, they are
well aware that he removes differences between the black and the white,
and similarly the barriers between the rich and the poor, and annuls the
limits fixed by the people between the employers and the employees. In
his eyes all human beings are equal like the teeth of a comb. All are
the descendants of Prophet Adam and Adam was created from clay. None
enjoys superiority over others except on account of piety and no
individual is preferable to another except by dint of good deeds,
decency and competence.  
    
 Abu Jahl and I are like each other, and Bilal and the son of Khalaf,
too, are equal to each other, and similarly you and Hamza are peers of
each other. All of us are equals and brothers of one another. There is
no master and no slave. It is truth which is the master of all and it is
truth which elevates one and brings down another according to its own
measures and standards! The measures and standards of truth are not
based on wealth, inheritance or old and rotten traditions.  
    
 They also know what we know and perhaps they know and understand it
more and better than you or I. However, a point is involved in it that
they fight against the values and concepts of that which you and I
believe in and not against the person of Muhammad. If Muhammad confirms
and guarantees their privileges and formally recognizes the principle of
slavery and serfdom, which is respectable in their eyes and supports
their despotism and selfishness, so that they may suck the blood of the
people, you should rest assured that not even two persons from amongst
them will disagree about the personality of Muhammad and his appointment
to the Prophetic mission.  
    
 I know that they are traders and their trade is not only confined to
carrying merchandise to Syria and Yemen but they also carry one
commodity elsewhere and bring back another here. Rather their trade
consists of the worship of their gods and they have made this act the
means of their business!  
    
 I have realized it clearly that actually they have no love or regard
for Hobal and other idols which are introduced as enjoying the rank of
'daughters'. On the contrary they jeer and mock at them. The only factor
which is at work is that they have made these idols the means of their
fraud and deceit. In this manner they befool the masses and preserve and
safeguard their own interest and master ship under the protection of the
worship of these idols and override the wishes of the people. If at one
time it so happens that the presence of these futile and worthless
effigies come in conflict with their own selfishness and egotism you
will see that they will trample on them.

The fact is that in the guise of the worship of the idols these people
worship themselves and their defence of the idols is actually their own
defence. I remember that one day Abu Jahl was punishing one of his
slaves and was beating him severely. I heard with my own ears that the
helpless slave was swearing by Hobal that he was guiltless, and in the
meantime requested him in the name of the same idol to spare him. Do you
know what reply Abu Jahl gave to him? Abu Jahl said to the helpless
slave: "O fool! What is Hobal? Is it anything but an inauspicious slave
like you with a broken hand which was purchased by 'Amr bin Lahi, the
chief of Khuza'a tribe, from Balqa in Syria and brought and installed
here, so that you and the people like you may worship it and treat it to
be a god?[^1]  
    
 The same Abu Jahl was punishing another slave one day. The poor slave
uttered the names of the two idols called ‘Asaf' and 'Na'ila' and
requested him in their names.[^2]  
    
 Do you know what reply Abu Jahl gave to the helpless slave? He said:
"Shut up, you fool! Are these two idols not the metamorphosed forms of
an adulterer and an adulteress? Do you wish to put into my brain the
absurdities which have taken their place in yours? Do you want me to
believe in the things which we have declared to be sacred for you and
people like you, and then take an oath in their names? You should know
that these gods are a sort of undiscerning and brainless slave girls of
ours, and we ourselves have introduced them to be great and placed them
over your heads, so that you may thereby recognize our value and worth,
and pay similar respect to us. You are not only my slave but the slave
of my slave girl as well. And the system and order which governs us is
that just as you humiliate yourself before my slave girl and worship
her, you should primarily worship me.  
    
 If this idol disobeys my orders I shall whip it as I whip you. We have
introduced this system and enforced this law as a corrective measure for
you. Be off from my presence. If you remind me of such things again I
shall take out your soul from your impure body.  
    
 Abu Usama! You should know that the symbol and sign of these stubborn
people or in other words the perfect manifestation of these devils is
Abu Jahl. He and others neither have any faith in these idols nor have
any personal grudge against Muhammad. On the contrary it is their selves
and souls which are personified in the shapes of these idols and the
people also surround these idols without knowing or assessing the real
position. And these fleshy idols frighten away the people of Muhammad
and his religion of justice, equity and equality!  
    
 It is for this reason that they attack him. And so long as they don't
give up the habit of self worship, and don't prefer the equity and
justice, which Muhammad is endeavouring to establish, they will always
remain oppressed, and deprived of their rights.  
    
 It is also an undeniable fact that they will not get out this darkness
and ignorance, unless we, with Allah's help, deliver them from this
turbidity and perversion."  
    
 ‘Ammar's remarks ended here and the two friends jointly entered the
masjid. At this moment the gatherings of Quraysh were in an agitated and
disturbed condition. Abu Jahl's blood which had been shed on the ground
had assumed various forms and had become the talk of the town. The
various forms of this incident consisted of humiliation and disgrace
coupled with the right of revenge on the part of Quraysh who exercised
prudence and care, and on the other side it was connected with
resolution and amazement.  
    
 With all the contradictions which this condition carried it was like a
volcano which might erupt any moment. Abu Jahl, from whose head and face
blood was flowing, was accusing Hamza of highhandedness, oppression and
violence, and his refraining from contention and retaliation showed how
intelligent and forbearing he was. He had assumed the image of a person
who had been wronged and pretended that his supporters would rectify the
wrong which had been done to him and would settle his accounts with
Hamza.  
    
 When the elders of Quraysh who had gathered round Abu Jahl saw ‘Ammar,
they broke the silence. The breaking of silence by them meant the
eruption of the volcano. At this moment Abu Jahl said to his associates
in a loud voice: "Do you know anyone more despicable and more humble
than the man who is coming towards us? Ask him whether he has brought
Zayd with him to help me, or whether Zayd has selected him from amongst
the slaves of Bani Makhzum and brought him so that he may deal me
another blow. I swear by god that I never saw such a state of affairs in
Makkah. Neither this earth is the earth of Makkah, nor is this sky the
sky of Makkah.”  
    
 The slaves of Abu Jahl ran towards ‘Ammar with the intention of taking
him to Abu Jahl. Zayd asked Abu Jahl’s slaves: "What does Abu Jahl want
from Abul Yaqzin? Tell Abu Jahl that ‘Ammar was busy and cannot attend
him. He will come when he is free.”  
    
 One of the slaves said to Zayd: "You shouldn't interfere with Abu Jahl
contacting his ally. Don't you know?  That ‘Ammar is an ally of the
tribe of Makhzum? I am afraid if you interfere with the connections
between ‘Ammar and Abu Jahl you will meet the same fate which Abu Jahl
met an hour ago."  
    
 Zayd said: "Woe to you! How ignorant you are! Don't you know that all
of us (i.e. Muslims) form one unit, and our smallest person is supported
by all? All of us are responsible for the act of the smallest person and
are as good as one hand. I order you to leave ‘Ammar alone and return to
your master.”  
    
 The slave of Abu Jahl said to Zayd: "Have you come to create trouble? I
swear by Lat and Uzza (names of the two idols of the polytheists) that
if you don't go away you will see with your own eyes what happens to
you, and even your master will not be able to defend you. Leave ‘Ammar
to himself, so that he may go to the ally of his family. It is
sufficient for Bani Hashim that they have made the head of Abul Hakam
bleed.”  
    
 ‘Ammar feared lest the situation should worsen and Zayd should have to
face trouble for his sake. He, therefore, said to Zayd: "O Abu Usama!
Leave me alone so that I may go with this man, and you need not worry.  
    
 Furthermore, it is necessary that we should not do anything which may
be contrary to the views of the Holy Prophet. In the meantime it will be
better if you go to the Prophet (S) and inform him of the situation.”  
    
 Zayd said: "I shall not leave you alone in any circumstances. I am
afraid these people may harm you, and if I leave you alone I fear
Allah.”  
    
 ‘Ammar said: "I am afraid that your remaining here may become the cause
of disturbance and trouble and the position is that we are not aware of
the views of the Prophet (S) with regard to such a situation. Apart from
it, if you meet any harm it will be as good as their having harmed Bani
Hashim and in that case fighting will become inevitable. And if they
treat me with insolence it will be like their having been insolent to
Abu Huzayfa and this news will reach the ears of Abu Huzayfa only when
it has reached the ears of all others who are dead and gone. Go, my
dear, and don't worry. I am a match for this man.”  
    
 Although Zayd did not agree with ‘Ammar, the latter accompanied the
slaves of Abu Jahl and went to Abu Jahl.  
    
 On having approached the gathering he said to Abu Jahl: "Has Abul Hakam
any business with his ally?"  
    
 Abu Jahl said: "And it is you O son of Sumayya!"  
    
 ‘Ammar said: "Are there many women like Sumayya in the tribe of
Makhzum?" O Abul Hakam! Sumayya was a slave girl who became free. Then
Allah favoured her and blessed her with a greater freedom under the
auspices of Islam .What freedom can be greater than getting rid of the
captivity of infidelity and idol worship! In the circumstances the
abusive language used by you towards me is praise for me!"  
    
 Abu Jahl: “Woe to you…”  
    
 ‘Ammar broke in upon Abu Jahl and said: “Of course it was a curse to
me, when I was a polytheist and an infidel and worshipped others than
Allah".  
    
 Abu Jahl: “Sakhar spoke the truth when he said that when I would rise
from sleep one day and regain my consciousness I would see, as a result
of Muhammad's miracle, a master superior to all masters! I seek refuge
from this silence of yours! How much we have been deceived by your
silence! Very well! O refugee slave! I shall give you what you deserve!
Wait for some time! I excuse you to a certain extent .However, if this
presumptuousness continues you should keep yourself ready to face the
devils.”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “Do you enjoy the position to excuse me? O Abul Hakam! May
Allah correct you!”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “Is there any thing which prevents me from excusing you and
forgiving you?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “The thing which prevents you from doing so is that you are an
idol worshipper! To excuse and to forgive is the right of a Muslim
because people are immune from his hands and tongue; and their faith,
property and honour is safe. However, as you are not a Muslim you don't
enjoy this position. You can be severe with me and you can order your
slaves to beat me. However, this action of yours will be a cruel and
despicable action, and not that you will be just and forgiving. Allah
alone is sufficient for us.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “Don't you see that my face has been besmeared with blood and
how much blood from my head has fallen on the earth?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “Yes. I can see it.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “Do you know who has shed this blood and who has disgraced
me?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “It is possible that I may not be unaware of it.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “In that case why have you associated with a slave of Bani
Hashim when they have risen against me and resorted to fighting?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “That slave of Bani Hashim is a man who is my brother in faith
and has had no share in the dispute with you.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “If the position had been the reverse of it and if I had
brought that calamity on the head of Hamza as he has brought on mine,
would it have been possible that Zayd should have been your associate
and companion? And could he like for his master the treatment which you
like for your master?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “If Hamza had been a polytheist and you had been a Muslim I
would certainly have done the same thing.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “However, I have not been cruel and unjust to Hamza and have
not even spoken harshly to him, but, as you know, I have been patient
and have resisted his oppression and transgression.”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “You have put the Prophet (S) to great trouble, abused his
religion, and have obstructed the way of truth, and even now you are,
acting as an obstacle in the path of Allah.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “But hasn't Muhammad abused our faith and religion and called
us silly people?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “The objective of Abul Qasim (the Prophet) is that he should
deliver you from the superstitions of which you are aware and bring you
out of darkness, which, as you yourself know, is very intense. If you
accompany me tonight to Muhammad, you will find how grateful you should
be to Hamza, who has taken this action only in the name of Allah and for
the sake of the Prophethood of Muhammad. O Abul Hakam! What I consider
to be the right course for you is that you should embrace Islam and
become one of its pioneers. In that event your dignity and position will
remain intact and all those like ‘Ammar will be obedient to you and will
hold you in great respect. I hope you will become a Muslim and acquire
such precedence in Islam as may not be ignored by Allah and His
Prophet.”  
    
 Abu Jahl turned towards Abu Sufyan and said: "I haven't so far seen an
obstinate and shameless person like him. Woe to this man! O Abu Hanzala!
I wish that people had recognized him.”  
    
 Then he addressed ‘Ammar saying: "Woe be to you O son of Sumayya! Are
you not an ally of Bani Makhzum? Do you not fight against those who
fight against them, and do you not make peace with those who make peace
with them?"  
    
 ‘Ammar: “In order to manifest my sincerity and faithfulness as an ally
I don't have any suggestion better than that you should follow Muhammad.
I swear by Him, in whose control my life is, that so far I have had no
better opportunity than this that I should advise you, as a well wisher,
as I am advising you today.”  
    
 Abu Jahl: “If I accompany you tonight will you intercede with Muhammad
for me?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “O Abul Hakam! Don't ridicule me. Don't persist in sinfulness
and abandon the pride which has overpowered you. Muhammad is a blessed
Prophet and a Messenger of peace. He guides everyone, who seeks
blessings, and conveys Divine Commandments to all such persons without
suggesting any obligation on them. I have often heard him praying for
your guidance and welfare. In the circumstances you should also be
attached to him in the same manner in which he is interested in you.
Come and be just, so that you may enjoy a high rank among us. In that
event you will rest on the principles of truth and will no longer be the
leader of ignorance and will shun obstinacy and rebellion. O Abul Hakam!
I am not telling you a lie when I say that your ignorance, rebellion and
obstinacy will soon collapse. In case, therefore, you are desirous of
becoming a leader and a master, you should give up contention and
obstinacy. I also reaffirm the covenant made with your uncle and
stipulate for the same alliance with you, I swear by Allah that
distinction and leadership are in the hands of the Holy Prophet (S) and
there is no distance between you and a place of distinction except that
you should become a Muslim. “  
    
 Abu Jahl: “O fool! Are you now bent upon apologizing on my behalf? Who
will blame me if I strip your skin off your body like that of a sheep?
Your existence is one of the evil acts of Muhammad who has made your
tongue operate with such strange magic arid you have become so
presumptuous?”  
    
 ‘Ammar: “Where was this valour, which you are displaying now, at the
time when Abu ‘Ammara struck the bow on your head? Of course, you then
feared the power of the brave man of Arabia' and the lionhearted
Children of Abdul Muttalib, but you are safe from ‘Ammar and Yasir, the
strangers and refugees, and don't have to fear them. If your intellect
had worked property, the humiliation and disgrace which you suffered at
the hands of Hamza would not have permitted you to feign such bravery
before ‘Ammar .It is sufficient for you and the law which you obey that
you should disinherit your uncle and be buried by the side of his
grave.”  
    
 Abu Jahl said to his slaves: "Get hold of this fool and flog him. It is
possible that he may change his views when he is flogged.”  
    
 Of course, at the moment when ‘Ammar was being flogged, the Almighty
Allah blessed and dignified his soul in Darul Islam the place where the
Holy Prophet (S) was staying; and the following verse was revealed
regarding him and Abu Jahl:  
    
***Can the condition of a man, who was dead and whom We brought to life
and provided him with light, so that he can walk among the people, be
similar to that of a person who lives in darkness and cannot step out of
it?*****(Surah al-An'am, 6: 122)**  
    
 Ibn Abbas says: "In this verse the man referred to, as having been
provided with light, is ‘Ammar and the one living in darkness is 'Amr
bin Hisham viz. Abu Jahl".  
    
  

[^1]: Amr bin Lahi was the chief of Khuza a tribe, who wrested authority
from the tribe of Jarham and assumed the custodianship of the 'House',
and brought the idol named Hobal from Syria to Makkah. Then he
introduced idol worship and treated the safe custody of this idol to be
the means of the continuance of his own rule. He was a shameless tyrant
who lived for a long time and destroyed the creed called 'Hanifiya'
(i.e. the religion of Prophet Ibrahim). After him the government fell in
the hands of Qusayy. Hobal, the big idol, had the figure of an old
dignified man with a long beard and was made of carnelian. Its right
hand had been amputated but Quraysh provided it with a hand made of gold

[^2]: The scholars of mythology believe that these two Idols were
originally a man and a woman of the tribe of jaiham who found their way
into the Ka'ba and were metamorphosed later, during the period of ‘Amr
bin Lahi, and assumed the shape of idol.


