Imam and Alawide Revolts
========================

We have already indicated that one of the reasons which prompted
al-Ma’mun to bring Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) to Khurasan and nominate him as
his successor was to avoid a direct collision with the Alawides who were
of the view that the Abbasides had monopolized authority and robbed them
of their right to rule the Muslims. Al-Ma’mun tried to deal with this
problem which always used to push the Alawides to assault the government
from time to time. Rebels were always inviting all fellow Alawides to
join them in their rebellions, as was the case regarding the Abbasides
when they moved against the Umayyad rule.

Al-Ma’mun suffered the agonies of the most serious Alawide rebellion
against his government, namely the rebellion of Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
al-Hasani. He was well known as Ibn Tabataba the Alawide; his chief
executive was Abul-Saraya al-Sari ibn Mansour, and his call was in the
name of ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) from the Progeny of Muhammad (S). Several
Alawide uprisings branched out of that revolution. After the rebellion
of Abul-Saraya, his Alawide governors declared autonomy in the areas
under their control.

Alawide Uprisings
-----------------

In Yemen, Ibrahim ibn Musa ibn Ja’far rose and took control of the
government after banishing al-Ma’mun's governor. In Mecca, al-Husayn ibn
al-Hasan al-Aftas rose, and Muhammad ibn Ja’far was named caliph. In
Basrah, Zayd ibn Musa ibn Ja’far rose in rebellion. He was nicknamed
"Zayd of the fire" due to the number of the homes of the Abbasides and
their followers which he had burnt. Whenever he came across a man draped
in black, he would burn him, and he confiscated a great deal of money
from the merchants except Abbaside money.

Ali ibn Sa'id marched towards him. Zayd requested him to give him an
assurance to safeguard his life should he give up, and Ali did so. But
he nevertheless arrested him [^1] and sent him to al-Hasan ibn Sahl who
ordered to have him executed while al-Hajjaj ibn Khaythama was present,
so he said, "Prince! Do not rush, for I have a piece of advice for you."
He stopped the executioner and came close to him. He said, "Prince! Did
you receive instructions from the commander of the faithful to do what
you are about to?" He answered in the negative, so he asked again, "then
why are you executing the cousin of the commander of the faithful
without his knowledge or consultation?" Then he narrated for him the
story of Abu Abdullah al-Aftas whom al-Rashid put in jail under the
watchful eyes of Ja’far ibn Yahya.

Ja’far killed him without his knowledge and sent his head on a platter
to him together with other Nawrooz presents. When al-Rashid ordered
Masrour to kill Ja’far, he said to him, "If Ja’far asked you about his
crime for which you are killing him, tell him that you are killing him
for his own killing of my cousin Ibn al-Aftas whom he killed without my
knowledge." Then al-Hajjaj ibn Khaythama said to al-Hasan ibn Sahl, "O
Prince! Do you feel secure should anything happen between you and the
commander of the faithful if you kill this man and use it as an excuse
just as al-Rashid used against Ja’far ibn Yahya?" Al-Hasan said to
al-Hajjaj, "May God reward you!" Then he ordered Zayd to be returned to
his prison where he was kept till he was transported to al-Ma’mun. When
he was there, he sent him to his brother ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) who set him
free.[^2]

Zayd and al-Ma’mun
------------------

One of the interesting anecdotes narrated about him is the following:
When he was brought to al-Ma’mun, the latter said to him, "O Zayd! You
led the uprising in Basrah, and instead of starting with the homes of
our common enemies the Umayyads, Banu Thaqeef, Uday, Bahila and Aal
Ziyad, you targeted the homes of your own cousins." Zayd, who had a
humorous temper, said, "I indeed erred from each direction, O commander
of the faithful! If I go back, I will start with our enemies!" Al-Ma’mun
laughed and sent him to his brother ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), saying, "I have
pardoned him to please you." When he was brought to the Imam (a.s.), he
rebuked him and released him.[^3]

Imam Rebukes His Brother Zayd
-----------------------------

Yasir the servant narrates that when Zayd entered the Imam's house,
Abul-Hasan (a.s.) said, "O Zayd! Were you duped by the speech of some
lowly people in Kufa who said that Fatima safeguarded her modesty,
therefore God shunned Hell-fire from her progeny? Those were only
al-Hasan and al-Husayn in particular. If you think that you could go
against God's Will and still enter Paradise, while Musa ibn Ja’far
(a.s.) obeyed God and entered Paradise, do you think you are more worthy
in the eyes of God Almighty than Musa ibn Ja’far? By God! Nobody
achieves the rewards with God except after obeying Him, while you claim
that you will achieve it by your disobedience..." Zayd said to him, "But
I am your brother and the son of your father!" Abul-Hasan (a.s.) said to
him, "You are my brother as long as you obey the Dear and Glorified God.
Noah had said, \`Lord! My son is of my family, and your promise is true,
and you are the best of judges,' and God Almighty said to him, \`O Noah!
He is not of your family! It is indeed a wrongful deed,' thus God
excluded him from his family due to his disobedience..."[^4]

Imam's View of the Alawide Revolutionary Method
-----------------------------------------------

What we try to get acquainted with by examining the Imam's stance
towards his brother Zayd of the fire was the reality regarding the
Imam's viewpoint of the revolutionary method employed by the Alawides in
their revolutions against the Abbasides. We find the Imam (a.s.) taking
a strictly negative stance towards his brother Zayd. Yet he did not
rebuke him and blame him simply because he had revolted against the
government, but rather because he had committed several unlawful acts
according to Islamic *Shari'a* such as looting, confiscating, burning,
in which acts he did not distinguish between the innocent and the
guilty. Other than that, the sincere Alawide revolutions which aimed at
standing in the face of injustice and oppression used to enjoy the
support of the Imams who considered them the only way which could
disclose to the nation how corrupt the government was and make them
become aware of its mistakes and transgressions.

From here we find Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) in his stance with his brother
not expressing his displeasure against his brother for the principle of
the revolution and the movement against the government, but his rebuking
was due to committing some Islamically unlawful transgressions which did
not please God. Al-Ma’mun's tolerance towards those who rebelled against
him was not in contradiction with his general conduct. On one hand, he
wanted to compete with the Alawides in winning the public opinion to his
side. On the other hand, he was trying to stay away from getting
involved in shedding their blood and seeking revenge against them which
did not agree with his theoretical inclination towards the Alawides.

Imam's Stance Towards Abul-Saraya's Revolution
----------------------------------------------

There is a previous stance in which the Imam (a.s.) had sided with the
Alawide revolution of Ibn Tabataba under the command of Abul-Saraya.
Muhammad ibn al-Athram, chief of the police force of Muhammad ibn
Sulayman al-Alawi at Medina during the days of Abul-Saraya, is quoted
saying, "His near in kin and some people from Quraish gathered around
him and swore allegiance to him saying, \`If you send word to Abul-Hasan
(a.s.), he would surely support us and we will be united.'

Sulayman said to me, \`Go to him and convey my greetings to him and tell
him that his kinfolk have gathered and desired that he should join them;
so, if you wish, please do so.' So I met him at al-Hamra and I conveyed
the message to him. He said, \`Convey my greeting to him and tell him I
will join him after twenty days.' So I conveyed to him the message with
which I was sent, and we stayed for a few days. On the 18th day, Warqa,
al-Jalloudi's commander, marched towards us, whereupon I ran in the
direction of the two Soors. When I heard someone calling me, \`O Abu
Athram!' I turned back, and it was Abul-Hasan (a.s.) asking me, \`Did
the twenty days pass already?!"[^5]

Why Did the Imam Refuse to Participate in the Revolution?
---------------------------------------------------------

The Imam (a.s.) was not objecting to the revolution but he simply wanted
to assure those persons that the revolution whose success he could not
secure was one he would not join. According to his serious foresight
into events, it seemed to him that the revolution whose movement was
arbitrary would end up with elimination and failure. For this reason, he
was hinging his participation in the revolution on the passage of twenty
days, for he calculated that the opposite move from the Abbasides would
show during such a period of time and would gauge the extent of success
achieved so far by the revolution.

This cautious stance of the Imam (a.s.) was not due to evading his
participation in the revolutionary movement but was the result of a
realistic calculation of the development of events in the sphere of the
movement of revolutions along the Abbaside rule and before them the
Umayyad. For this reason, we cannot conclude that the Imam's lack of
participation in a rebellion meant that he was not convinced of the
principle of its necessity.

Why Did the Imam Decline From Demanding Caliphate?
--------------------------------------------------

It is worth our research time to dispel the ambiguity which clouds the
motives which prompted the Imams (a.s.) not to claim authority by force
and thus upset the oppressive governments which were controlling the
sustenance of the Muslim nation and its general conditions. These are as
follows:

Lack of a Popular Front of Confrontation
----------------------------------------

To move within the framework of the revolution needs the existence of an
alert public base of confrontation which responds immediately to the
plans put by its leader no matter what the outcome might be. The Imams
always complained that it simply was not there. As regarding the fragile
public support base, which is not united by a unifying belief in the
means and objectives, this cannot be made the base from which a
revolution can start because it is doomed with failure in advance.
Suffices us for proof on that the shaky circumstance which surrounded
the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) whose
government took full control over all Islamic lands with the exception
of Syria which was under the control of Mu'awiya ibn Abu Sufyan.

The reason why Mu'awiya was able to stand firm and score a victory in
some of his battles against the Imam (a.s.) was due to the fact that he
had that public base which was united in concept and in objective. As
regarding the Imam (a.s.), his public base was fragmented and it lacked
harmony in its elements whose ideas and goals differed, and probably
what happened to the Imam's army during the masquerade of arbitration is
sufficient proof for that.

Suffices us also the revolutionary movement led by Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)
to confront Mu'awiya after his father had died, leading in the end to a
peace treaty with Mu'awiya. The reason for the failure was none other
than the lack of that base which would enable him through its
cementation to steer the situation to his own advantage, and we have
already explained that clearly in our book *Sulh al Imam al-Hasan*.

Imam's Main Responsibility was Disseminating Awareness
------------------------------------------------------

With a situation like that, we cannot blame the Imams for keeping silent
about revolutions, or for their reluctance to prepare for them, or
permit ourselves to pass a judgment about their own lack of necessary
qualifications to assume government responsibilities, or even tell them
that the role which was assigned to them was only to be leaders of the
spiritual authority alone, and that they simply do not have the
qualities required for temporal authority. Rather, their responsibility
is confined to create a public base that is alert and with the sense of
direction, and this cannot be achieved except when they are free to
direct others and disseminate awareness among the various segments of
the nation.

Governments' Persecution of Imams
---------------------------------

Their contemporary caliphs, Umayyad or Abbaside, made sure to rob them
of that freedom and besiege them with a siege of strict surveillance
which counted their movements and monitored their breath, so much so
that to belong to their school of thought was considered a crime
punishable by the ruling authority with execution or banishment. The
matter became so difficult and so straitened that their sincere
followers tried to hide their creed fearing for their lives should they
otherwise disclose it and even demanding that their Imams, too, should
hide it if any among them was destined to declare his Imamate.

All of that was out of their concern about the lives of those Imams lest
they should be endangered as actually happened to Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
when he declared that he was, indeed, the Imam (a.s.) succeeding his
father. Moreover, the Imams were contemporary to the revolutionary
experiences of the Alawides who rebelled against both Umayyad and
Abbaside dynasties and which ended in their utter defeat despite the
fact that some rebels such as Muhammad and Ibrahim sons of Abdullah ibn
al-Husayn were able to subject large tracts of Islamic territories to
their control.

Imams' Support of Alawide Revolutions
-------------------------------------

The Imams did, indeed privately support those successive revolutions
without publicly announcing their support. They viewed them as means of
public awareness against oppressive government systems.

For example, Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) is quoted saying to his cousin
al-Husayn, who was murdered in an ambush, upon saying farewell to him,
"O cousin! You are certainly going to be killed; so, fight very well,
for these folks are corrupt. They feign belief and hide atheism... *We
are God's and unto Him is our return*... I plead the Almighty on your
behalf to grant you the strength of unity."[^6]

Having said all of this, we see no reason to oppose and criticize the
negative stance of the Imams towards the rebellions which took place
against their contemporary governments, for they evaluated their
political circumstances and they knew that the end result of each
revolution against the government would be defeat..., and nothing but
defeat.

[^1]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, pp. 175-177

[^2]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 233

[^3]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 233

[^4]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 234

[^5]: Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 208

[^6]: Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 443


