Basic Beliefs
=============

Islam is the religion which preaches *tawhid*, the Unity of God.
*Tawhid*, then, is the starting point from which a Muslim sets out to
build his creed deep inside his inner self; otherwise, he cannot be
called a Muslim, nor can the light of faith shine in his soul. The sound
definition of *tawhid* is what has been endorsed by the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) through their teachings and statements; anything other than that
is but falsification and adulteration and insinuations which may have
been necessitated by erroneous philosophical ideologies the inventors of
which tried to reach the furthermost depth of the essence of the Divine,
but the results they reached caused them to deviate from reaching even
the beginning of belief, so they indulged themselves into the labyrinths
of atheism and loss.

In researching such an extremely complex issue, we have to follow into
the footsteps of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). If we accept them as our
guides, we shall have no fear about falling into destruction or
departing from the Straight Path according to what is already reported
about the Prophet (S) who said: "My Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) among you are
like the ark of Noah: whoever boards it is saved, and whoever lags
behind it is drowned and ruined."

Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) did not have a system of his own regarding the
philosophy of *tawhid*; rather, his was the very same pristine system
about which all Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) unanimously agreed and
to whose safeguarding they dedicated their lives in the face of all
other sects which may have deviated from the achievement of the noble
objective.

We are not going here to make a comparison between these sects in as far
as the belief in tawhid is concerned, for this may require a very
lengthy research whose discussion will require us to go beyond the
limits we have set for our study here; rather, what is important for us
here is to present the limits of the concept of tawhid from the stories
we have already narrated about Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.).

Misconception of the Similitude of God to His Creation
------------------------------------------------------

The first to come across in researching the *hadith* narrated by Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) in the subject of *tawhid* is this one: "Anyone who
makes a similitude of God with His creation is a *mushrik* (polytheist),
and anyone who attributes to Him what He has prohibited is *kafir*
(disbeliever)" which is, as reported about the Prophet (S), a clear
answer to those who claim that "God created Adam in His Own Image."

In another text, the Imam (a.s.) explains to us the misconception in
whose pitfall others have fallen; al-Husayn ibn Khalid reported saying,
"I said to ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), \`O son of the Messenger of God! People say
that the Messenger of God (S) said that the Almighty and Exalted God
created Adam in His Own image.' He said, \`May God fight them! They
distorted the beginning of this *hadith*. The Messenger of God (S)
passed by two men exchanging insults and abusive language, and he heard
one of them saying to the other, \`God made your face ugly and ugly is
anyone who is like you,' whereupon he (S) said, \`O servant of God! Do
not say so to your brother, for the Almighty and Exalted God created
Adam's image like his.'"

The Messenger (S) here is forbidding the man from articulating such an
abusive language which abuses Adam, father of all men. The pronoun in
the original text (i.e., "image like his") belongs to the man being
abused, not to God; therefore, it is erroneous to say that the meaning
here is that God created Adam in His Own Image. The Imam emphasizes this
by narrating one *qudsi hadith* in which the Almighty tells the
Messenger of God (S), "The one who makes a similitude of Myself to My
creation is indeed ignorant of Who I am."

The *hadith* regarding the Divine is entangled and complex, but if you
read it in the *hadith* narrated by the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), you will
find it in full harmony with the human nature, lucidly interpreting the
obscure concept in brief expressions with a full vision despite their
inclusion of a spacious philosophical context.

God's Attributes are His Own Essence
------------------------------------

While researching the *hadith* of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) in this regard,
we come across his treatment of the issue of His Attributes which are
none other than a description of His Own Essence, and that it is
impossible that they should be anything else.

For example, al-Husayn ibn Khalid said, "I heard ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
saying, "God has always been Knowing, omni-Potent, Living, Eternal,
Hearing, Seeing,' so I said to him, \`O son of the Messenger of God (S)!
People have been saying that God knows through His faculty of knowledge,
omni-Potent through His faculty of power, Eternal through His ability to
withstand time, Hearing through His faculty of hearing, and Seeing
through His faculty of vision.' He (a.s.) said, \`Anyone who says so and
believes in it has indeed accepted other gods besides God, and he has
nothing to do with our religion.'

Then he added, \`God has always been Knowing, omni-Potent, Eternal,
Hearing, and Seeing in His Own Essence; Exalted is God above the claims
of the polytheists and those who make such similitudes a great deal of
exaltation.'"

Knowledge, might, and other attributes of God are not actually different
from His Essence; rather, they are the same like the Essence in their
existence and reality; otherwise, they would have been partners with God
in His eternity which contradicts the very concept of *tawhid* which
agrees with the nature of His being, that is, the eternity of the Self
on its own, without having anything else as partner therewith.

Belief in Plurality of the Essence and Attributes is Shirk
----------------------------------------------------------

In another *hadith* reported by Muhammad ibn Arafa, the Imam (a.s.)
explains to us how one will be committing *shirk* if he considers the
Essence of the Almighty and His Attributes as separate from each other.
Muhammad said, "I asked ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), \`Did God create things by
some sort of power or not?'

He answered, \`It is not possible that He must have used some sort of
power to do so because if you say that He created things by a power, you
would be saying that you imagined a tool whereby He created things,
which is *shirk*. And if you say that He created things which He
subjected to His power, you would be saying that He made sure He would
be able to overpower them, while He is not weak or incapable or in need
of anyone else; rather, He, Glory be to Him, is Almighty due to the fact
that His own Essence is Mighty.'"

The Difference Between God's Will and People's
----------------------------------------------

In another part of the discussion, the Imam (a.s.) tells us about the
difference between the Will of God and the will of humans. Safwan ibn
Yahya said, "I asked Abul-Hasan (a.s.), \`Tell me about God's Will and
the will of His creation.' He said, \`The will of a person is something
he possesses, hence it is a possessive pronoun; as regarding God, His
Will is His Action, nothing other than that, because He does not
contemplate upon doing something, nor does He decide to do something,
nor does he sets His mind to do something, and all these verbs have
nothing to do with His Essence; they are among the faculties of humans,
and they are among the characteristics of the creation. God's Will is
His Action, nothing other than that. He says \`Be!' and it is without
articulating something, or using a tongue, or sets his mind upon
something or contemplates upon doing something, nor does He think about
the means to do so, nor does He think about how.'"

The previous chapter contained a discussion of the issue of eternity of
God's Will in a debate between the Imam (a.s.) and Sulayman al-Maroozi,
the Khurasani scientist of *kalam* who was invited by al-Ma’mun to
debate the Imam.

Queries
-------

There may be some innocent questions which come to the mind of anyone
which the Imam may have tried to answer in a very simple way relying on
clear Qur'anic verses whereby we may pass without being aware of their
precise meaning and the depth of their context. For example, regarding
the Knowledge of God, he was asked by al-Husayn ibn Bashshar, "Does God
know about the thing which never was how it would look like when it is?"
He answered, "God Almighty knows of things before their existence; He
has said: \`We were wont to write down all that ye did,'[^1] and He said
to the inmates of Hell, \`If they were returned (back to earth), they
would certainly relapse to the things they were forbidden, for they are
indeed liars.'[^2]

The Exalted and the Almighty God knows that if those inmates were to be
returned to earth, they would go back to their old ways and commit what
they were prohibited from committing. When the angels said, \`Wilt Thou
place therein one who makes mischief therein and shed blood while we
celebrate Thy praises and glorify Thy holy Name?' He said, \`I know what
ye know not.'[^3] So God always knows since eternity about things before
He creates them.'"

We may find in some Qur'anic verses that God is describing Himself with
attributes which do not fit His Exalted Status such as mocking and
ridiculing as in the verse, "God will throw back their mockery on
them"[^4] and "God will throw back their ridicule on them"[^5] and "(the
unbelievers) plotted and schemed, and God too plotted"[^6] and "They
strive to deceive God while He is deceiving them."[^7]

But the Imam (a.s.) answers by saying that God Almighty does not
ridicule, mock, cheat, or anything like that, but He rewards those who
commit these sins with the reward they deserve for their ridicule,
mockery, cheating, etc.

The Imam's answer is derived from the meaning of the Qur'anic verse
which states, "The plotting of evil will hem only the author
thereof."[^8] When these individuals ridicule, mock, plot, or cheat,
they do not sense the destined consequences for such a behavior when the
tables are turned and they have to suffer perpetual pain and torture.
This is proven by the verses, "They plotted and planned, but We too
planned, even while they perceived it not. Then see what the end of
their plot was! We destroyed them and their people, all of them."[^9]

There are Qur'anic verses which deserve a serious look into them when
their superficial meaning gives the impression that they invite one to
uphold what must not Islamically be upheld, departing from the concept
of the Divine Perfection. For example, the Almighty has said, "They have
forgotten God, so He has forgotten them,"[^10] and "We shall that day
forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs."[^11]

To attribute forgetfulness to God is erroneous because it is an
attribute of His creation; besides, such a superficial meaning
contradicts another verse which says, "... and thy Lord never
forgets."[^12] But the Imam interprets "forgetfulness" in these texts to
mean abandonment, and that God abandons them by not allocating for them
the rewards He allocates to those who yearn for such meeting. Since they
forgot about God and did not do good deeds prior to such meeting, God
will make His good rewards distant from them and will reward them with
torture and eternal Hellfire.

What is meant by "forgetfulness" in these texts is not overlooking or
bypassing, nor does the meaning of abandonment is negligence. The Imam
pointed this out when he answered someone who asked him about the
meaning of the verse "... and God left them in utter darkness so they
could not see"[^13] by saying, "God, the Sublime and Praised One, cannot
be described as abandoning as can His creation, but when He knows that
they would never leave disbelief and straying, He would stop His support
for them and His kindness, leaving them to have their own way."

Seeing God
----------

The discussion of "seeing" God is one of the subjects of the science of
*kalam* in which views of Islamic schools of thought differed since the
battle and argument on *kalam* started, shattering the unity of the
Creed's interpretation of many doctrinal bases upon which the structure
of the Islamic Message was established. The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) took a
stance towards the subject of "seeing" God which was in harmony with the
pristine concept of *tawhid* as Islam intends it to be, regarding Him
above being physically seen simply because that would be possible only
for an object of limited dimensions.

As regarding the verses which give the impression that "seeing" God is
possible, such as "Some faces on that Day shall be bright, looking
towards their Lord,"[^14] and "Verily, from (the Light of) their Lord,
that Day, will they be veiled,"[^15] and "Thy Lord comes, and His
angels, rank upon rank,"[^16] as well as other such verses, Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) interpreted them in a way which kept them in the
context in which they were revealed. For example, the meaning of "...
looking to their Lord" is that they were bright with hope and
anticipation waiting to be awarded with their Lord's rewards, that is,
anticipating His generosity and prizes.

The meaning of the second verse is that they are veiled from receiving
the rewards of their Lord, for God Almighty cannot be said to occupy a
physical space, a place, in which He would settle, veiling Himself from
His servants. In the third verse, what is coming is God's Decree, that
is, your Lord's Decree is coming to pass; otherwise, God Almighty cannot
be said to come and go, for these movements are characteristic of His
creatures, and it is impossible that He should have their attributes,
for this would mean that there would be a place where He is not there!
God is highly elevated above this degradation.

Thus are the Qur'anic verses interpreted according to the occasion upon
which they were revealed. Moreover, such an interpretation which takes
into consideration both context and occasion (or reason for revelation)
does not depart even a little bit from the particular appearance of such
verses simply because such an understood appearance is not derived from
the verbal text alone; rather, other aspects which encompass the
subject's angles, and for whose explanation the text was revealed, have
also to be taken into consideration.

Compulsion and Empowerment
--------------------------

While researching the way Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) employed to explain the
subject and relevant topics related to the unity of God, we are faced by
others with many questions inquiring about the theory of compulsion and
empowerment which occupied the minds of Muslims for a long period of
time and caused a great deal of more division among them due to the
debates among the scholars of the science of *kalam* of various sects at
that time. Some endorsed compulsion, others endorsed empowerment, while
still others preached taking an in-between approach.

[^1]: Al Jathiya:29

[^2]: Al An'aam:28

[^3]: Al Baqara:30

[^4]: Al Baqara:15

[^5]: Al Tawba:79

[^6]: Aali 'Imran:54

[^7]: Al Nisaa:142

[^8]: Fatir:43

[^9]: Al Naml:50-51

[^10]: Al Tawba:67

[^11]: Al A'raaf:51

[^12]: Maryam:64

[^13]: Al Baqara:17

[^14]: Al Qiyama:22-23

[^15]: Al Mutaffifin (or Tatfif):15

[^16]: Al Fajr:22


