The Approach Adopted by Ahl al-Bayt
===================================

The school of thought preached by Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) regards the latter
concept as the basis of Divine Justice whereby God rewards good doers
for their good deeds and punishes the evil doers for their evil.
Compulsion is akin to oppression and is a negation of justice, while
empowerment is a postponement of effecting justice, disabling it from
getting the upper-hand and the power it rightfully deserves. Both
contradict the concept of the absolute perfection of the Divine.

A man visited Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and asked him, "O son of the
Messenger of God (S)! It has been reported to us that the truthful
(As-Sadiq) Ja’far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) said, \`There is neither
compulsion nor empowerment but a way to choose one of two.' What does he
exactly mean?" He answered, "Whoever claims that God does our deeds and
then penalizes us for doing them has in fact accepted the concept of
compulsion, and whoever claims that God Almighty empowers His Proofs to
distribute His sustenance has in fact adopts the belief of empowerment.

One who believes in compulsion is a *kafir* (disbeliever), and one who
believes in empowerment is a *mushrik* (polytheist)." So I asked him, 'O
son of the Messenger of God! Then what is this way to choose one of two
means?' He answered, \`It is finding a way to do what they are enjoined
to do and forsake what they are enjoined to forsake.' I asked him,
\`Does God Almighty have a Way and a Will in this regard?' He said, \`As
regarding deeds done in obedience to His commandments, His Will in their
regard is His approval of and assistance in their performance. As
regarding His Will about sins, it is His order that they should be
shunned, that He condemns them, and that He forsakes those who commit
them.'"

Empowerment
-----------

Yasir the servant said, "I asked ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), \`What do you say
about empowerment?' He said, \`God Almighty entrusted His Creed to His
Prophets to convey to people, saying, \`Whatever the Messenger permitted
for you, take it with approval, and whatever he ordered you not to do,
do not do it.' As regarding creation and sustenance; no, He did not
empower anyone in their regard.' Then he said, \`God Almighty says:
\`God is the Creator of all things,'[^1] and He also says, \`It is God
Who has created you: further, He has provided for your sustenance; then
He will cause you to die; and again He will give you life. Are there any
of your (false) partners who can do any single one of these things?
Glory to Him! And High is He above the partners they attribute (to
Him)!'"[^2]

Imam Warns
----------

In another narrative, the Imam discloses for us the conduct which a
believer has to undertake with those who believe in empowerment in order
to create a psychological barrier between them and others which would
paralyze their action and deprive them of the element whereby they
influence others by the misleading and false creed they preach.

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari says: "I asked Abul-Hasan (a.s.) about the
*ghulat* and about those who believed in empowerment, and he said, \`The
*ghulat* are *kafirs* (disbelievers), while those who believe in
empowerment are *mushriks* (polytheists). Those who sit with them, mix
with them, eat or drink with them, visit them, marry their daughters to
them or marry their daughters, accept their trusts or entrust them to
keep theirs, believe in them, support them even by a fraction of a word,
have abandoned the nearness to God, to the Messenger of God, and to us
Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).'"

In another narrative, when someone mentioned compulsion and empowerment,
the Imam (a.s.) said to the attendants, "Shall I provide you with an
original view in which you shall not dispute with each other, and
through which you will win the argument over those who argued with you
in its regard?' We requested him to do so, whereupon he said, \`God
Almighty was not obeyed by compulsion, nor was He disobeyed by being
over-powered. He did not neglect His servants living in His domain; He
is the King above their kings, the Powerful One above those who have
power among them.

When His servants opt to obey Him, He would not stop them nor forbid
them, and if they opt to disobey Him, He may interfere and foil their
attempt, or He may not and they will do just that; therefore, He is not
the One who caused them to disobey Him.' Then he said, \`Anyone who
masters this will have the winning argument over his opponent.'"

Imams Did Not Endorse Making Similitudes With God
-------------------------------------------------

Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), in a dialogue with al-Husayn ibn Khalid, denied
what some people attributed to his forefathers when they claimed that
they made similitudes to God and believed in compulsion, describing
those people as *ghulat* who underestimated the Greatness of God
Almighty, and that their fabrication about his forefathers and their
attributing to them what they did not say was similar to the fabrication
of others about the Messenger of God (S) by their narration of
allegations endorsing making such similitudes and also endorsing
compulsion.

Regarding the subject of *tawhid* and its relevant topics, Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) has a long discussion which requires an independent and
sufficient research, and suffices us this brief presentation of what was
reported about him in this regard. Those who wish to pursue their
research of this subject are referred to *'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’
(a.s.)* by Shaikh al-Saduq in which he compiled what was narrated about
the Imam in this regard.

Transmigration of Souls
-----------------------

*Al-Tanasukh kufr*, that is, "To believe in the transmigration of the
souls is to disbelieve in God," says the Imam in an answer to the
question "What is your view regarding the transmigration of the souls?"
put to him by someone. He answered saying, "Anyone who believes in
*tanasukh is kafir* (disbeliever) in God the Great, a disbeliever in
Heavens and in Hell." The reason for this is that the belief in the
transmigration of the souls means that the human soul, after its
departure from the body at the time of death, goes to the body of an
animal to live in it. In other words, it is like a bird that as soon as
it is set free from its cage will seek another cage. This implies a
negation of the Judgment which is one of the basic principles of the
Islamic creed, hence it is a negation of Paradise and Hell.

Those who believe in the transmigration of the souls interpret Paradise
and Hell by saying that if the soul that was set free from the body
settles inside a good animal, then it is Paradise, and if it settles
inside a bad animal, then it is Hell, which is nothing but a
hallucination which the Holy Qur'an clearly refutes, for both Paradise
and Hell are realities rather than symbols as these persons would like
to think.

Imamate
-------

Imamate is one of the basic beliefs (*usool*) which was the starting
point for all the deep differences since the early period of Islam and
immediately after the demise of the Prophet (S). The Muslim *ummah*,
therefore, split into contradictory and contrasting sects due to the
deepening of the gaps either due to the actions of the ruling
authorities, or to personal ambitions aspired by some of those who
coveted to be Imams.

There are two major schools of thought in Islam which are regarded as
the stems from which those sects branch. They are the Sunni school of
thought, which preaches that Imamate after the Prophet (S) was the right
of Abu Bakr then to the three caliphs who succeeded him, and the Imami
Shi'a school of thought which preaches that Imamate after the Prophet
(S) was the right of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) and to his eleven
descendants after him. Each of these schools has its own arguments
regarding proving its authenticity and the lack thereof of the other.

The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) derive their arguments from clear and obvious
statement in their regard said by the Prophet (S) and also due to their
merits and qualifications which raised them above both common and elite
individuals. Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) explained to us the actual program to
identify an Imam which agrees with the human nature in considering the
distinctive merits and the sufficient qualifications present in a person
to qualify for such a very important status.

Imam's Qualifications
---------------------

In defining the qualifications of the Imam, Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) tells
us that he has to be the most knowledgeable among people, the most wise,
the most pious, the most courageous, the most generous, and the best in
worshipping God. These qualifications have to be present in the imam
since he is the one charged with safeguarding the Islamic Message after
the Prophet (S) and the one who clarifies its precise details and hidden
meanings to people.

Selection of the Imam is Done by God
------------------------------------

The Imam (a.s.) assured the person who inquired about these
qualifications that the nation cannot be left to choose its *imam*
without statements in this regard made by the Prophet (S) who in turn
conveys God's commandments related to this issue, for nobody other than
God knows the secrets of the individuals and what they hide inside their
hearts.

The Imam (a.s.) said: "Do they really realize the significance of
Imamate so that they permit themselves to make a choice in its regard?
Imamate is greater in prestige, more significant, higher in status, more
difficult to attain, harder to achieve, than can people conceive in
their minds or define according to their views, or select an Imam as
they please, for Imamate became the sole prerogative of Prophet Ibrahim
(a.s.), the Friend of God, second in significance only to Prophethood,
whereby He honored him, saying, \`He (God) said, \`I will make thee an
Imam to the nations.' He pleaded: \`And also (Imams) from my
offspring?!' He answered: \`But My Promise is not within the reach of
evil-doers.'[^3]

This verse, therefore, has nullified the imamate of any oppressor till
the Day of Resurrection and became the prerogative solely of those elite
persons. God, thus, honored Ibrahim (Abraham) by allotting Imamate to
those of his progeny who are the elite and who are the Purified, saying,
\`And We bestowed upon him Isaac and, as an additional boon, (a
grandson), Jacob, and We made righteous men of everyone (of them). And
We made them Imams guiding (men) by Our Command.'[^4]

Imamate, then remained among the descendants of Ibrahim (a.s.), son
inherited it from father, one century after another, till the Prophet
(S) inherited it. It was then when the Almighty God said to him,
\`Without doubt, among men, the nearest of kin to Abraham are those who
follow him as are also this Prophet and those who believe, and God is
the Protector of those who have faith.'[^5] Thus, Imamate became the
right of the Prophet (S) who, according to the commands of the Almighty
God, and in the manner He deemed, vested it upon Ali (a.s.) and it
settled among the elite of his descendants whom God gifted with the gift
of knowledge and true belief."

The Imam (a.s.) continues to say: "Imamate is the status of the
Prophets, the legacy of the wasis (successors of Prophets); Imamate is
the caliphate of God Almighty and of His Messenger (S)."  
 "The caliphate of God Almighty" has to be the prerogative of the best
of people after the Prophet (S) simply because he, the successor of the
Prophet (S), is God's caliph on earth after the demise of the Prophet
(S). His selection, therefore, has to be done by God for how can anyone
judge anyone else to be eligible for it if he does not know that
person's true inner self? We simply do not understand at all the wisdom
of leaving the selection of the Imam to the nation without a final
judgment in this regard coming from the Almighty...

An Imam's Attributes
--------------------

Having defined the attributes an Imam has to have which represent his
day-to-day conduct needed by people, Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) says: "An
Imam is a scholar who is not ignorant, someone who looks after others
untiringly, the substance of sanctity and purity, asceticism and
renunciation of the world, of knowledge and adoration. His knowledge
grows, his clemency is perfect; he is aware of the responsibilities of
Imamate, knowledgeable regarding politics, commanding obedience,
executing the Commandments of God, advising the servants of God,
protecting the creed of God. Prophets and Imams are assisted by God Who
bestows upon them from the treasures of His knowledge and sovereignty in
a way He does not endow anyone else, making their knowledge superior to
that of anyone contemporary to them, for He, the Exalted and the
Sublime, has said, regarding Talut (Samuel), \`God has chosen him above
you and has gifted him abundantly with knowledge and bodily prowess; God
grants His authority to whomsoever He pleases. God cares for all, and He
knows all things.'[^6]

Regarding the Imams from the Household, progeny and elite descendants of
His Prophet (S), the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), the Dear and Sublime One has
said, \`Or do they envy mankind for what God has given them of His
bounty? But We had already given the people of Abraham the Book and
Wisdom and conferred upon them a great kingdom,'[^7] and when God
selects one of His servants to deal with the servants of God, He
broadens his heart for such responsibility, depositing in it springs of
wisdom, inspiring knowledge to him."

Indications of Imamate
----------------------

As regarding how an Imam can be identified, and what the indications
are, this is explained by Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) in his answer to the
question someone put to him which was: "By what indication can Imamate
be regarded authentic for one who claims it to himself?" He said: "By
text and evidence." The man asked: "What is the characteristic of an
Imam?" He answered: "Knowledge, and God's answer to his plea." The man
asked, "By what can you yourselves prove your Imamate?"

He answered: "By a Promise made to us by the Messenger of God (S)." The
man asked: "What is the evidence that you can tell what is on the mind
of people?" He answered: "Have you not come to know that the Messenger
(S) said, \`Beware of the discretion of a *mumin* for he looks through
the light of God'?" The man answered in the affirmative, so the Imam
(a.s.) continued saying, "Every believer has a share of discretion,
looking through the light of God according to the amount of his belief
and the extent of his foresight and knowledge. God has combined in us
what He has distributed to all the believers combined and said in His
Book, \`Behold! In this are signs for those who by tokens do
understand.'[^8]

The first of these *mutawassimeen* is the Messenger of God (S), then the
Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) after him, then al-Hasan then
al-Husayn, then the Imams from among the descendants of al-Husayn till
the Day of Judgment."

By all of these statements does Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) define for us the
qualifications of an Imam and the group that chooses him in statements
which agree with the human nature and the balances of reason which are
the final judge on such issues.

[^1]: Al Zumar:62

[^2]: Al Rum:40

[^3]: Al Baqara:124

[^4]: Al Anbiyaa:72-73

[^5]: Aaali 'Imran:68

[^6]: Al Baqara:247

[^7]: Al Nisaa:54

[^8]: Al Hijr:75


