Exegesis
========

Exegesis (Tafsir) According to the Ahl al-Bayt
----------------------------------------------

When we examine the method employed by Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and the
other Imams from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) in interpreting the text of the
Holy Qur'an, we find out that it depends on the general overall meaning
in interpreting one particular verse, distancing itself from
interpretations which do not suit its own general or particular meaning.

This does not mean that the Holy Qur'an can be interpreted by anyone
according to what he understands of its apparent meaning; rather, its
interpretation is not limited to the *verbatim* understanding of the
text. Instead, some matters have to also be taken into consideration
which may be hidden in a way which requires seeking assistance from
those whom God endowed with the faculty of knowledge and understanding,
namely the Prophet (S) and his Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) who are the actual
testimony to the verse which says: "Nobody knows its interpretation
except God and those deeply grounded in knowledge."

### An Exegesis Phenomenon Regarding Ahl al-Bayt

One who studies *tafsir* according to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) will
clearly notice the phenomenon that they may interpret some verses on
their own, while others may be a reference to obeying and loving them.
Some people try to use this phenomenon to make notorious remarks, to
deliberately distort, and openly condemn the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.), trying to attribute to them their attempt to make the Holy
Qur'an a book regarding their own sect and nobody else's.

There is nothing further from the truth. The interpretation provided by
the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) of certain verses to be a direct or indirect
reference to them is due to one's perfect practical implementation of
*tafsir*, and the fact that they themselves are living witnesses to the
truth in such verses, or that should such verses make a reference to
them, they are all proofs of the truth contained in the Holy Qur'an and
it does not take the verse out of its intended general meaning. For
example, when Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) interprets the *ummah* (nation) in
the text of the Holy Qur'an to mean the *a'immah* (Imams), he gives it
the meaning that they are the most distinguished practical manifestation
of its Qur'anic meaning.

To use the word "interpretation" in such context may imply a metaphoric
meaning of the word, for what is intended by it is to provide the best
possible practical meaning which agrees with the spirit of the text,
which is something neither reason nor citation object to it.

### Exegesis of Imam ar-Ridha’

Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) did not author a book on exegesis, but he
explained the meanings of the verses about which he was questioned by
others who wanted to know his views in their regard, and we will
indicate here some such explanations in order to acquaint you with the
magnificent method and innovative style of the Imam (a.s.) in this
regard.

It is reported that al-Ma’mun asked him once to explain some Qur'anic
verses out of his curiosity about the knowledge God bestowed upon the
Imam regarding their meanings. Among such verses was: "He it is Who
created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His throne was over
the waters, that He might try you which of you is best in conduct."[^1]
He said, "The Praised and Exalted God created the Throne, the water, and
the angels before the creation of heavens and earth, and the angels used
to know God through their own creation, through the Throne and the
water.

Then He made His Throne over the water in order to manifest His might to
the angels so that they might know that He is capable of doing whatever
He pleased. Then He raised the Throne through His might, moved it and
made it above the seven heavens. Then He created the heavens and the
earth in six days while He was omni-Potent on His Throne.

He was capable of creating them in a twinkle of the eye, but the Exalted
One created them in six days in order to show the angels what He was
creating one after the other so that they would know time and again that
God was the Originator of each and every thing. God did not create the
Throne because He was in need for it since He is independent of the
Throne and of everything He created; He cannot be described by anything
in the cosmos simply because He has no physical body; Exalted He is
above the characteristics of what He created a great deal of Exaltation.

"As regarding His saying, \`...that He might try you which one of you is
best in conduct,' He has created them in order to test them through the
responsibility of obeying and worshipping Him, not out of His desire to
test or try them, since He already knows all things."

This glorious explanation of the Imam (a.s.) for the creation of the
heavens and the earth in six days is considered, we think, among the
best explanations because gradual creation and perfection deepens the
feeling of awe regarding the greatness of the Creator and Originator
more than had it been at once.

Al-Ma’mun also asked him about the meaning of the verse: "Had it been
thy Lord's Will, they would all have believed, all who are on earth!
Will you then compel mankind, against their will, to believe?! No soul
can believe except by the Will of God."[^2] Quoting his forefathers,
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) said: "Muslims said to the Messenger of God (S), \`We
wish you forced those whom you have conquered, O Messenger of God, to
accept Islam, so that our number would increase, and we would become
stronger in the face of our enemies.'

The Messenger of God (S) said: \`I am not going to meet God, the
Almighty and the Exalted, having invented an innovation which He did not
command me to do, nor am I the type of person who forces others to do
anything at all.' It was then that this verse was revealed: \`Had it
been thy Lord's Will, they would all have believed, all who are on
earth,' by means of forcing them, or when they find no other choice
while in this world just as those who believed only after seeing God's
might and retribution in the life after death. \`If I do such a thing to
them, they would not deserve any reward, but I wish they accept it out
of their own choice rather than being forced to do so in order that they
will deserve to be close to me and blessed through me, and they would
remain in Paradise forever.'

"As regarding the meaning of \`No soul can believe except by the Will of
God,' it does not mean that it is prohibited from believing (without a
prior consent of God); it simply means that God invites it to believe
without forcing it to do so."

The Imam (a.s.) said the following in his explanation of the verse which
says: "[God is He] Who has made the earth your couch, and the heavens
your canopy":[^3]

"He made the earth suitable to the creation of your nature, agreeable to
your bodies; He did not make it too hot to burn you, nor too cold to
freeze you, nor too windy to cause you dizziness, nor too stinky to
damage your heads, nor as liquid as water to cause you to drown, nor too
solid to enable you to build houses and graves for your dead; rather,
the Exalted and Sublime made it strong enough to be useful for you, for
your bodies, and for your buildings, making it usable in your homes and
graves and a great deal of other advantages as well; thus, He made the
earth a couch for you.

"As for the heavens, He made them like a protective ceiling above your
heads in which He let the sun and its moon and the stars orbit for your
own good. He \`... sent down water from the heavens, and brought forth
therewith fruits for your sustenance,' meaning thereby water which He
caused to descend from a high altitude in order to reach the summits of
your mountains and hills, valleys and plains, which He caused to descend
as showers and as moisture which soil inhales, and He did not cause it
to pour down at once to ruin your lands, trees and other vegetation and
fruits. \`And brought forth therewith fruits for your sustenance'[^4]
means whatever grows on earth for your sustenance, so \`Do not set up
rivals unto God when ye know (the truth),'[^5] that is, \`rivals' such
as similitudes and such things like idols which have no comprehension,
hearing, sight, or are able to do anything at all, while you know that
they cannot create any of these great blessings with which He, your
Lord, the Exalted, the Most High, has blessed you."

This simple explanation provided by the Imam (a.s.) gives the meaning of
the verse clarity and ease which can be comprehended by anyone, even one
whose share of intelligence is most modest, enabling him to appreciate
the magnificence, beauty, and perfection of the creation. He may even
explain the important points in a verse which may cause the wisdom of
their making as we find him doing with the last verse in order to point
out the depth of miraculous aspect of the verses of the Holy Qur'an.

The Holy Qur'an and the Infallibility of the Prophets
-----------------------------------------------------

In the subject of the infallibility of Prophets, the Imam (a.s.) was
asked to explain the meanings of some verses whose superficial meanings
suggested that Prophets were not infallible at all, that they were
liable to commit sins. In our discussion of queries above, we dealt with
this subject when we discussed the dialogue between the Imam (a.s.) and
Ali ibn al-Jahm, while here we would like to mention more of the same
regarding questions al-Ma’mun put forth to the Imam (a.s.) inquiring
about such verses:

### Adam

At one of the meetings arranged by al-Ma’mun, the latter asked the Imam
(a.s.): "O Son of the Messenger of God (S)! Don't you claim that
Prophets are infallible?" The Imam (a.s.) answered in the affirmative.
Al-Ma’mun then asked, "Then what is the meaning of the verse, \`Thus did
Adam disobey his Lord and allow himself to be seduced'?" The Imam
answered this question by explaining that God had forbidden Adam and Eve
from coming close to a particular tree without forbidding them from
eating its fruit or the fruit of similar trees.

They obeyed God by not coming near that tree, but Iblis (Eblis) confused
them in this regard and suggested that they should eat not from that
tree but from other similar trees, swearing to them by God that he was
only providing them with an advice. So they believed in his oath and
they ate the fruit of a similar tree, and that was before Adam was
considered as a Prophet and before his descent to earth, and what he did
was not a sin for which the penalty is Hellfire, but it was a minor
disobedience which could be forgiven and could be committed by Prophets
before wahi (revelation) reaches them.

When God chose him and made him a Prophet, he became infallible and was
not permitted to commit a sin, minor or major, telling him, "Thus did
Adam disobey his Lord and allow himself to be seduced. But his Lord
chose him (for His Grace); He turned to him, and gave him guidance.

### Ibrahim, the Friend of God

Then he asked him about Ibrahim (Abraham) al-Khalil (a.s.), the Friend
of God, and about the stage of doubt through which he passed as appears
superficially in the Holy Qur'an when he is mentioned, till truth became
manifest to him and he believed therein. The Almighty says: "When the
night covered him over, he saw a star. He said: \`This is my Lord.' But
when it set, he said, \`I do not love those that set.' When he saw the
moon rising in splendor, he said, \`This is my Lord.'

But the moon set, so he said, \`Unless my Lord guides me, I shall surely
be among those who go astray.' When he saw the sun rising in splendor,
he said, \`This is my Lord; this is the greatest (of all).' But when the
sun set, he said, \`O my people! I am indeed free from your (guilt) of
giving partners to God. For me, I have set my face firmly and truly
towards Him Who created the heavens and the earth, and never shall I
give partners to God.'"[^6] About this, the Imam comments thus:

"Ibrahim (a.s.) did not pass by a stage of doubt in God; rather, his
story may be summarized thus: He lived in a society where three types of
worship dominated: the worship of Venus, the worship of the moon, and
the worship of the sun. The outward pretense of Ibrahim (a.s.) to follow
these religions before declaring his belief in God was only to deny the
validity of each one of them and to prove to others the fact that they
were invalid, not due to his temporary belief in them. He simply wanted
to prove to their followers, through the method of argument which he
employed in a spirit filled with belief in Him, that their type of creed
and their norm of worship of Venus, the moon, and the sun, were not
appropriate due to the variation which occurred to them and which is one
of the attributes of the creature, not the Creator."

Then the Imam (a.s.) adds saying, "What Ibrahim al-Khalil (a.s.) did was
actually according to the inspiration he had received from God by the
token of the verse that says, \`That was the reasoning about Us which We
gave to Abraham (to use) against his people.'"[^7] What he did,
therefore, was merely a method to win the argument against his people
regarding the invalidity of their norms of worship and in their belief
in gods other than God, which is a unique method among Qur'anic methods
to invite others to believe.

Messengers and Despair
----------------------

Al-Ma’mun then asked him about the meaning of the verse which says, "...
till the apostles give up hope (of their people) and (their people come
to) think that they proved them to be liars, Our help will then come to
them."[^8] What may be a cause for questioning in this verse is to
attribute despair to God's Messengers after being promised help from
God. Despair and despondency are forms of *kufr* (disbelief), for the
Almighty has said, "Never give up hope of God's soothing mercy; truly
none despairs of God's soothing mercy except those who have no
faith."[^9] So, how can despair find its way to the heart of a messenger
of God or a prophet, knowing that, according to this verse, only
*kafirs* can do so, and what is a greater sin than committing *kufr*?!

What is superficially obvious from the text of this verse is that the
time when they despaired was after receiving the Message and
inspiration. To this, the Imam (a.s.) answers by saying that the subject
of despair in this verse is **not** God's help promised to His
messengers, but rather losing hope of their people ever believing in
them and accepting their message; i.e. to believe in Him and renounce
their previous disbelief and disobedience by their worship of gods other
than God. The meaning of this verse, then, will be something like this:
When the messengers lost hope that their people would ever believe in
them, and when those people thought that they succeeded in proving those
messengers as liars, it is then that Our help came to them.

Thus is the outward ambiguity of the verse removed, and thus does the
Imam (a.s.), through providing such glorious meanings to the sacred
verses of the Holy Qur'an whose outward meaning is actually the opposite
of that of their context, dispel the cloud of doubt which may come to
one's mind regarding the infallibility of Prophets. They are not mere
justifications or one's own personal opinions but actual facts the
upholding to whose contrary is not possible.

God's "Hand" is His Might
-------------------------

There are other verses the superficial meaning of which gives the
impression that God has limbs just as humans do which He uses to achieve
His purpose, such as His statement addressing Iblis when the latter
refused to prostrate to Adam as commanded by God: "What prohibited you
from prostrating to what I have created in My own hands?" and also like
the verse saying, "When a leg will be uncovered and they are invited to
prostrate..."

The Imam (a.s.) explains the meaning of God's hand to be His might. The
meaning of the previous verse would be, "What prohibited you from
prostrating to what I have created by My might and potency?" God does
not have eyes, legs, hands, or any such things as we may imagine which
would put limits to God like those to man, and the revealed texts
containing a reference to such things are given meanings which agree
with conceiving God to be Exalted above having physical dimensions a
great deal of Exaltation.

The "leg" is interpreted by the Imam as a barrier of light which, when
removed, will cause the believers to fall prostrating, while the legs of
the hypocrites become too stiffened to prostrate.  
 Thus does Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) portray for us an accurate portrait
which is honest in interpreting the meanings embedded in the Glorious
Book if we wish to honestly and wisely interpret its verses.

One more thing remains to be indicated here. There are some narratives
which contain some interpretations of Qur'anic verses attributed to Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) the authenticity of which is questioned simply because
some of those who reported them are not free of the practice of
distortion or fabrication. What we feel comfortable about is that the
fact that if such narrations do not contain anything which disagrees
with the beliefs of followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) regarding the
interpretation of Qur'anic verses, they testify to their authentic
reporting. Add to this the fact that we think it is quite unlikely that
some narrators would deliberately tell lies about the Imam (a.s.) in
cases where telling lies does not benefit the narrator a bit,
particularly in the interpretations of the verses we have quoted above.

This is why we find scholars of exegesis rely on such narratives and
their likes in explaining the Holy Qur'an, and if they contradict one
another, they accept the one which seems to have the most sound meaning,
or to the ones which agree with the basic principles of the school of
thought.

In the case where the interpretation of certain verses becomes the basis
of a legislative rule, or in the process of deriving one, then the
authenticity of narration or interpretation has to be verified first as
one provided by the Prophet (S) or by members of his Ahl al-Bayt, peace
be upon them, and attempts should be made to make sure that the
integrity of their narrators is not questioned.

[^1]: Hud:7

[^2]: Younus:99-100

[^3]: Al Baqara:22

[^4]: Al Baqara:22

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Al An'aam:76-79

[^7]: Al An'aam:83

[^8]: Yousuf:110

[^9]: Yousuf:87


