Supplement: Regency Document
============================

Historians have often made reference to the regency declaration written
for Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) by al-Ma’mun. Al-Arbili in his *Kashf
al-Ghumma fi Akhbar al-A'imma* may be considered the most reliable of
all in his textual accuracy because he stated that he had examined the
original copy of the declaration and quoted it word for word, and we
would like to quote it here in its narrative. He mentioned in his book
the following:

"In the year 670, one of his executives came from his (Imam's) sacred
quarters with the document written in person by al-Ma’mun, and between
its lines and on its back cover there were comments made in the
handwriting of the Imam; so I kissed the places where he had written,
and let my eyes glide on the gardens of his speech. I considered having
come across it as one of the blessings and favors of God, and I copied
it down *verbatim*, and it is handwritten by al-Ma’mun who stated:

*In the Name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful*

*This is a document written by the commander of the faithful Abdullah
son of Harun al-Rashid for Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far, his heir to the
throne: Thereupon, God the Exalted and the Sublime has selected Islam as
His religion, and chose from among His servants Messengers leading to
Him, guiding others towards Him, the first of them tells the glad
tidings about their last, the latest among them testifying to the
former, till God's Prophethood ended with the Prophethood of Muhammad
(S) after a long period during which no prophets were sent, while
knowledge was obliterated, inspiration ceased, and the Hour drew nearer.
So God sealed through him all other Prophets and made him a witness for
them, an authority over them, and He revealed unto him His Dear Book
which wrong cannot approach from front or from back, a Revelation from
the Wise, the Praised One, of what He permitted and prohibited, promised
of bliss and forewarned of retribution, warning and alerting, enjoining
and prohibiting, so that He would have the clear proof against His
creation,* **\`... to annihilate whoever He annihilates with clear
evidence, and keep whoever He kept with clear evidence, and God is
Hearing, Knowing.'**[^1]

*So he conveyed the Message on His behalf and invited others to His Path
according to the Commandment he received, by wisdom, counsel, and by the
most beautiful argument, then by* **jihad** *and ruthlessness till God
took him away to Himself and He preferred for him what He had in store
for him, peace of God be upon him and his progeny. So when Prophethood
was terminated, and God, through Muhammad (S), sealed inspiration and
the Message, He made the uprightness of the religion and the order of
the Muslims' affairs the responsibility of caliphate and its
commencement and dignity, and to uphold God's right by obeying it;
through it do God's injunctions and limits are performed and so are the
legislation and the Sunnah of Islam, fighting His enemy thereby.*

*The caliphs of God are obligated to obey Him regarding His religion and
His servants whom He entrusted to them, and the Muslims are enjoined to
obey and assist their caliphs to establish the right and justice of God,
to maintain security, avoid bloodshed, join rifts, bring people together
to love each other; otherwise, the Muslims will suffer chaos and
confusion, their religion will be altered, their creed will be overcome,
their enemy will have the upper hand over them, they will be divided
with dissensions, and they will lose this world and the world to come.*

*It became, therefore, incumbent upon those whom God enabled to be
caliphs on His earth, and whom He entrusted to fare with His servants,
to exert themselves and prefer what pleases God and what brings about
obedience to Him, and to hold tight to what God supports them about, for
God the Dear and Sublime says to His prophet Dawood (David) (a.s.),*
**\`O David! We have made thee a caliph on earth; therefore, judge among
people justly and do not follow your own inclination for that would
surely cause you to stray from God's Path, and whoever strays from His
Path shall have a painful chastisement due to what they forgot,'**[^2]
*and He also said,* **\`By thy Lord! We shall ask all of them about what
they used to do.'**[^3]

*It has reached us that Umer ibn al-Khattab said, \`If a goat was lost
on the bank of the river Euphrates, I would be afraid that God would ask
me about it.' By God! The person who is responsible particularly for his
own conduct regarding his relationship with God is subjected to a great
deal of danger and a great responsibility; so, how about the one who is
responsible for looking after the entire nation?! In God do we trust;
from Him do we seek security, help, protection against erring, support,
guidance to prove the argument, and success in achieving His Pleasure
and be worthy of His Mercy.*

*Indeed, the most wise of men, and the best in following God's creed
regarding his religion, and God's servants from among those whom He
established as His caliphs on His earth, is one who acts according to
his obedience of God, following His Book and the Sunnah of His Prophet
(S) during his lifetime and after his demise, and exerted his mind and
insight regarding who he should choose as his heir to the throne and the
Imam to the Muslims to look after them after him, installing him as a
flag post for them and a refuge to gather them together round him,
settle their disputes, protect their lives, guarantee their security by
the Will of God against their dissensions, broken relations, disputes,
and to purify them of the whispering of the devil and his scheming, for
God the Dear and Sublime has made succession after caliphate a condition
for complementing Islam, its perfection, dignity, and the goodness of
its people, inspiring His caliphs to make certain that whoever they
chose after them would be a great blessing, one who is blessed with
perfect health, so that he would render null the scheming of those who
sow the seeds of dissension and enmity and try to divide people and make
plans for dissension.*

*Since caliphate was assigned to him, the commander of the faithful
experienced the ugliness of its taste, the weight of its burdens, the
hardship of its tasks, and the extent of obedience to God and fear of
Him by the one who accepts to bear its responsibility; so he exhausted
his body, remained awake and prolonged his contemplation upon whatever
would bring about the dignity of the creed, the conquering of the
polytheists, the good of the nation, the dissemination of justice, the
upholding of the Book and the Sunnah, and all of this forbade him from
relaxing or resting or enjoying life, knowing that God will hold him
accountable for all of these matters, and out of his own love to meet
his Lord after having advised them regarding His religion and servants,
selecting his heir for the best interest of the nation after him the
best person he can choose due to his piety, soundness of belief and
knowledge, the most suited among them to carry out God's commandments
and His injunctions, pleading the Almighty to help him and inspire to
him what brings about His Pleasure and Obedience to Him at night and at
day, earnestly pleading and praying, from among his own household the
descendants of Abdullah ibn al-Abbas and Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.),
keenly discerning their condition, belief and knowledge, inquiring about
what he did not know regarding them, till he came to know their
conditions on a first-hand basis, observing them personally and
examining their affairs, questioning them about what he did not know in
their own regard.*

*Having prayed God for guidance in making his decision, exerting himself
in carrying out His commandments regarding His servants and lands in
both households, he selected Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn
Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali in Abu Talib (a.s.) due to his excellent
distinction, radiant knowledge, apparent piety, pure asceticism,
renunciation of the world, safety from people's criticism. And it became
clear to him that narrations still testify to each other and the tongues
agree with each other and the opinion regarding him is in consensus, and
due to what he personally knows of his distinction as a child, as a
young boy, as an adult, and as a grown-up man; therefore, he tied the
knot of caliphate for him after himself, feeling confident regarding
God's support to him in this regard, for He knows that he did so out of
his own preference of Him and His Creed and out of his concern about the
well-being of Islam and Muslims, seeking security for all and firmness
of the truth and salvation on the Day when people rise up for the
meeting of the Lord of the Worlds.*

*The commander of the faithful, therefore, invited his sons and members
of his family, his close friends, commanders of his army and those in
his service to swear the oath of allegiance which they did quickly and
gladly, knowing that the commander of the faithful prefers obedience to
God over his own inclination towards preferring his sons or others who
are among his kin, and he called him ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), for the commander
of the faithful is pleased with him; so, the household of the commander
of the faithful swore the oath of allegiance to him and so did his
commanders and soldiers at Medina and the Muslim masses, to the
commander of the faithful and to Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) after him
in the Name of God and by His blessings and decree for the good of His
creed and His servants, an allegiance to which your hands are stretched
and your hearts are pleased, knowing the objective of the commander of
the faithful behind it: his preference of obeying God, his and your own
interest, thanking God for the share of the commander of the faithful
spent in discharging your responsibility and his concern about your
guidance and good-will, hoping that its outcome will be your unity,
protection, solidarity, the strengthening of your weak spots, the
strength of your creed, and the uprightness of your affairs. Hurry,
therefore, to the obedience of God and of the commander of the faithful,
for the issue regarding which you hurry and because of which you praise
God will be for your own good as you will find out by the Will of God.*

He wrote it in his own handwriting on Monday, the 23rd of Ramadan, 201
A.H.  
 The above is a reproduction of what al-Ma’mun had written for Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), and on the back of it the Imam (a.s.) wrote down the
following:

*In the Name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful*

*Praise be to God Who does whatever He pleases; there is none to revoke
His judgment nor obstruct His Will; He sees what other eyes cannot, and
He knows what people conceal in their hearts; His blessings unto His
Prophet Muhammad (S), the seal of Prophets, and unto his good and
Purified Progeny (a.s.).*

*I, Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far, state here that the commander of the
faithful, may God grant him the strength of staying on the Right Path,
has come to recognize of our right what others have neglected to know;
so he joined wombs which were separated and brought security to
frightened souls; nay, he gave them life after they were annihilated and
provided them with wealth after being impoverished, seeking thereby to
please the Lord of the World, not expecting a reward from anyone other
than Him, and God will reward those who thank Him and will never suffer
the toil of doers of good to be wasted.*

*He has chosen me as his successor, granting me the greatest
responsibility if I live after him; therefore, anyone who unties a knot
God enjoined to be tied, or removes a joint God enjoined to be kept, has
indeed violated the honor and committed* **haram***, for he will then be
transgressing upon the Imam, violating the sanctity of Islam.*

*Such was the case in the past, so he remained patient while seeing
mistakes committed and did not voice his objection when rights were
discarded out of his fear of dissension in the religion and disunity
among the Muslim masses, and due to the fact that the days of ignorance
(***jahiliyya***) are not too far behind, and in order not to give
opportunists a chance nor to let an innovation invented.*

*I have prayed God to witness to what is on my mind should He place me
in charge of dealing with the Muslims and grant me caliphate, that I
will deal with them in general and on the descendants of al-Abbas ibn
Abdul-Muttalib in particular according to the obedience due to Him and
to His Messenger (S), and that I do not shed any blood unfairly nor
permit honor nor wealth to be violated* *except the blood shed according
to the permission allowed by the establishment of God's limits and
obligations, and that I shall choose to the best of my ability officers
who are most qualified for their jobs, making that a sure commitment and
a promise about which God shall ask me for He, the Exalted and the
Almighty, says, "And fulfill the promise, for the promise shall be
asked."*[^4]

*Should I bring an innovation, or alter anything, or replace anything, I
would then deserve my penalty and expose myself to retribution; I seek
refuge with God against His Wrath, and from Him I seek success in
obeying His Commandments and not to enable me to disobey Him, all for
the sake of the safety of myself and of all the Muslims; "And I do not
know what will be done with me or with you;"*[^5] *"The command rests
solely with God; He decides in truth, and He is the best of
judges."*[^6]

*But I obeyed the will of the commander of the faithful and preferred
his pleasure, and may God protect him and myself from erring, and I seek
His witness over myself about this matter, and He suffices for Witness.
I have written this in my own handwriting in the presence of the
commander of the faithful, may God prolong his presence, and in the
company of al-Fadl ibn Sahl, Sahl ibn al-Fadl, Yahya ibn al-Aktham,
Abdullah ibn Tahir, Thumama ibn Ashras, Bishr ibn al-Mu'tamid, and
Hammad ibn al-Nu'man, in the month of Ramadan, in the year two hundred
and one.*

On the right side of the document, the following witnesses have signed:
Yahya ibn Aktham who testifies to both the front and the back of the
document and he asks God to enable the commander of the faithful and all
the Muslims to appreciate the blessing of this testimony and testament;
Abdullah ibn Tahir ibn al-Husayn has written down his name and the same
date; Hammad ibn Nu'man has written in his own handwriting and has
testified to its front and back on that date; and Bishr ibn al-Mu'tamid
has testified to the same.

On the left side of the document, the following writing is inscribed:
"The commander of the faithful, may God prolong his presence, has
handwritten this script which is the document of covenant whereby we
anticipate goodness in both its front and back, (written) at the shrine
of our master the Messenger of God (S), between the *rawda* (courtyard)
and the *minbar* (pulpit), in the presence of all the witnesses, and
while the dignitaries of Banu Hashim and all friends and members of the
army who met the qualifications of making such a *bay'a* (allegiance),
in order to nullify any doubt cast by the ignorant, for \`God will not
leave the believers in the state in which ye are now...'[^7] Al-Fadl ibn
Sahl, in obedience to the orders of the commander of the faithful, has
written this on the same date."

[^1]: Al Anfal:42

[^2]: Saad:26

[^3]: Al Hijr (The Rocky Tract):92-93

[^4]: Bani Israil:34

[^5]: Al Ahqaf:9

[^6]: Al An'am:57

[^7]: Aali 'Imran:179


