Preface: Our Belief in Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
=========================================

Imam ar-Ridha’ is one of the bed-rocks of Islamic thought and one of its
main rich sources of knowledge. After the demise of his father Imam Musa
ibn Ja’far (a.s.), the secrets of the Divine Message and the keys to its
treasures became attainable to him, so he quenched his thirst there from
and derived the source of his intellectual contribution from the same.

He is one of the Twelve Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) who enriched the
Islamic thought with various types of knowledge due to the knowledge
they instructed their students to write down, or in providing their
answers to the questions put forth to them by others, or to what history
has narrated to us of their scientific and theological discourses with
followers of other Muslim sects.

The distinction which characterized the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
and which attracts our attention when we study their biographies is the
fact that they were obligated to others to provide them with knowledge
while nobody was obligated to accept it from them. This is a divine
bliss with which God endowed them in order to achieve through them the
establishment of His Proof against His creation, something with which
they were credited even by the rulers among their contemporary opponents
and by the most prominent thinkers among their contemporaries.

Supporting this phenomenon is the fact that some sciences and their
details were not distinctly clear during their time, nor were their
effects obvious, but they became clear and their ambiguities were
dispelled by the teaching of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) such as
the science of chemistry of which Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s.) is
considered as the very first pioneer and founder of its principles and
rules, and the science of medicine about which Imam ar-Ridha’ provides
us, in his letter to al-Ma’mun, with a glorious system and an innovative
approach in the way he explained its particularities and regulations, in
addition to various other sciences of which their legacy is full and to
which their contribution surpassed that of anyone else in setting their
corner-stones and in pointing out their various requirements.

None among the contemporary scientists was credited for being the
instructor of Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) in chemistry, or of Imam ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) in medicine. Rather, it was the fountainhead established for them
by their grandfather, Bearer of the Message (S) [^1], while they
inherited it son from father.

We may notice that the Imams (a.s.), upon being asked about the source
of their knowledge of the answers to the questions put forth to them,
refer it to their own particular comprehension of the Book (Qur'an), or
to what they derived from the book of their mother Fatima (a.s.), or to
what they learned from their forefathers who in turn learned it from the
Messenger of God (S). They did not refer it to the narration of a sahabi
of the Prophet or a tabi'i or to any other learned scholar or man of
knowledge.

Their familiarity with various branches of knowledge and with all norms
of learning in general was a cause for the nation's admiration of and
reverence for them. They were granted the final say in their disputes,
in solving a problem which may have then risen among their contemporary
scholars or men of learning. Every time they were asked about something,
they would produce an answer for it in such a most astonishing easily
convincing manner which unties the knot of what is complex, turning it
into a commonsense knowledge, or in turning the theoretical into a
practical necessity, without any ambiguity or confusion.

Such a unique distinction was not shared besides them by anyone from
among the scholars of the nation or its wise men despite their various
ranks in knowledge and degrees of wisdom and power of reasoning.

Suffices us for a proof a magnificent dialogue which is recorded in the
books of history and biography between Imam al-Jawad (a.s.), who was
then a child, and Yahya ibn Aktham, the supreme judge (or judge of
judges) of the then Abbaside regime in the meeting prepared by al-Ma’mun
to underscore distinction and superiority of the Imam over all others
when al-Ma’mun faced opposition to his decision to marry the Imam to his
daughter Ummul-Fadl due to his young age.

He was presumed to be in need of someone to educate him and teach him
theology. The conclusion of the dialogue was a victory for the very
young Imam in his stance and the shrinking of the judge and the crowd of
learned scholars and pillars of Fiqh and Sunnah and their admission of
his distinction and the greatness of his status.

Nobody ever reported that any Imam was slow in providing the answer to
any question put forth to him, a question which dealt with various
branches of knowledge and with different issues, despite the fact that
some of them were actually not old enough to provide such answers.

The Amali of Sayyid al-Murtada narrates the following:

Abu Hanifa said: "I saw once Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) as a young boy in
the corridor of his father's house and I asked him: \`Where does a
stranger among you respond to the call of nature if he has to?' He
looked up at me and said: \`He goes behind a wall, hides from the view
of the neighbor, keeps a distance from running rivers, residential
sewers, highways, mosques, without facing the Qibla or leaving it behind
him; then he turns, raises, and deposits as he pleases.'" Abu Hanifa
continues to say: "Having heard these answers, I saw him to be a nobler
person than I first thought, and his status grew greater. Then I asked
him: \`May my life be sacrificed for yours; what is the source of
renunciation?' He looked up at me and said: \`Sit down and I tell you
about it.' So I sat down, and he said this to me: \`Renunciation comes
either from the servant, or his Lord, or from both. If it were from the
Almighty God, He is more just and fair than renouncing or wronging His
servant or punishing him for what he did not do. And if it were to come
from both of them, He would be his accomplice, and the strong One is
more apt to do justice to His weak servant. If it comes from the servant
alone, he is to bear its burden, and he should be the one to forbid, and
for him is the reward and punishment, and for him were both Paradise and
Hell prepared.' I said (citing the Holy Qur'an): \`... a progeny, one
from another...'" [^2].

But some Imams, such as Imam al-Jawad, Imam al-Hadi, and Imam al-Askari
(a.s.), were not old enough to be acquainted with various branches of
knowledge and fields of arts, had we claimed that their knowledge was
the product of the tutoring of tutors or the teaching of teachers, but
they were a progeny, one from another, as Abu Hanifa said, that derived
knowledge from the substance of the Message and the Fountainhead of
Prophethood. That was a distinction for which the Almighty chose them
from among His creation in order to make them light-poles of the path of
guidance, and to make the word of faith and righteousness through them
the uppermost throughout the world.

Al-Tabrani, in his Al-Tarikh al-Kabir, and al-Rafi'i in his Musnad,
depending on the authority of Ibn Abbas, quote the Messenger of God (S)
saying:  
 "Whoever is pleased to live the way I have lived and to die the way I
shall die, to live in the Garden of Eden which my Lord planted, let him
emulate my Progeny after me and follow the example of my Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) after my demise, for they are my descendants; they were created
out of my own mould and were blessed with my own power of comprehension
and knowledge; woe unto those who deny their distinction in my nation,
those who severe their ties with my loins! May the Almighty deprive them
of my intercession."[^3].

Imam Ali (a.s.) says: "I and the elite among my descendants, and the
virtuous among my progeny, are the most clement when young, the most
learned when old."[^4]

Some historians and researchers, having exhausted themselves in the
attempt to explain this phenomenon in a way which seems reasonable to
them, may try to suppose that some Imams had mentors and instructors to
educate them. They claimed that Imam Zainul-Abidin, Imam al-Baqir, and
Imam As-Sadiq, peace be upon them, were tutored by some Sahaba and
Tabi'in, without relying on any historical document except mere
conjecture, going to extremities in their guesswork and presumption.

What proves the fallacy of such presumptions and allegations is that
whenever the Imams were questioned about something, they would not base
their answers on what any of the Sahaba or Tabi'in had said, but on one
of their own ancestors up to the Messenger of God (S), or to the books
of knowledge with which they were distinguished and which they inherited
from their grandfather the Messenger of God (S), something which anyone
who researches their legacy and is acquainted with their statements
comes to know. And it may quite be the case that some of them would
state so very clearly which supports our own conclusion.

Yet if we suppose that some Imams did indeed attend the sessions of some
of those Sahaba or Tabi'in, their attendance does not by any means
indicate that they became their students, or that they took them as
their own mentors, for one of the outcomes of tutorship at that time was
the narration of hadith, whereas it was never reported that any Imam
narrated hadith from any source other than his own forefathers.

If they did in fact narrate incidents through other avenues, such as the
avenues of the Sahaba or Tabi'in, such narration was not related in any
way to the sciences of the Islamic legislative system (Shari'a), or to
any other art; rather, it dealt with matters related to the biography of
the Prophet (S), or in their own process to prove a point against those
who did not follow them by citing what the ancestors of such
non-followers had themselves narrated.

From such a stand-point, we can refer the reason for some Sunni
traditionists who considered the hadith of Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) as
"weak," thus neglecting to record it, to the same argument, and we can
also conclude after reading their statements that Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.)
was not tutored by any mentor mentioned with reverence by them.

For example, in his Tabaqat, Ibn Sa'd, while discussing Imam As-Sadiq
(a.s.), said, "He narrated a great deal of hadith; he is not considered
as an authority on hadith and the hadith he narrated is considered weak.
The reason for this is that he was once asked whether he had learned the
ahadith he narrated from his father, and he answered in the affirmative;
on another occasion, he was likewise asked, and his answer was that he
had read them in his (father's) books."

Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash was asked once, "Why did you not learn hadith from
Ja’far and you were his contemporary?" He answered, "I asked him once
whether he had himself heard the ahadith which he narrated, and he
denied that saying that it was a narration heard by his
forefathers."[^5] .

What was "wrong" with the hadith narrated by Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.)
according to Ibn Sa'd is that some of what the Imam narrated had been
what he had read in the books of his father, rather than learning it
from others, and since it was not known which hadith he had learned was
narrated from his forefathers and which was learned from others, he
decided to reject all of them on that account.

But this cannot be an acceptable excuse for him, especially since a
great deal of what the Imam narrated did indeed give credit to others,
and since his father was quoting the hadith his own forefathers had
heard from the Prophet (S); so, why did Ibn Sa'd reject even such
ahadith?

As regarding his excuse for not accepting the Imam's hadith due to its
abundance, we cannot understand such an excuse at all; had this been the
case, he would not have narrated the abundant hadith of Abu Huraira and
his likes who attributed more hadith to the Messenger of God (S) than
was actually reported by those who kept company with the Messenger for a
much longer period of time, and who were much closer to him, than they
themselves did. But the presence of the element of bias and prejudice
does indeed interfere when someone makes an assessment, causing the
person calculating to miscalculate.

Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) is not harmed by Ibn Sa'd considering his hadith as
"weak" just as do Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash and Yahya ibn Sa'id. The latter
goes further than that by saying: "... and I personally have a great
deal of doubt about him," while discussing the Imam's hadith. Had Imam
As-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated hadith from Abu Huraira, Mu'awiya ibn Abu
Sufyan, or Marwan ibn al-Hakam, he would have been afforded the highest
pinnacle of reverence by these persons, but the "fault" of his
narrations is that they were narrated by his forefathers and were
derived from their books the knowledge of which was derived directly
from the Messenger of God (S).

The statements of these individuals, anyway, lead us to the conclusion
that his narratives were heard from his own forefathers, rather than
being quotations from others; otherwise, they would have indicated who
those "others" were. All in all, it supports our view that he and the
rest of the Imams did not have mentors besides their own fathers.

Our belief in the Imams is not, as some would like to state, due to
their knowledge of the unknown, or to their independent right to
legislate, but due to their being conveyers on behalf of the Bearer of
the Message of what is obscure to the nation of the secrets and
implications of the Message, the custodians of the particularities of
the legislative system, the ones who are most familiar with the rules
and their implementation.

We may grasp all of this from the sacred hadith which was produced and
verified by the masters of hadith and Sunnah from both sects. He (S), in
the wording of Ahmed, has said:  
 "I am about to be called upon and respond, and I am leaving with you
the Two Weighty Things: the Book of God, and my Progeny. The Book of God
is like a rope extended from heavens to earth, and my Progeny are my Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.), and the Most Knowing has told me that they both shall
never part from each other till they meet me by the Pool; so, see how
you shall fare with them after me."[^6] .

According to al-Tirmithi and al-Nisai, he has also said, "O people! I
have left with you that which, as long as you uphold to, will never
suffer you to stray, and that is, the Book of God and my Progeny,
members of my Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)."

Tabrani adds the following to the above: "So, do not go ahead of them
else you should perish, nor should you teach them, for they are more
knowledgeable than you are."  
 Ibn Hajar has said: "This proves that anyone among them who is
qualified for lofty positions and theological offices should be
preferred over all others."[^7]

The clarity of this hadith does not need any detailed explanation, nor
does it require precise interpretation and instruction, for the Book is
the first source of guidance, and the Progeny, the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
(members of the Prophet's household) are its second source, and the
nation is required to uphold to their path in order to secure for itself
to stay away from the paths of misguidance.

Put in a clearer way, we say that this hadith implies in its context
that Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) enjoy a unique distinction, that they by
themselves are independent of the achievements of others, for the
Prophet (S) made them peers only of the Holy Qur'an in explaining the
contents of the Message and the facts related thereto. This cannot be
logical if we presume their reliance on others, for those "others" would
then be more eligible to be equal to the Book of God than them.

Had it been otherwise, why did not the Prophet (S) choose the Sahaba and
their followers to be peers of the Book other than the Progeny or in
addition to them?

Other narrators have reported this hadith in a different way of wording
as in Malik's Mawti where a narrator states saying: "Malik told me that
it came to his knowledge that the Messenger of God (S) said, \`I have
left for you two Things; as long as you uphold to them, you shall never
stray, and these are: the Book of God, and the Sunnah of His Prophet."

In his Al Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, Ibn Hajar narrates it, taking its
narration for granted [^8]. Al-Tabrani, too, quoted it in his al-Awsat,
and so did Ibn Hisham in his Seerat without mentioning his references.
All of these authors may have all relied while quoting it on the Mawti
which mentioned it without its isnad.

What is quite unusual is that Professor Muhammad Abu Zuhra, in his work
Al-Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.), states that the Sunni references which narrated
the hadith with the wording of "my Sunnah" are more reliable than those
which narrated it with "my Itrat (Progeny)," despite the fact that only
Ibn Malik's Mawti narrates the hadith with the word "Sunnati (i.e. my
Sunnah)." The other three books which quoted it with the same wording of
"Sunnati" also narrated it with the wording "Itrati" as well.

As regarding the books which narrated it in the wording "Itrati," these
comprise most books of hadith, exegesis (tafsir), and tradition such as
Muslim's Sahih, al-Darmi's Sunan, Abu Dawud's Sunan, Ibn Maja's Sunan,
al-Nisai's Khasais, Ahmed's Musnad, al-Hakim's Mustadrak, al-Tabari's
Dhakhair and also Hilyat al-Awlia, Kanzul 'Ummal, in addition to the
tafsir books of al-Razi, al-Tha'alibi, al-Nishapuri, al-Khazin, Ibn
Kathir, and many others.

It was narrated through Sunni authorities in thirty-two ahadith by more
than twenty companions of the Prophet (S) as Ibn Hajar states. Through
Shi'a avenues, it was narrated in eighty-two ahadith. Despite all this,
Professor Abu Zuhra does not find in these books and avenues, some of
which are held to be the most authentic, and despite this consecutive
narration which not too many other ahadith enjoy..., what brings him
comfort with and confidence in this hadith!

Yet, a narration taken for granted or supported by one documentation,
one which is not reported except by one single source, is considered by
the professor to be "most authentic," bypassing all the consecutive
narration supporting its rival narratives and an almost total consensus
agreement regarding their authenticity...

Despite all of this, Professor Abu Zuhra considers himself to be
"subjective," and what he writes is inspired only by innocent knowledge
rather than dictated by personal bias; therefore, he presumes himself to
record only what is dictated by the balances of justice and equity, and
we shall have a lengthy discussion of him in our forthcoming book
Al-Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) in which we shall examine a degree of his own
trespassing beyond these very limits and will shed a light on the bias
and fanaticism his views are charged with.

There is a point I would like to tackle in this discourse: it is the
deliberate vicious policy of ignoring the Imams of the Prophet's
Household followed by the adherents of other sects while discussing
views and debating their proofs. While you find them giving ample
attention to the narrations reported through the companions of the
Prophet and those who followed suit in their footsteps, and to their
own, relying on them as proofs and bases of argument, even going to as
far as presuming that their own additional contribution is a Sunnah to
be emulated, these same individuals, when it comes to the Imams from the
Prophet's own family, stop short of discussing their views and the
narrations which they had narrated or were narrated about them.

This is so despite the fact that the founders of these sects, such as
Abu Hanifa, Malik, Sufyan al-Thawri, Abu Ayyub al-Sajistani and others,
who are considered as the creative pioneers who inspired the outset of
these sects, were actually graduates of the school of Imam As-Sadiq
(a.s.) who was one of the Imams of the Prophet's family. Even Abu Hanifa
used to be of the view that the reason why he was in the vanguard of his
peers was due to his being a student of Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.), and
history has recorded his famous statement: "Without those two years,
al-Nu'man (Abu Hanifa) would have been annihilated," [^9] meaning
thereby the period he lived as a student in the Imam's school, and also
his other statement when he was asked about the best Faqih he ever saw;
he said: "Ja’far ibn Muhammad (As-Sadiq, A.S.)."

History has preserved a great deal of the statements of Sunni imams and
renown personalities giving credit to Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) and other
Imams from the Prophet's family which, all in all, lead one to realize
their superiority over others and the need of those "others" for their
knowledge. Yet, despite all this, we find al-Bukhari in his Sahih
abstaining from considering a narration as authentic for no reason other
than the fact that its chain of narrators ends up with Imam As-Sadiq
(a.s.) about whom he has some "doubts."

In Tahtheeb al-Tahtheeb, Ibn Hajar says that the difficulty in
distinguishing what is authentic and what is not forced al-Bukhari not
to report any of his (As-Sadiq's) hadith [^10]. Yet Ibn Hajar did not
tell us how al-Bukhari was able to distinguish between what was
authentic and what was not of the hadith Abu Hurairah and other
fabricators and inventors of hadith had reported.

He may find for himself the excuse that the companions were all
equitable which is a justification worse than the error being justified
due to the fact that this is simply a false pretext since the behavior
of some of those companions and their exchanging of charges of deviation
and counter-charges undermined such claim of "equitability."

We cannot understand an explanation for this odd phenomenon except
prejudice and the influence of the standing sectarian environment which
was charged with the venom of grudge and bitter animosity towards the
Household of the Prophet (S), the environment which is but an extension
of desperate efforts of Mu'awiya and his agents, the caliphs of
iniquity, who succeeded him in widening the gap they created between the
masses of the Muslim nation and the members of the family of the
Prophetic mission and their practical isolation from general populace
whose conduct cannot remain on the Straight Path without that family,
according to the declaration of their great grandfather the Greatest
Prophet (S) as stated in the previously quoted hadith and in other
ahadith which fill the books of hadith and Sunnah of both parties.

Other than this, how else can you explain al-Bukhari's odd refusal to
quote Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) while he, at the same time, does not hesitate
to quote individuals such as Mu'awiya ibn Abu Sufyan, Marwan ibn
al-Hakam, Imran ibn Hattan who hailed Ibn Muljim for murdering the
Commander of the Faithful (a.s.), Umer ibn Sa'd who instigated the
murder of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) and others who were the social outcasts
of the nation and the most immoral among them?

How else can you explain what al-Sayyuti meant when he said that there
was nothing wrong with the hadith narrated by Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari
(a.s.) except that his narration of a virtue of Fatima al-Zahra (a.s.)
did not agree with his own "scholarly" taste, and that for this reason
the narration was considered a fabrication?! [^11] .

It was destined that the plot to isolate the Imams from among the
Prophet's family from public affairs should enjoy a total success during
the epochs of the Umayyad and Abbaside ruling dynasties barring brief
periods due to certain political factors. During those brief periods,
some such Imams (a.s.) were able to quench the scholarly and
intellectual thirst of their students. Despite the scarcity of such
periods and their short span of time, those Imams were able to benefit
the nation in the areas of the secrets of branches of knowledge and
intricacies of arts with which they filled numerous books and
chronicles.

The stronger factor which prompted the regime to take a negative stance
towards the Imams of the Prophet's family is that these Imams and their
followers were never convinced that such a regime was legitimate or that
those who were holding its reins were qualified for leading the nation.
According to them, the conduct of these "leaders" did not represent the
adequate conduct of message-bearers who rule with a commitment to carry
out the responsibilities of such a message so that the nation would
follow in their footsteps and correct its path should it at all deviate
from the straight path.

This lack of conviction caused them a great deal of trouble during their
lifetime despite their outward toleration of the government, and those
troubles were not confined to them alone but were extended to their
Shi'as and followers whose share was the lion's.

It is important to point out here the extent of the impact of this
negative stance of the government towards these Imams and their
disciples on the writings of the narrators and recorders of hadith, for
the pens of the latter were poisoned by the motives and ill intentions
of the rulers; therefore, we find them excluding the narrations and
ahadith if one of their narrators happens to be a Shi'a reporter or
traditionist even if he enjoyed the highest degree of reliability and
authenticity.

Their only excuse is that he was simply a Shi'a; therefore, they make
the false claim that the narration was not authentic because one of its
narrators was so and so, i.e. a Shi'a, or one who practiced Shi'aism
secretly, or a foul "Rafidi," or apply to him some other bad name, thus
revealing their sectarian prejudice which overturns the balances of a
conscientious investigation and insight upside down.

Contrariwise, Shi'as who followed those Imams applied a different
criterion wherein the judgment regarding the authenticity of a narration
or the lack thereof according to them was to ascertain the truthfulness
or untruthfulness of the narrator regardless of his sect or school of
thought. Upon such a premise, the authenticity or the lack thereof was
based.

There were numerous narrations among whose chain of narrators were
non-Shi'as, yet they were accepted and applied by the Shi'as who even
based their own juristic judgment upon them. There is no room here to
elaborate on this topic; those who wish to investigate the extent of
accuracy of this fact are referred to the books of their famous
dignitaries to see for themselves.

This proves the fact that the attitude of Sunnis towards their Shi'a
brethren regarding scholarly borrowing and loaning was not subject,
during the time of the Imams (a.s.), to sectarian or political motives
for these took place during later periods when arguments about sects
appeared, and the science of kalam was discussed in detail, and
partisans demonstrated their bias to what they thought to have proved
the accuracy of their own sect.

All this led to the widening of the gap of dissension which even caused
violence to erupt among the followers of various sects. It even led one
party to call the other "Kafir" (infidel) and corrupt, justifying the
spilling of the blood of its adherents. The sad tales of such bloodshed
are bitterly narrated by history.

Add to this the deliberate attempt by the rulers to instigate such ugly
prejudices and pave the path for those whose objectives were malicious
to spew their venom and nurture thereby the elements of dissension in
order to keep the nation from questioning the legality of the corrupt
government or questioning its iniquities and injustices, and in order to
prolong its own enjoyment and pleasure without anyone questioning what
it was actually doing.

Yet after all this, why do the Shi'as adhere to the sect of this
particular Household rather than any other Islamic sect?

The answer to this question, in our view, is quite clear. It does not
require an effort to find it out and simplify its arguments.

Man, by nature, is bent upon selecting the best path when approaching
crossroads in order to secure salvation for him and attain the goal he
aspires to achieve. He has to think long enough before making a move in
order to know exactly which path he has to take so that he will not be
confused while seeking the truth. It is only natural that man, in order
to define his safest path, should refer to one who is familiar with his
approaches and avenues when, at his outset, he stands confused as to
where to start from.

We may not differ while defining the "expert" who should be followed
when he defines the path for us in this regard, for such an "expert" is
none other than the Bearer of the Message and its Promoter (S), and we
have to follow his directives and instructions in this regard. When we
fail in our attempt to know what we need to know, we have to refer to
the complete definitions followed in this regard which would take us to
the desired result.

The texts narrated about the Custodian of the Shari'a may suffice for us
when we seek such a definition since he himself had outlined for us the
best path we have to choose. In addition to his tradition of the Two
Weighty Things in which he described the Book and the Progeny as the
dividing line between guidance and misguidance, there is another
explanatory tradition with a more explicit text in which he (S) is
quoted as saying:

"The similitude of my Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) among you is like the Ark of
Noah: whoever boards it is saved, and whoever lags behind it is
drowned." [^12]  
 Al-Tabrani adds another: "The similitude of my Household among you is
like the Gate of Hitta for the Children of Israel: whoever enters is
forgiven." [^13] The clarity of this tradition in defining the safest
path needs no explanation since he made salvation dependant upon
following them, making the sinking into the calamities of misguidance an
indication of lagging behind them.

Another tradition states: "Stars are protectors of the inhabitants of
earth against drowning, and my Progeny (Ahl al-Bayt, (a.s.) are the
protectors of my nation against dissension in the creed; therefore, if a
tribe among the Arabs differs from them (in religious matters), it would
then become the party of the devil." [^14].

Having quoted these traditions, Ibn Hajar comments thus:  
 "The reason for comparing them with the ark is that whoever loves them
and holds them in high esteem as means to thanking God Who granted them
such honors, following the guidance of the learned men among them, is
saved from dissension, and whoever abstains from doing so is drowned
into the seas of ingratitude and annihilated at the crossroads of
tyranny." [^15].

Besides, they were the overflowing fountainhead which produced the
leading scholars and founders of schools of thought; so, what stops us
from emulating these men by staying away from what they themselves had
stayed away from? Add to this the consensus view regarding these men's
integrity and immaculate conduct, their superiority over others in
knowledge, their being the final arbitrators regarding any difficult
problem faced in the legislative system or any other system according to
the testimony of the leading scholars and philosophers, nay, of even men
of the government, and the endorsement of everyone of their views and
the submission wholeheartedly thereto.

For these reasons and for others, we have upheld the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
of the Prophet (S) and preferred them over all others, following the
path they outlined for us without paying attention to others especially
since they enriched us with whatever valuable information and
intellectual riches any Muslim needs in his daily life and for which the
Message was revealed unto their grandfather the Greatest Prophet (S).

Thereupon, it is worthwhile to research the biographies of these great
Imams and examine their details and characteristics and highlight the
aspects of greatness of their unique personalities in order to correctly
emulate them. We have also to compare their conduct with that of others
so that their distinctions become manifest to us, the distinctions which
raised their status to the very summit of human perfection.

In this study, we shall try our best to examine the biography of one of
those Imams who is the eighth in the series of the Twelve Imams. He is
Imam Ali son of Musa ar-Ridha’ whose contemporary epoch was full of
historical events in whose shaping he played a significant role the
effects of which were reflected upon the then contemporary Islamic
history.

The reason which invited us to prefer to study the biography of Imam
ar-Ridha’ over those of other Imams (a.s.) is that he, despite the many
characteristics of his contemporary time, and despite the magnitude of
the events and occurrences which filled his days, has not been
independently researched as far as we know.

What I sincerely desire is to be honest in my exposition and analysis,
free from the psychological complexes of prejudice and sectarian
fanaticism, and I also wish the reader will be likewise so that he may
be my companion while conducting this research, and God is the Master of
success and uprightness.

[^1]: Acronyms of Salallaho Alaihi Wasallam (Peace and Greetings of God
be upon him). 

[^2]: Aamali of Sayyid al-Murtada, Vol. 1, p. 151. 

[^3]: Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 217. Also hadith number 3819 recorded
down by al-Hafiz Abu Na'eem in Hilyat al-Awliyaa, and he is quoted by
Ibn Abul Hadeed in his commentary, quoting similar ahadith recorded in
Ahmed ibn Hanbal's Musnad.

[^4]: Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 396. It is also narrated from al-Ma’mun
and recorded in Vol. 1, p. 204, of Akhbar ar-Ridha’ with the addition of
"So do not teach them, for they are more learned than you, and they do
not take you out of guidance, nor do they let you enter into
misguidance," and al-Ma’mun attributed this statement to the Messenger
of God (S). 

[^5]: Tahtheeb al-Tahtheeb, Vol. 2, p. 103.

[^6]: This hadith of the two weighty things is recorded by a large
number of pioneers of hadith: It is recorded by both al-Tirmithi and
al-Nisai from Jabir, by al-Tirmithi from Zayd ibn al-Arqam, by
al-Tabrani from Zayd ibn Thabit, and they are all quoted by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi in Vol. 1, p. 44, of his Kanzul 'Ummal. It is also recorded by
Imam Ahmed [ibn Hanbal] from the hadith narrated by Zayd ibn Thabit
through two authentic avenues in Vol. 5, pp. 182-189 of his Musnad. It
is also narrated by Sa'eed al-Khudri from two avenues and recorded in
Vol. 3, pp. 17-26. Al-Hakim, in Vol. 3, p. 873, of his Mustadrak, says,
"This is an authentic hadith through consecutive narration according to
both Shaikhs [Bukhari and Muslim] who did not record it down, while
al-Thahbi admitted in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak its authenticity
according to their own standards of authenticity." Ibn Abu Shayba, Abu
Ya'li, Ibn Sa'd, all record it from Abu Sa'eed as is recorded in Vol. 1,
p. 47, tradition number 945, of Kanzul 'Ummal. Ibn Hajar quotes it on p.
75 of his Al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, and so do others who learned hadith by
heart and by traditionists with an insignificant variation in their
texts. Having quoted this hadith in his Al-Sawa'iq, Ibn Hajar says, "Be
informed that the hadith enjoining us to uphold to them both is
plentiful and is narrated in numerous ways by more than twenty
companions of the Prophet (S)." This hadith enjoys a many testimonies
which agree with each other, and Dar al-Taqreeb Baynal Mathahib
al-Islamiyya in Cairo published a graduate thesis dealing with its Sunni
sources and authored by some virtuous contemporaries. 

[^7]: Al Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, p. 135, by Ibn Hajar, chapter titled
"Recommendation of the Prophet (SAW) in Their Regard."

[^8]: Al Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, p. 148. The same may be read in Hadith
al-Thaqalayn which was published by Dar al-Taqreeb Baynal Mathahib
al-Islamiyya of Cairo. 

[^9]: Mukhtasar al-Tuhfa al-Ithnai 'Ashariyya by al-Aloosi, p. 8.

[^10]: Tahtheeb al-Tahtheeb, Vol. 2, p. 103.

[^11]: Al Laali al-Masnoo'a fil Ahadith al-Mawdooa by al-Sayyuti, Vol.
1, p. 396.

[^12]: Al-Tabrani has recorded it relying on the authority of Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari on p. 151 of Vol. 3 of his Al Sahih al-Mustadrak. 

[^13]: Al-Tabrani has recorded it in his Al Awsat from Abu Sa'eed. It is
hadith number 18 of the fifth section of the forty traditions recorded
on p. 216 of al-Nabahani's book Al Arba'een Hadith. 

[^14]: Al-Hakim records it in Vol. 3, p. 149, of his Mustadrak, quoting
Ibn Abbas, then adding, "This hadith is authentic in its
consecutiveness, and they [Bukhari and Muslim] did not record it." 

[^15]: Al Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, p. 91.


