Imam and the 'Caliphs'
======================

The Imam (a.s.) was contemporary to a short period of al-Rashid's regime
during which he suffered the tragedy of the assassination of his father
Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) and other Alawides. After the murder of his
father, he was not safe from the moves of some of those who flattered
the rulers and followed their course and pretended to show their loyalty
by instigating enmity against the regime's opponents, encouraging their
elimination, thinking that that would increase the rulers' liking for
them and nearness to them, that it would strengthen their position and
grant them unique distinctions and raise them to the highest pinnacles.

Attempts to Eliminate the Imam
------------------------------

Ja’far ibn Yahya says: "I heard Isa ibn Ja’far say to Haroun (al-Rashid)
upon leaving al-Riqqa for Mecca, \`Remember your oath by the dignity of
the descendants of Abu Talib that should anyone after Musa (al-Kazim,
A.S.) claim Imamate, you would strike his head with the sword. This Ali,
his son, claims so, and people are addressing him in the same way they
used to address his father.' He looked at him angrily and said, \`Why?
Do you expect me to eliminate each and every one of them?'" Musa ibn
Mahran says that when he heard Ja’far ibn Yahya say so, he went to him
(i.e. to Imam ar-Ridha’) and told him what he had heard. Ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) responded by saying, "What do I have to do with them? By God,
they cannot hurt me in the least."

Such incitements were not confined within a reasonable limit but went
beyond it to dangerous ones where instigation might cause al-Rashid to
pay serious attention, for the Barmakis were most antagonistic towards
the Descendants of the Prophet (S) and the most cruel among them in
their grudge, so much so that it is reported that Yahya ibn Khalid
al-Barmaki was the one who ordered the murder of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far
(a.s.)[^1] when the Abbaside caliphate was under their mercy.[^2] Imam
ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) rendered God's retribution against the Barmakis to
their persecution and oppression the worst of which was suffered by Imam
al-Kazim (a.s.).[^3] Suffices for proof is the fact that Yahya ibn
Khalid was the one who plotted the ugly plot against Imam al-Kazim
(a.s.) after causing Haroun al-Rashid to be angry with him, instigating
al-Rashid against the Imam (a.s.) and using some naive weaklings among
the Alawides to achieve his goal.[^4]

It was, indeed, an attempt which spelled the extent of grudge felt by
Yahya ibn Khalid whose purpose was to pressure al-Rashid into murdering
Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and make him join his father. He said to him one
day: "This Ali, his son, has seated himself in place and claimed the
matter (Imamate) for himself." He (al-Rashid) said: "Is it not enough
for us what we have done to his father? Do you wish that we should kill
them all?"[^5] Al-Rashid's answer points out to the extent of anguish he
was suffering deep inside, and it reveals the bitter struggle exploding
deep inside him. Suffices him to live carrying the guilt of murdering
the pure soul of the Imam's father whom he subjected to numerous types
of trials and tribulations till he joined his Lord well-pleased and
satisfied after having faithfully executed the responsibilities of
Imamate which were entrusted to him honestly and faithfully, while the
tyrant's soul was no longer able to bear any bigger sin anymore.

Al-Rashid Moves to Eliminate the Imam
-------------------------------------

Finally, al-Rashid is surrounded by a large number of courtiers
instigating him to kill Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), and they finally
succeeded in stirring his feeling of anger against the Imam (a.s.),
stimulating his beastly instinct to eagerly kill. Abul-Salt al-Harawi
narrates saying that one day he was sitting with the Imam (a.s.) at his
house when a messenger from Haroun al-Rashid came in and ordered the
Imam (a.s.) to present himself before the caliph.

The Imam (a.s.) said: "O Abul-Salt! He does not call upon me at such a
time of the night except for trouble. By God! He cannot do anything
which I hate to me because of what I had come to know of certain
statements said by my grandfather the Messenger of God (S)." Abul-Salt
continues his narrative to say that he accompanied the Imam (a.s.) when
he entered the court of Haroun al-Rashid.

When the latter looked at him, ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) read those words of the
Prophet (S), and when he stood before al-Rashid, the latter looked
carefully at him and then said, "O Abul-Hasan! We have ordered a hundred
thousand dirhams for you, and write down the needs of all your family."
When the Imam (a.s.) left the court, the caliph kept looking at him as
he was leaving and said behind his back: "I wished, and God wished
otherwise, and what God wished was good." Thus did God save the life of
the Imam (a.s.) who sought refuge with Him, seeking His assistance
through the sincere words he had come to know that his grandfather the
Messenger of God (S) had articulated. Al-Rashid, on the other hand, went
back to himself satisfied after destiny had opposed his vicious
intention just to realize that what God had done was indeed better than
what he himself had intended to do.

Sincere Attempts
----------------

Contrariwise, there were sincere attempts to distance Imam ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) from danger which were undertaken by some of his followers who
had tasted the bitterness of pain during the adversity suffered by his
father Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) who suffered a great deal of oppression and
persecution at the hands of the stubborn tyrant Haroun al-Rashid.

Those attempts required the Imam (a.s.) to cease publicly promoting his
mission and to distance himself from the situations which would clearly
attract the attention of the government to him and become a cause for
its revenge and desire to eliminate him. But the Imam (a.s.) who was
confident of his stance did not pay attention to those attempts, and he
was of the view that they were simply unnecessary due to some knowledge
he had learned from his forefathers which assured him that al-Rashid
would not be able to harm him in any way.

For example, Safwan ibn Yahya is quoted saying: "When Abul-Hasan Musa
(a.s.) passed away and ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) started preaching his mission,
we were worried about his life and we said to him, \`You have declared
something of great magnanimity, and we worry about your safety because
of this tyrant.' He said, \`Let him try his best, for he shall not have
the means to hurt me.'"[^6]

Muhammad ibn Sinan said: "During the reign of Haroun, I said to
Abul-Hasan ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), \`You have made yourself well-known because
of this matter and followed in the footsteps of your father while
Haroun's sword is dripping with blood.' He said, \`What made me bold in
this regard is that the Messenger of God (S) had said: \`If Abu Jahl
harms even one hair on my head, then bear witness that I am not a
Prophet,' and I tell you that if Haroun took one hair away from my head,
then bear witness that I am not an Imam.'"[^7]

Vicious Intentions
------------------

Some Waqfis tried to warn him against declaring himself as the Imam
(a.s.) and openly acting as such, and he answered them saying that such
a matter did not require a warning, and that the fear that Haroun might
hurt him was groundless. Those individuals had only one objective in
mind: to discourage the ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) from making himself known as
the Imam and making his Imamate public so that they might be able to
promote their "sect" which claimed that the Qa'im was Imam Musa ibn
Ja’far (a.s.) and that he was still alive as we mentioned above. Let us
review the dialogue between the Imam (a.s.) and some of those Waqfis.
Abu Masrooq has stated:

"A group of Waqfis entered the house of the Imam (a.s.) once and among
them were men like Abu Hamza al-Bataini, Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Ammar,
al-Husayn ibn Umran, and al-Husayn ibn Abu Sa'id al-Makari. Ali ibn Abu
Hamza said to him, \`May my life be sacrificed for you! Tell us how your
father is doing.' He said, \`He, peace be upon him, passed away.' He
said, \`Who did he recommend to succeed him?' He answered, \`Myself.' He
said, \`You are claiming something which none among your forefathers
claimed, starting from Ali ibn Abu Talib downwards.'

He said, \`It was said by the best of my forefathers and the most
distinguished among them: the Messenger of God (S).' He asked, \`Do not
you fear them for your safety?' He said, \`Had I worried about my
safety, I would have been in a position to do something to protect
myself. The Messenger of God (S) was approached once by Abu Lahab who
threatened him; the Messenger of God (S) said to him: \`If I am
scratched by you even slightly, then I am indeed a liar.'  
 That was the first time the Messenger of God (S) incited someone, and
this is the first time I do likewise and tell you that if I am scratched
by Haroun even slightly, then I am indeed a liar.' Al-Husayn ibn Mahran
said to him, \`If this comes to pass, then we will have achieved our
objective.' He said, \`What do you exactly want? Should I go to Haroun
and tell him that I am the Imam (a.s.) and that he is nobody?

This is not how the Messenger of God behaved at the outset of his
mission; rather, he said so to his family and followers and those whom
he trusted from among the public. You believe that Imamate belongs to my
father, claiming that what stops me from admitting that my father is
alive is my own fear. I do not fear you when I say to you that I am the
Imam; so, how can I fear you if my father is indeed alive?'"[^8]

The Imam's expectation proved to be true; al-Rashid breathed his last
without hurting the Imam (a.s.) a bit.

From the Series of Tragedies
----------------------------

One incident that took place during the reign of al-Rashid reminds us of
the chain of tragic events from which the Alawides suffered during the
reign of al-Mansour. In Medina, Muhammad ibn Ja’far declared rebellion
against the government; therefore, al-Rashid sent an army under the
command of al-Jalloodi to crush his rebellion, ordering al-Jalloodi to
behead the man if he could lay his hand on him.

Al-Rashid, furthermore, was not satisfied with just that. He instructed
his commander to assault the houses of the descendants of Abu Talib and
loot everything their women had without leaving even one piece of
clothing on them. Al-Jalloodi tried to execute al-Rashid's order in
person; therefore, he attacked the house of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) using
his cavaliers. Having seen him, the Imam (a.s.) put all the women in one
house, and he stood at its door.

Al-Jalloodi said to Abul-Hasan: "I have got to enter the house and strip
the women of everything just as the commander of the faithful ordered
me." Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) said: "I can do that for you, and I will not leave
anything for them." The Imam (a.s.) kept requesting him to accept,
swearing that he would do just that till the man calmed down and
consented. Abul-Hasan took their wares, including their ear-rings,
anklets, shirts, and every valuable item in the house, small or big.

This incident, if true, does not depict an unusual behavior by al-Rashid
towards the Alawides since he was full of grudge and animosity towards
them. What encourages us to believe in it is what Ibn al-Athir narrates
about al-Rashid at the time of his death, shortly before meeting his
Maker. He was moaning and groaning while saying, "How horrible my evil
deeds are towards the Messenger of God! How Horrible!"[^9] This is a
clear expression of the admission of the calamities he inflicted upon
the family of the Prophet (S), of his horrible sins, of a bitter regret
which was consuming his soul at the time of its departure.

Imam During al-Amin's Reign
---------------------------

As regarding his life during the reign of al-Amin, we cannot review any
incident regarding the government's stance towards Imam ar-Ridha’
(a.s.), and this may be attributed to the confusing environment in which
the Abbaside caliphate found itself due to internal dissents which led
in the end to a serious split among the members of the ruling dynasty,
the split which was caused by al-Amin deposing his brother al-Ma’mun
from the post of heir to the throne and the nomination of his son Musa
in his place after listening to the advice of al-Fadl ibn al-Rabee' who
had a personal vendetta against al-Ma’mun and who feared him for his
post should he become the caliph instead, since he had already opposed
him openly.[^10]

Such a shaky situation is credited for the fact that al-Amin and his
ruling apparatus diverted their attention from Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and
from pursuing him, and we can regard that period of the Imam's life as a
peaceful respite with which circumstances blessed him in order to be
able to dedicate his time to carry out the responsibilities of his
mission and disseminate its pristine principles among the nation.

Imam During al-Ma’mun's Regime
------------------------------

As regarding the period of the Imam's life during which he was
contemporary to al-Ma’mun's regime, this may be the richest and most
eventful of all his life, for his personality enjoyed a significant role
in the turning of events and their reflection thereupon. But first we
have to provide a general expose of the intricate events which caused
Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) to enjoy a significant role in the shaping of the
events of that period. After that, we have to conduct a general study of
the personality of al-Ma’mun and of its distinctions, since he was the
number one man around whom the contemporary political events revolved.
Such a study may even lead us to research some other leading
personalities of the time that played and assumed a large role in the
political wheel of the time.

### Al-Ma’mun's Personality

As regarding al-Ma’mun, there is no doubt at all that he was one of the
strongest personalities of the Abbaside caliphate during its first
epoch, and one of the most moderate, highly intellectual and highly
learned of its scholars. He encouraged scholarship during his regime and
promoted free discussions out of his passion for increasing his own
knowledge and expanding its spheres.  
 He was also known to demonstrate an inclination towards Shi'aism,
preferring Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) to and recognizing his
superiority over all other sahaba. Narrators of hadith have recorded
lengthy dialogues with a number of narrators of *hadith* and scholars of
the Sunnah and with orators which reveal a glorious intellectual depth
and an absorption of his view which he strongly and enthusiastically
advocated.

### Al-Ma’mun's Inclination Towards Shi'aism

There is a disagreement regarding his school of thought. Some think that
he was Shi'a, while others think that he only pretended to be so out of
his regard for the feelings of Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and other Alawides
while in reality he was otherwise. But his discourses, debates, and his
serious method in challenging what was regarded as accepted facts by
those who opposed his views, all dispel any doubts regarding his
acceptance of Shi'aism.

Moreover, there are certain noteworthy measures he undertook which
support this view such as his belief that the Holy Qur'an was the Word
of God created by Him, and his insistence that scholars and faqihs
should indicate and promote this view, so much so that he caused quite a
reaction among contemporary Islamic circles to the extent that it was
referred to as the ordeal of the Holy Qur'an.

His father, al-Rashid, differed from him in this regard. When he heard
that Bishr al-Marisi endorsed the concept that the Holy Qur'an was
created by God, he said: "If I ever lay my hand on him, I shall strike
his neck with the sword."[^11] Also, he believed in the temporary
marriage of *mut'a*, and he refuted the views of the second caliph in
this regard with arguments which have already been recorded by foremost
historians.

Add to all the above his preference of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.) over all
other companions of the Prophet (S) and his view that Ali was more
worthy of succeeding the Messenger of God (S) as the caliph. Yet another
supporting argument is his serious attempt to make the cursing of
Mu'awiya a tradition and enforce it on his subjects; he announced to
people once the following:  
 "There shall be no pardon for anyone guilty of praising Mu'awiya, and
the best of creation after the Prophet (S) is Ali ibn Abu Talib
(a.s.)."[^12]

That was in response to Mu'awiya who made the cursing of Ali a tradition
which continued during the reign of all Umayyad governments till the
days of the caliph Umer ibn Abd al-Aziz who put an end to it in order to
safeguard the government of the Umayyads against the disgust people felt
towards such ignominious tradition, sympathized with the Alawides, and
returned Fedak to them when they requested him to do so.

Al-Ma’mun, in fact, sincerely felt guilty about the crimes his
predecessors had committed against the Alawides as a letter he wrote to
some Hashemites testified and in which he said: "The Umayyads killed
anyone (among the Alawides) who unsheathed a sword, while we, the
Abbasides, have been killing them *en masse*; so, ask the great souls of
the Hashemites what sin they committed, and ask the souls of those who
were buried in Baghdad and Kufa alive..."[^13]

Al-Ma’mun's inclination towards Shi'aism is the result of many factors
of a permanent impact upon his way of thinking, starting with his
childhood when a Shi'a educator planted deeply in his soul the
allegiance to Ali and the family of Ali (a.s.), and ending with his
residence in parts of Khurasan where mostly Shi'as lived. Al-Ma’mun
himself narrates an anecdote with a moral which taught him to sympathize
with Shi'as.

It involved an encounter with his father al-Rashid who was very well
known for his cruelty, tyranny, arrogance and hatred of the Alawides,
especially Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) whose life he ended with poison.
Al-Ma’mun states that when Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) met al-Rashid at
Medina, al-Rashid showed a great deal of humbleness before the Imam
(a.s.) and a great deal of respect for him to a degree which attracted
his own attention; so, he continues to say, "When there was nobody else
present, I said, \`O commander of the faithful! Who is this man whom you
have held with such a high esteem, respected a great deal, stood up to
receive, and even seated in the most prominent place while seating
yourself in front of him, and you even ordered us to hold the rein of
his horse?!'

He said, \`This is the Imam of the people, the Proof of God's Mercy to
His creation (Hujjatullah) and His caliph among His servants.' I asked,
\`O commander of the faithful! Are not all these attributes yours and
fulfilled in your person?' He replied, \`I am the Imam of the masses by
force and through oppression, while Musa ibn Ja’far (a.s.) is the Imam
in truth. By God, son, he is more worthy of being the successor of the
Messenger of God (S) as the caliph than I am and anyone else among the
people! By God! If you yourself attempt to take such caliphate from me,
I shall take it away from you even if that means pulling your eyes out,
for power is blind!'"[^14]

From all these arguments we can conclude that al-Ma’mun was indeed a
believer in Shi'aism, convinced of the principles of this school of
thought which are based on the preference of Ali (a.s.) for caliphate
over all others upon which principle al-Ma’mun insisted while debating
others. As regarding his conduct with Imam ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), his forcing
him to be his regent, and his possible assassination, all these fall
under the same precept adopted by his father al-Rashid that "power is
blind."

### Differences of Personalities of al-Amin and al-Ma’mun

There was a clear difference in mentality and way of thinking between
al-Amin and his brother al-Ma’mun. Al-Ma’mun was broader in mentality
and more open-minded than his brother, and he was more receptive to new
ideas, more deep in his political and theological philosophy. Al-Ma’mun,
moreover, was more serious than his brother in the administrative
management of the government.

Al-Amin did not enjoy these merits, and the reason may be the fact that
he was pampered and spoiled by his parents, that he was brought up to
feel distinctly superior to his brother al-Ma’mun. Add to this his
temper of hereditary stubbornness which he inherited from his mother who
was daughter of Ja’far son of (caliph) al-Mansoor; as regarding
al-Ma’mun's mother, she was a women who gave birth to several children,
and her name was Marajil. Al-Amin's mother raised her son to be aware of
the class distinctions by narrating to him some interesting anecdotes
involving herself and al-Rashid whenever the latter felt a psychological
and emotional inclination towards his son al-Ma’mun.

### Al-Rashid Evaluates his Sons

Al-Rashid was aware of the intellectual differences among his sons, but
he could not clearly express it out of his respect for the feelings of
his favorite wife and to safeguard the status of her son. He is quoted
as having said: "I am aware of the fact that Abdullah is gifted with
determination like that of al-Mansour, with asceticism like that of
al-Mahdi, and with dignity like that of al-Hadi.

Had I wished to link him to the fourth (meaning himself), I would have
done so and preferred Muhammad over him. I am aware of the fact that he
follows his own inclination, wastes what is in his possession, and
shares slave and free women in his views. Had it not been for the mother
of Ja’far, and the inclination towards the Banu Hashim, I would have
preferred Abdullah over him."

Differences of Conduct of Both Brothers
---------------------------------------

The vast difference which separates the brothers unveils when we review
the biography of each one of them and study its distinctions and
attributes. Al-Ma’mun was a practical man, strong in his administrative
management skills, serious, wise regarding his conduct, far-sighted in
his political or academic ambitions, loves knowledge and scholars, so
much so that he was nicknamed "scholar of the Banu al-Abbas (the
Abbasides)."

Al-Amin was the opposite of all of this in his general conduct. He
inclined more towards merry-making and entertainment which is the
natural outcome of his spoiled childhood and adolescence. To prove this
point, we have to read this interesting incident which spells out the
type of general conduct of al-Amin during the moments which preceded his
assassination. Ibn al-Athir states the following in his *Tarikh*
(chronicle):

"Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi narrated saying that he was with al-Amin when he
fell under the political pressure of Tahir. He says that al-Amin came
out during one night to cheer himself up and forget about his
depression, so he went to a house he had had in the Khuld suburb, then
he sent for Ibrahim. When Ibrahim was brought to him, he said, \`Do you
see how nice this evening is, how beautiful the moon appears in the sky
and how its light is reflected on the water of the Tigris? Would you
like to have a drink?' He answered that that was up to him, so he drank
a bottle of wine, and Ibrahim entertained him with the songs he knew he
liked best."[^15]

It is beyond imagination to conceive how a monarch undergoing a horrible
political crisis which was about to uproot his throne could resort to
such an extravagant behavior so far from permitting him to contemplate
upon the fate threatening him and jeopardizing his very existence. Some
other such extravagant norms of behavior narrated about al-Amin the
caliph since he ascended the throne and till his last moments clearly
indicate that he was not a man of government in the wide sense of the
word, nor were he a leader.

### Dissension Begins

Indications of dissension between both brothers started appearing before
al-Rashid's death, and historians render that to the fact that al-Rashid
had handed the reins of government over to his son al-Ma’mun in Khurasan
and secured the oath of allegiance to him from the army commanders and
civilian dignitaries there, granting him all what he had of money and
other items of value.[^16] When the news reached him in Baghdad, he did
not relish it at all but considered it as a premature action undertaken
by his departing father and something he himself was entitled to do in
his capacity as the first regent who had the authority to determine such
matters.

### Confused Behavior of al-Rashid Towards His Sons

Al-Rashid seemed to sense deep inside his soul the psychological gap
which separated his son al-Amin from him when he detained the messenger
his son had dispatched to Khurasan in the pretext of bringing him back
news about his father's health conditions whereas in reality he was
carrying secret letters to army leaders and civilian notables to be
delivered to them immediately after the death of his father al-Rashid.

The letters contained orders to carry out the duties the recipients were
expected to perform. The objective was to depose his brother al-Ma’mun
from actual authority vested upon him by his father. Al-Rashid tried to
extract an admission from the messenger that he was carrying secret
letters from al-Amin to army leaders and civilian notables, but he did
not succeed even when his patience reached its limit and he threatened
the messenger to have him killed, and he almost did so before death
overtook him whereupon the messenger was subsequently released and the
letters were delivered as planned. The result was the army leaders and
their troops reneging on the promises they swore to al-Rashid, causing a
great deal of political chaos.[^17]

We can easily discern the confusing ordeal which dominated the conduct
of al-Rashid regarding his arrangement of the issue of his own
succession by his sons. He was not satisfied with just securing
assurances and taking the most serious of oaths from his sons al-Amin
and al-Ma’mun, so he went during the *hajj* season to Mecca to require
his sons to write down their pledges, then he hung what they wrote down
on the walls of the sacred Ka'ba in the presence of a multitude of
people so that those who did not witness the event would be told by
those who did so on that day.

Al-Rashid Divides the State
---------------------------

Yet he was still not quite satisfied, so he went a step further to
divide the domains of the state to three sections, granting al-Amin
authority over Iraq and Syria up to the end of his western possessions;
to al-Ma’mun he gave the territories from Hamadan up to the eastern
borders of his domains; to al-Qasim he gave the peninsula, the sea
ports, and the metropolises after having secured the oath of allegiance
for him after his brother al-Ma’mun and giving him the option to keep or
depose al-Ma’mun.[^18]

Thus, al-Rashid thought, the ghost of dissension would be averted, and
the government after his death would be secured for all his sons since
he gave each one of them a portion thereof whereby he would maintain a
force strong enough to deter the transgression of any other brother.
Despite all of that, however, al-Rashid could not put an end to the
causes of his dilemma deeply rooted within himself as the incident of
the messenger who was sent by his son al-Amin suggested.

### Apprehension of the Public Regarding the Division

People predicted ominous consequences to take place because of what
al-Rashid had done. Some of them said that he sowed the seeds of evil
and war among them, and they feared the consequences, and indeed what
they feared came to pass.[^19] Some wise men said that he caused them to
fall into an inner conflict the perils of which victimized the
subjects.[^20]

### Ambition of Some Followers Deepens Division

The conflict among the two brothers was worsened by the incitement of
some top rank politicians in each party, and there were many reasons for
incitement and entrapment. On one hand, we find al-Fadl ibn al-Rabee',
who caused the army to renege on its sworn promise of support for
al-Ma’mun in Khurasan as soon as al-Rashid died and marched with it to
Baghdad in order to strengthen al-Amin's position, trying to aggravate
the tension between al-Amin and his brother al-Ma’mun, instigating the
first to nullify the allegiance to al-Ma’mun and change it to his son
Musa, depending in so doing on various means of incitement which in the
end pushed al-Amin to assault his brother.

Al-Fadl, by doing so, was trying to get rid of al-Ma’mun as the regent
for fear that should he come to rule, he would certainly seek revenge
against him due to his going back on his promise to support al-Ma’mun
whom he slighted and the allegiance to whom he broke after the death of
al-Rashid.[^21]

On the other hand, we find al-Fadl ibn Sahl, the Khurasani leader, who
was appointed in his post by al-Ma’mun, trying to secure the government
for al-Ma’mun by his brilliant methods after pledging to help him reach
the throne and dethrone his brother al-Amin at any price and stand in
the face of al-Amin's attempts to deprive him of his regency. Al-Fadl
and his brother al-Hasan ibn Sahl, in addition to the rest of Khurasani
leaders and chiefs, were aware of the precarious situation in which they
would find themselves should destiny decide that al-Amin must have
victory over his brother al-Ma’mun especially since they had already
declared their allegiance to al-Ma’mun and reneged in their promise to
al-Amin.

War is Waged and al-Ma’mun Wins
-------------------------------

The gap between the brothers became wider, and the presentiments of the
tragedy to befall the two brothers were in sight when al-Amin announced
in Baghdad his decision to drop the name of his brother al-Ma’mun from
Friday sermons and substitute it with that of his own son Musa whom he
named his successor, and he sent letters to places far and wide in this
meaning. Al-Ma’mun rose to defend his right and started planning to
overrun Baghdad, the capital of the government, while al-Amin was
gathering troops to take over his brother's domains.

Both armies finally clashed and fierce battles ensued in more than one
location, and in the end al-Ma’mun came out victorious, took control of
Baghdad and killed al-Amin. All of that became possible due to the
planning of al-Fadl ibn Sahl, who was nicknamed "Dhul-Riyasatain," i.e.,
the man who had a say in two states, and his brother al-Hasan, assisted
by an elite group of military experts and top political advisors.

Having won victory over his brother, al-Ma’mun tried to make Marw the
base of power for the Abbaside dynasty instead of Baghdad due to the
advice of his army leaders and top political aides who were credited
with regaining his right to the caliphate after al-Amin had deposed him,
and because of his own feeling of gratitude towards the city that
assisted him and brought him victory during the darkest periods of his
political crisis.

[^1]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 226. 

[^2]: 'Umdat al-Talib, p. 185, 1st edition (Najaf, Iraq). 

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 48, p. 249, quoting Al Kafi. 

[^4]: Shaikh al-Toosi's Al Ghayba, p. 22. 

[^5]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 2, p. 226. 

[^6]: Al Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 487. It is also mentioned in Al 'Uyoon, Al
Manaqib and Al Irshad. 

[^7]: Rawdat al-Kafi, p. 257. 

[^8]: A'yan al-Shi'a, Vol. 4, Part I, p. 138. 

[^9]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 130. 

[^10]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 138. 

[^11]: Tarikh al-Khulafa by al-Sayyuti, p. 284. 

[^12]: Ibid., p. 308. 

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 49, p. 210 as quoted in Ibn Maskawayhi's
book Nadeem al-Farid. 

[^14]: 'Uyoon Akhbar ar-Ridha’, Vol. 1, p. 88. 

[^15]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 162. 

[^16]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 134. 

[^17]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, pp. 134-135. 

[^18]: Ibid., p. 112. 

[^19]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 113. 

[^20]: Tarikh al-Khulafaa by al-Sayyuti, p. 290. 

[^21]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 5, p. 138. 


