Conveying the Voice of Imam Husayn To the World Chapter 4: Upholding the Husayni Sha‘a’er
=========================================================================================

**Introduction**

Allah Almighty says in His Glorious Book:

{On that account, We ordained for the Children of Israel that if anyone
slew a person - unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief in the
land - it would be as if he slew the whole people, and if any one saved
a life, it would be as if he saved the life of the whole people.}37

In some of the Tafsir (exegesis) it is stated that one of the meanings
of “saving life” of the above noble verse is “leaving and exiting the
darkness of aberration to the Light of being guided”, as the Almighty
states,{Can he who was dead, to whom We gave life, and a Light whereby
he can walk amongst men, be like him who is in the depths of darkness,
from which he can never come out? Thus to those without Faith their own
deeds seem pleasing.}38

So this noble verse considers he who is distant from faith – iman – to
be distant from the light or the knowledge with which one lives amongst
the people. Therefore the Light that is in fact knowledge or faith as
presented in this noble verse is one of the meanings of “giving life”.

This kind of giving life has many manifestations; one would be for
individuals who are alive, i.e. to endeavour to guide someone to the
right path. In Another case this “giving life” would be for individuals
who are dead; for example in a meeting one might highlight the virtues
and the good qualities of a mu’min – a believer – who is dead, this act
would also be considered “giving life” to the individual concerned. The
gatherings that are arranged on the occasions of the birthday or the
death of the Imams alayhum-as-salam are also considered a manifestation
of “giving life” to those occasions and to their respective owners. This
“giving life”
is no doubt considered as the Sha’a’er that Allah Almighty refers to in
His Glorious Book:

37 The Holy Qur’an, [5:22]

38 The Holy Qur’an, [6:122]

{And whoever holds in honour the Sha‘a’er – Symbols – of Allah, for
they truly reflect the piety of the heart.}39

In fact upholding and “giving life” to the Islamic occasions is one of
the Sha’a’er that Islam calls for. So when highlighting the virtues of a
believer means keeping his memory alive, it is far more significant when
we attempt to keep alive the memory of Rasulollah and his Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam. And this is clearly noticed in the tale reported in
the holy Qur’an when Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) alayhis-salam said,{Grant
me honourable mention on the tongue of truth among the latest
generations}40.

This means that “O Lord I ask to make the people after me remember me
and keep my memory alive – “giving life to me” – so that my teachings
and religion remain alive amongst the people – which are Tawheed and the
law of Allah – and at the end of the day the religion that you revealed
to me shall be the cause for the guidance of the people.”

**Benefits of the Husayni programs**

In the same way the mourning programs have great importance and they
may not be ignored, and the Husayni Sha’a’er have a significant role in
revitalising the nations and no one can deny this fact. So too are the
Qur’an recitation sessions, as the words of the Qur’an resonate in the
hearts of the believers and occupy their entire existence such that the
Qur’an verses become their aims and objectives. For the Qur’an rejects
tyranny and oppression, or transgressing upon others’ rights or
suppressing their freedoms or sending them on exile. Allah Almighty
states in His Glorious Book, {Those who do not judge by (the light of)
what Allah hath revealed, they are the transgressors.}41

{And do not transgress for Allah does not like the transgressors}42

{Take not life, which Allah hath made sacred, except by way of justice
and law.}43

39 The Holy Qur’an, [22:32]
40 The Holy Qur’an, [27: 84]
41 The Holy Qur’an, [5: 47]
42 The Holy Qur’an, [2: 190]

{Do the Unbelievers think that they can take My servants as protectors
besides Me? Verily We have prepared Hell for the Unbelievers for (their)
entertainment.}44

When the Muslims read such verses from the Qur’an, Allah opens their
hearts and they realise that the reality (of their society and of their
country and circumstances) is contrary to what the Qur’an calls for. It
is for such reasons that the tyrants endeavour to prevent the Husayni
programs, since these programs expose the criminals and reveal the truth
to the people. I shall mention an account from history in this respect
and then come back to our discussion.

**Husayni Programs vs. Ploys of Colonialists**

In one of the Indian cities where the Muslims used to lead a tranquil
life, the British entered one of the Indian cities under the guise of a
trade company. The local governor mobilised his forces to resist the
British, but with all the efforts he made his forces were no match to
the British forces.

The result was that British quashed the resistance and killed many of
the forces of the Indian governor. Then they issued a decree to kill the
women and children, and the city was subjected to brutal massacre, and
the bodies of the victims remained unburied for several days such that
animals fed on them. In this way the British managed to rule Indian
subcontinent. One of the laws they instituted was that they banned the
Qur’an recitation sessions and Husayni Sha’a’er programs, whereas the
Indian Muslims used to actively organise and participate in such
programs. Under the new British law anyone who organises such programs
is imprisoned for a period of ten years. However one of the scholars
decided to actively oppose this ‘law’ and set up Qur’an lessons for the
youngsters and encouraged parents to send their children to his Qur’an
lessons. The man was charged for breaking the imposed law and imprisoned
for ten years. On his release from prison, and with undiminished
determination he continued his Qur’anic lessons for the youngsters, in
addition to organising other lessons as well as Husayni Sha’a’er. The
successes of his programs were such that similar programs were also set
up in other mosques, and they became as widespread as before. Such
programs have a direct role in uprooting tyranny from the Islamic
countries and freeing them from the grips of the multinationals.

43 The Holy Qur’an, [6: 151]
44 The Holy Qur’an, [18: 102]

**The significance of the mourning programs**

As for the truths and validity (of the Sha’a’er), they are reflected in
the realities we come across in our daily lives. One of the Maraje’ in
the holy city of Qum narrated to me an interesting account of his
encounter with a Christian priest. He said, “When I was studying in
Najaf (in Iraq), I once went to Baghdad with some of the fellow
students. While there we heard that there is a priest who actively
preaches for Christianity, so we decided to wear normal clothing (not
the usual ‘Aba and turban) and attend his session. At the end of the
program, and when the people left the hall, the priest turned to us and
asked us, “Who are you?” we replied, “we are native” he said, “I don’t
mean that, but it seems to me that you are scholars and I do not think
you came here to learn from me.” I replied that we study theology. I
could tell that from the outset, he replied. In our conversation with
him he said, “I shall admit to you a truth that someone else would not
say it, and the truth is that your Prophet (Salla-llahu Alayhi wa Aalih)
was a man of knowledge and reflection and was aware of reality- and in
these qualities he was unparalleled and came second to no one.
Furthermore, your Prophet left behind for you things that no other
prophet left for his people, and if we had just one of those things we
would have made the entire world Christian. The first of those things is
the Noble Qur’an, which is the eternal miracle of Islam; the second of
them, the descendants of your Prophet who are referred to as “Sayyid”.
They always continue to remind the people of the existence of the
Messenger of Allah; the third of those is the existence of the shrines
of the impeccable Imams as well as those of their of springs. These
shrines act as a magnet and a focal point for the people, continually
attracting them and giving them spiritual strength and guidance. The
fourth of these things are the mourning programs that are established to
commemorate them, and these programs are the best centres for making the
people adhere to Islam. As you can see I have difficulty attracting
followers of my own faith, whereas in your case as soon as you put a
banner with “Ya Husayn” written on it, masses of people flock to your
assembly.”

**The Husayni Sha’a’er, or the mourning programs carry significant**

importance, as well as the programs commemorating the birth of the
Ma’soomeen alayhum-as-salam. One of the benefits of such programs is
that the teachings of Islam with respect to all aspect of life are
presented to the people, such as the question of government and
leadership, the characters of the leader, his qualities and attitudes,
etc. All such issues Islam has dealt with in details and the conduct of
Rasulollah and Ma’soom Imams alayhum-as-salam reflect them. Now when
such issues are presented and discussed during such programs, this does
not go well with the plans of the despots and tyrants. When the
characters of the Imams alayhum-as-salam are mentioned such as their
bravery and the sacrifice they made for the sake of Islam, or
encouraging the people to follow the Ahl-ul-Bayt and to have absolute
trust in Allah and whole-heartedly adhere to the teachings of the holly
Qur’an, or to fear Allah Almighty alone and no one else, or awakening
the youth and encouraging them to follow those teachings. Such issues do
not go well with the plans and policies of the tyrants who want to
distance the people from Islam and their Islamic heritage, and to weaken
their faith in Islam. They want to encourage non-Islamic or anti-Islamic
values in societies instead of truthfulness, trust, sincerity and
honesty, responsibility, strife, sacrifice, and adherence to the right
path. For this reason the tyrant rulers are in perpetual war with
mourning programs and the Husayni Sha’a’er. And everyone knows the clear
role the Husayni Sha’a’er play in awakening the nation and boosting
their morale, encouraging adherence to Islamic thoughts and teachings
and calling the people to enjoining good, piety, cooperation, and
upholding the cause of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.

**Recommendations for the Husayniyahs**

1. To organise programs that emphasise the love and dedication of the
Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam such that this love is out of awareness and
understanding of the truth. The creation of love in the hearts is the
responsibility of the Husayniyahs through the lectures and programs they
organise which give vitality to the hearts and reduces one’s attention
to this world and encourages the individual to ascend through an
elevated soul and with the teachings and thoughts of the Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam.

2. To emphasise on the Noble Qur’an and to organise recitation sessions
and classes for teaching the recitation of the Qur’an, especially for
the children, since they are the strength of the future of Islam, and
the same goes for the youth and women. It is imperative that everyone
uses this unparalleled source of knowledge and to disseminate its
teaching throughout society.

3. It is also important that programs are held to teach Islamic laws
and acts of worship including all those matters that people come across
in their daily lives, as well as Aqa’ed or Islamic beliefs, which are
obligatory for everyone to know. Other issues should also be taught such
the history of the Math-hab and the lives of the holy Imams and their
struggles against the tyrants of their times.

4. Such gathering places as the Husayniyahs should be places for
brotherhood, harmony, for remembering Allah Almighty, and honesty in all
our dealings with everyone else ranging from friends and brothers, to
family members and everyone else; the first and foremost being in our
relation with Allah Almighty and the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam.


