Working On Ashura
=================

Question:

Is it permissible to go for work on the day of Ashura?

Answer:

It is Makruh or undesirable, and the work shall not be blessed on that
day.

61 meaning “Master of the Martyrs”. This is title of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam.

**Husayni Shrine**

Question:

Were the severed heads of the martyrs returned with the captives of
Ahlul- Bayt alayhum-as-salam and buried with the bodies? Or were the
heads buried in another location?

Answer:

The overwhelming evidence is that they were returned back and buried
with the sacred bodies.

Question:

We have a mosque in Cairo, where it is believed that the sacred head
ofImam Husayn alayhis-salam is buried. However, I have also seen in
Bihar al-Anwar that the head was buried in the holy city of Najaf. What
is your opinion about this issue, and where do you think the head is
buried?

Answer:

Based on reliable and authentic sources, the head of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam was returned to the holy Karbala and Imam Zayn-al-Abidin
alayhis-salam buried the head with the sacred body. There are other
claims, but that we mentioned above is the correct one.

**Zeyarah**

Question:

In some books it is stated that if we wanted to read the Zeyarah
(salutation) of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam from a distant location – not
actually being in Karbala – we should go to the roof of a building and
face the direction of Karbala, and read the Zeyarah. Does this mean that
reading the Zeyarah from a room is not acceptable? Is the Zeyarah
without reading the associated prayer acceptable?

Answer:

The Zeyarah is acceptable. Going to the roof, and performing the
associated prayers increases in the reward.

Question:

Are the Zeyarah of Ashura, and Zeyarah of Nahiyah reliable and
authentic? What about Du’a Nudbah?

Answer:

All are correct, reliable, and authentic.

**Query on Ashura**

A group of the faithful presented a question on the validity of Tatbir
to the leading Maraje‘ of the Shi‘a world in Muharram 1423 Hijri, March
2002.

The question and the respective Maeaje‘ fatawa are given below:

Their Excellencies the Grand Maraje', may Allah protect them.

Salaam Alaykum,

We would be grateful if you express your opinion about Qama-Zani.
Please state the ruling if it were to be conducted in private and/or in
public.

With thanks

The Lovers and Devotees of Abi-Abdillah al-Husayn alayhis-salam.

**Fatawa**

Decrees of the leading Shi‘a Maraje‘ in the holy city of Qum in
response to the above query:

**Fatwa of Ayatollah al-Udhma Behjat**

In the case of it (Qama-Zani) not being harmful, there is no problem
with it.

Stamp of the office of Ayatollah al-Udhma Behjat

Fatwa of Ayatollah al-Udhma Abtahi

If it does not cause death, or unbearable harm, it should not be
prohibited.

For Allah is the Knower and Helper to the good.

Seal of Ayatollah al-Udhma Abtahi

Fatwa of Ayatollah al-Udhma Mirza Jawad Tabrizi

There is no objection to Qama-Zani in its own right.

Seal of Ayatollah al-Udhma Mirza Jawad Tabrizi

Fatwa of Ayatollah al-Udhma Muhammad Sadiq Rouhani

To do Qama-Zani is a very good act indeed, and to perform Qama-Zani in
public enhances the excellence of this act, and ifm one is harmed in the
process, the reward (Thawab) for this act will be increased even
further.

One of the things that I regret not doing is that I did not have the
honour to perform this great practice, and now that I am old and frail,
I am unable to perform it.

In any case, from all the people who have had the honour to perform
this religious symbol I wish to ask them to pray for me after performing
Qama-Zani.

**Signature and seal of Ayatollah al-Udhma Muhammad Sadiq Rouhani**

**Fatwa of Ayatollah al-Udhma Langaroudi**

Salaam upon the Lovers of Imam Husayn

In our opinion since Abi-Abdillah al-Husayn alayhis-salam is Thar-
Allah, the Blood of Allah, then it would be appropriate, but in fact
imperative that for the Blood of Allah, the blood of the creatures of
Allah is shed. Therefore not only Qama-Zani is permissible, but it is
also regarded as one of the Sha'a'er and it has great, and extensive
Thawab (reward).

It is honour and good for the Husayni Lovers who participate in this
beautiful and honourable act, since Qama-Zani is one of the Sha'a'er.

Needless to say that to practice this Sha'a'er in public is better.

Salaam be upon the Righteous Lovers (of Imam Husayn) and upon all the
Righteous servants of Allah.

Signature and seal of Abd-el-Saheb Sayyid Muhammad Mahdi Murtadhawi
Langaroudi

Fatwa of Ayatollah al-Udhma Sayyid Sadiq Shirazi

Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim

To perform Qama-Zani, whether in private or in public, and other kinds
of Azadari for Sayyid al-Shuhada Abi-Abdillah al-Husayn - may my soul be
his sacrifice and peace and blessings of Allah be upon him - brings
about the pleasure of Allah Almighty as well as Imam Mahdi - may Allah
hasten his reappearance - InSha'Allah.

{And he who glorifies the Sha'a'er of Allah, surely it is from the
piety of the hearts.} [The Holy Qur'an, 32: 22]

Signature and seal of Ayatollah al-Udhma Sayyid Sadiq Shirazi

Is it true that . . .

Question:

Is it true that the skies wept blood for Imam Husayn when he was
killed?
Answer:

Yes. When he was killed, the sky wept blood for Imam Husayn
alayhissalam.

It is reported that when Imam Husayn alayhis-salam was killed not only
the residents of the heavens cried for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, but
even the skies cried for him and they wept blood for him. This is
reported not only in the Shi’a books but also in the most important
Sunny references:

“On the day of the martyrdom of Husayn alayhis-salam the sky rained
blood . . .”

See

Thakhaa’er al-Uqba pp 144, 145, 150.

Al-Sawaa’eq al-Muhriqah pp 116, 192. . . . . .

“(on the day Husayn was killed) there was not a stone which was not
lifted but underneath it was found blood . . .”
See
Al-Sawaa’eq al-Muhriqah pp 116, 192. Tathkirat-ul-Khawaas p 284, Tafsir
ibn Kathir vol. 9, p 162 . . . . .

There are great many more hadith and great many references in abundance
in this respect, but for brevity only a few are cited here. These
astonishing events were observed and reported by people in various
geographical locations. The chroniclers in the reference such as the
above record theses reports from people who were in Medina, Karbala,
Kufa, Damascus, Jerusalem, etc. But this does not mean that these events
were confined to those areas only. In fact we have solid evidence that
the skies everywhere wept blood for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.
Chroniclers in Britain for example, have recorded that in the year
coinciding with the event of Ashura, the skies in Britain rained blood,
and milk and butter turned into blood! The exact quote is as follows:

“685. In this year in Britain it rained blood, and milk and butter were
turned into blood.”

The above is recorded in:

The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,

Translated, edited by G. N. Garmonsway,

Professor of English,

King’s College, London

ISBN 0-460-87038-6

Question:

Is it true that Imam Mahdi alayhis-salam weeps blood for Imam Husayn?
Answer:

Yes it is true. Imam Mahdi, may Allah hasten his reappearance, mourns
for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam every day - night and day - and he weeps
blood for his great grandfather, as seen from his declaration he makes
in his Zeyarah, known as Zeyarah of Nahiyah: “. . . now that I could not
be with you on the day of Ashura to defend you and fight your enemies, I
shall mourn you every morning and every evening, and I shall weep blood
for you instead of tears . . . ”

Question:

Is it true that the head of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam spoke, and
recited the Qur'an, while being carried from Karbala to Shaam and
back?

Answer:

Yes this is true, and the report of this phenomenon is reported by
numerous chroniclers and recorded in many references. This topic is
referred to in more details in chapter three of this book.

Question:

Is it true that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin alayhis-salam mourned and wept for
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam for more than twenty years?

Answer:

This issue is widely reported in and recorded in history books. More
details are presented in chapter three of this work.

Who was the first to . . .

Question:

Who was the first individual who founded the Husayni Sha'a'er or the
mourning ceremony for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam? was she Zaynab
alayhas-salam, the loyal sister of Imam Husayn? or was he one of the
imams?

Answer:

The first one who founded the Husayni Sha‘a’er is Allah the Almighty.

This was in the form of the composition of Zeyarah of Ashura. According
to authenticate hadith, it (Zeyarah of Ashura) was composed by the
Almighty.

[The hadith of Zeyarah of Ashura being the composition of Allah
Almighty is reported in Bihar al-Anwar, volume 98, page 300, second
edition, 1983/1403, al-Wafa publishers, Beirut.] After narrating Zeyarah
of Ashura and the Du'a that comes after the Zeyarah, Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq states, “I have received this Zeyarah from my father, who
received it in this form from Ali ibn al-Husayn, who received it in this
form from al-Husayn, who received it from his brother al-Hasan, who
received it from Amir-ul- Mu’minin Ali ibn Abi Talib alayhum-as-salam,
who received it in this form from Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih, who received it from Jibra'il
alayhis-salam, who received it from Allah Almighty.”

This report also appears in misbaah al-motahajjid, pp 542-546, by
Sheikh al-Tousi.]

Needless to say, the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam continued with the
Husayni Sha‘a’er, starting from Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam, and Imam
Zayn-al-Abidin alayhis-salam, and the rest of the Ma‘soom Imams
alayhum-as-salam.

Question:

Who was the first person that wept for Imam Husayn for the momentous
tragedy of Ashura? is it true that when Imam Husayn alayhis-salam was
born, archangel Jibra'il descended upon Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-waaalih to tell him of the events of Karbala?

Answer:

Yes this is true. On a number of occasions, Rasulollah wept for Imam
Husayn alayhis-salam while the latter was a baby, and quoted Jibra'il
alayhis-salam of the events of Ashura in a land called Karbala. However
the first person who wept for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam was the father
of mankind Adam alayhis-salam. Adam alayhis-salam is reported as saying
to archangel Jibra’il when he descended upon him on one occasion, "Why
is it that every time I pass through this particular area I feel
extremely sad and depressed and weep?" Jibra’il alayhis-salam said to
Adam, "The name of this particular area is Karbala", and he went on to
narrate to him the events of Ashura in detail.

Question:

Who was the first individual who founded the practice of walking on
fire?

Answer:

Lady Zaynab and Imam Zayn-al-Abidin alayhum-as-salam are the founders
of walking on fire in the Husayni Sha'a'er.

When the army of Yazid slaughtered every companion and then Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam, they attacked the living quarters of the Imam and his
companions. The victorious army of Yazid torched the tents and the women
and children fled the blazing tents. Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam was asked
why she did not escape, as they were about to torch her tent, she
replied "how can I when I have a patient inside the tent". When her tent
was eventually set on fire, Lady Zaynab dragged her nephew, Imam Zaynal-
Abidin alayhum-as-salam, walking on the fire of the burning tents as
they crossed them to a less dangerous area.

Question:

Who was the first Ma'soom Imam from the Ahl-ul-Bayt to hold a mourning
and lamentation program, like the traditional Majlis Husayni that are
held annually in Muharram today? Or is it that the Majlis Aza that we
have today is the invention of the Shi’a over the last few centuries?

Answer:

Imam Zayn al-Abidin alayhis-salam was the first member of the Ahl-ul-
Bayt alayhum-as-salam to publicly hold a mourning and lamentation
program for Imam Husayn - like the Majlis Aza that are held today.

After they were released from captivity in Shaam, the women and
children of Imam Husayn and his followers, lead by Imam Zayn-al-Abidin
alayhissalam headed towards Karbala so that they could revisit the
graves of their loved ones and bury the heads of the Martyrs with their
bodies. They arrived at the site of the graves and the battle of Karbala
on the twentieth of Safar – forty days after the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn and his followers, hence Arba‘een occasion which means forty.

After Karbala they headed back to their hometown - Medina. At the
outskirts of Medina, Imam Zayn-al-Abidin alayhis-salam ordered the
caravan to halt and to set up their tents there. They ended up staying
there for three days. The Imam turned to Bishr Ibn Hadhlam asked him if
he could compose poetry and lamentation for Imam Husayn saying, "Your
father was a very good poet, have you inherited some of that talent" The
reply of Bishr was affirmative.

Bishr Ibn Hadhlam entered Medina and went to the tomb of Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih and announced the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam, describing, in his lamentation poetry, the savagery and
brutality with which Imam Husayn and his sons, brothers, and companions
were killed. This touched the heart of the people to the extent that the
whole of Medina was lamenting Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, and almost
everyone gathered at the tomb of Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-waaalih
to mourn his grandson en masse.

Then the people headed to the outside of the city to receive the
remainder of the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam . . . . . .
**Historical background / evidence for Ashura practices
**
Question:

I was wondering if you could provide some historical background /
evidence to the mourning ceremonies that the Shi’a people perform during
the ten days of Muharram. Did any of the Imams perform and or condone
such practices?

Answer:

Members of the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam always encouraged their
followers to commemorate the memory and the tragedy of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam and they themselves set examples in different ways for us
to follow. Commemoration of Ashura is on the same basis as the
commemoration of the birthday of Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih,which are referred to as Sha‘a’er or
symbols, just as the Hajj is an example of Allah’s Sha‘a’er:

“Behold! Safa and Marwa are among the Sha’a’er (Symbols) of Allah ”62
“. . . and whoever holds in honour the Sha’a’er of Allah, such (honour)
are truly from the piety of heart.”63 There are also reports that Imam
al-Saadiq alayhis-salam arranged for shabeeh or ‘enactment’ about Ali
al-Asghar (the infant son of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam) to recreate the
scene of Karbala for the people, and the Imam alayhis-salam does not
hold this enactment solely for the Ali al- Asghar but for all the
martyrs of Karbala. On another occasion a poet comes to the Imam
alayhis-salam and asks permission to recite a poem about Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam. The Imam alayhis-salam said to the poet to wait so that
he could set up a partition screen so that the women could come to the
Majlis and listen to the lamentation. When the screen was set up, the
Imam invited the women to come to the Majlis and asked the poet to start
reciting, which he did. The Imam alayhis-salam stopped him and asked him
to recite the lamentation in the dialect that he does it in their
hometown (in Iraq for example).

All these indicate that the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam used to teach
and proactively encourage their followers to uphold the memory of the
torment, and the teachings of Imam Husayn by words, poetry, enactment,
and by showing devotion to Imam Husayn alayhis-salam in Tatbir as shown
by Zaynab al-Kubra alayhas-salam (as discussed later).

Furthermore, if today some people engage in practices that does not
contradict the teachings of Islam and at the same time those practices
depict the tragedy of Karbala in different ways then this could be
approved by the Maraje‘.

**On the legality of Tatbir**
Question:

Please enlighten me on Imam Shirazi’s teachings regarding the practice
of drawing blood during mourning ceremonies in Ashura. Is it permissible
or Makruh? What category does it fall in?

62 The Holy Qur’an, [2: 158]
63 The Holy Qur’an, [22: 32]

Answer:

Any action of a Muslim may fall in one of the following categories:

**Haram Forbidden**

Makruh Detestable/undesirable but not Forbidden Halal Permissible
Mustahab Desirable but not obligatory Waajib Obligatory As with the
issue of hitting the head with swords (Tatbir in Arabic or Qamah-Zani in
Farsi) Imam Shirazi is not exceptional in any way to permit, and
encourage this action in Ashura. In fact all high-ranking ‘Ulema,
Ayatollahs, and Maraje‘ not only have this permissible, and continue to
do so, but throughout the entire history of the Shi’a over the past
fourteen centuries, they have always encouraged this, declaring Tatbir
as Mustahab.

And it should be pointed out that if one suffers hardship in the cause
of commemorating Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, then so be it! Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam is a special case. He went out of his way to save Islam,
and offered all he had in this cause, not only worldly possessions, but
also his Ahl-ul-Bayt and sons . . . from Ali al-Akbar to his infant sons
. . . and not only that but his womenfolk (wives, sisters, daughters,
nieces) were left at the mercy of the most ruthless people on earth, to
be taken prisoners. All of this is in aid of us receiving the Islam we
have today. If it were not for the monumental sacrifices offered by Imam
Husayn alayhis-salam, today we would be living in an unimaginably
different world, if at all. Whatever we do is nowhere nearly sufficient
in appreciating what Imam Husayn alayhis-salam did.

Question:

As part of Ashura ceremonies, is shedding one’s blood permissible these
days? Was it ever permissible?

Answer:

The shedding of blood on the day of Ashura (the 10th of Muharram) for
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam is not only Mubaah (permissible), but it is
also very Mustahab (desirable) indeed, and all prominent scholars and
religious authorities – Maraje‘ – always encouraged it throughout the
history of Islam. This included Tatbir or Qama-Zani which is the hitting
of the head with swords. The Maraje‘ have even decreed that it is
acceptable and permissible if one is harmed in this process, provided
the injuries sustained do not constitute permanent injuries or endanger
the life of the individual.

The people who practice Tatbir take lead, amongst the teachings of
other infallibles, from Zaynab al-Kubra, the heroin of Karbala and the
loyal sister of Imam Husayn alayhum-as-salam. Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam
was the first person who hit her forehead to a bar in the carriage she
was in, causing considerable bleeding, when the head of Imam Husayn
alayhissalam was being paraded in Kufa. This is one evidence that the
shedding of blood is permissible.

Last, but not least, our Imam Mahdi alayhis-salam – may Allah hasten
his reappearance – states in his Zeyarat-al-Nahiyah, addressing Imam
Husaynalayhis-salam: “ . . . . now that I could not help you when needed
most help . . . I SHALL WEEP BLOOD FOR YOU INSTEAD OF TEARS.”

And according to the Fatwa of Imam Shirazi, we can deduce from this
statement by Imam Mahdi, that Tatbir is an emphatically Mustahab
(desirable) act.

**Conducts of members of the Ahl-ul-Bayt**

The following questions and answers are related to the topic of Tatbir
from the point of view of history and Shari‘ah.

Question:

Did Zaynab alayhas-salam hit her head on the bar by mistake, or did she
do it on purpose? What was her Niyya (intention) when she did the act?
Is it categorised as an act of Mubaah (permissible) or Mustahab
(desirable)?

Answer:

There is no doubt that Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam hit her head to the
bar on purpose, and most certainly this was not done by mistake. And her
ladyship alayhas-salam did that to show her grief and anger for the
catastrophe that had been brought about upon the Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-assalam and upon Islam, and in particular to Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam – who was the head of the Ahl-ul-Bayt and leader of
Islam.

This act was to declare her stance about the awesome events of
Karbala.

The evidence that would suggest that Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam did what
she did with the intention of a Mustahab act is that with her action she
wanted to defend the reputation of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam and to
defend the stance he took against the tyrant of the time. She did that
to show how oppressed Imam Husayn alayhis-salam was, and to declare and
defend his cause, which is the Truth and the Haqq, and she did that to
declare the Batil or False nature of the front opposing Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam, who are also the enemies of Islam and the Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam.

Her action was very much Mustahab, if not obligatory, given the role
she had to play and the responsibility to discharge under those
circumstances.

It was her duty to defend the stance of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam and
his cause, which is the Truth, and to expose the opponents of Imam
Husayn alayhis-salam who are the Falsehood.

If it were not for the actions of Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam - and every
single action of hers for that matter - and those of Imam Zayn-al-Abidin
alayhis-salam, the message of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam and his action
and effort would probably have been lost.

Question:

Was our 4th Imam alayhis-salam present when it happened (Lady Zaynab
hitting her head to the bar), or was he alayhis-salam later informed
about it and he alayhis-salam consented to the action?

Answer:

Most probably Imam Zayn-al-‘Abidin alayhis-salam was present when Lady
Zaynab alayhas-salam hit her head to the bar, since when she did so, the
captives were being paraded in one single caravan through the Kufan
streets, and she did so at the moment when the army displayed the head
of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam and those of his followers.

Even if we were to suppose that the Imam alayhis-salam was not present
in the vicinity of Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam at that moment, history
does not record that the Imam Zayn-al-‘Abidin alayhis-salam protested
against that action! Normally the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam used to
advice the people in general not to show (too much) grief for their
dead! But on the contrary, the history of the Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam is full of examples of the Imams actually supporting
and encouraging grief – Azadari – for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam and the
show and enactment of the scenes of Karbala.

Question:

A few of the brothers here say that what Zaynab did was an
understanding but typical female emotional response to the event of
Ashura. What is your opinion about this claim?

Answer:

In arguing against the practice of Tatbir or Qama-Zani, some might
argue that Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam was overwhelmed by emotion, and
therefore she hit her head to the bar causing substantial bleeding, i.e.
it was a natural, spontaneous, and emotional reaction and nothing more
than that.

The reply to this argument is two fold.

First, the statement of Imam Zayn-al-Abidin alayhis-salam about her -
“an ntaught scholar” – would counter any such argument. The infallible
Imam Zayn-al-Abidin alayhis-salam used to address Lady Zaynab al-Kubra
alayhas-salam by saying to her “Anti al-Hamdu-Lillah ‘Alimah Ghair
Mu‘allimah”, meaning “By the Grace of Allah, you are an untaught
scholar” Alimah Ghair Mu‘allimah – an untaught scholar – means that Lady
Zaynab alayhas-salam did not her knowledge through the time’s formal
education, but through divine teaching. Scholars see this statement as
indicating a degree of infallibility for Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam, let
alone her expertise in Shari‘ah laws, and ability in legislation.
Therefore Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam is better able to derive the laws of
Islam – if she needs to do so – than any of the scholars we follow
today! Today the scholars and the Fuqaha of Islam derive the laws of
Islam for the Halal, Haram, Mandoub, and Makruh while there is no
specific hadith about the scientific, scholarly status of any particular
Faqih. Despite that we follow their Fatwa and their Decisions in the
Halal and Haram.

Whereas in the case of Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam there is a specific
hadith from the infallible Imam alayhis-salam about her status.

So shedding blood to show one’s grief for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam was
carried out by the likes of Lady Zaynab, and condoned by Imam Zayn
al-Abidin alayhis-salam.

Second, if she were to be overcome by grief and emotion, she would have
done so in Karbala, where the carnage and the unbearably horrific scene
there on the Day of Ashura were overwhelming to the utmost degree . .
.

but in fact her Ladyship alayhas-salam did not do such a thing there .
. .

let’s not forget that at Karbala she sees her loved ones being
slaughtered and decapitated one after the other . . . before her own
eyes . . . the young and the old . . . and even the infants have their
throats slit . . . no one is spared, no matter what their age is . . .
and ultimately she sees the then leader of Islam and Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam, her most beloved one is slaughtered, beheaded and then
his body is trampled upon before her eyes . . . given this most horrific
scene – the pain of which no pen can put to paper, with the blood of her
loved ones flooding the battlefield and mutilated bodies everywhere,
Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam could have taken one of the hundreds of swords
there and hit her head with it, but Zaynab alayhas-salam does not do
that. On the contrary she keeps her composure – which is impossible for
almost any man and woman to do under those circumstances – and takes
care of the petrified orphans and bereaved women who were being chased
by the victorious army of Yazid after their tents were burnt and
possessions looted.

Lady Zaynab alayhas-salam does not hit herself in the highly charged
atmosphere at the scene of Karbala, but she does so in the relatively
calmer environment of Kufa, the first public gathering following the
Karbala massacre. Therefore it cannot be said that she was overcome by
grief and emotion and she did not know what she was doing, but in fact
her actions were calculated . . . she did that in Kufa to make a public
statement . . . about the events of Ashura, Imam Husayn alayhis-salam,
his cause, and what he stood for.

Question:

Did any of the Shi’a present at that time follow the example of Lady
Zaynab alayhas-salam?

Answer:

Whether any of the Shi’a followed her example or not, does not change
the legality of this act or reduce or diminish from its desirability.
Without researching more into this aspect, we cannot tell whether the
people followed the practice of Zaynab alayhas-salam or not, especially
at the times of the Umayyad brutal rulers when people were arrested on
mere suspicions, and executed on the basis of an accusation of being
followers of the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam.

Question:

Which of our Imams alayhum-as-salam use to draw blood during the days
of Muharram?

Answer:

There have been many books written about the biography of the Imams of
the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam but were brunt or destroyed. So we do
not know if any of the Imams alayhum-as-salam did draw blood from their
heads on the Day of Ashura. However there have been many hadith that
show the extent the ma‘soom Imams used to go to in order to emphasise
the importance of such matters. This can be seen from the following
hadith, which is one of many clear instructions from the infallible
Imams to the Shi'a, the enormity of the orders given to the Shi'a goes
far beyond what the Shi'a do today, and which they would have to do if
it comes to that . . .

Imam al-Saadiq alayhis-salam used to encourage the Shi’a to go and
visit the tomb of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, at all costs and under any
circumstances, at a time when the ruling authorities used to threaten
the visitors of the tomb with the amputation of the limbs. Despite that,
the Imam alayhis-salam used to urge them to visit the tomb, and used to
detail the thawab (rewards) for such visits, even if one loses an arm
and a leg in the process and even if such a visit led to the killing of
the person visiting the tomb of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.

This is an irrefutable evidence on how far the Imams of the Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam used to go to keep the cause of Imam Husayn
alayhissalam alive, even to the extent of arms and legs being amputated
and lives lost, let alone the shedding of a few drops of blood, which we
do these days!

Needless to say that we have mentioned elsewhere in this work reports
that the Imams alayhum-as-salam used to, and Imam Mahdi alayhis-salam,
and may Allah hasten his reappearance, goes as far as weeping blood
instead of tears for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.


