Chapter 7: Husayni Ceremonies- Interview With a Christian Scholar
=================================================================

Interviewer: Jasim Safar

The following is an extract of the interview with Dr Paul al-Hilw which
appeared in the Arabic Kuwaiti monthly 'al-Minbar', issue 12 (2nd Year),
May 2001, page 12. Translated by Ali Adam, London.

**Introduction**

There is a point which must be dealt with in reply to the question: is
it truethat our upholding of the Husayni ceremonies (al-sha’a’ir al-
Husayniyyah) including tatbir or the striking of the head with a sword,
causes others to look down upon us? The answer is more obvious than the
question, for it is evident that all Islamic ceremonies are likely to be
looked down upon, including theceremonies of prayer and the hajj
pilgrimage and so on, if we do not workto clarify the philosophy of
these ceremonies to others. When people look at us, they require an
explanation from us of the religious rituals andceremonies that we
practise. This is a natural thing. If we were not toclarify to them this
philosophy or explain its aspects and aims, then we open the door to
looks of bewilderment, mockery and denigration. Ifhowever, we work
towards explaining this to the people, and particularly to thinkers,
intellectuals and people of understanding, they will comprehend the
lofty goals of these civilised ceremonies and will grasp the extent of
their importance and this will result in an increased respect for us and
our beliefs and our school of thought.

We do not say this out of thin air, for reality proves this since many
thinkers and academics; westerners more than Muslims, have testified to
the greatness of these ceremonies and have bowed their heads in respect
to them. It would suffice for us to peruse books such as ‘Testimonies of
western scholars about Husayni ceremonies,’ or ‘Tatbir, a reality not an
innovation,’ in order to examine these statements and testimonies in
abundance64.

**The Interview**

Here we record the testimony of a Christian academic who specialises in
the study of human societies and their traditions and customs, the
Lebanese Maronite, Doctor Paul Joseph al-Hilw.

He has been a professor and lecturer at several Lebanese universities
and is a writer and linguist in many scientific and academic circles.
The testimony of Doctor al-Hilw is of increased importance because of
the dissertation he prepared in the past for his masters degree which
was entitled: ‘The Salafi Movement and its Effects on the Islamic
World.’ Presently he is preparing an academic study entitled:
‘Comparisons Between Christianity and the Imamiyyah . . . An Analytical
Study.’ His Doctoral thesis was entitled: ‘The Area of Juzein Over 80
Years . . . An Economic, Cultural and Sociological Study.’ This is the
thesis which earned him his doctorate in the University of The Holy
Spirit in Lebanon.

We took the opportunity of directing some questions to him about this
subject as well as other questions about the noble Husayni revolution.
The answers given by Dr al-Hilw, which bore the hallmark of the
analytical method, were more than beneficial. What follows is an edited
version of the conversation that took place.

..al-Minbar: Why has the voice of the Husayni revolution not subsided
and what is the secret of its survival and the renewal it experiences
every year?

- According to my belief, the Husayni condition is not confined to the
Shi’a alone. It is general and all-inclusive. Hence we find that the
Husayni revolution’s connection with the principle of resisting
oppression has made it very relevant to a person whatever his religion
or beliefs might be, because as long as there are oppressors and
oppressed then there will always be Yazid and Husayn as two fundamental
symbols of oppressor and oppressed. This is from a philosophical and
spiritual standpoint. From a practical and existential viewpoint, the
rituals that are practised by the Shi’a, during the days of the
anniversary of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn, attach an aspect of renewal
to this revolution by which it is made to be continuously present in the
human mindset.

..al-Minbar: How so?

- The sociological view of these rituals or ceremonies is that they are
international or universal ceremonies, which express the idea of
resisting oppression and aiding the oppressed. This expression is what
gives these ceremonies a universal flavour and which makes them accepted
on a societal level in many different environments and cultures. That a
revolution should take place in a certain place and time and also remain
alive until our time means that this revolution is connected with
universal human concepts on the one hand, and also that it relies upon
recurring social interactions on the other. These interactions take the
form of these rituals or ceremonies, which take place in the days of
Muharram and particularly on the tenth day.

..al-Minbar: Then you believe that these rituals are a source for the
survival of this revolution . . . correct?

- Naturally, because when we remember a person the way we remember
Husayn, it is not enough that we pray for his soul or remember his deeds
or virtues, but rather, something palpable and something painful must be
brought into the equation.

..al-Minbar: Painful?!

- Yes, painful. For that which does not cause pain to the body does not
persist. It is the pain that preserves the issue and the memory and is
what allows them to be implemented on an existential level and to have
effects on cultural and social movements. The persistence of the memory
and its survival in the human mind must be accompanied by tangible
physical pain and this is what the Husayni rituals accomplish. When one
feels pain in one’s body, one will contemplate its source and when this
contemplation leads one to the pains that befell Husayn, then one will
evoke his revolution and his principles and goals in a spontaneous way.
..al-Minbar: There are those who believe that Husayni rituals are
superstitions, which cause a negative view of those who practise them in
the eyes of the world. Is this true in your view?

- This is nonsense and is far from scientific realities. As we know, a
superstition is something invented by the human mind to explain a
certain form or image that he finds difficult to understand. Hence we
see that with the development of the human mind the superstition does
not persist. Theprinciple as regards superstition is that it does not
persist and does not remain but ceases to be when its inventor ceases to
be. Religious rituals and ceremonies however, are based on doctrine and
faith, which know no imperfection or middle ground; hence they have
persisted and survived.

There is a difference between belief and mythology. Mythology consists
of imaginings invented by man in order to arrive at what is behind
natural phenomena and these imaginings are what generally drives man
towards superstitions until he comes close to understanding and
comprehendingthese phenomena. Most of these superstitions are now
obsolete; for instance, we can see how those who used to worship the sun
or the moon are now extinct except for some in isolated places in
Africa. This is because their superstition cannot remain in the face of
the tremendous progress that has occurred in scientific discoveries.

The Husaynian ceremonies however, because of their intellectual aspects
and living values, have persisted throughout all these centuries and
this is because they are practises, which have a connection with the
psychological mechanism of human belief. For a person who believes in a
thing is not like one who invents a superstition and if these ceremonies
were superstitions they would not have persisted for the past fourteen
hundred years and would not still be perceptibly increasing every
year.

..al-Minbar: What then is the cause of this clamour that has been
stirred up about the Husayni ceremonies?

- In truth, I have only seen the existence of this clamour amongst you
(Muslims)! In any case, any movement whose fate it is to persist and
succeed will naturally find many enemies and critics and whenever the
enemies and critics are numerous, the movement always becomes stronger
on the condition that it is based upon authentic foundations connected
with the psychological belief mechanism as I mentioned.

..al-Minbar: And what about the tatbir that the Shi’a practice on the
day of Ashura out of grief for their Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, what is
your evaluation of it as a ritual?

- Tatbir is one method of evoking physical pain to attain a state of
complete remembrance as I have already explained. Tatbir is, in my view,
the ritual which is most effective in stimulating feelings and
sentiments.


