Foreword
========

Who was Imam Husayn, and why was he the sacrifice for the whole of
humanity?

Imam Husayn alayhis-salam3 was the grandson of the final Messenger of
Allah Almighty to humanity, the holy Prophet of Islam Muhammad
sallallahu-alayhi-wa-aalih4; the messenger who “has been sent as Mercy
to the worlds” to paraphrase the holy Qur’an.

His father was Imam Ali alayhis-salam, the commander of faithful, who
comes second only to prophet Muhammad in the excellent merits that he
possessed; qualities such as piety, sincerity, charity, tolerance, vast
knowledge, to name a few.

His mother was Fatima al-Zahra’ alayhas-salam5, the daughter of prophet
Muhammad and, given her immaculate qualities and moral values that she
possessed, the leading lady of the worlds.

After the death of his grandfather, father and brother Imam Hasan, Imam
Husayn was in charge of protecting Islam, the Almighty’s final
Revelation to humanity, from deviation. It was 60 H (around 680 CE). It
was the most crucial time in the history of mankind. The forces of evil
have been amassing all their forces, skills and expertise for fifty
years, and over this period, and through all the devious means, they had
managed to achieve considerable gains, but not enough to totally
obliterate the teachings of Islam and its Messenger. They needed one
final big push, and this task was assigned to Yazid bin Mo‘awiyah.
Through threat and brute force, Yazid had managed to quell all the
voices of opposition, except for one.

Husayn, the son of Imam Ali, being who he is, and the Imam (leader) of
Islam and Muslims had one duty to discharge; the protection of the final
revelation to mankind – and at any cost.

And this is exactly what he did. He stood up to protect the torch that
was lit to guide mankind to the light of truth.

3 alayhis-salam, meaning peace be upon him. This invocation is made
after the mention of the name of any of the twelve impeccable imams, out
of respect.

4 salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih, meaning peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him and his pure progeny. This invocation is made out of respect
and devotion after the mention of the name of the last Messenger of
Allah.

5 alayhas-salam, for feminine use, meaning peace be upon her, as
above.

He left Makkah for Karbala, along with his women and children. He was
joined by his devout friends, along with their families. There were also
those how did not share his stance to begin with, but when they heard
his call they joined in. Even some Christians joined him in his struggle
when they heard his message!

At Karbala he, along with his loyal companions of not more than
100,faced the army of Yazid of more than 100,000 (some reports put this
figure at several times more).

For the task of protecting this torch he did not hesitate to pay
everything he had. For this he gave his life, and those of his brothers,
nephews, sons, from his son of early twenties to his infant baby son of
few months. This is not to mention his most devout companions who paid
similarly.

What Imam Husayn achieved through his sacred movement was to rekindle
and revitalise the bearers of that torch, and by offering himself and
his family and companions as a sacrifice, he kept alive the message that
has been sent not just to the Muslims but to all of mankind. Through his
remarkable sacrifices, Imam Husayn managed to change the course of
history and the direction that mankind was heading for.

The articles in this work cover some aspects of the aims and objectives
of Imam Husayn’s movement, the difference between his strategy and that
of his brother Imam Hasan in facing tyranny and despotism, the examples
he set, and the lessons that are learnt from the events that led to
Karbala, and its aftermath fourteen centuries ago. Besides, the benefits
of his movement, the personality of Imam Husayn peace be upon him as
reflected by the many hadith and teachings of Prophet Muhammad is also
discussed.

The author has written a number of works about Imam Husayn
alayhissalam,whereas this book is a collection of lectures delivered by
the author. Included in this work is an interview with a Christian
scholar on the subject of the Husayni ceremonies, a number of Fatawa or
decrees from the most eminent Religious Authorities or Maraje‘, as well
as some questions and answers about the annual commemoration ceremonies
observed by the Muslims around the world on the occasion of Ashura – the
Day of Sacrifice for humanity.


