Chapter 2: the Distinct Roles of Imams Hasan and Husayn
=======================================================

It is reported that Rasulollah15 salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih said,
“Hasan and Husayn are both Imams whether they rise up or not16”.

**Introduction**

(The roles of) Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn alayhum-as-salam were planned
and devised by Allah Almighty, and in turn by Rasulollah sallallahu-
alayhi-wa-aalih, so they facilitate the salvation of generations to come
until the day of judgement. This was not because they were simply two
Imams and Caliphs [successors] of Rasulollah, for this is a forgone
conclusion, but because these two Imams were two models and exemplars
for every single individual who wanted to rescue their peoples and
countries from the yoke of tyranny of the despots at whatever time they
be and in whichever country.

A hadith is reported that Allah Almighty, via Jibra’el alayhis-salam,
sent twelve “envelopes” to Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih each
of which was sealed by the Almighty to be distributed to the twelve
Imams.

Each of these contained the instructions as to the Imams’ roles and
duties, which they needed to execute in turn. This is a short and known
hadith that needs at least fourteen sessions to discuss certain aspects
of each Ma‘soom and circumstances of the environment he was living in,
and how each Imam dealt with the situations he faced. Amongst these
Imams are Hasan and Husayn alayhum-as-salam. Here we wish to briefly
outline how precise the divine plan was and how perfectly the Imams
executed the plan, and this is apart from the fact that they are
Ma‘soom, or according to our beliefs Imams and successors to Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-waaalih.

The conclusion that we want to arrive at is whether we can make use of
the circumstances and conducts of these two Imams in accordance with the
hadith that “al-Hasan and al-Husayn are two Imams whether they rise up
14 Abstract of lecture by Grand Ayatollah Imam Muhammad Shirazi 15
Rasulollah meaning the Messenger of Allah, is one of the titles of
Prophet Muhammad salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih.

16 What is meant by this hadith is that an impeccable Imam is leader
for the Muslims under every and all circumstances and conditions;
whether he officially assumes the office of leadership or not, or
whether he revolts against a tyrant or not.

or not”? That they are not only Imams – leaders – for their own times
only, but they remain Imams or leaders for generations to come until the
day of judgement. There are three topics that we need to consider:
1. How society produces tyrants?
2. The character and psychology of a tyrant,
3. How to counter the tyrant?

**Society and the production of Tyrants**

Those societies produce tyrants where reformists are few and weak and
therefore fail to discharge their duties, while mischief-makers are
actively ferocious. And under such circumstances naturally the villains
take over the country and rule the people. On this basis Rasulollah
salla-llahualayhi- wa-aalih said, “You should enjoin good and prohibit
abhorrent, otherwise Allah shall empower on you the evil amongst you,
then you would pray (for this evil to be alleviated) but your prayers
would not be answered.”

This is a logical and rational fact, since if the reformist is not
proactive in his responsibilities and does not discharge his duties,
society would degenerate and gradually turn into a pit of corruption,
and under such circumstances who will come to power? Naturally of the
wicked and the corrupt . . . {however you are like, as such you will be
ruled by} Then if a wicked and a tyrant came to power and ruled the
country, and you pray to Allah that he is removed, will those facts and
circumstances change by this prayer? Of course not, and in the
above-mentioned hadith Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih is
clarifying two natural or universal laws. The universal law of how the
tyrants come to power, and the law that prayers (alone) do not remove
the tyrants from power. Both are universal laws, and here Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih is not outlining a (specific) Islamic law
for us, nor is he informing us from the unseen, but any sound thinking
individual (and Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih is the master of
wisdom and intellect) would realise that the society in which reformists
fail to discharge their duties, eventually and naturally a tyrant would
take over the country, and he would impose his will and his rule over
the people. And if a tyrant comes to power, it is natural that he would
not be deposed by prayers alone, but by action as well as prayers, for
each has its own role to play.

Society of the Shaam province17 before the Islamic conquest (around 620
CE) was highly influenced by Roman values, and the then Roman society
was a corrupt and a decadent society, and perhaps these characteristics
were some of the contributing factors to the fall of the Shaam province
to the Muslim army that came from Arabia to introduce Islam to the
people of the Shaam province. The victorious army headed back to Arabia
after the apparent establishment of Islamic rule in the area. However
since the Shaami society was influenced by those Roman values, and it
had not adequately absorbed the teachings of Islam, it was ridden by
ignorance and overwhelmed by corruption in its various forms; social,
political, economical, moral and ethical, and therefore in such a
society the corrupt had the upper hand and the reformists were a
minority, if at all.

Mo’awiyah and his son Yazid were the by product of such corrupt
society, as they did not absorb the teachings of Islam, nor did they
learn the manners of Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih, like Imam
Hasan and Imam Husayn alayhum-as-salam had done in the holy city of
Medina, where the government of Islam was established, and personally
led by Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih. Thus a society that has
not adequately absorbed Islam and the effect of reform is still
superficial, would easily be manipulated by the likes of Mo’awiyah, and
through fear or deceit would fall back to its old traditions and
beliefs, i.e. corrupt Roman values. Hence the like of Mo’awiyah and
Yazid managed to take over and hold on to the office of government,
through enticement and/or threat.

To reflect the situation above, a poet states in this famous poem, I do
not know what happened to the Muslim men Or how Yazid happened to be the
king amongst them How many (responsible) Muslims such as Abu Tharr
al-Ghefari18 were there in the Shaami society at the time of Mo’awiyah
and Yazid?

Mo’awiyah was fearful of Abu Tharr alone, since the Shaami society did
not know the Islamic laws and values, and the former was afraid that the
17 The Shaam province roughly covered today’s Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and
Palestine, and its capital city was Damascus.

18 Abu Tharr al-Ghefari was one of the most prominent companions of
Rasulollah sallallahu- alayhi-wa-aalih, and he was known for his
sincerity and honesty. He also became known for his frank and brave
criticism of wrong actions or policies, and for his standing up to
tyrant and despots rulers of his time.

latter would turn things against him by presenting the Teachings of
Islam as taught by Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih to the
public.

It is like introducing Islam to a new city. Will that society be a
deeply Islamic one? No. Only on the surface things may have changed, and
when anyone comes along and falsely claims to know the way of Islam,
they would follow him! And this is what Mo’awiyah claimed in the Shaami
society.

A tyrant is born in a society, where the fundamental factor in
nurturing him is the established corrupt social order of that society.
In other words, whenever you see a tyrant is born in a country, you
should know that there are fundamental factors for it, the first of
which being the corrupt and decadent social proviso of that country.

On the other hand when a society is rich with reformist and responsible
individuals, then it would be a field for growth of prosperity, reform
and development, such that it would be impossible for a tyrant to be
born in that environment.

The prophet showed the people the Islamic way {and what better is there
than Allah’s way} [2: 138], and it is then up to them to adhere to those
teachings in order to reach their targets.

Needless to say, by reformist we do not mean he who preaches to the
people to enjoin good and refrain from evil in a small religious
society, but by reformist we mean he who can change and transfer things
and stand up to tyrants.

**Character and Psychology of Tyrants**

The character of tyrants fall into two categories, we either have a sly
and cunning tyrant or a slow-witted and stupid one, and the sign of the
first kind is that he is deceitful in war, vile and despicable in peace,
while the second is vicious and savage in war and irresponsible and
disrespectful in peace. Using Mo’awiyah and Yazid as examples, Mo’awiyah
being the son of two devious parents, Abu Sufian and Hind, he is
deceptive and disingenuous, and this could be clearly be seen in his
wars with Imam Ali and Imam Hasan alayhum-as-salam, where deception
played major and important roles in Mo’awiyah’s wars.

The example of the second category is Yazid the son of Mo’awiyah, and
his savagery in war, as seen from unspeakable brutality in his war
with

Of course his viciousness and savagery was not limited to that battle
alone, as he displayed his barbarity and cruelty, and his total
disregard for any value when he attacked the holy city of Medina and
instructed his soldiers to do whatever they wanted to do. they committed
the most gruesome atrocities, ranging from burning, looting, and
destruction to killing the young and old, women and children, even the
infant babies, as well as raping thousands of women, . . . and all that
took place in the sacred city of Medina. Yazid also attacked the holy
city of Mecca and in particular he ordered to destroy the Ka'bah and the
Holy Mosque there, which the army torched by attacking it by mangonel or
catapult. It is in this sense that one is considered savage and brutal
in war, since the tyrant does not respect even the rules and regulations
of engagement, or any other laws, ideas or understanding. And this is
the meaning of Taghut (the Arabic word of Tyrant) not respecting nor
distinguishing between anything. Hence they say in Arabic the Tughyan of
fire (meaning the rage of fire) since the fire does not recognise the
laws and values and dose not respect anything but burns everything in
its path, and it does so without distinguishing one thing from another.
This is the nature of Yazid in war, and in peace he does not hold or
respect any value for anything. He did not use to have any respect for
anyone nor for any right of the people, he used to keep company with
monkeys, drink wine, and regularly commit adultery and incest. This was
to the extend that one of them used to say, “we were fearful that it
would rain stone on us since Yazid used to commit incest with the likes
of his sisters and aunts”.

These are the two categories of tyrants, and there is no third type to
them.

**Encountering the Tyrants**

Allah Almighty foreordained Imam Hasan alayhis-salam to encounter the
first kind of tyrant, whereas He foreordained Imam Husayn alayhis-salam
to deal with the second type. The reformists throughout the world must
therefore follow the example of Imam Hasan alayhis-salam if they were
faced with the like of Mo’awiyah, and to follow the model of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam if they were to deal with the like of Yazid.

So the essence of the noble hadith, “al-Hasan and al-Husayn are two
Imams whether they rise up or not” is to point out how Imam Hasan
alayhis-salam should fight his opponent, and how to make peace with
him.

If Imam Hasan alayhis-salam were not to make peace with Mo’awiyah, that
would have been a failure on his part, since Mo’awiyah plays with two
faces; one of peace and one war, and Imam Hasan alayhis-salam

needed to be prepared for both tactics. If Imam Hasan alayhis-salam
were to engage in battle only, then this would have exposed Mo’awiyah’s
conduct in war only and it would not have depicted his conduct in
peace.

Similarly if Imam Hasan alayhis-salam were to adopt peaceful measures
only, this would not have exposed Mo’awiyah’s conduct in war. Imam Hasan
alayhis-salam was careful in his plan to deal with Mo’awiyah, which was
not only in accordance with the plan of Allah Almighty, but it was
logical too – this is apart from the fact that he was Ma’soom and our
belief that he was Imam who must be obeyed. Imam Hasan alayhis-salam
fought Mo’awiyah for a period of time to reveal the conduct of Mo’awiyah
in war, and he made peace with him to expose Mo’awiyah’s face and
conduct in peace times.

If it were not for that, and if the Imam had fought him until death,
the peacetime conducts of Mo’awiyah would not have become apparent; such
conducts as ordering all speakers across the land to curse and swear at
Imam Ali alayhis-salam19 after every prayer. On many occasions Imam
Hasan was present in the Mosque when the speaker or prayer leader, on
instructions from Mo’awiyah, insulted Imam Ali alayhis-salam, while it
was one of the conditions of the peace treaty between Imam Hasan
alayhis-salam and Mo’awiyah that Imam Ali should not be insulted.

Another condition of the peace treaty was that Imam Hasan alayhis-salam
and his household as well as the followers of Imam Ali alayhis-salam
should not be harassed and intimidated. But in reality they were
constantly harassed and tormented, and denied their rights by Mo’awiyah
and his regime. In fact it was during this peacetime that Mo’awiyah
declared his famous statement in public that, “the treaty of al-Hasan
and all its conditions are beneath my feet!”

All of these would not have become apparent if it were not for the
peace Imam Hasan alayhis-salam made with Mo’awiyah, it was this act of
Imam Hasan alayhis-salam that exposed Mo’awiyah before the masses.

If it were not for a reformist like Imam Hasan, the two faces of
Mo’awiyah – his conducts in war and in peace – would not have been
exposed.

Therefore Imam Hasan alayhis-salam shall remain a role model for future
generations who want to stand up to tyrants such as Mo’awiyah.

19 Imam Ali alayhis-salam is the father of Imam Hasan alayhis-salam and
the immediate successor to Prophet Muhammad salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih,
who was appointed to this post by the prophet on instructions from Allah
Almighty.

Throughout history and the future, tyrants like Mo’awiyah will come
when there will be a need for reformists like Imam Hasan alayhis-salam,
and as for tyrants like Yazid, we will need reformists like Imam Husayn
alayhissalam


