Chapter 3: a Glimpse From the Ray of Imam Husayn24
==================================================

Allah Almighty states {Think not of those who are slain in Allah's Way
as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the Presence of
their Lord}25 This noble verse in the holy Qur’an points to the state of
those who are killed in the cause of Allah, and it emphasises that their
‘life’ continues even after being killed, and that they remain alive. So
he who is killed in the cause of Allah, his life would not be
terminated, but he remains alive and receives sustenance (from Allah
Almighty).

Also just as there are categories in this material life, e.g. those who
are happy and those who are not, such classifications also exist in the
hereafter too.

And how can it not be, when we have martyrs who scarified their lives
to uphold the Truth and the Oneness of Allah Almighty. With their blood
they have led other’s lives out of darkness and into light, so that
future generations can receive and adhere to the teachings of Islam.

And what if he who sacrificed himself – as well as being a martyr whom
Allah promised eternal life – was also a pillar of faith and one of the
Imams of the Muslims and mankind, such as Sayyid-ul-Shuhada Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam. What a great martyr he is, and an esteemed station he
occupies! Addressing Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, his son and successor
Imam Zayn al-Abidin alayhis-salam states, “and as for the Hereafter, it
is luminous with the light of your face”.

**The Ma’soom Imam**

If we want to get acquainted with the great personality of a Ma’soom
Imam, it is necessary for us to refer to some of the hadith that
elucidate the station of the Imam alayhis-salam in the view of Allah
Almighty, as well as his creative and legislative position.

Commenting about the Qur’anic verse, {and he to whom wisdom is granted
receives indeed a benefit overflowing}26 Imam Sadiq alayhis-24 Abstract
of lecture by Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad Shirazi 25 The Holy
Qur’an, 3: 169.

salam said; “(This is) obedience of Allah and gaining knowledge about
the Imam”.

Also commenting about the Qur’anic verse, {Say: "Do you see; if your
water (supply) seeps away, who then can supply you with clear-flowing
water?"}27 Imam Kadhem alayhis-salam said, “If your Imam disappears from
you, then who will bring you another Imam?” In another hadith from Imam
Ridha alayhis-salam, he said, “. . . the Imam is the trustee of Allah
amongst His creation, His proof and evidence upon His servants, His
viceroy on His land, the herald to Allah, the defender of the
commandments of Allah . . .”

The Ma’soom Imam has been chosen by Allah Almighty to represent Him,
since he has a significant position in the sight of Allah. The lofty
station that the Ma’soom has attained is beyond our comprehension.
Addressing the significance and superiority of the Ma’soom Imam, Imam
Ridha alayhis-salam said, “who can attain the full knowledge and
understanding of the Imam, or who can choose an Imam? How impossible!
The intellects went astray, the minds were confused, the eyes were
blurred, the great men were belittled, the wise were bewildered, the
eloquent failed to describe one aspect of his characteristics, or one
virtue of his many virtues, and admitted their failure to do so, . .
.”

So through these noble hadith and many more like them, it is possible
for us to appreciate certain aspects of the personality and station of
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, and his closeness to Allah Almighty, and his
role in leading and guiding the community of mankind. Thus if we wanted
to reach the divine mercy, and attain the bliss and felicity of this
world and the hereafter, then we must certainly follow the foot steps of
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, move according to the course he devised for
future generations with his pure blood. Of course the same is true for
other Ma’soomeen alayhum-as-salam, but here we are talking about and
focusing on Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.

Imam Husayn alayhis-salam is distinguished amongst other martyrs and
revolutionaries by characteristics that excel all other martyrs; he
became the master of all martyrs – from the first to the last – and this
is not because he is a Ma’soom Imam, nor is it because he is the
grandson, and the beloved one of Rasulollah (the Messenger of Allah)
salla-llahu-alayhi- 26 The Holy Qur’an, 2: 269.27 The Holy Qur’an, 67:
30.

wa-aalih, but it is because of the majesty of the aims for which he
started his revolution, the immensity of the sacrifice that he offered,
and the perfection he achieved in various dimensions. This is why the
particular emphasis is made by Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam on
establishing and upholding the Husayni Sha’a’er28, and the salute and
visitation of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.

**Hadith on the Virtue of Imam Husayn**

There are many hadith about the station and position of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam. Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih is reported as
saying, “he who want to see the one inhabitant of the Earth who is most
beloved by the inhabitants of the skies, he should look at Husayn”.

Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih is also reported as saying,
“Truly Husayn is one of the gates to Paradise; he who opposes him, Allah
would deny him even the scent of Paradise”.

Perhaps only this hadith is sufficient so as not to mention any more
hadith about the station of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam. There are many
hadith narrated from the Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam with regards to
establishing the Husayni Sha’a’er. Imam Sadiq alayhissalam is quoted as
saying, “He whose eyes fill with tears when we are mentioned to him,
Allah would bar his face from fire (of Hell)”. And can you imagine what
would be the reward for he who weeps for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, who
is Sayyid-ul-Shuhada (Master of the Martyrs) and Qateel-al-‘Abarah (the
murder victim who brings tears to the eyes).

Imam Mahdi may Allah hasten his return in his salute – known as Zeyart
Nahiyah – to Imam Husayn alayhis-salam declares, “Peace be to he in
whose torbah (the soil of the burial site) Allah has made the cure (for
every disease), Peace be upon he under whose dome prayers are answered,
Peace be upon he whose descendents are the Imams, . . . ”

From the above alone, only the first statement is sufficient (his
torbah being cure for every disease) to show the divine miracle in the
matter, and 28 Sha’a’er means programs of commemorations.

if this proves anything it points towards the position and station of
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam.

