Companions of Imam Husayn
=========================

One other aspect that distinguished the movement of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam amongst other movements throughout history is the
distinguished virtue of his companions, who were martyred alongside him,
to the extent that Imam Husayn alayhis-salam said, “I do not know of
companions and family members more faithful and devoted than my
companions and family members”

One of the greatest of the martyrs of Karbala is Abul-Fadhl al-Abbas
alayhis-salam, the son of Imam Ali alayhis-salam and his mother is
Ummel- Baneen. Abul-Fadhl has many virtues and qualities, and has shown
many miracles, which point to his station, and closeness to Allah
Almighty. Imam Zayn al-Abidin alayhis-salam has said about al-Abbas
alayhis-salam, “May Allah have Mercy upon my uncle al-Abbas ibn Ali, for
he favoured his brother over himself, showed extreme courage, and
sacrificed himself for his brother, such that both of his hands were cut
off. Thus Allah replaced them with two wings, with which he flies with
the angels in Paradise, just as He gave Ja’far ibn Abi Talib. In the
Sight of Allah al- Abbas has a station and position that all martyrs
would envy on the Day ofJudgement.”

Furthermore, al-Abbas alayhis-salam is known as Baab-al-Hawa’edge or
the “Gate of Needs” to Allah Almighty, and this in itself is a
manifestation of martyrs being alive by their Lord, such that people use
their Light after their martyrdom, and the people plead to them to
fulfil their needs.

**The Day of Ashura**

There are days that are turning points in the course of history and in
the direction of life on Earth, and one of the most important of those
days is the day of Ashura. Just as the 27th of Rajab – the day of
Mab’ath or First Revelation to Prophet Muhammad – forever changed the
course of history and life on Earth, and just as Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih planted the seeds of Islam and Iman in the
hearts of the people, the day of Ashura and the sacrifice of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam returned Faith or

Iman to the hearts of the people and restored the image of Islam which
the evil hands tried to distort and destroy.

When the pagans of Quraysh asked Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih
to forego his mission and his call for the oneness of Allah in exchange
for all that he wished for in terms of wealth and position, Rasulollah
sallallahu- alayhi-wa-aalih replied, “By Allah if they were to put the
sun in my right hand and the moon in my left, for relinquishing this
cause, before Allah establishes it or I die, I would not abandon it”.

Just as Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih showed his resolve and
steadfastness in his mission, Imam Husayn alayhis-salam manifested his
resolve on a number of occasions in Karbala, which would never be
forgotten by the passage of time. For example at noontime on the day of
Ashura, one of the companions said it is prayer time as it is now
noontime, Imam Husayn alayhis-salam said, “Yes it is”, and he led the
noon prayers, despite the raging battle and the ferocity of his enemies.
Thus at the mostpressing and dangerous times Imam Husayn alayhis-salam
did not relinquish even one of the obligations of Allah Almighty, and he
took this stance to emphasise the importance of protecting the sanctity
of the divine obligations, establish and uphold the Islam and its laws
and teachings. In the Zeyarat (Salutation) of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam
one reads, “I hereby testify that you upheld the prayers, paid the
Zakat, enjoined on good, and forbade evil”. The day of Ashura is the day
that teaches us how to straighten and perfect our way of life in this
world, and how to match it to the Syrah or the way of life of Imam
Husayn alayhis-salam, who sacrificed everything he had for the sake of
Enjoining Good, Forbidding Evil, and upholding the duties of Islam,
implementing its teachings, and adhering to Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-as-salam.

**The Torch of Guidance and Ark of Salvation**

It is reported that on one occasion Imam Husayn alayhis-salam entered
into a room where Prophet Muhammad salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih was
present, and the latter welcome him by saying, "Welcome to you O Aba-
Abdillah, the beauty of the heavens and earths". It was said to the
Prophet, "How can anyone other than you be the beauty of the heavens and
earths?"Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih replied, "by He who sent
me as a messenger, Husayn is greater in the heavens than he is on
earths. And it is

written on the right of the ‘Arsh “Throne”29 that, "Husayn is Torch of
Guidance and Ark of Salvation", and then Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhiwa- aalih took the hand of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam
and said, "O people! This is Husayn son of Ali, so glorify him and
favour him (over others) Just as Allah has favoured him, for by He in
whose hand is my soul, his place is in the heavens, and the place of
those who love him is also in heaven, and the place of those who love
them is also in heaven."

Imam Sadiq, alayhis-salam said, "My (grand) father is Qateel-al-‘Abarah
(the murder victim who brings tears to the eyes). The Imam was asked
what is Qateel-al-‘Abarah? The Imam replied, “He (Imam Husayn) is not
mentioned to a believer, unless he weeps for him." The Choice of Allah
Imam Husayn used to say, "I want to enjoin good, and forbid evil, follow
the teachings of my grandfather (Rasulollah) and that of my father Ali
ibn Abi Talib, . . .". He wanted to take the Ummah (the Muslim
Community) from Evil to Good, and put a stop to Evil, he wanted to
rescue the Ummah from the low and miserable state they had settled in to
honour and glory, and this after the Muslim Ummah had accepted this
deteriorated condition, symbolised by its state of apathy, reliance on
worldly matters, its silence to oppression, and therefore the domination
of tyrants such as Yazid and his father and their likes over the realm
of the Ummah. Imam Husayn alayhis-salam wanted to spread and disseminate
the spirit of Iman - commitment and conviction - and Truth in amongst
the Ummah so that it could awaken once again; just as it was in the days
of Rasulollah sallallahu- alayhi-wa-aalih. For it was clear to him that
the religion (of Islam) was being distorted and deviated and he wanted
to restore it afresh.

This is how Imam Husayn alayhis-salam became the Torch of guidance, and
Ark of salvation, and this is how he became the Choice of Allah
Almighty. It is reported from Imam Ali alayhis-salam that Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih said, “When I entered paradise30, I saw
written on its door with gold, there is no god but Allah, Muhammad is
the Beloved One of Allah, Ali is Waliy- 29 ‘Arsh is the symbolic
“Throne” of Allah in the heavens, just as the Ka‘bah in the holy city of
Makkah is referred to as the “House” of Allah.

30 . . . during one of many Me’raaj (Ascension to the heavens) that
Rasulollah salla-llahualayhi- wa-aalih made.

ullah, Fatima is Amatullah, Hasan and Husayn are the Choice of Allah,
and upon he who hates them be the Curse of Allah.”

Adherence to the Choice of Allah, and using the light of this Divine
Torch, will bring guidance in this world and salvation in the hereafter.
This is because the love of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam is associated with
good deeds, he is a torch who shows the path of the Truth to those who
seek it, and since by his sacred movement he – alayhis-salam –
discriminates between the path of Truth and the path of Falsehood. In
his well-known declaration on the day of Ashura, he states, “If the
religion of Muhammad were not to stand except by my killing, Oswords!
Take me”.

Furthermore, Imam Husayn alayhis-salam is also the fifth member of the
As-hab al-Kissa, about whom the Purification verse was revealed; in the
statement of the Almighty:

{Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, Ahl-ul-Bayt
(Members of the Household), and to make you pure and spotless.}31 So by
the evidence of the Qur’an, he is from the Ahl-ul-Bayt
alayhum-assalam.

Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih said, “To love me and my
Ahl-ul-Bayt is valuable and beneficial on seven occasions: whose fears
are immense; at the time of death, in the grave, at the time of
resurrection, at the (time of evaluating one’s) Book of Deeds, at the
time of questioning, and at the time of weighing (one’s deeds of good
verses evil)”.

Truly Imam Husayn alayhis-salam is a Torch of guidance, and his light
continues to shine upon us with goodness and blessing; for it
distinguishes the path of the Truth from Falsehood at all times and
ages, this is in addition to the perpetual presence of his light in his
Ma’soom descendent – in the manifestation of his grandson Imam Mahdi may
Allah hasten his reappearance. In acknowledging the momentous sacrifice
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam made, and the colossal trial and tribulation
he faced on the day of Ashura, Allah Almighty fashioned the Imams – who
are the protectors of Islam – in amongst his descendents.31 The Holy
Qur’an, 33: 33.

**The Severed Head of Imam Husayn**

One of the miracles that Allah Almighty gave to Imam Husayn
alayhissalam was that his sacred severed head spoke as it was being
carried from Karbala – in Iraq – to Shaam – modern Syria – and back to
Karbala where it was buried in the grave where his sacred body had been
buried. As reported by numerous chroniclers and recorded in many history
texts, in the course of the entire passage of the women and children
captives, with which the heads of the martyrs of Karbala were also
carried from Karbala to Shaam and back, the sacred head of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam used to recite the holy Qur’an, and this phenomenon proved
instrumental in guiding the people to Truth. The sacred head of Imam
Husayn alayhissalam also spoke in the court of the evil Yazid. When the
sacred head of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam arrived at the court of Yazid,
amongst others, the Roman envoy of the emperor of Rome was also present.
After realising that the captives were the women and children of the
household of the Prophet of Islam, and the head of the grandson of the
Prophet was amongst them, the Roman envoy protested to and rebuked
Yazid, and said, “Had we had a descendent of Jesus amongst us we would
have honoured him and glorified him”.

In response to this protest Yazid ordered the Roman envoy to be killed
immediately. The sacred head of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam said in a loud
voice, “there is no power but that of Allah”. At that occasion and at
every other occasion throughout the journey from Karbala to Shaam and
back, people were astonished to see and hear the sacred head of Imam
Husayn speaking, and they realised that this was no ordinary event but a
divine miracle, and Allah Almighty is showing them the realty of Imam
Husayn alayhis-salam. Such events revealed to the people the reality and
the significance of the hadith stated by Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-waaalih, “I leave behind two momentous weights, the
Book of Allah and my descendents the Ahl-ul-Bayt”

the people realised that the truth is with Imam Husayn alayhis-salam
when they saw the miracle of his sacred head speaking or reciting the
holy Qur’an.


