Conveying the Voice of Imam Husayn To the World
===============================================

There are therefore certain duties that we must discharge with respect
to the movement of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, some of which are:

1. We must present the movement of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, as well
as his principles and aims to the world through modern media such as
Radio and Television, books, internet, etc. in the way that Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam would want it. We must glorify the Sha’a’er which the
Husayniyahs32 facilitate commemorating the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam.

It is also desirable that the days of Ashura are declared public
holidays and signs of sadness and mourning being publicly displayed.
Imam Ridha alayhis-salam said, “even the Jahiliyyah33 – the pre-Islamic
era – used to regard Muharram as a scared month, thereby forbade war and
fighting in it, whereas our sanctity was violated in this month! Our
blood was shed, our dignity breached, our women and children were taken
prisoners, our tents were torched; and all their contents looted, our
dignity were not saved even for the sake of (our grandfather) Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih . . . , truly the day of Husayn wounded our
eyelids34, shed our tears, humiliated our revered one in the land of
Karb (anguish) and Bala’ (affliction), and you (O land of Karbala) have
left us with anguish and affliction until the last day of this life. So
for the likes of Husayn the weepers should weep, for crying and weeping
destroys the great sins”.

Then Imam Ridha alayhis-salam said, “With the start of the month of
Muharram, my father could not be seen smiling, every day his heartache
and anguish would increase until the tenth day, which was the day of
sorrow, grief and weeping; saying this is the day Husayn alayhis-salam
was killed”. Imam Ridha alayhissalam is also reported as saying, “he who
does not concern himself with his business and occupation, or seek to
sort out his affairs on the day of Ashura, Allah Almighty would see to
his needs in this world and in the hereafter, and he for whom the day of
Ashura is the day of mourning and sorrow, Allah would make the Day of
Judgement the day of joy and happiness, and he would 32 Husayniyah is a
religious centre where Husayni commemoration programs are held.

**Husayn – The sacrifice for mankind**

be pleased seeing us in Paradise. He who considers the day of Ashura
the day of barakah - blessing and good fortune – and stores food stuff
etc. in his house, on the day of judgement Allah would resurrect him and
accommodate him at the bottom of hell with Yazid, Obaydullah ibn Zeyad,
and Ommar ibn Sa’d – may the curse of Allah be upon them”.

2. Just as Imam Husayn alayhis-salam strived to implement the teachings
of Islam and the laws of the holy Qur’an, so too we must follow in his
footsteps and implement the teachings and laws of Islam throughout the
Muslim land.

3. It is imperative upon us, wherever we may be, to hold programs for
Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, in the best possible manner, since the
survival of Islam until the end of time is the aim which Imam Husayn
alayhis-salam died for. Islam shall remain alive by virtue of the blood
of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam and the blood of those who were brought up
in his school, defending Islamic values and teachings, throughout
history.

In short, commemorating the memory of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam by
holding mourning programs of Ta’ziah in the days of Ashura, giving food
on those days, etc. all of such programs help keep the memory of Imam
Husayn alayhis-salam alive, and it is such programs that have protected
the spirit of Shi‘a35 and adherence to the holy Qur’an and the
Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam.

**Imam Zayn al-Abidin and Ashura**

Imam Zayn al-Abidin alayhis-salam also manifested the essence of this
duty by his prolonged grief and weeping for his father. It is reported
from Imam Baqir alayhis-salam, “ . . . and he (Imam Zayn al-Abidin) wept
for his father for twenty years, and every time he was served food and
drink, he wept for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, until on one occasion his
servant said to him, "Is your sorrow and grief not going to end?", Imam
Zayn al- Abidin, alayhis-salam replied, "Woe unto you! The prophet Jacob
had twelve sons, and (when) Allah made one of them disappear, his eyes
35 Literally Shi‘a means ‘follower’, and this term was first used by
Rasulollah salla-llahualayhi- wa-aalih when he referred to Imam Ali
alayhis-salam by pointing to him and said,“He and his Shi‘a are the
prosperous ones” From then onwards the followers and devotees of Imam
Ali alayhis-salam become known as the Shi‘a.

turned white (i.e. blind) because of his increasing crying for him, his
head turned grey because of grief, and his back humped because of
sorrow, and all this while his son was alive in the world. Whereas I saw
my father, my brother, my uncle, and seventeen members of my family
killed around me . . . so how can my grief and sorrow end?" It is
reported that Imam Zayn al-Abidin alayhis-salam cried and wept so much
for Imam Husayn alayhis-salam that it was feared that he would loose his
eyesight. Every time he was given water to drink, he wept such that his
tears poured into the water cup, and when he was asked about this, he
replied "how can I not to when my father was denied the water that was
absolutely free for the beasts and wild animals".

**Ahl-ul-Bayt and Ashura**

The Ma'soom Imams alayhum-as-salam annually held Azadari or mourning
programs commemorating the day of Ashura, and in fact the Imams of the
Ahl-ul-Bayt alayhum-as-salam encouraged others to continue to hold such
programs to commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam in
various forms and styles of remembrance be it those which are
obligatory, or those that are Mustahab or permissible, for this day is
like no other day. There has been many hadith from them in this respect;
in one narration Imam Sadiq alayhis-salam is asked as to why the day of
Ashura became the day of sorrow and grief, lamentation and weeping,
rather than the day when Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih died, or
the day when Fatima-al-Zahra alayhas-salam died, or the day when
Amir-ul-Mu'minin36 alayhis-salam was killed, or when Imam Hasan
alayhis-salam was killed by poisoning? Imam Sadiq alayhis-salam replied,
“Truly the day of al-Husayn is the day of the greatest catastrophe,
since As-hab al-Kissa (people of the cloak) alayhum-as-salam who were
the most honourable of creation in the sight of Allah were five, and
when Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih died, Imam Ali, Fatima
al-Zahra, Hasan and Husayn alayhum-as-salam remained, and the people
sought solace and comfort in them, and when Fatima al-Zahra
alayhas-salam died, people sought consolation and comfort in
Amir-ul-Mu'minin, Hasan and Husayn alayhum-as-salam, and when
Amir-ul-Mu'minin alayhissalam died people sought solace and comfort in
Hasan and Husayn alayhum-as-salam, and when Hasan alayhis-salam died
people could find 36 Amir-ul-Mu’minin, meaning the Commander of the
Faithful, is the title that was exclusively awarded to Imam Ali
alayhis-salam by Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih.

comfort in Imam Husayn alayhis-salam, but when Imam Husayn alayhissalam
was killed, there remained no other member of As-hab al-Kissa to seek
solace and comfort in, and by the killing of the last of them all access
to As-hab al-Kissa was severed, whereas so long as there was even one of
them amongst the people, it was as if all of them were amongst the
people.

That is why the day of Husayn alayhis-salam is the most calamitous of
all days.”

Thus great rewards have been reported for establishing and upholding
these Husayni Sha'a'er. Imam Baqir alayhis-salam stated, "Imam Zayn al-
Abidin used to say, "Any believer who weeps for Imam Husayn alayhissalam
and his tragedy such that his tears run down his cheek, Allah Almighty
shall accommodate him in Paradise, and any believer who wept for us for
what we suffered at the hands of our enemy in this world such that his
tears run down his cheeks Allah shall accommodate him in a lofty
station, and any believer who suffers hardship in our cause, such that
he weeps for us and his tears run down his cheek, Allah Almighty shall
repel from his face any anguish and protects him from fire on the day of
Judgement".

And thus tyrants and despots throughout history tried to stop these
sacred ceremonies and Husayni Sha‘a’er, as is the case of the (Ba‘thist)
regime in Iraq. The regime first began by banning the mourning
ceremonies in the capital city – Baghdad – and it then extended this ban
to all other cities of Iraq. It then went on to ban the people Basra and
other cities from coming to Karbala on religious occasions such as on
Ashura and on the day of Arba‘een.

The Ba‘thist regime then gained enough courage and confidence to
arbitrary arrest the Ulema, scholars, and public speakers of the Husayni
Sha‘a’er, and subject them to brutal torture, before executing great
many of them. All of this is in aid of suppressing and killing the
spirit and the will of the Ummah, which emanate from the religious and
Husayni Sha‘a’er.

This was a quick insight in the role of Sayyid-al-Shuhada alayhis-salam
in protecting Islam, and a glimpse of his station in the sight of Allah
Almighty, and lofty station and the eminence of the Imam in this world
and in the hereafter, and how can it not be when he addresses Allah
Almighty saying:

I have left the entire world for the sake of You and I have orphaned my
children so that I see You So if I am cut into pieces for the love of
You my heart would lean to none other than You And these words reflect
the extent of the sincerity of Imam Husayn alayhis-salam in his love for
Allah, and his honesty in defending Islam.


