Introduction : a Word About the Methodology
===========================================

For a number of reasons there is a pressing need to define and
elaborate the Islamic paradigm of thought, that is, to explain for a
modern audience the Islamic concept.

The Muslim needs this definition because it provides him with a
comprehensive explanation of all that exists, on the basis of which he
relates to the world. This explanation brings him closer to an under­
standing of the great realities that confront him, and of the nature of
the relationships and connections that exist among these realities,
namely, the reality of the Creator and the reality of the created (the
latter including the universe, life, and man), and their mutual
relation­ ships and interconnections.

The definition of the Islamic concept is also necessary for the Muslim
so that he may understand the central position that man occupies in this
universe and the ultimate purpose for which he is created. This
knowledge in turn defines the role of man in the universe, the
parameters and perimeters of the field of his activities, and the limits
of his relationship with his Creator.

Such a definition, moreover, is essential because the understanding of
this comprehensive view and the recognition of man's central position in
the universe and the purpose of his existence define the Muslim's way of
life and the kind of system established by this way of life. The system
established in man's life is based entirely on this comprehensive view
and follows logically from it. Without this base, the system would be
mere patchwork, having shallow roots that will quickly disintegrate.

Such a contrived system, while it lasts, is a cause of suffering and
misery for people, since there exists a fundamental conflict between
such a system and man's basic nature and real needs. This judgement
applies to all systems current in. the world today, without any
exception, especially to the systems of the so-called "advanced"
nations.

The definition of the Islamic concept is also needed because the
Islamic din[^1] was revealed in order to initiate a special kind of ummah
(community), unique and distinctive, namely, an ummah that came to lead
mankind, to establish the way of Allah on earth, and to save people from
the misery brought about by misguided leadership, er­roneous ways, and
false concepts. Today we see mankind in a miserable condition, despite
some variations in forms and appear­ances. If a Muslim grasps the
Islamic belief-concept and its essential constituents

he is guaranteed a role as a founding member of this dynamic ummah,
with its special characteristics and distinguishing features, a member
capable of leadership and grace. The clarity of his belief-concept is a
great guiding force because the Muslim's system of life originates from
this concept and is based upon it. It is this belief-concept that
directs all individual and collective activities in various fields of
human endeavor.

The Qur'an presents this comprehensive explanation to people in such a
complete form that it takes into consideration all aspects of human
nature, and satisfies its needs in every dimension. It deals with all
matters, those pertaining to the senses, to feelings, to thought, to
intuition, and to insight, and addresses all the elements of man's
awareness, just as it deals also with his material needs in the physical
world. It does so in a style that exhorts, inspires, and guides all
these elements of human nature in a harmonious and natural manner, since
it comes from the Originator of the universe and the Creator of man.

The first group of Muslims molded their lives according to this concept
which comes directly from the Qur'an. They adapted to it in a uniquely
complete way, and consequently the leadership of mankind was bestowed
upon them. They led mankind in a manner unparalleled in history, either
before or after. In matters related both to the heart and mind and to
the world of actions and events, these first Muslims established such an
exemplary system for mankind that it has not been repeated or even
approached in the subsequent history of the world. The Qur’an was the
foremost source for this group of people.

Indeed, this group itself was a product of the Qur'an. What an amazing
phenomenon in the history of mankind: a nation emerging from the text of
a Book, living by it, and depending on its guidance as the prime source!
The practice or the Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be on him) reinforced
this guidance as its complete, practical application. This point has
been summarized by the Prophet's wife, 'Aishah. When she was asked about
the character of the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him), she replied,
aptly, summing up a deep truth, "His character was the Qur'an"
(Al-Nasa'i).


Later generations drifted away from the Qur'an, from its particular
style, its guidance, and from the milieu of values and practice similar
to those found in the milieu in which the Qur'an was revealed. Only
those living in such an atmosphere can truly understand the Qur'an and
be inspired by it. No one can understand the Qur'an as it should be
understood unless he lives amidst the toil and struggle accompany­ing
the revival of the real Islamic way of life, with all its burdens, its
sacrifices, its sorrows, and all the situations that arise in its
confron­tation with jahiliyyah[^2] at any given time.

The real problem in grasping the significance and the spirit of the
Qur'anic teachings does not lie in understanding its words and
sen­tences, that is to say, its exegesis, as is often claimed. This does
not constitute a problem at all. The problem lies in the capacity of our
minds to reconstruct feelings, ideas, and experiences like the feelings,
ideas, and experiences of the first generation of Muslims when they
received these revelations from the lips of the Prophet (peace be upon
him) in the thick of the struggle.

Theirs was a struggle of jihad, of striving within oneself and striving
with other people. It was a fight against temptations and a battle
against enemies -exertions on behalf of others, and sacrifices, fears,
and hopes. It was a constant cycle of falling down and rising up. The
first Muslims experienced the ex­hilarating beginning of the Call in
Makkah, and also the subsequent poverty and weakness, the indignities of
being outcasts among the people and of being shut up in the Valley of
Abu Talib, the hunger and the fear, the torments of being hunted down,
and the boycott.

And then they experienced the atmosphere surrounding the establishment
of the Muslim ummah and the initiation of a social and political order,
with ever present friction between feelings and policies throughout its
period of construction and organization.

Such was the vibrant and pulsating atmosphere in which the Qur'an was
revealed, with its words and messages full of meaning and inspiration.
And without doubt, in a similar atmosphere -an atmos­phere that always
accompanies any new attempt at the revival of Islamic life -the Qur'an
will again open its treasures to men's hearts and bestow its secrets on
their minds, sending forth its fragrance in all directions and bringing
guidance and light.

It was at such a time that they, the first Muslims, grasped the truth
of Allah's message to them:

They consider it to be a favor on you (Muhammad) that they have
accepted Islam. Say: Your acceptance of Islam is not a favor to me. Nay,
rather Allah has conferred a favor on you by guiding you to faith, if
you are (really) truthful (Al-­Hujurat 49:17).


And again, the truth of His exhortation to them:

O you who believe, respond to Allah and the Messenger when he calls you
to what will give you life, and know that Allah comes between a man and
his (own) heart, and that to Him you shall be gathered. And beware of a
trial that shall not befall only the wrongdoers among you, and know that
Allah is severe in retribution. And remember when you were few and weak
in the land, fearing that people would do away with you, whereupon He
gave refuge and strengthened you with His help, and provided you with
what is good, in order that you might be thankful (Al-Anfal 8:24- 26).

And the truth of His saying to them:

And Allah helped you at Badr[^3] when you were a humble force, so be
conscious of Allah so that you may be thankful (A le 'Imran 3: 123).

And the truth of His wisdom revealed to them:

Do not be faint-hearted nor grieve, for you shall be the uppermost if
you are believers. If some hurt touches you, a similar hurt has touched
the (unbelieving) people. We apportion such days among mankind so that
Allah may know those who believe and that He may take witnesses from
among you -for Allah does not love those who do wrong -and so that Allah
may prove those who believe and obliterate the unbelievers. Or did you
imagine that you would enter the Garden (of Paradise) without Allah's
know­ing which of you have struggled or knowing those who are steadfast?
(Ale '1mran 3: 139-143).

And the truth of Allah's encouragement to them:

You will surely be tried in your possessions and your persons, and you
will hear much abuse from those who were given the Book before you and
from those who associate others with Allah. But if you remain steadfast
and are conscious of Allah, this, behold, is something to set one's
heart upon (Ale 'Imran 3: 186).

They grasped the truth of all these messages of Allah Most High because
He was talking about events that were occurring in their lives, about
happenings that were fresh in their memories, and about con­ditions
surrounding them that were not remote in time and were within the
experience of that generation.

Only those who are passing through similar experiences today can truly
grasp the meanings and messages of the Qur'an. It is they alone who
appreciate the beauties of the Islamic concept as presented in the
Qur'an, because this concept is an integral part of their own feelings
and experience. They are receptive to it and see its light. But such
individuals are few. Since people have drifted away from the Qur'an and
from living in its atmosphere, it becomes incumbent on us to present to
them the truths of the Islamic concept concerning Allah, the universe,
and life and man,

taken directly from the text of the Qur'an, together with some
explanations, interpretations, classifica­tion, and synthesis. This can
in no way be a substitute for the richness of the Qur'an in addressing
minds and hearts, but, to the extent possible, it is intended to bring
people closer to the Qur'an. It is an attempt at making them enjoy the
Qur'an and seek in it the great truths of the Islamic concept for
themselves.

We must make it clear, however, that we do not desire to seek the
truths of the Islamic concept merely for the sake of academic knowledge.
We have no desire to add still another book to the shelves of Islamic
libraries under the heading of "Islamic Philosophy." Never! Indeed, our
purpose is not mere cold' 'knowledge" which deals only with intellectual
issues and adds to the stock of "culture." For us, this sort of activity
is somewhat trivial and cheap and not worth the effort. Rather, we want
to bring about that "movement" which is beyond "knowledge.

" We want the knowledge of the Islamic concept to lead people toward
the realization of its contents in the real world. We desire to awaken
the conscience of the' 'human being" so that he may fulfill the purpose
of his creation as delineated by this divinely ­revealed concept. Our
concern is that people return to their Lord, to the path He intends for
them, and to the sublime way of life consonant with the nobility
bestowed upon them by Allah, as it was once actualized in history when
an ummah came into being based on this concept and led mankind toward
what is good, wholesome, and constructive.

There came a time in the history of Islam when the original Islamic way
of life, based on the pure Islamic concept, came in contact with other
lifestyles and cultures prevalent in the lands that had newly joined the
Islamic fold and in lands still more distant.

The early days of struggle for the propagation of the Faith and of
jihad had given way to a period of ease and comfort. At the same time,
certain political occurrences, harking back to the disputes between 'Ali
and Muawiyah, had raised various thorny philosophical and religious
issues and caused the contending parties to support their position by
rational argument. People residing in the Islamic ter­ritories studied
Greek philosophy and involved themselves in the theological issues that
had plagued Christianity earlier, and which were now accessible to
Muslims through translations into the Arabic language.

Such involvement in metaphysical speculation, which no doubt gave
intellectual pleasure to those who engaged in it during the Abbasid
period and likewise in Andalusia, introduced deviations and foreign
elements into the original Islamic concept, which had come originally to
rescue mankind from such deviations and speculations. This
all-encompassing concept was revealed to restore mankind to the dynamic
and practical Islamic belief system that directs all human energies
toward building and construction, sublimity and purity, and living and
sharing, while protecting this human energy and intellec­tual power from
being dissipated through meaningless pursuits in the wilderness of
philosophical speculation.

Many Muslim scholars thought it necessary to respond to the
con­troversies and issues concerning the person of Allah Most High and
His attributes, will, and power, and concerning man's actions, and such
topics as reward, punishment, sin, and repentance, with rational
arguments, intellectual debate, and polemics. As a consequence of such
debates, which soon degenerated into polemics, various sects came into
being, such as the Kharijiyyah, Shi'ah, Mu'tazilah, Qadariyah, and
Jabriyah. Among Muslim thinkers, there were some who adored Greek
philosophy, especially the commentaries on Aris­totle, to whom they
fondly referred as "the first teacher,"

and they loved scholastic theology or metaphysics. They presumed that'
'Is­lamic thought" could not reach maturity and perfection, or greatness
and glory, unless it were clothed in this garment, the cloak of rational
philosophy, and unless volumes were written about it. Just as nowadays
some people admire Western modes of thought, they ad­mired the modes of
thought of their era and attempted to develop "Islamic philosophy" on
the pattern of Greek philosophy. Others initiated the Science of Kalam
to address theological issues through Aristotelian logic.

They abandoned the Islamic concept and its own pure and inde­pendent
format, which suits its nature so perfectly since both concept and
format address the total nature of man with all his faculties and
concerns, and not merely his intellect in cold logical terms. Instead
they took the mould of philosophy and tried to pour the Islamic concept
into it. They borrowed various philosophical concepts and tried to
demonstrate that the Islamic concept agrees with them. Even their
terminology was almost entirely borrowed.

In general, there exists a genuine disharmony between the methodology
of philosophy and the methodology of belief, between the style of
philosophy and the style of belief, and, in particular, between the
great and sublime truths of the Islamic faith and the petty, artificial,
and confused efforts that go under the headings of metaphysical
philosophy and scholastic theology. The so-called' 'Is­lamic philosophy"
was nothing more than a discordant note in the harmonious melody of the
Islamic belief. Such intellectual gymnastics merely produced confusion
in people's minds and polluted the purity of the Islamic concept,
narrowing its scope and rendering it superfi­cial, dry, complicated, and
incomprehensible. The whole corpus of "Islamic philosophy" and of the
Science of Kalam was and is com­pletely foreign to Islam -to its nature,
method, style, and teachings.

This statement will come as a shock, of course, to a great number of
people who indulge in what they term "Islamic philosophy" and, in
general, to those who enjoy any kind of philosophical discussion. But
the Islamic concept cannot be purified of distortions and devia­tions
unless we remove from it everything to which the label of "Islamic
philosophy" applies, discard every issue relating to the Science of
Kalam, and sweep away all the differences of various sects that have
come to us from times past.

We can then return to the Qur'an and take the Islamic concept, with all
the characteristics that distin­guish it from every other concept,
directly from the Qur'an. There is, of course, no harm in making
comparisons with other concepts in order to clarify its characteristics,
but the constituents of this concept must be taken directly from the
Qur'an and presented entirely in their own format and terminology.

In order to understand our method of presenting the Islamic con­cept,
we must bear in mind three important facts.

First, the heritage received by the Islamic world from Greek philosophy
and Christian theology can be traced in the disputes among various
sects. Their disputations consisted of nothing more than latter-day
commentaries on the original works, conveyed in a polemical and
argumentative style. To reproduce them now would cause only confusion
and disturbance in the minds of sincere people.

Second, the attempt to reconcile these commentaries on Greek philosophy
with the Islamic concept was simple-minded to the ex­treme, because it
demonstrated ignorance of the nature of Greek philosophy, its
deeply-rooted pagan elements, and its lack of a unified system and a
unified method, all of which are quite the antithesis of the Islamic
concept as revealed in its original sources. Greek philosophy originated
in the midst of an idolatrous society burdened with mythology.

Its roots were nourished by the same myths and pagan concepts, and it
was never free of such pagan mythological influences. What greater
naiveté and futility can there be than to try to reconcile such a
philosophy with the Islamic concept, which is based entirely on the
pure, absolute, and uncompromising belief in the Oneness of Allah, Most
High. But, under the influence of latter-day Christian commentaries,
Muslims who engaged in philosophical dis­cussions held the erroneous
view that "the Philosophers" (by which they meant the Greek
philosophers) could not have been pagan nor could they have strayed from
the Oneness of Allah.

Under this illusion, they took upon themselves the impossible task of
reconciling the Philosophers' discourses with the Islamic belief.
Unfortunately, a major portion of "Islamic philosophy" consists of such
attempts.

Third, after the murder of 'Uthman (may Allah be pleased with him), the
Islamic world faced many practical problems. People began to interpret
the verses of the Qur'an to suit their own purposes, giving them
far-fetched meanings. Moreover, arguments were put forward for and
against various sectarian views, each seeking support for its opinions
from philosophy and scholastic theology. Most such argu­ments were
biased. Consequently, such sources, biased as they are, cannot be relied
upon to present the pure Islamic thought.

Its charac­teristics and constituents must be derived from the fixed
text of the Qur'an and must be free of such pollutants from the legacy
of history. Indeed, it is better to set aside this entire legacy. For
our understanding of the genuine teachings of Islam, however, and for
the study of Islamic history in a proper perspective, we should study
the various aspects of deviations and their causes in order to avoid
similar pitfalls today in delineating the meaning of the Islamic concept
and in formulating a blueprint of the Islamic system of thought and
action.

Western modes of thought developed in their own particular fashion. In
the beginning they were based on Greek thought with all its pagan
elements, while in the end their main concern was to oppose the Church
and its teachings.

Since the Renaissance, the general trend of the Western mode of thought
was criticism of the Catholic Church and its doctrines, and, with the
passage of time, to object to all religion and religious doctrines per
se. But the doctrines of the Church, by and large, did not, at any
point, represent the true teachings of the Prophet Jesus (peace be upon
him). Christianity was born in the shadow of the pagan Roman Empire.
Later, when the Roman Empire adopted Christianity as the state religion,
it did great violence to the true teachings of Jesus, distorting them
beyond recognition.

In the beginning, the distortions came from the influence of Roman
paganism, but later the Church and its councils added many alien
concepts to the divinely-revealed teach­ings. Religious passions were
exploited to keep the Empire together, expositions of faith were
intended to halt disputes between the contending factions, and doctrines
were propounded to unite heretics to the orthodox Church and to the
central government[^4]. Thus, the "Christianity" expressed in the
teachings of the Church had very little relationship to what came down
from Allah to Jesus, the Messiah (peace be upon him).

As a result of these compromises, the Church adopted many distorted
concepts and a great deal of information concerning the universe that
was incorrect and faulty, since error is a part of all human research,
study, and experiment. When the astronomers and physicists started to
correct the errors contained in these “facts," the origin of which was
human rather than divine, the Church took a very harsh stand against
them. Not content with mere verbal attacks, the Church fathers employed
their temporal power to torture people for their heresies, whether
religious or scientific.

From that time to the present, "European thought" has taken an inimical
stand not merely against the doctrines of the Church prevalent at that
time, but against all religious ideas and concepts in general. Indeed,
its enmity extended beyond religious ideas and concepts to the very
essence of religious thought. The European thinkers originated modes and
schools of thought whose basic pur­pose was to oppose the essence of
religious thought itself.

In order to get rid of the authority of the Church, they eliminated the
God of the Church, sweeping away all ideas and ways of thought related
to Him. The enmity of European thought to religion and to the
methodology of religion consists not simply in the philosophical system,
schools of thought, and subjects of study that were established in
opposition to religion, but rather lies at the very heart of European
thought and its method of acquiring knowledge.

Accordingly, it is not possible to find a basis for Islamic thought in
the modes and products of European thought, nor to reconstruct Islamic
thought by borrowing from Western modes of thought or its products. As
the reader will see toward the end of our discussion, such attempts have
been made by some Muslim thinkers who desired to reconstruct Islamic
thought by borrowing the methodology of European thought.

Our methodology of researching the characteristics and con­stituents of
the Islamic concept is to derive inspiration directly from the Qur’an,
after having lived a lifetime under its shade, and to present, insofar
as possible, the atmosphere and the religious, social, and political
conditions of mankind at the time when Allah Most High revealed His Word
for the guidance of humanity, as well as to point out the errors that
have crept in as a result of deviating from this divine guidance.

Our method in seeking inspiration from the Qur'an is not to con­ front
it with pre-conceived criteria. We shall not apply to the text of the
Qur'an either intellectual or rational criteria borrowed from the
remnants of cultures that did not flow from the Qur'an itself, nor shall
we interpret the verses of the Qur'an in such a way as to make them
conform to such pre-established norms.

Indeed, the Qur'an came to establish the correct norms and criteria
that Allah desires for the life of mankind. Consequently, the least
human beings can do in response to this favor of their Creator, who
shows us His mercy and indulgence, though He is independent of His
creation, is to receive it with gratitude and with minds clear of all
impure and alien elements, so that this new concept may be purified from
the remnants of ignorance, old or new, and conform solely to the
instructions of Allah and not to the errant speculations of man.

How can there be any room for pre-established criteria in referring to
the Book of Allah, the Most High, for judgement? At the Outset, we must
adapt our criteria to accord with the Book of Allah and base our
concepts and standards of reference upon it. This alone is the correct
methodology for dealing with the Qur'an and for deriving from it the
Islamic concept and its characteristics and constituents.

We must avoid the style of philosophy in presenting the Islamic
concept, because there is a close relationship between subject and style
of presentation. The style of philosophy can only change and distort the
Islamic concept, because its nature and historical development are
foreign and discordant, even inimical, to the nature of the Islamic
concept. This fact is well-established. One who has grasped the Islamic
concept will enjoy its truth and beauty only as expressed in the sublime
text of the Qur'an.

We disagree with Iqbal[^5] in his attempt to present Islam in the
philosophical framework that he borrowed from the well-known systems of
Hegel's Idealistic Rationalism and August Comte's Materialistic
Objectivism. Indeed, a creed in general, and the Islamic creed in
particular, has its own style of addressing the total nature of man. It
is characterized by liveliness, harmony, and a direct appeal to
intuition. It inspires the human soul with great truths, truths which
cannot be fully expressed in words, although the words can point to
them.

The Qur'anic style of presenting Islamic belief has the distinc­tive
characteristic that it appeals to all the elements constituting human
nature, leaves no aspect untouched and no avenue of knowledge ignored,
and does not merely address man's intellect alone. Philosophy, on the
other hand, has a different style. It tries to capture reality in words.
But, there are some aspects of reality that cannot be formulated in
words and phrases. Furthermore, there are other aspects of reality that
cannot be comprehended by human "thought" because they are outside the
realm of its operation. If the philosophical style were adopted to
express the truths of religion, these truths would be rendered
complicated, dry, and lifeless.

It may also be observed that philosophical systems have rarely, if
ever, played a significant role in the daily lives of human beings.
Religious beliefs have always motivated people to action, propelling
them toward definite goals through the wilderness of time and the
darkness of the way, whereas philosophical systems have not.

A creed must be presented in its own particular style. Expressing it in
the style of philosophy kills it, extinguishes its light and
inspiration, and restricts it to only one aspect among the many aspects
of man's being. Distortions, complexities, deviations, and dryness are
intro­duced in any exposition of a belief system when a style is adopted
that is foreign to its nature and has too narrow a framework.

We should not hail the existence of "Islamic philosophy" with
eagerness, nor should we feel any eagerness whatsoever to suppose that
Islamic thought must possess such a branch or such a style for its
exposition. Its absence is no loss to Islam or to "Islamic thought." On
the contrary, its absence is a proof of Islam's strength, genuineness
and great uniqueness.

Another important aspect of our method of presentation is its
constructive approach. We will not focus on this or that particular
deviation in Islamic thought or practice. Our effort to clarify the
characteristics and constituents of the Islamic concept is not in
response to a specific deviation or situation in order to correct it.
Rather, we want to present the truths of Islam in their entirety in the
way the Qur'an contains them -complete, all-inclusive, balanced, and
harmonious.

There is a danger inherent in focusing one's attention on a specific
deviation or defect and in trying to refute or to correct it by
employing the total force of the truths of the Islamic concept. This
danger is that one may go to the other extreme and introduce a new
deviation in the process of trying to remove the old one -and a
deviation is after all a deviation, whether it be old or new.

We may find many examples of this danger in works produced for the
“defense" of Islam by well-meaning Muslim thinkers who wanted to reply
to the objections raised by the Orientalists and the atheists, both old
and new. Similarly, we find examples of this in works written to correct
a particular situation at a particular time and place.

As an example, some Christian missionaries and some Zionist authors
have accused Islam of being a religion of the sword, asserting that it
was spread by the sword, whereupon some defenders of Islam from among us
immediately rose up to remove this “blemish" from Islam. In their zeal
to "defend" Islam against these vicious attacks, they downgraded the
place of jihad in Islam by narrowing its sphere of application and by
apologetically stating that jihad is permitted only for" defensive"
purposes, in the narrow current technical sense of the word. They also
lost sight of the fact that Islam, in its role as the last
divinely-revealed guidance for mankind, has a natural duty, and
therefore the right, to establish its particular system as preeminent on
earth in order that the whole of mankind may benefit from its just,

balanced, and humane laws, and so that every individual living under
this system may enjoy freedom of belief. "There is no compulsion in
religion" is a part of this faith. The effort expended in establishing
the Islamic system for the benefit of all people, both Muslims and
non­-Muslims alike, is termed jihad. Jihad is thus struggle for the
initiation and establishment of this system which aims at securing
freedom of conscience and belief for every person on earth. And this
freedom can only be attained by establishing a just government and a
just legal and social system, which calls to account anyone who tries to
abolish freedom of speech and freedom of belief from the land.

This is merely one example of how the Islamic concept can become
corrupted by the very zeal of its defenders against the shrewd attacks
of Islam's enemies.

Deviations introduced into the Islamic concept by works written to
correct a particular situation, may be illustrated in the writings of
Imam Sheikh Muhammad \`Abduh and in the lectures of Muhammad Iqbal
published as The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam.

As Imam Sheikh Muhammad \`Abduh surveyed the Muslim world, he found
that ideas were stagnant and the door of ijtihad closed, and that
"reason" was denied its role in understanding the Shari'ah of Allah and
in deducing judgements from it. He observed that Muslim people were
satisfied with books written by latter-day scholars who were a product
of the period of stagnation of thought and whose books, reflecting
popular religious lore, incorporated many nonsensical con­cepts. Looking
abroad, he noted that,

with the advent of the Age of Reason in Europe, "reason" was being
worshipped there as a god, especially after the marvelous discoveries
and achievements of science and the ascendancy of rationalist
philosophies which ascribed to "reason" unlimited powers. At the same
time, Orientalists of various hues were busy attacking the Islamic
concept, the belief in the Will and Power of Allah and the apportionment
of good and evil (qada wa qadar), and were blaming Islam for the
lethargy and intellectual inactivity of Muslims. Consequently Sheikh
Muhammad \`Abduh decided to address himself to this particular
situation.

He confirmed the value of "reason" in relation to the “revealed text”
by reviving the principle of ijtihad, and fought against the nonsense
that had become popular religion. He argued that Islam gives human
reason great value and a significant role in religion as well as in the
practical affairs of life, and that, contrary to the allegations of
certain outsiders, Islam does not teach absolute' 'predestination"
devoid of "freedom of choice." However, caught between the two extremes
of the intellectual inertia in the Muslim world and the deification of
reason in Europe, he propounded the theory that human reason and divine
revelation are of equal importance for the guidance of man, and that it
is impossible that knowledge acquired through rational thought should
come in conflict with divinely-revealed truths.

He did not stop at saying merely that reason can comprehend what is
within its grasp but must admit to what is beyond its grasp. Indeed,
neither reason nor any of the other faculties of man are absolute and
all-powerful but are bounded by the limits of space and time, whereas
divine revelation (wahy) may deal with absolute realities such as the
reality of God and the relationship of the will of God to created
events. Reason has no choice but to accept these absolute principles
which are beyond its grasp[^6].

Thus Sheikh Muham­mad \`Abduh presented arguments that appeared
logical, but which were, in fact, a product of his desire to correct
that deviation of his time which denigrated and neglected the role of
reason. He says (may Allah have mercy on his soul) in his treatise on
the Oneness of Allah, "Divine revelation through messengers is an act of
God, while human reason is also an act of God in this world, and acts of
God are necessarily in harmony with each other, never at variance with
each other."

While this statement is true in a general sense, nevertheless divine
revelation and human reason are not at the same level, the former being
greater and more all-embracing than the latter. Divine revelation came
down to be a source to which human reason must refer, and to be the
criterion to which human reason must refer in judging norms, standards,
and concepts, and in removing errors and shortcomings. While there is
undoubtedly agreement and harmony between the two, it rests on the basis
of the ultimate superiority of divine revelation and not on the basis of
their being equal to each other in all respects. Moreover, "reason" as
an abstract' 'ideal," free of the influences of cultural biases and
personal opinions, does not exist in the actual world of human beings.

The Sheikh's commentary on Juz 'Amm (the thirtieth part of the Qur'an)
clearly shows the influence of this viewpoint. The commen­tary on the
Qur'an by his pupil, Sheikh Rashid Rida, and the commen­tary on"
Tabarak" (the twenty-ninth part of the Qur'an), by another pupil, Sheikh
Al-Maghribi, are other examples of far-fetched inter­pretations of the
Qur'anic text in an attempt to bring it into conformity with "reason."
Therein lies the danger because the word "reason" does not refer to
anything in existence. There is of course nothing which may be called"
reason" in the abstract, free from the influence of personal desires,
passions, biases, errors, and ignorance, to which the text of the Qur'an
may be referred. If we were to interpret the verses of the Qur'an
according to all these various. examples of "reason," we would end up in
chaos.

All this came about due to concentration on a single, specific
deviation. But if the matter is considered on its own, we can easily
understand the role of reason and its scope of action without either
­over- or under-estimating it, as well as the scope of Divine revelation
and the correct relation between the two.

Indeed, "reason" is not abandoned, discarded, or neglected in Divine
revelation. In fact, it is human reason which is the recipient of Divine
revelation. Its task is to receive this revelation, to understand what
it receives, to grasp what lies within its scope, and to accept what is
beyond its scope. But it cannot be the final' 'judge." Where a clear
text exists, its content, without any far-fetched interpretation, is
indisputable.

The task of reason is to accept the standards and criteria established
by this clear text and apply them in practical life. In our subsequent
discussions we will provide ample details on this topic, delineating the
correct Islamic position. Muhammad Iqbal surveyed the climate of thought
in the East and found it "hazy." People were absorbed in what he called
"ajami" (alien) mysticism, seeking' 'illuminations." It distressed him
to see the pursuit of “annihilation" of self, in which there was no
place for man's personality.

The “passivity” of so-called mystic ways, which negate human endeavor
and participation in worldly activity, shocked him because it is,
indeed, contrary to the nature of Islam. On the other hand, he saw that,
in the West, the objectivists and the pragmatists rely totally on
sensory experiences. He also came across the proclama­tion of the birth
of Superman and the death of God in Nietzsche's Thus Spake Zarathustra,
a collection of Nietzsche's insane ejaculations which some call'
'philosophy."

He decided to cleanse Islamic thought and Islamic practice from
negativism and passivity, and to affirm on their behalf
“experimenta­tion," the method on which the pragmatists and the
objectivists relied.

But he went too far in glorifying the human "self," which, in turn,
forced him to interpret certain verses of the Qur'an in a manner
contrary to its temperament, as well as to the temperament of Islam. He
stated that death, and even the Day of Resurrection, do not end
experimentation.

Experimentation and progress, according to Iqbal, will continue even in
the Garden and the Fire. But the Islamic concept states decisively that
this world is for trial and action, while the Hereafter is for reward
and punishment. Man has no scope for action except in this world, nor is
there room for new action after the final accounting and recompense.
This exaggeration of his was brought about by a strong desire to affirm"
life" and its perpetuity, or the perpetuity of the "self," as Iqbal
borrowed the term from Hegel's philosophy.

On the other hand, he was also forced to expand the meaning of
"experimentation" from its technical meaning in Western thought and its
history. He included in its meaning the concept of "spiritual
experience," which the Muslim realizes in his contact with the Great
Reality, though in Western philosophy the term" experiment" is never
applied to the spiritual, since, in its origin, the term'
'experimenta­tion" was coined to exclude any source of knowledge not
based on sensory experience.

Furthermore, Iqbal's borrowing of Western terminology led him to this
prosaic work, which is difficult, terse as well as dry, while his poetry
is alive, dynamic, and vibrant.

Our aim here is not to find fault with the great and fruitful efforts
for the revival and awakening of Islamic thought made by Imam Muhammad
\`Abduh and his pupils and by the poet Iqbal (may Allah have mercy on
their souls), but is only meant to provide a warning that an
over-enthusiastic attempt at confronting a particular deviation
initiates another deviation. It is therefore best, in the course of
presenting the Islamic concept, to express its truths in a complete,
all-encompassing, and harmonious fashion, taking into consideration its
particular nature and particular style.

Finally, this book is not a work on "philosophy," "theology," or
"metaphysics." It is dictated by practical considerations and deals with
practical matters.

Islam came to deliver mankind from the rubbish heaps of philosophies
and religions under whose ideas, systems, and burdens it was groaning
and from the wilderness of speculation in which its beliefs and ways of
life had gone astray. It came to initiate for mankind a unique and
distinct concept and to introduce a new life, running smoothly according
to Allah's prescribed way. Unfortunately, however, mankind has again
reverted to the rubbish heaps and the wilderness.

The revelation of Islam came to initiate a new ummah and then handed
over to it the leadership of mankind, thus bringing man out of the
wilderness and the rubbish. But this very ummah has now abandoned its
position of leadership and its method of leading, and is panting after
the nations that are lost in the wilderness and wallowing in refuse.

This book is an attempt to define the Islamic concept, and its
characteristics and constituents, from which are derived the way of life
prescribed by Allah and the principles of thought, science, and the
arts, that follow from a comprehensive exposition of this original
concept. Any research in any aspect of Islamic thought or of the Islamic
system must be founded primarily on the Islamic way of thinking. This
way of thinking is needed by the hearts and minds of man and by life and
by the world. It is needed by the Muslim ummah and by the whole of
mankind!

This is the first part of a two part book. It deals with “The
Characteristics of the Islamic Concept." Later, Allah willing, we will
present the second part, "The Constituents of the Islamic Concept."

And Allah is our Guide and Helper.

[^1] The Arabic word din is often translated as "religion," but this is
misleading because the term "religion" in the English language is
usually restricted to personal worship, whereas din refers to every
aspect of life. (Editor).

[^2] Lit., "ignorance" As used in the Islamic sense ,jahiliyyah denotes
ignorance or lack of awareness of Allah's guidance for mankind, whether
of the ancient or the contemporary variety (trans.).

[^3] One of the battles of the Prophet's era (trans.).

[^4] T. W. Arnold, The Preaching of Is lam, p. 53.

[^5] Muhammad Iqbal (1873-1938), poet and philosopher from the Punjab
(Pakistan). The reference here is to Iqbal's book. The Reconstruction of
Religious Thought in Islam (Trans).

[^6] For further clarification of this point, see the chapter entitled'
'The Divine Origin of the Islamic Concept" in the present volume.


