Chapter Iv : the Permanent Realities
====================================

And so, set your face [surrender your whole being and purpose] toward
the [one, ever- true] faith, turning away from all that is false in
accordance with the natural disposi­tion that Allah has instilled into
man. No change (let there be) in what Allah has created: that is the
ever-true faith. But most people do not know (AI-Rum 30:30).

From the basic characteristic of the Islamic concept that is, its
divine origin, proceed all the other characteristics. As this concept
has been revealed by the Creator, man's obligation in relation to it is
to receive it with an open mind, respond to it with a willing heart,
adapt to it, and apply its teachings to the affairs of his life. One
must realize that the Islamic concept is neither a product of human
thought, nor a response to some particular environment, nor valid only
for a par­ticular period of time, nor has it sprung from any earthly
cause. It is a pure gift of guidance from the Creator as a mercy for
mankind.

This characteristic of divine origination implies another very
im­portant characteristic. The Islamic concept contains certain
un­changeable realities, so that all development and changes in the
Islamic society must be within the framework of these permanent
realities.

The "constituents" and "values" of the Islamic concept are permanent
and unchangeable, whereas the "styles" and "forms" of societies and ways
of doing things may change. All the changes in the outward forms of
practical life, however, remain under the firm and fixed fundamentals
and values of this concept.

This does not mean a "freezing" of thought and action. On the contrary
the Islamic concept not only permits but encourages move­ment and change
as long as they are within its own framework and around its fixed
axis.

A little observation and thought will convince anyone that this
characteristic, i.e. movement within an orbit around a fixed axis, is a
characteristic of all of Allah's creation, not merely of the Islamic
concept. Some examples of this follow.

Matter, whether in the form of particles or in the form of energy is
subject to the law of conservation, yet it is always in motion and
changes its form and appearance.

The atom consists of a nucleus and some electrons that revolve around
it in fixed orbits.

Every planet has an orbit, and every star has a course. They all move
in an orderly fashion, within a particular system.

The “humanity" of a human being with a breath of divine spirit blown
into his frame, which makes him superior to all other creatures around
him, is a fixed reality. "Humanity" or "human nature" is found in every
human being, although each human being goes through various stages, from
an embryo to an old man or woman,

and through various social roles, advancing or regressing, in
proportion to his nearness or distance from his' 'human nature." Yet
none of those changes and developments take him outside the essence of
his "human nature," with all the desires, powers, and capacities
inherent in that nature.

The inclination of man to change the existing conditions of his
environment in order to improve it is also a permanent reality. This
desire is in the depth of his nature and is a product of his position as
the deputy of Allah on earth because this responsibility requires the
control and development of earthly resources. The expressions of this
desire, however, vary according to time and place.

Thus the characteristic of "movement within a fixed boundary around a
fixed axis" seems to be a deep property of all of Allah's creation, and
it is also clearly exhibited in the nature of the Islamic concept.

We present here in a summary fashion a few examples of the permanent
constituents and values of this concept that may be con­sidered as the
“fixed axis" around which the Islamic system revolves. The following are
at least ten of such permanent realities:

1) Whatever is related to Allah --and He is the axis of the Islamic
concept -has a fixed meaning, i.e. there is no scope for change or
development here. This relates to the existence of Allah, His eternity,
His Oneness, His power and dominion over His creation, the absolute
freedom of His will, and each of His attributes operating within the
universe, on the earth, and among human beings.

2) The entire universe, comprised of Objects and living beings, is
Allah's creation and His origination. Allah Most High willed its
exist­ence and it came into being. Nothing animate or inanimate in this
universe had or has any share in creating, managing or controlling any
part of the universe, or a share in any of the Divine attributes.

3) All of Allah's creation, that is, the objects and living beings,
including all human beings among whom are the messengers of Allah, are
in a relationship of servitude to their Creator, who alone is the
Master. As creatures of Allah, everything and everyone is His servant,
without possessing any part of the attributes of divinity. In this
relationship of servitude to their Creator, they are all equal.

4) Action without faith in Allah is just as useless as faith without
action. Belief in Allah, including the attributes that He has ascribed
to Himself, and in His angels, His books, His messengers, and in the
Final Judgement, whereby good and evil are appropriately recompensed, is
a precondition for meritorious actions. Their acceptance by Allah
depends on this faith in some form. Without this faith, actions are
meaningless from their very inception, incapable of acquiring any value,
rejected, and neither taken into account nor accepted by Allah.

5) In the sight of Allah only Islam is the true religion and Allah does
not accept any other faith or way of life from people. The meaning of
Islam is to worship Allah alone, to ascribe Divine attributes to no one
but to Allah alone, and then to submit to His commands and be pleased
with His judgements in human affairs and with His prescribed way of life
embodied in the Shari'ah. Islam and only Islam is the religion with
which the Creator is pleased.

6) Man, as a species, is the noblest of all the creatures on earth,
because he is the deputy of Allah on earth in the sense that to him
belong the control and management of this earth and whatever it
contains, and because there is no material value on earth that can be
raised higher than the value of man or for which man can be
sacrificed.

7) All the people on earth came from one origin, and hence, in this
regard, they are all equal. They acquire merit and rank with respect to
each other through their faith, consciousness of Allah, and good deeds.
Other criteria of distinction among people such as place of birth,
family, wealth, nationality, class, and race, have no value in the
estimation of Allah and His religion.

8) The ultimate purpose of man's existence is the worship of Allah, in
the sense of complete obedience to Allah alone. Among the require­ments
of complete obedience is to respond to His and only His commands in the
affairs of life, whether these affairs are big or small, and out of love
for Him to direct every intention, every vibration of one's heart, and
every action toward Him and Him alone. To be His

deputy on earth is the way of life and the religion for man, because
the way of life and the religion are equivalent expressions of one
reality.

9) In Islam, the basis of human groupings is belief and adherence to
the way of Allah, not ethnicity, or nationality, or country, or race, or
class, or economic and political interests, or any other earthly
cause.

10) The life of this world is a test of belief and action, and the life
in the Hereafter is a product of accounting and reward. Man is tried and
examined every moment of his earthly life in his movements and deeds, in
his reaction to whatever reaches him of good and bad or of benefit and
harm, all of which comes from Allah, Who is the final Judge.

All of these values and norms of the Islamic concept are permanent, not
subject to change or evolution. They are fixed, and the appearan­ces,
manners, and modes of individual lives move within their frame of
reference and evolve in connection with them. Their meanings are to be
realized in developing every institution of Islamic society, in every
relationship within that society, and in every organization of peoples'
affairs, individual as well as collective, under all conditions and
environments.

As the circumstances of a living society expand, so does the scope
within which the meaning of these norms and values are expressed. And as
the field of human knowledge expands, the varieties of expres­sion for
these permanent values and norms also enlarge. But the principles remain
fixed, and all these varieties of expression are governed in their
application by these principles.

To illustrate this point, let us consider the permanent reality that
man is the deputy of Allah on earth. This reality is expressed in
various forms. It is expressed when man tills the land to produce food,
and it is expressed when man smashes the atom or sends satellites into
space to investigate the earth's atmosphere or other planets. All such
activities from one end of the spectrum to the other, as well as
whatever may come in the future,

are various expressions of man's vicegerency on this earth. While the
varieties and scope of these expressions may increase and expand, the
reality of man's vicegerency on earth remains fixed and unchanged. Its
permanent nature demands that no man should be denied the dignity
belonging to him of being Allah's vicegerent on earth and sharing with
all other human beings this honor in the way prescribed by Allah, and
that his value should not be sacrificed for the sake of increasing
material production or for making spaceships. Man, every man, is the
master of the satellites and the master of material production.

Or consider the reality that the purpose of man's life is to worship
Allah. This is expressed in all his actions directed toward Allah, and
human actions are unlimited. The varieties of human actions grow and
expand with the growing and expanding demands of his vicegerency.
Similarly, the meaning of worship is attained when man implements
Allah's injunctions in the affairs of his life, and such affairs are
unlimited. They also expand with the growing and expanding demands of
his vicegerency.

But the reality of the ultimate purpose of man's existence remains
fixed and does not change. If a man does not direct all his affairs
toward Allah, and does not implement the injunc­tions of Allah in his
life, he falls short of his essential duty and removes himself from the
ultimate purpose of his existence, so that, in the estimation of Allah
and the believers, his actions become null and void, neither acceptable
nor capable of being set aright.

Thus, room for the expression and application of these values and norms
expands and the forms of expression multiply, while they remain fixed
and unchanged as constituents of the Islamic concept.

An advantage of this permanence in the constituents and norms of the
Islamic concept is that the movement of mankind and its develop­ment
remain guided rather than becoming random and chaotic, as occurred in
the life of Europe when it loosened the knots of transcen­dent belief
and ended in a miserably lost situation. With all its decep­tive luster
and false glamour, Europe hides within its fold bewilderment, defeat,
and despair.

Another value of fixed norms and standards is that man can refer to
them whatever occurs to him in feelings, thoughts, and concepts, and all
that reaches him from his surroundings, changing environments, and
connections. He can weigh them in the invariant balance of the Islamic
concept to see whether they are near or far from the truth and from
goodness. Thereby he lives always within secure boundaries, safe from
temptations to wander away into the wilderness of specula­tions, with
fixed stars to show the direction and signposts to mark the way.

Another value of a permanent “standard” for human thought is that one
can organize one's ideas with reference to it and not be swayed by
emotions and desires. If such a fixed standard did not exist, how would
one be able to refer to anything at all? If belief and values were to
change with human thought, wherever it happened to go, and with the
conditions of life, whatever they might become, how would it be possible
to have any control and any stability, since human thought and living
conditions change continually.

For the sanity of the human mind and the security of human life the
movement of our thoughts and actions must remain within the parameters
of orbit established by our Creator around a fixed axis, which itself
remains firm in the place created by Allah and does not move. This is
how this whole universe is organized, from the atoms to the galaxies,
without any exceptions to this rule.

The need for a fixed standard and unchangeable norms was never more
apparent than it is today, because people have abandoned fixed
principles and mankind is cut loose from its axis. Our situation
resembles a planet that has broken loose from its orbit and threatens to
collide with others, destroying itself as well as everything in its
path.

"Had the truth followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and
whoever is in them would have been corrupted" (Al-Muminun 23:71). Only
the person not overpowered by the madness that has gripped mankind today
is enlightened and wise. He looks at this miserable mankind, with its
false concepts and systems, and realizes that the manners, morals,
customs, and habits of people have all come off their moorings, that
people are wandering aimlessly like madmen, pulling off their clothes
and tearing them to pieces and moving feverishly from one hallucination
to another. He observes mankind changing its concepts and beliefs in the
same nonchalant manner as it changes its fashions in responding to the
advertising of fashion houses. He sees mankind screaming with pain,
laughing like a loon, running as if hunted, staggering about like a
drunk, throwing away what is precious in its hand, and grasping at
stones and dirt.

Hundreds of millions of humans have been destroyed and made into
machines in order to increase production! Human norms have been
sacrificed, together with the sense of beauty, morality, and higher
values merely so that a handful of usurers, pornographers, producers of
films, and directors of fashion houses may become rich.

Look at the faces of people and at their movements and clothes, and
then peer into their minds and survey their thoughts, opinions, and
desires, and you will find a people frightened, running away as if
hunted down, and never stopping or resting long enough to see anything
in its right and proper perspective. Indeed, they are running away,
running from their own hungry, anxious, bewildered selves, unable to
hold on to anything fixed or move in a permanent orbit around any stable
axis. But the human soul cannot live by itself, separated from the
reality of Allah's universe, nor can it be contented in such a state.
Thus it becomes shattered and wanders aimlessly, finding neither rest
nor peace.

Standing on the periphery of this miserable mankind is a gang of
exploiters whose sole aim is to profit from other peoples' miseries and
confusion. These gangsters consist of usurers, film producers,
manufacturers of fashions, and publishers of pornographic books and
magazines. Whenever they sense that mankind has had enough, has begun to
realize its mistake, and is about to find an orbit and a fixed axis,
they prod it on toward more madness and confusion. This gang, shouting
slogans of progress and liberation, without bounds and limits, shoves
mankind with both hands toward still greater chaos. What a crime, what a
horrible crime this is against the whole of mankind and especially
against the current generation!

As we explained earlier, the notion of perpetual "progress" or
advancement in all values and culture is contrary to the very basis of
the universe and of nature. Secondly, from this idea stems a
distur­bance in human affairs from which there is no refuge, because it
justifies any concept, value, or system merely because it comes later in
time. The sort of reasoning that whatever is more recent is ipso facto
more advanced is absurd and should not be employed for judging a
concept, a way of life, a value, or a system. Rather, weight should be
given only to the constituents and elements of a system and way of life,
and not to the epoch in which it appears.

We know that European thought, in its flight from the Church and in its
intense desire to be rid of this yoke, went to an extreme in its denial
of "absolutes" and in its affirmation of "change" by denying the very
concept of religious faith and revealed law. This was perhaps inevitable
when the "absolutes" of the time were manmade and obviously flawed.

We know the road that European thought followed and have described it
in some detail in an earlier chapter. We should not be too harsh in
condemning the historical course that it took, because this wrong and
blameworthy course was merely a reaction to a distorted belief, which
from the very first moment of its inception was mixed up with paganism
and mythology. At the same time, European thinkers and scientists also
had to face a corrupt and tyrannical Church which imposed conceptual
nonsense, in the name of its absolute and fixed faith, on thought,
science, and people generally.

Though we should not judge too harshly the course of Western thought
forced upon it by the tyranny of the Church, we must be clear about its
error in going to the other extreme of revolt against all fixed
principles, permanent values, and absolute truths by embracing the
notion of perpetual change and continual progress in a universe devoid
of anything absolutely true or permanently valid. This position is not
scientifically valid, but is rather a violent reaction to the tyranny of
the Church.

Darwin, who introduced the idea of evolution in the development of
living beings, only touched the superficial aspects of life, without
penetrating into its origin in the Will that brought life into being.
Even if we suppose this theory to be correct, despite the axes that
already are cutting at its very roots,[^1] all the supporting evidence
merely indicates that evolution is following a path determined by a
transcen­dent Will, without any role for randomness or chance. Evolution
is one of the laws of motion operating in this universe, and, as we
stated earlier, the natural laws governing motions within the universe
are within fixed orbits around fixed axes.

In any case, neither "the scientific method" nor "factual truths"
guided the thoughts of Darwin. He did not guide us toward the secret of
life nor did he give a scientific explanation for its appearance. He was
trying his best to avoid any reference to God. A scientific mind would
immediately recognize that the existence of life implies the existence
of the One who invented it.

And the direction of its development in harmony with its environment
implies that its Originator had a Will and a plan, was aware of what He
was doing, and was capable of translating His Will into the reality of
existence. But Darwin could not acknowledge this, because he had
revolted against the Church and was running away from the God of the
Church. He therefore ascribed the evolution of life forms to "Nature,"
which, according to him, has limitless powers.

He then tried to give the false impression that nothing, absolutely
nothing, is fixed and permanent. All his research was confined, however,
to the development of life forms after they had already emerged, and so
in no case could have been applied universally to everything.

The Marxist school is the most fantastic among the “objectivist"
schools of philosophy in opposing the idea of "movement within a stable
orbit around a fixed axis" in human affairs, although Marxism
acknowledges its validity in the material world. What then is the main
support of its claim of continual “progress?” Muhammad Al-Bahi answers
this question in the following excerpts from his book quoted above, The
New Islamic Thought and Its Connection with Modern Imperialism (pp. 311-
315):

"Marx employed the dialectic of the principles of contradiction
introduced by the German philosophers Fichte and Hegel before him. But,
while they employed it in the realm of concepts and ideas, Marx employed
this principle in the field of “economics” in relation to the history of
societies.

"In this view every 'thing' has its opposite and thus every thing
annihilates itself. This is the general principle of contradiction, but
Marx applies it to the annihilation of classes that support
‘capitalism,' just as those classes were annihilated which pre-dated the
capitalistic system. The monarchs and feudal systems collapsed,
according to Marx, because of their inherent contradictions. Thus will
the new capitalistic system collapse by producing its opposite or
contradic­tion, the communistic system, which will have but one class of
workers.

"According to this logic, the principle of contradiction does not stop
after producing the opposite of a 'thing,' but continues onwards by a
synthesis of the two, which brings about a new 'thing,' which again
produces its opposite, and so on. But, contrary to its own logic,
Marxism expects that after the communistic system comes into being it
will not collapse by producing its opposite.

"Adopting the Hegelian principle of contradiction, Marxism explains
that everything contains two opposing forces: if one of them is termed
'the thesis,' the other is 'the antithesis.' These two opposites
annihilate each other; but out of this mutual destruction is produced
the synthesis of the thesis and antithesis. The synthesis is again a new
thing, which produces its opposite and a new synthesis, and so on, ad
infinitum.

"Now Marxism takes this principle and applies it to human history,
arguing that communism, as a social system, is at a higher level than
any previous social system. The hierarchical system, with the king's
lords on one side and the subjects on the other, produces a conflict
between these two classes and is annihilated to produce the synthesis,
which is the feudal system. The feudal system, with the land-lords on
one side and the peasants on the other, produces a conflict between
these two classes and is in turn annihilated to give birth to the
synthesis, which is the capitalistic system.

Now, says Marxism, the capitalistic system, with the capitalists on one
side and the workers on the other, will produce a conflict between these
two classes and will in its turn be annihilated to give birth to the
synthesis, namely, the communistic system consisting of but one class.

"The question is why should the principle of contradiction stop its
operation at this stage? Why should not the communist system, by the
inexorable logic of this principle, produce its opposite, then a
conflict of the two, and then a new system?

"Furthermore, according to Marxism, every new synthesis produces a
superior social system. Hence, the feudal system is superior to
monarchy, capitalism is better than feudalism, and finally com­munism is
better than capitalism.

"This claim that every system is superior to its predecessor is tooted
very loudly by the communist propagandists, and many simple­minded
persons fall for this propaganda believing that whatever comes later in
time is superior to what has gone before and that they will be working
for a world that will be better than the one that they found."

From the above it ought to be very clear that Marxism is founded on
dogmatic assertions and has nothing to do with facts or historical
reality. To begin with, the principle of contradiction as formulated by
Fichte and Hegel is a purely intellectual construct, having no roots in
fact. Marx takes this principle and applies it to history, disregarding
all elements or factors of human societies except the economic, thus
sparing himself the trouble of demonstrating the validity of this
principle in other aspects of societal developments. Next, he takes the
economic element, which despite its importance is by no means the sole
factor in the development of human societies, and traces the history of
a single group of people, the Europeans, in an extremely simplified
fashion by emphasizing only a few aspects of it.

How could this one man, living for a limited span of time in a
particular place and society, comprehend the infinitely many causes and
influences operat­ing on millions of people over several centuries? But
he chooses one aspect of this complex and multi-dimensional history,
throwing away all other aspects, and then issues a dogmatic judgement
that what came later in time is better than what came before it.
Furthermore, he does not even try to be consistent with himself,

but abruptly brings the historical process to a complete stop as soon
as it reaches communism. Why should the historical process stop here,
one may ask, depriving mankind of better and superior systems that ought
to follow com­munism? In addition to this obvious incoherence in the
very founda­tion of this dogmatic system based on wishful thinking,
there is a madness in the ordering of values which is not limited only
to its followers but has also gripped its opponents both in Europe and
in America.

This madness is the craze to discard everything from the past and to
embrace everything new, to remove all restrictions in the way of
fulfilling desires and passions, and to mock everything traditional
whether in the moral or in any other sphere. For the Marxist regimes,
this madness is pre-planned and has a definite objective.

To advocate continual change is merely an excuse for doing whatever one
wants to do. In particular, when it is advocated by “the State" it means
that the government wants an excuse to take away from people all the
fixed reference points and established values against which the actions
of the government may be judged. When there are no established rights or
fixed constitutional guarantees, where can the people find any refuge?

While the government enjoys the freedom to deal with individuals as it
pleases, it encourages individuals to indulge in their desires and to
pursue bodily pleasures as a replacement for their usurped rights,
usurped values, and usurped freedoms. On the one hand this madness
justifies complete license for animalistic lusts, and on the other
com­plete license for dictatorship, one in exchange for the other. And
this deal is transacted between the parties, in technical jargon, the
"people" and the "state."

In communist societies this deal is rooted in a discrete "philosophy"
and "scientific" system, namely, the "principle of contradiction" and'
'dialectic materialism." And yet this "scientific" system dares to
declare that religion is the opiate of the masses invented to serve the
ruling cliques.

The characteristics of having "permanent realities" and fixed values in
the Islamic system is a guarantee that the Islamic society will' 'move
within a fixed orbit around a fixed axis" and that Islamic thought and
action will be consonant with the system of the universe in general,
thereby remaining immune to the evil perturbations of man's whims, which
would destroy even the universe if it were to follow man's ever changing
desires.

This characteristic of Islam keeps Islamic thought and Islamic society
safe from the kind of madness that has gripped Marxist thought and
socialist societies. Indeed, since the day they let themselves loose
from the anchor of faith, Western thought and Western societies in
general have been affected by this madness, even though they are opposed
to Marxism on religious and political grounds.

The characteristic of "permanence" in the beliefs and values of Islam
produces a deep sense of security in the conscience of the Muslim as
well as in the Muslim society. This sense of security comes from the
knowledge that the orbit and the axis of the Muslim's life are firm. A
Muslim understands that his every step is a step forward, directed
toward a goal; that his movements are connected in time, stretching from
yesterday through today toward tomorrow; and that his action is
purposeful, ascending sequentially toward spiritual heights, under the
firm guidance of Allah's will.

Finally, the unchanging character of Islamic values guarantees for the
Muslim certain inalienable rights and basic freedoms to which he and the
judges and governors over him can and must refer. The governors are not
free to change the constituents and the values of Islam, nor to lure the
people toward lusts and physical pleasures in order to take their minds
off the existing political oppression or financial ineptitude.

The Islamic concept stands firm on the basis of the policy that for the
life of man there are but two states of being, and that these states are
independent of time and place. Their respective values are intrinsic to
them, because they are determined by Allah's just balance, which remains
unaffected by temporal and spatial changes in man's condition.

There are only two possibilities for the life of a people, no matter in
what time and place they live. These are the state of guidance or the
state of error, whatever form the error may take; the state of truth or
the state of falsehood, whatever may be the varieties of falsehood; the
state of light or the state of darkness, regardless of the shades of
darkness; the state of obedience to the Divine guidance or the state of
following whims, no matter what varieties of whims there may be; the
state of Islam or the state of jahiliyyah, without regard to the forms
of jahiliyyah; and the state of belief or the state of unbelief, of
whatever kind. People live either according to Islam, following it as a
way of life and a socio-political system, or else in the state of
unbelief, jahiliyyah, whim, darkness, falsehood, and error.

The din of Allah is Islam (submission to His will) (Ale 'Imran 3:
19).

And if anyone seeks a religion other than Al- Islam (submis­sion to
Allah), never will it be accepted from him (Ale 'Imran 3:85).

After the truth, what is there but error? (Yunus 10:32).

And now We have set you on a clear way (shari'ah) of (Our) command; so
follow it, and follow not the whims of those who do not know
(Al-]athiyah 45: 18).

This is My straight path, so follow it. Follow not other ways, lest you
be parted from His way (Al-An 'am 6: 153).

Allah is the Protecting Friend of those who believe. He brings them out
of darkness into light. As for those who disbelieve, their patrons are
false deities. They bring them out of light into darkness (Al-Baqarah
2:257).

Then if any persons do not judge by what Allah has revealed, they are
disbelievers (Al-Mai'dah 5:47).

Do they desire [to be ruled by] the pagan ignorance? But for people who
have inner certainty, who could be a better lawgiver than Allah?
(Al-Ma'idah 5:50).

And if you have a dispute concerning any matter, refer it to Allah and
the Messenger, if you are believers in Allah and the Last Day (Al-Nisa
4:59).

When this framework is firmly in place, then life in its thought,
concept, practice, and system, can move within clear boundaries freely
and flexibly. Man can then respond to every natural and healthy
development, directed by the Islamic concept, which itself remains firm
and strong.

The great value of this state of guidance is that the root of all the
Muslim's concepts and ideas are firmly planted in his soul so that the
Islamic life and the Muslim society can stand on the framework of the
din erect and firm. At the same time this framework leaves sufficient
space for the natural growth and development of ideas and feelings and
of methodologies and institutions. It neither puts an iron jacket around
the Muslim society, which the Church intended for Christian society
during the Middle Ages, nor does it free the society from every
restriction so it can behave like a meteor in the sky or like a herd of
stampeding buffaloes. This latter analogy fits the recent history of
Europe, culminating in the chaotic Marxist way of thinking.

This state of guidance was the very characteristic that kept the Muslim
society cohesive and strong for more than a thousand years, in spite of
being shaken, beaten, and savagely attacked by all kinds of external and
internal enemies in every time and place. The weakness and decline in
the Muslim societies did not start until they began to lose confidence
in the unchangeability and perfection of the fun­damentals of Islam, so
that the enemies of Islam could succeed in convincing the Muslims to set
aside the Islamic ideas and replace them with Western ideas.[^2]

No doubt, any society will be subject to violent swings from one
extreme to the other if it has no firm roots in reality and follows
ever-changing ideas and concepts originating in limited human
understanding based on guess work, speculation, and false hypotheses.
Such a society inevitably will set up this speculative knowledge or its
own changing whim as a false god and derive its values and standards
from this new idol. Such a society can only remain confused in ideas,
disturbed in conscience, fatigued in nerves, and aimless in life, with
its entire foundation resting on the shaky ground of illusion.

This is exactly what happened to European societies after they broke
their ties with every firm principle, and this is exactly what is
afflicting the whole of mankind today. Not only Europeans, but all the
societies of the world today are lost in a wilderness.[^3]

Such a concept with permanent constituents and fixed values, must come
from a source with firm knowledge and will, which sees every area and
every direction, and from which the curves of the road are not hidden.
Such a source necessarily does not decide something today to find out
the next day that it was faulty and in error, nor is it affected by
lust, nor are its decisions influenced by whims and desires. Once such a
concept from such a source is firmly established, then there is no harm
in movement, change, development, growth, and progress, because all this
becomes desirable, secure, and natural, based on the principle of
movement within an orbit around a fixed axis. The movement will then be
guided and enlightened, will aim at achieving a noble purpose, and will
proceed with steady, straight, and firm steps. This guarantees that the
society will have a long, purposeful, and harmonious life.

There is no need for us to state that all this does not mean that the
Islamic society is frozen in a strait jacket. This is very remote from
the Islamic concept and sense of purpose.

"The movement within an orbit around a fixed axis" is not a "frozen"
movement nor is the life of such a society devoid of change and
progress. The main principle here is the' 'movement," because this is
the main principle in the pattern of the universe. The Universe does not
freeze or become still. To the contrary, it is always moving, changing,
developing, and at every moment taking new forms, but it moves while
conserving its mass and energy as mentioned earlier.

When we study the Western schools of thought and find that they are
dominated by the ideas of absolute “progress," without referring back to
some fixed principle, we should be aware of the historical circumstances
that propelled Western thought in this direction. We ought to be aware
of the resulting enmity, both deep and hidden, against all religion,
which has penetrated this thought and colored its entire concept.

It is wrong to apply the methodologies and philosophies of Western
thought to Islam, or to seek from it any help whatsoever for the
discussion of Islamic subjects and history.

Some of us take something from Western thought, sometimes its
methodology, sometimes its conclusions, and sometimes just a worn-­out
piece of paper, and then intermingle it with a discussion of Islam, or
of its society, or its way of thought and concept. This is pure
ignorance, and arrogance to boot, if it is dressed up as "scholarship."
Sometimes there is even malice behind this ignorance and triviality.

Muhammad Asad (Leopold Weiss) says in his book, Islam at the
Crossroads: "History tells us that all human culture and civilizations
are organic entities and resemble living beings. They experience all the
phases through which organic life is bound to pass: they are born, they
have youth, ripe age, and at the end comes decay, like plants that
wither and fall to dust. Cultures die at the end of their time and give
room to other, freshly born ones.

"Is this the case with Islam? It would appear so at a first superficial
look. No doubt, Islamic culture has had its splendid rise and its
blossoming age, and it had the power to inspire men to great deeds and
sacrifice. It transformed nations and changed the face of the earth, and
later it stood still and became stagnant. And then it became an empty
word, so that at present we witness its utter debasement and decay. But
is this all?

"If we believe that Islam is not a mere culture among many others, not
a mere outcome of human thoughts and endeavors, but a Law decreed by God
Almighty to be followed by humanity at all times and everywhere, then
one's perspective changes totally. If Islamic culture is or was the
result of our following a revealed law, we can never admit that, like
other cultures, it is chained to the lapse of time and limited to a
particular period. What appears to be the decay of Islam is in reality
nothing but the death and emptiness of our hearts which are too idle and
too lazy to hear the eternal voice. No sign is available that mankind,
in its present stature, has outgrown Islam.

It has not been able to produce a better system of ethics than that
expressed in Islam. It has not been able to put the idea of human
brotherhood on a practical footing, as Islam did in its supra-national
concept of ummah. It has not been able to create a social structure in
which the conflicts and frictions among its members are as efficiently
reduced to a minimum as in the social plan of Islam. And it has not been
able to enhance the dignity of man, his feeling of security, his
spiritual hope, and last, but surely not least, his happiness.

"In all these things the present achievements of the human race fall
considerably short of the Islamic program. Where, then is the
justifica­tion for saying that Islam is "out of date?" Is it only
because its foundations are purely religious, and religious orientation
is out of fashion today? But if we see that a system based on religion
in the Islamic sense of din has been able to evolve a practical program
of life more complete, more concrete, and more congenial to man's
constitu­tion than any other thing the human mind has been able to
produce by way of reforms and proposals, is not precisely this a very
weighty argument in favor of the enlightened, religious outlook?

"Islam, we have every reason to believe, has been fully vindicated by
the positive achievements of man and indeed pointed them out as
desirable long before they were attained. Equally, it has been
vindi­cated by the shortcomings, errors, and pitfalls of human
development, because it loudly and clearly warned against them long
before mankind recognized them as errors. Quite apart from one's
religious beliefs, there is, from a purely intellectual view-point,
every induce­ment to follow confidently the practical guidance of
Islam.

"We need not 'reform' Islam, as some Muslims think, for it is already
perfect in itself. What we must reform is our attitude toward religion,
our laziness, our self-conceit, our shortsightedness, in one word, our
defects, and not some supposed defects of Islam.

"Islam, as a spiritual and social institution, cannot be 'improved.' In
these circumstances, any change in its conceptions or its social
organization caused by the intrusion of foreign cultural influences is
in reality retrograde and destructive, and therefore to be deeply
regretted. A change there must be, but a change from within ourselves,
and it should go in the direction of Islam, and not away from it."[^4]

We assert that the loss from intermingling Islam with Western secular
thought is not merely that of the Muslims, but of all humanity. Humanity
will lose the only remaining source of guidance from Allah Most High, by
confounding its teachings, and by polluting, or rather poisoning, the
clear, clean spring of Divine revelation. The whole of mankind will lose
by being deprived of the firm and reliable source of reference in a
world shaking in the winds of random thoughts, and in which corruption
has appeared in the land and sea by what men have wrought by their own
hands. There is no refuge for mankind except in this preserved and pure
source coming directly from the Creator Himself.

Those who are trying to undermine the last refuge, in the name of
reform and progress, or in the name of getting rid of medieval heritage
or in some other name, are indeed the real enemies of mankind. These are
the people who should be rejected and thrown out, not only by us, but by
every other member of the human race!

They imagine that they are speaking in the name of "progressive" versus
“reactionary" ideas, while in fact they are picking up the intellectual
crumbs from European thinkers of the nineteenth or even eighteenth
century. They have not yet even reached the twentieth century! They are
at least fifty years behind the times.

Many do not know that while they are still in prostration before the
Marxist philosophy of dialectic materialism and its derivatives, and the
Dar­winian theory of evolution and its implications, there have
appeared, in Europe itself, ideas and tendencies that are in opposition
to Marxism and Darwinism.

These people themselves are "reactionaries" while claiming to be
"progressive." Real progress today is possible only if we recognize our
obligation to return to the truths of religion, seeking from them
certainty, comfort, and spiritual solace, after three centuries of
confusion, pain, and spiritual bewilderment.

If we, whom Allah has saved from those historical forces that afflicted
Western thought and led it into a wilderness of confusion, now jump into
this wilderness without any historical or intellectual reason, we must
be considered the worst of fools. Such an act of stupidity would not be
a loss to ourselves alone, but would be a great loss for the whole of
the human race, because we would have lost that source of reference to
which we might return one day to find therein peace of mind and
spiritual comfort after anxiety and fatigue.

In this serious situation confronting mankind today, we should
recognize the great responsibility that rests on our shoulders, not only
in relation to ourselves, but to the rest of mankind.

[^1] Refer to Julian Huxley: The Challenges of Modern Science to Human
Action and Belief, Chatto and Windus, London, 1931. [See also Clinging
to A Myth: The Story Behind Evolution, American Trust Publications,
1991. Editor]

[^2] Refer to Muhammad Qutb, Are We Muslims?

[^3] Refer to Al-Islam Wa Al-Mushkilat Al-Hadarah

[^4] Mohammed Asad, Islam at the Crossroads. Ashraf Publications, Lahore
(1955), pp. 150-155.


