Chapter Iii : the Divine Origin of the Islamic Concept
======================================================

Say: Surely my Lord has guided me to the straight way (Al-An 'am
6:151).

Divine origination is the foremost characteristic of the Islamic
concept and the source of all other characteristics, for this
belief-­concept has been revealed by Allah Most High. The Islamic
concept is confined to this one Source, not taking anything from anyone
else. It is therefore entirely different from philosophical concepts,
which originate in human minds, about the reality of God, the reality of
existence, the reality of man, and the connections among these
realities. It is also different from pagan beliefs, which originate in
human emotion, imagination, and superstition.

An objective scholar can say with conviction that among all belief-
concepts only the Islamic concept has remained as it was revealed by
Allah, true to its origin in Allah Himself. Other Divinely-revealed
concepts, with which the messengers of Allah before Muhammad came, were
corrupted in some way or another, as we explained earlier.

Interpolations, additions to the originally-revealed principles,
far­fetched interpretations, and information from human sources are so
intermingled with the texts of their scriptures that their "Divine"
characteristic is lost. Islam alone remains with its principal sources
intact, untouched by foreign pollutants, and without any mixture of
falsehood in its truths. Allah's promise concerning it remains
fulfilled:

Surely We have sent down the Message, and surely We are its guardian
(Al-Hijr 15:9).

This is an established fact, which gives this concept a unique value.

Philosophical concepts and belief-concepts, as such, have differing
approaches. A philosophical concept originates in the thought of a man,
the one who formulates it, in an attempt to explain the world and man's
relationship with it. But such a concept remains in the cold realm of
ideas. A belief-concept on the other hand, proceeds from the conscience,
interacting with feelings and intermingling with practical life, because
it is a living relationship between man and the world, or between man
and the Creator of the world.

The Islamic concept differs further from other belief-concepts due to
its Divine origin. It is not a concept originated by man, but comes
directly from Allah. Mankind received it in its entirety from its
Creator.

No man, or men, invented it, as is the case with pagan or philosophical
concepts, despite their mutual differences. Man's action concerning the
Islamic concept is to receive it with gratitude, to understand it, adapt
to it, and apply it to all affairs of life.

The Divine utterances constituting the Qur'an, which bring this concept
to us, are all from Allah as a gift from Him and a mercy. The thought of
all the Messengers of Allah is the same, since all of them received the
same Islamic concept in its original form but none of them shared in its
origination. Rather they received this concept as a guide for them and
through them for others. This guidance is a gift from Allah by means of
which minds are opened. The duty of a Messenger, any Messenger, with
respect to this concept is to communicate it accurately to others and
propagate it faithfully and diligently, without mixing any human
ideas -referred to in the Qur'an as ahwa or "whims" -with Divine
revelations. Whether the people are guided through his efforts and
whether their minds are opened to its message are not the Messenger's
concern.

And thus have We by our command sent inspiration to you. You did not
know [before] what Revelation is and what is faith, but We have made the
[Qur'an] a light, whereby We guide whom we deem suitable of our
servants. And truly you guide [men] onto the straight path, the path of
Allah, to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and on earth. Surely
unto Allah all things return. (Al- Shura 42: 52-53).

By the star when it sets, your comrade (Muhammad) is not astray;
neither does he err, nor does he speak out of whim. This is nothing but
a revelation revealed (Al-Nairn 53: 1-4).

If he (Muhammad) were to invent any false sayings about Us, We would
surely seize him by his right hand and cut off the artery of his heart,
and not one of you could have defended him (Al-Haqqah 69:44-47).

O Messenger, make known what has been sent down to you from your Lord,
for if you do not do so, you will not have conveyed His message
(Al-Ma'idah 5:67).

It is true that you will not be able to guide everyone you love, but
Allah guides whomever He will. And He knows best those who receive
guidance (Al-Qasas 28:56).

If Allah wishes to guide anyone, He opens his breast to Islam, and if
He wishes to let anyone go astray He makes his breast closed and narrow,
as if he had to climb up to the skies. Thus does Allah inflict horror
upon those who do not believe (Al-An'arn 7: 125).

We cannot overemphasize the point that it is the Source of this concept
that makes it precious and great, because it is the only trustworthy
Source, free of defect, ignorance, and whim. Defect, ignorance, and whim
are characteristics of human ideas and actions and, as we saw, are
embodied in all the conceptual paradigms molded by men, such as
mythologies and philosophies, and in the concepts interpolated by men
into the revealed beliefs of earlier times. This Source of the Islamic
concept is a guarantee that it accords with human nature, responds to it
from all directions, and provides for all its needs. Furthermore, from
this concept proceeds the straightest and the most comprehensive way of
life.

The fact that the Islamic concept did not originate in human thought
does not mean that it is outside the domain of the human intellect or
that rational thought is prohibited in Islam. Its divine origin,
however, does imply that it is the task of human thought to receive it,
grasp its significance, adapt to it, and then translate it into action.
As was pointed out in the introductory chapter entitled, "A Word About
Methodology," there is a correct method of receiving it, and this is as
follows.

Allah does not want humans to receive this Divinely-revealed concept
within the context of previous norms, whether these come from other
sources or from their own ideas, and then to judge this concept by them
or measure it in their scale. Indeed, human thought should receive all
its norms and standards from this very concept, rejecting all the
previous norms and standards that do not conform to it. Man should not
accept any norms and standards from any other source, but should correct
all incompatible norms and standards by using the method prescribed by
this concept, which originates from the Divine Source.

And then, whatever comes to a person's mind of feelings and ideas,
values and concepts, and of the affairs of the worldly life, he should
refer to the truths and standards of the Islamic concept in order to
know what is true and what is false, and what is right and what is
wrong.

If you have a dispute concerning any matter, refer it to Allah and the
Messenger (Al-Nisa' 4:59).

An inherent and central part of the Islamic concept is that human
reason is a great and valuable faculty to which is assigned the task of
understanding the characteristics and constituents of this concept
originating from their Divine Source. From them it is the task of human
reason to deduce values and norms, without adding to them anything from
external sources and without distorting or impairing them in anyway.
Furthermore, teachers of the Islamic method of training go to great
lengths to sharpen and develop this great faculty of man, the intellect,
to protect it from being wasted in futile pursuits, and to prompt it
toward action in all the numerous fields for which it is equipped.[^1]

Although the intellect has the prime responsibility to receive and
absorb this concept, other human faculties also participate in this
task. Due to its Divine origin, this concept is characterized by the
fact that it addresses the personality of man in its entirety and is
totally within man's comprehension.

Even if certain aspects of this concept relating to the ultimate
questions of what, why, and how are beyond human comprehension, they are
not contrary to human reason, as are the' 'mysteries" of other
religions, and the concept itself is totally within the realm of human
reason and logic. Human logic can never surrender itself to a
con­tradiction, and there are no contradictions in the Islamic concept.
But human reason knows when to surrender in the presence of a simple
fact.

The simple fact is that the domain of the Islamic concept includes
matters, such as the Person and the attributes of Allah, the operation
of Allah's will, and its connection with His creation, that are beyond
the reach of human perception. This is the domain of the Ultimate, the
Free and the Absolute, whereas man, a mortal creature, is cir­cumscribed
in time and space and is impotent in perceiving the infinite and in
knowing the totality of being.

O company of jinn and of men, if you can penetrate through the regions
of the heavens and the earth, then penetrate through them! You shall not
penetrate through them except with authority (Al-Rahman 55:33).

Vision comprehends Him not but He comprehends vision. He is the Subtle
and Aware (Al-An 'am 6: 103).

In fact, man as a whole, and not merely his thought, is impotent to
cross these boundaries. His task is to receive these truths gratefully
from Allah, the Absolute and All-Knowing, within the limits of his
nature and of his assigned task.

Man by nature is a creature, bound within the limits of his divinely
­given capacities, and he is mortal. He is neither absolute nor
all-knowing, nor is he from pre-eternity. Hence his perception is
necessarily limited by the limits of his created nature. It is further
limited by his assigned task. His task is to be the deputy of Allah on
earth in order to establish therein the true worship of Allah alone, as
will be explained later, and therefore he has been given a capacity of
perception just sufficient, neither more nor less, to perform his
task.

There are numerous matters not needed to discharge his responsibility,
and therefore he has not been given the power to grasp them in their
what-ness and how-ness, but he is nonetheless capable of grasping their
possibility. This is because he knows on the one hand that Allah's will
is absolutely free, and on the other that he himself is a mortal
creature, neither absolute nor all-knowing, and that therefore it is not
possible for him to completely grasp the attributes of the Eternal, the
One Who com­prehends everything.

The Qur'an mentions some aspects of reality that man has not been given
the power to understand, because either they are not within the limits
of his finite nature or else their knowledge is not needed in the
performance of his assigned task. The Qur'an also describes how a
sincere believer receives these aspects and how a crooked mind reacts to
them. Among these aspects is the Person of Allah Most High. The human
being cannot comprehend His Person, nor does he know of anything in
Allah's Creation with which to compare Him, or to make analogy with
him.

Vision comprehends Him not but He comprehends vision (Al-An 'am
6:103).

There is nothing like Him (Al-Shura 42: 11).

So do not make any analogy to Allah (Al-Nahl 16:74).

Another aspect of reality is the relationship of Allah's will with His
creation.

He (Zakariyyah) said, "My Lord, how can I have a son when I have grown
old and my wife is barren?" (The angel) answered, "Thus (it will be),
Allah does what He wills" (Ale 'Imran 3:40).

She (Mary) said, "My Lord, how can I have a child when no mortal (man)
has touched me?" (The angel) answered, "Thus (it will be). Allah creates
what He wills. When He decides a thing, He says only 'Be', and it is"
(Ale 'Imran 3:47).

This is stated without describing how it comes into being, because
description would have been beyond our understanding. Anyone who has
tried to describe how creation from nothing took place has succeeded
only in being unintelligible and has had to resort to some analogy from
the sphere of human action. To what extent then can one deviate?

Among other aspects of the Islamic concept relating to ultimate matters
is "the spirit" in any of its three meanings, namely, "life," "Jibril,"
and “revelation."

They ask you concerning the spirit; say, "The spirit is by command of
my Lord; and of knowledge you have been given but little" (Al-Isra
17:85).

A large part of the Islamic concept relates to the “Unseen Realities"
(Al-ghaib), which are hidden from the perception of man, except for what
Allah has deemed proper to reveal to some of His servants:

And with Him are the keys of the Unseen; none knows them but He (Al-An
'am 6:59).

Knower is He of the Unseen, and He does not disclose the Unseen to
anyone except one who is pleasing to Him among Messengers (Al-Jinn
72:26-27).

No soul knows what it will earn tomorrow, and no soul knows in what
land it will die (Luqman 31: 34).

In particular, among the elements of the Unseen is the time of the Last
Hour:

Surely with Allah is knowledge of the Hour (Luqman 31:34).

They ask you concerning the Hour: when will it come to pass? Why do
they ask? What have you to tell about it? Unto your Lord is the final
end of it. You are only a warner to him who fears it. On the day when
they see it, it will be as if they had tarried for only an evening, or
[at most until] the following morning (Al-Nazi 'at 79:42-46).

Nay, but it will come upon them unawares so that it will stupefy them,
and they will be unable to repel it, nor will they be reprieved
(Al-Anbiya 21 :40).

Allah Most High clarifies how these and similar matters beyond human
perception should be received:

He it is Who has revealed to you the Book wherein are verses clear.
They are the essence of the Book, and still others are allegorical. As
for those in whose heart is crookedness, they pursue the allegorical
part, seeking dis­sension, and seeking its (hidden) interpretations. But
no one knows its (hidden) interpretations except Allah. And those of
firm knowledge say' 'We believe in it; all of it is from our Lord." But
no one will (truly) grasp the Message except men of understanding. Our
Lord, make not our hearts swerve after You have guided us, and bestow
upon us mercy from Yourself, indeed You are the Bestower of all things
(Ale 'Imran 3:7-8).

With the exception of these elements or aspects of the Islamic concept,
which man can never fully comprehend, human thought, or human
perception, in its comprehensive meaning, is called upon to think and
ponder upon all the signs (ayat) of Allah both in the Qur'an and in the
created universe, to see and learn, to understand and then to apply the
implications of the Islamic concept in the world of conscience and in
the world of events. This all-inclusive concept opens up before every
individual numerous vistas of positive action.

No religion other than Islam shows so much concern for awakening the
human faculty of perception, for nourishing it with sublime ideas,
arousing it to action, liberating it from superstition and nonsense, and
freeing it from the shackles of priest-craft and the occult arts, while,
at the same time protecting it from being scattered in domains that are
beyond its ken and from stumbling over the intellectual trash in the
wilderness of speculation. No religion has done all this except Islam.

And no religion other than Islam has directed man's vision toward
Allah's laws operating within the human self and in the outside world,
toward the nature of the physical universe and toward the nature of man,
with all its hidden potentialities and noble traits, and toward the law
of Allah in the life of nations as revealed inexorably in history. No
religion has directed human perception toward all these as has Islam.
For training the human mind and for keeping its perception and judgement
on a straight path, the Qur'an says:

And never concern yourself with anything of which you have no
knowledge. Verily, [your] hearing, and sight, and heart will all be
called to account for doing so (Al-Isra 17:36).

O you who believe! Avoid suspicion as much as possible, for suspicion
in some cases is a sin (Al- Hujurat 49: 12).

Most of them follow nothing but speculation. Assuredly speculation has
nothing to do with the truth (Yunus 10:36).

They have no knowledge whatsoever of that; they do merely conjecture
(Al-Zukhruf 4 3: 20).

And to encourage awareness of the laws of Allah evident in the history
of mankind and in the rise and fall of nations, the Qur'an warns:

Say: Travel in the land and see how He originated creation, then will
Allah bring forth a later creation. Verily, Allah is able to do all
things (Al- 'Ankabut 29:20).

Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what was the end of
those who were before them? They were stronger than them in power, and
they dug the earth and built upon it more than these have built. Their
Messengers came to them with clear proofs. Surely Allah did not wrong
them, but they wronged themselves. Then evil was the consequence of
those who dealt in evil, because they denied the revelations of Allah
and mocked at them (Al-­Rum 30:9-10).

Do they not see how We visit the land, reducing it from its borders
(Al-R 'ad 13:41).

Such examples are numerous in the Qur'an and, taken together, they
provide a complete methodology for educating and training the faculties
of human perception and for developing them in the right way. In the
following chapters many more instances of this methodol­ogy will be
presented as the occasion arises.

Surely, Allah Most High, the fashioner of the human being, knows the
nature and extent of human faculties. He knows what capability man has
been given to understand the laws of the physical universe and to
control the forces of nature in order to carry out the tasks of his
vicegerency on the earth, just as He also knows what is concealed from
man of the secrets of “life," i.e. what are his body and brain, how they
came about, and how they function, and the secrets of his mind or soul
and of his spirit. Even the connection between his intellectual and
spiritual functions and his bodily functions is to a large extent still
unknown to him. This point has been set forth for us in a frank, sincere
manner by one of the greatest of the twentieth century's specialists,
Dr. Alexis Carrel, who in his book, Man the Unknown, says:

Indeed, mankind has made a gigantic effort to know itself. Although we
possess the treasure of the observations ac­cumulated by the scientists,
the philosophers, the poets, and the great mystics of all times, we have
grasped only certain aspects of ourselves. We do not apprehend man as a
whole. We know him as composed of distinct parts. And even these parts
are created by our methods. Each one of us is made up of a procession of
phantoms, in the midst of which strides an unknowable reality.

In fact, our ignorance is profound. Most of the questions put to
themselves by those who study human beings remain without answer.
Immense regions of our inner world are still unknown. How do the
molecules of chemical substan­ces associate in order to form the complex
and temporary organs of the cell? How do the genes contained in the
nucleus of a fertilized ovum determine the characteristics of the
individual deriving from the ovum? How do cells organize themselves by
their own efforts into societies, such as the tissues and organs? Like
the ants and the bees, they have advance knowledge of the part they are
destined to play in the life of the community.

And hidden mechanisms enable them to build up an organism both complex
and simple. What is the nature of our duration, of psychological time,
and of physiological time? We know that we are a compound of tissues,
organs, fluids, and consciousness. But the relations between
consciousness and cerebrum are still a mystery. We lack almost entirely
a knowledge of the physiology of nervous cells. To what extent does will
power modify the organism? How is the mind influenced by the state of
the organs? In what manner can the organic and mental characteristics,
which each individual inherits, be changed by the mode of life, the
chemical substances contained in food, the climate, and the
physiological and moral disciplines?

We are very far from knowing what relations exist between skeleton,
muscles, and organs, and mental and spiritual activities. We are
ignorant of the factors that bring about nervous equilibrium and
resistance to fatigue and to dis­eases. We do not know how moral sense,
judgment, and audacity could be augmented. What is the relative
impor­tance of intellectual, moral, and mystical activities? What is the
significance of esthetics and religious sense? What form of energy is
responsible for telepathic communica­tions? Without any doubt, certain
physiological and mental factors determine happiness or misery, success,
or failure. But we do not know what they are.

We cannot artificially give to any individual the aptitude for
happiness. As yet, we do not know what environment is the most favorable
for the optimum development of civilized man. Is it pos­sible to
suppress struggle, effort, and suffering from our physiological and
spiritual formation? How can we prevent the degeneracy of man in modern
civilization?

Many other questions could be asked on subjects that are to us of
utmost interest. They would also remain unanswered. It is quite evident
that the accomplishments of all the sciences having man as an object
remain insufficient, and that our knowledge of ourselves is still most
rudimentary."[^2]

This is how great our ignorance is concerning both the most obscure and
the most obvious aspects of the reality of "man," as elucidated by one
of the greatest scientists of the twentieth century, whose scholarship
is undisputed and whose place among scholars, old and new, is
unquestioned. All of these questions are dealt with by the Islamic
concept.

In the view of Alexis Carrel, the reasons for this ignorance are many.
His view, which we support only in part, is based on the scientific
method as known in the West and on his upbringing in Western society and
in the atmosphere of “scientific research" with its typical limita­tions
in the context of Western thought, which are frankly admitted by him in
the “Preface."

Our ignorance may be attributed, at the same time, to the mode of
existence of our ancestors, to the complexity of our nature, and to the
structure of our mind."[^3]

He elaborates on the first two reasons, with which we are not concerned
here. About the third reason, he says:

There is another reason for the slow progress of the knowledge of
ourselves. Our mind is so constructed as to delight in contemplating
simple facts. We feel a kind of repugnance in attacking such a complex
problem as that of the constitution of living beings and of man. The
intellect, as Bergson wrote, is characterized by a natural inability to
comprehend life. On the contrary, we love to discover in the cosmos the
geometrical forms that exist in the depths of our consciousness. The
exactitude of the proportions of our monuments and the precision of our
machines express a fundamental character of our mind. Geometry does not
exist in the earthly world. It has originated in ourselves.

The methods of nature are never so precise as those of men. We do not
find in the universe the clearness and accuracy of our thought. We
attempt, therefore, to abstract from the complexity of phenomena some
simple systems whose components bear to one another certain relations
suscep­tible to being described mathematically.

This power of abstraction of the human intellect is respon­sible for
the amazing progress of physics and chemistry. A similar success has
rewarded the physicochemical study of living beings. The laws of
chemistry and of physics are identical in the world of living things and
in that of in­animate matter, as Claude Bernard thought long ago.

This fact explains why modern physiology has discovered, for example,
that the constancy of the alkalinity of the blood and of the water of
the ocean is expressed by identical laws, that the energy spent by the
contracting muscle is supplied by the fermentation of sugar, etc. The
physicochemical aspects of human beings are almost as easy to
investigate as those of the other objects of the terrestrial world. Such
is the task that general physiology succeeds in accomplishing.

The study of the truly physiological phenomena, that is, of those
resulting from the organization of living matter ­meets with more
important obstacles. On account of the extreme smallness of the things
to be analyzed, it is impos­sible to use the ordinary techniques of
physics and of chemistry. What method could bring to light the chemical
constitution of the nucleus of the sexual cells, of its chromosomes, and
of the genes that compose these chromosomes? Nevertheless, those very
minute aggregates of chemicals are of capital importance, because they
con­tain the future of the individual and of the race.

The fragility of certain tissues, such as the serious substance, is so
great that to study them in the living state is almost impossible. We do
hot possess any technique capable of penetrating the mysteries of the
brain, and of the harmonious association of its cells. Our mind, which
loves the simple beauty of mathematical formulas, is bewildered when it
con­templates the stupendous mass of cells, humors, and con­sciousness
that make up the individual.

We try, therefore, to apply to this compound the concepts that have
proved useful in the realm of physics, chemistry, and mechanics, and in
the philosophical and religious disciplines. Such an attempt does not
meet with much success, because we can be reduced neither to a
physicochemical system nor to a spiritual entity. Of course, the science
of man has to use the concepts of all the other sciences. But it must
also develop its own. For it is as fundamental as the sciences of the
molecules, the atoms, and the electrons.

In short, the slow progress of the knowledge of the human being, as
compared with the splendid ascension of physics, astronomy, chemistry,
and mechanics, is due to Our ancestors' lack of leisure, to the
complexity of the subject, and to the structure of our mind. Those
obstacles are fundamental to be overcome at the cost of strenuous
effort. The knowledge of ourselves will never attain the elegant
simplicity, the abstractness, and the beauty of physics. The factors
that have retarded its development are not likely to vanish. We must
realize clearly that the science of man is the most difficult of all
sciences.[^4]

This exposes our ignorance about the reality of man, and about even the
smallest and most obvious facts of this reality, in the view of this
great Western scientist. We note that he has touched upon the main
reason that is the structure of our mind. This structure is connected
with man's role, which is to be the deputy of Allah on earth, and is so
designed as to facilitate the performance of this role. Hence our mind
is capable of advancing in comprehending the laws of matter and in
controlling it, as it is also capable of understanding many aspects of
"the reality of man," most of which are already known. But the secret of
man's existence, the secret of life, and the secrets of man's soul and
spirit will remain beyond his comprehension, because the knowledge of
these things is not essential for the performance of his basic task.

In any case, two basic facts emerge from this discussion:

First; It is Allah's mercy that He did not leave man alone in his deep
ignorance, as described by a great twentieth century scientist, to
construct a belief-concept on his own. Rather, He gave him a
comprehensive concept, governing not merely the reality of man, but also
the much greater realities of the Creator Himself, of the universe, of
life, and of all the interconnections among these realities. Again, He
did not leave man, with his ignorance of even his own self, to construct
his way of life, the form of his system, and its laws and rules, because
this requires a complete and comprehensive knowledge not merely of the
nature of man, but also of the nature of the universe in which he lives,
as well as the nature of life, and the reality of the great Creator of
this universe and of whatever and whoever is in it.

Second: It is sheer ignorance on the part of some people, of earlier
times or of the present, even to try to devise a comprehensive
explanation of the existence of life and of man and to attempt to design
ways of life and systems for human beings together with rules of
conduct, even though all the while they are in complete ignorance of
even the rudiments of man's nature, let alone of other greater
realities.

They succeeded only in piling up rubbish heaps of false concepts, in
devising corrupt systems and erroneous ways, and bringing misery and
sorrow to the world, for all these are nothing, but natural consequences
and bitter fruits of this unseemly arrogance, which is exceeded only by
the deep ignorance underlying it.

Indeed, the Divinely-revealed concept that man has received from Allah
is a gift from Him. It has spared this weak and ignorant creature from
struggling in vain in this matter, rescuing him from trying to originate
this concept on his own and thus scattering his energy in a domain for
which Allah has not given him any resource or tool.

People have been spared all this so that they may devote their time and
effort to learning and understanding this Divine gift in order to adapt
to it, to build the foundations of their lives upon it, to judge their
values by its standard, and to be guided by it. If they were to deviate
from this God-given concept, they would certainly fall into error and
confusion and the result would be the self-same rubbish heaps of
concepts and ideas, which should evoke either tears or laughter, and a
repetition of the suffering and sorrow that are natural consequences of
ways of life erected on this ignorance, confusion, and error.

In this respect, Professor Abul Hasan Ali Nadwi writes in his valuable
work, Islam and the World:

The prophets had imparted to man the true knowledge of God's existence
and His attributes and actions. They had laid the foundations upon which
man could erect the edifice of his own spiritual conduct without getting
in­volved in the fruitless metaphysical discussions on , “being" and
“knowing." But man heeded not. Instead of being grateful for Divine
guidance, he allowed the ship of his thought to drift on uncharted seas.
He behaved like an explorer who, setting aside the geographical charts
and maps,

tries to scale every height, fathom every depth, and measure every
distance on his own initiative. The results of such endeavors can at
best be a few sketchy notes and incomplete hints picked up here and
there. So when the people tried to reach God with the help of reason
alone and without the aid of light furnished by the Prophet's
teach­ings, the knowledge of God gathered by them consisted of little
else besides random thoughts, conflicting theories, and haphazard
conclusions. [^5]

The situation of those who, on their own, try to invent belief systems
or to construct a philosophical concept for the explanation of existence
and its interconnections is worse than the situation of the lone
explorer described by Professor Nadwi, and is more dangerous for the
life of mankind. Still more dangerous than this is the distortion of a
revealed message,

and, in particular, the distortion of the message revealed to Jesus,
the establishment of the Church of Europe, deriving its authority from
this distorted Christianity, and the subsequent imposition of its false
concepts by the use of force through the insistence on its erroneous
teachings concerning the physical world and through the savage
suppression of scientific research within its rightful domain by
claiming religious sanction for such matters. While the true religion of
Jesus is not to be blamed for it, all this persecution was carried out
in the name of religion.

This whole calamity descended upon the heads of millions of people
because human thought was interpolated into the original
Divinely-revealed teachings of Jesus, rendering them distorted,
mis­shapen, contradictory, and unintelligible.

All the European schools of thought, from "Idealism" to "Positivism" to
"Dialectical Materialism," originated in the revolt against religion and
religious thought, and came into being only because of these distortions
in the teachings of Jesus. This shows the enormity of the plague brought
upon mankind by the interpolation of human thought in a
divinely-revealed message. Such a devastating calamity has no parallel
in human history.

In order adequately to clarify this important point, it seems
ap­propriate here to present a brief review of the history of European
thought as a direct consequence of distortions and interpolations of
human ideas in the religious concept, of its subjugation to political
exigencies, and of the influence of racial and pagan heritages.

Perhaps this summary may open our minds to the wisdom and the mercy of
Allah Most High in preserving the Islamic concept from distortion by
human beings. The divinely-revealed Islamic concept has remained free of
such human attempts as “Reformation," "Protes­tantism," or "development
of religious thought." This concept alone remains in its pristine
purity, untouched by human ignorance and error, as a secure refuge for
mankind and as a source of guidance, solace, and satisfaction.

It is sufficient for our purposes to quote from Muhammad Al-Bahi's
book, The New Islamic Thought and Its Connection with Western
Imperialism, under the heading, "Is Religion a Drug?"

Under the sub-heading, The Conflict Between Religion, Reason, and
Senses In the History of Western Thought, Al-Bahi writes:

"Since the fourteenth century, European thought has passed through four
stages. These stages are related to the justification of one or another
of the three sources of knowledge prevailing in the history of mankind
up to modern times; religion, reason, and sensory percep­tion or facts.
At every stage, the relative 'value' of the three sources in providing
positive or certain knowledge came into question. These stages are
characterized by a positive or negative answer to this question of sure
knowledge. Controversies relating to the importance and value of these
sources of human knowledge have led to various schools of thought.

"The Supremacy of Scripture and Religion: During the long centuries of
the medieval period, religion was predominant in direct­ing human
affairs, in organizing institutions, and in explaining the world. The
religion here referred to was Christianity; Christianity meant
Catholicism; and Catholicism meant Papism, that is to say, as the Vicar
of Christ, the Pope was the final authority. The interpretation of the
'Holy Book' was strictly limited to the Pope and the College of
Cardinals, so that 'what the Book says' meant 'what the Catholic Church
says.' Thus, the Church formulated the doctrine of the Trinity and
introduced confession and indulgences, and whatever else relates to the
Catholic faith and practice.

"This state of affairs continued until the fifteenth century, by which
time the positive ideas which the Crusaders had brought back from the
Muslims to Europe had gradually changed European thinking. Martin Luther
(1453-1546) stood up against the authority of the Catholic Church,
castigating its teaching as 'satanic.' He opposed the sale of
indulgences, which only perpetuated the enslavement of the masses. He
fought against the concept of the Trinity as well as that of Papal
infallibility, declaring that only the Holy Book was the final authority
and demanding the freedom to study the Book. But he did not demand total
freedom of thought. He stated that the Holy Book is the source of faith
and that faith has priority over other matters including reason and
observation.

"In the footsteps of Luther came Calvin (1509-1564), who affirmed with
Luther that the Bible is the only true source for 'real Christianity'
and that belief in the Trinity as defined by the popes is no part of
true Christianity.

"It may be noted that what Luther and Calvin wanted to reform was Papal
Catholicism. The philosophers, who began to object to religion in the
wake of these reformist movements, also objected to papal authority.
When they pointed to the contradictions between reason and 'religion,'
they meant contradictions between common sense and the teachings of the
Catholic Church such as the Trinity, the sacra­ments, the sale of
indulgences, and so on. Anyone who defended Christianity among the
philosophers, as for example, Hegel, defended its 'pure teachings' as
expounded by Luther, in contrast to the teach­ings of the Catholic
Church.

"Thus, whenever 'religion' is spoken of, whether favorably or
unfavorably, in European philosophy it means this particular form of
religion.

"The Supremacy of Reason. The supremacy of the Scriptures over other
sources of knowledge continued until the mid- eighteenth century when
the Age of Enlightenment dawned on the horizons of European thought. The
Age of Enlightenment, which lasted for about half a century, has
peculiar characteristics that distinguish it from the periods preceding
and following it. These characteristics are common among the German,
French, and English philosophers of the time. The thought of this period
has three characteristics:

It extols human reason, proclaiming that the future of mankind will be
by its hand once it is rid of its past heritage of suppression and
denigration. The line of progress will then be very clearly defined.

It demonstrates boldness and intellectual courage in sub­mitting every
historical event to the test of reason. The same boldness is shown in
applying reason to political institutions, economics, law, religion,
education, and so on, in order to rest them on a rational foundation.

It proclaims its faith in cooperative efforts for all human affairs, in
the brotherhood of man on the basis of this new civilization based on
reason, and in marching forward from progress to progress.

"All of this may be summarized as meaning the supremacy of 'reason'
over the other source of knowledge, 'religion,' that is to say, both the
Catholic Church and Protestantism, as the reformist move­ment was
called:

"Reason has the right to be the supreme guide in all human affairs such
as politics, law, and religion, and the ultimate goal for man is
humanism.

"This period is called by such names as The Age of Enlightenment, The
Age of Humanism, and occasionally as The Age of Deism. Deism is a belief
in the transcendent deity postulated by the philosophers. This deity is
neither the Creator of the universe nor concerned with human affairs,
nor does He send down revelation. All these names signify the supremacy
of human reason. 'Enlightenment' had no other purpose than to depose
religion from its throne of authority and to put reason in its place.
'Humanism' existed to replace 'the pleasure of God' as the ultimate
good, while 'God,' who does not create or reveal Himself, was merely an
entity that conformed to the dictates of reason.

"Throughout this period there existed a conflict between the teach­ings
of religion and the dictates of reason, and a diligent effort to subdue
religion by reason. Thus this age is characterized by the supremacy of
reason just as the age preceding it was characterized by the supremacy
of religion. The religion here was the Christianity of the Church and
the field of this conflict was all those aspects of life where the
Church was dominant, such as faith and belief, knowledge and science,
politics and law.

"The Supremacy of Senses. This Age of Enlightenment came to an end by
the beginning of the nineteenth century. The subject of controversy,
however, continued to be the same: the relative impor­tance of religion,
reason, and sensory perception or 'nature.' Nineteenth century Europe
now inclined toward the supremacy of 'Nature' or 'facts' over both
religion and reason as a sure source of knowledge. It was the Age of
Positivism, signifying a philosophy of knowledge with its own climate of
thought. This climate of thought came into being in the first place
because of a certain abhorrence among some scientists and philosophers
toward the Church.

The Church had a particular kind of knowledge, the Catholic doctrine,
which it had imposed for a long period of time on everyone, including
scientists and researchers. The Positivist not only rebelled against
this doctrine, but also against all religious knowledge, and even all
metaphysical knowledge. In addition to this, the Positivist also
op­posed the philosophies of The Age of Enlightenment, 'Rationalism' and
'Idealism,' which, according to the Positivists, were completely
bankrupt in attaining their stated goal, namely, to replace the
religious objective by the objective of humanism and human welfare.
Strangely enough, this philosophy in the time of Hegel tended once again
to support religion and religious inspiration.

"The main objective of positivism was to oppose the Church, or to
oppose its type of knowledge, that is, metaphysical and rational
knowledge, in the name of 'science.' But positivism merely replaced one
religion with another, with its own forms of 'worship' and its own
'priesthood,' its saints and sacred symbols, exactly paralleling the
Catholic Church.

"Positivism is based on the affirmation of fact. Fact, sensory
per­ception, natural phenomena, and reality are synonymous in the
vocabulary of the positivists. According to them, any proposition that
does not admit of being ultimately reduced to a simple statement of fact
can make no intelligible sense. Thus, nature, that is to say sensory
perception, is the only source of sure and positive knowledge. It is
nature that imprints facts on the human intellect, inspires it, and
provides it with clear guidelines. Indeed, the human intellect is
nothing but a creation of nature. There is nothing beyond the world of
phenomena that can provide knowledge to the human intellect or dictate
to it nor anything within man's own self that can inform him about
anything real or true.

Whatever is supposed to have come from beyond nature is an illusion of
reality, and not reality, while whatever is produced by the human
intellect on its own is mere imagination and a reflection of reality and
not reality. Hence religion, which is the revelation from 'beyond
nature,' is nothing but a deception. The theological explanation of
natural facts is a mere stage in the history of ideas. Similar is the
case of the metaphysical or 'ideal' approach to physical phenomena.
These do not represent reality but are only products of human
imagination and mere reflections of reality.

"When people talk about human personality, the rights of man, or the
role of man in this world, or the nature of the world, based on
religious knowledge or on philosophical reasoning, they are propounding
unreal dogmas with no basis in observed fact. These are lies invented to
lead people into religious deceptions or to pander to their high opinion
of themselves.

"The human intellect, together with the knowledge it contains, is a
product of nature, which is represented by inherited characteristics,
the environment, and socio-economic conditions. The human intel­lect is
a creature but its creator is the physical world. It thinks but only
through interaction with the universe surrounding it. It is imprisoned
and determined by the laws operating in the body and brain. There is no
Mind prior to Matter, nor is there knowledge prior to human existence.
And both mind and knowledge appear with the appearance of the human
being, who himself is a product of the material world.

"Nature speaks concerning itself and the human being must listen to it.
As he is constrained to live within the natural world, he must follow
Nature's logic, and that logic is one -not the logic of theologians, nor
of metaphysicists, nor of psychologists -but the logic inherent in human
nature propelling it along a straight, narrow path, setting its goal and
inexorably leading toward that goal.

"The natural path for every human being starts at the individual and
ends in the group. The individual himself is not the ultimate goal of
his existence, nor should he be the object of his striving. The ultimate
goal of all one's striving is the annihilation of the self in
'humanity,' just as a mystic's goal is to annihilate his self in the God
whom he worships. Humanity must occupy the place of God, and each
individual must sacrifice himself in order that 'humanity' be
preserved.

"Marxism. The dialectical materialism of Marx, as distinct from
scientific or mechanical materialism, does not deny the existence of
'mind.' But matter precedes mind, which depends on matter for its
existence and which cannot be found independent of matter. Marx not only
denies that the mind (or the soul) survives the body, as religion
asserts, but, in fact, denies the very basis of religious
thought -belief in God, the Eternal, the Self-Subsisting Creator of the
material world. In Marx's view, all religion, because of its very
origin, is a curse or 'opium of the masses.'

"Hegel had centered his thought around the notion of Spirit or Mind:
Mind is real and matter is its reflection. Marx inverted this by saying
that the basic reality is material and mind is merely a reflection of
it. Marx contended that the generating influence on men's political,
social, and moral phenomena was the sum total of the material
circumstances (i.e. economic) of any historic time. In the view of Marx
and Engels, all human history was to be seen as a movement brought about
by conflicts in the material order, which is to say that history is a
dialectical materialistic power.

"Only change in the means of production and consequent economic
development influences a society and its political structure, science,
and religion. Thus, all cultural and intellectual attainments are
branches of economic life. The entire course of human history is nothing
but the history of the economic law of motion."

These stages in European thought, as outlined by Muhammad Al-­Bahi, are
the various consequences of running away from the distorted concepts of
the Church and from its abuse of authority in the name of religion. In
one direction lay the philosophy of Idealism, which rejected religion
and the supremacy of Reason in various ways, such as the philosophy of
Fichte and the support of the concept of the God of religion as the
Absolute in the philosophy of Hegel. In another direction this rebellion
against the Church went toward the philosophy of Positivism in the hands
of Comte and Stendahl, and then toward dialectical materialism in the
hands of Karl Marx and Engels.

This long detour in European thought was a direct result of tamper­ing
with the revealed religious concept and introducing human dis­tortions
into it by the Church and by a succession of Councils.

When an impartial inquirer looks into these wanderings in the
wilderness of thought, in frantic attempts to run away from God in order
to get rid of the yoke of the Church, he will only find that such
attempts failed miserably in clarifying ideas or in coming closer to
anything" concrete." After all these mental gymnastics, one cannot even
say that they succeeded in getting rid of metaphysical riddles.

Take, for example, the philosophy of rationalism wherein “reason" is
held to be supreme, which is supposed to guide us without reference to
God or physical phenomena. Where is this ideal reason to be found? What
is its nature and its laws of operation?

Again, take the philosophy of Idealism, either as expounded by Fichte
or as developed into a metaphysical system by Hegel or as later
transformed by Karl Marx into dialectical materialism. Let us look at
the' 'Principle of Contradiction," which Fichte introduced. One of its
arguments runs somewhat as follows:

"Every person has a concept of his own Self. The Self is sharply
distinguished from the rest of the universe, the Not-Self, which it
knows, but which is other than it. Thus the self is also the Not-Self.
But the existence of Not-Self is entirely dependent on the existence of
Self and has no independent existence. Thus Self, which contains in
itself Not-Self, is both Self and Not-Self.

"But the Not-Self has no reality. Whenever the human being looks into
himself he is conscious of Self, and the things which are outside the
Self, i.e. the Not-Self, which are perceived by us as a separate
reality, are but a product of mind.

"Hence, to start with, Self exists by itself and Not-Self does not
exist. The Self (or mind) imposes its categories upon experience, and
every object other than Self is a product of Self."

Proceeding on this line of thought, Fichte argued that the mind has an
existence completely independent of other-than-itself. Its exist­ence is
its own existence, and not of other-than-itself. There cannot be
unknowable things-in-themselves. Knowledge was possible be­cause the
mind itself produced the forms of knowledge through its various
categories. Thus every object of knowledge, including things, is the
product of mind. To say otherwise would be to admit the existence of
Not-Self which would contradict the Self, that is to say, the existence
of the mind itself Now, this kind of an argument has nothing to do with
our practical lives, and is merely an exercise in verbal jugglery. Why
should the existence of Not-Self contradict the existence of Self? Why
cannot there be things and objects as well as minds?

But the main purpose was to depose the God of the Church and to put in
His place some other god who will have neither priests, nor Pope, nor
churches. So "the Mind" became that god, needing no priests or churches,
and this was the ultimate objective.

While Fichte employed the principle of contradiction to argue for the
supremacy of the mind, Hegel employed it to establish the reality of the
Absolute. The dialectic process of Hegel exhibits a triadic movement.
This is a movement from thesis to antithesis and finally to synthesis,
after which the synthesis becomes a new thesis and so on. The human
mind, then, moves dialectically, constantly embracing an ever-increasing
scope of reality which discovers the truth of anything only after
discovering its relation to the whole, to the Idea.

According to Hegel, the Idea in its wholeness, the Absolute Idea, is
eternal and was self-existing before the realm of Nature or finite minds
came into being. This Absolute Idea is what religions refer to as God.
But Hegel was not referring to a Being separate from the world of
nature. As he puts it, Nature represents the Idea "outside itself" That
is to say, Nature is the rationality of the Idea in external form.

But there are not two separate entities, Idea and Nature. Ultimate
reality is a single organic and dynamic whole. The distinction between
the Idea as "behind" all things on the one hand and Nature on the other,
is simply to distinguish between the “inner" and the “outer" aspects of
the self-same reality. Nature, in short, is the antithesis of the thesis
Idea. Our thought moves dialectically from the rational (Idea) to the
non-rational (Nature). The concept of Nature leads our thought finally
to a synthesis represented by the unity of Idea and Nature in the new
concept of Spirit or Mind.

This is an example of "Idealism," which the European thinkers quickly
abandoned in favor of "Positivism." Indeed, they were right in
abandoning it. This kind of philosophy is purely intellectual and has
nothing to do with the practical affairs of human life.

But the leaders of Positivism, in their revolt against the God of the
Church and the godhead of "Absolute Idea," did not move toward anything
better. They ended by making the phenomenal world, or Nature, their god.
But what is this Nature, which, according to them, has created the mind
and imprints reality on the mind? Is this some well-defined being? Is it
the universe as a whole? Or is it the various "things" and their shapes
and movements? Does it have an existence independent of the human
concepts concerning it? Or is it what our senses tell us it is?

Again, did it' “create" the human intellect out of nothing? How is it
that it created intellect in man but not in animals or in plants? Does
Nature have a will and a power to make decisions, so that it singled out
human beings for the bestowal of this gift of reason?

Again, if its reality is manifested in human thought, how can we say
that it does not depend on the existence of the human mind? How is it
that this Nature is the' 'Creator" of the human mind, while it makes its
appearance nowhere except in the human mind?

Thus, these philosophers present us with a thousand unanswered
questions -and they point to Nature. What is this Nature? Is it matter
in the universe? What is the nature of this matter? They themselves
admit they do not know what this thing, which they term “matter" and
consider to be something permanent, really is.

When matter transforms it becomes energy. So is energy Nature because
it is matter? Or is matter, in which energy expresses itself as objects
possessing masses and shapes, the' 'Nature" of these philosophers? In
which of the two states, mass or energy, does it create the human mind,
since this" creator" itself remains perpetually in motion, transforming
from particles to energy, from energy to objects, from objects to
particles, and from particles to energy? During these transformations,
at which stage does it impart life and consciousness? When did this
"god" acquire the power of creation? In which of its states?

And if this Nature “imprints the reality on the human mind," why on the
human mind alone? Does it not speak so that all living beings hear it?
Does it imprint the reality on the minds of mules, donkeys, parrots, and
monkeys, or not? And is the reality that it imprints on the mind of a
parrot or a monkey the same reality that it imprinted on the minds of
August Comte and Karl Marx?

Again, if Nature imprints reality on the human mind, does it imprint
the correct reality? Did not this reality and this mind decide that the
earth was the center of the universe, and then again that the earth is
but a small planet, moving around the sun? Did not this imprinted
reality and the mind assert that matter and all objects are mere sensory
perceptions and that matter is nothing but a product of mind? And did it
not assert that the mind is but a product of matter?

Which of these contradictory intellectual judgements are the realities
imprinted on the human mind by Nature? Does one observe that it makes
mistakes in its imprints? Or is it the human mind that makes mistakes?
If so, is it not then an independent and active agent? How can the
positivists assert that it is nothing more than what this Nature has
made it to be?

We shall leave the discussion of the origin of life, its manifestations
and secrets, to a later chapter in this book, when we shall discuss this
subject in the context of Islamic concepts and other concepts. Rather
than discuss the origin of life and its secrets here, we merely ask:
What is this “god" which the philosophers of Materialism are trying to
present to us? In terms of our experiences, ideas, or point of view, we
do not find in it anything solid and clear to hold on to. One wonders
why anyone would adopt this “idol," seeing that it is neither concrete
to the touch, fixed for the sight,

nor even firm as an idea? And, praise be to Allah, we are not running
away from the Church! We cannot help but shudder in utter disgust at the
narrow mentality of Karl Marx and Engels in their distorted perception
of the life of mankind, and of man's motivations and field of actions.
They have imprisoned man's scope within the mouse-hole of the "the
factors of production." Think of all the great forces of the physical
universe and their miraculous harmony in producing the exact conditions
suitable for human life and human endeavors,

and think of the special place that human beings occupy in the scheme
of existence, and then think of how Marx and Engels turned their backs
upon all this greatness and beauty to hide their heads within the narrow
confines of economics and factors of production, not merely as the goal
and motivation for human activity, but as the First Cause, the Creator
God, and the Controlling Lord. One can only throw up one's hands in
utter con­tempt and disgust at the pettiness of their mentality.

After mentioning all this, we return to the point that this entire
calamity, from beginning to end, befell the peoples of Europe only
because the Church and the Councils deviated from the divinely­ revealed
concept. This left no choice for the European thinkers but to try to run
away from the Church and its God. We thank Allah Most High that the
divinely-revealed Islamic concept has remained pure and there was no
"Church" to tamper with it. The sort of conflict, which in Europe gave
rise to all this metaphysical and speculative trash, never occurred in
Islamic civilization, because there can be no conflict between the
Islamic concept and human reason or human experience.

We proclaim that the Islamic concept leaves a vast field of activity
for human reason and scientific experimentation. It does not put any
obstacles in front of reason for doing research and for engaging in
contemplation in order to discover the universe and its workings.
Indeed, the Islamic concept encourages and inspires it to engage in such
research. Again, it does not stop scientific experimentation, but counts
it as a necessary function of man's role as Allah's deputy on earth. We
appreciate the great blessing and favor of Allah upon us in giving us
this concept and keeping it secure from human interpolation and
interference.

[^1] For a detailed discussion, refer to the chapter entitled,
"Intellectual Training" in the book, The Islamic Educational Method, by
Muhammad Qutb.

[^2] Man the Unknown. Harper & Brothers. 1935. pp. 4-5.

[^3] Ibid., pp. 5-6.
[^4] Man the Unknown, Harper & Brothers, 1935, pp. 8-10.

[^5] Nadwi, Islam and tbe World, pp. 62- 63


