Chapter Ix : the Oneness of Allah
=================================

We sent no Messenger before you without revealing to him, "There is no
god but Me, so worship Me (alone)" (Al-Anbiya 21:25).

The Oneness of Allah, known as tawhid, is the first and paramount
constituent of the Islamic concept, as it is the fundamental truth of
the Islamic faith. It is also one of the chief characteristics of the
Islamic concept because, among all the belief systems and philosophies
cur­rently prevailing among human beings, only the Islamic faith can be
characterized as having a pure form of monotheism. This is why we have
included “The Oneness of Allah" as one of the characteristics of the
Islamic concept.

From the outset we state that the message of the Oneness of Allah has
been the chief constituent and characteristic of all religions brought
by the Messengers of Allah Most High, because every religion sent from
Allah was nothing but Islam, which is submission to Allah alone by
following the way prescribed by Him alone, receiving guidance in matters
of faith and moral conduct from Him alone, purifying one's intention and
worship for Him alone,

and obeying His commandments and implementing His laws in human affairs
as well as in worship. Unfortunately, after these Messengers passed
away, interpolations and deviations were introduced into the pure din of
Islam producing many impurities in these religions, so that no belief
has been left in its correct and pure form apart from the concept
brought by Prophet Muhammad, may Allah's blessings be upon him. Allah
Himself has protected the principles of the Islamic faith so that no
deviation has ever touched it nor has any impurity ever entered into its
beliefs. This is why “the Oneness of Allah" has become the distinctive
characteristic of this faith.

The Oneness of Allah is a characteristic of the Islamic concept because
the truth of the Divine Oneness includes all aspects of the Islamic
faith and practice. It permeates concepts, morals, manners, and all
types of dealings among people in a truly Islamic community.

The certainty of the truth that Allah is One dominates the Muslim's
concept of the universe and of everything happening in it and his
concept of the real, active power behind events in his own life and in
the life of the community in which he lives. This certainty and
conceptual conviction extend to all aspects of a Muslim's life,
includ­ing what is hidden and what is apparent and what is significant
and what is insignificant, and it applies to everybody he meets, the
great as well as the lowly, to all customs, laws, beliefs, and actions,
and to this life and the life-to-come, simply because not a single
element of the Islamic system can escape from the all-inclusive belief
in the Oneness of Allah. This point was earlier discussed in the chapter
entitled “Comprehensiveness."

The Islamic concept rests on the principle that the Divine Being is
distinct from His creation. Divinity belongs exclusively to Allah Most
High, while creatureliness is common to everyone and everything else.
Since Allah Most High is the only Divine Being, it follows that all the
Divine attributes belong to Him alone. And since everyone and everything
else is His creation, it also follows that they are all devoid of Divine
attributes. Thus there are two distinct orders of existence, namely, the
independent existence of Allah Most High and the depend­ent existence of
all others as His creatures. The relationship between Allah and
everything else is that of the Creator to His creatures and of the Lord
to His servants.

This is the first principle of the Islamic concept and all other
principles follow from it. Because the Islamic concept rests on this
basic principle, the Oneness of God is its most important
characteristic.

Earlier we said that all the Messengers of Allah Most High brought the
message of the Oneness of Allah, so this was the characteristic of all
the Divinely-revealed religions. Our assertion is derived from the
Qur'an, which states this fact in relation to the earlier Messengers.

We sent Nuh (Noah) to his people, and he said, "O my people! Serve
Allah. You have no god besides Him. I fear for you the retribution of an
awful Day (Al-A 'raf 7:59).

And to (the tribe of) 'Ad (We sent) their brother, Hud. He said, "O my
people! Worship Allah alone! You have no god besides Him. Will you not
then be conscious of Allah?" (Al-A 'raf 7 :65).

And to (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said, "O
my people! Worship Allah alone! You have no god besides Him. A clear
evidence has now come to you from your Lord" (Al-A'raf7:73).

And to Midian (We sent) their brother Shu'ayb. He said, "O my people!
Worship only Allah! You have no god besides Him. Clear proof has now
come to you from your Sus­tainer" (Al-A'raf 7:85).

And has the story of Moses ever reached you? He saw a fire, and he said
to his family, "Wait here! I see a fire (far away). Perhaps I shall
bring you a brand from it or may find guidance at the fire." But when he
came close to it, a voice called out to him: "O Moses! I am your Lord!
Take off your shoes, for you are in the hallowed valley of Tuwa. I have
chosen you (to be My apostle), so listen to what is revealed (to you).
Verily, I, and I alone, am Allah! There is no god but Me! So serve Me
and be constant in prayer in order to keep Me in your remembrance" (Ta
Ha 20:9-14).

And when Allah said, "O Jesus son of Mary, did you say to the people,
'Take me and my mother as gods besides Allah?” he said, "Glory be to
you! It is not possible for me to say what I have no right to. Had I
said this, You would have known it. You know what is in my mind, and I
do not know what is in Your mind, for indeed, You are the Knower of the
Unseen. I only told them what you commanded me, 'Serve Allah, my Lord
and your Lord.' And I was a witness over them as long as I dwelt among
them, but when You took me to Yourself, you were yourself Watcher over
them, for You are witness to everything. If You punish them, they are
Your servants. If You forgive them, You are the All- Mighty, the
All-Wise" (Al-Ma'idah 5:116-118).

We sent no Messenger before you without revealing to him, "There is no
god but Me, so worship Me (alone)" (Al-Anbiya 21:25).

With the passage of time, however, this message brought by all the
Messengers about the Oneness of Allah became distorted by the influence
of diverse beliefs and myths. We have already discussed this point in
some detail in the chapter entitled, "The Wilderness and Intellectual
Rubbish," in relation to the revealed religions as well as polytheism
and paganism.

Before we describe why the Oneness of Allah is one of the
charac­teristics of the Islamic concept and how it permeates the entire
life of the Muslim community, we should first briefly describe some
other concepts dealing with the Divine, with the other-than-the-Divine,
and with the Oneness of the Divine Being.

Hinduism, for example, acknowledges one Divine Being called Brahma, who
alone is "existent" and who alone has the attributes of perfection,
goodness, and perpetuity. Apart from this One Existent and Real Being
there is nothing, which is to say, this universe and whatever is in it
is non-existent.

On the other hand, Hinduism also says that Brahma, the real Being, who
is entirely Good, is incarnated or diffused into the “non-exis­tent,"
which is entirely evil. Thus Brahma is diffused into every part of this
universe, including man, and thus is a compound of being and non-being,
good and evil, perfection and defect, and eternity and mortality.

A believing Hindu, therefore, must continually strive to separate the
existence, the perfection, the goodness, and the eternity in his make­up
from the non-existence, imperfection, evil, and mortality, in order to
free “the being" that is incarnate in his body. This is called "Nirvana"
or becoming free of mortality and non-being and returning to the status
of pure being, Brahma.

We note that Brahma is not the Creator of this world, which is
non-existent, evil, and imperfect, but he is diffused in it. Moreover,
He does not administer or manage the affairs of this universe, which
have become manifest because of the diffusion of Brahma into
non­existence.

Again, beyond this Oneness, and apart from this diffusion, Hin­duism
also has a "Trinity": Lord "Brahma" the Creator; Lord "Vish­nu," the
Giver of life; and Lord "Shiva," the Destroyer.

Over and above the universe and the gods rules “Karma" or "Fate." It is
karma which determines the cycles of birth and rebirth and which creates
and repeats cycles of Universes. Clearly, with the Hindu pantheon and
the theory of impersonal karma ruling over gods as well as the world,
including human beings, the concept of the Oneness of God is completely
lost.

The Egyptian Pharoah, Akhinaton, believed in One God, whom he called,
“Aton," and he considered Him to be the Creator of the universe and its
Ruler. Apart from the revealed religions, his was the noblest concept of
God conceived by man. And it is quite possible that he was influenced by
the teachings of some Messenger of Allah. There was in his concept,
however, some influence of paganism, because he considered the sun to be
the representation of Aton. He thus polluted the purity of his concept
of God by this interpolation from paganism.

Aristotle made a distinction between the “Necessary Being" and the
"possible being." God is the Necessary Being but He is devoid of will
and action, and He did not create the universe, nor is He concerned with
it. The universe, and whatever and whoever is in it, was a "possible
being." Its desire to be like the Necessary Being brought it into
"'existence" from "non- existence."

Belief in the Oneness of Allah was the religion of Abraham, peace be
upon him, and he imparted it to his sons, Ishmael and Isaac. Jacob, the
son of Isaac, was also a believer in the Oneness of Allah and bequeathed
this to his children at the time of his death, as is reported in the
Qur'an .

And who would turn away from the religion of Abraham, except him who is
deluding himself? Assuredly We chose him in this world, and truly in the
Hereafter he shall be among the righteous. When his Lord said to him,
"Submit!" he said, "I have submitted to the Lord of the worlds." And
this Abraham enjoined upon his sons and also upon Jacob, saying, "O my
sons! Truly Allah has chosen for you the din therefore, do not die
without having submitted yourselves to Him." Or, were you witnesses when
death approached Jacob and he said to his sons, "What will you worship
after me?" They replied, "We shall worship your God, the God of your
fathers, Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, the One God, and to Him we
have submitted" (Al-Baqarah 2: 130­133).

When Moses, peace be upon him, came as a Messenger to the children of
Israel, he came with the message of the Oneness of Allah, but the
children of Israel, before and after Moses, corrupted this concept and
changed the meanings of the words from their intended meanings. They
made Allah into a national deity of the Israelites, the Lord God of
Israel, who helped them against the worshippers of other gods.

Furthermore, they ascribed to "the Lord God of Israel" many falsehoods,
for example, by claiming that they were the sons of God and His beloved,
that He would not punish them for their sins, that Ezra was a "son of
God," that He had sons who took the daughters of men as their wives and
that the children of these unions were giants, and that the Lord God was
afraid they might become gods like Him, and consequently He came down
and caused them to speak different languages in order to destroy their
unity. They also alleged that Jacob once fought with the Lord, hitting
Him on His thigh. And they claimed that He walked in the shade of the
garden and enjoyed the coolness of the breeze, and so on. All of such
tales, singly as well as together, corrupted the pure concept of the
Oneness of Allah.

Jesus, peace be Upon him, came with the message of the Oneness of
Allah, but Christians ended up with a belief in the Trinity. They still
claim that the Godhead is One entity divided among three persons: the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and they exhibit a variety of
beliefs among various denominations concerning the nature of the person
called the Son. In spite of their claim about the' 'Unity of the
Godhead," the variety of concepts and interpretations prevailing among
various denominations prove that their claim is false.

Thus we can safely state that the Islamic concept is the only concept
resting on the foundation of a complete and pure belief in the Oneness
of Allah, and that, among all the belief systems existing today, Islam
and only Islam can be characterized by this distinction.

After elucidating this point, let us now describe briefly the nature
and the definition of the Islamic concept of the Oneness of Allah.

As we stated earlier, the Islamic belief is based on the concept that
there is Allah and there is His creation. Divinity belongs to Allah
alone, whereas anything and anyone other than Him is His creature and
servant. Each and every Divine attribute belongs to Allah, whereas no
creature of Allah can possess any of these attributes. Human life, then,
ought to be based on the implications and consequences of this pure and
complete belief in the Oneness of Allah Most High.

Allah Most High is One in His Person and is Unique in His attributes:

Say, "He is Allah, the One; Allah the Self-Sufficient; He begets not,
nor is He begotten; and there is nothing that could be compared with
Him" (Al-Ikhlas 112).

There is nothing like Him (Al-Shura 42: 11).

So do not make any analogy to Allah (Al-Nahl 16:74).

Allah is the Creator of all things (Al-Zumar 39:62).

Such is Allah, your Sustainer. There is no god but He, the Creator of
everything. Worship, then, Him alone, for He has everything in His care
(Al-An 'am 6: 102).

And He created everything and determines its nature in exact measure
(Al-Furqan 25:2).

Say, "Do you see what it is you invoke besides Allah? Show me what it
is they have created on earth. Or do they have a share in (creating) the
heavens? (If so) bring me a Scripture before this (Scripture), or any
remnant of knowledge, if what you claim is true" (Al-Ahqaf 46:4).

Allah, the Almighty, is the Owner of everything:

Say, "To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth?" Say,
"To Allah. He has prescribed for Himself (the rules of) mercy" (Al-An
'am 6: 12).

To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all
that is between them (Al-Ma'idah 5: 17).

Hallowed is He...the One to whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens
and the earth, and Who begets no off­spring, and has no partner in His
dominion (Al-Furqan 25:2).

Allah Most Great is the Provider for everyone and everything He has
created:

O people! Call to mind the favor of Allah upon you! Is there any
creator other than Allah that could provide for you sustenance out of
heaven and earth? There is no god but Him. So where else can you turn
to? (Fatir 35:3).

How many are the creatures that cannot provide their own sustenance! It
is Allah who feeds them and you (AI-\`Ankabut 29:60).

There is no creature on the earth without its sustenance depending upon
Allah. He knows its time-limit (on earth) and its resting place (Hud
11:6).

Allah, the Glorious, is the Administrator of all things and the
Guardian of all things:

Allah holds the heavens and the earth so that they do not deviate, and
if they were to deviate there is no one to hold them after Him (Fatir
35:41).

And among His signs is that the heavens and the earth stand firm by His
command (Al-Rum 30:25).

For We take account of all things in a clear record (Ya Sin 36: 12).

Allah Most High is the All-Powerful Sovereign, Who is omnipotent over
everything:

And He is Omnipotent over His servants. He sends forth heavenly forces
to guard you. And when death comes to one of you, Our angels take his
soul, and they never fail in their duty. Then they are brought before
Allah, their Just Protector and Lord of Truth. Surely His is the
judg­ment. And He is most swift in taking account (Al-An 'am 6:61-62).

Say, "He is able to send punishment upon you from above you or from
beneath your feet, or to bewilder you with mutual discord and let you
taste the fear of one another" (Al-An 'am 6:65).

Say, "Don't you see! If Allah took away your hearing and your sight and
sealed up your hearts, what god other than Allah could restore them to
you?" (Al-An' am 6: 46).

All the creation of the Most Glorious Allah is obedient to Him and
approaches Him in submission and servitude:

Then He turned to the sky when it still consisted of gases, and He said
to it and to the earth, "Come, both of you, willingly or unwillingly,"
and they responded, "We come obediently" (Fussilat 41: 11).

And among His signs is that the heavens and the earth stand by His
command. Then, when He calls you by a single call from the earth, you
come forth. To Him belongs every being that is in the heavens and on
earth, and all are devoutly obedient to Him (Al-Rum 30:25- 26).

And before Allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and every
creature moving on the earth, and the angels. And they are not proud
(Al-Nahl 16:49).

And there is not a thing but celebrates His praise (Al-Isra 17:44).

What has been presented here should suffice to give a clear
under­standing of the Oneness of Allah in the Islamic concept, with
emphasis on the unambiguous separation of the Divine from the
other-than-the­Divine, and on the fact that the relationship between the
servants and the Lord is based only upon servanthood and not upon
lineage, marriage, partnership, or resemblance, because such
relationships do not pertain to Allah Most High.

Our description of the concept of the Oneness of Allah in Islam would
remain incomplete if we did not mention, at least briefly, the
far-reaching and all-encompassing consequences of this belief in the
life of mankind. In fact, these consequences are an embodiment of the
belief in the Oneness of Allah and a clear proof that this is the chief
characteristic of the Islamic concept.

One consequence of belief in the Oneness of Allah is that Allah Most
High is the Lord and Sovereign of men not merely in their beliefs,
concepts, consciences, and rituals of worship, but in their practical
affairs.

The Muslim believes that there is no deity except Allah, that no one is
worthy of worship except Allah, that no one is Creator or Sustainer
except Allah, that no one can benefit or harm oneself except Allah, and
that no one except Allah is in charge of the universe or even of one's
own affairs. Accordingly, the Muslim worships Him alone, and turns to
Him alone with hope and fear and with the sincerity of his heart.

In the same way, the Muslim believes that there is no true ruler above
him except Allah, no legislator for him except Allah, no one except
Allah to inform him concerning his relationships and connec­tions with
the universe, with other living creatures, and with one's fellow human
beings. This is why the Muslim turns to Allah for guidance and
legislation in every aspect of life, whether it be political governance,
economic justice, personal behavior, or the norms and standards of
social intercourse.

Turning toward Allah for guidance in forms of worship, in situations of
hope or fear, in developing legal and economic institutions for society,
and in establishing norms and standards of behavior, is an inevitable
consequence of the Islamic concept of Allah's Oneness and of its
all-encompassing impact on the conscience and life of the true Muslim.

In the Qur'an we find that belief in the Oneness of Allah is very
closely connected with this impact on every Muslim's conscience and
practical life. Belief in the Oneness of Allah and in His sole
Sovereignty over the universe and over the life of every person places
on the shoulders of the Muslim certain responsibilities of an
intellectual, spiritual, psychological, as well as moral and practical
nature. The Qur'an sometimes links all such things in one sequence of
verses, designed to connect Allah's power and dominion in the universe,
in this world, and in the Hereafter logically and systematically with
man's obedience to His commandments and Law.

And your God is One God. There is no deity but Him, the Merciful and
Dispenser of Grace.

Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the
alternation of the night and the day and in the ~hips that sail the
ocean for the benefit of mankind and in the water that Allah sends down
from the sky to revive the earth after its death and cause all manner of
living creatures to multiply on it, and in the change of the winds and
the clouds that follow their appointed courses between the earth and the
sky, are signs for a people of intelligence.

There are people who choose to believe in beings that allegedly rival
Allah, loving them as (only) Allah should be loved whereas those who
have attained to faith love Allah more than all else. If only those who
do wrong could but see, as they indeed will when they are made to suffer
(on Judgement Day), that all power belongs to Allah alone and that Allah
is severe in punishment! (On the Day) those who are followed will disown
those who followed them and the followers will behold the punishment
(that awaits them), with all their means cut off. And the followers will
say, "If we had one more chance, we would disown them as they have
disowned us." Thus will Allah show them their deeds (in a manner that
will cause them) bitter regrets, but they will not escape from the
Fire.

O people! Partake of what is lawful and good on earth, and do not
follow the footsteps of Satan, for he is an open enemy to you. He bids
you only to do evil and to commit shameful deeds, and to attribute to
Allah something about which you have no knowledge. When it is said to
them, "Follow what Allah has revealed," they say, "No! We shall follow
what we found our forefathers believing in and doing. What! Even though
their forefathers did not use their reason at all and had no guidance?
The parable of those who disbelieve is as if one were to shout like a
goat-herd, to things that listen to nothing but calls and cries: deaf..
dumb, and blind, they are without understanding.

O you who believe! Eat of the good things We have provided for you and
give thanks to Allah, if it is He whom you worship. He has forbidden to
you only carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which has
been consecrated to anyone other than Allah. But if one is in grave
need, without coveting it or exceeding one's imme­diate requirements,
then there shall be no sin on him, for, behold, Allah is Forgiving and
Merciful (Al- Baqarah 2: 163-­173).

When we ponder this passage of the Qur'an, we note that it begins with
the Oneness of Allah. Then follows the description of natural phenomena
in which Allah's power is manifested, and then the description of the
Day of Resurrection in which Allah's sovereignty, judgement, and
exclusive authority are manifested. Then come verses describing various
lawful and unlawful things, and commanding people to obey Allah's
legislation and forbidding them to obey Satan and the customs of the
Days of Ignorance, since nothing is to be followed except what Allah has
legislated.

The believers are then told to eat of the good things that Allah has
made lawful, with the reminder that if they worship Allah alone they
must follow His instructions about the lawful and the prohibited. Thus
Allah alone is God, He alone is the Ruler of the universe, He alone is
the Master of the Day of Resurrection, and He alone prescribes acts of
worship, the norms of moral behavior, and what is lawful and what is
prohibited.

In many other places the Qur'an describes the meaning of the Oneness of
Allah with all its implications. We present another such text to throw
more light on this subject, as well as to show how the Qur'an presents
the characteristics and the constituents of the Islamic concept in a
complete and comprehensive manner.

And thus We have made a Revelation to you in the Arabic tongue so that
you might warn the Mother of Cities (Mak­kah) and all around her, and
give warning of the Day of Assembly, (the coming) of which is beyond all
doubt, when some shall find themselves in Paradise and some in the
blazing Fire. If Allah had willed, He could have made them all into a
single nation, but He admits whom He wills to His mercy, whereas the
wrong-doers shall have no protector or helper. Or (did they think they
could) choose protectors other than Him? But Allah alone is the
Protector, since He alone gives life to the dead and He alone has power
over all things.

And on whatever you may differ, the decision is with Allah. (Say,
therefore,) "Such is Allah, my Lord; in Him do I trust and to Him do I
turn." (Allah), the Maker of the heavens and the earth, has made for you
pairs from among yourselves and pairs among cattle, in order thus to
cause you to multiply. There is nothing like Him. He is the All-­Hearing
and the All-Seeing. To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth.
He increases provision to whomever He wills or restricts it. Truly He
has knowledge of all things.

In matters of faith, He has ordained for you the din enjoined on Noah,
knowledge of which We have given to you (Muhammad) through Revelation,
and what We en­joined on Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus, namely, that you
should be steadfast in upholding the (true) faith and make no division
in it. The polytheists consider this unity of the din, to which you call
them, an enormity, but Allah draws to Himself everyone who is willing
and guides to Himself everyone who turns to Him.

And (the followers of earlier Revelation) broke up their unity, out of
mutual jealousy, only after they had come to know the truth. Had it not
been for a word that had already gone forth from your Lord (postponing
all decision) for a term set (by Him), the matter would have been
adjudged between them. And indeed those who inherited the Scripture
after them are in hopeless doubt concerning it. Because of this, summon
(all mankind), and stand firm as you are commanded, and do not follow
their likes and dislikes, but say, "I believe in the Book that Allah has
sent down, and I am commanded to dispense justice among you. Allah is my
Lord and your Lord. For us are our works and for you your works. Let
there be no contention between us and you. Allah will gather us
together, for with Him is the end of every journey" (Al-Shura
42:7-15).

When we ponder this passage of the Qur'an, we find that it starts with
revelation and messengership. It tells the Messenger to warn people of
the Day of Assembly and of the judgment in the Hereafter, and describes
the differing ends of the believers and of the wrong­doers in the
Hereafter depending on their ways of living in this world. Then follows
the exposition of Allah as the only Protector, who alone has power over
everything, including the power to revive the dead. Then it emphasizes
that Allah is the Ruler, and that true believers turn to Him alone and
put all their trust in Him alone.

Attention is then drawn to His creation and the phenomena of the
physical world, such as the creation and sustenance of people and
animals in pairs, followed by a renewed focus on the uniqueness of His
Person, "There is nothing like Him," and the uniqueness of His
Sovereignty, "To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth," and
of His Providence, "He increases sustenance to whomever He wills or
restricts it."

After these descriptions of the uniqueness of His Person, Sovereignty,
and other Divine attributes, the Qur'an emphasizes in this passage that
He alone is the Lawgiver, not only through this Messenger but through
all previous Messengers, "In matters of faith He has ordained for you
the din enjoined on Noah, knowledge of which We have revealed to you,
and enjoined on Abraham and Moses and Jesus."

This passage further commands the Prophet, may Allah's peace and
blessings be upon him, to call people to this din of Allah and to the
legislation inherent in it, and to stand firm on it, ignoring peoples'
desires and opinions, and to exercise justice among people by judging in
accordance with Allah's legislation. Finally, the text emphasizes that
there is a complete separation between the believers who rule and judge
according to what Allah has legislated and all others, and that the
believers' final goal is Allah Most High.

We hope that these two examples from the text of the Qur'an are
sufficient to elucidate the connection between the Islamic concept of
the Oneness of Allah and the concept of Allah's sovereignty over people,
and to explain the deep influence this belief exerts in the life of
mankind, as well as to substantiate our claim that the Islamic concept
is unique in being able to claim the Oneness of Allah as its most
distinctive characteristic.

Belief in the Oneness of Allah deeply affects one's personal life
because it affects both one's intellect and heart more markedly than any
other concept possibly can, so much so that it can transform the total
life of mankind.

Belief in the Oneness of Allah disciplines the mind and heart so that
concepts, values, and morals are not shaken by changing conditions. For
the person who believes in Allah in this manner and understands his
position as a servant of the Almighty Lord knows his direction and knows
his way. He knows clearly the answers to such questions as to who he is,
what the purpose of his life is, and what the limitations of his power
are. He also comprehends the nature of everything in this universe and
the nature of the Active Power operating within it.

With his correct understanding of the realities, he can deal with
things and events in a correct manner without wavering and without
hesitation. The accuracy of his conceptual framework produces in him a
dis­ciplined intellect with balanced standards as well as a disciplined
heart with firm values. This helps him deal effectively with the "laws
of nature" established by Allah Most High, which further increases his
intellectual discipline and his firmness of character.

We can grasp this fact very clearly when we consider the Muslim, who
deals with One Sovereign Lord and acknowledges Him alone as the Creator,
the Provider, the Almighty, and the All-Knowing, and contrast the Muslim
with believers in other concepts, such as those who have to contend with
two adversarial gods, the god of good and the god of evil, those who
have to struggle with an existent god diffused in non-existence, those
who have to deal with a god who knows neither them nor the universe in
which they live, and those who have to deal with matter as a god that
does not hear or see or remain constant. Such myths deprive the
intellect of anything firm and the heart of satisfaction.

The Islamic concept produces steadfastness in the heart and mind,
because the man who understands his Lord and His sublime attributes and
His relationship with the events occurring in the world can never be
anxious or beset with worries.

By knowing the attributes of his Lord, the Muslim understands what is
pleasing to Him and what is displeasing. He becomes firmly con­vinced
that there is no way of gaining Allah's pleasure except through faith,
through knowledge of His attributes, and by standing firm on His
commandments and obeying His revealed Law. He understands that his
relationship with Allah is not that of sonship nor of kinship, nor are
there any intermediaries between himself and his Lord. Rather his
relationship is that of a worshipper and an obedient servant who does
what his Lord commands him to do, keeps away from what He forbids, and
follows the way of life that He has legislated.

This insight gives steadfastness to his heart and intellect, clarity to
his thoughts, and firmness to his conduct.

The clarity, simplicity, and straightforwardness of the Islamic
con­cept and conduct can be appreciated most fully when we compare the
concept of the Oneness of Allah in Islam with the concept of the Trinity
in Christianity. According to "mysteries" in the Christian belief, there
is One God but three Persons. Salvation can be attained only through the
Person of the Son, and Original Sin, inherited by every human being,
cannot be forgiven except through the sacrifice of the Son, who is Jesus
Christ, may Allah's blessing and peace be upon him.

Or consider the individual who thinks of himself as the creation of
"Nature," which neither hears nor sees, neither commands nor prohibits,
neither encourages its creatures to action and noble conduct nor
discourages them from meanness and indecency. How can the servants of
such a deity be steadfast in any way of life or moral conduct? How can
they be firm of heart and intellect when they do not know whether their
god possesses anything absolute, or whether they may come across
something new by chance or by experimentation.

Similarly, if we study all the concepts discussed above in the first
chapter, entitled “The Wilderness and Intellectual Rubbish," and also in
other chapters, we can see why, because of their confusion, com­plexity,
and intricacy, they cannot produce firmness of concept and conduct in
their followers.

When a sincere person first encounters the Islamic concept, its
characteristics of straightness, simplicity, and clarity appeal to his
or her heart and mind. This feature of Islam has attracted and still
attracts both the less-sophisticated peoples of Asia and Africa as well
as the more sophisticated persons in Europe and America, because this
appeal to straightforward and simple truth is a part of human nature
common to all peoples, both "primitive" and "civilized."

The concept of the Oneness of Allah integrates the personality of an
individual just as it integrates the powers of a community, which is not
the case with other belief systems. And this concept prevents
disintegration of the individual personality and dissipation of
com­munity cohesion. In Islam the total personality of man, which has
been created as an indivisible whole, is directed toward One Divine
Being and deals with Him alone in all respects, in beliefs and concepts,
worship and devotions, moral rules and social laws, and in the affairs
of this world and of the Hereafter.

The Islamic belief is not refracted among numerous deities nor among
numerous persons in the same deity, nor among various forces, some of
which are divine while others are independent of divine power, nor among
"natural" forces that cannot be defined uniquely or even considered as
one entity.

Islamic teachings come from a single source, whether it concerns
personal belief and worship or the system of life for an entire
com­munity or nation. This source is not divided between matters of
faith and conscience and matters of practical life. Furthermore, the Law
prescribed for human beings is the same Law that governs the entire
universe. Accordingly, when human beings deal with each other and the
universe in accordance with this one universal law, they achieve harmony
and avoid conflict and division.

This integration of all human power generates such an invincible force
that nothing can stand before it. That is why the great ac­complishments
of earlier generations of Muslims now seem almost supernatural. Indeed,
such things were possible because the Islamic concept generates a
unified force, which integrates the energies of both people and nature,
prepares them to receive the blessing of Allah, and thereby makes them
responsive totally to Allah so that both forces mutually reinforce each
other in a single force dedicated to His service.

The Islamic concept, and especially the concept of the Oneness of
Allah, has an electrifying effect on the life and conscience of the
Muslim and on the internal organization and functioning of Islamic
communities, whether at the level of the family or at the level of all
mankind.

Indeed, the effect is no less than the liberation of man or rather the
birth of man. To believe in the Uniqueness and Oneness of Allah and to
understand His Divine attributes of divinity means that human beings
must take the rules and laws for their lives from no one other than
Allah, just as they take the rules for conducting their worship from
Allah. Sovereignty is one of the most important attributes of Allah. The
person who refuses to attribute sovereignty, either in theory or
practice, to anyone besides Allah is a Believer, while the one who does
so is an Unbeliever.

The text of the Qur'an is very clear about this, and there cannot be
any doubt or controversy concerning this point.

Judgement belongs only to Allah; He has commanded you not to serve
anyone or anything but Him. This is the (one) ever-true faith (Yusuf
I2:40).

Or have they partners (for Allah) who have made lawful for them in
religion that which Allah has not allowed? (Al­-Shura 42:21).

Whoever does not judge according to what Allah has revealed is a
disbeliever (Al- Ma'idah 5:44).

But no, by your Lord! They will not believe until they make you the
judge regarding disagreements between them and find within themselves no
dislike of your verdict but sur­render in full submission (Al-Nisa
4:65).

The Islamic concept does not differentiate between the rules of conduct
for private worship and the laws governing public life, because the
source of both is the same. There cannot be any differen­tiation between
these two sets of rules, because the Oneness of Allah and the Divine
Sovereignty that belongs to Him alone demand that there be no such
differentiation. Anyone who differentiates one from the other is
completely estranged from Islam and has no belief in the Oneness and
Sovereignty of Allah Most High. This is made clear by the Qur'anic
passages cited above, as well as by the following.

They have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords besides Allah, as
well as the Messiah son of Mary, whereas they were commanded to worship
only One God. There is no god but He! Glory be to Him, Who is far above
anything to which they may ascribe a share in His Divinity! (Al-­Tawbah
9:31).

The people of the Book, about whom this verse speaks, took Jesus the
son of Mary, as their Lord, in the sense that they worshipped him, and
took their rabbis and monks as their lords, not in the sense of
worshipping them, but in the sense that they took the rules and laws of
life from them. This verse combines these two aspects of lordship by
considering each aspect as the denial of the worship of One God. It
accuses them of ascribing associates or rivals to Allah because they
took Jesus as Sovereign Lord in worship and took monks and rabbis as
lords in legislation. The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, gave
such a clear-cut explanation of this verse that its meaning is beyond
all argument.

Imam Ahmad, Al-Tirmidhi, and Ibn Jarir have variously reported from
\`Adi bin Hatim, may Allah be pleased with him, that when the Call of
the Messenger of Allah reached him, he fled to Syria. He had been a
Christian in the days of pre- Islamic Ignorance, and some people of his
tribe, including his sister, fell prisoners of war to the Muslims. The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, released \`Adi's sister and gave
her generous gifts. She returned to her brother, persuaded him to accept
Islam, and to visit the Messenger of Allah.

'Adi came to Madinah as chief of the tribe of Tayy, and people talked
about his coming. He came into the presence of the Messenger of Allah,
wearing a silver cross around his neck, while the Messenger of Allah was
reciting the verse quoted above, "They have taken their rabbis and monks
as their lords beside Allah..." 'Adi reports that he said, "They do not
worship them." The Messenger of Allah replied, "No, but they forbid to
people what is permissible and make permissible what is forbidden (by
Allah) and people follow them in this. This is their worship and
servitude."

In this respect the Islamic concept is very sharp and clear by
proclaiming the liberation of man, and indeed, the birth of man. Through
this proclamation it brings mankind out of servitude to creatures into
the servitude of the Creator. The' 'human being," in its full sense,
cannot be found on this earth except when he is totally liberated from
enslavement to servants,

whatever be the form of this slavery, whether of belief and of
conscience, or of rules of behavior and system of life. Only Islam
refers back all legislative power and sovereignty to Allah and thereby
brings people from servitude to the servants into the service of their
Lord. In systems where legislative power and sovereignty belong to human
beings,

there is a kind of slavery of people to other people, but in Islam, and
only in Islam, all people, without exception, are liberated from such
slavery and serve their Creator alone. This is true "liberation of man"
and this is the "birth of man," because before this man's true
"humanity" had never come into existence in its complete and true form.
This belief in the Oneness of Allah and in His Sovereignty over people
is a Divine gift that guides all people on earth, and is the Divine
favor referred to in the following verse:

Today I have perfected your religion for you, and I have completed My
blessing upon you, and I have approved Islam for your religion
(Al-Ma'idah 5:3).

This gift the believers in the Oneness of Allah offer to all mankind,
and this is the blessing they want to share with people, after
benefiting from it themselves. They offer nothing less than the pleasure
of Allah Most High. This is the new message that the believers in the
Oneness of Allah can offer to mankind today, as their forefathers
offered it in the past. Men and women receive it eagerly today. The
attraction to this message is enormous because it offers mankind
something it does not possess, something not contained in other concepts
and beliefs, ideologies and philosophies, and systems and
constitutions.

Before the battle of Al-Qadisyyah, Raba' i bin \`Amer came to Rustum,
the commander of the Persian army, as a messenger from the Muslim army.
Rustum asked him, "For what purpose have you come?" Raba'I replied,
"Allah has sent us to bring whoever wishes from servitude to men into
servitude to Allah alone, from the narrowness of this world into the
vastness of this world and the Hereafter, and from the tyranny of
religions into the justice of Islam."

These few words convey the total message of Islam, namely the nature of
this belief and of the movement produced by this belief, as well as the
Muslims' understanding of this message and of their role in carrying
this message to the entire world.

Indeed, Islam is a migration from the servitude of men toward the
servitude of Allah, and a commitment to refer everything, whether it
concerns this world or the next, to Him alone, and to ascribe every
attribute of divinity to Allah Most High alone. Since sovereignty over
people is a major attribute of divinity, the believer cannot divide his
loyalty between Allah and something other than Allah. It follows that
anyone who divides his loyalty in such a position is a disbeliever.

It is not possible to find liberation for the human being, or indeed,
to find the "human being" at all except by purifying one's under­
standing that the attribute of Sovereignty belongs to Allah alone and by
purifying one's loyalty exclusively to Him.

The believers in the Oneness of Allah Most High, by returning to this
concept and raising its banner, are able to tell the whole of mankind
what Rabi' i bin \`Amer told Rustum at a time w hen the state of mankind
was similar to that of today. Mankind today is drowned in the servitude
of servants, and only belief in the Oneness of Allah in its most
comprehensive meaning can bring whoever wishes out of this enslavement
into the servitude of Allah alone. Only in this way can any person
liberate himself or herself and become a human being in the full sense
of the word.

Moreover, believers in the Oneness of God, by returning to the system
of life that this belief entails and calling others to it, are in a
position to offer the whole world something possessed by no other
religion, ideology, system, constitution, or philosophy. This is the
grand opportunity for them to playa great and significant role in
transforming the entire world. Their essential role will be to lead
mankind in all important matters, just as the first generation of
Muslims from the Arabian Peninsula led mankind 1400 years ago.

At present they are not in a position to offer mankind great scientific
discoveries or dazzling cultural achievements, so that the people of the
world would flock to them because of their superiority in science and
culture. They can offer something else, however, something greater than
all scientific discoveries and all cultural achievements. This is the
“liberation of man," or greater still, the “birth of man" as intended by
Allah.

In offering mankind this gift, they offer with it a complete way of
life, a way of life based on the dignity of man and based on freedom of
his person, his mind, his conscience, and his soul from all bondages.
Freed from the shackles of human enslavement, he stands as the deputy of
Allah on earth, strong and noble, just as Allah intended him to be. As
the deputy of Allah, he can make splendid discoveries and Open up great
avenues of culture, remaining at the height of his freedom, noble and
dignified, slave neither to any machine nor to any mortal. If Allah has
inspired us to say the right thing, all praise belongs to Him the Lord
of all Being.


