Summary
=======

The terms *cussing - “sabb”* (سبّ), *swearing - “shatam”* (شطم), and
­*malediction - “laʿn”* (لعن)*,* in their truest forms, represent the
totality of enmity, and the appreciation of these terms [and their
usage] has been present right from the initial stages of human existence
and historically speaking, there have been individuals, who in order to
show their enmity in regards to events which transpired in the past, or
individuals who lived in long-ago times, who have demonstrated these
terms vividly in their lives.

Even after the introduction of Islam, the usage and real-world practice
of these terms was common and there were some individuals, who in order
to express their aversion and detestation for the acts of others
resorted to *cussing - “sabb”* (سبّ) and ­*malediction - “laʿn”* (لعن).

As these practices were commonplace, it is important for us to analyse
these terms from an Islamic perspective and to carry out an in-depth
investigation into them.

In this article, what we seek to do through our study is to explore the
phenomenon of *cussing* and *malediction* and its status from the
Islamic point of view by delving into the relevant sources: the Qurʾan,
the Prophetic traditions *(ahadith)* and the conduct of the Muslims.

In addition, through reviewing the historical evidences and by means of
a psychological analysis, we will seek to prove that *cussing - “sabb”*
(سبّ) and *swearing - “shatam”* (شطم) are absolutely forbidden *(haram)*
in the sacred teachings of Islam; however as for ­*malediction - “laʿn”*
(لعن), it is something which is essential from the societal point of
view.

We will see how the permissibility of *malediction - “laʿn”* (لعن) is
something which all of the Muslim scholars agree upon and that what we
see today from the Wahhabi sect and those who follow this particular
group which has become prevalent in the world in which they categorize
*malediction* alongside *cussing* and *swearing* and claim that all of
these go against the teachings of Islam, is nothing other than baseless
and futile claims which lack any form of evidence.


