Conclusion
==========

From all of that which has been mentioned, we reach to this conclusion
that the issue of love and hate and specifically the act of malediction
is not only something which is allowed in Islam, rather, it is one of
the societal requirements and is one of the ways to encourage people
towards the truth and realities of Islam, and it is a mechanism by way
the masses are kept away from corruption and destruction.

How is it possible that a person refrains from renouncing those who are
worthy of being repudiated whereas God, the Most High, says in the
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ كَانَتْ لَکُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ
مَعَهُ إِذْ قَالُوا لِقَوْمِهِمْ إِنَّا بُرَآءُ مِنْکُمْ وَمِمَّا
تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ كَفَرْنَا بِکُمْ وَبَدَا بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَکُمُ الْعَدَاوَةُ وَالْبَغْضَآءُ أَبَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is certainly a good exemplar for you in Abraham and those who
were with him, when they said to their own people, ‘Indeed we repudiate
you and whatever you worship besides God. We disavow you, and between
you and us there has appeared enmity and hate forever….”***[^1]

However it must be noted that some companions of the Messenger of Allah
(S)- meaning those who accepted the call to Islam and went through
extreme pressures while in Mecca and resorted to various means in order
to safeguard their religion, and even the Muslims who after the
migration to Medina shed their blood to water this new-sapling called
Islam in the initial wars, as well as the individuals who after the
death of the Messenger of Allah (S) said farewell to their homes and
possessions and went forth in the sacred struggle – all of these groups
of individuals are to be congratulated, honoured and respected.

Similar to a candle, they “burnt” while trying to give light to their
surroundings – and no Muslims have a difference of opinion in regards to
these self-sacrificing individuals, who were true and noble companions.

Rather, the debate and examination is in regards to the other companions
of the Prophet (S) - because of the fact that they were not flawless.
When they intentionally performed a sin and fit into the criteria for
one who is worthy of having malediction evoked upon them – then what is
the religious ruling on passing judgement over such individuals?

Naturally, the ruling of such people, as it would be for anyone other
than them who are in the same position of committing such an act is the
same [and thus they should and must be open to critique and criticism
when they openly and intentionally violate the Islamic laws].

Therefore, if the Shiʿa seek to distance themselves from an identifiable
group of “companions” of the Noble Prophet (S) then it is not because
they are considered as “companions”; rather, evoking the malediction of
God upon this limited group of individuals known as the “companions” is
due to the fact that even though they saw the Prophet (S), and were able
to benefit from him and his magnanimous status, however they actively
and consciously decided to stay in their state of spiritual negligence
and to act against the orders and commandments of the Noble Prophet (S)
such that they deserve that the Muslims distance themselves from them –
as the Noble Qur’an has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَعَنَهُمُ اللهُ فِي
الدُّنْيا وَالآخِرَةِ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذاباً مُهِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed those who torment God and His Apostle are cursed by God in
this world and in the Hereafter, and He has prepared a humiliating
punishment for them.”***[^2]

Therefore, if one of the “companions” of Prophet Muhammad (S) did
something which led to the Prophet (S) being tormented, then that
companion would definitely be found guilty of the infraction mentioned
in the verse quoted above, just like if anyone other than one of the
companions was to possess any of the traits which would make him worthy
of having the mercy of God be removed from him.

Further, he too would definitely be worthy of having the malediction of
God inflicted upon him – and of course in Islam, there is no
discrimination when it comes to such things – all are equal in front of
the law.

It is with this said that the Shiʿa employ the concept of evoking the
malediction of God upon certain “companions” who were sources of
corruption in the Muslim society - not only during their own era, but
even after they left this world and up until the Day of Judgement.

[^1]: Al-Qurʾan, Suratul Mumtahina (60), verse 4

[^2]: Al-Qur’an, Suratul Ahzab (33), verse 57


