Introduction
============

The stances of love and hate are two extremely powerful forces within a
person which can be a source of great benefit for the society on a whole
and an individual on his own, and it is for this reason that Islam has
placed a lot of attention on them, such that the Noble Prophet of Islam
(S) has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلِ الإِيمَانُ إِلاَّ الْـحُبَّ وَ الْبُغْضَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Is true faith anything other than love and hate?!”*[^1]

Being endowed with the power of love and adoration and manifesting these
traits vis-à-vis the person who is acting with goodness is the actual
show of love of a person towards good itself; and this stance towards
love is a cherished guide to assist a person in reaching towards
perfection and spiritual happiness.

In the same vein, taking a stand and expressing abhorrence and aversion
towards individuals who have sunk to the lowest levels of depravity in
which they have permitted themselves to commit the most heinous of
atrocities and reach the bottom levels of baseness, is in reality, the
explicit confirmation of aversion to wickedness itself and keeping away
from everything which will distance a person from God Almighty.

The noble companions who lived during the time of Prophet Muhammad (S),
were fully aware of the life of the Noble Messenger (S) and in addition,
because they possessed a special status, they managed to gain the
attention of all of the believers – even though all of the companions
were not at the same [spiritual] level.

Some of them were not able to remain firm on the path of true faith and
some of them even ended up drifting away entirely from the path which
they had chosen during the life-time of the Prophet(S).

It is due to this fact that today, it is necessary that those who
brought about true faith during the life-time of the Messenger of God
(S) and remained on the straight path until the end [of their lives] and
the individuals who were led astray while traversing the straight path
and performed actions which went against the ways of the Noble Prophet
(S) and transgressed his commandments – need to be understood and
distinguished from one another.

In regards to the first group, we must show love and affection; while in
regards to the second group and their base actions, we must display our
disgust and distance ourselves from their un-ethical deeds.

Therefore, according to the habit of God in the Qur’an, the Muslims must
invoke the *malediction* of God and must seek aversion from that group
whose atrocities and opposition to the orders and dictates of the Noble
Prophet (S) reached such a critical level that it resulted in the
misguidance of many other individuals.

Meanings of cussing (sabb) and malediction (la’n) and their differences
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a difference between *malediction* and *cussing*. In Islam,
*cussing* is forbidden *(haram)*; and in the books of lexicon, *“sabb”*
is defined as cussing and the usage of profanities.[^2]

Al-Zubaydi has stated: “*As-sabb* is [defined] as cussing.”[^3]

Ibne Manḍhur has stated that: “*Al-Shatam* means offensive speech and
there is no requirement that in such speech, defamation occurs.”[^4]

Al-Turayhi has stated: “*al-Shatam* means to describe something such as
to show a deficiency within it.”[^5]

Islam has prohibited the acts of *cussing* and the use of vulgar
language just as God, the Most High, has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَسُبُّوا الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ فَيَسُبُّوا
اللهَ عَدْواً بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not cuss those whom they invoke besides God, lest they should
abuse God out of hostility, without any knowledge…”***[^6]

The Noble Prophet of Islam (S) was very strong in his words in
condemning this practice and has stated: “Cussing and usage of vulgar
language towards a Muslim is a sin.”[^7]

During the battle of Siffin, when the Commander of the Faithful ʿAli Ibn
Abi Talib (as) was informed that some of his companions where using bad
language in regards to the people of the Levant *(Sham)*, he addressed
them by saying: “I dislike that you start to verbally abuse them (using
vulgar language), but if you describe their deeds and recount their
situations (their actions) that would be a better mode of speaking and a
more convincing way of arguing [with others about how these people
are].”[^8]

In addition, Imam Jaʿfar as-Sadiq (as) has stated: “The cussing of a
believer [by another believer] is like the one who has thrown himself
into perdition.”[^9]

Therefore, *cussing* is definitely recognized as something which is
expressly forbidden *(haram)* in Islam and any sane and rational person
will be sure to refrain from such actions; however as for evoking
*malediction*, this is something other than *cussing* and its meaning is
to “distance oneself towards something good.”

Al-Jawhari has stated: “*Al-Laʿn* is to drive way and to distance one’s
self away [from evil and going towards] good.”[^10]

In addition, malediction has also been defined as displaying an aversion
towards an individual’s despicable actions.

Raghib al-Isfhani has stated that: “Malediction means the rejection and
distancing of oneself [from something] - angrily. If malediction is
practiced by God, then its meaning is that in the next life, one will
face the Divine retribution; while in the transient world, it means that
the individual will be cut off from being able to accept the mercy [of
God] and the Divine providence.

If malediction is employed by an individual, then it means that one
makes supplication and imprecation and entreats [God] to bring about
damage to the person whom one is praying against.”[^11]

Therefore, malediction means to distance one’s self from the despicable
actions of an individual and to pray that he is detached from the mercy
of God.

Perhaps the best way to phrase this word is to state that it ultimately
means: “May God never forgive you.” For example, in some instances it
may be said of an individual: “May God never forgive that person whose
actions led to the killing of countless innocent people” – this is
malediction.

Such phrases can never be considered to be positive or in a person’s
benefit [although one is praying “for” someone else]; rather, the
supplication against a person (imprecation) is due to the fact that one
has committed a contemptible action, and therefore when a person says:
“O God! Remove your mercy from such and such person,” what we mean is
that we are asking God to leave that person alone on his own and not
forgive him for his evil actions.

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, vol. 66, pg. 241

[^2]: Sihah fil lugha, vol. 1, pg. 299

[^3]: Taj al-ʿUrus, vol. 2, pg. 63: السب: الشتم

[^4]: Lisan al-ʿArab, vol. 12, pg. 318, الشتم: قبيح الكلام وليس فيه قذف

[^5]: Majmaʿ al-bahrayn, vol. 12, pg. 70

[^6]: Al-Qurʾan, Suratul An’am (6), verse 108

[^7]: Sahih al-bukhari, vol. 1, pg. 52; Al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 360 [سِبابُ
المُسْلمِ فُسُوقٌ]

[^8]: Nahj al-balagha, pg. 323 [إِنّي أَکرَهُ لَکُمْ أَنْ تَکُونُوا
سَبّابِينَ وَلکِنَّکُم لو وَصَفْتُم أَعْمالَهُمْ وَذَکَرْتُمْ حالَهُمْ،
کانَ أَصْوَبَ في الْقَولِ وَأَبْلَغَ فِي الْعُذْرِ]

[^9]: Wasa’il ash-shiʿa, vol. 12, pg. 298 [سباب المؤمن کالمُشرِفِ علي
الهلکة]

[^10]: Sihah al-Jawhari, vol. 6, pg. 2196; Lisan al-ʿArab, vol. 13, pg.
387 [اللعن، الطرد والابعاد من الخير]

[^11]: Al-Mufradat of Raghib, vol. 2, pg. 339


