Some proofs of the Ahlus Sunnah opposing malediction of the companions
======================================================================

One of the most significant proofs from some of the Ahlus Sunnah in
their rejection of malediction is their belief in defending the honour
and integrity of all of the companions due to the fact that they
consider the companions as being the prime sources of Islamic religious
legislation alongside the *Qur’an*, *Sunnah*, *Ijmaʿ* (consensus) and
*ʿAql* (intellect), and the other sources.

Sometimes, it is even seen that the ways and customs *(madhab)* of the
companions is referred to as the *sunnah* of the companions and this
clearly shows that the *sunnah* of the companions as well, is on the
same horizontal plane as the *sunnah* of Prophet Muhammad (S) for the
Ahlus Sunnah and that they too have a *sunnah* [just as it is an
obligation to follow the *sunnah* of Prophet Muhammad (S) so too for
some people, it is an obligation to follow the *sunnah* of the
companions].

These people truly believe that if the companions are open to
examination and analysis or are maledicted against, then this may lead
to the instability of Islam, whereas a faith whose fundamentals has been
laid down by God, the Most High, and the Noble Prophet Muhammad (S), and
as has been promised by God, will remain until the Day of Judgement, can
never be made instable by the analysis and criticism of a few
individuals!

Thus, this belief that the *madhab of the companions is one of the
fundamental sources of Islamic legislation* must also be rejected!

In this regards, Imam al-Ghazali said: “The person, in whom there is a
possibility of error and mistakes and whose infallibility from sins and
faults is not proven, his statements are not a testimony or proof over
us, therefore how can anyone ever rely on his testimony if he is prone
to error!? In addition, how is it possible that without any successive
proofs, one can claim infallibility of such individuals?

In addition, how is it possible to imagine that a community of
individuals would never have any differences of opinion amongst
themselves, and even more, how is it possible that two infallible people
would ever differ amongst themselves - whereas we see that there is a
consensus amongst all of the companions that one is permitted to go
against the opinions of the other companions.

Why is it that Abu Bakr and ʿUmar never allowed anyone, by way of their
own independent assessment *(ijtihad)*, to differ with them; rather, in
issues which call for *ijtihad*, it is an obligation upon every
individual who has reached the level of being able to conduct
independent research and analysis *(mujtahid)* to follow his own
*ijtihad!”*[^1]

Al-Shokani, apparently in discussing the sources of Islamic legislation,
has raised an objection and has said that the opinions of the companions
are not a proof [for us] as God only appointed Prophet Muhammad (S) for
this nation and other than one Prophet and one Divinely sent book, we
have nothing else [to take as a proof of the religion].

Thus, he contends that the entire Muslim nation is obligated to follow
and obey the Book of God (Qur’an) and the *sunnah* of Prophet Muhammad
(S) and there is no differentiation between the companions or others as
everyone is mandated to take their religious responsibilities from the
Book and the *sunnah*.

Therefore, whoever says that after the Qur’an and the *sunnah* of the
Prophet (S) and whatever reaches back to these two sources as a proof
[of the religion] for us in the religion of God, that there are other
proofs [of legislation] has actually said something about the religion
of God which is incorrect.[^2]

Therefore, the only things which are a proof over us [in terms of
religious mandate] are the Qur’an, *Sunnah* of the Prophet (S), the
unanimous consensus of the Muslim scholars, and the unambiguous
intellect and the opinions of the companions – as long as their opinions
**do not** go against the statements of the Prophet (S) - for if it goes
against the Qur’an and *Sunnah* then it is definitely not a proof of the
religion for us; however, if their opinions are extracted and deduced
from the Islamic religious sources, then for them and for those who
follow them, they are a proof – and they are not binding on other people
– on the *mujtahidin* and the *muqallidin*.

The companions of Prophet Muhammad (S) and the first generation after
the companions, are divided into two groups: righteous and iniquitous;
and accepted and rejected; and when we do not accept the traditions
which they claim to have heard Prophet Muhammad (S) say, then we must
clarify the point that this is not a condemnation that we reject all of
the traditions which the companions of the Prophet (S) related.

More than this, the traditions of the Prophet (S) which have been
narrated by the infallible successors of the Prophet (S) - meaning ʿAli
Ibn Abi Talib (as) and his family and noble line of successors who were
indeed the best of companions of the Prophet (S) are at our disposal and
we accept them.

But we do not accept just any tradition narrated by individuals who are
unconvincing or completely unknown. This is evidence that we do not
reject all statements, nor does this bring any uncertainty to the faith
as the Noble Prophet (S) left behind two valuable and solid arguments
for the Muslim nation and by holding firmly onto both of them, we will
be free from need of everything else.

[^1]: Al-Mustasfa, vol. 1, pg. 135

[^2]: Irshad al-fuhul, pg. 214


