The Secrets and Wisdom behind Malediction
=========================================

Just as was previously explained, Islam has placed great importance on
love and hate to such an extent that in the traditions it has been
mentioned that: “Is true faith anything other than love and hate!?”[^1]

This love and hate has also been clearly manifested within Islamic
history in regards to specific individuals [and is not just a theory].
For example Prophet Muhammad (S) addressed the Commander of the Faithful
ʿAli (as) and said: “O ʿAli! Love for you is [a sign of] true faith and
enmity of you is [a sign of] hypocrisy and disbelief.”[^2]

In regards to the wisdom and proofs on the emphasis and importance in
Islam on the traits of love and hate – whether this be of a general
nature or in relation to specific individuals, we will suffice with
mentioning the following brief points:

1. We should keep in mind that love and hate are two extremely powerful
forces within a person and that if they are allowed to fully surround a
person’s presence, then they will definitely prove to reward a person
with great benefits. For example, having love for a person due to the
fact that they have all of the traits of goodness within them is
actually a show of the person’s overwhelming possession of love and
affinity to the totality of goodness, and this affection and passion
which one has can prove to be an extremely powerful force which can take
over one’s entire essence and guide an individual towards the True Love
– meaning God, the Most High. This in actuality is the meaning of the
seeking of perfection and felicity for a human being. In addition, if a
person shows enmity for an individual due to that person being wicked
and evil, then this should lead to the person having one’s entire
presence covered with the detestation of all evil and bad which is
conceivably possible, and this is the actual meaning of the distancing
from corruption on a whole.

2. Contrary to some of the other global religions, Islam looks at the
world as a two sided coin - such that due to the societal requirements,
the believers have been enjoined to keep in mind the two important
beliefs of love and hate. A person is not able to have an affinity for
both good and bad, or the manifestations of both good and bad within
himself, as these two traits are opposite of one another and cannot be
twinned and if they are seen in a person, then this is a sign of
hypocrisy.

3. From the psychological aspect, it has also been proven that the best
way (generally and specifically speaking) to encourage people towards
following the truth and keeping away from corruption and bad deeds is to
present them with the best and most perfect examples of both sides of
the spectrum as this will definitely have the desired outcome intended
for a society.

4. It must be noted that love and hate cannot simply remain “in the
heart”. Rather, they must become manifest, and as long as their
manifestation has no problems from being carried out – both from the
point of view of the religious legal limits and also from the rational
aspect, then not only is it not a problem to manifest these two states,
rather, it becomes something extremely beneficial. This too can be
proven from a psychological point of view as the display of a phenomenon
leads to that thing being suggested and implanted into the spiritual
heart and soul of a person – leading to an eventual state in which that
thing becomes second-nature for an individual. It is for this reason
that the application of love and hate, in the formation of the spiritual
foundation of a person, plays a great role.

5. Voicing our love and hate and showing malediction – which is one of
the forms of voicing hatred – is actually the announcement of an
impending hazard and the pronouncement of good news; the proclamation of
hazard to the masses that they must be aware and on guard from the
enemies of their religion – enemies who are constantly in wait, hoping
to snatch a person’s faith away and to misguide them from the straight
path. Know that such people have definitely been maledicted against and
are not the kinds of people whom we should be following. Expressing our
love is a form of announcement of good news to the people that they
should know that we have perfect and flawless examples and if we follow
them, then we will reach to the Truth and that we will eventually make
it towards the Divine, and this is in reality, one of the manifestations
of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil *(al-amr bil maʿruf wa
nahi ʿanil munkar)* on a societal level.

6. Due to certain reasons, the companions of Prophet Muhammad (S) hold a
special status because they are people who had seen the Prophet (S);
they heard him speak and they listened to the statements which he made,
and they saw firsthand the way that he led his life. From another point
of view, due to the self-sacrifice which some of them offered in the
protection and spreading of the religion of Islam, they are worthy of
having our respect, and it is for this reason that the Muslims pay
special attention to them. From a different perspective, those people
who truly tried to prevent the advancement and were the reason for
misguidedness within the Islamic society enacted the greatest damage to
Islam and the Muslims. It is for this reason that we must differentiate
between the good and bad role models which exist amongst the midst of
the companions of Prophet Muhammad (S) - and the measuring stick for
judging them is the primary role model which we all have – the Messenger
of God (S) - just as Allah (SWT) says in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَکُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed in the Messenger of God [Muhammad] is the best role model for
you…”***[^3]

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, vol. 66, pg. 241 [هَلِ الإِيـمَانُ إِلاَّ الْحُبُّ
وَ الْبُغْضُ]

[^2]: Maʿani al-akhbar, pg. 206 [يَا عَلِيُّ، حُبُّکَ إِيـمَانٌ وَ
بُغْضُکَ نِفَاقٌ وَ کُفْرٌ]

[^3]: Noble Qurʾan, Suratul Ahzab (33), verse 21


