Q. 30: Rights of Animal in Islam
================================

Can you briefly allude to the rights of all living thing besides man?
A: It is a lengthy topic. However, a few main points are given below:
Wild Animals:

Hunting for pleasure or sport is haram (unlawful.) It is allowed only
if the aim is to eat its meat or to trade its meat and/or hide.
Domesticated animals:

1. It is wajib to look after them properly by feeding them and
protecting them from cold or heat etc.

2. It is haram to hit them on the face or head.

3. It is not allowed to brand them on face.

4. According to the traditions narrated from the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and
the Imams (a.s.), a domesticated animal has seven rights on its owner:

1) When he gets down, he should begin with feeding it and giving it
water before himself eating;

2) If during a journey, he passes by a stream or pond of water, he
should take the animal to it;

3) He should not hit on its face, because it glorifies the praise of
its Lord;

4) Not to ride it except in the way of Allah {i.e. for lawfijl
purposes};

5) Not to put heavy load on it beyond its normal strength;

6) Not to make it run beyond its strength;

7) Not to use its back as a seat for talking with friends/companions.


**Q. 31: HARAM MUSIC?**

Is music haram in religion?

A: Yes, it is forbidden. I am sending to you a booklet, Music and Its
Effects, which explains various aspects of this topic. However, it
should be mentioned here that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) spoke Arabic and
his immediate audience were Arabs.

Therefore, Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala used plain Arabic language for
revelation and promulgation of the shari'ah. All the words were used in
their normal and prevalent meanings except a few which were given new
connotations, like salah and zakah which originally meant invocation and
purification, respectively, and the shari'ah gave them new meanings as
we know them.

"Music" was not given any new meaning. Therefore, it is to be taken in
its usual meaning. Past scholars, never the less, had tried to define
"music" as a prolonged voice with varying pitch. Nowadays, they explain
it as a voice which arouses base desires and lust in the listeners.

Some say that it is a voice that is more in keeping with gatherings of
irreligious people. But I feel that the explanation given by late
Ayatullah As-Sayyid Abul Qasim Al- Khou'i (and later adopted by
ayatullah As-Seestani) is the best. He has written that music is the
sound which irreligious persons recognise as music. Thus he has thrown
it back to the general usage, (which is the proper way of explaining a
word to which islam has not given a special meaning).

**Q 32: DEFINITION OF MUSIC:**

In your book "Your Questions Answered,. Vol.III, in reply to Q. 56, you
have written about Music. "To recite or listen to the words of a song
without any music is permissible provided it is not obscene and/or
immoral."

Now according to Ayatullah Al-Khui, to recite Munajaat or Marthiyah in
tune of a song is Haram, then do you think it is allowed to recite the
following Munajats which are indeed film songs..

th- Film Dayare Madina-madad kijie Taajdaare Madina' or nowadays ladies
recite of 12 Imam 'madad kijie Ya Imame Zamana'. nd- Film 'Niaz or
Namaz' - 'Ai Momino niyaz dilawo Imam ki' which is recited on the 22 of
Rajab on sufra of the 6th Imam,

A: Late Ayatullah al-Khou'i had defined the music as the sound which
irreligious people recognise as music. Ayatullah Sistani has used
another wording to express the same idea. He writes that the haram music
is the one which is befitting to the gatherings of pleasure and
debauehery.

To identify which sound is haram music and which is not, one has to
look how the general public treats it. If they say, "He is reciting the
poem (or nawha or marthiyah) in a good voice, then it is halal. But if
they say, "He is singing the marthiyah etc. then it is haram.

**Q, 33: WHY JIHAD IN A RELIGION OF PEACE?**

Islam is a religion based on the fundamental concept of peace. How do
you reconcile this idea with the concept of Jihad?

A: Your question requires some detailed explanation, Islam does not
like to exterminate wrong-doers, it wants to remove the wrong. Evil
deeds are like diseases. They need treatment, and every doctor wants to
cure an ailment with medicine as far as possible.

But sometimes the ailment reaches a stage where no medicine can do any
good; the doctor feels that surgical operation is necessary, if the life
of the patient is to be saved. Then he decides, not happily but
reluctantly, to ampute one or more limbs of the patient.

It may cause hardest pain for the time being; but it is not torture, it
is mercy. Likewise, this humanity is a compact body. If some of its
parts become infected with spiritual diseas and every medicine of
sympathetic persuasion and rational pleading has failed, and there is a
danger that the infection is going to inflict damage to other parts; now
the spiritual doctor, (I mean the Prophet or Imam who is guided by
Allah), is confident that a surgical operation is essential to save
other sections of mankind from harm.

Then, and only then, he will order jihad; and even then it will be
limited to that part which is most necessary to remove.

However, even when you feel that there is a necessity of a surgical
operation, you will not entrust this dangerous task to an unauthorized
person. It will be a very foolish and irresponsible act. You can never
be sure that the operation is essential unless a qualified doctor tells
you so.

Therefore, according to the Ithna-'asheri law, a war cannot be started
unless specifically authorized by the Prophet or Imam himself, and that
also to the limits prescribed by that Representative of Allah. After all
life is a creation of God and it should not be destroyed unless it has
been sanctioned by a Representative of God.

**Q. 34: WHY INTERNECINE STRIFES BETWEEN FOLLOWERS OF ISLAM?**

You said in your lecture that Islam is based on social justice. Why has
Islam failed to establish practical social justice in the Midle-East
where we have seen wars between Iraq and Iran and between Iraq and
Kuwait?

A: You should not confuse Islam with the Muslims. Social justice needs
a society based on Islamic ideals, and that in turn requires a righteous
system of government which draws its strength from the Qur'an and
sunnah. Nowadays there are nearly forty five "nations" that are
populated predominantly by Muslims.

But their system of governance is totally unIslamic. Even the idea of
"nation-states" is a legacy of the Kuffar (infidels) of Europe. In the
eyes of Islam all Muslims are one nation. Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala
says: "Surely this your nation [or religion] is but one nation, and I am
your Lord, therefore worship Me."

(21:92) But the Europeans sowed the seed of "nationalism" in the minds
of the Arabs and nurtured the idea - with the sole aim of dissecting and
annihilating the Ottoman empire, which, in spite of all its
short-comings and defects, had kept the whole Middle East together under
one Muslim ruler.

Look at the map of the Middle East; you will find numerous
"nation-states" in it like pieces of a jig-saw puzzle. And these states
are always in conflict with one another; they are merely puppets whose
strings are pulled by their Western and Eastern puppeteers. It is a very
painful story and cannot be described in a short letter. But this much
is enough to tell you why there is always one or the other conflict in
the Muslim lands.

**Q.35: HOW TO UNIFY VARIOUS SECTS?**

What is the basic difference between the various sects of Muslims and
what remedy you do suggest for removing these differences. A: I am
sending you a small booklet of mine, Sects of Islam, which will give you
an idea of the differences.

At present, it is impossible to remove these differences. We have to
wait for the re- appearance of al-Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) who will
establish the rule of God on the earth, and the original Islam will
prevail over all other beliefs and ideologies.

**Q. 36: HOW DID MUSLIMS COMPARTMENTALIZE ISLAM?**

You mentioned that Muslims have compartmentalized Islam in pigeon
holes; can you perhaps explain why this has happened?

A: It is not possible to say at which point of history this thing had
happened. As for why, I think this phenomenon crept into Islamic
academic life imperceptibly. Let us say, a scholar is very fond of
hadith; he spends his time in pondering on its various aspects. Another
is enamoured with jurisprudence; he thinks over and solves legal
problems.

Each trains his disciples in his own field, and thus a time comes when
a jurist is not so proficient in hadith, and a muhaddith has no
expertise in jurisprudence. In this way different "pigeion holes" were
created in Islam.

**Q. 37: WHAT IS THE PATH OF SPIRITUAL JOURNEY?**

You said that jurisprudence is the starting point of Muslims' spiritual
journey. To gain excellence one has to go on spiritual path to one's
final destination. What is this path? A: I am a sinful man, and am not
in a position to provide guidance to you from personal experience.

However, I have studied biographies of many men of God, and based on
that, I can tell you that there are some very important steps which one
has to take in order to proceed on this lofty spiritual path.

First of all, you should cleanse your tongue from all types of
undesirable talk:backbiting, falsehood, slander and tale-bearing etc.

Second: Make sure that the food and drink going into your mouth is of
halaI category, and you have obtained it by halal means.

Third: Always remember that you and all that you have, belong
exclusively to Allah Subhanahu va Ta'ala, and you should always be ready
to sacrifice or abandon all if He demands it from you. Forth: Reserve at
least half an hour for the study of Qur'an. Merely its recital brings
divine reward to you: but if you ponder on its translation and its deep
connotation it can change your life.

Fifth: Pray nawafil with all five wajib prayers. And make tahajjud
prayers a compulsory part of your routine. Sixth: Keep sunnat fasts on
Thursdays regularly.

Seventh: Make sure that you fulfil the rights of the parents, the
children, the spouse and other relatives. Also be careful about the
rights of your neighbours. You may learn about these rights from my
book, Family Life of islam.

If you follow this regimen sincerely, a time will come when you will
enjoy Allah's worship and truly feel the taste of obedience to Allah and
His Messenger. That is the sign that your endeavours are succeeding and
your are proceeding in the right direction. May Allah give you and me
the tawfiq to acquire these noble traits and virtues. Amen.

**Q. 38: SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIETY:**

What is the best way to develop spirituality in innerself and in the
society as a whole. A; For personal development, the regimen given in
preceding reply should help. As for the society, it needs a government
based on Islamic values to bring societal upliftment in the desired
manner. Please note that a government based on Islamic values is not the
same as a government run by the Muslims. A system of governance based on
Qur'an and sunnah will create the atmosphere conducive to the society's
spiritual development.

**Q.39.HOW TO COUNTER ANTI-ISLAMIC PROPAGANDA?**

How is the Charter of Imam Zainul 'Abideen relating to us (Muslims) in
the light of considerable propaganda from the western media? In other
words, how do we counter it and propogate Islam as religion of PEACE?

A: Prejudice is born from the womb of ignorance. If we try to remove or
decrease the prevalant ignorance about Islam, this unremitting onslaught
against this noble religion will stop.

That is, if it emanates from ignorance. But, if it is the result of
wilful slandering, then it is not easy to counteract --- except from the
position of power. Allah Subhanahu wa ta'ala has given the Muslim rulers
enough power to make the West kneel down before them. But these rulers
are blind to the realities.

If they start withdrawing their petro-dollars from western banks, the
West's attitude will change in one week. May Allah have mercy on the
Muslim masses and release them from the clutches of these puppet
regimes.


