Q. 40: Character of Rights
==========================

Is this Charter of Rights available in English and where? A: Yes, it
was translated by me in 1968; and published in Karachi and Vancouver
(Canada). Now it is going to be printed in Dar es Salaam. At present you
may order it from: Syed Muhammad Rizvi 7 EL Dorado Street Richmond Hill,
Ontario, Canada L4C 0G9.

**Q. 41: CONDITIONS FOR CUTTING A THIEF'S HAND:**

I wonder if the Shari'ah law of amputating a thiefs hands is acceptable
in the eyes of Allah, if a person is forced by abject poverty to steal
food items? A: No. His hand will not be amputated.

The Islamic shari'ah is not blind to the realities on the ground. I
think I should give you a short description of the conditiona which
should be kept in view before deciding such cases.

(1) The thief must be adult, sane, and a free man;

(2) he should not have taken it thinking that it is his own thing;

(3) the alleged thief is not a joint owner of that thing;

(4) the stolen thing was kept in a safe place (for example, under lock)
and the thief did break into it either alone or with the help of others;
If someone else broke the lock, and afterwards the thief entered into
the place and took something from there, his hand will not be
amputated;

(5) the thing stolen is not the property of his son (If a father has
stolen from his son, he will not be given that punishment of cutting the
hand);

(6) he takes it stealthily, not openly;

(7) the stolen thing is at least equal in value to 21 grm. of gold.

If one steals food during a general famine, his hand is not to be
cutoff. If all conditions are fulfilled then according to the Qur'an,
his hand must be cut off. In Shi'a Shari'ah, 'hand' here means 4 fingers
of the right hand.

**Q. 42: CONDITIONS AND PUNISHMENT OF APOSTACY:**

What is the meaning, conditions and punishment for ridda? A: Riddah or
irtidad means apostasy. First, let me describe conditions and various
ways of apostacy:- A) Conditions of Apostasy:

Five condtions must be fulfilled before a person could be declared a
murtadd (apostate):

1) & 2) He must be adult and sane; 3) He must be knowing what he is
speaking. If a word of kufr (disbelief) slips out of his tongue without
his having any intention to do so, it would not be held against him.

4) He should be knowing that it is a word of kufr and then uses it in
that same meaning. If he speaks a word of kufr, without knowing its
meaning, or uses it in some other lawful meaning, then it would not be
held against him. If he knew that it was a word of kufr and used it in
the same meaning, he would become murtadd and najis, even if he was not
aware of the consequences of his utterance.

5) He should utter a word of kufr by his own free will. If he was
forced to say such words and he did so to save his life (i.e. in
taqiyyah), then it would not be held against him.

B) Apostasy may occur through heart, tongue and/or action:- ? Apostasy
through heart: If someone disbelieves after believing or harbours doubt
after being sure.

? Apostasy through tongue: When he denies the existence or oneness of
Allah, or refutes God's justice or knowledge etc., or tries to show that
God's actions are aimless or against Wisdom, or rejects any of the
Zaruriyat-e-deen like prayer, fast, zakah, hajj, or disparages religion,
qiyamat, Qur'an or hadith.

? Apostasy through action: When someone, say, throws the Qur'an down
(with intention of insulting it), or with that intention tears it down,
or kicks at it or throws it into a dirty place. The same is the rule if
he insults the books of du'a, or hadith, or the names of Allah

C) There are three things which, without any difference of opinion,
make a person kafir:

1. Denial of any one of the Zaruriyat-e-Deen. Some of its examples have
been given above.

2. Objecting to any command of Allah. It was this offence because of
which Satan became kafir; otherwise he believed in one God, Qiyamat and
almost all divine commands; but he objected to one order given by Allah
and became kafir and accursed. The objection was: Why did you order me
to do sajdah before Adam while I am superior to him?

3. To treat any divine order with disdain even if it is a sunnah law.
For example it is sunnah that moustache should be trimmed; now if
someone disdainfully says: What nonsense is this? Or, what it has got to
do with shari'ah? He will become kafir:

Now we come to the categories of apostates and their punishments :-
Murtadd is of two kinds: Murtadd fitri and Murtadd Milli.

Murtadd Fitri: A person both (or at least one) of whose parents were
Muslims at the time of his conception, and then he/she, on attaining
majority, renounces Islam by his own free will.

The rules about Murtadd Fitri differ according to the sex of the
offender, i.e. there are different rules for males and females.

A male murtadd fitri is to be killed. He is najis; his wife becomes
haram for him, and she will observe 'iddah of death; even during his
life; he loses all rights in his property-after repaying his debts the
residue will be distributed among his Muslim heirs.

And his repentance is not acceptable in this life, according to the
well-known ruling of the scholars. But Ayatullah al-Khoui says that
obviously his repentance is acceptable in the hereafter and to a certain
extent in this life too.

Accordingly, if he repents he will become tahir, and if his former wife
agrees he may remarry her in a fresh marriage. In short, he will be
treated as a Muslim-but even then he shall not regain possession of his
property unless the heirs willingly return it to him. Likewise the
sentence of death shall not be waived even after repentance.

If a woman becomes Murtadd (Fitri), she becomes najis; and haram on her
husband, but she does not lose her property, nor is she sentenced to
death; and her repentance is accepted. If she refuses to repent, she
will be imprisoned for life.

Murtadd Milli: A person who was not born of a Muslim parent; and
accepted Islam after attaining majority and later renounced it.

He should be told to repent. If he repents within three days, his
repentance will be accepted. Otherwise he would be killed on the fourth
clay. His Muslim wife will become haram for him, i.e. the marriage will
become invalid automatically, and she will have to observe the 'iddah of
divorse if the marriage was cosummated, but if he repents during her
'iddah period, the marriage will continue without there being any need
for a new nikah.

Murtadd Milli is debarred from managing his property (althought he
remains its owner). If he repents, he will regain its management;
otherwise he will be given his essential requirements from it until he
dies; after his death, the property will be divided among his Muslim
heirs.

**Q. 43: SOME ITEMS OF SEA-FOOD:**

What is the fatwa of Late Ayatullah Al-Khoui or Ayatullah As-Sistani
about eating crabs, squids, sturgeons, lobsters, ducks and rabbits? A:
Duck is lawful without doubt. Crabs, squids and rabbits are haram.
Sturgeon reportedly has a few scales; therefore this fish and its eggs
(caviar) are halal. Lobster like squid and crab is not counted as fish;
and is haram.

**Q. 44: LEADERSHIP OF JAMA 'AT:**

(a) Can we vote for a leader or a person in any position to represent
the community if we are certain of his shortfall in religious behaviour?
Can this community have leaders who are not religious or who have no
warmth for religious beliefs?

A: "Leadership of Jamaat" is not a position laid down by shari'ah; it
is an 'urfi institution, i.e. based on conventional or customary system
and practice. As such a Jamaat or community, in most of the cases, gets
the leaders it deserves; and the leaders' moral excellence or decadence
serves as a mirror of the moral standard of the electors. It is they who
elect the leaders and it is for them to think beforehand what type of
representatives or leaders they want to choose.

However, if that position of leadership entails mutawalliship of waqf
properties, then the relevant rules of shari'ah will apply, which I
append below:

If the waqif (who has made the waqf) has stipulated that the mutawalli
should be 'adil, then a non-'adil cannot become mutawalli; and if he was
'adil when he was chosen as mutawalli, but lost his 'adalat afterwards,
he will at once lose his mutawalliship, ipso facto. But if there is no
such laid down condition (as is usually the case in the waqfs of the
Jamaats in Africa and other countries), then it is not necessary that he
should be 'adil.

What is essential is that he should be honest and trustworthy. If such
a mutawalli mismanages or usurps waqf property, the electors should
remove him from that position, and if that is not possible, then the
mujtahid after some intermediary steps has the ultimate authority to
dismiss him.

b) If a person is holding any position already and he/she openly
violates the religious duty, eg. usurping the rights of the orphans, is
it wrong to point out his defects in person with guidance from the Holy
Qur'an with the aim that he may opt to reform? A: Nahy 'anil munkar
should be done in private, if there is hope that he would reform
himself. If there is no such hope, then Nahy 'anil munkar is not wajib
on you. Other necessary actions then should be taken.

**Q. 45: DONATION BY A NON-MUSLIM:**

Can Jamaat accept any donations in cash or kind from any non-Muslims to
be used in Jamaat's affairs?

A: Accepting donations from non-Shi'a or non-Muslim individuals or
groups (which are not openly hostile to Shi'a faith), in itself, is
allowed. But the following points should be kept in mind:

1. Such acceptance should not be against the dignity and honour of the
Jamaat.

2. Such donation may be used for general social services, but not for
masjid and the matters related to namaz and 'Ibadat.'

**Q.46.IS SHAVING BEARD HARAM?**

Is shaving beard haram? Some people argue that it is not mentioned in
the Qur'an or hadith Please clarify.

A: It is haram to shave beard or to trim it so closely that it looks
like shaving. This rule is based on hadith. There are about ten ahadith
on this subject, one of which is given here as example:

'Ali (a.s.) said that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said: Shaving
beard is mutilation, and on him who mutilates is the la'nat (curse) of
Allah.

(Jami' Ahadith ash-Shi'a; Qum; 1410; vol.16, pp.607-609) As for the
Qur'an, everyone knows that the Holy Book does not give detailed rules.
Can those people show us from the Qur'an, how to pray a 2-rak'ah prayer?
Detail are found in the ahadith. For example, there is the aya 2:124,
which says:

"And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled
them." The hadith which explains the "certain words", says inter alia: .
..Then Allah revealed to him the hanifiyah, and that is parity; it
consists of ten things, 5 in the head and 5 in the (rest of) body. The
items concerning the head are: Trimming the moustache, growing the
beard, keeping the (head's) hair clean, brushing the teeth and using
tooth-pick; and the five concerning the (rest of) body are: removing
hair from body, circumcision, trimming the nails, the bath of janabat
and cleansing (the body) with water; these five are in the body.

And this is the hanifiyah (purification) which was brought by Ibrahim;
and it will not be abrogated upto the day pf resurrection, and this is
the meaning of the word of Allah; "And follow the religion of Ibrahim,
the pure." (Qurfan, 3:95).

(The same book, pp. 608-609)
Please mark that some of the ten items are wajib and some highly
emphasized sunnat. Ayatullah Sistani, like other mujtahidin, says that
shaving the beard is haram and it is wajib ihtiyat not to shave.

Late Ayatullah Khoui was asked: "What is the punishment of the man who
shaves his beard?" He replied: "There is no punishment in this world; as
for the punishment in the akherat he is liable to enter the hell." In
reply to other questions, he wrote that the evidence given by the one
who shaves beard is not acceptable.

(Masa'el wa Rudud, Part 1, Qum 1412, pp. 75-77).

**Q. 47: IS PLAYING CARD LAWFUL?**

Is playing card lawful?

A: Card is one of the main "instruments" of gambling; and playing with
any such thing (even without wager) is definitely haram and a major sin.
Allah says about gambling: "O you who believe! Intoxicants and games of
chance (i.e. gamblings) and (sacrificing to) stones set up and (dividing
by) arrows are only an uncleanliness, the Shaitan's work; shun it
therefore that you may be successful.

The Shaitan only desires to cause enmity and hatred to spring in your
midst by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep you off
from remembrance of Allah and from prayer. Will you then desist?"
(Qur'an, 5:90- 91).

There are dozens of ahadith which very strictly prohibit all
instruments of gambling. As for the games with cards, someone had asked
late Ayatullah Khoui about it attaching 10 cards with the question. He
fully explained that a pack contains 52 cards; they are used in various
games with different names and various numbers of cards.

Some people play it with wagers, others play with it just as a
recreation. Ayatullah Khoui replied: "It is not lawful to play with it
at all, whether with wagers or for recreation, as it is known that these
cards are among the apparatus of gambling."

(Munyatu 's-sa'il, Qum, 1412, pp. 174-175).

Another man asked him:

"Is it allowed to play with instruments made for gambling, for example,
card, chess, donnah and carram, just for recreation, without wagers?"

He replied: "It is unlawful to play with instruments of gambling which
are made for that purpose, even if the players are playing for
recreation, without any wager." (Masa'el wa Rudud, Part 1, Qum, 1412,
pp. 119-120).

**Q. 48: IS SMOKING HARAM?**

Is smoking haram?

A: I believe your question is about cigarettes. Tobacco products are
not mantioned in the Qur'an or hadith. Therefore, no fatwa can be given
which would be applicable to all human beings. Of course, there are
certain general rules which cover such cases. For example, a person is
not allowed to use a thing which would be injurious to his/her health;
but for others the same thing would be lawful.

Sugar will be haram for a diabetic man or woman, but not for others.
Likewise, if a person believes that smoking cigarettes will be harmful
to his/her health, smoking will be haram for him/her; but not for
others.

Some of our mujtahids have advised the youths not to start smoking; and
try to discard the habit in case they have started it.

**Q. 49: IS RECITAL OF SHAHADATAYN NECESSARY FOR ENTERING INTO
SHI'ISM?**

Now that I am following the true Islam as taught by our beloved Prophet
and his pure progeny (Allah's blessings be upon them all), am I required
to take my shahadah over again?

A: No. The shahadah is recited when one discards a non-Islamic religion
and enters into the fold of Islam. But within the circle of Islam,
change of affiliation from one school to another does not require a new
shahadah.


