Q. 40: Character of Rights Q. 50: Minimum Hijab
===============================================

What is the minimum requirement of Islamic Hijab?

A: Covering the whole head and body except face and hands upto wrist -
without decoration (i.e. make up).

**Q.5I: MIXED GATHERING:**

If a mixed gathering of women and men is organised, and there is no
possibility of preventing it, then is attending such a gathering -
religious or otherwise -- lawful? A: Attending such a gathering with
full observance of the rules and when one does not look at the things
which are haram to look at, is without any difficulty in itself. But if
it encourages the women to non-observance of the rules of shari'ah then
attending such gathering is not lawful.

**Q. 52: LOOKING AT FACE OF A GHAYR-MAHRAM MAYYIT:**

I shall be grateful if you will kindly advise me if a ghayr-mahram is
allowed, in our Shari'ah, to view the face of a dead man (after having
been given Ghusl, Hunoot and Kafan). And in the same way is a
ghayr-mahram man allowed to see the face of a dead woman? A: The
restrictions of hijab which are applicable to or about a person during
his/her life, continue to be applied after his/her death too.

**Q. 53: WHY DIFFERENT PUNISHMENT FOR WOMEN?**

If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, take the evidence of four
(reliable) witnesses from amongst you against them; and if they testify,
confine them to houses until death do claim them, or Allah ordain for
them some (other) way.

If two men among you are guilty of lewdness, punish them both. If they
repent and amend, leave them alone; for Allah is Oft-Retuming, Most
Merciful. (Qur'an, 4:15-16) Why different punishment meted to women for
the same sin?

A: I do not know which translation you have used while writing these
questions.You should choose a good translation and avoid confusion which
results from motivated and/or mutilated translations. Even some
non-Muslims like Arbury have mostly given correct meanings.

In the above quotation, the translator writes in V.16: :If two men
among you are guilty of lewdness..." He has added the word 'men'
arbitrarily. Does he want to say that the verse speaks about sodomy?
Astaghflrullah!

In fact, both verses speak about fornication and adultery. They were
revealed in the early Madinite period, when the code of family life was
not yet promulgated. In pre-Islamic era, if a married woman committed
adultery, she was confined to her room, nobody talked to her, her food
was silently put in the room.

In those early days, Allah allowed the Muslims to go on confining them
in the house-but not arbitrarily; the said punishment was to be given
after four male witnesses have given evidence against them. And the end
clause clearly indicates that it was a temporary measure until Allah
makes for them some way of release. And that way was opened when it was
ordained in the ch. 24 v. 2: "(As for) the fornicatress and the
fornicator, flog each of them a hundred stripes..."

The verse 16 speaks about unmarried, man and woman, they are "the two
among you" (not, two men among you). That order too was abrogated by the
v. 2 of ch. 24. If you think that Islam is prejudiced against women,
study the chapter of penal code in any book of masa'il and you will see
that in most cases, punishment of women is much lighter than that of
men.

**Q 54: MUSLIM HUSBAND, CHRISTIAN WIFE:**

Is it lawful for a Muslim to marry a Christian woman? A: The Shi'a
shari'ah allows a Muslim man to marry a Christian woman in Mut'ah form,
i.e in temporary marriage.

**Q. 55: MUT'AH WITH A CHRISTIAN WOMAN:**

And lastly, I have a son by a woman who I am not married to. While in
prison, I've accepted Al-Islam and wish to marry her once I'm released.
Can I do so even though she is not Muslim.

If so,can I perform Mut'ah with her now? And do we need, witnesses?

A; If she is a Christian or Jewess, and is not willing to enter into
the fold of Islam, you may marry her in mut'ah marriage, i.e. a marriage
for a fixed period. That, period may be short or long.. You may marry
her for, let us say, 40 years or even more. In this connection, you
should understand the following points;-

(a) You should ask her not to use liquor of pork at all. (b) She should
agree for the children to be brought up as Muslim. However, you must
realize that a subsequent marriage does not make a previously born child
legitimate. Islam will not recognise him as your son or heir. You may do
mut'ah with her even now. It is better, but not necessary, to have
witnesses during recital of the formula of mut'ah.

**Q. 56: ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION OF HUMAN BEINGS:**

Does Islam allow artificial insemination of human beings?

A: There can be four situations in this matter: First: Inserting,
inside the woman's womb, the semen of her own husband. There is no
problem in it and the child will be legitimate.

But it should be kept in mind that the only person allowed to do this
"operation" is the woman's husband. No other person, male or female, is
allowed to look at the private parts of a woman. However, according to
Ayatullah sistani, a person, other than the husband, may look at or
touch a woman's private parts if her life is in danger or if she is
facing unbearable psychological problems and the cure depends on such
looking at or seeing.

In such a case, a lady doctor may be asked to deal with it. If it is
not possible, then a male doctor may undertake this responsibility. Also
in both cases, it is emphasized that if the "treatment" may be affected
by touching without looking at it, then he/she should not look at it;
similarly, if the work may be done by looking at it, without touching,
then he/she should not touch it.

If the "operation" is done by a doctor, other than the husband, this
action will be haram in itself, but it will not affect the legitimacy of
the child; he/she will be a legitimate offspring of his/her parents.

These rules concerning the doctor etc. apply to the remaining three
ways too; and it should not be necessary to repeat them in every case.

Second: Inserting, inside the woman's womb, semen of someone other than
her husband. This act is haram in itself. But if someone does it then
the child resulting from this insemination will belong to the man whose
semen was used; he will be the child's father as the woman will be his
mother; there will be no relationship between the child and the husband
of the woman. In short, the child will belong to his/her biolgical
parents; all rights and duties as between a parent and a child will be
affected here, including the right of mutual inheritance.

But there will be no such rights/duties between the child and the
husband of the woman. However, the child will not be called "child of
adultery", because adultery implies sexual intercourse between a man and
a married woman which had not taken place in this case.

Third: The ovum of the wife is fertilized in vitro with her husband's
sperm; and after some time the fertilized ovum is implanted in the
wife's womb.

There is no problem in it and the child will belong to his/her legal
parents. Fourth: The ovum of a woman is fertilized in virtro with the
sperm of someone other than her husband; and then the fertilized ovum is
implanted in that woman's womb.

As described in the second situation, this action is haram in itslef;
if a child is born it will belong to the woman and that man whose sperm
was used. All other details of the second situation will apply here
too.

**Q. 57: IS SURROGATE MOTHER ALLOWED IN ISLAM?**

Nowadays the system of employing "surrogate mother" is spreading. The
sperm of a man is inserted into the womb of a woman, other than his
wife. They make an agreement with that woman (called, surrogate mother)
that she will carry the child for the full term (cir.9 months), but
after delivery she will hand over the child to the man whose sperm was
inserted; and he and his legal wife will bring the child up as their own
child; the surrogate mother will have no contact at all with the child,
the surrogate mother is paid heavy remumeration for this "service".

Is this act allowed in Islam?

A: It has been explained in the preceding reply that inserting into the
womb sperm of someone other than the woman's own husband is haram.

However, if a woman commits this sin and the sperm fertilizes her ovum
which develops into a child, then, as was mentioned above, the child
will belong to the woman and that man. (See the Second situation above).
The legal wife of that man and the legal husband of that woman will have
no relationship with that child. All the details mentioned in the
preceding question will apply.

**Q. 58: COUPLE'S FERTILIZED OVUM IMPLANTED IN A SURROGATE MOTHER**

Concerning the above question about surrogate mother, what does the
shari'ah say if the ovum of a wife is fertilized in vitro with the sperm
of her own husband, and the fertilized ovum is inserted into the womb of
a surrogate mother, who carries it for nine months and after delivery
hands the child over to the above-mentioned couple? It is done when the
above-mentioned wife is unable to carry the child in her womb because of
some health problem A: All the restrictions mentioned in the Question
No, 56 under First and Second situations apply here in toto.

As for the child, according to Ayatullah Sistani and a majority of the
living mujtahideen, it belongs to the man and woman whose sperm and
ovum, respectively, contributed to its creation, i.e. to the said man
and his wife.

However, almost all of them say that in the matter of relationship
between the child and the surrogate mother, Ihtiyat (Precaution) should
be observed. It means that she should be treated at least as a foster
mother and her other sons and daughters as foster brothers and
sisters.

**Q. 59: A NON-MUSLIM IN A MASJID/IMAMBARA**

Can a non-Muslim be allowed to enter into masjid or Imambara? Should he
be allowed to touch 'alam or taboot?

A: He should not be allowed to enter into a mosque. There is no
difficulty if he enters into Imambara. Also, he may touch 'alam or
taboot if he does so with respect and reverence.


