Q. 70: Friday Prayers
=====================

In reference to all books of masaail which I have so far gone through,
I found that one who leads Jamaat prayers (of course under certain
qualifications as listed therein) can also lead Friday prayers provided
he fulfills the conditions of Friday prayers as mentioned therein too.
However there are speculations that one who leads Friday prayers is
obliged to seek permission from the Marjaa to do so although he does
lead daily prayers.

A: Any Imam who leads in daily prayers may lead in the Friday prayers.
Even according to Tahrirul-wasilah of Late Ayatullah Khomayni (r.a.),
there is no additional qualification required for Friday prayer's
Imam.

However, in the Islamic Republic of Iran, an Imam of Friday prayer has
been given the authority and privilages of a member of parliament. As
such, their appointment is in the hands of the Waliye Faqih. It is an
administrative matter which obviously should not apply outside Iran.

**Q. 71: SHI'A IMAM & MALIKI CONREGATION:**

I was leading in prayers, and all the congregation follows the Maliki
school of Fiqh while I am Shi 'a. Am I allowed to do Taqiyyah? If yes,
then in which parts of the prayer? A: It is a very complicated question.
Basically, Taqiyyah is allowed to avoid any harm or possible harm to
life, honour or property.

Apparently there is no such danger in your case. But if you think that
if people come to know about your change of madh-hab, your social
standing, or family relations or your livelihood will be harmed to an
unbearable extent, then you should resort to Taqiyyah, and pray exactly
as the Malikis do.

Also, if you think that by observing Taqiyyah you may be able to spread
the True Islam (Shi'ism) among your people, you can do so without
hesitation.

**Q. 72: PRAYING FURADA WHEN JAMA'AT IS IN PROGRESS:**

a) Can an individual offer a Furada (separate) prayer at the same time
when congregation prayer is being conducted in the same hall of the same
mosque?

A: Ayatullah al-'uzma as-Sistani has not written anything about this
matter in his book; but some previous mujtahideen have written that
praying furada prayer at the same time and place where and when
congregational prayer is being conducted is tantamount to gheebat of the
Imam of that congregational prayer. Needless to say that gheebat is a
most serious major sin which will not be forgiven by Allah Subhanahu wa
Ta'ala unless the victim of the gheebat forgives that person.

Late Ayatullah Khomayni has written in reply to a question that praying
furada in a place where congregational prayer is being conducted is not
Ja'ez (lawful), although the prayer is valid." (See Istifata'at, Vol.1,
p. 164).

b) If an individual (reasons best known to himselj) doesn't want to
pray in congregational prayers due to any particular Imam (leader), is
he permitted to pray everyday a furada namaaz (separately) during the
same time and at the same mosque when congregational prayers are being
conducted?

A: Late Ayatullah al-Khoui was asked by two persons separately about
this problem; one of them wrote:

"Zayd (who is respected by people) enters a mosque when a
congregational prayer is going to be held behind an Imam whom Zayd
thinks is not qualified for it, because he is not 'Adil' or his makhraj
is not correct or because of some other reason.

People rely on Zayd's opinion and respect it; if he prays behind him
because of taqiyah or just pretends to join the congregation (while
having niyyat of Furada), the mu'mineen will surely take it as a
confirmation of that Imam's qualifications and think that it is lawful
to pray behind him. Now what should Zayd do? Should he pray behind that
Imam? Or should he go out (of the mosque)? Or should he pray furada
(separately) which would be an insult to the Imam?"

Late Ayatullah al-Khoui replied: "In the situation mentioned in the
question, his only option is to go out. And Allah is Knowing." (See
Masa'il wa Rudud, Qum, Vol.1, pages 33-34).

Another person asked about the same problem with a slight difference:
He was in a gathering and when time of prayer came, congregational
prayer was arranged behind someone who, in his views, was not fit for
it. If he goes out, it will reflect badly on the said Imam, and if he
joins the prayer with niyyat of furada, others will take.it as a
confirmation of the qualifications of that Imam.

Late Ayatullah al-Khoui replied: "In this situation he may get out by
pretending that his nose had started beleeding, or that he had got
sovere stomach-pain or something like that." (See Munyatus-sa'il. 3rd
cd., 1412, Qum. p. 39).

c) Is it permissible for an individual (praying furada) to recite the
two suras loudly at the same time and place where congregational prayers
are being conducted and performed?

A: A man has to recite al-Hamd and the other Surah in an audible voice
in Fajr, Maghrib and 'Isha prayers. The voice should be audible to
another person standing with him. It may be even louder, but it should
not reach shouting level.

As is clear from late Ayatullah Khomayni's fatwa, praying fiirada when
and where congregational prayer is being conducted is not lawful.
Likewise, late Ayatullah al-Khoui tells such a man to go out of that
place. If in spite of these fatwas somebody prays furada at the same
time and place where Jama'at prayer is being conducted he commits a sin,
but his prayer will not be invalid. However he should keep the level of
his voice to the minimum as explained above

d) When the voice of an individual in the above question is to such an
extent which disturbs the Imame-Jamaat or Mamums in the congregational
prayers, what the Islamic Law says about such disturbance?

A: Distrubing a prayer, be it Jamaat or furada is an unlawful act,
which Islam does not approve, as was clearly written by late Ayatullah
al-Hakim and late Ayatullah al-Khoui in their fatwas.

**Q. 73: TWO ADHANS BEFORE FRIDAY PRAYER?**

Why calling two adhans before Friday prayer is not accepted by all
Muslims? Who started the 2nd adhan before it?

A: Adhan is said when the time of prayer begins. It is wrong to say it
before time. On Fridays, since Prophet's time to 'Uthman's early days,
the'Imam used to sit on minbar (pulpit) when prayer time came, and then
adhan was called. After the two khutbas, iqamah was recited and the
prayer started. This adhan and iqamah together were called two adhans.
'Uthman added one adhan before the time. It is bid'ah. See for reference
Tarikhu 'l-Khulafa'. Imam as-Suyuti, Delhi ed., no date, p. 154.

**Q. 74: WHY DO WE KEEP OUR HANDS OPEN IN PRAYERS?**

I would like to know if there is some tradition on the prayers, as the
Shi'a and the Malikis hold their hands to the side.

A: Keeping hands unfolded (while standing) is the natural posture, and
those who follow it do not need any hadith to justify their action. Has
any one asked you to quote a hadith that you should keep your eyes open
during prayer? It is those who deviate from natural way who should
justify their behaviour from Qur'an and/or hadith.

And when we look at their systems, an interesting picture comes before
our eyes. It appears from some reports that when Iranian prisoners were
brought before 'Umar, they stood before him with folded hands. On being
asked the reason, they said that it was their custom to stand before the
eleders with folded hands. 'Umar said: Then we too should do the same
when we stand before Allah in prayers.

That was the beginning. But as I will explain later the idea was not
accepted in Medina. There are some pointers which show that it had
caught up in the early days of Mu'awiyah's governorship in Damascus.
When Anas ibn Malik, a companion of the Prophet (s.a.w.), went to Syria,
he wept and said: "I do not see here anything which I used to see in the
days of the Prophet (s.a.w.), except this prayer and that too is
disfigured." (Sahih al- Bukhari).

Then there are these four Imams of the Sunnis. Look at their fatwas
concerning this matter; and you will see the truth yourself.

1) Imam Malik ibn Anas (died 179) lived in Medina. He orders his
followers (the Malikiyah) to keep their hands open, saying that it is
the way the people of Medina pray, and they must have learnt it from the
Prophet (saw).

2) Imam Abu Hanifah (died 150 A.H.) and Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal (died 241
AH.) lived in Iraq and they ordered their followers to keep the hands
folded.

3) Imam Shafi'i (died 204 A.H.) was born in Mecca, studied in Medina
and then shifted to Iraq and finally to Egypt. He gives his followers
choice of folding the hands or keeping them open.

Have you noted the connection between their places of residence and
their fatwas? The man who lived in Medina kept the hands open; those who
lived far from Medina folded their hands; and the one who lived in both
places allows both customs. It makes us believe that the custom of
folding the hands in prayer was invented far from the city of the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.)..

One more interesting fact: The Shi'as, the Malikis and the Ibadhis keep
their hands unfolded; the Hanafis and the Hanbalis keep them folded; and
the Shafi'is allow both. So, out of six sects three and a half keep
their hands open, and two and a half keep them folded. Looking from this
angle, those who pray with open hands are in majority!!

**Q. 75: TARAWIH AND NAWAFIL OF RAMADAN:**

What is the position of tarawih in Islamic shari'ah?

A: It is bid'ah (innovation), because praying a non-obligatory salah
with congregation is not allowed in Islam. (The only exception is Salatu
'l-istisqa' - the prayer to seek rain.) Tarawih was invented by the 2nd
caliph, 'Umar, who himself admitted that it was a bid'ah, when he said:
"A good bid'ah it is". (See Your Questions Answered, vol.6, Q.No.81).

The Shi'a shari'ah exhorts the believers to pray individually 1000
rak'ah sunnat prayers during 30 nights of the month of Ramadhan, details
of which may be seen in Your Questions Answered, vol. 6, Q.82.

**Q.76; FORBIDDEN MONTHS:**

Why is it that the months of Rajab, Zulqa'dah, Zulhijjah and Muharram
are called forbidden months?

A: "Haram" means forbidden, holy, sanctuary. Haram month means holy
months in which fighting is forbidden and people feel they are secure
and safe. The pre-Islam Arabs used to stop fighting from Dhulqa'dah to
Muharram to enable themselves to perform hajj safely without any fear.In
Rajab they held the famous fair at 'Ukaz and stopped fighting to enable
people to make deals peacefully.

Islam, being the religion of peace, confirmed this custom in order to
let people refrain from war and fights at least 4 months in a year.

**Q. 77: ON HUMAN BOMB:**

Just recently I met a young Palestinian who fled his country due to the
fact he was asked by his leader to place a bomb on himself in defense
against the Israelis. He opposed this, and he is now confined in the
prison system here. He asked me my position as it relates to this, but I
was at a loss. Could you shed some light on this practice for me? Does
this practice has anything to do with Islam?

A: I could not understand why that young man is in prison in the
U.S.A.; because according to what you have written he has not committed
any crime in or against your country. However, coming to your question,
such practices are not approved by Islam.

Turning oneself into a human bomb is suicide which is unlawful in
Islam. The Prophet (s.a.w.) used to instruct his army groups not to
attack the civilians, not to harm old people, children and women; in
short, they were not to attack anyone who had not come out to fight
them. The same instructions were given by his caliphs.

But whom do these human bombs (or car bombs etc.) make their target?
Unarmed civilians, children, women, young and old who have gathered in a
market or school or other such places. It is unmitigated terrorism and
nothing else. It is not a defence against the Israelis; it is in fact an
offence against the humanity.

The only situation when such action could be justified is if it is
ordered by the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) or the present Imam (a.s.). But the
Prophet is not alive and the present Imam is hidden from our eyes. And
we are sure that they would not order such a thing. Q. 78: EMANCIPATION
OF UMMU-WALAD;

I have seen an article, Islam and Woman, a few sentences of which are
copied here for your comment:

"As far as the women were concerned, Islam respected them even in their
captivity. ...They were no longer to be treated as a common property of
all with every man having free access to them to gratify his animal
passions. They were hence-forth to belong to theijr masters alone.

None else could establish sexual relations with them. Moreover, they
were, like men, granted the right to work out their freedom through
Mukatabah, besides providing that a slave-maid would be free the moment
she gave birth to a child by her master. Besides the mother, the child
would also be deemed free."

My question is:

Women war prisoners, not warriors but accompanied the enemy soldiers in
war, when captured were sexually exploited by their Muslim masters
without nikah. The question is why when these women concieved they were
set free instead of the masters getting married to them to sustain the
offsprings. Is it not unethical by any human code? Please explain with
your enlarged Islamic wisdom.

A: I do not know who the writer of that article is, which religion or
sect he belongs to, and whose fatwas he describes. However, let us look
at your queries.

a) Sexual Relation without nikah: The formula of nikah is not a magic
mantra to make the sexual intercourse lawful. It is Allah's command
which, after nikah, makes the man and the woman lawful for each other
and creates mutual rights and duties between them. Likewise, it is
Allah's'command that the previous marriage of the infidel women (when
they are captured in Islamic war), is automatically dissolved, and they,
after expiry of the prescribed waiting period, become lawful to their
masters. Allah says:

"And (forbidden to you are) all married women except those whom your
right hands possess; (this is) Allah's ordinance to you... (4:24) The
same authority which has made your wife lawful to you, has made the
captive girls lawful to their masters.

b) Ummu Walad: A slave girl who gives birth to her master's child, is
called ummu walad (mother of the child) in shari'ah. (In Swahili
language a wife is called, mama mtoto.) And there are special rules
governing her life. In Shi'a shari'ah: i. she cannot be sold to another
person;

ii. she cannot be separated from her child;

iii. on master's death, she will be included in the inheritance share
of her child, which will make her automatically free at once - because
one cannot possess either of one's parents or children etc.

In this way, she will continue to live with her child. (As for the
child, he/she, being the master's offspring, is born free, and has all
the rights on him which the other children have.)

c) A Comment On your quotation: The rule mentioned in the quotation
that she "would be free the moment she gave birth to a child by her
master", is a news to me. And you have added to its abusurdity by
saying, "why when these women conceived they were set free."

However, I have told you that that "law" is not according to our
shari'ah. But even looking from its perspective I do not see any reason
for objection.

I do not understand from where did you get the notion that emancipation
of the master's child's mother means leaving her and her child on their
own without sustaining the offspring. Maintainence of his child is wajib
on the father, no matter whether he/she was born from a free woman or a
slave girl.

Her emancipation frees her from the bond of slavery, restoring to her
the original dignity of freedom. How could Islam order the master to
marry her after freedom? After freedom, it is for her to decide whom she
wants to marry; and not for the ex-master to force her to marry him.

I am really surprised that instead of appreciating how Islam has looked
for excuses to bestow freedom on the slaves (this being only one of the
many cases) you have raised objection on it.

**Q. 79: WHY KHUMUS SAHM-E-SADAT?**

The Qur'an says: "And know you that whatever you acquire, a 1/5 of it
is for Allah and for the Messenger and for the near relatives and the
orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, if you be believers in Allah...
(8:41). Also I have read a copy of the booklet titled Khums and it had
very strong arguments with facts.

Regarding the various meanings of Ghanimtum or Ghanimah I have no
problem with that. The part I do not understand is Sahmi Sadat. I have
no problem with Sahmi Imam which is supposed to be handed over to the
Mujtahid. I just cant grasp the part about the sadat receiving hard
earned individuals' finances.

I notice it says in Al-Qur'an (17:26): "And give to the near of kin his
due and to the needy and the wayfarer and squander not thy earnings
wastefully." I read in the Tafsir of this Ayah that Ibn Jarir reports
that the fourth holy Imam Ali ibnul Husain Zainul 'Abideen (a.s.) asked
a Syrian: "Have you then read in the Sura Bani Israel in the Qur'an:
Give the near of kin his due?" He said: "Yes". Then the Imam said: We
are the near of kin meant by this verse. Also when this verse was
revealed the Prophet gifted Fatima az-Zahra Fadak. I'm aware of this.

But when the Imam says: "We are meant by the verse", I know he means
the 12 Imams of Ahl'ul Bait which are his near relatives and
descendants. But now that thousands of years have lapsed between the
Prophet and hundreds of years between the Ghaibat Kubra of Imam
Sahib-uz-Zaman, Al-Qaim, how can the descendants of the Imams lay claim
to Khums Sahmi Sadat? I was under the impression that after the 12th
Imam Al-Qaim went into Ghaibat that Sahmi Sadat is nullified until he
returns by the will of Allah.

But nowadays people lay claim on a certain part of Khums just because
of their lineage to the Imams of Ahl'ul Bayt (a.s.). To me that's
getting into nepotism and class distinction among people because I
notice that most of the Sayeds are Iranis, Arabs, Indians etc.

Is there a Hadith narrated by one of the Imams that says: "After
Al-Mahdi goes into Ghaibat you the Shias should give a certain part of
Khums to our descendants?" What I want to know is: Did a Mujtahid come
up with this through consultation with the clergy? The Usooli Muhammad
Baqir Behbahani defeated the Akhbaris' ideology and now we have Usuli
thought being propagated amongst the Shia because of his great efforts.
What I mean by this is: Have certain changes been made by fallible men
whether they are Mujtahids or not?

A: Looking at your question, it appears that the confusion arises from
your assumption that the Sahm-e-Sadat comes under the clause, "and for
the near relatives". It is not so. The verse divides the ghanimah in six
shares: for

(1) Allah,
(2) the Messenger,
(3) the near relatives,
(4) the orphans,
(5) the needy and
(6) the way-farer.

The first three shares were taken by the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and after
him they belong to the Imam (a.s.); that is why they are called
Sahm-e-Imam (a.s.) i.e. the Imam's share. So "the near relatives" in
this verse refers to the Imams, as you have rightly thought, not to
other descendants of the Imams.

The remaining three shares (the poor orphans, the other needy persons
and the stranded travellers), which constitute the other half and are
called Sahm-e-Sadat i.e. Sadat's share, are restricted to Banu Hashim
and Banu Muttalib since the time of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

When the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) gave Khumus to the Banu Hashim and Banu
Muttalib, Jubair ibn Mut'im and 'Uthman ibn 'Affan, (descendants of
Nawfil and 'Abdu 'sh-Shams, brothers of Hashim, respectively) complained
to him: "O Messenger of Allah! You have given (the Khumus) to Banu
Muttalib, although we and they are equally related to you." The Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) said: "The Banu Muttalib and Banu Hashim are one and the
same." (Sahih al- Bukhari, vol.4, p.240; vol.v, p.375; Tafsir at-Tabari,
vol.13 p.556, Cairo, 1958).

As for the Shi'a sources, the 4th Imam, Zainu 'I-'Abidin (a.s.) was
asked about the Khumus share belonging to "the orphans and for the needy
and the wayfarer". He said: "(It is for) our orphans and our needy and
our way farers." That is: from the Hashimtes. (Tafsir Al-'Ayyashi,
vol.2, p 63).

The obligatoriness of paying this part of Khumus to the Sadat has
nothing to do with the presence or occuhation of the 12th Imam (a.s.) or
with the difference of the Akhbari and Usuli schools of thought.

If there was any difference at all between the Akhbaris and the Usulis,
it was about the Sahm-e-lmam (a.s.) (whether it was wajib during the
occupation); but both groups were and are unanimous about the
Sahm-e-Sadat that it must be given to the poor etc. from the descendants
of Hashim and preferably those descended from Fatimah (as).

According to our ahadith, the reason why the Sadat have been allotted
this share, returns to the preservation of the dignity of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) himself. All Muslims agree that Zakah and Sadaqah
were forbidden to the Prophet (s.a.w.a) and to the Hashimites. It is an
unanimous law and there are countless ahadith (both from Shi'a and Sunni
sources) making it clear.

Why this prohibition?It is because Zakah and Sadaqah are termed in the
shari'ah as "the filth of people's hands." As Imam 'Ali Ar-Rida (a.s.)
said, inter alia, in a talk with Ma'mun Ar-Rashid: "Sadaqah is haram on
Muhammad and his descendants, and it is the filth of the people's hands,
which is not lawful for them to use." (Uyun Akhbar Ar-Rida, vol. 1
p.238) Probably it is for this reason that Zakah has been given this
name. Az-Zakah means purity; and as long as this tax is not separated
from the wealth, the whole wealth remains impure, filthy and unlawful to
be used.

When this tax is taken out, it is as though the remaining wealth
becomes clean. In other words, the amount given in Zakah was the filth
which, when removed, left the balance clean, pure and lawful for one's
use. And Allah deems His Messenger too dignified to be tainted or
sullied with this dirt. And it is for this reason that the Sadat too
have been forbidden to touch any item of Sadaqah or Zakah, because their
shame or disgrace will ultimately affect the dignity and respect of
their progenitor, i.e. the Prophet (s.aw.a).

It is not nepotism; nor is there any class consideration in Islam.
Never the less, Allah in His Mercy and Wisdom makes the believers'
offspring share in the glory of their progenitors, as He says:

"And (as for) those who believe and their offspring follow them in
faith, We will unite with them their offspring and We will not diminish
to them aught of their work... (52:21).

And He in His Wisdom and Mercy protects, and looks after the interests
of, the offspring just for the sake of their believing and virtuous
parents. Look in the ch. of the Cave (18:77) where Khidr (a.s.) found in
a village "a wall which was on the point of falling, so he set it up
right", and later explained to Musa (a.s.) its reason in these words.
"And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and
there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them, and their father was
a righteous man; so your Lord desired that they should attain their
maturity and take out their treasure, a mercy from your Lord...
(18:82).

On the other hand, the offspring's disgrace often puts a stigma on the
progenitors-even when the latter are totally innocent and blameless. The
Prophet Nuh (a.s.) was sinless and ma'sum; but one of his sons was
evil-doer. Now the phrase, son of Nuh, has become synonymous with 'a bad
man in a good family.' Because of that son's misconduct, the sacred name
of the Prophet Nuh (a.s.) is always bandied about!

Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala has bestowed on our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
the highest status possible. And He did not desire any of his
descendants - no matter how many generations have passed in between - to
eat from "the filth of the people's hands". So He forbade to them the
zakah and sadaqah. At the same time, there should have been some way of
alleviating their hardships, when recessary; so He allotted to them the
three of the six shares of khumus (which is called Sahm-e-Sadat).

It is this philosophy of protecting the Prophet's name from disrepute
that Allah says to his wives in the Qur'an: "O wives of the prophet!
whoever of you commits an open indecency, the punishment shall be
increased to her doubly; and this is easy to Allah. And whoever of you
is obedient to Allah and His Messenger and does good, We will give to
her reward doubly. .(33:30-31)

And ash-Shaykh as-Saduq (R.A.) says in his Kitab al-I'tiqadat in the
ch. On 'Ali's descendants, that "they are the progeny of the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.),... and sadaqah is haram for them because it is the
filth of the people's hands... and it is our belief that the evil-doer
among them shall be given double punishment and the good-doer among them
shall get double reward..."

Here it should be pointed out that the double reward emanates from
Allah's mercy and grace, and no one can question it. However the double
punishment apparently seems against justice; but it is not so. One
punishement would be for the sin committed; and the other would be for
sullying the Prophet's name.

So, you see, it is not nepotism; it is protecting the honour of our
beloved Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in the eyes of the public.

Also, I must make it clear that on the whole non-Sadat's share in
public money far exceeds the money reserved for the Sadat. There is a
chart in the 3rd ed. of the book, KHUMS, by my son, Sayyid Muhammad
Rizvi, (a copy of which is being sent to you by air mail).

The chart gives the "Overall Distribution of Islamic Tax", which is
self explanatory: Before ending this letter, I would like to remind you
that Allah is the Absolute Owner of our body and soul, as well as of all
that apparently belongs to us. Whatever we earn is actually His
property.

It is His Grace that he demands only a small part of that earning in
His name and then says that now the major part is lawful for you to use.
When we pay zakah, sadaqah or Khums, it should bring joy to our hearts,
as one feels happy when he takes bath and removes dirt and filth from
his body or clothes. These are not "charity" monies, they are obligatory
dues.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "I do take a dirham from one of you
(while I am a rich man of Medina); my only intention in taking it is
that you should be cleansed." (ash-Shaykh as-Saduq, llahu 'sh-Shara'i',
vol.2, p.65).

Also you should realize that a poor mu'min, be he a Sayyid or
non-Sayyid, can be paid from zakah or khumus only to that extent which
would be sufficient to meet his annual domestic expenses. Let us say, a
Sayyid's family expenses come to US$ 15,000/- annually, and his regular
earning is $ 10,000/-; so he can be given the balance of US$ 5,000/-
from Khumus Sahm-e-Sadat. But not a single cent more. Khumus or zakah
are not meant for luxuries or investments. As Zayd son of Imam Zaynul
'l-'Abidin (a.s.) said:

"Khumus is for us as long as we need it; when we do not need it, then
it is not for us to build palaces." (Tafsir Fur at ibn Ibrahim, p.
49).

Now you must have understood that the allocation of 3 shares of Khumus
to Banu Hashim was made and enforced by the prophet (s.a.w.a.), and was
explained by the Imams. It is not a decision made by any fallible alim
on his own.


