The Meaning of Hadith al-Thaqalayn
==================================

In each of the parts of the *‘Abaqat* dealing with a particular hadith,
the author, Sayyid Hamid Husayn - *quddisa sirruh* - after dealing with
its *tawatur* goes on to deal with the meaning and doctrinal import of
the hadith. In fact, this is the method which he is forced to follow in
order to refute the statements of Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz in the *Tuhfah*
regarding the *tawatur* of the traditions mentioned by him as well as
their doctrinal import.

In the second section of the part of the *‘Abaqat* dealing with *Hadith
al-Thaqalayn,* Sayyid Hamid Husayn deals with Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz's
objections, the first of which relates to its transmission and the rest
to its doctrinal impact.

The first objection dealt with is the statement of Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz
that only Zayd ibn Arqam from among the Prophet's Companions has
narrated the tradition. This objection is met by pointing out that at
least thirty-four Companions have narrated the tradition. The sources
which narrate the tradition from each of them - which were mentioned
earlier in this article - are pointed out by him.

Moreover, he points out, Zayd's narration of the tradition has two
lengthier versions as recorded by al-Nasa'i in *al-Khasa'is,* al-Hakim
in *al-Mustadrak,* al-Tabarani and ‘Ali al-Muttaqi. Moreover, he points
that the wording of the tradition as quoted by Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz has not
been narrated or recorded by any Sunni authority on tradition.

The next statement of Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz that is dealt with is his
outright denial that *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* implies the religious
leadership of the Ahlul Bayt (A). The author points out that since the
Prophet (S) has placed the Ahlul Bayt (A) by the side of the Qur'an, it
means that the Ahlul Bayt (A) have to be followed, like the Qur'an, as
the living guides of the Ummah in matters of doctrine, ritual and law.

He cites the statements of numerous leading Sunni authorities in
affirmation of this. The author points out that the words *'thaqalayn'*
and the command to hold on to them *(al-i’tisam, al-akhdh* or
*al-ittiba’* in accordance with the different wordings) unambiguously
imply that in the same way as it is obligatory to follow the Qur'an, so
also it is equally obligatory to follow the Ahlul Bayt (A) in the
matters of Islamic teachings.

Moreover, the inseparability of the Qur'an and the Ahlul Bayt (A), as
well as the repeated emphasis on holding on to the two and the specific
emphasis on adherence to the Ahlul Bayt (A) and the observance of their
rights clearly establish the obligation to follow the Ahlul Bayt (A) as
the religious leaders, authorities and guides of the Ummah. The author
points out that this interpretation of the *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* is also
confirmed by some verses of the Holy Qur'an such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...قُل لَّا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: 'I do not ask of you a wage for this, except love for the
kinsfolk.' (42:23)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِفُوهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُم مَّسْئُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And halt them, to be questioned. (37:24)***

The author cites a number of Sunni scholars, such as al-Sakhawi in
*al-Istijlab,* al-Suyuti in *al-Durr al-manthur* (vi, 7), ‘Abd al-Wahhab
al-Bukhari in *Tafsir Anwari,* al-Khatib al-Sharbini in *al-Siraj*
*al-munir* (v, 538), al-Tayyibi in *al-Miqat* (v, 594), al-Munawi in
*Fayd al-Qadir* (iii, 14), al-Zarqani in *Sharh al-­Mawahib* (vii, 7)
and others, regarding the interpretation of the first verse. Others,
including al-Samhudi, al-­Wahidi, al-Shaykhani, Mawlawi Wali Allah
Lakhnowi, and Mawlawi Muhammad Mubin, have affirmed that the questioning
on the Day of Judgment referred to in the second verse refers to the
attitude of the individual Muslim vis-a-vis the Prophet's Ahlul Bayt
(A).

Sayyid Hamid Husayn then goes on to point that *Hadith al-Thaqalayn*
also affirms the freedom of the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (A) from sin and
error *(‘ismah)* because: the hadith commands adherence to them and the
Qur'an together and since the Qur'an is free from every trace of
falsehood and error, so is the guidance of the Ahlul Bayt (A); adherence
to the two of them is considered as a guarantee against misguidance for
the Ummah, which is only possible if the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (A) are
free from error and sin. This conclusion is also supported by other
traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) in favor of ‘Ali (A) and the Ahlul
Bayt (A), some of which were mentioned earlier.

Furthermore, the author points out, the *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* implies
the preeminence of the Ahlul Bayt (A) within the Ummah from the
viewpoint of knowledge *(a’lamiyyah)* and excellence *(afdaliyyah).* He
cites statements of several non-Shi’i scholars in confirmation of this
conclusion.

Moreover, the author states, there are many traditions which indicate
that *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* and *Hadith al-Ghadir* were proclaimed by the
Prophet (S) in the course of a single sermon at Ghadir Khumm. Some of
these traditions have been recorded by al-Muttaqi in *Kanz al-’ummal*
(i, 167), Ibn Kathir in *Ta'rikh* (v, 209), al-Sakhawi in *al-Istijlab*
(MS), al-Samhudi in *Jawahir al-’iqdayn* (MS), Ibn Hajar in *al-Sawa’iq*
(25) from al-Tabarani and many others.

According to still some other versions of the narration, *Hadith
al-Thaqalayn, Hadith al-Ghadir* and *Hadith al-Manzilah* were mentioned
in the course of the same sermon at Ghadir Khumm as mentioned by Ibn
Hajar in *al-Fatawa al-fiqhiyyat al-kubra,* ii, 122.

In some versions of the tradition, he points out, the word
*'khalifatayn'* (successors) is mentioned instead of *'thaqalayn',* as
in the narrations recorded by Ahmad ibn Hanbal in *Musnad,* v, 181, as
well as al-Tabarani, Ibn Abi ‘Asim, Abu Bakr ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Zarqani
and others. This word implies rather more explicitly the *Imamah* and
*Khilafah* of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) and the Ahlul Bayt (A).

Some versions of the tradition, such as the one narrated by Al-Qunduzi
in *Yanabi’ al-mawaddah,* 20, from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (A), contain the
following statement of the Prophet (S) which signifies the perpetuity of
the Imamate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أعلم أن العلم لا يبيد ولا ينقطع ، وإنك لا تخلي أرضك من حجة
لك على خلقك ، ظاهر ليس بالمطاع ، أو خائف مغمور لكيلا يبطل حجتك ، ولا
يضل أولياؤك بعد إذ هديتهم ، أولئك الأقلون عددا الأعظمون قدرا عند الله
عز وجل, ولقد دعوت الله تبارك وتعالى أن يجعل العلم والحكمة في وعقب عقبي
وفي زرعي وزرع زرعي إلى يوم القيامة فاستجيب لي. 
  </p>
</blockquote>

O God, You don't let the earth remain devoid of Your Proof over Your
creation so that Your proofs should not become invalid or that Your
friends should go astray after You have guided them. They (the Proofs of
God) are few in number but great in worth near God, Almighty and
Glorious. Indeed, I had prayed to God, Exalted and Blessed, to place
knowledge and wisdom in my descent and the descent of my descendants,
and in my seed and the seed of my seed, until the Day of Resurrection,
and my prayer was granted.

This closely resembles the following tradition of *Nahj al-­balaghah
(Hikam:*147*)* addressed by ‘Ali (A) to his pupil Kumayl ibn Ziyad.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تخلو الأرض من قائم لله بحجة إما ظاهرا مشهورا أو خائفا مغمورا لئلا
تبطل حجج الله وبيناته. وكم ذا وأين أولئك؟ أولئك - والله - الاقلون
عددا، والاعظمون عند الله قدرا. يحفظ الله بهم حججه وبيناته حتى يودعوها
نظراءهم ويزرعوها في قلوب أشباههم. جَم بهم العلم على حقيقة البصيرة ،
وباشروا روح اليقين واستلانوا ما استوعره المترفون ، وأنسوا بما أستوحش
منه الجاهلون ، وصحبوا الدنيا بأبدان أرواحها متعلقة بالمحل الأعلى ،
أولئك خلفاء الله في أرضه والدعاة إلى دينه ، آه آه شوقا إلى رؤيتهم!
  </p>
</blockquote>

...But the earth is never devoid of him who stands for God with a proof
*(qa'im li'Ilah bi hujjatin).* He is either manifest and well-known or
afraid and concealed, so that God's proofs and His clear signs should
not become invalid. How many are they and where are they? By God, they
are few in number, but great in esteem before God. Through them God
maintains His proofs and signs till they entrust them to others like
themselves and plant them in the hearts of their likes.

Knowledge has led them to the reality of understanding and they have
attained the spirit of certitude. That which is hard upon the seekers of
comforts comes easy to them. They endear what the ignorant regard with
aversion. They live in the world with their bodies, but their spirits
are in a higher realm. They are the vicegerents *(khulafa')* of God in
His earth and His callers to His *Din.* Oh, how much I yearn to see
them! (H: 147)

This tradition of ‘Ali (A) has been widely reported and recorded by
Shi’i and non-Shi’i traditionists and historians, including Ibn ‘Abd
Rabbih in *al-’Iqd al-farid,* i, 265, 293; al-Ya’qubi in *Ta’rikh,* ii,
400; al-Harrani in *Tuhaf al-’uqul,* 169; al-Saduq in *al-Khisal,* i, 85
and *Ikmal al-Din,* 169; Abu Talib al-Makki in *Qut al-qulub,* i, 272;
al-Khatib al-Baghdadi in *Ta'rikh Baghdad,* vi, 389; al-Razi in
*al-Tafsir al-kabir,* ii, 192; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in *al-Mukhtasar,* 29
and *Jami’ bayan al-’ilm;* al-Khwarazmi in *al-Manaqib,* 390 and
al-Azhari in *Tahdhib al-lughah,* vi, 70.

To return to the discussion of *‘Abaqat* about the doctrinal import of
*Hadith al-Thaqalayn,* the author next points out that ‘Ali (A) referred
to it in the course of his debate with the members of the six-man
council *(shura)* appointed by ‘Umar, the second caliph, to select a
successor to him. ‘Ali's arguments *(ihtijaj)* before the *shura* are
recorded in detail by Ibn al-Maghazili in his *al-Manaqib,* 112.
Al-Qunduzi in *Yanabi’ al-mawaddah,* 35, also refers to ‘Ali's reference
to *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* in order to establish the incontestability of
his claim to successorship of the Prophet (S).

This tradition was also referred to by al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (A) in his
speech delivered after being elected as caliph following ‘Ali's
martyrdom. Al-Qunduzi, *op. cit.,* 21, 48 ­ 483 and Sibt ibn al­-Jawzi
in *Tadhkirat al­-khawass,* 198, have recorded related traditions in
their works.

Besides the large number of Companions who have narrated the tradition,
reference to it also occurs in a letter of ‘Amr ibn al-As addressed to
Mu’awiyah and recorded in al-Khwarazmi's *al-Manaqib,* 128 - 130, and in
a statement of al-Hasan al-Basri, a well-known Tabi’i saint, as recorded
by Ibn Abi al-Hadid in *Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,* iv, 95. All these
references affirm the preeminence of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) and the
Ahlul Bayt (A) in the Ummah and their claim to the comprehensive
leadership of the Ummah after the Holy Prophet (S).


