Some Traditions that Appear to Conflict with Hadith al-Thaqalayn
================================================================

Tradition n.1
-------------

Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz, in the *Tuhfah,* states that even if *Hadith
al-Thaqalayn* be accepted as such, it contradicts some traditions of the
Prophet (S). One of these traditions, which he claims to be *sahih*, is
as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليكم بسني وسنة الخلفاء الراشدين المهديين من بعدي تمسكوا بها وعضوا
عليها بالنواجد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Adhere to my sunnah and the sunnah of the rightly-guided successors
after me. Hold on to it and cling on to it stubbornly.

Sayyid Hamid Husayn points out that such a contention is invalid:

• Firstly, he says, the tradition has been narrated solely by Sunnis,
unlike the *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* which has been narrated widely both by
Shi’i and non-Shi’i narrators.

• Secondly, Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz has here failed to observe his own
self-declared principle that his arguments against Shi’i doctrines will
be based on material derived from works accepted as reliable by the
Shi’ah themselves.

• Thirdly, he points out, this tradition has been avoided by Muslim and
al-Bukhari, whose works are widely accepted by the Ahl al-Sunnah as the
most authentic works on hadith.

• Fourthly, the claim that the above-mentioned narration is *sahih* is
not true, because the veracity of its transmitters has been considered
as questionable by Sunni authorities.

The tradition has been recorded by Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah
in their works. As to al-Irbad ibn Sariyah, the sole narrator from whom
the tradition is narrated, he is not reliable because of the untenable
statement he makes in his own praise ("I am one-fourth of Islam").

As to Hajar ibn Hajar al-Kila'i, aside from belonging to Hims, a Syrian
town once notorious for its people's enmity of ‘Ali (A), is of unknown
standing as mentioned by Ibn Hajar in *Tahdhib al-Tahdhib,* iii, 118.

Khalid ibn Ma’dan ibn Abi Karib al-Kitabi, aside from belonging to Hims,
was the chief of police of Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah, the most infamous ruler
in the history of Islam.

Thawr ibn Yazid, too, belonged to Hims as mentioned by al-Dhahabi
*(Mizan al-i’tidal*, i, 374). As mentioned by Ibn Hajar *(op. cit.,* ii,
34) he hated ‘Ali (A), who had killed his father in a battle. ‘Abd Allah
ibn Mubarak refrained from narrating from him and considered him a
heretic *(fasid al­madhhab).*

The next transmitter, al-Walid ibn Muslim, has been accused of forgery
by Abu Mushar, as mentioned by al-Dhahabi in *Mizan al-i’tidal,* iv,
347. These were some of Abu Dawud's authorities.

The author then goes on to show that the transmitters of the narration
recorded by al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah, namely Abu ‘Asim, Hasan ibn ‘Ali
al-Khallal, Buhayr ibn Sa’id, Baqiyyah ibn al-Walid, Yahya ibn Abi
al-Muta’, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Ala', Mu’awiyah ibn Salih, Isma’il ibn Bishr
ibn Mansur, and ‘Abd al-Malik ibn al-­Sabbah, are all weak (*da’if*)
transmitters, as mentioned by Sunni authorities on rijal in their works.

Moreover, al-Hafiz ibn al-Qattan has expressly rejected the authenticity
of this sole narration of ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Salami, as mentioned by Ibn
Hajar in *Tahdhib al-Tahdhib,* vi, 238.

The author then goes on to point out that even if this narration be
presumed to be *sahih*, it cannot have any weight against *Hadith
al-Thaqalayn* which has been narrated by a great number of Companions
and leading Sunni scholars, while this narration has not been recorded
in most of their works. Moreover, should this tradition be really
authentic, then the words "rightly-guided successors" should be taken to
mean the Twelve Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (A), as affirmed by another
well-known tradition of the Prophet (S) that there would be twelve
*khulafa'* or *a'immah* after him.

Thereafter the author goes on to deal with another doubt cast on this
tradition by Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz, that even if it be presumed that *Hadith
al-Thaqalayn* does not conflict with the above-mentioned tradition, the
word *al-’itrah* can be taken to mean all the Prophet's kinsmen
*(aqarib)* belonging to Banu Hashim in general, or all of the
descendants of Fatimah (A). Then it would be absurd to say that every
individual belonging to them were an *imam.*

Sayyid Hamid Husayn clarifies this doubt by quoting various
lexicographers, such as al-Jawhari, Ibn al-Athir, Ibn Manzur,
al-­Firuzabadi and others to the effect that *‘itrah* means one's
nearest relations *(akhass aqaribih),* children *(walad)* and
descendants *(dhurriyyah).*

Moreover, he points out, *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* indicates the supreme
knowledge as well as freedom of the *‘itrah* mentioned in it from sin
and error. Such a description applies solely to the Twelve Imams (A),
who in their traditions, from ‘Ali (A) onwards, have introduced
themselves as the *‘itrah* of the Prophet (S) and as the supreme
authorities of the Islamic faith by the side of the Qur'an.

Tradition n.2
-------------

Thereafter, the author deals with another tradition ascribed to the
Prophet (S) which too Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz claims to be *sahih:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خدوا شطر دينكم عن هذه الحميراء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Take part of your religion from this Humayra' (i.e. ‘A'ishah).

Sayyid Hamid Husayn points out that many Sunni authorities and scholars
have considered it a baseless fabrication and forgery devoid of *isnad;*
among them are:

• al-Mizzi and al-Dhahabi as mentioned in *al-­Taqrir wa al-tahbir fi
sharh al-­Tahrir,* iii 99;

• Ibn Qayyim al-­Jawziyyah, who has considered all traditions with the
words "ya Humayra" and "al-Humayrah" as fabrications;

• Ibn Kathir as quoted in *al-­Durar al-­muntashirah fi al-ahadith
al-­mushtahirah,* 79;

• Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani as quoted in *al-Taqrir wa al-­tahbir,* iii, 99;

• as well as Ibn al-­Mulaqqin, al-­Subki, Ibn Amir al-Hajj, al-Sakhawi,
al-Suyuti, al-Shaybani, al-Shaykh ‘Ali al-Qari, al-Zarqani, ‘Abd al-Ali
al-­Shawkani and others.

Tradition n.3
-------------

Another tradition mentioned by Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz to contend the import
of *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* is the following one ascribed to the Prophet
(S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهتدوا بهدي عمار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Seek guidance with the guidance of ‘Ammar.

Sayyid Hamid Husayn points out that such a tradition cannot be put
forward to contest the import of *Hadith al-Thaqalayn,* for ‘Ammar
himself was one of the staunch followers *(shi’ah)* of ‘Ali (A) and had
been instructed by the Prophet (S) to obey and follow ‘Ali (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عمار, إن عليا لا يزيلك عن هدى, يا عمار إن طاعة علي طاعتي وطاعتي من
طاعة الله عز وجل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[The Prophet (S) said to ‘Ammar:] O ‘Ammar, ‘Ali will not divert you
from guidance. O ‘Ammar, obedience to ‘Ali is obedience to me, and
obedience to me is obedience to God, Almighty and Glorious.

This tradition has been recorded in various non-Shi’i works, such as:

• *Farai'd al-simtayn,* i, 178;

• *al-Mawaddah fi al-qurba;*

• al-Khwarazmi's *Manaqib,* 57, 124;

• *Yanabi’ al-mawaddah,* 128, 250;

• *Miftah al-naja,* MS.; and

• *Kanz al-’ummal,* xii, 212.

Moreover, it is strange of Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz to bring this tradition as
an evidence against *Hadith al-Thaqalayn,* for ‘Ammar, as mentioned by
al-Ya’qubi in his *Ta'rikh,* ii, 114 and al-Mas’udi in *Muruj
al-dhahab,* ii, 342, was among those who abstained from giving
allegiance to the first caliph. ‘Umar, during his reign, rejected
‘Ammar's guidance and spoke to him in harsh terms when the latter
suggested that one should perform *tayammum* when water could not be
found for *wudu',* instead of abstaining from *salat*, as ‘Umar had
ruled. This episode has been recorded by:

• Ahmad in his *Musnad,* iv, 265 and

• Muslim in his *Sahih,* i, 110,

• as well as a host of other writers such as Abu Dawud, al-Nasa'i,
al-Tabari, al-Ayni, Ibn al-Athir and al-Shaybani.

‘Uthman during his reign had ‘Ammar beaten until he fell unconscious and
nearly died when the latter handed over a letter of protest written by a
group of Muslims against the former's misrule. This episode has been
recorded by:

• Ibn Qutaybah in *al-Imamah wa al-siyasah*, i, 32;

• Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih in *al-­‘Iqd al-­farid,* ii, 192;

• al-Mas’udi in *Muruj al-dhahab,* ii, 338;

• Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in *al-Isti’ab,* iii, 136; and

• al-Ya’qubi in *Ta'rikh,* ii, 160.

Although the Prophet (S) was known to have made several statements in
‘Ammar's favour - such as "The enemy of ‘Ammar is the enemy of God" -
‘Ammar was either opposed, hated and mistreated by a number of
Companions such as ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas,
al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah, Abu Musa al-Ash’ari, Abu Mas’ud al-Ansari and
others. ‘Ammar stood firmly by ‘Ali's side and fought with him against
‘Ali's opponents, Talhah, al-Zubayr and Mu’awiyah, in the battles of
Jamal and Siffin. Ultimately he was killed by Mu’awiyah's men, thus
fulfilling the Prophet's well-known prophecy that ‘Ammar would be killed
by a rebellious party *(al-fi'at al-baghiyah).*

Tradition n.4
-------------

Sayyid Hamid Husayn then goes on to deal with some other narrations
ascribed to the Prophet (S) and cited by Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz, which are:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتمسكوا بعهد ابن أم عبد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hold on to the covenant of Ibn Umm ‘Abd (i.e. ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رضيت لكم ما رضي به ابن أم عبد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That which Ibn Umm ‘Abd approves of is approved for you by me.

Both of these are weak *(da’if)* and isolated *(ahad)* traditions, while
*Hadith al-Thaqalayn* is a *mutawatir* one. That both Muslim and
al-Bukhari did not record them in their works indicates that they
considered their *isnad* to be weak. Moreover, even if assumed to be
authentic they do not contradict *Hadith al-Thaqalayn,* for while they
only show the merit of Ibn Mas’ud, *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* signifies the
preeminence and leadership of the Ahlul Bayt (A).

Furthermore, it is inconsistent of Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz to advance those
traditions, for ‘Umar, instead of approving Ibn Mas’ud's acts, forbade
him to give *fatwa* and narrate the Prophet's hadith and forbade him
from leaving Madinah, which Ibn Mas’ud could not leave until the
former's death. ‘Uthman went a step further and had Ibn Mas’ud beaten so
mercilessly that his ribs were broken.

Tradition n.5
-------------

Another tradition advanced in this context by Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأعلمكم بالحلال والحرام معاذ بن جبل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mu’adh ibn Jabal is the most knowledgeable among you regarding *halal*
and *haram.*

Sayyid Hamid Husayn points out that it has exclusively been narrated by
the Sunnis. Muslim and al-Bukhari, although their traditions do not
constitute any binding evidence for the Shi’ah, have avoided it in their
compilations. Among a number of Sunni authorities who have considered it
as weak or baseless are:

• Ibn Taymiyyah,

• Ibn ‘Abd al-Hadi,

• al-Dhahabi, and

• al-Munawi.

Among its narrators, Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman al-­Baylamani, his
father, Zayd al-Ammi, Salim ibn Salim have been considered unreliable by
several authorities on hadith and rijal, among them:

• al-Bukhari,

• al-Nasa'i,

• al-Muqaddisi,

• al-Darqutni,

• Ibn Hajar,

• al-Dhahabi,

• Ibn al-Jawzi and others.

Moreover, there are episodes recorded in Ibn Sa’d's *al-Tabaqat,* iii,
585 and Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr's *al-Isti’ab,* iii, 1404 which indicate that
Mu’adh did not possess the kind of competence claimed for him in the
above tradition.

Tradition n.6
-------------

Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz advances another tradition ascribed to the Prophet (S)
in this context for which he claims a degree of prevalence *(shuhrah)*
nearing *tawatur:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقتدوا بالذين من بعدي أبي بكر وعمر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Follow those who will come after me, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

Hamid Husayn points out that the claim of *shuhrah* is untenable and
that a number of Sunni authorities have found fault with it or
considered it as baseless, such as:

• Abu Hatim al-Razi, al-Bazzaz and Ibn Hazm as mentioned in *Fath
al-Qadir fi sharh al-Jami’ al-saghir,* ii, 52;

• al-Tirmidhi, *Sahih*, v, 672;

• al-’Uqayli, *al-Du’afa';*

• al-Naqqash, as mentioned in *Mizan al-i’tidal,* i, 142;

• al-Darqutni, as mentioned in *Lisan al-mizan,* v, 237;

• al-’Ibri al-Farghani in *Sharh al-­Minhaj,* MS;

• al-Dhahabi, *Mizan al-i’tidal,* i, 105;

• Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, *Lisan al-­mizan,* i, 188, 272, v, 237; and

• Shaykh al-Islam al-Harawi, *al-Durr al-­nadid,* 97.

Ibrahim ibn Isma’il, Isma’il ibn Yahya, Yahya ibn Salamah ibn Kuhayl and
Abu al-­Za’ra', who have transmitted it have been considered unreliable
transmitters by Abu Zur’ah, Abu Hatim, Ibn Numayr, al-Darqutni,
al-Bukhari, al-Nasa'i, Ibn Mu’in, Ibn Hibban, al-Tirmidhi and others.

The narrations cited above are advanced by Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz to make the
point that if *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* be considered as signifying the
*imamah* of the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (A) then these traditions must
also be construed as signifying the *imamah* of al-Humayra', ‘Ammar, Ibn
Mas’ud, Mu’adh ibn Jabal, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Sayyid Hamid Husayn points
out that such a conclusion would follow if the traditions advanced were
authentic.

But as established, in the *‘Abaqat,* all of them are weak and
unreliable *ahad,* which have no weight in comparison with *Hadith
al-Thaqalayn,* which is a *mutawatir* tradition narrated widely by the
leading traditionists and scholars of the Ummah from the Shi’ah and the
Ahl al-Sunnah.

Tradition n.7
-------------

Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz cites another narration known as *Hadith al-­Nujum*
ascribed to the Prophet (S) in support of his argument:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن أصحابي بمنزلة النجوم في السماء, فأيها أخذتم به اهتديتم, و اختلاف
أصحابي لكم رحمة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, my Companions are like the stars *(nujum)* in the sky; whichever
of them you follow, you shall be guided rightly. The disagreement of my
Companions is a blessing for you.

Among Sunni authorities those who have considered this tradition as
unreliable are:

• Ahmad ibn Hanbal, as quoted in *al-Taqrir wa al-tahbir,* iii, 99;

• al-Mizzi, as quoted in *Jami’ bayan al-’ilm,* ii, 89-90;

• al-Bazzaz, as quoted in *Jami’ bayan al-’ilm,* ii, 90;

• Ibn al-Qattan, in *al-Kamil;*

• al-Darqutni, as quoted in *Lisan al-mizan,* ii, 137;

• Ibn Hazm, as quoted in *al-Bahr al-muhit,* v, 528;

• al-Bayhaqi, as quoted in al-Hafiz al-’Iraqi, *Takhrij ahadith
al-­Minhaj,* MS.;

• Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in *Jami’ bayan al-’ilm*, ii, 90-91;

• Ibn ‘Asakir as quoted in *Fayd al-Qadir,* iv, 76;

• Ibn al-Jawzi, in *al-’Ilal al-mutanahiyah fi al-ahadith al-­wahiyah*,
MS.;

• Ibn Dahiyyah as quoted in *Ta’liq Takhrij ahadith al-­Minhaj,* MS.;

• Abu Hayyan al-Andlusi, in *al-Durr al-laqit min al-Bahr al-­muhit*
published with *al-Bahr al-muhit,* v, 527-528;

• al-Dhahabi in *Mizan al-i’tidal,* i, 413, ii, 102, ii, 605;

• Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah in *I’lam al-muqi’in,* ii, 223;

• Zayn al-Din al-’Iraqi, in *Takhrij ahadith al-Minhaj,* MS.;

• Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, in *Talkhis al-Khabir,* iv, 190-191;

• Ibn al-Humam in *al-Tahrir bi Sharh Ibn Amir al-Hajj,* iii, 99;

• Ibn Amir al-Hajj, *al-Taqrir wa al-tahrir,* iii, 99;

• al-Sakhawi in *al-Maqasid al-hasanah,* 26-27;

• Ibn Abi Sharif, as mentioned in *Fayd al-Qadir,* iv, 76;

• al-Suyuti, *Itmam al-dirayah* and *al-Jami’ al-saghir,* iv, 76;

• al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, *Kanz al-’ummal,* vi, 133;

• al-Qari, *al-Mirqat,* v, 523;

• al-Munawi, *al-Taysir fi sharh al-Jami’ al-saghir,* ii, 48 and *Fayd
al-Qadir,* iv, 76;

• al-Khafaji, in *Nasim al-riyad (sharh* of *al-Shifa'),* iv, 323-324;

• al-Sindi, *Dirasat al-labib fi al-uswat al-Hasanat al-­Habib,* 240;

• al-Qadi Muhibb Allah al-Bihari, in *Musallim al-­thubut bi sharh ‘Abd
al-Ali,* ii, 510;

• Nizam al-Din al-Sahalawi, *al-­Subh al-Sadiq (sharh al-­Manar)*;

• Al-­Mawlawi ‘Abd al-Ali, *Fawatih al-­rahmut (sharh Musallim
al-­thubut),* ii, 510;

• al-Shawkani, in *Irshad al-­fuhul,* 83;

• Wali Allah ibn Habib Allah al-Lakhnowi in *Sharh Musallim al-­thubut*;
and

• Siddiq Hasan Khan al-Qannawji, in *Husul al-­ma'mul,* 568.

The tradition is also unacceptable on the following grounds:

1. It not only implies that each and every Companion was righteous
himself but was a competent leader and guide of the Ummah; such an
implication is false according to consensus, for all of them themselves
required guidance.

2. A group of them was guilty of such major sins as adultery, homicide
and false witness according to the testimony of history, and it is
unreasonable that the Prophet (S) should have appointed such individuals
as guides and leaders of the Ummah.

3. There are many verses in the Qur'an, especially in the *surahs* of
*al-Anfal, al-Bara'ah, al-Ahzab, al-Jumu’ah and al-Munafiqun,* which
throw a bad light on the character of a considerable number of the
Companions and it is illogical to hold that the Prophet (S) would make
such individuals as the leaders and guides of the Ummah.

4. There is a large number of the Prophet's traditions, narrated both in
authentic Sunni and Shi’i sources, which make the Companions appear
suspect as a group. The above-mentioned narration conflicts with all
such authentic traditions. [^1]

5. There are traditions recorded in Sunni sources which explicitly
prohibit the Ummah from following the Companions. According to one
recorded by al-Asimi in *Zayn al-fata fi tafsir Surat Hal Ata,* MS., the
Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكون من أصحابي أحداث بعدي (يعني الفتنة كانت بينهم), فيغفرها الله لهم
لسابقتهم, إن اقتدى بهم قوم من بعدهم كبهم الله في نار جهنم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There will be innovations perpetrated by my Companions after me (i.e.
the *fitnah* that occurred amongst them). God shall forgive them due to
their earlier record (of good deeds), but if a people follow them after
them, God shall throw them into Hellfire.

6. Some of the Companions are on record as having made statements that
imply the denial that they possessed the competence to be followed as
guides and leaders. Abu Bakr and ‘Umar have made numerous statements
about themselves which reveal their incompetence as guides who can be
followed, like the Quran, without qualms. [^2]

Aware of the difficulty involved in the adoption of the *Hadith
al-­Nujum,* Shah ‘Abd al-Aziz admits that some Companions are known for
certain to have erred in their *ijtihad* because it conflicted with the
express commands *(nusus)* of the Qur'an and the Sunnah. However, he
submits, the Companions may be followed in matters when there exist no
express commands in the Book and the Sunnah.

Sayyid Hamid Husayn replies by pointing out that:

1. one who is known for certain to have erred in his judgements cannot
be a legitimate guide.

2. Secondly, when the Companions are known to have erred in matters
where there exist express texts in the Book and the Sunnah, the
possibility of error is greater in matters where there are no such
express texts.

3. Thirdly, he points out, it is not permissible to follow one who may
err when there exist guides the righteousness of whose guidance and
whose freedom from error or sin (*‘ismah*) has been guaranteed by God.
The Verse of *al-Tathir* (33:33) and *Hadith al-Thaqalayn,* as well as a
great number of other verses and ahadith, introduce the Imams of Ahlul
Bayt (A) as possessing the quality of *‘ismah.*

4. Fourthly, the Companions disagreed amongst themselves concerning the
laws of the Shari’ah, including those which did not possess express
texts. In such a situation it is highly improper to consider them as
stars of the firmament of guidance.

5. Fifthly, the Companions often found fault with one another, sometimes
violating all limits of moderation in attributing falsehood, ignorance
and even *kufr* to one another, as recorded in the books of the Ahl
al-Sunnah. Obviously, no rational person will accept all of them as the
righteous guides of Muslims.

6. There were individuals amongst the Companions who practiced analogy
*(qiyas)* which has been condemned by a large number of the legists of
the Ummah.

7. There were individuals among them, including the first three caliphs,
who turned to others to find out the rule of the Shari’ah concerning an
emergent issue. It is illogical to imagine that the Prophet (S) would
designate ignorant persons as authorities for the Ummah in doctrinal and
legal matters. There were some among them who did not understand the
meanings of certain words of the Qur'an, such as ‘Umar, who, for
instance, did not know the meaning of *'kalalah'.* Al-Tabari in his
exegesis, iv, 283-284, has recorded ‘Umar 's own statement in this
regard.

8. Some of them were guilty of usurious transactions,[^3] sale of
wine,[^4] or of giving *fatwa* without knowledge,[^5] and sometimes in
opposition to the Prophet's express command.[^6] Some of them were
guilty of instituting innovations contrary to the Prophet's Sunnah.[^7]

[^1]: AI-Bukhari in his Sahih (Kitab al-ruqaq, hadith no. 1441) narrates
the following mutawatir tradition of the Prophet (S) from Anas ibn
Malik: حدثنا مسلم بن إبراهيم, حدثنا وهيب حدثنا عبد العزيز عن انس عن
النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: ليردن علي ناس من أصحابي الحوض حتى إذا
عرفتهم اختلجوا دوني فأقول أصحابي فيقول لا تدري ما أحدثوا بعدك.
AI-Bukhari reports from Muslim ibn Ibrahim, from Wuhayb from \`Abd
al-Aziz, from Anas that the Prophet (S) said: "A group of my Companions
will be brought to me on the Pond (of al-­Kawthar) and as soon as I
recognize them they shall be dragged away. I would say, ('God! Aren't
they) my Companions?' (God) would say, 'You don't know what they did
after you.' According to another version of this tradition (no. 1442)
the Prophet (S) would be told: إنك لا علم لك بما أحدثوا بعدك إنهم ارتدوا
على أدبارهم القهقرى. You have no knowledge of what they did after you.
They went back in a retrogressive manner (i.e. apostasized). Al-Bukhari
narrates similar traditions on the authority of Hudhayfah (no 1435),
\`Abd Allah (no.1435), Sahl ibn Sa\`d (no. 1442), Abu Sa\`id al-Khudri
(no 1442), Ibn \`Abbas (no.1442), Abu Hurayrah (no 1443), and Asma' bint
Abi Bakr (no. 1449) in "Kitab al-ruqaq", as well as elsewhere in "Kitab
al-tafsir" and "Kitab bad' al-khalq". The same tradition with various
wordings is also recorded by Muslim, Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasa'i,
Ibn Majah, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in their books (as well as Imam Malik
in al-­Muwatta', "Kitab al-­taharah", hadith no.28) from several
Companions. Imam Malik reports the following tradition in his
al-­Muwatta', "Kitab al-­jihad", hadith no.32: أن رسول الله صلى الله
عليه وسلم قال لشهاداء أحد ((هؤلاء أشهد عليهم)) فقال أبو بكر الصديق:
السنا يا رسول الله باخوانهم؟ أسلمنا كما أسلموا, وجاهدنا كما جاهدوا؟ فقال
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم ((بلى. ولكن لا أدري ما تحدثون بعدي)). "The
Prophet (S) said concerning the martyrs of Uhud, "I shall bear witness
for them (i.e. their faith)." Thereupon Abu Bakr said, "O Messenger of
Allah, aren't we their brethren, who embraced Islam like them and did
jihad like them?" The Prophet (S) replied, "Yes, but I don't know what
you will do after me ..." See, for instance, Adwa' \`ala al-Sunnat
al-Muhammadiyyah, pp.339-363, by Mahmud Abu Riyyah, a Sunni scholar, and
Nahj al-haqq wa kashf al-sidq, pp.262-375, by al-Allamah al-Hilli
concerning the large number of Qur'anic verses and Prophetic traditions
which decisively negate the very possibility of considering each and
every Companion as a star of the skies of guidance.

[^2]: Ibn Sa\`d in his al-Tabaqat (Leiden, 1322), iii, part 1, p.129
reports that in a sermon that Abu Bakr delivered after taking charge of
the caliphate, he declared, "I am only a man, and I am not better than
any of you. So obey me when I go straight and correct me when you see me
deviate. You should know that (at times) I am overwhelmed by a devil, so
when you see me in a state of rage keep away from me." Similar
statements by him have been reported by: al-Tabari in his Ta'rikh
(Cairo, 1357), ii, 440; Ibn Qutaybah in al-Imamah wa al-siyasah
(Matba\`at al-Futuh al-Adabiyyah, 1331), 6; al-Haythami in Majma\`
al-zawa'id (1352), v, 183; al-Muttaqi in Kanz al-ummal (Hyderabad,
1312), ii, 136; and others. \`Umar, the Second Caliph, is on record as
often having made such statements as "Everyone has a better knowledge
(of the Shari\`ah) than \`Umar" (kullu ahadin a\`lamu min \`Umar) and
"All the people have better understanding (of the Shari\`ah) than
\`Umar" (kullu ahadin afqahu min \`Umar). See: al-Bayhaqi, Sunan
(Hyderabad, 1344), vii, 233; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-manthur (al-Matba\`at
al-Maymaniyyah, 1314), under verses 4:20 and 34:13; al-Zamakhshari,
al-Kashshaf (Egypt, 1354) under verses 4:20 and 34:13; al-Muttaqi, Kanz
al-ummal, viii, 298; al-Haythami in Majma\` al-zawa'id, iv, 263.

[^3]: Here the author of the \`Abaqat has cited the tradition of
\`A'ishah which describes a usurious transaction between Zayd ibn Arqam
and a woman. The tradition is mentioned by: \`Abd al-­Razzaq in
al-Musannaf, Imam Ahmad in his Musnad, al-Jassas in Ahkam al-Qur'an,
al-Sarakhsi in al-Mabsut, al-Dabusi in Ta'sis al-nazar, as well as a
host of Sunni legists, traditionists and exegetes in their works.

[^4]: Here the author cites traditions from the works of al-Bukhari,
Muslim, al-Darimi, Ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Nasa'i, Ibn al-Athir,
al-­Ghazzali, al-Muttaqi, Ibn Khaldun and Abu Hilal al-Askari concerning
the sale of wine by certain Companions.

[^5]: Here the author has cited three instances of such baseless fatawa
by Abu Musa al-Ash\`ari.

[^6]: Here the author has cited an episode of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab who
gave a fatwa contrary to the Prophet's command from al-Suyuti's Miftah
al-jannah.

[^7]: Here the author has given several instances of violation of the
Sunnah by Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan.


