Publisher's Note
================

On the eve of 5th victorious anniversary of the glorious Islamic
Revolution of Iran, and having gone through five years of struggles and
achievements, we are witnessing great triumphs over all the colonizing
plots of both eastern and western Superpowers and their mercenary
agents, and are celebrating the Ten Days Dawn in a most splendid manner.
The revolutionary Moslem people of Iran have triumphantly smashed down
all the obstacles and bore all the problems imposed upon them by the
criminal big powers, which wanted to weaken and break down the Islamic
Revolution.

The revolutionary Islamic nation continues to resist like a firm
mountain in spite of suffering the loss of so many martyrs in various
scenes of combat imposed by stubborn murderous enemies of the
Revolution.

The committed Iranian people steadfastly follow their reviving Islamic
way-the way which has now become a model for all Moslems and oppressed
nations and have created an Era of Spirituality that has severely
terrified the arrogant world powers. This year, just as the preceding
years, the Council for Ten Days Dawn Celebrations, on this auspicious
occasion and for the purpose of presenting a lucid portrait of the
Islamic Revolution and its Islamic and political lines, offers a number
of books and pamphlets in various languages to the dear readers.

The present book-pamphlet is one of the said works and is offered to all
whom it may interest and concern. We convey best wishes for the final
victory of Islamic and Moslems in all arenas and forecast an ultimate
defeat of the sinister international powers, while we pray for
liberation of all oppressed and dominated peoples.

**Council for Ten Days Dawn Celebrations**


