Lesson Seven: The End of Prophethood
====================================

„... Among them was either a predecessor who would name the one to
follow or the follower who had been introduced by the predecessor.”
(Sermon 1, Nahjul Balaghah)

In the previous lesson, we mentioned that human beings have never
suffered from the absence of the Prophets or revealed Books. Here in the
above statement, the Commander of the Faithful points out that all the
Prophets have had the same direction, although their followers stand
against each other today (Jews against Christians and Christians against
Muslims...)

He actually means that there have been no dispute or quarrel among the
Prophets, all of them traversing the same path, conveying the same
message and knowing each other quite well. Everyone of them introduced
the Prophet after him and talked honorably about the one before him. For
example, Moses informed his followers that Jesus Christ would be his
successor and Jesus Christ mentioned, in turn, the name of Moses. Thus,
the disputes and wars running among the followers of the Prophets are
quite illogical, originating from egotism and selfishness.

We see, therefore, that this situation (the successive coming of the
Prophets, heavenly Books and the Prophets' followers such as the Imams)
continued along with history and humanity's evolution till God appointed
Muhammad peace and the mercy of God be upon him and upon his,
descendants as the last Prophet.

In this regard, the Commander of the Faithful continues with the
following words: «In this way, ages passed by and time rolled on,
fathers passed away while sons took their places till God deputed
Muhammad (peace and the mercy of God be upon him and his descendants) as
His Prophet, in fulfillment of His promise and in completion of His
Prophethood.»

What has God promised which should definitely be fulfilled? The answer
can be traced in the Qur’an where it gives good tidings, in the words of
Jesus Christ, of the advent of Muhammad, saying:

“***And remember, Jesus, the son of Mary, said.- 0 children of Israel, I
am the apostle of God(sent) to you, confirming the Law (which came)
before me, and giving glad tidings of an Apostle to come after me, whose
name shall be Ahmad. ...It is He who has sent His Apostle with Guidance
and the Religion of Truth, that he may proclaim it over all religion ...
» (61: 69)***

Thus, God's promise is the victory of Mohammed’s religion (or
prophethood) over all of humanity's intellectual courses and social
experiences. This does not mean, however, that during the Prophet's
lifetime this aim should have been achieved (as it was not achieved in
practice due to the Prophet's departure), nor does it mean that the
Prophet of Islam should, in the long run, overcome all religions,
nations and schools of thought (although this has been realized many
times in history and the Islamic government has approached a worldwide
extent)

The proclamation of truth actually has a more delicate significance. In
fact, the thought and mentality of human beings and their creativeness,
initiative and innovation increasingly provide them with new ways and
manners. Ideologies come into being, grow up and become widespread in
this way, and thinkers and philosophers (such as Plato Socrates and ...
) make their plans for humanity's social life or the basis of these new
ways and manners.

Now, the path (school) of the Prophets will gain absolute victory over
all the ways designed by human beings at a time when the whole content
of the prophethood is given to the people. The path of Moses was
certainly the path of God but no one claims that it was the most perfect
path ever disclosed for humanity.

It was quite appropriate for the time of Moses but it lacked that much
capacity to encompass various necessities of human life at all ages and
times. It is likely that such man-made schools of thought shall appear
in the course of the coming centuries as to be more perfect than the
school (religion) of Moses.

Thus, Moses' religion was not the one to overcome all other schools and
religions because the line of prophecy had not come to an end and the
cup of prophethood had not overflowed. Moses filled a part of this cup
and Jesus filled another part but they could not go forward because
human beings did not have the capacity to absorb more. The people were,
in effect, mentally weak. Otherwise, God would have bestowed on them the
whole message of prophethood through His first appointed Prophet.

But when the people got the essential readiness, God deputed His Last
Messenger to provide them with all (the knowledge and awareness) that
could be contained in the human mind and to complete the culture of
prophethood, fulfilling the divine promise and overcoming all religions
and man-made schools of thought.[^1]

The completion of prophethood speaks of the end of the line through
which humanity connects itself directly with God, i.e. revelation. When
this line comes to an end by the appearance of the Last Prophet there is
no further need of revelation, Gabriel and so forth, because human
beings themselves are thereafter capable of understanding new ways and
manners of life and extracting them from what has been offered to them
in a complete form by the Last Messenger of God, who stands at the end
of the chain of prophethood.

Now, going back once again to the Nahjul Balaghah, we see that all the
Prophets preceding the last, such as Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and so
forth, had a commitment to believe in him, as they anticipated his
coming: The Last Prophet stood in effect at the peak of prophethood and
other Prophets who were below him in rank had to await him, believe in
him (i.e. believe in his prophethood and message) and love him.

The Commander of the Faithful says, “God deputed Muhammad (peace and the
mercy of God be upon him and his descendants) as His Prophet, in
fulfillment of His promise and in completion of His Prophethood. His
pledge had been taken from the Prophets, his traits of character were
well reputed and his birth was honorable.”

There is, however, a subtler significance in these statements and that
is that the Prophet's commitment was neither a written nor an oral one.
They had, rather, a natural and primordial commitment to heighten the
thought and understanding of human beings and to make them ready for the
advent of the Last Messenger.

This commitment is similar to the commitment of the teachers of lower
grades towards the teachers of higher grades, although they may not know
one another. In fact, the former are responsible to train the students'
minds in such a proper way that the latter can make the more advanced
matters and more extended concepts easily understood.

The Commander of the Faithful continues that the Prophet's «traits of
character», i.e. his physical, familial, spiritual and behavioural signs
and characteristics were known to one and all and thus a few number of
people such as Salman of Fars could unprecedentedly, and without being
exposed to his later teachings and programs, know him an come to a
perfect belief in his religion. As to the birth of the Prophet, the
Commander of the Faithful uses the adjective „honorable” to indicate
that there was not weakness regarding this matter, i.e. the Prophet's
father and moth (were both chaste and pious. Also, his birth was
honorable in respect to circumstances of time and place.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

Q. Can people, other than the Prophets establish connection with God
through revelation? If so, can we conclude that after the end of
prophethood too, God inspires His pure beings with some mysteries?

A. The answer to this question lies in the different between revelation
and inspiration. Revelation is the descension of specific concepts
together with their special wordings to a Prophet. The Holy Qur’an is,
in the eyes of the Muslims, a revelation sent down to the Prophet of
Islam through Gabriel. It is completely different from what ordinary
human beings receive in their hearts or understands in an unusual
manner.

Theirs are inspirations that pure, faithful and sincere creatures of God
occasionally receive. Thus, revelation is far beyond inspiration and
there is no matter if some people are inspired with some secrets in the
period after the end o prophethood.

Q. If all the Prophets have had the same line and direction why have
their followers, who have to practice their, commandments, not followed
the same way?

A. The reason is that the followers of the Prophets were gradually
deceived, that is, as time passed, malicious an( ignorant hands were put
to work, beguiling the followers and distorting the teachings of the
Prophets.

Q. What is, wilayat- al-faqih (the guardianship of religious
jurisprudents)? Is it among the „Essentials of Religion” or among the
„Secondary Principles” of Religion?

A. „Wilayat” means the guardianship of the community and faqih» is a
jurisprudent or theologian. Thus, „wilayat- al-faqih” is the
guardianship of the Islamic community by the religious theologians or
jurisprudents in the period when the immaculate Imam is absent. It is
one of the „Secondary Principles of Religion”, a ruling system, and
those who do not believe in it and deny it are disbelievers in Islam.

Q. What are common to monotheistic religions and what are their
differences?

A. The doctrinal principles which they offer are common to all
monotheistic religions (i.e. heavenly religions, for we do not have
non-monotheistic heavenly religions), and the differences among them lie
perhaps in the special decrees and commandments, each of them provides
for that specific era in which it is founded.

Q. What is ijtihad?

A. Its literal meaning is «to try or endeavor» but in its technical
sense it refers to a theologian's effort in understanding Islamic rules
and regulations and deriving them from the Book (the Holy Qur’an),
Traditions, etc. through the special skill he has acquired in his long
course of discipleship under great Islamic experts and authorities. A
person who has the ability to perform this job is called a «Mujtahid.».

Q. Why did the Prophet of Islam appear among the Arabs and not among the
Persians, for example? Is it true that had he not appeared among the
Arabs, the Arabian civilization would have been forgotten?

A. There is no definite reason concerning this matter but perhaps it can
be argued that since Arabs were the most untrained and uneducated as
well as the most quarrelsome nation of that time, and since they could
more easily be affected and influenced than others, they possessed a
proper background for the acceptance of the Prophet's invitation to
Islam. Their lack of education and training was not, however, an
obstacle to their acceptance of the invitation but, rather, caused more
trouble and distress for the Prophet in attracting their attention.

Perhaps if this religion appeared among other nations, it would be more
difficult to convince them. Arabs, though fastened to the chain of
superstitions, possessed certain privileges such as bravery, devotion,
tolerance (against hardship) and freedom (not being under the rule of
satanic powers) which made them the most deserving nation to be exposed
to this heavenly religion of Islam.

As to the Arabian civilization it should be said that the Arabs, having
a civilization, a culture and a history of their own, would not have
been forgotten, had the Prophet not appeared among them, in the same way
as the Turks, Tajiks, Spaniards and so forth have remained up to this
day.

[^1]: For a better understanding of this matter, refer to Martyr Murtada
Mutahhari's The End of Prophecy.


