Lesson Eight: The Believer' Status Before, After and at the Time of the Prophets' Appearance
============================================================================================

In another sermon of the Nahjul Balaghah known as „al-Khutbah
al-Qasi'ah” (The Sermon of Disparagement),the Commander of the Faithful
lays down and explains some of the matters which were quoted in previous
from Sermon No. 1, concerning the status of the people during the Age of
Ignorance, conditions of the time of the appearance of the Prophets and
the situation of the people after the appointment of the Prophets to
prophethood.

He portrays, in effect, the conditions and circumstances, which had
naturally cast shadows over the people’s lives in the Age of Ignorance
as well as the victorious status, the people gained after the appearance
of the Prophets under the light of their efforts, struggles and
endeavors.

A study of some of the statements of this Sermon (al qasrah) which adds
to our mind concerning what we learned about the background to
prophethood, the Prophets' responsibilities, etc., in previous lessons,
would bring us to a sound conclusion for this book. In a part of this
Sermon we read: «think about the condition of people from among the
believers who passed before you. What distress and trials[^1] they
underwent:»[^2]

It means that we should look deep into the circumstances of the
believers who lived before us, not treating them in a perfunctory manner
because we cannot learn much from the formal appearance of the past
events. Only when one traces the causes of these events and contemplates
them deeply will one perceive that the believers of the past have been
under severe pressure' and that they have been subjected to such
hardships as hunger, torture, imprisonment and so forth and greater
hardships than those we suffer today, i.e. facing political problems and
happenings and recognizing the true character of different groups and
fronts and the stance they take.

The Commander of the Faithful continues with the following statements,
„Were they the most over-burdened among all the people and in the most
straightened circumstances in the whole world?”

The true believers have always been the most overburdened, the most pain
suffering and the poorest creatures of God before the advent of the
Prophets and the realization of Islamic revolutions (all the revolutions
led by the Prophets have been Islamic in the sense that they have all
been primarily aimed at submission to God). Why?

First, because the believers have to provide for their own sustenance.
In fact, the true believers, those who have touched the spirit of the
belief in God, never compromise with oppressive powers. They usually
refuse to enter their service and to help them should they not be able
to fight them.”

Thus, under tyrannical governments, the believers are constantly face to
face with hardships and inconveniences as far as their economic affairs
are concerned. This can be traced in Islamic traditions. On the
contrary, disbelievers compromise with the oppressors very easily, enter
the service and thus enjoy a comfortable life.

Second, in addition to providing for their own living, the believers are
usually obliged to shoulder the burden of the oppressors' impositions
concerning their luxurious life. As an example, we all know that the
overthrown regime (of Pahlavi) faced exorbitant expenses, which had to
be paid by those who did not compromise with it. Those who compromised
with that regime were not subjected to such burdens and impositions.
They themselves took advantage of the prevailing situations as well.

Third, the believers have to tolerate the political impositions of the
oppressive ruling powers with whom they fight. Such powers do not let
them express their beliefs and have their own free thoughts and
opinions. They force the believers to accept their own oppressive
thoughts. Thus, the prevailing strangulation in a society is a great
burden on the shoulder of the believers who refuse to adhere to the
thoughts and opinions imposed by the oppressive ruling powers. They are,
in effect, the most combative people, always fighting the oppressors in
order to eradicate calamities and corruptions.

It is narrated that the believer is always in a state of struggling in
some way or other. Under unlawful and corruptive governments, he
involves himself in organized hidden and underground battles and lives
in a precautionary, dissimulative manner, and under lawful, legitimate
governments, he deals with political, ideological and military
involvements or fights the enemy to safeguard the way of God. Thus, the
believer is always in a fighting state, which is very troublesome.
Fighting does not necessarily mean receiving wounds and bearing
distress. It includes, in addition to these, fears and failures, worries
and anxieties. The true fighter is thus the one who does not surrender
to these and who only fights for the sake of God and duty, not for the
sake of victory. Accordingly, fighting is more troublesome and difficult
than all the trials of life.[^3]

Finally the Commander of the Faithful says, that are the poorest and the
most straightened people because they have to live in a state of
strangulation, poverty, force and precautionary silence.

He continues to explain the believers' status in the following
statements: „The Pharaohs took them as slaves. They inflicted the worst
punishments and bitter sufferings on them. They continuously remained in
this state of (spiritual) ruinous disgrace and severe subjugation. They
found no method for escape and no way for protection.”

The first statement implies that the believers were forcefully made to
obey Pharaohs (holders of tyrannical power) or deities other than the
One God, although they were servants of God by nature. Sometimes, of
course, such deities or objects of worship believe in God themselves
and, therefore submission to them is submission to God. But when they
induce people to the worship of their own selves, submission to them is
submission to non-gods. It has been narrated he who listens to a
speaker, becomes his servant. If the speaker speaks of God, that person
will be the servant of God and if he speaks of Satan that person will be
the servant of Satan.»

And Satan is sometimes the very human 'self' and ‘concupiscence' to
whose obedience the Pharaohs forced the believers in God, who knew no
way of defending their human dignity and getting rid of such servitude.

Such was the status of the believers in God and followers of the
Prophets who dealt with satanic ruling powers before the victory.

The Three-Act Play of people's Status
-------------------------------------

The status of the people before, during and after the Prophets'
appointment can be likened to a three-act play, the first act of which
shows hardship and distress, the second speaks of resistance and
perseverance and the third pictures, victory and freedom. In fact, the
believers will never gain victory without resisting hardships and
struggling for their aim. The Commander of the Faithful continues, „Till
when God, the Glorified, noticed that they were enduring troubles in His
love and bearing distress and of fear for Him, He provided escape from
the distress of trials. So, He changed their disgrace into honor and
fear into safety.”

In these statements, the Imam shows that the direction of the believers'
struggles is towards God and they tolerate hardships and undesirable
problems such as hunger, torture, imprisonment, cudgel-punishments and
so forth upon His way and for the sake of His love so that God, seeing
their patience and perseverance, would reveal to them the ways of escape
from nuisances and calamities, maintain their convenience and
tranquility, change their disgrace into honor and fear into security and
finally their defeat into victory.

It should be added here that honor (i.e. not submitting to contempt) and
safety (i.e. not fearing any enemy) are the most important things the
oppressed people are concerned about. Under the rule of satans
(tyrannical powers) the people are not immune concerning their lives,
properties, and morality and so forth, whereas under the rule of God and
the oppressed people such worries and anxieties do not exist at all.

The Commander of the Faithful continues his discussion with these
statements, „Consequently, they became ruling authorities and
conspicuous leaders, and God's favors over them reached limits to which
their own wishes had not reached,” meaning that the whole community of
believers, after God, bestowed victory upon them, became leaders (Imams,
guides and patterns) and objects of imitation for other oppressed people
and nations who followed their ways and manners and made movements.

This is clearly observable in the world of today in which a nation of
believers (i.e. Iranians), after having struggled for a long time and
gaining victory over a tyrannical regime, has now become the leader of
the whole world of the oppressed, and achievement which had never been
imagined by Iranians.

They thought, in fact, about victory but they never imagined to become
leaders and guiding patterns for all of the oppressed people of the
world such as those of Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Egypt, Persian Gulf
countries, Africa and America, who have been greatly influenced and
motivated by Iranians' achievements. And this is nothing but God's favor
as he says.

Conclusion (Two General Points in the Sermon)
---------------------------------------------

First, in this Sermon (No. 191) the emphasis is mostly on the spiritual
aspects of the people's calamities and adversities.. In fact, such
factors as strangulation, lack of security, the burden of mental
impositions and the burden of providing for the satanic wishes of
illegitimate governments, all of which cause humanity to suffer
spiritually and invoke one to campaign, are more emphasized than such
material misfortunes (or trials) as hunger for which the people rarely
campaign. To say the least, human beings' honor and dignity are the
dearest things to them, which stimulate them to seriously struggle and
campaign. Hunger and the like can be removed in other ways. These are
the points of emphasis in this Sermon.

Secondly, the Imam emphasizes here that in a community of believers,
when the arrogant government is overthrown, it is the oppressed that
take it over another arrogant group. As an example, after the revolution
of Moses and destruction of Pharaoh, it was the believers themselves and
the masses that became rulers and established a true government.

Also, during the lifetime of the Last Prophet, as well as during the
reign of the rightly guided Caliphs, the people themselves were masters
of their own affairs and played significant roles in resolving the
matters which came about. They loved the Prophet and accepted what he
said but not blindly and under propagandic pressures. They freely
accepted his decisions and they themselves made minor decisions.

Unfortunately, as time has passed, people's participation in and
contribution to the ruling affairs of the Islamic communities have
gradually decreased and these communities have turned out to be, like
the communities predominated by ignorance, consisting of two classes of
people - the arrogant and the deprived; whereas a true Islamic community
consists only of one class of people and they are the believers.

[^1]: In the terminology of the Qur’an and in Islamic usage “trial”
(bala) comes to mean a bitter and a severe incident. Through these
incidents, the human heroes have always been tried in the course of
history and one cannot claim to be a perfect human being unless one
exposes.

[^2]: Nahjul Balaghah of ‘Ali, part two, page 410.

[^3]: Akhavan-i-Thalith, one of the forerunners of modern Persian
poetry, wrote a poem entitled „Wolves and Dogs” in which he pictures the
status of rebellious believers with all hardships and calamities they
suffer and their battle against oppressors as well as the status of the
peace-seeking disbelievers and hypocrites who compromise with tyrants
and do not refuse to he subjected to rneanness. Akhvan likens the
believers to wolves, which keep distance with the affluent and expose
themselves to great sufferings for a loaf of bread, and compares the
disbelievers with dogs, which always serve faithfully, collar on the
neck, in order to receive what is left over the master's table


