Lesson Three: To Which Class Of Society do The Prophets Belong?
===============================================================

In this chapter we are going to discuss the social origins of the
Prophets themselves, i.e., to find out the social class to which the
Prophets belonged. We are going to see whether they belonged to the rich
people, aristocrats and holders of worldly power or to the poor, the
needy and the deprived. It is, in fact, very import-ant to know the
social and economic classes from which the Prophets have arisen in the
course of history, founded monotheistic movements and revolutions and
provided the masses with divine words and messages.

The Holy Qur’an, the Traditions and the *Nahjul Balaghah* are rich
sources, which can help us in the analysis of this matter, but here the
emphasis is only on the words of the *Nahjul Balaghah.* In the long and
famous sermon of *al-Qasi'ah* (the Sermon of Disparagement) there are
statements which deserve careful reflection and which offer information
concerning the matter being discussed.

The statements run as follows: “certainly, if God were to allow anyone
to indulge in pride, He would have allowed it to His selected prophets
and vicegerents. But God, the Sublime, disliked vanity for them and
liked humbleness for them. Therefore, they laid their cheeks on the
ground, smeared their faces with dust, bent themselves down for the
believers and remained humiliated people (they were from the oppressed
people). God tested them with hunger, afflicted them with difficulties,
tested them with fear, and upset them with troubles.”[^1]

Here, the Commander of the Faithful speaks about pride and vanity and
emphasizes that since God disliked these two qualities; He
misrepresented them in the eyes of His Prophets and righteous beings.
Therefore, the Prophets hated self-deceit and superiority complexes, but
liked humbleness and humility. Thus, they bent themselves down for the
believers, lived among the lowest classes of the people, rubbed their
faces with the dust (in prostration) before God and refrained from
indulging in haughtiness. They did, in effect, what the Holy Qur’an
orders to be done to the parents. It says:

***„... and lower to them (one's parents) the wing of humbleness out of
mercy ... “ (17:24)***

The Prophets, according to the Commander of the Faithful were from the
oppressed masses of the people. They knew the, pains and agonies of the
needy. They felt, for instance, what hunger was, because God had tried
them with hunger. The Holy Qur’an quotes Moses, peace be upon him, to
have said, ***“Oh God! I need what you shall send me.”***

According to narrations, Moses, peace be upon him, was hungry and
implored God in this manner to send him bread so that he could satiate
his hunger. Thus, the Prophets felt the pains of hungry people. They had
tasted the sufferings of life. They knew well the troubles of hard
physical labor in cold and hot weathers. They understood the meaning of
hardship.

Timidity and the state of being fearful are characteristics of the
oppressed. They are usually fearful of the future, poverty and the
dominance of a powerful hand over their destinies. They are always
worried and in a state of mental disturbance, concerning the existing
situations and the coming conditions. They expect at any moment to be
put under pressure by a Powerful oppressor.

Likewise, the Prophets suffered from such fears and anxieties and, to
say the least, were so surrounded by hardships and difficulties as to
become pure in the same way as gold derives its purity under the
pressure of very hot temperature. In fact, the Prophets were not
pampered individuals to suddenly come Out of their Palaces and call the
people to make a revolution.

There was a close link between them and the common people. They had,
like all members of the society been subjected to ignorance, tasted the
pains and sufferings of life and then became worthy to be called
'Prophets'.

The Definition of the Deprived (mustad’af)
------------------------------------------

A society dominated by ignorance is always made up of two groups of
people. One group consists of those who make Plans, administer society
and have total authority over all affairs. The other group consists of
the subjects and subordinates who have nothing to do with different
affairs of society. They work hard (and thus they are not
good-for-nothings as they are usually called, compared for example, to
the amount of work Pharaoh performed with the slaves in building the
Pyramids), but they have no right to apply their will, personality and
points of view in the administration of the affairs of their society.

The first group is a minority consisting of the powerful families and
dynasties with various degrees of authority over society. They are
called 'the arrogant' *(mustakbirin). The* second group are the common
people and the masses who are regarded as the weak and who are devoid of
authority whatsoever. They are called 'the *deprived' (mustad’afin).
Our* own country, during the corrupt regime of Pahlavi, was administered
by a limited number of individuals, with the Shah at the head of them.
It is true that an institution named the 'National Consultative
Assembly' existed but all the decisions were made by the Shah and his
American advisers and dictated to the members of the Assembly, who had
no will of their own.

At the lower levels, the big money makers who acted in collusion with
governmental personages, by governor-generals and so forth, made
decisions. In fact, the total authority was centralized in the hands of
one person, the Shah. If all the ministers, Assembly members, director

Generals and the like agreed on something, but the Shah opposed; it was
his will and decision, which prevailed. The rest of the people, i.e. the
masses, had no authority (even over their own destinies) to interfere
with the affairs pertaining to foreign relations (with Russia and
America, for instance), internal industries, agriculture, animal
husbandry, etc. let alone matters concerning religion and morality. They
had no right to meddle with the total course of affairs of their society
due to the absolute lack of democracy, voting and elections in the
country.

This state of affairs is nowadays an obvious characteristic of all
socialist countries but in a more respectable form, i.e. one party (the
Communist Party) possesses the total power and authority in
administering the affairs of these countries. In fact, the high
governmental cadres, supreme councils and the general secretary himself
determine all the affairs of these countries. Other people have no right
to express their viewpoints, and their will and decisions are not taken
for granted. Thus, mental development is repressed in such countries,
and perhaps this is why the youth usually engage in Sports and physical
training and blossom out as the first rate athletes in international
competition such as the Olympics as we observed in the recent Olympic
games held in Russia.

In western societies, too, the situation is more or less the same
(mostly in the so-called civilized countries of America and Europe where
'freedom' and 'democracy' have widespread literal application).
Nowadays, there are unfortunately some people who try to transform
freedom and democracy to western conceptions of freedom and democracy,
without knowing that the West itself is bereft of real freedom; (in
America, West Germany and the likes, people imagine that they elect
their representatives freely whereas the reality is that it is specific
currents which lead them to one side or another to cast their votes in
favor of one party or another. Recent elections in America and the
conflicts between the Democratic and Republican parties are the best
evidence, verifying this reality).

Generally speaking, in all countries of the world, people are divided
into two classes: the deprived and the arrogant. The deprived masses are
themselves two groups: the needy and the non-needy. In fact, a poor and
wretched peasant who performs fifteen hours of physical labor a day
under the difficulties of rain, snow and hot weather and one who lives
an ordinary life, being a shopkeeper, or employee, etc., without
suffering so much, are both in the category of the deprived, because
both of them are considered to be worthless and good-for-nothing and are
devoid of the right to participate in the administration of their
society.

According to the Commander of the Faithful in the quoted Sermon, the
Prophets belonged to the deprived classes and, like them, have been
deprived of the authority to carry out a responsibility in their
society. A historical review of the life-accounts of Muhammad, peace and
the mercy of God be upon him and his descendants, and other Prophets
will clarify this matter further.

Moses, peace be upon him, was born to a deprived family among the
children of Israel who lived under severe pressures. But after birth he
was brought in a completely arrogant house and became a favorite with
the Pharaoh's family although he had not been born of the Pharaoh's
wife.

He was brought up under the best living possibilities, the most
delicious food and different kinds of luxuries (as a perfect
aristocrat). Then, when Pharaoh noticed that he was nourishing an enemy
within his house, Moses decided to escape. In fact, Moses had begun his
invitation and calling people to God, had started his revolutionary
propagations within the royal palace and had succeeded in converting the
Pharaoh's wife to submission to God when Pharaoh experienced a feeling
of danger and decided to prosecute him. Moses escaped to Egypt.

To say the least, Moses became a Prophet and invited the people to make
a revolution when he was within the royal house and at the peak of
arrogance (this biographical account of Moses is narrated in the Qur’an,
and no use was made here of the Traditions).

Our Prophet, Muhammad, peace and the mercy of God be upon him and his
descendants was born in a tribal house of high rank. He was the grandson
of and a favorite with 'Abd al-Muttalib, the chief of Mecca (although he
was, unlike Pharaoh, a pious, chief and a believer in God). When his
father, Abdullah, who was one of the dearest children of 'Abd
al-Muttalib, died in youth, the latter brought up Muhammad, peace and
the mercy of God be upon him and his descendants, until he became four
years of age (although Moses was the favorite with a great emperor and
Muhammad with a tribal chief, both of them enjoyed the favor of highly
respectful families).

Then 'Abd al-Muttalib passed away and Muhammad came under the
guardianship of his uncle Abu Talib who did not enjoy the same respect
as his father, 'Abd al-Muttalib, but who was himself a distinguished
personality, not belonging to the masses.

Abu Talib acted as a good guardian for a period of time and then he was
afflicted with poverty. Thus, Muhammad lost the (financial) support of
his uncle at this time. But before long he married Khadija, a rich
woman. He first acted as a functionary to Khadija but later on, (fifteen
years before his appointment to prophethood) he married her, thus
becoming a relatively rich man in Medina.

The very financial state remained with him until he became a Prophet at
the age of forty (this is why it is said that Islam advanced through
Khadija's wealth and ‘‘Ali’s sword).

Accordingly, the Prophet of Islam was born to an aristocratic family and
lived a comfortable and affluent life until God appointed him to
prophethood. After the appointment, however, due to the high expenses of
propagation and calling people to monotheism and due to the lack of
opportunity for conducting business, he became poor.

Other prophets, too, were more or less wealthy. It is in the Traditions
(although there is no clear, historical accounts available) that Job,
for example, possessed lands, gardens and trees which were destroyed
when God wanted to test his belief. David, too, had a rural origin. He
was a commoner. Yet he became a commander and a ruler. Solomon was born
in the house of this commander (David).

In fact, this chosen Prophet of God (although there is no difference
between him and Moses as far as his purity, piety, revolutionary spirit
and prophethood are concerned) was the son of a ruler. Abraham was born
in the house of an idol-carver, and the history of nations and religions
reveals that idol-carvers were not only not among the low, deprived
classes but were also considered to be saintly and respectable.

We come to the conclusion, therefore, that a considerable number (not
all of them) of the Prophets have been brought up among affluent and
powerful families. Thus, we have two points here to be considered along
with each other: First, in the Commander of the Faithful saying that
Prophets have belonged to the deprived and humble masses of the people.
Second, the Prophets (some of them), as we see above, have been born
among the socially, comfortable families of high ranks.

Are these two realities incompatible? No It is not the main point here
to see whether they are compatible or not, The main point is to nullify
the (communists') imaginary legend that all the revolutionary agents
have originated from the proletarian, bare-footed and needy classes.
What is essential is that a revolutionary person (be he a leader of the
revolution or a commoner) should be dressed with revolutionary morals
and Attributes.

Materialists and the interpreters of Marxism, in fact, hold a wrong
belief that only those individuals can enjoy revolutionary morals and
Attributes who themselves belong to the poor, bare-footed or proletarian
classes, for man is always and everywhere a human being and thus
corrigible. He can, like the Prophets about whom ‘Ali says, „They were
from the deprived people,” equip him with correct, revolutionary habits
and with the attributes of the deprived.

It is true that aristocratic training and education entail no result but
an aristocrat human being, yet it is untrue to believe that such an
education (in a person who is brought up in an aristocratic atmosphere)
is unchangeable and indestructible.

In fact, should divine guidance (either in the form of thinking,
meditation and the awakening of conscience of the individuals themselves
or through training and purification of the soul by the teachers of
morality, i.e. the Prophets) enlighten the sick bodies of those who are
under the influence of aristocratic habits and training, they would come
out of their spiritual depression and become dressed with revolutionary
dispositions.

Summary
-------

Two points are perceived when the social origin of the Prophets is put
to discussion: First those who are appointed to prophethood are dressed
with the Attributes of the deprived, revolutionary morals and combative
spirit against the existing class systems of the arrogant, i.e. at the
time of the appointment (and even before it) they have an anti-arrogant
position in support of the deprived.

Second, having these Attributes does not necessarily imply that all the
Prophets belong to the deprived classes. They can either belong to these
classes or not but, as was mentioned before, even at the time of
appointment to prophethood and at the beginning of their revolution they
may belong to the arrogant strata, having a comfortable life. There is
no need for them to have suffered from forced labor and hard work before
the appointment. Of course, they should have felt pain and distress but
this does not necessarily mean that they should curtail the bonds of
relationship with their social class and their (comfortable) life.

Spiritually exalted Beings Have Understanding as Well as the Feeling of
Sympathy.

Subsequent to the discussion concerning the arrogant and the deprived,
it should be added here that such a class division does not exist in
monotheistic societies. It is, in fact, the exclusive characteristic of'
societies suffering from ignorance and alienation. We have of course,
rulers, ruling classes, caliphs, holders of religious authority and
governments in monotheistic societies but none of them are arrogant
enough to manage the affairs of these societies on the basis of personal
beliefs.

Also, there are commoners in such societies, consisting of workers,
businessmen, peasants, bricklayers, government employees and so forth,
but none of them arrogant either. Each class has, in fact, some
authority over its own social affairs in proportion to the total number
of its members.

For example, under the present situations of Iran (although Iran is not
a 100% or even 50% Islamic society at the present time), every
individual has some authority and the right to vote as a member of a
society with thirty-six million individuals.

It is on this basis that the great movements and even the political
affairs of our country are nowadays managed and led by the people
themselves, although it may be considered wrong so far as the prevailing
patterns of politics on the international level are concerned. The truth
is that if the people were not inclined towards certain actions and
policies, connections and disconnections, the government (itself
consisting of Muslims belonging to the low classes of people) would not
dare take such positions as it does today and perform such courageous
actions. This is indicative of an Islamic country (although Iran is
still not a perfect Islamic country).

When Islam shall, God-willing, shed its light on our society in all its
dimensions, the role of every individual in the administration of the
whole country will be to the extent that he or she (although being the
lowest in social position) can act and promise on behalf of the Islamic
community. Today, if a given government or a certain action be condemned
in the sermons of the Friday ritual prayer in front of a multitude of
people, or if a treaty between our country and a given government be
orally made (or violated) in such sermons, neither our own government
nor the addressee will take care of it.

But in a perfect Islamic community, there is no irresponsible
individual. In such a community, in which Islamic culture and education
are perfectly dominant, every individual (being a businessman, a
housewife and so forth) can conclude a treaty or announce an agreement
for the cessation of hostilities or a special occasion and the Islamic
government is obliged to take it into account, although that individual
not be a minister, an army commander or a diplomat. In fact, every
individual can decide for the whole community on specific occasions, and
all accepts his or her decision.

This is not, however, practicable under the present culture and habits
of our society. But as the society gets closer to Islam and its
teachings, this is more likely to be accomplished. It should be added,
of course, that when we say something is not for the time being
practicable, it does not mean that Islam as a whole cannot be
materialized. It can, but only when the world has a complete readiness
for its acceptance.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

*Q. You said that Khadija's wealth and ‘‘Ali’s sword made the progress
of Islam possible. Does this not lead to a deviating concept that wealth
and material things have been the only factors for the spread of Islam?*

A. We do not believe that wealth alone played a role in this regard, but
the truth is that wealth, too, had certain roles and this is undeniable.
It was, is fact, necessary for the satiation of the newly converted
people's hunger as well as for providing the expenses of those who were
sent here and there by the Prophet. This does not negate the influence
of the spirituality and dynamism of Islamic thought and ideology, since
the very dynamism is in need of material things when acting and making
progress in the same way as it needs physical labor and activity.

*Q. You defined the deprived in its social and political aspects. Is it
not necessary to explain the economic and cultural aspects of it as
well?*

A. The economic activities of the deprived (as previously defined) are
also under the influence of the powerful, i.e. economic activities are
usually centralized where power is centralized (under the previous
regime of Iran, for example, no productive and economic activity took
place except through the direct or indirect interference of the
government).

Therefore, economic aspects are dependent on political aspects. It may,
however, be argued that political power originates from economic power.
This is possible but it lacks universality. Sometimes political power is
the cause for the absorption of money and sometimes money gives rise to
political power.

They are inter-connected, but in a society wherein political power is
centralized in a certain group, economics cannot grow and progress
independently. The cultural aspects (culture in its prevailing, not in
its revolutionary sense) of society, too, are affected by the opinion of
those who possess political and economic power. Thus, when political
oppression dominates society, the existing cultural and political
aspects of the deprived are also influenced by lt.

*Q. Is the following tradition, narrated from the Imams concerning
deprivation, authentic? „*The deprived are those who endeavored in the
way of God but could not achieve their aim in establishing the divine
system. The highest of them are the Prophets and saints, next to them
are the believers who make efforts in the way of God.”

A. It may be authentic for all the Prophets and their true followers
belong to the category of the deprived. It provides us with the
definition of the deprived not with the concept of deprivation.

[^1]: Ibid. Part two, page 406. Parenthesis is the translator's.


