Discourse 1: The Criteria for Humanity
======================================

I have been asked to discuss the question of the criteria for humanity.
If we were to do so from the viewpoint of biology, this would be an easy
matter since we would be dealing with the human body and the place of
human beings in the animal world, in which case there is no difference
between individuals. By the standard of anatomy, medicine, and, even to
some extent, psychology, there are no major differences between two or
more individuals.

But is humanity limited to the body? Is human perfection and mobility
confined to man's physical aspect? In humanistic sciences there is talk
of perfect and imperfect man, of the low and high kind. What type of
human being is ethically and socially worthy of respect because of his
or her perfection, or deserving of contempt because of his or her
imperfections?

This is a topic which has always attracted attention not only in human
knowledge, but also in various religions. For example, the Quran speaks
of human beings who are higher than angels and worthy of homage by the
latter. It also mentions human beings who are inferior to animals.

What is the criteria which measures the differences between human
beings? This question is not only related to religion. Materialistic
philosophers, too, who do not believe in God and religion, discuss the
question of man, humanity and superior and inferior beings.

What is the criteria according to these philosophers? Can we say that
human beings are equal genetically, but that they differ in knowledge.
That is, something which is acquired not inherited, so that a person
with more knowledge is higher than one with less? Is this related to
academic knowledge which gives superiority according to the level and
stage of one's studies? Do we respect people only in proportion to their
learning? Is Abu Dharr honoured because he was more learned than his
contemporaries? Is Mu'awiyah blameworthy and disliked because he had
inferior knowledge?

I do not believe that learning is a criterion for humanity. If it were
so, we should say that Einstein was the most endowed with qualities of
humanity since he was the most learned man of his time.

Another view is that although knowledge is one of the requisites of
humanity, and although the importance of awareness of the self, of the
society and of the world cannot be denied, it is inadequate. This view
claims that humanity is measured by character and disposition. A person
may be very learned, but if he has a bad character, would he be
considered to be a real human being?

An animal behaves according to its instincts and it possesses no will to
rule over its instincts. When we call a dog a faithful animal, its
faithfulness is instinctive. An ant is prudent by instinct. There are
also human beings in the world who have a disposition resembling that of
an animal. They possess their natural instincts, but have done nothing
to refine themselves, and are condemned only to follow their nature.

The awareness of an animal is limited to its own time and place, while
man's awareness allows him to know the past and have an idea of the
future and also step beyond his own area and even his own planet. But
the question of character is a different matter. Knowledge is related to
what one is taught, while character is related to training and the
forming of habits.

I do not think that knowledge as a criterion of humanity is acceptable
and I will later explain what type of people support it. The second
view, i.e., characteristics as a criterion of humanity, has more
supporters. But we may ask what kind of characteristics and
dispositions? One of the answers to this question is that love is the
desired criterion, love, which is the mother of other fine dispositions.
Thus, if one bases one's character on the love of human beings, one has
real humanity. Such a person is as interested in others as in one's
'"self " or even more interested in them.

In religion this is called self-sacrifice. There is a statement in a
book that there is an instruction in all religions to love for others
what you love for yourself, and dislike for them what you dislike for
yourself. This has been stated in our traditions. This is the logic of
love. As we know, in the Hindu schools and in Christianity, much
emphasis is laid on love. But they have gone so far as to lose sight of
everything else and maintain that love is to be a course of action in
all circumstances. Thus the love of both these ideologies is a kind of
stupefaction and the adequacy of love as a criterion of humanity is to
be discussed.

But if we accept the love for other human beings as the criterion, the
issue will be solved more easily than if we accept knowledge as the
criterion. For example, concerning our preference for Abu Dharr over
Mu'awiyah, we are in a better position to judge them on the basis of
love. Mu'awiyah was a selfish and ambitious man who exploited others by
force.

Abu Dharr was the reverse, and although he had all the possibilities and
even though Mu'awiyah was prepared to offer him many privileges, yet he
was anxious about the fate of others, particularly those who were
oppressed by Mu'awiyah. That is why he arose against this wicked man and
spent his last years in exile where he died. Thus, we call Abu Dharr
human as he loved others, and we consider Mu'awiyah inhuman as he was
only interested in himself.

Or, similarly, why do we think Hadrat Ali, peace be upon him, is a
perfect human being? Because he felt society's pain, and his 'I' had
become 'We'. His personality attracted all others. He was not an
individual separated from others. He was a limb or organ of a whole
body. He himself said that a pain in one part of society, as in a body,
made itself felt in the other parts, one of which was himself. Ali had
declared this long before the humanistic philosophy of twentieth century
claimed it as an ideal.

When he heard that a governor appointed by him had attended a feast, he
wrote him a letter of protest which is quoted in the Nahj ul-Balagha. It
is not mentioned what kind of a feast it had been, whether there had
been drinking or gambling or dancing. The governor was considered guilty
by Hadrat Ali because he had participated in an aristocratic feast which
was not attended by any poor people.

He says, "I never believed a governor and representative of mine would
attend such a party of the nobility." He then describes his own life and
says that he felt other people's pain more than his own and their pain
prevented him from feeling his own. His words show that he was a truly
learned and wise sage. Yet the reason why we honor him so deeply is not
only because of his wide knowledge, but because he was human. He was not
unaware of the destiny of others.

Another school of thought considers resolution and will power as the
criterion for humanity. It claims that if a person can dominate himself,
his instincts, nerves and passions by his will-power and reason and not
be dominated over by his inclinations and desires, he is really human.

There is a difference between desire and will. Desire is an attraction
by an exterior force, a relation between man and external objects, like
a hungry man drawn by food, or sexual attraction. Even sleep is an
attraction. So is desire for rank and position.

But resolution is some thing internal, which liberates one from the
urges of desire. It places desires at the disposal of will-power to
employ them as it considers expedient. Most of our past moralists
emphasized resolution as a criterion for humanity. People, unlike
animals, which are ruled by instinct, can decide to act against their
own inclinations. Thus a person of resolution is more human than one who
cannot control the 'self'.

Another criterion for humanity is freedom. What does this mean? It means
that to the extent that one tolerates no force, and is not captivated by
any power and can choose freely, one is human. In modern schools of
thought, much emphasis is laid on freedom as one of the criteria of
humanity. Is this view correct or not? It is both correct and incorrect.
As a requisite for humanity, it is correct, but as the sole criterion
for humanity, it is wrong.

Islam has laid great emphasis on self-control.

I relate a story here in connection with it. It is narrated that the
Prophet was passing by a place in Medina where a number of young men
were testing their strength by lifting a heavy stone. When they saw the
Prophet, they asked him to act as judge. The Prophet agreed, and at the
end of the competition he said, "Do you know who is the strongest? It is
he who controls his anger and does not allow it to overcome him. He must
not use his anger in a way contrary to God's satisfaction and should be
able to dominate over his own desires."

On that day, the Prophet transformed a physical contest into a spiritual
one. What he meant was that physical strength shows manliness but it is
not the only sign of it. True manliness is in the strength of will
power.

We call Hadrat Ali the 'Lion of God', for he was more manly than all in
two ways: Externally in society and on the battlefield where he could
overthrow his strongest opponents; and, more important than that,
internally, meaning that he was in perfect control of himself and of
every whim and wish.

Jalal al-din Rumi tells a story in his Mathnavi about Hadrat Ali as a
young man of 24 or 25 in which he portrays a fine picture of manliness.
He had thrown down his adversary in a battle and was sitting on his
chest, about to kill him. The man spit on Hadrat's face. Annoyed, Hadrat
Ali temporarily leaves the man and walks about for a while. The man asks
why he left him to himself. Hadrat answers, "If I had killed you then,
it would have been in anger, not in the way of my duty to my goal and
for the sake of God." This is a wonderful example of self control.

Hadrat says in his testament to his son, Imam Hasan, peace be upon him,
"Consider yourself and your life above every mean deed. In return for
what you pay out of your life for desires, you receive nothing. Do not
make yourself a slave of others, for God has created you free." The
question of freedom is something that the school of existentialism, too,
accepts as a criterion for humanity.

Another criterion for humanity is the question of duty and
responsibility which began with Kant and has been emphasized in our own
time. This means feeling responsible to society, to oneself and to one's
family. How should one obtain this feeling and what is its basis? Is it
created in one's conscience?

Another school of thought, including Plato, considers beauty as the
criterion for humanity. All schools recognize and approve of justice.
One school approves of justice from an ethical viewpoint. Another one
approves of it because it considers that there is a relation between
justice and freedom, while Plato thinks justice is good in both the
individual and society, because it leads to poise and beauty. Of course,
his idea of beauty is obviously spiritual beauty.

On another occasion we will judge between all these schools and we will
review the views of Islam on this issue.


