Discourse 10 : Migration and Jihad I
====================================

***And whoso goes forth from his house as an emigrant to God and His
Messenger and then death overtakes him, his wage shall have fallen on
God. Surely God is All-forgiving All-compassionate. (4:100)***

The holy religion of Islam is based on the two pillars of migration and
jihad (spiritual and religious struggle upon the way of God). The Quran
sanctifies both matters and praises profoundly those who migrate.

Migration means leaving one's home and dwelling and Setting off for
another destination in order to save religion and faith This matter is
referred to in many verses of the Quran The Muslims of early Islam
consisted of two groups: The Emigrants and the Companions. The
Companions were  
 In Medina and the Emigrants were those who left their town and Went to
Medina. Migration and jihad cannot be abrogated; both are permanent
decrees which conditions might at any time make necessary.

To remove misunderstanding, let me explain that other intepretations are
also made of both migration and jihad. It has been said, " An emigrant
is one who abandons sins." Is this meaning proper? If so, then all
penitents in the world who avoid sin are emigrants. Two examples may be
given here: Fuzeil bin Iyaz and Bashir Hafi. Fuzeil was a thief at the
beginning but a change of heart made him reject all sins and repent
sincerely. Later he was known not only as a virtuous man but as a guide
and teacher of others. In his former days he climbed a wall to enter a
house where as it happened a devout man kept awake praying and reading
the Quran. He heard the melodious voice of the man reading a verse of
the Holy Quran.

When he heard it, sitting on the wall, he thought, "It is a revelation
addressed directly to me. Yes, oh God, it is time, this very moment." He
climbed down and from that moment on, he abandoned theft, drinking and
gambling and whatever other vices he had. He restored as much property
as was possible and whatever other vices he had. He restored as much
property as was possible to their owners and made up for all his missed
acts of worship. Thus, he was an emigrant from sin.

In the time of Imam Musa Kazim, peace be upon him, there was a man in
Baghdad called Bashir Hafi who was a pleasure-loving aristocrat. One day
the Imam was passing by this man's house when a maid came out to leave
the rubbish somewhere. At the same time, the sound of music was heard
from the house. It seemed that some kind of revelry was going on there.
The Imam tauntingly asked whose house it was and whether or not the
owner was a slave or a free man. The maid answered in surprise, "Don't
you know? This is the house of Bashir Hafi. How could he be a slave?"
The Imam said, "He must be free to be engaged thus. If he were a slave
his conduct would be different. “Then the Imam went on his way.

When the maid returned to the house, Bashir asked why she had been gone
so long. She related the conversation she had with a man who, according
to her, looked very virtuous and religious. By her description, Bashir
realized that it could not have been anyone but the Imam. He felt a
sudden change of heart and eagerly asked which direction he had taken.
On being told, he ran out bare-footed and managed to catch up with the
Imam. He fell at the Imam's feet, sobbing and admitted his interest in
being a slave from that minute onward, a slave of God. He repented his
past conduct and on returning home, threw away all the implements of
revelry and began a life of virtue and devotion. Thus he may be
considered another emigrant from sin.

There is a similar interpretation about jihad. It is said that a mujahid
(one who engages in religious and spiritual struggle in the way of God)
is one who combats the self and fights against his or her carnal
desires.

Ali, peace be upon him, says, "The bravest person is he who conquers his
own desires." One day the Holy Prophet was passing through a street in
Medina. He saw a number of youths who were engaged in a contents of
lifting a heavy stone. The Prophet asked if they would like him to act
as a judge of the contest. They eagerly agreed. Then the Prophet said,
"There is no need to lift the stone to see which of you is the
strongest. I can say that the strongest person is he who in his desire
for a sin is able to control that desire. Such a person is truly a brave
warrior."

A story is related about Puryayeh Vali who is considered a great world
champion as well as a symbol of chivalry and manliness. Once he had
visited another country for a wrestling contest with its champion. In
the street he came across an old woman who was offering people sweets as
charity and begging them to pray for her son. She approached Puryayeh
and offered her sweets. He asked what it was for. She said, "My son is a
wrestling champion who is challenged by a champion from another country.
We live on the income he gets from wrestling and if he loses this
contest, we will have nothing to live on." He said he was at a
cross-road whether to show his strength or his manliness in the next
day's contest. Although he was far stronger than his adversary, he
wrestled in such a way as to let him win. He says that at that moment he
suddenly felt that his heart was opened by God and it seemed as if he
was surrounded by angels. He fought his own desire and thus joined the
rank of saints.

There is another story about Ali, peace be upon him, and Amr ibn
Abdawud, a champion who had stood alone against a thousand men. In the
Battle of the Trench, the Muslims were on one side of the trench and the
enemy, on the other, so that the enemy could not cross it. A few of the
infidels including Amr managed to get to the other side challenging the
Muslims who were afraid to face him since they were aware of his
strength. The Prophet asked who would take the challenge but no one
moved except a young man of 23 or 24 and that was Ali, peace be upon
him. The Prophet did not give him leave.

Umar said to the Prophet that as no one came forth, Ali, peace be upon
him, should be allowed to proceed. Ali, peace be upon him, faced Amr and
knocked this great champion down and sat on his chest to kill him. But
Amr spat in Ali's face in anger for his defeat. Ali, peace be upon him,
was offended greatly at this mean conduct. He arose from the enemy's
chest and walked about for a while to curb his anger. When Amr asked him
the reason for his hesitation, he answered, "I did not wish to kill you
in anger for I am fighting for God and in this task there is no room for
wrath." This is what a brave warrior is like.

Another interpretation of the jihad is combatting one's self. The
Prophet called it the greater jihad. But some people were diverted by
this interpretation, supposing that migration was only abandoning sin
and jihad was only against the self. Thus, they forgot that migration
also means abandoning an undesirable place and jihad also includes
fighting foreign enemies. Thus, Islam believes in two kinds of migration
and two kinds of jihad. If we negate one type of either under the
pretext of the other, we are diverted from the teachings of Islam.

The saints of our religion including the holy Prophets, Imam Ali and all
the other Imams were all strivers and migrants. From a spiritual point
of view, there are stages which cannot be passed except through these
actions. A man who has never entered the field of jihad cannot be called
a mujahid and one who has not migrated may not win the epithet of an
emigrant.

From the view of Islam, marriage is sacred in several practical ways
(unlike Christianity where celibacy is considered to be sacred). What is
the reason for this? One of the reasons is in educating man's spirit. It
is a kind of maturity and perfection which is not obtainable except
through marriage. If a man or a woman remains single to the end of
his/her life, even if that life is spent in asceticism, devotion, prayer
and in combat with vices, there is still a kind of immaturity noticeable
in each of them. That is why marriage is recommended as a necessary
tradition.

The factors which are efficacious in man's education are so in their
proper spheres and none of them can take the place of another. Migration
and jihad, too, are factors which cannot be replaced by any other
factor. Nor can one kind of each factor take the place of the other
kind.

What is the duty of individuals under different conditions? For not all
conditions are those of jihad and migration.

The Holy Prophet has seen to this and told us that the duty of a Muslim
is to be serious in his intention to migrate or enter jihad whenever
conditions so necessitate it. Thus a person who has never fought or
never thought of fighting will in his death pass away in a kind of
hypocrisy while those who cherish the intention to migrate or fight in a
jihad under necessary conditions, may attain the rank. of emigrants and
crusaders.

The Holy Quran says,

***"Such believers as sit at home, unless they have an injury, are not
the equals of those who struggle in the path of God with their
possessions and their selves over the ones who sit at home, yet to each
God has promised the reward most fair and God has preferred those who
struggle over the ones who sit at home for the bounty of a mighty wage
..." (4:95)***

What God is telling us here is that the Muslims who are mujahids,
fighters in the path of God with their wealth and their lives and those
who sit in their homes (in disobedience to the Quran) merely on the
pretext of 'those who are ready to fight are enough," are not all equal.
The Holy Quran does not reproach those who sit in their homes due to
some excess like blindness or being lame or ill, whose mentalities and
intentions are such that if they were not handicapped in this way, they
would be the first to rush to jihad in the path of God. Perhaps they too
have the level of mujahids.

When Ali, peace be upon him, returned from the Battle of Siffin, someone
came to him and said, "I wish my brother was with you in the battle."
Ali said, "What was his intention? Did he have an excuse or not? If he
had no excuse for not joining us, all the better that he did not come.
But if his heart was with us though he could not join us for a reason,
he may be considered to have been with us. " The man said, "He did
intend to join you." Ali, peace be upon him, said, "Then not only was
your brother with us but even those who are still in the wombs of their
mothers or in the loins of their fathers may be considered as having
joined us."

What is meant by 'waiting for the advent?' Some people suppose it to
mean waiting for the twelfth Imam to reappear one day with his three
hundred and thirteen special companions and other followers to destroy
the enemies of Islam, to establish peace and prosperity and perfect
freedom, for us to enjoy. What is really meant by waiting for relief
(through the advent of the Imam Mahdi) is the hope of joining Imam Mahdi
on his reappearance in the holy war and perhaps even attaining
martyrdom. That is the hearty wish of every true Muslim and striver.

It never means sitting by until everything is put into order and then
benefitting from the subsequent blessings. The Prophet's companions
said, "We are not like Moses' tribe." When this tribe reached near
Palestine, they said to Moses, 'You and your God can go and fight the
enemy, and we will sit here until everything is all right." Moses asked,
"What do you think is your duty? Your duty is to drive out the enemy who
has occupied your home." The Prophet's companions said, "We are not like
Moses' tribe. We will do whatever you command." Thus, waiting for relief
means aiding Imam Mahdi in fighting and reforming the world.

Many of us in praying wish to have accompanied Imam Husain, peace be
upon him, to have won salvation. Is this claim made in all sincerity? In
some cases it is, but in others it is not.

On the night before his martyrdom, Imam Husain, peace be upon him, said,
"I know of no better and more loyal companions than mine." A great
Shi'ite man of learning stated that he did not believe the above
statement was really made by Imam Husain, peace be upon him, for,
according to them, the Imam's companions did not do much against the
enemy's cruelty. It was the duty of every ordinary Muslim to offer his
service to the grandson of the Prophet and Ali's son. Those who
abstained from assisting him must have been wicked people. This learned
man says that God made him realize his mistake by means of a dream. He
dreamed that he was in the battlefield of Karbala and had come to the
Imam to offer his services. The Imam told him that he would give him
instructions in its proper time. It was the time of the ritual prayer
and the Imam told him to stand guard in case the enemy started shooting
while the Imams and his companions performed the noon ritual prayer.
Suddenly an arrow was shot towards him and as he bent himself to avoid
it, it struck the Imam. He says that in his dream he felt ashamed and
penitent in evading the arrow and said he would not do so another time.
But he repeated his former action to avoid the next three shots which
again struck the Imam's body. "I never found better and more loyal
companions than mine." His companions were men of action, not words. On
the 10th of Muharram, most of Imam Husain's companions had been killed
while a few of them and members of his household were still alive by
noon.

In the first phase of the battle, the two sides faced each other. The
Imam's side consisted of only 72 warriors but looking valiant and
steadfast. The Imam arranged his little army by placing Zahir bin Alghin
at the head of the right flank, Habib on the left flank and his brave
brother Abul Fazl as his own standard bearer. The commanders asked
permission to begin the fight.

Meanwhile Umar Sa'd as a commander of the enemy's side had been hesitant
about beginning the battle, intending to satisfy both sides. He kept on
writing letters to the Imam proposing some kind of compromise. Ibn Ziad
as the enemy's commander-in-chief was annoyed at this conduct and orded
him either to act at once or yield the command to someone else.

Umar ibn Sa'd fearing that his former procrastination may have caused
him loss of face with his superiors as well as the chance of being given
the governorship of Rey, tried to make up for it by showing excessive
cruelty and was the first man to shoot at the Imam's tent, calling the
men around him to witness this act and report it in his favor to ibn
Ziad.

The late Shaykh Ayati used to say in his sermons that the Battle of
Karbala began with one arrow, shot by Umar ibn Sa'd and ended with
another, when a poisoned arrow struck the Imam on the chest so that he
ceased to proclaim his challenge against the enemy and only had time to
pray to God. "In the Name of God, in God and for the sake of the nation
of the Prophet of God."

One of Imam Husain's companions called Abbas ibn Abi Shubiyb faced the
enemy bravely and challenged them. No one dared to take up the
challenge. In anger he returned to the camp, took off his battle dress
and came back to the battlefield again almost naked and challenged the
enemy. Again no one came forth but they treacherously threw stones and
broken swords at him and finally killed him.

The Imam's companions showed amazing manliness and loyalty on the last
day of the battle. Both men and women created scenes which are
unrivalled in human history. Abdullah ibn Umar Kalbi was one of these
valiant men who had brought his wife and mother with him. When he wanted
to set off for the field, his newly wed wife stopped him demanding what
would happen to her if he was killed. His mother interrupted her telling
him not to pay attention to his wife since that day was a day of trial
and if he did not sacrifice himself for the Imam s she would not forgive
him as a mother. Abdullah joined the battle and was killed. Then his
mother picked up a tent pole and rushed upon the enemy. The Imam told
her to return as women were not obliged to fight in Islam and she picked
up the head, kissed it and pressed it tightly to her breast, saying,
"Well done, my son. I am satisfied with you." Then she threw the head
back at the enemy saying, "We do not take back what we have offered in
the way of God."

Among those who offered their service to him was a boy of twelve who had
tied a sword to his waist asking for leave to fight as his father had
already been killed. The Imam said, "I fear that your mother may not be
willing"' he answered, "It was my mother who gave me leave and told me
that if I did not offer my life for the sake of the Imam, she would not
forgive me." It was customary for the Arabs to introduce themselves on
entering the battlefield but this boy did not do so and remained
unknown. His battle cry in the face of the enemy was original for he
said, "I am one whose master is Husain and what a good master he is, oh
people." He considered this enough. In conclusion I pray to God to
illuminate our hearts with the light of faith and make us true migrants
and warriors in the religion of Islam and give us victory over its
enemies and enable us to win His satisfaction.

Whoso goes forth from his house are migrants to God and His Messenger
and then death overtakes him, and his wage shall have fallen on God;
surely God is All-forgiving, All compassionate. (4:201)  
 My previous discourse showed that the questions of migration and holy
war are frequently mentioned in the Quran together. Today I wish to add
to my previous remarks concerning the value of these two injunctions in
training and perfecting man's spirit ethically and socially. If we wish
to discover the spirit of migration and jihad, we should remember that
migration means freeing oneself from certain attachments which prove
themselves to be undesirable and jihad means combating an enemy and the
self. Without these two assets, man would be abject and enslaved for
living in abasement in a material and spiritual environment shows total
lack of spiritual freedom.

If we consider migration to mean travelling to other places the question
arises whether travelling is better than staying in one place. In Islam,
travel is praised though not as a permanent activity similar to a gypsy
life. In the same way, staying permanently in a village or a town all
one's  
 life is a form of enslavement which is not recommended since it weakens
one's soul and spirit. Travel, especially if one is equipped with
knowledge gamed at home, is most profitable, while for an ignorant
person, it is of little value. Even studying books cannot supply the
maturity that travel produces in one's spirit. Without travelling to
Islamic countries, for example, we cannot truly know the Islamic world
and its problems. Solely through reading is to some extent valuable.
Thus the Holy Quran tells us, "Travel in the earth "

Historians are unanimous about the need for the study of history but the
Quran does not confine the study of history to reading books on history.
It recommends visits to historical monuments and relics which are made
possible by travel.

In a poem attributed to the first Imam, we are told to travel in the sea
of attainment and eminence and that these are five benefits to be had
from journeys. These are as follows:

The removal of sorrow from the heart. As long as one sticks to an
environment, his mind is full of grief and sadness and for a time at
least he feels relieved of their burden.  
 Earning a livelihood. If you are intelligent enough you can gain a
living in travel and improve your financial condition beyond what is
possible by staying always in one place.  
 Earning knowledge. You can also increase your knowledge by travel, by
contact with the learned men of the places you visit, by becoming
acquainted with their world and thoughts.  
 Earning experience in manners and customs. Travel makes you familiar
with all sorts of customs which may seem to you better than your local
customs, thereby improving your conduct by selecting ways which seem
desirable and appropriate to you.  
 Earning experience in companionship. There is a special delight of
conversation and companionship that is often afforded by travel. This
contact with lofty minds may ennoble your spirit.  
 Thus the phrase in the first line of the poem means "Seeking
accomplishments and distinction by leaving one's domicile for travel."

History shows that men of learning on returning from their travels have
gained a polish and maturity which they did not have before. Shaykh
Bahai is a good example of versatility among learned men because of his
extensive travels. The poet Sa'di is another traveller who shows his
wide knowledge and experience in his works. He spent thirty years of his
ninety years of life in studying and another thirty in travel to various
parts of the world after which his finest books were produced. In his
books Gulistan and Bustan he made many references to places in India,
Arabia and many other countries he had visited and wrote delightful
anecdotes about various incidents he had met with here and there.

Rumi is another much travelled poet who became familiar with various
countries and their languages and cultures. But Hafiz, inspite of his
deeply spiritual poems, shows more limitation of experience since he
disliked travel and preferred to spend his life in his beloved Shiraz.
Once he was invited by a ruler of India to visit his country. He went as
far as the Persian Gulf and, reconsidering it, decided to return to
Shiraz and stay there.

Obviously there is a difference between Shaykh Bahai who had travelled
all over the world and a clergyman who has stayed in Najaf for fifty
years. Many of our learned clergymen who have experienced the joys of
travel and have come into contact with great religious masters have
proved more broad-minded than others whose genius has not been less than
theirs but have always lived in limited surroundings.

So, in interpreting migration as abandoning undesirable spiritual
conditions, it should not be supposed that this negates the actual
abandonment of a place. Both kinds of emigration are important: Freeing
oneself geographically from a town, zone, a climate, etc. and freeing
oneself from habits and qualities which cause one's enslavement.

It is natural for a person to acquire certain habits or follow certain
social traditions. Those who smoke usually tell the physician who
advises them not to do so that they cannot leave the habit. But this is
not manly. One should be able to separate oneself from what is harmful.
One is not human if one lacks the ability to migrate from vice.

The late Ayatullah Hujjat was almost a chain smoker and in his waking
hours he rarely stopped smoking. He fell ill and the doctors advised him
to give up smoking. He said jokingly that he wanted his chest for the
sake of smoking and without it had had no need for a chest. They warned
him of the danger. He agreed at once to give it up and with one word he
changed himself into a migrant from where he had been.

It is related about the Caliph Ma'mun that he was in the habit of eating
soil. The physicians gathered to find a way of curing him from this
strange habit. They prepared some kind of concoction and prescribed this
and that, but it was of no use. One day a man dressed in patched
garments came to their door and said, "I have the remedy for it. A
kingly resolution." Ma'mumn felt humiliated and said that it was true
and thus got rid of the habit.

Being enslaved by habits and customs is unfortunately more prevalent
among women than men such as the ceremonies connected with funerals,
weddings, etc. If you ask them why they follow these customs, they say
it is a tradition. The meaning of migration is the revival of the human
personality and combatting a factor which is the main cause of human
abjection. A human being should have enough self-respect not to exchange
one's freedom and independence for slavery to an environment or to
habits and vices. Thus, migration is a necessary factor of
self-refinement.

Jihad means struggling, combating ones desires and removing obstacles.
The Quran says that when the angels come to take the souls of human
beings and see their black records, they ask the reason and human beings
answer that they were helpless and lived in a corrupt environment where
they could do nothing. The angels answer that this is no excuse. A tree
might offer such an excuse because it is stationary and cannot move
elsewhere to escape from undesirable surroundings. Even animals cannot
offer such an excuse for they are able to migrate. Pigeons, geese,
swallows and other birds and animals and even fish keep on moving from
one region or climate to another in different seasons. Locusts and other
insects, too, migrate in a body to new lands. No living creature ties
itself down to the soil and rocks. Why then should a human being do so?
It is no excuse to say that the enemy leaves no alternative but
subjection and abasement. It is a human being's duty to migrate to a
position of strength and then give the enemy the same treatment. This is
called jihad.

The spiritual interpretation of jihad is similar. You advise people not
to tell lies and they say it is impossible not to do so. Or you tell
them to concentrate on God and holy matters in prayer and not allow
themselves to be diverted by other thoughts. Again they think it
impossible. Why should a man bear defeat? God has not made him to be
vanquished by other creatures. He has given him enough freedom to
liberate the self from all kinds of fetters, to fight against one's
whims and fancies, against love of pleasure and luxury. The choice is
between freedom and subjugation. If you cannot dominate desires and
place them under your control, they will dominate you.

What was the philosophy of Hadrat Ali as to asceticism and his
renunciation of the world? Just as he had no wish to be vanquished by
renowned champions in the field of battle, so he had no desire at all to
be in the clutches of desires.

It is related that one day he was passing by a butcher who invited the
Imam to take away some fresh meat. The Imam said that he had no money
with him. The butcher said, "I can wait for it." Ali, peace be upon him,
answered, "And I will tell my stomach to wait." He could easily provide
himself with the best food and the finest clothes but he refused to
become the slave of worldly things. His wish was to be free from
undesirable fetters.

Today is the day after the anniversary of the martyrdom of Imam Husain,
peace be upon him, and his companions and relatives. All the vices and
evils of which man is capable showed themselves in the battlefield of
Karbala. The angels witnessed all of it but God Almighty told them to
see the other aspect of it which showed all the virtues and fine
qualities that man can show.

The enemy committed unheard of cruelties such as beheading children in
front of their mothers or cutting them to pieces. They killed eight of
them in this way. One of them was Ali Asghar, the son of Imam Husain,
peace be upon him. The Imam was holding him in his arms and kissing him
farewell. Another child was Asim, the son of Imam Hasan, peace be upon
him, who was killed in the presence of his mother. Another youth whose
death was witnessed by his mother was ibn Abdullah, the son of Zainab,
the sister of Imam Husain, peace be upon him. His half-brother, too, was
killed on the same day. A remarkable thing which shows the lofty mind of
this woman is that neither before nor after the martyrdom of her son did
she mention this happening while on the death of her brother's son she
rushed out of the tent and cried, "Oh my brother and my brother's
son."  
 Another youth who met his death in that battle was the son of Muslim
ibn Qutb whose mother was Ruqiyah, the daughter of the first Imam. She
witnessed the death of her son. Another youth who was killed after the
Imam was a ten year old boy. As he rushed out of the tent and stood
there looking stupefied, the enemy ran to him and cut off his head.
Another sad event was the death of Imam Hasan's son, Abdullah, a ten
year old orphan who had never seen his father and had been brought up by
Imam Husain, peace be upon him. As the Imam was in his last dying
moments, this boy rushed out of the tent and Zainab, his aunt, could do
nothing to stop him. He shouted, "I will not be separated from my
uncle." A man with a drawn sword rushed upon the Imam to deal him a
death blow. The boy lifted his arm to shield his uncle but the blow of
the sword cut off his arm and he cried, "Oh uncle." The Imam said, "Dear
nephew, be patient. You will soon join your father's grandfather."

In conclusion, I pray to God to illuminate our hearts with the light of
faith, full them with love for you and Your saints, grant our sick ones
a speedy recovery, our dead ones, salvation, accept our efforts in
mourning for the Imam, guide Muslims and grant us salvation in this and
the next worlds.


