Discourse 2: The School of Humanity
===================================

The subject of our discourse is 'the school of humanity'. The human
being who is the only inquisitive being in the world that we know, has
always been subjected to investigation and discussion.

The word 'humanity' has always been connected with a sense of loftiness
and sanctity as a being superior to animals from various points of view,
such as knowledge justice, freedom, moral conscience, etc. Although many
of humanity's sacred objects have been subjected to doubt and even
denial, apparently no school of thought has yet gone so far as to scorn
the special dignity of humanity and its superiority over other
Creatures.

This fact has been elegantly expressed in the poems of Rumi and Sa'adi
and by other poets of ours. This topic is also the theme of most of the
world's literature, both religious and non-religious, in which the
question of humanity and its glorification has been described. In
Islamic literature, too, both in Persian and Arabic, we come across many
such statements.

In the last two centuries, with the great advance of science, humanity
has suddenly fallen from that pedestal of sanctity it had always been
given. It fell with a real crash since the more one is elevated, the
greater is the damage Caused by the fall. In the past, mankind has been
exacted to the rank of a semi-god as witnessed in the poems of Hafiz and
other poets.

The first discovery of humanity was the form of the universe which
revolutionized its ideas. Before that, the earth was believed to be the
center of the universe round which all the plants and stars revolved.
Science proved that the earth was a small planet which revolved around
the sun and the solar System was only an insignificant part of the
universe.

It was then that the position of humanity as the center of all
possibilities and as the goal of creation was subjected to doubt and
denial, and no one dared any longer to make claims about its exalted
position. Then, another severe blow dealt, was the idea that the human
being was no longer a divine creature and vice gerent of God upon the
earth was given up.

Biological research on the question of evolution and the origin of
species at once showed the relationship of people with those same
animals which they Scorned and despised. It proved them to be an evolved
form of a monkey or some other animal and thus they lost their divine
origin.

Another strong blow as against humanity's apparently brilliant record of
activities, namely, that it could act in such a way that showed only
goodness and benevolence, whose motive was only the love of Cod, and
lacking all animal aspects.

The new thesis was that the claim of humanity to all that sanctity and
virtue was false and all the activities to which it had given the name
of the love of knowledge, art, beauty, morality and conscience, prayer
and devotion and everything supernatural, are similar to those which can
be found in animals, too, except in a more complex form and mechanism.
It was said that the stomach is the source and cause of all activities.
Some went so far as to say that the stomach was also the basis of its
thoughts and feelings. There were still others who considered this
position too high and claimed that the human being was even lower than
he is.

Eventually it was concluded that this being who had formerly claimed
divine origin and exaltation must be subjected to a careful study to
discover its true nature. Another theory was offered that there is no
difference between humans, plants and even inanimate objects. There is,
of course, a difference in the texture and form, but not in the
substance of which they were all made. It was stated that spirit and
divine breath were non-existent because the human being is a machine
which is only more complicated than other machines such as cars, planes,
and satellites; that is, only a mechanical creature.

This was a great blow to humanity and yet human values were not wholly
condemned except in some schools of thought where ideas like peace,
freedom, spirituality, justice and compassion were considered as jokes.

But since the middle of the 19th century, humanity has won fresh
attention in philosophical schools such as schools of humanity and even
worship of human beings. In the past the human being was only a sign of
spirituality and the Quran speaks of the human being as being the
worthiest creature through whom God could be understood.

Now the human being is trying to recover its former honor and sanctity
and become a goal in itself but without the adoption of the former
criteria and without a regard for its divine or non-divine aspect, or
the points stated in the Quran that everything that is created on earth
is for it and that God has breathed some of this spirit into it to
making it a manifestation of Himself.

There is no longer any talk of the above matters, nor even a discussion
of internal human motives, but only a belief in the sanctity of humanity
and its intelligence. Now we see all schools of thought and even the
declaration of human rights beginning their claims with respect for the
inherent dignity of human beings. They say this in order to base their
education on its foundation and though each individual is able to
violate the rights of others, this respect for the dignity and sanctity
of humanity will serve as a check to such violations.

Most of those who follow the philosophy of humanitarianism, have
criteria different from those of the past. But the difficulty lies in
this same contradiction in the life, thought and logic of mankind today,
a logic which lacks foundation .

I do not think that there are any scholars in the world who would
interpret humanitarianism to mean universal peace. There are, of course,
ordinary people who think all human beings in the world are the same and
of equal worth.

But this is not true. One is learned, another is ignorant; one is
virtuous, another is impure; one is tyrannical, another is oppressed;
one is benevolent, another is malevolent. Should we consider them all
the same from a humanitarian point of view, irrespective of their
knowledge, faith, chastity and benevolence or vice versa?

If we say so, we are betraying humanity. Let me give an example. Both A
and B are human beings who are biologically similar. If you dislike one
of them, it has nothing to do with his blood group. But if you are
humanitarian, you cannot be indifferent to both of them and claim that
they are equally human; for then both should be equally liked, or both
equally disliked.

But this is not so since the human being's basic difference with animals
is that the human being has more potentiality than animals and less
actuality. What does that mean? A horse on its birth possesses all the
peculiarities that a horse should have and if it has less than that, it
can gain it by practice. But a human being has potential only at birth.
lt is not known what he or she will be in the future. The shape is human
hut that person may, in reality, become a wolf or a sheep or a human
being.

Mulla Sadra, the great Iranian Islamic philosopher, in pointing out the
error of people in thinking human beings equal in everything, says that
there are as many kinds of individuals as there are individuals. He is,
of courses regarding the human being philosophically, not biologically.
A biologist pays attention to human organs and limbs, while a
philosopher concentrates on the human being's qualities and thus he
cannot believe that human beings are all of the same kind. That is why
human values are potential. Some attain the height of humanity while
others fail to do so. As Hadrat Ali says, "The shape is humans but the
mind may be a beast." Not all individuals have an interior proportionate
to their exterior.

As I said before, to a great extent, the world is returning, once again
to the school of humanity, meaning that philosophies of humanity have
appeared; and the strangest of them all is the creed of humanity which
Auguste Compte originated in the middle of the 19th century.

This man wavered between his intelligence and mind on the one hand and
his heart and conscience on the other and came to the conclusion that
the human being needed a creed, the absence of which results in all
kinds of social corruption. According to him, past religion
(Catholicism) is not adequate enough for modern mankind. He describes
three stages of religion; The divine supernatural stage, the
philosophical reasoning stage and the scientific positive stage.

He said that Catholicism belonged to the human being's supernatural
thinking and this is not acceptable to the person of the scientific age.
His invented religion however, lacked an occult root, but he accepted
all the traditions and rites which existed before, and even proposed
having priests in this new creed, presenting himself as its prophet, but
a prophet without a god. They say about him that he got his rites from
Catholicism and he was criticized for this since he disbelieved that
religion but imitated and adopted its ceremonies and traditions. He was
right in one thing, that the human being needs worship and devotion as
well as the performance of a number of rites.

He seems to have found a large number of followers in Europe and America
and his house has become a center of pilgrimage for them. According to
some Arabic books, he had fallen in love with a lady whose husband had
been condemned to life imprisonment, but she died before he could win
her and consequently he turned away frown the world of the intellect to
the world of sentiments and eventually started his creed of humanity.
This lady-love is considered by his followers as holy as Mary, the
mother of Christ. But this school of humanity underwent a number of
changes which gave it its present form.

One of the questions concerning the human being is freedom and
responsibility. Is the human being really free and independent or does
it have a responsibility and a mission to perform? According to the
Quran, the human being is faced with no compulsion before God. On the
contrary, the human being is created a free being with a fixed
responsibility and mission. The Holy Quran refers to the human being as
the vice-gerent of God, while no others Holy book has given such
sanctity to the human being. God says in the Quran:

***"And when your Lord said to the angels, I am setting on the earth a
vice-gerent, they said, What will You set therein one who will do
corruption there and shed blood ... But God answered, Assuredly I know
what you know not." (2:28)***

All that, is evidence of the human being's talents and potentialities.
You see, then, that Islam, which is a school of humanity, believes in
the exalted position of the human being from a philosophical point of
view. The Quran says again that God taught the human being the names of
all things.

Then it showed itself superior to the angels in this knowledge and God
reproached the angels for what they did not know about humanity and
while they supposed the human being to be a creature of wrath and lust,
they had ignored the other side of its character. The angels confessed
their ignorance and begged for His forgiveness. Then God told the angels
to prostrate themselves before His creature.

The greatest interpretation that can be given to this command in order
to show the human being's mission freedom and option is that God makes
it the vice-gerent of and the successor to himself. God is the Creator
and here He confers some of His creative power on the human being to
benefit from.

Another question shout the human being is its happiness and pleasure. I
say briefly that the human being seeks pleasure. Where Should it be
found? Is it from within the self or from without, or from both within
and without and in what proportion? Those who focus their attention on
sures outside themselves, wrongly supposing that the whole joy of life
is this, have not been able to know themselves as human beings. They
cannot consider the life within themselves as a source of joy and
pleasure. Their exhilaration lies in a wine-cup, a cabaret.

How well does Rumi describe a person addicted to drinking and direct
that person to righteousness and away from evil saying,

You are the symbol of existence, wherefore do you seek annihilation?  
 You who are an ocean, what do you intend to become?  
 Why do you make yourself indebted to wine?

He continues to say that the human being is the essence and the world is
the form.

It is equally wrong to reject all external things and go to the other
extreme of thinking that all joys must be sought internally. In some
poems of Rumi we come across such an exaggeration when he says,

Consider that the way of pleasure is all from within, not without  
 And think it foolish to abandon customs and traditions.  
 Someone is happy and intoxicated in the corner of prison,  
 And another is full of grief in his garden.

He does not mean that all external things should be put aside but, at
the same time, it Should not be supposed that all joys are found in
material things. The self is the center of joy and there should be an
equilibrium between the internal and external.

There are many things to say about the human being. The school of
thought which considers itself human should be able to answer certain
questions in order to be accepted as a true human school. The human
being was considered as the door of spirituality, that is, one could
discover the spiritual work through one's own essence.

Spirituality and humanism or religion and humanism are two inseparable
matters. We cannot accept one of them and abandon the other . The
contradiction which we claim to exist in various genuine humanistic
schools lies in this point that when humanity suffered a downfall,
however wrongly, namely through a change in the Ptolemaic astronomy, it
should not make us doubt the exalted position of the human being as a
goal in the course of creation.

The human being is the goal of the universe whether the earth is the
center of the universe or not. What does the phrase 'goal of the
universe' mean? It means that nature moves in a certain direction in its
evolutionary course whether we consider the human being a spontaneously
created being or a continuation of other animal species. it makes no
difference to this process whether we think it to possess a divine
spirit or not.

God has said, "***We have breathed some of Our spirit into him***." He
has not said that the human being is the race of God. If He had said
that thee substance of which the human being is made was brought from
another world, then the human being would be a lofty and sacred being.

To those of you whose philosophy is humanitarian, we say, is there a
sentiment in the human being either called benevolence, goodness or
service, or not? If you say there is not, then to attribute Such a
quality to the human being would be as meaningless as calling him a
stone or an animal. But the human being has the sentiment.

What is it? Some one may say the feeling of service in us is a kind of
substitution. What does that mean? When we witness something and our
humanitarian feeling is supposedly roused to go and instruct, serve and
save the oppressed, we are told that if we ponder about it, we as human
beings are putting ourselves in their place, thinking of them first as
belonging to our group or our group related to them and then we
substitute ourselves for them. Then, the feeling of selfishness which
makes us defend ourselves is roused to defend the oppressed; otherwise
there is no genuine sentiment in the human being to defend an oppressed
person directly.

The school of humanity must firstly answer whether such a sentiment
exists in the human being or not? We answer that it does on the basis of
its being appointed the vice-gerent of God and as the manifestation of
divine generosity and benevolence. It means that while the human bring
in its Selfishness is duty-bound to show activity for its survival, tile
whole of its existence is not selfishness. The human being also has
benevolence, humanity, world-building and moral conscience.

Some time ago when I was in Shiraz, an organization called the Happy
Organization was introduced to me consisting of individuals with an
internal sentiment and personal faith and a gathering of the deaf and
dumb. I visited one of their classes. For us fastidious people it would
he exhausting to spend even one hour in such a class and watch them and
their strange gesticulations for a remark.

Their teacher was a Sayyid who was named after the first son of Imam and
he was showing a great deal of interest and sympathy in those children
even though his salary was less than an elementary school teacher's, for
that organization was short of funds. He taught them how to write and
made them understand words with a great expenditure of effort.

What is this sentiment in the human being? It is the manifestation of
humanity and its genuineness. Generally speaking, what is this sense of
praise for the good and dislike for the sick, even though they belong to
the distant past? When we hear the names of Yazid and Shimr and remember
their wickedness and crimes, and on the other hand, when the names of
the martyrs of Karbala are mentioned, we have a feeling of hatred for
the first group and a sense of wonder and respect for the latter.

What is the reason for it? Is it a class feeling which makes us think of
ourselves as belonging to the group of the martyrs of Karbala and
dislike Yazid and Shimr as we dislike our enemies? Do we project our
feelings of sympathy and hatred on to each group respectively, while in
truth both are related to ourselves? If this is so then the person you
consider your enemy will be no different from you. For in his turn he
has the right to praise those you dislike and hate those you praise.

On the contrary you may look upon it from a different angle which is not
personal and individual but is related to the whole of humanity in which
there is no question of personal dislike but the truth. There your
connection with the martyrs in your praise, and your dislike of their
enemies, is not personal but general and universal.

The school of humanity must supply an answer to what these feelings are
and whence they arise and to such problems as the human being's honest
love of gratitude, to some one who has done a good deed. When the
genuineness of human values are discovered, then the question of the
human being crops up. Is the human being who has such genuine qualities
the same person spoken of by materialism? Is that person a machine, a
satellite?

A machine, however big, is only big, if a machine is made a thousand
times bigger than an Apollo, what could we say about it? We could say it
is great, amazing and extraordinary but not noble or sacred. Even if it
is made a billion times bigger, possessing a billion pieces, again it
can only be called amazing and extraordinary but never noble, holy and
honorable. How can the declaration of human rights and communist
philosophers who support human genuineness in various forms, speak of
the human being's inherent prestige and sacredness without paying
attention to God's words saying, "We breathed some of Our spirit into
him," When they ascertain the genuineness of these values then they can
realize the genuineness of the human being itself.

Now supposing we realize this genuineness of the human being is it only
the human being who exists in this universe which is in infinite
darkness? As a European says, is the human being only a drop of sweat in
an ocean of poison created accidentally? Or is the human being a drop of
sweet water in a sweet ocean? Does this small light represent universal
light?

Here the relation of the genuineness of the human being with God will
become clear, for both of them are inseparable. In the phrase of the
Holy Quran, God is the light of the heavens and the earth, the word God
is not what Aristotle calls the first Cause for that is different from
the God of Islam. His god is separate from and foreign to the universe.
But the God Of Islam, when the phrase:

***He is the First, He is the Last, He is the Outer and He is the Inner.
(57:3)***

is heard, it at once gives you a different view of the universe. Then
you understand the meaning of all the genuine qualities within yourself
and realize that there is a goal. You will see that if you are a beam of
light then a whole world of light exists and if you are a drop of sweat
water it is because an infinite ocean of sweetness exists there and a
ray of His light is within you.

Islam is a humanistic school based on human criteria There is nothing in
it based on wrong discriminations between human beings. In Islam there
exists no country, race, blood, zone and language. These things are not
an evidence and criterion of privilege for human beings.

That criterion in Islam is those human values. If it respects those
values, it is because it believes in the genuineness of the human being
and the universe; that is, it believes in God Almighty. That is why
Islam is the only humanistic school that has for its foundation proper
logic and there exists no other such school in the world.


