Discourse 4: Spiritual Freedom II
=================================

***And removes from them their burden and the shackles which were upon
them. (7:157)***

Last week I mentioned that our discussion consists of three parts: The
meaning of freedom, the two kinds of freedom, namely social and
spiritual freedom and the dependence of these two types of freedom upon
one another, especially the dependence of social freedom on spiritual
freedom.  
 Tonight, I wish to devote myself to the subject of spiritual freedom,
its meaning and its necessity for mankind. This is particularly urgent
since today little attention seems to be paid to spiritual freedom by
human societies, which is the cause of many present troubles. This is so
evident that many people consider spiritual freedom as something
abolished, even though the need for it is much greater than in the past.
What does spiritual freedom mean? Freedom requires two sides so that one
side becomes free of the bond of the other. In spiritual freedom what
must the human be free of? Spiritual freedom is freedom from one's self
as against social freedom which is freedom from the bonds of others. One
may be asked whether the human being can be enslaved by the self.

Can a person be both a slave and a slave owner? The answer is in the
affirmative. In the case of animals this may not be true but what about
this strange being called the human being? How is it possible for it to
be at the same time a slave and master? The reason is that the human
being is a complex creature and that is a fact which has been confirmed
by religion and philosophy by scientists and psychologists and about
which no doubt exists.

Let me begin by an interpretation of the Quran on Creation which says,

***"So when I have shaped him and breathed into him of My spirit, fall
you down, bowing before him." (15:29)***

It is not necessary to know what this divine spirit means, but it is
enough to know that this earthly being is granted something else which
is unearthly. According to a Tradition, the Prophet says that God
created angels and granted them only intelligence. He created animals
and gave them only appetites and He created man and granted him both
intelligence and appetite; an utterance of the Prophet that has been
used in a poem by Rumi.

Now, besides these verses of the Quran and Traditions and what has been
affirmed by philosophers and psychologists, what does spiritual freedom
consist of in simple language. We will begin with something which
everyone would understand. Undoubtedly we need food to live and the more
of it the better, and we need clothing and the finer the better and we
require a dwelling and the more magnificent the better. We desire wives
and children, luxury, money and material things.

But at one point we may reach a cross-road where we should keep our
honor and nobility and at the same time put up with poverty, eat dry
bread, wear shabby clothes, live in a poor hut and have no money and be
distressed. If we ignore our honor and nobility and submit to abjection,
then all material benefits will be provided for us. We see that many
people are not willing to suffer humiliations for the sake of material
things while others readily accept this exchange, even though they and
their consciences are ashamed of themselves.

In the Gulistan, Saidi describes two brothers, one of whom was rich and
the other poor. The former was in the service of the government and the
latter was an ordinary worker who secured a livelihood by manial labor.
One day thc rich brother said to his poor brother, "Why don't you accept
government service, to be delivered from hardship and distress?" The
poor brother answered, "Why don't you work to be delivered from
abjection?"

That kind of service with all its accompanying wealth means lack of
freedom, for, it involves bowing to others and being humbled. Sa'di goes
on to say that according to the wise, sitting down to eat your own bread
is far better than wearing a golden belt and standing to serve others.

You may be well-versed about this subject but I wish you to analyze it
from a psychological point of view. What feeling makes the human being
prefer pain and hardship, labor and poverty to humbling himself or
herself betore others? He calls it captivity to serve others though it
is not of the type of material slavery. It is not his or her strength
that is enslaved but the spirit. There is a quatrain attributed to Ali,
peace be upon him, saying, "If you desire to live freely, labor like a
slave, work and suffer pain and shut your eyes from Adam's offspring
whoever they may be, even from Hatam Ta'i (a heroic figure famous for
his generosity in pre-Islamic Arabia). So have no expectation not only
from mean people but also from the generous."

He goes on to say that when a job is offered to someone, that person
considers it below his or her dignity to accept it. He or she thinks
every kind of manual labor as mean. But Ali, peace be upon him, believes
that every kind of work and labor is better than extending your hand
before others begging for something. He says, "Nothing is worse than
going to others to beg for something."

Having no need of others means being superior to them. Once I came
across a remark of the poet Hafiz who was an extraordinarily eloquent
man and had a deep respect for Ali, peace be upon him. He quotes nine
sayings of his which are relevant to our discussion, one of which is,
"You may be in need but remember that if you have need of someone, you
still turn yourself into his slave. But if you do away with that need,
you will be his equal and if you show benevolence to someone, you will
be his master."

So you see that your need makes you someone's slave What kind of
slavery? Slavery of spirit. These sayings are fine but today they are
disregarded since mankind prefers to discuss other problems and pays
little attention to ethical ones.

Again Ali, peace be upon him, says, "Greed means perpetual slavery."
Thus he considers greed worse than slavery. Here then, spiritual slavery
is mentioned as something worse than physical slavery. There is also
slavery to wealth against which all moralists have warned mankind.

Another saying of Ali is, "The world is a passage not a residence."
Again he says, "There are two groups of people in the world." He
continues, "One of these two groups come and sell and enslave themselves
and go and the others come and buy their freedom and go." These two
attitudes can also be applied to wealth, either to be a slave of wealth
or free from it. A person should say that as he or she must not be a
slave to riches, he or she should say, "I am a human being. Why should I
make myself a slave of inanimate things like gold and silver, land and
other things?"

But the truth is that when a person thinks the self to be a slave of
wealth, that person is in fact a slave to his or her mental
characteristics, a slave to greed and one's animal nature. For inanimate
things like money, land, machine and even animals have no power to
enslave that person. When one ponders deeply over this matter, one finds
the source of slavery to lie in one's own peculiarities such as greed,
lust, anger and carnal desires.

The Quran says, "Have you noticed someone who 11as made his carnal
desires his god?' Wealth itself is not to blame when a person is warned
against his or her own desires. Thus if one liberates oneself from the
bond of one's wicked desires, one will realize that one is not at the
service of wealth.

It is then that one finds one's own true worth and understands the
significance of this verse of the Quran, "All We have created on the
earth is for you.‚Äù Thus riches are at the service of the human being and
not vice versa. If so, then, envy and avarice have no meaning and if one
engages in them, one is enslaving oneself. There are two stages for the
human being: A lower, animal stage and a higher, human one.

The Prophets are sent to preserve the spiritual freedom of humanity.
What does that mean? It means preventing human honor, humanity,
intelligence and conscience from being subjugated to its own lust,
passion and love of profits. If you overcome your passion, you are free.
If you conquer your lust and not vice versa, you are free. If you are in
a position to gain an illegitimate profit, but your faith and conscience
and intelligence forbid you to do so, you have overcome your desire and
then you can say that you are really spiritually free.

If you see a woman, but you check your lustful desires and obey your
conscience, then you are a free human being. But if your eyes, ears, and
stomach incite you to satisfy them by whatever means, then you are their
slave. The human being is ruled by two types of ego: An animal ego and a
human one. This fact and this contrast are well illustrated by Rumi in a
story of Majnun (in eastern literature, Majnun is the equivalent of
Romeo and Laila is the equivalent of Juliet) and the camel.  
 The story goes that Majnun was riding a camel intending to visit
Laila's home. The camel happened to have a baby camel and Majnun, in
order to ride faster to his destination, confined the baby camel to the
house. He was deep in thought about his Beloved while the camel was
worried about its young. Every moment Majnun absentmindedly let the
reins loose, the camel turned back towards home. This was repeated
several times until the camel collapsed. The poet digresses to say that
thc human being has two kinds of inclinations: that of the spirit and
that of the body.

If you wish to be free in spirit, you cannot be a glutton, a
woman-worshipper, a money-lover, a lustful person of passion. I have
come across a narrative in the Nahj ulbalagha which says that one day
the Prophet went among the Companions (the ansar who were the poor
followers of the Prophet in Medina who had migrated there. The Prophet
first let them stay in a mosque, but a divine command was issued to him
to find another home for them since a mosque was not a proper place to
live in and they obeyed the order.

Subsequently, they lived in a large shelter near the mosque). One of
them said to the Prophet, "I feel as if the whole world is worthless in
my eyes." He did not mean that he made a similar use of stones and gold
but that neither of them had the power to attract him. The Prophet
looked at him and said, " Now I can say that you are free." Thus we can
say that spiritual freedom is in itself something real.

We can give other reasons to show that the human being's personality is
complex and that one can either be spiritually free or a slave. God
Almighty has granted this power to a person to be one's own judge. In
society, a judge stands apart from the plaintiff and defendant. Have you
ever heard a person to be his own plaintiff and defendant and judge, all
at the same time?

A person is called just. What is a just human being? Does it not mean
that a person can judge impartially about one's own problems and issue a
verdict against one when guilty? Does this not show the complex nature
the human being? Many a time you have seen people who judge fairly about
themselves and prefer the rights of others to their own. The late Sayyid
Husain Kuh Kamari who was a great religious authority with a following
and an uncle o the late Ayatullah Hujjat Kuh Kamari who was our teacher
was such a man. It is narrated about him that he had theological class
in Najaf which had not yet won the reputation it had later on,
especially as his stay in Najaf had not been long for he had been in the
habit of travelling here and there to benefit from the teachings of the
great masters in various towns such as Mashhad, Isfahan and Kashan.

The late Shaykh Ansari who was dressed poorly and whose eyes suffered
from trachoma happened to teach in the same mosque as Sayyid Husain,
each in turn, the Shaykh first and Sayyid Husain next, without meeting
each other. One day the latter happened to arrive an hour earlier than
usual. As there was no time to go home and come back, he thought he
would wait there for his pupils to arrive. He noticed a peculiar looking
Shaykh sitting there teaching two or three fellows. He sat in a corner
and could hear the Shaykh's words. He found them to be profound and
wise. It was a strange experience for a great scholar like him to meet
an unknown but erudite teacher. He decided to go earlier to the mosque
once more to see how things went.

The second visit proved to be as beneficial as the first and he found
the Shaykh very learned and in fact more of a scholar than himself. On
repeating the experience for the third time, he was fully convinced of
the man's profound knowledge. So he decided to join the small class and
when his own pupils arrived, he said to them,"I have news for you. That
Shaykh is much more learned than I am as I have discovered and I advise
you to accompany me to join his class." They arose together and attended
the Shaykh's class.

What is the implication of such fairness? Sayyid Husain turned himself
into a pupil of Ansari and gave up his claim to being an authority. He
must have felt, as we do, what respect and mastership are and must have
been pleased at being an authority. And yet his noble and free spirit
allowed him to judge fairly between himself and that man, and issue a
verdict against himself. This is proof of the human being's complex
personality. A person commits a sin and then blames the self. What is
this prick of conscience? Exploiting governments train individuals in
such a way as to kill their conscience . And yet when that conscience is
supposed to be dead, a small light is noticed to scatter its beams at
its proper time. The pilot of the plane who bombed Hiroshima was
actually trained for such a crime but when he dropped his bomb and saw
the city burning and the innocent men and women and children who had no
connection with war, being annihilated, he felt spiritually sick. In
America they gave him a fine welcome but they could not check that
torture of conscience which led him eventually to a lunatic asylum. The
Quran says,

***"Nay, I swear by the Self-reproaching soul ...‚Äù (75:2).***

Ali, peace be upon him, says, "He who is not granted a preacher within
himself by God, will not be affected by other's preaching." Do not
deceive yourself into thinking that you will be influenced by others if
you are not influenced by your own conscience. One of our religious
injunctions is to judge ourselves and issue a verdict against ourselves
when necessary. "Call yourself to account before you are called to
account." "Weigh yourself before you are weighed for your deeds on the
Day of Resurrection."

All these show the human being's complex personality which has a lower
animal side and higher human side. Spiritual freedom means that the
higher side is free from the lower one.

In connection with self-punishment, I remember a case related to Hadrat
Ali. A man came to him to repent, supposing that by saying the sentence
of repentance, everything would be all right. Ali reprimanded him
sharply by saying, "May your mother mourn for you. Do you know what
repentance means? It is very much higher than saying a sentence." Then
he told the man that repentance is based on several things: Two
principles, two conditions of acceptance and two conditions of
completion. That is, a total of six points.

He then explained this by saying, "The first principle is that one
should be truly penitent of one's past wicked deeds. The second is to
decide never to commit that sin in the future. The third is to grant
people their right if one owes it to them. The fourth is to perform the
obligatory devotions which one may have forsaken." The last two points,
Ali, peace be upon him, mentioned are most relevant to my discourse.
They are: Fifthly, to melt down the flesh that is grown on you by
lustfulness through sorrow and constant grief; and lastly, to give this
body which has in the past been addicted to the pleasure of sin, the
pain of worship and devotion.

Have there been people in the past who have reached this stage? Yes.
There have. Today we may forget that repentance exists. But we can cite
a fine example of it by mentioning Mulla Husain Quli Hamadani who was a
great moralist of modern times and a pupil of the great religious
scholars, the later Mirza Shirazi and Shaykh Ansari. A sinful man goes
to him to be guided. When the man came back after a few days, he could
hardly be recognized due to his extraordinary leanness. The Mulla used
neither a whip nor a weapon nor a threat. But he could offer true
spiritual guidance. He managed to awaken that man's conscience to fight
his lust and passion.

The most significant program of the prophets is to provide spiritual
freedom. Self-purification is in fact spiritual freedom. The Quran says,

***"Prosperous is he who purifies it and failed has he who seduces it."
(91:9-10)***

The greatest damage of our time is speaking of freedom and confining it
to social freedom. Spiritual freedom is never spoken of and, in
consequence, social freedom is not secured. A great crime is committed
in our time in the form of philosophy and philosophical schools totally
ignoring the human being, its personality, spiritual honor and God's
revelation, "I breathed into him of My Spirit, ‚Äúis quite forgotten. They
deny that the human being has two aspects an animal side and a human
one. They claim that this human being is no different from animals and
is subject to the survival of the fittest. This means that each
individual' effort is for his or her own interests. Can you imagine how
much damage this attitude has done to humanity? They say that life is a
battle and the world a battlefield. They also say that a right is what
one seizes, not what one ,rants. But the truth is that a right must both
be taken and given and not only something which is snatched by force.

The prophets did not come to make such a statement that a right must be
seized by force. They came to persuade the oppressed to secure their
rights. They also compelled the oppressor to rise against their evil
deeds and grant others their rights.

In conclusion I pray God to liberate us all from our carnal desires as
he has done for truly generous beings; and to grant us social freedom
and blessings in this and the next world; to acquaint us with the facts
of Islam; to meet our legitimate needs and to grant salvation to our
deceased ones.


