Discourse 5Â :Nobility and Magnanimity of Spirit
===============================================

***Oh soul at peace return unto your Lord, well pleased, well-pleasing.
Enter among My servants. Enter My paradise. (89:28-30)***

On the holy birthday anniversary of Imam Husain, peace be upon him, last
Monday I began a discourse saying that anyone who possessed a lofty
spirit must suffer physical discomfort while only those who have loose
spirits live in comfort, sleep soundly and enjoy delicious dishes and
other benefits.

Tonight, I wish to discuss the greatness and nobility of the spirit and
show the differences between the two. Greatness of spirit is one thing
but nobility is a higher quality. In other words, every greatness is not
nobility but every nobility is also greatness.

Determination is obviously a sign of greatness of the spirit and there
are different levels of determination. One person is content to secure a
diploma while another knows no limit to the pursuit of knowledge, and
his aim is to make the utmost use of his life and gain as much knowledge
as he can.

You may have heard the well-known story of Abu Rayhan Biruni, a man
whose true worth according to scholars, is not quite known. He was so
extraordinary a mathematician, sociologists and historian that he is
considered by some to be superior to Abu Ali Sina (Avicenna).

These two were contemporaries. Abu Rayhan was in love with knowledge,
research and discoveries. Sultan Mahmud summoned him to attend his court
and he had to obey the call. He accompanied the King in his conquest of
India and found a great treasure of knowledge in that country. But he
did not know Sanskrit, so he began learning it. Inspite of his old age,
he learned it to a very high degree and after many years of study, he
produced a book called Tahqiq mal al-Hind min maqulihi marzalah fi
al-aql wa maqbulat, which is a very valuable source of reference for the
Indianologists of the world.

He was on his death bed when a jurisprudent neighbor of his, learning of
his serious illness, went to visit him. Abu Rayhan was still conscious
and, in seeing the jurisprudent, asked him a question of jurisprudence
concerning inheritance or some other issue. The jurisprudent was amazed
that a dying man should show interest in such matters. Abu Rayhan said,
"I should like to ask you which is better, to die with knowledge or
without it?" The man said, "Of course it is better to know and die." Abu
Rayhan said, "That is why I asked my first question." Shortly after the
jurisprudent reached home, the cries of lamentation told him that Abu
Rayhan had died. This shows his determination even at the moments of
death.

One person is great in gathering wealth, for example, while others show
no such endeavors and are content with earning a simple livelihood by
whatever means they can, whether it is by serving others or begging or
submitting to abasement. Are those two types of effort equal? Not at
all.  
 Sometimes you see the people who lack the resolution to get rich,
simply because they are weak and others scorn and laugh at them. They
recite verses of the Quran about asceticism, based on fallacious
reasoning. But they are wrong. The person who pursues the amassing of
wealth, with all his misery, with all his devotion to the world, is
still better than those having a weak determination or no determination,
who resemble beggars and thus, he has more character. This person is not
blameworthy before him.

These persons can be considered blameworthy only before a real ascetic
who himself is a man of determination. Like Ali, peace be upon him, he
can gather riches, not because of his own needs, but to spend on others
and help the needy. He is in a position to reproach another for whom
storing and hiding riches have become a goal, not a means.

Similarly, one may seek high rank and position. Alexander the Great was
such a man who desired to rule the world. He is a superior to a man who
lives in servility and has no determination for feelings of nobility.
Nadir Shah is another example of high-mindedness. These men have great
spirits but it cannot be said that they have noble spirits.

Alexander is an example of a great ambition, and his greatness has
developed only in one direction, in ambition, fame and influence, in
being the most powerful man in the world.

His spirit is noble only to that extent. But did he experience any ease
and comfort? Could Nadir have had an easy life with his tyranny, and his
building of minarets with the skulls of those he had killed, the man who
pulled men's eyes out of their sockets, the man who was madly ambitious?
He had no time sometimes to take off his boots for ten days. A story is
told about him that in a very severe winter night he reached a caravan
serai by himself. The keeper was awakened by a loud knock, and when he
opened the gate he saw a burly-looking man riding a big horse. He asked
the keeper what food he had, and the latter said he only had eggs.

He was sharply ordered to fry the eggs and bring it with some bread for
him and some fodder and barley for his horse. The keeper did so and the
man rested there an hour or two and after grooming his horse, he threw
some gold coins on to the keeper's lap and said, "Very soon a column of
soldiers will reach here. Tell them Nadir has gone in that direction and
they must follow at once." On hearing the name of Nadir, the keeper was
so frightened that he let the coins fall down. Nadir ordered him to go
on the roof and shout to the soldiers on their arrival not to linger a
moment but to follow him speedily. The men grumbled when they heard the
message but none of them dared to stay a minute to refresh himself.

One may become a Nadir, but he can never enjoy a comfortable bed, fine
food and hundreds of other luxuries. His body can never relax. And
eventually he will die. Whoever has great determination, in whatever
area it may be, will have no physical ease. But none of these men
possessed noble souls. Their souls were great but were not noble.
Suppose a man to be a great man of learning without any other good
quality. He has lofty thoughts about human knowledge. Another is
skillful in gathering wealth. Someone else is full of rancour, envy or
ambition. All of them are extremely selfish but none of them is noble
and magnanimous.

The point is that from a psychological and philosophical point of view,
there is another kind of greatness which does not depend on selfishness
and which is called humanity.

I have not yet seen how materialists explain away this aspect of the
human being. What makes the human being or, at least, some individuals,
have a feeling of honor in their spirits, something which is beyond and
above selfishness? Such a human being wishes to be noble and great, but
not at the expense of another. One's spirit does not allow one to tell a
lie. Nobility is the opposite of baseness and a person avoids baseness
completely.

Mussolini, the well-known Italian dictator, is reported to have said to
a friend that he preferred to live like a lion for one year, rather than
like a sheep for a hundred years. He insisted that his friend should not
quote his words to anyone since his being a lion must mean that other
people are sheep and if other people learned what Mussolini desired,
they, too, would want to be lions in which case the dictator could no
longer remain a lion. There is no nobleness in such an attitude.

But what is a noble person like? It is a person who wants all people to
be lions rather than sheep in the world. The Prophet has said, "I was
appointed to perfect the morality of nobility," not "I was appointed to
perfect good morals." The latter is not the correct meaning. Every
innovator of a school claims that what he teaches is right. Even
Nietzche who believes in might and has no compassion for the weak,
considers his school as one of the true ethics. His words mean nobleness
not mastery over others.

Ali, peace be upon him, says to his son, Imam Husain, peace be upon him,
"Uplift your spirit above every mean act and think that your spirit is
worthier than to be polluted by meanness." He advises his son to think
himself nobler than to demean himself by lies or by abasing himself
before others. Ali, peace be upon him, says that an honorable person
never commits adultery and this is irrespective of the fact that it is
forbidden by the divine law and punishable in both worlds. In the epic
of the Nahj ul-balagha it is said that in the first encounter of Ali,
peace be upon him, with Mu'awiyah, in the Battle of Siffin, the Imam had
no desire to fight and wished to settle matters through letters and
emissaries. But when Mu'awiyah seized the access to the waters of the
Euphrates to prevent Ali's army from reaching it, hoping to inflict
defeat on them through lack of water, he wrote a letter asking Mu'awiyah
to desist from such strategy since fighting had not begun yet and there
was the possibility of reaching an agreement.

Mu'awiyah refused to forego his advantage and when Ali found that his
insistance was of no avail, he gathered his men and delivered a
discourse saying, "These people are seeking war like food. If so, do you
know what should be done? You are thirsty and there remains only one
way, and that is to quench your swords with their blood in order to
satisfy yourselves. If you die victoriously, you are alive but if you
live in defeat, you are dead."

This is how Ali, peace be upon him, inspired the spirit of nobility and
self-respect in his followers. Ali, peace be upon him, believes that all
vices are caused by the baseness of character. For example, he thinks
slandering is the act of a weak person. A brave person is so noble and
magnanimous that he or she expresses the objections he or she feels for
another to that person's face or at least keeps silent. One who is
covetous towards others is making the self contemptuous. One who laments
one's misfortune before others is abasing the self.

Someone came before Imam Sadiq, peace be upon him, lamenting his
distress and poverty. The Imam asked an attendant to go and pay him a
few dinars. The man said in apology to the Imam, "I did not intend to
ask for anything." The Imam said, "I did not say that you did but my
advice to you is to abstain from narrating your difficulties before
others, for you lose your worth, and Islam does not wish a believer to
be humbled before others."

Ali, peace be upon him, says, "He who describes his helplessness for
others is destroying his self-respect and honor which are the dearest
things for a true believer. And he who lets his carnal desires dominate
him is abasing himself." Ali peace be upon him, believes that all
virtues are due to the nobleness of spirit. Being truthful, honest,
perseverant and avoiding all vices are the result of that nobleness.
Drinking, to give an example, causes drunkenness, even though
temporarily robbing one of reason and reducing one to the level of a
stupid animal.

He also says, "I do not base my life on excess." The teachings of our
gnostics and Sufis have many exalted thoughts. But one of the problems
that Islam suffered through the teachings of the gnostics and Suifis was
that it was influenced by the teachings of Christianity, Buddhism and
Manicheanism. They lost hold of the correct balance in what they called
forgetting the self and killing the self. If they had paid attention to
Islam, they would have realized that Islam is in favor of annihilating
one aspect of the self and reviving another aspect of it. It advises you
to forget your animal self and strengthen your noble spirit. I have come
across the same idea in the works of the poet-philosopher, Iqbal
Lahouri.

Islam believes that one of the divine punishments is that the human
being is brought to forget the self altogether. The Quran says,

***Be not one of those who forgot God and so He caused them to forget
their souls. (59:19)***

Do you know of anyone like Ali who called people to renounce the world?
Ali did this but at the same time he emphasized self respect and
magnanimity. He says to his son, Hasan, peace be upon him, "Do not be
the slave of another being. God has created you free." How is it that
Ali, peace be upon him, as the most humble man in the world, invites
people to regard the self? This self that he respects is the noble side
of man kind.

We have in hand many sayings of this kind belonging to Ali, peace be
upon him, but few quotations from his two sons, a result of the despotic
conditions of their time. But in the books containing the words of Imam
Husain, peace be upon him, the question of narrowness of the spirit is
noticed abundantly, particularly his sayings in the last moments before
his martyrdom, blaming those who had sold themselves to tyrants. He
says, "If you are not religious and do not fear the Resurrection, at
least be free men in your world." In his discourse in Mecca, he says
that his spirit does not allow him to live and see such corrupt
conditions, let alone be a part of it. Again he says, "Verily I consider
death to be nothing but felicity and life with these tyrants to be
anything but misery." By this he means that it is an honor for him not
to be amongst such people who bring nothing but weariness and sorrow to
his soul.

To those who advised him to abandon his fight against tyrants, he quoted
the sentence of one of the Prophet's friends, said as an answer to his
cousin who wished to prevent him from fighting. The sentence is, "No. I
will go forth. Death is no disgrace but honor for a free man whose
intention is to follow the right path and fight a holy war. Death in
aiding the good and opposing the wicked is an honor." He continues
saying," You who forbid me this humility is enough for you to live in
abjection. Do you not see that they do not act according to what is
right and no one forbids all this corruption?" Again he says, "A
believer must seek death." When it was reported to Ali that Mu'awiyah's
army had plundered the town of Ambar, and seized the earnings of a
Muslim woman, he says, "By God, if a Muslim dies in sorrow for such a
happening, he is not blameworthy."

On the day of his martyrdom (the 10th of Muharram), Imam Husain, peace
be upon him, gives this answer to the messenger of Ibn Ziad who was
demanding allegiance, "I will never offer my hand in humiliation nor
confess like a slave (that I have been in error)." Even in his last
moments of fighting when all his relatives and companions died and he
himself, in facing death, and his household is in danger of capture, he
continues to declare his exalted goal of nobility and freedom.

Thus we see that all great men are not noble but all noble ones are
great. About Imam Husain, peace be upon him, we must say that he was
great in his good deeds, his indifference to wealth, his endeavours in
enjoining to good and forbidding the wrong, in his lack of ambition and
vengefulness, in his insistence on prayer and communion with God and in
his revival of the noble self in fighting for (God and the truth. I pray
God to grant us such spirits of nobleness and to give us the awareness
of our destiny .


