Discourse 6: Worship and Prayer I
=================================

We sometimes notice points in our Islamic interpretations that raise
questions for some of us in connection with worship. For example we are
told in the case of prayer that either the Prophet or the Imams have
said, "Prayer is the pillar of religion," or if we think of religion as
a tent, 'prayer is the pole that keeps it standing." This remark is also
quoted from the narrations attributed to the Prophet, "The requisite for
the acceptance of other human deeds is the acceptance of prayer". In
other words, the good deeds of the human being will be null and void if
prayer is incorrect and thereby unacceptable.

Another Tradition says, "Prayer is the means of proximity of every
virtuous being to God." Another Tradition says that the devil is always
uneasy with a believer and shuns him who is devoted to his prayer. The
Quran, too, shows the remarkable importance of prayer in many verses.

But sometimes it is stated by some persons that all these traditions
about prayer must be forged and unreliable and uttered not by the
Prophet and his successors but by some devotees in order to win more
followers particularly in the 2nd and 3rd centuries of the hegira when
the matter of worship had gone to such excess that it had more or less
led to monasticism and Sufism.

We see that some people concentrated all their efforts on acts of
worship to such an extent that they ignored other religious duties. For
example there was among Ali's companions a man called Rabi' ibn Husain,
who was later known as Khajah Rabi' whose tomb is in Mashhad. He was
known as one of the eight famous ascetics of the Islamic world and he
went so far in asceticism and devotion that he had dug his own grave
long before his death. (It is said that for twenty years he never spoke
a word about worldly matters). Sometimes he went and lay in it reminding
himself that the grave was his home. The only words he was ever heard to
say besides prayer was on the occasion of hearing of Imam Husain's
martyrdom. He said, "Woe upon these people who murdered the dear
descendant of their Prophet." It is reported that afterwards he repented
having uttered a sentence other than the invocation of God.

He was a warrior in the time of Ali, peace be upon him, and one day he
came to Hadrat Ali and said that they had doubts about that war they
were fighting, as it seemed to them to be unlawful, for they were
fighting against those who in their prayer turned their faces to Mecca
and uttered the formulas of the Islamic creed. This man at the same time
did not want to abandon Ali, peace be upon him, so he asked to be given
a task in which there was no doubt.

Ali, peace be upon him, agreed and sent him to a frontier again as a
soldier so that in case of fighting he would face non-Muslims or
idolaters. This man was a type of ascetic of the time but of what worth
was his asceticism and worship? It is useless to be the follower of a
man like Ali, peace be upon him, and at the same time have doubts about
the way shown by him in a holy war. Sometimes people use the phrase,
"Why should one observe a fast based on doubt and uncertainty? It is
worthless." Islam requires insight combined with practice but Khajah
Rabi' had no insight. He lived in the time of Mu'awiyyah and his son
Yazid. He had nothing to do with the social problems of the Islamic
society and he used to retire to a corner praying day and night and
uttering nothing but the Name of God and regretting his own remark about
the martyrdom of Imam Husain, peace be upon him.

This kind of thing does not accord with Islamic teachings and as the
saying goes, "An ignorant person either goes too fast or too slowly."
Some may say that the phrase, "Prayer is the pillar of religion," is not
in harmony with Islamic teachings since Islam pays more attention to
social matters than any other. Islam says, "God orders to do justice and
benevolence. " (16:92) We sent our prophets with manifestations and the
Book and justice to make people do justice also." (57:25) It commands
people to direct others to goodness and forbid evil (3:110) Islam as a
great religion is the creed of activity and work. If these matters are
important in Islam, then acts of worship and devotion are not so
significant. Thus, according to such people, one should follow social
teachings and leave acts of devotion and prayer to idle people who have
no other task to perform.

But such thoughts are wrong and very dangerous. Islam should be
recognized as it is. I emphasize this point since I feel that our
society is suffering from a sickness. Unfortunately those who have
religious ardor are two groups: One group follow the way of Rabi' and
think of Islam only as a creed for prayers, hymns and pilgrimage and
refer to certain standard books of theology to guide them. They have
nothing to do with the world or social regulations or Islamic principles
and education.

The reaction to the slowness of this group is the appearance of a second
group who go too fast and move on the path of excess. They pay all their
attention to social matters, which in itself is a worthy attitude, but
ignore acts of worship. I have met people who can well afford to go on a
pilgrimage to Mecca, an injunction which is regarded as an important
matter in Islam. They ignore prayers, and put aside the matter of
imitating a religious leader. They believe that problems related to acts
of worship should be solved by oneself, without the need of the guidance
of others. Thus everyone is assumed to be a religious expert or a
jurisprudent. One is one's own physician and has no need of consulting a
doctor or a specialist. There are some who are slack in fasting and its
conditions in the case of permanent residence or on a journey and do not
believe in making amends for failure to perform acts of worship in their
proper time and place.

Both groups consider themselves Muslims but they are not wholly so.
Islam does not agree with the phrase, "To believe in some things and
disbelieve in other things."79It cannot agree with the acceptance of
worship coupled with the rejection of its moral and social questions, or
vice versa. You notice that whenever the Quran says, "Perform your
ritual prayer," it is followed by, "Pay your alms."

The first injunction concerns the relation between a creature and God
and the second one shows the relation between one creature and others.
Thus a true Muslim has a dual responsibility towards God and towards
human beings and to their society in a permanent way. No Islamic society
can be built without worship and invocation of God and prayer and
fasting. In the same way, no pious society can exist without directing
to goodness and forbidding evils and without kindly relations between
individuals, even though a person may be a pious individual.

We see Ali, peace be upon him, as the most exalted, pious man, so much
so that his worship was proverbial, a worship full of terror and love
and tears. After his death, a man called Zirar, who was a companion of
his, met Mu'awiyyah who asked him to describe Ali, peace be upon him,
for him. Zirar narrated something he had witnessed about Ali, peace be
upon him. He said, "One night I saw him in his special worshipping place
of worship.' He was twisting with the fear of God like a man bitten by a
snake and weeping with deep sorrow and saying, 'Oh, for the fire of
hell'"; Mu'awiyyah wept on hearing this.

Before Ali's death, Mu'awiyyah met Adass bin Hatam and intended to
provoke him against Ali, peace be upon him, so he asked him about his
three sons who had been killed fighting for Ali, peace be upon him. He
wished to hear Adass blame Ali, peace be upon him and so he said, "Was
it fair of him to deprive you of your three sons and save his own sons
from death in the battlefield?"

Adass answered, "It was I who was unfair to him. I should not be alive
while he is buried in the earth." When Mu'awiyyah saw that he had failed
in his purpose, he asked Adass to describe Ali, peace be upon him, fully
for him, which he did. When he ended his narration, he noticed tears
flowing down Mu'awiyyah's beard and wiping them with his sleeve, saying,
"Alas! Time is too sterile to produce a man like Ali." You see how truth
reveals itself.

But was Hadrat Ali only a pious man of the altar? No. We see him also as
the most social being, well aware of the conditions of the poor and
helpless and all who brought their complaints to him. Though he was a
Caliph, he went among the people, dealing with their affairs. When he
met merchants he shouted, "You should first go and learn Islamic
questions of trade." In other words, before engaging in commerce, they
should know divine injunctions about what is lawful and unlawful in
every deal. He is also reported to have used a phrase to a poor beggar
who begged him for something. Ali, peace be upon him, looked at him and
saw that he was capable of working but had chosen begging as a trade. He
gave him advice and said, "Follow your honor and dignity, " a phrase
that he addressed to every person. For work brings dignity and honor.

Ali, peace be upon him, is thus a true Muslim: Pious in worship, a just
judge in the court, a brave soldier and commander on the battlefield, a
fine orator at the pulpit, a remarkable teacher in his chair, and a
wonderful and perfect example in every other accomplishment.

Islam can never approve of half-hearted acceptance of its injunctions or
belief in some of them and not in others. This is a wrong way adopted by
some ascetics who considered Islam to consist of praying, or those who
ignored acts of devotion altogether.

The Quran says,

***"Muhammad is the Prophet of God and those who are with him are hard
against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves.‚Äù (48:29)***

In this sentence, the feature of an Islamic community is portrayed. In
the first part of it, the matter of following faith and the Prophet is
expressed and in the latter part, the question of standing firmly
against infidels is mentioned. Thus these seeming devotees who make a
mosque their home and say no word when they are driven on by a single
soldier, are not Muslims. The most important quality of a Muslim
according to the Quran is showing firmness and strength against an
enemy.

The Quran says,

***"Faint not, neither sorrow; you shall be the upper ones if you are
believers." (3:133)***

Islam does not allow weakness in religion. Will Durant says in his
History of Civilization that no religion but Islam calls upon its
followers to be so strong and steadfast.

To bend the neck with helplessness, to dress poorly and in a dirty way,
to walk lazily and to pretend to be forelorn and indifferent to all
around you and sigh and groan are all contrary to Islam. The Quran says,

***"And as for the favor of your Lord, announce (it)." (93:11)***

God has given you blessings like health and strength. Why do you show
yourself so helpless? This is ingratitude. Ali, peace be upon him, was
never such a man. He stood ably and strongly against enemies.

What about being kind to others ? We sometimes meet devotees who are
never kind and are usually glum and unsociable. They never laugh and
seldom smile as if the whole of humanity is indebted to them and yet
they suppose themselves to be attached to Islam. Is it enough to stand
firmly against enemies and be kind to Muslims? The answer is no. The
Quran says, "You will see them bowing down, prostrating themselves,
seeking grace from God and good pleasure." (48:29) This speaks of those
who have the two above qualities of steadfastness and kindness and in
their prayers and prostrations sink so deeply in their devotion that you
can see in their faces all signs of chastity and godliness.

It is narrated from the Prophet that the disciples of Christ asked him
with whom they should associate and he answered, "Sit with someone whose
sight reminds you of God, whose speech increases your knowledge and
whose conduct persuades you into doing good." The verse continues, "That
is their description in the Old Testament and their description in the
New Testament like a seed-produce that puts forth its sprout, then
strengthens it so it becomes stout and stands firmly on its stem,
delighting the sowers that He may enrage the unbelievers on account of
them." (48:29).  
 A nation possessing all the above attributes must be a remarkably find
nation. Now, tell me, why should Muslims be so decadent, docile and
miserable. Which of those qualities mentioned before do we possess? What
should we expect? Although we admit that Islam is a social creed, why
should we scorn worship and prayer and communion with God? Let me assure
you that taking prayers lightly is a sin as ignoring them is a sin.

On the death of Imam Ja'far Sadiq, peace be upon him, as Abu Bassir came
to offer Umm ul-Hanida his condolences, the latter wept and so did the
former. Umm ul-Hanida then narrated something that had happened in the
last moments of the life of the Imam. She said that he sank into a
trance and then opened his eyes and asked for all his relatives to be
present. After they had all gathered there, the Imam addressed them the
following remark and then died. He said, "Those who take ritual prayers
lightly will never gain our intercession."89You see that he did not
speak of those who ignore ritual prayers altogether, for, the
consequence of that is obvious. What does 'taking the ritual prayers
lightly' mean? It means that inspite of having time, an opportunity, one
may postpone them and just before it is getting too late, perform the
acts of devotion hastily and perfunctorily, without giving the mind and
spirit the necessary tranquility before beginning to say the ritual
prayer.

Experience has shown that in a household where ritual prayers are taken
lightly, no interest is shown by its members to pray or to pray
properly. One should choose a spot in the house allotted to acts of
devotion, or, if possible, a separate room for them and carry on with
ablution without haste and spread a clean prayer-carpet and accompany
all the preliminary acts with the convocation of God. Ali, peace be upon
him, began with, "In the Name of God and with the help of God. Oh God
place me among those who repent; place me among those who cleanse
themselves."

Two nights ago I spoke about repentance and explained that repentance
meant purifying oneself. Washing the body is the prelude to purifying
the spirit; it refreshens the face, but since the intention is to
cleanse the spirit, too, it gives one a sacred aspect. Ali, peace be
upon him, in his ablution prayed to God to illuminate his face on the
Day of the Resurrection where many faces are black with shame and sin.
Then he said this prayer on washing his right hand, "Oh God, on the Day
of Resurrection, put my book of deeds in my right hand," and on washing
his left hand, he said, "Oh God, do not give me my book of deeds in my
left hand nor from behind my back. Oh God, do not let it be shackled to
my neck; I seek refuge from You from the fire of hell."

Then, on touching his forehead with water, he said, "Merge me into your
grace and blessings." Then on touching his feet with water he said, "Oh
God, direct my efforts towards such a path of your satisfaction."

Such an ablution which is accompanied by so many pleadings is of a
different worth and merit than what most of us are accustomed to
perform. We should not lightly disregard all these rites and confine
ourselves only to the absolutely obligatory parts.

Let us see what religious authorities say about this. Should we repeat
the following sentence three times or only once, "Glory be to God,
praise be God, there is no god but God and God is great." An authority
may say, "Once is enough, since it is obligatory but the second and
third repetitions are recommended." Should we, on the basis of this
verdict, confine ourselves to saying this prayer only once?

In the same way, fasting may be taken lightly. I am saying this as a
joke, but if I were God I would not accept such fasts. I know some
people who stay awake at night in the month of Ramadhan, not to worship
and pray, but to drink tea, smoke and eat fruit. In the morning, they
say their ritual prayers and go to sleep. Some of them sleep all day and
wake up near sunset to say their daily ritual prayers hastily before it
is too late and get ready to break their fast. What kind of a fast is
this? When you do not give yourself the chance of feeling the pain of
abstemiousness? This is fasting lightly and is really an insult to a
fast.

Again we go on a pilgrimage to Mecca but perform the rites lightly in
the same way as our prayers and fasts. Similarly the matter of the call
to prayer may be taken lightly; it is said that the call to prayer
should be utterest melodiously to attract and invite people to prayer,
in the same way that the Quran should be recited clearly, fluently and
with a fine voice. Some people are gifted witll a fine voice, but if you
ask them to sing out the call to prayer, they consider it below their
dignity to be known as a muizzin. But it is really an honor to be one.
Ali himself was one, even when he was a Caliph. There is no disgrace
attached to this task and no nobility to forsake it.

Thus no act of worship should be taken lightly. The merit of Islam is in
its comprehensiveness, not in being so absorbed in devotion as to ignore
every other duty, nor to be so involved in social matters to forget acts
of devotion. Although a prayer is for its own sake and for proximity to
God, if we scorn worship, we are ignoring other duties, too. Worship is
the executive and guarantor of other Islamic injunctions.

Here I end my discourse and pray God to make us true worshippers, to
acquaint us with the comprehensiveness of Islam, to make us
whole-hearted Muslims, grant us pure intentions, forgive our sins in
these precious nights, and grant salvation to our deceased ones.


