Discourse 9Â : Repentance II
===========================

***Lord we have wronged ourselves and if You do not forgive us, and have
mercy upon us, we shall surely be among the lost. (7:23)***

In my previous discourse, I explained that repentance is the first step
of the devotees on the journey of affinity to God and I promised to
mention in this discourse the explanation of Imam Ali (as), peace be
upon him, about the conditions and phases of repentance. Before doing
so, I wish to answer this question, "When is the time for repentance and
when is it accepted?"

A person has the opportunity to repent as long as that person is alive
and before death comes. When a person is in the cluches of death, no
time is left to be saved through repentance. According to traditional
interpretations, this death time is the moment that one feels and sees
death and gets a glimpse of the next world.

Repentance in the next world has no meaning for one is not in a position
to repent nor can it be real. But the reason why at the time of death
repentance is not acceptable, is explained in the Quran.  
 Then when they saw Our might, they said,

***'We believe in God alone and we disbelieve in that we were
associating with Him. ' But their belief when they saw Our might did not
profit them ... (40:84)***

Why is it so? Because repentance does not mean simply regret or a return
from the wrong path due to one factor or another. Repentance is real
when an internal revolution takes place in a person, causing a rise
against all lustful, evil forces and wicked deeds, and domination over
them all.  
 Seeing divine vengeance approaching and then experiencing belief and
repenting is not an internal revolution. The Quran says about Pharaoh,

***Till when the drowning overtook him, he said, 'I believe that there
is no god but He in whom the Children of Israel believe. (10:90)***

As long as Pharaoh alive he acts like a despot and nothing and no
counsel convinced him. He resorts to a contest between his magicians and
Moses; he shows more rebelliousness and decides to kill Moses and his
tribe. He chases them in their flight and, when he is at the point of
drowning in the sea and there is no escape, he repents and expresses his
belief in the God of Moses. But it is too late for his repentance to be
acceptable for it is not a real, internal revolution. His repentance is
only due to his helplessness in a calamity. So they say to him, "Now?
When you previously rebelled?" In other words, "Why did you not repent
an hour before when you were quite free to do so?" For, then, it would
have been a true change of heart. What criminal in the world is not
penitent at the moment of punishment? But if he shows a regret and
penitence before he is caught, then we can say he is changing
spiritually.

Now, as for why repentance in the next world is unacceptable, this is
because the criminal witnesses punishment there and the consequence of
his deeds and therefore his repentance would not be a true revolution.
Moreover, death is like the fall of a fruit from the tree. As long as it
is a part of the tree, it is dependent on the air, water and nourishment
that the tree obtains. Even an hour before falling, there is the chance
for that fruit to become more ripe and sweet but the moment it falls
every possibility of development comes to an end for it.

The human being is the fruit of nature with all the potentials for that
person to be good or bad. If we adopt worship and devotion, we are being
ripened. If we sin, we are plagued like a rotten fruit. Repentance is
one of the ways by which one is nourished when one is alive, not in
death or after it. All the changes and revolution and ups and downs are
connected with this world while in the next world, they all come to an
end and stop.

Another example is a baby in the mother's womb. All its nourishment and
health are through the mother but the moment it is born, total
dependance comes to an end and, a new order is established for its life
that is quite different from the previous one. In the next world, too,
everything is different from the order of this world.

Imam Ali (as), peace be upon him, says, 'Today is the time of deeds and
not reckoning and tomorrow (in the hereafter) is the time for reckoning
and not for deeds.' He does not mean that there is no punishment in this
world. Some of the misfortunes which befall us are punishments. But
again it does not mean that all punishments for wicked deeds are
inflicted in this world. Therefore, if one receives no punishment here
it does not mean that one is quite chaste and that one's account is
clear.  
 On the other hand, if a happening like a flood destroys people, is it
due to their deeds and their punishment in the world? No. The above
saying of Imam Ali (as) says that as this world is for deeds and not for
reckoning, the next world is for reckoning and not deeds. That is the
reason why repentance must take place before death to be valid, that is,
it must take place where there is still time and opportunity for it.

***God says in the Quran, He promises them and fills them with fancies
but there is nothing satan promises then? except delusion. (4: 120)***

A man came to Hadrat Imam Ali (as) to repent and when the Imam realized
that the man was ignorant of the importance of repentance, he said to
him, "Do you know the meaning of repentance? It has an exalted position.
It has six conditions for its acceptance and the last two are the
conditions of its completion." What are those six points?  
 The first one is regretting what has passed. It means looking at the
dark deed and being so sorry and ashamed of it that it makes your heart
burn. The Quran says,

***Oh believers, wine and arrow-shuffling, idols and divining arrows are
an abomination, some of satan's work, so avoid it; haply you will
prosper. (5:90)***

Everyone knows how despicable dead flesh is and there is nothing more
fitting than comparing backbiting with it. Calumny is in the same
category of sins. Some people in accusing others begin their words by
the phrase, "It is said," and suppose that in this way they acquit
themselves of the sin of calumny and later on they disclaim their remark
and say that they have quoted others' words. This too is a sin and the
Quran has forbidden it in the following verse.

***Those who love that indecency should be spread abroad concerning
those who believe there awaits them a painful chastisement. (24:19)***

Those who spread accusations of others are committing a great sin. The
same applies to unclean glances at people's wives or daughters to the
abandonment of prayer and fasting and showing indifference to sacred
rites in the months of mourning and fasting. Being inadequately dressed
in public is another such sin.

The Prophet in speaking of his ascension says, "I saw women there hung
by their hair and beaten with fiery scourges and women who were hung by
their breasts and beaten with whips. I asked who they were and was told,
"These are the women who exhibited their bodies in public."

Of what worth is this brief span of life to expose oneself to such
heavenly punishments. Is it not time to come to oneself, to feel humble
and show interest in what is ordained by God? The Quran says,

***Is it not time that the hearts of those who believe should be humbled
to the remembrance of God and the Truth which He has sent down (57:
16)***

What is the use of shedding one tear drop occasionally for appearance's
sake instead of repenting and checking ourselves and others from
sinning?

The second condition that forms the basis of reference is a decisive
resolution not to repeat the foul deed again. Repentance does not depend
on the enormity of sin. Every kind of sin, whether big or small, lends
itself to repentance provided the Penitent is serious in his or her
intention .

One of the two conditions for the acceptance of repentance is to return
what belongs to others, whether it is something that is seized or a
right that has been trampled on. It must either be returned itself or,
at least, the rightful owner must be given satisfaction. God will not
forget him and the same applies to a person who has been backbitten. He
must be given satisfaction. He must accept the apology.

I wish to narrate something that concerns myself. I was a young
religious student attending a group in which someone started to slander
the late Ayatullah Hujjat whose pupil I had been for years. I felt this
to be quite wrong but I did nothing about it. One day I went to his
house and asked to see him. I was let in and I explained that he had
spoken about him behind his back a great deal and had done nothing to
stop them. I felt penitent about it and asked for his forgiveness. With
the greatness that this man had, he said, "There are two kinds of
slander about people like us, one is an insult to Islam and the other
concerns our person." I explained that he had not said anything
offensive about Islam but had spoken only of his person.  
 He told me I was forgiven.

In repentance everything that is unlawfully acquired belongs to others
whether it is a religious task, bribery or any illegitimate gain or any
damage done and it must be repaid and amended so that the rightful owner
or the person who has received the damage should be satisfied. If you
have nothing left to give back and for example the rightful owner is no
longer living, seek forgiveness from God. God willing, He will make that
person satisfied. Similarly, heavenly rights must also be restored. What
are heavenly rights? If you have failed to observe the fast or perform
your ritual prayer or failed to make your obligatory pilgrimage to Mecca
in spite of being able to bear it physically and financially, you must
make up for all these failures. This is the second condition for the
acceptance of your repentance.

A lady who attended one of my discourses had written to me saying that
she was deeply influenced by my remarks about a total change of heart.
She confessed that inspite of the higher education and her job as the
head of a school, she was unfortunate enough not to be properly
acquainted with the Quran and she asked for guidance and advice.

Allow me to give a general answer. It is necessary for every Muslim to
know Arabic in order to understand the Quran and his own prayer. But as
it happens English is at present the international language and a means
of increasing one's income and every school boy and girl is taught that
language, while Arabic is entirely neglected even though it is
religiously and spiritually greatly needed by us.

The next point Imam Ali (as), peace be upon him, mentioned about the
condition for the acceptance of repentance is to rid oneself of all the
flesh that has grown on one by illegitimate means. This requires the
mortification of the flesh, abstinence and self-discipline. It means
benefitting from what is legitimate, honest and proper.

My father narrated that the late Razavi Khorasani, who was a religious
sage, had a very corpulent body. In the last years of his life he met a
devout ascetic and through his influence, he decided to get rid of his
extra flesh to such an extent that he became quite lean and thin. I am
not so insolent as to say that his fatness was due to lose living, but
anyhow he himself had come to the conclusion that a religious person
must not be so corpulent.

The last condition that I wish to explain is to let the body which has
tasted the sweetness of sin, also taste the pain of deviation and
worship. Fasting is not an easy matter especially if you spend the night
in prayer. The Quran in speaking of repentance mentions the following
points:

***God loves those who repent and He loves those who cleanse themselves.
(2:222)***

This means that you must cleanse yourself not only physically but also
spiritually. The Prophet was a fine example of both kinds of
cleanliness.

The Quran also speaks of reforming oneself in connection with
repentance.

***And he who repents, after his evil doing and makes amends, God is
All-compassionate. (5:39)***

I have already mentioned that sometimes one half of a person rebels
against the other half and this rebellion may be by the lower side of a
person such as his lust, anger or devilry or by his higher side like his
intellect, conscience, his true nature and his depth of heart.

Those who have suffered sexual deprivations in the name of worship and
virtue suddenly turn into libertines and make rebels of themselves. But
a revolution which is started by a belief in God by recognizing the
higher side of the human being, is holy and accompanied by reform.

One of the peculiarities of the Prophets as compared with other human
leaders is that their revolution is different from a revolution begun by
leaders in a society. The latter manage only to arouse one group or
class against another class or classes of society and equip them with
the means or vanquishing the adversaries. This kind of revolution has
its use in cases where a class of oppressors and a class of the
oppressed have come into existence. Calling upon the oppressed to seize
the right is human and this action has been both recommended and carried
out by Islam and all the Prophets. One of the testaments of Imam Ali
(as), peace be upon him, to his two sons, was, "Always be an enemy of an
oppressor and an ally of the oppressed."

But what revolutionary leaders are unable to do what Prophets can do is
to arouse the human being against the self and make him or her repent,
they can also make the oppressors rise against their own wicked deeds.
You meet many figures like Abu Sufiyan and Abu Jahl in the history of
Islam against whom the poor and weak people have arisen and also tyrants
like these have rebelled against themselves.

Imam Musa ibn Ja'far was passing through a market in Baghdad. He heard
the sound of music and merry-making from a house. As he was passing by
it, he saw a girl servant coming out with a bucket of rubbish. He asked
her whether the owner of the house was a free man or a slave. The girl
was surprised at this question and answered that he was naturally a free
man and a man of consequence in that town. It took her some time before
she returned to the house. The master asked her why she had been away so
long. She told him about her talk with the man and gave a description of
him. She said that his last remark was that if the master of the house
did not consider himself a free man, he would not engage in such revelry
and merry-making.

The man realized by her description that the man was none but the Imam.
He gave himself no time even to put on his shoes and hurried to the
door, bare-footed to see the Imam. He ran in the direction that he was
told the Imam had taken and on catching up with him, knelt down and
said, "You were quite right. I am a slave but I knew it not. I want from
this hour to be God's slave and begin again with my repentance."

He returned home and threw away all the means of revelry and from then
on he walked the streets of Baghdad in his bare feet receiving the
nickname, 'the barefooted Bashar'. He was asked the reason for not
wearing shoes and he answered, "As I had the honor of meeting the Imam
as I am now I wish to preserve the memory of it by going bare-footed."

Concerning the affair of the Jewish tribe of the Bani Quraida who had
acted treacherously against Islam and the Muslims, the Prophet decided
to settle the question for good. They asked him to dispatch Abul Babah
who had an inclination towards them for consultation. The Prophet agreed
and sent him to them. He betrayed this trust by some remark which was in
favor of the Jews and against the Muslims. As he was returning to Medina
he felt ashamed of his action and went home, not to see his wife and
children, but to get a piece of rope to go to the mosque of the Prophet.
He tied himself to a pillar and cried, "Oh God I will not untie myself
until my repentance is accepted." Only at the time of ritual prayers or
to ease nature did his daughter untie him tor a few moments and gave him
some food and again he asked to be bound, spending long hours lamenting
and regretting what he had done and wishing to be dead unless he was
absolved from his sin.

They reported this to the Prophet and he said, "If he had come to me I
would have begged God to forgive him but as he has made a direct request
of God, He will deal with him." After two or three days, divine
revelation informed the Prophet that Abul Babah was forgiven. When the
people of Medina heard this, they poured into the mosque to release him
but he requested the Prophet to do so, which he did.

Those who have made a pilgrimage to Medina know that on one of the
pillars of the Prophet's mosque it is written, 'pillar of repentance'.
This is the pillar where Abul Babah repented and in his time it was a
wooden column. After his absolution, Abul Babah, as a sign of gratitude
offered all his wealth to be used in the way of God but the Prophet did
not agree. He offered two-thirds of it. Again the Prophet refused. For
the third time he offered one third and the Prophet agreed. This was
just since Abul Babah had the duty of supporting his family.

It is narrated that a man died and the Prophet went to perform his
burial prayer. He asked how many children the man had and what wealth he
had left. They said he was well-off but had given away his wealth for
charity before his death. The Prophet said, "If I had known this before,
I would not have prayed for him since he has bequeathed hungry children
to society."  
 It is also said that if a sick man intends to leave more than one third
of his wealth to charity, his bequest is not acceptable since he has
done so on his death bed even if this is not done by bequest but as an
ordinary act of transfer.

I have discussed the question of repentance throughout these nights
hecause these sacred nights of staying awake are the best time for
penitence and begging God's forgiveness so that you may be absolved from
your sins. But in this repentance all the conditions that I mentioned
before must be fulfilled.

Another example of repentance was Zuhair ibn al Qain who became a
companion of Imam Husain, peace be upon him. He was one of the followers
of Uthman who believed that Imam Ali (as), peace be upon him, God
forbid, had a hand in the murder of Uthman. He was returning from Mecca
to Iraq and as Imam Husain, peace be upon him, was taking the same
route, he wondered whether he should meet the Imam or not. As he was at
heart a true believer he feared that the Imam, as the grandson of the
Prophet, might ask him something which he would be unwilling to perform
which would be very bad so he kept away from the Imam. But in one of the
stopping places on their way they happened to alight by a well at the
same time. The Imam sent someone to bring Zuhair to him. Zuhair, as the
head of the tribe, was dining in his tent with his family and
companions. He went pale on hearing the summons and said, "What I did
not wish for has happened."

He did not know what to say. He had a wife full of belief who said to
him, 'Are you not ashamed by showing hesitation in obeying the call of
the Prophet's grandson which you should consider an honor? Go at once.'
Zuhair unwillingly arose and went to meet the Imam. No one knows what
passed between them but when Zuhair returned he looked quite a different
man. He was now very cheerful and happy. We do not know how the Imam
transformed him but a holy revolution had taken place in him. At once he
started giving instructions about his will concerning his wealth and
members of his family and hastened to join the Imam. In Karbala he was
in the front line of the Imam's followers, where he achieved martyrdom
with them all. When his wife sent a servant with a shroud for his body,
the servant saw a shameful sight. They discovered that not only Zubair's
body but also his master's body lacked a shroud .

In conclusion I pray to God for a good end for us all and for the chance
of true repentance by us and forgiveness by Him.


