Preference of the Centre
========================

**IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE BENEFICIENT THE MERCIFUL**

Praise is to Allah the Lord of the worlds, the best blessing and the
complete salutation are to the loyal chosen “Mustafa” and his pure
progeny however; Man’s viewpoint about life, universe and his concepts
in different fields, rather even his emotions and senses all of these
centre around the axis of the belief which he adopts and which
contributes in his ideological, ethical and social constructing, and
directing his energies to words development and change.

If positive (unreligious) schools had achieved some success in the
materialistic fields of civilization it has proved its failure in
responding to man’s need for an honorable life free from the chains of
indecency and profligacy. So moral corruption, ethical decline familial
dissociation and ideological emptiness have been the most outstanding
outputs of the materialistic civilization which Man has created on the
ideological individual and social level of life.

The creator’s wisdom has required that He guides him to the roots and
origins from which he draws his knowledge and the truths of this being
so that he could reach through them to the right beliefs which are
purified of blemishes and far from deviation due to the fact that Allah
has bestowed upon him the pure nature as a cresset which guides him to
the light, the light of the right Islamic belief which has enlightened
with its brightness what is around it.

When one judges with his mind he finds that the Islamic belief forms
complete system for human life with all of its stages and draws the way
to all of its sides, harmonizes with human composition, ensures the
accomplishment of the spiritual and materialistic needs of the
individual in a balanced and precise manners and in a way which secures
his dignity and personality.

On the bases of this belief the building of personality is founded, the
personality of the individual, the society, and the Islamic state duties
are specified, justice and equity are achieved, security and peace are
settled, liability and solidarity originate, virtues and noble qualities
nourish and man is built on all levels.

On the ideological level: the Islamic belief has rescued man from the
world of legendry and ignorance to help him enter the world of knowledge
and light, stimulating his potential energy to speculate and learn
lessons from the evidences and proofs of Allah (be glorified) so it has
cast away imitation in believing and connected between knowledge and
faith.

On the social level: the Islamic belief has succeeded in elevating
social relationships for from the bases of tribal spirit, color and
wealth up to moral bases such as piety, virtue and human brotherhood, so
Moslims had formed the best nation that humanity has seen after they had
been separated and conflicting groups.

On the ethical level: the Islamic belief has succeeded in promoting the
subjective motive which relies on the basis of believing the creator’s
observation of all Man’s movements and stillness and what follows that
from reward and punishment, this matter resulted in moderating the
instincts and growing the tree of virtues and making them as a common
ingredient of all Islamic laws.

The Islamic belief has also contributed in building the society
economically, politically and educationally, so it represents the strong
factor in the history of the Islamic civilization.

Thus, in order to raise the Moslim human being from the state of
spiritual weakness, from the slipping into the holes of materialism and
its temptations he should be reminded of the fruits of that belief,
stabilizing his perscuation of its strength and suitability for all
ages, using contemporary language, and inform that matches with the
necessities of the modern age and mental analysis.

Our book clarifies to you these truths plainly, following intellectual
research and analysis, using an interesting easy style and a straight
scientific survey which lead ideas far from the holes of deviation and
fantastic imagination, and direct them towards pure truths and brilliant
evidences.

So, we thank Allah for what he has granted and praised Him for the
success he bestowed and it is on Him we depend.


Al-Risaalah Centre.


