Subsistance Is Guaranteed For Its Seekers
=========================================

There is a fear that befalls Man and embitter his life, it is the fear
of poverty but the Islamic ideology diffuses this fear by emphasizing a
very clear truth like the sun at midday.

It is that the sources of sustenance are at the hands of Allah, and He
has guaranteed it for His servants so there is no justification for
these fears. He who reads the Qur’an finds so many verses urging to
eradicate the reasons of the fear of poverty which motivated the Man
before Islam to kill his children Allah (be exalted) says: “surely Allah
is the bestower of sustenance the Lord of Power, the strong”[^36]. He
also said “ And do not kill your children for fear of poverty we give
them sustenance and yourselves too” [^37]

The “hadeeths” of the prophet (S.W.A.) and the purified Imams lead to
the same course, the prophet (S.W.A.) says: “the doors of paradise are
opened to the poor and the wretched, Allah’s mercy descends to the
merciful people, Allah is pleased with the generous people” [^38]

His executor Imam Ali (A.S.) says: “…The creatures are His family, He
has guaranteed their sustenance determined their foodstuff…”[^39]

From another side they corrected peoples’ concept about sustenance.
Truly Allah has guaranteed his servants’ sustenance but this does not
mean that He urges them to be lazy and inactive or to sit at home idle,
but He connected obtaining sustenance with one’s striving and seeking
it. Imam Ali (A.S.) says: “ search for sustenance as it is guaranteed to
its seeker” [^40]

Ameeral Mu’amineen was working in an agricultural field with his spade,
he released the slaves from the revenue of his hand’s toil” [^41]

He (A.S.) was irrigating date palms of some Jews of Medeena till his
hands fatigued, he gave his wages to the poor as alms and put a stone
and tight it on his stomach” [^42]

Imam has not been striving to collect the funds for himself out of this
wearisome work as Imam Ali (A.S.) is not cheated by a white or yellow
coin rather he was trying to obtain the “halaal” sustenance from its
source and spend it in its proper place.

As spirits are infatuated with properties, fond of collecting and
treasuring it, it is appropriate for the enlightened aware believer not
to be cheated by its brightness, lured by its attractions, and he has to
take lesson from those attracted and cheated by it while they are
deprived of the reward of the next life, they are bankrupt in every
additional property more than their necessary needs as they are trusty
treasurers who strive and suffer in saving it, then they leave it behind
like a sweet food for inheritors, so they are hold responsible for it in
the hereafter while their sons spend it and enjoy it as they like”[^43]

In this way the Islamic ideology uproots the sources of fear from
poverty from spirits and makes man work to ensure the necessities of his
honorable living.

**DISEASE ERADICATES SIN…ENTAILS REWARD:**

From another side the Islamic ideology mollifies Man’s constant fear of
caching diseased by insisting on an obvious truth, it is that every body
is liable to illness. Imam Ali (A.S.) says “one should not have
confidence in two attributes: health and wealth, you may find him
healthy, suddenly he becomes ill; and you may find him rich suddenly he
becomes poor”[^44]

Their hadeeths also emphasized that disease eradicates sins. Imam
Alsajjad (A.S.) says, “when a believer fevers one time his sins scatter
like the leaves of tree” [^45]

And it related from Abbiabdullah (A.S.) that he said: headache for a
night lays down every sin except great sins” [^46]

In addition disease entails abundant reward and that enlightens its
severity to the soul. The prophet (S.W.A) says: “I wonder at the
believer and his grief of illness had he known his reward due to
illness, he would have liked to be ill continually till he meets his
Lord” [^47]

Imam Reza specifies the philosophy of illness by his saying: “illness
to the believer is purification and mercy, and to the infidel a
chastisement and curse, believer is still suffering from disease till he
is freed from sins completely”[^48]

We return to say that illness has not been made by Allah in vain,
rather He made it an examine the human being and know his patience to
forbear calamities. So He examined by illness His prophets the pious
servants, Ayyoub’s (A.S.) examination -as t is known-had been in his
body: “None of his organs remained sound except his heart and tongue by
which he glorifies Allah, in all that he has been tolerant and
contented, glorifying Allah day and night morning and evening.

The duration of his illness lasted for a long time till his companions
loathed him, his associations deserted him, he was expelled out of his
country, all people deserted him no one remained to help him except his
faithful wife who was taking into account his right and knowing his old
favor to her. All this hadn’t increased Ayyoub but tolerance and
contentedness, praise and thanks to God, till his patience became a
proverb”[^49]

As a result of this tolerance and contentment Allah gave back to him
everything He had taken of him kindly and generously.

The ideology, at the time which it orders the Moslem to endure, it
advises him not to complain of disease, as complaining means that one
accused Allah of injustice in His determination, it also abases one’s
dignity in peoples’ eyes, it incites disappointment and mockery.
Ameeralmu’amineen (A.S.) says: “I had previously a brother whose brother
hood was for the sake of Allah, what makes him great in my view is the
meanness of this world in his view.. He wasn’t complaining of a pain
except after it heals…” [^50]

It is worth mentioning that the ideology at the time which scatters the
clouds of fear within the self it grows up in him the feeling of fear
from Allah (be exalted) only as it is the only way to be released from
all kinds of fear and it (the belief) bewares of disobeying Him and
brandish refers at His severe revenge.

The Holy Qur’an in so many verses deepens the feeling of fear of Allah
(be exalted) some of them are: “Say, surely I fear, if I disobey my
Lord, the chastisement of a grievous day” [^51]He also says: “And for him
who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord and forbids the soul from
low desires, then surely the garden- that is the abode”[^52]

The prophet (S.W.A.) says: “Allah has not invested with power over Man
except of whom Man has feared, and had Man not feared except Allah,
Allah wouldn’t invest any one with power over him except Allah…”[^53]

He also said: “blessedness is to whom fear of Allah has occupied him
and diverted him from fearing people” [^54]

It is natural that this kind of fear has educational influences from
which the individual benefits. In this concern imam Alsaadiq says: “He
who knows Allah fear Him and he who fears Him abandons this world”
[^55]

Social advantages result from this fear as it motivates the individual
to help others, Allah (be exalted) said: “And they give food in spite of
their love for it to the poor and the orphan and the captive we only
feed you for Allah’s sake we desire from you neither a reward nor
thanks\* Surely we fear from our Lord astern distressful day” [^56]

In short, the ideology had changed the souls, opened to them immense
horizons by releasing them from their fears. It also connected their
rope with their Creator, and made it feel His favors and frightened them
of His painful chastisement.

**THIRDLY: KNOWLEDGE OF THE SELF:**

One of the advantages of this ideology is that it motivates the Moslem
to know himself. It is impossible to elevate the self without knowing
its nature. This knowledge is the first step to take control over it and
to rein its caprices. Imam Albaaqir says: (there is no knowledge like
knowing your self” [^57]

Then, there is a strong associative relationship between knowing Allah
(be exalted) and knowing the self. For by knowing the self, its nature
and powers, Man can know its Creator and evaluate His greatness. It is
in the prophetic Hadeeth “He who knows himself, knows his (Creator)”. In
return forgetting Allah (be exalted) results in forgetting one’s self:
“And be not like those who forsook Allah so He made them forsake of
their own selves” [^58]


