And This Wounderful Educational Attitude
========================================

Following the example is not restricted to the individual and social
moral field. Rather it has a very immense horizon as the vastness of the
horizons of life. How much can politicians and prudent men take lessons
from the creators of history and the engineers of intellect, let us look
at this incident –which may appear to be a small one- in the history of
Ameeralmu’amineen (A.S.), looking at what it reflects of the
characteristics of the leader and the representative, and at the lessons
we can derive in the sides of our life whether it is individual or
social:

A nomad stood up and came to Ameralmu’amineen (A.S.) at the day of
Aljamel (War) and said: O Ameeralmu’amineen’ do you say that Allah is
one?

He said: people blamed him saying: Don’t you see that the Imam’s heart
is busy (with the affairs of war)?!

Ameeralmu’amineen (A.S.) said: “Let him ask as what he wants is the
same thing we want from the other party (i-e from our enemy!)”.

Then he (A.S.) said: “O nomad’ the saying that Allah is one has four
meanings, two of them are not applicable i-e they are wrong to be
attributed to Allah while the other two are right and applied to Allah
(be exalted).

As to those which are wrong and not applicable to Him are the saying of
one that He is one, meaning the category of numbers, this is not right
because one has no second for him is not counted within numbers.

Do you not see that he who said that He is the third of three became
infidel; likewise that who says that He is one of people, meaning that
He is on individual of the sort which is taken from the genus this is
wrong because it is a likening, our Creator is exalted from that
meaning.

As to the two meanings which are right to be said about Him. The first
is when one says that He is one, who has no similarity among things, and
our Creator is as such. The second is when one says that He is one
outside numbers (monism) which means that He is not divided in reality,
mind or imagination, our creator is as such, may He be exalted”[^39]

As a comparable point of view, what a great difference between what
Imam Ali (A.S.) has done there, in spite of his being busy as his
comparisons described him due to the turmoil which befell Muslim during
Al-Jamal war, and what Aumer ebnal khataab has done with Alasbagh ebna
assal when he asked him about the “Mutashaabeh” of Qur’an although Aumer
was living untroubled at Almadeena.

Ebin Hajjar narrated that a man came to Almedeena at the time of Aumer;
this man is called Alasbagh bin Assal; he asked Aumer about the
“Mutashaabeh” of Qur’an Aumer called on Him and beat him with his stitch
till his head bleeds, he cancelled his share from “baitelmaal”, forbade
people from sitting with him- then he decided to expel him to Basrah and
wrote to his governor there Abu Mousa Al-Asha'ri: “I tell you that
Alasbagh has burdened on himself what he has been saved and wasted what
he had been entrusted, so when my letter reaches you don’t deal with him
in purchase, don’t visit him when he becomes ill and if he dies don’t
participate in his funeral”[^40]

**AHLILBAIT (A.S.) ARE THE EXAMPLE AFTER THE PROPHET (S.W.A.):**

Ahlilbait (A.S.) are one of the two “Thaqalain” (i- e the two rare
things) to which the prophet (S.W.A.) ordered his nation to adhere, and
to tread in their traces: he said: “I have left with you “Althaqalain”
(i – e the two rare things) As long as you adhere to them you would not
go astray at all, the Book of Allah, a tough rope stretched out from
Heaven to earth and my house hold Ahlilbait surely they wouldn’t leave
each other till they reach me at the end (the Day of Judgement) [^41]


**Summary**

The Islamic ideology is the central foundation of the Islamic thinking,
which moulds for the Moslem his monotheistic view point to universe and
life. This ideology produces to him proper concepts, which reflect the
Islamic viewpoint in different fields of life as it also produces to him
philanthropic emotions, and sentiments.

So the ideology represents the ingredient of power, it is the ideology,
which fulfilled miracles and achieved the great victories at the dawn of
Islam.

In order to motivate Moslem today to move towards revival and progress
we must remind him of the civilizational donations that the ideology has
bestowed upon those who preceded him, and we must stabilize his
certainty of its rightness and appropriateness for all generations.

We can summarize the important role, which the ideology played in
building man on all levels as follows:

1- ON THE INTELLECTUAL LEVEL: It considered man to be a respected
being. It regards sin as an incidental thing, which can be treated by
repentance. Hence it makes man feel that he has the ability to advance
it does not disappoint him of Allah’s mercy and pardon.

The Islamic ideology released man from the political dictatorship of
unjust governors. It also freed him from the habit of idolizing human
beings, it granted him his freedom but it confined it to the limits of
Islamic law least it results in chaos; it also connected human freedom
with the servitude to Allah only and the attentive, voluntary submission
to His authority.

It also freed man from his lusts and from worshipping the phenomenons
of nature around him.

It also freed him from legendries and myths in beliefs and behavior.

It carried out the operation of building man through the operation of
releasing the mind, so it gave mind a great position, it recognized its
role, opened to it vast cognitive horizons. It also opened to it the
window of the unseen, and released it from the captivity of the narrow
circle of senses, directed his creative power towards contemplation and
taking lessons of Allah’s signs in horizons and selves and considered
its contemplation one of the best worships.

The ideology did not restrict itself to this but it directed the energy
of the mind to discover the laws of history, which control over nations
and peoples. It also directed the mind to know the wisdom of “Teshreea”
(the Islamic laws) to solidate Moslem’s certainty of the suitability of
his “Share’a” to every time and place.

It also urged the Moslem from another side, to acquire science and
knowledge, it-connected knowledge with belief. Every separation between
them leads to destructive results. It also directed the mind to
independent contemplation and attentive notes, to derive the results
from certain premises and call the Muslim not to imitate others in
understanding the basic principals of religion.

**2- ON THE SOCIAL LEVEL:**

The Islamic ideology played a big changing role, which the pre-Islamic
man thinks about himself and his interests he became after being
interacted with the elixir of the Islamic ideology, ready to sacrifice
every expensive and precious thing for the sake of his religion and the
interests of his society.

The ideology has eradicated the contrast between the subjective
motives, which motivate man to achieve his own interests and the
interests of the community by agitating the social feeling of the
individual towards the others.

The Islamic ideology has grown this feeling through several manners
some of them that are: by awakening the feeling of responsibility for
others and by developing the spirit of sacrifice and altruism of the
individual and urging him to be molded in the block of community.

From another side, the Islamic ideology has changed the social
relations among the individual: from relations based fanaticism for
kinship, or on the basis of color or money or race, to more sublime
relations based on moral foundations: piety, virtue, and human brother
hood.

The ideology changed the individuals from the state of contradiction
and conflict to the state of association and co-operating, so they
formed a mighty nation after they had been separated conflicting tribes
for which other nations do not pay any attention.

In addition to that the Islamic ideology had changed the pre-Islamic
habits which insult the human’s dignity and cause him to suffer
hardships.

3- ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL LEVEL: The ideology participated in creating a
feeling of safety, and security to the human being whatever hardships
are around him.

It followed different manners to lighten the miseries which man faces
suddenly, some of these manners are:

Showing the nature of this world as it is a place of afflictions and
examination filled with the currents of tribulations, which befall man
from every direction.

So it is impossible for man to seek rest and relaxation in this world.
He has to seek success in this divine examination, as it is a place of
performing man’s duties.

The ideology has enlightened the bitterness of afflictions through its
emphasis that they involve every good reward; it also drew man’s
attention to the great affliction, which is the affliction with one’s
religion, which enlightens the impresses of small secular distresses.

The belief had released spirits, from the fears, which paralyses man’s
activities withhold his energy, it also urged man to know himself as it
is very difficult to get control over it and curb it without this
knowledge. It is then, impossible to know Allah (be exalted) without
knowing the self.

We have deduced, throughout the research, that the psychological
dangerous diseases such as fanaticism, miserliness and egocentrism, lead
to very dangerous social and political results, such as the affliction
which blew away Moslems in “Alsaqeefa” that Imam Ali (A.S.) showed its
psychological roots.

**4- ON THE MORAL LEVEL:**

The Islamic ideology played a creative role in building the moralities
of the Moslem individual; it founded those moralities on religious bases
which involves good and bad reward they are not mere moral
recommendations free from responsibility, on the contrary with positive
laws which abolished from the individual’s soul the feeling of Allah’s
observation and so they invalidated the foundation of morals, since
morals lose the guarantees of perseverance without faith.

It is known that the ideology followed several manners to urge
individuals to be adorned with good morals and avoid bad morals, some of
them are: Showing the affects of good and bad morals in this world and
the other world.

It also followed the manner of introducing the “good example” in order
to connect the individuals with the examples of the ideology and its
leaders in order to be influenced with their good morals and imitate
them in their life history.

[^1] Kenzel Aumaal 11: 240/ 31969.

[^2] Rawzatel Waaeizeen: Al Fattaal alnisabouri: 376- Aleazzi Qum.

1 Ausoul Alkaafi: 2: 99/ 1 Ketaab aleimaan Walkufur..

2 Almehajjah Albaiza’a 5: 89.

[^5] Tuhafil A’ukool: 200.

[^6] Almeezaan fi tefseerel Qur’an, Alaamah Altabatabaei 11: 157.
Ala’alemi foundation edition 3.

[^7] Mustadrekel wasseil: 2: 283.

[^8] Almahajjah albaiza’a 5: 93.

[^9] Ershaadelkuluub: 1-2: 133.

[^10] The same source.

[^11] Ausoulilkaafi: 2: 100/ 7 Ketaabil eimaan walkufur, baseereti
library publications- Qom.

[^12] Ausoul alkaafi 2: 101/ 12, kitaabil eimaan wal kufur.

[^13] Alakhlaaq sayed Abdullah Shubber: 70.

[^14] Tuhafel aukool: 38.

[^15] Tuhafel Aukool: 98.

[^16] Tuhafel Aukool: 356.

[^17] Ausoul Alkaafi 2: 100/ 8 ketaabil eimaan walkufur.

[^18] Ausoul Alkaafi 2:321/ 4 ketaab eimaan walkufur.

[^19] Fi rehaab aeima Ahlilbait (A.S.) sayyed Mohsin Alameen 4: 69 from
Tuhafil aukoul.

[^20] Mekaarim alakhlaaq: altebressi: 17.

[^21] Alkhesaal, Alsadooq 2: 621, Hadeeth the 400.

[^22] Behaarel anwaar 77: 1213, from Keshfil mehajjah lithamaratel
muhjjah: 157, ch. 154, Alnajjaf Alashraaf.

[^23] Behaarel anwaar 78-53, Alghurer: Aamed.

[^24] Ahzaab: 33: 21.

[^25] Alkalam 68-4.

[^26] Ala’araaf 7: 199.

[^27] Majmaelbaiaan: Altabressi 3: 89- Alhayaat library publications the
year 1980 A.H.

[^28] Nehjil balagha, Subhi Alsaalih 228/ sermon 160.

[^29] Sherhnahjil balagha: Ebna abbil Hadeed 7: 84.

[^30] Almuraaja’at, sayyed Abdulhussan Sharrafideen 23, 8th murajaah.

[^31] Sherh alnehj, Ebnaabil hadeed 7: 76.

[^32] Sherh alnehj, Ebna abilhadeed 18: 273.

[^33] Mekaarim alakhlaaq: Altebressi: 113.

[^34] Mea’ani Alakhbaar: Alsadouq: 191.

[^35] Nehjilbalaagha: subhil alsaalih 439 leter: 53.

[^36] Tuhaf Al-Ikoul, p. 176.

[^37] Al-Ihtijaj by Al-Tebressi vol.1-2, p. 315.

[^38] Al-Sahifah Al-Sajjadiyah Al-Jamia, p. 69-Qom.

[^39] Ketaab Alkhesaal, Alsheikh Alsadouq: 2/ ch. Of Alwaahid, pub.:
Jama’atalmuderreseen Qom and Ma’ani Alakhbaar: 5 baab alwaahid.

[^40] Alessabah fi temyeez elsahaabah: Ebnahajjar alaskalaani 2: 198-
Dar Ehyaalturaath alarabi pub: 1st, , 1328 H.

[^41] Behaar el anwaar 23: 106 and kenzel aumaal 1: 172, the Hadeth has
many other ways from both sides.


