Introduction
============

The most important thing for the human being in life is that he knows
his beginning and end, the aim of his presence, from where he has come,
to which place he goes finally and why has he been created?

These questions which man always puts forward to himself need definite
answers in order that Man takes a position towards life in their lights
which specifies his behavior, and builds a right satisfactory order to
his society.

Positive belief has failed in giving the answer to man’s inquiries
about his beginning and end, and the aim of his presence, one time by
claiming that Man has been created by chance, another time by claiming
that he has been created as a result of development of material…and
other interpretations like these which don’t have any result nor value
so as to know the truth.

Furthermore, they failed in drawing the outlines of the social order
which can reform Man and make him happy.

While deviated religious belief have answered these questions with
distorted and dull answers when they admitted initially the existence of
the Creator but they likened Him to his creatures as they also failed to
specify the most convenient order for humanity,

the Islamic belief has answered all that with the most sincerity and
depth when it has announced that man has a wise powerful Creator, who is
not known by senses and not compared with people, and that Man has been
created for a sublime purpose which is worshipping Allah to reach
through this worship to the loftiest degrees of perfection and
eternity.

This belief also generates noble emotions and sentiments, which Islam
adopts spreading and growing them up, in order to build the perfect
human being in the intellectual social and behavioral dimentions, to
construct the ideological personality which owns a purposeful
intellectuality, straight behavior and a vocational direction on the
contrary of the outsider character whose attention concentrates on
itself, interests and wishes; therefore suffers from mental emptiness,
psychological tension and lack of aimfullness in life.

We must refer that the Islamic belief is not like the beliefs of
philosophers- as an intellectual theory- situated in the corners of the
mind- rather it is a power which moves through the heart and is
reflected positively on the spirit and senses, so he (who adopts it)
rushes into the fields of strife and work, so it had been an active and
motive power which changed the direction of history,

altered the features of civilization, brought about excellent social
and intellectual conversions in man’s life and, achieved witnessed
military victories. Hence, we found that the oppressed armless minority
in Mecca could- thereby depending on their belief- withstand for
thirteen years in confronting a tyranny like flood.

It is this belief which could draft for the Prophet (s.w.a.) an army of
ten thousand men while he left Mecca hidingly and chased by its
infidels. Those who had made war against him for along time couldn’t
withstand against the creeping power of faith, so they surrendered to
him, came to him submissively or they paid him the tribute humbly.

Moslems have owned the most powerful implements of victory, it is the
belief which makes miracles, which made Hamza- the master of martyrs-
leads the first cavalry squadron of thirty Moslems to confront three
hundred cavalry fighters from Qureish on the shore of the Red Sea, the
Moslem squadron have not come out for a mere parade rather they have
been serious in confrontation and engagement with an enemy whose power
is ten times its force.

It hadn’t happened through the history of the battles of Islam in which
Islam achieved magnificent and successive victories that Moslems’
material power was equal to that power of the enemy.

Rather Moslems’ power had been- as for the number and equipments- no
more than a fifth of the enemy’s victory hadn’t been achieved except
through their dependence on the great moral reinforcement which the
Islamic belief grants for the Moslem fighter without ignoring the role
of the continual divine support and some other material factors and
conditions.

Thus we find that belief is the basic power in all of the battles of
Islam and the central factor in achieving victory in all fields.

In order to motivate the Moslem individual and to put him on the way of
civilizational development he should be reminded of the civilizational
achievements which the Islamic belief has granted to Moslems who
preceded him;

it is true that Moslem has not lost his belief completely but his
belief has lost its activity in his heart and lost its social radiance
in his behavior because of the factors of the invasion to which he had
been subjected and because of the factors of moral decay and retardation
which blew away his society as a direct result of his drawing for from
the values and instructions of Heaven.

What we must emphasize here in this framework are the following:

Firstly: we must familiarize the Moslem with his right- belief by
taking its knowledge from its pure sources.

Secondly: we must stabilize his certainty of its rightness and
competency for the modern age and show the points of its superiority to
other beliefs.

Thirdly: we must strive to renew the role of the belief in building
Moslem individual in order that it is manifested in his intellect as a
deep faith, in his behavior as good deeds and virtuous morals as it was
interacting in the spirits of Moslems previously bringing about
donations and struggle.

For this aim we have issued this research which deals with the role of
belief in the intellectual, social and psychological construction of Man
and its reflections on the moral of Moslems and their behavior. We also
shed light on the great role which the school of “Ahlilbait” (A.S.) had
played in preservating belief and contronting the attempts of
superficializing knowledge to which the Moslem had been subject
throughout successive political eras.

We must mention that we have followed the “traditional procedure” and
have depended-basically- on traditional sources. From Allah we ask
support and success.


