Chapter One : the Ideoligical Constquction
==========================================

**The first Topic: liberating Man’s mind:**

The view of the Islamic Ideology relies the fact that Man is an honored
creature: (And surely we have honored the Sons of Adam and We carry them
in the land and the sea and We have given them of the good things and We
have made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over most of those
whom We have created) [17-7-].

He is the “Chaliph (i. E representative) of Allah on earth, he has the
abilities which enable him to ascend to high degrees in sublimity and
elevation: “And when your Lord said to the angels I am going to create
in the earth a Kaliph, they said! What! Wilt Thou place in it such as
shall make mischief in it and shed blood and we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy Holiness? He said; surely I know what you don’t know.”
[2:30]

Likewise, He can stoop and demean himself till he reaches the rank of
animal: “He clung to the earth and followed his law desires so his
parable is as the parable of the dog, if you attack him he lolls out his
tongue and if you leave him alone he lolls out his tongue…” [7:176].

“Then he falls down more and more till he reaches the rank of a solid
body! “Then your hearts hardened after that so that they were like rocks
rather worse in hardness” [2;74].

So the Islamic ideology faces in consideration takes the strong and
weak sides together in the human being as Man has been described in the
Holy Book as has been created weak, dismayed and rash, he is surely in
ordinate, and that he oppresses and is ignorant- [^1]

On this basis the Islamic legislation does not attempt to overburden
him by heavy incumbents which exceed his psychological and bodily
abilities, Allah (be exalted) has said:

“Allah Does not impose on any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability” [^2]

The prophet (s.w.a.): “Nine things from my nation are not requited: the
mistake, forgetting, the thing to which they are obliged, what they do
not know, what they do not endure, what they do under necessity
jealously and evil omen, and thinking with a sense of misgiving about
creation unless it is uttered”[^3]

He also said “The pen had been lifted (i-e it doesn’t write) from three
persons “the mad person who has lost his mind till he restores it, the
sleeping person till he wakes up, and the young boy till he reaches
sexual maturity” [^4]

The Islamic belief, then, considers the sides of weakness in man as a
natural state caused by his human construction and it does not consider
it as very complicated to the degree that Man loses with it his ability
to build and move, and to choose freely.

More than that the Islamic belief has attempted –while its motivating
to construct and develop human being-to agitate in him a deep feeling of
the positive side in his presence.

**Sin is accidental:**

From another side, the Islamic ideology considers sin as an accidental
matter to human being and not on original subjective matter. So when Man
falls into the holes of sin he is not changed into a devil whose
develish nature prevents from returning to the vastnesses of humanity,
rather Man remains a sinful person who can strive to repent, correct his
fault and can rise from his misstep.

This is the secret of the greatness of the Islamic view point to man as
it doesn’t put him under the mercy of the feeling of an imposed original
sin as Christianity does, rather it tries to save him from the mud of
sin and make him know his ability to progress, remind him always of
Allah’s pardon and His vast mercy and not to feel disappointed of it.

There is no “confessional chair” in Islam as it is there in
Christianity, rather the leaders of religion and theologians attempt to
veil the defects and sins of people as much as possible because Allah
loves concealing sins.

It is related from Assbagh Ebin Nabaatah that he said: A person came to
Ameeral Mu’amineen and said: O Ameeral Mu’amineen, I have committed
adultery so purify me (i-e punish me), Ameeral Mu’amineen turned his
face away from him then he said to him: “Sit down, then Ali “A.S.”
turned to his people and said: Poes the one of you fail to conceal his
sin when he commits it as Allah Has concealed his sin?!…” [^5]

**Man is an honored creature:**

From another side the Islamic ideology attempts to make Man
feel-always- that he is an honored being who has his important position
in this universe through the duty of “Caliphate which he should adopt
and he has nothing to do but to carry out the duty of caliphate”
(Allah’s representativeness on earth in the best way, to thank his
Creator for his honor, enabling and guidance to the right religion.

A person asked Ameeral Mu’amineen (A.S.) about his love to meet Allah
(be glorified), he said how do you love the meeting of Allah? He (Ali)
said “When I found that He has chosen foe me the religion of His angles,
apostles and prophets I knew that He has honored me with this does not
forget me so I loved his meeting,”[^6]


