The Symptoms of Liberating
==========================

The Islamic ideology played an active role in liberating Man on
different axes:

Firstly: It has freed man from political dictatorship.

No one in Islam can dictate to another person, nor is there any
exploitation of a class or a nation over an other one (religion has been
along the Islamic history one of the most prominent factor of the
appearance of liberation movements whatever the view point of the
researcher towards religion he can not exclude the religious factor and
its influence in building the revolutionary awareness during this era of
Islamic history.

Abbizer’s and Alhussain’s (A.S.) revolutions had been nothing but a
starting point of a concious tendency to correct the deviation in the
history of Islam. In spite of all deviation from which Moslems had
suffered along their long history they hadn’t lost in any era of this
history a strong revolutionary tendency which strives to restore Islam
to the runs of life to eliminate oppression, exploitation and to restore
the rights of the Moslem and his dignity”. [^7]

The Islamic ideology has released Man from “defying people” such as
worshipping monarchs and dynasties. This habit was prevented by some
ancient nations like ancient Egyptians. Islam has abolished the theories
of discrimination against any one on the basis of race or language or
color or wealth or power. The measure of superiority is restricted
within moral matters which are piety and virtue, Allah “be exalted” Has
said: (O you men!

Surely we have created you of a male and a female and made you tribes
and nations that you may know each other, surely the most honorable of
you with Allah is the one among you most pious! Surely Allah is knowing
aware)[^8]

Islam has preceded the French revolution in announcing the doctrine of
liberty with ten centuries.

Ameeral Mu’amineen Ali (A.S.) says in one of his sermons (O people,
Adam has not born a slave or a girl maid all people are free…) [^9]

But Islam has not made this granted freedom for Man unlimited so that
man is free to do whatever he wishes. Rather it set controllers and
curbs for freedom least it results in anarchy.

Hence, the difference between the Islamic ideology, which connects
human freedom with slavery to Allah and the conscious and voluntary
submission to His authority and between the legislation which throw Man
in amazement that doesn’t accord with his ability and his nature.

From this, there must be a balance between freedom and servitude, there
is no a balance in this concern which releases Man’s energies and
preserves his nature at the same time but what we find in Islam; a
servitude to Allah and liberty from other servitudes, these slave’s
freedom does not become complete except through his servitude to Allah,
his servitude to Allah does not become complete except through his
freedom from worshipping other than Him, so there is a clear balance and
consistency between the social side and the tiducial side in the
character of Moslem through the way of freedom as Islam views it.[^10]

In the light of what has preceded, the ideology settles a basic truth
which is the essence of the true freedom is the servitude to Allah
because it means the freedom from all deviated authorities while in the
servitude to Allah there is not any disgrace for human’s dignity rather
it, on the contrary, consolidates his character and protects his
dignity.

The prophet “s.w.a.” has been proud of his being a slave of Allah, he
liked to be called the slave of Allah and refused the exaltation, which
may lead to the false deity, as it had happened to “Ahlil Kitaab”
(Christians and Jews) in spite of Allah’s warning them not to raise the
personalities of their prophets, Allah said: “O followers of the Book!
Don’t exceed the limits in your religion and don’t speak (lies) against
Allah but speak the truth the Messiah Isa son of Maryam is only an
apostle of Allah and His word, which he communicated to Maryam and a
spirit from Him…” [^11]

The School of “Ahlil Bait” (A.S.) refuses strongly the idea of
apotheosizing people through concentrating on the feature of servitude
for sometimes…

Ameeralmu’amineen Ali (A.S.) said “I am the slave of Allah and the
brother of His prophet” [^12]Alimaam Alreza (A.S.) said: “I am proud of
being Allah’s slave”[^13]. The idea of apothessizing people has been
prevailing among other nations then it sneaked to the followers of
heavenly religions and mixed with the beliefs of some of them.


Christianity for example claims AlMasseiah’s deity, Judaism claims that
Auzair is the son of Allah!

Therefore Imam Ali’s wisdom and foresight becomes clear in his
concentration on the feature of “servitude” and his challenge to
withstand all the claims of exaggeration which attributed him to deity.
It is narrated in “Hadeeth” that “some people came to Ameeral mu’amineen
(A.S.) and said: Salutations be to you, our God! He called them to
repent but they didn’t, he dug for them a hole, he kindled fire in it
then he dug another hole beside it and connected them when they didn’t
repent he threw them down in the hole and kindled fire in the other hole
till they died. [^14]

In this concern he said: “In me two kinds of men perished an
exaggerating lover and an extravagant hater” [^15]

Secondly: The Islamic ideology has released Moslem from his lusts after
it has connected his heart with Allah and the next abode and it didn’t
connect him with his wishes and caprices. The Islamic ideology has
supplied the Moslem’s mind and will with the protective immunity from
deviation or preferring the transient world to the remaining everlasting
life. The spirit –according to Ahlilbait’s instructions- is the place of
danger, so it took most of their attentions.

Thus, we find that the speech about the “spirit”, the necessity of
controlling it, occupies a vast area of Ameeral Mu’amineen’s sayings,
maxims and preachments, he didn’t miss any chance without speaking about
the “soul” because it is the pivot of the mill in building the human
being.

The Holy Qur’an has told us: “Allah has never changed a favor which He
has conferred upon a people until they changed their own
conditions”[^16], so what is noteworthy is that Imam Ali (A.S.)-during
the days of his just government- was ordering his governors and leaders
to take control over their wishes, although he has chosen them precisely
from virtue and that most of them had a recommended merits,

from alter he (A.S.) wrote to Alashtar when he appointed him as a
governor of Egypt: “this is what Abdullah Ameeralmu’amineen ordered
Maalik bin AlHaarith Alashtar…he ordered him to fear Allah and to prefer
His obedience… he ordered him to break his devotion to lusts…as the
spirit longs for evils, except what Allah’s mercy helps…so take control
over your wishes, keep your wishes back of what is not permitted to you
as taking control of the spirit is the equity of what she loves and
hates and feel sympathy to your subject. [^17]

From a commandment to Shureih Ibna Haani, one of his millitary leaders
when he appointed him on the vanguard of his army to Alsham: “…know that
if you don’t hold yourself back from so much of what you like your
wishes will guide you to so much damage. So would you prevent yourself
and deter it..”[^18].

From a letter he wrote to Muaweia, he uncovered to him the secret of
his mutiny against the legal leadership i-e his psychological
deviations, he said to him- your spirit (wishes) has driven you in
evils, pushed into sin, has led you to perils and has guided you through
rough passageways” [^19]

Psychological deviation has serious consequences especially from those
who take power without legality and qualification.

“Ahlilbait” with their known infallibility were asking Allah to help
them take conrol over their wishes in order to teach and refine others”
some of what is cited in a supplication of Imam Zeinala’abideen (A.S.)
“…And weaken our strength to do what enrages you to us, do not let our
souls alone with its choice as it chooses false option except what You
help, longs for evil except what you lead with Your mercy”. [^20]

from all that we deduce that Man cannot be built except by taking
control over the soul “wishes” about which we will speak later.

Thirdly: the Islamic ideology has released Man from worshipping nature
and sanctifying its phenomenon, and fear of it, Allah says: “of His
signs night and day, sun and moon don’t kneel to the sun and to the
moon…” [^21]

Man has passed through the stage of confusion, inquiry and fear of the
phenomenon of nature about him, he does not know any thing of its
secrets and changes of its conditions so he began to sanctify it and
sacrifised to it generously thinking that- he can feel safe of its
bursting volcanos, destructive earthquakes, sweeping floods and its
burning thunder bolts.

So the ideology worked towards purifying minds of their veils, opened
the vast way to make use of nature and to make peace with it when it
removed the thick veils between Man and nature, it has became clear to
him that nature and what it includes of creatures and happiness are all
emanated from Allah (be exalted),

they are exploited creatures to serve him, he (Man) has nothing to do
but to make use of them, think of them and their origin in order to
reach through them to the Creator: “will they not then consider the
camels, how they are created? And the heaven how it is reared aloft, and
the mountains how they are firmly fixed and the earth how it is made a
vast expanse? [^22]

We must point out here that the procedure of the ideology in building
human being is a “comprehensive procedure” it arranges Man’s
relationship with himself, his creator, and nature around him. Every
establishment or development in the relationship between man and his
Creator will be reflected positively on the relationship between Man and
nature, which is drudged by the hands of Allah.

So it grants the faithful man with blessings and benevolences. Hence
the prophet “Hood” asked his people –who had deviated from the procedure
of Heaven so it didn’t rain for three years till they were about to
perish- to ask Allah’s forgiveness for their past sins and to repent to
Him by correcting their course and arranging their relation with Allah
(be exalted) then their relation with nature will be organized and it
will grant them with rain and benevolences he said to them: “And, O my
people’ ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him, He will send on
you clouds pouring down abundance of rain and add strength to your
strength, and don’t turn back guilty” [^23]

So, real worship should be to Allah alone, fear should be of guilts,
which cause Allah’s rage and revenge, so He uses nature as a means to
punishment, as Allah Has drowned pheroons into the sea, send the
destructive wind which damaged the people of Aaad. Hence we find that
most of the punishments which afflicted infidels had been fulfilled by
the powers of nature which reveals to us the correlative relationship
between Man an nature,

in this concern Imam Al-Baaqir says: “we have found in the Book of the
prophet (S.W.A)…when people abstain from praying “Zakaat” earth abstains
its blessings such as plants, fruits and metals”[^24] His son Imam
Alsaadiq (A.S.) says “when adultry spreads out earthquicks appear, when
“Zakaat” is not paid cattle perish, when judges decide unjustly rain
doesn’t come down from heaven…”[^25]

In brief, human fear must coneentrate on sins and misbehavior, which
cause the destruction of societies and prevent heavenly blessings. As to
the fear of nature, the belief that some of its phenomenons are evils
which don’t harmonize with the worldly prevalent order firstly and with
its wisdom and justice secondly it is originated from their limitedly
narrow viewpoint to these issues.

Had they looked out to these incidents in the framework of the
universal common order they would have given in to the idea that they
are all good things. At the first look these incidents appear to be evil
and disastrous, but he who contemplates deeply finds that they are
motives for good and reform and they are not outside wisdom, justice and
order.

Dealing in detail with the subject of the philosophy of evils and
aflictions in this world is related to the (Scholastic theology) but
what is connected with our research we reemphasize that the Islamic
ideology has restored the molding of man’s mind towards the nature
around him in a way which makes him much freer, more interacting and
feeling in peace with it.

Fourthly: releasing Man from legendries and myths in belief and
behavior in order to eradicate the fantastic deterrents, which prevent
the right use of the energy the mind. Man in the pre-Islamic era e.g.
had been regarding a good or a bad omen of the movements of bird, so he
went optimistically to do some thing when bird takes the right direction
and retreats and gives up the work when the bird takes the left
direction. The class of parsons and diviners occupy the position of
forefront in the social ladder and were cheating people by claiming that
they know the unseen.

Telling bad omen were chaining people with the ropes of fanaticism and
prevent them from work and traveling, also the use of “azlaam” i-e if
one wants to do something he takes three arrows writing on one of them
(do) on the second (do not do) and leave the third free he stretches his
hand to take one of them,

if the first comes out he advances to his work, when he hits the second
he does not do this work if the third comes out he repeats once again!
Magic also has been prevalent among people foreshadowing a serious evil,
the Islamic ideology made war against these phenomenons, it has been a
cause for opening the minds and elevation of spirits and to bring people
out of the darknesses of illusion and legendry to the light of science
and truth.

The prophet (S.W.A.) said: “ he is not of us who sees an evil omen or
is told about evil omen, and he who foretold or was foretold, or made
magic or was made to him[^26]. He (A.S.) also said that He who gives up
his work because of bad omen is a polytheist. [^27]

Al Imam Alsaadiq (A.S.) said: “ bad omen is as you consider, if you
regard it unimportant it becomes as such, if you regard it serious it
becomes as such, if you regard it nothing it becomes as such too” [^28]

From another side the Islamic ideology released the Moslem’s mind from
the deductions of soothsayers as it considered a soothsayer like a
foreteller, both of them try to restrict Man’s movement in life and to
cheat his mind.

It is related from Abdilmalik bin A’ayon that he said: I said to
Abiabdula (A.S.): I have been afflicted with this science-he means
divinations- so when I look in the horoscope and I see the horoscope of
evil I sit down and don’t go and if I see the horoscope of good luck I
go to fulfill what I need he said to me: do you gain your need? I said:
yes he said to me burn your books”[^29]

We must state here that the Divine school of Ahlilbait (A.S.) does not
criticize the stars as a natural science Man can discover by it the
features of the sky which shadows him in order to discover through that
the greatness of the creator, but it finds fault with these who claim
that they know through them (stars) the unseen future.

One of the witnesses which reflects Ahlilbait’s striving to release
Moslem human being from the habit of soothtelling which remained to a
late centuries, what Ameeralmu’amineen said to some of his companions
when he decided to setup to confront “Khawaarij” as it is said to him!
If you setup in this time we fear that you will miss your aim through
the science of stars.

He (A.S.) said: “Do you claim that you guide to the hour where every
one set up would avoid evil? And you threaten of the hour where every
one sets up would suffer damage? He who believes you, then, has accused
Qur’an of telling lie and has dispensed with depending on Allah in
getting the wanted and getting of evil…. Then he (A.S.) turned to people
and said:

O people’ beware of knowing the science of sooth telling except what is
used to know the directions in land and sea- till he said to them- go on
depending on Allah (be exalted). [^30]


