Knowledge and Faith
===================

It worthies stating that the ideology connects knowledge with faith, as
knowledge without faith is like a plant without fruit. Knowledge calls
to faith and faith prompts to knowledge. To separate one from the other
leads to serious dangers. The martyr Murtaza Mutaharri says:

“Historical practices proved that separating knowledge from faith had
resulted in damages which couldn’t be made up, faith must be known in
the light of knowledge faith draws for a way from legends in the light
of knowledge. By separating knowledge from faith, faith changed into
languidness and blind fanaticism,

moving Quickly round itself without reaching anywhere. In the place
which is empty of science and knowledge the ignorant believers are
turned into a tool at the hand of the big hypocrites and this was what
we had seen of the examples of “Khawaarij” in the first period of Islam
and the following ages in different forms.

Knowledge without faith is a torch at the hand of a thief at midnight
to steal the best merchandise, so the person of knowledge without faith
today doesn’t differ from the ignorant person without faith yesterday in
the least difference concerning the nature of manners, practices and
their essence” [^81]

So knowledge needs faith as the body needs spirit because knowledge
alone is unable -by its nature-to build the perfect human being, pure
scientific education builds a half human not a perfect human, it can
make a human being who may be powerful and able but he is not
necessarily virtuous, it creates a human being with one dimension which
the material dimension. As to faith it molds one’s personality in its
different dimensions.

Europeans’ deception by science has reached the limit of deification
and worshipping although they did not perform its rituals in their
churches and because religion depends on unseen foundations outside the
extent of material they considered it to be an unscientific
phenomenon.

On this basis the disease of separation between religion and knowledge
appeared, this is a strange inclination to Islam “Nothing gives more
evidence to this cohesion between religion and science than this urgent
call by religion to get knowledge and to get more of it in all stages of
the age and in all circumstances… and from this high evaluation of
knowledge and Scholars by religion.

If there had been a conflict between religion and science in some eras
of history, as it happened with the history of Christianity, that
conflict had no connection with religion. Rather it had been a sort of
deviation from religion, and religion is not responsible for the
deviations people commit by its name” [^82]

It is sorrowful that some voices rise here and there calling to
separate religion from knowledge on the pretext that Europe had shun
religion then it developed and we adhered to religion we failed. The
minds of those people are either incapable of realizing the function of
science which is a tool to uncover the objective truths and to give a
neutral,

precise and deep interpretation of the reality, or that those minds are
ignorant of the Islamic procedure which doesn’t cease to inspire people
to get knowledge. Most probably that they are mercenaried minds echoing
the allegations of the grudged enemies of Islam and they overlook the
serious spiritual results which stemmed from separating science from
religion:

“The clearest example of that is the age in which we live, the age in
which the scientific and material development has reached its summit,
and in which humanity had reached its lowest point in brutal fighting
and enmity which severs the relations of humanity and makes it live in a
lasting horror and fear of destruction, as it also has reached the
lowest level in their depiction of the aims of life and the raise d’être
of humanity restricting them to lust and enjoyments, reaching its lowest
level -as a result of that thinking- of moral corruption and sexual
disorder from which the animal abstains.”[^83]

So the procedures of education bear a big obligation to the Islamic
ideology for its insistence on the role of faith and knowledge in
building Man’s personality. By separating knowledge from faith Man
becomes like a magnetic needle swinging between the north and the south;
therefore he needs a power which can stimulate a revolution in his
conscience and give him a moral course that can actualize his humanity,
this is a task which science can not perform without religion.

[^1] Al-Nissa’a 4:28, Al-Ma’arech 70:19 Al-Ahzaab 33:72, Al-Anbei’a
21:37, Al-Alaq 96: 6.

[^2] Al-Baqarah 2: 286.

[^3] Al-Khisal by Al-Sadook, p. 417, chapter of number nine.


[^4] Kanzel Ummal by Al-Muttaki Al-Hindi, vol. 4, p. 233.

[^5] Manlaa Yahzurul Fakeeh 4: 31 the chapter of punishments Daar Saaub
pub. 140, h…

[^6] Alkhisal: 33 chapter of No.2”-the society of teachers-Qum.

[^7] The role of the Religion in Man’s life, Sheikh Aasefei: 50 Dar
Alta’aruf pub:2.

[^8] Al-Hujuraat [49:13].

[^9] Forou’a elkaafii 8: 69- Darsaamb 3rd pub.

[^10] The features of Moslem’s character, Dr. Yahya Ferghul: 79-80 Al
Maktabba alasreiah publications, pub. 1399 h.

[^11] Alnissa’a 4: 271.

[^12] Kenzel aumaal 13: h’a 36410.

[^13] Behaar elanwar 49:129.

[^14] Wassaeil alsheiah 18: 552 Dar ehiaal turaathil arabi pub. 5

[^15] nehjilbalagha! Subhi alsaalih 558/ hikam 469.

[^16] Anfaal 8: 53.


[^17] Nehjilbalagha: Subhi Alssaalih 427.

[^18] Nehjilbalagha: 447.

[^19] Nehjil balaghah: 390.

[^20] Fizelaalilsaheefah alsajjadeia, sheikh Mughneia: 100 Dar alta’aruf
pub.2.

[^21] Al-Ghaasheia 88: 17-20

[^23] Hood 11: 52.

[^24] Ausoulilkaafi 2: 374/2 ketaab aleimaan walkufur Dar Saub.

[^25] Alkhesaal: Alsheikh alsadouk 1-2:242/ baab alarba’a’a publication
of Jamm’aat almudereeseen the year 1403 h.

[^26] kanzel aumaal 10: 113.

[^27] Kanzel aumaal 10: 113.

[^28] Wassaeil Alshee’a: 8:262.

[^29] Wassaeil Alshee’a: 8: 268.

[^30] Al Mahajjah albaizaa, Alkaashaani 1: 172, ketab aleilim ala’alemi
foundation pub: 2.

[^31] The same previous sourse.

[^32] Ausoulil Kaafi 1:11, Ketaab Alakil wal jahaal

[^33] Alzukruf: 43: 22.

[^34] Alzukruf: 43: 23.

[^35] Yunous: 10: 78.

[^36] Alzukhruf 43: 24.

[^37] Alma’aeidah 5: 104.

[^38] Ala’araaf 7: 20.

[^39] Al-Shu’ar’a 26: 74.

[^40] Alzukhruf 43: 25.

[^41] Aaliamraan 3: 190-191.

[^42] Alzaareyaat 51: 21-22.

[^43] Younus 10: 101.

[^44] Altaarek 86: 5-6.

[^45] Abasah 80: 24.

[^46] Alghasheia 88: 17-21.

[^47] A’al Imraan 3: 190-191.

[^48] Consult Alkeshshaaf Alzamakhshari 1: 453.

[^49] Nehjilbalaagha, Subhi alsaalih 270-271.

[^50] Almu’aminoon: 23: 115.

[^51] Aldukhaan 44: 38- 39. Aldukhaan 44: 38- 39.

[^52] Ausoul alkaafi 2: 55/ 3 the Book of faith infidelity.

[^53] Tenbeehil Khawaatir, the prince , Warraam ibnaabi farraas 1: 250,
chapter of thinking, saaub pub.

[^54] Aali Aumraan 3:137.

[^55] Alan’aam 6: 6.

[^56] Younus 10: 13.

[^57] Alahzaab 33: 62.

[^58] The role of religion in Man’s life, Sheikh Ala’aseffi 121-122,
Darel taa’aruf pub.2.

[^59] behaar elanwaar 71: 325, almahaasin: 26.

[^60] Kenzel aumaal 16:205.

[^61] Nehjiel balagha: Subhi Alsaalih: 290.

[^62] Nehjil balagha: 296-297.

[^63] Nehjil balaghah: 393-394.

[^64] Albakarrah 2: 179.

[^65] Almaeidah 5: 6.

[^66] Manlaayahzurahul fakeeh 3: 369.

[^67] Meezaanil hikmah 8:254 from Tergheeb and terheeb 3: 341.

[^68] Mohammad 47: 24.

[^69] Albagharah 2: 111, An-Naml: 27: 64.

[^70] Alkeshshaaf: 1: 178.

[^71] Amaali Altoosi: 625/ 1292, Alba’atha foundation, Behaarel anwaar
39: 239/ 28.

[^72] Alzumar : 9: 39.

[^73] Almijaadalah: 11: 58.

[^74] Taaha: 20: 114.

[^75] Faatir 35: 28.

[^76] Aalaumraan 3: 187.

[^77] Kanzel U’maal 10: 131/ 28655.

[^78] Nahjil balaagha, Subhi Al-Salih: 482/ saying 81.

[^79] Nehjilbalagha: 496/ saying 147.

[^80] Look up: Menhaj alterbeia Aleslaameia: Mohammad Kutub 119, Dar
Damascus pub.2.

[^81] man and faith: the martyr Murtaza Mutahhiri 1: 15 published by
Ershaad Islami ministry.

[^82] The role of religion in Man’s life, Shakh Ala’asifi,
69-Darelta’aruf pub.2.

[^83] Menhaj Al-Tarbiyah Al-Islamiyah, by Mohammad Qutb, p. 115.


