Chapter Two : the Social and Educational Bulding
================================================

The Islamic ideology had played a big role on the level of the social
and educational building, one can state it in the following points:

**Firstly: Agitating the social feeling:**

Man before Islam was concentrating upon himself in his social behavior,
he sets up in his communications with others through the view point of
his desires and interests, driven far away with his selfishness. He had
fallen down in his social behavior to the degree of burying his newborn
gird alive for fear from poverty and starvation. This matter required
the divine intervention to rescue the innocent souls from this ugly
social habit, Allah (be exalted) says: “Don’t kill your children for
fear of poverty”[^1]

The thing which draws one’s attention mostly is that pre-Islamic man
who was moving around himself and his interests had become after his
interaction with the elixir of belief ready to sacrifice himself and
every precious thing he has for the sake of his religion and society,
the horizons of change in his spirit had reached the level at which he
prefers the interests of his society to his own interests.

The level of altruism which the “Ansaar” (proponants) showed to the
“Muhajireen” (emigrants) is very clear to every one, as they shared them
with every thing they possessed even with their homes and wares, this
level of alturism had not been restricted to some individuals, rather it
represented a social phenomenon that the history of humanity had not
witnessed its like at all. In this phenomenon Qur’an verses were
revealed from Heaven blessing this compassion, commemorating a society
qualified with it as an example of social coherence and brother
hood…Allah (be exalted) Has said:

“It is for the poor who fled, those who were driven from their homes
and their possessions, seeking grace of Allah and His pleasure and
assisting Allah and His Apostle: these it is that are the truthful, and
those who made their abode in the city and faith before them love those
who have fled to them and don’t find in their hearts a need of what they
are given, and prefer (them) before themselves though poverty may
afflict them, and whoever is preserved from the niggard liness of his
soul, these it is that are the successful ones” [^2]

Islam pulls down foundations in the social pre-Islamic building which
consolidate the classical and tribal partition, which consisted of two
basic classes, the class of the nobles and the class of slaves. The
class of nobles should remain as such: wealths are collected at their
hands! They monopolize stature and prominence.

Whereas those of the class of slaves should remain as self moving in
the orbit of their Lord…so Islam tore out these bases and established
other bases that put people equal in one level in the right of life and
stature Allah (be exalted) says: “O you men! Surely we have created you
of a male and a female, and made you tribes and families that you may
know each other, surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the most
pious.” [^3]

So those people in the class of slaves had been released and enjoyed
their right in life. Ammar, Selmaan, and Belaal rose to higher level
than the class of nobles of Qureish which were still wandering in the
aberrations of ignorance such as Alwaleed bin Almugheera, Hishaam Ibnal
Hakam and Abbisuffian and the like…

Even funds and money are no more a monopoly to rich people in order to
be wealthier, Allah (be exalted) Has said: “Whatever Allah has restored
to His Apostle from the people of the towns, it is for Allah and for the
Apostle and for the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the
wayfarers, so that it may not be a thing taken by turns among the rich
of you, and whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever
he forbids you keep back, and be careful of your duty to Allah: surely
Allah is severe in retributing evil” [^4]

**The manners of growing the social feeling:**

The Islamic ideology has grown the social feeling with the individual
by several means some of them are as follows:

A- awakening the feeling of responsibility to- wards others:

Through the Qur’anic emphasis on one’s responsibility towards himself
and others such His saying: “And stop them for they shall be questioned”
[^5]and His saying: “ O you who believe! Save your selves and your
families from a fire whose fuel are men and stones…” [^6]

And the prophet’s saying: “I am responsible and you are responsible as
well” [^7]

And his saying (S.W.A.): “certainly everyone of you is in change and he
is responsible for his subjects, the leader of people is in charge and
he is responsible for his subjects; the man is in charge of his family
and he is responsible for them; the woman is in charge of her husband’s
house and his sons and she is responsible for them…” [^8]

Ameeralmu’amineen (A.S.) says: “Fear Allah in his servants and cities
as you are responsible for even lands and beasts..” [^9]

In a comparative view point to the social positive decrees we find that
these decrees have been based on the individual responsibility in this
life only and supporting this responsibility with a legal supporters
such as depriving of freedom, or torture, or financial penalty or
dismissal from work, or rewarding with money or upgrading in office… and
the like, and with social supporters such as confidence and no
confidence, and evaluation or disgracing.

As to the Islamic doctrine, it is not restricted to the individual’s
responsibility for the society in which he lives in this life. Rather
Islam develops in the individual the feeling of great responsibility to
the Great Creator in another life. This prompts him to the voluntary
restriction of his wishes and to have the social feeling towards others
a part from the law, tradition or conscience because conscience may fail
to confront the instincts when the religious belief is lost. Further, it
is difficult to secure social observation in every place, where and at
all times, so this inner observation can not be obtained except in the
religious ideology.

Developing the spirit of sacrifice and altruism Qur’an has urged to
practice altruism and celebrated the spirit of sacrifice which Moslems
manifested.

So when Ali Ebna Abi Taalib (A.S.) slept on the bed of the prophet
(S.W.A.) sacrificing himself for him preferring his life to his own,
Allah celebrated this sacrificing unrivaled position so He revealed (And
among men is he who sells himself to seek the contentment of Allah; and
Allah is affectionate to the slaves” [^10]

Alfakhr Alraazi says “it is revealed in the concern of Ali Ibna Abi
Taalib (A.S.) he slept in the bed of the prophet the night the prophet
had left to the cave. It is narrated that when Ali (A.S.) slept in the
bed of the prophet (S.W.A.) Gibraeil (A.S.) stood at his head and
Michaeil at his legs and Gibraeil shouts: it is great! Who is like you
the son of Abbi Taalib Allah boasts off you with His angels, then the
verse was revealed”.[^11]

The prophetic bibliography introduced the excellent example in this
concern. It is narrated that the prophet (S.W.A) had not satisfied for
three successive days at all till he departed this world if he would
like he could satisfy but he preferred other to himself” [^12]

The results of this prophetic behavior appeared clearly in the behavior
of his progeny “Ahlilbait” (A.S.) who were following his procedure and
walk in his steps and translate his ideals into real practice.

It is narrated from Mohammad bin Ka’ab Alqurzi that he said: I heard
Ali Ibna Abi Taalib (A.S.) saying:

“I so often fasten a stone to my stomach because of hunger while my
“Sadaqa” (i-e money I give to the poor people) reaches four thousands
Dinaars” [^13]

All that because he preferred others to himself and preferred their
interests to his own interests.

Abul Anwaar- a shirts seller- said: Ali Ibna Abi Taalib came to me with
his boy he bought two shirts, then said to his servant “chose what you
wish” he took one of them and Ali took the other and wore it”[^14]

One of the evidences of that big social change which the Islamic
ideology in a short time could create is that:

A head of a sheep was presented to one of the prophet’s companions he
said:

My brother Mr. X- is more in need for that than us he sent it to him,
it continued to be sent by one to another till seven persons circulated
it till finally it returned to the first person” [^15]

In this way the Islamic ideology educates the Moslem to have a social
feeling especially one’s feeling towards others, so he exceeds the field
of the self to a circle which is wider, it is the circle of the family.
Then his concerns extend to include the circle of neighbor hood, then
the inhabitants of his country, and then the circle of his nation, then
it finally extends to include the whole humanity.


