The Third Chapter : the Psychological Bulding
=============================================

Every ideology has an effect on its believer which motivates him to a
kind of actions and behavior, the belief in Allah (be exalted) for
Moslems had deep influences which had their practical results in he
general life, we can point out some of them briefly:

**Firstly: tranquility of the soul:**

The faithful human finds in his ideology tranquility in spite of the
storms of accidents around him. It protects him from anxiety and
tension, creates for him psychological environment full of tranquility
and hope even though he lives in an unstable or dangerous environment.

The history of Islam recites to us countless examples of that state.
Although the first Moslems were living difficult conditions, as there
were the successive wars which Qureish and her allies made and the
economical embargo, social seclusion and psychological pressures which
accompanied those wars, they were enjoying high moral, plunging into
fight with tranquil spirit hoping Allah’s reward and mercy.

It is related from Annas that the prophet of Allah (S.W.A.) said on the
Day of Badre “Advance to a paradise whose expansion is like that of
earth and heavens”.

Aumair Ibnal hammam Alansaari said: O prophet of Allah’ Paradise whose
expansion is like that of earth and heavens? The prophet (S.W.A) said:
Yes, he said: excellent, excellent, No the prophet of Allah, by Allah, I
must be one of its inhabitants, the prophet (S.W.A.): certainly you are
one of its people “

He drew out some dates and began to eat them, then he said: If I lived
till I eat these dates it is then a long life, so he threw out the
remnant of his dates, he plunged into the battle and fought till he was
martyred.[^1]

The environment in which this “mujaahid” was living was dangerous, he
was living in the incidents the war of Badre but his psychological
environment was happy as he hopes to live in a paradise whose width is
like that of earth and heaven.

So the Moslem due to the ideology of belief in Allah (be exalted) feels
content and reassured to the accidents taking place around him; he
reconciles himself to Allah’s fate and will, as the disaster which
afflicts him in the present time may change into a blessing. The Holy
Qur’an cultivates this feeling and makes it grow in believer’s soul,
Allah (be exalted) Has said: “it may be that you dislike a thing while
it is good for you, and it may be that you love a thing while it is evil
for you, and Allah’s know while you don’t know.” [^2]

The hadeeths of Ahlilbait (A.S.) deepen this feeling in the spirits of
Moslems, Ameeralmu’amineen (A.S.) sent a letter to Ebnaabbaas says: I
have not got benefit of a speech after the speech of the prophet
(S.W.A.) as I have got from this speech he (A.S.) says: “one may feel
happy for getting what he shouldn’t miss, and may feel sorry for missing
what he should not obtain, so let your happiness be with what you have
got of your next life and your feeling sorry for what you have missed of
it”. [^3]

It is right that the ordinary man naturally submits to disappointment
and despair when he is afflicted with calamities as the Qur’an points
that out frankly by Allah’s saying: “when he is afflicted with calamity
he is disappointed and hopeless” [^4]…”And if we make man taste mercy
from us then we take it off from him; most surely he is despairing
ungrateful”[^5]. But the faithful human, armed with belief is sober in
misfortunes, tolerant in calamities, and suspicion doesn’t find away to
his soul: “Surely none despairs of Allah’s mercy except the unbelieving
people”[^6]

The leader of the monotheists (A.S.) describes the associates of Allah
(be exalted) saying: “…when they are afflicted with successive
calamities they seek a refuge with You knowing that the reins of matters
are at Your Hands, and their resources spring from Your fate” [^7]

It is noticeable that at the time which Ameeralmu’amineen insists on
that one should not become despaired of Allah’s mercy, he insists in his
highly educational instructions on being despaired of what is at the
hands of people in order that one becomes completely dependant on his
Lord and not to be a burden on others’ backs Ali (A.S.) says “The
biggest wealth is in being despaired of what is at others’ hands” [^8]


