First Sermon
============

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

All Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and the Maker of
all creation, and may Peace and benedictions be upon His servant and
messenger, His beloved and elect, our master, our prophet, and our sire,
Abul Qasim Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his pure, immaculate, and
infallible Progeny. I seek the refuge of Allah from the accursed
Satan.

So for their breaking their compact We cursed them and made their
hearts hard; they would pervert the words from their meanings. and they
forgot a portion of what they were reminded of. (5:13)

Our discussion here concerns the misrepresentations (tahrifat) relating
to the historic event of Karbala'. There have occurred various kinds of
distortions in recounting the details of this great event. We shall
carry out this discussion in four parts. The first will deal with the
meaning of tahrif and its various existing forms, while pointing out
that such misrepresentations have occurred in the [popular] accounts of
the historic episode of 'Ashura'. The second part deals with the general
factors responsible for tahrif, that is, the causes which commonly lead
to the distortion of events and issues in the world. Why do men
misrepresent and distort events, issues, and, occasionally,
personalities? In particular, what factors have played a distorting role
in the narrative of the episode of Karbala'? The third part consists of
an explanation concerning the distortions that have crept into the
narratives of this historic event. The fourth part deals with our duty,
that of the scholars and the Muslim masses, in this regard.

The first part of this discussion is about the meaning of tahrif: What
does tahrif mean? The Arabic word tahrif is derived from harrafa
meaning, to slant, incline, alter, distort, misconstrue which means to
make something depart from its original or proper course and position.
In other words, tahrif is a kind of change and alteration, though it
includes a sense not possessed by mere change and alteration. If you do
something that prevents a sentence, message, verse, or passage from
conveying the meaning that it ought to convey and gives it some other
sense, you have subjected it to tahrif. For instance, you make a
statement before someone. Elsewhere he quotes you, and later on you are
told that so-and-so has reported that you have made such a statement.
You find out that what you had said was very different from what he has
reported.

He has interpolated your statement, deleting words which conveyed your
intent and adding others on his own account, with the result that your
statements have been distorted and totally altered. Then you would say
that this person has misrepresented your statements Especially, if
someone tampers with an official document, he is said be guilty of
causing tahrif in it These examples were meant to elucidate the meaning
of the term tahrif, and it does not need any further explanation or
clarification. Now we shall take up the different forms of tahrif.

There are various kinds of tahrif, the most important of which are
tahrif in words and tahrif of meaning. Tahrif of wording occurs when the
literal form of a statement is changed. For instance, when words and
phrases are deleted or added to a statement or the sequence of sentences
is altered in such a manner as to change its meaning. In this case
tahrif occurs in the outward form and wording of a statement.

Tahrif of meaning occurs when one does not change the words, which
remain in their original form, but the statement is interpreted in a
manner that is contrary to the intent of its speaker. It is interpreted
in such a manner as to express one's own intent, not that of its
author.

The Noble Qur'an employs the term tahrif specifically in relation to
the Jews. A study of history shows that they have been the champions of
tahrif throughout the course of history. I don't know what kind of race
this is that has such an amazing penchant for misrepresenting facts!
Accordingly they always take up professions in which they can distort
and misrepresent events. From what I have heard, the world's well-known
news agencies, which are perpetually quoted by the radios and
newspapers, are exclusively in the hands of the Jews. Why? Because they
can report the events as they wish. How amazing is the Qur'an's
statement about them! This characteristic of the Jews, the tendency for
tahrif, is considered a racial trait by the Qur'an. In one of the verses
of the Sura al-baqarah, the Qur'an declares:

Are you then eager that they (i.e. the Jews) should believe in you,
while a party of them had heard Allah's word, and then consciously
misinterpreted it, after they had understood it, and did that knowingly?
(2:75) 1

This means, 'O Muslims, have you pinned your hopes on their telling you
the truth? They are the same people who would go along with Moses, and
hear God's pronouncements. But by the time they returned to their
people's midst to recount what they had heard, they would twist it out
of shape.' The tahrif that they would carry out was not for the reason
that they did not understand and so altered what they reported. No! They
are an intelligent people and they understand matters the issues very
well. But despite the fact that they understand what they have heard
they would recount them in a distorted manner for the people. This is
what tahrif is, that is, distorting and twisting things out of their
original shape-and they carried out tahrif even in Divine scriptures!

In this context, in most of the cases the Qur'an uses the very term
tahrif or expresses the matter in some other manner. However, the
exegetes have pointed out that the Qur'anic reference to tahrif in this
context includes tahrif in wording as well as in meaning. That is, some
of the instances of corruption that have occurred [in the scriptures at
the hands of the Jews] relating to the wording and some of them relate
to the meanings and interpretation. As this involves a digression from
my main topic, I do not wish to discuss this matter any further.

There is a story which would not out of place here. One of the scholars
used to recount that once during the day of his youth a maddah 2 from
Tehran was visiting Mashhad. During the day he would stand in the
Gawharshad Mosque or in the courtyard of the shrine and recite verses
and eulogies. Among things that he recited was the famous ghazal
ascribed to Hafiz:

O heart! Be slave of the world's King and rejoice!

Forever dwell in the shelter of God's grace!

Embrace the tomb of Rida, the Eighth Imam,

From the heart's depth, and cling to the threshold of his shrine
(bargah).

This gentleman, in order to have some fun with him, had approached him
and said to him, "Why do you recite this verse wrongly? It should be
read like this, which means, as soon as you reach the shrine you must
throw yourself down in the manner a bundle of straw (barekah) is rolled
off the back of an ass. Thereafter, whenever the poor maddah recited
these verses, he would say bar-e kah instead of bargah and at the same
time throw himself down on the ground! This is what tahrif does!

Here I must point out that tahrif also differs in respect of the
subject involved. There is a time when tahrif occurs in an ordinary
speech, as when two persons misrepresent each other's words. But there
are times when tahrif takes place in a matter of great significance to
society, such as when there is misrepresentation of eminent
personalities. There are personalities whose words and deeds represent a
sacred authority for the people and whose character and conduct is a
model for mankind. For instance, if someone were to ascribe to Imam 'Ali
(a) a statement that he did not make or something that he had not meant
to say, that is very dangerous. The same is true if a characteristic or
trait is ascribed to the Prophet (S) or one of the Imams ('a) when in
fact they had some other qualities, or when tahrif occurs in a great
historic event which serves as a moral and religious authority and as a
momentous document from the viewpoint of society's norms and is a
criterion in matters of morality and education. It is a matter of
incalculable ,importance and entails a crucial danger when
tahrif-whether in respect of words or meaning-occurs in subjects which
are not of the ordinary kind.

There is a time when someone tampers with a verse of Hafiz or makes
interpolations in an animal fable. This is not so important, though, of
course one should not tamper with books of literary value.

One professor wrote a paper about Mush-o gorbeh ("The Cat and the
Mouse"), which is a book of considerable literary value. He had found
that it had been victim of so many interpolations, changes of wording,
addition and deletion of verses, as to be beyond reckoning. There, he
remarks that in his opinion no nation in the whole world is so
untrustworthy as the Iranians who have made such extensive unauthorized
interpolations in works belonging to their literary heritage. The same
is true of Rumi's Mathnavi. God knows how many verses have been appended
to the Mathnawi! For instance, there is a fine couplet in the original
versions of the Mathnawi about the power of love. It says:

Love sweetens matters bitter,

Love turns bronzes into gold.

That is a sensible thing to say: love is something that turns even the
bitter aspects of life into ones that are sweet and pleasant. Love, like
an elixir, transforms the bronze of man's being into gold. Then others
came and added verses to this one, without bothering for pertinence or
aptness in respect of analogy. For instance, they said: 'Love turns a
serpent into an ant,' or that 'love turns the roof into a wall,' or
'love turns a musk-melon into a water-melon'! These analogies have no
relation at all to the theme. Of course such a thing should not happen,
but these interpolations do not harm a society's life and felicity and
do not cause deviance in its course. But when tahrif occurs in things
that relate to the people's morality and religion, it is dangerous, and
this danger is incalculable when it occurs in documents and matters that
constitute the foundations of human life.

The event of Karbala' is, inevitably, an event possessing great social
meaning for us, and it has a direct impact on our morality and
character.

It is an event that prompts our people, without anyone compelling them,
to devote millions of man-hours to listening to the related episodes and
to spend millions of tumans for this purpose. This event must be retold
exactly as it occurred and without the least amount of interpolation.
For if the smallest amount of interpolation takes place at our hands in
this event, that would distort it, and instead of benefiting from it we
would definitely suffer harm.

Now my point is that we have introduced thousands of distortions in
retelling the narrative of Ashura, both in its outward form, that is, in
respect of the very episodes and issues relating to the major events and
the minor details, as well as in respect of their interpretation and
meaning. Most regrettably, this event has been distorted both in its
form and content.

At times a distorted version has at least some resemblance to the
original. But there are times when distortion is so thorough that the
corrupted version has not the least resemblance to the original: the
matter is not only distorted, but it is inverted and turned into its
antithesis. Again I must say with utmost regret that the
misrepresentations that have been carried out by us have all been in the
direction of degrading and distorting the event and making it
ineffective and inert in our lives. In this regard both the orators and
scholars of the ummah as well as the people have been guilty, and, God
willing, we will elucidate all these matters.

Here I will cite examples of some of the distortions that have occurred
in the outer form of this event and the concoctions that have grown
around it. The topic is so vast as to be beyond expression. It is so
vast that should we attempt to collect all the unfounded narratives it
will perhaps take several volumes of 500 pages each.

Marhum Hajji Mirza Husayn Nuri, may God elevate his station, was the
teacher of such figures as marhum Hajj Shaykh 'Abbas Qummi, marhum Haji
Shaykh 'Ali Akbar Nehawandi and marhum Hajj Shaykh Muhammad Baqir
Birjandi. He was a very extraordinary man and a muhaddith (scholar of
hadith) with an unparalleled command of his field and a prodigious
memory. He was a man of fine spirituality with a highly fervent and
passionate faith. Although some of the books that he wrote were not
worthy of his station 3 -and for this reason he earned the reproach of
his contemporary scholars - but in general his books are good,
especially the one that he wrote on the topic of the minbar (pulpit),
entitled Lu'lu' wa marjan. Though a small book, it is an excellent work
in which he speaks about the duties of those who deliver sermons and
recount for the mourners the narrative of Karbala' from the minbar. The
entire book consists of two parts.

One part is about the sincerity of intention and purpose, as one of the
requirement for a speaker, orator, sermonizer, and rawdeh-khwan 4 is
that the motive of someone who relates the narrative of 'Ashura' should
not be greed or attainment of pecuniary gain. How well he has discussed
this topic!

The second requirement is honesty and truthfulness. Here, he elaborates
on the topic of false and true narration, discussing various forms of
lying in such a thorough-going manner that I do not think there is any
other book which deals with Iying and its various form in the way that
it does, and perhaps there is no such other book in the whole world. In
it he exhibits a marvelous learning and scholarship.

In this book, that great man mentions several examples of falsehoods
that have become prevalent in narratives of the historic event of
Karbala'. Those which I will mention are all or mostly the same things
that the marhum haji Nuri has lamented about. This great man even says
explicitly, "Today too we must mourn Husayn, but there are tragedies
which have befallen Husayn in our era which did not occur in the past,
and they are all these falsehoods that are said regarding the event of
Karbala' and which no one opposes! One must shed tears for the
sufferings of Husayn ibn 'Ali, not for the sake of the swords and spears
that struck his noble body on that day, but on account of these
falsehoods." In the book's introduction he writes that an eminent
scholar from India had written him a letter complaining about the false
narratives that are recited in India, and asking him to do something or
to write a book to stop the fictitious narratives that were current
there. Then he remarks: "This Indian scholar has imagined that the
rawdakhwans tell false stories when they go to India. He does not know
that the stream is polluted from its very source. The centre of false
rawdahs are Karbala', Najaf and Iran, that is, the very centres of
Shi'ism."

Now as a sample, I will cite some instances of tahrif, of which a few
relate to the events that occurred before 'Ashura', some that occurred
during the Imam's way, some during the days of his final halt at
Karbala' in the month of Muharram. I will also mention some of them that
relate to the days of his family's captivity and some about the Imams
who lived after the event of Karbala'. However, most of them will relate
to the day of 'Ashura' itself. Now I will give two examples of each of
them.

It is essential to mention a point at first, and that is that the
people are responsible in all these cases. You folks who attend the
majalis 5 sessions imagine that you have no responsibility in this
regard, and think that it is only the speakers who are responsible. The
people have two major responsibilities. The first is that of nahy
'anil-munkar (forbidding what is wrong) which is obligatory for all.
When they find out and know-and most of the time they do know!-that a
narrative is untrue, they should not sit in that gathering. It is
forbidden to sit in such gatherings and one must protest against them.
Secondly, they must try to get rid of the eagerness and expectation
which the hosts as well as the audience attending the majalis have for
the majlis to become fervid, that there should be impassioned mourning
and the majlis should get feverish with cries of the mourners. The poor
speaker knows that if he were to say only things that are true and
authentic, the majlis would not get into a frenzy and the same people
will not invite him again. Hence he is compelled to add something.

The people should get this expectation out of their heads and refrain
from encouraging the kind of fictitious narratives which kill the soul
of Karbala but work up the mourners into a frenzy. The people should
hear the true narrative so that their understanding and level of
thinking is elevated. They should know that if a sentence creates a
tremor in one's souls and attunes it with the spirit of Husayn ibn 'Ali
and, as a result, one small tear were to come out of one's eyes, it is
really a precious station. But tears drawn by the scenes of mere
butchery, even if a deluge, are worthless.

They say that in one of the towns there was an eminent scholar who had
some concern for the faith and who protested against these falsehoods
which are uttered from the minbar. He would say, "What are these
abominable things that they say on the minbar?" One wa'iz said to him,
"If we don't say these things we will have to shut down our shops right
away!" That gentleman replied, "These are mendacities and one must not
utter them." By chance, some days later this gentleman himself happened
to host a majlis in his mosque and he invited the same waiz; to make the
rawdah. But before his taking his seat on the minbar the host said to
the wa'iz, "I want to hold a model majlis in which nothing is said
except the true narrative. Make it a point not to recount any episode
except out of the reliable books.

You shouldn't touch any of that abominable stuff!' The wai'z replied,
"The majlis is hosted by you. Your will, will be done." On the first
night, the gentleman himself sat there facing the qiblah in the prayer
niche, close to the minbar. The wai'z; began his sermon, and when the
time came to recite the tragic narrative, as he had committed himself to
recite nothing but the true accounts, the majlis remained unmoved and
frozen as he spoke on. The gentleman was now upset. He was the host of
the majlis and he thought about what the people would say behind his
back. The women would certainly say, "To be sure, the Aqa's intent was
not sincere, and so the majlis was a fiasco. Had his intentions been
good and were his motives sincere the majlis would have been rocked with
the howls and-groans of mourners crying their eyes out. He saw that it
would all end up in a loss of face. What should he do? Quietly, he
signaled to the wai'z, "Get a bit of that abominable stuff!"

The expectation of the people that the majlis should go wild with
mourning is itself a source of falsehoods. Accordingly, most of the
fabrications that have occurred have been for the purpose of drawing
tears, nothing else.

I have heard this story repeatedly, and you too must have heard it.
Hajji Nuri also mentions it. They say that one day 'Ali, the Commander
of the Faithful, may Peace be upon him, was delivering a sermon from the
minbar. Suddenly Imam Husayn ('a) said, 'I am thirsty, Imam 'Ali said,
'Let someone bring water for my son.' The first person to get up was a
little boy, Abu al-Fadl al-'Abbas ('a). He went out and got a jar of
water from his mother. When he returned carrying the jar on his head,
his head was drenched in water as it spilled from the sides. This story
is narrated in its elaborate detail. Then, when the Commander of the
Faithful's eyes fell on this scene, tears flowed from his eyes.

He was asked why he was crying. He told them that the ordeals that this
young son of his would face had come to his mind. You know the rest of
the story, which serves the purpose of a point of departure for
switching to the tragic scenes of Karbala'. Hajji Nuri has an excellent
discussion at this point. He writes, "Now that you say that 'Ali was
delivering a sermon from the minbar, you should know that 'Ali spoke
from the minbar and delivered sermons only during the period of his
caliphate. Hence, the episode must have occurred in Kufah.

At that time Imam Husayn was a man of about thirty-three years." Then
he remarks, "Is it at all a sensible thing for a man of thirty-three
years to say all of a sudden, in a formal gathering while his father is
delivering a sermon, 'I am thirsty!' 'I want water!" If an ordinary man
does such a thing, it would be considered ill-mannered of him. Moreover,
Hadrat Abu al-Fadl, too, was not a child at that time but a young man of
at least fifteen years.

" You see how they have fabricated the story! Is such a story worthy of
Imam Husayn? Aside from its fictitious character, what value does it
have? Does it elevate the station of Imam Husayn or does it detract from
it? It is definitely detracting to the dignity of the Imam, as it
ascribes a false act to the Imam and detracts from is station by
bringing the Imam down to the level of a most ill-mannered person who,
at a time when his father - a man like 'Ali - is delivering a sermon,
feels thirsty and instead of waiting for the session to be over,
suddenly interrupts his father's sermon to ask for water.'

Another example of such fabrications is the story of a messenger who
has brought a letter for Abu 'Abd Allah ('a) and he awaits a reply. The
Imam tells him to come after three days and collect the reply. After
three days on inquiring he is told that the Imam was departing the same
day. He says to himself, "Now that he is setting out, let us go and
watch the majesty and glamour of the prince of the Hijaz He goes and
there he sees the Imam, together with other Hashimis among men, seated
on splendid chairs. Then the camels are brought bearing the litters
draped in silk and brocade. Then the ladies emerge and with much honor
and ceremony they are escorted into these litters. This description
continues in this vein until they make the digression to switch to the
scene of the eleventh day of Muharram, to compare the glamour and honor
of this day with the sorry state of the womenfolk on the latter day.
Haji Nuri calls such descriptions into question. He says, "It is history
which says that when Imam Husayn left Madinah he recited this Qur'anic
verse:

He left it in the state of fear and concern. (28:21)

That is, he likened his own departure to that of Moses, son of 'Imran,
when he fled for the fear of the Pharaoh.

He said, "It might be that my Lord will guide me to the right
path."(28:22)

The Imam had departed with a most simple caravan. Does the greatness of
Imam Husayn lie in his sitting, for instance, on golden chairs? Or does
the greatness of his family and womenfolk lie in their using litters
draped in silk and brocade, or their possessing fine horses and camels
and a retinue of lackeys and servants?!

Another example of tahrif in the accounts of 'Ashura' is the famous
story of Layla, the mother of Hadrat 'Ali' Akbar, a story that is not
supported even by a single work of history. Of course, Ali' Akbar had a
mother whose name was Layla, but not a single historical work has stated
that Layla was present at Karbala'. But you see how many pathetic tales
there are about Layla and Ali' Akbar, including the story of Layla's
arrival at 'Ali Akbar's side at the time of his martyrdom. I have heard
this story even in Qum, in a majlis that had been held on behalf of
Ayatullah Burujerdi, though he himself was not attending. In this tale,
as 'Ali Akbar leaves for the battlefield the Imam says to Layla, "I have
heard from my grandfather that God answers a mother's prayer for the
sake of her child. Go into a solitary tent, unfurl your locks and pray
for your son. It may be that God will bring our son safe back to us."

First of all, there was no Layla in Karbala' to have done that.
Secondly, this was not Husayn's logic and way of thinking. Husayn's
logic on the day of 'Ashara' was the logic of self-sacrifice. All
historians have written that whenever anyone asked the Imam for the
leave to go to battlefield, the Imam would at first try to restrain him
with some excuse or another that he could think of, excepting the case
of 'Ali' Akbar about whom they write:

Thereat he asked his father's permission to go forth to fight, and he
gave him the permission. 6

That is, as soon as 'Ali Akbar asked for permission, the Imam told him
to depart Nevertheless, there is no dearth of verses which depict the
episode in quite a different light, including this one:

Rise, O father, let us leave this wilderness,

Let us go now to Layla's tent.

Another case relating to the same story, which is also very amazing, is
the one that I heard in Tehran. It was in the house of one of the
eminent scholars of this city where one of the speakers narrated the
story of Layla. It was something which I had never heard in my life.
According to his narrative, after Layla went into the tent, she opened
the locks of her hair and vowed that if God were to bring 'Ali Akbar
back safely to her and should he not be killed in Karbala' she would sow
basil (rayhan) all along the way from Karbala' to Madinah, a distance of
300 parasangs. Having said this, he began to sing out this couplet:

I have made a vow, were they to return

I will sow basil all the way to Taft!

This Arabic couplet caused me greater surprise as to where it came
from. On investigating I found that the Taft mentioned in it is not
Karbala' but a place related to the famous love legend of Layla and
Majnun. Taft was the place where the legendary Layla live. This couplet
was composed by Majnun al-'Amiri and sung for the love of Layla, and
here this man was reciting it while attributing it to Layla, the mother
of 'Ali Akbar, conjuring a fictitious connection with Karbala'. Just
imagine, were a Christian or a Jew, or for that matter some person with
no religious affiliation, were to be there and hear these things, will
he not say what a nonsensical hagiography these people have? He would
not know that this tale has been fabricated by that man, but he would
say, na'udubillah, how senseless were the women saints of this people to
vow sowing basil from Karbala' to Madinah!

A worse fabrication is the one mentioned by Hajji Nuri. As you know, in
the heat of the battle on the day of 'Ashura', the Imam offered his
prayers hurriedly in the form of salat al-khawf 7 and there was no
respite even to offer full prayers. In fact, two of the companions of
the Imam came to stand in front of him to shield the Imam (against the
arrows) so that he may offer two rak'ahs of the salat al-khawf. The two
of them fell from the injuries inflicted under the shower of the arrows.
The enemy would not even give respite for offering prayers.
Nevertheless, they have concocted a story that the Imam called for a
wedding ceremony on this day, declaring, 'It is my wish to see one of my
daughter wedded to Qasim.' Obviously, one cannot take one's wishes to
one's grave.

By God, see what kind of things they have attributed to a man like
Husayn ibn 'Ali, things the like of which we sometimes hear from persons
of a very mediocre character, who express a wish to see the wedding of
their son or daughter in their life. And this is said to have occurred
at a time when there was hardly any respite even for offering prayers.
They say that the Hadrat said, 'I want to wed my daughter to my nephew
here and now, even if it is just an appearance of a wedding.' One of the
things that was an inseparable part of our traditional ta'ziyahs was the
wedding of Qasim, the boy bridegroom. Such an episode is not mentioned
in any reliable book of history. According to Hajji Nuri, Mulla Husayn
Kashifi was the first man to write this story in a book named Rawdat
al-shuhada' and it is totally fictitious. The case here is similar to
the one about which the poet says:

Many are the appendages that they have clapped upon it,

You will hardly recognize it when you see it again.

Were the Sayyid al-Shuhada' to come and observe these things (and, of
course, he does from the world of the spirit, but were he come into the
world of appearance ) he will find that we have carved out for him
companions that he never had. For instance, in the book Muhriq
al-qulub - whose author was, incidentally, an eminent scholar and
jurist, but who had no knowledge of these matters - that one of the
companions to appear out of nowhere on the day of 'Ashura' was Hashim
Mirqal, who came bearing an eighteen cubits long spear in his hand.
(After all someone had claimed that Sinan ibn Anas - who according to
some reports severed the head of Imam Husayn - had a spear sixty cubits
long. He was told that a spear could not be sixty cubits. He replied
that God had sent it for him from the heaven!) Muhriq al-qulub writes
that Hashim ibn 'Utbah Mirqal appeared with a spear sixteen cubits long,
whereas this Hashim ibn 'Utbah was a companion of Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali
and had been killed twenty years earlier.

We have attributed several companions to Husayn ibn 'Ali that he did
not have, such as the Za'far the Jinn. Similarly, there are some names
among the enemies that did not exist. It is mentioned in the book Asrar
al-shahadah that 'Umar ibn Sa'd's army in Karbala' consisted of one
million and sixty thousand men. One may ask, where did they come from?
Were they all Kufans? Is such a thing possible?

It is also written in that book that Imam Husayn himself personally
killed three hundred thousand men in combat. The bomb that destroyed
Hiroshima killed sixty thousand people. I calculated that if we assume
that a swordsman kills one man every second, it would take eighty-three
hours and twenty minutes to massacre a force of three hundred thousand.
Later, when they saw that this number of those felled by the Imam did
not fit with a day's duration, they said that the day of 'Ashura was
also seventy-two hours long!

Similar things are said concerning Hadrat Abu al-Fadl, that he killed
twenty-five thousand men. I calculated that if one man were killed per
second, it would require six days and fifty and odd hours to kill that
many. Therefore, we have to admit what Hajji Nuri, this great man, says,
that if one wanted to mourn the Imam today and narrate the ordeals of
Abu 'Abd Allah, may Peace be upon him, one should lament over these new
tragedies, over these falsehoods, which have been incorporated in the
accounts of his martyrdom.

Another example relates to the day of 'Arba'in. At the time of 'Arba'in
everyone relates the narrative that leads the people to imagine that the
captives of the Imam's family arrived at Karbala' on the day of
'Arba'in, and that Imam Zayn al-'Abidin met Jabir (ibn 'Abd Allah
al-Ansari) there. However, excepting the Luhuf, whose author is Sayyid
ibn Tawus and who has denied it in his other books, or at least has not
confirmed it, such an episode is not mentioned in any other book, nor
does it seem very reasonable to believe it. But is it possible to
expunge these stories, which are repeated every year, from the people's
minds? Jabir was the first visitor to Imam Husayn grave, and the
significance of 'Arba'in is also nothing except that it is the occasion
for the ziyarah of Imam Husayn's tomb. It is not for the renewal of
mourning for the Ahl al-Bayt, nor on account of their arrival in
Karbala'. Basically, the road to Madinah from Syria is not through
Karbala' and the two ways diverge from Syria itself.

What is more painful is that, incidentally, there are few events in
history that are as rich as the event of Karbala' from the viewpoint of
reliable sources. Formerly I used to imagine that the basic reason for
the proliferation of legends in this field is that the actual events are
not known to anybody. But when I studied I found that no event of remote
past-for instance of a period thirteen or fourteen centuries ago-has as
reliable an history as the event of Karbala'. Reliable Muslim historians
have reported the pertinent episodes with trustworthy chains of
transmission from the first/seventh and the second/eighth centuries, and
their narrations are close and corroborate one another.

There were certain reasons which were responsible for the preservation
of these details in history. One of them, which caused the details of
this event to be preserved and its objectives to remain clear, were the
many speeches (khutbahs) that were delivered during its course. In those
days, an oration was what communiques and press releases are in our era.
In the same way that official communiques issued during wartime are the
best historical source, so were orations in these days. Accordingly,
there were many of them before the event of Karbala', during, and after
it. Individuals from among the Prophet's household made orations in
Kufah, Damascus and other places. Basically, their aim by delivering
these orations was to inform the people about the episodes as well as to
declare the truth of the matter and to spell out the goals. This was
itself one of the reason for the events to be reported.

There were also many exchanges, questions and answers, in the event of
Karbala' and these are recorded in history. They too disclose for us the
nature of the occurrences.

Rajaz poetry 8 was also recited a lot during Karbala', and, in
particular Abu 'Abd Allah ('a) himself recited much rajaz, and these
rajaz verses also reveal the character of the confrontation.

There were many letters that were exchanged before and after the
episode of Karbala', letters that were exchanged between the Imam and
the people of Kufah, between the Imam and the people of Basrah, the
letters that the Imam wrote earlier to Mu'awiyah (which indicate that
the Imam was preparing for an uprising after Mu'awiyah's death), the
letters that the enemies wrote to one another, Yazid to Ibn Ziyad, Ibn
Ziyad to Yazid, lbn Ziyad to 'Umar ibn Sa'd, 'Umar ibn Sa'd to Ibn
Ziyad, whose texts are all recorded in the history of Islam.

Hence the developments relating to Karbala' are quite clear and all of
them are throughout a matter of great honor and pride. But we have
disfigured this shining historic event to such an extent and have
committed such a monstrous treachery towards Imam Husayn ('a) that if he
were to come and see, he will say, 'You have changed the entire face of
the event. I am not the Imam Husayn that you have sketched out in your
own imagination. The Qasim ibn Hasan that you have painted in your fancy
is not my nephew. The 'Ali Akbar that you have faked in your imagination
is not my aware and intelligent son. The companions that you have carved
out are not my companions."

We have fabricated a Qasim whose only desire is to become a bridegroom
and whose uncle's wish, too, is to have him wedded. Contrast this one
with the historical Qasim. Reliable histories report that on the night
of 'Ashura' the Imam ('a) gathered his companions in a tent whose
location, as described by the phrase 'inda qurbil-ma', 9 was the place
where water used to be kept, or near it. There he delivered that very
well-known sermon of the night preceding 'Ashura'. I do not want to
mention its details here, but, to put it briefly, in this sermon the
Imam told them that every one of them was free to depart and leave him
to confront the enemy alone. The Imam did not want anybody to stay just
for considerations of courtesy or to remain out of compulsion, or even
to think that they were obliged to do so by virtue of the allegiance
(bay'ah) they had given him. Hence he tells them, "You are all free, my
companions, members of my family, my sons, and my nephews-everyone-to
leave without being liable to anything. They [i.e. the enemy's forces]
have nothing against anyone except me. The night is dark. Take advantage
of the darkness of the night and depart. They will definitely not stop
you." At first, he expresses his appreciation for them and tell them, I
am most pleased with you. I do not know of any companions better than
mine, and no better relatives than the members of my family."

But all of them tell him, in unison, that such a thing was impossible.
What answer will they give to the Prophet on the Day of Resurrection?
What will happen to loyalty, to humanity, to love and attachment? Their
ardent responses and their words said on that occasion melt a heart of
stone and are most moving. One of them says, "Is one life worth enough
to be sacrificed for someone like you? I wish that I were brought to
life seventy times to die seventy time for your sake." Another says, "I
would lay down a thousand lives for your sake if I had them." Another
says, "If I were to sacrifice my life for you and my body were burnt to
ashes and the ashes were cast to wind, and were this done a hundred
times, I would still love to die for your sake." The first to speak was
his brother Abu al-Fadl, and then the Imam changed the subject and told
them about the events of the next day, informing them that they all
would be killed. All of them receive it as a great good news.

Now this young man - to whom we are so unjust and think that all that
he cherished in his heart was the wish to become a bridegroom - puts a
question to the Imam. In reality he expresses his real wish. When a
group of elderly men gather in an assembly, a boy of thirteen does not
sit in their midst, but reverently stays behind them. It appears that
this youth was sitting behind the Imam's elderly companions and was keen
to hear what others said. When the Imam told them that they would all be
killed on the next day, this child wondered if he too would be one of
them. He thought to himself, After all I am only a boy. Perhaps the Imam
means that only the elderly would be martyred. I am just a minor."
Therefore, he turned to the Imam and asked him:

**Will I be among those who will be killed?**

Look! See what his wish and aspiration are! The Imam says to him,
"Qasim, first let me ask you a question. I will reply after you have
answered me." I think the Imam purposefully put this question. With this
question he wanted to show to posterity that they shouldn't think that
this youth gave his life without awareness and understanding, that they
should not imagine that what he cherished was a wish to become
bridegroom, that they should not conjure up a wedding for him and be
guilty of the crime of distorting his fine character. So the Imam said,
"First, I will ask you a question":

That is, "My child, my nephew, tell me, how do you regard death and
what do you think about getting killed?' He promptly answered.

"It is sweater to me than honey!"

That is, "I haven't a desire that should be dearer and sweater to me!"
This is an astounding scene. These are the things that have made this a
great and historic event - and we should keep it alive! For there will
not be another Husayn, nor another Qasim ibn Hasan. These are the things
that make us give so much value to this event, and if after fourteen
centuries we build such a husayniyyah as this 10 in their memory and in
their name, we have done nothing. Or else the wish to become bridegroom
does not oblige one to put in one's time and money, to build
husayniyyahs or to deliver sermons. But they were the very essence of
humanity, the very concrete instances of the Divine purpose as stated in
the verse:

Surely I will make a vicegerent in the earth (2:30)

and they stood above the angels.

After getting this answer, the Imam said to him, "My nephew, you too
will be killed. But your death will be different from that of others and
(it will be) after you have faced a great ordeal.

Accordingly, when Qasim, after much insistence, received the permission
to leave for the battlefield, being very young, there was no armour that
was fit for his years, nor a helmet nor shoes, nor arms. It is written
that he wore a turban ('ammamah) and this description is given of his
appearance:

He appeared like a piece of the moon. 11

This boy was so handsome that when the enemies saw him they described
him as a piece of the moon:

'Where does the wind carry this petal of red rose?'

said whoever that saw you on your fleeting mount.

The narrator says: "I saw that the strap of one of his sandals was
untied, and I do not forget that it was his left foot" This shows that
he was not wearing boots. They write that the Imam stood near the tents
as he held his horse's reins. Evidently he was alert and ready. At once
he heard a cry. It was Qasim: "Ya 'ammah!" (O Uncle!). They write that
the Imam flew on the horse like a hunting falcon. As he arrived by the
side of this youth, about two hundred men had surrounded this child.
They fled as the Imam attacked, and one of the enemy's men who had
dismounted to sever Qasim's head was himself trampled under the hoofs of
the horses of his fleeing comrades. The one who is said to have been
trampled to death under the hoofs of the horses was one of the enemy's
men, not Hadrat Qasim. In any case, when the Imam arrived at Qasims
side, there was so much dust and confusion that nobody could see what
was happening; When the dust settled down, they saw the Imam sitting at
Qasim's side with his head in his arms. They heard the Imam utter this
sentence:

My nephew! By God, it is very hard on your uncle that you should call
him and he should not be able to respond, or that he should respond
without being able to do anything for you! 12

It was at this moment that a cry came from this youth and his spirit
departed towards its Creator.

O God, may our ultimate end be one that is of felicity. Make us aware
of the realities of Islam! Remove from us our ignorance and nescience
with Your grace and munificence. Give all of us the ability to act with
sincere intentions. Fulfill our legitimate needs and forgive all our
dead and pardon them.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 J. M Rodwell in his translation of the Qur'an (London: Everyman's
Library, p 345) makes in a footnote the following remark under this
verse: "This is one of the passages which shows great familiarity with
the habit of the Jews on the part of Muhammad." [Tr.]

2 The professional maddah, himself somewhat of a rawdeh khwan, though
mostly without a clerics training, is someone who recites elegies,
verses and even delivers a rawdah in the majalis, the gatherings that
are held for the sake of ceremonial mourning, before the rawdeh e khawn
takes to the minbar.[Tr.]

3 This is a reference to his controversial book Fasl al-Khitab in which
he, contrary to the general belief of Shi'i Imami scholars through the
course of history, raised doubts concerning the occurrence of tahrif
(mainly the occurrence of deletions) in the Qur'an.[Tr.]

4 The rawdeh-khawn, often a cleric is someone who delivers the rawdah,
consisting of narratives relating in particular to the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn, his family and companions, and in general to the ordeals of
Ahlal Bayt, the Prophet's family. Wa'iz, Dhakir, Minbari, etc. are other
names for the professional rawdeh-khwan.

5 The verse pertains to the story of Moses at the time of his flight
from Egypt: So he departed therefrom, fearful and vigilant; he said, 'My
Lord, deliver me from the wrongdoers.' And when he turned his face
towards Midian, he said, 'It may be that my Lord will guide me on the
right way.' Quran, 28:21-22

6 Ibn Tawus, al-Luhuf, p. 47

7 The Shari'ah stipulates certain modifications in the obligatory
salat, the daily ritual prayers, when offered in conditions of war and
danger of the enemy's attack. The salat thus offered is referred to as
salat al-khawf; (see the Quran, 4:101). [Tr.]

8 It was a tradition among the Arab warriors to recite verses during
combat and encounter with the enemy on the battlefield. Rajaz is the
form of poetry composed of such purposes and occasions. [Tr.]

9 Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44 p. 392, A'lam al-Wara, p. 234, al-Shaykh
al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad, p. 231, al-Muqarrim, Maqtal al-Husayn, p.
257. Apparently, there was a tent where water-skins used to be kept and
stored from the first days of the caravan's halt at Karbala'.

10 This is a reference to the Husayniyyeh-ye Irshad, in Tehran.
Husayniyyah is a building which is at times also used as a mosque but is
built mainly with the purpose of holding mourning ceremonies during the
months of Muharram and Safar as well as other occasions relating to
anniversaries of the martyrdom of the figures of the Ahl al-Bayt.

11 Ibn Shahr Ashub, al-Manaqib, iii, p. 106, see also A'lam al-Wara,
p.242; al-Luhuf, 48; Bihar al-Anwar, vol 45 p. 35, al-Mufid's Kitab al
Irshad, p. 239, al-Muqarrim's Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 331; and al-Tabari's
Ta'rikh, vi, p. 256.

12 Ibn Shahr Ashub, al-Manaqib, iv, p. 107, A'lam al-Wara, p. 243;
al-Luhuf, 38; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45 p. 35, al-Mufid's Kitab al Irshad,
p. 239, al-Muqarrim's Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 332; and al-Tabari's Ta'rikh,
vi, p. 257.


