Foreword by the Publisher
=========================

We live in an age of mass confusion in which the political landscape of
countries around the world is changing at a rapid pace. It is an era in
which nations are unilaterally deciding to invade sovereign, free
countries under the pretext of ‘liberation’, ‘freedom’ and putting an
end to ‘state-sponsored terrorism’ – an act which “they” refer to as
‘pre-emptive strikes’. It is also a time in which countries are actively
and whole-heartedly engaged in the greatest crimes against humanity
which can be classified as nothing other than genocide and the enactment
of their own state-sponsored holocaust by subjugating those whose land
they occupy and enacting fear on their neighbors who want nothing other
than to live in peace and harmony.

In such times of peril and strife, it becomes incumbent upon everyone,
however the Muslim in particular, to understand the global political
maneuvers, rhetoric used to mislead the innocent people and the tactics
employed to oppress the downtrodden peoples of the world – regardless of
their color or religion – and to have a comprehensive awareness of the
various political theories and ideologies present.

This will help in being able to better analyze and understand the
various theories, see which one truly offers ‘freedom’ to the masses and
help alleviate the present predicament which a majority of the countries
of the world – particularly the ‘Muslim’ countries - are facing. In
addition, from the point of view of the Islamic teachings of the Qur\`an
and Sunnah, it is incumbent that the Muslim understands the role which
‘religion’ plays in ‘politics’.

Indeed, in the Islamic world-view, there is no difference between
‘religion’ and ‘politics’ as one of the roles of ‘politics’ or
‘government’ was to grant humanity the freedom to worship their Lord in
the way in which He wants them to submit to Him (SWT).

However, it must be kept in mind that the ‘submission’ to Allah (SWT) is
not limited to the daily rituals such as prayers *(salat)*, fasting
*(sawm)*, pilgrimage *(hajj)* and other such actions. Rather and more
importantly, it extends to rules of social engagement, economic policy
and covers the entire life of the human being – from birth to death –
and in all areas of life.

Once we understand the reason for the creation of the human being and
why he was placed on this Earth, which is beautifully illustrated in the
Noble Qur\`an, we can then begin to understand the reason why Allah
(SWT) appointed prophets to humanity, just as He (SWT) clearly tells us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولاً أَنِ اعْـبُدُوا اللهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We raised an apostle in every nation [to preach:] ‘Worship
Allah, and keep away from the despot...’***”[^1]

Thus, how can we keep away from the despots, tyrants, oppressors and
dictators if there is no land on the Earth which is ruled by the
righteous people of Allah (SWT)? Where would the downtrodden people of
the Earth – regardless of their ‘religion’ – flee to in times of peril
and strife and in whom could they take refuge?

Indeed, this is exactly what the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the Supreme Leader of the Muslim Ummah and the guide for all of the
oppressed and downtrodden peoples of the Earth, the late Ayatullah
al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khumayni alluded to in
his work, *Islamic Government*, where he stated:

“The most Noble Messenger (SAWW) headed the executive and administrative
institutions of Muslim society. In addition to conveying the revelation
and expounding and interpreting the articles of faith and the ordinances
and institutions of Islam, he undertook the implementation of law and
the establishment of the ordinances of Islam, thereby, bringing into
being the Islamic state.

He did not content himself with the promulgation of law; rather, he
implemented it at the same time, cutting off hands and administering
lashings, and stonings.

After the most Noble Messenger (SAWW), his successor had the same duty
and function.

When the Prophet (SAWW) appointed a successor, it was not only for the
purpose of expounding articles of faith and law; it was for the
implementation of law and the execution of Allah’s ordinances. It was
this function – the execution of law and the establishment of Islamic
institutions – that made the appointment of a successor such an
important matter that the Prophet (SAWW) would have failed to fulfill
his mission if he had neglected it!

For after the Prophet (SAWW), the Muslims still needed someone to
execute laws and establish the institution of Islam in society, so that
they might attain happiness in this world and the hereafter.

By their nature, in fact, laws and social institutions require the
existence of an executor. It has always and everywhere been the case
that legislation alone has little benefit: legislation by itself cannot
assure the well-being of mankind.

After the establishment of legislation, an executive power must come
into being, a power that implements the laws and the verdicts given by
the courts, thus allowing people to benefit from the laws and the just
sentences the courts deliver. Islam has therefore established an
executive power in the same way that it has brought laws into being. The
person who holds this executive power is known as the *Waliul Amr*.[^2]

The *sunnah*[^3] and path of the Prophet (SAWW) constitute a proof of
the necessity for establishing government.

First, he himself established a government, as history testifies. He
engaged in the implementation of laws, the establishment of the
ordinances of Islam, and the administration of society. He sent out
governors to different regions; both sat in judgment himself and also
appointed judges; dispatched emissaries to foreign states, tribal
chieftains, and kings; concluded treaties and pacts; and took command in
battle. In short, he fulfilled all the functions of government.

Second, he designated a ruler to succeed him, in accordance with Divine
command.

If Allah Almighty, through the Prophet (SAWW), designated a man who was
to rule over Muslim society after him, this is in itself an indication
that government remains a necessity after the departure of the Prophet
from this world.

Again, since the most Noble Messenger (SAWW) promulgated the divine
command through his act of appointing a successor, he also, implicitly
stated the necessity for establishing a government.

It is self-evident that the necessity for enactment of the law, which
necessitated the formation of a government by the Prophet (SAWW), was
confined or restricted to his time, but continues after his departure
from this world.

According to one of the noble verses of the Qur\`an, the ordinances of
Islam are not limited with respect to time or place; they are permanent
and must be enacted until the end of time.[^4] They were not revealed
merely for the time of the Prophet (SAWW), only to be abandoned
thereafter, with retribution and the penal code no longer be enacted, or
the taxes prescribed by Islam no longer collected, and the defense of
the lands and people of Islam suspended. The claim that the laws of
Islam may remain in abeyance or are restricted to a particular time or
place is contrary to the essential creedal bases of Islam!

Since enactment of laws, then, is necessary after the departure of the
Prophet (SAWW) from this world, and indeed, will remain so until the end
of time, the formation of a government and the establishment of
executive and administrative organs are also necessary. Without the
formation of a government and the establishment of such organs to ensure
that through enactment of the law, all activities of the individual take
place in the framework of a just system, chaos and anarchy will prevail
and social, intellectual and moral corruption will arise. The only way
to prevent the emergence of anarchy and disorder and to protect society
from corruption is to form a government and thus impart order to all the
affairs of the country.

Both reason and divine law, then, demonstrate the necessity in our time
for what was necessary during the lifetime of the Prophet (SAWW) and the
age of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) -namely the
formation of a government and the establishment of executive and
administrative organs.”[^5]

From this, we understand that the Prophet (SAWW) and his successors (AS)
were not just ‘spiritual’ leaders – rather, they were also ‘temporal’
leaders as without ‘temporal’ leadership, it is impossible to enact
‘spiritual’ leadership.

The life of the Prophet of Islam (SAWW) while in Madinah and his power
of authority shows that he was not only a ‘prophet’ of Allah (SWT),
rather, he was the *‘Khalifah’* of Allah (SWT) - the governor appointed
by Allah (SWT) to rule over the believers.

Those who came after him, the twelve righteous and legitimate leaders
(AS) were also charged with this responsibility and even though it was
only the first Imam, the Commander of the Faithful, Ali ibn Abi Talib
(AS), who was able to exercise this right [due to the political climate
of the time], nonetheless, the remaining leaders of the faith (AS) also
had this responsibility on their shoulders which was enacted in a limit
capacity amongst those who recognized and accepted their authority.

Ruling by what Allah (SWT) has revealed in His revealed books is so
important, that the Supreme Legislator has referred to this issue three
times in one surah – one after the other! In these verses, He (SWT) has
severely castigated those who rule and adjudicate by anything other than
the revelation of the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
. وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْكَافِرُونَ...وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ
هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ...وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِـــمَا أَنزَلَ اللهُ
فَـــأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“ ... Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down, it is they
who are the*** ***faithless ...*** ***Those who do not judge by what
Allah has sent down, it is they who are the*** ***wrongdoers ...***
***Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down, it is they who
are the*** ***transgressors.”***

Thus, with the great importance that the issue of leadership and
governance plays in Islam, especially in today’s political climate in
which many non-Muslims have launched calculated assaults against the
teachings of Islam and in which an increasing number of ‘Muslims’ are
claiming to speak for ‘Moderate Muslims’ or ‘Moderate Islam’ and are
seeking to label and portray those Muslims who wish to follow the
Qur\`an and Sunnah as ‘fundamentalists’, it is of the utmost importance
to understand the Islamic mode of governance which is based directly on
the Qur\`an and the Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad (SAWW) – what is
referred to as ‘*Wilayatul Faqih*’ or the ‘Governance of the Jurist’.

This short treatise is not meant to be an exhaustive look at this very
important topic. It is merely an introduction to the ‘Governance of the
Jurist’ and certain aspects related to his leadership and thus, we
present this short work to the readers with the hopes that others who
are more educated on this topic expend their energies to look at the
‘Governance of the Jurist’ from an even greater angle and with much more
in-depth insight from the Qur\`an, Sunnah and the history of Islam.

- - -

With there being very few books on this topic in the English language,
it gives the Islamic Publishing House great pleasure to present this
short tract on ‘The Governance of the Jurist.’

This work is an extract from the work, *On the Shore of Contemplation*,
written in Farsi by Akbar Asad Ali Zadeh under the guidance of the
well-known scholar and researcher, Ayatullah Shaykh Ja’far Subhani
[[www.imamsadeq.org]](http://www.imamsadeq.org%5D) – the founder and
rector of the Imam as-Sadiq (AS) Research Institute based in Qum, Iran.

The entire work, *On the Shore of Contemplation*, features a series of
questions and answers on the following topics:

1. Allah (SWT) and various issues in regards to the Creator;

2. The creation of the Jinn;

3. The necessity of following a religion;

4. The necessity of following Islam;

5. The intellect of the human being and how it can reach to completion;

6. Logical proofs for the infallibility of the A\`immah;

7. The reason behind the occultation of Imam al-Zaman;

8. Governance of the Jurist (the present work);

9. The physical resurrection of human beings after being decomposed and
consumed by animals;

10. Nahj al-Balagha and women.

The book which you are currently holding is merely the first series of
selected questions and answers to be published in English.

After feedback form the readership, and the assistance of Allah (SWT),
we hope to have the other chapters of this work translated and published
in the form of individual booklets, Insha-Allah.

Due to various reasons, all installments in this series will be made
available via **[www.iph.ca](http://www.iph.ca)** and
**[www.al-mubin.org](http://www.al-mubin.org)**. Those wishing to
publish this series in print format are requested to contact the
publishers for permission.

All praise belongs to Allah - only the mistakes are mine

Islamic Publishing House  
[www.iph.ca](http://www.iph.ca)

[^1]: Surat al-Nahl (16), Verse 36

[^2]: Lit. “the one who holds authority,” a term derived from the Noble
Qur\`an, 4:59: “O you who believe! Obey God, and obey the Messenger and
the holders of authority (ūli ’l-amr) from among you.” For commentary of
this verse, see Mīr Ahmad Ali, The Noble Qur\`an (NY: Tahrike Tarsile
Qur\`an, 1988).

[^3]: The practice of the Prophet, accepted by Muslims as the norm and
ideal for all human behavior.

[^4]: See, for example, Sūrat Ibrāhīm (14), verse 52: هَذَا بَلاَغٌ
لِلنَّاسِ وَلِيُنذَرُوا بِهِ وَلِيَعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا هُوَ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ
وَلِيَذَّكَّرَ أُوْلُوا الأَلْبَابِ “This is a proclamation for mankind
so that they may be warned thereby, and know that He is indeed the One
God, and those who possess intellect may take admonition.” Sūrat Yūnus
(10), verse 2: أَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَبًا أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى رَجُلٍ
مِنْهُمْ أَنْ أَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ وَبَشِّرْ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنَّ لَهُمْ
قَدَمَ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ قَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ إِنَّ هَذَا لَسَاحِرٌ
مُبِينٌ “Does it seem odd to these people that We have revealed to a an
from among themselves, declaring , ‘Warn mankind, and give good news to
the faithful that they are in good standing with their Lord’? The
faithless say, ‘This is indeed a plain magician.’” Sūrat al-Hājj (22),
verse 49: قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّمَا أَنَا لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ
مُبِينٌ “Say, ‘O mankind! I am only a manifest warner to you!’” Sūrat 
al-Ahzāb (33), verse 40: مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِنْ
رِجَالِكُمْ وَلَكِنْ رَسُولَ اللهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَكَانَ اللهُ
بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمًا “Muhammad is not the father of any man among
you, but he is the Apostle of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets, and
Allah has knowledge of all things.” and Sūrat Yā Sīn (36), verse 70:
لِيُنْذِرَ مَنْ كَانَ حَيًّا وَيَحِقَّ الْقَوْلُ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ “So
that anyone who is alive may be warned, and that the word may come due
against the faithless.”

[^5]: Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist


