The Authority of the Jurist (Faqih): Absolute or Limited?
=========================================================

Question: Is the authority of the Jurist (Faqih) absolute or limited? Why?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The authority of the Jurist (Faqih) is absolute, meaning that the
Supreme Leader (Wali al-Faqih) possesses all of the authority which the
Noble Prophet (SAWW) and infallible A\`immah (AS) possess in relation to
the administration of the society.

In order to better understand this discussion, we must first discuss two
points:

The first point is that ‘wilayat’ or ‘authority’ is of two types –
‘wilayat takwini’ - the ‘generative authority’, and ‘wilayat tashrii’ -
the ‘legislative authority’.

The ‘generative authority’ – meaning any form of intervention in the
world of creation – is a right restricted to Allah (SWT) alone. However,
sometimes Allah (SWT) grants a portion of this authority to some of His
servants and the miracles and super-natural acts of the prophets and
select-friends (awliya\`) of Allah (SWT) stem from this form of
authority.

The second form, the ‘legislative authority’, refers to the right to
issue commandments and prohibitions in regards to matters of faith and
the life of the temporal world.

When we say that the Noble Prophet (SAWW) and the A\`immah (AS) possess
‘wilayat tashrii’ or the ‘legislative authority’, we mean that they have
the right, by the permission of Allah (SWT), to command and prohibit the
people from certain actions. Once these individuals (the Prophet (SAWW)
and A\`immah (AS) have employed their ‘legislative authority’, it then
becomes obligatory upon the people to obey them in everything which they
command (and prohibit).

We see that the same authority (as that of the Prophet (SAWW) and
A\`immah (AS) has also been given to the Jurist, and therefore, the
meaning of the governance of the Jurist (the wilayat of the Faqih) is
within the boundaries of the ‘wilayat tashrii’ or the ‘legislative
authority.’

Therefore, the Jurist also has the right, just as the Noble Prophet
(SAWW) and A\`immah (AS) have the canonical right, to command and
prohibit the people from various actions.[^1]

The second point which must be noted is that such an authority being
absolute does not mean that it is unrestrained and uncontrolled! It does
not mean that the Jurist can work in any way which he wishes!

Rather, the meaning of the absolute authority of the Jurist is that he
has an absolute authority in regards to the enforcement of the Islamic
injunctions. This means that the Jurist and Muslim ruler’s absolute
authority is limited to the scope of the implementation of the rulings –
not that he is able to alter the Islamic commandments!

In addition, the meaning of the absolute authority in regards to the
implementation of the rulings is not that the Jurist can put the Islamic
laws into practice in any way he sees fit. Rather, the implementation of
the Islamic laws must be carried out in the ways which the sacred
teachings have explained that they are to be executed.[^2]

The Reason why the Authority of the Jurist is Absolute
------------------------------------------------------

The reason why the authority of the Jurist is absolute is that during
the occultation of Imam al-Zaman (may Allah hasten his return), since
Islam must be implemented in all of its dimensions and because all of
its societal rules must be put in place, the Jurist is the custodian of
the faith.

In order to implement all of the Islamic commandments, the Islamic
leader must establish a government so that all aspects of the Islamic
regulations - such as the application of the rules of retribution, the
economic regulations and all other areas of life (governed by Islam) can
be put into action.

In addition, the Jurist who fulfills all of the conditions to implement
this system is responsible for putting an end to all forms of societal
corruptions and deviations for which he is in need of the co-operation
of the entire society, a central system of management and a just and
able government.

In order to regulate the society and implement the various Islamic
regulations, the Muslim leader must be able to appoint individuals to
maintain the system. He must also be able to issue the necessary laws
and regulations for the maintenance and preservation of the country,
protection of the wealth (of individuals), safety of the people and the
freedom and independence of the entire Islamic society. Such laws must
also cover the areas of war and peace – as needed.

Maintaining local and foreign relations; dispatching border patrols to
protect the country; appointing the prayer leaders for Salatul Jumuah
and Salatul Jamaat; appointing financial representatives who would be
responsible for collecting the zakat and other forms of wealth [which
are due by the people to maintain the country] and hundreds of other
programs which must be implemented, including the various cultural
issues, economic rights, political and military issues, etc... are all
the definite responsibility and task of the Jurist!

Without such responsibilities, it would be impossible to implement the
complete and comprehensive code of Islam and correctly manage the
Islamic society in a way which would earn the pleasure of Allah
(SWT).[^3]

In Summary
----------

From that which we have just mentioned, we conclude that:

1. The meaning of ‘wilayat’ or ‘authority’ is the ‘wilayat tashrii’ or
‘legislative authority’.

2. The absolute authority does not mean that the Jurist works
unrestrained or with no one overseeing him. Rather, it means that he has
the absolute authority when it comes to the implementation of the
Islamic regulations within the framework of the sacred teachings of
Islam.

3. Seeing as how the Jurist is responsible for all aspects of the faith
and its protection during the occultation of the infallible Imam (AS),
he cannot achieve his goals without having a full authority in the realm
of the implementation of all of the aspects of Islam and the best form
of management of the Islamic society as it should be managed and guided.
Therefore, this (too) points to his absolute authority.

**For more information on this topic, refer to:**

1. Naqd Quarterly Journal, issue 7, pp. 68 to 69.

2. Naqd Quarterly Journal, issue 8, pg. 68 onwards.

[^1]: Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi, Questions and Answers, vol.
1, pg. 59

[^2]: Ayatullah Abdullah Jawadi Amuli, Wilayatul Faqih, pg. 251

[^3]: Ibid., pp. 248 - 249


