The Supreme Leader: Elected or Appointed?
=========================================

Question: Is the Supreme Leader elected to his position or appointed to it?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The position of the Supreme Leader is granted by appointment and this
can be proven through the logical proofs and also the narrated proofs
(the Qur\`an and ahadith) of which, we shall refer to some below.

### A. The Logical Proofs

Seeing as how the governance of the Jurist is known as a continuation of
the leadership of the infallible A\`immah (AS) and since the infallible
A\`immah (AS) are guardians (of the faith) who have been appointed
directly by Allah (SWT), the Jurist who fulfills all of the criteria
(for being followed) is also one who has been appointed by Allah (SWT)
and the infallible A\`immah (AS) to the station of the Supreme Leader
over the Islamic society.

In regards to this, we state that: Our intellect dictates that a
person’s felicity is tied to the Divine Laws and on his own, mankind is
not able to formulate laws which would be without defect for his
happiness in this life and the next.

The Divine Laws, which have been conveyed through the perfect human
being referred to as the prophet of Allah (SWT) were given to humanity
as a gift, and since these laws cannot have any impact if they are not
implemented, and since the implementation of such laws cannot be carried
out error free except by one who is infallible, it is for this reason
that Allah (SWT) appointed and sent prophets (AS) and then followed this
up with the infallible A\`immah (AS) as guardians over the Islamic
society and for the implementation of the teachings of the faith.

Since it is inconsistent with the wisdom of Allah (SWT) and His grace
that during the period of occultation of the Imam of the time (may Allah
hasten his noble advent) that the Muslims would be left without a leader
and that the faith and the final way of life (Shariah) would be
abandoned without a guardian, it is for this reason that the Jurists who
fulfill all of the requirements (to lead) - who happen to be the closest
people to the infallible A\`immah (AS) from three angles – their
knowledge, justice, and ability of management – are therefore recognized
as the successors to Imam al-Zaman (may Allah hasten his noble advent).

Therefore, during the period of the occultation, the Jurists have been
appointed to be the guardians of the Islamic society.

Thus, it becomes incumbent upon the Muslims and the wise people of the
society who fully comprehend the issue as it has been presented and are
not caught up in unruliness and the worship of their lower desires and
passions, to accept the governance of such worthy individuals. Through
this, the religion of Allah (SWT) will become manifest throughout the
entire society.

Therefore, the governance of the Jurist who fulfills all of the
conditions (for leadership) is just as the rule of the Prophet (SAWW)
and the infallible A\`immah (AS). By this we mean that in regards to the
maintenance of the Islamic society, just as the people would pledge
their allegiance to the Prophet (SAWW) and the Imam (AS) as the governor
who has been appointed by Allah (SWT), and would accept the authority of
these individuals over them, so too during the period of the
occultation, the people must also pledge their allegiance and give their
hand in fealty and follow the worthy and rightful representative of Imam
al-Asr (may Allah hasten his noble advent) who has been proclaimed by
the infallible A\`immah (AS) as the leader.[^1]

### B. The Qur\`anic Proofs

The various verses of the Noble Qur\`an give us a general picture of the
appointment of the Islamic leader (and the Jurist). From amongst all of
these verses, we narrate the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
وَأُوْلِي الأًمْرِ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنْ تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ فَرُدُّوهُ
إِلَى اللهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ
الآخِرِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلاً. أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى
الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا
أُنزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَحَاكَمُوا إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ
وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ وَيُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَنْ
يُضِلَّهُمْ ضَلاَلاً بَعِيدًا. وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى
مَا أَنزَلَ اللهُ وَإِلَى الرَّسُولِ رَأَيْتَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ
يَصُدُّونَ عَنْكَ صُدُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you. And if you dispute concerning anything,
refer it to Allah and the Apostle, if you have faith in Allah and the
Last Day. That is better and more favourable in outcome. Have you not
regarded those who claim that they believe in what has been sent down to
you, and what was sent down before you? They desire to seek the judgment
of the despot, though they were commanded to defy it, and Satan desires
to lead them astray into far error. And when they are told, ‘Come to
what Allah has sent down and [come] to the Apostle,’ you see the
hypocrites keep away from you, aversely.”***[^2]

In these verses, the Qur\`an expressly orders us to obey Allah (SWT),
His Messenger (SAWW) and those who are ‘in authority amongst us’ and in
times of dispute and differences, rather than referring to the despots,
we must refer to Allah (SWT) and His Messenger (SAWW). This means that
we must be satisfied with the ruling given by the book of Allah (SWT)
and the sunnah of the Prophet (SAWW).

Thus, the responsibility of the Muslims is that they must submit to
those who are put into authority over them.

However, are those who are in authority (whom we are to obey) the
despotic forces? Without a doubt, this is not the case since in the
verse which follows, this has been forbidden!

Therefore, the meaning of those who are charged with authority from
amongst us whose commandments must be followed are individuals whose
directives are on the same level as those of Allah (SWT) and His
Messenger (SAWW):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those vested
with authority among you...”

The meaning of ‘those who are charged with authority from amongst you’
are those people who follow the Qur\`an and the Sunnah in relation to
governance and judgment.

In the second verse which we wish to look at (as was quoted above), we
see that Allah (SWT) has stated that those who show satisfaction with
the governance and judgment of the despotic forces have actually
disbelieved in all of the Divinely revealed books!

If the responsibility of the Muslims is to keep away from and struggle
against the despotic governments, then it stands to reason that it is
their responsibility to establish a just government and submit
themselves to those who order others to act according to the Qur\`an and
the Sunnah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَـــــعَالَوْا إِلَـى مَا أَنْــــــــزَلَ اللهُ وَ إِلَـى
الرَّسُولِ. …
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Come to that which Allah has revealed and [come] to the Messenger.”

From this verse, we understand that in the Qur\`anic terminology, a
despotic force refers to the person who judges contrary to the rulings
of the Qur\`an and the Sunnah of the Prophet (SAWW). Thus, the only
person who is worthy of attaining the government is the one who judges
by the Qur\`an and the Sunnah!

Thus, one of the conditions of governance is a deep understanding of the
Book of Allah (SWT) and the Sunnah – and this is reserved for the one
who is a Jurist.[^3]

### C. The Narrated Proofs (Ahadith)

1. There is a long tradition contained in the book *Tuhaf al-Uqul* from
Imam Husayn b. Ali (AS) in which the Imam (AS) reprimanded the scholars
of his time as to why, due to their own slackness and differences, they
were denied the status of leadership. In this tradition, the Imam (AS)
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْتُمْ أَعْظَمُ النَّاسِ مُصِيبَةً لِمَا غُلِبْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ
مَنَازِلِ الْعُلَمَاءِ لَوْ كُنْتُمْ تَشْعُرُونَ ذَلِكَ بِأَنْ
مَجَارِيَ الأُمُورِ وَ الأَحْكَامِ عَلَى أَيْدِي الْعُلَمَاءِ بِاللهِ
الأُمَنَاءِ عَلى حَلاَلِهِ وَ حَرَامِهِ فَأَنْتُمُ الْمَسْلُوبُونَ
تِلْكَ الْمَنْزِلَةِ وَ مَا سُلِبْتُمْ ذَلِكَ إِلاَّ بِتَفَرُّقِكُمْ
عَنِ الْحَقِّ وَ اخْتِلاَفِكُمْ فيِ السُّنَّةِ بَعْدَ الْبَيِّنَةِ
الْوَاضِحَةِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are the people at the greatest loss - if you only knew - as you
subdued the status of scholars, as the answers to affairs and religious
rulings rest with these godly scholars – those who are responsible for
(guiding you to) the permissible (halal) and impermissible (haram) as
prescribed by Allah. You have not plundered that dignity and have not
deprived (yourselves) of that status except by your swaying from the
truth and disagreeing with the Sunnah after it has been shown clearly.
If you would be patient in the face of tribulations and would bear
whatever has been provided, for the sake of Allah - then the commands of
Allah would come to you, would issue from you and would return back to
you.”

2. Ishaq b. Yaqub wrote a letter to Imam Wali al-Asr (AS) [the 12th
Imam] and gave it to Muhammad b. Uthman, the representative of the 12th
Imam to pass it on to the Imam (AS). In a portion of the reply, Imam
al-Zaman (AS) wrote the following as a response to the questions of
Ishaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا الْحَوَادِثُ الْوَاقِعَةُ فَارْجِعُوا فِيهَا إِلـى رَوَاةِ
حَدِيثِــنَا فَإِنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِي عَلَيْكُمْ وَ أَنَا حُجَّةَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for those events that will occur in the future, (for the answer on
how to deal with them), refer to those people who narrate our sayings
(ahadith) since surely they (the Ulama) are my proof over you and I am
the proof of Allah.”[^4]

The proofs which we have, show us that the challenge which Ishaq b.
Yaqub was facing was not in finding a person to answer his religious
enquiries. He was not a person that did not know that answers to the
practical laws of Islam relating to worship and transactions had to be
taken from the scholars of the traditions of the Infallibles (AS)!
Rather, his hindrance was in understanding his responsibility in
relation to societal issues for which the only way to solve these sorts
of challenges was to have the judgment of one who had the right of
governance (over him).

In this letter, first off we see that the Imam (AS) orders the people to
refer to the Jurists; they are then told that they must follow such
people due to the fact that they are a proof (hujjat) over them.

From the general purport of this discussion, it is clear that the
authority of the Jurist is vast and is at the same scale as the
authority of the Imam (AS).[^5]

3. Umar b. Hanzalah asked Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (AS) a
question in regards to two Shia, who due to either a loan or some
inheritance, had gotten into a dispute with one another. Were they
permitted to refer to the governor or the judges of the un-Islamic
system for a ruling? The text of the tradition and the answer of the
Imam (AS) is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأَلْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ عَنْ رَجُلَيْنِ مِنْ
أَصْحَابِنَا بَيْنَهُمَا مُنَازَعَةٌ فِي دَيْنٍ أَوْ مِيرَاثٍ
فَتَحَاكَمَا إِلـَى السُّلْطَانِ وَ إِلَى الْقُضَاةِ أَ يَحِلُّ
ذَلِكَ؟ قَالَ: مَنْ تَحَاكَمَ إِلَيْهِمْ فِي حَقٍّ أَوْ بَاطِلٍ
فَإِنَّمَا تَحَاكَمَ إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَ مَا يَحْكُمُ لَهُ فَإِنَّمَا
يَأْخُذُ سُحْتاً وَ إِنْ كَانَ حَقّاً ثَابِتاً لِأَنَّهُ أَخَذَهُ
بِحُكْمِ الطَّاغُوتِ وَ قَدْ أَمَرَ اللَّهُ أَنْ يُكْفَرَ بِهِ قَالَ
اللَّهُ تَعَالَى: يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَحاكَمُوا إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَ
قَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِِ. قُلْتُ: فَكَيْفَ يَصْنَعَانِ؟
قَالَ: يَنْظُرَانِ إِلَى مَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ مِمَّنْ قَدْ رَوَى
حَدِيثَنَا وَ نَظَرَ فِي حَلاَلِنَا وَ حَرَامِنَا وَ عَرَفَ
أَحْكَامَنَا فَلْيَرْضَوْا بِهِ حَكَماً فَإِنِّي قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ
عَلَيْكُمْ حَاكِماً فَإِذَا حَكَمَ بِحُكْمِنَا فَلَمْ يَقْبَلْهُ
مِنْهُ فَإِنَّمَا اسْتَخَفَّ بِحُكْمِ اللَّهِ وَ عَلَيْنَا رَدَّ وَ
الرَّادُّ عَلَيْنَا الرَّادُّ عَلَى اللَّهِ وَ هُوَ عَلَى حَدِّ
الشِّرْكِ بِاللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I asked Aba Abdillah, peace be upon him, about two of our people (the
Shia) who have a dispute amongst themselves regarding a loan or an
inheritance and seek a judgment from the ruler or from (government
appointed) judges – is this permissible (for them)? He said, ‘The one
who seeks judgment from them justly or unjustly has sought judgment from
the despot and (if he takes) that which has been awarded to him, then
surely he has taken (possession) unlawfully even if it may be an
established right, because he took it by the judgment of a despot
whereas Allah has commanded that he (the despot) be defied. Allah
(Glorious and Free from Imperfections is He) says: They desire to seek
judgment from a despot, though they were commanded to defy it...”

I said, “Then what should they do?” He said, “They should wait for one
from among them who has narrated (traditions) from us, has observed our
permissible (halal) and impermissible (haram), knows our rulings and
should suffice with his judgment for I have made him a judge over you.
So if he judges by our judgment and it is not accepted, then Allah’s
judgment has been belittled and he has rejected us - and the one who
rejects us has rejected Allah and this is the same as ascribing partners
to Allah.”[^6]

From this tradition, we can deduce the following three points:

1. In regards to the portion of the tradition which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ رَوَى حَدِيثَنَا وَ نَظَرَ فِي حَلاَلِنَا وَ حَرَامِنَا وَ عَرَفَ
أَحْكَامَنَا فَلْيَرْضَوْا بِهِ حَكَماً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“That person who narrates our tradition and who knows our permissible
(halal) and our impermissible (haram) and knows our injunctions...”

the Imam (AS) is, without doubt, referring to the Jurists and scholars
of the faith of Islam since this part of the tradition cannot be in
reference to anyone other than the person who is a Faqih and Mujtahid of
the Islamic injunctions and religious issues.

2. The second point gathered from this tradition from the portion which
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاكِماً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“...Surely I have placed them as a ruler over you...”

is a general formula given which actually shows us the ‘reason for the
ruling’.

From this we can understand that being in charge of the affairs and
ruling over the societal issues which will occur in the future for which
the people will need to refer to the government in place must be the
undertaking of the Jurist.

3. The third and final point which we gain from this tradition is that
the Imam (AS) has introduced the Faqih as the authority over the people.
In addition, the ruling of the Faqih has been equated as being the same
as the ruling of the Imam (AS).

As we know, it is obligatory to obey the command of the infallible Imam
(AS) and in the same way, the Imam (AS) himself has stated that denying
the governance and ruling of the Faqih is equivalent to not accepting
the governance of the infallible Imam (AS) and is tantamount to
considering his rule as being insignificant! This [not obeying the
command of the Imam and the Faqih] is equal to not accepting the
‘legislative governance’ of Allah (SWT) and is equivalent to associating
partners with Allah (SWT)!

**For more information on this, refer to:**

1. *Wilayatul Faqih*, Ayatullah Abdullah Jawadi Amuli

2. *The Sources of Islamic Governance*, Husain Jawan Araste

3. *A Glance at the Opinions in regards to Wilayatul Faqih in the
writings of Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi*, compiled by Muhammad
Mahdi Nadiri Qummi.

[^1]: Ayatullah Abdullah Jawadi Amuli, Wilayatul Faqih, Section on
Wilayat of the Jurists and Adalat, pp. 212 to 213.

[^2]: Surat al-Nisa (4), Verses 58 to 61

[^3]: Abbas Yazdani, Discussions on Religious Governance, pp. 32 to 34

[^4]: Ikmal al-Din wa Itmam al-Nimah, section on the Letters of the 12th
Imam, no. 4; Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 18, section on the Traits of a
Islamic Judge, no. 9.

[^5]: Refer to Wilayat-e-Faqih containing the opinions of Ayatullah
Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi as compiled by Muhammad Mahdi Nadiri Qummi,
pp. 98 and 99.

[^6]: Furu al-Kafi, vol. 7, pg 412; also refer to the work by Husain
Jawan Araste, The Sources of Islamic Governance.


