The Necessity of Following the Orders of the Supreme Leader
===========================================================

Question: Is it Obligatory to Follow the Orders of the Supreme Leader?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

First off, we must mention the following point that: An issue which is
tied to the management of the affairs of the society – for the Prophet
(SAWW), the infallible Imam (AS) and also for the Jurist - is related to
the discussion of the ‘wilayat tashrii’ or the ‘legislative authority’.
This is what is referred to in the verse of the Qur\`an which reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلنَّبِيُّ أَوْلـى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet has a greater authority over the believers than they
have over their own selves.”*** [^1]

In addition, there is a hadith which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَهَذَا عَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever I am his master, this Ali is also his master (and
authority).”

At this juncture, this verse and hadith form the basis of our
discussion.

Therefore, the ‘legislative authority’ refers to the ‘judicial
authority’. This means that a person can and has the right to, through
the establishment and formation of laws and their implementation,
intervene in the lives of the people and the society while others are
obliged to submit to such an individual and follow his laws.

The meaning of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلنَّبِيُّ أَوْلـى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Prophet has a greater authority over the believers than they have
over their own selves.”[^2]

is that when the Prophet (SAWW) decides on an issue for an individual
Muslim or for the entire Islamic society, it is obligatory to follow
that decision. In addition, any resolution which the people would make
in relation to themselves or the entire society would be superseded by
the decision of the Prophet (SAWW)!

In other words, the society is in need of one powerful point of
reference for which, in the face of societal issues, this focal-point
would have the right and power to speak the final word and in the verse
of the Qur\`an quoted above, Allah (SWT) has clearly identified the
central point on the pyramid of authority.

Therefore, the ‘Guardianship of the Jurist’ is not in the meaning of the
mere guardianship over the mental challenged or simple minded people
[since such individuals do not have ability to maintain themselves and
conduct their own lives, they are in need of an authority and
assistant].

Rather, it is our belief that the Jurist has the right of possession (of
the property of others); right of formulating religious laws and
societal regulations; passing rulings and the execution of the laws in
relation to the administration of the affairs of the society and the
societal issues. Therefore, we must place him ahead of all others while
all other people are bound with the responsibility of observing this
right and obeying his decisions, commands and laws.

It is for this reason that we state that according to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلنَّبِيُّ أَوْلـى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet has a greater authority over the believers than they
have over their own selves***.”[^3]

if the Prophet (SAWW) was to order a person to go to the battlefield and
even if that person did not want to go, he would be obligated to obey
the order of the Prophet (SAWW)!

Or if, for example, a person had given his khums (20% savings tax) and
zakat (various religious tithes which have been explained in the
detailed books of Islamic jurisprudence) and had no other compulsory
financial obligations resting upon him, however if the Prophet (SAWW)
was to order him to give a certain amount of money towards the war [or
any other cause], then that person would be obligated to give that
money! He would not have the right to object since his (the Prophet’s
(SAWW) ruling is as the ruling of Allah (SWT) and as we know, when it
comes to the rule of Allah (SWT), there are no ifs, ands or buts!

The late Imam Khumayni (RA) had given the following example in his
lessons on many occasions that:

“If the Islamic authority was to tell me to give my Aba (cloak), then I
must give it to him. When the best interest of the Islamic society would
have demanded it, the Jurist who is in authority must have discerned
that he had a need for my Aba and thus, if he was to ask me for it, I
would be obliged to obey him and hand it over.”

This is the true meaning of the ‘Governance of the Jurist’ which has
matured and set into our culture.

Until recent, there were no doubts in regards to this issue. Indeed,
every single man and woman - young and old - villager or city dweller -
knew this definition and accepted it.

In addition, there are also various proofs in regards to this authority,
of which the most well-known is the ‘Tobacco ruling’ case and the
verdict (hukm) which was laid down by the late Mirza Shirazi.

During the era of Mirza Shirazi, all of the Shia firmly believed that
the Ulama and the Mujtahidin were sitting in the seat of authority which
ultimately belongs to Imam al-Zaman (AS). Thus, if the one in the place
of the Imam (AS) was to order something, his commands would be obeyed.

It is for this reason that when the late Mirza Shirazi stated that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليوم استعمال تنباكو حرام و مخالفت با امام زمان (عليه السلام) است.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“From today, the use of tobacco is forbidden (haram) and is akin to
going against Imam al-Zaman (peace be upon him).”

all of the hookah machines were destroyed! Even the wife of Nasir al-Din
Shah (the ruler of Iran at that time) took the hookah pipe and threw it,
breaking it!

It did not come into anyone’s mind at how it was possible that tobacco
usage, which up until the day before this ruling was issued was
permissible and was not problematic was now forbidden!? Is it possible
for the permissible (halal) and impermissible (haram) of Allah (SWT) to
change like this??

Rather, everyone – including the scholars, Maraja and those who had the
right to issue legal rulings (fatawa) all realized that they were bound
by the ruling and that they had to follow the verdict of Mirza Shirazi!

In any case, when the principle of the ‘Governance of the Jurist’ is
proven using the logical and narrated proofs, then without doubt, the
next rational step is complete obedience of (the one who is in) that
position.

**For more information on this, refer to:**

1. *The Governance of the Jurist: The Governance of the Jurisprudence
and Justice* by Ayatullah Abdullah Jawadi Amuli

2. *A Glance at the Theory of the Governance of the Jurist* Ayatullah
Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi

3. *Naqd Quarterly Journal*, Issue 7

[^1]: Suratul Ahzab (33), Verse 6

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibid.


