Criticizing the Supreme Leader
==============================

Question: Can the Supreme Leader be criticized? Who has the right to do this and under what conditions can he do this?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is permissible to criticize the Supreme Leader, however in doing so,
the following points must be observed:

1. Islamic etiquette must be observed at the time of criticizing and in
this regards, the Supreme Leader is the same as all other believers.

It must be noted that the conditions of criticizing include the
following:

a. Before criticism, the original subject matter, defect or shortcoming
must be definite. This means that it must not be based on rumor or
information which cannot be relied upon. It must also not be based upon
one’s supposition and without any sort of research such that something
is unjustly attributed to an individual and is then used to bring about
objections and criticism upon him.

b. The criticism must be done in order to bring about a reformation and
improvement – not that one becomes a fault picker and one who seeks to
disgrace people.

c. The criticism must be done because one feels sympathy and
consideration for the other party and not because he wishes to be
thought of as being greater than the other person.

d. The criticism must be done with no insult or abuse. Rather, it must
be carried out with complete etiquette and by observing the status which
the person holds. In reality, such criticism must be presented to the
individual as a gift.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (AS) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَبُّ إِخْوَانِي إِلَـيَّ مَنْ أَهْدَى إِلَـيَّ عُيُوبِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My most beloved brother to me is the one who offers me my shortcomings
as a gift.”[^1]

In addition to what was mentioned above in regards to a respected
individual (and how he should be treated) – especially the leader of the
Islamic system, there are also other issues which must be kept in mind.

Certainly there is clear difference when it comes to a person
criticizing his friend; a wife censuring her husband; a child pointing
out the slips of his father or a student noting the errors of his
teacher, than there is in criticizing a religious leader and authority.

The child and a student both owe a certain level of respect to their
father and teacher, however above these people is the respect and honor
which the Imam (AS) and his representative deserve.

3. The third point in regards to criticizing the Supreme Leader is that
one must keep the enemies (of Islam) in mind. Criticizing the Supreme
Leader must be planned out with intelligence so that the enemies do not
make ill use of such a thing.

Seeing as how it is necessary to observe this point when it comes to
criticizing the Supreme Leader, we see that there is a commission
referred to as the ‘Assembly of Experts’ whose task is to oversee the
actions of the Supreme Leader and when necessary, inform him of their
review (of him). In fact, this group of investigators was put into place
by the advice of the Supreme Leader himself!

The Best Way to Appraise the Supreme Leader
-------------------------------------------

In our opinion, in order to comply with the mentioned principles, the
best path to follow in airing one’s criticisms is to write a letter to
the Secretary General of *The Assembly of Experts for the Supreme
Leadership* [Majlis-e-Khubragan-e-Rahbari] explaining the issue at hand.

Criticizing others in the establishment (the Parliament, Judicial
System, etc...) has been mentioned in principle number 90 of the
constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran which reads:

“Whoever has a complaint concerning the work of the Assembly, executive
power or the judicial power can forward his complaint in writing to the
Assembly. The Assembly must investigate his complaint and give a
satisfactory reply. In cases where the complaint relates to the
executive or the judiciary, the Assembly must demand proper
investigation in the matter and an adequate explanation from them, and
announce the results within a reasonable time. In cases where the
subject of the complaint is of public interest, the reply must be made
public.”

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, pg. 249, no. 108, sec. 23


