Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله رب العالمين و الصلاة و السلام على محمد و آله الطاهرين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.*

*All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Universe.*

*May Allah shower His blessings upon*

*Prophet Muhammad and his progeny.*

Islam is a world religion; its presence can be felt all over the world
through conversion or migration. However, the most visible symbol of
Islam’s presence in the West is the *hijab*—the headdress used by a
Muslim woman to cover her head. In the Greater Toronto Area, you can see
Muslim women in *hijab* at schools, in colleges and universities, in the
workplace, in malls, and on the streets.

Being the most obvious symbol of Islam’s presence, it is also the
easiest target for harassment against Muslims. Whenever a racist
politician or the media or any hate group attacks Islam, the very first
target is the Muslim woman’s *hijab*. Also, some so-called experts on
Islam and the Middle East assume a patronizing attitude and try to teach
Muslims that *hijab* is not a religious requirement in Islam, saying it
is more a cultural issue used by Muslim men to oppress the women. Some
self-loathing Muslim journalists, politicians and intellectuals also
jump on that back wagon to prove themselves as “progressive” and
“liberated”.

Is *hijab* really a cultural tradition of the Persians or the Turks that
was adopted by the Arabs who implanted it into Islam? Or is there a
religious basis in the Qur’an and the tradition of the Prophet for
*hijab*?

The Term Hijab
--------------

The term *“hijab—***الحجاب***”* literally means a cover, curtain or
screen. It is not a technical term used in Islamic jurisprudence for the
dress code of women. The term used in Islamic jurisprudence that denotes
the conduct of unrelated men and women towards one another, and their
dress code, is “*satr* or *satir—***الستر، الساتر**”.

In the last two decades however, the Muslims in the west, as well as the
media, use the term “*hijab*” to define the headdress and the overall
clothing of Muslim women.

It is in this latter meaning —headdress as well as the overall clothing—
that we have used the term “*hijab*” in this article.


