The Qur’an and Hijab
====================

Islam has strongly emphasized the concept of decency and modesty in the
interaction between members of the opposite sex. Dress code is part of
that overall teaching. There are two verses in the Qur’an in which
Almighty Allah talks about the issue of decency and *hijab* as defined
earlier.

The First Verse
---------------

In Chapter 24 known as an-Nur (the Light), in verse 30, Allah commands
Prophet Muhammad as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ يَغُضُّوْا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَ يَحْفَظُوْا
فُرُوْجَهُمْ, ذَلِكَ أَزْكَى لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“*****Say to the believing men that: they should cast down their
glances and guard their private parts (by being chaste). This is better
for them.”***

This is a command to Muslim **men** that they should not lustfully look
at women (other than their own wives); and in order to prevent any
possibility of temptation, they are required to cast their glances
downwards. This is known as “*hijab* of the eyes”.

Then in the next verse, Allah commands the Prophet to address the
**women**:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَ يَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوْجَهُنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say to the believing women that: they should cast down their glances
and guard their private parts (by being chaste)…”***

This is a similar command as given to the men in the previous verse
regarding “*hijab* of the eyes”.

This *hijab* of eyes is similar to the teaching of Jesus where he says,
“You have heard that it was said by them of old time, you shall not
commit adultery. But I say unto you, That whosoever looks on a woman to
lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his
heart.”[^1] So if you see a Muslim casting his/her eyes downwards when
he/she is talking to a member of opposite sex, this should not be
considered as rude or an indication of lack of confidence — he/she is
just abiding by the Qur’anic as well as Biblical teaching.

\* \* \* \* \*

After “*hijab* of the eyes” came the order describing the **dress code**
for women:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ يُبْدِيْنَ زِيْنَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَ
لْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلىَ جُيُوْبِهِنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“...and not display their beauty except what is apparent, and they
should place their*** **khumur** ***over their bosoms...”***

There are two issues about this sentence.

### (1) What is the meaning of “khumur” used in this verse?

*Khumur* **خُمُرٌ** is plural of *khimar***خِمَارٌ** **,** the veil
covering the head. See any Arabic dictionary like *Lisanu ’l-‘Arab,
Majma‘u ’l-Bahrayn* or *al-Munjid*.

*Al-Munjid*, which is the most popular dictionary in the Arab world,
defines *al-khimar* as “something with which a woman conceals her head
—**ما تغطى به المرأة رأسها** **.**” Fakhru ’d-Din al-Turayhi in *Majma‘u
’l-Bahrayn* (which is a dictionary of Qur’anic and hadith terms) defines
*al-khimar* as “scarf, and it is known as such because the head is
covered with it.”[^2]

So the word *khimar*, by definition, means a piece of cloth that covers
the head.

### (2) Then what does the clause “placing the khumur over the bosoms” mean?

According to the commentators of the Qur’an, the women of Medina in the
pre-Islamic era used to put their *khumur* over the head with the two
ends tucked behind and tied at the back of the neck, in the process
exposing their ears and neck. By saying that, “place the *khumur* over
the bosoms,” Almighty Allah ordered the women to let the two ends of
their headgear extend onto their bosoms so that they conceal their ears,
the neck, and the upper part of the bosom also.[^3]

This is confirmed by the way the Muslim women of the Prophet’s era
understood this commandment of Almighty Allah. The Sunni sources quote
Ummu ’l-mu’minin ‘A’isha, the Prophet’s wife, as follows: “I have not
seen women better than those of al-Ansar (the inhabitants of Medina):
when this verse was revealed, all of them got hold of their aprons, tore
them apart, and used them to cover their heads...”[^4]

The meaning of *khimar* and the context in which the verse was revealed
clearly talks about concealing the head and then using the loose ends of
the scarf to conceal the neck and the bosom. It is absurd to believe
that the Qur’an would use the word *khimar* (which, by definition, means
a cloth that covers the head) only to conceal the bosom with the
exclusion of the head! It would be like saying to put on your shirt only
around the belly or the waist without covering the chest!

Finally the verse goes on to give the list of the *mahram* – male family
members in whose presence the *hijab* is not required, such as the
husband, the father, the father-in-law, the son(s), and others.

The Second Verse
----------------

In Chapter 33 known as al-Ahzab, verse 59, Allah gives the following
command to Prophet Muhammad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ, قُلْ لأَزْوَاجِكَ وَ بَنَاتِكَ وَ نِسآءِ
الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ: يُدْنِيْنَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِنْ جَلاَبِيْبِهِنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Prophet! Say to*** ***your wives, your daughters, and the women of
the believers that: they should let down upon themselves their***
**jalabib.*****”***

### What is the meaning of “jalabib”?

*Jalabib* **جَلاَبِيْبٌ** is the plural of *jilbab***جِلْبَابٌ** **,**
which means a loose outer garment. See any Arabic dictionary like
*Lisanu ’l-‘Arab, Majma‘u ’l-Bahrayn* or *al-Munjid*.

*Al-Munjid,* for instance, defines *jilbab* as “the shirt or a wide
dress—**القميص أو الثوب الواسع.”** While al-Turayhi, in *Majma‘u
’l-Bahrayn*, defines it as “a wide dress, wider than the scarf and
shorter than a robe, that a woman puts upon her head and lets it down on
her bosom...”[^5]

This means that the Islamic dress code for women does not only consist
of a scarf that covers the head, the neck and the bosom; it also
includes the overall dress that should be long and loose.

So, for instance, the combination of a tight, short sweater with
tight-fitting jeans with a scarf over the head does not fulfill the
requirements of the Islamic dress code.

[^1]: The Gospel of Matthew, chap. 5, verses 27-28.

[^2]: Al-Munjid (Beirut: Daru ’l-Mashriq, 1986) p. 195; at-Turayh¢,
Majma‘u ’l-Bahrayn, vol.1 (Tehran: Daftar Nashr, 1408 AH) p. 700. See
at-Tusi, at-Tibyan, vol. 7 (Qum: Maktabatu ’l-l‘lam al-Islami, 1409 AH)
p. 428; at-Tabrasi, Majma’u ’l-Bayan, vol. 7 (Beirut: Dar Ihyai
’t-Turathi ’l-‘Arabi, 1379AH) p.138; also see the famous Sunni
commentator, Fakhru ’d-Din ar-Razi, at-Tafsiru ’l-Kabir, vol. 23
(Beirut: Daru ’l-Kutubi ’l-‘Ilmiyya, 1990) p. 179-180. Even the Hans
Wehr Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic (Ithaca, NY: Spoken Languages
Services, 1976) defines al-khimar as “veil covering head and face of a
woman.” (p. 261) No one has excluded the covering of the head from
definition of “al-khimar”.

[^3]: Ar-Razi, at-Tafsiru ’l-Kabir, vol.23, p. 179, and other famous
commentaries and collections of hadith such as at-Tabataba’i, al-Mizan,
vol. 15 (Tehran: Daru ’l-Kutub, 1397AH) p. 121; al-Kulayni, al-Furu‘
mina ’l-Kafi, vol. 5 (Tehran: Daru ’l-Kutub, 1367AH) p. 521. Also see
the commentaries of al-Kashshaf, Ibn Kathir, at-Tabari, and al-Qurtubi.

[^4]: Ibid, also see, al-Bukhari, Sahih (Arabic & English) vol. 6
(Beirut: Daru ’l-‘Arabiyya) p. 267; Abu ’l-A‘la Mawdudi, Tafhimu
’l-Qur’an, vol. 3 (Lahore: Idara-e Tarjuman-e Qur’an, 1994) p. 316.

[^5]: Ibid. al-Munjid, p. 96; at-Turayhi, Majma‘u ’l-Bahrayn, vol. 1,
p.384.


