The Sunna and Hijab
===================

The *sunna* —the sayings and examples of the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.)—
is the second most important source for Islamic laws. It is impossible
to truly understand the Qur’an without studying the Prophet’s life that
provided the context in which the holy Book was revealed. Almighty Allah
says,

***“And We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) the Reminder (i.e., the
Qur’an) so that you may clarify to the people what has been revealed to
them, and so that they may reflect.”*** **(16:44)**

“Sunna” is that “clarification” mentioned in this verse.

There is a tendency among the so-called progressive and liberated
Muslims to claim that they only follow the Qur’an and ignore the *sunna*
of the Prophet. Responding to such Muslims, Drs. Murata and Chittick
write, “We are perfectly aware that many contemporary Muslims are tired
of what they consider outdated material: they would like to discard
their intellectual heritage and replace it with truly ‘scientific’
endeavors, such as sociology. By claiming that the Islamic intellectual
heritage is superfluous and that the Koran is sufficient, such people
have surrendered to the spirit of the times. This is a far different
enterprise than that pursued by the great authorities, who interpreted
their present in the light of a grand tradition and who never fell prey
to the up-to-date—that most obsolescent of all abstractions.”[^1]

From the Shi‘i point of view, the authentic sayings of the Imams of
Ahlul Bayt portray the true *sunna* of the Prophet and further clarify
the meaning of the Qur’anic verses. The Prophet himself introduced the
Ahlul Bayt as the twin of the Qur’an.[^2]

\* \* \* \* \*

The following two sayings from the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt on the issue
of *hijab* are presented here as an example.

Al-Fudayl bin Yasar asked Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) about the forearms of a
woman: whether they are included in the “beauty” as described by the
Almighty when He says, “*and they should not display* *their beauty
except for their husbands...*” The Imam replied, “Yes, and what is
beneath the veil covering the head (*khimar*) is from the beauty [as
mentioned in the verse], and also what is beneath the wristbands.”[^3]
As one can clearly see in this authentic hadith, the Imam has exempted
the face and the hands, but everything else has been counted as *“the
beauty that should not be displayed except for their husbands...”*

Abu Nasr al-Bazinli quotes Imam ‘Ali as-Rida (a.s.) as follows: “A woman
does not have to cover her head in the presence of a boy who has not yet
reached the age of puberty.”[^4] The implication of this statement is
obvious that once a boy who is not related to a woman reaches the age of
puberty, she has to cover her head in his presence.

Even the founders of the Sunni schools of law are unanimous in this
view. According to the Maliki, the Hanafi, the Shafi‘i, and the Hanbali
views, the entire body of a woman is *‘awrah* and therefore it should be
covered with the exception of the face and the hands.[^5]

\* \* \* \* \*

**The two verses discussed above put together clearly show that**
***hijab*****, as a decent code of dress for Muslim women, is part of
the Qur’anic teachings. This is also confirmed by how the Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.) understood and implemented these verses among the
Muslim women. This is further confirmed by how the Imams of the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.), and the Muslim scholars of the early generations of Islam
understood the Qur’an.**[^6]

**It is an understanding that has been continuously affirmed by Muslims
for the last fourteen centuries. And, strangely, now we hear some
so-called experts of Islam telling us that** ***hijab*** **has nothing
to do with Islam, it is just a cultural issue and a matter of personal
choice!**

[^1]: Sachiko Murata & William C. Chittick, The Vision of Islam (St.
Paul, MN: Paragon House, 1995) p. xi.

[^2]: For more information on the sunna and also the connection between
the Qur’an and the Ahlul Bayt, see my Introduction to Islamic Laws.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, al-Furu‘ mina ’l-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 64.

[^4]: As-Saduq, Man la Yahduruhu ’l-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 140; Qurbu
’l-Asnad, p. 170. See Wasa’ilu ’sh-Shi‘ah, vol. 14 (Beirut: Dar
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.) p. 169.

[^5]: ‘Abdu ’r-Rahman al-Juzari, al-Fiqh ‘ala ’l-Madhahibi ’l-Arba‘ah,
vol. 5 (Beirut: Daru ’l-Fikr, 1969) p. 54-55.

[^6]: Besides the references quoted earlier, also see at-Tabrasi,
Majma‘u ’l-Bayan, vol. 7-8, p. 138, 370; at-Tusi, at-Tibyan, vol. 8, p.
361; Fakhru ’d-Din ar-Razi, at-Tafsiru ’l-Kabir, vol. 23, p. 179-180.


