Muslim Culture & the Style of Hijab
===================================

It is quite probable that these so-called experts of Islam and of the
Middle East have confused the basic order of the Qur’an with the style
of *hijab* worn by Muslim women of various ethnic backgrounds.

The requirement of *hijab* is a Qur’anic command. The basic requirement
is that a Muslim woman should cover her head and bosom with a *khimar*
(a head covering), and her body with a *jilbab* (a loose over-garment).
Of course, she can leave her face and hands open.[^1]

When it comes to the style, colour, and material of the *khimar* and
*jilbab*, each Muslim ethnic group can follow the Qur’anic injunction
according to their own cultural background. The variety in styles of
implementing the same Qur’anic law is so because Islam is a world
religion, it is cannot be confined to one region or tribe or culture.

Therefore you see that the Muslim women in Arabia use *‘abaya*; the
Persian Muslim women use *chador*; the Afghani Muslim women use *burqa;*
the Indo-Pakistani Muslim women use *niqab* or *purdah*; the
Malaysian/Indonesian Muslim women use *kerudung;* the East African
Muslim women use *buibui*; and now in the West, the Canadian Muslim
women use mainstream clothes worn with a bigger scarf over the head and
a loose outfit.

Islam is not concerned with the style as long as it fulfills the basic
requirement of *khimar* and *jilbab*. This is where the religion and
culture interact with one another, and therein lies the dynamic aspect
of the Islamic *shari‘a;* and this interaction might have confused some
of the so-called experts of Islam who erroneously believe that *hijab*
is a cultural tradition and not a religious requirement.

[^1]: Putting a veil to cover the face is not the initial requirement of
the rules of hijab. The Shi‘i as well as majority of Sunni jurists say
that the face should be covered only if there is a danger of fitna, a
situation that could lead to committing a sin.


