Conclusion
==========

To those who very harshly and quickly judge *hijab* as a symbol of
oppression of women, I ask: When you see a nun in her habit, what do you
think of that—is that a symbol of oppression or a dress that demands
dignity and respect? The *habit* of a nun is a complete *hijab*. Why
then the double standard? Is this not cultural imperialism? When a
Catholic nun dresses in that way, she becomes dignified, but when a
Muslim woman dresses in that way, she becomes the symbol of oppression?!
In Islam, we want that dignity and respect for each and every Muslim
woman, not only a few selected ones who have decided to serve the cause
of their faith.

I salute those Muslim women who have found the courage in themselves to
observe *hijab* in this non-Muslim society, and I strongly urge their
male-counterparts to appreciate women’s great contribution in being at
the forefront in the struggle to carve out a niche for Islam in the
multicultural society of Canada.

One last thing that I must say is that in spite of all the talk about
suppression of rights of women in Muslim societies, we have had three
countries in the world of Islam—Turkey, Pakistan and Bangladesh—which
have had female Prime Ministers. Against this track record, the United
States of America or Canada have not yet shown that openness for the
advancement of women where a lady could be elected for a full term as a
President or Prime Minister. I think that says a lot about Islam and the
Muslims.


