Hijab Jokes
===========

*“Appendix B” consists of a humorous write up about*

*the pointless hijab that some Muslim sisters wear.*

*This is reproduced here from the internet.*

*Hijab* Jokes

By: Ayesha <Ayesha1998@aol.com>

Broadcasted on BIC News 20 November 1997

Brothers and Sisters,

*Although it may seem humorous it can serve as constructive criticism
both for the sisters, and the brothers. We learn from this that all
those outward actions which Islam requires must be done correctly and
with the correct intention, i.e. not for fashion or to fit into a
certain group. That is it must all be solely for the sake of Allah
(swt). The purpose of this article is not to offend anyone, rather it
was written to make a point. Enjoy...*

It has been my personal observation that some Muslim girls and women do
not realize the significance of *hijab*. *Hijab* is Arabic for
protection and cover. Some people put a lot of effort into their
*hijab*, yet it serves no purpose. I am referring to the *pointless
hijab* that some girls wear.

The first pointless *hijab* is referred to as the ***headband***
***hijab***. It is a band of fabric approximately 4 inches wide. It
covers the back of the head and allows all the hair to be exposed. It
doesn't serve much in terms of modesty, but at least it comes in handy
in case of an unexpected tennis match.

The second pointless *hijab* is the *dupetta,* also known as the
***Saran wrap hijab.*** It covers all the hair, but it is totally
transparent. Again it doesn't serve much in terms of modesty, but it
keeps the hair nice and fresh.

The third type of *hijab* is known as the ***Mickey Mouse***
***Hijab*****.** It is when a girl wears a black scarf and tucks it
behind her ear, so that her ears stick out.

We now move to my favorites: the ***yo-yo*** ***hijab*****s.** The first
yo-yo *hijab*, also known as the Benazir Bhutto *hijab*, is the scarf
that keeps falling down and needs to be constantly pulled back up....up,
down, up, down, just like a yo-yo. The second yo-yo *hijab* is also
referred to as the **convertible** ***hijab***. This type of *hijab* is
predominant at any type of social event, i.e. an Aqeeqah, Bismillah
party, Ameen party, wedding, etc. This is when an Imam or Qari comes up
to the microphone and starts to recite Qur'an. At this point, all the
convertible *hijab*s come up...until he says "Sadaqallahul adheem". I'm
not sure, but apparently in some cultures that translates to "Ok
sisters, you may now take off your scarves".

I'm sure this may seem odd, but what's even funnier is when people do
not anticipate the recitation of Qur'an at a social event, and are
forced to be creative and use accessories such as a purse to cover one's
hair. I was surprised to see a women hold her purse over her head as
"*hijab*"...as if the multitudes of men surrounding her are not a good
enough reason to wear *hijab*, but some guy reciting du'a compels her to
hold a purse over her head. Her friends were more creative...one friend
used her dinner napkin.

I was also laughing when I saw the **communal** ***hijab***---two or
more girls draped under one dinner napkin during the recitation of
Qur'an. Her other friend was still more creative. She used her coffee
saucer on the back of her head. I wasn't sure if it was *hijab* or a
Yamaka. I didn't know if she was a Muslim or a Jew. I felt like going up
to her and saying "Shalom alaikum, sister".

And, people should remember that *hijab* is not just a protection from
guys, but from a girl's nafs (ego) as well. It should prevent girls from
having to spend hours in front of the mirror doing their hair. But,
unfortunately, you see girls in front of the mirror for hours doing
their *hijab* as they would do their hair, with all sorts of elaborate
braids and the like. I wanted to go up to a sister and say "Is your
*hijab* naturally curly?" I also felt compelled to go up to another girl
and say "pardon me, but is your *hijab* naturally that color, or did you
dye it?"

Well, the point to remember is that some people make an effort to wear
*hijab*, but it is futile, because it is not fulfilling its purpose.
It's like using an umbrella with holes in it. *Hijab* is used for
protection from guys as well as from the girl herself, and should not be
used as an accessory or for beautifying one's self. Anyway, that's it….


