The Necessity for Islamic Government
====================================

   
 A body of laws alone is not sufficient for a society to be reformed. In
order for law to ensure the reform and happiness of man, there must be
an executive power and an executor. For this reason, God Almighty, in
addition to revealing a body of law (i.e., the ordinances of the
*sharī‘ah*), has laid down a particular form of government together with
executive and administrative institution.  
    
 The Most Noble Messenger (s) headed the executive and administrative
institutions of Muslim society. In addition to conveying the revelation
and expounding and interpreting the articles of faith and the ordinances
and institutions of Islam, he undertook the implementation of law and
the establishment of the ordinances of Islam, thereby, bringing into
being the Islamic state. He did not content himself with the
promulgation of law; rather, he implemented it at the same time, cutting
off hands and administering lashings, and stonings. After the Most Noble
Messenger (s), his successor had the same duty and function. When the
Prophet (s) appointed a successor, it was not only for the purpose of
expounding articles of faith and law; it was for the implementation of
law and the execution of God’s ordinances. It was this function—the
execution of law and the establishment of Islamic institutions—that made
the appointment of a successor such an important matter that the Prophet
(s) would have failed to fulfill his mission if he had neglected it. For
after the Prophet (s), the Muslims still needed someone to execute laws
and establish the institution of Islam in society, so that they might
attain happiness in this world and the hereafter.  
    
 By their nature, in fact, laws and social institutions require the
existence of an executor. It has always and everywhere been the case
that legislation alone has little benefit: legislation by itself cannot
assure the well-being of man. After the establishment of legislation, an
executive power must come into being, a power that implements the laws
and the verdicts given by the courts, thus allowing people to benefit
from the laws and the just sentences the courts deliver. Islam has
therefore established an executive power in the same way that it has
brought laws into being. The person who holds this executive power is
known as the *valī-yi amr*.[^1]  
    
 The Sunnah[^2] and path of the Prophet (s) constitute a proof of the
necessity for establishing government. First, he himself established a
government, as history testifies. He engaged in the implementation of
laws, the establishment of the ordinances of Islam, and the
administration of society. He sent out governors to different regions;
both sat in judgment himself and also appointed judges; dispatched
emissaries to foreign states, tribal chieftains, and kings; concluded
treaties and pacts; and took command in battle. In short, he fulfilled
all the functions of government. Second, he designated a ruler to
succeed him, in accordance with divine command. If God Almighty, through
the Prophet (s), designated a man who was to rule over Muslim society
after him, this is in itself an indication that government remains a
necessity after the departure of the Prophet from this world. Again,
since the Most Noble Messenger (s) promulgated the divine command
through his act of appointing a successor, he also, implicitly stated
the necessity for establishing a government.  
    
 It is self-evident that the necessity for enactment of the law, which
necessitated the formation of a government by the Prophet (s), was
confined or restricted to his time, but continues after his departure
from this world. According to one of the noble verses of the Qur’an, the
ordinances of Islam are not limited with respect to time or place; they
are permanent and must be enacted until the end of time.[^3] They were
not revealed merely for the time of the Prophet, only to be abandoned
thereafter, with retribution and the penal code no longer be enacted, or
the taxes prescribed by Islam no longer collected, and the defense of
the lands and people of Islam suspended. The claim that the laws of
Islam may remain in abeyance or are restricted to a particular time or
place is contrary to the essential creedal bases of Islam. Since
enactment of laws, then, is necessary after the departure of the Prophet
from this world, and indeed, will remain so until the end of time, the
formation of a government and the establishment of executive and
administrative organs are also necessary. Without the formation of a
government and the establishment of such organs to ensure that through
enactment of the law, all activities of the individual take place in the
framework of a just system, chaos and anarchy will prevail and social,
intellectual and moral corruption will arise. The only way to prevent
the emergence of anarchy and disorder and to protect society from
corruption is to form a government and thus impart order to all the
affairs of the country.  
    
 Both reason and divine law, then, demonstrate the necessity in our time
for what was necessary during the lifetime of the Prophet (s) and the
age of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a)—namely the
formation of a government and the establishment of executive and
administrative organs.  
    
 In order to clarify the matter further, let us pose the following
question. From the time of the Lesser Occultation[^4] down to the
present (a period of more than twelve centuries that may continue for
hundreds of millennia if it is not appropriate for the Occulted Imām to
manifest himself), is it proper that the laws of Islam be cast aside and
remain unexecuted, so that everyone acts as he pleases and anarchy
prevails? Were the laws that the Prophet of Islam labored so hard for
twenty-three years to set forth, promulgate, and execute valid only for
a limited period of time? Was everything pertaining to Islam meant to be
abandoned after the Lesser Occultation? Anyone who believes so, or
voices such a belief, is worse situated than the person who believes and
proclaims that Islam has been superseded or abrogated by another
supposed revelation.[^5]  
    
 No one can say it is no longer necessary to defend the frontiers and
the territorial integrity of the Islamic homeland; that taxes such as
the *jizyah*, *kharāj*, *khums*, and *zakāt*[^6] should no longer be
collected; that the penal code of Islam, with its provisions for the
payment of blood money and the exacting of requital, should be
suspended. Any person who claims that the formation of an Islamic
government is not necessary implicitly denies the necessity for the
implementation of Islamic law, the universality and comprehensiveness of
that law, and the eternal validity of the faith itself.  
    
 After the death of the Most Noble Messenger (s), none of the Muslims
doubted the necessity for government. No one said: “We no longer need a
government”. No one was heard to say anything of the kind. There was
unanimous agreement concerning the necessity for government. There was
disagreement only as to which person should assume responsibility for
government and head the state. Government, therefore, was established
after the Prophet (s), both in the time of the caliphs and in that of
the Commander of the Faithful (‘a); an apparatus of government came into
existence with administrative and executive organs.  
    
 The nature and character of Islamic law and the divine ordinances of
the *sharī‘ah* furnish additional proof of the necessity for
establishing government, for they indicate that the laws were laid down
for the purpose of creating a state and administering the political,
economic and cultural affairs of society.  
    
 Firstly, the laws of the *sharī‘ah* embrace a diverse body of laws and
regulation, which amounts to a complete social system. In this system of
laws, all the needs of man have been met: his dealings with his
neighbors, fellow citizens, and clan, as well as children and relatives;
the concerns of private and marital life; regulations concerning war and
peace and intercourse with other nations; penal and commercial law; and
regulations pertaining to trade, industry and agriculture. Islamic law
contains provisions relating to the preliminaries of marriage and the
form in which it should be contracted, and others relating to the
development of the embryo in the womb, and what food the parents should
eat at the time of conception. It further stipulates the duties that are
incumbent upon them while the infant is being suckled, and specifies how
the child should be reared, and how the husband and the wife should
relate to each other and to their children. Islam provides laws and
instructions for all of these matters, aiming, as it does, to produce
integrated and virtuous human beings who are walking embodiments of the
law, or to put it differently, the law’s voluntary and instinctive
executors. It is obvious, then, how much care Islam devotes to
government and the political and economic relations of society, with
goal of creating conditions conducive to the production of morally
upright and virtuous human beings.  
    
 The Glorious Qur’an and the Sunnah contain all the laws and ordinances
man needs in order to attain happiness and the perfection of his state.
The book *al*-*Kāfi*[^7] has a chapter entitled, “All the Needs of Men
Are Set Out in the Book and the Sunnah,”[^8] the “Book” meaning the
Qur’an, which is, in its own words, “an exposition of all things.”[^9]
According to certain traditions, the Imām[^10] also swears that the Book
and the Sunnah contain without a doubt all that men need.  
    
 Second, if we examine closely the nature and character of the
provisions of the law, we realize that their execution and
implementation depend upon the formation of a government, and that it is
impossible to fulfill the duty of executing God’s commands without there
being established properly comprehensive administrative and executive
organs. Let us now mention certain types of provisions in order to
illustrate this point; the others you can examine yourselves.  
 The taxes Islam levies and the form of budget it has established are
not merely for the sake of providing subsistence to the poor or feeding
the indigent among the descendants of the Prophet (s); they are also
intended to make possible, the establishment of a great government and
to assure its essential expenditures.  
    
 For example, *khums* is a huge source of income that accrues to the
treasury and represents one item in the budget. According to our Shī‘i
school of thought, *khums* is to be levied in an equitable manner on all
agricultural and commercial profits and all natural resources whether
above or below the ground—in short, on all forms of wealth and income.
It applies equally to the greengrocer with his stall outside this
mosque, and to the shipping or mining magnate. They must all pay
one-fifth of their surplus income, after customary expenses are
deducted, to the Islamic ruler, so that it enters the treasury. It is
obvious that such a huge income serves the purpose of administering the
Islamic state and meeting all its financial needs. If we were to
calculate one-fifth of the surplus income of all the Muslim countries
(or of the whole world, should it enter the fold of Islam), it would
become fully apparent that the purpose for the imposition of such a tax
is not merely the upkeep of the *sayyids*[^11] or the religious
scholars, but on the contrary, something far more significant—namely,
meeting the financial needs of the great organs and institutions of
government. If an Islamic government is achieved, it will have to be
administered on the basis of the taxes that Islam has
established—*khums*, *zakāt* (this, of course, would not represent an
appreciable sum)[^12] *jizyah*, and *kharāj*.  
    
 How could the *sayyids* ever need so vast a budget? The *khums* of the
bazaar of Baghdad would be enough for the needs of the *sayyids* and the
upkeep of the religious teaching institution, as well as all the poor of
the Islamic world, quite apart from the *khums* of the bazaars of
Tehran, Istanbul, Cairo, and other cities. The provision of such a huge
budget must obviously be for the purpose of forming a government and
administering the Islamic lands. It was established with the aim of
providing for the needs of the people, for public services relating to
health, education, defense, and economic development. Further, in
accordance with theprocedures laid down by Islam for the collection,
preservation, and expenditure of this income, all forms of usurpation
and embezzlement of public wealth have been forbidden; so that the head
of state and all those entrusted with responsibility for conducting
public affairs (i.e., members of the government) have no privileges over
the ordinary citizen in benefiting from the public income and wealth;
all have an equal share.  
    
 Now, should we cast this huge treasury into the ocean, or bury it until
the Imām returns,or just spend it on fifty *sayyids* a day until they
have all eaten their fill? Let us suppose we give all this money to
500,000 *sayyids*; they would not know what to do with it. We all know
that the *sayyids* and the poor have a claim on the public treasury only
to the extent required for subsistence. The budget of the Islamic state
is constructed in such a way that every source of income is allocated to
specific types of expenditures. *Zakāt*, voluntary contributions and
charitable donations, and *khums* are all levied and spent separately.
There is a *hadīth* to the effect that at the end of the year, *sayyids*
must return any surplus from what they have received to the Islamic
ruler, just as the ruler must aid them if they are in need.  
    
 The *jizyah*, which is imposed on the *ahl adh-dhimmah*,[^13] and the
*kharāj*, which is levied on agricultural land, represent two additional
sources of considerable income. The establishment of these taxes also
proves that the existence of a ruler and a government is necessary. It
is the duty of a ruler or governor to assess the poll tax to be levied
on the *ahl adh*-*dhimmah* in accordance with their income and financial
capacity, and to fix appropriate taxes on their arable lands and
livestock. He must also collect the *kharāj* on those broad lands that
are the “property of God” and in the possession of the Islamic state.
This task requires the existence of orderly institutions, rules and
regulations, and administrative procedures and policies; it cannot be
fulfilled in the absence of order. It is the responsibility of those in
charge of the Islamic state, first, to assess the taxes in due and
appropriate measure and in accordance with the public good; then, to
collect them; and finally, to spend them in a manner conducive to the
welfare of the Muslims.  
    
 Thus, you see that the fiscal provisions of Islam also point to the
necessity for establishing a government, for they cannot be fulfilled
without the establishment of the appropriate Islamic institutions.  
    
 The ordinances pertaining to preservation of the Islamic system and
defense of the territorial integrity and independence of the Islamic
*ummah*[^14] also demanded the formation of a government. An example is
the command: “Prepare against them whatever force you can muster and
horses tethered” (Qur’an, 8:60), which enjoins the preparation of as
much armed defensive force as possible and orders the Muslims to be
always on the alert and at the ready, even in time of peace.  
    
 If the Muslims had acted in accordance with this command, and after
forming a government, made the necessary extensive preparations to be in
a state of full readiness for war, a handful of Jews would never have
dared to occupy our lands and to burn and destroy the Masjid
al-Aqsā[^15] without the people’sbeing capable of making an immediate
response. All this has resulted from the failure of the Muslims to
fulfill their duty of executing God’s law and setting up a righteous and
respectable government. If the rulers of the Muslim countries truly
represented the believers and enacted God’s ordinances, they would set
aside their petty differences, abandon their subversive and divisive
activities, and join together like the fingers of one hand. Then a
handful of wretched Jews (the agents of America, Britain and other
foreign powers) would never have been able to accomplish what they have,
no matter how much support they enjoyed from America and Britain. All
this has happened because of the incompetence of those who rule over the
Muslims.  
    
 The verse: “Prepare against them whatever force you can muster”
commands you to be as strong and well-prepared as possible, so that your
enemies will be unable to oppress you and transgress against you. It is
because we have been lacking in unity, strength, and preparedness that
we suffer oppression and are at the mercy of foreign aggressors.  
    
 There are numerous provisions of the law that cannot be implemented
without the establishment of a government apparatus; for example, blood
money, which must be exacted and delivered to those deserving it, or the
corporeal penalties imposed by the law, which must be carried out under
the supervision of the Islamic ruler. All of these laws refer back to
the institutions of government for it is the government power alone that
is capable of fulfilling this function.  
    
 After the death of the Most Noble Messenger (s), the obstinate enemies
of the faith, the Umayyad[^16] (God’s curses be upon them), did not
permit the Islamic state to attain stability with the rule of ‘Ali ibn
Abi Tālib (‘a). They did not allow a form of government to exist that
was pleasing to God, Exalted and Almighty, and to His Most Noble
Messenger (s). They transformed the entire basis of government, and
their policies were, for the most part, contradictory to Islam. The form
of government of the Umayyads and the Abbasids,[^17] and the political
and administrative policies they pursued, were anti-Islamic. The form of
government was thoroughly perverted by being transformed into a
monarchy, like those of the kings of Iran, the emperors of Rome, and the
pharaohs of Egypt. For the most part, this non-Islamic form of
government has persisted to the present day, as we can see.  
    
 Both law and reason require that we not permit governments to retain
this non-Islamic or anti-Islamic character. The proofs are clear. First,
the existence of a non-Islamic political order necessarily results in
the non-implementation of the Islamic political order. Then, all
non-Islamic systems of government are the systems of *kufr*[^18] since
the ruler in each case is an instance of *tāghūt*,[^19] and it is our
duty to remove from the life of Muslim society all traces of *kufr* and
destroy them. It is also our duty to create a favorable social
environment for the education of believing and virtuous individuals, an
environment that is in total contradiction with that produced by the
rule of *tāghūt* and illegitimate power. The social environment created
by *tāghūt* and *shirk*[^20] invariably brings about corruption such as
you can observe now in Iran, the same corruption termed “corruption on
earth.”[^21] This corruption must be swept away, and its instigators
should be punished for their deeds. It is the same corruption that the
Pharaoh generated in Egypt with his policies, so that the Qur’an says of
him, “Truly, he was among the corruptors” (28:4). A believing, pious,
just individual cannot possibly exist in a socio-political environment
of this nature, and still maintain his faith and righteous conduct. He
is faced with two choices: either he commits acts that amount to *kufr*
and contradict righteousness, or in order not to commit such acts and
not to submit to the orders and commands of *tāghūt*, the just
individual opposes him and struggles against him in order to destroy the
environment of corruption. We have in reality, then, no choice but to
destroy those systems of government that are corrupt in themselves and
also entail the corruption of others, and to overthrow all treacherous,
corrupt, oppressive, and criminal regimes.  
    
 This is a duty that all Muslims must fulfill, in every one of the
Muslim countries, in order to achieve the triumphant political
revolution of Islam.  
    
 We see, too, that together, the imperialists and the tyrannical
self-seeking rulers have divided the Islamic homeland. They have
separated the various segments of the Islamic *ummah* from each other
and artificially created separate nations. There once existed the great
Ottoman State, and that, too, the imperialists divided. Russia, Britain,
Austria, and other imperialist powers united, and through wars against
the Ottomans, each came to occupy or absorb into its sphere of
influence, part of the Ottoman realm. It is true that most of the
Ottoman rulers were incompetent, that some of them were corrupt, and
that they followed the monarchical system. Nonetheless, the existence of
the Ottoman State represented a threat to the imperialists. It was
always possible that righteous individuals *might* rise up among the
people and, with their assistance, seize control of the state, thus
putting an end to imperialism by mobilizing the unified resources of the
nation. Therefore after numerous prior wars, the imperialists at the end
of World War I divided the Ottoman State, creating in its territories
about ten or fifteen petty states.[^22] Then each of these was entrusted
to one of their servants or a group of their servants, although certain
countries were later able to escape the grasp of the agents of
imperialism.  
    
 In order to assure the unity of the Islamic *ummah*, in order to
liberate the Islamic homeland from occupation and penetration by the
imperialists and their puppet governments, it is imperative that we
establish a government. In order to attain the unity and freedom of the
Muslim peoples, we must overthrow the oppressive governments installed
by the imperialists and bring into existence an Islamic government of
justice that will be in the service of the people. The formation of such
a government will serve to preserve the disciplined unity of the
Muslims; just as Fātimah az-Zahrā[^23] (‘a) said in her address: “The
Imamate exists for the sake of preserving order among the Muslims and
replacing their disunity with unity”.  
    
 Through the political agents they have placed in power over the people,
the imperialists have imposed on us an unjust economic order, and
thereby divided our people into two groups: oppressors and oppressed.
Hundreds of millions of Muslims are hungry and deprived of all forms of
health care and education, while minorities comprised of the wealthy and
powerful live a life of indulgence, licentiousness, and corruption. The
hungry and deprived have constantly struggled to free themselves from
the oppression of their plundering overlords, and their struggle
continues to this day. But their way is blocked by the ruling minorities
and the oppressive governmental structures they head. It is our duty to
save the oppressed and deprived. It is our duty to be a helper to the
oppressed, and an enemy to the oppressor. This is nothing other than the
duty that the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) entrusted to his two great
offspring[^24] in his celebrated testament: “Be an enemy to the
oppressor and a helper to the oppressed.”[^25]  
              
 The scholars of Islam have a duty to struggle against all attempts by
oppressors to establish a monopoly over the sources of wealth or to make
illicit use of them. They must not allow the masses to remain hungry and
deprived while plundering oppressors usurp the sources of wealth and
live in opulence. The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) says: “I have
accepted the task of government because God, Exalted and Almighty, has
exacted from the scholars of Islam a pledge not to sit silent and idle
in the face of gluttony and plundering of the oppressors, on the one
hand, and the hunger and deprivation of the oppressed, on the other.”
Here is the full text of the passage we refer to:  
    
 “I swear by Him Who causes the seed to open and creates the souls of
all living things that were it not for the presence of those who have
come to swear allegiance to me, were it not for the obligation of
rulership now imposed upon me by the availability of aid and support,
and were it not for the pledge that God has taken from the scholars of
Islam not to remain silent in the face of the gluttony and plundering of
the oppressors, on the one hand, and the harrowing hunger and
deprivation of the oppressed, on the other hand---were it not for all of
this, then I would abandon the reins of government and in no way seek
it. You would see that this world of yours, with all of its position and
rank, is less in my eyes than the moisture that comes from the sneeze of
a goat.”[^26]  
    
 How can we stay silent and idle today when we see that a band of
traitors and usurpers, the agents of foreign powers, have appropriated
the wealth and the fruits of labor of hundreds of millions of
Muslims—thanks to the support of their masters and through the power of
the bayonet—granting the Muslim not the least right to prosperity? It is
the duty of Islamic scholars and all Muslims to put an end to this
system of oppression and, for the sake of the well-being of hundreds of
millions of human beings, to overthrow these oppressive governments and
form an Islamic government.  
              
 Reason, the laws of Islam, and the practice of the Prophet (s), and
that of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), the purport of various
Qur’anic verses and Prophetic traditions—all indicate the necessity of
forming a government. As an example of the traditions of the Imāms, I
now quote the following tradition of Imām Ridā[^27] (‘a):  
    
 ‘Abd al-Wāhid ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abdus an-Neyshābūri al-‘Attār said: “I
was told by Abū ’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Qutayba an-Neyshābūri
that he was told by Abū Muhammad al-Fadl ibn Shadhan an-Neyshābūri this
tradition. If someone asks, ‘Why has God, the All-Wise, appointed the
holders of authority and commanded us to obey them?’ then we answer,
‘For numerous reasons. One reason is this: Men are commanded to observe
certain limits and not to transgress them in order to avoid the
corruption that would result. This cannot be attained or established
without there being appointed over them a trustee who will ensure that
they remain within the limits of the licit and prevent them from casting
themselves into the danger of transgression. Were it not for such a
trustee, no one would abandon his own pleasure and benefit because of
the corruption it might entail for another. Another reason is that we
find no group or nation of men that ever existed without a ruler and
leader, since it is required by both religion and worldly interest. It
would not be compatible with divine wisdom to leave mankind to its own
devices, for He, the All-Wise, knows that men need a ruler for their
survival. It is through the leadership he provides that men make war
against their enemies, divide among themselves the spoils of war, and
preserve their communal solidarity, preventing the oppression of the
oppressed by the oppressor.  
              
 “A further reason is this: were God not to appoint over men a
solicitous, trustworthy, protecting, reliable leader, the community
would decline, religion would depart, and the norms and ordinances that
have been revealed would undergo change. Innovators would increase and
deniers would erode religion, inducing doubt in the Muslims. For we see
that men are needy and defective, judging by their differences of
opinion and inclination and their diversity of state. Were a trustee,
then, not appointed to preserve what has been revealed through the
Prophet (s), corruption would ensue in the manner we have described.
Revealed laws, norms, ordinances, and faith would be altogether changed,
and therein would lie the corruption of all mankind.”[^28]  
    
 We have omitted the first part of the *hadīth*, which pertains to
prophethood, a topic not germane to our present discussion. What
interests us at present is the second half, which I will now paraphrase
for you.  
              
 If someone should ask you, “Why has God, the All-Wise, appointed
holders of authority and commanded you to obey them?” you should answer
him as follows: “He has done so for various causes and reasons. One is
that men have been set upon a certain well- defined path, and commanded
not to stray from it, nor to transgress against the established limits
and norms, for if they were to stray, they would fall prey to
corruption. Now men would not be able to keep to their ordained path and
to enact God’s laws unless a trustworthy and protective individual (or
power) were appointed over them with responsibility for this matter, to
prevent them from stepping outside the sphere of the licit and
transgressing against the rights of others. If no such restraining
individual or power were appointed, nobody would voluntarily abandon any
pleasure or interest of his own that might result in harm or corruption
to others; everybody would engage in oppressing and harming others for
the sake of his own pleasures and interests.  
              
 “Another reason and cause is this: we do not see a single group,
nation, or religious community that has ever been able to exist without
an individual entrusted with the maintenance of its laws and
institutions—in short, a head or a leader; for such a person is
essential for fulfilling the affairs of religion and the world. It is
not permissible, therefore, according to divine wisdom that God should
leave men, His creatures, without a leader and guide, for He knows well
that they depend on the existence of such a person for their own
survival and perpetuation. It is under his leadership that they fight
against their enemies, divide the public income among themselves,
perform Friday and other congregational prayers and foreshorten the arms
of the transgressors who would encroach on the rights of the
oppressed.  
              
 “Another proof and cause is this: were God not to appoint an Imām over
men to maintain law and order, to serve the people faithfully as a
vigilant trustee, religion would fall victim to obsolescence and decay.
Its rites and institutions would vanish; the customs and ordinances of
Islam would be transformed or even deformed. Heretical innovators would
add things to religion and atheists and unbelievers would subtract
things from it, presenting it to the Muslims in an inaccurate manner.
For we see that men are prey to defects; they are not perfect, and must
need to strive for perfection. Moreover, they disagree with each other,
having varying inclinations and discordant states. If God, therefore,
had not appointed over men one who would maintain order and law and
protect the revelation brought by the Prophet (s), in the manner we have
described, men would have fallen prey to corruption; the institutions,
laws, customs, and ordinances of Islam would be transformed; and faith
and its content would be completely changed, resulting in the corruption
of all humanity.”  
              
 As you can deduce from the words of the Imām (‘a), there are numerous
proofs and causes that necessitate formation of a government, and
establishment of an authority. These proofs, causes, and arguments are
not temporary in their validity or limited to a particular time, and the
necessity for the formation of a government, therefore, is perpetual.
For example, it will always happen that men overstep the limits laid
down by Islam and transgress against the rights of others for the sake
of their personal pleasure and benefit. It cannot be asserted that such
was the case only in the time of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), and
that afterwards, men became angels. The wisdom of the Creator has
decreed that men should live in accordance with justice and act within
the limits set by divine law. This wisdom is eternal and immutable, and
constitutes one of the norms of God Almighty. Today and always,
therefore, the existence of a holder of authority, a ruler who acts as
trustee and maintains the institutions and laws of Islam, is a
necessity—a ruler who prevents cruelty, oppression, and violation of the
rights of others; who is a trustworthy and vigilant guardian of God’s
creatures; who guides men to the teachings, doctrines, laws, and
institutions of Islam; and who prevents the undesirable changes that
atheists and the enemies of religion wish to introduce in the laws and
institutions of Islam. Did not the caliphate of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) serve this purpose? The same factors of necessity that led
him to become the Imām still exist; the only difference is that no
single individual has been designated for the task.[^29] The principle
of the necessity of government has been made a general one, so that it
will always remain in effect.  
              
 If the ordinances of Islam are to remain in effect, then, if
encroachment by oppressive ruling classes on the rights of the weak is
to be prevented, if ruling minorities are not to be permitted to plunder
and corrupt the people for the sake of pleasure and material interest,
if the Islamic order is to be preserved and all individuals are to
pursue the just path of Islam without any deviation, if innovations and
the approval of anti-Islamic laws by sham parliaments[^30] are to be
prevented, if the influence of foreign powers in the Islamic lands is to
be destroyed—government is necessary. None of these aims can be achieved
without government and the organs of the state. It is a righteous
government, of course, that is needed; one presided over by a ruler who
will be a trustworthy and righteous trustee. Those who presently govern
us are of no use at all for they are tyrannical, corrupt, and highly
incompetent.  
              
 In the past, we did not act in concert and unanimity in order to
establish proper government and overthrow treacherous and corrupt
rulers. Some people were apathetic and reluctant even to discuss the
theory of Islamic government, and some went so far as to praise
oppressive rulers. It is for this reason that we find ourselves in the
present state. The influence and sovereignty of Islam in society have
declined; the nation of Islam has fallen victim to division and
weakness; the laws of Islam have remained in abeyance and been subjected
to change and modification; and the imperialists have propagated foreign
laws and alien culture among the Muslims through their agents for the
sake of their evil purposes, causing people to be infatuated with the
West. It was our lack of a leader, a guardian, and our lack of
institutions of leadership that made all this possible. We need
righteous and proper organs of government; that much is self-evident.  
  

[^1]: Valī-yi Amr: “the one who holds authority,” a term derived from
Qur’an, 4:59: “O you who believe! Obey God, and obey the Messenger and
the holders of authority (ūli ’l-amr) from among you.” For commentary of
this verse, see Mīr Ahmad ‘Ali, The Holy Qur’an (NY: Tahrike Tarsile
Qur’an, 1988), http://www.al-islam.org/quran (Pub.)

[^2]: Sunnah: the practice of the Prophet, accepted by Muslims as the
norm and ideal for all human behavior.

[^3]: See, for example, Sūrah Ibrāhīm (14:52), Sūrah Yūnus (10:2), Sūrah
al-Hājj (22:49), Sūrah  al-Ahzāb (33:40), and Sūrah Yā-Sīn (36:70).
(Pub.)

[^4]: Lesser Occultation: ghaybat-i sughrah, the period of about 70
years (260/872-329/939) when, according to Shī‘i belief, Muhammad
al-Mahdi, the Twelfth Imām, absented himself from the physical plane but
remained in communication with his followers through a succession of
four appointed deputies, viz., ‘Uthmān ibn Sa‘īd, Muhammad ibn ‘Uthmān,
Husayn ibn Rūh, and ‘Ali ibn Muhammad. At the death of the fourth
deputies no successor was named, and the Greater Occultation (ghaybat-i
kubrah) began, and continues to this day. See Muhammad Bāqir as-Sadr and
Murtadā Mutahhari, Awaited Saviour (Karachi: Islamic Seminary
Publications), http://www.islam.org/saviour/index.htm; Muhammad Bāqir
as-Sadr, An Inquiry Concerning Al-Mahdi (Qum: Ansariyan Publications);
Jassim M. Husain, The Occultation of the Twelfth Imām: A Historical
Background (London: Muhammadi Trust, 1982); Ibrāhīm Amīni, Al-Imām
Al-Mahdī: The Just Leader of Humanity, trans. ‘Abdul ‘Azīz Sachedina
(Qum: Ansariyan Publications),
http://www.al-islam.org/mahdi/nontl/index.htm. (Pub.)

[^5]: The allusion is probably to the Bahā’is, who claim to have
received a succession of post-Qur’anic revelations.

[^6]: Jizyah: a tax levied on non-Muslim citizens of the Muslim state in
exchange for the protection they receive and in lieu of the taxes, such
as zakāt, that only Muslims pay. Kharaj: a tax levied on certain
categories of land. Khums: a tax consisting of one-fifth of agricultural
and commercial profits (see p. 24 and Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Khums,
http://www.al-islam.org/beliefs/practices/khums.html). Zakāt: the tax
levied on various categories of wealth and spent on the purposes
specified in Qur’an, 9:60. (Pub.)

[^7]: Al-Kāfi: more fully, Al-Kāfi fī ’l Hadīth,one of the most
important Shī‘i collections of hadīth, compiled by Shaykh Abū Ja‘far
Muhammad ibn Ya‘qūb al-Kulayni (d. 329/941). This treatise consists of
34 books, 326 sections, and over 16,000 ahādīth. Two fascicules of this
work have been translated into English by Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Rizvi
and published by the Tehran-based World Organization for Islamic
Services (WOFIS), http://www.wofis.com, e-mail: wofis@wofis.com. (Pub.)

[^8]: Usūl al-Kāfi, Book of “Virtues of Knowledge,” vol. 1, pp. 76-80.
(Pub.)

[^9]: Qur’an, 16:89.

[^10]: The reference is probably to Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq, whose sayings
on this subject are quoted by ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’i in al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān (Beirut, 1390/1979), XII, 327-328. First eight volumes of
‘Allāmah Tabātabā’i’s Al-Mīzān has been translated into English by
Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi and published by the WOFIS. (Pub.)

[^11]: Sayyids: the descendants of the Prophet through his daughter
Fātimah and son-in-law ‘Ali, the first of the Twelve Imāms.

[^12]: Zakāt would not represent an appreciable sum presumably because
it is levied on surplus wealth, the accumulation of which is inhibited
by the economic system of Islam.

[^13]: Ahl adh-Dhimmah: non-Muslim citizens of the Muslim state, whose
rights and obligations are contractually determined.

[^14]: Ummah: the entire Islamic community, without territorial or
ethnic distinction.

[^15]: Masjid al-Aqsā: the site in Jerusalem where the Prophet ascended
to heaven in the eleventh year of his mission (Qur’an, 17:1); also the
complex of mosques and buildings erected on the site. The chief of these
was extensively damaged by arson in 1969, two years after the Zionist
usurpation of Jerusalem.

[^16]: Umayyads: descendants of ‘Umayyah ibn ‘Abdu Shams ibn ‘Abdu Manāf
from the Quraysh tribe, and members of the dynasty that ruled at
Damascus from 41/632 until 132/750 and transformed the caliphate into a
hereditary institution. Mu‘āwiyah, ibn Abū Sufyān frequently mentioned
in these pages, was the first of the Umayyad line. This kingdom ended
with the murder of Marwān II, the last Umayyad caliph. (Pub.)

[^17]: Abbasids: offspring of ‘Abbās ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib, uncle of the
Holy Prophet (s), and the dynasty that replaced the Umayyads and
established a new caliphal capital in Baghdad. This dynastic rule began
in 132/750 with the caliphate of ‘Abdullāh as-Saffāh. With the rise of
various local rulers, generally of military origin, the power of the
Abbasids began to decline from the fourth/tenth century and it was
brought to an end by the Mongol conquest in 656/1258. (Pub.)

[^18]: Kufr: the rejection of divine guidance; the antithesis of Islam.

[^19]: Tāghūt: one who surpasses all bounds in his despotism and tyranny
and claims the prerogatives of divinity for himself, whether explicitly
or implicitly. See also p. 78-79.

[^20]: Shirk: the assignment of partners to God, either by believing in
a multiplicity of gods, or by assigning divine attributes and
prerogatives to other-than-God.

[^21]: “Corruption on earth”: a broad term including not only moral
corruption, but also subversion of the public good, embezzlement and
usurpation of public wealth, conspiring with the enemies of the
community against its security, and working in general for the overthrow
of the Islamic order. See the commentary on Qur’an, 5:33 in
Tabātabā’i’s, al-Mīzān, V, 330-332.

[^22]: It may be apposite to quote here the following passage from a
secret report drawn up in January 1916 by Thomas E. Lawrence, the
British organizer of the so-called Arab revolt led by Sharīf Husayn of
Mecca: “Husayn’s activity seems beneficial to us, because it matches
with our immediate aims, the breakup of the Islamic bloc and the defeat
and disruption of the Ottoman Empire…. The Arabs are even less stable
than the Turks. If properly handled they would remain in a state of
political mosaic, a tissue of small jealous principalities incapable of
political cohesion.” See Philip Knightley and Colin Simpson, The Secret
Lives of Lawrence of Arabia (New York, 1971), p. 55.

[^23]: Fātimah az-Zahrā: Fātimah, the daughter of the Prophet and wife
of Imām ‘Ali. For her biography, see Fātimah the Gracious (Qum:
Ansariyan Publications). (Pub.)

[^24]: I.e., Hasan and Husayn.

[^25]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Letter 47. See English translation of Nahj
al-Balāghah, Peak of Eloquence with commentary and its original Arabic
text (Qum: Ansariyan Publications),
http://www.al-islam.org/nahjul/index.htm. (Pub.)

[^26]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 3 (The famous Shaqshaqiyyah Sermon).See
Nahj al-Balāghah, ed. Subhi as-Sālih. (Pub.)

[^27]: Imām Ridā: eighth of the Twelve Imāms, born in 148/765 and died
in 203/817 in Tūs (Mashhad). He was poisoned by the Abbasid caliph
Ma’mūn, who had appointed him as his successor at first, but then grew
fearful of the wide following he commanded (see p. 137). His shrine in
Mashhad is one of the principal centers of pilgrimage and religious
learning in Iran. See Bāqir Sharīf al-Qarashi, The Life of Imām ‘Ali bin
Mūsā al-Ridā, trans. Jāsim al-Rasheed (Qum: Ansariyan Publications);
Muhammad Jawād Fadlallāh, Imam al-Ridā: A Historical and Biographical
Research, trans. Yāsīn T. al-Jibouri,
http://www.al-islam.org/al-rida/index.html; Muhammad Mahdi Shams ad-Dīn,
“Al-Imām ar-Ridā (‘a) and the Heir Apparency,” At-Tawhīd Journal,
http://www.al-islam.org/al-tawhid/heir.htm. (Pub.)

[^28]: The text of this tradition can be found in Shaykh Sadūq, ‘Ilal
ash-Sharāi‘  (Qum, 1378/1958), I, sec. 182, hadīth 9, p. 251. (Pub.)

[^29]: That is, in the absence of the Imām or an individual deputy named
by him (as was the case during the Lesser Occultation), the task
devolves upon the fuqahā as a class. See argument on pp. 44-112.

[^30]: Here the allusion may be in particular to the so-called Family
Protection Law of 1967, which Imām Khomeini denounced as contrary to
Islam in an important ruling. See Imām Khomeini, Tauzih al-Masā’il,
n.p., n.d., pp. 462-463, par. 2836, and p. 441.


