Program for the Establishment of an Islamic Government
======================================================

   
 It is our duty to work toward the establishment of an Islamic
government. The first activity we must undertake in this respect is the
propagation of our case; that is how we must begin.  
    
 It has always been that way, all over the world: a group of people came
together, deliberated, made decisions, and then began to propagate their
aims. Gradually, the number of like-minded people would increase, until
finally they became powerful enough to influence a great state or even
to confront and overthrow it, as was the case with the downfall of
Muhammad ‘Ali Mīrzā and the supplanting of his absolute monarchy with
constitutional government.[^1] Such movements began with no troops or
armed power at their disposal; they always had to resort to propagating
the aims of their movement first. The thievery and tyranny practiced by
the regime would be condemned and the people awakened and made to
understand that the thievery inflicted on them was wrong. Gradually, the
scope of this activity would be expanded until it came to embrace all
groups of society, and the people, awakened and active, would attain
their goal.  
 You have neither a country nor an army now, but propagating activity is
possible for you, because the enemy has been unable to deprive you of
all the required means.  
    
 You teach the people matters relating to worship, of course, but more
important are the political, economic, and legal aspects of Islam. These
are, or should be, the focus of our concern. It is our duty to begin
exerting ourselves now in order to establish a truly Islamic government.
We must propagate our cause to the people, instruct them in it, and
convince them of its validity. We must generate a wave of intellectual
awakening, to emerge as a current throughout society, and gradually, to
take shape as organized Islamic movement made up of the awakened,
committed, and religious masses who will rise up and establish an
Islamic government.  
    
 Propagation and instruction, then, are our two fundamental and most
important activities. It is the duty of the *fuqahā* to promulgate
religion and instruct the people in the creed, ordinances, and
institutions of Islam, in order to pave the way in society for the
implementation of Islamic law and the establishment of Islamic
institutions. In one of the traditions we have cited, you will have
noticed that the successors of the Most Noble Messenger (s) are
described as “teaching the people”—that is, instructing them in
religion.  
    
 This duty is particularly important under the present circumstances,
for the imperialists, the oppressive and treacherous rulers, the Jews,
Christians, and materialists are all attempting to distort the truths of
Islam and lead the Muslims astray. Our responsibilities of propagation
and instruction are greater than ever before. We see today that the Jews
(may God curse them) have meddled with the text of the Qur’an and have
made certain changes in the Qur’ans they have printed in the occupied
territories.[^2] It is our duty to prevent this treacherous interference
with the text of Qur’an. We must protest and make the people aware that
the Jews and their foreign backers are opposed to the very foundations
of Islam and wish to establish Jewish domination throughout the world.
Since they are a cunning and resourceful group of people, I fear
that—God forbid!—they may one day achieve their goal, and that the
apathy shown by some of us may allow a Jew to rule over us one day. May
God never let us see such a day!  
    
 At the same time, a number of orientalists serving as propaganda agents
for the imperialist institution are also active in endeavors to distort
and misrepresent the truths of Islam. The agents of imperialism are busy
in every corner of the Islamic world drawing our youth from us with
their evil propaganda. They are not converting them into Jews and
Christians; they are corrupting them, making them irreligious and
indifferent, which is sufficient for their purposes. In our own city of
Tehran now there are centers of evil propaganda run by the churches, the
Zionists, and the Bahā’is in order to lead our people astray and make
them abandon the ordinances and teachings of Islam. Do we not have a
duty to destroy these centers that are damaging Islam? Is it enough for
us simply to possess Najaf?  (Actually, we do not even have Najaf!)[^3]
Should we be content to sit lamenting in Qum, or should we come to life
and be active?  
    
 You, the younger generation in the religious institution, must come
fully to life and keep the command of God alive. Develop and refine your
thinking, and lay aside your concern with the minutiae and subtleties of
the religious sciences, because that kind of concentration on petty
detail has kept many of us from performing our more important duties.
Come to the aid of Islam; save Islam! They are destroying Islam!
Invoking the laws of Islam and the name of the Most Noble Messenger (s),
they are destroying Islam! Agents—both foreigners sent by the
imperialists and natives employed by them—have spread out into every
village and region of Iran and are leading our children and young people
astray, who might otherwise be of service to Islam one day. Help save
our young people from this danger!  
    
 It is your duty to disseminate among the people the religious knowledge
you have acquired and to acquaint them with the subjects you have
learned. The scholar or the *faqīh* is accorded praise and glorified in
the traditions because he is the one who makes the ordinances,
doctrines, and institutions of Islam known to the people and instructs
them in the Sunnah of the Most Noble Messenger (s). You must now devote
your energies to the tasks of propagation and instruction in order to
present Islam more fully to the people.  
    
 It is our duty to dispel the doubts about Islam that have been created;
until we have erased these doubts from people’s minds, we will not be
able to accomplish anything.  We must impress upon ourselves and upon
the generation—and even the generation after that—the necessity for
dispelling these doubts about Islam that have arisen in the minds of
many people, even the educated among us, as the result of centuries of
false propaganda. You must acquaint the people with the worldview,
social institution, and form of government proposed by Islam, so that
they may come to know what Islam is and what its laws are.  
    
 It is the duty of the teaching institution today in Qum, Mashhad, and
elsewhere to propagate Islam, to expound this faith and school of
thought. In addition to Islam, you must make yourselves known to the
people of the world and also authentic models of Islamic leadership and
government. You must address yourselves to the university people in
particular, the educated class. The students have had their eyes opened.
I assure you that if you present Islam and Islamic government to the
universities accurately, the students will welcome it and accept it. The
students are opposed to tyranny; they are opposed to the puppet regimes
imperialism imposes; they are opposed to thievery and the plundering of
public wealth; they are opposed to this consumption of what is forbidden
and this deceitful propaganda. But no student could be opposed to Islam,
whose form of government and teachings are beneficial to society. The
students are looking to Najaf, appealing for help. Should we sit idle,
waiting for them to enjoin the good upon us and call us to our
duties?[^4] Our young people studying in Europe are enjoining the good
upon us; say to us: “We have organized Islamic associations; now help
us!”[^5]  
    
 It is our duty to bring all these matters to the attention of the
people. We must explain what the form of government is in Islam and how
rule was conducted in the earliest days of Islamic history. We must tell
them how the center of command and the seat of the judiciary under it
were both located in part of the mosque, at a time when the Islamic
state embraced the farthest reaches of Iran, Egypt, the Hijaz, and the
Yemen. Unfortunately, when government passed into the hands of the next
generations, it was converted into a monarchy, or even worse than a
monarchy.  
    
 The people must be instructed in these matters and helped to mature,
intellectually and politically. We must tell them what kind of
government we want, what kinds of people would assume responsibility for
affairs in the government we propose, and what policies and programs
they would follow. The ruler in Islamic society is a person who treats
his brother ‘Aqil[^6] in such a way that he would never request extra
support from the public treasury (lest there be economic discrimination
among the Muslims), and who requires to account for the guaranteed loan
she has obtained from the public treasury, telling her, “If you do not
pay back this loan, you will be the be the first woman of the Bani
Hāshim[^7] to have her hand cut off.” That is the kind of ruler and
leader we want, a leader who will put the law into practice instead of
his personal desires and inclinations; who will treat all members of the
community as equals before the law; who will refuse to countenance
privilege or discrimination in any form; who will place his own family
on an equal footing with the rest of the people; who will cut off the
hand of his own son if he commits a theft; who will execute his own
brother and sister if they sell heroin (not execute people for
possession of ten grams of heroin when his own relative operate gangs
that bring into the country heroin by the hundred-weight).[^8]  
    
 Many of the ordinances of Islam that refer to worship also pertain to
social and political functions. The forms of worship practiced in Islam
are usually linked to politics and the gestation of society. For
example, congregational prayer, the gathering on the occasion of *hajj*,
and Friday prayer, for all their spirituality, exert a political as well
as moral and doctrinal influence. Islam has provided for such gatherings
so that religious use might be made of them; so that feelings of
brotherhood and cooperation may be strengthened, intellectual maturity
fostered, solutions found for political and social problems, with
*jihād* and collective effort as the natural outcome.  
    
 In non-Islamic countries, or Islamic countries ruled by non-Islamic
governments, whenever they want the people to assemble like this,
millions must be spent out of the national treasury or budget, and even
then the result is unsatisfactory; such meetings lack spontaneity and
spirit and are of no real consequence. In Islam, however, anyone who
wishes to perform the *hājj* departs of his own will and goes on the
*hājj*. Also people go eagerly to take part in congregational prayer. We
must take advantage of these assemblies to propagate and teach religion
and to develop the ideological and political movement of Islam.  
    
 Some people are completely unaware of this; they are only concerned
about the correct pronunciation of “*wa lā ’dh*-*dhāllin*.”[^9] When
they go on the *hājj*, instead of exchanging ideas with their Muslim
brothers, propagating the beliefs and ordinances of Islam, and seeking
solutions to the universal problems and afflictions of the Muslims (for
example, rallying to liberate Palestine, which is part of the Islamic
homeland)—instead of doing all this, they exacerbate the differences
that exist among Muslims. The first Muslims, on the other hand, used to
accomplish important business on the occasion of *hājj* or at their
Friday gatherings. The Friday sermon was more than a *sūrah* from the
Qur’an and a prayer followed by a few brief words. Entire armies used to
be mobilized by Friday sermon and proceed directly from the mosque to
the battlefield—and a man who sets out from the mosque to go into battle
will fear only God, not poverty, hardship, or his army will be
victorious and triumphant. When you look at the Friday sermons given in
that age and the sermons of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), you see
that their purpose was to set people in motion, to arouse them to fight
and sacrifice themselves for Islam, to resolve the sufferings of the
people of this world.  
    
 If the Muslims before us had gathered every Friday and reminded
themselves of their common problems, and solved them or resolved to
solve them, we would not be in the position we find ourselves in today.
Today we must start organizing these assemblies in earnest and make use
of them for the sake of propagation and instruction. The ideological and
political movement of Islam will thus develop and advance toward its
climax.  
    
 Make Islam known to the people, then, and in so doing, create something
akin to ‘Āshūrā.[^10] Just as we have steadfastly preserved the
awareness of ‘Āshūrā (peace be upon its founder) and not let it be lost,
so that people still gather during Muharram and beat their breasts, we
should now take measures to create a wave of protest against the state
of the government; let the people gather, and the preachers and
*rawzakhwāns*[^11] firmly fix the issue of government in their minds.  
    
 If you present Islam accurately and acquaint people with its worldview,
doctrines, principles, ordinances, and social system, they will welcome
it ardently (God knows, many people want it). I have witnessed that
myself. A single word was enough once to cause a wave of enthusiasm
among the people, because then, like now, they were all dissatisfied and
unhappy with the state of affairs. They are living now in the shadow of
the bayonet, and repression will let them say nothing. They want someone
to stand up fearlessly and speak out. So, courageous sons of Islam,
stand up! Address the people bravely; tell the truth about our situation
to the masses in simple language; arouse them to enthusiastic activity,
and turn the people in the street and the bazaar, our simple-hearted
workers and peasants, and our alert students into dedicated
*mujāhids*.[^12] The entire population will become *mujāhids*. All
segments of society are ready to struggle for the sake of freedom,
independence, and the happiness of the nation, and their struggle needs
religion. Give the people Islam, then, for Islam is the school of
*jihād*, the religion of struggle; let them amend their characters and
beliefs in accordance with Islam and transform themselves into a
powerful force, so that they may overthrow the tyrannical regime
imperialism has imposed on us and set up an Islamic government.  
    
 Only those *fuqahā* who make people acquainted with the beliefs and
institutions of Islam, and who defend and protect them, are truly
“citadels of Islam.”[^13] They must deliver rousing, impassioned
speeches and lead the people in order to fulfill this function. Only
then, if they live to be, say, 120, will the people feel that Islam has
suffered a misfortune with their passing away and that a gap has
appeared in the Muslim community, or as the tradition puts it, “A crack
will appear in the fortress of Islam.” Will some irremediable deficiency
occur in Islamic society now if one of us dies after spending his life
at home reading books?  What loss could our death mean? But when Islam
lost Imām Husayn (‘a), then indeed the loss was irreparable. A loss
occurs with the death of people who have preserved the doctrines, laws,
and social institutions of Islam, like Khwājah Nāsir ad-Dīn Tūsi[^14] or
‘Allāmah Hilli.[^15] But what have you or I done for Islam that our
passing should remind men of that tradition? If a thousand of us were to
die, nothing would happen. The only explanation for this is that either
we are not true *fuqahā* or we are not true believers.  
    
 No reasonable person expects our activities of propagation and
instruction to lead quickly to the formation of an Islamic government.
In order to succeed in establishing an Islamic government, we must have
several kinds of continuous activities. Ours is a goal that will take
time to achieve. Sensible people in this world lay one stone in position
on the ground in the hope that someone two hundred years later will come
to finish a building mounted upon it so that the goal will finally be
reached. Once the caliph said to an old man who was planting a walnut
tree: “Old man! Why plant this walnut tree, which will not bear fruit
until fifty years from now, by which time you will be dead?”  The man
replied: “Others planted so that we might eat. We are planting so that
others may eat.”  
    
 We must preserve in our efforts even though they may not yield their
result until the next generation, for our service is devoted to Islam
and the cause of human happiness. If it were for a personal cause, we
might say: “Why trouble ourselves! Our efforts cannot benefit us, but
only those who come later.”  If the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a), who
risked and indeed sacrificed all his material interests, had thought
that way, acting only for himself and his personal benefits, he would
have compromised with Yazīd[^16] at the very beginning and settled the
whole affair—the Umayyad rulers were only too anxious for him to swear
allegiance to them and accept them as rulers. What could have been
better for them than to have the grandson of the Prophet (s), the Imām
of the Age, call them “Commander of the Faithful” and recognize their
rule?  But his concern was the future of Islam and the Muslims. So that
Islam might be propagated among men in the future, and its political and
social order established in society, he opposed the Umayyads, fought
against them, and ultimately sacrificed himself.  
    
 Examine carefully one of the traditions I have cited above. You will
see that Imām as-Sādiq (‘a) was subjected to pressure by oppressive
rulers and therefore chose *taqiyyah*. He had no executive power, and
most of the time he was confined under surveillance. Nevertheless, he
kept informing the Muslims of their duties and appointing judges for
them. What was the reason for this, and what benefit was there in
appointing and dismissing judges?  
    
 Great men, with broad horizons of thought, never despair or pay
attention to the circumstances in which they find
themselves—imprisonment or captivity, for example, which may continue
indefinitely; instead, they continue making plans for the advancement of
their cause. Either they will carry out their plans themselves, or if
they are not granted the opportunity, others will follow their plans,
even if it is two or three hundred years later. The foundations of many
great movements in history were laid in this way. Sukarno, the former
president of Indonesia, conceived and drew up his plans in prison and
later put them into practice.  
    
 Imām as-Sādiq (‘a) not only laid down plans; he also made appointments
to certain posts. If his appointments had been intended for that time,
naturally they would have been pointless, but in reality, he was
thinking of the future. He was not like us, thinking only of ourselves
and concerned with our personal predicaments; he was concerned with the
*ummah*, with humanity as a whole, and he wished to reform mankind by
implementing the laws of justice. Thus, more than a thousand years ago,
he had to lay down a pattern of government and make his appointments, so
that on the day when the nations awoke and the Muslims came to their
senses, there would be no confusion and the form of Islamic government
and its leadership would be known.  
    
 Generally speaking, Islam, and the Shī‘i school of thought, and indeed,
all religions and schools of thought have advanced and progressed in
this fashion. They all started with nothing but a plan, which came to
fruition later because of the fortitude and dedication of the respective
leaders and prophets.  
    
 Moses was a mere shepherd, and for years he followed that calling. When
he was summoned to do battle with the pharaoh, he had no supporter or
helper. But as a result of his innate ability and his steadfastness, he
overthrew the rule of the pharaoh with a staff. Now imagine that staff
in the hands of you or me would we have been able to achieve the same
result? It takes the determination, seriousness, and resourcefulness of
a Moses to make that staff capable of overthrowing a pharaoh; not
everyone can perform such a feat.  
    
 When the Most Noble Messenger (s) was given his prophetic mission and
began to propagate his massage, an eight-year old child (the Commander
of the Faithful, upon whom be peace) and a forty-year old woman (his
wife Khadījah) were the only people who believed in him; he had no one
else. Everyone knows of the vexations that plagued the Prophet, the
obstacles that were placed in his way, the oppositions that he faced.
Yet he never despaired or said, “I am all alone.” He persisted and, with
his spiritual power and firm resolve, was able to advance his cause from
nothing to the point it has reached today, where seven hundred million
people are gathered under his banner.  
    
 The Shī‘i school of thought also began from zero. On the day that the
Most Noble Messenger (s) laid its foundations, he was greeted with
mockery. He invited people to his house and told them, “The man who
possesses such-and-such qualities is to be my minister,” meaning the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a). At the time, the Commander of the
Faithful had not yet reached adulthood, although he always possessed a
great spirit, the greatest in the world. But no one rose to pay him
respect, and some one even turned to Abū Tālib[^17] and said to him in
jest, “You are to march under the banner of your son now!”  
    
 Also on the day of the Prophet’s announcement to the people that the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was to succeed him and govern, some
expressed apparent admiration and satisfaction, but the opposition to
him began on that very day and continued down to the end. If the Most
Noble Messenger (s), had appointed him only as an authority to be
consulted on legal problems, there would have been no opposition to him.
Since he assigned him the rank of successor, however, and said that he
was to rule over Muslims and be entrusted with the destiny of the
Islamic nation, various sorts of discontent and opposition arose. If
you, too, were to sit at home today, and not intervene in the affairs of
the country, no one would disturb you. They trouble you only when you
try to intervene in the destiny of the nation. It was because they
intervened in the affairs of government and the country that the
Commander of the Faithful and his followers were harassed and
persecuted. But they did not abandon their activity and their struggle,
with the result that today, thanks to their labors, there are about two
hundred million Shī‘ah in the world.  
    
 To present Islam properly to the people, the religious teaching
institutions must be reformed. The syllabi and methods of propagation
and instruction must be improved; apathy, laziness, despair, and lack of
self-confidence must be replaced by diligence, endeavor, hope and
self-confidence; the effects left on the minds of some people by
foreigners’ insinuating propaganda must be erased; the attitudes of the
pseudo-saintly persons, who, despite their position within the teaching
institution, make it difficult for people to gain a true appreciation of
Islam and the necessity for social reforms, must be changed; and the
court-affiliated *ākhūnds*,[^18] who have sold their religion for
worldly gain, must be divested of their garb and expelled from the
religious institution.  
    
 The agents of imperialism, together with the educational and political
apparatuses of the anti-national puppet governments they have installed,
have been spreading poison for centuries and corrupting the minds and
morals of the people. Those who have entered the religious institutions
have naturally brought with them traces of this corruption, for the
religious institution make up part of society and the people. We must
therefore strive to reform, intellectually and morally, the members of
the religious institution and to remove the traces left on their minds
and spirits by the insinuating propaganda of the foreigners and the
policies of corrupt and treacherous governments.  
    
 One can easily observe the effects of which I speak. For example,
sometimes I see people who sit in the centers of religious institution
saying to each other, “These matters are beyond us; what business are
they of ours? All we are supposed to do is to offer our prayers and to
give our opinions on questions of religious law.”  Ideas like these are
the result of several centuries of malicious propaganda on the part of
the imperialists penetrating deeply into the very heart of Najaf, Qum,
Mashhad, and other religious centers, causing apathy, depression, and
laziness to appear; and preventing people from maturing, so that they
constantly make excuses for themselves and say, “These matters are
beyond us!”  
    
 These ideas are wrong. What are the qualifications of those who now
rule the Muslims countries? What gives them the ability to rule that we
allegedly lack? Who among them has any more ability than the average
person? Many of them have never studies anything! Where did the ruler of
the Hijāz ever go to study? As for Rizā Khān, he was totally illiterate,
an illiterate soldier, no more! It has been the same throughout history:
many arbitrary and tyrannical rulers have been totally lacking in any
capacity to govern the society or administer the nation and devoid of
learning and accomplishment. What did Hārūn ar-Rashīd[^19] ever study,
or any other man who ruled over realms as vast as his? Study—the
acquisition of knowledge and expertise in various science—is necessary
for making plans for a country and for exercising executive and
administrative functions; we too will make use of people with those
qualifications. But as for the supervision and supreme administration of
the country, the dispensing of justice, and the establishment of
equitable relations among the people—these are precisely the subjects
that the *faqīih* has studied. Whatever is needed to preserve national
independence and liberty is, again, precisely what the *faqīh* has to
offer. For it is the *faqīh*, who refuses to submit to others or fall
under the influence of foreigners, and who defends the rights of the
nation and the freedom, independence, and territorial integrity of the
Islamic homeland, even at the cost of his life. It is the *faqīh*, who
does not deviate either to the left or to the right.  
    
 Rid yourselves of your depression and apathy. Improve your methods and
program of propagation, try diligently to present Islam accurately, and
resolve to establish an Islamic government. Assume the lead and join
hands with the militant and freedom-loving people. An Islamic government
will definitely be established; have confidence in yourselves. You have
the power, courage, and sense of strategy it takes to struggle for
national liberty and independence, you have succeeded in waking the
people and inspiring them to struggle, casing imperialism and tyranny to
tremble. Day by day, you are accumulating more experience and your
ability to deal with the affairs of society is increasing. Once you have
succeeded in overthrowing the tyrannical regimes, you will certainly be
capable of administering the state and guiding the masses.  
    
 The entire system of government and administration, together with the
necessary laws, lies ready for you. If the administration of the country
calls for taxes, Islam has made the necessary provision; and if laws are
needed, Islam has established them all. There is no need for you, after
establishing a government, to sit down and draw up laws, or, like rulers
who worship foreigners and are infatuated with the West, run after
others to borrow their laws. Everything is ready and waiting. All that
remains is to draw up ministerial programs, and that can be accomplished
with the help and cooperation of consultants and advisers who are
experts in different fields, gathered together in a consultative
assembly.  
    
 Fortunately, the Muslim peoples are ready to follow you and your
allies. What we are lacking are the necessary resolve and armed power,
and these, too, we shall acquire, God willing. We need the staff of
Moses and the resolve of Moses; we need people who are able to wield the
staff of Moses and the sword of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a).  
    
 But the gutless people who now sit in the religious centers are
certainly not capable of establishing and maintaining a government; for
they are so gutless that they cannot wield even a pen or undertake any
activity at all. The foreigners and their agents have filled our ears
with their propaganda so often that we have begun to believe we are
incapable of anything: “Go mind your own business! Attend to your
schools, your classes, your studies. What business of yours are these
matters? They are beyond your capacity!” I cannot disabuse some people
of these notions and make them understand that they must become leaders
of humanity; that they are at least the equals of others and are capable
of administrating the country. What qualifications do others have that
they lack? All one can say is that some of the others went abroad to
enjoy themselves, and maybe studied a little while they were there. (We
do not say they should not study. We are not opposed to study or
learning. Let them go to the moon, found an atomic industry; we will not
stand in their way. However, we have duties as well.)  
    
 Give them Islam; proclaim to the world the program of Islamic
government; maybe the kings and presidents of the Muslim countries will
understand the truth of what we say and accept it. We would not want to
take any thing away from them; we will leave anyone in his place who
faithfully follows Islam.  
    
 Today, we have 700 million Muslims in the world, 170 million or more of
whom are Shī‘ah. They are all ready to follow us, but we are so lacking
in resolve that we are unable to lead them. We must establish a
government that will enjoy the trust of the people, one in which the
people have confidence and to which they will be able to entrust their
destiny. We need trustworthy rulers who will guard the trust the people
have placed with them, so that protected by them and the law, the
peoples will be able to live their lives and go about their tasks in
tranquility. These are the things to which you should be devoting your
thought. Do not despair; do not imagine that this task is impossible.
God knows that your capacity and courage are not less than those of
others—unless, of course, the meaning of courage is oppressing and
slaughtering the people; that kind of courage we certainly do not
have.  
    
 Once that man came to see me while I was in prison[^20] along with
Āqā-yi Qummi[^21] (may God preserve him), who is under arrest again now.
He said: “Politics is all dirt, lying, and viciousness; why don’t you
leave it to us?”  
    
 What he said was true in a sense; if that is what politics really
consists of, it belongs exclusively to them. But the politics of Islam,
of the Muslims, of the guiding Imāms who lead God’s servants by means of
politics, is quite different from the politics he was speaking of.  
    
 Afterwards, he told the newspapers: “An agreement has been reached to
the effect that the religious leaders will not interfere in politics.”
As soon as I was released, I denied his statement from the *minbar*. I
said: “He is lying; if Khomeini or anyone else gives such a pledge, he
will be expelled from the religious institution!”[^22]  
    
 At the outset, they plant in your minds the suggestion that politics
means lying and the like so that you lose all interest in national
affairs and they can proceed with their business undisturbed, doing
whatever they like and indulging all their vices.  Meanwhile, you are to
sit here offering prayers for their welfare: “May God perpetuate their
rule!” They, of course, do not have the intelligence to elaborate such a
plan themselves (thank God!); it is their masters and the experts who
advise them that devised this plan. The British imperialists penetrated
the countries of the East more than three hundred years ago. Being
knowledgeable about all aspects of these countries, they drew up
elaborate plans for assuming control of them. Then came the new
imperialists, the Americans and others. They allied themselves with the
British and took part in the execution of their plans.  
    
 Once when I was in Hamadān, a former student of the religious sciences,
who had forsaken the religious garb but preserved his Islamic ethics,
came to see me and he showed me a map on which certain places had been
marked in red. He told me that those red symbols indicated all the
mineral resources existing in Iran that had been located by foreign
experts.  
    
 Foreign experts have studied our country, and have discovered all our
mineral reserves—gold, copper, petroleum, and so on. They have also made
an assessment of our people’s intelligence and came to the conclusion
that the only barriers blocking their way are Islam and the religious
leadership.   
    
 They have known the power of Islam themselves for it once ruled part of
Europe, and they know that true Islam is opposed to their activities.
They have also realized they cannot make the true religious scholars
submit to their influence, nor can they affect their thinking. From the
very outset, therefore, they have sought to remove this obstacle from
their path by disparaging Islam and besmirching the religious leaders.
They have resorted to malicious propaganda so that today, we imagine
that Islam simply consists of a handful of legal topics. They have also
tried to destroy the reputation of *fuqahā* and the ‘*ulamā*, who stand
at the head of Islam society, by slanderous accusations and other means.
For example, that shameless agent of imperialism wrote in his book[^23]:
“Six hundred of the ‘*ulamā* of Najaf and Iran were on the payroll of
the British. Shaykh Murtadā[^24] took the money for only two years
before he realized where it was coming from. The proof may be found in
documents preserved in the India Office archives.” Imperialism tells him
to insult the ‘*ulamā* so that it may reap the benefits. Imperialism
dearly wants to present all the ‘*ulamā* as being on its payroll so that
they will lose the respect of the people and the people will turn away
from them. At the same time, they have tried with their propaganda and
insinuations to present Islam as a petty, limited affair, and to
restrict the functions of the *fuqahā* and ‘*ulamā* to insignificant
matters. They have constantly tried to persuade us that the only duty of
the *fuqahā* is to give their opinion on legal problems.   
    
 Some people, lacking in correct understanding, have believed them and
gone astray. They have failed to realize that all this is part of a plan
designed to destroy our independence and establish control over all
aspects of life in the Islamic countries. Unwittingly, they have
assisted the propaganda organs of imperialism in carrying out its
politics and reaching its goals. The propaganda institutions of
imperialism have sought to persuade us that religion must be separate
from politics, that the religious leaders must not interfere in social
matters, and that the *fuqahā* do not have the duty of overseeing the
destiny of the Islamic nation. Unfortunately, some people have believed
them and fallen under their influence, with the result that we see. This
result is what the imperialists have always desired, desire now, and
will desire in the future.   
    
 Look at the religious teaching centers and you will see the effects of
this imperialist propaganda. You will see negligent, lazy, idle, and
apathetic people who do nothing but discuss points of law and offer
their prayers, and are incapable of anything else. You will also
encounter ideas and habits that are born of the same imperialist
propaganda—for example, the idea that to speak is incompatible with the
dignity of the *ākhūnd*; the *ākhūnd* and the *mujtahīd* should not be
able to speak, or if they are, they should not say anything except,
“*Lā* *ilāha* *illa ’Llāh*,” or may be one word more! But that is wrong,
and contrary to the Sunnah of God’s Messenger (s). God has praised
speech and expression, as well as writing and the use of pen. For
example, He says in *Sūrat ar*-*Rahmān*: “He taught him [man]
expression” (55: 4), counting the instruction in speech that He gave man
as a great blessing and a source of nobility. Speech and expression are
necessary for promulgating the ordinances of God and the teachings and
doctrines of Islam; it is by means of them that we can instruct the
people in their religion and fulfill the duty indicated in the phrase:
“They instruct the people.”[^25] The Most Noble Messenger and the
Commander of Faithful both delivered speeches and sermons; they were men
of eloquence.  
    
 These foolish ideas that exist in the minds of some people help the
imperialists and the oppressive governments in their attempts to keep
the Muslim countries in their present state and to block the progress of
the Islamic movement. Such ideas are characteristic of those who are
known as saintly but in reality are pseudo-saints, not true ones. We
must change the way they think and make clear our attitudes toward them,
for they are blocking our movement and the reforms we want to carry out,
and are keeping our hands tied.      
    
 The late Burūjirdī,[^26] the late Hujjat,[^27] the late Sadr,[^28] and
the late Khwansari[^29] (may God be pleased with all of them) had
gathered in our house one day to discuss some political matter. I said
to them: “Before anything else, you must decide what to do with these
pseudo-saints. As long as they are there, our situation is like that of
a person who is attacked by an enemy while someone else keeps his hands
bound behind him. These persons who are known as saints but are
pseudo-saints, not real ones, are totally unaware of the state of
society, and if you want to do something—take over the government,
assume control of the Majlis, stop the spread of corruption—they will
destroy your standing in society. Before everything else, you must
decide what to do with them.”       
    
 The state of Muslim society today is such that these false saints
prevent Islam from exerting its proper influence; acting in the name of
Islam, they are inflicting damage upon Islam. The roots of this group
that exists in our society are to be found in the centers of the
religious institution. In the centers at Najaf, Qum, Mashhad, and
elsewhere, there are individuals who have this pseudo-saintly mentality,
and from their base within the religious institution, they infect the
rest of society with their evil ideas and attitudes. They will oppose
anyone who tells the people: “Come now, awaken! Let us not live under
the banners of others! Let us not be subject to the imposition of
Britain and America! Let us not allow Israel to paralyze the
Muslims!”    
     
 First, we must advise these pseudo-saints and try to awaken them. We
must say to them: “Can you not see the danger? Do you not see that the
Israelis are attacking, killing, and destroying and the British and
Americans are helping them? You sit there watching, but you must wake
up; you must try to find a remedy for the ills of the people. Mere
discussion is not enough. Simply pronouncing opinions on points of law
is of no use by itself. Do not keep silent at a time when Islam is being
destroyed, Islam is being wiped out, like Christians who sat discussing
the Holy Ghost and the Trinity until they were destroyed.[^30] Wake up!
Pay some attention to reality and the questions of the day. Do not let
yourselves be so negligent. Are you waiting for the angels to come and
carry you on their wings? Is it the function of the angles to pamper the
idle? The angels spread their wings beneath the feet of the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a) because he was of benefit to Islam: he made Islam
great, secured the expansion of Islam in the world and promoted its
interests. Under his leadership, a free, vital, virtuous society came
into being and won fame; everyone had to bow before him its might, even
the enemy. But why should anyone bow before you, whose only activity is
offering opinions on points of law?       
    
 If our pseudo-saints do not wake up, and begin to assume their
responsibilities after repeated admonition and advice, it will be
obvious that the cause of their failure is not ignorance, but something
else. Then, of course, we will adopt a different attitude toward them.  
    
 The centers of the religious institution are places for teaching,
instruction, propagation, and leadership. They belong to the just
*fuqahā*, learned scholars, teachers, and students. They belong to those
who are the trustees and successors of the prophets. They represent a
trust, and it is obvious that a divine trust cannot be placed in the
hands of anyone. Whoever wishes to assume such a weighty responsibility,
to administer the affairs of the Muslims and to act as the deputy of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a), to settle matters concerning the honor,
property, and lives of the people, as well as the booty taken in war and
the penal provisions of the law—such a person must be totally
disinterested in the world and devoid of worldly ambition. Anyone whose
efforts are oriented to this world—even in matters that are inherently
legitimate—cannot be the trustee of God, and is not worthy of our trust.
Any *faqīh* who joins the state apparatus of the oppressors and becomes
a hanger-on of the court is not a trustee and cannot exercise God’s
trust. God knows what misfortunes Islam has suffered—from its inception
down to the present at the hands of these evil ‘*ulamā*! Abū Hurayrah
was one of the *fuqahā*, but God knows what judgments he falsified for
Mu‘āwiyah and others like him, and what damage he inflicted upon Islam.
When an ordinary person enters the service of an oppressive government,
he is to be accounted a sinner, but no greater harm will come of it.
But, when a *faqīh* like Abū Hurayrah[^31] or a judge like Shurayh joins
such a government, he improves its standing while besmirching the
reputation of Islam. When a *faqīh* enters the service of an oppressive
government, it is as if the whole *ulamā* entered it along with him; it
is no longer a question of a single individual. It is for this reason
that the Imāms (‘a) strictly forbade their followers to join the
government service, and told them that the situation they found
themselves in had come about because some of them had done so.         
        
 The obligations that are incumbent on the *fuqahā* do not apply to
others; on account of their position and function, *fuqahā* must avoid
and relinquish even things that are otherwise licit. In cases where
others are permitted to resort to *taqiyyah*, *fuqahā* may not. The
purpose of *taqiyyah* is the preservation of Islam and the Shī‘i school;
if people had not resorted to it, our school of thought would have been
destroyed. *Taqiyyah* relates to the branches (*furū’*) of religion; for
example—performing ablution in different ways. But when the chief
principles of Islam and its welfare are endangered, there can be no
question of silence or *taqiyyah*. If they try to force a *faqīh* to
mount the *minbar* and speak in a way contrary to God’s command, can he
obey them, telling himself “*Taqiyyah* is my religion and the religion
of my forefathers”?[^32] The question of *taqiyyah* does not even arise
here. If a *faqīh* anticipates that by his entering the service of an
oppressive government, oppression will be furthered and the reputation
of Islam soiled, he must not enter its service even if he is killed as a
result.  There is no acceptable excuse he can offer, unless his entry
into the service of the state has some rational basis, as was the case
with ‘Ali ibn Yaqtīn,[^33] whose motives in joining state service are
well-known, and with Khwāja Nāsir Tūsi[^34] (may God be pleased with
him), whose actions resulted in benefits also well- known.      
    
 The true *fuqahā* of Islam are, of course, free of all guilt in this
respect. From the beginning of Islam down to the present, their example
is clear, and shines before us like a light; they are untouched by
guilt. The *ākhūnds* who joined the service of governments in past ages
did not belong to our school. Not only did our *fuqahā* oppose the
rulers; they also suffered imprisonment and torture because of their
disobedience.[^35] Let no one imagine that the ‘*ulamā* of Islam have
ever entered the service of the state or do so now. Upon occasion, of
course, they have entered it in order to bring the state under their
control or transform it; were such a thing possible now, it would be our
duty to do so. But that is not what I am speaking of. Our problem is the
people who wear turbans on their heads, have read a few books somewhere
or other (or nor read them, as the case may be), and joined the service
of the government in order to fill their stomachs or increase the scope
of their authority. What are we to do with them?  
    
 Those persons are not Muslim *fuqahā*; they are people whom SAVAK has
issued a turban and told to pray. If SAVAK cannot force the
congregational imāms to be present on the occasion of
government-sponsored festivities and other ceremonies, it will have its
own people on hand ready to say: “Greater be his glory!” (Yes, they have
recently begun to say, “Greater be his glory” when they mention the name
of the Shāh.) These persons are not *fuqahā*; the people have recognized
them for what they are. A certain tradition warns us to guard our
religion against these people, lest they destroy it. They must be
exposed and disgraced so that they may come to lose whatever standing
they enjoy among the people. If their standing in society is not
destroyed, they will destroy the standing of the Imām of the Age and the
standing of Islam itself.         
              
 Our youths must strip them of their turbans. The turbans of these
*ākhūnds*, who cause corruption in Muslim society while claiming to be
*fuqahā* and ‘*ulamā*, must be removed. I do not know if our young
people in Iran have died; where are they? Why do they not strip these
people of their turbans? I am not saying they should be killed; they do
not deserve to be killed. But take off their turbans! Our people in
Iran, particularly the zealous youths, have a duty not to permit these
*ākhūnds*, these reciters of “Greater be his glory!” to appear in
society and move among the people wearing turbans. They do not need to
be beaten much; just take off their turbans, and do not permit them to
appear in public wearing turbans. The turban is a noble garment; not
everyone is fit to wear it.                   
            
 As I have said, the true ‘*ulamā* of Islam are free of all guilt in
this respect; they have never joined the service of the government.
Those who are affiliated with the government are parasites trying to
grow fat on religion and on the ‘*ulamā*, but they have nothing to do
with the ‘*ulamā*, and people recognize them for what they are.  
    
 We too have difficult tasks facing us. We must improve ourselves
spiritually and improve our way of life. We must become more ascetic
than before and completely shun the goods of this world. All of you must
equip yourselves to protect the divine trust that has been vested in
your. Become worthy trustees, and hold the world in less esteem. You
cannot be like the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), who said that the
world was no more to him than the snot of a goat; but turn away from the
desire for worldly gain, purify your souls, turn toward God Almighty,
cultivate piety. If your purpose in studying is—God forbid—to secure
your future livelihood, you will never become *fuqahā* or trustees of
Islam. Prepare yourselves to be useful to Islam; act as the army for the
Imām of the Age in order to be able to serve him in spreading the rule
of justice. The mere existence of righteous people has a beneficial
effect on society—as I myself have observed, one becomes purified by
walking with them and keeping company with them. Act so that your deeds,
conduct, character, and aversion to worldly ambition will have an
uplifting effect on people. They will imitate your example, and you will
become models for them and soldiers of God. Only thus can you make Islam
and Islamic government known to the people.        
    
 I am not telling you to abandon your studies. Indeed you must study,
become *fuqahā*, devote yourselves to *fiqh*, and not permit *fiqh* to
decline in the centers of the religious institution. Unless you are
*fuqahā*, you will not be able to serve Islam. But while you study, be
concerned, too, with representing Islam accurately to the people. Islam
is now a stranger; no one knows Islam properly. You must convey Islam
and its ordinances to the people so that they understand what Islam is,
what Islamic government is, what prophethood and imamate mean, and in
the broadest terms, why Islam was revealed and what its goals are. Thus
Islam will gradually become known, and, God willing, an Islamic
government will one day be established.  
    
 Let us overthrow tyrannical governments by: (1) severing all relations
with governmental institutions; (2) refusing to cooperate with them; (3)
refraining from any action that might be construed as aiding them; and
(4) creating new judicial, financial, economic, cultural, and political
institutions.                
    
 It is the duty of all of us to overthrow *tāghūt*; i.e., the
illegitimate political powers that now rule the entire Islamic world.
The governmental apparatus of tyrannical and anti-popular regimes must
be replaced by institutions serving the public good and administered
according to Islamic law. In this way, an Islamic government will
gradually come into existence. In the Qur’an, God Almighty has forbidden
men to obey the *tāghūt—*illegitimate regimes—and encouraged them to
rise up against kings, just as He commanded Moses to rebel. There are a
number of traditions encouraging people to fight against oppressors and
those who wish to pervert religion. The Imāms (‘a), joined by their
followers, the Shi‘ah, have always fought against tyrannical governments
and illegitimate regimes, as one can easily see by examining their
biographies and way of life. Most of the time they were subject to the
pressures of tyrannical and oppressive rulers, and were compelled to
observe *taqiyyah* out of extreme fear---not fear for themselves, of
course, but fear for their religion, as is evident from an examination
of the relevant traditions. Tyrannical rulers, for their part, stood in
terror of the Imāms. They were aware that if they gave the Imāms the
slightest opportunity, they would rebel and deprive them of their life,
which was synonymous with pleasure-seeking and licentiousness. This is
the reason we see Hārūn arresting Imām Mūsā ibn Ja‘far[^36] (‘a) and
imprisoning him for several years, and after him, Ma’mūn[^37]
transporting Imām Ridā (‘a) to Marv[^38] and confining him there for
many years before finally poisoning him. Hārūn and Ma’mūn acted as they
did not because the Imāms were *sayyids—*i.e., descendants of the
Prophet—and the rulers were opposed to the prophet; indeed, both Hārūn
and Ma’mūn were Shī‘ah.[^39] They were motivated entirely by
considerations of state: they knew that the descendants of ‘Ali laid
claim to the caliphate and that their earnest desire was to establish an
Islamic government, considering this to be their duty. One day, it was
suggested to Imām Mūsā ibn Ja‘far that he delineate the boundaries of
Fadak[^40] so that it might be returned to him. According to a certain
tradition, he drew a map of the entire Islamic realm and said,
“Everything within these boundaries is our legitimate right. We should
rule over it, and you are usurpers.” The tyrannical rulers thus saw that
if Imām Musa ibn Ja‘far were free, he would make life impossible for
them and might lay the groundwork for a rebellion and the overthrow of
their rule. So they did not give him the slightest opportunity. Have no
doubt that if he had had the chance, he would indeed have rebelled and
overthrow the ruling usurpers.  
            
 Ma’mūn similarly kept Imām Ridā under surveillance, cunningly and
hypocritically addressing him as  “Cousin” and “Descendant of God’s
Messenger” out of fear that one day he might rise and destroy the
foundation of his rule. Since he was indeed a descendant and a legatee
of the Prophet (s), he could not be allowed to go free in Medina. The
tyrannical rulers desired rule and were ready to sacrifice everything
for its sake; they had no personal enmity with anyone. If—God forbid—the
Imām (‘a) had frequented their court, he would have been shown the
utmost veneration and respect; they would even have kissed his hand.
According to tradition, when Imām Ridā came into the presence of Hārūn,
the ruler ordered that the Imām be carried on horseback all the way to
his throne and showed him all possible veneration. But when it was time
to distribute the shares that were to be given from the treasury and it
was the turn of the Bani Hāshim to receive their share, Hārūn awarded
them only a very small amount. His son Ma’mūn who was present was
surprised as the contrast between the veneration he had just witnessed
and the allotment he now saw being made. Hārūn told him: “You do not
understand. The Bani Hāshim must remain in this state. They must always
be poor, imprisoned, banished, afflicted, even poisoned or killed;
otherwise, they will rise up against us in revolt and ruin our
lives.”                
    
 The Imāms (‘a) not only fought against tyrannical rulers, oppressive
governments, and corrupt courts themselves, they also summoned the
Muslims to wage *jihād* against those enemies. There are more than fifty
traditions in *Wasā’il ash*-*Shī‘ah*,[^41] the *Mustadrak*,[^42] and
other books calling on the Muslims to shun tyrannical rulers and
governments and to fill with earth the months of those who praise them,
and threatening anyone who does so much as lend their panegyrists a pen
or fill their inkwells. In short, the Imāms have given orders that all
relations with such rulers be severed and that no one collaborate with
them in any way. In contrast to these traditions are others that praise
the learned scholars and the just *faqīh*, and emphasize their
superiority over other men.  Taken together, these two classes of
traditions form a program for the establishment of an Islamic
government. First, the people are induced to turn away from the
tyrannical government of the oppressors and destroy their house of
oppression; then the houses of *fuqahā* are to open their doors to the
people: *fuqahā* who are just and ascetic and who fight in God’s way to
implement the laws of Islam and establish its social systems.  
    
 The Muslims will be able to live in security and tranquility and
preserve their faith and morals only when they enjoy the protection of a
government based on justice and law, a government whose form,
administrative system, and laws have been laid down by Islam. It is our
duty now to implement and put into practice the plan of a government
established by Islam. I hope that by presenting the system of government
and the political and social principles of Islam to broad segments of
humanity, we will create a strong new current of thought and a powerful
and popular movement that will result in the establishment of an Islamic
government.                        
    
 O God, foreshorten the arms of the oppressors that are stretched out
against the lands of the Muslims and root out all traitors to Islam and
the Islamic countries. Awaken the heads of the Muslims states from their
deep sleep so that they may exert themselves on behalf of their people’s
interests and renounce divisiveness and the quest for personal gain.
Grant that the younger generation studying in the religious colleges and
the universities may struggle to reach the sacred aims of Islam and
strive together, with ranks united, first, to deliver the Islamic
countries from the clutches of imperialism and its vile agents, and then
to defend them. Grant that the *fuqahā* and the scholars may strive to
guide and enlighten the minds of the people, to convey the sacred aims
of Islam to all Muslims, particularly the younger generation, and to
struggle for the establishment of an Islamic government. From You is
success, and there is neither recourse nor strength except in God, the
Exalted, the Sublime.                                         
  

[^1]: On June 23, 1908, Muhammad ‘Ali Shāh carried out with Russian aid
a military coup against the first Iranian Majlis. He was overthrown and
constitutional rule restored on July 16, 1909, as a result of popular
resistance, largely directed by the most important religious scholars of
the day in Najaf. See Browne, The Persian Revolution of 1905-1909, chs.
7-10.

[^2]: Soon after the Six-Day War, it was reported that copies of the
Qur’an were circulating in the territories seized by the Zionists, as
well as in African countries, from which all verses critical of the Jews
had been excised.

[^3]: Najaf is the main center of learning in the Shī‘i world. The
lament here that “we do not even have Najaf” refers to the restrictions
and pressure placed on the Shī‘ah scholars of Najaf by the Ba‘athist
regime of Baghdad. The Ba‘athist persecution of Najaf reached a
highpoint in May 1969—ten months before these lectures were given—when a
number of ‘ulamā were arrested and tortured and religious endowments
were confiscated. See anon., Hayāt-e-Kareem, in Eng. (Karachi, 1973),
pp. 73-84. After the victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, the
crime of the regime in Baghdad was epitomized by torturing and
cold-bloodedly murdering Āyatullāh al-‘Uzma Sayyid Muhammad al-Bāqir
as-Sadr and his sister Bint al-Hudā in April 1980. (Pub.)    

[^4]: Insofar as the “enjoining of the good” is the particular duty of
the religious scholars, it would be shaming for them to need a reminder
from students.

[^5]: Throughout his exile in Najaf, Imām Khomeini gave special
attention to the Islamic associations of Iranian students in Europe and
the United States, sending them guidance and encouragement. For an
example of his messages to the Iranian Muslim students in North America,
see Islam and Revolution, pp. 209-211.

[^6]: ‘Āqil ibn Abi Tālib: brother of Imām ‘Ali. After Imām ‘Ali assumed
the caliphate, ‘Aqil is related to have asked him to withdraw 40,000
dirhams from the public treasury to enable him to settle a debt. When
his request was denied, ‘Aqil abandoned his brother and joined the camp
of Mu‘āwiyah in Damascus.

[^7]: Bani Hāshim: the Meccan clan to which the Prophet and his
descendants belonged. See Subhāni, chap. 4, “Ancestors of the Prophet,”
http://www.al-islam.org/message/5.htm. (Pub.)

[^8]: An allusion to the activities of Ashraf, the Shāh’s twin sister,
who was reported in 1960 to have been detained by the Swiss police after
large quantities of heroin were found in her possession. See Bahman
Nīrūmand, Persien, Modell eines Entwicklungslandes (Hamburg, 1967), pp.
133-134.

[^9]: Wa lā ’adh-Dhāllīn: “not those who go astray,” a phrase occurring
in the seventh verse of the opening chapter of the Qur’an that is
recited in every prayer. The letter dh (ﺽ) in ’dh-dhāllīn represents an
Arabic sound that does not exist in Persian and it is generally
pronounced by Persian speakers as a z. Nonetheless, there are those—in
Iran and elsewhere—who devote excessive energy to the task of giving the
letter its Arabic value when reciting the verse in prayer.

[^10]: ‘Āshūrā: the tenth day of Muharram; the day on which Imām Husayn
was martyred in Karbala. See n. 11 above.

[^11]: Rauzakwāns: those who specialize in reciting narrations, often
versified, of the martyrdom of the Imāms. The first part of the
designation, rauza, is taken from the title of one such narrative,
Rauzat ash-Shuhadā, by Husayn Vā‘iz Khāshifi (d. 910/1504).

[^12]: Mujāhid: those who engage in jihād, who struggle for the
attainment of God’s purposes on earth.

[^13]: “Citadels of Islam”: see the tradition cited on p. 58.

[^14]: Khwāja Nāsir ad-Dīn Tūsi: one of the most outstanding of all
Shī‘ah scholars, 597/1201-672/1274. He wrote voluminously not only on
the religious sciences, but also on philosophy, mathematics, and
astronomy. He joined the entourage of the Mongol conqueror Hulagu when
he was passing through Iran on his way to Baghdad, a circumstance that
has led many to accuse him of complicity in the conquest. Concerning his
associations with the Mongols, see A.H. Hā’iri, “Nāsir ad-Dīn Tūsi: His
Alleged Role in the Fall of Baghdad,” Actes du Ve Congress international
d’Arabisants et d’Islamisants (Brussels, 1971), pp. 255-266.

[^15]: ‘Allāmah Hilli: more fully, ‘Allāmah ibn al-Mutahhar al-Hilli,
another important Shī‘ah scholar who lived in the period of Mongol
domination of Iran, 648/1250-716/1325. Concerning his scholarly and
political activities, see Michel Mazzaoui, The Rise of the Safawids
(Wiesbaden, 1972), pp. 27-34.

[^16]: Yazid: second Umayyad caliph and adversary of Imām Husayn. He
ruled from 60/680-64/683.

[^17]: Abū Tālib: father of Imām ‘Ali. According to Shī‘i belief, he
embraced Islam; but according to Sunni belief, he did not. For a
discussion of his faith in Islam, see Subhāni, op. cit., chap. 21,
“Death of Abū Tālib,” http://al-islam.org/message/22.htm; Islam of Abū
Tālib (Part I-IV), http://al-islam.org/encyclopedia/chapter5a/4.html.
(Pub.)

[^18]: Ākhūnd: see n. 5 above.

[^19]: Hārūn ar-Rashīd: Abbasid caliph who reigned from 180/186-193/809
and was the contemporary of the seventh and eighth Imāms, Mūsā al-Kāzim
and Ridā.

[^20]: “That man” was Hasan Pakravan, head of SAVAK between 1961 and
1965, executed after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution. This visit
occurred on July 2, 1963 when Imām Khomeini was being detained at the
‘Ashratābād garrison in Tehran. See S.H.R., Barrasī va Tahlīlī, p. 575.

[^21]: Āqā-yi Qummi: that is, Āyatullāh Hasan Tabātabā’i Qummi,
religious leader of Mashhad who actively cooperated with Imām Khomeini
in the movement of Khurdād 15.

[^22]: For the text of this speech, given at the Masjid-i A‘zam in Qum
on March 6, 1964, see anon., Biyūgrāfi-yi Pīshvā, n.p., n.d., II,
109-138; Sahīfeh-ye Imām (Tehran: The Institute for Compilation and
Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, 1379 Sh.), vol. 1, p. 269. (Pub.)

[^23]: The reference may be to a passage in Mahmūd Mahmūd, Tārīkh-i
Ravābit-i Siyāsī-yi Īrān va Inglīs (Tehran, 1332 Sh./1953), VI, 1743.
Sultān Ghāzī ad-Dīn Haydar of Oudh established an endowment of a hundred
lakhs of rupees for the support of the needy in Najaf and Karbala. After
his principality was absorbed into British India, the administration of
the endowment passed into British hands. Concerning the Oudh bequest and
its recipients, see Algar, Religion and State, pp. 237-238.

[^24]: Shaykh Murtadā: that is, Shaykh Murtadā Ansāri, first mujtahid to
become the sole source of guidance (marja’-i taqlīd) of the Shī‘i world,
1216/1801-1281/1865. He was the author of al-Makāsib, a major work on
Shī‘i jurisprudence. See Algar, Religion and State, pp. 162-164.

[^25]: See p.52.

[^26]: Burūjirdi: that is, Āyatullāh Husayn Burūjirdi, concerning whom,
see p. xii. See also ‘Abbās al-‘Abīri, Āyatullāh Al-Broojerdi, trans.
Muhammad Hasan Najafi (Qum: Ansariyan Publications). (Pub.)

[^27]: Hujjat: that is, Āyatullāh Muhammad Hujjat, a teacher for many
years and an associate of Āyatullāh Hā’iri, 1310/1862-1372/1953. He was
responsible for the building of Hujjatiyyah Madrasah. See Muhammad
Sharīf Rāzi, Ganjinā-yi Dānishmandān (Tehran, 1352 Sh./1973), I, pp.
305-335.

[^28]: Sadr: that is, Āyatullāh Sadr ad-Dīn, 1299/1882-1373/1953,
another of the chief associates of Hā’iri in Qum. See Rāzi, Ganjinā-yi
Dānishmandān, I, pp. 326-335.

[^29]: Khwansāri: that is, Āyatullāh Muhammad Taqi Khwansāri, a
religious scholar who combined militancy with learning,
1305/1888-1371/1952. He fought against the British occupiers of Iraq
under the leadership of Mīrzā Muhammad Taqi Shirāzi (see n. 157) before
joining the circle of Hā’iri in Qum. See Rāzi, Ganjinā-yi Dānishmandān,
I, pp. 322-326; Hasan Iedrem, Āyatullāh Khonsāri: Through Sources of
Witnesses, trans. ‘Abbās Abū Sa‘eedi (Qum: Ansariyan Publications).
(Pub.)

[^30]: Possibly a reference to the Christological disputes of Byzantium.

[^31]: Abū Hurayrah: a companion of the Prophet (d. 59/679) who embraced
Islam in 7 A.H. Even though his companionship with the Prophet hardly
exceeded three years, he is reported to have narrated 5,374 of the
Prophet’s traditions, more than any other companion. Even during the Era
of the Caliphate, prominent companions used to complain against him. He
was named governor of Bahrain by ‘Umar (but deposed later and was fined
with 10 thousand dirhams due to misappropriation of public funds); judge
of Medina by ‘Uthmān (for whom he concocted traditions, extolling his
virtues); and governor of Medina by Mu‘āwiyah. It has been reported that
during the Battle of Siffīn he kept aloof from taking side. Many a times
he spent a day in the camp of Imām ‘Ali while in the midst of
Mu‘āwiyah’s army in another day. He used to pray behind ‘Ali while
giving preference to partake meals with Mu‘āwiyah. He said: “Mu’āwiyah’s
food is more gorgeous whereas praying behind ‘Ali is more virtuous.” A
number of traditions transmitted by him have been rejected by both Sunni
and Shī‘ah scholars. See ‘Allāmah Sayyid ‘Abdul Husayn Sharafuddīn, Abū
Hurayrah; Muhammad Abūzahrā, Abū Hurayrah: Shaykh al-Madīrah; Abī Abī ’l
Hadīd, Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah, vol. 4, pp. 63-69; Ibn Abī ’l Hadīd,
Dāyirat al-Ma‘ārif Islāmiyyah, vol. 1, pp. 418-419. (Pub.)

[^32]: A celebrated saying of Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq.

[^33]: ‘Ali ibn Yaqtīn: an early Shī‘ah traditionist, 124/742-182/798.
His father was a staunch supporter of the Abbasids during the Umayyad
period. He associated with Mansūr, the second Abbasid caliph, and is
said to have assisted him in planning Baghdad. (Pub.)

[^34]: See n. 173 above.

[^35]: Although a pattern of alliance between Sunni fuqahā and rulers
can be discerned in Islamic history, it is worth noting that there have
been numerous important exceptions, e.g., Abū Hanīfah (80/669-152/769),
founder of the most widespread Sunni law school, who was imprisoned by
the ‘Abbasid caliph Mansūr.

[^36]: See n. 88 above.

[^37]: Ma’mūn: Abbasid caliph from 198/813 to 218/833, and persecutor of
Imām Ridā (see n. 48 above).

[^38]: Marv: a city in Transoxiana.

[^39]: Ma’mūn and his father Hārūn were Shī‘ah in the sense that they
implicitly recognized the authority of Imām Ridā in their dealings with
him.

[^40]: Fadak: see n. 134 above.

[^41]: Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah: see n. 105.

[^42]: Mustadrak: see n. 159 above.


