Q.80: Redress For a Woman Neglegted By Her Husband
==================================================

Why can't a woman divorce a man? Under extremely difficult
circumstances when the man has left his wife refusing to give her
'talaaq', how should she be able to marry another man?

A. In the condition mentioned in the question, the woman may refer her
case to the Mujtahid (or his authorised agents) who would direct the
husband to maintain her and treat her according to Islamic shari'ah. If
the husband persists in his misbehaviour, the Mujtahid (or his agent)
would give her talaq by his own authority.

Why the woman has not been given the authority to give talaq to her
husband? For its reason, read my booklet "Family Life of Islam" (pp.
44-52 and 63-67).

**MARRIAGE WITH UNCLE'S DAUGHTER**

If I marry the sister of A, can my son marry the daughter of A?

**Q. 81: BIRTH CONTROL DEVICES AND RULE OF 'IDDAH**

If I enter in mut'ah and use Birth Control, is she required to observe
'idda after the expiry of the period of mut'ah or not? A. Yes. 'Iddah is
compulsory, if sexual relation has been established even once. There is
no escape from it.

**Q.82: CAN A WOMAN IN 'IDDAH GO FOR SHOPPING?**

During 'Idda, is a woman allowed to go out for shopping if she has no
servant? Should she remain in the house all day?

A. She may go out during 'Iddah, if need be, observing proper hijab.

**Q. 83: CAN A MUSLIM WOMAN MARRY A NON-MUSLIM?**

A Shi'a adult girl wants to marry a Christian man. The man is not
prepared to accept Islam. Can we arrange their marriage in our Imambara?
If refused, they threaten to go to church for the marriage?

A. Marriage of a Muslim woman with a non-Muslim man is not allowed in
Islamic Shari'ah. It is strictly forbidden in the Qur'an,and no Islamic
sect has ever allowed it. There is no difference on this matter between
Shi'a and Sunni sects.

Therefore the said "marriage" wIll not be a marriage. It makes no
difference whether any ceremony is performed or not, and If it is
performed then it is done In church or masjid, it will be totally null
and void; if the man and woman remain together they will be living in
sin; and the children of such union will be illegitimate.

**Q.84: ABOUT MUT'AH**

1. How many times a man can contract a woman in mut'ah? I mean to stay,
with same woman. Suppose I contract mut'ah for 7 days and then after,
say, one month I want to contract again with the same women. How many
time in this way I can contract, mut'ah?

2. If I contract mut'ah with a woman for 7 days and after 7 days she
wants to contract mut'ah with another man, is she required to observe
'Idda or not?

A. A woman married in Mut'ah has to observe 'Iddah which in her case is
two monthly courses, or two months. If in that period, signs of
pregnancy appear, then the 'Iddah will continue upto the delivery of the
child. But if the same man who had done mut'ah with her wants to extend
the mut'ah period, or wants to remarry her, there Is no need of
'Iddah.

**Q85.The rule of 3 divorces and mutah marriage**

If a married woman is divorced three times, the ex-husband cannot marry
her again until she is married to another man and divorced. Now if I
enter in mut'ah for, say, 7 days, after 7 days she is no longer my wife;
now after, say, 15 days I again enter in mut'ah with same woman for,
say, 10 days and after 10 days she again will remain no longer my
wife.

Say, after one month I again enter in mut'ah with her for one month and
after one month she Is no longer my wife. Thus I have entered in mut'ah
with the same woman for three times now. If I intend to enter in mut'ah
with same woman again, is it permitted for the 4th time, or 5th time or
6th time?

A. In mut'ah marriage, there is no "divorce", because the marriage
terminates by itself on expiry of the agreed period, while in permanent
marriage divorce is required to terminate the marriage.

It should be now clear to you that the rule about "3 divorces" is not
applicable to mut'ah marriage, for the simple reason that there is no
divorce here. Therefore, one may marry the same woman as many times as
they agree.

**Q. 86: SOME CEREMONIES AT MARRIAGE TIME**

During our marriage ceremonies, one notices that the customs we
practise are very unlslamic. According to 'shari'ah' are we allowed to
sprinkle flowers on the bride and groom, to break earthen pots beneath
their feet, and cut wedding cakes? In the above, please note, that we
aren't mixing men and women nor are we playing music etc... but are just
following the customs and traditions of our grand-parents which make the
wedding lively and more enjoyable. If we can't do the above, please,
what should we do apart from the 'nikah' ceremony to make a marriage a
more lively occasion.

A. There is no harm in showering flowers on the bride and bridegroom.
Cutting wedding cakes is western culture and breaking earthen pots a
Hindu rite; both these rites should be avoided.

**Q87: IS VANNEY ALLOWED?**

A vanney is a ceremony in which the mother of the bride covers herself
and the daughter with velvet cloth; and the relatives, in turn, come, to
her, kiss her, give her a sweet or 'attar", sprinkle confetti on her and
give her some money. Is this allowed? A. There is no harm if it involves
only those male relatives wno are "mahram", or if it is done by ladies
only.

**Q. 88: PURDAH DURING MARRIAGE CEREMONIES**

By your answer, does it mean that after nikah, the bride and groom on
reaching home are allowed to be met by ONLY their parents (the other
relations being either na-mahram of the groom, bride, or each other)? In
Arabia during the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) 's times, how did weddings take
place? Weren't they full of music etc.?

A. You should not confuse the matter by using the word " music" for the
chant or songs sung by women during wedding in those days.

So far as shari'ah is concerned the rule of "purdah" is not relaxed for
marriage ceremonies, although nowadays only few "old-fashioned" women
seem to care about it in marriage gatherings. To compound the evil, now
video films are made of the whole ceremonies, and shown everywhere thus
a wrong committed for a few hours in perpetuated for years.

**Q. 89: HIJAB RULES AND LOOKING AT A WOMAN OR MAN**

Are we allowed to look at women who are veiled with their faces open?
Are women allowed to look at men if they are themselves properly veiled?
Or if they aren't properly veiled? Do men have any necessary covering
like women have to wear hijab? Can a man look at an unveiled Muslim or
non-Muslim without a 'lusty1 intention? Does 'lusty" include:

(a) admiring her facial features?
(b) admiring her clothes?
(c) admiring the contours of her body?
(d) admiring her parts which are left bare eg. legs, hands, etc.

If l am mahram to a lady, am I allowed to look at her private parts? To
what extent is she allowed to show me her body?

A. Here is the gist of the full mas'ala, which covers all your
enquiries on this subject: Woman is obligated to cover her body (except
face and two palms) from all men except the husband and those who are in
prohibited degree like father, son etc. It is wajib for her to cover
even her face and palms from all-other than husband-even from mahram if
he looks at her with lust; rather it is ahwat to hide the face and palms
from ghair-mahrams in all cases.

Man is not obligated to hide his body except the private parts. But it
is haram for woman to look at his body-except the face, head, neck,
hands and feet She may look at the above- mentioned parts (face etc.) if
there is no lustful intention or enjoyment, although it is ahwat not to
look at these parts In any case.

Man may look mahram women, provided there is no lust or enjoyment. He
is not allowed to look at Ghair-mahrams even without lusty intention; it
is ahwat not to look even at Ghair- mahram woman's face and palms.


