Q. 90: Looking At Woman Not Observing Hijam
===========================================

On reading "Your Questions Answered'. I came to a part in which you
have stated that a Muslim could watch a film provided:

(a) it had no music
(b) It was not immoral and
(c) it didn't have dancing in it.

What about the namahram women we see in it who are unveiled? A. The
face of those ghair-mahram women may be looked at who do not observe
rules of hijab-provided that look is not with lust.

**Q. 91: HIJAB BEFORE MALE SERVANTS**

Why is it necessary for a woman to wear hijab in front of her male
slave? Does he not have the similar instincts and feelings of a human
being that he should be allowed on the beauty of his mistress? Does a
women have to wear hijab in front of her servants? A. Women are not
allowed to remove hijab in front of those male servants who might be
having even a little bit of lust. Qur'an clearly says "they are not
obligated to observe hijab before only those male servants who have no
need of women" (see Sura an-Nur,ayat 31).

**Q. 92: ABOUT MUSIC**

We have a few tapes that our brothers got from Iran. The tapes are full
with chants supported by drums, which is definitely a musical instrument
and also I heard other supportive instruments?" (The above question was
asked from a Caribbean country. Another brother asked from another
country):

I have seen a programme on Iran in which there is a scene which shows
the Iranians acting out the tragedy of Kerbala during Moharram/Safar.
During the show, music is constantly being played. Is this allowed in
the Islamic shari'ah A. The law about music, according to Ayatullah
al-Khoui, is as follows:-

Music is haram... doing it as well as listening to it or earning by it.
It does not mean merely good voice, but it is prolongation of voice with
variation of tune and crescendo in a particular charming way (as is
found in the gatherings of lahv and pleasure parties) and the musical
instruments.

It makes no difference even if the words sung are haqq (right, true)
like recital of the Qur'an, du'a, Marthiyah etc.; rather his punishment
will be increased if he uses music in things (like Qur'an etc.) which
are intended for obedience of Allah Ta'ala.

Of course, some ('ulama) have made exception of singing of singer women
in marriages, and this (exception) is not far (from truth), but Ihtiyat
should not be abandoned and it should be restricted to the (occasion of)
sending the bride (to her bridegroom) and to the gathering related to it
before or after that sending off. Rather it is ahwat to avoid it in all
cases.

Ayatullah al-Khoui has further explained that only that music is
unlawful which has affinity i.e. relation and connection with "lahw" and
"la'ib" i.e. vain amusement and merry-making. While on this subject, I
should mention two more exceptions to this general rule:

1. Hudi, a song sung by camel-drivers, the effect of which was to
increase the camel's speed.

2. Military band, used for soldiers' march while training or fighting
etc. But as hudi was restricted to that particular occasion, likewise
military band is restricted to the soldiers who are actually fighting or
training or are marching with it. Other people are not allowed to listen
to it.

You should never forget that actions of ghair-ma'sumeen are not the
criterion of religion. We must appreciate that the Islamic government of
Iran is trying to establish Islamic system in various fields of life:
economy, spcial ordr, government departments etc. But we cannot expect
them to attain to their goal at once. We should not expect them to undo
the misdeeds of taqhuti regime in 4 or 5 years.

Do not forget that two or three generations of Iranis had been brought
up in un-islamic ways. Can all of them become truly pious overnight? The
Islamic government has started on the right path and is going in the
right direction. Let us hope and pray that they succeed in their
endeavours.

**Q. 93: WHY 'MUSIC IS NOT FORBIDDEN BY NAME IN THE QUR'AN?**

Why isn't it straightforward in the Qur'an about the evil of music but
is indirectly put? How come there is not straight forward ayat which
clarifies that 'Ali ibn Abi Taalib is the successor of the Prophet and
that 12 Imams will follow him right to the end until Al-Mahdi (a.s.). A.
Here is a hadith from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) which fully answers
your question:

Once the Imam (a.s.) said that the verse, "O you who believe! Obey
Allah and obey the Messenger and those vested with authority from among
you" (4:59), was revealed about 'Ali ibn Abu Talib, al-Hassan and
al-Husayn (a.s.). Hearing this, someone said: "People say, 'Why did
Allah not mention the names of 'Ali and his family in His Book?"'

The Imam answered: "Tell them that there came the command of Salaat
(prayer), but Allah did not mention whether three or four rak'at (units)
(to be performed); it was the Apostle of Allah who explained all the
details. And (the command of) Zakat was revealed, but Allah did not say
that it is one in every forty dirham; it was the Apostle of Allah who
explained it; and Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) was ordered but Allah did
not say to perform Tawaf (circumambulation of the Ka'bah) seven
times-the Apostle of Allah explained it.

Likewise the verse was revealed: "Obey Allah,, and obey the Apostle and
those vested with authority from among you," and it; was revealed about
'Ali and Hassan and Hussain (a.s.)." As for music, the words "lahw" and
"zur" are comprehensive and they cover several forbidden things
including music. You should not take the Qur'anic words in the meanings
they are used for in Gujarati and Urdu, or even in modern Arabic. They
have to be taken in the meanings they were used for 1400 years
earlier.

**Q. 94: WOMEN SINGING AT MARRIAGE CEREMONIES**

You explained your answer quite clearly. However I would like to know
whether the following is what you mean to say: "Having a woman sing at a
marriage with music, in front of men, is allowed according to the laws
of the Shari'ah? A. No. Her voice should not reach "namahram"; and not
with musical instruments; also the song should not be obscene.

**Q. 95: MUSIC IN MARTHIYA**

It is widely accepted that instrumental music is haram. Is It also
haram to sing an English pop song, to hum the tune of a 'marsiya', to
listen to a namahram's voice reciting a munajaat/majlis or song (in a
film for example), to listen to a bird singing, to listen to war music
and also to listen to the rythm of a hammer blended in with the
monotonous sawing of wood at a construction site, for example?

A. Vocal music too is prohibited. It means "the sound which is
prolonged with variation of tune and crescendo, as is recognised as
music by irreligious people." In other words, music is that sound which
irreligious people accept as music.

It makes no difference whether it is in marthiyah or Qur'an. (In fact
reciting Qur'an or marthiyah/nawha with music Is double haram). Bird's
chirping is not called "singing"; and reciting anything in good
melodious voice (without crossing the limit mentioned above) is lawful
and good. Hearing ghair-mahram's voice is not prohibited, provided it
does not create any "mischief', or is not accompanied by lust.

**Q. 96: WATCHING TV PROGRAMMES**

Concerning TV., what do you recommend that we watch only the news,
documentary shows and positive movies? Or totally abstain? A. There is
no need of totally abstaining from T.V. You may watch news, documentary
and educational films and the programmes having positive values-provided
it is not polluted with obscene scenes or language.

**Q. 97: SONG FOR ISLAMIC PROPAGATION**

Can one listen to a song that has a clear message, and it opposes wrong
in the society, which is technically a da'wah through music? Is the law
rigid and firm? Or is there some flexibility for music that has a
message?

A. I think the reply should be clear from the explanations given above.
The booklet, "Music and Its Effects", is a good writing by our late
Chairman, Haji Ahmad Hussein Sheriff. Yet I would like to add a chapter
on the above-mentioned exceptions with some details

**Q. 98: WANT TO KNOW MORE ABOUT ISLAM**

I want to know more about Islam. Where can I get such knowledge? A. You
may contact the Bilal Muslim Mission for Books.You may also enroll
yourself in one of our Correspondence Courses. There are courses for
higher and junior grades.The junior courses are available in English and
Swahili languages. The English one is called Islamic Religious Course
(IRC, in short), and the Swahili one is named Masomo Ya Ki-lslamu Kwa
Njia ya Posta (MYK, in short).

The higher grade course is called "Islamic Correspondence Course" (ICC,
in short). It is available in English only.

**Q. 99: BOOKS WRITTEN BY YOU**

How many books have you written to date? Will you be kind enough to
write for me a subject-wise list?

A. I suppose you need only the list of my English books. Urdu and
Arabic writings would not be of any interest to you. With each book, I
am writing brief details of its publication and also its translations.
The main publishers' names have been abridged as follows: BMT = Bilal
Muslim Mission of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam BMK = Bilal Muslim Mission of
Kenya, Mombasa WOFIS = World Organisation For Islamic Services,Tehran
VIEF = Vancouver Islamic Education Foundation,Canada PET = Peermohamed
Ebrahim Trust, Karachi

A) Tafsir of the Holy Qur'an

1-8) Tafsir al-Mizan, Vol. 1 to 8. Translation, from Arabic, of the
Tafsir al-Mizan of Late 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba'i.
Seven volumes have been published; 8th is under print. (WOFIS).

9) Tafsir al-Bayan, Translation, from Arabic, of the Tafsir of the same
name of Ayatullah' Sayyid Abul Qasim al-Khoui. (Not complete yet)

B) Fundamentals of Faith

10. Qur'an and Hadith: Repeatedly published by BMT and BMK.

11. Islam: At least 17 editions have been published by BMT, BMK, WOFIS
and a Manchester (U.K.) Association.

Its Swahili translation has been published several times by BMT and
BMK. WOFIS has prepared and published its translations in Japanese,
Thai, Italian and Hausa. They also have translations ready in French,
Burmese and Indonesian.

12. Need of Religion: Published repeatedly by BMT and BMK. Its Swahili
translation, Haja ya Dini, has been published several times by them.

13. God of Islam: Published at least 15 times by BMT, BMK and WOFIS.
Its Swahili translation published several times by BMT and BMK.
Translations in French and Thai prepared by WOFIS. Urdu, Hindi and
Gujarat] translations published as serials by the Al-Waiz, Lucknow, and
the Tawheed (Hindi ed.) Lucknow.

14. Justice of God: More than four editions by BMT and BMK. Its revised
edition is ready for printing by BMT and the Muslim Foundation, New
Jersey, U.S.A. Swahili translation printed by BMT.

15. Prophethood: Several editions printed by BMT and BMK. Swahili
translation also published by BMT.

16. Imamate: At least nine editions published by BMT, BMK and WOFIS.
Its revised, enlarged and annotated edition published by WOFIS in 1987,
and reprinted by BMT.

Its Urdu translation has been published by Tablighat-e-lmani (Bombay)
on the occasion of the celebration of the 14th century of al-Ghadeer.
SwahL'i, translation under preparation by BMT.

17. Day of Judgement: Three editions published by BMT and BMK. Urdu
translation is being checked.

18. What A Muslim Should Know And Believe: First edition published in
1988 by BMT. Swahili translation published by BMT in 1989. C) Fiqh

19. Elements of Islamic Studies: More than eight editions published by
BMT, BMK, London and the Muslim Foundation (U. S.A.).

Its Swahil! translation published several times by BMT. Swedish
translation published by VIEF, and Sindhi one published by
Ma'arif-e-lslam Foundation, Karachi, both in 1990. Reportedly its
Portuguese translation is almost ready. 20. Fast: Published several
times by BMT.

21. Islamic Laws: Contains detailed laws of marriage, dissolution of
marriage, will, inheritance, acknowledgement and waqf. (Now out of
stock).

22. Pork: Published more than ten times by BMT, WOFIS, BMK and
Pakistan, WOFIS has distributed it throughout the world.They have also
published its French and It Jmesian translations. French version also
printed by some Muslims in Paris,Persian translation prepared and
published by Mr. Muham- madi Reyshahri, Tehran. Swahili translation
published repeatedly by BMT.

23. Hijab: It has not been published yet. Its Swahili translation
printed several times by BMT

24. Rulings On Modern Poblems: It is translation of of Ayatullah
al-Khoui.Printed as a serial in 1978 ih the Light Magazine, Dsm.

D) Moral and Social Affairs

25. Inner Voice: Two editions published by PET; third revised edition
published by M/s Dar Rah-e-Haq, Qum; fourth published by BMT.

26. The Charter of Rights: Translation of Imam Zaynul 'Abideen (a.s.)'s
"Risalatul- Huquq"; first published by PET, with the title "Reciprocal
Rights". Second revised edition, with footnotes and Preface, published
by VIEF in 1989. Its Swahili translation published by BMT.

27. Family Life of Islam: Published several times by BMT, BMK and
WOFIS. PET included the whole book in a publication on family affairs.
Its Gujarati translation was published as a serial in the Alamdar,
Bombay. Urdu translation under preparation.

E) History and Biographies 28. The Holy Prophet: At least four editions
have been published by BMT, BMK and the Islamic Society of Virginea
(U.S.A.). Its Swahili translation published several times by BMT and
BMK.

29. The Shi'as and the Shi'ism: An in-depth study of the Shi'a faith
and the Shi'ite peoples, from religious and historical perspectives.
Under preparation.

F) Islamics

30. Muhammad Is the Last Prophet: At least six editions have been
published by BMT, BMK and WOFIS.Its Swahili translation has been
repeatedly published by BMT and BMK.

31. Slavery: From Islamic & Christian Perspective: First published by
PET; second enlarged and annotated edition published by VIEF, Canada.

32. A Correspondence Between a Christian and a Muslim. Translation of a
Persian booklet; published by WOFIS.

33. Sects of Islam;A short booklet, published by WOFIS several times.
34. Shi'ite Sects: Another small booklet, published by WOFIS.Its
translation published by BMT.

G) Miscellaneous

35. - 39) Your Question Answered, volume 1 to 5; Four Volumes printed
by BMT; the 5th volume (i.e. this book) is now ready for print.

40. A few Questions Answered: A small booklet printed twice by BMK
(Nairobi branch)

41. Four California lectures; Type-set by VIEF and published by BMT
42. -43)Selected Articles Vols. 1 and 2; This collection of articles is
under preparation.


