Q1: Are We Self-existing of Created?
====================================

Are we self-existing or created? Who created us?

A. We are not eternal; we have a beginning and an end. Also, we are not
self existing, someone must have created us, must have brought us into
existence. That creator is God, who is free from all defects and
shortcomings. In Islam God is called Allah.

**Q2.IS THERE ANY PURPOSE BEHIND OUR CREATION?**

Was there any purpose behind our creation?

A. Doing a work without any reason or purpose is a defect; we do not
like to be accused of working aimlessly. Obviously, Allah too must have
created us for some good purpose. He points to this purpose when he asks
mankind in the Qur'an: "What! Do you think that we have created you in
vain and that you shall not be returned to us?" (Surah 23, aya 115) so
there IS a purpose behind our creation.

**Q. 3:WHAT IS PURPOSE OF OUR CREATION?**

What is that purpose?

A. Let us ask the Creator Himself why He has created us. If He tells
us, that would be the really authentic and genuine reason. And He, in
His mercy, has already told us-without our asking. He says: "And I have
not created the jinn and the human beings except that they should
worship Me." (Surah 51, aya 56).

**Q.4: OUR RESPONSIBILITY?**

Then what is our responsibility?

A. Every man and woman must fulfil the purpose of his/her creation;
everyone should submit to the Will of Allah and worship Him. When we
worship Allah, we acknowledge His majesty and power and confess our
helplessness and neediness, in a manner prescribed by Him. We should do
it with sincere intention and pure heart, in obedience to Allah, in
order that we may come nearer to Him.

Allah has sent Prophets, appointed Imams, revealed Books and prescribed
Laws of Shari'an in order to guide us to the right Path, and to teach us
the proper way of divine worship. We must follow their guidance, because
it is the only way by which we may attain to the goal of our life,
fulfil the purpose of our creation.

**Q. 5: HOW TO FIND THE TRUE GUIDANCE?**

How can we find their guidance?

A. By following the way of Islam.

**Q. 6: WHAT IS ISLAM?**


What is Islam?

A. Islam is to believe and accept that there is none to be worshipped
but Allah and Muhammad is His Messenger. It means that one MUST believe
in and accept all that has been brought by Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).

**Q. 7:MUSLIM SECTS.**

How many groups are there in Islam?

A. There are two main groups: The Sunni and the Shi'a-we are Shi'a.

**Q. 8: WHY ARE YOU CALLED SHI'A?**

A. The word 'Shi'a' is from Arabic word At-Tashayo, which means 'to
follow'. Thus the word, Shi'a, means "follower".

We are called Shi'a because after the Holy Prophet we follow Sayidana
'Ali and other sinless members of the family of the Holy Prophet.

**Q. 9: "ITHNA- 'ASHARIYA": WHAT DOES IT MEAN?**

A. Ithna-'ashar in Arabic means twelve. As we believe in 12 Imams
(successors of the Holy Prophet of Islam), we are called Shi'a
Ithna-'ashariya.


