Q. 20: How Many Ulul''azm?
==========================

How many ulul- 'azm Messengers were there?

A. We know of five. They were Nuh (Noah), Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa
(Moses), 'isa (Jesus) and Muhammad. Only the shari'ah brought by
Muhammad (which is generally known as Islam) is valid now; it has
abrogated all the previous shari'ah.

**Q21: THE RELATION BETWEEN NABII (PROPHET) AND RASUL (MESSENGER)**

"The dictum 'Every Messenger was a Prophet', deserves this comment:

The Prophet (Nabii) is a helping class, and the messenger (Rasul) is a
class that is helped. "And when Allah made a covenan 'with the prophets:
Certainly what I have given you of Books and Wisdom - then a messenger
comes to you verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him
and you must aid him." (Qur'an, 3:81).

Moreover, the messengers (Rasuls) need help even in the Akhirat: "Most
surely we help our messengers and those who believe, in this world's
life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand up." (40:51).

A. First of all, the verse 3:81 refers to the covenant taken from all
the prophets about the Holy Prophet of Islam - that they would believe
in him and help him by giving his good news to their nations and telling
them to believe in him when he comes along.

This Is generally agreed explanation found both in Sunni and Shi'a
books and traditions. Second: Even this verse shows that the prophets
were required to "believe in" and help the messenger. Evidently it shows
the higher status of the messengers.

Third: Prophets and messengers were not two mutually exclusive classes.
According to general Islamic belief, based on prophetic traditions,
there were 124,000 prophets- out of which 313 or 300 were messengers
(among whom, 5 were ulul-'azm). Thus, every messenger was a prophet but
not every prophet was a messenger.

Fourth: Your observation that prophets were a helper class and
messengers the helped ones, is amusing. Do you mean to say that they
were two mutually exclusive groups? Then what will you say about those
messengers who have been called "messenger prophet"? Were they the
helpers or the helped ones? Vide Qur'an, 7:157, 7:158, 19:51, 19:54,
etc.

You say that the messengers (Rasuls) need help even in the Akhirat, and
quote this verse: "We will without doubt help our messengers and those
who believe, in this world's life and on the day when the witnesses
shall stand up." (40:51).

I fail to understand what do you want to prove by this verse. How does
it affect the relationship between Prophethood and messengership? And
who does not need Allah's help in this life and in the next? The
"believers" will be helped by Allah in Akhirat-does not this word cover
the prophets too?

**Q. 22:AMIN?**

WHY THE QUR'AN DOES NOT CALL THE HOLY PROPHET AS AL- The article, 'The
Prophet Muhammad through non-Muslim eyes', by Prof. Bomoklishna Poo,
published in the Light contains the following sentence: "Muhammad has
been admitted by friends and foes as Al-Amin (the trustworthy)."

The question is: "Why does not the Holy Qur'an call him by that title
when: Nuh (Qur'an 26:107), Hud (Qur'an 26:125, 7:68), Salih (Qur'an
26:143), Lut (Qur'an 26:162), Shu'aib (Qur'an 26:178), Yusuf (Qur'an
12:54), Musa (Qur'an 28:26, 44:18) and even the Jinn 'Ifrit (Qur'an
27:39) have that epithet attached to their names in the Holy Qur'an?"

Could you please point out any ayat of the Holy Qur'an wherein the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is called Al-Amin? I do accept the Holy Prophet as
Al-Amin as it is.

A. A very interesting question. You are right that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) has not been mentioned with this title in the Qur'an. We do not
know why. May be it is because his trustworthiness was an established
fact which was undisputably recognised even by his enemies; and as such
it needed no vouching by the Qur'an.

For example, the Qur'an does not mention about mother of any prophet,
except Hazrat Maryam, that she was chaste. It was because only Hazrat
Maryam needed this vouching.

**Q. 23: SOME SPECIAL OBLIGATIONS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE HOLY
PROPHET**

I have read in "Your Questions Answered' that the Prophet had nine
wives when he died. Aren't all Muslims supposed to have not more than
four wives at a time?

A. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had some special duties and some special
privileges. For example, it was wajib for him to pray tahajjud; to
cleanse the teeth before every wuzu, etc. etc. Likewise, he was allowed
to marry more than four wives (with many conditions).

**Q. 24: THE BOOK REVEALED TO PROPHET MUHAMMAD (SA.WA.)**

Was Prophet Muhammad given any book by God? A. Yes. He was given the
Qur'an by Allah. As he is the Final Prophet, his Book is the last Book
revealed by Allah. It was revealed to Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) as the
Guidance for mankind.

**Q. 25: SHI'A BELIEF ABOUT QUR'AN**

What is the belief of the Shi'a about the Qur'an?

A. We believe that the Qur'an is the word of Allah which was revealed
to His last Prophet, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) as a miracle and guidance for
the mankind. It is truth, around which falsehood cannot reach. It is the
foundation of Islamic shari'ah. It is the Complete Book of God - nothing
has been added to it, nothing has been removed from it, nothing has been
changed in it.

Even non-Muslim scholars admit that the Qur'an is free from all types
of interpolation, change and defect-since the days of the Prophet to
this day. In this respect, it differs from previous revealed books which
have been extensively changed and altered.

**Q. 26: SIGNIFICANCE OF THE SURAH AL-KAUTHAR**

I wish to enquire from you about the translation of the Qur'anic verse,
Surah 108, verse 3. In the Holy Qur'an, by M.H. Shakir, the translation
is: "Surely your enemy is the one who shall be without posterity."

And in the Holy Qur'an, by Yusuf Ali, the translation is: "For he who
hateth thee-he will be cut off (From future Hope).Of the two
translations which is more correct. Because the word, "posterity", means
descendant. In the New Webster's Dictionary this word means all future
or succeeding generations A. You have asked about the correct
translation of the last verse of the chapter 108 (al- Kauthar), which
has been translated by M.H. Shakir as follows:

"Surely your enemy Is the one who shall be without posterity." And
which Abdullah Yusuf Ali translates in the following way: "For he who
hateth thee - He will be cut off (From future hope)."

In fact Shakir's translation is correct. It is not possible to write
the details in a letter. Still, it is necessary to explain that the word
al-abtar is used in Arabic for one whose progeny is cut off, is
discontinued.

When Qasim and 'Abdullah, the sons of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) died in
their infancy, 'Asi ibn Wa'il taunted him that now he (the Prophet
s.a.w.a.) had become al-abtar, i.e. he had lost his sons and now he was
without a progeny. The Arabs did not give women-daughters, mothers,
wives etc. - any importance. In their eyes, only the sons could
perpetuate the name of the progenitor. The polytheists of Mecca (and
especially 'Asi ibn Wa'il, who boasted that he hated the Prophet
s.a.w.a, and was his bitter enemy) thought that because the Prophet had
lost his sons, his mission would be finished after him.

In reply to this taunt, this shortest chapter was revealed. And it says
that; "Surely your enemy is the one who shall be without posterity." The
verse uses the same two words shani' (enemy) and abtar (without progeny)
which 'Asi ibn Wa'il had used. And this prophecy was proved right,
because soon all his progeny became extinct.

The Muslim rulers of the early centuries of Islam, for their own
political reasons, wanted to erase the name of the family of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) from people's minds. For this purpose they hired scholars and
writers who tried to give new interpretations to those Qur'anic verses
which had any connection with the progeny of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). And
by passage of time those mis-interpretations became a part of Islamic
literature. This chapter too was interpreted and re-interpreted in many
ways, one example of which you have seen in Yusuf Ali's translation.

The first verse of the chapter contains the word, al-Kauthar,which they
have interpreted in not less than twenty-six ways. But no meaning gives
this short chapter of three verses any coherent connotation. al-Kauthar
in Arabic means "abundance." If you keep the meaning of the third verse
in view, then clearly the first verse refers to the abundance of his
descendants which the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was promised in this chapter.
Now, read the whole chapter in this light:

"Surely we have given you abundance of progeny. Therefore, pray to your
Lord and make a sacrifice. Surely your enemy is the one who shall be
without progeny."

Also, al-Kauthar is the name of the heavenly reservoir in the Paradise
which belongs to the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and from which 'Ali (a.s.) will
give water to the Prophet's true followers. Thus, we may say that the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was promised "abundance" in this world as well as in
the next. In the hereafter it is the heavenly reservoir of abundant
grace; and in this world, it is the increase in progeny.

This prophecy too has proved correct. There is hardly a place now where
the descendants of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) are not found. They are called
"Sayyid" or "Sharif"; and you will not find anyone claiming any
relationship with 'Asi ibn Wa'il or other hateful enemies of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

The interpretation and the background is found not only in the Shi'a
books but in Sunni writings too.

**Q. 27: SYSTEM OF GUIDANCE AFTER THE PROPHET**

Did the Prophet make any arrangement for guidance of people after his
departure? A. Yes. He has left two things for this purpose: the Qur'an
and his sinless progeny. He has said: "I am leaving behind among you two
precious things, one of them is greater than the other: the Book of
Allah which is the covenant of Allah from the heavens upto the earth,
and my Descendants who are my family members. So look how you deal with
them, and surely they both will not be separated from each other..."

**Q. 28:WHO ARE THE FAMILY MEMBERS OF THE PROPHET?**

Who are those Family Members who have been given the responsibility of
guiding the mankind to the right path?

A.First of them is 'Ali, the cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), whose name was declared at a huge gathering at Ghadir Khum,
when the Prophet was returning from his last pilgrimage. There the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) delivered a long Khutba (lecture) at the end of which
he asked the Muslims: 'Do not I have more authority upon you than you
have got upon yourselves?".

All of them responded by saying. "Surely, O Messenger of Allah!" Then
the Prophet took the arms of 'Ali, and showing him to the audience,
declared: "He whose Master am I, this 'Ali is his Master."

**Q. 29: WHAT DOES IMAMAT MEAN?**

And the fourth Root, Imamat?

A. To lead the people to the Straight Path, and to preserve the
religion of Islam, Allah appointed twelve successors-one after
another-of the Prophet of Islam. They were from the progeny of the
Prophet. Those successors are called Imams. Imam literally means leader.
As mentioned above, first of them was 'Ali, son of Abu Talib, and the
last one is al- Mahdi (a.s.).


