Q. 30:number of Imams
=====================

Was any number fixed for this chain of the Guides? A. Yes, according to
many accepted traditions, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has said: "Imams after
me will be twelve."

**Q. 31: THE TWELVE IMAMS**

Who are those twelve Imams?

A. They are as follows:

1. 'Ali
2. Hasan
3. Husayn
4. 'Ali Zaynul 'Abdeen
5. Muhammad Baqir
6. Ja'far Sadiq
7. Musa Kazim
8. 'Ali Rida
9. Muhammad Taqi
10. Ali Naqi
11. Hassan 'Askari
12. Muhammad Mahdi

**Q. 32:WHY SUNNI SCHOLARS, IN SPITE OFNARRATING HADITH OF GHADEER,DO
NOT ACCEPT 'ALI (A.S.) AS FIRST KHALIFA?**

If there are so many Sunni scholars who have narrated the traditions
that 'Ali was the appointed successor of the Prophet and that after him
12 Imams were to follow, how come the Sunni majority still believes in
the three Caliphs etc. How can those scholars be called Sunni, if they
narrate these traditions which prove Shi'a belief?

A. It is because in their eyes Imamate is synonymous with ruier-ship;
and, as such, depends on acceptance of people. Allah or Rasul, in Sunni
theology, have no role in it. A famous Sunni writer had once written in
India, "I accept that it was the Prophet's ardent wish that 'Ali should
be his immediate successor. But also it should be accepted that the
Ummah decided otherwise".

So this is their way of thinking. For details, see my book, Imamat,
available from the Mission.

**Q. 33: DID 'ALI (A.S.) ACCEPT ABU BAKR AS THE RIGHTFUL KHALIFAH?**

In The "Light" (June, 1986) in the article The Origin of the Shiahs'
appears this passage: "Both the Sunni and the Shia sects agree that when
allegiance was being taken from Muslims, 'Ali (a.s.) did not accept the
authority of Abu Bakr."The question arises, whether 'Ali (a.s.) ever
accepted the - Khilafat of Abu Bakr?

A. The sentence ("Both the Sunni and the Shi'a sects agree that when
allegiance was being taken from Muslims, 'Ali (a.s.) did not accept the
authority of of Abu Bakr") is correct The difference is about the later
period, whether after the death of Hazrat Fatima (a.s.), 'Ali (a.s.)
gave the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. The Sunnis claim, as mentioned
in Bukhari, that he did. The Shi'as deny it.

I do not have time to go into detailed explanations. Suffice it to say
that Bibi Fatima and Hazrat 'Ali (peace be on them) both were sinless
and Ma'sum; and the verse of "Purity" confirms their freedom from every
error and sin. As the Sunnis accept that Bibi Fatima did not allow her
husband to give allegiance to Abu Bakr, it naturally means that she
herself did not accept Abu Bakr. Not only that; they agree that she died
angry with Abu Bakr and Umar; and told 'Ali (a.s.) not to allow them to
attend her funeral.

Now, the question arises Was her rejection of Abu Bakr right or wrong?
It could not be wrong, because Fatima (a.s.) couid not do any wrong. So,
it was right; and that is why 'Ali (a.s.) too could not give allegiance
to Abu Bakr.

Now, if 'Ali (a.s.) changed his stand after six months as the Sunnis
claim, then the question arises: Which of his stands was correct? If, as
explained above, his attitude during first six months was correct, then
changing it would be wrong, an error and a sin. But 'Ali (a.s.) was free
from all errors and sins.

Two other events show what attitude 'Ali had towards these persons.

First: During the Shura, when 'Abdur Rahman ibn 'Awf offered Khilafat
to 'Ali (a.s.) on the condition that 'Ali (a.s.) would follow (1) the
Book of Allah, (2) the tradition of the Prophet and (3) the system of
the two shaykhs (i.e., Abu Bakr and 'Umar), 'Ali (a.s.) refused to
accept the 3rd condition (i.e., following the system of Abu Bakr and
'Umar).

The same condition was put before 'Uthman, who at once agreed and was
declared as the 3 rd Khalifah. Had 'Ali (a.s.) agreed to that condition,
it would have been tantamount to confirming their legitimacy. For 'Ali
(a.s.) leaving his own chance of Khilafat was easier than showing that
they were legal Khalifas.

Second: When Ibn Ziyad (Yazid's governor of Kufa) appointed 'Umar ibn
Sa'd as commander of the army which was being sent to Karbala, he said
to 'Umar ibn Sa'd to fight and kill Imam Husayn (a.s.) unless the Imam
gives his allegiance to Yazid. To this, 'Umar ibn Sa'd replied: "Husayn
will not give that allegiance because the heart (nafs) of his father is
inside his chest." What does it mean? It means that at least upto the
year 61 A.H., friends and foes alike knew that Ali (a.s.) had not given
allegiance to those Khalfas. Otherwise, Ibn Ziyad would not have
remained silent.

**Q.34: THE PRESENT IMAM**

Who is the Imam these days?

A. The Imam these days is the 12th Imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.).

**Q. 35: SOME MORE ABOUT THE PRESENT IMAM.**

Tell me some more about him.

A. Imam Mahdi (a.s.), the twelfth Imam, is alive, but is hidden from
our eyes by order of Allah. He will re-appear, when Allah allows him, to
establish the Kingdom of God on earth. It will be near the end ot the
world, when he will establish justice and equity in the world after it
would have been devastated by injustice and oppression.

**Q. 36: HE WHO DIES WITHOUT KNOWING THE IMAM OF HIS TIME...**

Can you give me the full references to the quote on page 17 of the The
Light (August, 1987): "He who dies without recognising the Imam of his
age is like the one who died during the Jahiliyah."

A. It is a well known hadith, accepted both by the Sunnis and the
Shi'as. For Shi'a books, please see 'Allama Majlisi's "Biharui-Anwar",
7th volume (Vol. 23 in the new printing in which original 25 volumes
have been printed in 110 handy volumes), chapter 4: "Chapter of
recognising the Imam, and that people shall not be excused if they
discard the Wilayah;

and that he who dies without recognising his Imam, or having doubt
about him. dies the death of Jahiliyyah, disbelief and hyprocrisy".
There you will find more than 30 traditions to this effect narrated from
the Prophet (s a.w.a.) and the Imams, in various words (New edition,
vol. 23. p 76-95).

As for the Sunnis references,at present I can give you the reference of
Kanzul-Ummai,(by Mulla 'Ali al-Muttaqi, 5th ed.1985, Beirut), 1st Vol.
p. 103, Hadith 'No.463 and 464. Hadith No.463:(Abdullah) ibn 'Umar
narrates:'He who dies without (doing) bai'at dies the death of
Jahiliyyah:" It is quoted from al-Musnad of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal.

No. 464: Mu'awiyah narrates: "He who dies without an Imam, dies the
death of Jahiliyyah". It is quoted from al-Musnad of Imam Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, and al-Mu'jam al-kabir of Imam at-Tabarani.

**Q. 37: WHO WILL KILL DAJJAL?**

In the book, "Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is the last Prophet", it is mentioned
that Hazrat 'Isa (a.s.) is the person who will chase and kill Dajjal.
But in many of the books written by Shi'ite scholars, it is stated that
this work will be done by Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.). Kindly clarify this
contradiction.

A. As the said book deals with the Qadianis' beliefs, naturally most of
the traditions and references have been given from the Sunni books; and
their books refer to Hazrat 'Isa (a.s.) as the one who will kill
Dajjal.

However, it is not irreconcilable with most of the Shi'a traditions
which say that the 12th Imam (a.s.) will kill Dajjal. As Hazrat 'Isa
(a.s.) will come to assist Imam Akheruz-Zaman (a.s.) and will fight the
unbelievers under his banner as one of his closest commanders, any work
done by Hazrat 'Isa (a.s.) can logically and truthfully be attributed to
Imam Akheruz-Zaman (a.s.). So, even if someone insists on the Sunni
version, he cannot discard the Shi'a traditions.

**Q.38: RAJ'AT (RETURN)**

Will the total transformation of the society into an Islamic one be
achieved during the reign of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) or will it be completed
by the other holy Imams' (a.s.) "Return" (i.e. Raj'at)? By the way, will
the other Imams (a.s.) come during the life-time of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.)
or after his death?

A. "The total transformation" will happen during the reign of Imam
Sahebuz-Zaman (a.s.). The belief in "Raj'at" is necessary, and the
concept and the principle must be believed in. But the details should be
left into the hands of Allah.

However, it is certain that the Prophet and all preceding eleven Imams
(peace be on them) will return during the life-time of Imam
Sahebu-e-Zaman (a.s.).

**Q. 39: DAY OF JUDGEMENT**

What is the significance of the Day Judgement?

A. After re-appearance of Imam al-Mahdi, there will come Qiyamat, the
day of resurrection, the day of judgement. All people will die; then the
whole mankind will be resurrected to face the reckoning of their faith
and deed. People having correct belief and doing good deeds will be
placed in the paradise; while people having wrong belief will go to the
hell.


