Q. 50: If a Wife Doesn't Pray
=============================

My wife doesn't want to perform daily prayers although she is a
daughter of the Imam of a nearby mosque. My impression is that she was
not in the habit of performing prayers even before. In order to instill
the fear of Allah in her, I translated the whole book of Day of
Judgement for her but she wasn 't moved! I realized that whoever is not
moved by that book of yours, must be having a harder heart than rocks. I
have therefore decided to leave it like that. But I must be sure of my
responsibility on this matter; hence the following questions.

a) Am I going to be answerable to Allah for her negligence of five
prayers?

b) Am I required to take any steps against her by the Shari'ah?

A.

a) No, if you have tried your best but failed.

b) Put as much moral pressure on her as you can. But if she persists in
her behaviour, you are not to be blamed. However, make sure that the
children are brought up as practising Muslims.

**Q. 51: FUNERAL PRAYER FOR A NON-PRACTISING SHI'A**

If there is an Ithna- 'asheri who does not pray and also drinks
alcohol, and I know about him. Now when he dies a prayer is held, how
can I declare before God that I know nothing bad about him when I
actually do know? Is it not that I will be telling lies before God? A.
The declaration, "We do not know about him except good", mainly refers
to the Iman and faith of the deceased.

Even if it were purely related to his deeds, there should be no cause
to worry. We know that Allah's mercy has no limits; Allah is in fact
pleased to find an excuse for showering His mercy on a deceased
believer. My father (May Allah raise his rank in the Paradise!) had
narrated to me the following event: Once a most pious teacher of him was
leading the funeral prayer of a person whose evil deeds were known to
him.

Reaching to the above mentioned sentence, he hesitated for a moment,
but eventually uttered the words. At night he saw in dream that someone
was telling him: "Why were you reluctant in saying that you did not know
anything about him except good? Do you think that Allah does not know
man's true condition?

The Creator surely knows even His creatures' hidden secrets. But Allah
is pleased when someone offers Him a reason to bestow His mercy on a
believer. If forty believers say during the funeral prayer of a believer
that they did not know about him any thing but good, Allah says to His
angels: 'So many of My creatures knew the deceased person's
wrong-doings, and yet they have covered it up. Therefore, I too should
cover his sins up with My mercy and forgive his wrong-doings.'"

**Q. 52: IF A MUSLIM DIES IN UNBELIEVERS' COUNTRY**

1. In his Ruling 317 of Minhajus-Saleheen, our present Marja' says: "It
is not lawful to bury Muslim in the graveyard of unbelievers or to bury
an unbeliever in the graveyard of Muslims". What is the judgement of our
Marja' regarding a Muslim living in a non-Muslim country where there are
no Muslim grave-yards? Where should he be buried?

2. What is the judgement of our Marja' regarding a Muslim deceased in a
non-Muslim country where there is nobody to carry out the obligatory
bathing and then to offer the prayer ofJanaza? Will the soul of the
deceased have to suffer on account of that?

A. I had written you once that the shari'ah recognises the difference
between Darul Islam and Darul kufr, because not all the rules can be
enforced in a place dominated by unbelievers. Therefore, a Muslim who
dies in such a country will be buried in the place reserved by the town
authorities for burial.

As for the second question, please remember that "No bearer of burden
shall bear the burden of another." (Qur'an, ch. 53, v. 38; ch.
35.V.18).

So in both cases, there will be no trouble for the dead Muslim at all.
A man gets reward or punishment for what he has done; not for what
others have done or not done to his dead body.

**Q.53: DOLLS KEPT IN A ROOM**

Can we keep statues or dolls in our homes, if we do not pray in that
room? A. According to Ayatullah al-Khoui, it is allowed.

**Q.54: ZAKAT MONEY**

Regarding Zakat money should I pay it to Shi'a brothers only or to any
poor in the town? A. It is only for the Shi'a Ithna-'asheri poor.

**Q. 55: ABOUT SAHM-E-IMAM**

Am I allowed by shari'ah to pay my Khumus Sahm-e-lmam (a.s.) to those
Zakirs who come to Zanzibar for reciting majlis of Imam Husain (a. s.)
whether they be Sadat or not? Or should I pay to those Zakirs only who
are Sadat?

A. Khums Sahm-e-lmam must be handed over to the Mujtahid or his
authorised agent. It is used by the Mujtahid for religious, education
and missionary work.

If you have any specific project of this type, for which you want to
use the Sahm-e-lmam (a.s.), you will have to write to Ayatullah al-'uzma
al-Khoui (with full details) for his permission, it means you cannot
give it to any one without the said permission.

**Q.56: PHILOSOPHY OF JIHAD**

You have counted jihad as a branch of religion. How can you justify war
as a desirable thing?

A.I am glad that you asked this question. Let us look at this matter in
a dispassionate way. Islam does not like to exterminate wrong-doers, it
wants to remove the wrong. Evil deeds are like diseases. They need
treatment and every doctor wants to cure the ailments with medicines as
far as possible.

But sometimes the ailment reaches a stage where no medicine can do any
good; he feels that surgical operation is necessary if the life of the
patient is to be saved. Then he decides, not happily but reluctantly, to
ampute one or more limbs of the patient. It may cause hardest pain for
the time being; but it is not torture, it is mercy.

Likewise, suppose that this humanity is a compact body; some of its
parts become infected with spiritual disease and every medicine of
sympathetic persuasion and rational pleading has failed. And there is a
danger that their infection is causing harm to, and inflicting hardships
upon, other parts;

and the spiritual doctor, I mean the Prophet or Imam who is guided by
Allah,is confident that now the surgical operation is essential to save
other parts of mankind from trouble. Then, and only then, he will order
a Holy-War; and then also it will be limited to that part which is most
necessary to remove.

But even if you feel that there is necessity of a surgical operation
you will never entrust this most dangerous task to an unauthorized
person. It will be a very foolish and irresponsible action. You can
never be satisfied that the operation is essential unless a qualified
doctor tells you so.

Therefore, according to Shi'a-lthna'ashari law, a war cannot be started
unless specifically authorized by the Prophet or Imam himself, and that
also to the limits prescribed by that Representative of Allah. After
all, life is a creation of God and it should not be destroyed unless it
has been authorized to do so by a Representative of God.

Accordingly, the Holy-War is forbidden for the Shi'a Ithna-'asheris
during the period when our Imam is hidden from us. The Prophet himself
never started any war unless it was thrust upon him by the enemies. A
study of the map of Arabia will show the actual facts. When the Prophet
took refuge in Medina, the Meccans became infuriated because they could
not satisfy their anger against him. So they made repeated attacks on
him.

The battle places of three important wars will tell the story. The
first war 'Badr' was fought at Badr in the second year of Hijra. Badr is
80 miles frorh Medina and 170 miles from Mecca. Is there any doubt that
the Meccans were the aggressors? The second war named 'Uhud' was fought
next year at Uhud.

Uhud is 3 miles from Medina and 247 miles from Mecca. Two years after
Uhud, Medina was surrounded by Meccans and Jews for about one month.
They had come 250 miles from Mecca to attack Medina. Is there anybody
who can say that the Prophet should not have fought in self-defence? The
first Ayat of 'Qur'an permitting the war, after 14 years of continual
oppressions, speaks for itself. Qur'an says: "Permission to fight is
given to those upon whom war has been thrust, because they are
oppressed."

**Q57: WAS ISLAM SPREAD BY SWORD?**

But we were told that Islam was spread by sword. Is it not correct?

A. Absolutely wrong. It is a propaganda started by enemies of Islam
which has no basis at all. You have just seen that the Muslims had to
fight in self-defence, the Holy Prophet of Islam did not start any war;
and no war was fought "to spread Islam", it was done to defend the
Muslims.

And all the wars were fought with minimum required force and always
keeping the love of humanity in heart. A good proof may be found in the
fact that in all the wars fought during the life of the Holy Prophet,
the total loss of life (on both sides) was less than seven hundred

**Q. 58: PURPOSE OF IMAM HUSAYN'S MARTYRDOM**

A Sunni scholar delivered a very eloquent lecture in Husein Day at our
town. He said: "Hazrat Amir Mo'awiyah (May Allah be pleased with him!)
destroyed the Islamic system of government, by changing it from
democratic Khilafat to hereditary monarchy; and that was why Imam Husayn
(a.s.) had to stand up against Yazid. Islam does not recognise monarchy.
The Imam willingly endured unprecedented sufferings and sacrificed his
all in order to protect the Islamic democratic system of leadership
against hereditary monarchy." Any Comment?

A. Yes. A book may be written about these premises; but obviously a
letter has its limitations. Yet a few points should be clarified
here:-

FIRST: Is monarchy or hereditary monarchy really not acceptable to
Islam? What will they say about Talut whom Allah had appointed as the
"King" of Israel? (Qur'an, ch. 2, verses 246-248). The Kingdom was his
to bestow on whomever he pleased. When Dawud killed Jalut (Goliath) in
the battle, Talut appointed Dawud as his heir-designate. When Dawud
died, Sulayman "inherited" the kingdom. (Qur'an, ch. 27, verse 16).

So here you find hereditary monarchy with all its ramifications.
Second: No system of government is inherently good or bad. It is as good
or bad as the person holding the power in his hands. The Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) had all powers concentrated in his hands; in modern
terminology he could be called a "dictator".

But it was a "dictatorship" for which thousands of democracies could be
sacrificed. It follows that no form of government provides a panacea for
mankind's troubles unless it is headed by a sinless (Ma'sum) ruler.

Third: What democracy they are talking about? Abu Bakr was chosen by a
handful of people. No body had known that there was going to be any
"election"; nor was the place, date, time, or method of election
announced. Even the prospective candidates were neither aware of, nor
present at, the so-called "election". 'Umar was appointed by Abu Bakr,
and people were ordered to do bai'at for the person whose name was
inside a sealed cover.

'Uthman was chosen, supposedly by a committee of six, but in practice
by one person. If all this was democratic, then what does the word,
"undemocratic", mean? Fourth: Coming to our own side, we know that Imam
Hassan (a.s.) was appointed by Allah as the second Imam to succeed his
father, 'Ali (a.s.), the first Imam. But for those who believe in 'Ali
(a.s.) as the fourth Caliph, there is a real problem here. If hereditary
succession to caliphate was wrong, then why do they count Imam Hassan
(a.s.) as the fifth "Rightly guided caliph"?

Now let me explain, in simple words, why in recent times many Sunni
thinkers have started offering this justification for the stand of Imam
Husayn (a.s.):-

In Karbala, there were two forces facing each other: Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and Yazid. For the Shi'as, there was no problem. They believed that the
Imamate belonged to Husayn by divine appointment and any one fighting
him was wrong. But the majority of the Sunnis faced a dilemma. Yazid was
appointed by the preceding Caliph, Mo'awiyah, just as 'Umar was by Abu
Bakr. He was firmly holding the rein of political and military power in
his hand; that was the same method by which Mo'awiyah is said to acquire
the legal caliphate.

Thus Yazid was a doubly-qualified Caliph, while all the previous
caliphs had only one qualification each. Logic demanded that Yazid
should be accepted a legally-appointed caliph, and any body standing
against him should be called a "rebel". In fact a great Sunni scholar,
Qazi Abu Bakr Muhyiddin Ibn al-'Arabi (died in 543 A.H.)A frankly had
said: "Husayn was not killed but with the sword of his grandfather (the
Prophet) because Yazid's bai'at had already taken place and Husayn had
rebelled against him."

But for the majority of the Sunnis, this was not a palatable idea. They
knew that, according to the Qur'an and prophetic traditions, Imam Husayn
was son of the Prophet and his flower; he was purified by Allah and
could not commit sin; his love and obedience was obligatory for Muslims;
and he, together with his elder brother, was the chief of the youths of
paradise. How could such a sinless chief of the paradise's youths be
called a rebel?

This tug-of-war between the teachings of Qur'an and hadith on one side,
and the logic of their religious creed on the other, was fortunately
resolved by the change of wind in the modern world when people started
singing praise of democracy. Then intelligent thinkers, like Maulana
Abul A'la Maududi, began saying that Amir Mo'awiya had tried to pervert
and destroy the Islamic democracy, and that it was to protect that
democracy that Imam A Not the well-known Sufi of the same name who came
later and died in 638 A.H.

Husayn (a.s.) had accepted martyrdom..

This propaganda has been going on for a very long time, and with such
zeal and fervour that even some Shi'a scholars have been hypnotized by
it. It is really distressing to hear those Shi'a scholars parrot-like
repeating this falacy without understanding its implications.

**Q. 59: DEMONSTRATION AT MECCA**

The obligatory pillars of Hajj are to be preserved. Allah says: 'Show
us our place for the celebration of rites'. (Qur'an 2:128).To take out
processions during Hajj season to condemn America / lsrael / Monarchies
etc., is not an essential part of a Hajj.

A. Well, the Qur'an says, concerning the days of Hajj: "There is no
blame on you in seeking bounty from your Lord." (Qur'an, ch. 2, verse
198). The bounty is accepted by all to mean trade and business. Also, He
says about the Hajj-. "That they may witness advantages for them..."
(22:28).

Now if business and personal advantageous deals are not against the
sanctity of Hajj, how can we claim that matters affecting the welfare of
the World Muslim Ummah cannot be discussed in the Hajj? Or that,
identifying the enemies of Ummah is against the ummah's interest?

Of course, it is debatable whether it was "essential" or not But none
can say that it is "disallowed" in Hajj.


