Q. 60: More On Dedemonstration At Mecca
=======================================

Mecca Shariff should be protected from such non-Hajj activities because
co-ordination therein is impossible vis-a-vis law and order situation:
Read the following tradition: Narrated Ibn Abbas...'Abdur Rahman bin
Auf...was with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab during 'Umar's last Hajj...
'Abdur-Rahman said... 'O the Chief of Believers!... the season of Hajj
gathers the riffraff and the rubble and it will be they who will gather
around you when you stand to address the people.

And I am afraid that you will get up and say something, and some people
will spread your statement and may not say what you have actually said,
and may not understand its meaning, and may interpret it incorrectly.

So you should wait till you reach Madina, as it is the place of
emigration and the place of Prophet's traditions, and there you can come
in touch with the learned and noble people and tell them your ideas with
confidence and the learned people will understand your statement and put
it in proper place". On that 'Umar said "By Allah! Allah willing, I will
do this in the first speech I will deliver before the people in Medina"
(Bukhari No. 817IG, 537lch. 82/Vol. 8). '

A. The tradition concerns 'Umar ibn al-Khattab and' Abdur Rahman ibn
'Awf both of whom were non-Ma'sum and their views are not binding oh us.
Moreover, your quotation does not say or imply that giving lecture in
Hajj was not permissible.

It only shows that 'Umar was advised not to speak on a certain subject
in that gathering, and yet it is clear that if touching on such subjects
during Hajj were "forbidden", 'Umar would not have thought of speaking
on them in Hajj, in the first place. That he accepted Ibn 'Awfs advice,
is besides the point It shows speaker's own discretion, not religious
prohibition.

Apart from that, beginning from the time of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
uptill now Khutbas have been delivered in 'Arafat and/or Mina, during
Hajj days, dealing with the matters concerning the Muslim Ummah. 'Umar
himself used to deliver lectures in 'Arafat during Hajj. (Vide Kanzul
Vmmal,vo. 5, p. 284, hadith No. 12902). So, why object if some people
wanted to express their views on common matters of Ummah before Hajj?

Of course, as I have said above, you may argue that it was not
"essential"; but none can say that-it was against the sanctity of
Hajj.

**Q.61: SHOULD WE PROPAGATE OUR SECTARIAN BELIEFS WHEN IRAN ADVOCATES
ISLAMIC UNITY?**

Must we promote our school of thought to the Sunnis or should we
abstain for the sake of unity? If so, should the unity be a tight and
close one, or only superficial?

A. There appears to be a common misunderstanding about the Iranian
slogan of "Islamic Unity" in both Shi'a and Sunni circles. There are
three conceivable ways of unity among the Muslims. Two of them are:

1. Unity in belief, that all Muslims should adopt a single set of
beliefs, or

2. Unity in Masa'il (rulings) of Shari'ah, that all Muslims should
follow a single set of rites of worship, as well as personal, social,
financial and penal codes Obviously both these methods are impossible to
adopt. Now only remains the third way of unity, and that is the unity in
face of the enemies of Islam.

It means that all Muslims should stand shoulder to shoulder to defend
Islamic values, Muslim land and the Muslim people. They should forget
their sectarian differences in face of the Zionists, the Americans and
the Communists. This is the Islamic unity advocated by the Iranian
leaders. It does not mean that we should hide our beliefs. it only
implies that the sunnis and the Shi'as should not ridicule each other's
beliefs and customs. But it does not mean that we should not propagate
our ideas and ideals among the Sunnis in a sober and academic manner.

**Q.62: SHI'A COLLECTIONS OF AHADITH**

Do you have books of traditions like the Sunnis' Sihah Sitta?

A. If you mean books which we believe to contain only correct ahadith,
as the Sunnis do about their Sihah Sitta (six correct books), or at
least about Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim, then the answer is 'NO'. We
do not believe that any book written or compiled by a non-Ma'sum is
completely free of errors.

But if you mean, important collections of the ahadith of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a) and Ma'sumeen, then, yes, we have scores of such collections,
most Important of which are the Four Early Books, and Three Later Books.
Four Early Books:

Compilation of the words of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the Imams (a.s.)
had started from the very beginning, though unfortunately the early
writings are lost.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) (57 A.H.-114 AH/676 C.E.-733 C.E.) and
Imam Ja'far as- Sadiq (a.s.) (83 A.H.-148 A.H7702 C.E.-765 C.E.) the 5th
and the 6th Imams, were able to spread their teachings far and wide.
There were four thousand disciples gathered around the 6th Imam alone.
Many disciples of these two and the succeeding Imams noted down whatever
they heard from the Imams. Such collections were called usul (Roots;
foundations). From those Usul, the Four Book's were compiled.

Four Books:

i. Al-Kafi: By Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibnYa'qub al-Kulayni,(died in 329
A.H./941 C.E.). As. mentioned above, there were thousands of Usul in
hand when the Shorter Occupation (Ghaybat Sughra) of the 12th Imam began
in 260 A.H. There was no printing press in those days. The danger was
imminent that those Usul would be lost for ever, as anyone having one or
more usul was reluctant to lend it to others.

Also there was need to arrange those scattered ahadith subject-wise to
facilitate their use. The Shi'a scholars asked al-Kulayni to fulfil this
difficult task. Thus after twenty years of continuous effort, af-Kafi
was compled.

ii. Man la yahdhurhul-faqih

by Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Babwayh, popularly known as Shaykh
Saduq. He was born after du'a of the 12th Imam in about 306 A.H.-919
C.E. and died in 381 a.H./991 C.E. His memory and his zeal in collecting
ahadith were unmatched. He travelled far and wide in search of hadith.
He has left a lot of collections of ahadith, but the above-mentioned
book occupies a special place in Shi'a hadith and jurisprudence.

iii. Tahdhibul Ahkam:

By Abu Ja'fer Muhammad ibn al-Hasan at-Tusi. popularly known as Shaykh
Tusi. (Born 385 AH/995 C.E. and died in 460/1067).

iv. Al-lstibsar,

by the same author. This too like Tahdhibul Ahkam is a critical study
of ahadith. Except al-Kafi, all three books are confined to the ahadith
concerne with fiqh (jurisprudence). It was a strange coincidence tliat
all the above muhadditheen (Traditionists) were named "Muhammad" and had
the same patronymic "Abu Ja'far".

The Shias, unlike the Sunnis, do not call any of the above books,
"Sahih". If a hadith is found in any of them, it does not necessarily
mean that it is correct. Its acceptance or rejection depends on three
tests: Conformity with the Qur'an and the known facts and reliability of
its narrators. In the same way, if a hadith is found in some other book
and passes the test, it will be accepted.

**THE THREE LATER BOOKS:**

In later period, 3 other books of ahadith became very popular. Unlike
the former four books, these are not based on direct transmission; they
are collections of ahadith gathered from various early books. These
are:

i. Bihar-ul-anwar:

By Muhammad Baqir Majlisi (popularly known as 'Allamah Majlisi). (Born
1037/1628; died 1110/1699). He realised that hundreds of books which
were known to exist a few centuries earlier, had become extinct. He
feared that if the remaining books were not preserved they too would be
lost. The four earlier books dealt mainly with fiqh; but there was a
large number of ahadith on other subjects which was scattered throughout
the Shi'a World. So he decided to collect those books and arrange their
ahadith subject wise. He collected the whole treasure in twenty five
volume-which now printed with typed letters has spread to one hundred
and ten volumes.

'Allamah Majlis wrote in his Muqaddamah (Preface) that his immediate
aim was to preserve those ahadith without looking at their degree of
reliability; and If God gave him time he would later separate the
authentic from unauthentic Unfortunately he died when only sixteen
volumes were finalized. The remaining volumes were completed from the
collected material by his trusted disciple and helper, Mirza 'Abdullah
Afindl.

ii. Al-Wafi,

by Muhammad ibn Murtaza, commonly known as Muhsin Faiz (born 1010/1599;
died 1091/1690). This book combines the ahadith (subject-wise) of the
earlier Four Books, with comments and notes about each hadith fixing the
degree of its reliability.

iii. Wasa'il-ushShi'a:

By Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr (born 1033/1625. died 1104/1693). This
book collects all ahadith on jurisprudence from the early Four Books as
well as other sources.

It will be noted that these three authors too had the same name,
Muhammad. They are called "Three Later Muhammads", as the authors of the
earlier Four Books are jointly called, "Three Earlier Muhammads."

It has been noted above that, unlike the early Four Books, these three
books are not based on direct transmission. They are compiled from early
books. Their importance however lies in the fact that they are of
immense help to scholars who can get it in one place all relevant
ahadith on a given subject, instead of hunting for them in scores of
books.

**Q.63: TEST OF AUTHENTICITY OF HADITH**

Then how do you judge which tradition is trustworthy?

A. Only that hadith is considered authentic whose meaning is not
against the Qur'an and another mutawatir hadith, nor against reason or
known facts; and whose narrators are trustworthy.

Narrators' trustworthiness or otherwise is known from 'Itm-ur-rijal.
There are many books of Shi'a scholars on this subject right from the
Rijal of al-Kashshi (end of the 4th century of hijrah) to the present
rhujtahid, as-Sayyid al-Khoui whose Mu'jam-u-rijal-il-hadith (in 23
large volumes) Is the most comprehensive of all. Depending on narrators'
degree of trustworthiness, the Shi'a have divided ahadith into four
categories: Sahih (Correct), Hasan (Good), Muwaththaq (Reliable) and Dha
'if (Weak).

**Q. 64 ABOUT ABU HURAYRAH**

A book prescribed for Isiamic studies In our country's secondary
schools praises Abu Hurayrah that he was a constant companion oi the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and had a sharp memory which enabled him to remember
and transmit thousands and thousands of prophetic traditions. I would
like you to explain the reality to me.

A. Abu Hurayrah had accepted Islam at the end of the 7th year of
hijrah-after the conquest of Khayber which was on the 24th or 25th of
Rajab of 7A.H. The Prophet (s.a.w.a) died at the end of the 2nd or the
beginning of the 3rd month of 11 A.H. Thus the total period Abu Hurairah
could be with the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was about 3½ years. Such a man
should not be called as one who was constantly with the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

In such a short period, he claimed to hear so many ahadith from the
Prophet (s.a.w.a) which exceed by far all the ahadith narrated in the
Sunni books from the four Caliphs, Bibi Fatimah, all wives of the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) (including 'A'ishah) and Imam Hassan and Imam
Husayn.

Traditionists have found that there are 5,374 traditions narrated by
Abu Hurayrah. Now look at the ahadith of some of the above-mentioned
personalities recorded in Sunni books: These four Caliphs had jointly
spent a total of about 86 years with the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Now compare
1,411 ahadith In 86 years with 5,374 ahadith In 3½ years!!

People In early days of Islam knew that Abu Hurayrah was an inveterate
liar. 'Ali (a.s.) called him, "the greatest liar"; 'Umar flogged him and
forbade, him transmission of hadith. It was during Mo'awiyah's reign
that Abu Hurayrah's "wonderful memory" came to the fore.

Mo'awiyah established a department of propaganda in which alfew
companions like Abu Hurayrah and some of the companions' disciples, like
'Urwah Ibn az-Zubayr, were employed. They flooded the Islamic world with
their "traditions" belittling the family members of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) and extolling their enemies. In the process the holy name of
the Prophet was besmeared too. It is such "traditions" which serve as
the armoury for the enemies of Islam.

**Q. 65: ON INTEREST**

Can an individual take Riba in case of necessity? Or should he be firm
and steadfast and abstain from the Riba?

A. Any deal entailing riba is invalid. Details may be seen In the
English translation of the Rulings of Ayatullah al-'Uzma al-Khoul; you
may obtain a copy from the Islamic Seminary. But in case of emergency
you make take loan from a bank without intention of paying its interest.
Later on when the bank demands extra payment (as interest) and there Is
no way of avoiding It, then you may pay It "to save your honour".

**Q. 66: INTEREST FROM THE NATIONAL BANK OF COMMERCE, TANZANIA**

I have deposited some money in the National Bank of Commerce. Now may I
take its' interest or not?
A. There is no harm in taking Interest from the National Bank of
Commerce, Tanzania.

**Q67: WIFE WENT BACK TO CHRISTIANITY**

(Many problems arose when the wife of a new Shi'a convert went back to
Christianity. The questions may be understood from the answers copied
here).

A. First of all, I must humbly express my gratitude to Allah Sub-hanahu
wa Ta'ala that he made our books instrumental for your guidance.I
welcome you whole-heartedly and most sincerely in the fold of the true
and original Islam. May Allah keep you steadfast on the right patrh and
guide others through you. Amen. Also I congratulate you on your faithful
obedience of the rules of Shari'ah It was really very good of you to
remove the musical Instruments from your house.

Regarding your problems, please note the following points:

1. It is clear from the facts mentioned by you that your wife was not a
Muslim. She had pretended to accept Islam just to please you; but in
reality she believed in Christianity and longed to return to the Church
environment.

2. As soon as she returned to her previous Christian belief, your
marriage with her became null and void, and three months later the
dissolution of marriage was final.

However, as you cannot pinpoint the time when she had left Islam (if
she had ever accepted it!), I advise you to divorce her at once. It will
save you many troubles and you will be able to claim the custody of your
various properties. (Better consult a good lawyer on legal points of
this advice).

3. According to the Shi'a shariah, mother is entitled to the custody of
her child till he reaches the age of seven years;thereafter the father
gets the custody. But if any parent (father or mother) renounces Islam
and becomes Kafir, his/her right is forfeited. Therefore, your Christian
wife has lost the right of custody because of her Kufr, and now you are
the rightful guardian of your legitimate children. (This ruling is
according to the Muslim Shari'ah. As for the law of the country, you
should consult a good lawyer).

**Q.68: RIGHT OF A KAFIR MOTHER**

You already know the dispute with my ex-Wife whom I divorced for going
back to Christianity. Is she entitled to the rights of a parent from my
children? A. Read again the relevant chapter of my book, "Family Life of
Islam", and you will find that she Is not to be obeyed in matters of
religion and Shari'ah; but even then the children should show her
respect in other matters. However, she has no right at all concerning
their custody and bringing up.

**Q. 69: RIGHTS OF A MUSLIM SISTER MARRIE6 TO A CHRISTIAN**

I have my sister who, despite being a Muslim, married a Christian:

(a) Has she any "rights of Relatives" from me?

(b) If I succeed to bring her back to Islam, will it be necessary for
her to recite Shahadah as a new convert to Islam?

(c) If she comes back to Islam, will all her children become Moslem
automatically?

Must they also recite Shahadah? Should she leave them with their
Christian father?

A.

(a) Yes; you should show her brotherly love in worldly affairs, but not
in religious matters.

(b) No She is a Muslim, although at present she is entangled in the
capital sin of illegal sexual relations with a Kafir, whom she
erroneously thinks is her husband. But if she repents and returns within
the boundary of shari'ah, there is no need to recite Shahadah again.

(c) If she returns to you, the minor children will be treated as
Muslims, but they will have to recite Shahadah when they reach age of
bulugh.


