Q. 70: Can a Kafir Inherit a Muslim?
====================================

If my sister and my half brother remained as they are now, without
becoming Muslems, will they have the right of inheritance on me if I
die? I have my half brother (by my mother) who is a Christian Has he any
right on me as my relative?

A .Kafir does not inherit a Muslim. Moreover, brother or sister is not
entitled to inheritance if the deceased has left father, and/or mother,
and/or a son and/or a daughter.

**Q. 71: DIVISION OF A DECEASED WOMAN'S ASSETS**

How should the gold ornaments left by a woman be destributed between
the surviving husband, mother and father respectively. Your guidance,
based on Shi'a Ithna'asheri Law of inheritance, is kindly solicited. A.
If the deceased has not left any child of her own, and there are no
agnate or consanguine brothers, then the estate will be divided as
follows:

Husband - one-half

Mother-one-third Father- one-sixth.

For your information, you may find this division In the verses 11 and
12 of the chapter 4 (The Women) of the Qur'an; and also in the ruling
No. 1733 of Ayatullah al-Khoul (vide Minhajus-saleheen, vol.

**Q. 72: DIVISION OF AN ESTATE**

My wife died and she has left Shs. 36,000/= cash; and she has left the
following:

(1) Father, (2) Husband, (3) 2 sisters, (4) 4 daughters and (5) 3 sons.
I shall be grateful if you will guide me as to how to distribute the
amount according to Shi'a law.

A. I was sorry to learn about the death of your wife. May Allah give
her high place near 14 Ma'sumeen (a.s.).

As for the division of the money left by her, it is as follows: Husband
will get one-fourth; father one-sixth; and the balance will be divided
among the sons and daughters - a son getting twice as much as a
daughter. Sisters will get nothing. She has left Shs. 36,000/-.
Therefore, the final figures will be as follows:

**Q. 73: MEMBERSHIP OF A SUNNI-RUN INSTITUTION**

Is it right for a Shi'a to be a member of a Jamaat under Sunni
leadership? A. Yes, if the aims and objects of that association are
common and not sectarian.

**Q.74: ABANDONED GOLF BALLS AND TEES**

When we go and play golf, we often pick up tees (a peg used in golf to
raise the ball while hitting) which have been lost by other players. We
too sometimes lose our tees and expect other people to find and use
them. Does this mean that the tees we pick up are'ghasbi'?

On the golf course the caddies (people who carry your cart during the
game), ask us to buy their balls which they have found lost by other
people. Can we buy these? Please take into account that we lose our
balls quite often and also that the caddies put a lot of effort in
looking for these balls before selling them.

A. It depends on the value of the said tee or ball. If its price is
less than that of 2 grammes of pure silver then the finder may become
its owner and treat it as his property. Then if the original owner comes
to claim it, he is entitled to it provided the thing is extant but if it
is used up or lost again, then there is no responsibility on the
finder.

If the price is equal to, or more than that of two grammes of pure
silver, and it is difficult to ascertain who the original owner is, then
the finder may treat it as his property, but he will be responsible to
pay its price to the original owner, if he is found. If it is definitely
known that the original owner has abandoned it then the finder may treat
it as his own property, and the original owner has no right to claim it
or its price.

**Q. 75: SHAVING HAIR ON HANDS AND FEET**

Is it Sunnat or recommended to shave or trim the hair growing on the
hands or feet of a male person? Why? A. No. it is not sunnat.

**Q. 76: ABOUT BARNABAS AND HIS GOSPEL**

I received a copy of the gospel of Barnabas, published by M/s BEGUM
AISHA BAWANY WAKF. KARACHI, PAKISTAN. The publisher in his front page
presentation has written; "About Barnabas the commandment is 'if he
comes onto you receive him'. The publisher refers to the Epistle to the
Colossians, Ch. 4 Verse 10.

A Christian friend has told me that the Gospel of Barnabas is rejected
by the Christian world because Barnabas was not inspired by God. I
challenged him to the above reference.

The first Bible we got, read:- "Aristarchus who is in prison with me
sends his greetings and so does Mark the cousin of Barnabas. (You have
already received instructions to welcome Mark if he comes your way)."

I was shocked and embarrassed. I forced my friend to bring a different
edition and there was no difference in the text with the brackets
maintained.

A. Bilal Trust of Pakistan has sent your letter to me for reply. You
have written that the publishers of the "Gospel of Barnabas" have
written 'in their first page presentation: "About Barnabas the
commandment is 'if he comes unto you receive him" The publishers have
referred to the Epistle to the Colossians, chapter 4 verse 10. Also that
a Christian showed you a Bible which says "(you have already received
instruction to welcome Mark if he comes your way)".

I checked the quotation given by the publishers of the said "Gospel" in
the King James version of the Bible which is the oldest and even now the
best English translation of the Bible. It says:" ... and Marcus,
sister's son to Barnabas (touching whom you received commandments: if he
comes unto you, receive him)."

It appears that the Pakistan publishers have related the pronoun "whom"
to Barnabas, while the writers of the Bible (which was shown to you)
have substituted the pronoun with the noun "Mark." Thus the argument can
never be brought to its end. They should not have replaced the pronoun
with the name.

However, I would advise you not to put too much reliance on the said
"Gospel",as its authenticity is open to question.Its manuscript in
Italian language was found in the imperial library of Vienna (Austria).
Lonslade Ragg and Laure Ragg edited and translated it into English,
which was published by the Clarendon press,Oxford in 1907.The
translators had written a preface, in which they had tried to show that
the manuscript was spurious, not genuine.

The muslim publishers (of South Africa and Pakistan) have omitted that
preface entirely which they should have not done.The best course would
have been to print the preface and then reply to its arguments.

There are many books which give an authentic picture of Christianity.
By a copy of this letter, I request M/S Bilal Trust of Pakistan to send
you a copy of "Dimensions of Christianity", which was published by
"Islami Mission, Sant Nager, Lahore." It may prove useful to you.

**Q.77: IS MARRIAGE MARRIAGE?**

A

A. No, in Islam the spoken words of a person are more important. If a
man and a woman or their authorised agents recite the formula of Nikah,
marriage takes place without any need of a written certificate. It is,
of course, advisable to get a certificate from the reciter of Nikah, to
avoid possible difficulties in future.

Q. 78:
A. Yes.

**Q. 79: IS VASECTOMY ALLOWED?**

In your book "YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED" volume I, page 49, question
number 105, on recognition of family planning by Islam, the answer is
not detailed except that abortion is prohibited.

Perhaps you might be aware of a less-used method of family planning by
males known medically as "Vasectomy". In it a man's "vas deferens" is
cut and tied up with a simple operation, to prevent sperms to be
included in ejaculation during sexual union. This operation does not
interfere with normal sexual pleasure. Is this method of family planning
allowed in Islam?

A. No. Vasectomy is not allowed.


