Introduction
============

The personality and statements of His Holiness Ali (P) indicate his
brilliance and magnanimity. Ali (P) is a personality belonging to an era
further beyond his own era the horizon of his outlook traverses the
boundaries and narrow passes of the materialistic approach and the more
science progresses, the more his impressive statements excel. His
Holiness Ali (P), as a great Islamic personality has illustrated the
exalted status of a Muslim woman. One can find out the comprehensiveness
of woman’s status and dignity in his lofty ideals as indicated in his
eloquent statements and way of living with the Eminence Zahra (P).

Undoubtedly, different social events have occurred throughout history
pushing the perspective of His Holiness Ali (P) concerning women’s
status into a halo of ambiguity many things have been left unsaid and
questions raised. We have conducted an interview with Dr. Shameli to
present a response to such ambiguities and state some dimensions of His
Holiness Ali’s (P) line of thought, as well.

Dr. Abbas Ali Shameli, a faculty member of Imam Khomeni’s (r.h.)
Institute, having the educational experience in theological seminary
towards the attainment of the level of ijtihad (level qualified for
religious guidance), holds three bachelor degrees (jurisprudence, law
and Islamic studies) a master's degrees in psychology of personality
growth and Islamic philosophy and a doctorate in education and training
philosophy from McGill University (included in the Dean’s List), Canada.
From among his writings, we can point to two books on psychology and 29
research articles.


