What is the role of married life and that of housekeeping from His Holiness Ali’s (P) point of view?
====================================================================================================

***The importance of man and woman’s role in family life is considered
one of the ambiguous subjects at present. What is the role of married
life and that of housekeeping from His Holiness Ali’s (P) point of
view?***

In Imam Ali’s (P) opinion, the issue of Holy War (jihad) is the most
important feature of women’s role, which is at the same level as that of
men’s. In Islamic culture, jihad is the highest degree of readiness and
receptivity of the personality of a Muslim. However, according to this
statement of Imam Ali (P), jihad is not specified only to men but to the
woman, too. She has her own jihad and can perform a role of the same
level as men’s jihad. Without doubt, the ground for activating this role
has roots inside the family. Imam Ali’s (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
جهاد المراة حسن التبعل
</p>

“A woman’s jihad (as a wife) is having good behavior towards the
husband1 ”.

This message is related only to the relation of woman with her husband
however, woman’s relation is not limited only to her husband but inside
the family she has relations with the children and relatives too.
Nevertheless, the value and status of woman’s good conduct and treatment
towards her husband is similar to her presence in the battlefield for
jihad.

In general, other roles of woman are related to the affairs of everyday
life. With this statement, one comes to think that such obedience might
result in the erosion of woman’s personality and instilling within her
passivity and indiscriminate submission to the husband but the meaning
of having good attitude and treatment towards the husband and the
evidences of good conduct can be found in Her Eminence Zahra’s (P)
remarks and testament on His Holiness Ali (P), the testament which is in
fact an explanation of “good treatment”. Her Eminence Zahra (P) tells
her husband:

<p dir="rtl">
«يابن عمّ ماعهدتني كاذبة ولا خائنة و لا خالفتك منذ عاشرتني»
</p>

“O cousin, have you observed any lie, treachery or opposition from my
part, during our marital life? I mean, during our marital life, can you
mention the time when I have told a lie, an instance of disloyalty or a
remark which I have expressed opposition2 ?”

This remark indicates that good conduct of a woman revolves around the
three following pivots:

1. Shows honesty in her behavior and speech towards her husband and
never tells a lie.

2. Shows loyalty with regards to property, chastity and reputation and
faithfulness and demonstrates her sincerity and loyalty regarding
property and chastity.

3. Never makes life bitter for her and her husband with opposition and
discord of any kind.

Remarkably, His Holiness Ali (P) following the enumeration of these
three pivots, states:

<p dir="rtl">
معاذ الله!
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فقال (ع): معاذالله انت اعلم و ابرّ و اتقي و اكرم و اشد خوفاً من الله ان
او بخك بمخالفتي.
</p>

"I seek refuge in Allah. O, my wife you are of a higher position to tell
such words, you are more knowledgeable, more righteous, pious and
magnanimous in relation to the divine obligations and your fear of God
is to an extent that prevents you from having such deficiencies in your
personality3 ."

Comparing the two sides of this narration, one can find out that a
person can tell no lie, commit no treachery and wrongdoing if he/she is
cognizant of God, in other words, has awareness of divine rules and
religion, possess conviction with regards to God and His religion. Such
a personality is concerned of God’s Justice and Fairness regarding piety
and behavioral control.

His Holiness Ali (P) in reply to the question, “What is your experience
during the 9 years of living with Her Eminence Zahra (P)?” states:

<p dir="rtl">
و الله لا اغضبتني اذلتني و لا عصت لي امراً
</p>

"She never makes me angry and never disobeys my command at all."

Her Eminence Zahra (P) had such knowledge of the personality of His
Holiness Ali (P) that he had devoted her life to the stability of his
guardianship though it may seem that she had devoted her life to her
husband. Of course, there might be two spouses, who being as one with
each other, sincerely offer whatever they have to each other but Her
Eminence Fatimah (P) not only did this but also was concerned of the
strengthening of His Holiness Ali’s guardianship.

What we want to present here is a real illustration of the pure Imams’
(P) statements, we must not judge according to our own interests. If
there are some points raised regarding woman’s personality, there are
some points mentioned regarding men, too. Any obligation and commandment
in Islam first of all, is addressed to His Holiness Ali (P) and Her
Eminence Fatimah (P). In some instances, the obligations assigned to
them may be more burdensome than that assigned to other people. It was
so for the Holy Prophet (P) when the verse was revealed:

<p dir="rtl">
«من الليل فتهجد نافلة لك»
</p>

"At night, wake up and pray during it as an extra bonus for yourself."

The Holy Prophet (P) was the first one who must do the very Divine
Commandment for he is considered an example and role model. In view of
that, His Holiness Ali (P) describing infallibility as one of his own
attributes states:

<p dir="rtl">
انكم لا تقدرون علي ذلك ولكن اعينوني بورع
</p>

“You can never be like me, however, assist me through piety”.

Some claim that they are Imams and have specific knowledge and others
state that the concept of a woman as presented in Imam Ali’s remarks is
too idealistic and it may be unachievable in real life however, it must
be taken

into consideration that they are witnesses of God, they are examples and
proofs who will testify in the Hereafter. Unfortunately, in discussing
woman’s personality it is said that woman should be like this and like
that, she should not disobey and so on failing to see the other side of
the coin. There are some people who relate to obligations of the spouse
according to their own interests, rationalizing the rules of Islam to
their own advantage.

The management inside the family and responsible supervision over the
internal affairs of the family is another clear and distinct role of a
Muslim woman. The Chief of the Faithful, Ali (P), quoting from the Holy
Prophet (P) states: "One of the points of

<p dir="rtl">
كلكم راع و كلكم مسئول عن رعيته
</p>

“All of you should be a shepherd towards your flock.”

Refers to the woman’s role and responsibility initiated inside the
family. His Holiness states in this regard:

<p dir="rtl">
والمراة راعية علي بيت زوجها و هي مسئوله
</p>

“The woman is the supervisor and the one responsible inside the house,
in the family and in relation with her husband.”

Therefore, the supervision over the sphere of the family assigned to the
spouse (wife) is considered one of the clear and obvious proofs of
general supervision. Through this supervision, tensions inside the
family will fade away and the ground for a sound life will be paved as
well.

The ideal personality for a Muslim woman from Imam Ali’s (P) point of
view is different from the concept of a woman's personality of a woman
at present. What are the virtues of a woman’s personality from the
Islamic point of view?

In His Holiness Ali’s (P) words, the best elements of a Muslim woman’s
personality which are considered at the same time the worst for men, are
as follows:

<p dir="rtl">
خيار خصال النساء شرار خصال الرجال، الزهو و الجبن و البخل، فاذا كانت
المرأة مزهوةً لم تمكن من نفسها و اذا كانت بخيله حفظت مالها و مال بعلها و
اذا كانت جبانة فرقت من كل شيئ يعرض لها.
</p>

(**زهو** ) (Zahv means inviolability that is a woman must be inviolable
in her social activities and her sense of pride should be dominant over
her predisposition4 .)

If a woman were inviolable, she would never allow a stranger to have
authority over herself and if woman were niggardly, she would take care
of the economy of the family and if a woman were timid she would never
be involved with things that would be a threat to her chastity. However,
in the field of education and training it is said that a person should
be extrovert, have social communications and seek for a brethren in
religion and must never fear.

If these three elements of the personality of a woman, which have been
mentioned according to Imam Ali’s (P) perspective, seem unusual, more
explanation and interpretation are required. These elements, which
endanger

woman and put her in a predicament are of two states, the general and
particular here, the particular state is mentioned. Such destructive
characteristics in both woman and man are not desirable in the general
state, since Islam endeavors to educate human beings who are free from
arrogance, fear and pride.

So, Imam Ali (P) does not consider the elements of pride and
inviolability in its general state however, inviolability has a
different meaning from pride. Inviolability means that Islam has defined
a structure for a woman’s personality. According to educational and
training standards, a woman must be extrovert and be able to relate with
others easily and if she could not relate with the opposite sex, she may
have reservations with the opposite sex, while according to Islam, a
woman must observe a boundary in her social responsibilities.

Regarding the characteristic of niggardly, its general state is
considered as well. When the Holy Qur’an states:

<p dir="rtl">
…وَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ
</p>

***"Those who are shielded from their own avarice will be prosperous."
(59:9)***

So the praiseworthiness of these characteristics is referred to in the
particular state. The martyr, Professor Motahhari, regarding disapproval
of these three characteristics for women by some individuals, states:
"Are the moral characteristics relative and are they for men in one
dimension and for women in another dimension? Does this subject indicate
that these characteristics are relative or has the role of man been
separated from the role of woman, according to Imam Ali’s (P) speech?"

In fact, Imam Ali (P) aims to state the attitudes, which are the
outcomes of those characteristics but not the qualities of personality.
For instance, when God states:

<p dir="rtl">
الله يستهزء بهم
</p>

"Allah will throw back their mockery on them."

How can God ascribe that characteristic to Himself? Or when He states:
“If a servant requests something three times from God, he/she will be
addressed at the third time that God is ashamed of His servant”.

If such passive and reprehensible characteristics would be in the
personality, how can the Exalted God deserve these characteristics?
Consequently, in these instances what is referred to is the manner of
Dominion and Sovereignty of God. His Holiness Ali (P) discarding such an
incorrect concept through the analysis and interpretation of his words,
states:

<p dir="rtl">
فاذا كانت المرأة مزهوة لم تمكن من نفسها
</p>

“If a woman continually observe a boundary and certain precautions in
her own social relations, she will never be exploited and vulnerable.

<p dir="rtl">
لم تمكن نفساً ً
</p>

"She never allows herself to be misused.”

<p dir="rtl">
فاذا كانت بخيله
</p>

"If she has the characteristic of stinginess……"

<p dir="rtl">
حفظت مالها و مال بعلها
</p>

".. she will safeguard her own property, that of her marital life and
also that of her husband."

<p dir="rtl">
فاذا كانت جبانة فرقت شيئ يعرض لها
</p>

"If a woman be concerned, in social interactions she will have fright
and together with precaution and apprehension driving away many
calamities and contention as well.”

Nevertheless, Imam Ali (P) considers the best characteristics of women
as the worst attributes of man pointing out that from the Islamic point
of view the role and position of woman is completely different from that
of man in marital life. The nature and personality of woman had been
created in a manner that is compatible with such characteristics and
virtues.

The martyr, Motahhari states: "The reason why the characteristics
mentioned in this narration are not considered in general, in its
absolute state and include particular instances, is that regarding
stinginess, if its general state is mentioned, it will be incompatible
with the certainties of the Holy Qur’an. The verse:

<p dir="rtl">
…وَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ
</p>

***"Those who are shielded from their own avarice will be prosperous."
(59:9)***

Considers the element of prosperity as the point opposite to stinginess.
It is expected of a woman to be proud towards strangers and not towards
the husband, other women and/or her relatives close to her. What is
focused upon is the pride in order to safeguard chastity and perform
social responsibilities.

According to the above-mentioned verse, obsession of this world is
condemned and one who can rescue oneself from this obsession and free
oneself from worship of worldly matters or wealth will reach the stage
of prosperity. So, it is not the best characteristic for a woman not to
spend out of her property. Her Eminence Zahra, (P) as an example did not
have stinginess in its general state. Stinginess is for the purpose of:

<p dir="rtl">
المرأة راعية علي بيت اهلها
</p>

“The woman is the supervisor and the one responsible inside the house,
in the family and in relation with her husband.”

As I have mentioned, Islam considers some characteristics favorable to
woman, which are undesirable for man. Definitely, the general state of
these characteristics because of its incompatibility with the
certainties of the Holy Qur’an is not desired. The preference and
encouragement of the characteristics of pride fear and stinginess is
because of the vulnerability of woman. Stinginess and niggardliness is
for the conjugal property according to Imam Ali (P) who states:

اذا كانت بخيلة <p dir="rtl">
حفظت مالها و مال بعلها
</p>

“Of course, both woman and man are responsible to safeguard conjugal
property.”

The woman has an essence called chastity, which is vulnerable in social
interactions therefore, she must possess a characteristic required to
guard this vulnerability. Throughout history nowhere has it been
mentioned that a woman violated a man, on the contrary, there have been
so many cases regarding violations against woman.

Therefore, fear is for safeguarding the chastity of a woman and
encouraging to have this characteristic is observing precaution.
Accordingly, perseverance and sensitivity in defending chastity as the
basis of personality and complement of woman’s dignity has been
recommended to her.

The Martyr Motahhari states: "A woman’s fear in the position of
enjoining the good and forbidding the wrong is condemned. The verse:

<p dir="rtl">
المومنون و المومنات بعضهم اولياء‌ بعض يامرون بالمعرو ف و ينهون عن المنكر
</p>

"Some men believers and women believers are superior over the other
believers they command decency and forbid dishonor."

Considers woman and man as partners and equal in enjoining the good and
forbidding the wrong. To safeguard values it is said that one has to
offer one's wealth or life unless it may cost your chastity. So fear has
meaning only in this point. Where it is stated "enjoin the good", it
says:

<p dir="rtl">
المومنون و المومنات. .
</p>

“Men and women believers.”

or says:

<p dir="rtl">
الرجال قوامون علي النساء بما فضل الله بعضهم علي بعض
</p>

“Men are the ones who should support women since God has given some
persons advantages over others.”

It does not say:

<p dir="rtl">
بما فضل الله الرجال علي النساء
</p>

“Since God has given men advantages over women.”

In fact here it means mutual rights not superiority. The interpretation
of guardianship is presented and guardianship is not specified to men,
rather woman is the one who safeguards values and fundamentals as well.
However, God considers the characteristics of both woman and man and
accordingly the duty of superiority.

In the words of the Chief of the Faithful, fear in its absolute sense is
not considered, for instance, the action of Her Eminence Zahra to
reclaim Fadak, is an example and the action not being for material gain
indicates the courage of that lady.

His Holiness Ali (P) observing one, who has such an indifference towards
the world, comes to the field in like manner, bears difficulties and
never fears, never stated that the actions of Her Eminence Zahra (P)
were incompatible with the fundamentals of Islam. For instance, at the
time of usurpation of the caliphate, she, along with a group of women of
Quraish entered the mosque to prove the legitimacy of the guardianship
leadership of the Chief of the Faithful (P) and safeguard the principles
as well. This shows why fear is reasonable on some occasions and is not
desirable in any

conditions. It can only be practical for safeguarding and protecting the
woman.


