Can you give an explanation on Imam’s (P) prohibition on consultation with woman mentioned in Nahjul Balaghah?
==============================================================================================================

The Imam’s (P) prohibition has a particular reference. Nobody can find
an instance in Imam’s (P) maxims where consultation with woman in
general has been prohibited. It is clear that we must consider the
following different dimensions on understanding a tradition:

1. Text of tradition and understanding the content.

2. Authority and chain of transmissions of tradition

3. Basis and background of the traditions (Martyr Sadr focused on this
component)5

The first two components are usually in general sense, but the Imam's
(P) taking of a stand is not general, therefore, it cannot be considered
as a standing example. In fact, the prohibition on consultation with
women has been issued as a command for the conduct of a woman who caused
a crisis in the Islamic system in that era.

The basis of a tradition may be for a political, social or thought
crisis. The reason that we cannot have a general consideration is the
very practice of the Imam (P). If he believed these characteristics as
the best for a woman in any condition, why did he keep silent towards
Zeinab Al-Kubra (P)? Or why was there no reaction from him with regards
to Her Eminence Zahra (P) and how she defended herself?

It has been quoted that the Holy Prophet (P) stated to His Holiness Ali
(P): "My dear Ali, if you want to consult with my daughter Fatimah (P)
after my departure, act upon what she would say, because Gabriel is the
one who addresses her and she would say nothing from herself.

Another point, which must be considered in relation to the content of
traditions, is the consensus of the people and cultural condition at the
time when the traditions were quoted. The predominant culture in the
Arabian peninsula with its aristocracy, woman denigration and many
others, could not have been changed for a night or even 20 years,
influencing views and opinions inevitably, some parts of the statements
of Imam Ali (P) have been recorded with a mixture of concepts of that
culture. In some instances, some parts of Imam’s (P) words, the former,
the latter or the part approved through the consensus of the people may
have been recorded.

Hence, to have an independent judgment, it is not sufficient to rely
only on the manifestation of tradition it is a must to consider the
conditions of that time and the basis of the tradition. At times a
tradition has been quoted at the time of taqiyyah (concealing one’s
beliefs at a time of eminent danger) and the command seemed rational
expressing the view of the narrator.

The Imam’s (P) way of treatment is not restricted to his words and deeds
but also depends on his behavior, saying and taking of a stand. The
manner of treatment of the Infallibles (P) towards their wives,
daughters and sons depended upon their capabilities and personalities.
The way of treatment of Imam Ali (P) towards Her Eminence Zahra (P) was
different from that

towards his other wives the way of treatment is also another aspect that
must be considered beside the content of saying.

According to the remarks of the Chief of the Faithful (P) what are the
basic factors effective on the stability of marital life?

From His Holiness Ali’s (P) point of view the factors effective on the
stability and strengthening of the family are two, as follows:

1. The factors related to spouse selection

2. The factors related to the time after start of marital life.

It points out that events should be dealt with foresight. The wife and
the husband must be equal and match to each other. The first condition
for wife and the husband is being of an equal standing, that is, being
spouses. It is not the random selections that can produce stability in
our marital life. The wife and husband must consider if they have
interests to share or not.

Psychologists believe that there are so many individual differences
among people this may not be so in all cases if there is a general
criteria. Being matched may mean two people on the same level. Being
match to each other differs from person to person and depending on the
occasion. Accordingly, the Holy Prophet (P) had special concern for Her
Eminence Fatimah (P) more than his other daughters. He states regarding
the marriage of Her Eminence Fatimah (P):

“I have no authority on her marriage”.

Imam Sadiq (P) states:

“If Ali did not exist, a husband matching Her Eminence Fatimah (P) would
never be found from the time of Adam until the Judgment Day”.

Sharing the same belief and religion is one of the bases of matching
however; unfortunately it is ignored at present.

The prudence of His Holiness Ali (P) on selection of Ummul Banin
indicates that a great part of child’s personality is transmitted
through genetics (genes-chromosomes). It is clear that the chromosomes
do not entirely transfer all characteristics. The ground for formation
of characteristics is prepared during the stage of chemical processes
and physiologic growth.

Whose personality characteristics are more important and focused from
the Islamic point of view, that of the mother or that of the father?

There are some recommendations in the Traditions regarding the father’s
characteristics just like that of the mother. The characteristics of
both mother and father are given importance in Islam. In general,
marriage in Islam has a specific culture contrary to certain countries
wherein discipline and ethics are not usually observed.

On occasions where you are concerned of the moral characteristics of
woman or that of man, considering that in the Islamic family the
structure of guardianship usually rests upon the man and the man heading
the family will be more effective, precaution should be observed
regarding the man. Imam Ali (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
لان المرأة تاخذ من ادب زوجها <p dir="rtl">
و يقهرها علي دينه
</p>
</p>

"A woman is under the influence of her husband.”6

<p dir="rtl">
و يقهرها علي دينه
</p>

Meaning that if one gives her daughter to a man who is not of the same
religious level, the man can influence the wife in the long run. Of
course, these are not in general and there are particular cases, too.

However, if the management of the house were upon the man he would be
effective in influencing the moral and religious aspects. It has been
observed through experience that when a woman of a noble family entered
a family of a different line of thought, it is the woman who would be
influenced.

Imam Sadiq (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
العارفه لا توزع الا عند العارف.
</p>

"Al’arefah in gnosis means a woman of a specific awareness and insight
who has high level from the mental and cultural perspective if such a
woman marries a person incompatible to her she will encounter a problem.
Altogether, these have been referred to in verse 26 of Chapter Nur
(Light), in two words "impure" and "pure", covering all the mentioned
points.

What are the factors of compatibility of woman and man from the Islamic
point of view?

The late Tabarsi quoting from the Holy Prophet (P) in the book "Makarim
al-Akhlaq" states: "The daughters and sons of Ali (P) and Ja'far are
compatible with each other, for this reason Her Eminence Zeinab (P) got
married with Abdullah ibn Ja'far while His Holiness could easily select
a spouse for his daughter from among the rest of the people. However he
has a special sensitivity towards Her Eminence Zahra (P).

The lesson is that the selection of a matching spouse must be considered
in proportion to one’s potentiality and capability. Who will be a
matching spouse for the lady of the two worlds? Of course, it is the
prince of the two worlds. Her Eminence Zahra (P) had other sisters
brought up in the lap of the Prophethood however, for particular
reasons, they could not attain a prominence such as hers. This is why
the Holy Prophet (P) had no such sensitivity towards them. In the
Traditions, the following variety of factors, as a basis of matching,
have been mentioned:

1. Match in religion and faith

2. Match in personality and morals

3. Genetic and hereditary similarity

Islam recommends that one be discreet in selecting the spouse because
characteristics will be manifested in the generations that will follow.
For instance, His Holiness Ali (p) on selecting Ummul Banin consulted
Aqeel who was a genealogist. Then the Imam chose the tribe having the
reputation of bravery so that His Holiness Abbas be brought up with such
characteristic.

However, when His Holiness Ali (P) sent Muhammad ibn Hanafiah to the
battlefield he retreated. Imam Ali (P) helped him once more and he moved
back again. His Holiness told him: O, my son you are my child, but in
facing the enemy you are not like me, rather you lack ability to handle
crisis and you are like your mother.

Accordingly, a person lacking courage will produce a child-like oneself
considering the role of genetics and personality. Although some believe
that

many of characteristics will be corrected through education and
training, there will be little influence even with much effort (even if
there are some potentialities that exist). Nonetheless, there must be
basic potentialities so that there will be growth.

Accordingly, hereditary and genetic factors directly or indirectly
influence compatibility. Regarding intelligence quotient it is
recommended to select a spouse who possesses intelligence and keen
perception as well. As mentioned in Traditions one shouldn't be careless
in selection of a spouse and avoid selection of a person lacking normal
perception and with low IQ for the sons.

The stupid persons (feminine) are of different types. First group with
low IQ sometimes this might have normal intelligence, but deficient in
analysis, problem-solving7 and lacking the faculty of decision. The
second group includes those who cannot resolve a crisis, with their
emotions dominating over their capability to perceive and make decision
with hastiness and apprehension. These types do not deserve to be
selected as spouses.

As we have mentioned before, the first factor which influences matching
and compatibility is that of faith and religion. Faith and Islam have
different meanings. According to an ideological study on the Traditions,
faith and Islam are defined in two ways. Some consider faith as being a
Shi’a and Islam as being a Muslim. Some believe faith is of the same
level as Islam and some consider it higher than Islam. Islam means
submission to divine commandments, while one who acquires faith, reaches
firm and strong religious beliefs. In jurisprudence, the difference
between faith and Islam reflects to being a Shi’a, however, according to
Chapter Hujurat of the Holy Qur'an, faith is considered second aghebah
(stage) and stronger than Islam.

The Holy Prophet (P) stated:

<p dir="rtl">
المومن كفواً للمومنة و المسلم كفو للمسلمة
</p>

“A faithful man is a match for a faithful woman and a Muslim man is a
match for a Muslim woman and they are of the same standing.8 ”

So there is a difference between faith and Islam. Undoubtedly, each
Muslim of any level is not equal to another Muslim. For example, both
the wife and husband are Muslims but only one of them is a believer.
Religious standing is different. In case a person with high level of
faith and who strictly observes obligations marries a person of lesser
standing they will have problems in the future.

The late Tabarsi states in "Makarim al-Akhlaq:

<p dir="rtl">
عن يونس بن ظبيان قال، قال ابو عبدالله: أتدري اي شي تفسير فاطمه
</p>

"Do you know what our mother’s name Fatimah means?"

<p dir="rtl">
قلت اخبرني يا سيدي
</p>

(“Can you tell us the meaning?”)

<p dir="rtl">
قال (ع): فطمت من الشر
</p>

(“Fatimah means removed from any evil and uncleanness”.)

<p dir="rtl">
ثم قال (ع):‌ لولا ان اميرالمومنين (ع) تزوجها لما كان لها كفواً الي يوم
القيامه
</p>

“If the Chief of the Faithful were not to marry Her Eminence Zahra (P),
there would be no spouse to match Fatimah (P) on Earth forever9 .” Imam
Sadiq (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
المومنون بعضهم اكفاء بعض.
</p>

If a man enters into the circle of faith in its real meaning, he can be
equal and match to a woman of the same standing. Focus on the same level
of faith is because faith manifests itself in the personality and
behavior of person and gives color and freshness to life.

<p dir="rtl">
قال (ع) : الكفو ان يكون عفيفاً عنده يسا
</p>

“Equal and match, is a chaste person who is not corrupted from the
sexual and moral aspect, who is financially stable and can carry the
responsibilities of life10 .”

The word

<p dir="rtl">
يسار
</p>

means ability to manage and handle life. Now, this ability could be
savings, a skill, an art or any other capability through which a person
can earn a living. Some people believe equity and similarity in
something apart from moral aspects, chastity and piety, focusing more on
the economic issues, which to a certain extent, is considered by Islam.
In fact, according to this Prophet's (P) tradition:

<p dir="rtl">
كاد الفقر ان يكون كفراً
</p>

“Wretchedness can hinder human being from acquiring faith”

This is natural and many matters related to training have a special
meaning in the scope of religion. Piety is of the most important
characteristics considered in selection of a spouse11 . Undoubtedly,
faith is different from piety. Faith is the first spark, but piety is
the reflections of faith in limbs, in actions and deeds.

Someone asked Imam Sadiq (P) to give a reply to the question:

"In one sentence, can you tell me how we can find out if a person is
pious? His Holiness (P) replied: "Piety means being present wherever God
has enjoined one to be present and not being present wherever God has
prohibited one to do so."

Therefore, the first boundary for piety is the observance of obligations
and prohibited things. Taking counsel with Imam Hasan Mojtaba (P), a
person asks: "To whom should I give my daughter in marriage?" The Imam
(P) replies:

<p dir="rtl">
زوجها من رجل تقي
</p>

Endeavor that the suitor of your daughter be a pious person12 .

With piety is not just devotion but should be manifested in behavior
such as observance of mutual rights in facing the spouse and other
family members and dealing with and handling life. His Holiness (P)
states:

<p dir="rtl">
فانه ان احبها اكرمها و ان ابغضها لم يظلم.
</p>

“If a person is pious, there will be two states either he loves his
spouse or not. If he does not love her he never does injustice to her
and if he loves her he treats her well and respects her.”

Therefore, piety is a factor within us that controls and assists one not
to go beyond limits

<p dir="rtl">
امساك بمعروف او تسريح باحسان
</p>

“Either he takes care of his spouse kindly or frees her legally and
never oppresses her.”

Many problems that come up may make a person feel that he/she does not
love his/her spouse and treats the spouse in the worst way. So, piety in
the sight of Imam Hasan Mojtaba (P) is an effective factor for the
establishment of justice in the family.

The Infallibles (P) have focused on education and training regarding
selection of spouse. For instance, they have recommended avoiding
idealism. Parents must avoid idealism in guiding their children in
selecting the spouse and never be a perfectionist in terms of the
qualifications of the spouse and conditions set. Imam Ali (P) asks: "Are
you a perfect person that you seek a person with all qualifications?
Conditions are relative and we must never be so sensitive, however, this
does not mean being careless.

Once, Ali ibn Asbat, a companion of Imam Baqir (P) who was considered by
the Imam (P) to possess a good character, wrote a letter to the Imam
(P):

“I have a few unmarried daughters and I do not want to give them in
marriage to the suitors who have already come. Of course, I did not set
rigid conditions. I just wanted them to be as faithful as I am."

The Imam (P) wrote in reply:

"I have read all what you had written about your daughters. As you said
you considered your own faith as a criterion and up to now you have not
found a qualified person. What you're doing is wrong, if you want to do
so not only will your daughters be hurt but also the consequence of your
sensitivity will be a factor that will lead to sinfulness and crime that
could spread in the society.

If your example is the Holy Prophet (P) and his religion, he has never
said so. In the Holy Prophet’s (P) opinion whenever there is a person of
good moral character and you are satisfied with his conduct you can give
your daughter to marry him. If you do not do so, the entire world will
be filled with corruption. If all people think that the spouses of their
daughters must be like them, such an approach would block the way of the
child for marriage, opening the ways and channels towards sinfulness and
crime13 .”

This is the viewpoint of Islam unfortunately people have insufficient
knowledge in this respect. People must finally be aware of the fact that
their deeds are far from the criteria presented by the Infallible Imams
(P). People follow the way of life and marriage of the exemplary
individuals and groups. If the exemplary groups change, which somehow
are attracted to materialism, consequently, the behavior and view of
people would change as well.

If the political, religious and cultural figures who are examples for
people, but not in their practice, the entire world will be filled with
the perversions and depravities and the responsibility lies on their
shoulder. As the Holy Prophet (P) stated:

"One who propagates a wrong example in a society would be accountable
for his own sin and towards all people who would be deviated in
consequence of his misleading deed".

That's why people should be knowledgeable of Islam and Islamic
teachings. Many individuals are thirsty for and curious of the truth of
Islam. The first step in the field of cultural reforms is to present the
truth and genuine Islam to the people. Islamic matters must be mentioned
just like five-times-a-day prayer and we must enjoin people to do good
and forbid them from wrong. His Holiness Ali (P) states:

"One of the rights of people upon the governor of a society is kindness
and benevolence”.

If the people be indifferent and show no reaction towards the signs of
corruption in the society in a way that such corruption gradually
becomes customary the mass media has the responsibility to safeguard
religious and Islamic values and standards as well.

His Holiness Ali (P) had said:

"If the obligation of enjoining the good and forbidding wrong in a
society were ignored, one would observe that unlawful deeds would little
by little be considered as lawful”.

The state of indifference is the greatest threat to the stability of
morals and values, to the extent that values sometimes become
anti-values. So the first step in safeguarding values is to enjoin
people to do good and forbid them from wrong.

How important is consideration of family background in selecting a
spouse?

According to the Traditions it is important, but is not of the first or
second priority. If family modesty and chastity as well as training,
cultural and moral factors were ignored on selecting a spouse, such a
marriage would be similar to picking a sweet-smelling flower from mire.
Imagine a person picking a flower from mire. When the person wants to
pick that very flower, he has to step on the mire, gradually sinking
into the swamp and be corrupted as well. The Holy Prophet (P) stated:

<p dir="rtl">
ايها الناس اياكم و خضراء الدمن
</p>

“O people, refrain from the beautiful flowers growing in a ire14 .”

He was asked: "What do you mean by beautiful flowers?" His Holiness (P)
replied:

<p dir="rtl">
المراه الحسني في منبت السوء
</p>

“It means, avoid women with beauty (of course, this beauty can refer to
apparent beauty or good personality), but does not have a good family
background (she is in a mire) because this will destroy the ground of
upbringing and stability and will create trouble in the long run”.

The Holy Prophet (P) was careful on the marriage of Her Eminence Zahra
(P) because of the recommendations of Gabriel, the angel of revelation.
However His Holiness (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
انكحت زيد بن حارثه زينب بنت جحش
</p>

"I united Zeid ibn Haresah and Zeinab, daughter of Jahsh in marriage.

<p dir="rtl">
وانكحت المقداد ضباعه بنت الزبير
</p>

"...and the daughter of Zobair to Meghdad."

He continued: "I do so to demonstrate for the people what is in the
customs and they would be aware that the best honor is that of Islam. "

<p dir="rtl">
ليعلموا ان اشرف الشرف الاسلام
</p>

Undoubtedly, equity has dimensions in terms of customs and religion.
Regarding customs, social and economic authority, honor and common sense
are the criteria. His Holiness states: “Individuals must be equal in the
gem of Islam and faith because no social value could be equal to Islam
and faith”. The criteria of Islam and faith have special importance
compared to other variations.

Another criterion is good disposition. Hosein Beshar asked Imam Abul-
Hasan (P):

<p dir="rtl">
ان لي قرابه قد خطب الي و في خلقه سوء
</p>

A relative of mine wants my daughter's hand in marriage. Do I have to
accept because of family relations considering the fact that to some
extent he has a bad temper? The Imam states:

<p dir="rtl">
لا تزوجه ان كان سيّئي الخلق
</p>

Do not accept if he has a bad temper. The important thing therefore is
translating faith into action like having Islamic conduct and good
morals. Having family relationship would not be a good reason in
accepting such a person. Therefore, good morals and right conduct are
from among the factors, which must be focused as well.

To what extent should matching be based on economic factors in marriage
of two Muslims?

As I have earlier mentioned, wealth and financial ability is considered
to the extent that the person could earn a living. However, carefulness
in economic equity does not mean that there is no special tradition in
this regard. There is such a tradition in the way of life of the
Infallibles (P). For instance, Abubakr, Umar, Abdurrahman ibn Oof and
His Holiness Ali (P) proposed to Her Eminence Zahra (P). Oof was an
aristocrat and a wealthy person and expected the Holy Prophet (P) in
spite of having an exemplary conduct to give his daughter to a rich one.

He thought of that because at the time the Holy Prophet (P) wanted to
select a spouse for himself he selected Her Eminence Khadijah (P). It
was so while she offered all her money as well as her life to the
objectives of the Holy Prophet's (P) mission. Abdorrahman ibn Oof at the
time of proposing to Her Eminence Zahra (P) suggested an amount of
marriage portion to which no one could outrun. He added to the amount of
marriage portion three or four times, camel, sheep, gold, silver and
others, while it is quoted

in a tradition that Her Eminence Zahra (P) held a gravel stone in her
hand and immediately it was turned into a piece of pearl and coral15 .

The Holy Prophet (P) stated:

<p dir="rtl">
ان من يقدر علي هذا لايهمه كثرة المهر
</p>

"One who has such a power does not care for the amount of marriage
portion.”

After this incident, Angel Gabriel came down to the Holy Prophet (P) and
stated:

"God has selected Fatimah (P) for His Holiness Ali (P) in marriage and
set the amount of 500 dirhams as marriage portion.”

The very marriage portion, nowadays referred to as mahr us Sunnah
(marriage portion), adjustable according to the times unfortunately, is
at present, being disregarded. If the economic ability had been the main
basis, the Holy Prophet (P) could have immediately given his daughter to
Abdorrahman ibn Oof in marriage.

Is it important to consider nations, cultures and sub-cultures in the
selection of a spouse from the Islamic point of view?

The Holy Prophet (P) used to encourage his own comrades from non-Arab
nations and tribes to marry Arabs. They have remained without spouses,
wanting to marry those from their own nation (non-Arabs). Most of the
mothers of the pure Imams (P) did not belong to the high strata of
society but possessed particular capabilities because of the fact that
they were educated and trained in an era concurrent with that of Imams
(P).

The mother of His Holiness Lord of the Time (may God hasten his
reappearance) was a Christian however, she possessed the ideal
qualities, being religious, faithful, pious and virtuous. Religion gives
more depth to individual and social relations. Undoubtedly, if we
believe in the fact that religion is a series of regulations for the
conduct of a human being, anyhow it will have a bearing on the
prosperity of the individual and society.

Does Islam focus on the sameness of age for a girl and a boy who wants
to marry each other?

Yes, being about the same age is one of the factors considered for
matching of wife and the husband. Of course, girls naturally reach
adolescence 4 years sooner than boys. This difference between men and
women is natural and physiologic accordingly, it is focused in Islam
that the spouse should be either of the same age or the age gap between
them should not be more than 4 years and since the tension and pressure
on women are more than that on men during the struggle of life it is
preferable that the age of woman be less than that of the husband.

Imam Ali (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
و لتنكح المرأة‌ لمتها من الرجال و لينكح الرجال منكم لمة من النساء
قال(ع): لمة الرجال من النساء‌ مثله في السن
</p>

“A man should pick one from among women who matches him. Every woman on
selecting a spouse should choose a man who matches her16 .”

A person asked Imam (P): "What does "???" mean? He replied: "???" means
nearness and sameness in age."

Undoubtedly, compatibility and nearness in age means being of the same
age or having not much difference in age, because a huge difference in
age may cause conflict to the extent that the two parties would not be
able to stand each other.

Ignoring and being indifferent towards these factors will cause
problems. Evaluating the variations, it is sometimes observed that some
qualifications on which we focus or which the Divine Law recommends do
not exist in the person. In general, focus on the factor of age is
important. If there is a 15-year age gap between the two parties, the
fact is that they live in two different worlds. In selecting a spouse,
we must dispense with idealism, of course. Needs must be met in
selecting a spouse. In selection of a spouse one should evaluate his/her
qualifications. Is he/she the best one? Does he/she have such and such
ideal qualifications so that one expects to find that very
qualifications in the spouse?

To what extent can beauty be considered an appropriate criterion in
selecting a spouse?

Beauty can be one of the criteria.

<p dir="rtl">
يا من ترضون خلقه و خلقة
</p>

A person went to see the Imam (P) and observed that His Holiness was
beautifying his hair and face he then asked: "Why do you beautify
yourself? His Holiness replied:

"A man who is careful in the beautification of his appearance will
prevent his wife from corruption."

According to this tradition, beautification is not only enjoined for
women but for men, too. Men should also care for their appearance. One
shouldn't be an idealist and must consider similarity with one's own
qualifications, focusing not only on appearance but faith, virtue and
training factors as well. Unfortunately, some pay attention only to one
dimension and are perfectionists and sensitive in selecting a spouse
having high level in this qualification. A person cannot possess all the
qualifications. Generally, idealism in any area leads to failure.

Imam Hasan Askari (P) states:

"Co-existence and social communications require carefulness, evaluations
and assessments to some extent and going to extremes makes a personality
abnormal.”

In some instances, things can be found out through hearing and visiting
but in some cases such as spouse selection, all that we expect are not
visible but will be known only in the future. In fact, two thirds of
characteristics are discovered through communication, sharp-sightedness,
evaluation and carefulness and the remaining one third is concealed and
not known. We are relative so our choice will be relative as well. Those
who are very sensitive will put themselves in trouble and their choice
will not be the best.

Can you tell us about the factors related to the strengthening and
stability of marital life within the family?

The Chief of the Faithful was asked about his 9-year marital life with
Her Eminence Fatimah (P). Ali (P) stated:

<p dir="rtl">
والله ما اغضبتها و لا اكرهتها علي امراً
</p>

"I call God to witness that I never made Fatimah (P) angry in any
circumstances and never forced her to do something and there was no
instance that Fatimah (P) made me angry and did not show disobedience in
any matter.”

<p dir="rtl">
ولا اغضبتني و لا عصت لي امراً
</p>

"After any unhappiness, when I looked at Fatimah’s (P) face, I was
relieved of the sorrow and sadness

<p dir="rtl">
«لقد كنت انظر اليها فيكشف عني الهموم و الاحزان
</p>

Therefore, a husband must never make his wife angry. Most of family
troubles are related to those things imposed on one another. His
Holiness states:

"I neither forced Fatimah (P) to do something nor made her angry and she
never disobeys me at all.”

One of the factors contributing to stability of married life is the
focus on appearance in a manner that when the spouses look at each
other, their unhappiness and tension are removed and the difficulties
and problems are forgot as well. A spouse who aims for harmony never
encounters conflict and dispute.

The structure of spouse selection and control of family affairs and
heading of the family in Islam make some men to assume that it is their
right to control everything and that women must merely obey. What
prevents such a misunderstanding as referred to in the statements of our
Master Ali (P)?

The Chief of the Faithful (P) states:

<p dir="rtl">
من اساءها الي اهله لم يتصل به تأميل
</p>

“One who does evil to his family is not expected to do well with
others17 .”

Accordingly, such a person does not deserve to have a responsibility in
society and above all, to handle life. It is recommended that
individuals be selected who will undertake social responsibilities that
will not create crisis.

Husbands must support their wives because they have delicate sentiments
and at the same time nurture optimism and tranquility in the family.

There is no mention of blind submission rather it is quoted that

<p dir="rtl">
‌لا تعصيها امراً
</p>

that is - do not disobey the order.

Taking good care of the husband

<p dir="rtl">
حسن التبعل
</p>

Means there should be the state of submission and women must be
emotionally supported and the faults in marital life must be ignored. Of
course, there are two messages in training for stability of the family
in Islam.

According to the first message, an individual functions entirely within
the framework of obligations, in other words, one is aware of his/her
obligations towards the spouse and performs the duties certainly, the

stability of such families is not what we speak about, in this case
spouses function like customer and buyer.

According to the second message, the wife and husband stay with each
other in any situation and this is the evidence of

<p dir="rtl">
جعل بينكم مودة و رحمة
</p>

that is- in some cases mere observance of matrimonial rights and
obligations may not solve any problem and it is friendship and mercy
which secure the stability of family.

Being aware of and doing one's part in duties and limitations of rights
and responsibilities are considered among the factors, which contribute
to the stability of the family. How do you evaluate this factor in the
life of Her Eminence Zahra (P) and His Holiness Ali (P)?

On the third day of their marital life, Her Holiness Zahra (P) wanted
the Holy Prophet (P) to determine the scope of rights and duties of each
spouse and consulted him regarding the tasks, which each spouse must
perform, inside the house. The Holy Prophet (P) replied: "The tasks
inside the family should be upon Her Eminence Fatimah (P) and the
affairs outside the home, upon the Chief of the Faithful (P). According
to Imam Sadiq (P), Her Holiness Fatimah had expressed:

<p dir="rtl">
فلا يعلم ما داخلني من السرور الا الله باكفائي رسول الله تحمل رقاب الرجال
</p>

“Nobody knows except the Exalted God how I was filled with gladness at
the moment, because of the fact that the Holy Prophet (P) through this
division of duties freed me from undertaking the responsibilities
leading to have interaction with men”.

Family stability is connected to fulfillment of responsibilities, on one
hand and to the self-sacrifice of family members, on the other. Duties
means function within the determined framework however, self-sacrifice
is something beyond it.

Regarding this division of duty, the best women are those who are not
involved in conflicts and responsibilities, which are beyond the limits
of chastity. Depending upon the circumstances, one may be obliged to do
something outside the spheres of duties as well. Of course, His Holiness
Ali (P) was helping Her Eminence Fatimah (P) in the household chores
during his leisure time and Zahra (P) was doing tasks outside household
duties when His Holiness Ali (P) was in holy wars.

Does such a division of duty means woman’s deprivation from social
rights and advancements outside the household?

Not at all, in fact, if a woman wants to be an ideal woman, she must not
be involved in the tensions outside the family. Undoubtedly, in order to
establish a general structure for the responsibilities of woman and man,
it’s better to rely not only upon traditions but in addition to the
traditions, we can focus on the practice of the Infallibles (P), the
atmosphere of the Islamic society and the function of those who lived
near the time of divine legislation, too.

Martyred Professor Motahhari writes: "Mr. Baghdadi has compiled a book
entitled

<p dir="rtl">
بلاغات النساء
</p>

(“Balaghatun- Nesa”) in 250 A.H. (during the era of Imam Hasan Askari
[P]) which, unlike most books that include social issues on men, covers
all sermons and speeches of the learned women of the Islamic world and
all sermons delivered by Her Eminence Zahra (P) and Her Eminence Zeinab
(P). This indicates that women who have attained such a level in the
field of science and produced scientific works have never been limited
to the four corners of the house.

Imam Hasan Askari (P) advised Hakimah, daughter of Imam Javad (P) to be
a refuge for Shi'ite followers in their religious problems because after
his martyrdom, his son, the Lord of the Time (May God hasten his
reappearance) would be very young. A person hearing this became doubtful
and said that consulting a woman on religious problems should be
possible whenever there is no Imam. Imam Hasan Askari (P) stated:

"My son will be Imam even though he would be a child."

This means that people can refer to a learned woman for religious
problems even if an Imam exists.

Imam Sajjad (P) assigned the responsibility of performing and executing
the missions for which he himself was apparently responsible to the
learned woman Zeinab (P) while she was enduring the worst crises.
Indeed, the culture of Ashoora is a culture wherein women and men
partake in the open and the fact is that when people asked Imam Hosein
(P) why he took women to the battlefield knowing that he would not win
the battle and he replied:

<p dir="rtl">
شاء ان يريهنَّ سبايا
</p>

“God had wanted them to be captives.”

This is why these captives are actually considered the complement of
Ashoora and it did not matter whether they were women or men.

Fatimah (P), being shoulder to shoulder with His Holiness Ali (P), who
had been the first devotee in the path of Wilayah (Guardianship), and
Imamate or the movement of Zeinab (P) and that of Her Eminence Khadijah
(P) all indicate social presence of women. In the pilgrimage
supplications of Her Holiness Masoomah (P), one can read:

"Fatimah! You have a dignity and position in the sight of God different
from that of others.”

It is noteworthy that whenever an indefinite noun is used in Arabic
language, it is referred to magnanimity which means, she had such a
great personality that could never been expressed in words. Imam Sadiq
(P) regarding Her Holiness Fatimah Masoomah (P) states:

"God has a sacred place that is the Inviolable Place of Worship. The
Holy Prophet (P) has a sacred house that is the Prophet’s (P) Mosque.
The Chief of the Faithful has one that is Kufa. We, the people of the
Household of the Prophet have a sacred place and that is Qom wherein the
shrine of Her Holiness Masoomah (P) is located”.

One can observe some similarities in the activities of this personality
and that of Her Eminence Zahra (P), such as activity towards stability
of the Imamate. Her Eminence Zahra (P) endeavored to prove the
legitimacy of

guardianship of the Chief of the Faithful (P) not only because of being
his spouse but also a follower of an Imam. Her martyrdom was a sign of
stability of guardianship of His Holiness Ali (P).

Her Holiness Masoomah (P) was of the learned women of the family of Imam
Kazem (P) who played great roles towards the continuity of guardianship.
There is even a tradition called Favatem (Fatimahs), which talks about
some Fatimahs and ends with Her Eminence Zahra (P) and the legitimacy of
the leadership of His Holiness Ali (P). In the same way that the Holy
Prophet (P) addressed her daughter Her Eminence Zahra (P):

<p dir="rtl">
فداها ابوها
</p>

"May her father be sacrificed for his daughter."

One can find in a tradition the status of Her Holiness Masoomah (P) in
relation to the Imams (P) of her times. In this tradition, it has been
narrated that once a group of Shi'ites wrote down their problems and
questions and proceeded to Medina to visit Imam Musa (P), but His
Holiness (P) and Imam Reza (P) were not at home. Her Holiness Masoomah
(P) states: Come tomorrow to take the answers and show them to Imam
Kazem (P) in order to be certain about the answers."

When they showed the answers to the Imam (P), he states:

<p dir="rtl">
فداها ابوها
</p>

"May her father be sacrificed for his daughter."

This was not only an expression of affection for Her Holiness Masoomah
(P) but also shows her status in the scientific field.

Her Eminence Zahra held meetings for women of Quraish and Bani Hashem
however, due to the political atmosphere at that time her sermons have
not been available.

The sermon of Her Holiness Zahra (P) delivered at Medina Mosque
defending Ali’s (P) guardianship though, is available. Referring to
monotheism, Divine Essence and Attributes and the philosophy of Divine
Law, Her Eminence (P) compares the culture before the advent of Islam to
that after it. In fact, acceptance of the division of duty is
significant in social activities and scientific endeavors and it does
not create obstacles on the path of her advancement. Or Her Holiness
Zeinab (P) who ordered the people of Kufa to be silent before delivering
a strong sermon so that Imam Sajjad (P) addressed her:

<p dir="rtl">
اسكتي يا عمه، انت الحمدالله، عالمه غير معلمه، و غير مفهمه
</p>

“O, my aunt please discontinue because you are in a critical condition.
You, praise be to God, are a woman of science whose knowledge comes from
no one and a learned woman whose knowledge is with God.”

Of course, it may be said that a part of their knowledge is with God,
but they also endeavored to obtain knowledge. Her Holiness Zeinab (P)
made efforts in seeking religious knowledge. In fact, the rising of
Karbala was a movement shared by man and woman.

The martyred Motahhari states: "There are both men and women narrators
on the authenticity of traditions and chain of transmission of hadith
(narrations) as well. Undoubtedly, if these traditionists had been
staying at

home how could they have transmitted these teachings? Therefore, through
observing boundaries and Islamic values and avoidance of intermingling
of sexes, one can function as circumstances may allow and the treatment
of the daughters and wives of the Infallibles (P), as demonstrated in
their practice, indicates their responsibility towards scientific and
cultural advancement.


