The Birth and Education of Fatimal –ma'sooma “a.s”
==================================================

“1”

The people of Almadeenal Munawwara were expecting a birth of a female
child of the prophet’s household, and especially the family of Imam
Al-Kaadhum “a.s” who also were expecting the blessed coming of this
child.

Najma, the spouse of Imam Al-Kaadhum “a.s.”, was spending the night and
the day with the hope of giving birth, while the house experiences and
calls out for happiness and joyfulness.

And lastly at the beginning of Thul-Kiada month 173 A.H., the days of
the expectation had finished, while Allah “s.w.” provided Al-Imam
Al-kaadhum “a.s” with a blessed and honoured female birth.

Happiness overcame the community, while no one reached the happiness
degree of Imam Al-kaadhum save Najma his wife, on whom the mercy of God
“s.w.” descended, when she was provided with her second birth after
twenty-five years of Ali’s birth, who was called as Ar-Ridha “a.s.” and
whose birth was in the same month Thul-Kiada in the year 148A.H. Najma
became extremely happy for him, hence Allah “s.w.” favored her and
Al-Imam Al-Kaadhum “a.s.” by giving them a girl who would be the sister
of Ar-Ridha “a.s.”.

And due to the close relationship between Imam Al-Kadhum and his
grandmother, Fatima Al-Zahra, he called his darling daughter Fatima,
whom then was known as Al-Ma'sooma ie “the infallible” for her
devoutness and saintliness and she imitated her father in his
infallibility and abstained herself from any sin or evil.

The name of Fatima has its particular affection for that which tells of
the sweet and bitter memories about the veracious immaculate Fatima
“Faimatil –Zahra” “a.s.”, and whenever they called one of their females
Fatima, she will gain a particular estimation of dignity, and welfare
because of her similarity with the name of the Prophet’s daughter, hence
the Lady Fatima Al-Ma'sooma was never out of this good attribute
wherever she was.

Imam Kadhum “a.s.” did his best in order to protect and educate his
darling daughter, while he left no effort to demonstrate his attention
and affection towards her.

The Lady Al-Ma'sooma lived under the protection of her noble parents,
from whom she attained the good virtues and qualities, while her father
was an infallible Imam, and whom no one equals in his virtues and piety
whereas her mother is “Najma”, a virtuous, faithful woman, and was
educated at the school of Imam As-Saadiq’s wife, and who was known by
piety during that period. Thus Hameeda, mother of Imam Kaadhum “a.s.”
advised her son Al-Kadhum “a.s.” to marry Najma.

The Lady Ma'sooma got benefit everyday at hands of her infallible
father and pother “a.s.”, and her educated pious mother, till she
attained a high level in knowledge and virtue while she became aware of
many kinds of Islamic knowledge and matters during her youth.

One day a company of Shia' came to Al- Madeena in order to lay their
religious questions at Imam Al- Kaadhum “a.s.”, and to take knowledge
from its original springs, but Imam Al-Kaadhum and Imam Ar-Ridha “a.s.”
were travelling out of Al-Madeen, and so they became grieved because
they did not find the trustee of Allah who can solve their inquiries so
they were obliged to think of returning back.

When the lady Ma'sooma “a.s.” saw their sadness she took their question
which were written and answered them.

Then the group’s grief was changed into extreme happiness, since they
returned back home with their solved inquiries prosperously. When they
returned, they met Imam Al-Kaadhum “a.s.” and they told him about what
had happened for them and when he saw his daughter’s answer on those
questions he recommened his daughter piefly saying “May her father be
sacrificed for her”.


