The Burial Ceremonies
=====================

"8"

The women of the Shi’as and the friends of Ahlil-baiyt “a.s.” took up
on themselves the vitual ablution of the Holy body of the Lady Ma'sooma
“a.s.” and shroweded her.

When the time of the burial took place, the bigshot people from the
Ashariam and their important men saw, that the pure body must be buried
in a special place other than the common cemetry, and that was because
of their great and high estimation towards the daughter of Imam
Al-Kaadhum “a.s.”, since they never desire to bury her body besides the
graves of common people.

Musa bin Khazraj the antecedent in this affair, specialized a vast
orchard at a location named “Bablaan” on the coast of Qom river, “and
that is the location of the current holy shrine” in order to bury the
pure body, so all the arrangents are ready now for the burying, but who
will be the appointed one, who shall take up on himself in order to bury
the immaculate body?

The people present exchanged the views about this affair between them,
and finally they decided to recommend this affair for a virtuous old
man, who is called Kaadir, thus they sent a person in order to fetch
him, but he didn’t find him, and suddenly two persons came from the
river side, approached towards the burial location, and when they
approached to the pure body location, they came down from their horses,
perfomed the ritual praying; then they took upon themselves the burial
arrangement and buried the pure body. Then they amounted their horses
and moved far and far fastly, while the common people were astonished.

Thus the ceremony of the body burial finished in high estimation with
the cry and sadness of the Shi'a, so Qom became the true shelter of
Muhammad’s progeny, and the sanctuary of the daughter of Imam Musa
Al-Kaadhum “a.s.”.

Respecting the Lady’s Shrine Musa bin Hkazraj intailed his orchard for
the Muslims, in order that the followers of Ali “a.s.” could bury their
deads surrounding the holy grave.


