The Holy Shrine of the Lady Ma'sooma “a.s”
==========================================

"9"

The population of Qom built a hut over the shrine of the Lady Ma'sooma
“a.s.” using the strawmat, and after 50 years, and by the attention of
the Lady Zainab the daughter of Imam Al-Jawaad “a.s.” the first dome was
built over the holy grave of the Lady Ma'sooma, then the holy shrine was
rebuilt by the lovers and the followers of Ahlil-Baiyet “a.s.”, then it
was expanded till it became, in its present form.

Many years after Fatima Al- Ma'sooma’s death, many daughters of the
Imams were buried close to the holy shrine of Al- Ma'sooma “a.s.”, which
increased the importance of this clean and blessed ground.

The blooming shrine of the Lady Fatima al-Ma'sooma was a shelter of the
Shia's throughout the history, and the pinger of the benefit and
blessings for Qom population.

How many of the needy whose purposes are achieved, and how many of the
ill people were cured by the way of the daughter of Ahlil-Bayit’s and
she will take with the hands of her visitors towards the coast of
rescue, “O, Fatima intercede for us in the paradise….”. and it was
narrated from Imam As-Sadiq “a.s.” that he said: “She truly enters all
of our shiites into paradise by her intercession.”

Throughout the later centuries many great scholars had educated at the
closeness and beseach of this blessed grave, those jurisprudents were
the spring of good and blessings throughout the Islamic world, and from
them was the great scholar Imam sayyid Rohul-Lah Al-Mussawi Al-Khumaini,
while all of those see that their prosperity was due to visiting this
holy shrine of the Lady Ma'sooma “a.s.”, so they started their important
projects and activities at the nearness of this holy shrine of the Lady
Ma'sooma “a.s.” and this is Imam Khumaini, who started his blessed
revolution, from the close of this grave .

Today this holy shrine of the Lady Ma'sooma “a.s.” is illuminating like
the pight gem in the center of Qom. Everyday Caravans come from various
regions of Iran, and the world to visit this holy shrine, and to declare
their loyalty and love towards the Prophet of Islam and his progeny.

Peace be upon her at the day of her birth, the day of her death, and
the day on which, she will be resurrected alive.

