Foreword
========

##### Bismillahirrahmanirrahim

All praise be to Allah alone, and all blessings be upon the Chosen
Prophet, Muhammad, and his household whom He has chosen

Amir al-Mu’minin, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s), is a great and peerless
personality whose qualities have been recognized by friends and foes
alike. None could ever deny his sterling qualities. He was born in a
distinguished family of the tribe of Quraysh. He had the singular
distinction of taking birth in the holy precincts of the Ka\`bah. He
first opened his eyes in this world to see the radiant visage of the
Prophet (a.s). He grew and received upbringing under the tutelage of the
Prophet (a.s). Imam \`Ali (a.s) followed the footsteps of his mentor and
cousin from his very childhood. He was always with the Prophet (a.s)
like a shadow and derived felicity from the company. Imam \`Ali (a.s)
accomplished the various stages of upbringing and training under the
fond and watchful eyes of the Prophet (a.s) His head and heart absorbed
the actions and the exemplary character of the Prophet (a.s).The purity
of thoughts and excellence of upbringing elevated Imam \`Ali (a.s) to
such heights that the moon and the stars appear to be at lower
elevations!

This is a common belief, and true to a certain extent, that the
environment plays a major role in shaping the nature and thoughts of
persons. But, in this world, there have been august personalities who
were not at all affected by the popular beliefs and superstitions. The
thinking of these persons has always been different and their actions
far apart from those of the populace. \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) has been
one such noble personality who, rather than falling in line with the
mundane thoughts and habits of the people, left his mark on their
thoughts and actions. With his vision, power of comprehension and
Allah’s help he was able to draw a line between right and wrong and,
therefore, laid the foundation of a new and unique culture and thought
process. Instead of treading the beaten track, he left his own
footprints for others to follow. Therefore, in that idolatrous period in
the history of Arabia, he never bowed his head to anyone other than the
Creator, Allah! He kept his radiant forehead safe from bowing to myriad
idols installed in the Ka\`bah

those days. Imam \`Ali’s thoughts and actions were always in tune with
those of the Prophet (a.s). It was the result of this unity of thoughts
that no sooner the Prophet (a.s) proclaimed his Message, \`Ali (a.s)
accepted it and gave the proof of his adherence to the Truth by being
the first person to join the Prophet (a.s) in the prayers.

In his early days Imam \`Ali (a.s) dedicated himself to the task of
propagating Islam as a universal movement. He became a pillar of support
for the Prophet (a.s) to confront and fight against the enemies of the
Cause. At the Feast of al-\`Ashirah when the Quraysh were dumbfounded at
the Prophet (a.s)'s Declaration, Imam \`Ali (a.s) faced their piercing
eyes and stood firmly to witness the Prophet-hood of Muhammad (a.s). He
publicly declared his support to the Prophet (a.s) and remained
steadfast in his resolve until the end. History bears witness to the
fact that when the infidel Quraysh exceeded all bonds of decency in
torturing and ridiculing the Prophet (a.s) and his followers, they had
to take shelter in a cave. Imam \`Ali (a.s) braved all these hardships
and never left the side of the Prophet (a.s) for a moment. He faced
untold hardships but remained firm in his resolve. He was scared neither
of the hardships nor the blatant threats of the enemies. He bore the
difficulties with absolute equanimity. During the days in Medina, when
the different tribes in Arabia kept aside their long drawn differences
and joined to confront and harm the Prophet (a.s) and his Cause, Imam
\`Ali (a.s) stood firm as a wall of steel in the battlefield to vanquish
and chase them away. He laid to dust the false pride of the infidels of
Quraysh, who in the end capitulated to lay down arms and hypocritically
professed allegiance to the New Creed!

The atmosphere was not congenial for Imam \`Ali (a.s) after the closing
of the eyes of the Prophet (a.s), the greed for power and pelf turned
the Divinely commissioned leadership into worldly rule. These
circumstances forced him into self-imposed isolation. But whenever the
greater interests of Islam were at stake, he came out of his seclusion
and gave invaluable advice to the “powers-that-be” in times of important
expeditions and economic or religious matters. During these years of
seclusion Imam \`Ali (a.s) busied himself in study of Islamic tenets and
thoughts. He always preferred collective rights to individual desires.
When at the ripe old age of fifty-eight he ascended to the worldly
caliphate, he found the State in turmoil. With the plunder of the
foreign lands there was excess of wealth in the Nation that had changed
the very nature of the Arabs for the worst. Instead of the proverbial
simplicity, the life style of Arabs turned towards pomp and show of
wealth. Although it was not an easy task to mend the fences, Imam \`Ali
(a.s) faced the intrigue of the adversaries to protect Islam and its
moral values.

His services in this direction were selfless and his observations are a
treasure- house in the annals of Islamic History. In the battlefield and
in the halls of debate he represented the cause of Islam with absolute
valor and success. Whether it was the Feast of al-\`Ashirah or it was
the presentation of the Verse of Bara’ah to the infidels of Makkah;
whether it was the Capture of Makkah, Purification of the Ka\`bah, the
expedition of Khandaq or that of Khaybar; Imam \`Ali’s services to the
cause have a unique distinction enjoyed by none else in the comity of
the Prophet’s companions. His efforts are rated the highest in the
protection, welfare, propagation and development of the Faith of Islam.

If his contribution is separated from the History of Islam, the history
will appear wanting in content. His achievements are a dominant part of
the annals of Islamic History. Although in every epoch efforts were made
by his adversaries to put curtains of darkness over his achievement, and
the establishments of those days were hand in glove with such
historians, their enmity and hatred could not succeed in hiding Imam
\`Ali’s great contributions, and he continues to shine on the horizon of
Islam like the brightest of stars!

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), on the one hand patronized learning and
knowledge to take the caravan of humanity forward and on the other he
himself set brightest examples of virtuous action that became a beacon
of guidance for the populace. It is necessary that people follow and
emulate his way of life. They should draw light from his thoughts and
beliefs. The norms of action should be devised on his teachings and
actions. The society must be built on the foundation of unshakable
principles. Then only the individual and collective lives will be
compatible with the requirements of the Faith and will achieve the moral
heights.

With this aim impressions of the life and achievements of Imam \`Ali
(a.s) are being described in this work. Attempt has been made neither to
make a colorful presentation nor to exaggerate any facts. We have
abstained from the slightest element of bias in this work and all the
facts are presented in the light of authentic historical references.
They are arranged in such a way that chronologically the presentation
has the interest of a biographical work. If any references have been
made to the events of difference and controversy in the narrative, we
have limited them to mere quotation of the source material without going
into a discussion over the matter. We do pray to Allah that this work
dispels the clouds of bias and helps people to understand the great
personality. “And with none but Allah is the direction of my affair to a
right issue; on Him do I rely and to Him do I turn.”
