Food Habits
===========

\`Ali’s food habits too were very moderate and frugal. Generally, he
took bread made out of unsieved barley flour and a sweet beverage
prepared from parched barley meal. The accompaniment for the bread
generally was a little salt; sometimes he took a little vinegar, and
sometimes, green vegetables and at times milk. He ate very little meat.
Ibn Abil-Hadid says:

###### “If he used anything with the bread, it used to be the salt or vinegar. Sometimes he ate greens. He rarely took camel’s milk with his food. He seldom ate meat and used to say that people should not make their tummies the Grave yard of animals!”

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) says that \`Ali (a.s) served meat and bread
to his guests and he himself ate his bread with vinegar or olive oil.

He used to keep bread and Sattu in a sealed bag. Someone said that he
was living in Iraq, a land of plenty, and what was the need to seal his
supply of food? The Imam (a.s) replied that he did not seal his stock of
food for the reason of scarcity and the real reason was:

###### “I do not like to fill my tummy with a thing I do not know about!”[1]

\`Amr Harith says that once at noon time he had the privilege of
visiting the Imam (a.s). He saw a sealed bag was placed in front of him.
He took out a dried piece of bread from it, soaked in water, sprinkled a
little salt over it and ate. Seeing the dry pieces of bread \`Amr asked
Fiddah at least she should sieve the flour and remove the chaff before
kneading it for making the bread. Fiddah said that once she sieved the
flour and the Imam (a.s) asked her not to do it again. Once she had put
in the bag other eatables besides the dry bread, the Imam (a.s) started
sealing the bag to avoid anyone putting other things in the bag.

\`Adi ibn Hatam says that once he saw dry pieces of barley bread, salt
and a pitcher of water in front of \`Ali (a.s), He said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh

###### “You are busy with jihad during the days and occupied with prayers in the nights. Is the food you are taking sufficient for your nutritive maintenance?”

The Imam (a.s) looked at \`Adi and said, “The psyche has to be trained
for Mystic Exercise that it does not become rebellious.” Then he recited
the following couplet:

###### Make your psyche accustomed to contentment otherwise, it will have excessive desires![1]

Suwayd ibn Ghaflah says that he went to the Imam (a.s) and saw that he
had a bowl of sour yogurt in front of him and barley bread in his hand,
which had flakes of barley chaff all over. He was breaking the bread,
sometimes with his hand and others by putting it on his knee. Once he
went to greet the Imam on \`Id. He saw that \`Ali (a.s) had bread and
Khatifah. Suwayd asked the Imam (a.s), “Even on a festive occasion you
eat such frugal food?” The Imam (a.s) replied,

###### “\`Id is for those whom Allah has pardoned!”[2]

The Imam (a.s) never ate two types of food at one time. If, at any time,
various dishes were placed in front of him, he would mix and make them
one. Therefore, at the time of a festival, several dishes were placed
before him. He mixed portions of the different foods and made it one.
Once he got food that had meat in it but not any oil. Someone suggested
if some oil could be added to it. The Imam (a.s) replied,

###### “We do not eat two things at one time!”[3]

The Imam (a.s) always ensured this. During his last days, once his
daughter Ummu-Kulthūm placed barley bread, salt and milk in front of
him. He asked her to take away the bowl of milk and ate the bread with
salt.

In emulation of the Prophet (a.s), he abstained from things that
Muhammad (a.s) avoided eating. Therefore, \`Adi ibn Thabit says that
once \`Ali (a.s) was served a drink prepared from sieved flummery. He
refused to take it; and said:

###### “A thing that the Prophet (a.s) has not taken, I do not like to take!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Manāqib ibn Shahrāshūb  
 **[2]** An Arab food that is prepared by boiling flour in milk.  
 **[3]** Kifāyat al-Tālib

While \`Ali (a.s) avoided eating delicacies, never ate even the frugal
fare to the fill. Ibn Abil-Hadid writes:

###### “He never ate to satiation of the appetite”[1]

While Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) emulated the Prophet (a.s) in other
matters, he was meticulous in following his food habits as well. He took
care of the minutest details of seating at the meals, the way of taking
the morsels and the style of eating. Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s) says:

###### Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was much like the Prophet (a.s) in his food habits and style of eating.”

He used to wash his hands before and after eating. He used to say that
hands became clean of oily deposit if they were washed. And the eyes
become bright He used to sit on his knees with folded legs. He
disapproved of putting one leg over the other and sitting cross-legged.
He used to say bismillahi before starting to take food. He also said
that if someone missed reciting this before starting to eat, he could do
so in the midst of the meal as well. He used to commence the meal with a
little salt. He used to wait for the food to cool down if it was served
hot. He used all the five fingers of the right hand for eating. He
always picked his morsel from the front instead of taking the hand to
different sides of the platter. He never picked up Tharid (the pieces of
bread soaked in gravy) from the center of the service and always took
his share from the periphery. Of all the beverages, he preferred water
and particularly the rainwater. He said that the rainwater wards away
diseases and cleansed the digestive system. Instead of throwing away the
crumbs of bread from the spread, he used to pick and eat them. He said
that this practice cured illness. He never drank from the mouth of the
pitcher nor from the broken side of any container. He did not like
blowing over foods and drinks. Once he asked his servant, Muslim, to
fetch a tumbler of water. When he came in front of the Imam (a.s), he
blew over the water because there was some particle floating on the
surface. The Imam (a.s) said, “Now! You drink this water and bring
another tumbler for me!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah, the Introduction.
