Ibn `amir in Al-basrah
======================

When Mu\`awiyah captured Egypt, he thought of attacking al-Basrah and
annexing it. Therefore, he called \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir al-Hadrami and
told him that the people of al-Basrah still have the wish to seek
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. They want someone to come forward
and they would join him to fight with the killers of \`Uthman. He said
that he, \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir, was suitable for the purpose. Therefore,
he asked him to go to al-Basrah and stay with Banū-Tamim. But he asked
him to beware of the tribe of Rabi\`ah because they were Turabiyyah or
Shi\`ah of Abū-Turab. Ibn \`Amir readily agreed to this suggestion.

When Mu\`awiyah found him willing, he wrote to \`Amr ibn al-\`As that he
wanted to send \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir to al-Basrah so that he could
revive the movement for the *qisas*. He sought \`Amr’s opinion about the
move. \`Amr agreed with the suggestion and Mu\`awiyah sent Ibn \`Amir to
al-Basrah.

When Ibn \`Amir arrived at al-Basrah, as instructed, he stayed with
Banū-Tamim. One group of people of al-Basrah too assembled who were of
the same opinion. He addressed them, “You know that \`Uthman was
assassinated in oppression! The responsibility of this killing rests
with \`Ali (a.s). You people had cooperated in the matter of seeking
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. Allah will reward you for this
act! Many important persons from your place were killed claiming for the
*qisas*. Rise and take revenge on the killers. We shall always be ready
to give help to you.” Al-Dahhak ibn \`Abdullah told \`Amir, “May Allah
put you in trouble! You are again trying to ignite the mischief that had
died down! This was the mischief that was raised by Talhah and al-Zubayr
and instigated us against Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) although we had already
owed our allegiance to him. We were all united people, but the two came
here and created rifts in every household and made us fight with one
other. We are paying for that mistake until now! You have come up again
with the message of destruction. We are under the *bay\`ah* of the
Truthful Imam (a.s)! He has forgiven us our mistakes! He has even
forgiven his mortal enemies! You want us to come out with swords and cut
each others’ necks so that you get a position from Mu\`awiyah! By Allah!
One day of \`Ali (a.s) is more valuable than a hundred years of
Mu\`awiyah and his family!”

At this, \`Abdullah ibn Khuzaym al-Salami said, “Keep quiet! You are not
competent to interfere in these matters!” He turned to Ibn \`Amir and
said, “We are your supporters and friends! We shall be with you in the
matter of the *qisas*!” al-Dahhak said, “You son of the Abyssinian
woman! What are you and what is your status? By Allah! One whom you
support is without any support! And the one, whom you oppose, need not
have any fear!”

At this, both started using invectives against each other. \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn \`Umayr al-Tamimi said, “We have not assembled here to
fight with one other. We must have unity between us. My suggestion is
first to listen to the letter sent by the emir of Syria. If it sounds
useful, act on it!” Therefore the letter from Mu\`awiyah was read to
them. He wrote, “O people of al-Basrah! You have seen the style of
functioning of \`Uthman. He was a peace loving and gentle mannered
person. He was a supporter for the weak and friend of the oppressed.
Some cruel persons besieged him and killed him hungry and thirsty. We
invite you to claim the *qisas* for his blood and take responsibility
that the verdicts will be based on the Book and the Sunnah of the
Prophet (a.s). We shall also pay half yearly pensions to the people of
al-Basrah!”

When this letter was read, most of the gathering supported the
suggestion. Al-Ahnaf ibn Qays kept quiet and said that he was not
concerned with the matter. However, one person from the tribe of \`Abd
al-Qays, \`Amr ibn Marhūm said, “O People! You remain firm on your
previous *bay\`ah*! Do not create rift in the society by breaking the
*bay\`ah*! If you break the *bay\`ah* at the call of this person, then
you will meet with calamity and destruction! “\`Abbas ibn Sahar
al-\`Abdi, who was inimical to the Imam (a.s) against the opinion of his
tribe of \`Abd al-Qays, said, “We shall support him in our words and our
deeds and will not leave anything aside in helping him!”

When Muthanna ibn Makhrabah al-\`Abdi heard this, he told Ibn \`Amir,
“Do not be carried away by what Ibn Sahar has said! It is better you go
back from where you have come! Otherwise, we shall send you back with
our swords, spears and arrows! Should we recant from our support to the
Prophet’s cousin and enter into the *bay\`ah* of a rebel! By Allah! It
shall never happen!” When Ibn \`Amir heard the emotional outbursts of
the opponents, he told Sabrah ibn Shayman al-Azdi, “O Sabrah! You too
are of the same opinion as us and are a great personality of the Arab
World and the chief of your tribe! Help me and promise me amnesty!
“Sabrah said, “If you get up from Banū-Tamim and come over to me and
stay at my home, we shall help you and provide you amnesty! “\`Amir
said, “I am supposed to stay where I have been ordered to stay!” When
Sabrah heard this, he went away angrily!

The governor of al-Basrah, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas was in al-Kūfah at
that time to give his condolences on the demise of Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr
and the governorate was in the hands of Ziyad ibn \`Ubayd. On the
arrival of Ibn \`Amir, Ziyad was worried because Banū-Tamim, and others
who wanted the *qisas*, were in favor of Ibn \`Amir. He called Hazin ibn
al-Mundhir and Malik ibn tasmah to the governor’s house and told them,
“O people of the tribe of Bakr ibn Wa’il! You are counted amongst the
supporters of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! I am concerned about the
interference and mischief of the enemy. Until the instructions for
action are received from Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), give me protection.”
Hazin ibn al-Mundhir said, “If you are asking for protection, I am ready
to give it!” But Malik said, “I cannot tell anything without asking my
men.” When Ziyad felt that Malik was trying to evade the issue of
protection he sent word to Sabrah ibn Shayman al-Azdi to give him
protection and protect the *bayt al-mal*. Therefore, overnight Ziyad
shifted to his place and the *bayt al-mal* and the pulpit too were
shifted there.

When the governor’s house was vacant after Ziyad shifted, Banū-Tamim and
their cohorts wanted to keep Ibn \`Amir there. Therefore, they proceeded
towards the governor’s house with Ibn \`Amir. When Banū-Azd saw this,
they too came with their horses and said that we shall not allow an
undesirable person to stay in the Dar al-Imarah. When insistence started
from the other side, the situation worsened and al-Ahnaf ibn Qays
intervened and told the companions of Ibn \`Amir that they did not have
more right than the others on the governor’s house nor it was right to
force a person on them whom they consider undesirable. With the
persuasion of al-Ahnaf, they went back to their homes.

Ziyad wrote to \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas that Mu\`awiyah had sent Ibn
\`Amir al-Hadrami who was staying with Banū-Tamim. He was instigating
people to start claiming retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman once
again. Lot of people from al-Basrah have joined him. He wrote that he
had taken shelter with Sabrah ibn Shayman al-Azdi and the *bayt al-mal*
too was shifted to Banū-Azd. He wrote that the Shi\`ah of \`Ali (a.s)
were visiting him and the Shi\`ah of \`Uthman were going to Ibn \`Amir.
The Dar al-Imarah was lying vacant. He asked \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas to
inform about the situation to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and communicate his
instructions.

Ziyad remained hidden with Banū-Azd for one day. But they insisted that
hiding like that would not serve any purpose. They forced him to lead
the Friday Prayer and give the Sermon. Therefore, Ziyad led the Friday
Congregation and giving the Sermon said, “If I had taken shelter with
Banū-

Tamim and Ibn \`Amir had your support, I would not have been able to
subdue Ibn \`Amir! And now that I have your protection, Ibn \`Amir
cannot subdue me nor the son of the ‘Chewer of Human Liver’, Mu\`awiyah,
would be able to overwhelm Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), the Muhajirūn and the
Ansar. O people of Banū-Azd! I have witnessed your valor at the Battle
of the Camel. You had demonstrated patience and bravery on that
momentous day in support of the forces of evil. I am sure you will show
the same fortitude and bravery in support of the Truth now!” At this
point Shayman, the father of Sabrah, said, “O people of Banū-Azd! As a
result of the Battle of the Camel, you got only insult and infamy! If I
were present at that time, I would never have permitted you to fight. If
you were against \`Ali (a.s) then, wash the black mark on your
reputation by siding wholeheartedly with him now! If Banū-Tamim bring
their chief in the battlefield, you too must take your chief there and
fight with them. If they seek reinforcements from Mu\`awiyah, you too
must seek reinforcements from \`Ali (a.s)! If they seek for peace, you
too should agree for peace!” Then his son Sabrah stood up and said, “We
do not have any fear from \`Ali (a.s), but we do not trust Mu\`awiyah!
Therefore, stand up with your arms and justify the shelter that you have
given to Ziyad.”

The men of Banū-Azd said in one voice, “We are under your command!
Whatever orders you give us, we shall follow without asking any
questions!” Ziyad asked, “O Sabrah! Tell me, if you have any fear that
you will not be able to fight with Banū-Tamim?” Sabrah said, “There is
no question of any such fear! If they bring al-Ahnaf, we shall put
forward Abū-Sabrah. If they bring Habbah, I shall fight with him. If
they bring their youths, we do not have shortage of youths with us!”
When Banū-Tamim saw that Banū-Azd were backing Ziyad and were ready to
fight, they sent a message to them that they need not fight. Instead of
that they would send Ibn \`Amir and from the other side Ziyad should
come and fight to decide who is the winner. Whoever of the two won,
everyone should accept to obey him. Abū-Sabrah replied that this claim
could be accepted when we had not given shelter to Ziyad. Now sending
him out to fight and killing him are both the same.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) learned about the worsening situation in
al-Basrah, he told Banū-Tamim of al-Kūfah to go to al-Basrah and
convince the men of their tribe to abstain from mischief. But none of
them agreed to go. The Imam (a.s) asked them what prevented them from
going to meet the men of their own tribe. You give your brothers and
your sons advice to do good. If they disagree, fight with them. Ayn ibn
²abyah al-Tamimi stood up and said that he was willing to do the task.
He said either he will kill \`Amir to finish

the story or push him out of the environs of al-Basrah. The Imam (a.s)
sent him to al-Basrah and wrote to Ziyad that he was sending \`Ayn ibn
²abyah to convince the head-strong people of his tribe to disburse. If
the Banū-Tamim remained stubborn, do jihad with them taking along your
supporters. He asked Ziyad to keep them engaged until the army of Islam
arrived. When Ibn ²abyah reached al-Basrah he first went to Banū-Azd and
gave Amir al-Mu’minin’s letter to Ziyad and said that he hoped to bring
back the conditions to normalcy. Then he assembled the Banū-Tamim and
told them, “O people of my tribe! Why do you give your lives by joining
the mischief mongers? By Allah! To crush you the contingent has already
been mobilized! If you come to the straight path, the contingent may not
come here. But if you remain adamant to create unrest, then remember
your death and destruction is certain! “Ibn ²abyah tried to convince
them the whole day and explained to them the serious consequences of
recanting from the *bay\`ah*. In the end, they said that they would
listen to what he advised. But when he started to go back to his
residence in the evening, ten persons followed him and killed him
mercilessly.

Ziyad informed the Imam (a.s) of the sincere efforts of Ibn ²abyah and
about his killing. The Imam (a.s) sent Jariyah Ibn Khadhmah al-Sa\`idi
along with fifty men of Banū-Tamim to al-Basrah with instructions that
they should be cautious against the enemies lest they were attacked the
way Ibn ²abyah was. On reaching al-Basrah, Jariyah first met Ziyad and
then went to Banū-Azd and read the Imam’s letter which was addressed to
the people of al-Basrah, “O people of al-Basrah! Because of your
rebellious acts you did not deserve any concessions. But I have pardoned
your criminals and did not punish those who laid down the arms. You had
owed your allegiance to me willingly. If you remain on my *bay\`ah* and
make faithfulness your habit, I shall treat you according to the norms
of the Qur’an and the Sunnah. But if you demonstrated lack of
intelligence and adopt rebellious attitude, I will be forced to act
severely. Then you will be faced with such a battle that you will forget
the hardships of the Battle of the Camel. I am sure you will not pave
the way for your destruction with your own hands.”

When this letter was read, Sabrah ibn Shayban stood up and said, “We
shall listen to every word of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and act on it! We
shall battle with those people, with whom he fights! The people with
whom he makes peace, we too shall make peace with them! O Jariyah! If
you can deal with the enemy using your men, it is well and good!
Otherwise, we are ready to assist you in all ways.” After him the others
too assured Jariyah of their

cooperation. Now Jariyah went along with his men to Banū-Tamim and
explained to them the pros and cons and tried to bring them to the right
path. But none gave ear to him and started misbehaving. When Jariyah saw
the situation, he sought help from Ziyad and Banū-Azd. Ziyad addressed
Banū-Azd, “O Banū-Azd! Those who were friends yesterday are enemies
today! And those who were enemies yesterday are friends now! Jariyah
needs our help. Therefore, rise and help him against the enemy!”
Therefore Banū-Azd armed themselves and Sharik ibn al-A\`war, who was a
Shi\`ah of \`Ali (a.s), and a friend of Jariyah, too joined the men. On
the other side Ibn \`Amir appointed \`Abdullah ibn Khuzaym al-Salami as
the chief of the horsemen. Both the parties brought their men to the
battlefield. For some time there was fierce battle. In the end Ibn
\`Amir and his men fled and took shelter in the Palace of Zanbil around
which there was a protective moat. Among these fugitives was \`Abdullah
ibn Khuzaym. When his mother, \`Ajla, learned that her son has been
besieged, she went running and shouted for her son. He looked at his
mother from the top of the palace and asked her why she had come. She
asked him to come down and go home with her. He refused to go with her.
\`Ajla, who was a black Abyssinian woman, removed the scarf from her
head and said that if he did not come down she would become totally
naked.

Ibn Khuzaym was thus forced to come down. And went away with his mother.
After Ibn Khuzaym went, Jariyah and Ziyad laid siege of the palace. When
no efforts to vacate it of the enemies succeeded, Jariyah set fire to
the building and Ibn \`Amir, along with his companions, was killed in
that conflagration. Some were crushed under the crumbling walls and the
others were killed trying to escape. Among those who were killed were
\`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Umayr al-Tamimi and Dharih ibn Badr.

Ziyad sent a letter with ²abyan ibn \`Umayr to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).
He wrote that they had achieved victory and the enemy was finished at
the hands of Jariyah. The Imam (a.s) expressed satisfaction at the
crushing of that rebellion and asked ²abyan where his house was located
in al-Basrah? He told about the location of his house. The Imam (a.s)
asked him to build a house on the out-skirts of al-Basrah and shift
there. He added that al-Basrah will always be under fire and water and
will submerge in a manner that except the minarets of the Mosque,
nothing else will be visible! Therefore, al-Basrah was submerged twice.
Once during the period of al-Qadir billah, the \`Abbasid ruler, and the
next time again when al-Qa’im bi-amrillah was ruling and the flood level
was so high that only the minarets of the Mosque were above the water
level!

This act of Mu\`awiyah was the result of his greed for power, arrogance
and enmity for peace. In the end his designs were abjectly defeated. The
same tribe of Banū-Azd on whom he was banking, supported Ziyad and
proved an important weapon in the hands of Jariyah. They crushed the
enemy in such a manner that they left no trace of them in al-Basrah.
Mu\`awiyah’s step was not without any purpose and planning. The reasons
behind the move were:

(1) Mu\`awiyah, after capturing Egypt, thought that the military
strength of the Imam (a.s) had gone down in Iraq, otherwise he would
have sent reinforcements from al-Kūfah to help Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr. He
thought that when there was no force available at the center, how could
there be sufficient numbers in al-Basrah to resist attack.

(2) \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, who was the relative of the Imam (a.s) and
his staunch supporter, was then away in al-Kūfah. His deputy, Ziyad, was
holding temporary charge and would not have jeopardized his life to
fight back the attack. There was a strong likelihood that he would put
down arms and surrender.

(3) Al-Basrah was already the theater of the Battle of the Camel
recently and the people of that place had supported Talhah and al-Zubayr
claiming retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. There was no scarcity of
people in that city who still felt the need for the *qisas*. Even if
they did not side with the attackers, they would not also help the
defenders!

(4) Innumerable persons from al-Basrah were killed by \`Ali (a.s) and
his men. The survivors of those who were killed had the fire of revenge
burning in their hearts. They would certainly support Mu\`awiyah’s
troops to fight the Imam’s troops.

(5) Al-Basrah was located in the neighborhood of Persia. If this place
was conquered, it would serve as a launching pad for other conquests to
follow!
