The Aggressive Attacks of the Syrians
=====================================

After the ignominy of al-Basrah, Mu\`awiyah realized that attacking the
Iraqi cities and achieving success was difficult. However, making raids
on suburbs and remote hamlets to frighten and terrorize the people was
to his advantage. Therefore, he started attacking the border habitations
and the army barracks and in no time the pleasant habitations were
rendered into veritable ruins. There was a flood of the blood of
innocents everywhere. The purpose of these nefarious activities was to
spread disturbance and unrest in the realm.

The Imam (a.s) did not get any respite from handling these disturbances
to give his attention to reform and development, as he would have wished
to do. In 39 H Mu\`awiyah sent al-Nu\`man ibn Bashir with 2,000 troops
to attack \`Ayn al-Tamr. There Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had an arms depot.
Malik ibn Ka\`b al-Arhabi was in charge of this depot. Under him 1,000
troops always used to be there. When Malik heard of al-Nu\`man’s move,
he had only 100 men with him and the rest had taken permission and had
gone to al-Kūfah. He wrote to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) that a contingent
of 2,000 Syrians was headed to attack him and the men present were not
sufficient to meet the onslaught. He therefore requested for urgent
reinforcement. The Imam (a.s) told al-Harith al-Hamdani to proclaim, in
al-Kūfah that all people must urgently assemble at al-Rahbah. The next
morning the Imam (a.s) went to al-Rahbah after the Morning Prayer. He
found about 300 men assembled there.

When he saw the lack of interest in the people, he said, “O people of
al-Kūfah! I had called you to rise to the help of your brothers! But
when the troops of the Syrians hover over your heads, you shirk from
fighting. \`Adi ibn Hatam, finding the Imam (a.s) disturbed, said, “O
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! In my tribe of Banū-tay there are 1,000 strong
fighters. If you order, I shall take them to teach a lesson to the
enemy” The Imam (a.s) said, “I do not like that to face the enemy,
people from only one tribe volunteer. This gives an impression that the
other tribes are not interested in taking part in the campaigns. You go
to al-Nukhaylah and invite others to participate as well” Therefore he
went and talked to the people and in addition to Banū-tay he raised
another 1,000 men. \`Adi ibn tay was about to start with his contingent

when a message came from Malik ibn Ka\`b that they were able to force
the enemy away and they were no more in need of the reinforcements. It
happened that Malik thought it would take time to get help from al-Kūfah
and he took the precaution of sending \`Abdullah ibn Hawzah al-Azdi to
Qarazah Ibn Ka\`b and Mikhnaf ibn Salim and sought help from them.
Qarazah said that he was stationed for collection of the tribute and the
men under him were not suitable for battle, but Mikhnaf ibn Sulaym sent
50 men under the command of his son, \`Abd al-Rahman. When around the
time of \`Asr Prayer the group reached near Ayn al Tamr, they found that
Malik and his men were standing with their backs to the wall and, having
broken the sheaths of their sword, they were ready to fight unto death.
When al-Nu\`man saw this small group he thought this must be the front
guard and the larger contingent must be coming from behind. He
immediately turned back his troops and ran away. Malik chased them and
killed three of their men.

In the same 39 H Mu\`awiyah sent 6,000 troops with Sufyan ibn \`Awf
al-Ghamidi to attack al-Anbar and al-Mada’in. He ordered him to destroy
the army cantonments of the Imam (a.s). Sufyan first went to Hit. The
governor of Hit, Kumayl ibn Ziyad al-Nakha\`i heard that at Qarqisiyah
some troops of the Syrians had assembled and had plans to attack Hit. He
therefore left the city to meet the invaders, although he was instructed
not to leave the place. The result was that when Sufyan’s contingent
reached Hit, there was none in the city to defend it. He proceeded to
al-Anbar without any resistance at Hit. At al-Anbar there was stationed
a group of 500 men but when the Syrians arrived, there were only 200
present and the rest were not there. Sufyan wanted to gather
intelligence about the number of troops there.

They caught hold of a few local youths and asked them. They said that
presently there must be about 200 men there. When he knew that the
number of defenders was very small, he became bold. He advanced with his
contingent. From that side, Ashras ibn Hassan al-Bakri, who was the
chief of the men, came out to fight with his small group. When the men
saw the huge contingent, more than half of the 200 men fled. And the
rest fought with the enemies from the street corners playing the game of
hide and seek! When Ashras saw that it was difficult to save their lives
through the tactics of hide and seek, he shouted his instructions,
“Those who wish to give their lives in the way of Allah, and they should
come out in the open and fight with the enemy!” At this call thirty men
came out and fighting with great bravery they were martyred! Now there
was none to stop the atrocities of the Syrians. They looted each and
every house, snatched jewelry from the women and gathered whatever they
could lay their hands on.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) knew about the events, he wrote an angry
note to Kumayl ibn Ziyad and warned him against leaving the city
unprotected without the unit of the guards. H gave a sermon from the
pulpit and invited the people to do Jihad and go in pursuit of the
enemy. But there was hardly any response from the gathering. When he saw
them quiet and in a mood of avoiding the battle, he stood up angrily and
decided to go alone and pursue the enemy. Now the people felt ashamed
and they went behind the Imam (a.s). When they reached the valley of
al-Nukhaylah, they said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! You may go back! We are
sufficient to deal with the enemy.” When their insistence increased, he
went back to al-Kūfah and under the command of Sa\`id ibn Qays a
contingent of 8,000 troops went in hot pursuit of the Syrians. When this
army reached \`Anah via Euphrates, Sa\`id sent Hani’ ibn al-Khattab
al-Hamdani to reconnoiter for the enemy troops. He went until the limits
of Qannisrin but Sufyan’s contingent had gone far ahead and there was no
sense in further pursuit.

When Sa\`id ibn Qays returned to al-Kūfah, the Imam (a.s) gave a sermon
about the importance of jihad and exhorted those who were reluctant to
battle with the enemy. On this Jundub ibn \`Afif al-Azdi stood up and
said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! I can speak on my behalf and on behalf of my
nephew, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Abdullah! Whatever command you give us, we
shall abide by it implicitly!”

The Imam (a.s) said, “What I want cannot be done by only two persons!”
The Imam (a.s) wanted to punish the people who played havoc at Hit and
al-Anbar in such a way that they should not have courage to make
incursions into the Iraqi borders in the future. After the return of
Sa\`id, the Imam (a.s) kept quiet for some time. And again he gave a
sermon to the people of al-Kūfah, “O People! You are much more in
numbers than the Ansar of al-Madinah! They gave shelter and protection
to the Prophet (a.s) and the Muhajirūn. They bore hardships but did not
stop supporting Islam and the Muslims, until the Standard of Islam
started flying all over Arabia! “At this a mischievous, tall person
stood up and said, “You are neither Muhammad (a.s) nor are we the Ansar!
Please put on us weight that we might bear!”

The Imam (a.s) said, “Understand the talk, and then speak! When did I
say that I am Muhammad (a.s) and you Ansar! I gave the example that you
too tread the path of the Ansar and create in yourself the spirit that
they had and protect the Realm of Islam from the depredations of the
enemy!” At this another person stood up and said, “Today Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) must have felt the need of the people of Nahrawan whom
we killed with our own hands!”

Now voices were raised from different directions and there was a sort of
pandemonium. One person said, “If Malik al-Ashtar was here today, these
persons would not have dared to behave in this manner!” The Imam (a.s)
said, “Pity on you! Malik al-Ashtar had right over you as any other
Muslim has a right over another Muslim! My rights are far greater which
you have to guard as a bounden duty!” In the end Sa\`id Ibn Qays and
Hijr ibn \`Adi said, “Whatever commands you give us, we shall not
disobey them in any manner even if we have to forego our lives and
properties in abiding by them!” The Imam (a.s) said, “You stand up for
the punishment of the enemy and crush him!” He then came down from the
pulpit and went to Bayt al-Sharaf, his home. Some of his sincere
companions too followed him. He continued discussion with them and said,
“Who is the person in your opinion who is himself very active and can
also enthuse the Iraqis to agree for warfare. We must mobilize the army
under the command of such a person.”

Sa\`id ibn Qays said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! For this campaign none other
than Ma\`qil ibn Qays al-Tamimi is better. He is your sincere friend and
is a valorous warrior.” The Imam (a.s) said, “Yes! He is the right
person for the job!” Then Ma\`qil was called and entrusted the command
of the campaign.

During the same year Mu\`awiyah sent \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`adah al-Fazari
with 1,700 troops towards Taymah. He ordered him to keep advancing
towards Makkah and al-Madinah and collect *zakat* and *sadaqah* from the
settlements that fall in his way. Those who refuse to pay must be
immediately executed. Therefore, he started on his journey and the
people of his tribe gathered under his flag. When the Imam (a.s) heard
about this, he sent Musayyab ibn Najbah al-Fazari with 2,000 troops to
fight with them. When Mas\`adah reached Taymah, killing and looting the
people on the way, the troops of the Imam (a.s) too reached there. Both
the contingents took out their arms and the fight started. The fight
went on from morning until midday. Musayyab, who was also from the same
tribe, attacked Mas\`adah lightly with the sword, and asked him quietly
to escape. Therefore, he took a small troop of men and locked himself up
in a small fort nearby.

The remaining contingent escaped towards Syria. The camels that had been
collected by Mas\`adah as *zakat* and *sadaqah* were taken away by the
nomads. When three days since passed Mas\`adah locked himself into the
fort, it was decided to set fire to the fort. Therefore, firewood was
put near the door and the fire was lighted. Ibn Mas\`adah said, “O
Musayyab! You are burning the persons from your own tribe!” Musayyab
ordered the fire to be put out. After the fire was put out, he told his
troops that he had intelligence that a bigger

contingent of men was coming from Syria. His men assembled at one place.
Ibn Mas\`adah got an opportunity and escaped in the night with his men
towards Syria. When news spread about his escape \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Shabib said that they must chase and capture Mas\`adah. But Musayyab did
not agree to that suggestion. At this \`Abd al-Rahman said, “You have
sold yourself to the enemy against Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and your
attitude is certainly indicative of hypocrisy!”

In the same year, 39 H, Mu\`awiyah sent al-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fahri
towards al-Hirah and asked him to kill the nomads who had owed their
allegiance to \`Ali (a.s) and plunder their goods. Therefore, he went on
destroying habitations on the way and reached Salabiyah. He attacked one
caravan of Hajjis and looted them. Then passing through Waqasah and
Sharaf he proceeded towards Qatqatanah. There he killed \`Amr ibn
\`Umays and Ibn Mas\`ūd and their companions. When Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) got news of these atrocities, he asked his men to pursue him. But
the men did not show any interest. The Imam (a.s) expressed anger at
their attitude and tried to stir their conscience! In the end a
contingent of 4,000 men under the command of Hijr ibn \`Adi went in
pursuit of the enemy and reached Samadah. Here Hijr met the father of
Rabab—the consort of the Master of Martyrs—as well as \`Imarah al Qays
ibn \`Adi and some men from his tribe went along to guide the contingent
to the cisterns of water and the way. When they reached the environs of
Tadmur, they found the camps of al-Dahhak. When they came across each
other, the swords were drawn and the fighting started. In this battle,
al-Dahhak lost 19 men and two men were martyred from the army of the
Imam (a.s). In the darkness of the night al-Dahhak ran away with his
men. Hijr went back with his men to al-Kūfah.

The same year Mu\`awiyah sent Yazid ibn Shajarah to Makkah during the
Hajj period. To act as the emir for the Hajj and chase away the
functionaries appointed by Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and take *bay\`ah*
from the people for Mu\`awiyah. He started with 3,000 men for Makkah.
When the functionary at Makkah, Qathm ibn \`Abbas heard about the
arrival of this contingent, he went to the pulpit and informed the
people that the army of Syria was coming to the Holy Land to cause
bloodshed. You must take up arms and stop the enemy before he comes
here. But except Shaybah ibn \`Uthman al-\`Abdari, everyone else took
his word lightly. When Qathm ibn \`Abbas saw that the people of Makkah
were not concerned, he wanted to go out to the hills and take shelter
and inform Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) to seek help from him. Abū-Sa\`id
al-Khidri, on learning that Qathm was thinking of leaving Makkah,
opposed his

plans and asked him to await the arrival of the Syrian forces. He
advised that if it was felt possible to fight with them, they could
fight. Otherwise they could then leave Makkah. Qathm agreed with this
suggestion and wrote to the Imam (a.s) for help. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
sent one contingent of men on the first of Dhul-Hijjah in which
Abul-tufayl and Rayyan ibn Samarah were there. Yazid ibn Shajarah
reached Makkah two days prior to the Day of Tarwiyah with his army. He
asked Abū-Sa\`id al-Khidri to tell Qathm to stop leading the prayers and
acting as the Emir of Hajj and that he too would demit his office. Then
they should give the people choice to select the successors. Qathm ibn
\`Abbas showed some reluctance But realizing his own helplessness, he
agreed to quit. Other people suggested the name of Shaybah ibn \`Uthman
for leading the prayers and emirate of Hajj. He was thus selected for
the position. When the Hajj was over, Ibn Shajarah went towards Syria.
In that time the contingent sent by the Imam (a.s) reached Makkah. When
they learned that the Syrian army had left, Ma\`qil ibn Qays took the
lead of the contingent in his hands and went in pursuit of them and
after crossing the Valley Al-Qira, they came face to face with it. The
Syrians tried to escape but Ma\`qil’s men took captive some of the
Syrians and returned to al-Kūfah.

When Yazid ibn Shajarah reached Syria, Mu\`awiyah learned about some of
his men becoming captive. He sent al-Harth ibn Namr al-Tanūkhi towards
al-Jazirah, where there were people who had owed their allegiance to the
Imam (a.s), to capture some of them and bring as captives. He reached
al-Jazirah and captured seven men of Banū-Taghlib. When these persons
reached the court of Mu\`awiyah, some men of Banū-Taghlib who had left
the camp of the Imam (a.s) and joined Mu\`awiyah, came to him and
pleaded for the release of their tribesmen. But Mu\`awiyah did not
agree. At this, Banū-Taghlib were unhappy with him and left his side.
Mu\`awiyah wrote to \`Ali (a.s) that Ma\`qil had made some men from
Yazid ibn Shajarah’s army captive. He suggested they could be exchanged
with the men from Banū-Taghlib who were with him. (a.s) agreed to this
suggestion and the exchange was affected.

The same year Mu\`awiyah sent \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Qabat to plunder the
habitations of the area of al-Jazirah. When the governor of al-Jazirah,
Shabib ibn \`Amir, learned about this, informed Kumayl ibn Ziyad, who
was the governor of Hit, and sought help from him. He took 600 men with
him and went towards the area of al-Jazirah. The enemy troops under
\`Abd al-Rahman ibn Qabat and Ma\`an ibn Yazid salami came across him.
Kumayl fought with them with his small contingent and killed a good
number of the enemy troops. From his side two men were martyred. Now the
enemy was not able to bear

the onslaught and his men fled the scene. He ordered that the fleeing
men need not be pursued nor the injured be killed. After defeating the
Syrians, he informed Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) of his success. The Imam
(a.s) was very happy with his performance and the mistake that he had
made of abandoning his post in the past was condoned.

When Shabib ibn \`Amir arrived with his contingent from Nasibahin, he
found that Kumayl had defeated the enemy. He congratulated Kumayl and
proceeded in pursuit of the enemy force. He crossed the river Euphrates
and reached until Ba\`labak. When Mu\`awiyah knew about this, he sent a
contingent under Habib ibn Maslamah, but it could not get near the
contingent of Shabib. Now, instead of pursuing the enemy, Shabib
attacked al-Riqqah, a settlement of the supporters of Mu\`awiyah. He
confiscated their arms and horses and took away other livestock. When he
returned, he wrote in detail to the Imam (a.s) about his campaign. The
Imam (a.s) replied, “You have a right over the arms and the animals that
the enemy uses during the battle. But you have no right to confiscate
the livestock”. Then appreciating his valor the Imam said:

###### “May Allah be kind on Shabib. He went attacking for a long distance and did not abstain from contending with the enemy.”[1]

In the same year Mu\`awiyah sent Zuhayr ibn Makhūl al-\`Amiri to the
town of al-Samawah, which was under the Imam (a.s), for collecting the
*zakat* and *sadaqah*. When the Imam (a.s) knew about this, he sent
Ja\`far ibn \`Abdullah al-Ashja\`i, \`Urwah ibn \`Ushbah al-Kalbi and
Jallas Ibn \`Umayr al-Kalbi to collect taxes from the tribes of
Banū-Kalab and Banū-Wa’il. When these persons reached there, they had a
confrontation with the men of Mu\`awiyah. Ja\`far ibn \`Abdullah was
killed. Ibn \`Ushbah was given a horse by Zuhayr and he escaped. He
became a suspect in the eyes of the Imam (a.s) He reprimanded the
person. Ibn \`Ushbah moved over to the camp of Mu\`awiyah. Jallas too
escaped. On the way, he exchanged his expensive cloak with the cloak of
a shepherd to avoid identification. Thus he reached al-Kūfah with
difficulty.

During those days, Mu\`awiyah sent Muslim ibn \`Uqbah Mari to Dawmat
al-Jandal. The people there owed their allegiance neither to \`Ali (a.s)
nor to Mu\`awiyah. When the Imam (a.s) learned about the movements of
Muslim, he sent Malik ibn Ka\`b al-Hamdani with a patrol of troops. When
they came face

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 191.

to face, there was fight that went on for the complete day. In the end,
\`Uqbah ran away. After he went, Malik asked the people there to owe
their allegiance to the Imam (a.s). They did not agree and said that
unless there is total consensus they will not accept anyone as the
caliph.

It can well be imagined from these events that while there were sincere
friends of the Imam (a.s) in al-Kūfah, there was no shortage of
hypocrites who had Khariji tendencies. They used to spread rumor and
dissent and always tried to make the administration weak. On the one
hand were these traitors and on the other were the machinations of the
Syrians. The way he managed the affairs despite all the odds is a proof
of his political and administrative acumen.
