The Atrocities of Busr Bin Arta’ah
==================================

Yemen was under Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) but there was a sizeable number
of fans of \`Uthman as well. Although they had entered into the
*bay\`ah* of the Imam (a.s) their hearts were elsewhere! Their attitude
with the governor of Yemen, \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas too was inimical.
When Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr was killed in Egypt, and the guerilla attacks
on the Iraqi territory by the Syrians continued at regular intervals,
the inimical element in Yemen too started their act. They started
instigating people to claim the retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman.
When \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas knew about this intrigue, he called some
important persons and told them what he was hearing about them. They
said what he had heard was right. They said that from the very beginning
they thought that the killing of \`Uthman was a calamity and that those
who had killed him, and those who created the circumstances for the
killing, must be punished.

When \`Ubaydullah felt that the intrigue was rising in the province, he
put those persons under house arrest. They sent messages to the army men
who subscribed to their thinking to create a revolt in their ranks and
remove the chief, Sa\`id ibn Nimran. Therefore, they revolted and
snatched away the command from him. The army was totally demoralized and
splinter groups were formed. Since the martial strength was affected,
the civilian unrest started raising its head. Those who were quiet until
then started airing their views openly. And even those who did not
subscribe to their views, joined with them to avoid paying the zakat and
the tribute.

\`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas, Sa\`id ibn Nimran and important Shi\`ah met to
decide the strategy to face the situation. They decided to inform about
the situation to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) in detail and act on his advice.
They thought that if they themselves started hostilities with the fans
of \`Uthman they did not know what will be the consequences. Therefore,
the details were communicated to the Imam (a.s). When he read their
report, folds appeared on his forehead. He wrote to \`Ubaydullah and
Sa\`id, “Whatever has happened is because of your poor politics!
Otherwise they were not important enough to be given any importance!
Neither they are more in numbers nor do they have any power.

You must talk and convince them to be the men of piety. If they come
back to the Right Path, we shall thank Allah! If they want to fight, we
shall be ready to fight as well!”

The Imam (a.s) simultaneously sent a letter to the fans of \`Uthman of
Yemen with a person from the tribe of Hamdan, “I have been informed of
your rebellion and headstrong attitude! Abstain from rebellion and go
back to the peace of your homes! If you hesitate in doing this, an army
is coming to teach you a suitable lesson and crush you.” But those
people remained adamant. When the courier found them reticent, he told
them that the Imam (a.s) readied an army under Yazid ibn Qays al-Arhabi
which is waiting for me to inform about your reaction. If you do not
change your attitude, the troops will rush for Yemen. When they
understood that this was not just a threat, they said that if
\`Ubaydullah and Sa\`id were removed from there, midst they will become
obedient to the Imam (a.s). This was their trick to save time. They
would not have remained content only with the change of the
functionaries. They had already sent a message to Mu\`awiyah asking him
to send out a contingent to deal with the Shi\`ah of Yemen. They
promised to cooperate with the army in its operations.

Mu\`awiyah, who was carrying on his guerilla operations on various towns
of Iraq, could not have kept quiet at this initiative of the Yemenis. He
immediately called Busr ibn Arta’ah, who was a tyrant of much ferocity,
and sent him with a contingent of 3,000 troops to proceed to Yemen via
al-Madinah and Makkah. He had instructions that whichever place he
passed through, he should force the people to owe allegiance to
Mu\`awiyah. Those of the Shi\`ah of \`Ali (a.s) who refuse his call must
be executed forthwith and plunder their homes and hearths. Therefore,
commanding the contingent he started for al-Madinah. On the way,
wherever he came across a source of water, he confiscated the camels of
the people who were there to water their animals. When he reached near
al-Madinah terrorizing and looting the people enroute, the tribe of
Banū-Khuza\`ah welcomed him and slaughtered camels to feed his
contingent. When he entered the environs of al-Madinah, Abū-Ayyūb
al-Ansari, the governor went out of the city awed by seeing the huge
contingent of troops and escaped towards al-Kūfah. There was none there
to resist him. Busr went straight to the mosque and threatened the
people who assembled there. He frightened them so much that they thought
that death would come to them any moment. Some people asked Huwaytib ibn
\`Abd al-\`Uzza, in whose house Busr’s mother lived, to do something to
save them. He told Busr, “These people are the companions of the Prophet
(a.s). They are

neither the killers of \`Uthman nor did they have anything to do with
the conspiracy of killing him! Leave them alone!” Busr did not agree.
When they agreed to enter the *bay\`ah* of Mu\`awiyah, he allowed them
to go home. But those on whom he had doubt that they would not owe
allegiance to Mu\`awiyah, he got their homes burned down. These were the
homes of Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari, \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d, Rafa\`ah ibn Rafi\`
al-Azraqi and Zurarah ibn Harūn.

At the arrival of Busr, many people abandoned their homes and fled.
Among them was Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansari who left his home and took
shelter elsewhere. When Busr did not see Jabir, he told a branch of
Banū-Salamah that if they did not produce Jabir in front of him, the
safety of their lives and property could not be guaranteed. When Jabir
learned that the lives of the people of his tribe were in jeopardy, he
went in the darkness of the night to Umm al-Mu’minin Ummu-Salamah and
told her, “I have come to you to take your advice! What should I do in
these circumstances? “She said, “For you there is no other alternative
than owing allegiance to Mu\`awiyah and saving the lives of your men and
your own! Although this *bay\`ah* is sheer deviation, I have also
advised my son \`Umar ibn Abi-Salamah and my son-in-law \`Abdullah ibn
Zum\`ah to save themselves by entering into it” Therefore Jabir very
unwillingly went to Busr and entered into the *bay\`ah* of Mu\`awiyah.

All the days that Busr was in al-Madinah the clouds of terror and fear
were hovering over the place and people were forced to owe their
allegiance to the tyrannical force of Busr! Busr spared their lives and
said, “O people of al-Madinah! You did not deserve that even a single
person here should be allowed to live because in front of your eyes
\`Uthman was killed and you did not do anything to help him. Although I
am forgiving you in this world, I hope that you will be deprived of
Allah’s Blessings in the Hereafter! I am appointing Abū-Hurayrah as the
governor of al-Madinah on behalf of the government of Syria. Beware! Do
not act against his orders!” Then he proceeded towards Makkah. When he
reached near Makkah, spreading terror at all the places on the way, the
governor of Makkah, Qathm ibn \`Abbas quietly left the city. Most of the
inhabitants of Makkah had left the place. Among these people was
Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari as well. When Busr heard that even Abū-Mūsa had run
away because of fear, he said that at least he should not have any fear!
One who had deposed \`Ali (a.s) despite being his own nominee, he cannot
be killed! Busr threatened and frightened the people of Makkah and
addressed them thus, “We thank Allah that He has given us control and
authority! Our enemies have been shamed by Him! Look at Ibn

Abi-Talib! He is sitting in an insignificant corner of Iraq! The areas
of his own realm are shrinking for him! Allah has given retribution for
his sins! His companions too are abandoning him! Today, the leader of
the Muslims is Mu\`awiyah who is the successor of \`Uthman and the
standard-bearer for claiming the *qisas* for his blood! There do
*bay\`ah* with him and do not put your lives in jeopardy by turning away
from him!”

The people were already in fear and confusion. Seeing the bloodied
swords they agreed to owe their allegiance to Mu\`awiyah. After the
*bay\`ah* he appointed Shaybah ibn \`Uthman as the governor of Makkah.
Now Busr moved towards Ta’if.

When Busr went some distance, he sent one Qarashi to Nabbalah saying
that there were many Shi\`ah there and he must kill them one by one. The
man went there and made them captive. They said that they were from his
own place and tribe. They wanted some respite to send a person to Busr
to request him for amnesty. If he gave us amnesty in writing, it would
be fine. Otherwise, you will be free to kill us. The man gave permission
and Munih al-Bahili went to Ta’if where Busr was waiting for the return
of the Qarashi. Munih made the request for amnesty with Busr. Some
important persons of Ta’if too supported him. He agreed to give amnesty
because of their recommendation but was hesitant to write down his
approval. When he thought that his man must have already killed all the
other persons in al-Nabbalah, he wrote the order and gave to Munih. When
he went to the house of the woman where he was staying, he found that
she was not there. He did not want to delay his departure anymore and,
instead of the saddle he put a sheet of cloth on the back of the camel
and started for his place, al-Nabbalah. There the people were losing
hope of his returning in time to save their lives. The Qarashi and his
men had already brought the persons to the ground for the execution.

In fact, the sword was used on the neck of one person, but it had
broken. They talked with one another that to make the swords work they
must be swung around. When Munih reached al-Nabbalah after spending one
day and one night on camel back, he saw the swords shining from a
distance. He thought that some fighting was going on. He speeded up his
camel and waved his white shawl to indicate that he was coming. The
person on whose neck the sword was about to fall was Munih’s own
brother. He rushed and gave the letter to the Qarashi and their lives
were saved just in time.

Busr left al-Ta’if and went towards the habitations of Banū-Kinanah
where two young sons of \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas, Qathm and \`Abd
al-Rahman and their mother, Ummu-Hakim Hūriyyah bint Kurayz
al-Kinaniyyah were living. Busr sent his men to bring the children for
killing them. \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas had left the children in the care
of al-Kinani. When he saw that Busr wanted to kill them, his conscience
would not allow him to see the children, who were in his care, getting
killed before his eyes. He took out his sword and was ready to kill or
to be killed. Busr said that they had nothing to do with neither him nor
any need for them to kill him. He asked him to keep away and leave the
children alone. He said that the duty of guardianship is more precious
than his own life. Saying this he attacked the enemies and died fighting
valiantly. Busr searched Qathm and \`Abd al-Rahman and killed them with
great barbarity. When the women of Banū-Kinanah heard this, they came
out of their homes. One lady said, “Until this day men were seen
executed. Even during the days of ignorance children were never
executed! This tyrannical rule will not exist for long which is based on
cruelty and barbarity! A rule in which there is no consideration even
for small children and old persons!” Busr said, “By Allah! I wish to
kill all these women with my sword!” The woman said, “Allah knows! If
you do that the pain of our hearts would be relieved!” when Ummu-Hakim
saw her children immersed in dust and their own blood, she was
disconsolate with sorrow. She went round as if she was searching for her
little children. During the days of Hajj thereafter she used to make the
pilgrims cry with her couplets full of pathos!

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard of the sad ending of those children,
he was very sad and cursed Busr in these words:

###### “O Allah! Snatch away the Faith and wisdom from him!”[1]

And really it did happen like that! A time came when he lost his mental
capacities. But even in this lunacy he used to utter the word, “Sword!
Sword”. In the end, he was given a sword made out of wood and a
sheepskin filled with air was placed in front of him to hit with his
wooden sword! He used thus to quench his thirst for tyranny until he
died.

Coming back to the narrative, Busr reached Najran killing and maiming
people along the way. In Najran he killed \`Abdullah ibn \`Abd al-Mudan
al-Harithi and his son Malik. After troubling and torturing the people
of Najran, he went to Arhab and killed Abū-Karb who was an ardent
Shi\`ah of \`Ali (a.s) and a chief of the tribe of Hamdan. Then Busr
proceeded to San\`a’, the capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 193

of Yemen. \`Amr ibn Arakah al-Thaqafi, who was the deputy of
\`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas in his absence, valiantly fought with the men
of Busr with the remnants of his troops and was martyred in the process.
Busr entered the city and ordered general massacre and killed hundreds
of innocent persons. During this whirlwind tour Busr destroyed complete
towns, looted materials and indulged in wholesale arson. Thirty thousand
Muslims were the victims of his unparalleled barbarity.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) asked the people of al-Kūfah to give a befitting
reply to the atrocities of Busr. But they exhibited their disinterest
and avoided pursuing the enemy. After repeated proddings by the Imam
(a.s), Abū-Buradah ibn \`Awf al-Azdi said, “If you go commanding the
troops, we are ready to go!” The Imam (a.s) said, “Your suggestion is
not proper! It is not good that I leave the head quarters and keep
chasing a marauder and brigand all over the realm!” Jariyah ibn Qudamah
al-Sa\`idi said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! I am ready to go in the pursuit of
the enemy!” The Imam (a.s) said, “You take a contingent of two thousand
troops from al-Basrah and chase him in Hijaz and then up to Yemen and
give him punitive punishment!” Wahab ibn Mas\`ūd al-Thaqafi said, “O
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! I shall take a contingent of two thousand men
from al-Kūfah to teach a lesson to the enemy! “The Imam (a.s) gave him
the permission as well. Both of them started on the campaign. After they
went, the other persons felt that they did not respond to the call of
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Therefore, some important persons came to the
presence of the Imam (a.s) and said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! We are
really sorry that we tried to avoid fighting with the enemy! It is the
result of our shortcomings and lethargy that the enemy could take
courage in his hands to attack our territory. Order us! We shall prepare
an army and chase the enemy and finish him!”

The Imam (a.s) said, “I have sent a person who will not return without
chasing the enemy out of the borders of the realm! However, you must
prepare for a result-oriented war instead of these chases! That will
totally eliminate the repeated incursions by the enemy! Rise and prepare
to fight with Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan and finish that mischief for all
time! “Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! We
are in your service and my tribe shall always be at your beck and call!
We can fight with the enemy within our borders and away from our realm!
We shall shatter the idols of ignorance and treachery!” The Imam (a.s)
said, “May Allah bless you! What you have said is very correct!”

Then Ziyad ibn Khasfah too assured of his whole-hearted cooperation.
Seeing the sangfroid of the people of al-Kūfah, the Imam (a.s) ordered
Ma\`qil ibn Qays to arrange for men and materials of war. Then he
addressed in a general gathering of the people of al-Kūfah in this
manner, “O People of al-Kūfah! I am mobilizing troops to fight with the
Syrians. Those of you who want to do jihad in the way of Allah should
report to join the contingent.” The people of al-Kūfah sharpened their
swords and getting together other arms joined the army in large numbers.
The number of troops rose to 40,000 men. On a contingent of 10,000 men
the Imam (a.s) appointed his son Husayn (a.s). Another 10,000 troops
were put under the command of Qays ibn Sa\`d, and 10,000 under Abū-Ayyūb
al-Ansari. In this manner different contingents were under the command
of different persons.

The Imam (a.s) wanted to move with this army on the campaign to Siffin
after a week. But a Khariji, Ibn Muljim al-Muradi struck the head of the
Imam (a.s) with such ferocity that he was martyred. With this great
calamity the conditions in the realm became very uncertain. The
rebellious ruler of Syria got the opportunity to play his treacherous
tricks. The contingents got together so meticulously were disbursed over
night. At the crucial time when arrangements had been made to crush the
tyrannical enemy, the accursed Khariji turned everything upside down! On
the other side Jariyah ibn Qudamah reached Yemen with his regiment. When
the fans of \`Uthman of Yemen knew of this, they went into the hills to
hide themselves. But Jariyah’s men chased and surrounded them. Some of
them were killed.

Jariyah inquired about Busr and he was told that he had gone towards the
habitations of Banū-taym. Jariyah chased him. The tyrants are generally
cowards. When he learned that the Iraqi army was in his pursuit, he went
towards Yamamah. He ran away even from there, running from place to
place to make the Iraqis miss his trail. People were aware of his
cruelties. Wherever he went, people used to attack him and Banū-Tamim
even looted some of his goods. Jariyah chased him until Haras and the
tired contingent rested there for a month. Then they went to Makkah.

Jariyah asked the people of Makkah if they had owed their allegiance to
Mu\`awiyah. They said that they did the *bay\`ah* but they did not have
any other choice. Jariyah asked them to renew their *bay\`ah* with the
Imam (a.s). They asked, “Whose *bay\`ah*? Amir al-Mu’minin is no more in
the world!” He said, “You must owe your *bay\`ah* to the person to whom
the Companions of \`Ali (a.s) have owed their allegiance.” Therefore the
people of Makkah pledged their *bay\`ah* to Imam al-Hasan (a.s) and
Jariyah proceeded towards

al-Madinah. There Abū-Hurayrah had started to lead the congregations of
prayers. When he heard of the arrival of Jariyah he went underground.
When Jariyah heard about this, he said:

###### “By Allah! If Abū-Hurayrah was caught by me, I would have cut away his head!”[1]

Then he told the people of al-Madinah to owe their allegiance to Imam
al-Hasan (a.s). All the people did the *bay\`ah* and Jariyah proceeded
towards al-Kūfah. Busr saved his life and reached Damascus and sought
encomiums from Mu\`awiyah for his dark deeds.

Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan wanted to extend his sway as far and wide as
possible. For this purpose he was attacking the areas under Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) and used tyrants like al-Dahhak al-Fahri and Busr ibn
Arta’ah for this nefarious purpose. The gangs of Syrians played havoc on
the unarmed, innocent civilians for no fault of theirs. Although this
nefarious activity was carried out under the excuse of claiming
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman, the real purpose was to extend
the tyrannical sway of Mu\`awiyah. To achieve this, they rendered
buildings into ruins, obliterated habitation after habitation from
existence and the survivors had to fly to safer places.

The sanctity of Makkah and al-Madinah was compromised by spreading fear
psychosis in those holy places. Although Makkah is the place where there
is no justification for disturbing the peace or of causing death or
injury to any person! The Prophet of Islam (a.s) by declaring general
amnesty at the time of conquest of Makkah had forgiven the worst of
offenders of peace and had said:

###### “One who has Faith in Allah and the Hereafter, for him it is not legitimate to shed blood and cut trees in Makkah!”[2]

Similarly, al-Madinah too is sacrosanct and spreading terror there and
torturing the residents there are foul acts. Therefore, the Prophet
(a.s) has said:

“One who frightens the people of al-Madinah as an act of cruelty; on him
there will be the curse of Allah, His angels and the entire humankind!
Allah will neither accept the mandatory prayers nor the optional of such
a person!”[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 107  
 **[2]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 3, Page 167  
 **[3]** Wafā al-Wafā, Vol, Page 32
