The Martyrdom
=============

In 40 H after the Battle of Nahrawan the remnants of Khawarij had a
conclave in Makkah and discussing about the loss of lives in their
ranks, they put the blame of these killings on \`Ali (a.s), Mu\`awiyah
and \`Amr Ibn al-\`As. To avenge all those killings, they wanted to do
away with all the three. The blood of the Khawarij was already seeking
revenge. They unanimously agreed that Bakr ibn \`Abdullah al-Sarimi
would kill Mu\`awiyah, \`Amr ibn Barrak al-Tamimi to kill \`Amr ibn
al-\`As and \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljim to assassinate \`Ali (a.s). They
also agreed that all the three killings were to be committed on the same
day and at the same time. They did not want any of the three to get the
wind of the killing of the other and get wary and make the attempts
fail. Therefore, they fixed the day and time and sent Barrak ibn
\`Abdullah to Damascus, \`Amr ibn Bakr to Egypt and \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Muljim to al-Kūfah.

For this difficult task they had fixed 19th of Ramadan and the time was
the Morning Prayer. Therefore, Barrak ibn \`Abdullah reached the Masjid
of Damascus and when the congregation stood up, he took station behind
Mu\`awiyah in the first row. When Mu\`awiyah bent forward in
genuflection, he struck a blow with his sword. The wound was small and
healed within a few days. The assailant was taken captive. \`Amr ibn
Bakr reached the Masjid of Egypt on the night of 19th Ramadan with the
plan of killing \`Amr ibn al-\`As during the Morning Prayer, but it so
happened that \`Amr ibn al-\`As suffered from a bout of colic and had
deputed Kharijah ibn Hudhafah al-Sahmi to lead the prayer in his place.
\`Amr ibn Bakr was not able to identify in the darkness that it was not
\`Amr ibn al-\`As. He killed Kharijah in that confusion. The people
caught hold of him, bound him in ropes and took to \`Amr ibn al-\`As.
When he realized that Kharijah was killed by him in place of \`Amr ibn
al-\`As, he felt sorry for the failure of his design. \`Amr ibn al-\`As
addressed him and said, “You wanted to kill me, but the death turned
towards Kharijah and you have failed in your attempt on my life!” Then
he was killed for killing Kharijah.

\`Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljim arrived in al-Kūfah around the end of the
month of Sha\`ban and stayed in the locality of Banū-Kindah with some
Khawarij. He did not inform anyone of his plans nor did he give any
indication of his intention through his behavior. In that time he
developed acquaintance with a Khariji woman, Qatam bint Taymiyah. He
fell for her at the first sight. When he knew that she was a spinster,
he proposed marriage to her. Qatam’s father and brother were killed in
the battle of Nahrawan and she wanted to wreak vengeance on \`Ali (a.s).
But she did not find any way to fulfill her wish. When Ibn Muljim
proposed to her, she saw a ray of hope in the proposal. Therefore, she
said, “I am willing to marry you but my dowry is 3,000 dirhams, a male
slave, a slave girl and the killing of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.”

Ibn Muljim was already having plans for that crime, he had come there
for that purpose and now another strong motive presented itself to make
him more determined for the act. But outwardly he expressed surprise at
the suggestion and he said, “Killing \`Ali is not an easy task!”

Qatam said, “You can make a surprise attack and kill him. If you
succeed, it is well and good. Even otherwise you will get the Blessings
of the Hereafter!” When Ibn Muljim saw that Qatam had the same feelings
as himself, he told her that he had come to al-Kūfah with the same
purpose and wanted to avenge the deaths of his men in the battle of
Nahrawan. Then Qatam told him that he must act with determination and
she would talk to dependable persons of her tribe to extend their
cooperation. Therefore, she prepared Dardan ibn Mujalid to assist him.
Ibn Muljim took Shabib ibn Bajrah al-Ashja\`i and al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays
into confidence and kept waiting for the day and time of the act.

During that month of Ramadan, \`Ali (a.s) was alternately going to the
houses of his children and that of \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far to break his
fasts. His appetite had gone down very much and he used to take only a
few morsels of food. When asked about it, he would say:

###### “I wish that when my death comes, I should be on an empty stomach!”[1]

On the night of 19th Ramadan, the Imam (a.s) went to her daughter
Ummu-Kulthūm’s house. She offered him two breads of barley, a bowl of
milk and some salt. When he saw the food he said, “In following the foot
steps of the Prophet (a.s) I have never had more than one type of food
on my spread. O Daughter! There is accountability for the legitimate and
retribution for the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 195

illegitimate. Do you want your father to stay longer at the station of
accountability of the Day of Judgment? Remove one of the two things from
the spread!”

Ummu-Kulthūm took away the bowl of milk and Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) ate a
few morsels of the bread with the salt. After the meal, according to his
practice, he stood up on the mat to offer his prayer. But he was looking
up repeatedly at the twinkling stars and said:

###### “By Allah! I am not lying nor am I making a wrong statement! This is the night about which promise has been made to me!”[1]

In uneasiness he sometimes recited Sūrah Yasin, sometimes he said “We
are Allah’s and to Him do we return,” and sometimes “There is neither
might nor power save with Allah, the Most High, the All-great,” and “O
Allah! Make death felicitous for me!” When Ummu-Kulthūm saw this, she
asked, “Father! Why are you so worried today?” He replied, “I have the
Hereafter in front of me! I am going to the Presence of Allah!” Tears
welled in the eyes of Ummu-Kulthūm and she said, “Father! Today you
should not go to the Mosque! Ju\`dah ibn Hubayrah is there. Ask him to
lead the prayer!” The Imam (a.s) said, “There is no escape from the Fate
fixed by Allah” The night was in its last stages when the Muezzin, Ibn
tabaj came and informed about the prayer. The Imam (a.s) rose to move
towards the mosque.

When he came to the courtyard of the house, the domesticated geese
started shouting and swaying their wings. Someone wanted to move them
aside, but the Imam (a.s) said, “Leave them alone! After a short time
the sounds of crying and wailing would start” Imam al-Hasan (a.s) or
Ummu-Kulthūm said, “Father! What sort of things you are saying today!”
He said, “This is the truth that has come out of my mouth!” Then the
Imam (a.s) told Ummu-Kulthūm, “My daughter! These birds cannot speak!
Take care of feeding them! If you cannot do that, then you must free
them so that they find their food by going around on the earth!” When he
reached near the door, he tied a shawl around his girdle and recited two
couplets of Ruhayhah al-Ansari:

###### Fasten you riddle for the death  
 Because the death is coming before you  
 When death comes  
 Do not show unease!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Sawā\`iq al-Muhriqah, Page 134

Ummu-Kulthūm bid adieu to her father with tears in her eyes. Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) wanted to go to the Mosque with the Imam, but he asked
him not to come. When he reached the Mosque, there was darkness there.
He offered a few genuflections of prayer in the darkness. After reciting
the supplications, the reddish dawn was around. He then went to the
place from where the adhan is sounded and called the Faithful to prayer!
This was the last time that his voice resounded calling the people to
pray and was heard in every household of al-Kūfah. Then he went round
calling “Come to prayer! Come to prayer,” waking people for the prayer.
Among these people was Ibn Muljim as well. The Imam (a.s) found him
sleeping face down and said, “This is the way the Satan sleeps! Sleep on
your left shoulder which is the way of the believers or sleep on the
right shoulder that is the wont of the scholars, or sleep with you face
up that is the way the Prophets sleep! Get up and pray. I know with what
purpose you have come here and what you have hidden under the lapel of
your cloak!”

After awaking people, the Imam (a.s) stood in the arch for the prayer.
When he raised his head from the first prostration of the morning’s
optional prayer, Shabib ibn Bajrah attacked with his sword, but the
sword hit the pillar of the Mosque and the attack went in vain. Then Ibn
Muljim hit his poisoned sword on the head of the Imam (a.s) that cracked
his skull. The Imam (a.s) immediately said, “In the Name of Allah; and
on the Religion of Allah’s Messenger. I have really won. I swear it by
the Lord of Ka\`bah! O People! The son of the Jewess, Ibn Muljim, has
killed me.”

The Imam (a.s) is like the spirit of the world. When the spirit is hurt
the limbs and other parts are affected. Therefore, at that time the sky
shivered and the earth had a cataclysm! The doors of the mosque dashed
against each other. The following words were heard between the earth and
the sky, “The pillars of the True Guidance have actually been
demolished; and the Firmest Handle has split! By Allah! The cousin of
the Prophet has been killed! The successor of the Prophet has been
killed! \`Ali the Well-Pleased has been martyred!” This sound shook up
the people of the city of al-Kūfah. People started arriving at the
Mosque in hordes. Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn ran towards the
Mosque in panic where the people were crying inconsolably and were
shouting, “Amir al-Mu’minin has been martyred!” The sons of the Prophet
(a.s) went forward and saw that the arch of the Mosque was immersed with
blood and the Imam (a.s) was restlessly turning on the floor in blood
and dust. He was picking up the dust from the floor, putting it on his
injured skull and reciting the following verse:

### مِنْهَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ وَفِيهَا نُعِيدُكُمْ وَمِنْهَا نُخْرِجُكُمْ تَارَةً أُخْرَى.

#### “From it We created you and into it We shall send you back and from it will We raise you a second time. (20/55)”

Seeing the face and the head of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) covered with
blood, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) said with choking voice, “Father! Who has
shed your blood?” The Imam (a.s) lifted his head, looked at Hasan (a.s)
and said, “My son! First, offer your prayer!” Therefore Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) led the congregation and \`Ali (a.s) sat there in prayer. After
the prayer, the Imam (a.s) was brought to the courtyard of the Mosque.
People had already gathered in large numbers inside and around the
Mosque. Every eye was wet with tears and every heart was saddened. When
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) inquired about the killer, the Imam (a.s) said, “I
have been killed by Ibn Muljim al-Muradi” He pointed towards the door,
Bab-Kindah and said that. “He will just be brought through that door!”
Some persons were just then seen dragging Ibn Muljim in through that
door. People started shouting, “Ibn Muljim has been apprehended!” The
crowd was getting restless with anger and anguish. Every person was
cursing him.

When he was brought before Imam al-Hasan (a.s) he told the wretch, “O
unfortunate accursed person! You have killed Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! Is
it the return for the kindnesses that he showered on you people?” Ibn
Muljim stood there with bowed head and did not give any reply. \`Ali
(a.s) opened his eyes in delirium and looking at him said, “O Ibn
Muljim! Was not I your good Imam? Were my kindnesses worth forgetting?”
At this Ibn Muljim said, “Will you get one released who has made the way
for the Hell?” Then the Imam (a.s) turned towards Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
and said, “O son! If I remained alive, it will be my prerogative whether
I punish him or pardon him! If I pass away because of this injury, you
must kill him only with one stroke. After killing do not sever his
limbs! I have heard the Prophet (a.s) say, ‘Beware! Do not do cutting
off the limbs of anyone. Even if it is a dog!’ During the days of his
captivity give him the food that you yourself eat and drink!”

Now people carried the Imam (a.s) home on their hands. Outside the house
there was loud lamentation. Hearing these sounds Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
came out and told the people, “Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) is asking you to
go to your homes!” Al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah says that the people disbursed
but his heart would not allow him to go without seeing the Imam (a.s).
He kept standing there. When Imam al-Hasan (a.s) came out again, he
said, “O Son of the prophet (a.s)! I would not like to go without seeing
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).

Please allow me one glimpse of him!” Imam al-Hasan (a.s) went inside and
emerged after some time and took al-Asbagh inside. He saw the Imam (a.s)
had a yellow cloth tied around his head His face too had turned yellow
with weakness and loss of blood. He could not distinguish between the
color of the bandage and the Imam’s face. He could not control himself
and started crying.

When the Imam (a.s) saw al-Asbagh crying, he said, “O al-Asbagh! Do not
cry! I am going towards the Heaven!” He said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! I
know you will go to the Heaven! But I cry because I am getting separated
from you! Now who will take care of us? Who will help the orphans and
the widows?”

Saying this, al-Asbagh stood up and the Imam (a.s) went into a delirium
with weakness. He was now alternating between delirium and senses. Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) gave him a bowl of milk. The Imam (a.s) drank a little
and left the rest. He said that Ibn Muljim too should be given a
beverage of milk. In that time the physicians of al-Kūfah had assembled.
Among them was the famous surgeon and physician, Athir ibn \`Amr
al-Sakūni. After inspecting the wound he said it was mortal and that
there was not any chance of survival. The poisoned sword had penetrated
the brain and the venom had spread. Hearing this, the hearts of the
people there started sinking. And tears started flowing from their eyes.
The Imam (a.s) spent the nights of 19th and 20th of Ramadan in great
pain. When two thirds of the twenty-first night was gone, the condition
of the Imam (a.s) became very precarious and droplets of the sweat of
death appeared on his forehead. He recited the *shahadah* and breathed
his last! The one who spent his life doing jihad against the forces of
evil, ultimately died at the hands of the evil Ibn Muljim!

Murder is a serious crime, but the consequences of the murder depend on
the status of the victim and similarly the punishment too varies from
case to case. An ordinary person’s killing is a crime and the killing of
a believer is a bigger crime and according to the Nass of the Qur’an the
punishment for the perpetrator of the crime is perpetual burning in the
Hellfire. Then killing of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was a great calamity
and the killer qualified for Allah’s curse and perpetual retribution!
This was the killing of the person who used to spend his nights in
supplication to Allah! The killer neither considered the sanctity of the
Mosque nor thought that he did the heinous act when the Imam (a.s) was
in his prostration. One sad aspect of this tragedy is that when this
happened, the Imam (a.s) had already mobilized a big contingent of
troops and was to leave for Syria soon to fight with the forces of evil.
It is quite possible if there was a conspiracy behind the assassination.
When a tributary could be used to poison Malik al-Ashtar and Ju\`dah
bint al-

Ash\`ath too is used to poison Imam al-Hasan (a.s), it is quite probable
that the same forces of evil might have used Ibn Muljim to commit this
heinous crime. The person, Ibn Muljim, was the most villainous
character. The Prophet (a.s) had compared the assassin of \`Ali (a.s) to
those who killed the she-camel of Prophet Salih. Therefore, Ja\`far ibn
Samarah says:

###### The prophet (a.s) said to \`Ali (a.s), “Amongst the bygone people, the most callous was that who killed the she-camel of Prophet Salih.”  
 The prophet (a.s) was asked by \`Ali (a.s), “Who is the most callous in the latter days?”  
 He said, “Allah, and His Prophet know that he is your assassin.”[1]

If the killer of the she-camel of Prophet Salih deserved Hellfire, then
how could the killer of \`Ali (a.s) escape Hellfire, when both had
extinguished the miracles of the prophets and erased the verses of
Allah! After this, there is no weight in Ibn Hazm saying that this
killing was the result of (error of interpretation). One cannot lighten
the sin of the person and term him deserving of Allah’s Forgiveness and
Blessings!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh Baghdād, Vol 1, Page 135
