The End of Ibn Muljim and His Cohorts
=====================================

There were four persons involved in the assassination of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s): \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljim, Qatam bint Akhdar, Shabib
ibn Bujrah, and Wardan ibn Mujalid. When there was pandemonium in the
Mosque after the act, and the people advanced towards the arch of the
Mosque, Wardan ran away to his house. One of his relatives, on knowing
of his involvement in the assassination, killed him with his sword! Ibn
Muljim had run out after inflicting the mortal blow on the Imam (a.s).
When the people saw him running away, they chased him. He threatened
them that he would kill them if they went near him. But one person from
the tribe of Hamdan and Mughirah ibn Nawfal succeeded in apprehending
him and brought him back to the Mosque. He was kept under captivity
until Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was laid to rest. When Imam al-Hasan (a.s)
came back to al-Kūfah after the funeral, he asked for Ibn Muljim to be
brought to his presence. He told him, “O enemy of Allah! For what crime
you have killed Amir al-Mu’minin? Did he ever ill-treat you? “He said,”
I had sworn to Allah that I would kill him. Therefore, I killed him! Now
you have the right to claim qisas or to leave me free! If you give me
amnesty I shall kill Mu\`awiyah and remove your care forever.” Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) said, “You deserve that you must be executed!” Therefore
he ordered him to be executed. Haytham bint al-Aswad al-Nakha\`iyyah
claimed his body for the last rites. The body was given to her. She
lighted a pyre and burned the body. Then the uncontrollable crowd went
to the house of Qatam. She was killed; her body was rendered to shreds
and burned. Her house was looted.

Shabib ibn Bujrah was hiding in the crowds and saved himself. When
Mu\`awiyah visited al-Kūfah after assuming power, Ibn Bajrah met him. To
get into good books of Mu\`awiyah he said that he was an accessory of
Ibn Muljim in the assassination of \`Ali (a.s). When Mu\`awiyah heard
this he got up in anger and told the people of his tribe that if he saw
Ibn Bajrah in al-Kūfah, they will all be executed. He asked them to
exile him from al-Kūfah. Hearing this he escaped from al-Kūfah in the
darkness of the night. When Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah was the emir of
al-Kūfah, ibn Bajrah and his companions were killed fighting with the
troops of Ibn Shu\`bah.
