Settlement in Najaf
===================

Najaf is situated five miles to the west of al-Kūfah. There is a legend
that log ago there was a mass of water at the place. When the water was
totally absorbed by the soil and its substrata, the place was called
*annajaf or nayjaf,* meaning the water had dried up. With excessive use
the place came to be called Najaf. Adjacent to Najaf, there was another
habitation, three miles from al-Kūfah, that was known as al-Hirah.
Between these two places, there was a desert known as *maltat*. The
foundation of al-Hirah was laid by the Caledonian monarch,
Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander of Macedonia took part in its renovation
and development. After sometime the people of al-Hirah moved to al-Anbar
and al-Hirah fell into ruins. Habitations keep coming up and
disappearing over periods. After its ruination, therefore, opportunity
came for the revival of al-Hirah. Malik ibn Fahham, who had left Yemen
fearing its submergence into the sea, came to settle down in Iraq. He
succeeded in establishing his kingdom in the new area. After him, his
son Judhaymah Abrash came to power. When he was killed by ²ubbah, the
queen of al-Jazirah, his nephew \`Amr ibn \`Adi, in the year 240 A.D.,
during the times of Shahpur I, succeeded to the throne. \`Amr, on
assuming power, adopted al-Hirah as his home and thereafter it became
the permanent capital of Iraq. Its beauty was enhanced with gardens and
oases. Imposing structures like *al-khawarnaq* and *al-sadir* were
constructed. The people here were dependent on horticulture and
agriculture. Being on the borders of Iran, it also provided security to
the Iranian caravans of traders and received compensation for the
service rendered to them. When after the conquest of Iraq, the
foundations for the city of al-Kūfah were laid, people started moving
there from al-Hirah. The bricks and stones of the structures in al-Hirah
too were moved to al-Kūfah. This place fell into ruins and became a
stretch of sand. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) got his final resting place
in the neighborhood of al-Hirah, the people started re-inhabiting the
area. This place came to be known as Najaf, Mashhad and al-Ghari.
Al-Hirah remained only in the pages of the books of history! The name of
the place became al-Ghari because Judhaymah al-Abrash built two huge
structures over the graves of his friends, Malik and \`Aqil, which were
called al-Ghariyyayn. With passage of time, instead of

saying al-Ghariyyayn, the people started calling the place as al-Ghari.
Even Najaf in the early days was called al-Ghari because of being
adjacent to it.

When the Shi\`ah of \`Ali (a.s) became the attendants of the Shrine,
they started constructing shacks and rooms in the surroundings of the
shrine for their residence. The population of the place kept increasing
and soon it assumed the proportion of a city. From Najaf to Syria there
was a desert track and the danger of brigands was always there for the
wayfarers. Because of this danger, the emirs and monarchs had
constructed imparts around the city. This way renovated and improved as
the need arose. Therefore, the first one to construct the Mausoleum of
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was \`Adud al-Dawlah Fanakhusrow during the years
367 to 372 H and the boundary wall for the city. In 400 H, the vizier of
Sultan al-Dawlah al-Daylami, Abū-Muhammad ibn Sahlan, demolished the
first rampart and constructed a wider and stronger compound wall. Ibn
al-Athir writes:

###### “Abū-Muhammad Sahlan fell ill. When the sickness increased he made a vow that if he was restored to health, he would build a compound wall around the Mausoleum of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Therefore, he recovered his health and he issued orders for the construction of the wall. The project was completed the same year, 400 H.”[1]

The last time the rampart was renovated in the period of Fath \`Ali Shah
Qajar (expired 1250 H) by his vizier Nizam al-Dawlah al-Isfahani, but
most of this wall has been demolished because of the expansion of the
city.

The population of Najaf consists of mainly the Shi\`ah. A major portion
of the population consists of the students of the disciplines of Islamic
Studies who come from various countries in the world. Although Najaf had
always been the center for learning, but when Shaykh al-Ta’ifah
Abū-Ja\`far al-tūsi shifted his residence from Baghdad, because of
trouble from the people there, to Najaf, the foundations for the Najaf
were laid and with the felicity of *madinat al-\`ilm* it remained the
center of imparting knowledge!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 7, Page 942
