Childhood
=========

There are three phases in every human being’s life: childhood, youth and
old age. There are different requirements in every phase of ones life.
Childhood is for play. In this phase, the individual does not have full
sense of things. The childish activities prove this. They cannot
distinguish between right and wrong while at play

The aptitude of Abū-Talib’s son was different from the other children.
He was never seen at childish games and play. He was away from other
activities that children enjoy indulging in. His looks indicated
courage, determination, and his actions dignity. His physical and mental
activities were different from those of other children. The development
of his physical identity was faster than that of the children of his
age. He grew in a day as much as another child in a month. Therefore,
his body was strong and the sense of comprehension far advanced. The
author of *Arja al-Matalib,* Najmuddin Fakhr al-Islam Abū-Bakr ibn
Muhammad al-Marandi writes in Manaqib al-Ashab about the reason for
giving the name Haydar to \`Ali (a.s) that while he was still a baby in
arms, his mother once left him alone at home. The house was at the foot
of a hill. A snake came down from the hill, came near the baby and
started hissing. The baby caught the snake in one hand and pressed it
until it died. When his mother came back, she noted the dead reptile in
the hand of the baby and said,

###### “O my tiger! May Allah keep you alive!”

When he grew up and started walking around, he used to lift heavy stones
with ease and bring them down from the top of the hills. He was fond of
breaking the idols.

According to the norms of Arab upbringing, Abū-Talib trained his
children in archery, horse riding and wrestling. He used to gather his
sons and nephews together and arrange their matches in these disciplines
and taught them the finer points of the martial arts. \`Ali (a.s),
though he was the youngest of all, was never subdued by the others. He
used to defeat all his brothers and cousins without any difficulty. This
was a Divine Gift to him. Ibn Qutaybah writes:

###### With whomsoever he wrestled, he defeated him![1]

Besides this physical strength, \`Ali (a.s) was far advanced in the
development of his mental capabilities. He had a great sense of
distinguishing between the right and wrong from his very childhood. He
recognized the Real Creator (Allah) as soon as he opened his eyes.
Living in the environment of idolatery, he never thought the idols fit
for worship! When people were hesitant to accept Islam for long after
the Prophet declared his Annunciation, he had understood its importance
prior to this declaration. Therefore, he himself has said:

###### “I see the light of Revelation and Prophethood and get the Fragrance of Prophethood,”[2]

His high vision saw the light of Prophethood and smelled its fragrance.
Even before the Annunciation of the Prophet (a.s), he made him his role
model. Therefore, \`Ali’s childhood, like his youth and old age, was a
mountain of greatness. Viewing the period of his childhood, one
understands that a great personality was in the making. This greatness
was a gift from the Almighty Allah!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ma\`ārif, Page 91  
 **[2]** Nahj al-Balāghah
