The Feast of `ashirah
=====================

The Prophet (a.s), as soon as he was Ordained as the Messenger, he
silently commenced his mission. When he entered the fourth year of this
activity, he received a Commandment from Allah to openly propagate the
Faith:

### وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الأَقْرَبِينَ.

#### “Preach your nearest relations!”

On the Revelation of this Verse, the Prophet (a.s) made Abū-Talib’s
residence the head quarters of his Mission. He asked \`Ali (a.s) to make
arrangements for a meal to be served to the progeny of \`Abd al-Muttalib
and to invite them to join the feast. \`Ali (a.s) procured one shank of
meat, one measure of milk and about three seers of wheat flour. Then he
went round inviting people. At the appointed time about forty persons
assembled at the house of Abū-Talib. Among the guests were Abū-Talib,
Hamzah ibn \`Abbas and Abū-Lahab. Although the number of guests was high
considering the quantity of food, Allah made it sufficient for all the
guests and some quantity was left over. When the guests finished the
meal, the Prophet (a.s) rose from his place and tried to make the
announcement of his Prophethood and to invite them to the Right Path.
Abū-Lahab interrupted at this point and said, “Muhammad wants to lead
you away from the faith of your ancestors. Do not give ear to his
suggestions lest you get affected with his magical spell!” As a result
of the outburst of Abū-Lahab the group got restive. Some stood up to
depart and others followed them. The Prophet (a.s) could not communicate
what he had planned to say. The second day, the Prophet (a.s) extended
invitation to the same group through \`Ali (a.s). They again assembled
for the meal. After the meal, the Prophet (a.s) rose to give a talk.
Abū-Lahab once again tried to interrupt. But Abū-Talib chided him and
asked him to sit quietly. Abū-Talib told him:

###### “O unfortunate person! What have you to do with these things?”

Hearing this, Abū-Lahab had no courage to interrupt any further and sat
quietly putting his head on his knees. Abū-Talib addressed the gathering
and asked them to sit comfortably in their places. He asked the Prophet
(a.s) to tell what he wished to say. He said that the people would
listen to him with attention and act on what he had to say. The Prophet
(a.s) got encouragement from these words of support and addressed the
gathering:

###### “O progeny of \`Abd al-Muttalib! By Allah! No youth in Arabia has brought any thing better than what I have brought for you. I have brought for you the welfare of this world and the Hereafter. Allah has commanded me to invite you towards this welfare! Who is the person amongst you willing to become my associate and helper? I assure you that he will be my Brother, My Vicegerent and my Successor!”[1]

Barring three or four persons, none of the gathering was happy over the
statement and none had the courage to extend his hand in support.
Everyone sat quietly with bowed heads. Suddenly, in that quiet
environment \`Ali’s voice broke the silence:

###### “Although I am young, definitely younger than all of them, I shall be your associate, helper and protector! If someone cast an evil eye on you, I shall break that eye! If someone created turmoil, I shall strike him!

The Prophet (a.s) said:

###### “O \`Ali! Wait for a while! Perhaps someone from the grown ups might come forward!

When after making the call thrice no one came forward, the Prophet (a.s)
called \`Ali (a.s) close to himself, put his hand on his head and said:

###### “Certainly! This is my Brother, My Associate and My Vicegerent. It is binding on all of you to listen to him and obey him!”[2]

When the Quraysh heard this statement, they had a sarcastic smile on
their faces. They stole glances at each other, joked with each other and
some braves told Abū-Talib, “Now you will have to listen to and obey
your son!” Although the gathering took \`Ali’s words lightly, later on
it was proved that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 63  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 63

the promise that the small boy made in the gathering of the Quraysh was
kept in letter and spirit. In the most difficult situations, he shielded
the Prophet (a.s) from the assaults of the enemies. He proved to the
world that there was none more deserving of the brotherhood, support and
the position of the successor of the Prophet than he was.

In recognition of the selfless services of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), the
Prophet (a.s) was bound to make a public announcement of his Succession
and Vicegerency! While returning from the Farewell Pilgrimage, at a
place called Ghadir Khumm, the Prophet (a.s) delivered a Sermon wherein
he said:

###### “\`Ali is the master of him, whose master I am!”

Saying this, the Prophet (a.s) proclaimed the Succession and the
Vicegerency of \`Ali (a.s). This was an echo of the promise made at the
Feast of al-\`Ashirah and the recognition of the fulfillment of \`Ali’s
Resolution to act as the support and bulwark for the Prophet of Islam
(a.s).

The da\`wat al-\`Ashirah also throws light on the Vicegerency or
Caliphate of \`Ali (a.s) that the Prophet (a.s) had declared only three
things at the Feast:

###### Tawhid or Unity of Allah, Prophethood and Succession or caliphate of \`Ali (a.s).

Along with the announcement about Tawhid and Prophethood, the mention of
caliphate illustrates its importance in the consideration of the
Prophet! This proves that if Tawhid and Prophethood are the main pillars
of Islam, the caliphate (of \`Ali (a.s) too is of prime importance. As
the acceptance of Tawhid and Prophethood is imperative for a Muslim, the
acceptance of \`Ali’s Succession and Vicegerency too is necessary.
