Help and Assistance To the Prophet Commences
============================================

When the Prophet of Islam (a.s) started open propagation of the Faith,
the Quraysh, because of their respect and consideration for Abū-Talib,
did not directly attack the Prophet (a.s) but they set urchins to
trouble him and throw stones and brickbats on him. They thought that
this way they could force the Prophet (a.s) to abruptly discontinue his
mission. Therefore, whenever he came out of his house, the youths of the
Quraysh used to follow him, shouting invectives and throwing stones and
garbage at him. The Prophet (a.s) was much disturbed and saddened with
this treatment, but he never uttered a word against the culprits. He
knew that arguing with the children and youth was not of any use. Once
\`Ali (a.s) saw the marks of injury on the Prophet’s body and asked him
about the cause of the injuries. The Prophet (a.s) explained to him that
the Quraysh themselves do not come out openly against him but send out
their children to cause him harm. Whenever he came out, they came
together, followed him and threw stones and pebbles on him. \`Ali (a.s)
was very disturbed to hear this and said, “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)! In
the future, you should not go out alone. I shall be with you. If they
throw brickbats on you, I will hurl stones at them. Then they will not
have courage to do such nasty things again!” The next day \`Ali (a.s)
was with the Prophet (a.s) when he stirred out of their home. The
Quraysh youths, as usual tried to crowd the Prophet (a.s). They noticed
that \`Ali (a.s) was standing in front of the Prophet (a.s). The youths
were almost of the same age as \`Ali (a.s) but first they hesitated
seeing his angry face and then advanced sheepishly. \`Ali (a.s) rolled
up his sleeves and sprang on them like an angry tiger. He broke the limb
of one attacker, struck the head of another and threw another down! The
crowd of youth, getting a good beating from a youth of their own age
fled defeated! They ran to their elders and complained, “\`Ali (a.s) has
beaten us!” But the elders could not gather any courage to confront
\`Ali (a.s) because the youths were doing the mischief at their instance
only. From that day, the youth of Quraysh stopped misbehaving. Whenever
they saw \`Ali (a.s) with the Prophet (a.s), they would try to crouch
themselves in some corners to hide from their view! They did not dare
any time in the future to trouble the Prophet (a.s).

After this incident, \`Ali (a.s) was remembered with the title of
al-Qadim that means a person who breaks the bones and the ribs!
Therefore, during the Battle of Uhud when he came out to fight Talhah
ibn Abi-Talhah, Talhah asked who was coming to fight. He said, “I am
\`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib!” When he knew that it was \`Ali (a.s) that was
against him, he said:

###### “O al-Qadim! I think none other than you can dare to come and fight with me!”[1]

Talhah remembered him with the title they gave him in their youth!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A\`yān al-Shī\`ah
