Migration To Al-madinah
=======================

On release from the virtual incarceration at Shi\`b Abū-Talib, of
Banū-Hashim, the enthusiasm of the Quraysh in pestering them cooled
down. Although, in their hearts, they had the same hatred for the
Prophet (a.s), his family and companions, as erstwhile. They had some
consideration and awe of the personality of Abū-Talib that kept them in
a degree of check. Abū-Talib had now grown old and the troubles of exile
had not done any good to his health. He deceased a short while after his
return from Shi\`b Abū-Talib. Now the people of Makkah got total freedom
to trouble the Prophet (a.s) and the new converts to Islam the way they
wished. None had the courage to stop them from their nefarious
activities. Every day the troublesome activities of Quraysh increased.

When the tyranny of the Quraysh became unbearable, the Prophet (a.s)
went to Ta’if from Makkah. Ta’if is at a distance of sixty miles from
Makkah and has a salubrious climate. According to a narrative of
Abul-Hasan al-Mada’ini, \`Ali (a.s) and Zayd ibn Harithah accompanied
the Prophet (a.s) on this journey. The purpose of the Prophet (a.s)
behind this trip was to invite the people of Ta’if to the fold of Islam.
But the people there were worse than those in Makkah were. They did not
agree to listen to the Prophet (a.s) and set wayward urchins and
vagabonds to throw stones at the visiting party. With difficulty the
Prophet (a.s) spent a month at Ta’if and, literally, the vagabonds
chased the party away from there. The only way left for them was to head
back to Makkah. They came to the outskirts of the town and camped at the
Cave of Hira’. It was risky for them to enter the precincts of the town
without some plausible support. He sent word to Mut\`im ibn \`Adi
through a person seeking his protection. When he pledged his support,
the Prophet (a.s) entered the town. Here he faced the same difficulties
and hurdles as he faced at Ta’if. But, despite all the difficulties, he
continued his Mission. He visited the nearby hamlets and propagated the
Message of Islam. The Quraysh too shadowed him during these trips and
used to interrupt the meetings calling him a madcap. The Prophet (a.s)
however maintained his calm and composure. He never reacted angrily and
thus continued his mission.

It was the practice of the Prophet (a.s) that during the Hajj, he used
to meet the persons coming from far away places to give them the Message
of Islam. Those pilgrims, who were of receptive nature, embraced Islam.
It was the Hajj on the tenth year after the Annunciation when a group
from Yathrib visited Makkah. When the Prophet (a.s) during a trip of
propagation reached Mina, he came across six persons near \`Uqbah. He
went near them and asked about the tribe to which they belonged. They
said that they were from Yathrib and they belonged to the Tribe of
Khazraj. The Prophet (a.s) sat down with that group and recited to them
some Verses from the Holy Qur’an and invited them to embrace Islam. They
were much influenced by the Islamic Principles and they readily embraced
it. Now, this was the beginning of the spread of Islam in Yathrib.
During the next Hajj, twelve persons came from Yathrib and embraced
Islam. The following year a contingent of seventy-three persons arrived
and embraced Islam at the hands of the Prophet (a.s) these persons said
that it was their desire that the Prophet (a.s) changed his residence to
Yathrib and made it the head quarters for his Mission. They promised him
all cooperation and protection. In Makkah, there were many hurdles in
the way of propagating the Faith. He informed to the Muslims that he
intended to migrate to al-Madinah. The Muslims were already fed up of
the ill treatment meted out to them by the Quraysh. When they found a
place of peace, they started migrating one after another. When the
Quraysh saw that the Muslims have gained support and protection of the
people of Yathrib, they feared that if the Prophet (a.s) too migrated,
his disturbed group might consolidate and rise against them. Therefore,
the Quraysh started creating hurdles in the way of those migrating to
al-Madinah. They withheld the families and children of some migrants,
snatched away the money from some and threatened some others. But all
these schemes of the Quraysh were of no avail and barring a few persons
all the intended migrants succeeded in changing their residence.

When the Quraysh failed in their efforts to curb the migration, they
called together a council in which all the major families excepting the
Banū-Hashim participated. From Banū-\`Abd-Shams, \`Utbah, Shaybah and
Abū-Sufyan, from Banū-Nawfal, Taymah ibn \`Adi, Jubayr ibn Mut\`im and
al-Harith ibn \`Amir, from Banū-\`Abd-al-Dar, Nizar ibn Harith, from
Banū-Asad, Abul-Bukhtari ibn Husham, Zum\`ah ibn al-Aswad and Hakim ibn
Hizam, from Banū-Makhzūm, Abū-Jahl ibn Husham, from Banū-Sahm, Nabih and
Munabbih, sons of al-Hajjaj, from Banū-Haja, Umayyah ibn Khalaf were at
the conclave. In addition to these dignitaries, some other people too
attended the meeting. It happened that one aged person from Najd
attended this meeting. One person who started the proceedings of the
meeting said that the

Muslims have struck an alliance with people from outside and they can
acquire a position of strength at any time in the future. The meeting
must seriously deliberate the matter. If this movement is not curbed,
there was a lurking danger of their rising under the leadership of
Muhammad (a.s) and attacking the Quraysh! There was the need for
devising a way to nip Islam in the bud and to give such punishment to
Muhammad (a.s) that, in future, none else raises his head. Al-\`as ibn
Wa’il, Umayyah ibn Khalaf and Ubay ibn Khalaf said that Muhammad (a.s)
must be chained and incarcerated in a dungeon until he died with hunger
and thirst. The Najdi old man said that the suggestion was not good. If
such a step was taken, the people of Muhammad’s tribe might fight and
get him released. \`Utbah, Shaybah and Abū-Sufyan said that he must be
exiled so that they do not hear any word against their idols in the
future. The Najdi opposed this proposal too saying that wherever he
went, he will gather people around him with his sweet talk and make them
rise against the Quraysh. Then none will be able to curb his onslaught.
Abū-Jahl said that strong youths should be selected from every tribe and
they should all, in unison, attack Muhammad (a.s) and kill him. In such
an event any one tribe cannot be blamed individually for the killing and
it will be beyond the strength of Banū-Hashim to avenge the killing.
Therefore, they will be forced to accept the blood money instead of
demanding with retaliation! He added that they would together contribute
to pay the amount of the blood money. This suggestion was accepted by
everyone and the Najdi too endorsed it. To implement the project it was
decided to post a vigil near the Prophet’s residence around dusk to keep
a keen eye on the movements there lest he escaped getting wind of their
plan. In the darkness of the night, the youths would then barge into his
house and kill him. Here the conclave against him was in progress, and
on the other side, Allah had forewarned the Prophet (a.s) of the
impending danger. Therefore, Allah has said in the Qur’an:

### وَإِذْ يَمْكُرُ بِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِيُثْبِتُوكَ أَوْ يَقْتُلُوكَ أَوْ يُخْرِجُوكَ وَيَمْكُرُونَ وَيَمْكُرُ اللَّهُ وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ الْمَاكِرِينَ

#### “Remember the time when the infidels were scheming against you to incarcerate you at some place or to kill you or to banish you. They were planning their stratagem and Allah had his own plan. Allah is a better Planner!”

To implement Allah’s Plan, the Prophet (a.s) called \`Ali (a.s) and
said,

###### “O \`Ali! Quraysh have decided that they would assassinate me tonight. But Allah has ordered me to leave Makkah and make you sleep in my bed! It is very disturbing for me to leave you

###### behind surrounded with enemies, but this is the command of Allah, therefore: You must cover yourself with my green Hadramite shawl and sleep in my bed and no harm will come your way from them.”[1]

\`Ali (a.s) did not raise a word of dissent or objection against the
Prophet’s instruction. He was concerned only of the safety of the
Prophet (a.s). The Prophet (a.s) assured him that he would be able to
safely escape from the clutches of the enemies. Hearing this, \`Ali
(a.s) made a prostration of thanksgiving to Allah! Ibn ShahrAshūb
writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) was the first to Make a prostration of Thanksgiving and the first to keep his face on the dust after prostration”[2]

After raising his head from the prostration, \`Ali (a.s) asked the
Prophet (a.s) to go peacefully and that he would sleep in his bed as
instructed. The Prophet (a.s) could elude the infidels and proceeded
towards the Mount tūr and \`Ali (a.s) fearlessly covered himself with
the Prophet’s shawl and peacefully slept in his bed. \`Allamah
Diyarbakri writes:

###### “On the night of the Migration when \`Ali (a.s) slept on the bed of the Prophet (a.s), Allah Revealed to Archangel Gabriel and Archangel Michael, saying: I have established a relationship of brotherhood between you two and Have made the life of one more than that of the other. Who is the one between you who can sacrifice his life for the other?’ They both opted for their individual life only! Then Allah Revealed to them why they were not like \`Ali (a.s)! ‘I made him Muhammad’s brother. At the cost of his life, he is sleeping on the bed of Muhammad (a.s). Descend both of you, to the earth and guard him from his enemies!’ Therefore, Archangel Gabriel stood at the head and Archangel Michael stood at the foot of the bed and started saying: ‘Felicitations! O son of Abū-Talib! Who is like you that Allah prides on the angels because of you’ and then Allah Revealed the Verse: ‘There are also people who stake their lives in the way of Allah, and Allah is very kind on His Creatures’”[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 72  
 **[2]** Manāqib, Vol 1, Page 127  
 **[3]** Tārīkh al-Khamīs , Vol 1, Page 325

After the Prophet (a.s) went away, Abū-Bakr came to his house. Not
finding him there, he asked \`Ali (a.s), “Where is the Prophet (a.s)? On
being told that he had gone towards the Mount tūr, Abū-Bakr too
proceeded in that direction. The historian al-tabari writes:

###### “When the Prophet (a.s) heard the sounds of the steps of Abū-Bakr in the darkness of the night, he thought that one of the infidels was following him. He increased the speed of walking. The strap of his sandal gave way and one of his toes was injured. This caused him bleeding. However he kept on walking fast!”[1]

Abū-Bakr felt that he was the cause of inconvenience to the Prophet
(a.s) and therefore he called him aloud and identified himself.
Recognizing his voice, the Prophet (a.s) stopped. Around dawn both
reached the Mount tūr and took shelter in a cave.

The vigil of the infidels continued at the house of the Prophet (a.s).
Whenever they peeped inside, they found the Prophet (a.s) deep in his
sleep covered in his shawl! Near the dawn, they unsheathed their swords
and rushed into the house. Hearing the slight commotion, \`Ali (a.s)
removed the shawl from his face. When they saw \`Ali (a.s) in the bed of
the Prophet (a.s) their faces went pale! Surprised they asked where
Muhammad (a.s) had gone. \`Ali (a.s) asked them, “Did you entrust him to
me that you are asking me about him? Allah knows where he is!” At this
reply, the infidels were much upset. They were facing defeat in their
designs. They thought of avenging the failure against \`Ali (a.s) but
ultimately left him unharmed and went with crestfallen faces to go in
the pursuit of the Prophet (a.s).

The infidels of Quraysh so far had the satisfaction that although most
of the Muslims had migrated from Makkah, Muhammad (a.s) was still there
for them to wreak their revenge against him. Even if the Muslims
acquired strength at Yathrib, they dare not attack Makkah for the fear
of the Prophet’s safety. Now that the Prophet (a.s) had escaped, the
situation had drastically changed. They made men run in all directions
to search for the Prophet (a.s). Some men reached near the Mount tūr in
their search. Outside the cave, there was neither any mark of footsteps
nor any signs of someone entering it. At the entrance, spiders had knit
their web and some pigeons had made their nest. The men returned from
there disappointed. Abū-Jahl announced that whoever brought back the
Prophet (a.s), he will be gifted a hundred camels. Suraqah

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 100

ibn Malik, in the greed of the gift, went in search of the Prophet
(a.s). He even spotted him. But the person was awed with the majesty of
the Prophet (a.s). He quietly returned. The Prophet (a.s) stayed in the
cave for three days and nights. On the fifth of Rabi\` I, he started
traveling towards al-Madinah. After traversing the distance of three
miles he halted with Banū-\`Amr ibn \`Awf at the place called Qaba. He
halted there until \`Ali (a.s) joined him.

After the departure of the Prophet (a.s), \`Ali (a.s) stayed at Makkah
for three days. He returned the things in the trust of the Prophet (a.s)
to their owners. On the fourth day he seated Fatimah bint Muhammad,
Fatimah bint al-Zubayr and Fatimah bint Asad in litters on the camel
backs and proceeded towards al-Madinah. When Quraysh learned that even
\`Ali (a.s) had left for al-Madinah, they felt deeply insulted and sent
a contingent of eight men mounted on camels in his pursuit. When \`Ali
(a.s), and his retinue, was around twenty-five miles from Makkah near
the hill of Dajnan, the men too reached there. Seeing them, he
dismounted the ladies, made them stay at the foot of the hill in a safe
place, and confronted the men. The men tried to surround and ambush him
and addressed in a harsh tone asking him to return to Makkah with them.
They also said that if he did not yield, they would take him there
forcibly. \`Ali (a.s) did not pay any heed to what they said and
breaking the circle he moved forward. The slave of Harb ibn Umayyah,
Janah, unsheathed his sword and stood in his way. A change came on the
face of \`Ali (a.s), he put his hand on the scabbard of his sword and
moved forward. Janah attacked but missed the mark. \`Ali (a.s) moved his
sword and the slave was cut into two. When the other men saw this scene,
they fled in fear! \`Ali spent the night at the foot of the hill of
Dajnan and early morning moved towards al-Madinah. It was summer time
and hot winds were blowing. Walking on the hot sand, the soles of his
feet developed calluses. It was only his spirit that kept him moving
forward. Alas, the small entourage reached Qaba where they joined with
the Prophet (a.s). The Prophet (a.s) came forward and embraced him
affectionately. His eyes watered and he removed the dust from \`Ali’s
cloak with his own hands. They now traveled safely to al-Madinah.

The courage demonstrated by \`Ali (a.s) sleeping in the bed of the
Prophet (a.s) has no parallel in the history. He had learned from the
Prophet (a.s) about the plans of the Quraysh to assassinate him in the
bed that night. The ease with which he slept in that bed demonstrates
his courage and the profound love and care that he had for the safety of
the Prophet (a.s). He knew that he was exposing his own life to
jeopardy. But for him, no sacrifice was big enough in the cause of the
Faith and the Prophet (a.s)!

If \`Ali (a.s) had not slept in the bed, or even moved away from it
after some time out of fear, it would have warned the vigilantes and
they could have easily pursued and caught up with the Prophet (a.s) and
the result could have been either the loss of the life of the Prophet
(a.s) or his incarceration at Makkah to prevent his migration to
al-Madinah. Both ways it would have been detrimental to the propagation
and the progress of the Faith. It was \`Ali’s courageous act that
ensured the safety of the Prophet (a.s) and the victory of Islam over
infidelity!
