The Matrimony
=============

Fatimah al-Zahra’ (a.s) was born to Khadijah al-Kubra and was the
dearest daughter of the Prophet (a.s). Her birth took place at Makkah in
the fifth year of the Annunciation of the Prophet (a.s). When she was
only five years old her beloved mother, Khadijah, died. The entire
responsibility of her upbringing became the responsibility of the
Prophet (a.s). Despite his very busy schedule, he gave good attention to
her education and training. His attention and her personal innate
capability resulted in her accomplishments that became an example for
the womenfolk of the world. While she was a replica of the Prophet (a.s)
in her looks and personality, she was also a reflection of his qualities
of head and heart. When she walked, it felt as if the Prophet (a.s) was
walking. When she spoke, she modulated the words the same way as her
father did. She achieved such heights in learning that the Prophet (a.s)
gave her the titles of *\`adilat maryam* (the equivalent of Mary) and
*sayyidat nisa’ al-\`alamin* (the Doyenne of the women of the world).
Whenever she came to the presence of the Prophet (a.s), he used to stand
up in respect. \`A’ishah says:

###### “Whenever Fatimah came to The Prophet (a.s), he used to stand up, kiss her, welcome her and guide her with his own hands to sit on his carpet.”[1]

After arrival in al-Madinah, Lady Fatimah attained the age of maturity.
At this time, the elite of Quraysh and other important persons sent in
proposals for her hand in marriage. One person was very proud of his
wealth. He offered excessive dowry if the Prophet (a.s) acceded to his
request for marriage with his daughter. The Prophet (a.s) turned away
his face when this proposal was mooted before him. He told some other
persons, “Fatimah’s matter is in the hands of Allah! He will fix a match
for her!” When none of the proposals received the assent of the Prophet
(a.s), some of the Companions asked \`Ali (a.s) to stake his claim. They
said that there is no reason that he proposed and got a refusal from the
Prophet (a.s). He said that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Hakim, Vol 3, Page 160

he felt shy to make the proposal to the Prophet (a.s). When those
persons insisted, he promised to moot the subject with the Prophet (a.s)
at an appropriate time. Therefore, one day after completing the
important tasks, he went to the presence of the Prophet (a.s) and sat
quietly in a corner. When he saw him sitting quietly, the Prophet (a.s)
understood that he wished to make some important request. He said,
“\`Ali! Do you wish to say something?” He replied, “Yes!” The Prophet
(a.s) asked, “Then! Tell me!” A blush crossed the face of \`Ali (a.s).
He kept his eyes down and said in low tone, “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)!
You have brought me up from my childhood. And your kindnesses on me were
more than those of my own parents! Now I am approaching you for more
kindnesses!” The Prophet (a.s) understood the intent of \`Ali (a.s) and
happiness reflected from his face. He asked \`Ali (a.s) to wait for
sometime and went to the inner chamber of his house. He asked Fatimah
al-Zahra’, “My daughter! \`Ali (a.s) has made a proposal for your hand.
What is your opinion about it?” Fatimah al-Zahra’ sat with her head
bowed down and did not reply. The Prophet (a.s) said, “Quietness is
acceptance!” he came out with a smiling face and told \`Ali (a.s) that
the proposal for marriage with his daughter was accepted. He asked \`Ali
(a.s) to arrange money for the dowry. \`Ali (a.s) said, “O Prophet of
Allah (a.s)! Except for armor, a sword, and a camel, I have nothing
else!” The Prophet (a.s) said, “Keep the camel and the sword with you
and sell the armor to raise the money for dowry and other expenses.”
\`Ali (a.s) sold the armor to \`Uthman for a consideration of four
hundred and eighty dirhams and presented it to the Prophet as the dowry.
He gave some dirhams from that money to Abū-Bakr and asked \`Ammar ibn
Yasir and some other companions to accompany him and buy the household
utensils etc from the bazaar. He gave some dirhams to Bilal to buy
perfumes etc.

It was the month of Dhul-Qa\`dah of 2 A.H. In the al-Masjid al-Nabawi
(the Holy Prophet’s Mosque) the group to witness the Marriage Covenant
between the bride (Fatimah al-Zahra’) and the groom (\`Ali) had
assembled. The Companions of the Prophet (a.s) were there in numbers.
The Prophet (a.s) delivered the Sermon. It was a speech of erudition and
knowledge. The covenanting parties gave their assent. Then this happy
occasion was concluded with a prayer by the Prophet (a.s) for the
couples’ happiness and prosperity. In the month of Dhul-Hijjah 2 A.H.,
the bride shifted to the residence of the groom. The Prophet (a.s) got
together the Wedding Reception.

He ordered meat and bread and the groom, \`Ali (a.s), arranged for
cooking oil and dates. The reception was an open house for all the
inhabitants in al-Madinah. All the Muhajirūn and the Ansar attended the
reception. All the guests ate to their fill. After service of the
dinner, lot of food remained. One portion of the food was reserved for
\`Ali (a.s) and Fatimah. Food was also sent to the homes of the
Prophet’s wives.

The dowry that was given to the daughter of the Prophet (a.s) and the
richest lady of Arabia, Khadijah, consisted of the following:

###### One dress  
 One Scarf  
 One Black Headgear from Khaybar  
 One cot knit with date fiber  
 Two mattresses-one filled with wool and the other with date fiber  
 Four pillows made of Ta’if Leather  
 One mat  
 One curtain of silk and cotton waste  
 One millstone  
 One small pitcher of bronze  
 One big water-skin  
 One pot  
 One big tumbler  
 One spouted Jug  
 Some small earthen bowls

The approximate total cost of all these things was about eighty dirhams.

When the Prophet (a.s) saw his daughter’s dowry, he had tears in his
eyes. He looked at the materials, lifted his head towards the sky and
said:

###### “O Allah! Give them prosperity whose utensils are mostly earthen.”

When dusk was around, and the shadows darkened, the Prophet (a.s) helped
Lady Fatimah (a.s) mount the mule, al-shahba’, and the atmosphere of
al-Madinah reverberated with the calls of “allahu-akbar”. From every
side came sounds of prayers. The women of Ansar and Muhajirūn
accompanied the wedding procession singing. Salman al-Farisi was holding
the reins of the

mule and walked in front of it. The Prophet (a.s) and all the men of
Banū-Hashim carried unsheathed swords in their hands. The procession
went round the Prophet’s Mosque and reached its destination. The Prophet
(a.s) took the hand of his daughter in his hand and put it in the hand
of the groom, \`Ali (a.s) and said:

###### “\`Ali! May the daughter of the Prophet (a.s) be auspicious for you!”

The Prophet (a.s) then called for a tumbler of water, took a mouthful of
the water in his mouth, put it back in the tumbler and then sprinkled
the water from the tumbler on the chests of \`Ali (a.s) and Fatimah.
Then he said:

###### O Allah! Give prosperity to both of them! Give prosperity to their progeny as well![1]

After giving his blessings, when the Prophet (a.s) entered the home of
\`Ali (a.s) and Fatimah, he again prayed for their happiness and
prosperity! Seeing the daughter of Khadijah settle in her new home, the
Prophet (a.s) returned home happily!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isābah, Vol 4, Page 366
