Birthplace and Origin
=====================

Arabia is situated in the south west of the Continent of Asia. It is the
biggest peninsula in the world. In the north, it has Syria; in the west
are the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, in the south flow the azure blue
waters of the Indian Ocean. The coastal area of the Red Sea is a barren
desert. Away from the coast, there are dry mountains, desert dunes and
sandy stretches merging into the horizon. This desert land is called the
Hijaz. This area has no agriculture whatsoever nor are there any means
of irrigation for crops to grow. If there is any rain, the water runs
away into the valleys of the barren mountains or it is accumulated in
the low-lying ditches. For miles and miles there will be no trace of
water in the desert. In such a parched area where there are vast
stretches of desert land and barren mountains, the likelihood of
commercial activity and habitation are naturally sparse. However on the
periphery of Ka\`bah the \`Amaliqah (the giants) used to live a nomadic
life. These nomads had no permanent habitation and the search for
sustenance and water used to take them from place to place in the
desert. Wherever they found some water and greenery, they would set
their camps. When the water and the pasture for their animals were
exhausted, they would move in search for new source of water.

In the Batha’ Valley of this vast desert habitation started with the
progeny of Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) (a.s). Ibrahim (a.s) was born in
Babylon one thousand and eighty one years after the Deluge of Noah
(a.s). He lost his father during his early childhood and was brought up
by his uncle who was known as Azar. Azar means the chief keeper of the
temple. This word was later changed to Azar. Ibrahim (a.s) had his
upbringing in an environment where idols were carved and worshipped.
They also used to worship the sun, moon and the stars. The statue of the
ruler of the time used to be revered and worshipped. In such depraved
surroundings, Ibrahim (a.s) never had any wish for idol worship. To the
contrary, he was against idol worship from his very childhood. He was
very critical of the ways of his people and always invited them to
worship one and only God. However, the people never paid any heed to his
preaching. They continued thinking that all their affairs were
controlled

by their lifeless idols! When Ibrahim (a.s) felt that his people were
incorrigibly adamant in their false beliefs, he thought of giving them a
proof of the abject helplessness of the idols. For this, he waited for
an opportune moment. The opportunity came when the inhabitants assembled
in the wilderness for celebration of a festival and there was not a
single soul in the town. He headed for the temple and broke the biggest
idol and many smaller ones. He left the hatchet used for breaking the
idols near the neck of the biggest idol. When the people returned to the
town, they found that the temple was in utter disarray and the pieces of
the broken idols scattered all around. They looked at each other in
disbelief and then said that this would be the doing of Ibrahim (a.s)
who always talked against the idols. They called Ibrahim (a.s) aside and
asked him if he had caused the damage? He replied:

### قَالَ بَلْ فَعَلَهُ كَبِيرُهُمْ هَذَا فَاسْأَلُوهُمْ إِنْ كَانُوا يَنطِقُونَ {style="direction:rtl"}

#### This is the doing of their biggest idol. If they have the power of speech, do ask them! (21:63)

When the people heard Ibrahim (a.s) say the impossible thing, they said,
“O Ibrahim (a.s)! Have the idols ever spoken?” He replied, “How could
those who cannot even speak and defend themselves be of any help to
anyone. You consider them your gods and bow to them!” The belief of the
idolatrous people was that the idols bring the rains; they help in
growing the crops, and give them the means of sustenance and protect
them against calamities. Now they found the very idols helplessly
shattered. They brooded over the matter and then presented Ibrahim (a.s)
at the court of Nimrod. He asked Ibrahim (a.s),” How you dared to harm
the idols? Pride has gone so much to your head that you have challenged
my divine authority! “Ibrahim (a.s) replied, “What are your idols? They
are the handiwork of human sculptors. They are weaker than the weakest
creatures! Then how do you expect me to accept you as a god when you
have no authority over your own life and death! “Nimrod was furious
hearing these words from Ibrahim (a.s). His own uncle threatened Ibrahim
(a.s) to crush him with the stones. Nimrod ordered Ibrahim (a.s) to be
burnt on a pyre. For this purpose a big pyre was lighted. When the
flames rose high, Ibrahim (a.s) was thrown into the fire. Not a single
hair of his was burnt. It was as if the pyre was a blooming garden.
Seeing this miracle, Nimrod was dumb-founded! But his flame of revenge
was not extinguished. He ordered Ibrahim’s assets to be confiscated and
exiled him from the kingdom. When Ibrahim (a.s) heard this decree, he
said, “You have no right to confiscate my animals and belongings!”
Nimrod said, “You have acquired

these things living in my realm!” Ibrahim rejoined, “Then, return to me
the years that I have spent living in your city and take my belongings!”
Nimrod had no reply for this argument. He ordered that his belongings
may not be confiscated but he must be banished forthwith.

Ibrahim (a.s) left Babylon along with his spouse Sarah and nephew Lot
(a.s)). Passing through Aleppo and Damascus this small group reached
Palestine which, in those days, was called Kan\`an. In Palestine, his
abode was eleven miles away from Jerusalem. The locality is known as
Hebron. Ibrahim (a.s) stayed here for sometime and then proceeded to
Egypt to preach the people about the Unity of Allah. When the king of
Egypt, Raqyūn, saw the pretty Sarah, evil intentions passed through his
mind. When he stretched his hand towards her, it instantly was
paralyzed. Raqyūn repented his action and begged for Ibrahim’s pardon.
He gave valuable gifts to the group and presented a slave girl, Hajar,
to Ibrahim (a.s). This girl later on became the consort of Ibrahim
(a.s). The historian al-tabari writes that Hajar was the daughter of
\`Alwan ibn Sinan, the Pharaoh of Egypt. Ibrahim (a.s) returned to
Hebron to make it his permanent place of residence. He prayed to Allah
to give him off springs that could help him advance his Mission. His
prayers were answered and, at the age of eighty-six, he was blessed with
his first son Isma\`il (a.s) through Hajar. After sometime, Sarah too
gave birth to Ishaq (a.s).

When Sarah presented a son to Ibrahim (a.s) she insisted that he should
move away Hajar and Isma\`il (a.s) from Hebron. Ibrahim (a.s) agreed and
traveled with Hajar and Isma\`il (a.s). With Divine Guidance, they
reached a desolate place in the wilderness of Hijaz. Although the place
was devoid of any human presence, Allah had earmarked it for the
location of the Umm al-Qura—the mother of towns. Therefore, with the
hands of Ibrahim (a.s), the foundation of habitation at the Holy Place
was laid. He left Isma\`il (a.s) and Hajar there. Ibrahim (a.s) had made
a promise to Sara, while departing from Hebron, that he would settle
Hajar and Isma\`il (a.s) at a safe place and return to her. Therefore,
he left them in the trust of Allah and started on his return journey
with a heavy heart that he was leaving behind his beloved son and the
faithful wife. When he reached the Mount Kada at some distance, he
glanced back at Hajar and Isma\`il (a.s) and prayed to Allah:

### رَبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنتُ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ عِنْدَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ فَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مِنْ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ وَارْزُقْهُمْ مِنْ الثَّمَرَاتِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَشْكُرُونَ. {style="direction: rtl"}

#### “O Sustainer! Near Your Holy Abode, where nothing grows, I have settled my progeny. O Our Provider! When my progeny establish Prayer, turn the hearts of people towards them and bestow them with sustenance of fruits that they are grateful to You. (14:27)”

Although Ibrahim (a.s) had faith in Allah’s Beneficence, this prayer
gave satisfaction to his heart. He then took the way back to Hebron.
Hajar made a canopy of the sheet of cloth and sat under it with little
Isma\`il (a.s). Although it was quiet all around, the courageous lady
was not scared at all. She had absolute trust in Allah. She had with her
only one pitcher of water that was exhausted in a day or two. Now she
worried about water. As the sun progressed on its journey, the intensity
of thirst increased. She became restless looking at the parched face of
the baby. She started searching for water in the environs. She climbed
over the peaks of Safa and Marwah and made seven trips between the two
peaks. When she came back very exhausted, Hajar noticed water oozing
from the pebbles of sand. She removed the pebbles and stones from the
spot and a spring of sweet and cool water spurted out. Hajar’s happiness
knew no bounds. She uttered, “Zam-Zam!” This word in the Hebrew language
means, “Stay put!” This thus has become the name of the spring. Hajar
quenched the thirst of her baby and herself with the cool water and then
erected a parapet around the place with stones gathered from the
surroundings so that it served as a cistern for the water. Looking at
the water, birds started hovering around the place. In no time, there
were signs of life in the desolate wilderness.

At that time a caravan of Banū-Jarham of Yemen passed that way, going to
Syria. When they noticed groups of birds in the horizon of the valley,
they were surprised. They wondered what the birds had to do in the
desolate, waterless desert. When the caravan descended from the heights
of the mountain, they noticed a lady sitting with her bowed head and
having a baby on her lap. Nearby they saw a spring of water. Finding the
spring there, they asked the permission of Hajar if they could settle
down in the neighborhood. Hajar was agreeable to their inhabiting the
area, but she told them that without the consent of Ibrahim (a.s) she
had no authority to give such a permission to them. She asked them to
wait until Ibrahim (a.s) came back and made a decision about their
request. When Ibrahim (a.s) arrived there, as promised, Hajar obtained
his consent and allowed Banū-Jarham to make a settlement there. Thus, a
small colony of shacks was the first community of inhabitants there.

Ibrahim (a.s), with Allah’s Wish, commenced construction of the Holy
Ka\`bah in that wilderness. Isma\`il (a.s) helped his father in this
work. He carried stones on his shoulders to the site and Ibrahim (a.s)
sorted out the stones to erect the walls of the structure. Thus the team
of father and son accomplished the construction of the Ka\`bah. It was
the result of their sincerity and dedication that very soon Ka\`bah got
the status of the most revered place of pilgrimage in the entire Arabian
Peninsula. People started heading for the Ka\`bah from all directions.
The population of the place thus increased by leaps and bounds. It
became a bustling habitation in the heart of Peninsular Arabia and
became known by the name of Bakkah. This is its original name and Zabūr
(the Psalms of David) too refers to the place as Bakkah. In the Holy
Qur’an too, it is termed as Bakkah when the Book mentions about the
event of its construction:

### إِنَّ أَوَّلَ بَيْتٍ وُضِعَ لِلنَّاسِ لَلَّذِي بِبَكَّةَ مُبَارَكًا وَهُدًى لِلْعَالَمِينَ.

#### “The First House that was made for the people is in Bakkah which is felicitous (place) and a source of inspiration for the worlds. (3:96)”

The other name of Bakkah which is in vogue is Makkah al-Mukarramah (the
Honored Makkah). Al-Dahhak says that the ‘ba’ (B letter) of Bakkah has
been replaced with ‘mim’ (M letter). He says that both are the names of
the same place. Some traditions mention that the place where the Ka\`bah
is located is Bakkah and the habitation around it is Makkah. There are
several versions about the naming of the place but those that have been
authenticated by the Infallible Ahl-al-Bayt are that the word Bakkah has
its root in the word ‘Buka'’ that means lamentation. The reason for
giving this name to the place is that whenever the Arabs from all over
assembled there, they lamented and wailed loudly. Therefore, Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s) has said:

###### Makkah has been named Bakkah that people used to assemble there and do lamenting and wailing.[1]

Mujahid too had a similar opinion. He says:

###### Makkah was termed as Bakkah because men and women used to assemble there and wail. [2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ilal al-Sharā’i\`.  
 **[2]** Al-Durr al-Manthūr Vol 2, Page 52.

And Makkah is derived from the word ‘Muka'’ that means shouting and
whistling. Therefore, Imam al-Rida (a.s) says:

Makkah is called Makkah because people there shout and cry.[1]

This shouting and wailing too was considered as a sort of worship by the
people there. Therefore, Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

### وَمَا كَانَ صَلاتُهُمْ عِنْدَ الْبَيْتِ إِلاَّ مُكَاءً وَتَصْدِيَةً.

#### Near the Ka\`bah their worship was whistling and clapping of hands. (8:35)

In the Holy Qur’an the city of Makkah is also mentioned as Umm-al-Qura.
The real meaning of the word Umm is origin or foundation. One reason for
terming Makkah as Umm-al-Qura is that a spate of human population
originated from here and spread far and wide in the world. Therefore,
when Isma\`il (a.s) married the daughter of Mazzaz ibn \`Amr, the chief
of the tribe of Banū-Jarham, his progeny prospered and spread soon into
Tehama, Najd and Hijaz and as far as Palestine and Yemen. They also
established settlements in other parts of the world. This holy land,
besides being the foundation of human settlements also is the center for
the Faith and Guidance of the humankind. On this very land, the First
House of Allah was constructed. The Message of Islam too was first given
from these environs. The call for Tawhid (The Unity of Allah) was given
from here and the foundation for the Last and Ultimate Faith of Allah
has been laid here. The Revelation of the Holy Qur’an too started in
Makkah. The Prophet of Islam was born here and his radiance spread far
and wide. It is here that \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib was born in the Holy
precincts of the Ka\`bah. In Makkah, he spent his years from childhood
to early youth.

It is a fact that different places in the world have effect on the life
in consonance with the geographic location and the climate. Therefore,
what thrives in one place generally does not in another clime.
Similarly, the land in the same area has stretches that have different
types of soil. Therefore, when something is grown on a fertile soil, it
thrives. If the same crop is on an infertile piece of land, it will
wither. The plants growing on soft soils are generally weak. The shrubs
growing on rocky soils are hardy. The reason for this is that the roots
of the plants growing on desert soils have to penetrate deep to draw the
moisture from there. Therefore, Nature has provided these

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ilal al-Sharaa’i’.

plants the strength to contend with the harsh environment. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) has also made an observation about such desert soils:

###### Remember the timber of the trees in the wilderness is strong and the bark of fresh and fleshy plants is weak and puny. The wood from the trees growing in the wild burns well and the fire lasts longer.[1]

Similarly, the soil, the climate and the environment of a place have
marked effect on the mental and physical built of the people there. The
place of birth influences the character and habits of the people there.
When there is a change of environment from the wilderness to urban
conglomerates, then they slowly mould themselves towards adoption of the
new ways.

If we take stock of the inhabitants of the hot desert lands, we find
that they are more frugal, chivalrous and hard working than those living
in more comfortable and salubrious climes. In the deserts, people have
to contend with harsh situations. Therefore, they have the capability to
face these difficulties.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had the faculty of physical strength and
equanimity of nature endowed by Allah in abundant measure. Even on human
consideration too, the harsh desert environment too was responsible for
his great faculty of resilience…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah.
