Construction of the Mosque and Sealing of the Doors
===================================================

The Prophet (a.s), until after six months after his arrival in
al-Madinah, stayed at the home of Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari. During this
period neither there was any specific place for congregational prayers
nor a permanent place of residence for him. He felt is necessary to
construct the mosque along with a house for the family. There was a
vacant piece of land near the house of Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari where some
animals used to be penned. The Prophet (a.s) liked this land for
building the mosque. The land belonged to the people of Banū-al-Najjar
from which family \`Abd al-Muttalib’s mother came. The Prophet (a.s)
wanted to buy away the land but the owners refused to accept any money
for it and said that instead of material value they would prefer to get
Reward from Allah. The Prophet (a.s) did not like to take the land
without cost because it belonged to two orphans whose names were Sahl
and Suhayl and were under the guardianship of Asad ibn Zurarah. The
Prophet (a.s) bought the land through Asad, got it leveled and started
the construction of the mosque on it, which was ready in the shape of a
four walled enclosure in a few days. Then, putting on wooden pillars and
thatch, one part of the enclosure was covered to provide shade from the
sun. On one side of the mosque, rooms were built for the ladies, which
were increased later on as the need arose. In the middle of these rooms
the house of \`Ali (a.s) was constructed. The Muhajirūn coming from
Makkah too started building their quarters on the other periphery of the
mosque. They had doors opening towards the mosque and they used to enter
the precincts through these doors. The Prophet (a.s) thought that this
arrangement was not proper for the sanctity of the mosque and ordered
that the doors opening into the mosque be sealed and the houses to have
doors at the back. He wanted them to enter the mosque only through the
main door. He permitted only the door of \`Ali’s house to open towards
the mosque. Al-Tirmidhi writes:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) ordered that except the door of \`Ali’s house all other doors to be sealed.”[1]

Some persons did not like this arrangement. Certain brows frowned, some
mouths opened and the gossip mill started working. The Prophet (a.s)
heard about the feelings of the companions. He therefore gathered them
and said:

###### “Neither have I neither sealed your door nor Have allowed \`Ali’s door to Remain open. It is Allah Who has Ordered sealing of your doors and Leaving \`Ali’s door open.”[2]

Certain relatives of the Prophet (a.s) too wished that the doors of
their homes opened towards the mosque, therefore they complained that
showing partiality towards \`Ali (a.s) he had allowed him this privilege
and refused them the facility. He said:

###### “Neither have I sent you out nor did I allow \`Ali (a.s) to stay. It is Allah who has kept you out and \`Ali (a.s) to stay in.”[3]

\`Umar too considered this a singular privilege for \`Ali (a.s) and used
to say:

###### “\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib enjoyed three such special privileges that if I got even one, it would have meant to me more than owning red haired camels.” When asked what these privileges were, He said: “The first was that he was married to Fatimah bint Muhammad (a.s); secondly, he had the honor of residing inside the mosque with the Prophet (a.s), and thus the matters that were legitimate for the Prophet (a.s) became legitimate for him, and Thirdly, He was given the Standard on The Day of Khaybar!”[4]

Ibrahim al-Hamawayni writes in Fara’id al-Simtayn that at least thirty
companions have talked about the tradition of Fath al-Bab (The Opening
of the Door) and termed it as a singular privilege for Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s). In the school of Ahl al-Sunnah, while this tradition is certainly
quoted, they also mention that the Prophet (a.s) had said

###### “Barring the window of the house of Abū-Bakr, no other window was open towards the mosque.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh Al-Tirmidhī, Vol 2, Page 214  
 **[2]** Khasā’is al-Nassā’ī, Page 37  
 **[3]** Mustadrak Hakim, Vol 3, Page 117  
 **[4]** Mustadrak Hakim, Vol 3, Page 125

When there was no chance of refuting the first narration, they tried to
connect the two versions saying that the first event happened in the
first year of Hegira and the second happened during the last days of the
Prophet (a.s) This means that when the Prophet (a.s) ordered the sealing
of the doors all openings were sealed except that of \`Ali’s house. But
when the time for the departure of the Prophet (a.s) was nigh, he
ordered Abū-Bakr’s window to remain open towards the mosque and ordered
all other windows sealed. This way they thought that a similarity had
been established between the two events. But the effectiveness of the
similarities of events will be in the event of their weight on the scale
of dirayah. The second narration is weak according to dirayah because
Abū-Bakr’s house was not on the periphery of the mosque since after
migration he first lived with Banū-Abd \`Awf and then he built his house
outside al-Madinah in a village, Sakh, about a mile from the mosque. He
used to visit the Prophet (a.s) during his illness from there only.
Therefore, the historian al-tabari has written that on the day of the
death of the Prophet, Abū-Bakr came to al-Madinah and inquired about his
condition:

###### “When he was assured that There was some diminution in the pain suffered by the Prophet (a.s), He (Abū-Bakr) went satisfied to his home in Sakh.”[1]

It is surprising that Abū-Bakr used to live in Sakh and was not in
al-Madinah at the time of the demise of the Prophet (a.s), nor did he
have any house adjacent to the mosque, then from where and how that
‘window’ was installed to remain installed and all other windows were
ordered shut! Remember, these were the last days of the Prophet (a.s)
and in his extreme illness, according to Al-Tirmidhi, three days before
his death he orders all windows opening towards al-Masjid al-Nabawi
sealed and Abū-Bakr’s window to remain in its place! If we analyze this
narration, the order was issued on Friday or Saturday and the Prophet
(a.s) demised on Monday. This means that this event happened after the
Event of Qirtas, that took place on the Friday before the Prophet’s
demise when the COMPANIONS raised hue and cry that he was seriously ill
and pen and paper must not be brought to him that he was not in full
control of his senses! But the later, ostensible, order about the WINDOW
they sheepishly accept, if ever it was issued, and implemented!

This narrative, being against all norms of dirayah, is constructively
wrong that in one version it talks about khawkhah (window) and in others
as bab (door). The meaning of the narrative becomes different with the
use of these

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol 2, Page 420

two different words and thus the narrative is unreliable. If instead of
window, we accept the word door, the two events cannot be coordinated.
Because in the earlier event all the doors opening towards the mosque
were ordered closed excepting that of the house of \`Ali (a.s) that
continued to remain open. In the second, ostensible, event, when there
was no other door opening towards the mosque, then how could they be
sealed and the door of Abū-Bakr’s (nonexistent) house to continue to
have the door opening towards the Mosque! The purpose for the concoction
of this story seems that when, even \`Umar recognized the opening of
\`Ali’s door towards the Mosque as a singular privilege, they made a
weak attempt to devise a story to establish the same privilege for
Abū-Bakr!

It is imperative to consider that what was the reason for leaving the
door of \`Ali (a.s) open towards the mosque and ordering all others
sealed. It is apparent that the main purpose must have been to preserve
the sanctity of the precincts. The doors of the Companions were opening
towards the mosque and they used to enter through those doors in all
conditions of cleanliness or otherwise. This was ultra vires the
sanctity of the place. The Prophet (a.s) therefore ordered all the doors
opening into the mosque to be sealed excepting that of \`Ali’s house.
The reason for this exception was that \`Ali (a.s) was chaste, pure, and
was free of all apparent impurities. Therefore, no conditions were
imposed on his entry to the mosque, as was the case of the Prophet
(a.s). Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) said:

###### “O \`Ali! None other than you and me is permitted to enter his mosque in the state of apparent impurity”[1]

On account of this purity and chastity, \`Ali’s door was kept open
towards the mosque and all others were ordered sealed. As the homes of
Mūsa (a.s) and Harūn (a.s) were accepted as mosques, the house of the
prophet (a.s) and his Vicegerent (a.s) too had the same sanctity.
Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) said:

###### “Allah ordered Mūsa (a.s) that he build a pure and clean Mosque and none else, other than Mūsa (a.s) and Harūn (a.s), should reside in that. Allah ordered me to build a pure and clean mosque wherein only me, \`Ali (a.s) and his two sons, And none else, should reside.”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mishkāt, Page 564  
 **[2]** Khasā’is, Suyūtī, Page 243

When this privilege was reserved only for the Prophet (a.s), \`Ali (a.s)
and his Chaste sons (a.s), no question arises of allowing the door or
window of any other person opening into the mosque. If it was the Divine
will to give the same status to Abū-Bakr, he would have been allowed to
keep the door open in the first instance only! When he was not eligible
for such a privilege, what was the question of his having a door or
window opening in that direction! Another question about the narrative
is that the word khawkhah does not mean a window. At best, it can be
translated as ‘a ventilator’. It is written in the al-Fayrūzabadi’s
Arabic-Arabic Dictionary, “a hole that allows light into a house.” The
ventilators cannot be used for entering or leaving a house and they are
located on the walls almost at the roof level! When it is impossible to
enter or exit the house through the khawkhah, then what privilege ouch a
contraption would provide to Abū-Bakr!
