The Prophet’s Expeditions
=========================

A ghazwah is a war or a battle in which the Prophet (a.s) himself
participated. After the Annunciation, the Prophet (a.s) bore the
hardships inflicted by the infidels of Makkah for thirteen long years.
When he moved from Makkah to al-Madinah, he did not have any thought of
wreaking revenge on the infidels and polytheists. But the Quraysh were
working under the shame of defeat and failure and were very upset over
the Prophet (a.s) escaping unscathed from Makkah. After rendering the
Muslims of Makkah homeless, they were planning strategies to destroy
Islam and finish the Movement once for all! They started putting
together all their evil powers to achieve their ends. The Prophet (a.s)
who had peacefully tried to propagate his Faith in Makkah and had struck
agreements of peace with the Jewish Tribes of al-Madinah, wished that no
opportunity arose for wars with the Quraysh that would mean unnecessary
shedding of innocent blood. But the Quraysh wanted to destroy the peace
and tranquility of the Muslims in al-Madinah by imposing wars over their
heads. The Prophet (a.s) was left with no other choice than fighting in
self-defense. Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) made no mention of waging
wars and did not give permission to his men to take any precipitate
action until the Quraysh and the Jews forced any such eventuality. Allah
had given assent for jihad when the activities of the infidels crossed
all limits of decency. Therefore, Allah says in the Holy Book:

###### “Those (the Muslims) against whom the Infidels fight, too have permission to battle, because hardships were inflicted on them, and Allah has the power to help them.

The fact is not hidden that the Infidels first forced the Muslims out of
their homeland and attacked their homes to annihilate them. In these
circumstances if war was not declared against them, their very existence
would have been in jeopardy. No doubt, Islam is the custodian of peace
and tranquility, but it does not mean that it wants people to stoically
face all the tyrannies endlessly. The Muslims had to exercise their
right to fight for their own safety and tranquility. In the
circumstances, they were left with no other choice than rising to the
occasion and preparing to combat the enemy. If war is an

abhorrent activity, the responsibility for the consequences rests on the
shoulders of the aggressors. One who clashes with the enemy in
self-defense can never be blamed for the consequences of the conflict.

The word ‘Islam’ has its root in the word ‘Salamah’ that means ‘Peace’.
It is evident from the very name that the Religion, of Islam, stands for
peace and tranquility. It shows that Islam is opposed to bloodshed and
conflict. Islam makes no difference of race and color and is opposed to
any forced annexation of territory. It permits war only in two
situations: the first is when the enemy wages a war of aggression and
attacks Muslims and without warfare there is no way of protecting the
lives and property of the Muslims. Secondly, if there is positive
evidence of the enemy making warlike preparations and any neglect might
cause irreparable damage to lives and properties of the Muslims. In both
circumstances, when waging war became unavoidable, the Prophet (a.s)
gave his assent for it. The Muslims clashed with the Infidels once at
the wells of Badr then at the foot of the hills at Uhud. Sometimes they
defended themselves from within the bounds of al-Madinah. All these
theatres of war were geographically close to the Dar al-Islam,
al-Madinah and very far from the Dar al-Kufr of those days, Makkah. This
proves that all these campaigns by the Muslims were solely in
self-defense. If Muslims had aggressive designs, these battles would
have been fought nearer the homes of the Infidels! They were all the
preemptive and planned attacks of the Infidel Enemy! Only the Battle of
Khaybar was fought away from the Islamic Base and closer to the
stronghold of the Jews. But the truth is that they were exiled from
al-Madinah for intriguing against the Muslims and raising men and
materials to wage a war against them. If the Prophet (a.s) had not
initiated preemptive action, they were about to attack al-Madinah with
immense power of men and materials.

Although Islam has given permission of waging wars in unavoidable
circumstances, there are strict norms about the various stages like the
outbreak, the action in the actual theater and the aftermath of the
wars! At every stage, they have to keep in mind the ultimate aim of
peace and tranquility. Before any warlike activity, they have to invite
the opponents to Islam or Peace! The opponents must be informed that the
purpose of the conflict is not shedding unnecessary blood and causing
loss of property and making slaves and prisoners out of children, women
and men. Islam also prohibits harming women, children and maimed and
injured men. Therefore, in the Battle of Hunayn, when Khalid ibn
al-Walid killed a woman, the Prophet (a.s) expressed his disapproval of
the act and ordered him not to

commit any such act in the future. Once talking to the troops, the
Prophet (a.s) said that they must take care to see that the women and
children of the infidels were not harmed during the war. Someone said
that they were the children of the polytheists and they deserve to be
killed. The Prophet (a.s) said,” Are not many of you good persons not
the offspring of the infidels?” Islam never permits causing obstruction
to the flow of essentials like food and water even for the troops of the
enemy. It also bans destruction of enemy property like gardens, farms
and buildings. Similarly, it abhors sadistic severing of the body parts
of the fallen enemies. This was one of the heinous practices of the Days
of Ignorance in Arabia. Islam abolished this nefarious practice! Islam
also laid down norms for the treatment of the prisoners of war. It also
established norms for collecting reparations (fidyah) and releasing them
honorably. If circumstances required keeping them under detention, norms
were there for their proper treatment during the incarceration. Even if
they were to be kept as slaves, the treatment had to be very humane.

It cannot be denied that after the Prophet of Islam (a.s), Muslims had
waged some wars of aggression and expansion when the norms of jihad were
overlooked. While one group championed the acts of terror and
suppression as their right, they thought that victory, wealth and pelf
acquired through such wars was Rightful! But Islam neither approves of
such wars nor is it responsible for such atrocious acts! Islam has
declared in clear terms: “There is no aggression in the Faith!” All the
Verses that have been revealed in the Holy Qur’an concerning jihad are
about the circumstances when the enemy forcefully tries to suppress and
crush the Muslims. Islam neither permits aggressive warlike initiatives
nor does it allow forcing its thoughts on others cruelly. The
responsibility of the wars is always on the kings and emperors who, for
self-aggrandizement and craving for wealth, plundered innocent peoples
and caused untold hardship to huge human populations. These acts gave an
opportunity to some people to blame Islam that it was spread with the
strength of the sword!

After these introductory sentences, we shall describe the ghazawat that
were fought by the Prophet (a.s) that highlight the defensive aspect of
these battles and at the same time illustrate the prowess and valor of
the Standard Bearer of Islam and the Victor of the Battles, \`Ali
(a.s).He set such high standards in his conduct of the warfare that he
never chased a combatant running away from the theatre, he never harmed
women and children, never killed an injured opponent and never stripped
an enemy as was the practice during the battles of those times!
