The Expedition of Badr
======================

The Quraysh who had already become the deadly enemies of the Muslims of
Makkah, after the Migration the Ansar of al-Madinah too had become
abhorrent for them. Their crime was that they came to the help of the
Prophet (a.s), gave him succor and shelter. The Faith that the Quraysh
did not like flourishing in their own domain, was finding roots in
Yathrib. How could they bear to see it prosper and grow there and
elsewhere? They determined that to safeguard their cultural and
traditional heritage, they would not allow this new Faith to establish
and spread. They resolved to fight with the Muslims until they were
totally obliterated from the face of the Earth or they recant from the
new Faith and revert to the old ways! Therefore, describing their plans,
the Holy Qur’an says:

### وَلا يَزَالُونَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ حَتَّى يَرُدُّوكُمْ عَنْ دِينِكُمْ إِنْ اسْتَطَاعُوا

#### “These infidels will always fight with you, until, if they can, make you turn away from your Faith. (2:217)”

Although the Jews of al-Madinah had made a covenant of peace with the
Prophet of Islam (a.s) on his arrival, that they would support the cause
if an attack was made by the infidels on al-Madinah, but they were very
concerned with the increasing popularity and power of the Muslims as a
threat for their own safety. They therefore established surreptitious
contacts with the Quraysh and tried to form a joint front against the
Muslims. To give vent to mischief, Karz ibn Jabir al-Fahri was made to
attack the pastures of al-Madinah and chase away the flocks of animals
with him. The Prophet (a.s) chased him until the valley of Safwan but
could not catch him. Now he appointed \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh to keep an
eye on such events. He went with a few companions to Naqlah, which is a
place between Makkah and Ta’if. When they reached Naqlah, a small group
of Quraysh businessmen was halting there on their return from Ta’if. One
of the companions of \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh, Waqqad ibn \`Abdullah
al-Tamimi, shot dead \`Amr ibn al-Hadrami with an arrow. They took
\`Uthman ibn \`Abdullah and al-Hakam ibn Kaysan prisoner along with
their merchandise and returned to al-Madinah. These were

the days of the month of Rajab when fighting and killing are prohibited.
The Prophet (a.s) was very upset with \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh, reprimanded
him, and set the detainees free along with their goods. Although this
was an isolated incident that was committed without the approval of the
Prophet (a.s), the Quraysh saw it as an excuse to prepare for a war.
They started crying about reparations (qisas) for the life of Ibn
al-Hadrami and went ahead in full swing for the preparations for war.
They decided that they would attack al-Madinah as soon as Abū-Sufyan
returned from his business trip to Syria. Abū-Sufyan was to return
through al-Madinah, that was the usual halt for caravans back and forth
Syria. While the people of Makkah were eagerly awaiting Abū-Sufyan’s
return, he sent to them a letter through Zamzam ibn \`Amr al-Ghifari
that the Muslims were planning to attack his caravan near al-Madinah to
plunder his merchandise and that they should reach there post haste with
all preparations for a war. The Quraysh were almost ready and did start
without any loss of time on getting the letter. Now Abū-Sufyan avoided
the normal route and proceeded on his journey along the coast, reached
Jeddah in five days and Makkah in another three days. When the troops of
the Quraysh reached near Badr, they got news that Abū-Sufyan’s caravan
had reached home safely. Some men of Banū-Zahrah said that the caravan
had reached home unmolested and therefore there was no need of fighting
and that they should return home from there. But Abū-Jahl refused to
return home without fighting. With the attitude of Abū-Jahl it is clear
that the intention of bringing the troops was not to protect the caravan
but he wanted to fight a war at any cost. The Banū-Zahrah however
returned home and did not participate in the war.

The story was going the rounds in al-Madinah that Abū-Sufyan’s caravan
was to pass along with lot of merchandize enroot to Makkah from Syria
and that the warlike preparations were in full swing at Makkah to attack
al-Madinah. The Muslims were still unprepared for a war and wanted to
avoid any such eventuality. They were eagerly watching for the arrival
of Abū-Sufyan’s caravan through the normal route that it might not be
difficult for them to overpower that small group and capture large
amount of booty in the bargain. The Qur’an records this in the following
words:

### وَإِذْ يَعِدُكُمْ اللَّهُ إِحْدَى الطَّائِفَتَيْنِ أَنَّهَا لَكُمْ وَتَوَدُّونَ أَنَّ غَيْرَ ذَاتِ الشَّوْكَةِ تَكُونُ لَكُمْ.

#### “When Allah informed you that the Infidels of Makkah will confront you in two groups, you wanted to have the smaller group in your share. (8:7)”

Generally the historians have believed the cohorts of Banū-Umayyah that
the Prophet (a.s) came out with the intention of plundering the caravan
of Abū-Sufyan, but instead of finding the caravan, he came across the
Quraysh troops. It is a pity that the historians have included even the
Prophet (a.s) among the persons who had the thought of plunder and loot
and termed it as the only purpose for the campaign. Therefore, Muhammad
ibn Isma\`il al-Bukhari writes:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) moved out with the idea of getting the Caravan of the Quraysh, and unexpectedly he came across the enemy (troops).”[1]

This stand is contrary to the clarifications made by the Holy Qur’an. It
says about the events of Badr:

### كَمَا أَخْرَجَكَ رَبُّكَ مِنْ بَيْتِكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّ فَرِيقًا مِنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ لَكَارِهُونَ. يُجَادِلُونَكَ فِي الْحَقِّ بَعْدَ مَا تَبَيَّنَ كَأَنَّمَا يُسَاقُونَ إِلَى الْمَوْتِ وَهُمْ يَنظُرُونَ.

#### “As your Sustainer has sent you out of your home with the Truth, when one group of Muslims was talking against the war and on knowing about the Truth was fighting with you as if in front of their eyes they were being pushed towards death. (8:5-6)”

If the move of the Prophet (a.s) were to plunder the Caravan, it would
have been exactly the same way, as some Muslims wanted it. Then there
would have been no reason for them to protest and fight and think that
they were being pushed towards death. They knew it that Abū-Sufyan’s
Caravan had no more than forty persons and the Muslim men totaled over
three hundred. This expression of a group of Muslims was because they
were scared of the large number of the Quraysh Troops. We have to accept
the fact in the light of what the Holy Qur’an says that the Prophet
(a.s) did not move out to plunder the caravan, but to prepare in advance
to meet the onslaught of the Quraysh Army! Therefore, \`Ali (a.s) says:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) used to ask about Badr. When we learned that the Infidels have moved forward, the Prophet (a.s) moved towards Badr. Badr is the name of a well where we reached earlier than the infidel Quraysh”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 3, Page 3  
 **[2]** Tārīkh Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 133

This was the first major war between Islam and infidelity. The Muslims
were poorly equipped and in small numbers as compared with the expected
strength of the enemy. Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) thought it necessary
to take the opinion of the Ansar and Muhajirūn about their willingness
to take on the formidable adversary. People gave different replies to
the queries of the Prophet (a.s). Some were heart breaking and others
very encouraging. It is recorded in the Sahih Muslim that on one of the
replies of Abū-Bakr and \`Umar, the Prophet (a.s) turned away his face.
When al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad saw the signs of concern on the face of the
Prophet (a.s) he said,

###### “O Prophet (a.s)! We are not the Banū-Isra’il who told Mūsa (a.s) ‘You go and your God, and both of you Fight! We shall keep sitting here!’ By Allah! Who has endowed you the Prophethood! We shall fight from your back your right and your left Until Allah gives you Help and Victory”

These words took away the gloom of concern from the face of the Prophet
(a.s) and he offered a prayer for al-Miqdad. Then he turned towards the
Ansar and asked them, what is your opinion?” Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh al-Ansari
told with enthusiasm, “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)! We have absolute Faith
in you and we have vowed to obey you! Therefore, we are with you! If you
jump into the ocean, we shall jump along with you! Nothing can stop us
from keeping your company! Do rise in the name of Allah! Not one person
from us will turn his Back on you!” The Prophet (a.s) was very pleased
with this reply and said:

###### “By Allah! Now I see the spots with my eyes where the Enemies will fall dead!”[1]

The Prophet (a.s) had a small contingent of three hundred and thirteen
men, of whom there were seventy seven Muhajirūn and the rest were the
Ansar. They left al-Madinah and stayed at a little distance from the
Well of Badr. They did have a fear that the enemy might make a surprise
attack by the night. As a precaution he had asked \`Ali (a.s), Sa\`d ibn
Abi-Waqqas and al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam to reconnoiter the location of
the enemy by going a little forward. Surveying the surroundings the
three reached near the well of Badr and spotted some men there. Seeing
them, the other men fled. \`Ali (a.s) chased them and captured two of
the men who were slaves. The companions, seeing them, gathered around
them and asked as to who they were? They said that they were the
watermen of the Quraysh and had gone to the well in search of water.
Hearing the name of the Quraysh, the companions lost their temper and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 140

started beating the men trying to make them reveal that they were not
the slaves of the Quraysh but were the men of Abū-Sufyan. Out of fear
they confessed that they were the men of Abū-Sufyan. The Prophet (a.s)
was busy offering his prayer. After finishing the prayer he said that it
is very strange that they tell the truth, you beat them, and leave them
when they tell a lie. These certainly are the men of the Quraysh. The
Prophet (a.s) himself interrogated them and they revealed that they had
no knowledge about the whereabouts of the Caravan of Abū-Sufyan. They
also said that the Quraysh army was camped about three miles from Badr.
About the numbers, they said they had no correct idea, but every time
they are slaughtering nine to ten camels! The Prophet (a.s) made
estimation from this information that they will be about nine hundred to
one thousand men. Then he asked who the chiefs among them were. The men
told the names of some prominent chiefs of Quraysh. At this, the Prophet
(a.s) said that Makkah had sent forth pieces of its heart for the
campaign!

Hearing about the arrival and location of the Quraysh, the Muslims moved
towards the Well of Badr. The Quraysh army was camping at the periphery
of the valley of Badr on a hillock of sand. They were about a thousand
men and had seven hundred camels and three hundred horses with them.
They had plenty of spears, swords and other implements of war. Against
this, the Muslims were lesser in numbers and very weak in the matter of
materials. They had very few swords and armors. They had seventy camels
and two horses. Where they had camped, the feet were sinking down into
the sand. It was Divine help that it showered hard during the night and
the sand was consolidated. They also collected plenty of drinking water.
With this Divine help, the sagging morale of the Muslims improved! They
all prepared themselves to face the enemy with courage! Ibn al-Athir,
al-tabari and other historians have written about the happenings at the
Battle of Badr that when the Prophet (a.s) arrived at Badr, Sa\`d ibn
Mu\`adh said, “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)! We prepare a thatch with the
leaves of the date palm so that you can sit in its shade! Near the shack
will be in readiness your steed. If we overwhelm the enemy, there is no
problem. In the event of our defeat you can proceed fast to al-Madinah
on the horse! There our men will defend you. If they had known that you
are going out for a battle, they would not have stayed back!” The
Prophet (a.s) prayed for the welfare of Sa\`d and asked him to erect the
shack and stayed in that.

If dirayah is kept in mind while judging the veracity of the narrations,
then this narration cannot be trusted at its face value. It neither is
supported by the events of the Battle of Badr nor is it commensurate
with the character of the prophet (a.s) that the world knows of. First
of all, from where could Sa\`d get so many date palm leaves to be able
to erect a shack in the desert sands. Therefore, Ibn Abil-Hadid writes:

###### “I am very surprised at the matter of the shack. From where did he get sufficient number of date palm leaves to build the shack when in the soil Of Badr no date palms grow?”[1]

If it is said that he had brought them from al-Madinah, it sounds
ridiculous that why he brought so many palm leaves all the way? As such,
the party was short of draught animals and it would be laughable to
carry along the palm leaves from there. Besides this, it has always been
the wont of the Prophet (a.s) that he always wanted to be the same way
as all the others in his party and never accepted any special treatment
for himself. He took active part in the physical work of the
construction of the mosque and in digging the trenches. Also, it was the
need of the leadership that he moved shoulder to shoulder with the
Muslims without seeking or accepting any special treatment! And in the
battles, everything depends on the spirit and the Spiritual Strength of
the commander! Then how could it be imagined that the Prophet (a.s)
instead of joining the ranks of the brave warriors, kept sitting
comfortably in a shack! Not only this, but in the event of defeat the
suggestion that the Prophet (a.s) would have a fast steed waiting for
him near the shack to escape to al-Madinah leaving behind his defeated
companions to the mercy of the enemy! It is the most unimaginable act
that could ever be suggested to the Prophet (a.s)! The events of Badr
are the proof that the Prophet (a.s) spent his time organizing the
troops in formations, arranging the left and the right flanks, and
issued orders from time to time depending on the fast changing
circumstances. He identified the spots where the prominent men from the
ranks of the enemy fell and held the command like an experienced
commander. Al-tabari writes:

###### “On the Day of Badr the Prophet (a.s) was seen chasing the enemies with His unsheathed sword, reciting the Verse ‘Soon the enemy army will face defeat and flee showing their backs!’”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibn Abī-Hadīd, Vol 3, Page 330  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 172

All these affairs cannot be conducted sitting away from his men in a
comfortable shack. For the accomplishment of all these affairs, and
prediction of victory and success, which were certainly according to a
Revelation from Allah, no question arises of making arrangements to flee
in the event of defeat! Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) has thrown light on the
activities of the Prophet (a.s) on the Day of Badr:

###### “When the Day of Badr came, and People assembled, we took shelter under The Prophet (a.s); his majesty was dominating and was in the vicinity of the enemy more than all of us!”[1]

It is evident from this statement that instead of preferring the shack,
or thinking of escape in the event of defeat, the Prophet (a.s) was all
the time controlling the theatre of the war and functioning as a
commander who doe not get any thought of the possible defeat! The last
part of the narrative, where Sa\`d says, “If those who remained back in
al-Madinah had known that you were coming out for a war, they would not
have stayed back”, is a reflection of the weakness of the narrative. The
Revelation of the Qur’an has clearly indicated that one group was
feeling uneasy about the war and that they were being pushed to meet
death. If they had no idea of the impending war, why there was so much
scare and fear.

In the army of Quraysh, too there were persons who were not so much
against the Prophet (a.s). Despite their infidelity, they had some
consideration for the person of the Prophet (a.s). Some of such persons
had already embraced Islam but had not declared their Faith. They did
not want to participate in the war but Quraysh forced them to join up.
The Prophet (a.s) thought it proper to warn his men about such people.
He said that some persons from Banū-Hashim and others are in the ranks
of the army of the infidels but they have no enmity or wish to fight
with us. Therefore, if any of you come across Abul-Bukhtari ibn Harith,
\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib or anyone from Banū-Hashim, you should not
kill them because they have been forcibly recruited to fight with us.”
After this announcement of the Prophet (a.s), some persons winced and
expressed their unhappiness. Therefore, Hudhayfah Ibn \`Utbah told the
Prophet (a.s) that he wanted them to put to sword their relatives and he
wanted them to leave \`Abbas alive. He swore on Allah, that if he came
face to face with \`Abbas, he would kill him. The Prophet (a.s) asked
\`Umar if he heard what Hudhayfah had said. Will he strike my uncle with
his sword? \`Umar said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 135

###### “O Prophet of Allah (a.s) Allow me to cut his head with my sword. He is a Hypocrite!”[1]

After these necessary instructions, the men were arranged in the left
and the right flanks in proper order. The Standard of the Ansar was
given to Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah and that of the Muhajirūn was handed over to
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s). Ibn Kathir writes:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) gave the Standard on the Day of Badr to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) When he was twenty years old.”[2]

The enemies too organized their men. \`Utbah ibn Rabi\`ah, his brother
Shaybah and his son al-Walid came forward from the ranks of the Quraysh
and called for hand-to-hand combat. From the troops of Islam \`Awf ibn
Harith, Mu\`awwadh ibn Harith and \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah went forward to
fight. \`Utbah asked who they were. They replied that they were the
Ansar from al-Madinah. \`Utbah knit his brows and said that they were
not of the same status as he was and that they should go back to their
lines. He addressed the Prophet, “Muhammad! Send men in status equal to
us to fight! Men who are from our Tribe!” The three volunteers returned
to their positions. When the prophet (a.s) saw this conceited attitude
of the Quraysh, that they did not rate the Ansar equal to themselves, he
sent \`Ubaydah ibn Harith, Hamzah ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib and \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib (a.s). \`Utbah was demanding that Quraysh be sent to fight
with him. The Prophet (a.s) not only deputed the Quraysh but the tallest
figures of Banū-Hashim, the progeny of \`Abd al-Muttalib! He did this to
prevent others from saying that in partiality he was trying to protect
his relatives! At that time \`Ubaydah was seventy years old, \`Ali (a.s)
was a youth who had no experience of warfare and was coming to a theatre
of war for the first time. When \`Utbah knew that \`Ali (a.s), \`Ubaydah
and Hamzah had come to fight him, he said that he had a match to
confront him in battle. \`Ubaydah went forward to fight with \`Utbah,
Hamzah with Shaybah and \`Ali (a.s) with al-Walid. Al-Walid tried to
attack \`Ali (a.s) but he sent an arrow to incapacitate him. After being
hit by the arrow, al-Walid went to the side of his father to take his
support. But before he reached \`Utbah, the son of Abū-Talib (a.s)
surrounded him in such a way that he could not save himself from \`Ali’s
sword and slept unto death before reaching the lap of his father. When
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was through with al-Walid, the Muslims called him
that Shaybah was overwhelming his uncle

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 151  
 **[2]** Al-Bidāyah wal-Nihāyah, Vol 7, Page 223

Hamzah. He noticed that both were lying exhausted on the ground with
their swords blunted and the shields shattered. He went forward,
attacked Shaybah, and severed his head with the sword. Now \`Ali (a.s)
and Hamzah turned towards \`Utbah who was busy combating with \`Ubaydah.
They noticed that \`Ubaydah was injured and unable to stand the
onslaught any more. When \`Utbah was about to martyr him, the swords of
Hamzah and \`Ali (a.s) severed the head of \`Utbah. \`Ubaydah was
severely injured and \`Ali (a.s) and Hamzah carried him to where the
Prophet (a.s) was stationed. He saw that a leg of \`Ubaydah was almost
completely amputated and the pith was oozing from the cut. He put
\`Ubaydah’s head in his lap and tears fell from his eyes on \`Ubaydah’s
face. He opened his eyes and said, “O Prophet (a.s)! Will I be raised
with the Martyrs?” The Prophet (a.s) said, “Yes! You will be counted
with the martyrs!” \`Ubaydah added, “How I wish Abū-Talib was around to
see that we did not let his words go in vain:

###### “We shall surrender Muhammad (a.s) to the enemies only when we die fighting before him and we become oblivious of the memory of our wife and Children!”

\`Ubaydah, while returning from Badr, died either at the Valley of Rawa’
or Safrah and was interred there.

The killing of the renowned braves of the Quraysh made the morale of
their troops sink to very low ebb. When Abū-Jahl saw their morale
running very low, he shouted to egg them on! tu\`aymah ibn \`Adi got
motivated. He went like a wild elephant to the arena. \`Ali (a.s) hit
him with his lance. The giant could not control his balance and fell
down. He turned on the ground for a while and breathed his last. \`Ali
(a.s) said,

###### “By Allah! After today he will not come to fight with us about Allah with hatred in his heart!”[1]

After tu\`aymah, al-\`As ibn Sa\`id came fully armored to the arena.
\`Ali (a.s) killed him too with a stroke of the sword. Then \`Abdullah
ibn al-Mundhir and Harmalah ibn \`Umar came with great vigor. Both
became the victims of \`Ali’s sword. Similar was the fate of Hanzalah
gave such a blow of his sword on his head that it shattered into two.
This Hanzalah was the son of Abū-Sufyan and Mu\`awiyah’s brother. Before
him, his maternal grandfather, \`Utbah, uncle al-Walid were killed by
\`Ali (a.s).When during the caliphate of \`Ali (a.s), Mu\`awiyah
threatened him of war, he reminded him of the fate of his grandfather,
uncle and brother in the Battle of Badr. He wrote:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A\`lām al-Warā, Page 89

###### “I am none other than Abul-Hasan who killed \`Utbah, your grandfather, al-Walid your Uncle and Hanzalah your brother on the day of Badr”[1]

Because of the killing of these eminent persons of the army of the
infidels, there was total chaos in their ranks and men were scared of
coming forward for man-to-man combats. They realized that if they came
to the arena alone, none will be spared by the sword of \`Ali (a.s).
Therefore, now they started attacking in groups. The Muslims, seeing
their increasing numbers of combatants coming forward, wanted to move
forward too. But the Prophet (a.s) ordered to maintain their order and
attack the Quraysh with arrows only. He prayed to Allah:

###### “O Allah! If this group of Muslims is killed, then on the face of the earth there would not remain any to worship You! O Allah! Fulfill Your Promise of Succor and victory!”[2]

He took a nap of sleep, opened his eyes and said, “Thanks to Allah! He
has answered my prayers and has sent the Angels to help us!” Therefore,
Allah says in the Holy Book:

###### “When you were pleading with your Sustainer, He accepted your prayer and replied that a thousand Angels would come in droves for your help.”

When the Quraysh threw arrows, in reply to arrows, and came near to the
troops of Islam, the Prophet (a.s) ordered his men to attack them in
full vigor now. Therefore, the swords were unsheathed, the bows twanged
and arrows were released. The fight was so intense that the arena was
echoing with the sounds of the clash of swords and the hiss of the
flying arrows. The Muslims went on forward killing the infidels. Alas,
the onslaught of \`Ali (a.s) and Hamzah disheartened the enemy ranks.
They went as a flock of sheep attacked by a tiger. Sa\`d says:

###### “I saw \`Ali (a.s) fight on the Day of Badr. From his chest came a sound like neighing of a horse and was constantly reciting martial poetry. When he returned His sword was red with blood!”[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah  
 **[2]** Tārīkh Kāmil, Vol 2, Page 87  
 **[3]** Kanz al-\`Ummāl, Vol 5, Page 270

During the battle, Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid, a mortal enemy of the Prophet
(a.s) passed in front of \`Ali (a.s). He gave Nawfal such a blow of the
sword that it cut the helmet, shattered the head of the infidel, and cut
his jaw. With the next blow both his legs were cut. The Prophet (a.s)
was pleased that the enemy of Allah was killed. And said, “Thanks to
Allah! He has answered my prayers!” The battle was in its last stages.
The infidels’ morale had totally vanished. Abū-Jahl, his brother al-\`As
ibn Husham and other chiefs of Quraysh had been slaughtered. The enemy
was in the last throes of defeat. Around dusk, they had abandoned arms
and fled leaving behind their materials. The Muslims chased them and,
instead of killing them, took them captive with the idea of collecting
ransom from the Quraysh. When Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh saw that the Muslims
were taking the infidels captive instead of killing them, he was very
upset and told the Prophet (a.s):

###### “O Prophet of Allah! This has been the first occasion when Allah gave us victory over the infidels. Instead of leaving them alive, I would prefer crushing them!”[1]

Seventy bodies of the infidels were scattered in the arena. The Prophet
(a.s) got them thrown into the Well of Badr and addressing them said, “I
saw the truth in Allah’s promise! Did you find the promise of your gods
true?” Some people said, “O Prophet of Allah! Do you speak with the
dead? Do they hear us talk?” He said:

###### “They hear my talk more clearly than you do, but they have no faculty to reply!”[2]

After accomplishing these tasks, the Prophet (a.s) ordered all the booty
of war to be collected in one place. Some natures did not like this
arrangement. They wished that, according to Arab custom, whatever booty
anyone got, it were his rightful possession. But the Prophet (a.s) did
not permit this and put the entire collection in the charge of
\`Abdullah ibn Ka\`b. The captive infidels were sent to al-Madinah. When
they reached the valley of Safrah, he got the booty equally divided
among all the men. This task could also have been done after reaching
al-Madinah, but perhaps some persons were becoming restless and it was
thought good to be done with the booty. On reaching al-Madinah he
arranged for the captives to be accommodated with different persons and
instructed them to give humane treatment to the men. Therefore, as long
as they were in the custody of the Muslims, they were treated well. The
captives

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh Kāmil, Vol 2, Page 88  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Kāmil, Vol 2, Page 90

too acknowledged this fact. Those captives who were men of worth,
arranged for the ransom money. The poor were released without paying any
ransom. At the time of the Annunciation of the Prophet (a.s), there were
only seventeen literate Quraysh. Feeling the need for literacy, such of
those captives who were literate and poor, he ordered them to teach
reading and writing to small groups of, say ten, children, after which
they would be released from captivity! There is also a narrative about
the captives of Badr that the Prophet (a.s) consulted Abū-Bakr, \`Umar
and \`Ali (a.s) whether they should be killed or ransomed. Abū-Bakr
opined that they should be released on payment of ransom. \`Umar was
against this idea:

###### “By Allah! I do not agree with this view of Abū-Bakr! You must order me that I behead so and so! Ask Hamzah to kill his brother \`Abbas and ask \`Ali (a.s) that he kills \`Aqil!”[1]

The Prophet (a.s) through his ijtihad, decided not to act on the
suggestion of \`Umar and preferred Abū-Bakr’s suggestion of releasing
the captives on payment of ransom money. On the day following the
decision, \`Umar came to the Prophet (a.s) and found him and Abū-Bakr
crying. He asked, “Why are you two crying? If there is something on
account of which you are crying, please let me know that I could join
you too!” The Prophet (a.s) said that because of accepting the ransom I
find retribution hovering as near as the tree here (pointing towards the
tree in the neighborhood). He also said that the following Verse too has
been revealed:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) should not make enemies captive without lot of bloodshed. You want wealth and Allah wishes the betterment of the Hereafter. Allah is Dominant and Wise. If Allah’s Guidance were not there from before, you would have gathered something. That would bring you lot of Retribution.”

\`Umar says that because of collection of ransom, the Prophet (a.s) lost
seventy companions, the very next year in the Battle of Uhud and seventy
more were taken captive by the enemy. The Prophet (a.s) also lost his
tooth, his face was injured and his companions left his company.

It needs consideration why the Prophet (a.s) had to consult his
companions. Is not there clear instruction in the Holy Book about the
matter? No. The Qur’an clearly says about the prisoners of war to take
ransom from the captives and release them. Therefore, the Qur’an says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 169

###### “When you fight with infidels, kill them. When you make them thoroughly injured, tie them up. Then release them in kindness or take ransom and free them. Do this until the enemy puts down his arms!”

This is a verse from Sūrah of Muhammad and was revealed before the
Battle of Badr. Therefore, the Qur’an had provided instructions about
treatment of the captives ahead of the Day of Badr, and the Prophet
(a.s) released some of the captives on payment of ransom, some on
providing instruction on reading-and-writing to the children and some
others he released in kindness because they were poor persons. When all
this was done in accordance with the prior instructions of Allah, then
what was the question of any reprimand? When there was Divine Decree
(nass) what was the need of consulting the companions about treatment to
the captives of war? And about \`Umar suggesting that Hamzah kill
\`Abbas, \`Ali (a.s) kill \`Aqil, we do not know what reply the Prophet
(a.s) gave to him. This suggestion came after hearing the Prophet (a.s)
before the battle commenced that the Muslims should exercise care to see
that none of the Banū-Hashim or \`Abbas in the enemy ranks were killed.
And this suggestion coming from \`Umar who, when Hudhayfah thought of
killing \`Abbas, called Hudhayfah a hypocrite. Had all these ideas
escaped from \`Umar’s mind or for him killing the persons was not
legitimate in the theatre of war and it became legitimate later on!

If this narrative is accepted that because of accepting the ransom, and
releasing the men, retribution was hovering around, then the Prophet
(a.s) could have abrogated the acceptance of the ransom and arranged for
the execution of the captives. Because the ransom money would take lot
of days and the event took place immediately after the battle was over.
In fact, the history records that it took about two months for the
ransom money to arrive. And terming the happenings of the Battle of Uhud
as a retribution for the acceptance of ransom and release of the
captives sounds strange. Anyway, this is a concocted narrative and the
reason for the concoction to cover the shame of the desertion of the
Companions (including some very prominent names) from the Battle Field
of Uhud! They want to make an excuse that if the Prophet (a.s) had not
released the captives at Badr by taking ransom, the event of the
desertion of the Companions would not have taken place! They also
contend that the reprimanding Verse too was revealed as a consequence of
the release of the prisoners although; there is not the slightest
indication towards the Prophet (a.s) in the said Verse.

Shah Waliyyullah blames the Companions of not killing the deserting
infidels, making them captives and extracting ransom from them. He
writes:

###### “The Companions were inclined towards taking ransom from the captives. Although Allah wished that the root of infidelity was destroyed. Because of this, they were reprimanded and then pardoned!”[1]

Craving for wealth and riches is a human failing but where the
strengthening of the Faith against the Infidels is concerned, the
material gains have always to be forgone. This tendency of running after
wealth in the Arabs could not be curbed very much even after the advent
of Islam. Therefore, in the beginning the Companions preferred attacking
the Caravan of Abū-Sufyan to plunder its rich merchandise rather than
meet the army of the infidels in the battle! The men also took the
infidels captive instead of killing them with the same purpose of
getting the ransom from them. Once the captives were shifted to
al-Madinah, they were not in the arena of war and the only alternative
left was to release them on taking ransom from them. It was the right
thing to do according to the Verse of Sūrah of Muhammad (a.s).

In this ghazwah, the infidels were shamed absolutely. They lost seventy
men and seventy were taken prisoner. The rest fled. Muslims lost only
fourteen men, of whom six were Muhajirūn and eight Ansar. The infidels
being killed at the hands of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) numbered
thirty-five. This was half the total number of casualties suffered by
the enemy. He accounted particularly for the chiefs of the Quraysh, viz:
Shaybah, al-Walid, Hanzalah, Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid, al-\`As ibn Sa\`id,
Mughirah ibn al-Walid, etc. The victims dying at the hands of \`Ali
(a.s) is the evidence of the fact that he was not enamored of the ransom
nor he had chased the deserters from the ranks of the infidels. He was
busy all the time in uprooting the strength of the infidels through his
exploits. If the Muslims were defeated in this battle, they would have
suffered extreme feelings of inferiority and lack of valor and bravery
would cause them abject defeat. But the victory at Badr got Muslims the
recognition as a force to reckon with! This victory, that was the
victory of truth, justice and equality had the greatest contribution
coming from Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) through his chivalry and bravery!

This battle was fought on Friday, the seventeenth of Ramadan, 2 A.H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hujjat Allāh al-Balaghī, Vol 2, Page 573
