The Expedition of BanŪ-al-nadir
===============================

In Safar 4 A.H. one chief of Abul-Bara’ came from Najd to al-Madinah.
The Prophet (a.s) invited him to embrace Islam. He said that he would
have no objection to embracing the Faith, but he would prefer if the
Prophet (a.s) sent with him a delegation of Muslims to Najd to extend
the invitation to the people there. The Prophet (a.s) expressed his
doubt that some persons in Najd might harm the delegates. Abul-Bara’
said that the men would go in his personal protection. The Prophet (a.s)
selected seventy companions who were pious, and well informed, and sent
them with a letter from himself to the people of Najd. On reaching the
region, the delegation halted at Bi’r-Ma\`ūnah and gave the Prophet’s
letter to Haram ibn Malhan to take it to \`Amir ibn al-tufayl, the
nephew of Abul-Bara’. That enemy of Allah refused to read or even take
the letter. Haram ibn Malhan, sensing the situation said that if he had
his pardon, he would say something. Before he could say anything
further, at a hint from \`Amir, one of his men pierced a spear in the
back of the courier. He fell down dead.

After this heartless murder, \`Amir sent his men to Bi’r-Ma\`ūnah to
attack the Muslims. But they refused to act because they were aware of
the protection that al-Barra’ had promised them. With the help of some
other tribes, \`Amir surrounded the Muslims and killed all of them
excepting two of the group. Of these two, one was Ka\`b ibn Zayd whom
they thought dead and left him. The other was \`Amr ibn Umayyah who was
taken prisoner but later on released as a thanksgiving offer of \`Amir’s
mother for a boon that she had received! When \`Amr reached Qarqarat
al-Kadar, on the way to al-Madinah, he noticed two companions of \`Amir
and quietly shadowed them. While the two were sleeping under a tree, he
murdered them as retaliation for the killing of the delegates by \`Amir.
When he reached al-Madinah he learnt that both the persons had been
given a written amnesty by the Prophet (a.s). When the Prophet (a.s) was
informed of this event, he said that whatever had happened was because
of lack of information and misunderstanding and that blood money shall
be paid to both the families.

The Prophet (a.s) was having an agreement of cooperation with the Jewish
Tribes of Banū-Qunayqa\`, Banū-Qurayzah and Banū-al-Nadir. He thought of
borrowing some money from Banū-al-Nadir for paying to the families of
the two deceased persons as a settlement. They responded by saying that
he was their guest and they would comply with what he has asked for. The
Prophet (a.s), along with his Companions, went to the locality of
Banū-al-Nadir which was in the neighborhood of al-Madinah. He sat there
with his back to the wall of their fortress. Banū-al-Nadir were not
having any good intentions. They sent a person, \`Amr ibn Jahsh, to
climb the wall of the fortress and throw a big stone on the Prophet
(a.s) to kill him. The Prophet (a.s) got a vision that he should
immediately rise and return to al-Madinah. He sent a word through
Muhammad ibn Maslamah that the Banū-al-Nadir were behaving treacherously
and were attempting to kill him contrary to the terms of their
agreement. He served them a notice that with all their belongings they
should go away within ten days. When Banū-al-Nadir got this notice, they
prepared to leave al-Madinah. But \`Abdullah ibn Ubay, who was their
cohort, asked them to keep staying in their homes and not to shift to
any other place. He assured them that he would help them with two
thousand strong contingent. He also told them that in the event of a
conflict even Banū-Qurayzah, Banū-Ghatafan and their allies too will
help them. When Banū-al-Nadir received offers of help, they decided to
stay put and sent word to the Prophet (a.s) that they would not evacuate
their homes and he might do whatever he wished to! In a manner, it was
an invitation to fight, leaving no choice for the Prophet (a.s). The
Prophet (a.s) got together a small contingent and marched towards the
fortress. Al-Tabari writes:

###### “On that day the Standard of the Prophet (a.s) was in the hand of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s).”[1]

When Banū-al-Nadir saw the Islamic contingent coming, they locked
themselves inside the fortress. The Muslims established a siege of the
fortress. When they saw that they were surrounded from all sides, the
Banū-al-Nadir started flinging stones and arrows from the ramparts of
the fortress but did not succeed in disturbing the siege. One night some
Jews came out of the fortress and sent a barrage of arrows on the
Muslims to force them lift the siege. One of them took aim of the
Prophet’s tent and shot an arrow. The Prophet (a.s) ordered his tent to
be pitched at the base of the hill away from the open, exposed place.
The Prophet (a.s) ordered the shifting, and \`Ali (a.s)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 226

stood up and watched to identify the bowman. When the Companions missed
\`Ali (a.s) they asked the Prophet (a.s) of his whereabouts. He said
that he must have gone for some work. A short while after that they
found \`Ali (a.s) coming with the head of a Jew in his hand. He went
near the Prophet (a.s) and put the head near his feet. He said, “This is
the head of the famous Jewish bowman, Ghalūl, who had sent the arrow
towards your tent! He and nine of his fellow bowmen have been creeping
around our camps. If I can lay my hands on more of them, I shall bring
them dead or alive!” The Prophet (a.s) sent Abū-Dujanah, Sahl ibn Hunayf
and a few more persons with \`Ali (a.s). He came out with his men. They
must have gone a little distance when they surrounded the Jews before
they could get inside the fortress and lock themselves in. All the nine
Jews were killed outside the gate of their fortress.

When Banū-al-Nadir saw that their men got killed and Banū-Ghatafan and
Banū-Qurayzah did not turn up to help nor was any sign of the two
thousand men promised by \`Abdullah ibn Ubay, they capitulated to the
Prophet (a.s) and requested for amnesty that they would ultimately
evacuate the fortress and leave the place. The Prophet (a.s) agreed to
their request but prohibited them from taking the arms with them.
Whatever else was in their possession, they were free to take away.
Therefore, the Jews demolished their dwellings with their own hands and
they carried away the doors, windows and other merchandise on camels and
went singing and playing musical instruments! Some of them went towards
Syria and one group in which there was Salam ibn Abil-Haqiq, Kinanah ibn
Rabi\`ah and Huyay ibn Akhtab went to the west of al-Madinah and settled
down in Khaybar.

The lands of Banū-al-Nadir and the gardens were treated as evacuee
property were termed as the property of the Prophet (a.s). Therefore,
\`Umar says:

###### “The property of Banū-al-Nadir that Allah had given to His Prophet (a.s) was a special property because the Muslims neither ran their horses nor the camels.”[1]

This event took place on the fourth of Rabi\` I, 7 A.H. and six months
after the Battle of Uhud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Futūh al-Buldān, Page 26
