The Expedition of Al-ahzab
==========================

Banū-al-Nadir, after expulsion from al-Madinah, settled down in Khaybar.
But their mischievous nature did not let them remain quiet. They were
very keen to take revenge for their expulsion from their homes. They
were themselves not strong enough to take on the Muslims, but they were
making efforts to enhance their fighting strength and had plans of
joining hands with the Quraysh and some other tribes to attain the cause
dear to all these parties. Therefore, a delegation of twenty persons
from Banū-al-Nadir, of which the prominent persons were Huyay ibn
Akhtab, Kinanah ibn Rabi\`ah, Salam ibn Mushkam and Salam ibn Abil-Haqiq
along with some chiefs of Banū-Wa’il went to Makkah and met Abū-Sufyan
and other chiefs of Quraysh. They discussed with them about their
intention of a conflict with the Muslims, and definitely, this was the
favorite subject of the Quraysh. They all pressed their chests to the
walls of the Ka\`bah and vowed to help each other that they would fight
with the Muslims until they are not very annihilated. When this oath was
taken, the Jews headed towards Banū-Ghatafan and convinced them to ally
with them and the Quraysh. Similar alliances were struck with
Banū-Kinanah and some other tribes and they had approximately four
thousand men in the group now. They now set out to attack al-Madinah. On
the way the troops of Banū-Sulaym, Banū-Asad, Banū-Fazar and
Banū-Ashja\` joined them. Their force now was touching ten thousand men.
They had three hundred riding, draught horses, and four thousand camels.
There was no scarcity of material for war.

Although they kept all their preparations in wraps, and wanted to make a
preemptive, surprise attack, through some riders of Banū-Khuza\`ah, the
Prophet (a.s) got wind of the impending attack. He got together an
emergency meeting of the Companions to discuss the gravity of the
situation and to devise the strategy to prepare for the confrontation.
Salman al-Farisi said that the people of Iran used to dig trenches on
the expected entry points of the enemy to prevent swift advancement of
their troops and to take defensive measures in the time thus gained. The
benefit will be that the trenches serve as defensive fortresses. This
suggestion was generally liked by everyone and

the Prophet (a.s) ordered speedy implementation of the project.
Al-Madinah was secure from three sides because of the walls of the
houses, hills and the oasis. Only the Eastern end of the city was not
secure and always the entry point for any invaders. The Prophet (a.s)
shifted all the women and children to small fortresses within al-Madinah
and the men all came out with crowbars to dig the trench. They surveyed
the area, fixed the benchmarks, divided the entire length into blocks of
the length of forty hands each, and entrusted each block to a group of
ten persons. The Prophet (a.s) took active part in the work and assured
the Muslims that one day they would rule Syria, Rome, Pars and Yemen!

Arabs were not aware of the construction of the trenches. This was first
thought of by the grand son of Faridūn, Manocher, who invented the
trenching for defensive purposes. For the first time in Arabia, Salman
was introducing it. He was not only supervising the work of others but
was giving a helping hand to groups along the length of the trench.
Because of his dexterity, both Muhajirūn and the Ansar wanted Salman to
be with them. Therefore, the Muhajirūn said, “Salman is ours!” The Ansar
too echoed, “Salman is one of us!” The Prophet, when he heard this,
said:

###### “Salman is ours! Salman is from our Ahl al-Bayt!”[1]

Therefore the Muslims, who were three thousand in numbers, worked day
and night and dug a five yards wide, five yards deep and three and half
miles long trench. The Prophet (a.s) got erected eight defensive
stations along the length of the trench, and at each station was posted
a Muhajir and an al-Ansari to keep constant vigil along with some men to
help in time of need. They had stocks of stones to keep as missiles to
prevent the enemy men from crossing over the trench. When the Jews and
the infidels reached the environs of al-Madinah, they found that the
huge trench was a big hurdle in their way! They said:

###### By God! No Arab has devised this strategy so far![2]

The Jews and the Quraysh were of the view that because of their
numerical and material strength, they would take on the Muslims as soon
as they reached al-Madinah and immediately bring them down to their
knees! But this new defensive strategy had pulled back their advancing
steps. They had a feeling of dejection on confronting the hurdle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Kāmil, Vol 2, Page 122  
 **[2]** Sīrat Ibn Hushām, Vol 3, Page 235

One of the Jewish tribes with whom the Prophet (a.s) had the agreement
of peace was Banū-Qurayzah. They were under an oath to support the
Muslims if an outside force attacked al-Madinah. Abū-Sufyan was worried
that if Banū-Qurayzah sided with the Muslims in terms of their
agreement, and then their strength would increase. He wanted to try to
make them repudiate the agreement. Therefore, he deputed one chief of
Banū-al-Nadir, Huyay ibn Akhtab to visit Banū-Qurayzah and persuade them
to violate the agreement. Huyay went to the fortress of the chief of
Banū-Qurayzah, Ka\`b ibn Asad that was situated on the East of the city
of al-Madinah. He knocked at the entrance and Ka\`b asked who it was?
When Huyay identified himself, Ka\`b understood his sly purpose. He
refused to open the door and admit him. Huyay insisted on him to open
the door and told him that he was bringing for him a happy tiding that
the Quraysh and all the tribes of Arabia had united to fight with the
Muslims! He added that if he wanted the goodwill of the Arabs, he should
support their cause. Ka\`b said that they had never experienced anything
from the Prophet (a.s) other than good and trustworthiness! He said they
would not breach the agreement needlessly. He also added that the unity
of the Arabs he talked of was like the fast flying clouds that might
thunder, but seldom rain! Huyay said that keeping the door closed for a
guest is not a way with Arabs! Please open the door and talk to me for a
while! On the insistence of Huyay, Ka\`b opened the door and admitted
him. They entered into an argument and the result was that Huyay was
able to talk Ka\`b into agreeing to cooperate with them. He also assured
him that in the event of the Quraysh losing, his tribe would face the
situation with Banū-Qurayzah. Therefore, they tore away the document of
agreement the tribe had signed with the Prophet (a.s). Now,
Banū-Qurayzah were friends and allies of the Quraysh.

When the Prophet (a.s) learnt about the breach of agreement by
Banū-Qurayzah, he sent Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh to them to persuade them to
behave. But this had no effect on them and they said in clear terms that
they did not know any one nor did they have any agreement with anybody.
Since these people were living within the boundaries of al-Madinah, they
would be a danger for the women and children when hostilities with the
enemy troops started. Their attitude added pressure on the Muslims. The
Holy Qur’an describes this situation thus:

###### “When those people were on you from the top and from the bottom and when your eyes became stony and the hearts stretched and came to your throats and when you started

###### having several doubts about Allah, then came the time for the trial of the Muslims and they were shaken severely.”

At this time, it was natural that the Muslims were worried and confused.
When the enemy was on their doorstep in hordes and within the city
Banū-Qurayzah too were waiting in ambush. Then there were a sizeable
number of hypocrites in the ranks of the Muslims as well who were
themselves scared for their lives and were creating panic in others as
well. Therefore, they started making excuses and pulling away from the
line of action and even told the Prophet (a.s) that their homes were not
well protected, they had fear of thefts and thus wanted to go home. The
Holy Qur’an says:

### وَإِذْ قَالَتْ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْهُمْ يَا أَهْلَ يَثْرِبَ لا مُقَامَ لَكُمْ فَارْجِعُوا وَيَسْتَأْذِنُ فَرِيقٌ مِنْهُمْ النَّبِيَّ يَقُولُونَ إِنَّ بُيُوتَنَا عَوْرَةٌ وَمَا هِيَ بِعَوْرَةٍ إِنْ يُرِيدُونَ إِلاَّ فِرَارًا.

#### “And when a group from them said, ‘O people if al-Madinah! You have no place here and you must return back.’ From them one group that sought the Prophet’s permission said that their homes were empty (unprotected), although they really were not empty and unprotected. They just wanted to make an excuse for running away. (33:13)”

Things went to such a pass that Mut\`ib ibn Qushayr, who had the honor
of serving in the Battle of Badr said,

###### “Muhammad (a.s) was promising us that we will have the treasures of Khusrow and Caesar in our hands. But today our predicament is such that even if someone wants to go to attend the nature’s call, he does not feel safe!”[1]

But there were some sincere persons who were not afraid of the enemy’s
strength and were not scared of the hardships confronting them. In fact,
these conditions strengthened their Faith and confidence levels
enhanced. The Holy Qur’an says about these persons:

### وَلَمَّا رَأَى الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الأَحْزَابَ قَالُوا هَذَا مَا وَعَدَنَا اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَصَدَقَ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَمَا زَادَهُمْ إِلاَّ إِيمَانًا وَتَسْلِيمًا

#### “When the True Believers saw the hordes of the infidels, they said. ‘This is the thing that Allah and His Prophet (a.s)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sīrat Ibn Hushām, Vol 3, Page 233

#### promised. And Allah and His Prophet (a.s) had told the truth.’(33:22)”

This was the time of great trial for the Muslims. The extreme cold and
non-availability of food made them weaker and even the infidels were fed
up waiting on the other side of the trench. It was the twenty-seventh
day since they started the siege and still the hand-to-hand battle had
not started. Only stones and arrows were exchanged with no result
whatsoever. At last, they decided that somehow hoodwinking the guards
they should go across the trench and fight the Muslims with swords. So
some of their chiefs reconnoitered the trench and found a spot where it
was slightly less wide and, as it chanced, the spot was not so well
protected. They determined that the horses could be jumped from there to
cross over. For this purpose they selected the famous cavalier of the
Quraysh, \`Amr ibn \`Abd-Wudd al-\`Amiri with \`Ikrimah ibn Abi-Jahl,
Hasal ibn \`Amr, Munabbih ibn \`Uthman, Dirar ibn al-Khattab al-Fahri,
Nawfal ibn \`Abdullah and Hubayrah ibn Abi-Wahab. They went round, came
forward, kicked the horses and were able to jump across the trench. This
small success gave the infidels some encouragement and Abū-Sufyan and
Khalid ibn al-Walid organized the ranks of their men to send the footmen
across to commence concerted fighting. Although, the cavaliers were all
experienced men in warfare but \`Umar ibn \`Abd-Wudd had a very high
reputation and was known as the support of the Arabs and the knight of
Yalyal, that at a place of this name he overpowered a thousand robbers
all alone. Therefore, \`Umar told the Prophet (a.s) at that moment that
he was himself in a caravan of trade proceeding to Syria and \`Amr too
was one of the group. When the caravan reached Yalyal, a thousand
robbers attacked them. The entire group fled except \`Amr ibn \`Abd-Wudd
who kept fighting alone and chased away the robbers. After this event,
\`Amr had the fame as the best swordsman in Arabia. With his
participation in any battle, the morale of the men shoots up. As if a
thousand more men were with them! When \`Amr threw a challenge for
fight, there was total silence! The Prophet (a.s) said, “Who is there to
answer this dog?” \`Ali (a.s) went near the Prophet (a.s) and said, “O
prophet of Allah! I shall fight him!” The Prophet (a.s) asked him to
wait that some other of his Companions might volunteer! He again asked
if anyone was willing to face \`Amr in battle. But the result was only
stony silence! \`Ali (a.s) again asked for permission and he was ordered
to wait. \`Amr started repeatedly calling someone for combat! He said
sarcastically, “O Muslims! Where is your Heaven that you go to after
your death! And where is the Hell that will be my destiny after I die?
Come! Either you go to the Heaven or consign me to the Hell!” Then he
kicked his horse,

came closer to the Muslim troops, and started reciting a martial poem:

###### “My voice has gone soar shouting and shouting!

###### I fight like a brave even in places where men of valor show weakness!

###### My feet move faster towards battle, and a bold youth’s qualities certainly are charity and valor!”

Because of repeated calls of \`Amr, a quiet had descended on the Muslim
ranks. They were stealing glances at each other quietly. None of the
ostensible “brave” Companions had the courage to come forward and
challenge him. The historians have recorded the moment in these words,
“As if birds were sitting on their heads!” When \`Ali (a.s) heard the
repeated challenge from an infidel and the timid silence of the valiant
Companions, he could not stand it anymore. He once again came close to
the Prophet (a.s) and sought his permission to go and combat! “O Prophet
of Allah! I must now fight with this accursed person! “The Prophet (a.s)
had stopped \`Ali (a.s) twice before this. The purpose was not that he
did not want him to fight, but it was to know that whether any other
‘brave” Companions really take courage in their hands to face that
champion! If \`Ali (a.s) was allowed to fight at the very first call of
\`Amr, the others would have said that they too were ready to fight with
him. Now it has been proved that they were the shirkers! After this
general trial of the will of the Companions, the Prophet (a.s), to
brighten the quality of self-confidence and bravery in \`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “That cavalier is Yalyal \`Amr ibn \`Abd-Wudd!”

\`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “If he is \`Amr, let him be! I am \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s)!”

The Prophet (a.s) put the headgear, al-Sahab, on the head of \`Ali (a.s)
and put the armor, Dhat al-Fudūl, on his body, tied the sword,
Dhul-Faqar, around his girdle and lifting his hands towards the sky
prayed:

###### “O Allah! You had taken away \`Ubaydah on the day of Badr, and Hamzah in the battle of Uhud. Now there is only \`Ali (a.s) whom You must guard. O Allah! Do not make me lonely and You are the better Guardian!”[1]

While \`Ali (a.s) proceeded towards the arena, the Prophet (a.s) uttered
these words:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadīd, Vol 4, Page 344

###### “The total Faith moves towards total infidelity!”

\`Ali (a.s) challenged \`Amr and recited the following poem in reply to
his earlier rajz:

###### “Wait! The one who will respond to your challenge has come;

###### He is not weak and is a person with determination and vision.

###### And only truth is the guarantee for success!

###### I hope that I shall arrange women to wail for you with such a blow that it will vanish after doing its task!

###### But its mention will always be made during encounters!

Both stood for a while facing each other. According to the martial
practice, \`Abd-Wudd asked who his opponent was. He replied that he was
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s). \`Abd-Wudd asked, “In your army, is not there
anybody else to fight with me? You are the son of Abū-Talib and he was
my friend! I do not want to kill the son of my friend! You better go and
send out some grown up person so that he will be killed at my hands
instead of you!” \`Ali (a.s) said, “But I like to shed your blood!”

The famous author of the Ahl al-Sunnah, Musaddiq ibn Shabib, says that
\`Amr mentioned about his friendship with Abū-Talib only to save his own
life, because he had witnessed in the Battle of Badr that whosoever
confronted \`Ali (a.s) would not return alive from the arena. Therefore,
he wanted to avoid the chance of fighting with \`Ali (a.s). It was not
possible to show his back after entering the arena. Therefore, he
devised this ruse to avoid the combat with \`Ali (a.s).

When \`Amr knew that it was not possible to avoid this combat, he
acquiesced. When \`Ali (a.s) noticed that he was himself on foot and
\`Amr was on his steed, and generally a horseman has an advantage over a
foot soldier, he thought of making \`Amr dismount. He said, O \`Amr! If
your opponent asked of you three favors before the fight, you are known
to be accepting one of his requests. Is it true?” He said “Yes” \`Ali
(a.s) then said, “My first wish is that you embrace Islam that you do
not have to fight with me!” \`Amr said, “It was not possible!” \`Ali
(a.s) said, “My second wish is that you cut away from your troops and go
away!” \`Amr replied, “Turning away from the arena is not the wont of
men! Only women can be deserters from the theatre of war!” Then \`Ali
(a.s) said, “If you are not ready to fulfill this wish of mine, my third
and final wish is that you should dismount from your horse and combat
with me!” Hearing this \`Amr, dismounted from his steed in anger and
anguish and

slashed on the feet of the horse with his sword. Apparently, this was a
meaningless act, but he wanted to impress that cutting away the legs of
the horse he had sealed his avenue of escape. Now he had to kill or to
be killed! Another reason could be that perhaps he wanted to gain some
psychological advantage over the opponent by his dramatics! But \`Ali
(a.s) was not the one to be carried away. When he came to fight in the
way of Allah, he was a mountain of determination! He did not give any
importance to the swordsmanship of \`Amr and gave him the chance to take
precedence in attacking. Therefore, he rushed on \`Ali (a.s) brandishing
his sword. He stopped the sword on his shield. \`Amr was an accomplished
swordsman. Despite his defense, \`Amr’s sword bruised his head and blood
flew on his forehead. Now the Sword of Faith swayed in \`Ali’s hand and
he made a counter attack! He roared like a tiger and hit on the legs of
\`Amr with such ferocity that both his legs were cut away and he fell on
the ground! \`Ali (a.s) loudly said, “allahu-akbar!” and the ground
reverberated with this slogan! \`Ali (a.s) climbed on to the chest of
\`Amr and severed his head. The Companions, because of a sand storm,
were unable to see anything. When they heard the sound of the slogan,
they realized that \`Ali (a.s) was victorious. In the meanwhile, the
storm abated and things became clearly visible. They saw that \`Ali
(a.s) was coming with bloodied sword in one hand and the head of \`Amr
ibn \`Abd-Wudd in the other! His gait was like that of a tiger walking
during a light shower of rain! He had a couplet on his lips:

###### “I am \`Ali (a.s) and son of \`Abd al-Muttalib! For a man death is better than deserting!”

Seeing \`Ali (a.s) coming in that manner, some said that he was walking
with pride that day! The Prophet (a.s) heard this and said that in the
arena of battle, Allah likes this attitude! Any way, when \`Ali (a.s)
arrived after winning the battle of Faith over infidelity, the Prophet
(a.s) embraced him and praising his great service to the Cause said:

###### “One blow of \`Ali (a.s) on the Day of Khandaq (the Trench) is more (felicitous) than the prayers of all the Jinn and Men!”[1]

When \`Umar noticed that quite contrary to the practice of the Arabs,
\`Ali (a.s) neither took away the armor of \`Amr ibn \`Abd-Wudd nor he
took the sword and the helmet, he asked, “O \`Ali! Why did not you take
away his armor?” \`Ali (a.s) replied, “I did not feel like making him
naked.” This was the greatness of \`Ali’s character!” At this juncture
one Arab poet said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak Hakim, Vol 3, Page 32

###### “In the battle the determined eyes of the warriors turn towards the adversary and not the booty!”

\`Amr’s sister too recognized this gesture of \`Ali (a.s). Therefore,
when she heard that the killer of her brother did not remove anything
from the body of her brother, she said, “His killer is definitely a
noble person with high moral values!” When people said that it was \`Ali
Ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) she recited the following couplets:

###### If \`Amr’s killer was anyone other than \`Ali,  
 I would have cried for him forever  
 But his killer is he who has no faults  
 And his father is known as chief of Makkah.

After the death of \`Amr, his friends were disheartened. No one else had
the courage to call for man-to-man combat. All of them ran towards the
trench to jump away from it. \`Ali (a.s) got them surrounded. \`Amr’s
son showed signs of resistance and he was killed by \`Ali (a.s). Nawfal
ibn \`Abdullah, trying to cross the trench, fell into it. The Muslims
started throwing stones at him. He said, “If you want to kill me, do not
kill me in this insulting manner. Let someone from you come down and
fight with me” \`Ali (a.s) jumped into the trench and finished him with
one blow! Munabbih ibn \`Uthman, while trying to cross the trench, was
pierced by an arrow, and died after reaching Makkah. \`Ikrimah reduced
his weight by throwing away his spear, crossed the trench and with
Hubayrah reached the camp of the Quraysh. \`Umar saw Dirar ibn
al-Khattab running away. He chased him. Dirar turned back to attack, but
when he noticed it was \`Umar, he said, “O \`Umar! Remember this good
deed that I have done to you!” He also escaped to his camp. The infidels
were not in a position to take away their dead. But they demanded to
take the bodies of \`Amr and Nawfal are given to them in exchange for a
sizeable ransom. The Prophet (a.s), said, “They are your property! We do
not sell dead bodies!” When they got permission, they took the dead
bodies away.

After the killing of the few eminent persons of the infidel forces, the
morale nosedived very low and none else had the courage to attempt
crossing the trench. The paucity of food materials too was pressing.
Staying there any further would have disastrous consequences for them.
They were already thinking of withdrawing when, one night, there was a
severe rainstorm that destroyed their tents and paddocks. The horses and
camels were going helter-skelter, the cauldrons on fire over turned. Now
there was no other way than lifting the siege and quietly going away.
Therefore, Abū-Sufyan said that

biding there any more was of no use. Saying this he got up and the camps
were wound up! In the morning, when the Muslims looked across the
trench, they found the ground vacant. They made prostrations of
thanksgiving to Allah! Shouting slogans of victory, they happily
returned home!

In this battle, the hypocrites lost four men. \`Amr ibn \`Abd-Wudd,
Nawfal ibn \`Abdullah and Hasal ibn \`Amr were killed by \`Ali (a.s) and
Munabbih ibn \`Uthman got injured and died after arriving at Makkah. The
other men of the Muslim army either threw stones at Nawfal when he fell
into the trench and one of them shot an arrow at Munabbih who died of
the injury in Makkah. And \`Umar made a short chase of Dirar ibn
al-Khattab and he himself had to be indebted to the fleeing person that
he decided not to attack the worthy. The one person who really dealt
with the renowned warriors of the infidels was \`Ali (a.s). His blows to
the great warriors of the Quraysh dampened their spirits and all their
plans for subduing the Muslims.

There is a lot of similarity between the ghazwah al-Khandaq and the
battle between Saul and Goliath. Briefly, we are describing the other
battle to highlight the salient similarities between the two. Goliath, a
scion of Pharaoh, was the ruler of Banū-Isra’il. He was a tyrant and had
made the lives of his subjects miserable. The Banū-Isra’il complained
about it to Ishmael, the prophet of the time. Ishmael, with Allah’s
permission, selected a poor water carrier, Saul, to be the king.
Banū-Isra’il were upset saying what was so special in Saul. They felt
that neither he had wealth nor did he have an impressive personality.
The reply given by Ishmael is indicated in these words of the Holy
Qur’an:

###### “Allah has given him preference and superiority, knowledge and strength of the body. Allah gives his land to anyone He wants”

The way the Qur’an has put forth the contents of the Verse, it reflects
on the method of appointment and the style of governance. This
appointment is not because of the wealth or status of the person but it
is because of knowledge, nobility and valor.

When Goliath saw that the state was being transferred to Saul, he
arranged his army and came to the battlefront. Saul too took the
Banū-Isra’il with him and moved away from Palestine and went to the
region of Jordan, camped in front of the enemy’s army. The army of Saul
had one thousand and three hundred men. When he saw the huge army of
Goliath, he felt scared. When Goliath came to the arena riding on an
elephant, no one took courage in his hands to

meet him in combat. When Saul saw the cowardice of his companions, he
declared that whoever killed Goliath would be given half of the kingdom
and he would give his daughter in marriage to him. But none had courage
to challenge the strong man. Ishmael said that he will be killed by the
person who is from the progeny of Lu’ay ibn Ya\`qūb and Mūsa’s armor
would fit his body. Therefore, Isha, who was from the progeny of Lu’ay
ibn Ya\`qūb, was asked to present his ten sons. When they came, each one
of them was asked to try the armor of Mūsa, but it fitted only Dawūd,
who was the youngest son. They said that only he could overpower
Goliath. Dawūd wore the armor and came to the arena. Goliath, seeing him
said:

###### “O young man! Will you fight me at your tender age?”[1]

He replied that he was willing to take him on. Dawūd took stones in his
sling when Goliath said; “Will you kill me like they kill the dogs?” He
replied, yes! The reason is that you are worst than a dog!” Dawūd swung
his sling and threw the stone at such speed that it broke Goliath’s head
and went through it. Goliath fell down on the ground and died instantly.
With Goliath’s death, there was pandemonium in his army and the men
fled. Ya\`qūb was given the kingdom because of this achievement. He was
also married to Saul’s daughter.

Now let us compare the ghazwah Khandaq with that battle and see the
similarities between the two. In Khandaq, the army of Muslims was very
small compared to that of the infidels. Similarly, Saul’s army was small
and that of Goliath was very large covering the wilderness of Jordon.
Saul’s men were scared of this very large army. The way \`Amr ibn
\`Abd-Wudd came boasting of his strength, Goliath too behaved the same
way. The way none in the army of Islam had the courage to challenge
\`Amr other than \`Ali (a.s), so too Ya\`qūb was the only person from
Saul’s army who could challenge Goliath. As \`Amr came astride a horse
to challenge the army of Islam, Goliath was riding on an elephant. The
way Dawūd was on foot, so too was \`Ali (a.s). As Mūsa’s armor exactly
fitted Ya\`qūb so did fit the Prophet’s armor for \`Ali. As Dawūd was
the youngest of his brothers, so was \`Ali (a.s) the age of Dawūd and
\`Ali (a.s) was thirty years at the time of the wars! As Goliath
objected to the young age of Dawūd, so did \`Amr about \`Ali (a.s).
Shaykh \`Ali \`Ala’uddin has written:

“Amongst the prophets, Dawūd (a.s) and amongst the Saints \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib were the leaders of the warriors”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bidāyat al-Rumūz, Page 159

The way the Prophet (a.s) addressed \`Amr as dog, Dawūd called Goliath
worse than a dog as well. As the armies of the infidels fled from the
Battle of al-Ahzab, so did those of Goliath! The way \`Amr’s killer
became the son-in-law and successor of the Prophet (a.s), so did Ya\`qūb
got married to Saul’s daughter and was his successor too. Awareness of
this similarity is evident from what Hafiz Yahya ibn Adam has said:

###### “If the killing of \`Amr by \`Ali (a.s) can be compared to any event reported in the Holy Qur’an it is the Verse, ’Then those people defeated the enemy with Allah’s Orders and Dawūd killed Goliath.’”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhā¤arāt al-Awā’il, Page 204  
 **[2]** Al-Sīrah al-Nabawiyyah, Dahlān, Vol 2, Page 111
