The Expedition of BanŪ-qurayzah
===============================

When the joint forces of the Quraysh and the Jews were vanquished in the
ghazwah al-Ahzab, The Prophet (a.s) decided to take action against
Banū-Qurayzah who had breached their agreement with the Muslims and
openly sided with the Quraysh-Jewish Combine during that campaign, on
the instigation of Huyay ibn Akhtab. The Prophet (a.s) formed an
advanced party of three Khazrajis under \`Ali (a.s) and sent them with
the standard of war. Al-Tabari writes:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) gave the Standard of War to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and sent him with the Advance Guard towards Banū-Qurayzah.”[1]

Banū-Qurayzah had a feeling that they might be punished for their breach
of the agreement. They had locked themselves up in their fort after the
armies of the infidels was decimated and thought that their fort was
unconquerable. When \`Ali (a.s) reached near the fort, and planted a
spear in the ground, the Jews shouted invectives against the Prophet
(a.s). When he heard this, he wanted to return and tell the Prophet
(a.s) to stop going close to the fort. He was still on the way when the
Prophet (a.s) arrived. \`Ali (a.s) requested him not to go near the fort
because the Jews were using foul language. The Prophet (a.s) said that
when they see him, they would desist from using such language. On
reaching near the fort, the Prophet (a.s) reprimanded them and ordered
his tent to be pitched outside the fort. The Muslims laid siege of the
fort and sealed all the exit and entry points for the besieged Jews.
Among the inmates of the fort was Huyay ibn Akhtab who had tempted
Banū-Qurayzah to support the Quraysh in the Battle of al-Ahzab. He had
promised the Banū-Qurayzah that in the event of the defeat of the
Quraysh he would stay with them and share their fate.

The chief of Banū-Qurayzah, Ka\`b ibn Asad saw that the siege by the
Muslims was getting tougher, therefore he told his people that there is
mention of the prophethood of Muhammad (a.s) in the Divine Books, and if

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 245

they agree to embrace Islam now, they could win their freedom without
any problem… But their men would not agree to this suggestion. Then
Ka\`b suggested that the next course of action open for them was to kill
their women and children, go out of the fort and fight to finish. Doing
this, they will have no care left for their families. They would not
accept even this suggestion. Then he said that it was the eve of
Sabbath, the Muslims would not imagine that the Jews would attack on the
sacred night. The attack, if it is executed, will have an element of
surprise and the Muslims will be taken on unawares. But the Jews turned
down even this suggestion. They said that they could not imagine
desecrating the Sabbath.

Twenty-five days passed since the fort was besieged. They kept raining
stones and arrows on the Muslims but did not succeed in breaking the
siege. When they were fed up with the hardships of the siege, the Jews
sent Nabash Ibn Qays to the Prophet (a.s) that they were willing to lay
down arms if they were pardoned and allowed to move away with their
families and their wealth. They then offered that they would abandon all
their belongings and would leave only with the families. Even this was
not acceptable to the Prophet (a.s). They were told that they must
surrender unconditionally. Nabash went back and told them what
transpired. They sent a message to the Prophet (a.s) requesting him to
depute Abul-Bu\`bu\` al-Ansari so that they talk to him and come to a
final conclusion. The Prophet (a.s) sent Abul-Bu\`bu\` to them. They
asked him if it would be safe for them if they made an unconditional
surrender. He replied in the affirmative but pointed his hand towards
the neck indicating his apprehension of what would happen to them if
they surrender.

This act of Abul-Bu\`bu\` contrary to all norms of decency and was not
proper official emissary to do. The Qur’an mentions about this event
thus:

###### “O believers! Do not be dishonest in the matters of Allah and the Prophet (a.s), nor knowingly commit dishonesty with trusts.”

When Banū-Qurayzah felt that unconditional surrender might spell their
doom, and then they said:

###### “We accept Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh as the mediator and will abide by his decision.”[1]

The Prophet (a.s) too accepted Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh as the mediator and
that his decision would be binding for both the parties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 246

Ibn Husham writes that when the Banū-Qurayzah refused to surrender,
\`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “By Allah! I shall either get martyred, as Hamzah was martyred, or capture the fort!”[1]

Saying this, he took al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam along and advanced to
attack the fort. When Banū-Qurayzah saw him advancing to attack, they
shouted with concern:

###### “O Muhammad (a.s)! We bow our heads to the decision of the arbitrator, Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh!”

Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh was injured in the Battle of al-Ahzab and was
recuperating at al-Madinah in the tent of Rafidah al-Ansariyyah. When he
was brought in a litter, Banū-Aws surrounded him and said that the
Prophet (a.s) had left the decision about the fate of Banū-Qurayzah to
him and he should give a mild judgment in their favor. Sa\`d said that
he will give a decision which is just and fair. The people understood
from what Sa\`d said that the judgment would go against Banū-Qurayzah.
His decision was that the men of Banū-Qurayzah be executed and the women
and children taken as slaves. Therefore, the men were executed and the
women and children taken away as captives. Their belongings were
confiscated and distributed to the troops. The Holy Qur’an says about
this incident:

### وَأَنْزَلَ الَّذِينَ ظَاهَرُوهُمْ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ مِنْ صَيَاصِيهِمْ وَقَذَفَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ الرُّعْبَ فَرِيقًا تَقْتُلُونَ وَتَأْسِرُونَ فَرِيقًا . وَأَوْرَثَكُمْ أَرْضَهُمْ وَدِيَارَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ وَأَرْضًا لَمْ تَطَئُوهَا وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرًا.

#### “And He drove down those of the followers of the Book who backed them from their fortresses and He cast awe into their hearts; some you killed and you took captive another part. And Allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not obtain any advantage, and Allah sufficed the believers in fighting; and Allah is Strong, Mighty.”

This punishment appears very severe, but if the circumstances were
considered, the worst critic would accept that Banū-Qurayzah did deserve
the harsh punishment. Despite the Prophet (a.s) giving all the
concessions in terms of the agreement, Banū-Qurayzah collaborated with
the enemy, the Quraysh, against the interests of the Muslims. Even their
chief, Ka\`b ibn Asad, had accepted that the Prophet (a.s) was abiding
by the agreement in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sīrat ibn Hushām, Vol 3, Page 251

word and spirit. Flouting this agreement, Banū-Qurayzah themselves were
responsible for the consequences. When Banū-al-Nadir were exiled from
al-Madinah, the agreement with Banū-Qurayzah was revised maintaining the
old mild terms even when the circumstances demanded making a more severe
agreement. But they flouted the agreement by collaborating with the
enemy during the battles of Uhud and al-Ahzab. If they were left alive,
they would be a constant danger to the people of al-Madinah. The
punishment meted out to them was not so strange for the people of the
world. Traitors and collaborators are dealt with everywhere in this
manner. When Huyay ibn Akhtab, the main instigator of the episode who
tempted Banū-Qurayzah to collaborate with Quraysh was taken for
execution he told \`Ali (a.s), “A decent person is executing another
decent person!” And then he requested \`Ali (a.s) that he not be
undressed after execution. \`Ali (a.s) said it was not his way to render
an enemy naked after killing him! In accordance with his practice, he
did not take away the dress of Huyay.
