The Truce of Al-hudaybiyah
==========================

Makkah was the ancestral town and the birthplace of the Prophet of Islam
(a.s). He spent fifty-three years of his life here and it was here that
he got his first Revelation from Allah. For thirteen years the
Revelations of the Holy Book continued coming here only. Although he had
to leave the home and hearth because of the troublesome attitude of the
people of Makkah, he always liked to mention and hear about his home
town. Love for ones own place of birth is quite natural Whether one had
a comfortable life or had to face hardships in his home town, its
memories will ever live in his mind. Besides this natural affinity, the
Prophet (a.s) had a spiritual attachment with the place because it has
located in it the Ka\`bah and other places of religious importance. This
urge for Makkah was not only in the heart of the Prophet (a.s) but all
the Companions had the same attachment for the place. Now it was six
years since they had Migrated and now they were all eager to visit
Makkah and circumambulate the Ka\`bah. Once the Prophet (a.s) related
about a dream of his. He saw in the dream that they had entered the
Haram of Ka\`bah and were doing the circumambulation. Hearing of this
dream the eagerness of the Companions to make a visit too increased.
They insisted on the Prophet (a.s) to plan a visit. From the Quraysh
they expected some resistance in allowing the Muslims to come there.
However after the ignominious defeat at al-Ahzab, it was conjectured
that their spirit of battle had cooled and that they might not hinder
the visit by the Muslims. Considering the keenness and pressure from the
Companions, the Prophet (a.s) planned a visit and invited people from
the neighborhood of al-Madinah too to join. Some people avoided going
because it crossed their minds that the Quraysh might think it a good
opportunity to start a battle. The number of persons who made up their
minds to travel was around one thousand and four hundred to one thousand
and five hundred. Along with this entourage, the Prophet (a.s) started
from al-Madinah on I Dhul-Qa\`dah 6 A.H. They had seventy camels for the
ceremonial sacrifice, and all the members of the party were dressed in
the loincloth prescribed for the pilgrimage and carried no arms to give
confidence to the Quraysh that they had no warlike intentions!

It was evident from the dress of the Prophet (a.s) and the Companions
that they were not going for a battle and heading for a pilgrimage to
Ka\`bah. But the Quraysh did not allow them to enter Makkah. When this
caravan reached the Valley of \`Asfan, Busr ibn Abi-Sufyan al-Ka\`bi
came to the presence of the Prophet (a.s) and said that the Quraysh had
assembled in the Valley of Dhi-tuwa hearing of the arrival of the
caravan and Khalid ibn al-Walid was stationed at Kura\` al-Ghamim with a
contingent of troops to prevent them from reaching Makkah. The Prophet
(a.s) changed his route, and via Thaniyyat al-Marar, they reached
Hudaybiyah which is a well at a distance of fifteen miles from Makkah
and the area around it was known by the same name. Khalid informed the
Quraysh that the caravan has changed its route and had reached
Hudaybiyah. Quraysh sent Badil ibn Warqa’ al-Khuza\`i along with some
men from Banū-Khuza\`ah to talk with the Prophet (a.s). He asked the
Prophet (a.s) to give up the idea of going to Makkah and return from
Hudaybiyah only. He said that if he went any further, Quraysh would use
force to stop him. At any cost they did not want his party to enter
Makkah. The Prophet (a.s) said that they had come only to circumambulate
the Ka\`bah and Quraysh need not have any apprehensions from them and
they had no plan whatsoever of fighting with them. Badil conveyed the
Prophet’s message to the Quraysh who agreed that the intentions did not
appear warlike; nonetheless they would not be allowed to enter. If they
tried to enter forcibly, the Quraysh would fight to stop them. \`Urwah
ibn Mas\`ūd al-Thaqafi said that it would not harm Quraysh in any manner
if they enter, perform \`Umrah and return like any other group generally
coming for the pilgrimage! Quraysh said that Arabs would consider it as
their weakness and capitulation if the Muslims were allowed in. Then
\`Urwah sought permission to negotiate with the Prophet (a.s) and send
his party back peacefully. Quraysh agreed and he came to the presence of
the Prophet (a.s). He said, “O Muhammad (a.s)! Quraysh is the tribe you
personally belong to! Imagine if you annihilate the tribe, it will be
the first example in the entire Arabia that someone destroyed his own
tribe! Quraysh do not want that you enter Makkah. If you try to do it,
the consequence will be a fight! When the hostilities start, the same
people who are around you will run away!” At this point Abū-Bakr chided
him rather impolitely and said that they shall never abandon the Prophet
(a.s). \`Urwah asked who this person was. He was told that it was
Abū-Bakr. He said, “O Abū-Bakr! I remember one good turn you did to me!
Otherwise I would have properly replied to your impoliteness!” \`Urwah’s
patience and forbearance nipped the little tiff in the bud. It was
possible that he might have left the talk incomplete and gone away and
misguided the Quraysh to go for fighting. The

Prophet (a.s) realized about his balanced and fair thinking and asked
him, “Is it fair to prevent us from performing the \`Umrah and not
allowing our sacrificial camels reaching near the Ka\`bah? We have
neither come with an intention of war nor shall we unnecessarily start
hostilities” \`Urwah was very much impressed with the attitude of the
Prophet (a.s) and returned to the Quraysh. He told them that he had gone
in the past to the presence of kings like Caesar, Khusrow and Najashi,
but meeting the Prophet (a.s) was an entirely different experience for
him. He did not find the aura of respectability and dignity anywhere
else as in his company. He recommended that the party must be allowed to
perform the \`Umrah and go back peacefully. But the Quraysh did not heed
his advice and were adamant in their stand. When Halis ibn \`Alqamah saw
that the matter was not getting resolved, he asked to be permitted to
make his efforts for resolution. He proceeded to Hudaybiyah. When he saw
the sacrificial camels restless with hunger, and he heard the call of
*“labbayka! allahumma labbayka!”* from the men in the caravan, he
returned without entering the camp. He told the Quraysh that preventing
the group from performing the \`Umrah will be sheer cruelty and there is
no reason stopping any pilgrims from entering the Ka\`bah. Quraysh
however were still adamant. Seeing this attitude Halis said:

###### “O People of Quraysh! Maybe we have a pact with you! But we have not made any understanding with you that you prevent, whosoever it might me, from performing the rites of pilgrimage in Makkah!”[1]

When these representations failed, the Prophet (a.s) sent Kharrash ibn
Umayyah al-Khuza\`i on his personal camel to the Quraysh to assure them
that he did not mean to fight and had come there only for \`Umrah.
Kharrash talked to the Quraysh that they need not obstruct the party
performing the rites of pilgrimage but they did not listen to any
argument and even threatened to kill him. Halis and the tribes under his
control prevented them from the act. Under protection of their swords
they escorted Kharrash to safety. However the Quraysh slaughtered the
Prophet’s camel. They did not stop at it. They deputed fifty roughs from
Makkah to go to the camp and trouble them. They reached near the camp
and started throwing stones and arrows on the party. The Muslims were
not so weak that they would be cowed down by those roughs. They
surrounded and withheld the men. They were brought before the Prophet
(a.s) who released them without any punishment. He called \`Umar

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 276

and asked him to visit Makkah and impress on the Quraysh that their
visit was not for fighting. \`Umar expressed his inability in the
following words:

###### “In Makkah there is none from my tribe, Banū-\`Adi, who could come forward for my rescue! I have enmity with Quraysh and my harshness and strictness towards them is no secret. I have fear for my life from them. You may send \`Uthman instead, he has more influence over the Quraysh!”[1]

Now the Prophet (a.s) called \`Uthman and appointed him for the task.
Along with him a delegation of ten Muhajirūn too was sent. When he
reached Makkah he conveyed the message from the Prophet (a.s) to
Abū-Sufyan and other chiefs that they need not resist the group’s entry
for \`Umrah. They did not pay any heed to what he said. Instead they
stopped him from returning. \`Uthman secured the protection of his
relative, Aban ibn Sa\`id, but the others were at the mercy of the
Quraysh. Because of their detention in Makkah, rumors became current
amongst the Muslims that \`Uthman and the other delegates had been
killed. Since they were sent by the Prophet (a.s) as diplomats and their
killing was against all norms of international laws, there was a feeling
of anger amongst the Muslims. They started talking of avenging the
killings. When the Prophet (a.s) felt the disturbed emotions of the
Muslims, he gathered them under a tree and took a bay\`ah from them that
in the event of a conflict, they would not desert and run away.
Therefore, Jabir ibn \`Abdullah says:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) took *bay\`ah* from us that we do not run away from the fight!”[2]

This *bay\`ah* is called the bay\`at al-ridwan (Allegiance of Approval)
because Allah had expressed His approval and happiness over it and said:

### لَقَدْ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ يُبَايِعُونَكَ تَحْتَ الشَّجَرَةِ فَعَلِمَ مَا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ فَأَنْزَلَ السَّكِينَةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَثَابَهُمْ فَتْحًا قَرِيبًا .

#### “Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility on them and rewarded them with a near victory. (48:18)”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 138  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 279

Now they learnt that \`Uthman and other delegates were safe and there
was no need for fighting. They returned safely to the camp. The result
of this was that the emotions of the Muslims cooled down. On the other
side, the infidels of the Quraysh too were not in a mood for
hostilities. They only wanted to salvage their false sense of honor and
prestige. Therefore, after this event, they sent Huwaytib and Suhayl ibn
\`Amr for negotiations. The Prophet (a.s) too was not in favor of a
battle. He approved negotiations for an understanding. For the
negotiations he nominated \`Ali (a.s). Al-Tabari writes:

###### “The Quraysh sent Suhayl ibn \`Amr and Huwaytib and the Prophet (a.s) selected \`Ali (a.s) for the parleys.”[1]

When the talks started, the representatives of the Quraysh felt that the
opposite party did not intend fighting, started putting forward
unreasonable conditions for the settlement. Therefore, after much
debate, the following terms were agreed to by both the sides:

(1) This visit the Muslims would return without performing the \`Umrah.

(2) Next year they can visit Makkah for \`Umrah but not to halt there
for more than three days.

(3) They should not carry any arms, other than swords, along with their
caravan. The swords should all the time be in the sheaths.

(4) The tribes of Arabia shall have the right to make agreement of
cooperation with any of the two sides and the conditions will also apply
to the tribes on both sides.

(5) If any person from Makkah strayed into the territory of the Muslims,
it would be binding on the Muslims to return him safely. If any Muslim
went to the Quraysh territory, he will not be returned to them.

(6) The agreement will be valid for a period of ten years. During this
period there will be neither hostility nor restriction on travel.

All these conditions were, more or less, in the favor of the Quraysh and
they were not ready for the deal without enforcing them. In these
conditions it was really difficult to establish peace with them when a
sizeable block of the Quraysh was not in favor of any peace and the
majority of Muslims did not like the terms of the agreement. Now there
were only two options. Either to accept their conditions or reject them
outright and get ready for a battle! The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 278

Prophet (a.s) had an eye on the consequences of any conflict with them
at that time when the Muslims were in a state of absolute unpreparedness
for battle. If the Prophet (a.s) decided to fight, despite the
disadvantage, and even if the Muslims were victorious, and entered
Makkah as the winners, the animosity of the Quraysh would become so much
that they would never ever think of embracing Islam. Another conclusion
could also have been drawn that the Prophet (a.s) was not peace loving
and that as soon as he had military strength he took the first
opportunity to wreak vengeance on the Quraysh. While all the previous
battles were defensive in nature, this one would have been termed an
aggressive campaign. This was the prime reason that the Prophet (a.s)
gave preference to peace. Although they had to yield some concession in
the terms of the agreement, the deal was not as a result of defeat in
any battle. In fact it was after repeated successes in the previous
battles. But the Prophet (a.s) demonstrated his love for peace after
victories in battles! He also exposed the ignorance and the stubbornness
of the Quraysh by offering them conditions of peace.

After deciding the terms of peace, it came to drafting the agreement.
Suhayl created hurdles at every step in this matter too. When \`Ali
(a.s) started writing the draft, the Prophet (a.s) asked him to write
*“bismillahirrahmanirrahim”* on the top of the document. Suhayl said
they did not know what “arrahman” was. He just wanted them to write
*“bismikallahumma”* at the head of the document (this was first used by
Umayyah ibn al-Salt before Islam and was generally written in all
letters and documents since then). The prophet (a.s) did not want to
enter into an argument and accepted his suggestion. Then \`Ali (a.s)
wrote “This is the agreement of peace which Allah’s Prophet Muhammad has
made with Suhayl ibn \`Amr.” Suhayl objected about this sentence as well
that they did not accept Muhammad (a.s) as the Prophet of Allah. If they
had recognized him as the Prophet (a.s) they would not have objected to
his entering Makkah. He therefore wanted them to write his name as
“Muhammad (a.s) ibn \`Abdullah”. The Prophet (a.s) asked \`Ali (a.s) to
strike off the words *“rasūlullah”* with his pen and write “Muhammad ibn
\`Abdullah”. \`Ali (a.s) put down his pen in anger saying, “By Allah! I
shall not strike off the words, *‘rasūlullah’* from the document!” The
Prophet (a.s) said, “I shall strike off the words myself!” He drew a
line across those words and told \`Ali (a.s):

###### “One day, you too will be put to such a test!”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 128

When the document was ready, witnesses from both sides put a hand to it.
One copy of the document was given to the Prophet (a.s) and another to
Suhayl ibn \`Amr.

All the matters connected with the drafting and execution were completed
under the direct supervision of the Prophet (a.s) and no Companions were
asked to participate in the proceedings nor their opinions were
obtained. It was only \`Ali (a.s) who helped the Prophet (a.s) in
deciding on the terms and drafting of the document. Many Companions were
against the terms of the agreement and even the need to make peace with
the Quraysh. They were hoping to enter Makkah despite the opposition of
the infidels and perform \`Umrah. But when they were asked to return
from Hudaybiyah without performing the \`Umrah they were so much
disturbed that doubts cropped up in their minds. Al-Tabari writes:

###### “When the Companions of the Prophet (a.s) started from al-Madinah they had no doubt about victory on the basis of the dream that the Prophet (a.s) saw. But when they knew about the truce and the need to return, and knew that the Prophet (a.s) himself had agreed to the terms of the truce, a big doubt crept into their minds and were about to start a dispute.”[1]

\`Umar was most upset with this truce. His anger rose so much that he
went to the presence of the Prophet (a.s) and said, “Are you not the
true Prophet?” The Prophet (a.s) replied, “Yes! I am!” \`Umar added,
“Did you not say that we shall all enter the al-Masjid al-Haram and
circumambulate the Ka\`bah?” The Prophet (a.s) replied, “Yes! I had seen
a dream and interpreted it that the time is coming when we shall enter
to al-Masjid al-Haram and circumambulate the Ka\`bah! But I did not say
that we shall do it this year only. Whatever has happened is with the
Command of Allah! I cannot do anything against His Commands! Allah will
never let the enemy to be trampling me!” Even after this explanation by
the Prophet (a.s), \`Umar’s ire did not subside. He went to Abū-Bakr in
anger and talked in the same manner with him. He said:

###### “O \`Umar! Keep holding his reins! I bear witness that he is the Prophet of Allah (a.s)!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 281  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 280

Abū-Bakr had to confirm about the prophethood of Muhammad (a.s) because
it was evident from \`Umar’s way of talking that he was so much angry
and upset about the truce that he started doubting the very prophethood
of Muhammad (a.s). Therefore, \`Umar has expressed his doubts in this
manner:

###### “By Allah! Ever since I embraced Islam, I never had a doubt, but on that day!”[1]

The anger of the companions was such that while the Prophet (a.s) giving
a practical shape to it ordered them to sacrifice the animals and cut
their hair, they started disobeying. Despite instructing them several
times they did not comply. The Historian al-Tabari writes:

###### “By Allah! Despite the Prophet (a.s) ordering them thrice, none of them rose to obey!”[2]

When the Prophet (a.s) saw this state of affairs, he was very saddened.
He stood up and went to the tent of Umm-Salamah and sat down quietly.
She saw the sad visage of the Prophet (a.s) and asked the reason for his
glumness. He complained about the behavior of his companions.
Umm-Salamah said, “You need not force anyone. Go and sacrifice your
animal, get your hair removed and change the dress.” The Prophet (a.s)
came out of the tent, sacrificed the animal, removed his hair and
changed from the Ihram to ordinary dress, when the companions saw that
the decision of the Prophet (a.s) cannot be changed, some persons
followed suit. Most of them got small tufts of hair removed. Their anger
seemed not be coming down. Al-Tabari writes:

###### “They were clipping each other’s hairs. But it seemed as if they were in a state of sadness and might slay each other.”[3]

When the Prophet (a.s) saw the men removing their hair, he said, “May
Allah be kind on them!” The companions said:

###### “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)! You have offered a prayer of blessing for the men who are getting their hair cut But you did not pray for those who got their hair clipped! He said, ‘Because they did not doubt!’”[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Khamīs, Vol 2, Page 32  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 283  
 **[3]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 283  
 **[4]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 283

In spite of the misbehavior of the Companions, the Prophet (a.s)
strictly adhered to the terms of the truce. The conditions of the truce
were still being discussed. At this time the son of Suhayl ibn \`Amr,
Abū-Jandal, who had converted to Islam and was facing incarceration with
the infidels, escaped from the vigil of his guard and came to the
presence of the Prophet (a.s), the chains of the gaol still in his
ankles. He said, “O Prophet of Allah! Allow me to ride with you!” When
the representative of the Quraysh, Suhayl saw his son, he said, “A truce
agreement has already been agreed upon by us! If any of our men escaped
and came to you, you will have to return them to us. In terms of this
clause you must return Abū-Jandal to us.” The Prophet (a.s) said, “The
agreement is not complete as yet and you started asking for complying
with its terms!” Suhayl said, “If you do not hand over my son to us, we
shall abrogate the agreement of truce!” The Prophet said, “Then, you
might take him away!” He advised Abū-Jandal to be patient and handed him
over to Suhayl.

When Abū-Jandal started walking away, \`Umar stood up, and guiding his
hand toward the scabbard of the sword, said, “The blood of an infidel is
not worth as much as that of a dog!” He thought that Abū-Jandal would
attack his father and kill him. Abū-Jandal said:

###### “O \`Umar! You do not have more right than me to follow the command of the Prophet (a.s)!”[1]

The infidels of Quraysh getting their conditions accepted practically
thought that they had the upper hand, although this condition was not
harmful to the Muslims in any manner whatsoever. After the truce one
person from the Quraysh, Abū-Basir \`Utbah ibn Usayd embraced Islam and
came to al-Madinah slyly. Quraysh deputed two persons to al-Madinah with
a letter to bring him back. The Prophet (a.s) called Abū-Basir and asked
him to go back to Makkah. He unwillingly accompanied the emissaries.
When they reached the Valley of Dhul-Halifah, Abū-Basir praised the
sword of one of them. He said that certainly the sword was very good and
took it out of the sheath. With the excuse of looking at it, Abū-Basir
took the sword from the hand of the person and killed him. When the
other person saw that his companion was killed, he ran away and reaching
al-Madinah informed the Prophet (a.s) that Abū-Basir had killed his
companion. In that time Abū-Basir too reached al-Madinah and told the
Prophet (a.s) that he had handed him over to the Quraysh in terms of the
agreement and now there is no responsibility on him any further and that
he need not be handed over to them again. The Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Khamīs, Vol 1, Page 22

(a.s) said that this person wanted to give vent to trouble between the
two sides, If he was given any support, the Quraysh would definitely
start a conflict. Abū-Basir now understood that the Prophet would
definitely hand him over to the Quraysh. Taking an opportunity he went
towards the shore of the sea and stayed there. On the other side,
Abū-Jandal, who was incarcerated in Makkah, heard that Abū-Basir was
hiding at a place on the coast and he too escaped from captivity and
went the same way. In due time that place became a place of refuge for
the fugitives from Makkah. The number of such persons rose to seventy
and they formed a strong group. When the caravans of Quraysh used to
pass through there on the way to Syria, this group attacked and looted
them. The Quraysh were fed up of this and sent word to the Prophet (a.s)
to call those men to al-Madinah. They said that in future they would not
claim back any person who had embraced Islam of his free will and moved
to al-Madinah. The Prophet (a.s) sent word to Abū-Basir to come to
al-Madinah. He was seriously ill at that time and asked Abū-Jandal to
go. Therefore, they disbanded the group and went to al-Madinah. The
route of travel now was safe for the Quraysh.

The utility and advantage of this truce was not comprehended by most
Muslims. At the time of the execution of the agreement, and even after
that, they were unhappy about it. But later on when they got certain
political and other advantages because of the terms of the truce, they
realized that their thinking was wrong and started appreciating the
farsightedness of the Prophet (a.s). Some of the salient advantages the
Muslims got from the truce are:

The first benefit was that the unreasonable attitude of the Quraysh
became evident to the tribes that they had stopped the Muslims from
performing pilgrimage at Makkah which was the right of every individual,
from whatsoever place he came. The tribes were unhappy with the Quraysh
on account of this and sympathetic towards the Muslims.

The second benefit was that the Muslims, who were in Makkah, and keeping
their Faith secret, became fear less and openly declared it and publicly
performed the rites of prayer etc. And when persons, impressed by the
Islamic norms, converted to the Faith, the Quraysh could not interfere
with them because of the terms of the agreement.

The third benefit was that the infidels got opportunities to meet and
exchange views with the Muslims Because of removal of restrictions of
visiting al-Madinah, they frequented there and observed the excellent
morals and the divine qualities of the Prophet (a.s) more closely. They
started getting impressed with the Islamic teachings and subtly carried
the message back to Makkah. Therefore, in a short span of two years the
number of Muslims in Makkah doubled. The historian al-Tabari says:

###### “Within two years the population of Muslims was more than double than what it was.”[1]

The fourth benefit was that it refuted the belief of the people that
Islam had spread with the strength of the sword. If the sword had played
any part in the spread of the Faith, the truce should have played a role
of deterrent in its spread. To the contrary its fast growth was a result
of the love of peace that the Faith propagated. If hostilities had
continued after Hudaybiyah, the spread of Islam would not have been so
fast. Peace gave an opportunity to the right thinking persons to flock
towards it.

The fifth benefit was that the new generation of the Quraysh observed
the peace loving attitude of the Prophet (a.s) in comparison to the
stern stance of Abū-Jahl and Abū-Sufyan. They also thought about the
canard spread by the infidels and the Jews and read through it. They
realized that all this talk about the Prophet (a.s) was wrong. If the
Prophet (a.s) was of aggressive bent of mind, he had better strength of
men and material and could have started battles to avenge the earlier
fights that the Quraysh had imposed on him. But this truce, and his
attitude thereafter, proved that he was a man of peace! In the past he
fought back only in self-defense.

The sixth benefit was that the Quraysh were contented that during the
period of the truce they will not be attacked by the Muslims. Therefore,
they did not feel the need to arm themselves any more. But when they
took part in the conflict between Banū-Bakr and Banū-Khuza\`ah, against
the terms of the truce, and sided with their friends, Banū-Bakr, and
killed persons from Banū-Khuza\`ah who were the allies of the Muslims,
the Muslims came forward and conquered Makkah! The truce in fact laid
the foundation of the consolidation of the Muslim State! Allah has
termed the annexation of Makkah as *“al-fath al-mubin”* and the Prophet
(a.s) termed it *“\`azm al-futūh!”*

While this truce proved the sagacity and right thinking of the Prophet
(a.s), its implementation proved that he had great regard for
commitments and agreements.

The advantages derived from patient and meticulous follow up of the
truce are:

The first is that when there is the possibility of peace, war cannot be
started with this end in view even if harsh terms and conditions for the
truce are accepted, it would be beneficial for the society in the longer
run. No doubt, it could have caused some heart burn to the Companions
who were ignorant and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 283

less farsighted. The truce was declared on the terms of the infidels and
the fruitful results are there for every one to see.

Secondly, the implicit implementation of a truce or an agreement is
absolutely essential even if the truce is with infidels and hypocrites.
Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) did not hesitate in handing over Abū-Jandal
and Abū-Basir to the infidels to meet the requirements of the terms of
the truce. This shows his high respect for the terms of the agreement.
However, when the Quraysh acted against the terms of the truce,
immediate action was taken and the conquest of Makkah was the result.

Thirdly, the Prophet (a.s) is not bound with the public opinion. The
opinion of the companions was against the signing of the truce. But the
Prophet (a.s) used his best discretion and the results are there for
everyone to see. This discretion also had the Divine Backing. If the
Prophet (a.s) consulted the Muslims, it was only to keep them at rest.
When their opinion was not worth accepting, he discreetly kept it aside

The part played by Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) in the negotiations and
formulation of the truce of Hudaybiyah has been invaluable. He conducted
the parleys for the truce as meticulously as he did during the earlier
campaigns of battle with the Quraysh. It is common experience that those
who are adept at warfare do not have any aptitude for peace making.
\`Ali (a.s), who was the greatest warrior of his time, proved his mettle
at peace making too. Shaykh al-Mufid writes:

###### “All the matters connected with Hudaybiyah were in the charge of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)—whether it was the bay\`at al-ridwan, organizing the troops or the negotiations and drafting of the truce!”[1]

He had felt the need for truce and peace from the very beginning.
Therefore, he was neither confused nor did he doubt the Prophet (a.s),
as was done by some senior Companions. He also did not like to score off
the words *rasūlullah* from the truce document. This shows his staunch
Faith and dedication to the Prophet (a.s). Shaykh \`Abd al-Haqq
al-Muhaddith al-Dahlawi writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) not agreeing to erase the words rasūlullah is not disobedience nor disrespect, but it is the manifestation of his obedience and respect for the Prophet (a.s).”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kitāb al-irshād, Page 54  
 **[2]** Madarij al-Nabuwwah, Vol 2, Page 286
