The Conquest of Makkah
======================

At al-Hudaybiyah, a truce was declared between the Quraysh and the
Muslims that both the parties will not indulge in fighting for the next
ten years. If one of the parties infringed the agreement, then the other
will not be bound by the terms. One of the tribes having a treaty with
the Muslims, Banū-Khuza\`ah and a tribe having a treaty with the
Quraysh, Banū-Bakr, had been at loggerheads for long, but because of the
wars between the Quraysh and the Muslims they were quiet for some time.
They had both kept aside their differences and were united against the
Muslims. When the long truce between the Quraysh and the Muslims became
effective, Banū-Bakr attacked Banū-Khuza\`ah and killed one of their
men. The suppressed animosity was revived. Although Banū-Bakr was
sufficient to deal with Banū-Khuza\`ah, Quraysh supplied arms to
Banū-Bakr. This was an infringement of the truce with the Muslims. Also,
\`Ikrimah ibn Abi-Jahl, Safwan ibn Umayyah and Suhayl ibn \`Amr who were
the signatories to the treaty with the Muslims took active part in the
conflict between the two tribes in favor of Banū-Bakr. Banū-Khuza\`ah
took shelter in the Ka\`bah to save their lives. Even there they were
attacked and killed. When they were helpless, a delegation of forty
persons from Banū-Khuza\`ah under the leadership of \`Amr ibn Salem went
to the Prophet (a.s) in al-Madinah and lodged a protest that the Quraysh
had infringed the truce taking part in the hostilities and supplying
arms to Banū-Bakr against them, the vassals of the Muslims. The Prophet
(a.s) agreed to provide help to them. He sent a message to the Quraysh
to give the blood money to Banū-Khuza\`ah for their lives lost during
the conflict or abstain from aiding and abetting Banū-Bakr, or otherwise
their treaty with the Muslims would become void. Quraysh refused to
abide by the suggestions and said plainly that neither they would give
the blood money nor they will abstain from helping Banū-Bakr. Because of
this stubborn attitude of the Quraysh, the Prophet (a.s) made a public
declaration that there was no more a treaty of peace with the Quraysh.

After this announcement by the Prophet (a.s), the Quraysh were restless.
They started brooding over the consequences of their infringement of the
terms of the truce. Realizing that they were incapable of meeting the
onslaught of the

Muslims, they started planning to keep the truce intact. Therefore, they
deputed Abū-Sufyan to al-Madinah to negotiate and diplomatically save
the situation. When he arrived at al-Madinah, Abū-Sufyan went straight
to his daughter Ummu-Habibah who was one of the spouses of the Prophet
(a.s). When Ummu-Habibah saw her father coming, she quickly folded the
bedding of the Prophet (a.s). When Abū-Sufyan asked her why she moved
away the bedding, Ummu-Habibah said that it was the bedding of the
Prophet (a.s) and she would not like him to sit on that because he was
an infidel and idolater. Abū-Sufyan went away from there with an
unpleasant mood. He went to the Prophet (a.s) and requested him to renew
the treaty for truce with the Quraysh. The Prophet (a.s) did not pay
heed to any of his arguments. He sat there for a while and went to
Abū-Bakr and asked him to recommend to the Prophet (a.s) for renewing
the treaty. Abū-Bakr expressed his inability to help. He then went to
\`Umar and he too excused himself. When he was disappointed everywhere,
he went to \`Ali (a.s) and sought his help in the matter. He said that
when the Prophet (a.s) arrives at a decision, none else has the right to
interfere with it. Abū-Sufyan told Fatimah (a.s), who was sitting there,
“O daughter! If your son, Hasan (a.s), intervenes and gets the truce
renewed he will be called as the Chief of Arabs until the world exists.”
She replied, “Hasan (a.s) is still a child and has nothing to do with
these matters!” In the end he told \`Ali (a.s) that if he cannot help,
he must at least suggest what the Quraysh should do to save the
situation. \`Ali (a.s) suggested to Abū-Sufyan to make an announcement
for renewal of the truce and go away to Makkah! Abū-Sufyan asked what
benefit such an announcement will bring to the Quraysh? He replied that
it could not be predicted whether the declaration would be of any
advantage to the Quraysh or not. Any way, Abū-Sufyan did go to the
mosque and made a public announcement that the Quraysh were unilaterally
renewing their truce of peace with the Muslims. After this announcement,
he went away to Makkah.

When he reached Makkah, people asked him what was the result of his
visit to al-Madinah? He said that he had a discussion with the Prophet
(a.s) but he would not agree to renew the truce. Then he told about
going to Abū-Quhafah and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab and getting no help. He
said that he went to \`Ali (a.s) who listened to him with attention and
only on his suggestion he had made a unilateral public announcement of
renewal of the truce by the Quraysh. The Quraysh asked whether the
Prophet (a.s) approved of this measure. Abū-Sufyan said that he did not
have the approval of the Prophet (a.s) for the renewal. The Quraysh said
that any declaration of a truce has at least two consenting parties, if
the other party has not agreed there is no sense in your announcement.
\`Ali (a.s) has pulled a fast one on you!

The Prophet (a.s) was much affected with the bloodshed caused by
Banū-Bakr and in terms of the agreements, he was bound to come to the
rescue of Banū-Khuza\`ah. Therefore, he asked his people to be ready for
battle and asked others outside of al-Madinah to prepare for joining the
troops. People started arriving in numbers on the call of the Prophet
(a.s) and started preparing the arms for the fight. But none knew where
they had to go for the fight! The Prophet (a.s) took full care to see
that the Quraysh did not learn about these preparations to take them on
unawares! The Companions who knew about the program were strictly warned
to keep their confidence. But Hatib ibn Balta\`ah, whose family was in
Makkah, committed the mistake of revealing the secret by writing a
letter to \`Amr ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib and sending it to him through his
slave girl. In the letter, he mentioned that the Prophet (a.s) was
preparing to attack Makkah. The Prophet (a.s) learned about this
betrayal through a Revelation. He sent \`Ali (a.s) and al-Zubayr ibn
al-\`Awwam to intercept the girl and bring her back to al-Madinah. She
had only reached the Valley of Dhul-Halifah when she was captured. \`Ali
(a.s) asked her about the letter, but she flatly refused any knowledge
about it. Al-Zubayr rummaged her belongings but did not find the letter.
\`Ali (a.s) said that it was not possible that she did not have the
letter when the Prophet (a.s) had informed them about it. There is no
question of a wrong statement from him. He sternly questioned the girl
and told her that if she did not produce the letter a search of her
clothes would be made. Because of this threat, she produced it from the
hair of her head. \`Ali (a.s) went with the letter to the Prophet (a.s)
and reported to him about the entire episode. The Prophet (a.s)
assembled all the Companions and told them that he had warned everyone
to maintain the secrecy about the entire operation. But one of them
tried to unsuccessfully reveal the secret to the Quraysh. The letter
written in this connection has been intercepted and, therefore, the
person should own his guilt. Otherwise, he might be put to grave shame!
Hearing this, Hatib stood up shaking and said, “O Prophet of Allah
(a.s)! I am the guilty person. I have not done it for the friendship of
the Quraysh or enmity for Islam. I thought that I would be able to
secure my children by earning the gratitude of the Quraysh. My family is
living in Makkah at their mercy. \`Umar angrily rose up and said:

###### “O Prophet of Allah! Permit me that I cut away his head. He is a hypocrite!”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 328

But the Prophet (a.s) forgave the person. The Holy Qur’an mentions about
the episode:

### …تُسِرُّونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَأَنَا أَعْلَمُ بِمَا أَخْفَيْتُمْ وَمَا أَعْلَنتُمْ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْهُ مِنْكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ.

#### …would you manifest love to them? And I know what you conceal and what you manifest; and whoever of you does this, he indeed has gone astray from the straight path. (60:1)

On the tenth of Ramadan 4 A.H., the prophet (a.s) marched with one
hundred thousand strong army of armed men Four hundred companions were
on horses and the rest were footmen. When the army reached Ghadir, the
prophet (a.s) asked the men to break their fasts and he too did the
same. Some people hesitated in doing it. When the Prophet (a.s) learnt
about it, he said that they were sinners. After this everyone broke his
fast. When they reached Thaniyyat al-\`Uqab, the Prophet’s uncle,
\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib, met him along his family members. \`Abbas
sent his family to al-Madinah and himself joined the entourage of the
Prophet (a.s).Twelve miles before Makkah, the Prophet (a.s) established
camp. \`Abbas came out riding on the mule of the Prophet (a.s) to find a
person who could go to the Quraysh to tell them to come to the camp and
appeal for amnesty. He also suggested to them that they embrace Islam
and save themselves from destruction. After the unsuccessful visit of
Abū-Sufyan to al-Madinah the Quraysh had the fear that the Muslims would
come anytime to settle scores with them. Therefore, they used to remain
alert during the nights to quell any surprise attack in the darkness of
the night. With this purpose Abū-Sufyan, Hakim ibn Hizam and Badil ibn
Warqa’ were on rounds of the outskirts of Makkah when they noticed
lights of fire at a distance in the direction of Marj al-Dharan.
Abū-Sufyan asked who these people could be? Badil ibn Warqa’ said it
could be the troops of Banū-Khuza\`ah. Abū-Sufyan said that
Banū-Khuza\`ah had no means to mobilize such a huge army. They were
still discussing the matter when they met \`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib.
Abū-Sufyan asked him if he knew about the army at some distance from
there. He replied that it was the army of the Prophet of Islam (a.s).
The Prophet (a.s) was marching towards Makkah with an army of one
hundred thousand men and might attack with the dawn! He said none from
the Quraysh will survive this onslaught. Hearing this, Abū-Sufyan
shivered and asked what should be done to save themselves. \`Abbas asked
him to sit on his mule behind him and that he will get him amnesty by
talking to the prophet. When \`Abbas passed through the army with
Abū-Sufyan, \`Umar espied them and he went running to the Prophet (a.s)

and told him that the enemy of Allah was coming. He asked for his
permission that he would kill him. When \`Abbas heard \`Umar stressing
on killing of Abū-Sufyan, he said:

###### “Stop O \`Umar! You are saying this because he is from the progeny of \`Abd-Manaf. If he was from your tribe, Banū-\`Adi, you would never have uttered any such thing.”[1]

The Prophet (a.s) told \`Abbas to keep Abū-Sufyan in his tent and fetch
him to his presence in the morning. When he was brought in the morning,
the Prophet (a.s) said, “O Abū-Sufyan! You have still not understood
that besides Allah, there is no other god!” Abū-Sufyan replied that it
seemed like it. If there were any other god than Allah, he would come to
their rescue. The Prophet (a.s) said, “You have still not understood
that I am the Prophet of Allah (a.s)?”Abū-Sufyan replied that his mind
was not clear about it! \`Abbas told Abū-Sufyan that if he cared for his
life, he should embrace Islam or else someone would kill him. When he
saw that there was no other way, he recited the kalimah and joined the
ranks of Muslims. \`Abbas recommended that Abū-Sufyan loved pomp and
show and that he may be given some important position. The Prophet (a.s)
said that whoever took shelter in his house will have amnesty and those
who take shelter in the *al-Bayt al-Haram* too will have amnesty. Those
who lock themselves up in their homes too shall be safe. The Prophet
(a.s) asked \`Abbas to take Abū-Sufyan to such a spot that he could have
a birds eye view of the vast army! \`Abbas took him to a place from
where he saw the well armed troops, row after row! He told \`Abbas,
“Your nephew has become the ruler of a great Empire!” \`Abbas replied,”
it is not an empire. It is only the grandeur of the prophethood!”
Abū-Sufyan added, “I did not remember when I made the remark! It must be
as you say!”

After seeing the army of Islam, Abū-Sufyan returned to Makkah. He told
the Quraysh that Muhammad (a.s) had come with a huge army. People asked
him if he had been there. What has he said? Abū-Sufyan informed them
that the Prophet (a.s) had told him that those who took shelter in
Abū-Sufyan’s house will have amnesty. The people said that his house was
not big enough to take lot of people. He then told that those who took
shelter in the *al-Bayt al-Haram* too would have amnesty. He then
addressed the Quraysh and told them that they are not strong enough to
fight the Muslims. It would be better for them if the embraced Islam.
His wife, Hind bint \`Utbah, hearing this came forward and caught hold
of his beard and said, “O people! Kill this foolish old

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 331

man!” Abū-Sufyan told her,” remember! If you hesitate slightly in
embracing Islam, you will lose your head!” The Quraysh were still
brooding over the matter in surprise when Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah entered
Makkah carrying the Standard of Islam.

The words that Sa\`d was uttering were manifesting his desire to avenge
the atrocities that the Quraysh had inflicted on the Muslims and that he
will advance killing people and letting their blood. \`Abbas told the
Prophet (a.s) that Sa\`d had intensions to harm the people. The Prophet
(a.s) had no plan to enter into unnecessary fights. He therefore asked
\`Ali (a.s) to:

###### “Go to Sa\`d, take the Standard from him and enter Makkah!”[1]

\`Ali (a.s) took the Standard from Sa\`d and marched into Makkah with
the army behind him. Quraysh had no courage left to encounter the huge
army. They locked themselves up at homes. For those who had the doors of
Makkah closed for them yesterday, the doors of victory and success were
wide open today. This was a victory of Islam’s love for peace and amity!
For this victory they did not have to fight any battles. But in every
group there will be some trouble makers. They cannot live without being
harsh to their adversaries. Therefore, Khalid ibn al-Walid, who had
embraced Islam just before the conquest of Makkah, and Islam has not yet
brought about any change in his thinking, while passing through the
lower reaches of Makkah, started fighting with Banū-Bakr. The Prophet
(a.s), passing through the Mount Hajūn, noticed the shining of the
blades of swords. This upset him very much. He ordered, “This bloodshed
must be stopped forthwith!” But many men from Banū-Bakr were already
killed. When the Prophet (a.s) arrived from the upper reaches of Makkah,
he came to the Ka\`bah and circumambulated it. He noticed that the
chiefs of the Quraysh were standing with bowed heads. These were the
persons who did everything possible to harm the Prophet (a.s). they
pushed him away from home and did not let him live in peace even in
exile. He looked at them and asked what treatment they expected from the
Muslims? They put their heads further down in shame! The Speaker of
Quraysh, Suhayl ibn \`Amr said,” You are the son of a noble brother and
a noble uncle! We only expect good from you! “The Prophet (a.s) replied,
“Today there will be no revenge taken on you! Go! You are all free!”
This was the manifestation of the noble character and broadmindedness of
the Prophet (a.s). Those who were his deadly enemies embraced Islam.
Yesterday’s orphan was today’s ruler who not only ruled their bodies but
also their hearts! The hegemony of Quraysh had vanished in thin air and
infidelity died its own death!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 166

Although the men of Makkah embraced Islam and some of them were already
having the seeds of Faith in their minds, but certainly, there was a
vast majority of persons who had embraced Islam in their helplessness.
Sudden change in the Faith and beliefs is difficult for the human
nature. There were also some who were adamantly infidel. Many of them
escaped from Makkah and were hiding elsewhere. They would have proved
dangerous for Islam. Therefore, it was necessary to mete out to them
punitive punishment. Although the Prophet (a.s) had declared general
amnesty, he issued orders for some mischief mongers to be executed
wherever they were found, even if they were hanging form the cover of
the Ka\`bah. Therefore, \`Abdullah ibn Khatal and his slave girl who
used to sing lampooning songs against the Prophet (a.s), Huwayris ibn
Nuqayd and Mughith ibn Sabbabah were executed. Some persons were
pardoned from orders of execution as well. Therefore \`Abdullah ibn
Abi-Sarh took shelter with \`Uthman and was released on his
recommendation. \`Ikrimah ibn Abi-Jahl escaped towards Yemen. His wife
Umm Hakim appealed for amnesty for him, that was granted. Habar ibn
al-Aswad, \`Amr ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib’s slave girl Sara and Khatal’s
slave girl saved themselves by embracing Islam. Besides these some other
persons were hiding in Makkah with the intention of creating trouble.
\`Ali (a.s) heard that al-Harith ibn Husham and Qays ibn al-Sa’ib and
some persons of Banū-Makhzūm were there in the house of Ummu-Hani’ bint
Abi-Talib. He came to her house and asked that those hiding inside must
be handed over. Ummu-Hani’ could not recognize \`Ali (a.s). She said, “O
person! I am the real sister of \`Ali (a.s) and the daughter of
Muhammad’s uncle! If you force me to surrender those whom I have given
shelter, I shall complain to the Prophet (a.s). Now \`Ali (a.s) removed
the hood from his head when Ummu-Hani’ recognized him. She ran close to
him and said that she had already resolved to complain to the Prophet
(a.s). He said, “You may keep your resolution by complaining to the
Prophet (a.s)! Ummu-Hani’ then came to the Prophet (a.s). The Prophet
(a.s) asked her the reason for her visit. She said, “O Prophet of Allah!
I have given shelter to some people from my husband’s family. \`Ali
(a.s) wants to take then in custody!” The Prophet (a.s) said, “To
whomsoever you gave shelter, I have given shelter!”

About the events of the conquest of Makkah, \`Ali’s attitude had been
exemplary at all stages. He preferred obedience to the Prophet (a.s)
over everything else. This attitude was so much engrained in his nature
that everything he thought and did was a reflection of the actions of
the Prophet (a.s).He was the keeper of the confidences of the Prophet
(a.s) about the campaign for the conquest of Makkah and he never opened
his mouth ever to

assert his own importance when a Companion who was there at the Battle
of Badr and at *bay\`at al-ridwan* tried to reveal the secret to save
his family from the Quraysh in Makkah. When Abū-Sufyan consulted him
regarding the renewal of the truce with Quraysh, unlike Abū-Bakr and
\`Umar he adopted a soft, discreet attitude in denying to intercede with
the Prophet (a.s) that was acknowledged by Abū-Sufyan on his return to
Makkah. This was the reason that he had not returned to Makkah totally
dissatisfied about his efforts at renewing the truce. If this were not
the case, he would certainly have stressed that the Muslims might soon
attack them. In that event, all efforts at keeping the plans of the
attack confidential would have been futile. Then \`Ali (a.s) also hinted
to Abū-Sufyan that there was no guarantee that if he made unilateral
announcement of renewal of the truce, whether it would be of any
advantage or not. This advice by \`Ali (a.s) to Abū-Sufyan appeared as
if he wanted to momentarily shake him away. But even then Abū-Sufyan was
grateful and did acknowledge it when he returned to Makkah.

During this campaign too the Standard of Victory was in the hands of
\`Ali (a.s) like in all other battles. Although in the beginning the
Standard was given to Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah, but when his attitude was seen
to be harsh and revengeful, the Prophet (a.s) took away the Standard
from him and gave to \`Ali (a.s). If the Prophet (a.s) had given the
Standard to anyone other than \`Ali (a.s), Sa\`d would have deemed it a
personal affront and might have hesitated to hand over the Standard But
giving it to \`Ali (a.s) was like giving it back to the Prophet (a.s)
himself. \`Ali (a.s) had the capability of handling matters both at war
and during the peace times. One cannot even imagine that he would do
anything under momentary emotions. It is an attractive aspect of his
character that when at war, he is an adept warrior and in peace, he is
so soft and pliable that he never took part in any warlike actions!

Here, he also manifested his attitude of following the rules. He did not
want to spare even the persons who took shelter in his own sister’s
house until the Prophet (a.s) himself ruled on the matter. This shows
that in the enforcement of the law there was no dividing line between
kin, friend or foe!
