Purification of the Ka`bah
==========================

\`Amr ibn Laha al-Khuza\`i had seen the \`Amaliqah (the giants)
worshiping idols in the year 207 A.D. in Egypt and Syria. He did not
find any advantage in idol-worship, but he liked the art of carving of
the idols. He brought some of the idols to Makkah and installed them in
the Ka\`bah. In time, Makkah became a centre of idolatry. The biggest
idol of the Quraysh was Hubal which was installed at the highest point
in the Ka\`bah. Around it there were kept hundreds of idols tied to each
other. Out of the three hundred and sixty days of the year, one day was
earmarked for the veneration of one particular idol. In emulation of the
people of Makkah, the people in the surrounding areas too were attracted
to idol worship. When they visited the Ka\`bah during the Hajj, they
would take home stones from there and carve out idols for themselves in
the shape of the idols in Makkah. This way every tribe of Arabia had its
own idols. About one stage away from Makkah, a place called Naqlah had
an idol by name al-\`Uzza. This place was venerated by the Quraysh and
Banū-Kinanah. In Ta’if there was the idol of al-Lat. At some distance
from al-Madinah there was Manat that was the god of Aws, Khazraj and
Ghassan. For the Hamdan tribe of Najran the idol for worship was Ya\`ūq.
In Yanbu\` and its environs the idol of Hudhayl, Sawah was installed. In
Dawmat al-Jandal Banū-Kalab’s god, Wudd was installed. Some isolators
considered these idols as the representatives of one and only God. They
used to pray and ask for boons from these inanimate idols! They were
unable to understand that those inanimate pieces of stone had no power
to grant their wishes or save them from the natural calamities! They
used to say that through them they were able to reach closer to God! The
Holy Qur’an also records their thoughts:

### وَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ مَا نَعْبُدُهُمْ إِلَّا لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلَى اللَّهِ زُلْفَى …

#### “And as for those who take guardians besides Him, saying, We do not serve them save that they may make us nearer to Allah… (39:3)

The purpose for annexing Makkah was not that the Prophet (a.s) wanted to
expand his territory and get termed as a conquer. The main purpose was
to

abolish idolatry and spread the message of Unity of Allah. After
subduing Makkah the first step was to give attention to the destruction
of the idols in the Ka\`bah. Although there was the risk of the Quraysh
rising against this step, the Prophet (a.s) decided to go ahead with the
performance of his duty against all possible odds. First he erased the
paintings of the prophets and the angels from the walls of Ka\`bah.
Then, along with \`Ali (a.s), he destroyed the idols put at the lower
levels of the Ka\`bah. Now was the turn of the bigger idols at higher
level. The Prophet (a.s) told \`Ali (a.s) that he would climb on his
shoulders to reach the idols. He did climb but he felt weakness and came
down. He now asked \`Ali (a.s) to climb on his shoulders and perform the
task. \`Ali (a.s) went up the shoulders of the Prophet (a.s) and besides
the smaller idols he destroyed the big Hubal that was installed on a
foundation of steel rods. He pulled it with such strength that it
crashed to the ground and shattered to pieces. It would have been such a
pathetic scene for the Quraysh that until the other day they were
worshiping the idol that was lying today shattered on the ground!

\`Ali (a.s), after breaking this big idol, dropped down to the ground
and smilingly told the Prophet (a.s), “I have jumped form such height
but was not hurt a little!” The Prophet (a.s) replied, “How could you
get hurt when Muhammad (a.s) raised you and Jibril (Archangel Gabriel)
helped you down!” This was the greatness of \`Ali (a.s)! In other words,
this was the Mi\`raj (Ascension) on the shoulders of the one who had the
privilege of the Real Mi\`raj. \`Ali (a.s) himself has said:

###### “If I wished, I could have touched the heights of the sky!”

There were other people too with the Prophet (a.s) at that time. This
task could have been entrusted to any other person by the Prophet (a.s).
But the Prophet (a.s) did not want any one else to be associated with
the work of the purification of the Ka\`bah. The reason was that \`Ali
(a.s) had never bowed down before the idols in the past and always
prostrated before Allah, the Real Creator! Other persons, at some time
in their past lives, were idolaters! If they were asked to destroy the
idols, they might have hesitated in performing the task. One example is
the people of Ta’if, who, even after embracing Islam, did not like to
break the idol with their own hands. Therefore, when they embraced Islam
at the hands of the Prophet (a.s), they requested him to leave their
idols untouched for one year. When the Prophet (a.s) turned down their
request, they refused to break the idols with their own hands and wanted
someone else to do the task!
