The Expedition of Hunayn
========================

During the conquest of Makkah, the Quraysh had laid down arms in front
of the Prophet of Islam (a.s) and then the fear of the Muslims became
rooted in the minds of the infidel tribes of Arabia. Most of them sought
amnesty from the Muslims. But the naughty tribes of Banū-Hawazin and
Banū-Thaqif were still rebellious. They were still planning to be
mischievous. One of the chiefs of Banū-Hawazin, Malik ibn \`Awf
al-Nasri, colluded with Banū-Jathm and Banū-Nasr to raise an army for a
result oriented battle with the Muslims. Banū-Thaqif who had once stoned
away the Prophet (a.s) from Ta’if joined hands with them. Malik ibn
\`Awf also sent word to Banū-Sa\`d to join hands with them. Banū-Sa\`d
did not agree with the offer saying that Muhammad (a.s) had his
upbringing with them and they would not like to fight with him. But some
of their men did join the collaborators. The size of the army reached a
total of five thousand. Malik ibn \`Awf was named the Commander-in-chief
and Abū-Jarwal the standard bearer. They started on the campaign along
with their families, children and flocks of animals! In this army was
the famous warrior of Arabia, Durayd ibn Samah. His age at the time was
120 years but he was brought sitting in a litter on the back of a camel
to make use of his vast experience of planning the strategies of battle.
When the army halted at the Valley of Awtas he said that the place will
be suitable for the movement of horses and for undertaking combats! He
also said that the place was neither too soft nor very stony. At that
moment, he heard the sounds of children and sheep. He enquired of Malik
ibn \`Awf about the sounds. He informed that women and children too were
there with the army. He asked why they were brought with the troops. He
was told that with the families and children along, no one will think of
showing his back to the battlefield! He said that when the fear of the
enemy dominates the minds of the troops, nothing can stop them from
running away! If defeat was faced in these circumstances, the shame will
not leave them forever! Then he asked, “Are Banū-Kalab and Banū-Ka\`b
too with you?” He replied that they had not joined with them. The old
man said that if luck had favored them, they too would have joined the
army! He expressed his frank opinion that they return to their
respective habitations! If then the Muslims attacked them, they would be
able to defend themselves and

other tribes too might come to their rescue against the aggressors.
Malik did not agree with his advice. Durayd said that then he would not
have anything to do with the campaign! In fact Malik did not want his
interference because he would claim credit if the battle was won by
them! Therefore, rejecting a wise suggestion, the troops advanced
forward to fight!

When the Prophet (a.s) learned that Banū-Hawazin and Banū-Thaqif were
advancing for a battle with the Muslims, he deputed \`Abdullah ibn
Hadrad to reconnoiter about their movements. He returned after his
investigations and reported to the prophet (a.s) that their intention to
battle was very evident and that the Muslims must be ready to repulse
their attack. The Prophet (a.s) called \`Umar and told him what he had
heard from Ibn Abi-Hadrad. \`Umar said Ibn Abi-Hadrad cannot be trusted
because he is a liar. At this point Ibn Abi-Hadrad addressed \`Umar and
said:

###### “O \`Umar! If you are refuting me, you were used to refuting the Truth in the past”[1]

The Prophet (a.s) trusted the intelligence of Ibn Abil-Hadrad and
ordered the troops to be in readiness. They loaned from Safwan ibn
Umayyah, who had not still embraced Islam, a hundred armors and other
equipment of war and on 8 Shawwal 8H moved with 12,000 troops. In this
contingent there were 10,000 persons who had accompanied him from
al-Madinah. The other 2,000 were the recent converts from Makkah. The
numerical strength was thrice as much as that of the Infidels. This has
created a subtle feeling of pride among the Muslims. Therefore, seeing
the strength of the army of Islam, Abū-Bakr said, “Today we shall not
face defeat because of paucity of numbers!” The enemy arrived at the
Valley of Hunayn and entrenched the men in the crevices and passages of
the passages of the hills Hunayn is a valley lying on the hills between
Makkah and Ta’if and had plain grounds on one side and ravines and
ditches on the other. When the Muslims reached the Valley of Hunayn in
the morning, and advanced on the difficult and sloping terrain, the
enemy started throwing stones and arrows on them. The Muslims did not
expect this sudden attack on them. Pandemonium broke out in the troops.
First the Front Guard flew! The commander of the group was Khalid ibn
al-Walid! When those coming from behind saw Khalid running away, they
too took to their heels! The pandemonium was such that no one bothered
about the others. They were all running helter-skelter. Abū-Qutadah who
was one of the deserters said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 346

###### “The Muslims flew! I too flew with them. Suddenly I noticed \`Umar Ibn al-Khattab among the deserters I asked him, ‘What has happened to the people?’ He replied, ‘It is Allah’s Wish!’”[1]

The books of Hadith and biographies certainly recorded about this
flight, but the Holy Qur’an too records the incident thus:

### لَقَدْ نَصَرَكُمْ اللَّهُ فِي مَوَاطِنَ كَثِيرَةٍ وَيَوْمَ حُنَيْنٍ إِذْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ كَثْرَتُكُمْ فَلَمْ تُغْنِ عَنْكُمْ شَيْئًا وَضَاقَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ الْأَرْضُ بِمَا رَحُبَتْ ثُمَّ وَلَّيْتُمْ مُدْبِرِينَ.

#### “Certainly Allah helped you in many battlefields and on the day of Hunayn, when your great numbers made you vain, but they availed you nothing and the earth became strait to you notwithstanding its spaciousness, then you turned back retreating. (9:25)

When Abū-Sufyan saw the Muslims running away he said, “Wait! When they
are vanquished, they will run to the sea shore!” Kildah ibn Hanbal said,
“Today the spell of Islam has been broken!” Some said that al-Lat and
Manat had avenged their destruction! Although they were in the army of
Islam, but their hearts were not with them. They would certainly have
showed their backs if defeat looked into their faces. But the surprising
fact was that those who were there at the bay\`at al-ridwan and swore to
lay down their lives for the Cause chose to fly! Within no time, a major
portion of the 12,000 men vanished in thin air! Very few persons
remained with the Prophet (a.s). According to one narration, only four
persons, \`Ali (a.s), \`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib, Abū-Sufyan ibn
al-Harith and \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ūd remained steadfastly with the
Prophet (a.s). According to another narration there were ten persons
with him, viz: \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib (a.s), \`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib,
al-Fadl ibn \`Abbas, Abū-Sufyan ibn al-Harith, Rabi\`ah ibn al-Harith,
\`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib, \`Utbah and Mu’tah sons
of Abū-Lahab and Ayman ibn \`Ubayd. The Prophet (a.s) was astride a pony
in the battlefield. \`Abbas and al-Fadl were standing on the right and
left of him. Abū-Sufyan was at the back holding the saddle of the mule
and \`Ali (a.s) was in the front meeting the attacks of the enemy with
his sword. The other persons formed a protective circle around the
Prophet (a.s). The enemy’s pressure increased every moment. Malik ibn
\`Awf came forward to attack the Prophet (a.s). Ayman ibn \`Ubayd
countered his attack and was martyred defending. The history records
that in the moment of trial the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 3, Page 45

Prophet (a.s) was the most steadfast. He had these words on his lips:

###### “It is true that I am the Prophet (a.s) I am the son of \`Abd al-Muttalib!”

When he saw the Muslims deserting the theatre of war, he turned left and
right, and called them:

###### “O Allah’s Creatures! Where are you heading to?”

When he found none heeding his call, he turned to his uncle, \`Abbas,
and asked him to call the deserters in a loud voice. \`Abbas shouted at
the top of his voice:

###### “O men of Ansar! O those who were present at the bay\`at al-ridwan!”

On this call, some of the deserters came back. \`Ali (a.s) gathered them
under his Standard and advanced to attack the enemy. On the other side,
the enemy too was alert. Both the sides attacked each other with swords.
Sparks came out of the clashing swords. The Prophet (a.s) said:

###### “The oven of battle is hot now!”

The Standard Bearer of Banū-Hawazin, Abū-Jarwal was riding on a camel.
He was waving his black flag, and he attacked reciting martial poems.
\`Ali (a.s) was looking for a chance to attack him. From the back he hit
the legs of the camel with his sword. The camel fell down and Abū-Jarwal
was not able to keep his balance. At that moment \`Ali (a.s) gave him
such a blow that he was cut into two. With the killing of Abū-Jarwal the
morale of the enemy sank low. Their men started running away. The
deserters from the Muslim army who were hiding themselves in the
crevices of the hills came back and attacked the enemy in unison. Some
of the enemy men were killed and others were taken captive. The fight
was on when the time for meals arrived. The Prophet (a.s) said that they
should stop fighting now and those taken captive should not be executed.
But despite this order, two of the captives were killed. One of them was
Ibn al-Akwa\` who was functioning as a detective for Banū-Hudhayl during
the campaign for conquest of Makkah. When \`Umar found him helpless, he
motioned to an al-Ansari to slay him. The other person killed was Jamil
ibn Mu\`ammar. He too was killed by an al-Ansari. When the Prophet (a.s)
asked for an explanation from him, he said that \`Umar had prompted him
to kill the person. The Prophet (a.s) said that he had personally asked
them not to kill the captives, looked angrily at \`Umar and turned away
his face! After some days, on the intervention of \`Umayr ibn Wahab, the

Prophet (a.s) overlooked that act of \`Umar. Similarly, the Prophet
(a.s) was disturbed at the killing of a woman. Looking at her dead body,
he asked who had killed her. The people informed that it was Khalid ibn
al-Walid who killed her. He asked the persons to go to him and tell:

###### “The Prophet of Allah (a.s) prohibits you from slaying women, children and laborers.”[1]

The war was over but the Muslims continued to chase the infidels. They
took custody of the enemy’s animals and materials. They took lot of
prisoners of war, among whom were women and children. The Prophet (a.s)
wanted one person, Bahad, to be apprehended alive. Therefore, the
Muslims held him and his family members. Among the captives was
al-Shayma’ bint al-Harith, who was the prophet’s sister by the virtue of
her mother being his foster mother during his childhood. When she was
put to hardship by the Muslim troops, she told them that she was their
Prophet’s foster sister. They did not believe it and brought her to the
presence of the Prophet (a.s). She said, “I am al-Shayma’, your foster
sister! Once you had bitten my back in your childhood! The mark is still
there! “The Prophet (a.s) recognized her and made her sit on his own
quilt. He asked her, “Would you like to live with us, or return to your
own tribe?” She preferred to get back to her tribe. The prophet (a.s)
gave her a slave, one camel and some sheep and sent her away with
respect.

During this campaign, four Muslims were martyred and seventy infidels
were killed. Thousands were taken captive. They got large amount of
booty of war. In that, there were 24,000 camels, 40.000 sheep and lot of
silver. The captives and the booty were left in the charge of Badil ibn
Warqa’ al-Khuza\`i at Valley al-Ju\`aranah. Those who were able to
escape with their lives went to Ta’if. The chief of Banū-Hawazin, Malik
ibn \`Awf was among the fugitives who reached Ta’if. One group went to
Awtas and another reached Naqlah.

Ghazwah of Hunayn was a big trial for the Muslims. In the beginning,
they were unable to meet the sudden attack of the enemy. They were under
the illusion of the large force they had. If they had exercised care and
forethought to the possibility of the enemy troops attacking from the
caves and crevices, they would not have faced the initial setbacks.
There was also a group of the capitulators of the campaign for conquest
of Makkah who were not wholeheartedly participating in the battle. If,
during this battle, the prophet (a.s) and his near relations were not
steadfast, the battle was nearly lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 180

In this victory too, \`Ali (a.s) played the major part. He never left
the company of the Prophet (a.s) for a moment and was fighting the enemy
like a shield for his Master. It was his example that brought back many
a deserter to the battlefield!
