The Siege of Al-ta’if
=====================

Banū-Thaqif and their chief, Malik ibn \`Awf al-Nasri, escaped from
Hunayn and took shelter in Ta’if. They kept accumulating the equipment
of warfare for one full year and locked themselves up in the fort. The
army of Islam, under the command of the Prophet (a.s) chased them and
laid siege of the Ta’if Fort. From both sides there was exchange of
arrows. The Muslims were in open ground and the Infidels were in the
security of the fort. They rained so many arrows from the fort that some
of the Muslims got martyred and many more injured. When there was no
means of subduing the well-entrenched enemy, Salman al-Farisi came up
with the idea of Catapult. With a specially devised catapult they
started hurling fairly large stones on the fort. Thus they were able to
breach the wall of the fort. When the Muslims tried to enter the fort
through the breach, the infidels threw red-hot iron rods from the top.
The Muslims were forced to withdraw a little and did not succeed in
capturing it.

In the meantime, the Prophet (a.s) asked \`Ali (a.s) to visit areas
surrounding Ta’if and ordered him to destroy any place where idols were
installed. \`Ali (a.s) took a group of men with him and passed near the
habitation of Banū-Khatm while it was still dark. They resisted and one
of their well-known fighter came forward and challenged for a fight.
\`Ali (a.s) asked someone of his men to go ahead and kill the infidel.
When none took courage in his hands, Abul-\`As ibn Rabi\`ah saw that
\`Ali (a.s) was himself getting ready to confront the enemy. He offered
that he would go. But the Imam stopped him and told him that if he
succumbed during the fight, Abul-\`as should take the command. Saying
this, \`Ali (a.s) advanced swiftly and killed the infidel in one stroke.
When Banū-Khatm saw their warrior killed, they retraced their steps.
\`Ali (a.s) went forward and destroyed all the idols of Banū-Hawazin and
Banū-Thaqif. When the entire area was free of the idols, he returned.
When the Prophet (a.s) saw him coming, he loudly raised the slogan of
‘allahu-akbar’ and took \`Ali (a.s) to a corner. They were quietly
exchanging confidences for quite some time.

Some persons did not like this quiet talk. They said, “Today the
exchange of confidences with the cousin is quite long!” \`Umar could not
control himself. And he told the Prophet (a.s) directly that he talked
with \`Ali (a.s) in private and did not allow others to come near him!
The Prophet (a.s) replied:

###### “I have not exchanged confidences with \`Ali (a.s), but Allah has done it.”[1]

During these days of the siege, Nafi\` ibn Ghaylan, with some cavaliers
of Banū-Thaqif, emerged out of the fort. He was chased and killed. The
cavaliers fled in fear. Now the besieged persons did not have any
courage to come out of the fort. During this time the people living in
the environs of Ta’if accepted Islam. Some slaves of Banū-Thaqif came
out of the fort and accepted Islam on condition that they would be free
men. The siege was now over twenty days and there was no indication of
the fort being captured. The Prophet (a.s) asked Nawfal ibn Mu\`awiyah
about the matter. He said that the enemy was like a fox in its den. On
waiting it can be caught, if the chase is given up, there is no fear of
harm. The Prophet (a.s) thought it better to lift the siege and leave
Banū-Thaqif to their own scruples. He made an announcement that they
were leaving from there the next day. Therefore, the Companions prepared
for traveling on the following day. \`Uyaynah ibn Hasan al-Fazari talked
of Banū-Thaqif in laudatory words when the Muslims prepared to lift the
siege. Despite being a member of the Islamic army, he praised the enemy
in these words:

###### “By Allah! I did not come with you to fight with Banū-Thaqif. My purpose was that when Muhammad (a.s) captured Ta’if, I take a woman of Banū-Thaqif as my slave!”[2]

Someone said, “O Allah’s Messenger! At least curse the Banū-Thaqif!”
Instead of cursing, the Prophet (a.s) uttered these words:

###### “O Allah! Guide Banū-Thaqif and send them to me!”[3]

The Prophet’s prayer was answered very soon after that. One delegation
of Banū-Thaqif came to al-Madinah and called on the Prophet (a.s). They
offered to embrace Islam but made a condition that their idol of al-Lat
should be left unharmed for three years! The Prophet (a.s) rejected this
condition. Then they reduced the period to two years, one year and
finally to one month!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Tirmidhī, Page 487  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 355  
 **[3]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 181

Every time the Prophet (a.s) refused to accept the condition. Then they
said that if he insisted to break the idol, he should ask someone else
to perform the task and should not ask them to break their own idol! The
Prophet (a.s) accepted their request. Then they asked to be exempted
from offering mandatory prayers. The Prophet (a.s) said:

###### “There is no good in a Faith Where there is no prayer!”

Then he uttered these words of warning:

###### “You accept Islam, or else I shall send one, towards you, who is from me, (or he said, he is like my Conscience)! He will cut your necks and enslave your women and children and confiscate your wealth and property.”[1]

\`Umar said that a wish came to his mind that the Prophet (a.s) meant
him as that person! But the Prophet (a.s) caught hold of \`Ali’s hand
and said twice: “This is him! This is him!”

The delegation returned to Ta’if and made their report about the
meeting. They all agreed to unconditionally accept Islam.

In this expedition too, \`Ali’s presence is prominent. Along with the
duties of the jihad, he is also active propagating the Faith. During the
siege he destroyed the idols of Banū-Thaqif and Banū-Hawazin and brought
about a change in the thinking of the people in the environs of Ta’if
preparing them to embrace Islam. He killed a strong warrior of
Banū-Khatm forcing them to capitulate. He killed Nafi\` ibn Ghaylan and
chased away his cavaliers. In the end, they all embraced Islam fearing
his valorous attacks!

In this campaign, certain aspects of \`Ali’s superiority are very
evident. The Prophet (a.s) exchanged confidences with him within sight
of the other important Companions! When others expressed their
objections, the Prophet (a.s) said that \`Ali (a.s) was not only the
keeper of his confidences, but of Allah as well! Then the Prophet (a.s)
compared \`Ali (a.s) with his own Conscience, with his Own Self!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 2, Page 477
