Distribution of the Booty
=========================

When the Prophet (a.s) returned from Ta’if and camped at the Valley of
al-Ju\`ranah on the fifth of Dhul-Qa\`dah, a delegation of Banū-Hawazin
embraced Islam and came to his presence. They requested the persons of
their tribe taken captive be freed. One chief of Banū-Sa\`d, Zuhayr ibn
\`Amr, said that among the captives were two of the Prophet’s own aunts
who had brought him up in their own arms. If any Arab chieftain had
taken the milk of one of our ladies, he would certainly have respected
her. You too must treat us with dignity, and we do not expect anything
else from you. The Prophet (a.s) told him that when the Muslims
assembled, he should broach the subject of the release of the captives
with them. He said that at that moment he will raise the matter of the
release of the progeny of \`Abd al-Muttalib. Therefore, when the Muslims
came after the ²uhr Prayer, the captives said that the Prophet (a.s) had
taken the milk of one of their tribeswoman and on that strength; they
ask to be freed from captivity. The Prophet (a.s) said that he was
foregoing the share of Banū-\`Abd al-Muttalib. The Muhajirūn and the
Ansar said that their share too belonged to the Prophet (a.s) and that
they had foregone their rights in his favor. However, \`Aqrah ibn Habis,
\`Abbas ibn Mirdas and \`Uyaynah ibn Hasan were a bit reluctant. When
the captives were released, the Prophet (a.s) asked the delegates about
Malik ibn \`Awf al-Nasri. They said that he was with the Banū-Thaqif at
Ta’if. The Prophet (a.s) asked them to send word to him that if he came
there, the members of his family will be released from captivity. When
Malik got the message, he immediately started from Ta’if, and reaching
al-Ju\`ranah, he went to the presence of the Prophet (a.s) and embraced
Islam. The Prophet (a.s) released his family, gave back his confiscated
assets and gave him a hundred camels as a gift.

When the captives of Hawazin were released, the Muslims insisted on the
distribution of the booty of war and said that the camels, goats and
sheep might be distributed there and then! The Prophet (a.s) gave his
approval and the distribution started. The Prophet (a.s), from his
khums, gave a hundred camels each to the persons who had newly embraced
Islam. Abū-Sufyan and his sons Mu\`awiyah and Yazid were given a hundred
camels each. Besides

them, \`Aqrah ibn Habis, \`Uyaynah ibn Hasan and some other persons
received a hundred camels each. Some persons were given lots of fifty
camels. Generally, the rest of the men got four camels and forty sheep
each. The Ansar too received the booty in the same manner. They
complained that the Prophet (a.s) preferred his own people, although the
Ansar supported him in the time of need. When he heard about these
murmurs, he assembled them and told them that he had given some
preferential treatment to the Quraysh that they do not recant from
Islam! He said that they had their camels and sheep with them and you,
the Ansar, have with you your Prophet (a.s)! He asked them what was
preferable. The eyes of the Ansar watered and they said, “O Allah’s
Messenger (a.s)! We wholeheartedly accept the distribution of the booty!
In their share is the worldly wealth and you are in our share!” The
Prophet (a.s) offered a prayer for the Ansar and their progeny!

\`Abbas ibn Mirdas al-Aslami too was expecting a larger share of the
booty than the ordinary Muslims got. He wrote some couplets to express
his displeasure, “Hasan and Habis were not superior to my father Mirdas
in any society, neither I am inferior to \`Uyaynah and \`Aqrah. But whom
you down grade will not rise again!

The Prophet (a.s) said, “Cut his tongue!” meaning that he be quietened
by giving him some more of the booty! But he did not understand the
allegory and shivered thinking that his tongue was about to be cut! When
\`Ali (a.s) asked him to come, he asked where he was being taken. He
said that he was being taken along to comply with the orders of the
Prophet (a.s)! He therefore accompanied \`Ali (a.s) to the place where
the camels and sheep were penned. \`Ali (a.s) asked him to take more
camels to bring his tally to hundred and join the group of the
*al-Mu’allafatu-Qulūbuhum* (the Pretenders) or remain contented with the
four camels and continue in the group of Muhajirūn!” \`Abbas ibn Mirdas
asked \`Ali (a.s) to let him be with his four camels because he could
not imagine to be counted among the *al-Mu’allafatu-Qulūbuhum!*

Amir al-Mu’minin had placed before him both the situations and had also
explained the consequence of each of them giving him the right to
maintain the privilege of being in the group of the Migrants or going to
the side of the Pretenders!

After the distribution, the Prophet (a.s) returned to Makkah and
performed the minor pilgrimage of \`Umrah. \`Attab ibn Usayd was
appointed the governor of Makkah and then the Prophet (a.s) left for
al-Madinah in the beginning of the month of Dhul-Hijjah.
