Propagation of Islam in Yemen
=============================

During 8H, the Prophet (a.s) deputed Khalid ibn al-Walid with a group of
Companions to Yemen for propagating the Message of Islam there. He
stayed there for six months, but the efforts did not bear any fruits.
There was no positive reaction from the people there al-Barra’ ibn
\`azib, who was a member of the delegation, says:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) sent Khalid ibn al-Walid to Yemen for inviting people to the Faith. I was one of the persons sent with him. He stayed there for six months, but none paid any heed to him.”[1]

When the Prophet (a.s) learnt about the failure of the mission, he sent
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) to take charge of the work. He asked him to
send Khalid and his team back. Those from the team who wished to stay
further in Yemen; they may be permitted to stay back. Al-Barra’ ibn
\`azib says that he preferred to stay on with \`Ali (a.s). When the
Yemenis learned that Khalid was going and \`Ali (a.s) was replacing him,
they were keenly interested and gathered at one place. After the Morning
Prayers \`Ali (a.s) went to them and read the letter that the Prophet
(a.s) had sent for the people of Yemen. Then he delivered a Sermon on
the virtues of Islam. The talk was so effective that the people, who did
not respond even after six months of Khalid’s efforts, embraced Islam.
The Historian al-Tabari writes:

###### “The entire tribe of Hamdan embraced Islam in one day.”[2]

When \`Ali (a.s) informed the Prophet (a.s) about this event, he did a
Prostration of Thanksgiving and said thrice: On Hamdan my Salam.”

In the Battle of Siffin the tribe of Hamdan was solidly behind \`Ali
(a.s). Seeing their exploits of valor, \`Ali (a.s) said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 289  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 390

###### “If I was the keeper to the Gate of Heaven, I would have asked the Tribe of Hamdan to enter peacefully.”

After the Tribe of Hamdan embraced Islam, the avenues for the progress
and propagation of Islam opened up in Yemen. With the rays of the sun of
knowledge, the darkness of infidelity was dispelled! In every nook and
corner there were the voices witnessing the Unity of Allah!
