The Emirate of Yemen
====================

Although the Yemenis had embraced Islam with one Sermon of \`Ali (a.s),
they were still not fully conversant with the tenets of the Faith.
Therefore, it was necessary to give them instruction on the legitimate
(*halal*) and taboo (*haram*) from Islamic point of view. They were also
to be told about the mandatory, the optional prayers, and other pillars
of Islam. They needed to get their disputes settled according to the
laws of the Faith. For taking care of all these things, the Prophet
(a.s) deputed \`Ali (a.s) once again to Yemen. For this important
mission, there was the need for knowledge and balanced thinking was very
essential. This was his first stint outside the area of Hijaz and \`Ali
(a.s) was initially reluctant to accept the onerous responsibility. He
told the Prophet (a.s) that he was still young and new to such an
assignment. He felt that it might be difficult for him to handle the
work without advisers around. The Prophet (a.s) put a hand on the chest
of \`Ali (a.s) and said:

###### “O Allah! Make \`Ali’s heart well informed and the tongue free of defects and errors!”[1]

\`Ali (a.s) says that after that day he never had difficulty in
assessing correctly between two persons. The quality of confidence and
determination became stronger in him.

At that time of his selection the senior Companions, both Muhajir and
Ansar, were present. But the Prophet (a.s), despite \`Ali’s youth
nominated him for the emirate of Yemen. In this connection, he neither
consulted anyone nor obtained anyone’s opinion. The Prophet (a.s) was
confident that \`Ali (a.s) was the most suitable candidate of the job.
It was this confidence that the Prophet (a.s) entrusted the important
functions of delivering justice to people in his lifetime and prepared
\`Ali (a.s) for the same function after him as well. Therefore, the
Prophet of Islam (a.s) said:

“O \`Ali! After me, you will be the judge for the mutual disputes of the
people!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 3, Page 36

If leading a congregational prayer is termed the qualification for
selecting the Caliph, then why is the emirate of Yemen, first ever such
important assignment in the annals of Islamic History, not termed a
better qualification for the selection as the Caliph! We should
understand that leading a congregational prayer is one thing and leading
the governance of a people is another! The duties of an emir and a
caliph are similar that need skills in governance and deliverance of
justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol 3, Page 122
