Sariyyat Wadi Al-raml
=====================

Some people gathered in Wadi al-Raml and were planning a surprise night
attack on al-Madinah. They were looking for an opportune time to carry
out their plan. But one person chanced to know their plans and gave the
information to the Prophet (a.s). These people were not a regularly
organized contingent but were a group of brigands and highway robbers.
The Prophet (a.s) gave the standard to Abū-Bakr and sent with troops to
quell and disburse this mob. When the troops reached the Wadi al-Raml,
the brigands went into hiding. The Muslims looked around for them, and
not finding any trace, relaxed thinking that they had fled getting wind
of the coming of the Muslim attack. The Muslims were tired of their
journey. They decided to spend the night in the valley and slept
soundly. After some hours of their sleeping, the brigands came out
quietly from their hideouts and attacked the Muslims. In the confusion,
some Muslims were killed and the rest ran for their lives. When the
unsuccessful group returned, the Prophet (a.s) gave the standard to
\`Umar to lead the campaign. The morale of the brigands was high now.
When they saw the contingent arrive, they came out of their hideouts and
started fighting with such ferocity that the Muslim contingent was
forced to withdraw. After these two failures, \`Amr ibn al-\`As told the
Prophet (a.s) to give him the command to control the situation. The
Prophet (a.s) complied with his wish, but the result was the same as
before. After these repeated failures, the Prophet (a.s) appointed \`Ali
(a.s) as the Commander of the contingent and sent him for the campaign.
He also asked the earlier unsuccessful commanders too to join the
contingent under him. The first strategy of \`Ali (a.s) was to change
the route of advance from that which was followed by the earlier three
attempts. He also made the journey during night and rested the troops
during the day. This provided them a degree of stealth in their
movement. They thus were able to surprise the enemy by sudden attack.
While the first rays of sunlight was about to touch the peaks, the tips
of the swords started shining. The enemy fled because of the element of
surprise in the attack and the Muslims proceeded to al-Madinah
victoriously. The Prophet (a.s) on hearing of the arrival of the
victorious army came out of the city to give them a reception. He
happily said:

###### “O \`Ali! If I had not the fear that some people of my Ummah might say what the Christians said about \`Isa (a.s), I would have said something about you that people would pick up the soil from under your very feet, wherever you went!”[1]

The success of this campaign was because of the leadership of \`Ali
(a.s) in planning the strategy of war. He kept a keen eye on the reasons
of the failure of the previous attempts and took care to eliminate them.
In the first attempt, they were lethargic and careless in their
movement. Having gone to the den of the enemy, they casually retired to
sleep without even posting nominal night vigil. The second and third
attempts they made the mistake of following the same route of travel and
thus gave early warning of their arrival to the enemy. \`Ali (a.s)
eliminated all these faults and added the element or surprise by
traveling in the night and reaching the arena just before dawn! If he
had made the same mistakes as the first three leaders did, his attempt
might have met with the same result as theirs did!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kitāb al-irshād Shaykh al-Mufīd, Page 76
