The Call For Mubahalah Or Imprecation
=====================================

Najran is in the north of Yemen about ten stages away from San\`a’. It
was a fertile area with 73 settlements those days. In those
conglomerates about forty thousand Christians lived. They were initially
idol worshippers like the Arabs but a Christian hermit, Fimiyūn, who
earned his living as a mason, converted them to Christianity. Fimiyūn
was a migrant from Rome. It was his selfless missionary zeal that the
entire population converted to Christianity. Very soon, Najran became an
important centre of Christianity. They constructed a Church for
performing their religious rites. This was built with the skins of the
camels and became famous as Ka\`b Najran. People assembled there for
prayers and made offers. In addition to the offerings made at the
Church, its income was 200,000 annually that were used for the upkeep of
the hermits and the pastors.

When Islam progressed after the conquest of Makkah, and the warring
groups capitulated, the Prophet (a.s) invited those tribes that had not
embraced Islam until then. In 10H a message was sent to the Christians
of Najran as well. They were asked to embrace Islam or start paying
jizyah as the subjects of the Islamic Dominion. When the Bishop of
Najran read the Prophet’s letter, he gathered all the important persons
of the area and discussed the matter with them. he told them that they
should all put their head together and devise the strategy to find a
solution for the problem. Although the news created a commotion in the
population, the braves started talking of battle. The Bishop calmed them
down. When he talked to the people, there were different suggestions to
face the situation. In the end, after much deliberation, they decided to
send a delegation to al-Madinah and talk to the Prophet (a.s).
Therefore, a delegation of 14 persons under the leadership of \`Aqib
al-Sayyid and Abū-Harithah was constituted. Abū-Harithah was an eminent
scholar of Christian Faith and Aqib Sayyid was known for his sagacity
and wisdom. When the delegation arrived at al-Madinah, the people were
surprised at the grandeur of their raiment! Earlier no other delegation
had arrived with such pomp! When they descended from their carriages
near the al-Masjid al-Nabawi (the Holy Prophet’s Mosque), and entered
proudly into the Mosque,

the Prophet (a.s) noticed the gold rings in their fingers and their
dresses of silks; he turned away his face from them! The time for their
prayer was at hand and turning to the East, they commenced their prayer.
Some persons wanted to stop them from praying but the Prophet (a.s)
prevented them from doing it. After their prayer the delegates waited
for a while. When the prophet (a.s) did not pay them any attention, they
had frowns on their faces and left the mosque in a huff. When they saw
\`Uthman and \`Abd al-Rahman outside, they complained to them about the
cold treatment meted out to them. They said that they have come in
response to the message of Muhammad (a.s) but he turned away his face
from them and did not acknowledge even the greetings! They said that
they did not know why he treated them like that. But \`Uthman asked them
to go to \`Ali (a.s). They took the delegates to \`Ali (a.s) and
mentioned about the cold treatment that the Prophet (a.s) gave them. He
told them that they should go in ordinary raiment and without the gold
rings in the fingers. Then the Prophet (a.s) will give them a good
reception. They followed \`Ali’s advice and the Prophet (a.s) sat down
with the delegates after the \`Asr Prayer and discussed with them many
matters of mutual interest. When he invited them to embrace Islam, they
said that they were already Muslims! He asked, “How you are Muslims when
you eat pork, worship the Cross and consider Jesus as the Son of God?”
They replied that certainly they consider the Messiah as the Son of
Allah! They asked the Prophet (a.s), “If he is not the son of God, then
who his father is? Can anyone take birth without a father?” The Prophet
(a.s) recited the following verse from the Qur’an:

### إِنَّ مَثَلَ عِيسَى عِنْدَ اللَّهِ كَمَثَلِ آدَمَ خَلَقَهُ مِنْ تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ .

#### “For Allah, the example of \`Isa (a.s) is like that of Adam (a.s), whom He made with the soil and said, ‘Be’, and he ‘Was’. (3:59)”

The Prophet (a.s) conveyed that \`Isa (a.s) did not have only the
father, but Adam was created by Allah without either parent. Then why do
not they call Adam (a.s) the Son of Allah? They had no reply for this
argument and hence they started unnecessary debate. When they were not
paying any heed to the arguments, the following Verse was revealed:

### فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَكَ مِنْ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءَنَا وَأَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَنِسَاءَنَا وَنِسَاءَكُمْ وَأَنْفُسَنَا وَأَنْفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ لَعْنَةَ اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ.

#### “But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons

#### and your sons and our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars. (3:61)”

The Prophet (a.s) read this verse to the Christians and invited them for
the imprecation (Mubahalah). The need for imprecation arose because if
the matter was closed just with discussions, they would turn back and
say that they requested the Prophet (a.s) for a debate, but we were not
satisfied with his arguments. There was only one alternative to
challenge them for the imprecation. After the Mubahalah, they would have
nothing to brag home about. Initially the Christians were scared about
the prospect of an imprecation. But later they relented. They asked the
Prophet (a.s) to give them a day respite. Then they went back to their
inn and had a long discussion between themselves. Everyone had his own
opinion. Abū-Harithah said that if Muhammad (a.s) came tomorrow with his
Companions and lot of men in attendance, we can accept to go for
imprecation with him. But if he came in humility with his children and
the family members, we must refute to have imprecation with him!

After making the agreement for the imprecation, the Prophet (a.s)
selected a place outside al-Madinah for the purpose. Salman al-Farisi
prepared it by removing the grass and the weeds from the ground. Early
next morning the Christians reached the venue of the imprecation. The
Muhajirūn and Ansar too came to the ground. When the Prophet (a.s)
learned that the Christians had reached the site, he called for \`Ali,
Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s).

Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas says:

###### “When the Verse of Mubahalah (Imprecation) was revealed, the Prophet (a.s) called \`Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn (a.s) and said, ‘O Allah! These are my Ahl al-Bayt!’”[1]

Al-Ya\`qūbi writes:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) came out early morning that al-Hasan and al-Husayn were holding his hands, \`Ali was in his front and Fatimah was behind him.”[2]

When the Prophet (a.s) reached the grounds of Mubahalah he squatted
under a tree and made \`Ali (a.s) sit in his front, Fatimah (a.s) at his
back and Hasan

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh Muslim, Vol 2, Page 278  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Ya\`qūbī, Vol 2, Page 66

(a.s) and Husayn (a.s) on his right and left. He told them that when he
offered prayer they should all say ‘Amen!’ When the Christians saw with
the Prophet (a.s) one male, a female and two children, they were first
surprised and then an unknown fear took hold of them! Abū-Harithah said:

###### “O group of Christians! I am seeing such faces that if Allah Desire to move a mountain from here, He will do it for those faces. Do not imprecate with them! Or else you will meet with death and destruction!”[1]

When the Christians knew that the persons coming with the Prophet (a.s)
were his cousin and son-in-law, \`Ali (a.s), the daughter Fatimah (a.s)
and the grandchildren al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s), they were dumb
founded. They now thought that if the Prophet (a.s) had not strong
Faith, he would not have exposed his family to the imprecation! They
were still in a dilemma when Abū-Harithah’s brother Karaz ibn \`Alqamah,
who was already impressed with the Truth of Islam, said, “O Group of
Christians! I see that Muhammad (a.s) himself is that last prophet about
whom there is reference in our Sacred Bulletins. We should not imprecate
with him. Because those who imprecate with the Prophets, they fall
perpetually in the abyss of destruction. Just open your eyes and see the
surroundings. The nature is silently telling about your impending
destruction!” When they lifted their eyes, they noticed that the
brightness of the sun had dimmed, in the atmosphere there were clouds of
smoke, the leaves were shed by the trees and the birds were hiding in
their nests! The hearts of the Christians shook seeing these
manifestations of the nature! They requested to be excused from the
imprecation. The Prophet (a.s) readily acceded to their request. He
appointed \`Ali (a.s) to settle the terms of the truce with Najran.
\`Ali (a.s) agreed on the following terms:

Every year twice, in the months of Safar and Rajab, they will give 1000
drapes (each valued forty dirham) as jizyah to the Muslims. If there
were hostilities in Yemen, Najran will give to the Muslims 30 armors, 30
swords, thirty horses as their war effort. In return, they will be free
to until their own lands and live in peace. The safety of their lives
and property will be the concern of the Muslims.

This victory in the annals of human history is unique and only one of
its type. On, the one side are five individuals, unarmed, of whom there
is one lady and two innocent children! They were firm on the strength of
Faith and made the representatives of Najran capitulate before them and
enter into a treaty on

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tafsīr al-Kashshāf, Chapter 3.

their terms!

At this time the Ansar, the Muhajirūn, the al-\`asharah al-mubashsharah,
the Warriors of Badr along with their children too were present.
According to the Verse of the Qur’an, the Companions, and their
families, too could have been included in the imprecation! But only
\`Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn (a.s) were selected for the
event! If the meaning of the Verse was that one should go with two sons,
one daughter and a person dear to him, then the Prophet (a.s) could have
told the others that he considered them to participate in the
imprecation. But according to the Verse of the Qur’an, he was permitted
to take only four persons along. He could have also said that if there
were scope for more than four persons, he would have taken them along.
It was not the restriction on the numbers for not including more persons
in the imprecation. It was the qualities that were not present in any
other persons than the four who went. Otherwise, there was no reason for
the Prophet (a.s) to ignore others for the event.

For entering the stage of Mubahalah, two qualities were essential. One
was Strong Faith and the other Truthfulness. Strong Faith was essential
because without it there was risk of fatality as a result of the
imprecation if the participant was weak in his Faith. In such situations
only those will come forward who are truthfully following their Faith
without any doubt or fear. Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) selected the
persons who were absolute in their Faith and the most truthful. The
imprecation was with the untruthful persons, if there was the slightest
element of untruth on this side, the result could be fatal! The
Christians, by the clear-cut text of the Holy Qur'an were untruthful on
account of their beliefs, because they falsely believed in three gods
the father, the son and the Holy Spirit! But the belief of Unity is so
strong that they also said that there is only one God! Because of this
confusion, their Faith or Belief was not strong. The philosophy of
Trinity is the innovation of some inventive minds and the Holy Qur’an
says about it:

### إِذَا جَاءَكَ الْمُنَافِقُونَ قَالُوا نَشْهَدُ إِنَّكَ لَرَسُولُ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ إِنَّكَ لَرَسُولُهُ وَاللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ لَكَاذِبُونَ.

#### “When the hypocrites come to you they say that they bear witness that you are prophet of Allah, and Allah bears witness that they are liars. (63:1)”

Therefore this proves that if the heart is separated from the tongue, in
a way that the heart thinks something and the tongue says something
else, then it is a

falsehood, although the words coming out of the tongue may be factual.
Truthful is the word that is compatible with both the heart and the
tongue. What comes out of the tongue is factual and is also there in the
heart. Who can deny that the persons whom the Prophet (a.s) selected to
participate in the imprecation were paragons of Faithfulness and
Truthfulness? \`Ali (a.s) himself said:

###### “The Prophet of Islam (a.s) did not find the slightest untruth in any of my talks nor any falsity or weakness in my actions.”[1]

While this selection manifested the Strength of faith and Truthfulness
of the Ahl al-Bayt, and their superiority over others, that Allah deemed
their participation necessary in the act of imprecation, the Prophet
(a.s) asked them to say ‘Amen’ on the completion of his prayer of
Mubahalah! It was thanks to their exemplary characters that Islam
achieved the Victory the *al-fath al-mubin* !  It is surprising that
those who were actively participating with the Prophet (a.s) in his
Prophetic Duties, and without whose participation the Mubahalah was not
possible, they were kept aside in the matter of the Caliphate that they
were not thought necessary even at the consultative stage of the
Succession!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah
