Sariyyat BanŪ-zubayd
====================

When the Prophet (a.s) returned from Tabūk the chief of a branch of
Banū-Madhhij, Banū-Zubayd, \`Amr ibn Ma\`d Yakrab came to al-Madinah and
met the Prophet (a.s). When he was invited to embrace Islam, he accepted
and his tribesmen followed suit. \`Amr’s father, Ma\`d Yakrab was killed
during the period of Ignorance. \`Amr told the Prophet (a.s) that he
wanted to claim *qisas* for his father’s life. The Prophet (a.s) said
that the heinous practice has been abolished and he should forget about
*qisas*. He kept quiet at that time but returning home he took to
rebellion and recanted from Islam. He attacked Banū-al-Harith ibn Ka\`b
and killed their men.

When the Prophet (a.s) heard of his mischief, he sent three hundred men
under \`Ali (a.s) to Yemen for subduing these rebellious people and to
collect the jizyah from the Christians of Najran. When \`Ali (a.s) was
about to start on his journey, the Prophet (a.s) gave him the Standard
and tied the headgear, one end of which he kept on the chest and the
other on the back. The Prophet (a.s) told \`Ali (a.s) that any outbreak
of fight with Banū-Zubayd, if it takes place, should be from their side
only. Another contingent, under Khalid ibn al-Walid, was also sent at
the same time towards the tribe of Banū-al-Ju\`fi. He instructed Khalid
that if ever both the contingents came together, and were involved in
fight, \`Ali (a.s) will hold the joint command. \`Ali (a.s) made Khalid
ibn Sa\`id the chief of the front guard of his contingent and Khalid ibn
al-Walid appointed Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari. Both the contingents moved
towards their destinations. When Banū-al-Ju\`fi learned of the arrival
of the Muslim army, they divided into two groups, one group went to
Yemen and the other joined Banū-Zubayd. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
learned about this, he sent word to Khalid that when he received the
message, he should halt at that place. But Khalid thought that this way
he would lose the command of the contingent and refused to halt. \`Ali
(a.s) sent a group of men under Khalid ibn Sa\`id to go and stop Khalid
from proceeding any further. Khalid ibn Sa\`id moved forward and stopped
them. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) joined with the other contingent he
reprimanded Khalid ibn al-Walid for his attitude and the army went
forward. When they reached a place called Kashar, they came

face to face with Banū-Zubayd. \`Amr ibn Ma\`d Yakrub came to fight.
Khalid ibn Sa\`id wanted to start fighting, but \`Ali (a.s) restrained
him and himself came out with his sword. \`Amr ibn Ma\`d Yakrub was a
famous combatant, but when he saw \`Ali (a.s) himself in the arena, he
fled. One of his brothers and a nephew was killed. His wife Rakanah bint
Salamah and children were taken captive. Besides them, several other
women too were taken captive and plenty of booty too was captured. After
defeating the enemy, \`Ali (a.s) proceeded toward Makkah for Hijjat
al-Wada\` leaving behind Khalid ibn Sa\`id to collect the taxes from
Banū-Zubayd and if any of them embraced Islam, provide them amnesty.
When \`Amr ibn Ma\`d Yakrub learnt that his wife and children had been
taken captive, he came to Khalid ibn Sa\`id, embraced Islam and got his
wife and children released. At that time he presented his famed sword,
Dhussa’mah, to Khalid ibn Sa\`id.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had taken one slave girl from the booty. Khalid
ibn al-Walid sent a letter to the Prophet (a.s) in which he complained
about this action of \`Ali (a.s). When the Prophet (a.s) read this
letter, he was much upset and told al-Barra’ ibn \`Azib:

###### “What opinion you have about this person who is a friend of Allah and the Prophet and they befriend him”[1]

Al-Barra’, finding anger written on the face of the Prophet (a.s), said,
“O Prophet of Allah! I seek refuge from the anger of Allah and His
Prophet (a.s)! I have come to you only as a courier. “Hearing this, the
Prophet (a.s) cooled down.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had every right on the booty of the battle. And
his share could have been much more than a maidservant. But those who
have enmity in their hearts searched for such opportunities to turn the
Prophet (a.s) against him. At that time too, they made a similar
attempt, but the tables turned on them only. The Prophet (a.s) shut
their mouths saying that \`Ali (a.s) was a friend of Allah and His
Prophet (a.s) and they his friends!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Tirmidhī, Page 215
