The Hijjat Al-wada`
===================

In 6H the Prophet (a.s) started with the intention of performing \`Umrah
(the Minor Pilgrimage) at Makkah but the Quraysh obstructed the effort
and he returned to al-Madinah from Hudaybiyah. During 7H too he went for
\`Umrah but because of the terms of the truce with the infidels he could
not stay in Makkah for more than three days. In 8 A.H. Makkah was
conquered and the Ka\`bah was cleared of the idols. In 9H \`Ali (a.s)
was deputed to Makkah with the Verses of the Sūrah of Bara’ah to purify
the various aspects of the Hajj from the undesirable practices of the
infidels. He banned the infidels from entering the precincts of the
Ka\`bah. In 10H the Prophet (a.s) decided to perform the Hajj and the
invitation for the pilgrimage was announced all over:

### وَأَذِّنْ فِي النَّاسِ بِالْحَجِّ يَأْتُوكَ رِجَالًا وَعَلَى كُلِّ ضَامِرٍ يَأْتِينَ مِنْ كُلِّ فَجٍّ عَمِيقٍ.

#### “And proclaim among men the Pilgrimage: they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel, coming from every remote path. (22:27)”

On the call of the Prophet (a.s) Muslims came from all over and
assembled in al-Madinah to join his entourage to Makkah to learn about
the Islamic Rites of the Hajj and to perform the pilgrimage with him.
The Prophet (a.s) left al-Madinah along with thousands of pilgrims on 26
Dhul-Qa\`dah. Fatimah al-Zahra’ (a.s) and the Prophet’s spouses too were
in the group. When around the ²uhr Prayer the caravan reached the Valley
of Dhul-Halifah, they took the bath prior to wearing the Hajj uniform
and everyone recited the *talbiyah*.

\`Ali (a.s) was still in Yemen when the Prophet (a.s) wrote to him to
proceed to Makkah for Hajj. With a small contingent of troops, he
started on the journey. On the way, he gave the command of the men to a
senior person, wore the Ihram at Yalamlam, and reached Makkah before the
arrival of the Prophet (a.s) to welcome him. When the Prophet (a.s) saw
him, his face glowed. He asked, “O \`Ali (a.s)! With what Intent have
you put on the Ihram?”

\`Ali (a.s) replied, “Since you had not mentioned about the matter in
the letter, I have worn the Ihram with the intent that I shall perform
the same pilgrimage that you perform! I have left behind 34 camels for
the sacrifice.” The Prophet (a.s) said that he had with him 66 camels
and that \`Ali (a.s) was a member of his family for the rites of the
Hajj and the Sacrifice of the animals. Then \`Ali (a.s) made a report
about his campaign in Yemen and gave the account of the booty and jizyah
collected. He said that he had left those things in the charge of the
contingent and had started for the pilgrimage. The Prophet (a.s) asked
him to fetch his contingent to Makkah. He must have gone a small
distance when he saw his contingent arriving. He reprimanded the men for
coming away without orders. He also saw that they were all wearing cloth
from the booty as Ihram. He told the person in charge of the contingent
to take the cloth pieces from the men. The men were not too happy about
this order and they complained to the Prophet (a.s) when they met him.
The Prophet (a.s) said:

###### “O people! Do not complain about \`Ali (a.s)! He is strict in the Cause of Allah!”[1]

Prior to Islam people used to perform two types of Hajj; *hajj al-ifrad
hajj al-qiran.* In both these types, \`Umrah has a definite and
permanent place which is performed after the rites of the Hajj. The only
difference between the two types is that for the *Hajj al-Qiran* the
sacrificial animals have to be with the pilgrim and for the *hahh
al-ifrad* the sacrificial animals will not be with the pilgrim.

At this time, the verse “And accomplish the pilgrimage and the visit for
Allah… (2:196)” was revealed and a third type of Hajj, *Hajj
al-Tamattu\`* came into vogue. In this type of Hajj, both Hajj and
\`Umrah are performed together. The \`Umrah here is performed, at the
same time, prior to the Hajj. After the \`Umrah the Ihram is removed and
is again put on for the Hajj. This is called *Hajj al-Tamattu\`* because
the restriction of wearing Ihram between \`Umrah and Hajj is removed.
Here the Ihram is removed and again put back on the eighth of
Dhul-Hijjah, the Day of Tarwiyah and the rites of Hajj are performed.
This Hajj is for the people who live within 48 miles or more from
Makkah.

During the Hijjat al-Wada\`, mostly there were people who did not have
the sacrificial animals with them. The Prophet (a.s) asked them to
change their intent for Hajj to that of \`Umrah and remove the Ihram
thereafter. Those who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 402

had the animals with them must keep wearing the Ihram after the \`Umrah.
Since the Prophet (a.s) was having the sacrificial animals with him, his
intent was for *Hajj al-Qiran* and since \`Ali’s intent too was same as
that of the Prophet (a.s), he too did not remove the Ihram and continued
with the performance of the *Hajj al-Qiran*. When the people saw the
Prophet (a.s) continuing with the Ihram, they were hesitant about
removing theirs. When he saw them not obeying the orders, he felt sad
and anger appeared on his face. \`A’ishah says about it:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) arrived at Makkah on the 4th or 5th of Dhul-Hijjah and came to me in great anger. She asked him, “Who has angered you? May Allah send the person to the Hell!” He said, “Do you not know that I gave an order to the people and they hesitated in obeying it! If I had known that the situation would develop like this, I would not have brought the sacrificial animals with me, bought the animals here and then I could have removed my Ihram as they are supposed to do!”[1]

As people opposed the *Hajj al-Tamattu\`* during the lifetime of the
Prophet (a.s), they did the same after him as well and preferred their
own wish against the order of the Shari\`ah. Therefore \`Imran ibn
Husayn says:

###### “The Verse of *Hajj al-Tamattu\`* was revealed in the Qur’an and the Prophet (a.s) ordered us about it. Later on no further Verse was revealed on the matter to change the order nor did the Prophet (a.s) stop us from it until his death. But there was one person who said, what he said with his own intuition.”[2]

The Commentator of Sahih Muslim, al-Nawawi writes:

###### “Here, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab is meant, because he was the first to raise objections against the *Hajj al-Tamattu\`*. As far as \`Uthman and others were concerned, they were his followers!”[3]

Anyway, on 8 Dhul-Hijjah the Prophet (a.s) ordered the people who had
removed Ihram after the \`Umrah to wear them again for the Hajj. The
Prophet (a.s) was already in Ihram and so was \`Ali (a.s) on the
instructions of the Prophet (a.s). When the people wore the Ihram, they
proceeded to Mina. The next day, after the Morning Prayers, the pilgrims
moved to \`Arafat. Prior to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh Muslim, Vol 1, Page 403  
 **[2]** Sahīh Muslim, Vol 1, Page 403  
 **[3]** Sharh Sahīh Muslim, Vol 1, Page 402

Islam the Quraysh had established a custom that they used to stop at
al-Mash\`ar al-Haram and say that they were the Ahl al-Haram and that
they would not go out of the Haram. But the other people used to go to
\`Arafat. The Quraysh were thinking that the Prophet (a.s) too would not
go beyond al-Mash\`ar al-Haram. But the Qur’an ordained, “From where
others start to go, you too should go!” Therefore, the Prophet (a.s)
proceeded towards \`Arafat, and reaching there, camped at Namirah. The
²uhr and \`Asr Prayers were offered together and then spending the night
at al-Mash\`ar al-Haram they returned to Mina on the day of \`Id. After
stoning the *jamarat al-\`aqabah,* the Prophet (a.s) sacrificed the
thirty camels with his own hands and asked \`Ali (a.s) to sacrifice the
remaining animals. After the sacrifice he took one piece of meat from
each animal, got it cooked, tasted a little and got the rest
distributed. After the sacrifice, they got their heads shaved, changed
from the Ihram into ordinary clothes and returned to Makkah. Then they
circumambulated the Ka\`bah and did the sa\`y between the Safa and
Marwah. Now they returned to Mina where they waited until 13 Dhul-Hijjah
and did the stoning of the *ramy al-jamarat*. Now all the rites of the
Hajj were over and the prophet (a.s), with his retinue, started for
al-Madinah.
