The Contingent of Usamah Ibn Zayd
=================================

The Prophet of Islam (a.s) had deputed al-Harith ibn \`Umayr al-Azdi as
his ambassador to the ruler of al-Basrah with the Message of Islam. But
on the way the ruler of Balqa’, Shurahbil arrested and killed him. When
the Prophet (a.s) got this sad news, he sent a contingent under Zayd ibn
Harithah, Ja\`far ibn Abi-Talib and \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah with
instructions that if Zayd was killed, Ja\`far ibn Abi-Talib should
assume command. If he was martyred, \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah should take
charge of the contingent. When they reached Ma\`an, they got news that
Heracles of Rome was camping at Balqa’ with the armies of Rome and
Syria. When the Muslims got wind of the huge enemy armies, they halted
at Ma\`an and wanted to call more troops from al-Madinah. But \`Abdullah
ibn Rawahah encouraged the men to improve their morale and said that
they should not be afraid of the disparate groups forming the enemy
ranks and that they must go forward and confront the enemy! The courage
of the Muslims was thus boosted and they marched forward. When they
reached, Mushrif, a satellite town of Balqa’, they turned towards Mu’tah
sensing the movements of the enemy and confront them appropriately. They
organized their men into proper left and right flanks. The enemy troops
too arrived there and organized themselves. Zayd ibn Harithah went
forward with the Standard in his hand and was martyred fighting. Now
Ja\`far ibn Abi-Talib took the Standard in his hand and lost his right
hand fighting the enemy. He took the Standard in his left hand. That too
was severed during the fight. He now held the standard close to his
chest and bearing more than eight wounds from swords and arrows, he was
martyred. The Prophet (a.s) gave him the posthumous titles of
*Dhul-Janahayn* (One with two wings) and *al-Tayyar fil-Jannah* (The one
who flies in the Heaven). \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah now took charge of the
battle and he too was martyred fighting. After these well-known
commanders, there was none of the renowned warriors left. But one
al-Ansari, Thabit ibn Arqam picked up the Standard and asked the men to
select a standard-bearer from amongst them. They proposed that he
himself should do the duty. He said that he was not ready to take the
responsibility. Therefore, Khalid ibn al-Walid came forward to become
the Standard-bearer. After a little while of fighting, the dusk fell and
it became dark. The fighting stopped

because of the darkness. Khalid considered the nightfall was to his
advantage and withdrew with the men in the cover of darkness and started
the return journey to al-Madinah. When the fleeing contingent reached
al-Madinah, the people started pelting dust on their faces to shame
them. They used to hide their faces while going around and Salamah ibn
Husham stopped going to the congregational prayers in shame. When they
went to the mosque, the people used to shame them with the calls of
deserters! They used to say:

###### “Are you one of the persons who deserted from Allah’s Way?”[1]

This event took place in Jumada I, 8H but no steps were taken to exact
*qisas* for the martyrs of Mu’tah. It appears that, for some reason, the
Prophet (a.s) wanted to postpone it for his last days. Therefore, during
his illness, he called Usamah ibn Zayd, a youth of 18 or 19 years, and
put him at the head of a contingent. Ibn Sa\`d writes:

###### “From the Ansar and Muhajirūn there was hardly any prominent person who was not asked to join the ghazwah. Amongst them were Abū-Bakr Siddik, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, \`Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, Sa\`id ibn Zayd, Qutadah ibn al-Nu\`man and Salamah ibn Aslam ibn Huraysh were included”[2]

When the Prophet (a.s), despite his illness, handed over the Standard to
Usamah ibn Zayd, the Muslims started criticizing his capability instead
obeying the Commands of the Prophet (a.s) and accepting him as their
commander. Sometimes they said that Usamah was too young and
inexperienced and at other times, they said that he was the son of a
freed slave and it was below their dignity to serve under him. When the
Prophet (a.s) got wind of this gossip, he came out with covered head, in
a state of high fever, and said:

###### “If you have objection about his Commanding the Contingent, you have been critical of his father’s command too. By Allah! He was capable of the Command and in my eyes more likeable than others! This youth too is dear to me than the others!”[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 323  
 **[2]** Al-Tabaqāt, Vol 2, Page 190  
 **[3]** Sahīh Muslim, Vol 2, Page 283

Then he went into the house and the ailment became more acute. Even in
that state, he was repeatedly telling, “Send the Contingent of Usamah
soon, send the Contingent of Usamah urgently, and send the Contingent of
Usamah urgently!”

Usamah came to the presence of the Prophet (a.s) to see him and said, “O
Prophet of Allah (a.s)! It would be better if the contingent leaves
after you recover from your illness!” He replied, “No! You must start
forthwith without any delay!” Usamah got up to go and prepare for the
departure of the contingent. On the other side, the Prophet’s ailment
increased and he swooned. When he recovered slightly he asked if the
Contingent had left or not. When he was told that the preparations for
the departure were under way, he folded his brow and said,

###### “Send the Contingent of Usamah urgently and Allah’s curse on those who do not join it”[1]

With repeated exhortations of the Prophet (a.s) the Contingent moved out
of al-Madinah, but it halted at a distance of three miles in Wadi
al-Jurf. Someone came to them and gave the tiding that the Prophet (a.s)
was in his last throes. Hearing this Usamah, \`Umar and Abū-\`Ubaydah
came back to al-Madinah. When the Prophet (a.s) demised, the rest of the
Contingent returned to al-Madinah.

For the Muslims every Command of the Prophet (a.s) is the Command of
Allah. Going against his commands is tantamount to disobeying Allah.
Despite the repeated exhortations by the Prophet (a.s), the persons
nominated to be a part of the Contingent were hesitant in proceeding on
the campaign. When the Prophet (a.s) asked for paper and pen to dictate
his will, they said that he was in a state of delirium and not in his
senses. But when they refused to obey the Command for proceeding on the
Campaign what excuse they were offering for disobeying the Orders of
Allah’s Prophet (a.s)?

To understand the reasons for the behavior of the Companions at that
time, we shall have to go into the scenario of the event. History points
out that after the Hijjat al-Wada\`; the Prophet (a.s) started keeping
indifferent health. This illness was the forerunner of his death. The
Prophet (a.s) had hinted in his Sermons of the Hijjat al-Wada\` and
Ghadir Khumm that the time for his departure was nigh. After returning
from the H ijjat al-Wada, \` he hinted about it. The Companions
understood that this sun was about to set after giving his radiance for
twenty-three years! \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ūd says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Milal wan-Nihal, Page 8

###### “Our Prophet (a.s) gave the tiding of his death a month before he died.”[1]

On the one hand, the Prophet (a.s) was talking about his imminent demise
and on the other; he was expressing concern about mischief by some
people in the Ummah. Therefore, one night he walked with much difficulty
to Jannat al-Baqi\` and prayed for the people of the graves and said,
“Seeing the living people the way they are, your condition is
praiseworthy. Now mischief is spreading like dark nights and the
mischief that will rise will be worse than the earlier one!”

In the trying circumstances when the time for his Call was nigh on one
hand and on the other mischief was raising its ugly head. He had to
think whether to suppress the mischief or to seek qisas for the martyrs
of Mu’tah. Almost two years had passed since the persons were martyred
at Mu’tah and the *qisas* was not obtained so far. The subject was
almost in the cold storage for very long and why did the prophet (a.s)
think of sending a contingent to extract the *qisas* now when he was
himself critically ill? He also did not have the tendency of conquering
people and annexing places. He always fought in his own defense. Then
why did he repeatedly order the contingent to go, and prayed for the
Curse of Allah for those who abstained from joining the Contingent. He
had never taken such a stringent stand before. Whenever any person made
excuses for not joining to jihad, he readily conceded his request. But
here there is only one command that the people in the Contingent must
leave immediately for the campaign. Generally, people during their last
days have the wish to have all their kin and companions near them to
make their passage smooth and help in arranging the last rites. Here the
Prophet (a.s) was sending away two of his closest Companions on a
campaign under the Command of a youth of nineteen years! If the Prophet
(a.s) had the matter of the Shūra and the imminence for the selection of
the successor in his mind he would never have tried to send the two
important contenders for the position hundreds of miles away from
al-Madinah at this critical juncture! If he had the idea of prevention
of possible mischief after his demise through their good offices, he
would never have packed them away to a distant destination! It is a fact
that the Prophet (a.s) was not happy with the men around him. Some
persons were deviating from Islam when they felt that his end was near
and others gave indications that they were paving their way to capture
the seat of power. They were busy designing and devising ways to usurp
power through

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 435

these stratagems dividing people. The Prophet (a.s) had already declared
at Ghadir Khumm that \`Ali (a.s) was his Vicegerent and Caliph. But he
was foreseeing certain difficulties in the implementation of this
decision. He had felt that attaching the slightest importance to \`Ali
(a.s) upset and disturbed certain persons. He knew that these persons
would oppose the implementation of what was decided at the Feast of
Dual-\`Ashirah and Ghadir Khumm. Those who did not accept the Command of
Usamah ibn Zayd in the Prophet’s lifetime, they would go to any length
to deny the Caliphate to \`Ali (a.s) when the Prophet (a.s) was not
around. The Prophet (a.s) had appointed Usamah the

Commander of the contingent over Abū-Bakr and \`Umar because he was
indirectly impressing on them that youth was no bar for persons holding
positions of responsibility. The Prophet (a.s) did feel that his
antagonists would raise the question of \`Ali (a.s) youth when the
question of Caliphate came up. Even after this exercise of care the
opponents did raise the question that \`Ali (a.s) was young and an old
person should take the office of the caliph. The contingent of Usamah
ibn Zayd was set up with the twin purpose of extracting *qisas* for the
martyred Muslims and to send away the main contenders for the Caliphate
hundreds of miles away to facilitate smooth succession. But the
contenders had their well thought out plan ready and even at the cost of
getting cursed by the Prophet (a.s) they did not move more than a few
miles from al-Madinah. It was their utter misfortune that they did not
comply with the last Command and instruction of their beloved Prophet
(a.s)!

During the lifetime of the Prophet (a.s), his command was treated in a
cavalier manner. But soon after his demise, the first thing the Caliph
did was to send Usamah’s Contingent on the Campaign. It was a poor
attempt to cover their tracks that they had blatantly disobeyed the
prophet’s Commands. This was done by Abū-Bakr despite opposition from
many quarters. The Ansar were of the view that the Campaign should be
postponed and, if not, some person other than Usamah should command it.
Therefore, \`Umar took sides with the Ansar and Abū-Bakr pulled \`Umar’s
beard in anger and said:

###### “You die and let your mother sit in mourning for you! O son of al-Khattab! He was appointed the Commander by the Prophet (a.s) and you ask me to remove him!”[1]

If sending of the Contingent was in compliance of the Command of the
Prophet (a.s), then no demand should have come for removing him from the
post because he was selected by the Prophet (a.s) himself. Usamah was
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 462

choice of the Prophet (a.s) and although \`Umar was asking Abū-Bakr to
remove Usamah as a mouthpiece of the Ansar, he should have himself told
them that he was the choice of the Prophet (a.s) instead of strongly
seeking his removal! Abū-Bakr too should have taken out his ire on the
Ansar for their demand instead of pulling at the beard of \`Umar in
anger. Abū-Bakr did not join the campaign because of his duties as the
Caliph. \`Umar took permission from Usamah, the Commander, to stay away.
The question is whether Usamah had the right to permit the persons named
and detailed by the Prophet (a.s) to join the contingent for the
Campaign to stay away. But how could the poor youth act against the
might of the ruling clique!
