The Felicitous Birth
====================

The Ka\`bah is a very ancient structure. Its foundation was laid by Adam
(a.s) and the walls were raised by Ibrahim (a.s) and Isma\`il (a.s).
Although this building is devoid of any designs and embellishments, made
out of lime and stones, every stone is the fountainhead of felicity. The
Holy Qur’an says about it:

###### “Allah has rated Ka\`bah as an honorable abode.”

This eminence of the Ka\`bah is permanent and eternal. From the day of
the laying of its foundation, it has the same eminence, and shall be
there forever. This is expressed through various acts of worship in
Islam. Therefore, every Muslim, be the person an Arab, a non-Arab, a
Westerner or an Oriental, will face towards the Ka\`bah when standing up
to pray! When they circumambulate the building, they exercise care to
see that their shoulders do not move away from it. This circumambulation
is a very important pillar of the performance of the Hajj.

\`Ali (a.s) was born at this felicitous place on the thirteenth of
Rajab, Friday, thirty years after \`am al-fil. This privilege of taking
birth in the holy place went to none before him and anyone after him!
The chroniclers of the traditions and the biographers of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) have recorded this as a very important event in his
life. Therefore, al-Hakim al-Nayshabūri writes:

###### “It is proved from continuous narrations that Amir al-Mu’minin was born at the center of Ka\`bah from the womb of Fatimah bint Asad.”[1]

Shah Waliyyullah too reports about this birth with some detail:

###### Reports in continuity prove that Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali (a.s) was born on Friday, the thirtieth of Rajab, thirty years after

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Vol 3, Page 483

###### \`am al-fil at the center of Ka\`bah. Besides him, none was ever born there, before or after him.[1]

The modern time scholar \`Abbas Mahmūd al-\`Aqqad has termed this
felicitous birth as the renaissance of the felicity of the Ka\`bah and
the forerunner of the worship of, one and only, Allah there:

“\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) was born inside the Ka\`bah and Allah kept
his face away from bowing to the idols there. His birth there was the
beginning of the new era of worship of one and only Allah.”[2]

Similarly, every historian and biographer has mentioned about this fact.
However, some, accepting the birth of \`Ali (a.s) in the Ka\`bah have
tried to lessen the importance of the event. Sometimes they express a
view that taking birth inside the Ka\`bah is not of any importance,
particularly when it was used as a place for installation of idols. The
reply to them is that if a mosque is converted into a temple, a church
or any other place of worship, it will remain a mosque. Its sanctity
will not diminish because of the change. Similarly, if idols were
installed in the Ka\`bah, its sanctity remained unchanged. Even when
Ka\`bah was declared as the Kiblah[3] it continued to have the idols
until Makkah was conquered and the idols removed from there. Sometimes
they say that Fakhitah bint Zuhayr gave birth to Hakim ibn Hizam inside
the Ka\`bah thirteen years before the \`am al-fil. They say that there
is no sanctity of being born inside the Ka\`bah when even an infidel was
born there.

This attitude is contrary to the position taken by the historians and
biographers who have admitted in clear terms that besides \`Ali (a.s),
no one else was born inside the Ka\`bah prior to or after him. Besides
this, it can be sanctimonious only for a Muslim to have taken birth
inside that holy precinct. For an infidel, it is immaterial where he is
born! The event of an infidel taking birth inside the Ka\`bah will not
be of any significance to him like meeting the Prophet (a.s) or even
visiting the precincts of the Ka\`bah. However, a person in the Faith of
Islam will consider it a good fortune to have seen the Prophet (a.s) or
he had the opportunity to visit the Holy Place. It cannot be said about
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib that he was ever under the influence of infidelity
or that he was born an infidel. Therefore, it is mentioned in the books
of Ahl al-Sunnah that when \`Ali (a.s) was in his mother’s womb, and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Izālat al-Khafā, Page 251  
 **[2]** Al-\`Abqariyyah al-Islāmiyyah, Page 863  
 **[3]** Direction in which Muslims turn to pray.

she wanted to bow in front of the idols, he used to turn inside in such
a way that it became impossible for her to bow! Although this narrative
is not acceptable according to the Shi\`ah belief, it is a positive
proof that \`Ali (a.s), from the womb of his mother to his grave, was
never in the influence of infidelity. And those who have written about
the birth of Ibn Hizam have termed it as an accidental birth. But
\`Ali’s birth there was according to the wish of Allah. Therefore,
\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib says that he and Yazid ibn tannab and some
persons of Banū-Hashim and Banū-al-\`Uzza were sitting near the Ka\`bah
when Fatimah bint Asad came and stood near the Ka\`bah for a while.
Hardly any time elapsed when there appeared signs of concern on her
face. She lifted her shaking hands towards the sky and prayed,

###### “O my Sustainer! I have faith in You, Your Prophets and the Books Revealed to them. Ease my difficulty for the sake of this very House, its Builder and the one who is in my womb! Make the birth of the child I am carrying easy for me! I am confident that he is one of the radiant signs of Your Greatness and Your Majesty!”

\`Abbas says that when Fatimah bint Asad finished the prayer, they saw
the rear wall of the Ka\`bah go asunder and she entered through that
opening without any hesitation. Then immediately the opening closed and
the wall was the same way as it was earlier.

The veracity of this narrative has been accepted by the scholars of both
the schools of thought. Therefore, from among the erudite Shi\`ah
scholars, \`Allamah Abū-Ja\`far al-tūsi in al-Amali, \`Allamah Majlisi
in Bihar al-Anwar and from the scholars of Ahl al-Sunnah, Mir-Salih
al-Kashshafi in al-Manaqib and Mawlawi Muhammad Mubin in Wasilat
al-Najat have recorded this event. This tradition highlights the fact
that this event did not happen all of a sudden as an accident. The
miracle is that the wall of the Ka\`bah went asunder and Fatimah Bint
Asad went boldly in and the wall came back to its original position. It
was a manifestation of the Divine Power of Allah. Fatimah bint Asad
emerged from the Ka\`bah three days after the birth of \`Ali (a.s) with
the baby in her arms.

The Prophet (a.s), who was waiting eagerly outside, went forward and
took the son of his beloved uncle in his arms. The baby opened his eyes
and the first person on whose face he set his eyes was the Prophet
(a.s). The Prophet (a.s) put his tongue in the mouth of the newborn and,
they say, he transferred the Divine Prophetic Knowledge to him.
Witnessing this event, the Prophet

(a.s) has said, “He chose me for the first glimpse and I selected him
for the knowledge.”

\`Ali (a.s) has several relationships with the Ka\`bah. The Prophet
(a.s) has termed him ‘like the Ka\`bah’, that his own forbears had
constructed it and were the protectors and keepers of the edifice.
Hassan ibn Kalal attempted to demolish it when Fihr ibn Malik defeated
and imprisoned him. Abrahah ibn Ashram attacked with a fleet of
elephants when \`Abd al-Muttalib steadfastly stood at the entrance to
the Ka\`bah. If the idolaters had converted it into a storehouse of
idols, it was \`Ali (a.s) who, astride the shoulders of the Prophet
(a.s), demolished the idols and threw them out. Therefore, his birth was
the prelude of the purification of the Ka\`bah.

While \`Ali (a.s) had the singular privilege of being born in the holy
precincts of the Ka\`bah, the timing of his birth was very felicitous
that he was born in the month of Rajab which is one of the sanctimonious
months in the Islamic Calendar. On the twenty-seventh of this month, the
Annunciation of the Prophet (a.s) took place and commenced the
invitation for the people to embrace Islam. This also is an indication
of the nearness and affinity that \`Ali (a.s) had for Islam! \`Ali’s
life had been a mirror of Islamic teachings and character. Islam and
\`Ali (a.s) grew under the tutelage of the Prophet (a.s).
