The Prophet’s Last Journey
==========================

One day prior to his demise the Prophet (a.s) called \`Ali (a.s) close
to himself and said, “O \`Ali! Now is the time for my departure! After
my death, you must give me the bath, drape me in the shroud and put my
mortal remains in the grave. You must fulfill the promises that I have
made with people. I have taken a loan from a certain Jew for the
expenses of the Contingent of Usamah ibn Zayd. You must clear this
debt!” Then he took out the ring from his finger and asked \`Ali (a.s)
to wear it. He also gave to \`Ali (a.s) his sword, helmet the yellow
turban and other arms. That day was over and the next day was Monday
28th of Safar 11H. Now the condition of the Prophet’s health
deteriorated. The clouds of death were hovering over his head. He was in
semi comatose condition prior to death. The time was close when the
human body stops breathing and the spirit travels towards its final
destination. The Prophet (a.s) opened his eyes and when he did not find
\`Ali (a.s), who had gone out for some errand, he said, “Call my
friend!” \`A’ishah says:

###### “When the time of his departure was nigh, the Prophet (a.s) asked his dearest one (habib) to be called. Someone went and called Abū-Bakr. The Prophet (a.s) did not look on him and put his head down. He again wanted his Habib to be called. A person went and called \`Umar. When the Prophet (a.s) saw him he put his head down and again asked for his Habib. Now \`Ali (a.s) came. When the Prophet (a.s) saw him, he took him under his quilt and remained like that until he was dead. His hand was over \`Ali (a.s) at that moment.”[1]

This was the greatest tragedy in the History of Islam. Everyone was
affected with this sad event but for the Banū-Hashim and his close
family it was the most irreparable loss. The condition of the Prophet’s
Daughter was such as if her own life had been snatched away from her.
Her children were crying for the loss of their doting Grandfather. The
entire world of \`Ali (a.s) was changed. In spite of exercising maximum
control over his emotions, tears were running from his eyes. Crying, he
touched his hands to the face of his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Riyā¤ al-Na¤irah, Vol 2, Page 237

departed mentor and cousin and touched his own face. He closed the eyes
of the Prophet (a.s) gently and covered his face with the cloth. Then,
as per the wish of the Prophet (a.s), he got busy with the preparation
for his interment. Ibn Sa\`d writes:

###### “When the Prophet (a.s) died, his head was on the lap of \`Ali (a.s). It was \`Ali (a.s) who gave him the last bath. Al-Fadl Ibn \`Abbas was supporting the Prophet (a.s) and Usamah ibn Zayd was giving the water.”[1]

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had given the bath to the Prophet (a.s), he
draped his body in the shroud and alone offered the Funeral Prayer. The
persons who were gathered at the mosque were discussing as to who must
be asked to lead the last parting prayer for the Prophet (a.s) and where
he should be interred. Some people thought that the compound of the
mosque was a suitable place for the purpose. Other said that the Jannat
al-Baqi\` was the right place. When \`Ali (a.s) learned about these
discussions, he came out of the room and said, “The Prophet (a.s) was
our leader in his lifetime and is our Imam and leader in his death too!
Therefore, every individual group should go into the room and offer
Funeral Prayer individually! As far as the place for his interment is
concerned, he will be buried at the same place where he breathed his
last!” As instructed by the Imam (a.s) the Banū-Hashim first went into
the room and offered the Funeral Prayers. Then followed the Muhajirūn
and the Ansar. Of course, one group was deprived of offering the
Prophet’s Funeral Prayer. They were the persons who were jostled
together at the Saqifah of Banū-Sa\`idah busy in the worldly conclave of
deciding about the corporal power structure! After the Funeral Prayers,
the Prophet (a.s) was interred in the same room where he expired. Zayd
ibn Sahl excavated the grave. The persons in charge of the interment
were \`Ali (a.s), \`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib, al-Fadl ibn \`Abd
al-Muttalib and Usamah ibn Zayd. When the time for burial came, the
Ansar called from outside, “O \`Ali! Please include one of our persons
in the process that we do not remain deprived of the felicity!” \`Ali
(a.s) called Aws ibn Khawli to come in and allowed him to descend into
the grave of the Prophet (a.s). \`Ali (a.s) took the body in both his
hands and lowered it into the grave. When the body was laid in the
grave, he removed the cloth from the face, turned the body towards the
Kiblah, and put the cheek on the dust in the grave. \`Ali (a.s) put the
earth on the body with his own hands, leveled its surface and sprinkled
water over it!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Tabaqāt, Vol 2, Page 263
