Compliance With the Will
========================

The things that a person leaves unfulfilled in this world and those that
need to be done only after the death of the person, he entrusts to a
person close to himself whom he deems capable and willing to comply with
his wishes. It is the bounden duty of a person to comply with the will
of a dear departed person to the best of his capability. The Prophet
(a.s) had appointed \`Ali (a.s) as his *wasi* with the confidence that
he would comply with all his wishes and instructions during his lifetime
and thereafter. He would treat them as his bounden duty. Therefore,
\`Ali (a.s) acted as the most responsible and committed executer of the
Will of the Prophet of Islam (a.s). For the last rites of the Prophet
(a.s), in accord with his wish, \`Ali (a.s) personally gave him the bath
and the burial. Despite of the unfavorable conditions in the
neighborhood and the machinations of the adversaries, his only concern
at the time was to comply with the last wishes of the Master. In
addition to these normal duties, he was responsible for fulfilling the
promises that the Prophet (a.s) had made to some people and to clear his
outstanding debts. This has also been sited in one of the traditions of
the Prophet (a.s): “\`Ali will fulfill the promises made to me and will
clear my debts.” \`Ali (a.s) meticulously performed all the tasks and
responsibilities that were entrusted to him by the Prophet (a.s). \`Abd
al-Wahid ibn \`Awan says:

###### “When the Prophet (a.s) died, \`Ali (a.s) appointed a herald to announce that whatever promises the Prophet (a.s) made to the persons or the debts he owed to them, should call on him for settlement. Every year during the H ajj, he used to send a person to make an announcement near \`Uqbah, the place of sacrifice, about his commitment to honor the promises made to the people by the Prophet (a.s). After him, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) followed the practice and so did Imam al-Husayn (a.s). Then the practice was discontinued.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabaqāt Ibn Sa\`d, Vol 2, Page 319

Could there be a better example of dedication and fulfillment of
responsibilities than this that during the Hajj when people from all
over are assembled the announcement was made for fifty years to ensure
that the demands of no person remained unattended? For such settlement
\`Ali (a.s) neither made the condition of any written documents nor he
asked for any witnesses. \`Abdullah ibn \`Awn says that whatever claims
anyone made, \`Ali (a.s) settled them

This attitude of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) should have been a lesson for
the persons who did not value the claim of the Prophet’s daughter and
made the excuse that the requirements of the witness were not completely
complied with. They should have also thought that when the legacy of the
Prophet (a.s) was the property of the State then, logically, the
liabilities of the Prophet (a.s) too should have been the responsibility
of the State as well. But they kept their silence on this matter! It
does not stand to reason that the fixed assets of a person are attached
by the Sate and the debts incurred by him, also in the discharge of his
duty to the State, were left for others to discharge! One has to
recognize that one who took the responsibility of discharging the debts
was the Prophet’s Deputy after him and the usurpation of the Prophet’s
was not a legitimate act!
