An Overview of the Events of Saqifah
====================================

The drama that was enacted about the demise of the Prophet (a.s) was
over. It had to be over because it was enacted to gain time until
Abū-Bakr arrived on the scene. But it created doubts in the minds of the
Ansar. They started thinking that the rumpus over providing paper and
pen to the Prophet (a.s) for writing his will, the disobedience to
proceed for the campaign with Usamah ibn Zayd and the imminent and
vehement denial of \`Umar about the Prophet’s demise were the links of
the same chain. The purpose was to divert the Caliphate from its main
focus and take it somewhere else. They urgently put together a conclave
at Saqifah Banū-Sa\`idah to owe allegiance to a person from the Ansar
and render the Muhajir’s plan unsuccessful. If the Ansar were sure that
the Muhajirūn will not obstruct \`Ali (a.s) assuming the Caliphate, they
would never have established the conclave at the Saqifah. There
conscience always raised the same call that they did at the Saqifah, “We
shall owe allegiance to none other than \`Ali (a.s)”

In that conclave both the tribes of Ansar Aws and Khazraj participated
despite their differences. Whether it was Aws or Khazraj, the dominance
of one group of the Muhajirūn was not acceptable to them, nor they
considered their hegemony in the interest of the Ansar. However, the
people of Khazraj were very active in organizing this conclave and one
of their prominent persons, Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah was the secretary of the
meeting and was sitting there with a quilt around his body as he was
suffering from a fever at that time. He started the proceedings with his
speech that was delivered in a very low tone because of his weakness.
His son, Qays, repeated loudly what he said. He said, “O people of
Ansar! The precedence and importance that you have in the Faith, no
other Arabs have it! The Prophet (a.s) kept inviting his people to the
Right Path for ten years, but only a few persons accepted to embrace
Islam. It was not in the power of a few persons to safeguard the Faith.
Allah blessed you that you embraced Islam and acted as shields of
protection for the Prophet (a.s) and his small group of companions! You
entered the field of battle and fought for the cause. With your swords,
the proud Arabs were vanquished! The Prophet (a.s) has left this world!
He was happy and satisfied

with you until his last breath! Who is more deserving of the Caliphate
than you who have rendered yeoman service to the Faith! Therefore rise
and make your hold tight over the Caliphate!” All the participants
appreciated his talk and said that they would support him to become the
Caliph. If this was only the matter of the Ansar, they could have
finalized the *bay\`ah* and decided immediately. But there was a fear
that if the Muhajirūn opposed the move, there would be unnecessary
conflict. Therefore, after the speech of Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah the question
arose that if the Muhajirūn did not agree with them, then how would the
problem be resolved? Some suggested that if they do not agree then they
could opt for one emir from each side. Sa\`d said that this is the
weakness of the Ansar. He said that if there was solidarity in their
thoughts they would never have suggested sharing power with the
Muhajirūn and would decide the matter before the other side thought of
the *bay\`ah*.

Although the people of Aws too were present at this conclave, they were
there just as observers. They also wanted to give others a feeling that
the Ansar were not divided. But in their hearts, they still carried a
grudge against the Khazraj. They had even fought a bloody battle, known
as the Battle of Bu\`ath, that was fought just before the advent of
Islam to their area. Although Islam paved the way for peace and amity
between them, and to a major extent removed the hostility between the
two groups, but the human failing always maintained a sort of distance
between them. Therefore, at this time too, some men of Aws carried the
message about the conclave to \`Umar. \`Umar was disturbed with this
news and, accompanied by a couple of cohorts, went to the Saqifah to
disrupt the conclave. Ibn al-Athir writes:

###### “When \`Umar heard this news he came to the place of the Prophet (a.s) where Abū-Bakr was present. He sent word to Abū-Bakr to come out for a while. He said that he was busy with the Prophet (a.s). \`Umar sent word that some accident had happened and his coming out was important. Therefore, Abū-Bakr came out and he was informed of the event. Both of them took Abū-\`Ubaydah along and proceeded fast towards the quarters of the Ansar.”[1]

\`Umar thought it necessary to inform Abū-Bakr about the conclave of the
Ansar. This was not a personal or individual affair and concerned the
entire Ummah. If there was any fear of harm to the community at large
from the conclave of the Ansar, then informing to the other important
persons too was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 2, Page 222

very essential. Were \`Abbas, \`Ali (a.s), al-Zubayr and other persons
from Banū-Hashim not important enough to be taken into confidence.
Instead of surreptitiously sending a message to Abū-Bakr, \`Umar could
have himself entered the chambers of the Prophet (a.s) and informed the
persons there about the gravity of the situation. But his maintaining
secrecy about the matter creates doubts about the intentions of the two
comrades.

When these three persons arrived panting at the Saqifah, the Ansar were
completely surprised. With the revelation of their secret conclave, they
thought that their plans had gone awry. The Aws too got a chance to join
hands with the Muhajirūn to defeat the plans of the Khazraj. As soon as
\`Umar arrived there, he viewed the gathering and asked, “Who is the
person draped in the quilt?” He was informed that it was Sa\`d ibn
\`Abadah who was presiding over the conclave and was the candidate for
the Caliphate. \`Umar knit his brows and wanted to say something to the
gathering. Abū-Bakr knew his vitriolic temper and stopped him from
uttering anything that might harm their own interest. \`Umar sat down
saying:

###### “I shall not disobey the dictates of the Caliph of the Prophet (a.s) in a day or two!”[1]

Abū-Bakr rose and addressed the gathering:

###### “Allah sent the Prophet (a.s) at a time when idol worship was rampant. He stood up to stop people from worshipping the idols and start worshipping the one and only Allah. But the Arabs did not agree to forsake their ancestral faith. Allah selected the initial Muhajirūn, who are from the same clan as the Prophet (a.s), to bear witness to his Faith. They bore with patience the hardships inflicted on them by the men of their own clan. At that time, all the people were against this handful of the supporters of the Prophet (a.s). They remained steadfast in their Faith and were the first to worship Allah. These people are the true friends of the Prophet (a.s) and are from his clan. Who could be more deserving of the Caliphate than they could? Those who dispute with them in this matter will be termed rebellious! O Group of Ansar! Your felicity in the Faith and the precedence in accepting Islam too cannot be denied! Allah made you the supporters of the Prophet of Islam and gave you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 444

###### elevated status! Therefore, we shall be the Emir and you will be the Vizier! No matter shall be settled without you consent!”

This speech of Abū-Bakr reflected his foresight, understanding of the
situation and the political wisdom. It was his political wisdom that he
prevented the outburst of \`Umar when they arrived at the Saqifah to
ensure that in his anger he did not use words that would upset the
Ansar. Abū-Bakr was seeing that the situation was not for strictness and
needed discreet and smooth handling. Therefore, in his well-balanced
words, he impressed the Ansar by terming them the advisers for the
Muhajirūn and offered to them to be their Vizier. The main point about
the speech was that while he was not the opponent of the Ansar, he gave
them the impression that the Muhajirūn were one with them. He did not
present himself as an opponent but as a one who had come to them as a
facilitator. He talked about the Muhajirūn and Ansar in a manner that he
never sounded that they were opponents. If the question of Muhajir or
Ansar had arisen, it would be to great disadvantage to his own group. It
was then possible that the endemic tribal rivalry amongst the Arabs
would have raised its head once again. Then the race for power would
have started and none would achieve any success. He was also very
discreet in not posing the Muhajirūn in general against the Ansar but
only the small group who had the privilege of embracing Islam in the
early days and helping with the Prophet’s Mission. He did this to
impress on them that he was not trying to project the tribal superiority
of the Muhajirūn and only the felicity of the small group that was close
to Prophet (a.s) in his early days of propagation of the Faith. Then, to
strengthen his point of view, while he praised the contribution of the
select group of the Muhajirūn, he praised the contribution of the Ansar
to the Cause. To establish the claim of the Muhajirūn for the Caliphate
he mentioned the qualities of the Muhajirūn that were convincing for the
audience. The Ansar knew that among the Muhajirūn there was a small
group who had precedence over all in embracing Islam under very
difficult circumstances. He stressed his point to establish the claim
for the Caliphate and this point went well with the audience! He knew
that \`Ali (a.s) had precedence over everyone else in embracing Islam,
he was from the Quraysh and was the closest person to the Prophet (a.s)
throughout his Mission. But Abū-Bakr gleaned over this fact and kept the
Ansar quiet by offering to them the carrot of becoming the Vizier. This
offer also removed the doubts from the minds of the Ansar that their
rights might be denied to them in the new disposition. It is another
matter that the position of vizier was created neither during the time
of Abū-Bakr nor \`Umar. It was just a non-existent carrot that was
offered to the Ansar only at the Saqifah. But during the reign of
\`Uthman,

a position almost similar to vizier, the katib (clerk), was created. But
how could an Ansar dream of the position when an Umayyad was available!

Aws were happy with the oratory of Abū-Bakr because they were not happy
with the claims of superiority by their rivals, the Khazraj. They kept
sitting with their head bent and did not raise any objection to whatever
he claimed. But the Khazraj did speak out. Their representative, Habbab
ibn al-Mundhir rose to say:

###### “O people of Ansar! You must firmly take your stand! These people are living under your shadow! None can dare to say anything against you or act against your wishes. You have respectability, affluence, strength and valor! Neither are you lesser in numbers than they are nor in martial skills. People are looking towards you. Remain united. If you do not remain together, you will fail in you endeavor. The Prophet (a.s) migrated to settle in your City. Because of you, there was freedom for Worship and Mosques were constructed. With the help of your swords, the Arab Tribes were subdued and Islam was successful. You are not the wrong claimants of the Caliphate. If these people do not accept your rights, there must be one Emir from our side and one from theirs!”

The spirit with which Habbab started his speech, it became evident that
the Ansar would not capitulate to the Muhajirūn at any cost nor will
they allow the diminution of their determination. But that was not to
be. \`Umar suddenly rose and said, “How is it possible to have two
chiefs at the same time? By Allah! The Arabs will never agree for this
arrangement to bring you to that position when the Prophet (a.s) was not
one of you The Arabs can certainly accept the leader only from the clan
of the Prophet (a.s) Therefore, whoever opposes our right to Caliphate,
we shall oppose him with this argument! Whoever clashes with us about
the Emirate of the Prophet’s Domain will be a sinner and will be the
cause of his own destruction!

After \`Umar’s talk, Habbab rose once again. And with great emotion
addressed the Ansar, “O group of Ansar! Remain steadfast on your stand!
Do not pay any heed to the talk of these persons. If they do not accept
your claims, push them out of the city! Then select anyone you wish to
have as your emir. By Allah! You are more deserving of the Caliphate
than these persons are. Because the Faith was spread through your
efforts and the people bent towards Islam! By Allah! If anyone refutes
me I shall cut his nose with my sword!”

Habbab’s talk did not convince the gathering when compared to the
oratory of Abū-Bakr and \`Umar. Although Habbab was considered a person
of opinion amongst the Ansar, he did not have the foresight and maturity
that is required to make a success out of a popular movement. An example
of his indiscretion was reflected in his speeches at the gathering. It
was required at the moment that instead of exhibiting emotional
outbursts prevalent during the age of ignorance and exercising
discretion in making statements that was the need of the day. Therefore,
with his outburst he made his position weak and was not able to make any
impression on the audience. Abū-\`Ubaydah was realizing the gravity of
the situation. He shook the religious sentiments of the Ansar by saying,
“O group of Ansar! You have given us support and succor when we had the
need! Do not change your ways now and remain steadfast with your past
attitude! “The result of this talk was that even the people of Khazraj
relented. Seeing the direction of the wind, Bashir ibn Sa\`d Khazraji
said, “O group of Ansar! Although we have the felicity of taking on the
infidels and took precedence in accepting Islam, the only thing in our
sight was the pleasure of Allah and the obedience for the Prophet (a.s)!
It is not proper that we use the Faith for worldly advancement and
contest for gaining power. The Faith is a Blessing given by Allah. The
Prophet (a.s) was from the Quraysh and therefore his tribe has the right
to bring forth his successor and Emir. May Allah forbid that I dispute
with them on this matter! You must fear Allah and do not get embroiled
with them.” When Bashir uttered these words, the unity of the Ansar
manifested so far went into thin air. Their attitude suddenly changed.
There is no doubt people’s attitude takes no time in changing!

As a result of the weakness and irresolution of the Ansar when the
foundations of their claims started shaking, the Muhajirūn got the
opportunity to exploit their weakness. Therefore, Abū-Bakr stood up and
said that sitting in their presence were \`Umar and Abū-\`Ubaydah and
they may pledge their allegiance to any one of them! This was a move
which could certainly confuse the audience but might not bring about an
assent. The condition of the minds of the audience was like that of a
traveler who had lost his way and was standing confused at the
crossroads. He fails to decide which way to take. People started staring
at each other’s faces and got confused for the selection of one of the
two. If Abū-Bakr had suggested only one name, there would not have been
any difficulty in the gathering agreeing to it. The reason would be that
they look to a person’s suggestion that has impressed their thinking at
the meeting and they go with closed eyes in the direction pointed out by
the person. But Abū-Bakr neither proposed only one name for the position
nor he expressed any particular interest in any one of the two. It
appears a very

clever move that he wanted to confuse the gathering and divert their
attention towards the source of the suggestion that was he! Sensing the
confusion in the minds of the audience \`Umar suggested that Abū-Bakr
was suitable in all respects to be the Caliph. He asked Abū-Bakr to
stretch his hand that he and others extend their allegiance to him.
Abū-Bakr instantaneously stretched his hand as if the proposal of the
other two names was just a formability and the matter was already
predetermined between them. \`Umar was about to put his hand in the hand
of Abū-Bakr when Bashir ibn Sa\`d put his hand on the outstretched hand
of Abū-Bakr in token of owing his allegiance to him. Then \`Umar and
Abū-\`Ubaydah did *bay\`ah* with Abū-Bakr followed by the people of
Khazraj. Although the people of Aws had come to the conclave as
supporters of Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah, they would not have liked someone from
the Tribe of Khazraj to get a position of power. Therefore, the
representative of the Aws, Usayd ibn Hudayr, seeing the Khazraj move
forward to owe allegiance to Abū-Bakr said:

###### “By Allah! If Khazraj are able once to rule over you, they will get superiority over you for all time. Then they will not give you any share from that emirate. Therefore, rise and owe your allegiance to Abū-Bakr.”[1]

The words of Usayd ibn Hudayr indicate that they were agreeing to owe
allegiance to Abū-Bakr only on account of the differences between the
tribes of Aws and Khazraj. They never wanted anyone from the Khazraj to
become the Caliph and dominate them forever. Another motivation that the
vizierate was being offered to the Ansar and the Aws might rise to that
position in time to come. But it is a fact of history that the Ansar
were neglected even for small positions of power and the position of a
Vizier was never instituted. The talk of Habbab ibn al-Mundhir proved
true that he told Ansar while asking them not to owe allegiance to the
Muhajirūn, “O group of Ansar! I see with my eyes that your children are
begging at the thresholds of the progeny of Muhajirūn with outstretched
lapels and no one giving them even water to drink!”

In this hullabaloo of the *bay\`ah*, Habbab ibn al-Mundhir took out his
sword but it was snatched away from him and was disarmed. Sa\`d ibn
\`Abadah was trampled under feet. \`Umar came back in his element. While
he was subdued in the beginning, now after the dispelling of the
political danger, he could take a stern stance. With Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah,
he exchanged harsh words and pulling of each others beards. \`Umar
shouted and said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 458

###### “Kill him! May Allah perish him! He creates unrest!”[1]

The words of Tarikh al-Tabari are:

###### “May Allah kill him. He is a hypocrite!”[2]

Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah, was an important person from the Ansar and a chief
from the Tribe of Khazraj and one of the important companions of the
Prophet (a.s). What was his crime to be termed a hypocrite and
troublemaker? If he was a claimant of the caliphate, others too had come
there for the same purpose. If Abū-Bakr and \`Umar thought that it was
important to decide about the Caliphate before the Prophet’s funeral to
avoid unrest and dispute, the Ansar too had gathered together for the
same purpose. If the conclave was illegitimate, the Muhajirūn too made
use of the same illegitimate conclave to get their candidate foisted as
the Caliph. When they said that the conclave of the Ansar was
non-representative because of the Muhajirūn not being there, then how
could the selection of the Caliph be legitimate when there were only
three persons from the Muhajirūn and none of the Banū-Hashim was present
at the Conclave. When the relationship with the Prophet (a.s) was made a
condition for the selection of the Caliph, Banū-Hashim were the closest
of his kin. If the elders have to meet and decide the urgent and
important matters, then the action of Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah cannot be
termed illegitimate. Calling him a hypocrite and troublemaker was not
warranted. The truth is that Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah was a candidate for the
caliphate and that was not palatable to \`Umar.

All this proves that the *bay\`ah* of Abū-Bakr came about in disturbed
and emotional circumstances. On the one hand there was the clash between
Aws and Khazraj and on the other was mutual antagonism between two
Khazrajites that provided an opportunity to the Muhajirūn to put forward
a candidate for the *bay\`ah*. Bashir ibn Sa\`d tried to obstruct the
claim of Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah took the first initiative in extending his
hand in *bay\`ah* to Abū-Bakr. Seeing Bashir, the Khazraj yielded and
Aws followed too. In this pell-mell there was no chance for any parleys
or consultation and the *bay\`ah* was done in a hurry. \`Umar too
considered it the creation of the unusual circumstances and said:

###### “Abū-Bakr’s *bay\`ah* was a *‘falta’* or something done without thinking about it. Even then, Allah spared us from His anger. Again if someone follows this method, he must be killed.”[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 63  
 **[2]** Vol 2, Page 459

\`Allamah al-Zamakhshari describing the meaning of *‘falta’* writes:

###### “Abū-Bakr put the shackle of caliphate in his neck in a way as if something is snatched from another person or is snatched away with the talons. Without doubt such a *bay\`ah* is born of mischief and wickedness but Allah saved people from evil consequences.”[1]

It may be right to call this *bay\`ah*  a *fitnah* (mischief) because
although he had decided on the candidature of Abū-Bakr, beforehand, and
had enacted subterfuges to clear the ground, but he kept the name of
Abū-Bakr secret until the last moment. When he felt that the Ansar were
about to achieve unanimity about one candidate, in an opportunistic
manner he extended the hand of Abū-Bakr for the *bay\`ah*. People were
raring to cast their lot. As soon as a candidate was presented before
them, they rushed to give their votes. Thus, the ‘*fitnah*’ came about!

It was \`Umar’s political acumen that besides the confidantes none else
got wind of what was brewing. If this secret leaked, some persons could
have opposed the move. If the Banū-Hashim had learned about the scheme,
it would have run into failure. The reason was that the contention of
the Muhajirūn was that Abū-Bakr was near of kin to the Prophet (a.s). If
someone from the Banū-Hashim was around, this contention would have
collapsed! The reason being that whether someone was from Banū-taym or
Banū-\`Adi, he could not claim nearness to the Prophet (a.s) in
comparison with Banū-Hashim. If \`Ali (a.s) had reached there, there
would not have been the question of anybody else getting selected for
the Caliphate. Therefore, al-Mundhir ibn Arqam, representing the
sentiments of the Ansar says:

###### “Among the Muhajirūn, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib was one that if he contested for the Caliphate then not a single group of the Ansar would go against him.”[2]

In view of the Democratic Caliphate, what came about cannot be called an
exercise in democracy. The requirement of the democratic process was
that the common man was allowed to express his choice. But what really
happened was that at first the Caliphate was restricted to the
Muhajirūn, and then only three persons from the Muhajirūn quietly
present themselves at the conclave

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Sawā\`iq al-Muhriqah, Page 36  
 **[2]** Al-Fā’iq, Vol 1, Page 146  
 **[3]** Tārīkh al-Ya\`qūbī, Vol 2, Page 103

of the Ansar for the selection of a leader at the Saqifah. In the
beginning the majority of the conclave was in the favor of Sa\`d ibn
\`Abadah. If that selection were concluded, at least, it would have sent
a signal that in Islam selection of the caliph is not on the basis of
tribal affiliation. When the caliphate can be got by Banū-taym and
Banū-\`Adi, why not the Ansar? If it is accepted that the caliph can
only be from the clan of the Prophet (a.s) then the nearest to him was
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, as against those who meet with the Prophet (a.s)
with the ninth or tenth forbear! About this Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) has
said:

###### “They argued about the tree but had destroyed the fruits.”[1]

At the Saqifah of Banū-Sa\`idah, the opponents were the Ansar, the
contention that worked was “the Arabs want to see the Caliphate where
the Prophethood was.” If the competition was with the Banū-Hashim, then
\`Umar would have said what he told once to Ibn \`Abbas:

###### “People do not like that the Prophethood and caliphate come together in one family!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 34
