Amir Al Mu’minin’s Discreet Silence
===================================

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) openly challenged the Democratic Caliphate and
proved his Right with the same proofs that his opponents used at the
Saqifah. His proof was, in fact, more valid than that of his
adversaries. His was a protest against the politics that resulted in the
‘elected ruler’ who assumed the status of Caliph of the Prophet (a.s)!
In his protest, there was neither wish for acquiring power nor craze for
position of strength. If he had such ambitions, he could have also
indulged in politics of the same order that the other group did. He
could have accepted the cooperation of persons who had offered their
support to him for such moves. But he discreetly turned their offers
down.

When the selection of Abū-Bakr was taking place in Saqifah, the Umayyad
Chief Abū-Sufyan was not present in al-Madinah. The Prophet (a.s),
during his last days, had deputed him for some work away from there.
When he returned after the Prophet’s demise, and heard about the passing
away of the Prophet (a.s) and the elevation of Abū-Bakr to the
Caliphate, he raised a hue and cry. He went running to \`Abbas ibn \`Abd
al-Muttalib and after discussing with him came to \`Ali (a.s) and wanted
to assure him of the support of his tribe to stand against the
self-styled rulers. Therefore, in a very confident tone he said:

###### “How has the governance gone into the hands of a person from the lowliest family of the Quraysh? If you wish, by Allah, I can fill al-Madinah with cavaliers and foot-men!”[1]

Any ordinary person would find it very difficult to control his
emotions. He might tend to accept such an offer in a similar situation.
But Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was never influenced by emotions nor could he
be tricked by wearing a cloak of friendship. He read through the
subterfuge of Abū-Sufyan that it was not the spirit of friendship and
fairplay that motivated his offer. But it was his ulterior motive to
cause trouble in the fledgling Islamic State and usurp power in the
bargain. Refusing his offer, the Imam (a.s) angrily said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 449

###### “By Allah! Your aim is only to create disorder. You have always opposed Islam and I do not need your sympathies and advice!”[1]

This fact needs consideration that what enmity Abū-Sufyan had with
Abū-Bakr that immediately on arrival he started lobbying against him. In
fact both persons were always very chummy and even during the days of
Abū-Sufyan’s infidelity, Abū-Bakr did not like to hear anything against
him. Once some companions, amongst whom were Salman, Suhayb and Bilal,
were sitting at a place when Abū-Sufyan passed by. They passed a remark
that the enemy of Allah was not killed by Allah’s Swords even to that
day! Abū-Bakr was angry at their remark and said that they were making
an impertinent remark against a senior chief of the Quraysh and moved
away from there. He then went to the presence of the Prophet (a.s) and
repeated what he had heard them say about Abū-Sufyan. The Prophet (a.s)
said:

###### “Perhaps you have offended those persons! If you have angered them, you have angered Allah!”[2]

Hearing these words from the Prophet (a.s), Abū-Bakr returned to those
persons and asked them if they were upset with what he told them
concerning Abū-Sufyan. They only said, “May Allah forgive you!”

This incident can only be from the days of Abū-Sufyan’s infidelity. If
he were not an infidel, the persons would not have termed him as Allah’s
enemy and deserving of getting killed by Allah’s Swords. Even Abū-Bakr
would not have referred to him only as a senior Quraysh Chief. Some
historians have clarified that this event took place at the time of
Hudaybiyah in 7 H and Abū-Sufyan embraced Islam after the conquest of
Makkah in 8 H.

It becomes evident from this event that neither Abū-Sufyan had any
enmity with Abū-Bakr, nor Abū-Bakr disliked him. Then how is it that the
person thought of disturbing his apple cart and trying to bring a person
from the Tribe inimical to his own who had personally dispatched many of
his close kinsmen in recent battles! The truth is that he played the
trick to give an impression to the rulers of the day that he was capable
of creating a group in opposition to them to put their rule in danger.
This way he wanted to frighten Abū-Bakr and his cohorts to get things
decided the way he wanted them. Therefore, this strategy of his proved
successful. When the rumor spread that Abū-Sufyan was conspiring with
Banū-Hashim against the rulers, the rulers

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 449  
 **[2]** Ansāb al-Ashrāf, Vol 1, Page 489

quietened him by giving him undue favors. \`Umar told Abū-Bakr:

###### “Abū-Sufyan has arrived! He is bound to create some mischief. The Prophet (a.s) himself used to keep him appeased with regard to Islam! The charities that are in his control they should remain with him. Therefore, Abū-Bakr did accordingly and Abū-Sufyan was happy. He extended his *bay\`ah!”* [1]

Abū-Sufyan was not only appeased in this manner. His son Yazid was
appointed the governor of Syria that proved as the cornerstone of the
Umayyad Dynasty!

\`Ali’s discreet quiet is reflective of his sagacity and understanding
of the fissiparous conditions prevalent at that time. If he had agreed
to fight at the instigation of Abū-Sufyan, the conflict would not have
been given any other name than the search for power. The hands of the
enemies of Islam would have strengthened as a result of the war of
attrition between two groups of Muslims. People would have felt that
taking shelter behind the Prophet’s name he was running after
acquisition of power. Then his silent protest against the existing power
center would have gone in vain. He still had strength in his arms to
face any adversary, the example s of which he had set time and again in
the ghazawat that he won single-handed while other important
functionaries were fleeing, and he had the courage and will to stand any
onslaught. But his farsightedness stopped him from taking any
precipitate action. The defeated Jews and the captive Ansar were looking
for a chance to rise no sooner they smelled that the Muslims were a
divided house. The hypocrites were busy in the garb of Muslims as well.
All these forces were raring to unite under one flag to inflict one
final blow to the Muslims! This is a great favor to Muslims from \`Ali
(a.s) that he made only silent protest and did not rise against the
persons who had deprived him of everything that was rightfully his as
Ordained by Allah and His Prophet (a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 62
