Istikhlaf Or Nomination of the Second Caliph
============================================

At the Saqifah, the foundation of democracy was raised in Islam.
Whatever that democracy was, could not be continued with any more and
nomination took its place. Therefore, Abū-Bakr, in his deathbed, decided
to nominate \`Umar. He called \`Uthman and \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf and
took their advice. \`Abd al-Rahman said that the choice was right but
\`Umar had an element of anger and cruelty in his nature. \`Uthman fully
supported the idea and said that it was for the betterment of the Ummah
to nominate \`Umar as the next caliph. After this discussion Abū-Bakr
sent the two persons away. He again called \`Uthman to prepare the
document of nomination. When he started dictating, and only the preamble
was written when Abū-Bakr swooned and became unconscious. \`Uthman knew
what he was intending to dictate. Therefore, during the period of the
unconsciousness of the caliph \`Uthman wrote, “I have nominated \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab as caliph.”

When Abū-Bakr revived from his unconsciousness he asked what was
written. \`Uthman read to him what he had written down. He asked
\`Uthman whether he hurried writing down the name fearing that he might
not revive and pronounce the name of his successor and that might cause
unrest and differences amongst the Muslims? \`Uthman nodded his
agreement. Abū-Bakr said that Allah would Bless \`Uthman for what he
did!

After this document of succession was completed, Abū-Bakr called \`Umar
and gave him the document for safekeeping and to follow the decree
recorded therein. \`Umar took the document from him and asked people to
pledge that they would abide by the decree of the first caliph! One
person asked \`Umar, what was written in the document? \`Umar said he
was not aware of what was written in the document but affirmed that the
contents of the document were binding for him. The person said, “But by
Allah! I know what is written in the document. Last year you made him
the caliph and now he is leaving creating you the caliph!”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Imāmah was-Siyāsah, Vol 1, Page 33

When this news spread, some people remained quiet out of discretion and
some started protesting against the nomination. Therefore, a group of
Muhajirūn and Ansar came to Abū-Bakr and said, “O Deputy of the Prophet!
Nominating Ibn al-Khattab as your successor you have placed a ruler over
our heads! When you go to the presence of Allah, what reply will you
give Him?”[1]

Talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah too expressed dissatisfaction on the nomination
and said, “You have imposed \`Umar over the people as caliph and ruler.
You know fairly well that with you around how much hardship he was
putting them to! Now he will have total authority to do what he wished
to do! What reply will you give to Allah when He asked you questions
about the people?”[2]

It has been the attitude of the democratic regimes to beat the drums
about the peoples’ right to elect their representatives. But when they
are elected, they keep aside the people’s rights and do what suits their
own interests. Then the democracy gets restricted to one or a few
persons only. The democracy of Saqifah Banū-Sa\`idah came to such a
pass. In about two years and half it got restricted to two or three
persons! If the process of nomination is accepted, we shall have to
acknowledge that the selection of the caliph is not determined by the
opinion of the populace. Even if Abū-Bakr was the people’s
representative, he was not given the authority to nominate his successor
unilaterally. In no democratic regime such an authority is ever given.
Even if Abū-Bakr expressed his choice, it was only to \`Abd al-Rahman
ibn \`Awf and \`Uthman and none else. One of them thought it futile to
oppose the nomination and the other wholeheartedly supported the
nomination to reap the benefits in the future! The opinion of two
persons cannot be termed as the opinion of all the people. If he really
wanted advice of the men of wisdom, he could have consulted \`Abbas ibn
\`Abd al-Muttalib about whom the Prophet (a.s) had said that he was his
uncle and his ancestors’ representative. Even \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib (a.s)
was available who had been with the Prophet (a.s) from the beginning of
his Annunciation. They had an excuse that he was not invited to come to
the Saqifah of Banū-Sa\`idah because he was preoccupied with the last
rites of the Prophet (a.s) at that time. But for this nomination process
Abū-Bakr had no excuse why he avoided consulting \`Ali (a.s) on this
very important matter. It is surprising that \`Ali (a.s) was consulted
on all important matters like the ghazawat etc, and his wisdom was
praised by

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Talkhīs al-Hubbayr, Page 348  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 2, Page 621

everyone, including the new coterie, but now he was totally forgotten in
this very vital decision. According to the opinion of the Prophet (a.s),
\`Ali (a.s) was having the first right to be the caliph. But here he was
not even consulted on the matter!

Anyway, those who accepted the caliphate on the flimsy democratic
process concluded at the conclave of Saqifah, surrendered themselves to
the rule of \`Umar as well. Abū-Bakr, after being on the throne for two
years, three months and ten days, left this world on 22 Jumada II 13 H
leaving the reins of power in the hands of \`Umar.
