Name, Appellation and Filial Appellation
========================================

Abū-Talib named him Zayd after his ancestor, Qasi ibn Kalab. Fatimah
bint Asad named him Haydar after her father Asad. Asad and Haydar both
the words mean a tiger. Therefore, in the battle of Khaybar, while
reciting the martial poetry combating with Marhab, he said,

“I am that whose mother has named him Hayder!”

The Prophet (a.s), under divine inspiration called him with the name of
\`Ali (a.s). There is another opinion that Abū-Talib himself gave him
the name of \`Ali (a.s). As a proof, they present the following couplet
of Abū-Talib:

“I have given him the name of \`Ali that eminence and success always
follow him. Respectability is the only wealth that remains forever.”

This name, literally meaning greatness and high status, proved most
appropriate for \`Ali (a.s). Although the Umayyads tried their level
best to play down his name and the kunyah, they could not succeed in
doing it. Therefore, Abū-Na\`im al-Isfahani writes in Hilyat al-Awliya’
that the son of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas was \`Ali and kunyah Abul-Hasan.
One day \`Ali ibn \`Abdullah went to Abd al Malik who said that he could
not tolerate his name and kunyah. He did not change his name but changed
his kunyah to Abū-Muhammad! With this bent of mind, for centuries no
Muslim ruler by the name \`Ali was there. But today, in the Muslim
population anywhere, after Muhammad, the most popular name is \`Ali.
Despite centuries of suppression and oppression, the name (\`Ali) spread
all over the world with the spread of Islam!

He has several titles that signify his various qualities. The most
popular are al-Murtada, al-Wasi and Amir al-Mu’minin. His first kunyah
is Abul-Hasan. Another well-known kunyah is Abū-Turab. Generally, Arabs
keep the kunyah on the name of the first son. For instance, Abū-Talib
adopted the kunyah as Abū-Talib when his first son Talib was born. \`Abd
al-Muttalib had his kunyah based on the name of his first-born son as
Abū-Harith. The second kunyah of \`Ali (a.s) was on the suggestion of
the Prophet (a.s). It is written in Sirat Ibn-

Husham that during the battle of al-\`Ashirah, \`Ali (a.s) and \`Ammar
ibn Yasir went towards the lake of Banū-Mudlaj and lay down under the
shade of a tree on green grass. Hardly any time passed when the prophet
(a.s) too arrived there, and seeing \`Ali’s dusty clothes he said,

###### “O Abū-Turab, in what condition are you!”

From that day, \`Ali’s kunyah became Abū-Turab. \`Allamah Halabi has
written:

###### “In the battle of al-\`Ashirah the Prophet (a.s) had given to \`Ali (a.s) the kunyah of Abū-Turab when he found him and \`Ammar ibn Yasir sleeping and \`Ali (a.s) was covered in dust”[1]

In the beginning this kunyah was suggested for \`Ali only. Prior to him,
none had this kunyah. Therefore, Shaykh Aluddin writes:

###### “For the first time ever, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) was addressed with the kunyah of Abū-Turab.”[2]

Al-Bukhari has included this incident in his Sahih that the Prophet
(a.s) once came to the residence of Fatimah al-Zahra’ (a.s) and not
finding \`Ali (a.s) at home he enquired about him. Fatimah (a.s) said
that they had some difference of opinion and that in a state of anger he
went out. The Prophet (a.s) asked one person to go and look for \`Ali
(a.s).The person noticed \`Ali (a.s) lying on the floor of the mosque.
He returned and informed his whereabouts to the Prophet (a.s). The
Prophet (a.s) then went to the mosque and noticed \`Ali (a.s) covered
all over in dust. He dusted his clothes and said,

###### “Get up, Abū-Turab!”

After this event he was known with the kunyah of Abū-Turab.

This narration, when compared with the earlier tradition sounds
different and is not plausible according to the norms of Dirayah. The
reason for the non-plausibility is that during the entire married life
of Fatimah and Al (a.s) there is no instance of ever being any
differences between them. Their lives have been examples of most cordial
marital relationship. From the tradition where \`Ammar ibn Yasir was
also there, it appears that the Prophet (a.s) had suggested the kunyah
of Abū-Turab in Jumada II, 2 A.H., because the Battle of al-\`Ashirah
was fought in that period. Fatimah al-Zahra’ (a.s) was married to \`Ali
(a.s) on the first of Dhul-Hijjah 2 A.H. that is, six months after the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol 2, Page 142  
 **[2]** Muhā¤arāt al-Awā’il, Page 123

proposal of this kunyah. In that event, there is no chance of any
difference of opinion between the two and the need to go away from home
in anger. Because at that time, Lady Fatimah was not married to \`Ali
(a.s). It appears that the tradition has been concocted to please the
Umayyad rulers who used to address \`Ali (a.s) with this kunyah while
they carried out their campaign of vilification against him. A name that
is associated with an unpleasant memory would never be a popular name.
Although this kunyah of \`Ali (a.s) is the most likeable of this titles
Therefore, Sahl ibn Sa\`d says:

“\`Ali liked Abū-Turab more than all his names.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 8, Page 63
