Amir Al Mu’minin’s Style of Governance
======================================

For ages, the system of rule by the kings has been dominating on the
human race. As a result of this system, the craving for power had become
a part of the human instinct. Therefore, the ancient Egyptians and the
Japanese had a belief that the kings were born to rule over the people
and that others were their serfs and servants! This created an
inferiority complex in other people of those races. They were used as
bonded slaves of the ruling elite. Despite all the tyranny, they thought
they had no right to protest against the injustices of their masters.
They thought the purpose of their lives was to abjectly surrender to the
will of their rulers.

When the voice of Islam rose from the desert of Arabia, the conditions
there were almost the same. The weak were helpless in front of the
persons with power. The poor persons always remained in the clutches of
the usurers or the shackles of the masters. Slavery was rampant. Islam
gave them the tiding of freedom and equality. It removed the differences
of color and race. It abolished the rule of men and established Allah’s
Rule! The meaning of Allah’s Rule is that the people believe that He is
our Master and observes all our words and deeds. We are subservient only
to His Commands and answerable to Him! This new concept did away with
idolatry and hypocrisy and the minds and hearts were endowed with
brotherhood and equality.

The prophet of Islam (a.s) was not having the political power and pelf
in his view. The purpose of his Annunciation was to establish Allah’s
Rule among the people. Therefore, he gave the lesson of the Unity of
Allah to the people. And invited all people to gather at one focal point
and give birth to a clean society. The society in which there was
knowledge instead of ignorance and where there was justice in place of
tyranny. The Prophet (a.s) was not doing this only for his own time. His
message was for the posterity as well. He advocated a system that is
termed Divinely commissioned leadership. The one to establish the
divinely commissioned leadership was to set an example to the people
with his beliefs and actions in accordance to the Commands of Allah. The
people should obey him accepting him as the Representative of Allah
amongst them. The acceptance of Allah’s Commands is to follow his
directives! Therefore, Allah says:

### يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ.

#### “O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority from among you. (4/59)

This is an undeniable fact that after the Prophet (a.s) the weak
democracy that was the basis of the governance was the forerunner of the
monarchy of the type followed by Caesar and Khusrow. Instead of Allah’s
Rule, the hegemony of individuals was enforced on the people. In
divinely commissioned government, there is no place for personal
aggrandizement. The yardstick of Allah’s Rule is neither power nor pelf
of individuals but the one who administers and enforces the norms and
Commands Revealed by Allah. No doubt, those who came to the caliphate
were called Muslims. But the Islamic Rule does not mean that a person
who has embraced Islam comes on the top to rue. But it is the
implementation of the life style that the Prophet (a.s) had enunciated.
If anyone establishes rule contrary to those norms, then that is not an
Islamic regime. Therefore, the rule of Yazid, Marwan, \`Abd al-Malik and
persons of that ilk cannot be called as Muslim rulers. In fact, they
were the images of Heracles and Caesar in an Islamic environment!

\`Ali’s rule was truly Islamic. He had accepted the caliphate only on
condition that no one should interfere in his running the administration
exactly in accordance with the norms laid down by the Shari\`ah of
Islam. Although his period was dominated by intrigue and troubles
created by his enemies, that in his brief rule he presented an
administration that was in accord with the style of governance of the
Prophet (a.s) and implicitly followed the Commands of Allah. If he had
not taken the reins of governance in his hands, people would have
forgotten what is divinely commissioned government. Running the
governance on the Islamic norms is something and acquiring power through
politics is something else.

Amir al-Mu’minin’s entire life is a proof that every act of his was in
accordance to the Commands of Allah. If he accepted the caliphate, he
did it with the condition that it would be the divinely commissioned
government and not personal rule. He gave real interpretation to “Who
has not a partner in the kingdom, (17/111)” through his actions as the
caliph. If he were interested in personal aggrandizement, he would not
have dismissed the functionaries of the previous regime against many
well-meaning advisers. He went against their advice because he knew that
those functionaries were promoting their own interests instead of
governing according to the norms set by Allah. He had accepted the
caliphate only to do away these personal and corrupt

coteries. If the Imam (a.s) was interested in his personal power, he
could have closed his eyes to the misdeeds of those persons. But in his
eyes, personal power and influence had no meaning. His intent was to
educate and inform the people about the Islamic norms. Once he was
mending his foot wear when he told Ibn \`Abbas:

###### “By Allah! If in my view the establishment of the Truth and the destruction of the Falsehoods was not there, this footwear would be dearer to me than being the ruler.”[1]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) has described the purpose of his rule in two
simple sentences. The first is the establishment of the Truth and the
second the destruction of the Falsehood. During his rule, he kept these
two things in view. His main aim was to propagate the Islamic norms and
practices. Not only he was firm on his stand, but also he created
movement in the stagnant natures of the people with his actions.
Although he was not interested in the annexation of other territories,
but conquering hearts and developments of the minds is a bigger
achievement. No doublets the other rulers annexed large territories and
were termed conquerors, \`Ali (a.s) tried to put the Islamic society on
healthy ground. Despite all the unrest and mischief in the realm, \`Ali
(a.s) proceeded with his task of reforming the society. He heard the
complaints of the people against their exploitation by the functionaries
of the state and removed unnecessary restrictions imposed on the people.
He crushed the destructive and disruptive forces and kept an eye on the
activities of the functionaries. He fixed the duties and
responsibilities of the persons responsible for the collection of
*zakat*. He abolished the racial discrimination among the people and
promoted equality and fraternity among all.

\`Ali (a.s) had such an ideal society in his view that it should be free
of injustice, cruelty, bribery, cheating and other such ills. He
promoted legal and societal equity among the people. He wanted to
inculcate the sense of responsibility among the people and he used to
sound them, from time to time, with his writings and sermons. At the top
of these writings and lectures there used to be an exhortation to the
people to adopt piety and a reminder about the Day of Reckoning.
Although every writing of his is a document of advice, but the letter
that he wrote to Malik al-Ashtar while nominating him as the governor to
Egypt is a reflection of the Divine Instruction. The document covers the
norms of statecraft in such perfection that until today the human mind
cannot think more than that on the subject. With all the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah

developments taking place, no additions could be thought of on the basic
norms enunciated therein. George Jordac, a Christian Scholar, comments
on the comprehensiveness of the document in these words:

###### “Among his writings this is a great document of advice and instruction. It is a comprehensive instrument of the laws of citizenship and city life and encompasses the rights and privileges of the common man.”[1]

In this document, the Imam (a.s) has encompassed the lowest rung of the
society to the elites, the rights and duties of each stratum, and has
mentioned about the rights of the workers, the traders, artisans,
soldiers, judges, advisers and viziers. He described the functions of
the departments of finance, interior, foreign affairs, the covenants of
the state, the relations between the Muslims and the Dhimmis; about
administration of justice, the duties of the functionaries in all the
departments and their staff…

This document, as far as its efficacy is concerned, is not bound by
conditions of time and place. \`Ali (a.s) had created this document
1,400 years ago and the picture that he had drawn of the administrator
and the administered still holds good, and will hold good until this
world exists! The wonderful thing about the document is that it is as
efficacious to the democratic societies as it is to the totalitarian
environments as well! If the countries that raise the slogans of
universal peace and equity take guidance from this document, neither
then there will be any conflict between the landlord and the tiller, nor
will the factory worker raise the slogan of injustice by the factory
owner. There will not be any grouse about iniquitous distribution of
wealth nor will economic inequality exist. Such peaceful environment
will result that it will be an example of welfare and justice!

Instead of copying the document here, we recommend to the reader to
peruse “Nahj al-Balaghah”, the compendium of \`Ali’s writings and
sermons. However, in this book, we shall present the relevant extracts
from the book as we proceed with our writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sawt al-\`Adālah al-Insāniyyah, Vol 1, Page 335
