The Norms For Selection of the Functionaries
============================================

The progress of a society very much depends on the organization of the
State on proper lines, be it a monarchy or a democracy for that matter.
Whether it is Islamic or otherwise. When there is good law and order in
a state and respect for the human rights, it is a well-managed welfare
state. All this depends on the wisdom and sagacity of the head of the
state and the capability and efficiency of the functionaries of the
state. These functionaries provide efficient administration and make the
people law-abiding citizens of the state. All these functionaries are
appointed to the various provinces of the state at the discretion of the
head of the state. If it is an Islamic state, the functionaries will be
responsible for efficient collection of the zakat and jizyah in addition
to the other duties like law and order, dispensation of justice to the
people etc.

This is a fact that the people take inspiration from their
administrators. They adopt the way their administrator follows. If the
administrator in an Islamic state is pious and follows all the tenets
properly, the people too try to emulate him. If the administrator is
selfish, corrupt and ill mannered, the people in that area will also
behave in that manner. Therefore, it is imperative that maximum care is
exercised to select administrators after proper screening of their
dossiers.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) used to judge his functionaries on the basis of
their piety, honesty and capability to perform the function assigned to
them. He gave key positions only to persons with immaculate honesty,
nobility and straightforwardness. Ibn \`Abd al-Barr writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) appointed only those persons as the governors of provinces who were trustworthy and honest.”[1]

He never considered the family background, the tribe to which the person
belonged and the recommendations of important persons for appointment as
functionaries of the state. He used to instruct these functionaries not
to retain

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 3, Page 47

any person on the basis of recommendations. Therefore, he said on one
occasion:

###### “Do not accept any recommendation for retaining personnel; only consider that they are trustworthy and honest.”[1]

Among the functionaries of the \`Ali (a.s) there were some Hashemites as
well. Among them were the sons of \`Abbas; \`Abdullah, \`Ubaydullah and
Qathm. Some people started thinking that he had retained them because of
his close relationship with them. They said that if \`Uthman had favored
Banū-Umayyah as functionaries of state, what was wrong? The question is
whether these functionaries were honest, just and capable of performing
the assignment entrusted to them. But \`Uthman’s functionaries were
conceited, ill behaved and absolutely incapable of good administration.
If he had placed persons who were men of piety, honest and capable, the
criticism of nepotism would not have been leveled. The persons whom
\`Ali (a.s) appointed were above criticism as far as their honesty,
piety and capability were concerned. Just because of the relationship
with the caliphs, putting the functionaries of both the administrations
on the same level is not justifiable. This comment would be justifiable
if the Hashemite functionaries were appointed all over as the Umayyad
functionaries were predominantly all over the realm during \`Uthman’s
caliphate. During \`Ali’s period there were only a few Hashemites in
important positions and their antecedents were immaculate. Was no
Hashemite deserving of any important position? If they were capable,
keeping them away from assignments just because they were Hashemite was
no justice. It is surprising that over a period of twenty-five years
after the Prophet (a.s) no Hashemite is seen in any important position
of the state! \`Ali’s yardstick for appointment of any person was his
piety, capability and character. If the person did not measure up to
these requirements he would not consider him fit for the assignment, be
he a Hashemite, Muhajir or Ansar! If any functionary were found
committing an impropriety, he would not be spared of the punishment,
whosoever he was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Alfu Kalimah
