Accountability of the Functionaries
===================================

The functionaries of the state can be both constructive and destructive
in their action and attitude. With their constructive actions, the state
develops and prospers. If they adopt a contrary attitude, it would
certainly be harmful for the state. The head of a state needs to monitor
the activities of the functionaries and should not relax after assigning
them to their tasks. However honest and trustworthy the functionaries,
they are fallible human beings. They might get attracted to the luster
and lucre of wealth and stray from the right path if left to their own
scruples for long. They might indulge in bribery, misappropriation and
other such destructive activities. Instead of serving the people, they
might turn self-serving.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) knew the futility of the human nature very well.
He did not believe in closing the eyes and ears in trusting people.
Besides, some of the functionaries of the previous administration had
convinced him of their reliability and were continuing in service, for
example: Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari, al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays and Masqalah ibn
Hubayrah. It was necessary that all their activities were monitored and
the cash inflows and outflows audited. Therefore, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
used to keep an eye on every minute thing like the lifestyle of these
persons. He praised them for good performance and reprimanded them if he
found any oversights, defects or dereliction of duty in their
activities. He used to check the account of *bayt al-mal* regularly. If
he received reports of misappropriation by any functionary, he used to
lift his eyes towards the sky and say:

###### “O Allah! You know that I have placed them over Your creatures not to harm them and defy Your Rights.”[1]

He then used to conduct an audit and punish the person according to the
seriousness of his misdemeanor. From some he used to recover the
misappropriated funds and some he incarcerated as a punishment for their
crime. Some of such events are mentioned her in brief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 3, Page 48

The governor of al-Basrah, \`Uthman ibn Hunayf attended a party. \`Ali
(a.s) came to know about it and wrote to \`Uthman,

###### “I did not expect that you would accept their invitation from whose doors the beggars and the needy are chased away and the affluent entertained! The morsels that you chew, you must first look at carefully! Leave aside those morsels that give you some suspicion. O Ibn Hunayf! Fear Allah and remain contented with your own bread so that you get relief from the fire of the Hell!”

Some reports of misdemeanor came about al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays, who was the
governor of Azerbaijan since the times of \`Uthman. After the Battle of
the Camel, \`Ali (a.s) wrote to him, “You are the treasurer of all the
funds of Allah that are in your trust until you hand them over to me!”
al-Ash\`ath understood that he was about to be dismissed. He gathered
whatever amounts he could and told some of his friends about \`Ali’s
letter and that he intended to go under the protection of Mu\`awiyah.
His friend said that it was not proper for him to leave behind his
tribesmen and go to Syria. On the advice of his friends, he gave up his
intention of going there. \`Ali (a.s) sent Hijr ibn \`Adi to him, who
somehow brought him to al-Kūfah. When his baggage was rummaged, they
recovered 400,000 dirhams in cash. \`Ali (a.s) gave him 30,000 dirhams
as a compensation for his services and the rest was transferred to the
*bayt al-mal*.

Al-Mundhir ibn al-\`Abdi, whom he appointed as the governor of Astkhar
did some misappropriation. \`Ali (a.s) wrote to him, “I have been
informed that you are losing your Hereafter to make this world! You are
breaking your link with the Faith and doing favors with your relations!
You do not deserve to be in a position of trust or to depend on you for
protecting others from misappropriation. Therefore, as soon as you get
this letter, come and report to me!” When al-Mundhir came, his accounts
were audited. It was found that he was short of 20,000 dirhams. But he
denied having that money with him. \`Ali (a.s) asked him to make the
statement under oath, that he refused. He was sent to the jail. After
some time he was released at the instance of Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Sawhan.

Reports of cheating came about Ziyad ibn Sumayyah, who was on a
deputation in place of Ibn \`Abbas, at al-Basrah. \`Ali (a.s) wrote to
him, “If I find that you have misappropriated the funds of Muslims and
you have done malpractice in anything big or small, I shall give you
such punishment that

will make you empty handed, weak and discredited among people!”

\`Ali (a.s) wrote to the governor of Ardshir, Maslamah ibn Hubayrah,
“The funds that were earned through the tips of the Muslims’ lances and
the hoofs of their horses, for which they had shed their blood and
sweat, you are distributing to the Bedouin of your tribe. If this is
proved right, you will come down in my estimation! In this fund, the
Muslims who are with me here and those who are with you there are equal
partners!”

When some persons from Banū-Tamim complained about the harsh treatment
of Ibn \`Abbas, \`Ali (a.s) wrote to him, “May Allah be kind on you!
Whatever good or bad that comes from your mouth and the hands about the
people, do not hasten in doing that! Remember, we are both equal
partners in whatever you do!”

\`Ali (a.s) wrote to the governor of Halwan, al-Aswad ibn Qatbah, “When
a person in authority has different attitudes towards different persons,
then mostly it may not be a just act! Therefore, justice demands that
all people must be equal in your consideration! Protect your psyche and
protect the people to the best of your ability!”
