The Department of Justice
=========================

One of the important functions of the state is the dispensation of
justice to the people. It has to constitute such courts that unbiased
and fair judgments are made on disputes between the citizens. If the
poor and needy are not protected by the state, the foundations of such a
state become weak and peace will not prevail there for long. This will
bolden the perpetrators of cruelty on one side and on the other, the
suffering poor might rise in rebellion. Therefore, it is said, “A
country can exist with infidelity but not under oppression.”

The constitutional regimes of the world form courts for civil, criminal
and small causes, but people have to make rounds of the courts for
hearings and pay heavy fees to the attorneys seeking redressal for, in
most cases, a just cause. But Islam has devised such system of justice
that, if it is followed properly, neither there will be any difficulty
in delivering justice nor will the supplicant have to be burdened with
heavy expenses. In this system, there is no scope for partiality or
bribery. In Islam, only such persons are authorized to deliver justice
who have attained a high degree of piety and have an interpretational
awareness of the Islamic law of justice. They must be self-respecting
and with a clear conscience. They have to be highly respected persons in
the society so that they do not stoop to bribery and favoritism in
dispensing justice.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) gave special attention to the department of
justice during his regime. At every prominent place, he constituted
courts. He appointed as qadis only persons of piety, honesty, integrity,
and knowledge about the Islamic Laws and jurisprudence. \`Ali (a.s)
himself had served as a qadi during the time of the Prophet (a.s) and he
is known for his dispensation of justice in the annals of the History of
Islam. After this practical experience, none could match his skills in
the organization of the department of justice. Keeping the human
weakness in mind, he provided sufficient compensation to the qadis that
they need not think of malpractices and bribery in the discharge of
their duties. As a check, strict vigilance was kept on their activities
and the lifestyles. If any suspicions arose, they were either
reprimanded or removed from their positions. Therefore, the qadi of
al-Kūfah, Shurayh Ibn Harith, who

was serving in that position since the times of \`Umar, was found that
he had bought a house for eighty Dinars. \`Ali (a.s) called him and
said, “I have heard that you have bought a house for eighty Dinars!”
Shurayh replied, “Yes!” \`Ali (a.s) looked at him in anger and said, “O
Shurayh! Is it that you bought the house with someone else’s money or
through ill-gotten money? If it is so, then you lost this world and the
Hereafter too!”

Islam is a religion of justice. It wants to see justice in all walks of
life. Then the very purpose of the department of justice is specifically
for deliverance of justice! Therefore, the Holy Qur’an says:

### وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَنْ تَحْكُمُوا بِالْعَدْلِ.

#### “…And that when you judge between people, you judge with justice. (4/58)”

The requirement of this justice is that during the hearings the judge
must be absolutely impartial and unbiased. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was
very particular about equitable treatment of the contesting parties
whether they were Muslim or they were Dimmi. He gave strict instructions
to the judges to follow this rule meticulously without any consideration
for any one. The author of *wafiyyat al-a\`yan* has written that with
one Dhimmi he (\`Ali) went as a contesting party to the court of Shurayh
the judge. Shurayh the judge stood up to receive him with due respect.
The Imam (a.s) said, “This is your first injustice!” Once a person was
\`Ali’s guest and during the same period he made an appeal against
another person in the Imam‘s court. He told him that he was a contestant
and the Prophet (a.s) has said that it is against the requirements of
justice that the judge keeps one of the contesting parties as his guest
and not the other. Therefore, he asked him to move away from his place.
It is recorded in the books of tradition that once \`Ali (a.s), during
the period of \`Umar, visited him in connection with a case. \`Umar
addressed him as Abul-Hasan and the contesting party as the opponent! At
this signs of unease came on the face of \`Ali (a.s). When he was asked
about his disturbance, he said that the requirement of justice is that
the way of addressing the contesting parties must be equitable.
Addressing the one with his kunyah and the other in a different way
smacks of making difference between the two!

Mentioning about a couple of instances, that are an infinitesimal part
of innumerable such instances, it has to be accepted that the eyes of
\`Ali (a.s) used to be focused on the requirements of justice and even
minute aspects did not escape his attention. In the events narrated
here, it has certainly become

evident that he did not like welcoming one contestant to the hearing and
neglecting the other, or addressing one with more respect than the
other. Such intricacies will be noted by a person who keeps intently
focused on the details of the matter. He made the Judges understand that
although what they did was not very important but the attitude might
reflect the possibility of bias creeping into their verdict. Will there
be any person in this world who would object being addressed with due
respect, when he is certainly deserving of all respect! But the Imam’s
sense of justice was such that he felt that there was an element of bias
when the other party and he were addressed in a different way.

These days we hear a lot that the judiciary must be free of extraneous
pressures so that it did not become an instrument in the hands of the
establishment and instead of protecting the public interest, it starts
serving the functionaries of the state. No doubt, to this extent the
independence of the judiciary is very essential. The judiciary is the
institution for the translation of the laws and statutes into practice
and the laws are not restricted to the people but also the state is
subservient to them. But this does not mean that the judiciary is given
total liberty to act as it wished. There must be someone to review the
functions of the judiciary. It is the responsibility of a just
establishment to evaluate the judgments of the department of justice and
review the decisions wherever necessary. Therefore, Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) made it mandatory for the judiciary to communicate the verdict on
important cases to him for review before they were pronounced. The
author of Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah writes that the Imam (a.s) told the Shurayh
the judge:

###### “Beware! Do not pass any verdict on cases of *qisas* or the matters requiring Divine Justice and about the Rights of the Muslims before referring them to me.”[1]

As far as freedom to the judiciary in the ordinary cases was concerned,
he stressed on the qadis to practice the utmost equity and fairness in
their verdicts. He was very particular of the judges not favoring
anyone, however important he might be. Therefore, when he was returning
from the Battle of Siffin, he lost one of his armor chain. After some
time he saw a Christian wearing the same armor. The Christian insisted
that it was his property. \`Ali (a.s) went in appeal to the court of the
Shurayh the judge. On inquiry by the judge, the Christian said that the
armor belonged to him and that he was in possession of it was the proof
of his ownership. Shurayh asked \`Ali (a.s) his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasā’il al-Shī\`ah, Vol 3, Page 395

proof of the ownership of the material. The Imam (a.s) said, “The armor
is mine! I have neither sold it nor have I gifted it to anyone!” Shurayh
was confused that on the one hand the claim of \`Ali (a.s) could not be
wrong and on the other hand the respondent had the strong proof of the
possession of the material. With the evidence available, the verdict
would go against \`Ali (a.s). The qadi was reluctant to pass the verdict
against him. Noticing this, the Imam (a.s) told him to give a verdict
that was according to the requirement of justice. Therefore, the verdict
went against \`Ali (a.s) and the Christian retained the armor with him.

When we analyze this case, several aspects of justice become evident
that highlight \`Ali’s great sense of justice. As the head of state, he
could have passed a verdict on the case. The verdict would have been in
his favor only because he knew that the armor was his own stolen
property. But he did not want the supplicant himself to give a verdict.
Therefore, he went before the Shurayh the judge. Instead of telling to
the qadi that the property was stolen by the respondent or he might have
bought it from the thief, \`Ali (a.s) told that he had neither sold nor
gifted the armor to anyone. Although the intent was clear that the
property was stolen, he did not say that the person was a thief.
Although he lost the case, it was his moral victory. The result was that
the Christian felt defeated even after winning the case. When he came
out of the court he could not look straight into the eyes of \`Ali
(a.s). He apologized to \`Ali (a.s) and said that he had picked up the
aromor on the way from Siffin and wanted to give it to him. He praised
the Imam’s high morality, sense of justice and in fact, he was so
impressed, that he embraced Islam at that instant. \`Ali (a.s) was very
happy that the person had embraced Islam and gifted that armor along
with a horse to him!
