Protection of Basic Human Rights
================================

Every person, on attaining the age of consent, starts feeling on the one
hand that certain duties are imposed on him and on the other that the
society in which he lives, he has certain rights and privileges. This
feeling requires that he recognizes his duties and protect his rights,
be the rights the individual rights or the collective rights! He also
has to see that not only his rights are not denied, but the rights of
his fellow men too are protected. If some impediments come in the way of
these rights, he must try to the best of his capabilities to remove
them. The biggest responsibility for protecting the rights of the
individual and the society rests on the state. Therefore, the states, in
their statutes give a pride of place to the individual and human rights.
They do this to preclude a feeling of insecurity from the minds of the
people

These rights, basically, are four in number.

*The Right to Live*
-------------------

The first right is the right to live. Every individual in this world has
a right to live. The individual or group of individuals have no right to
deprive a person the right to live. Islam, which is a system based on
the norm of peace, considers murder as the most heinous crime. One
blatant murder is termed such a huge sin by Islam as if an entire race
has been killed. Therefore, Allah says:

### …أَنَّهُ مَنْ قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا.

#### “…Whoever slays a soul, unless it be for manslaughter or for mischief in the land, it is as though he slew all men. (5/32)”

This verse also permits that killing a person who is guilty of making
mischief on the earth is permissible. Because the person himself had
been guilty of killing others and creating mischief in the society.
Islam prescribing the punishment of a life for a life has very
efficiently controlled the urge for taking human life for no reason at
all. A person, before killing any one thinks twice that soon he will
meet the same end at the hands of Justice! Therefore,

the Holy Qur’an terms the Law of *qisas* as the very life of the human
race:

### وَلَكُمْ فِي الْقِصَاصِ حَيَاةٌ يَا أُوْلِي الْأَلْبَابِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ.

#### “And there is life for you in the law of retaliation (*qisas*), O men of understanding, that you may guard yourselves. (2/179)”

Similarly, killing someone who attacks with an intention of killing too
is not forbidden. It is done in self-defense.

Islam not only forbids killing someone else, but committing suicide too
is a major sin in the Faith. In fact severing any part of one’s body is
not allowed. Man is made the trustee of his life and the act of killing
oneself or severing the parts of one’s body too are taboo. Although in
some countries suicide is considered an act of valor, but the truth is
that it is the worst type of cowardice and defeatist tendency in the
person. The Holy Qur’an has prohibited people from this act:

### وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِكُمْ رَحِيمًا.

#### “And do not kill your people; surely Allah is Merciful to you. (4/29)”

While Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was the protector of the human values, he
was also aware of the importance of the human life. He did not like or
tolerate taking human lives needlessly. Although he was in the forefront
during the battles fought during the time of the Prophet (a.s), he even
fought some battles during his reign as well, but all these battles were
in self-defense and not aggressive battles for conquest and
self-aggrandizement, as some others did. The Prophet (a.s) took up his
sword when the enemy had attacked. Similarly \`Ali (a.s) initiated
action only when the enemy aggressively came and started hostilities. In
fact, he always tried to nip the conflict in the bud and find ways of
establishing peace with the enemy. \`Ali (a.s) never made a preemptive
attack on the enemy and retaliated only when the attack started from the
opposing side. Also, he tried to make the hostilities as short as
possible to limit loss of lives on both sides. He refrained from taking
men captive and forgave even the known sworn enemies. Therefore, after
the Battle of the Camel, with a single stroke of pen he gave amnesty to
all people of al-Basrah. He did not seek any reparations from Marwan,
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr and sent Umm al-Mu’minin
from the battlefield to al-Madinah with all the respect! The Iraqis and
the Syrians who were taken prisoner during the Battle of Siffin were
released unconditionally. At the end of the Battle of Nahrawan, the
injured Khawarij (the

excommunicated) who numbered 400 were released from detention
unconditionally. The people from their tribes were called to take them
away. He wanted them to be treated and sent to al-Kūfah after total
recovery. Every fair thinking person can make out from the attitude of
\`Ali (a.s) that his purpose in fighting was just to curb the mischief
and not to kill men and plunder territories, as was done by some others
not very long ago!

While \`Ali (a.s) was very much against unnecessary bloodletting, he did
not permit anyone’s blood going waste without the application of
*qisas*. Therefore, when \`Umar was killed, his son \`Ubaydullah killed
al-Harmuzan and a few other innocent persons. \`Uthman closed his eyes
to this and was not willing to punish the guilty. When Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) took reins in his hands, he determined to extract *qisas* for the
life of al-Harmuzan. But the culprit flew and went to the protection of
Mu\`awiyah in Syria. Ibn al-Athir writes:

###### “When \`Ali (a.s) took reins of office, he decided to get \`Ubaydullah executed, but he (the culprit) escaped to Mu\`awiyah in Syria.”[1]

\`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar was finally killed fighting against \`Ali (a.s)
in the Battle of Siffin.

*The Right of Thought*
----------------------

The second right is the freedom of thought. This means that every
individual must be free of extraneous pressures in his thought process
so that he is able to independently decide what is good for him and what
is bad. If this freedom of thought is curbed, then he will say a thing
is good if the powerful say it is good, and he will accept a thing as
bad when the persons in power say that it was bad. He will thus be
subservient to the thinking of others and will not have any independent
opinion about things. The freedom of thought is the most important
aspect of freedom and wherever it is curbed, there the society becomes
retrograde.

Islam brought forth this freedom of thought to its followers and broke
all the oppressive practices of the Days of Ignorance (*jahiliyyah*).
There is no place for coercion in Islam and its beliefs have never been
forcefully thrust on anyone. Those who wanted to embrace Islam were
invited to freely think about it and decide for themselves if they were
willing to embrace the Faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 40

Therefore, the Qur’an tells in very clear terms:

### لاَ إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ قَدْ تَبَيَّنَ الرُّشْدُ مِنْ الغَيِّ.

#### “There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has become clearly distinct from error. (2/256)”

The period of Amir al-Mu’minin’s reign was a period of independence of
though for the people. When, at the end of the third caliphate the
people wanted to owe their allegiance to him, \`Ali (a.s) asked them to
think over the matter before casting their lot. He gave them a full week
to think over the matter. \`Ali (a.s) had in his mind that in their
selection the people should not act on the spontaneous emotions because
such decisions are not durable. One day they decide something in a hurry
and the next day they go back on it. So, instead of making an emotional
decision at the spur of the moment, they must make a well considered and
thought of decision. Although the cunning and seasoned politicians take,
advantage of such emotions of the people and win their election
campaigns with this policy. But Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) gives the people
all the time to think and decide. Such an example cannot be cited in the
annals of the elections anywhere in the world.

Similarly, in the matter of religion neither he closed the avenues of
thought nor he enforced any change of Faith under coercion. People of
all faiths, viz: Jews, Christians, and Magians, etc… had total freedom
to practice their creeds.

*The Right of Action*
---------------------

The third right is the right to act. Man is free, to a certain degree,
to act the way he wishes. He cannot be forced to act contrary to his own
wishes. He will do what he himself thinks is right for him and shuns
what he thinks is harmful. He is within his rights to do this as far as
his action does not go against the interest of the people in general.
Therefore, certain restrictions are imperative with the right of action.
In every civilized society, such restrictions are deemed necessary.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).believed in freedom of action as well as freedom
of thought. He never forced any person to do things that he personally
did not want to do. Therefore, when some persons refused to owe
allegiance to him, he did not force them to agree. When Talhah and
al-Zubayr went back after pledging their allegiance to \`Ali (a.s), he
told them that no one forced them to do the *bay\`ah*. When they wanted
to go to Makkah, he told them that it would

be better for them to stay at al-Madinah. But when they insisted on
going, he told them that if they wished to go, they might. About \`Umar
the history records that he forced important Companions to stay put in
al-Madinah lest they go out and hatch conspiracies against him! But Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s), despite knowing the nature of the two persons that
their intention in traveling was to create mischief, did not curb their
freedom of action. But when they headed towards al-Basrah for raising a
rebellion, it became necessary to control them. Similarly Mu\`awiyah too
raised the standard of rebellion in Syria and steps had to be initiated
against him. The step was not taken because he had refused to owe
allegiance to the Caliph. The action was necessary because he was
creating mischief and disturbing law and order in the realm. Mu\`awiyah
was only a governor in a province and his action was a clear rebellion
by any standards of statecraft. Similarly, the Khawarij were left to
their own scruples until they crossed their bounds and started to become
rebellious.

\`Ali (a.s) respected the freedom of action of the individual so much
that even in very delicate situations he did not interfere with it. Even
during battles, he allowed this privilege to persons. When he received
word that some persons had escaped to Syria, he told Sahl ibn Hunayf,
the chief of al-Madinah, “I am told that some of your people are
stealthily going to Mu\`awiyah. Do not worry about those who have gone.
These are worldly-wise persons and they will bend towards worldly
things! They have understood, seen and felt justice and learned it well
that here, according to their rights, all are equal. Therefore, they
have run away to a place where partiality is rampant!” One can know from
these few instances to what extent he allowed personal freedom to
people: be it a friend or a foe, strong or weak, a known person or a
stranger; none was deprived of this freedom. And this is the freedom
that the people of a civilized society demand from their rulers. The
purpose of this freedom is not that people keep doing anything they
wanted to do. When the establishment finds that people have abused the
freedom given to them, then drastic action can also be instituted
against such persons.

*Right of Racial Equality*
--------------------------

The fourth right is the right to racial equality. This means that
discrimination on the basis of race, color and geographical origin has
to be done away with. Every person, by virtue of the fact that he is a
human being is entitled to the same respect as any other human being.
All the social and economic rights for all individuals in the society
have to be maintained at the same level. It is

immaterial whether the person is rich, poor, Arab or non-Arab, rich or
poor, black or white. They are all the creature of the same Allah and
belong to the human kind. The differences that existed among the people
were the creation of the Days of Ignorance. This was done to put into
the minds of the people that some were superior to others! Allah says in
the Holy Qur’an:

### يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ.

#### “O you men! Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of his duty); surely Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49/13)”

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was the torchbearer of Islamic equality and the
guardian of human rights. He treated Qarashi, Arab, non-Arab, freemen,
slaves and everyone else on an equal footing. He did not tolerate
discrimination between men on the basis of tribal and racial
differences.

From the bayt al-mal, a freed slave would get as much allowance that was
received by a Qarashi. The way he treated others, he had the same
attitude towards his own relations. He never took others and outsiders
for granted. His attention was shared in equal measure by all. Once he
learned about a governor that he had misused some money. He wrote to the
person, “By Allah! If al-Hasan or al-Husayn (a.s) had done what you did,
I would not have shown any consideration to them, nor would they be able
to influence my decision!”

This was the equity of treatment that the Vicegerent of the Prophet
(a.s) presented to the world. Today the Charter of Human Rights is given
much importance by all the nations in the world. But Amir al-Mu’minin,
in his time, practiced all the norms of human and the individual’s
rights that are very dear to the people in these modern times!
