The Economic System
===================

In modern day, the economic system of countries revolves around
capitalism and socialism. The capitalist system is an independent
economic order in which every one is free to pursue acquisition of
wealth keeping aside all norms of religion and morality. Neither there
is any moral bonding in hoarding wealth nor does the society prevent
them from doing so. In this system, the individual’s interest dominates
over the interest of the society! The capitalists’ eyes are always
focused on the hoards of wealth. This avarice reaches such heights that
the capitalist crushes the common interest of the people and adopts the
way of selfishness and considers that his aim is to keep running in the
race of accumulating wealth. He neither refrains from harming anyone in
this pursuit nor does he feel ashamed of sucking the blood of the poor
workers in his factories and establishments. Because of the behavior of
these capitalists, the instinct of hate arises in the minds of the
suffering workers. The worker thinks that the profit that goes into the
coffers of the capitalist is the result of his hard toil. The capitalist
on the other hand thinks that the profit comes because of his wisdom,
planning and investment. He thinks that the worker is only a cog in the
machines of his factory that can be thrown away when it gets rusted and
is useless! This economic exploitation and the difference in the status
of the owner and the worker create the socialist movements. The aim of
socialism is to eliminate the capitalist and distributing the wealth
equitably to all the people in the society. In the view of these
socialists, without removing the single ownership of businesses, the gap
between the rich and the poor cannot be bridged.

The idea of socialism is not new or a product of the past century. In
500 B.C., Plato noticed the ups and downs of the economy and the wrong
attitude of the government of Greece when he laid the foundation of the
concept of socialism. In 3rd Century A.D. during the reign of Qabad, a
person by name of Mazdak termed women and wealth as joint capital and
propagated the concept of socialism. His contemporaries, and those who
followed him, accepted the concept of socialism. But this concept was
followed by very few people and after sometime, it almost disappeared.
In the I9th Century A.D. Again,

socialism was heard of. Some people made efforts to adopt it. But their
efforts did not bear fruit. In the year 1847 A.D. one German born Jew,
Karl Marx enunciated the norms of socialism as a Concept of Economics.
He believed that it was the remedy for all the economic and social ills
This was the time when in Russia there was excess of wealth and the
affluent groups were rolling in wealth and on the other hand, due to
unemployment and economic problems there was general discontent among
the masses. The majority of people was farmers and because of coming up
of industries, a new group of workers too came into existence. The
farmers were at the mercy of the landlords and the workers were
subservient to the factory owners. Because of the ill treatment by the
factory owners and the landlords, the workers were striking work and the
farmers started agitations. Ultimately, the people started hating the
moneyed classes and the path was thus leveled for the rise of socialism.
Therefore, after the death of Marx, Lenin rose and in 1917 A.D., he
formally launched the concept of Socialism. He gathered around himself
the Russian youth with the slogan of equitable distribution of wealth
and crushed the opposing voices with force. He ultimately succeeded in
formulating a system based on the concept of Socialism. Some other
countries too were impressed with the concept and accepted it with some
minor changes. Whether it is the concept of Capitalism or that of
Socialism, both revolve around worldly economics and economic growth.
They neither have any consideration for religious and moral norms nor
other values of material. The difference between the two is that
capitalism believes in Economic Freedom and Concept of Individual
Ownership of assets, but there is no guarantee of Economic Safety. In
Socialism, there is Guarantee of Economic Safety but the individual
ownership of assets is not permitted.

The Islamic Economic System that is quite close to nature provides
solution for all the economic ills and problems. This system neither
depends on experimentation nor is it the result of the thoughts of
experts in economics. It is the Concept propounded by Allah and
presented by the Prophet of Islam (a.s). The System, instead of
depending on the personal or group interests, stresses on collective
interests of the society. The reason is that Allah is not the Creator
only of any particular person or a group. Everyone owes his, and her,
existence to Him! Therefore, in the Economic System propounded by Him
the Collective Interest of the entire Ummah is envisaged

From the Islamic point of view, the real owner of everything in the
world is Allah. Therefore, He exhorts about the distribution of the
wealth thus:

### وَآتُوهُمْ مِنْ مَالِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي آتَاكُمْ.

#### “And give them of the wealth of Allah which He has given you. (24/33)”

In Allah’s wealth, basically all humans have equal right of use. They
are all equally entitled to utilize it all the things that come out of
the earth, or are produced from the earth, or those that are found in
the world, are for the benefit of all men. Therefore, Allah says:

### هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا.

#### “He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth. (2/29)”

However, a person who acquires, through legitimate means, more or less,
wealth through either hard labor or toil like trading, farming, doing
jobs or gets it as inheritance without any effort, becomes his. But to
maintain a balance between men in the society, a share has been fixed
out of this wealth of the person for the society in general. One reason
for this is that the individual remains connected with the society and
the society remains in touch with the person and the relationship of
mutual brotherhood and equity remained intact.

Islam does not believe in capitalism to the extent that the wealth gets
intensely concentrated in only a few hands and others live at their
mercy. Nor is it so much opposed to capitalism that the person is denied
right over the wealth generated with his personal toil and effort. Islam
preaches contentment and treading the middle path and its economic
system is based on this concept. In this system, neither unfettered
capitalism is allowed that is free of all neither religious nor moral
bindings nor socialism that takes away all the individual rights to
ownership of wealth and property. The individual’s efforts are bought by
the society for provision of food and clothing in the socialistic system
and a special group gets authorized to make use of the wealth thus
generated. Islam neither backed capitalism that an unjust and unbalanced
social structure came into existence, nor has it preached the unnatural
concept of socialistic equality that the state keeps all the resources
of production in its control and become responsible for meeting the
needs of the individuals.

With this coercive equity, the spirit of competition among the people
gets curbed because the individual has been deprived of the right of
ownership and finds no incentive in putting in maximum efforts at work.
Islam, instead of the forced equity of socialism, has kept equity in the
economic resources and has provided equal opportunities for every
individual that he generate

livelihood depending on his capability and toil. Therefore, the Holy
Qur’an says:

### وَأَنْ لَيْسَ لِلْإِنسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَى.

#### “And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for. (53/39)”

Under this system, there will be difference between the individuals
according to their capability and the efforts put at work. Not all the
persons are of the same level of intelligence and learning and therefore
the results achieved by them in their fields of activity too will be
different. Instead of creating artificial equity, Islam has tried to
bridge the gap between the rich and the poor. It has not enforced such
conditions on the affluent sections that after complying with them
neither there will be imbalance in the society nor did any individual
remains deprive of his basic needs.

Islam has provided individual ownership of wealth in addition to
economic independence. The sense of ownership is such a human sentiment
that has been recognized by Islam and has been promoted with certain
checks and conditions. The Holy Qur’an has highlighted this:

### وَلَا تَأْكُلُوا أَمْوَالَكُمْ بَيْنَكُمْ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَتُدْلُوا بِهَا إِلَى الْحُكَّامِ لِتَأْكُلُوا فَرِيقًا مِنْ أَمْوَالِ النَّاسِ بِالْإِثْمِ وَأَنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ.

#### “And do not swallow up your property among yourselves by false means; neither seeks to gain access thereby to the judges, so that you may swallow up a part of the property of men wrongfully while you know. (2/188)”

Islam not only gives personal ownership rights to the individual, but it
has also stressed on respecting and strengthening it. Therefore,
stringent punishment for thefts is prescribed to provide these
safeguards only. Islam does not tolerate using others wealth
clandestinely or utilizing it without the consent of the owner.
Therefore, the Prophet (a.s) has said:

###### “The use of the assets of another person without his consent is not legitimate.”

Although Islam has given the right of ownership to the individual, it
has enforced certain conditions to prevent unrestricted capitalism.
Therefore, clear differentiation has been made between legitimate and
taboo. One big source of capital growth is usury. Islam has declared
usury as taboo to curb capitalism. Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

### وَأَحَلَّ اللَّهُ الْبَيْعَ وَحَرَّمَ الرِّبَا.

#### “And Allah has allowed trading and forbidden usury. (2/275)”

We have presented a brief outline of the economic system in Islam before
we discuss the economic policy during the caliphate of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) that he had implemented those norms that had been prescribed by
Islam. Although the period was not conducive for enforcing Islamic
economic reforms because it followed the period of conquests and plunder
and the treasury created capitalistic tendencies in the people because
of the heavy gifts and allowances that were given to them. There was
already a group of capitalists who had abandoned the Islamic norms of
plain living and indulged in luxury and pomp. Without giving any
importance to this group, \`Ali (a.s) started revolutionizing the
economic system. Therefore, as soon as he assumed his position he
ordered confiscation of the feudatory gifts of land given to some
persons by the former regimes. He said, “By Allah! If I had noticed such
wealth that had been spent on the dowry of women and buying slave girls,
I would have withdrawn it!” Therefore he confiscated swords, armors and
camels meant for sadaqah from \`Uthman’s place and announced that
whosoever had the wealth gifted by \`Uthman must deposit it in the bayt
al-mal. This announcement created commotion among the Umayyads and other
capitalists. Al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah came to \`Ali (a.s) and said that they
would owe allegiance to him if he allowed them to retain the gifts given
by \`Uthman to them. \`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “Do you want me to leave the wealth that has been illegitimately usurped by you? It is not in my power to relinquish Allah’s Right that is with you and other rich capitalists.”[1]

To run the economic system on proper lines, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
thought it necessary to bring the people and the ruling class on the
same level. Therefore, he said, “Allah has made it binding on the Imams
(a.s) that they keep themselves in penury at the level of the common
man, so that the downtrodden do not feel dejected of their economic
difficulties.” He spent all his life in that manner. His standard of
life, food and other habits were the same as a common poor person.
Neither he liked to eat food better than that of the common man nor did
he dress lavishly. He says, “Shall I eat to my fill when I find people
around me who starve. Or should I be the way a poet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by ibn Abil-Hadīd

describes, ‘Is it a lesser ailment that you sleep after a large meal and
around you there are hungry hearts who crave for dried crumbs!”

Amir al-Mu’minin wanted to put the economy on a pedestal that the gap
between the rich and the poor was narrowed. He did not like the society
to be divided into two distinct groups of ‘very rich’ and ‘very poor’.
He did not want that on the one side there are palatial mansions and on
the other dilapidated shacks. On one side grand raiment and on the other
tattered and patched clothes. On one, hand even the dogs of the rich
appeared well fed and on the other starving, emaciated men! On the one
hand people wasting the nation’s wealth and on the other men, to name
one, the Prophet’s favorite Companions, perishing without food and
medicine in the wilderness of al-Rabadhah! These are the consequences of
undue accumulation of wealth by the privileged few and denial of the
rights of the poor. \`Ali (a.s) has therefore said:

###### “Allah has kept the sustenance of the poor in the wealth of the rich. If a beggar starves, it is because a rich person has hoarded wealth and Allah is going to seek account of it from them.”[1]

Instead of this uneven economic situation, \`Ali (a.s) wanted to
establish a system where the needs of every individual were fulfilled
and that none, wherever he was, suffered from want of basic necessities
of life. He wanted that in the resources of production, everyone got his
legitimate share and everyone got equal opportunity to toil and generate
fair livelihood. This is the Islamic concept of equity which is very
practicable. The spirit of equality amongst people is evidenced from the
concepts of khums, *zakat* and the institution of Hajj when all the
Muslims, irrespective of their status come to perform the pilgrimage.
Therefore, \`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “The betterment of men lies in their being different from each other. They will perish if they are all equal.”[2]

It is evident that when all men are on the same economic level then one
will not need the other. As a result of this, the contacts between them
will be weak and the economic relations will be disturbed.

If we view the economic system during the time of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s), it becomes evident that besides freedom to trade, the resources
were owned by the people. Everyone was free to adopt any profession,
viz: agriculture,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah  
 **[2]** al-Amālī by Shaykh al-Sadūq

trading, handicraft etc. This is the yardstick of any good economic
system that the people are free to pick the profession or avocation of
their own choice. On the other side, they must have total economic
protection so that every individual will have assurance that the desired
results will emanate from his toils. \`Ali (a.s) did not like people
sitting at home doing nothing and becoming a burden on the society. Such
drones depend on others’ income instead of earning their own livelihood.
However, if a person was incapacitated to work due to some physical
disability, he was supported by the *bayt al-mal*.

\`Ali (a.s) considered agriculture and trading as the mainstay of the
economy. Therefore, he said:

###### “One who has land and water for irrigation, and even then he is poor, then Allah should keep him away!”

About trading, he said:

###### “Do trading! Trading is that investment which will keep you contented from money and wealth!”

For the encouragement of agriculture and trading \`Ali (a.s) did farming
himself. He also was a trader. Therefore, he used to reclaim fallow
lands and digging wells, he used to create oases. Similarly, for
creating interest in trading, he promoted sales of loincloths in these
words:

###### “I have bought this loincloth for five dirhams. If someone gives me a dirham extra, I shall sell it to him!”

Whenever he had free time, he used to sit at his friend, \`Ammar ibn
Yasir’s shop. When \`Ammar used to be away on some work, \`Ali (a.s)
would sell the dates. He never felt belittled doing this task.

\`Ali (a.s) used to keep a watch on the trading community to ensure that
they did not inflate the prices. Therefore, he used to go round the
bazaar and inquire the prices of different commodities. He also used to
look at the weights and measures with the traders. Abul-Sahba’ says:

###### “I have seen \`Ali (a.s) going round al-Basrah inquiring the selling rates of different materials.”

Hoarding materials to create artificial scarcity is a big economic
crime. To stop this malpractice, \`Ali (a.s) announced that if any
trader, for inflating prices, hoards more than necessary inventories of
materials, he will be liable for punishment. Therefore, he wrote to
Malik al-Ashtar, “Warn traders against hoarding because the Prophet
(a.s) was against it. Whenever anyone is found

hoarding materials, give him suitable punishment!”

The balance in the economic system is possible when extravagance and
unnecessary purchasing is avoided. \`Ali (a.s) considered both these
habits as the cause of the economic structure of any society. Therefore,
about the habit of incurring unnecessary expenses he says:

###### “Cultivate moderation and avoid extravagance. Do not forget today that there is a tomorrow!”

About accumulating unnecessary things \`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “The thing that you do not need, leave it! Acquire only the things that you need.”

When man shuns moderation and becomes extravagant, the result is that he
becomes poor and dependent on others. Therefore, extravagance at the
time of marriages and other occasions people mortgage or sell their
houses and other property to meet the unnecessary and in fructuous
expenses. Many times, they become indebted to meet the expenses of such
occasions. They spend with both hands and are praised by friends and
neighbor for the excellent arrangements for the function. But, in fact,
the person traps himself in heavy debts and falls into the clutches of
the usurers. Similarly, unnecessary purchasing too affects the economy.
When a thing is bought without its need by a person, he sells it at a
heavily reduced price when he needs money for some other important
requirement. If this habit of buying without need spreads in the
society, it will affect the economy very badly.
