Distribution From the Bayt Al-mal
=================================

The Prophet (a.s) used to distribute the zakat, alms and booty of wars
as soon as it was collected, within the city where they were received.
And therefore he neither constituted the *bayt al-mal* nor did he ever
feel the need of such an institution. After the passing away of the
Prophet (a.s), when Rome and Persia were conquered, treasures were
brought to al-Madinah and the *bayt al-mal* was founded. To maintain it,
a separate department of revenue was constituted. Under this department
the accumulated wealth was kept. From this money, development activities
were organized and annual pensions were paid. During the period of the
Prophet (a.s), the funds were distributed equitably. After him, the
method of distribution was changed. During \`Umar’s time there was no
equity that some got more from the *bayt al-mal* and others less. The
wives of the Prophet (a.s) were given more than the other ladies and
\`A’ishah received 2,000 more than the other wives of the Prophet (a.s).
Those who participated in the campaign of Badr received more pension
than those who were not present there. The Muhajirūn received more than
the Ansar. During the period of \`Uthman even this procedure was not
followed. Even after making a pledge that he would follow the Book, the
Sunnah and the *sirat al-shaykhayn*, he neither made equitable
distribution nor he followed the method of ranking of the recipients of
the pensions. He distributed the funds of the Muslims to his kinsmen in
the tribe of Banū-Umayyah. He gave as much as he wanted to these
Umayyads.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) took control of the *bayt al-mal* in his
hands, according to the practice of the Prophet (a.s), arranged
distribution of the funds in the city where they were received. When
some funds were remaining after the distribution, and were sent to
al-Madinah, he distributed them instead of retaining in the *bayt
al-mal*. Such distribution was done on every Friday when, generally the
*bayt al-mal* was rendered empty of funds. When that happened, \`Ali
(a.s) would sweep the floor of the premises with his own hands. After
doing this, he would offer two prostrations of thanksgiving to Allah! He
used to say after such events that he was thankful to Allah that he was
going empty handed from there as he had come empty-handed! Ibn \`Abd
al-Barr writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) did not allow it to happen that he spent a night and funds remained lying in the *bayt al-mal*. He used to distribute the funds before nightfall. If some other important thing came in the way, he would keep it for the morrow.”[1]

Once the funds arrived when it was already, dusk. He said that the money
must be distributed immediately. People said that it was already night
and the distribution could be done next morning. He asked if they were
sure that he would be alive until the morning. He added that about death
only Allah knows. He insisted on distributing the funds immediately.
Torches were lighted and all the money was distributed then and there.

The iniquitous distribution of the funds from the *bayt al-mal* rendered
the economy unbalanced. \`Ali (a.s) felt the need of changing the system
and making the distribution more equitable. He removed the distinction
of big and small while distributing the pensions. The influential
persons did not like the change and the affluent opposed it. \`Ali (a.s)
did not budge a little from his stand that was exactly in accordance
with the norms of Islam. Therefore, \`Abdullah ibn Abi-Rafi\` narrates
that when Talhah and al-Zubayr saw that in the distribution of the funds
their status was being compromised, they came to \`Ali (a.s) and said
that \`Umar was giving them such and such an amount as pension. They
asked him to keep that in mind. \`Ali (a.s) asked them to forget what
someone else used to give them. He asked them to tell what the Prophet
(a.s) used to give them. At this, they kept mum. When the Imam (a.s)
found them quiet, he said whether the Prophet (a.s) was not following
the method of equitable distribution of funds. Both the persons
affirmed. Then, he asked them tell him whether the Sunnah was more
worthy of following than the Sunnah \`Umar? They said that definitely
the Sunnah has to be emulated but added that they had the privilege of
taking active part in the Prophet’s ghazawat and that they had been
close to him. \`Ali (a.s) asked them if they had precedence in embracing
Islam or him? They agreed that he had the precedence. He asked them if
they took more part in jihad than him. They agreed that he took more
part. He asked if they were more closely related to the Prophet (a.s) or
him. They affirmed that he was more closely related to the Prophet (a.s)
\`Ali (a.s) pointed towards a laborer standing there and said that from
the fund he took the same share as this person gets! When I do not claim
more pensions for my status, how could you expect to get more?

\`Ali (a.s) believed that the share of big, small, Qarashi or others, is
equitably

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 2, Page 50

same in the funds of the *bayt al-mal*. He did not make any
discrimination on the basis of color, descent, nationality or the place
of origin of the people. He had announced that he would eliminate all
discrimination on the basis of status in the society. When \`Aqil heard
this, he asked \`Ali (a.s) whether he wanted to treat him on par with
the Nubian Slave? The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “Sit down! May Allah be kind on you! If you want to have precedence over him, it could only be on the basis of Piety and precedence in embracing the Faith!”

Once two women came to \`Ali (a.s) He gave them equal amounts to both.
One said that she was an Arab woman and free and the other woman was a
slave girl. She complained that he was treating them equally though she
was superior to her. \`Ali (a.s) lifted some earth from the ground,
looked at it, and said:

###### “It is not in my knowledge that Allah has made one superior over the other, unless one is more pious than the other!”

Once Sahl ibn Hunayf brought his Abyssinian slave along with him and
told \`Ali (a.s) that the slave had come to take his share from the
*bayt al-mal*. Sahl asked how much the slave will get? The Imam (a.s)
asked how much he himself had received. He said every one got 3 Dinars
each. The Imam (a.s) said then he too would get three Dinars!

Once Ummu-Hani’ bint Abi-Talib came to the Imam (a.s) He gave her 20
dirhams from the *bayt al-mal*. She turned to her non-Arab slave and
asked her what she had received? She replied that she had also received
20 dirhams. Then Ummu-Hani’ came to the Imam (a.s) and said that she had
been given the same allowance as was given to her slave, not considering
her superior status. \`Ali (a.s) said:

###### “By Allah! In this money Banū-Isma\`il has no preference over Banū-Ishaq!”

\`Ali’s sense of justice and equity did not permit him to give any
preference to relationship to change the norms of distribution of the
funds of the *bayt al-mal*. Therefore, when \`Aqil, his brother,
complained of his poverty and penury and asked for money from the *bayt
al-mal*, \`Ali (a.s) asked him to be patient for some more days when
others would get their allowances and he too will be given. When \`Aqil
insisted very much to be given some money, \`Ali (a.s) asked a person to
take \`Aqil to the bazaar where he should break the lock of a shop and
take the money. \`Aqil was upset and said that he was asking him to
steal and get a bad name in the society. The Imam (a.s) then said, “Do
you also want me to steal from the funds of the Muslims and give to
you!”

Once \`Aqil’s children invited the Imam (a.s) home for a meal. When the
food was served he asked from where it had come? They said that they
were saving their share of the barley for some days. The barley was sold
to buy the food. The Imam (a.s) said that if you have been able to save,
it means that your allowance was that much more and from that time, the
allowance of barley for them would be reduced by that quantity. \`Aqil
got angry on this. The Imam (a.s) heated an iron rod and took it near
\`Aqil. \`Aqil was taken aback. The Imam (a.s) said that \`Aqil was
scared of just one hot steel rod and wanted to consign him, his brother,
to the perpetual Hellfire!

Once \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far told the Imam (a.s), “Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s)! Give me something from the *bayt al-mal*. My predicament is that
I am unable to meet the daily expenses unless I dispose of my horse!”
The Imam said:

###### “By Allah! I do not have anything with me to give you. But you tell your uncle to steal and give you!”

Whether it was a relative or any outsider, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) would
not show the smallest undue favor to anyone. If he had closed his eyes
and distributed favors, none could have questioned him. Therefore, once
\`Amr ibn Salamah, who was the governor of Isfahan, brought some
shortening and honey from there. Ummu-Kulthūm took a small quantity of
the materials for her use. The next day when the containers reached
\`Ali (a.s), he did not find them in their original condition. When he
inquired, \`Amr said that Ummu-Kulthūm had taken out small quantities.
\`Ali (a.s) sent both the containers to the assessors and asked them the
value of the material taken out from them. After evaluation, they said
that the shortening and honey taken out was worth approximately 5
dirhams. He asked Ummu-Kulthūm to pay the value and the entire quantity
of the products was distributed to the people.

Once, from al-Basrah came a valuable string of pearls. Ummu-Kulthūm
asked Abū-Rafi\`, the keeper of *bayt al-mal*, to lend it to her for
three days. Abū-Rafi\` sent to her the necklace. When Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) saw the pearls with her, he asked from where she got them.
Ummu-Kulthūm said that she had borrowed it from the *bayt al-mal* and
requested him to give it to her. The Imam (a.s) said how he could give
it to her until every Muslim woman had such a necklace in her neck! He
also said that she was pardoned because she had just borrowed it from
the *bayt al-mal*, or else she would be liable to be punished for theft!
He then ordered it to be deposited with the *bayt al-mal*.

With the sense of responsibility, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) used to give
much importance to even very small things. He would not be content until
everything at the *bayt al-mal* was distributed. Once he found a rope,
lying in the *bayt al-mal* after the distribution process was over. He
ordered that also to be given to a deserving person. Once when materials
arrived from Isfahan, there was a bread in the packages. While he had
made seven portions of the materials for the seven tribes, he divided
the bread too in seven portions! Once cloth was being distributed. Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) found a cap in the packages of the cloth. He asked for
the cap to be given to him. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) refused the request
and the cap went to the share of al-Hamdani person. People told him that
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) had liked the cap but Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had
refused to give it to him. The al-Hamdani sent the cap to Imam al-Hasan
(a.s).

These few events would give a clear idea that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
followed the same practices for the distribution of materials to the
people as did the Prophet (a.s). Neither he hoarded the materials in the
*bayt al-mal* nor did he make any distinction of status or importance in
the matter of equitable distribution. Can an example be cited that his
own brother pleading for help from the *bayt al-mal* in the form of a
few seers of barley for the feeding of his hungry children, but he is
refused help to maintain equity in the process of distribution! When a
sister asks for increase of a few dirhams in her pension, she is
refused. He did not allow the smallest favor to his relatives from the
*bayt al-mal*. He did not want to put even the smallest of burden on the
Muslims by showing the smallest of favors to his own family. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) used to buy his own requirements of grains from the
bazaar of al-Madinah and did not take from the *bayt al-mal* although he
was entitled to it. Harūn ibn \`Antarah says that he saw the Imam (a.s)
at Qurnaq using an old rug that was insufficient to protect him from the
cold. He told the Imam (a.s) that he was entitled to a share in the
material in the *bayt al-mal* and he could take a new rug from there for
his use. The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “By Allah! I do not want to take anything from your assets! The rug that I am using I have brought from al-Madinah!”
