The System of Zakat
===================

*zakat* tax is a tenet in Islam that is applicable to wheat, barley,
dates, raisins, gold, silver, cattle, goats and sheep, camels; and is
mandatory for every major Muslim at prescribed rate. The meaning of the
word *zakat* is purity and cleanliness and the Shari\`ah too has used
the word in the same sense. The purpose is that the person pays this tax
to cleanse his or her assets. When the *zakat* is not paid, the holdings
of a person are deemed unclean. After payment of the *zakat* they
affects of a person are clean and even the mind will be free of
miserliness, avarice and undue love for wealth. Therefore, the Holy
Qur’an said:

### خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِهَا.

#### “Take alms out of their property, you would cleanse them and purify them thereby. (9/103)”

The basic purpose of *zakat* is providing help to the poor and needy
that none in the society remains helpless. Therefore, *zakat* has eight
uses. Out of the eight, seven are applicable to individuals and one
pertains to the collective requirement of the society. The Holy Qur’an
says:

### إِنَّمَا الصَّدَقَاتُ لِلْفُقَرَاءِ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَالْعَامِلِينَ عَلَيْهَا وَالْمُؤَلَّفَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَفِي الرِّقَابِ وَالْغَارِمِينَ وَفِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَاِبْنِ السَّبِيلِ فَرِيضَةً مِنْ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ.

#### “Alms are only for the poor and the needy, and the officials (appointed) over them, and those whose hearts are made to incline (to truth) and the (ransoming of) captives and those in debts and in the way of Allah and the wayfarer; an ordinance from Allah; and Allah is knowing, Wise. (9/60)”

*zakat* can bridge the economic imbalances to a greater extent. The
reason is that a substantial amount of wealth goes from the hands of the
affluent for the benefit of the poor. Although it does not reduce the
difference between the rich and the poor very much, but certainly it
does make appreciable difference in the living standards of the poor.
One of the main purposes of the *zakat* is

that the wealth does not stagnate in the hands of a few and a part of it
percolates to the poor and needy. Therefore, the Holy Qur’an describes
the purpose of alms in these words:

### كَيْ لَا يَكُونَ دُولَةً بَيْنَ الْأَغْنِيَاءِ مِنْكُمْ.

#### “…so that it may not be a thing taken by turns among the rich of you. (59/7)”

In some circles there is a feeling that the quantum of *zakat*
prescribed is so meager that it is neither sufficient to bridge the
economic gap between the rich and the poor, nor the numbers of the poor
and needy could be brought down with this amount. The best reply for
this thinking has been given by Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s),

###### “Allah has affixed the share of the poor in the assets of the rich that is sufficient to meet their needs. If Allah had thought that it would not suffice for the poor, He would have enhanced the quantum.”

In fact, if Allah wanted He could have apportioned an equal share for
the poor in the wealth of the affluent or even more! But the Divine
Wisdom is that He leaves more for the affluent because it is the product
of their hard work and toil. If the poor have a share in it, the rich
too owns the wealth as a matter of right!

The truth is that the quantum of *zakat* is not less because it is fixed
in such a manner that the rich do not make excuses to avoid it which,
they might have done, if the quantum was fixed higher. If the *zakat* is
paid honestly and regularly by all, there is no doubt that the poor will
rise above their economic problems and there will be general well being.

*zakat* is a religious obligation and therefore people should have the
spirit of intent, nearness to Allah and sense of fulfillment of duty.
They should not think that they are delivering any favor to the
recipients but must know that it is the right of the society that had
been endowed by Allah. Therefore, the Holy Qur’an says:

### وَفِي أَمْوَالِهِمْ حَقٌّ لِلسَّائِلِ وَالْمَحْرُومِ.

#### “And in their property was a portion due to him who begs and to him who is denied (good). (51/19)”

was raised by the representatives and spent on predetermined heads. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) who was the wali \`Amr after the Prophet (a.s) started
the department of *zakat* during his regime. This department took
special care to observe the steps that the Prophet (a.s) used to take in
the matter of the *zakat*. Therefore, such persons were appointed to
this task that was known for their piety and honesty. The Imam (a.s)
used to exhort them not to use coercive tactics in demanding for the
payment of the *zakat*. If someone voluntarily declared the quantity of
the *zakat* applicable to him, that was collected. When some people said
that the *zakat* was not applicable to them, no questions were asked. He
told the *zakat* collectors that they should not give an impression to
persons that they were not trusted. The collectors were also asked not
to demand any particular animal from the flocks towards settlement of
the *zakat*. It was always the discretion of the assessed to part with
whatever he deemed fit to be given as the *zakat*. But the people were
asked not to give lame, sickly and emaciated animals towards the
*zakat*. \`Ali (a.s) also instructed his men to take proper care of the
animals that came in their charge as a settlement of *zakat*. He asked
them not to bring them through ways that had no possibility of getting
fodder and water for long spells. He asked them to keep the she camels
and their young ones together. They were also asked not take all the
milk from the mother that the little ones suffered want of feed.

These steps of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) indicate that he was not in favor
of force or coercion in the matter of *zakat*. In fact, he wanted to
create the right spirit in the minds of the people to come forward
voluntarily that they fulfill this mandatory duty of theirs.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) used the *zakat* money only on heads that have
been prescribed in the Holy Qur’an and never mixed it in the funds for
other requirements of the State.
