Appearance, Bearing and Looks
=============================

The study of human appearance and bearing is an important branch of
psychology. This is based on innumerable studies and experiments. These
psychologists study the eyes, nose, forehead and other parts of the body
and arrive at a conclusion about the person’s nature and temperament.
According to these experts, a bulging forehead is a sign of intelligence
and cleverness. When the arms of a person are firm and wide, he has the
qualities of a leader of men. The hardness of hair, according to them,
is a sign of valor and big eyes indicate a person who is quick of
nature. One who has a short neck might be tricky and querulous. When a
person has fleshy calves is generally foolish. One who has small and
sunken eyes is tricky and treacherous. One who has weak and thin
shoulders is apt to be poor in thinking. Although these are hypothetical
assessments, at best, they give a fair idea about the persons under
study.

According to the books of history and biography, the appearance of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) can be described as given here:

His body was heavy, his complexion light whitish, his appearance and
bearing were very attractive, and his visage was smiling and shiny like
the full moon. Abul-Hajjaj Mudrak says,

###### “He was more handsome and attractive than others.”

He had a wide forehead. Ibn \`Abbas says,

###### “I have not seen temples better looking than those of \`Ali (a.s)”

On his forehead, calluses had developed on account of excessive
prostration in prayer. He had a delicate and pointed nose and eyes big
and dark that reflected determination and boldness. Abul-Hajjaj says
that he had seen traces of collyrium in \`Ali’s eyes. His eyes were
bright, eye brows were bow shaped, eyelashes long, teeth properly spaced
and shining. Zurarah ibn Samarah says,

###### “When he smiled the teeth shone like strings of pearls!”

His neck was muscular and long. His chest was wide and hairy. His biceps
were well formed. His wrists were strong and firm and finding the joint

between the wrists and the arms was difficult. His collarbones were wide
and strong. His palms were hard and the knees were neither weak nor
fleshy. His tummy was rather bulgy. His beard was dense and wide. The
hair of his head was grey. Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah says,

###### “\`Ali (a.s) once dyed his hair with henna once, and then abstained from doing it.”

Because of excessive use of the armor, the hair on his forehead had
fallen. His height is slightly more than the average. \`Ali (a.s)
himself said,

###### “Allah has bestowed on me a modest body and height When my adversary is short, I strike on his head to cut him into two pieces and if he is tall I cut him horizontally into two.”

His voice was clear and loud, his style and speed of walking was like
that of the Prophet (a.s), elegant and slightly drooping to the front.
When he advanced to face an adversary in battle, he used to walk briskly
and his eyes used to get reddish.

Ibn Qutaybah writes in al-Ma\`arif that a woman saw \`Ali (a.s) and
said,

###### “As if he had been broken and he was then rejoined!”

People thought that it means that his body was asymmetrical. In fact,
what the woman said was an Arabic idiom and its allegorical meaning is
different from its apparent meaning. Therefore, Sayyid Muhsin al-\`Amili
writes in A\`yan al-Shi\`ah and \`Umar Abul-Nasr in al-Zahrah also
writes the saying of Ibn \`A’ishah that the quoted sentence is for the
person whose arms are muscular and his eyes piercing the ground and not
a person who is asymmetrical of body!
