The System of Tribute
=====================

Of the territories annexed by the Muslims, certain were those that were
acquired through warfare and some others were annexed peacefully. In the
areas annexed through warfare, the uncultivable barren land consisting
of mountainous and marshlands were termed as *anfal* or the land that
belong to Allah and the Prophet (a.s). The Holy Qur’an says:

### يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنْ الْأَنْفَالِ قُلْ الْأَنْفَالُ لِلَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ.

#### “They ask you about the windfalls. Say: The windfalls are for Allah and the Messenger. (8/1)”

After the Prophet (a.s), the Vicegerent and Imams (a.s) have the
authority to utilize the minerals and other resources from this land for
the welfare of the people. Without the permission of the *wali al-amr*
of the time, or his deputy, none has the authority to exploit such lands
in any manner. The cultivated lands that were acquired through warfare
used to be distributed amongst the Muslims so that they took crops on
them and boosted the prosperity of the people. Those areas where the
people, of their own free consent, embraced Islam, their ownership of
the lands were not disturbed and they continued to use them as in the
past. The examples of such areas are al-Madinah, Bahrain and a major
part of Yemen. They were only required to pay the *zakat* on the returns
they derived from the cultivation of those lands. If the people in such
places wished not to embrace Islam, they will be bound by the terms of
truce with them. If in the terms of truce it was decided that they would
continue to have the use and ownership of the land, they will not be
evicted from them. However, they will be treated as Dhimmis and were
liable to pay the *jizyah*. If the truce was with the condition that
they would forego the ownership of the lands, then such lands were to be
distributed amongst the Muslims. Such lands were called the lands of
tribute. They are called the lands of tribute because they have been
received as tribute from the people who had surrendered in terms of the
truce with them. From the persons who cultivate such lands, in addition
to the *zakat*, they have to pay land revenue which is either in kind
called in cash that is termed *khiraj*. The quantity of *khiraj* is
fixed by the *wali al-amr* at his discretion.

During his time, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) fixed the limits of the *khiraj*
and determined the norms for the collection of this revenue. But he had
more concern for land use than collection of the tributes to ensure that
there was prosperity among the people. Therefore, he instructed Malik
al-Ashtar, “More than collection of the tribute, concentrate on the
promotion of the use of land for cultivation because tribute is
generated when the land is in use!” One, who wants to take tribute
without putting the land to use, becomes the cause of destruction of the
state and the people. Such regimes do not last for long.” Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) was not in favor of using coercion in the collection
of the tribute and asked his representatives to have a soft attitude in
the matter of collecting the land revenue. Therefore, when he retained a
person from Banū-Thaqif to collect the tribute from a certain area, he
told him:

###### “Beware! For the sake of the dirhams of tribute, do not trouble Muslims, Jews and Christians. Do not confiscate and sell farm animals to collect the tribute from the tillers. We have been commanded only to take from them what is in excess of their needs.”[1]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had fixed a very nominal rate for the collection
of the tribute from the farmers. Buladhari has written in Futūh
al-Buldan that Mus\`ab Ibn Yazid said that his father was appointed for
the collection of the tribute for the lands irrigated with the waters of
Euphrates. He said that the rate of tribute for wheat, if the crop was
good, was 1.5 dirham or three seers of the produce per *jurayb* (land
measuring approximately 120 square feet), if the crop was average the
tribute was one dirham and for a poor crop two thirds of a dirham. For
the barley crop, the tariff was half of this. For gardens, like dates
and other fruits, the tribute was ten dirhams per *jurayb*. The grape
vines that reached the fourth year after planting, the tribute were ten
dirhams per *jurayb*. For vegetable, linseed, cotton and miscellaneous
crops no tribute was collected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihār al-Anwār, Vol 9, Page 538
