The System of Jizyah
====================

In Islamic states the other communities viz: Jews, Christians and
Magians, had all the civic rights provided they lived amicably with the
Muslims and remained faithful to the state and did not cooperate or
collaborate with the enemies of Islam. If these conditions were
fulfilled, the state would be responsible for their safety and they will
be free to follow the tenets of their own Faith. However, they were not
allowed to drink intoxicants, eat pork or marry such women who are taboo
for marriages under the Islamic system.

In a state subscribing to a certain system, when the rights of certain
other groups are recognized, then some duties too are imposed on those
groups. Therefore, in return for those social and economic rights, in
addition to following the local laws and regulations, one additional tax
is levied on these groups that are called the Jizyah. This word is
derived from *jaza*’ that means return or compensation. This is the
Arabic form of the Farsi word *gazida* or *gaziya*. The funds collected
through *jizyah* were used for the development activity of the entire
population irrespective of the religious denomination. Therefore, this
tax was not an unnecessary burden on any community. The Muslims were
paying the *zakat* and the others were paying the Jizyah for the common
welfare of all the people. Therefore, it was not an unreasonable burden
on the non-Muslims. The tariff for Jizyah was not fixed like that for
Khiraj. The authorities fixed the charges on the basis of the
circumstances prevailing. During the period of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
the rates of Jizyah were: Forty dirhams from rich and affluent,
twenty-four dirhams from middle classes, and twelve dirhams from the
common people.

The Jizyah was collected once every year. It was not levied on children,
elderly persons, blind, mentally retarded and handicapped. There was no
Jizyah on women and the religious hermits.
