Kindness On Widows, Orphans and the Poor
========================================

Islam is not only performing the mandatory duties Viz: prayers, Fasting
Hajj, etc… but it is a collection of beliefs and commensurate actions by
the Believers. Kind treatment to the widows, orphans and the poor too is
a part of good deeds that a Muslim must perform. If a person indulges
only in personal comforts and luxuries not bothering about the orphans
and other needy around him, he is not fulfilling the requirements of the
Faith. When the Prophet (a.s) was asked about the requirements of the
Faith, he said:

###### “Faith is respecting the Commands of Allah and kindness on His creatures.”

It is the duty of every Muslim that, according to his capability, he
helped the poor and needy persons but as the head of the State this is
the most important function of his office that he ensures that the care
of such poor and destitute persons was not neglected.

Amir al-Mu’minin’s heart was a depository of affection and care.
Whenever he found a poor person, he felt kindness and compassion for
him. He treated the orphans in a way that they forgot that they were
orphans. Once containers of figs and honey arrived from Halwan and
Hamdan. The Imam (a.s) asked some men to assemble orphans. When the
children came, he distributed the honey and the figs to them. The
children were taking the honey and licking the remnants sticking to the
side s of the containers. Some person said what has happened to the
children that they were licking the honey and the Imam (a.s) is not
stopping them from doing it. The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “Imam is the father of the orphans and because of this filial sentiment I have allowed the kids to lick the honey!”

Once the Imam (a.s) was passing through a lane. He noticed a woman
carrying a leathern bag of water on her shoulder. Out of kindness, he
took the bag from her and carried it himself. He asked if she had a male
member at her home. She said that her husband was sent by Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) on a campaign where he was martyred and that her
children have been orphaned. She said that she was herself bringing the
water and earning a livelihood for

her children and herself through hard labor. The Imam (a.s) came home
after leaving the water bag at the woman’s home. The whole night he was
thinking about the troubles that family was facing. Early morning he
bought the necessities for food and went to the house of the woman. When
he knocked at the door, the woman asked who it was. The Imam (a.s) said
that he was the same person who had carried the water bag to he home.
She opened the door and the Imam (a.s) entered. He gave her the food
materials he had brought. He asked her if she wanted to knead the flour
or to tend to her children. She said that she would knead the flour and
he can tend to her children in that time. When she finished the kneading
she said, O kind person! Now put fire to the oven!” The Imam (a.s) put
firewood in the oven and lighted it. When the flames rose, he felt the
heat and thought:

###### “O \`Ali! Feel the heat of keeping away from the orphans and the widows!”

In that time a woman from the neighborhood came and told the woman if
she was not ashamed of asking Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) to work on the hot
oven. When she heard this, she was very sorry. She craved his pardons
telling him that she had not recognized him. The Imam (a.s) said that he
himself was sorry that he did not care for her and the children for so
long.

Once he came out of the Mosque after the prayers. He saw a woman crying
at the threshold. The Imam (a.s) inquired the reason of her crying. She
said that her husband was cruel and was committing excesses on her and
he had sworn that he would kill her. The Imam (a.s) told her that he
would call him over after the sun goes down and try to correct him. She
expressed her doubt and fear that he might do something serious in that
time. The Imam (a.s) then agreed to go to her house immediately in the
hot sun. Reaching the house, he called for the man who came out. The
Imam (a.s) told him that he should have fear of Allah and he should not
trouble his wife. The man could not recognize the Imam (a.s) and asked
who was he to interfere in his domestic matters. He stubbornly said that
even if he were not troubling his wife earlier, he would do it. In that,
time some of the neighbors too assembled there. When they saw Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) they told the person that he was speaking in that
manner with the Imam (a.s). The man repented his behavior and promised
that he would not be harsh with his wife thenceforth even if she were
very unreasonable. The Imam (a.s) sent the woman home advising her not
to disobey her husband.

The Imam (a.s) used to do social service and give monetary assistance to
the deserving at the cost of his own essential needs. No person asking
for help went empty-handed from his door. Al-Mas\`ūdi writes in Murūj
al-Dhahab that one needy person asked for help. \`Ali (a.s) asked Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) to fetch 1 dirham from home and give him. Imam al-Hasan
(a.s) came and told that there were only 6 dirhams at home that were
kept for buying the flour. \`Ali (a.s) said that one should have more
faith on what comes from Allah than on what is at one’s home. He then
asked him to fetch all those 6 dirhams and give to the needy person.
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) brought the money and gave to the person. In that
time, a person came riding on a camel. The Imam (a.s) asked if the camel
was for sale. The man said that it was for sale at a price of 140
dirhams. The Imam (a.s) bought the camel and said that the payment would
be made in a week. In a short while, another person came and bought the
camel from the Imam (a.s) for two hundred dirhams. The Imam (a.s) paid
140 dirhams to the man who sold the camel to him and went home with the
balance of 60 dirhams. When Fatimah al-Zahra’ (a.s) asked him from where
the money had come, he said, “Allah has sent me sixty dirhams for the
six dirhams I gave in His way and that His word is true:

###### “What you wear, give them to wear. What you eat, give them to eat.”

Imam (a.s) had great concern for the slaves. He used to spend his
hard-earned money to earn their freedom and to support them. He got the
slaves released and provided them opportunities to flourish. He believed
that progress is not associated with any particular race or family. He
said that a slave too has the same right to work and progress as does a
freeman. Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s) says:

###### “Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) got release for 1,000 slaves with the money earned through his own hard work.”[1]

The Imam (a.s) was not only arranging the release of slaves, but he used
to take the responsibility of their upkeep as well. If those released
persons, because of their tender age, old age or sickness were unable to
work for a livelihood, he always took care of them. His affection and
care was of such magnitude that the slaves never felt that they could
even be punished for their carelessness or faults. Therefore, once he
called one of the slaves for some work. When he did not respond after
several calls, the Imam (a.s) peeped out and saw the slave was standing
near the door. He said that he called him

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasā’il al-Shī\`ah

several times but there was no response. The man said that he thought
perhaps he was being called to be reprimanded for some fault and in his
fear, he did not respond. The Imam (a.s) hearing this said:

###### “I thank Allah that He has made me in a way that His creatures do not expect any harm from me. Rise, you are free in the way of Allah!”

One of the slaves of \`Ali (a.s) was Qanbar who was very dear to him.
Once he took Qanbar along to the bazaar. He told Qanbar that he wanted
to buy a cloak and that he too needed one. Therefore, they went to a
garment sellers shop and he bought one expensive and another cheaper
cloak. He asked Qanbar to take the expensive cloak and leave the other
for him. Qanbar said that he was the master and should wear the better
dress. The Imam (a.s) replied:

“You are a youth and you have the taste and desire of youth. I feel
ashamed before Allah to dress in superior quality garment.”[1]

Perhaps it may not sound strange that the Imam (a.s) preferred poorer
quality cloth for himself and an expensive cloak for his slave because
the rulers used to dress their retainers is finery and show them off in
the courts. The slaves did dress in costly raiment but their feeling of
being slaves never left them. Every slave used to view that show with
hate. He used to think that he would prefer tattered clothes on his body
in freedom rather than the finery in slavery! Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s),
who had a deep understanding of human nature, with a thought that Qanbar
might feel that he was being given the expensive cloak to impress on him
that he was a slave, mentioned to him that he was a youth and would have
taste for better clothes that has to be worn by the young and not the
old persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Manāqib
