Treatment of the Dhimmis
========================

Dhimmis are those Jews, Christians and Magians of the Islamic state who
pay Jizyah according to the agreement with them and in return, the State
takes the responsibility of protecting their lives and properties. They
will have all the economic freedoms but they will be prohibited from
fighting with the Muslims or causing them harm in any way. About these
Dimmis, Amir al-Mu’minin’s attitude was that of kindness. He defined
their economic and cultural rights and did not have any narrow-minded
attitude towards them. He gave them total freedom to follow their
religious rites. He neither belittled them on account of subscribing to
a different faith nor did he tolerate any oppression against them from
any quarter. He also instructed his functionaries to keep in mind their
rights and not deprive them of any thing that was rightfully theirs.
Therefore, in the document that he wrote to Malik al-Ashtar, he said:

###### “Do not become a wild beast against them that you think of swallowing them. Among the subjects, there are two types of persons: one is your brothers in Faith and the other is creatures of Allah who look like you!”

It is evident from what the Imam (a.s) said here that he used to keep
all men, on account of being men, at the same level. He gave as much
importance to the relationship of humanity that he gave to religious
unity. Therefore, on account of difference in faith and belief, he never
deprived any one of his rights nor did he ever express hate for anyone
subscribing to another faith. Because of this attitude, the Dhimmis
always remained faithful with him. Ibn Abil-Hadid writes:

###### “What should I write about the person who the *Dhimmis* liked as much as their own lives although they used to belittle the prophethood (of the Holy Prophet)?”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The introduction of Ibn Abil-Hadīd’s Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah,
Page 7

Once Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was traveling to al-Kūfah. On the way, a
Dhimmi joined him on the journey. He asked the Imam (a.s) where he was
heading to. The Imam (a.s) told him that he was going to al-Kūfah. After
traveling for sometime, the Dhimmi wanted to take a diversion to go
towards his destination. The Imam (a.s) too accompanied him. The Dhimmi
said, “This way does not go to al-Kūfah, your destination.” The Imam
(a.s) replied, “I know! But good manners demand that I come with you
some distance before I go my way! Our Prophet (a.s) has taught us these
manners!” The man said, “It is an excellent Faith that gives such good
lessons and I shall now come with you to al-Kūfah.” Therefore he went
with the Imam (a.s) to al-Kūfah and when he learned that he was
traveling with Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) he embraced Islam.
