The Trusts and the Projects For People’s Welfare
================================================

It is the demand of brotherhood and friendship that one does not keep
only his personal interest in mind but he makes efforts to contribute to
the welfare of humanity in general. Islam, with this in view, stressed
on the one hand that the Muslims must observe the rites and prayers
regularly, and on the other also exhorted people to do works of common
welfare. Therefore, from the *zakat* it encouraged a head of expenses
for the works of general welfare. This amount has to be spent on
excavating wells, constructing lakes, constructing rest houses for
travelers and constructing mosques. It encourages people to take up such
constructive activities that benefit all men irrespective of their
religious denomination.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), during his short period, despite being engrossed
with rebels and traitors, did not close his eyes to the works of general
welfare of the people and took up reform activities. Ibn Shahrashūb
writes in his al-Manaqib that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) built for the
Hajjis seven water cisterns in Yanbu\`. He got wells excavated in
al-Madinah, al-Kūfah and al-Basrah and constructed a road between Makkah
and al-Kūfah and affixed milestones enroute. On this road, many wells
were excavated for the benefit of the travelers. He built a place for
impounding stray animals that used to spoil the crops of the farmers.
These animals were given feed at the expense of the *bayt al-mal*. When
any owner came and gave evidence of his ownership, the animal was given
to him.

The Imam (a.s) dug several cisterns with his own hands, planted gardens
and gave them to the poor Muslims. Therefore, a freed slave of the Imam
(a.s), Abū-Nayzar says that once the Imam (a.s) came to his place. He
served to him his frugal fare. Then the Imam (a.s) started digging a pit
until he was drenched in sweat. When the spring flowed out of the
cistern, he said that it was Perpetual Charity and wrote the following
document with his own hand:

###### “This is what Allah’s creature, \`Ali Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) has given in charity. Both the fiefs \`Ayn Abi-Nayzer and al-Bughaybughah have been given as *sadaqah* for the poor of al-

###### Madinah and for the travelers, so that, through them he will save his face from the hellfire. Both these fiefs cannot be sold nor gifted until they return to Allah and He is the better Successor. However if al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s) need them, they shall have no restriction and none other than them will have this right.”[1]

Yaqūt al-Hamawi writes that Imam al-Husayn (a.s) was in debts when
Mu\`awiyah wanted to buy \`Ayn Abi-Nayzar for 200,000 Dinars, but Imam
al-Husayn (a.s) refused to sell it saying that his father had made of
sadaqah of the fiefs to save himself from the Hellfire I cannot sell the
two fiefs at any cost.

Besides the cisterns of Abi-Nayzer and al-Bughaybughah, there were fiefs
that had been converted into trusts at Yanbu\`, Irbaja, Uraynah, Raghad,
Razin and Rabah.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) gave special attention to the construction of
mosques as well. He constructed the Masjid Fath in al-Madinah and a
mosque near the grave of Hamzah. He built a Mosque in the Miqat and in
al-Kūfah, al-Basrah and Abadan. While going to Siffin while he halted at
Aqtar, he laid the foundation for a mosque there…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mu\`jam al-Buldān, Vol 14, Page 176
