Unrest and Its Causes
=====================

Amir al-Mu’minin’s *bay\`ah* was still in process when disruptive
activities commenced and a web of intrigue was created around him.
Mischief raised its head from all sides. When one mischief was dealt
with, another presented itself. His short reign was marked with these
troubles. Because of these intrigues some people have formed an opinion
that the unrest was because of his political ineptitude and that Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) was not capable of organizing the administration, law
and order. No doubt, his period was faced with internecine warfare that
did not allow any expansion in the realm. All this was the after effects
of the earlier administrations. It is a fact the excess of wealth
created a race for power. Because of the conquests, lot of wealth came
in and the minds of the people turned from caliphate to monarchy. This
tendency poisoned the entire environment. Any one else in that situation
must have thrown down the gauntlet. But Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) faced all
the odds with great courage and equanimity.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) assumed caliphate when al-Madinah itself was the
epicenter of intrigues. Men with the idea of revolt assembled from many
places in al-Madinah. The functionaries of the previous administrations
were conspiring to promote intrigue. Mu\`awiyah was raring to declare
himself independent in Syria. Al-Zubayr wished to establish himself in
al-Kūfah and Talhah had his eyes focused on al-Basrah. All of them
conspired to create hurdles at every point. They organized troops and
threw challenge for fight. It was the sagacity of \`Ali (a.s) that
despite all the trouble he was able to run the administration and crush
the rebellion whenever it raised its ugly head. The disparate people who
gathered under his banner were not sincere to him. Coordinating with
such groups and contending with the guerilla tactics of the enemies was
not an easy task. But he faced the enemies with the same army of
disparate groups and defeated them. The defeat of the Syrians too was
almost certain but they created rift in the army of \`Ali (a.s). Despite
these intrigues and unrest, he introduced many long lasting reforms and
kept an eye on the issues of the people’s welfare. That is the proof of
his political acumen and capability of administration. Ibn Abil-Hadid
writes:

###### “Some spokesmen of our sect say that if some impartial person considers the politics of \`Ali (a.s) he will find that he was faced with such situation at the hands of his companions that notwithstanding the complications, his politics was no less than a miracle.”[1]

The following were also the causes of intrigue and disturbance:

***The first fact***  was that \`Ali’s politics was purely Islamic
administration and he was not willing, at any cost, to sacrifice the
moral and Islamic values for worldly power. Therefore, it was beyond him
to think of trying to hold to the power with falsehoods and worldly-wise
talk. If \`Ali (a.s) had adopted the same tactics as did his
adversaries, he would have succeeded as did they. But then caliphate
would be termed Monarchy. It would not then be an example of the
caliphate that has no space for stealth and falsehoods or the tricks of
cheating and misguiding the people. It is evident that while on one hand
the rules of morality and the norms of the Faith were there on the other
there was every type of intrigue and false allegations. The opponents
knew that the Imam (a.s) would not allow any bend in his principles took
advantage of his forthrightness and played all types of political
tricks. Ahmad Hasan al-Zayyat writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) would not bend the principles of the Faith and was not aware of the worldly manipulations. They were these lofty traits that Mu\`awiyah used in his cunning to turn the atmosphere against him.”[2]

***The second reason*** was that for the appeasement of the elite, the
Imam (a.s) would not compromise the interests of the people. In fact, he
gave precedence to the interest of the common man over that of the
affluent class. He also instructed his functionaries too to do the same.
Therefore, he wrote to Malik al-Ashtar:

###### “Of all the methods you must like the method that is the best from the point of view of the truth and from the point of view of justice it must encompass everyone and in accord with the wish of the majority of the people. The discontent of the masses nullifies the agreement of the elite, and the disagreement of the elite can be overlooked if the masses are in agreement.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 2, Page 184  
 **[2]** Al-Adab al-\`Arabī, Page 174

This attitude was not palatable to the minds that wanted power and
wanted to maintain their status and the elitist position in the society.
When they saw that this was not happening, they planned to turn the
administration tipsy turvy. They impressed the people with their
revolutionary slogans and stooped down to create intrigue and discord.

***The third reason*** was that the Imam (a.s) was strictly following
his principle of equitable distribution and not discriminating between
people on the basis of race or geographical origin of persons. Although
the commoners were happy with this attitude, but those who were used to
getting preference over others on account of their origins were unhappy
with the new regime. They first protested. But when they were unable to
create impression with their voices, they went towards Syria where the
base for intrigues against the Imam (a.s) was established. Al-Fudayl ibn
Ju\`dah says:

###### “The main reason for opposition of Amir al-Mu’minin(a.s) was wealth and that he was not giving any preference to the Arab over the non-Arab, nor was he receiving the rich and the chiefs of tribes with any pomp and he also did not try to attract anyone towards himself. Mu\`awiyah’s attitude was exactly opposite of this. Therefore, they left \`Ali (a.s) and joined hands with Mu\`awiyah.”[1]

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was told that those who were expected to
create intrigue or were having the notion to join Mu\`awiyah, could be
won over with gifts and concessions, he said:

###### “Do you want me to take help of some people through foul means? Then, By Allah! Until the day when the sun keeps rising and the stars shining in the sky, I shall not be willing to do that. Even if the wealth of the Muslims was my own, even then I would have distributed equitably, more so, the wealth belongs to them (the Muslims)!”[2]

Opposite this character and attitude of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was
Mu\`awiyah’s attitude that for political ends he distributed huge
amounts as gratification and was buying the Faith of some people. Once
Jariyah ibn Qudamah, al-Ahnaf ibn Qays, Jawn ibn Qutadah and al-Hattat
al-Mujashi\`i came to Mu\`awiyah. Mu\`awiyah gave seventy thousand
dirhams to al-Hattat

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihār al-Anwār, Vol 9, Page 539  
 **[2]** Al-Manāqib, Vol 2, Page 33

and one hundred thousand to each of the others. When al-Hattat learnt of
this differentiation, he told Mu\`awiyah that he had insulted him in his
tribe by giving one hundred thousand to others and only seventy thousand
to him. Mu\`awiyah said:

###### “I have bought their Faith from them!”[1]

Al-Hattat said, “Then! Buy my Faith as well!”

Where the state of affairs was such that the very faith was compromised
for Dinar and dirham how could Amir al-Mu’minin’s policy of equity and
fairplay keep such persons happy and satisfied. How could such persons
be expected to remain attached to the Truth merely on the basis of their
Faith.

***The fourth reason*** was that the acts that were against the
Shari\`ah had assumed the shape of acts within the requirement of the
Shari\`ah and were understood to be the part and parcel of the Faith.
The Imam (a.s) was not ready to give them sanctity by approving of them.
The minds of people are such that those things that enter their minds,
they cannot shake them off nor do they want to hear anything against
them. Therefore, the Imam (a.s) once said something from the pulpit when
\`Ubaydah al-Salmani stood up and said:

###### “More than your solitary opinion we like your opinion that is in accord with the opinion of the group.”[2]

This difference of opinion too gave vent to intrigues and people used to
gossip about anything that was contrary to their own thinking and
created bad heart among the people and spread intrigue.

***The fifth reason*** was that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), announced the
removal of all those functionaries who were retained by his
predecessors. The reaction to this step was that these persons made
common cause with those who were expecting crumbs of office and were
denied, and they joined together to destroy the law and order by
starting the movement to claim retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman.

Despite all these forces in operation, the manner in which Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) carried on the administration is reflective of his
political vision and understanding of the situation. The intriguers went
to any length imaginable to create intrigue and lawlessness in the
realm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vo 3, Page 231  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 2, Page 184
