Habits and Temperament
======================

Amir al-Mu’minin had a smiling face, was good-natured and a paragon of
sincerity. He was kind to the poor and always took care of the orphans.
He was an exact replica of the manners and character of the Prophet
(a.s). He met the elite and the ordinary persons with the same
affability. He used to treat the slaves with the same consideration as
he would treat his own relatives. To servants he always gave help in
sharing their heavy burdens. He hated self-praise. He lived a very
simple and frugal life. Like the ordinary folk, he ate simple food and
wore inexpensive clothes. Most of the chores he preferred to perform
with his own hands. He used to repair his own footwear, stitch his torn
cloaks and always went to the bazaar to buy the grocery. He used to work
as a farm laborer. He used to excavate ponds with his own hands, plant
trees and water them. Instead of amassing wealth, he preferred to
distribute it to the poor and impecunious. He did not like distinction
based on color and descent. He used to treat the guests with great
honor. He never sent back any needy person empty handed. He never let
the feelings of hate; rancor and revenge come near him. He exercised
forbearance and forgiveness to a surprising extent. He was strict in the
matter of Faith and always fulfilled the requirements of justice and
fairplay. He used to tread on the path of truth and fairness and never
was partial to anyone in these matters. He never used methods of stealth
and cunning even with his sworn enemies. He spent the nights in prayer
and supplication. After the Morning Prayers he used to give instruction
to people in matters of the Qur’an and Fiqh (Muslim jurisprudence). With
the fear of Allah, he used to shiver. He used to cry so much while
supplicating to Allah that his beard used to get wet with the tears.

Once Dirar ibn Samarah al-Dhuba’i visited the court of Mu\`awiyah.
Mu\`awiyah asked him to tell something about \`Ali (a.s) because he had
the privilege of spending lot of time with him. In the beginning Dirar
was reluctant, but on insistence of Mu\`awiyah he said:

###### By Allah! His aims were high and physique strong! He always talked with determination and acted with justice and fairness. The streams of learning used to flow from him and his words were like songs of erudition and wisdom. He was not attracted

###### to the false glitter of the world. He used to take solace in the loneliness of dark nights. Tears used to flow from his eyes and he used to be immersed in thoughts. He preferred dress that was modest and liked simple food. He lived with us like an ordinary person. Whenever we asked anything, he would reply with patience. By Allah! Despite all the nearness, we used to hold him in awe before we opened our mouths to speak with him. He respected men of learning and gave the poor the privilege of his company. The powerful could never expect his support in their waywardness and the weak was never disappointed with his justice. Allah is witness that I have seen him, in dark nights, restlessly holding his beard and wincing as would a person bitten by a snake and saying “O world! Go and deceive someone else! Do not come to flatter me. How is possible for me to reconcile with you that I have already divorced you thrice! You are transient and your importance is but little! It is a pity that the provision for the journey is meager, the destination is distant and the way frightening!”[1]

This was the Voice of Truth that reverberated in the Dardar al-Sham, a
court where sycophants were gathered to flatter the tyrant. None could
dare there to speak out the truth. This was a unique situation that a
person of courage did speak! The books of history record that the
courtiers cried copiously hearing the talk of Dirar and even the eyes of
Mu\`awiyah watered. This was the magnetic effect of the high morality
and veracity of actions that even the hearts of enemies melted like wax.
Amir al-Mu’minin was an ideal mixture of awe and dignity, kindness and
compassion. He was as hard as a mountain and as soft as the cloud in
flight. One of the companions of \`Ali (a.s), Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Sawhan, has
said:

###### “(Imam) \`Ali used to live amongst us as an ordinary person. Despite his humility and softness, we used to be hesitant and subdued in his presence, like the prisoner who had a sword of the executioner over his head!”[2]

In view of these characteristics of \`Ali (a.s), Mulla \`Ali
al-Adhrabayjan has something wonderful to say:

###### “He used to challenge the enemy and attack him like Allah’s Tiger! And while doing charity and good deeds he looked like the parent of the orphans!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 2, Page 463  
 **[2]** Preface Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadīd
