Mu`awiyah Ibn Abi-sufyan
========================

Mu\`awiyah was born from the womb of Hind bint \`Utbah and was the son
of Abū-Sufyan ibn Harb. Hind was first married to Fakihah ibn Mughirah.
When Fakihah was killed at the hands of Banū-Judhaymah, she married Hafs
ibn Mughirah, and married Abi-Sufyan when Hafs died. Hind was on top of
the roster of women of ill repute in Makkah and was in the forefront of
the enemies of Islam. In the Battle of Uhud, she rendered martial songs
to encourage the infidels to fight the Muslims. She chewed the liver of
the Prophet’s uncle, Hamzah, and set a record of barbarity. She was
known from that time as The Eater of the Liver. Similarly Abū-Sufyan too
was a sworn enemy of the Prophet of Islam (a.s) and was a part of the
conspiracy that forced the Prophet (a.s) to migrate from Makkah to
al-Madinah. Even after the Migration Abi-Sufyan continued to fight with
the Prophet (a.s) and the battles of Badr, Uhud and al-Ahzab were fought
by the infidels at his instance. When Makkah was conquered in 8H, he
accepted Islam along with his son Mu\`awiyah to save his and his
children’s’ lives. Jalaluddin al-Suyūti has written:

###### “Mu\`awiyah, along with his father, accepted Islam on the day Makkah was conquered and participated in the Campaign of Hunayn. He was in the list of *al-Mu’allafatu-Qulūbuhum”*

The *al-Mu’allafatu-Qulūbuhum* are the persons who did not embrace Islam
through their own conviction but they had done it out of fear for their
lives. It was like the abjectly defeated surrendering to the victor!
Therefore, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) has said about them, “By Allah! They
had not embraced Islam but had bowed down their heads!” Notwithstanding
this explicit Islam of those persons, the Prophet (a.s) included them in
the fold so that they might slowly understand the teachings of the
Faith. In fact, to humor them he gave them more facilities than to the
other Muslims. Therefore, from the booty of the Battle of Hunayn he gave
more to Abū-Sufyan and his two sons Yazid and Mu\`awiyah. Abū-Sufyan and
his two sons got the share of *al-Mu’allafatu-Qulūbuhum*, that was a
hundred camels each while the other Muslims got four camels each.

The control of Mu\`awiyah over the territory of Syria came about in the
following manner. Abū-Bakr decided to attack Syria He organized four
contingents of men under Shurahbil ibn Hasnah, Abū-\`Ubaydah al-Jarrah,
Yazid ibn Abi-Sufyan and \`Amr ibn al-\`As. He made an agreement with
these commanders that after achieving victory Abū-\`Ubaydah would be the
governor of Hims, Shurahbil ibn Hasnah of Jordan, \`Amr ibn al-\`As and
\`Alqamah ibn Majzaz of Palestine and Yazid ibn Abi-Sufyan of Damascus.
Then all the four contingents took different routes and met at Yarmūk.
The Muslims were confronted with a huge Roman army. They sent word to
Abū-Bakr to send more men. He sent Khalid ibn al-Walid with 2,000 men
from Iraq to Yarmūk. Now the total force available was 46,000 men. In
Yazid’s contingent Suhayl ibn \`Amr and some other sheikhs were present
as advisers. The standard of the contingent was in the hands of
Mu\`awiyah.

While this campaign was in progress, Abū-Bakr died on 21 Jumada II, 13
H. And the caliphate was transferred to \`Umar. During his reign, in the
month of Rajab 14 H, after a siege of 6 months Damascus was conquered
and Yazid ibn Abi-Sufyan was appointed the governor. In 18 H Yazid ibn
Abi-Sufyan died of a plague and \`Umar appointed his brother Mu\`awiyah,
who was present at Damascus, in his place. After the death of \`Umar in
23 H when \`Uthman became the caliph, he gave Mu\`awiyah the charge of
Jordan, Palestine, Hims and Qinnasrin in addition to Damascus. The
foundation for the influence that Mu\`awiyah laid, \`Umar gave it a
practical shape and \`Uthman strengthened it.

It is surprising that the Companions of the Prophet (a.s), whose
services had been invaluable, were totally neglected and those who were
open enemies of Islam, opponents of Banū-Hashim and always opposed the
Prophet (a.s), were supported and promoted by the three caliphs.

\`Umar not only gifted the governorate of Damascus to Mu\`awiyah but he
laid out the road map for his influence and perpetuation. He instructed
people that when they noticed the changing environment, they must
migrate to Damascus and gather around Mu\`awiyah. Therefore, Ibn Hajar
al-Makki writes:

###### “\`Umar used to encourage people to follow Mu\`awiyah and used to prepare them that when there was division among the people, they must migrate and go to Mu\`awiyah in Syria.”[1]

This fact does not need any proof that in the hearts of Banū-Umayyah
there was always enmity and hatred for Banū-Hashim. In addition to this
ancestral

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tathīr al-Jinān, Page 19

maternal grandfather \`Utbah, brother Hanzalah and uncle al-Walid ibn
\`Utbah. It was the nature of the Arabs that they did not easily forget
old enmities. Although Islam tried to change this evil trait in people,
but the trait that remained with them for centuries could not be removed
so fast. The farsighted eyes of \`Umar were seeing that the spirit of
hatred and revenge can raise its evil head in the form of war. It was
possible that the circumstances changed and the power shifted to the
hands of \`Ali (a.s). In such an event the influence of Mu\`awiyah might
wane. Forecasting such a scenario he advised people to migrate to Syria
and assemble under the flag of Mu\`awiyah. This, he thought would
strengthen the hands of Mu\`awiyah. In fact, such a thing did happen. As
soon as \`Ali (a.s) assumed power, people started moving towards
Damascus in numbers. They looked like moving at the slightest hint of
his eyebrows! If this dissent was not in the mind of \`Umar, how was he
advising people to assemble under Mu\`awiyah so far ahead of that time.
What sort of dissent he was forecasting that he advised people to gather
under Mu\`awiyah at Damascus and not in al-Madinah, to strengthen it,
the original Dar al-Hijrah!

When it was not hidden from \`Umar the type of lifestyle that Mu\`awiyah
had adopted was certainly the emulation of Caesar and Khusrow which had
nothing to do with the Spartan Islamic Lifestyle! Therefore, once \`Umar
was in Syria. He saw the pomp and pageantry of Mu\`awiyah and said, “You
look the Khusrow of the Arabs! I have heard that the needy come to your
door standing there for long hours and you remain relaxing at home!
“Mu\`awiyah replied, “We are in such a land that where the sleuths of
the enemy keep an eye on every move of ours and conveying the
intelligence to their center. We want to frighten them with our pomp and
show! “Hearing this reply, \`Umar said, “This is the talk of a clever
person!”

Al-Tabari writes that \`Umar used to say:

###### “You talk of the cunning exploits of Caesar and Khusrow, although Mu\`awiyah is living amongst you!”[1]

But, despite this he paved the way for Mu\`awiyah and put it in his mind
that he should take advantage of the mutual differences and to usurp the
caliphate Thus, psychologically he made him a candidate for the
caliphate. Therefore, Ibn Abil-Hadid writes with reference to the book,
Al-Safinah, by Abū-\`Uthman al-Jahiz quoting what \`Umar told the
members of the Shūra:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 244

###### “If you act with the spirit of mutual cooperation and help and thoughtfulness, then you and your progeny will taste the caliphate. If you persist with envy and hate and hesitated in helping each other, then Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan will overwhelm you and grab the caliphate.”[1]

If this talk had reached the ears of Mu\`awiyah he must certainly have
been motivated by the words and his mind might have started thinking in
terms of getting the caliphate in the future. Therefore, his movements
and actions very well demonstrated that from the time of \`Uthman he had
started running around to achieve his end. After the assassination of
\`Uthman, he redoubled his efforts. He tried all methods, fair and fowls
to achieve his end.

When the Umayyad standard flew in Syria, there was an imprint of the
Roman culture on it. Even after the advent of Islam, there the people
were still under the influence of the Roman culture. Mu\`awiyah too
forsook the simple Islamic style of living and adopted the Roman ways.
He lived in the lavish palace, Qasr al-Khadra’, built by him. On the
gates of the palace, he had liveried guards and the slaves in bejeweled
girdles used to flit around him. This pomp was a reflection of the
lifestyles of Caesar and Khusrow. This show and the furniture that would
create a glow in the eyes of the beholder were sufficient to overwhelm
anyone. But where he thought that the royal pomp and show might not
work, he adopted another tactic. Therefore, \`Amr Ibn al-\`As once came
to him with a delegation of the Egyptians. He wanted to belittle
Mu\`awiyah in the eyes of the delegates. \`Amr told them that when they
met Mu\`awiyah, they should not address him as the caliph. And wish him
as they do with any other Muslim. He also told them to adopt a style of
conversation as they do talking to ordinary persons. He warned them not
to be awed with his pomp and show. He told them that behaving that way,
their respectability would enhance. Mu\`awiyah had already guessed that
\`Amr had plans of making him seem unimportant in the eyes of the
visitors. He ordered the guards that when the Egyptians arrived, they
should shake them up that all their smartness would vanish. They should
be under the impression that they were being pushed towards death. The
guards followed the instructions. When they arrived, confused and
disturbed, before Mu\`awiyah, a person by name Ibn Khayyat came forward
and said, “Peace be upon you, O Allah’s messenger.” Then all the
Egyptians who followed did the same. \`Amr was furious when he met them
outside and said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 1, Page 37

###### “Allah curse on you! I had asked you not even to address him as the caliph! You have addressed him as ‘O Allah’s Messenger”[1]

This is surprising that Mu\`awiyah is addressed as the prophet and he
keeps listening to it. If anyone else were addressed that way, his
spirit would shiver. If the quiet were with some meaning, he would have
thought that the utterance was blasphemous. But he kept quiet all along.
What would he do if that frightened delegation addressed him as the god?
Would he keep quiet even then or reprimand them for their blasphemous
talk?

Where the bent of mind is of that type, it cannot be imagined that the
commandments of Islam are respected at all. Therefore, Islam has made
the wearing of silks as taboo for the Muslim men. He wore silks without
any reservation. He used vessels of gold and silver and intoxicants were
in daily use! Even these drinks were served to the others. \`Abdullah
ibn Buraydah says that he went with his father to the court of
Mu\`awiyah. They were asked to squat on the floor. After the meal, they
were served spirits. His father, when he saw the spirits, said:

###### “From the time the Prophet (a.s) had termed the spirits taboo (haram), I have never touched them.”[2]

There is a long list of Mu\`awiyah’s innovations in the Faith.
Therefore, he termed the illegitimate issue of his father, Ziyad ibn
Sumayyah as Ziyad ibn Abi-Sufyan, made a joke of the Prophet’s saying,
“The child is his father’s and stone is for the adulterer.” In sermons,
Mu\`awiyah used to talk ill of \`Ali (a.s). He started the practice of
reciting the adhan prior to the \`Id prayers. He gave priority to the
Sermon of the \`Id to \`Id Prayers. He started delivering the khutbah
sitting down instead of standing up. After Mu\`awiyah, Banū-Umayyah made
it their practice. After the Umayyads, when Abul-\`Abbas al-Saffah, the
first \`Abbasid ruler, became the Caliph, he started delivering the
khutbah standing. Then the people shouted:

“O son of the uncle of the Prophet (a.s)! You have revived the Sunnah!
May Allah keep you alive!”[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 344  
 **[2]** Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol 5, Page 347  
 **[3]** Muhā¤arat al-Awā’il, Page 84

Mu\`awiyah stopped reciting the *basmalah* [1] loudly during prayers.
Muhammad ibn \`Aqil writes:

“Mu\`awiyah was the first in al-Madinah to avoid saying the *basmalah*
loudly during the prayer. The Muhajirūn and Ansar raised their voices
against this and said, ‘O Mu\`awiyah! You have stolen the
*Basmalah!’”*[2]

Besides changing the clear commands of Islam, he invented several
customs and festivities that were prevalent amongst people of other
faiths. He appointed other people on key positions. He tried to disturb
the central status of al-Madinah. The person in charge of his main
office was Sirjawn al-Rūmi, a Christian. The person responsible for
collection of the tribute in Hims too was a Christian, Ibn Awsal. When
Mu\`awiyah went to al-Madinah during the Hajj in 50 H, he wanted to
shift the Pulpit to Damascus. When they tried to lift it, there was
suddenly an eclipse of the sun. The people who saw this phenomenon were
frightened. Seeing the anger of the people, Mu\`awiyah desisted from
putting his plan into operation. He made an excuse that by lifting the
pulpit from its place he wanted to see whether it was affected with the
mites.

This event is similar to that of Hassan Ibn Kalal al-\`Abdi. He too
wanted to dismantle the Ka\`bah and carry the stones to Yemen but nature
did not allow him to fulfill his wish. In Mu\`awiyah’s case, too nature
expressed its fury in the form of the solar Eclipse.

There are plenty of acts of Mu\`awiyah that were contrary to the norms
of the Faith. But his naming his evil son, Yazid, as his successor was
worst act that he perpetrated. This was such a heinous act that the
group which abstains from criticizing the Companions, closing their eyes
and ears to their deeds, cannot control themselves from condemning this
episode from Mu\`awiyah’s evil life. They were forced to accept that
Mu\`awiyah had turned caliphate towards Monarchy naming his son as his
heir! He laid the cornerstone of such an evil innovation that it
continued for centuries in the Islamic dominions. One, who sat on the
throne of caliphate with cruelty and oppression, considered it his fief
and put his uncouth, undeserving and evil son on that throne. Thereafter
every person who usurped the position called himself the caliph of the
Muslims and the chain of succession continued!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Basmalah is saying, “bismillāhirrahmānirrahīm (In the Name of
Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful)”  
 **[2]** Al-Nasā’ih al-Kāfiyah, Page 96

This act of Mu\`awiyah was not only contrary to the norms of Shari\`ah,
but from the moral aspect too was very undesirable. He had signed a
covenant with Imam al-Hasan (a.s) that he would not nominate anyone as
his successor. But in breach of the agreement, despite the opposition of
the Muslims, imposed his son on them. A son who was a known debauch and
drunkard. He was the practitioner of all the evil habits that can be
named! Such a person was nominated to be the caliph of the Muslims! The
people from whom he feared some resistance, he did not trouble them as a
strategy. Some persons he threatened and silenced them, those who were
not acquiescing to his demand, he silenced them by administering poison
through cunning and stealth. Therefore, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was poisoned
by Ju\`dah bint al-Ash\`ath. Al-Mas\`ūdi writes:

###### “Mu\`awiyah secretly sent her a message that if she killed Hasan (a.s) by some means, he would give her one hundred thousand dirhams and will marry her to Yazid.”[1]

According to the terms of the conspiracy Mu\`awiyah sent to her one
hundred thousand dirhams but did not fulfill the second term of the
agreement saying that Yazid’s life was very precious for him!

Similarly Mu\`awiyah got Khalid ibn al-Walid’s son poisoned. Ibn \`Abd
al-Barr writes that Mu\`awiyah, delivering a sermon in Syria, said, “O
People! I have grown old and my death is near! I wish to make
arrangement for the realm after me.” He was under the impression that
the people would themselves suggest the name of Yazid awed by the wealth
and pomp of the court. Then under the cover of the public opinion he
would announce the succession of Yazid. But the evil acts of Yazid were
no secret for the people. They could not have imagined that Yazid’s name
could even be mentioned about the caliphate. They took the name of \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn Khalid. When Mu\`awiyah heard the name of \`Abd al-Rahman
coming from the people instead of Yazid’s name, a knot was formed in his
evil heart. He instantly decided to remove this stone from the path of
his son. Therefore, when he heard of the illness of \`Abd al-Rahman, he
deputed a physician from the court to administer the medicine that cured
the poor person forever!

###### “He was to go to him, administer the medicine and thus finish him.”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murūj al-Dhahab, Vol 2, Page 50  
 **[2]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 2, Page 401

\`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakr too was the victim of poison as well. Ibn
Hajar al-\`Asqalani writes that when Mu\`awiyah wanted to take bay\`ah
from the people for Yazid, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakr said:

###### “Is it the reign of Heracles that one Caesar dies and the next Caesar take his place? By Allah! We are not ready for this!”[1]

Mu\`awiyah sent him one hundred thousand dirhams to close his mouth. But
he returned the money and said that he was not willing to sell his Faith
for the world. The result of this was that on the way to Makkah, he must
have traveled about ten miles when he was sent to eternal sleep. Ibn
Hajar al-\`Asqalani writes:

###### “\`Abd al-Rahman died suddenly while in sleep!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isābah, Vol 2, Page 400  
 **[2]** Al-Isābah, Vol 2, Page 400
