`amr Ibn Al-`as
===============

\`Amr’s father was al-\`As ibn Wa’il whom the Holy Qur’an has termed
abtar or issueless and the enemy of the Prophet (a.s). \`Amr’s mother
was Salma bint Harmalah and her title was al-Nabighah. She was brought
as a captive from Banū-Ghazzah. She was auctioned in the Mart of \`Ukaz.
Fakihah ibn Mughirah bought her and resold to \`Abdullah ibn Jad\`an.
Thus, changing hands, she reached al-\`As ibn Wa’il and gave birth to
\`Amr.

\`Amr had inherited the enmity for Islam from his father. Therefore, he
was in the first list of the enemies of the Faith. He used to utter
impertinent things about the Prophet (a.s) and take part in the
activities against him. When he was helpless with Islam gaining
importance and power, he accepted the Faith and joined the ranks of the
Muslims. \`Umar, during his caliphate, appointed him the governor of
Palestine and Jordan. When that territory came under Mu\`awiyah, \`Amr
was sent with the army to Egypt. He fought with the Egyptians, defeated
them, and was named the governor there. After \`Umar, \`Uthman too kept
him in that position for sometime. He deposed him in the year 26 H and
replaced him with his relative, \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d. \`Amr, who was a
supporter of \`Uthman turned against him because of removal from the
governorate of Egypt. This was not strange because nothing else could be
expected from his selfish nature. This enmity became so much that he
gathered a coterie around himself and started creating opinion against
\`Uthman. Ibn \`Abd al-Barr writes:

###### “\`Uthman removed \`Amr from the Emirate of Egypt and he started instigating people against him. He also used insulting words against \`Uthman.”[1]

He did not stop at this. In anger \`Amr divorced his wife Ummu-Kulthūm
bint \`Uqbah who was half sister of \`Uthman. He worked actively to
over-turn \`Uthman’s regime. When \`Uthman noticed this, he called \`Amr
and told him, “O son of al-Nabighah! Beware of such acts! Shun hypocrisy
and adopt nobility.” \`Amr too replied in the same tone and heaped
complaints against

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol3, Page 322

the old person. \`Uthman was taken aback at his talk and told him that
he had no right to interfere with his work and to criticize him. He said
that even during the days of ignorance he was more respected than him
and that presently he was holding a very important position. \`Amr said
that he had seen his father, \`Affan, and that he was no match for his
own father, al-\`As ibn Wa’il. At this \`Uthman did not say anything but
Marwan, who was listening, became angry and told \`Uthman, “You have
come to such a pass that \`Amr is not sparing even your father.” After
this harsh exchange, \`Amr redoubled his campaign of vilification and
registered the opinion of Talhah, al-Zubayr and others against the
caliph. When the sentiments of the people were aroused against \`Uthman
and he was in literal house-arrest, \`Amr left for Palestine where he
was having a palatial house for himself to see his designs bear fruit
against the caliph from a distance and save himself from the blame for
the consequences

One day he was busy conversing with Salamah ibn Rawh al-Judhami and two
of his own sons, Muhammad and \`Abdullah, that a horseman passed that
way. He called him and asked from where he was coming. He said that he
was from al-Madinah and informed that \`Uthman was still in heavy siege
at his residence. Then another rider from al-Madinah passed that way who
informed that \`Uthman was assassinated. On hearing this \`Amr said:

###### “I am the father of \`Abdullah! In whatever task I put my hand; I never leave it half finished!”[1]

Ibn al-Athir writes that when the news of \`Uthman’s killing reached
him, \`Amr said:

###### “I am \`Abdullah’s father! I have killed \`Uthman living in the Valley of al Saba. If Talhah becomes the caliph, he is a young Arab, kind and charitable. If ibn Abi-Talib gets the caliphate then from the point of view of governance he is not a desirable person.”[2]

He was still celebrating his success when he received the news of \`Ali
(a.s) becoming the caliph. As soon he got this news, he caught hold of
his head. After some days when he learned that \`A’ishah, Talhah and
al-Zubayr have turned against \`Ali (a.s), his hope was revived and
awaited the result of the Battle of the Camel. But when he heard of the
victory of \`Ali (a.s), all his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 392  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 141

hopes were shattered. However, when he heard that Mu\`awiyah had refused
to owe allegiance to \`Ali (a.s) he saw a ray of hope in the
development. He did have the craving for power and had spent a major
portion of his life holding positions of power. Although he was old, his
desire for power was still young! Therefore, he approached Mu\`awiyah
with a wish for the governorate of Egypt. After coming to an
understanding with him, he performed his deed that has gone into the
annals of the history.

\`Amr ibn al-\`As was a past master at intrigue and conspiracy He was an
adept at creating differences between persons for his own benefit.
Although he had to sacrifice the norms of Faith and morality to achieve
his ends, he never thought about it for a moment. The events are the
proof that Ibn al-\`As felt no compunction for the acts that he
perpetrated. After living a long life of ninety years, he died on \`Id
al-Fitr 43 H. His son first offered the funeral prayer followed by the
\`Id Prayer!
