`abdullah Ibn Sa`d
==================

\`Abdullah had shared his mother’s milk with \`Uthman. He was the son of
Sa\`d ibn Abi-Sarh. Sa\`d was amongst the persons who conspired against
Islam remaining within it. Because of this attitude, such persons are
termed as hypocrites. Ibn Qutaybah writes:

###### “\`Abdullah’s father, Sa\`d, was in the group of the hypocrites (*munafiqūn*).”[1]

Although \`Abdullah was a companion of the Prophet (a.s) and a
transcriptor of Qur’an, his mind was same as that of his father. The
proof of this was that when the Prophet (a.s) dictated the Verses,
\`Abdullah used to make alteration in the words at will. Therefore,
instead of the word *al-kafirin* (the disbelievers), he wrote
*al-zalimin* (the unjust ones); and instead of *al-\`aziz al-hakim* (the
Almighty, the Wise), he wrote al-\`alim al-hakim (the All-knowing, the
Wise). Once transcribing a verse about human birth, in the context of
the Verse, the following words came out of his mouth: *fa-tabaraka
allahu ahsanu al-khaliqin* (so blessed be Allah, the best of the
creators). The Prophet (a.s) said, “This too is a part of the Verse.
Write it down.” Although he wrote it down, a doubt crept into his mind.
Whether the Qur’an is a revealed scripture or the Prophet (a.s) himself
has thought it out. Then he started gossiping about it that the Qur’an
was not a Divine Revelation and that he himself could produce such
literature! The following Verse was then revealed:

### وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا أَوْ قَالَ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ وَلَمْ يُوحَ إِلَيْهِ شَيْءٌ وَمَنْ قَالَ سَأُنزِلُ مِثْلَ مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ.

#### “And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, or says: It has been revealed to me; while nothing has been revealed to him, and he who says: I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed? (6/93)”

Because of this loose talk, the Prophet (a.s) exiled \`Abdullah from
al-Madinah. He therefore turned against Islam, went to Makkah and
continued his campaign of vilification. He told people that Muhammad
(a.s) himself

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ma\`ārif, Page 131

makes the verses and says that they are revealed to him. \`Uthman was
always in the forefront of taking up the cause of such person. He
therefore recommended to the Prophet (a.s) to allow \`Abdullah to return
to al-Madinah. But the Prophet (a.s) refused him entry. When Makkah was
conquered and the Prophet (a.s) entered there as the victor, he ordered
\`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d to be executed even if he clings to the cover of
the Ka\`bah. When \`Uthman learned about this order of the Prophet
(a.s), he worried very much and hid \`Abdullah somewhere. When the
events normalized he took \`Abdullah to the Prophet (a.s) and said, “O
Prophet of Allah (a.s)! This \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d has come to owe his
allegiance to you. Do give him amnesty.” The Prophet (a.s) neither
extended his hand for *bay\`ah* nor did he speak anything. He was quiet
for along time. On the other, hand the insistence of \`Uthman increased.
In the end, the Prophet (a.s) gave amnesty to him. When \`Abdullah left,
the Prophet (a.s) told the persons sitting with him that I kept quiet
for such a ling while that someone of you rose to slay the person, “Was
there none amongst you who could rush towards that dog and killed him
before I gave him amnesty.”[1]

\`Umar said, “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)! If you had given slight message
through your eyes, we could have slain him!”

The Prophet (a.s) said, “I do not order executions with my eyes nor do
the prophets communicate through their eyes.”[2]

\`Uthman, during his days, closed his eyes to the behavior of \`Abdullah
ibn Sa\`d and appointed him governor to Egypt. After taking charge of
the emirate of Egypt, he adopted the same attitude that was feared from
him. There was a spate of tyranny and oppression in the province.
Contentment of the people turned into penury. Excepting some favorites
of \`Uthman, the entire population of Egypt was unhappy. People turned
against the governor and they had a similar feeling for the center. In
the end Muhammad ibn Abi-Hudhayfah overturned the establishment in Egypt
and released the people from the clutches of the tyrant. Muhammad ibn
Abi-Hudhayfah was brought up by \`Uthman and was under his care after
his father, Hudhayfah, was killed in the Battle of Yarmūk. When Muhammad
grew up, he asked \`Uthman to give him permission to work for the
promotion and propagation of Islam and go for jihad with some
contingent. \`Uthman sent him with \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d to help him in
Egypt. He went with some companions to Egypt. Muhammad ibn Hudhayfah was
a very pious person. When he saw the maladministration

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ansāb al-Ashrāf, Vol 1, Page 358  
 **[2]** Ansāb al-Ashrāf, Vol 1, Page 358

in Egypt, he tried to convince \`Abdullah to mend his ways. When he did
not pay any heed to Muhammad’s repeated appeals, he openly started
preparing people to rise against \`Abdullah. He also reported about the
conditions in Egypt to \`Uthman and told him that he had imposed such an
evil person over the people in Egypt whom the Prophet (a.s) declared a
persona non grata. They people of Egypt were impressed with the piety of
Muhammad ibn Hudhayfah. They gathered around him. When he saw the
situation worsening, \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d wrote to \`Uthman that his
ward ibn Abi-Hudhayfah has spoiled the environment in Egypt and was
instigating the people to rebel. If immediate arrangements are not made,
things might go out of control. \`Uthman could not think of any other
strategy than controlling the situation through the use of wealth. He
therefore sent some expensive garments and thirty thousand dirhams to
Muhammad ibn Abi-Hudhayfah. This strategy did not work on Muhammad. He
took the garments and the money to the people and said:

###### “O group of Muslims! You do not see this act of \`Uthman that he wants to trick me in the matter of the Faith and has sent to me this wealth as a gratification.”[1]

The result of this episode was that the opposition further increased.
And the feelings of rebellion came up in the minds of the people. People
openly started talking against \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d. When \`Uthman heard
about this situation, he wrote to Muhammad that he did not expect such
behavior from him. But Muhammad Ibn Abi-Hudhayfah was not impressed with
the fans of \`Uthman appeals and he continued his campaign against
\`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d. At last one group of Egyptians went as a
delegation to al-Madinah to plead with the caliph for removal of
\`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d. In this group, there was Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr too
was there who was associated with the movement of Muhammad ibn
Abi-Hudhayfah.

Following this delegation, \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d too proceeded towards
al-Madinah. Now the administration of Egypt came to the hands of
Muhammad ibn Abi-Hudhayfah. When \`Abdullah reached Aylah road to
al-Madinah he learnt that \`Uthman had been besieged in his own house
and that going there would be fraught with danger. He returned to Egypt
from there. But Muhammad ibn Abi-Hudhayfah did not allow him entry into
the city. When he found no place of succor, he proceeded towards
Palestine and halted at the border between Egypt and Palestine. He
waited there to see what turn the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 135

events took. During those days, one person passed that way. He informed
that \`Uthman was assassinated in al-Madinah. He said “We are Allah’s
and to Him do we return.” He asked who was elected as the next caliph.
The person said it was \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib.” \`Abdullah again said, “We
are Allah’s and to Him do we return.” The man asked him, “Do you
consider the assassination and selection of \`Ali (a.s) to the caliphate
as tragedies of the same order?” Then the person looked at him with deep
intent and said, “Are you \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d?” He replied, “Yes. I
am!” The man said, “Then, run and save your life! Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
will put you and your associates to sword or will send you into exile!”
\`Abdullah proceeded from there to Damascus and lived there for some
time under the protection of Mu\`awiyah. He died at \`Asqalan in 36 or
37 H.
