Al-walid Ibn `uqbah
===================

Al-Walid was born to Arwa bint Kurayz. His father was \`Uqbah ibn
Abi-Mu\`it. He was \`Uthman’s half brother through his mother. \`Uqbah
was also in the forefront of fighting against the Muslims. The Muslims
took him captive, produced before the Prophet (a.s), and was executed
under the command of the Prophet (a.s). Al-Walid and his brother
\`Amarah embraced Islam after the conquest of Makkah. This change was
not because of any conviction, but the circumstances forced them to
capitulate.

When the Prophet (a.s) selected different persons for the duty of
collection of *zakat* and *sadaqah*, al-Walid was deputed to the tribe
of Banul-Mustalaq. When he reached near those hamlets, the people came
out in numbers to welcome him. When he saw them advancing, he ran away
thinking that they had recanted from the Faith and were coming to attack
him. He went to the Prophet (a.s) and told him that the Banul-Mustalaq
had recanted and were refusing to pay the *zakat*. The Prophet (a.s)
expressed surprise at this report and wanted to take steps to reprimand
and punish them. When Banul-Mustalaq heard about this, they came to the
presence of the Prophet (a.s) and said, “O Prophet of Allah (a.s)! You
have received a wrong report about us! We have neither recanted from the
Faith nor have we refused to pay the *zakat*.” In this regard, the
following Verse was revealed:

### يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ جَاءَكُمْ فَاسِقٌ بِنَبَإٍ فَتَبَيَّنُوا أَنْ تُصِيبُوا قَوْمًا بِجَهَالَةٍ فَتُصْبِحُوا عَلَى مَا فَعَلْتُمْ نَادِمِينَ.

#### “O you who believe! If an evildoer comes to you with a report, look carefully into it, lest you harm a people in ignorance, then be sorry for what you have done. (49/6)”

Once he told \`Ali (a.s) that he was no less than him in the martial
skill of swordsmanship and combating. The Imam (a.s) said, “Be quiet!
You impious liar!” At that time, the following Verse was revealed:

### أَفَمَنْ كَانَ مُؤْمِنًا كَمَنْ كَانَ فَاسِقًا لَا يَسْتَوُونَ.

#### “Is he then who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They are not equal. (32/18)”

Ibn \`Abbas says, “This Verse was revealed about \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib
(a.s) and al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah.”[1]

In both the Verses al-Walid is termed as impious. Then in all meetings
and groups, people called him *fasiq*. Until the time the Holy Qur’an is
recited he will be remembered with this title.

Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, whom \`Umar had selected to the Shūra, was deposed
from the governorate of al-Kūfah by \`Uthman and sent the *fasiq*
al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah to replace him. He reached al-Kūfah in the
scorching sunlight and went to the house of Sa\`d who had no inkling
that the person had brought the orders for his dismissal. He pleasantly
asked, “What brings you here?” al-Walid said, “I have been appointed the
governor of al-Kūfah. I have been instructed to remove you and take
charge of the bayt al-mal and the functionaries appointed by you.” Sa\`d
said, “I am wondering whether you people have become more wise and
sagacious or we are the victims of foolishness and stupidity. What is
this sudden confusion?” al-Walid said, “With whom this regime kept its
faith that it would place faith in you! It is with some in the morning
and with someone else in the evening! Do not feel for what you have
lost. One day or other it was bound to go!” Sa\`d said angrily, “I feel
that you people consider this country as a fief left to you by your
ancestors! Give whatever you like to any one and snatch away whatever
you wish to take!”

Sa\`d handed over the emirate of al-Kūfah to al-Walid and came away to
al-Madinah. Once in the position of the governor, power went to the head
of al-Walid. He started to have parties of drink and dance. Ibn \`Abd
al-Barr writes:

###### “Al-Asma\`i, Abū-\`Ubaydah, Husham ibn al-Kalbi, and others say that al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah was impious and an alcoholic.”[2]

One of the chief courtiers of al-Walid was a Christian, by the name of
Abū-Zubayd al-ta’i. Al-Walid took a house near the mosque and gave him.
He was using the compound of the mosque for his passage. He was seen by
people walking through the enclosure of the mosque in a drunken,
inebriated condition. They were angry, but afraid of questioning the
governor’s friend! Once an incident happened that the people could not
control their anger any

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 3, Page 596  
 **[2]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 3, Page 596

more. What happened was that, in an intoxicated state, al-Walid offered
four genuflections instead of two mandated for the Morning Prayer. He
told the people that he was in a state of trance that morning. He said
that he could make more genuflections if they wished! Instead of
reciting the verses, he was repeating the following couplet during the
prayer, “The heart is old and the rabab (stringed musical instrument)
too is old! But the heart is still stuck in that!”

The people of al-Kūfah were now fed up of al-Walid. They complained to
\`Uthman and brought witnesses for the alcoholism of al-Walid. \`Uthman
had no other alternative than of calling him to al-Madinah and punishing
him with whipping. In his place Sa\`id ibn al-\`As was sent as the
governor of al-Kūfah. Sa\`id ordered the people that al-Walid was using
to be cleansed by washing. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) became the
caliph, al-Walid moved away to al-Basrah. After some time he moved to
al-Riqqah where he died and was buried beside his friend Abū-Zubayd
al-ta’i!
