Sa`id Ibn Al-`as
================

Sa\`id was the son of al-\`As ibn Sa\`id who was killed by \`Ali (a.s)
in the Battle of Badr. Sa\`id spent his childhood, after being orphaned,
under the care of \`Uthman. After the conquest of Syria he moved there
to live with Mu\`awiyah. Later on he moved from Syria to al-Madinah. In
30 H when al-Walid was dismissed from the governorate of al-Kūfah, he
was appointed in his place. Sa\`id was a self-centered, conceited and
aggressive person. Ibn \`Abd al-Barr writes:

###### “Sa\`id was cruel, vitriolic and aggressive.”[1]

His conceit and cruelty is evident from one incident. Once he gathered
some persons for the sighting of the \`Id Crescent. He asked if some of
them had sighted the moon. Hashim ibn \`Utbah said that he had seen the
moon and others said that they had not. Then Sa\`id said that the one
eyed person has sighted the moon and you have not been able to see it.!
Hashim had lost one of his eyes in the Battle of Yarmūk. He was angry at
this style of speaking and asked why he was making a remark about his
eye that he lost fighting in the Way of Allah! Saying this Hashim went
home and people kept coming to him to confirm about the sighting of the
Crescent. On the other hand Sa\`id was angry and upset the way Hashim
retorted. He sent some men to his house and got him beaten up and burned
down his house. When this information reached al-Madinah, Sa\`d ibn
Abi-Waqqas told \`Uthman that this tyranny must be stopped forthwith.
When no satisfactory reply was forthcoming, he wanted to burn down
Sa\`id’s house that was in al-Madinah. But on the intervention of
\`A’ishah he desisted from doing it.

The period during which Sa\`id was the governor, he used harsh,
tyrannical methods with the people. He treated the *bayt al-mal* as his
personal treasury and gave whatever he wanted to anyone. He neither had
Allah’s fear nor was there any accountability required by the center. If
anyone raised a voice against him, he crushed it. His impunity became so
much that, once, when al-Kūfah was full of important visitors, he said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 2, Page 9

###### “The land in Iraq is only for Quraysh (Banū-Umayyah)”[1]

Malik Ibn al-Harith al-Ashtar could not keep quiet listening to this. He
said that the lands that were conquered with their swords could not
become the fiefs of your tribe. On this one senior officer of the
police, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Jahsh al-\`Asadi got entangled with Malik
al-Ashtar saying that what the emir said was right. When the dispute
increased, at the instance of Malik al-Ashtar, the important persons of
al-Kūfah, roughed him up and rendered him incapable of walking back
home. After this event the suppressed flames of hatred rose. Wherever
some people gathered they started talking ill of Sa\`id and blamed
\`Uthman who had appointed him. Sa\`id could not do anything more than
stopping those people from visiting him and wrote to \`Uthman that
certain persons were trying to create mischief against the state.
\`Uthman wrote in his reply that those persons must be exiled to Syria
and wrote to Mu\`awiyah that some mischief mongers were being sent to
Syria who have to be kept in check that they do not conspire against the
State. As a result, some persons were forcibly sent to Syria.

The persons who were termed mischievous were the important persons of
al-Kūfah, amongst whom were the memorizers of Qur’an, Companions of the
Prophet (a.s) and some others who were known for their piety. Main
persons amongst them were Malik ibn al-Harith al-Ashtar, Malik ibn Ka\`b
al-Arhabi, al-Aswad ibn Yazid al-Nakha\`i, \`Alqamah ibn Sawhan
al-\`Abdi, Zayd ibn Sawhan, al-Harith ibn \`Abdullah al-A\`war, Thabit
ibn Qays al-Hamdani, Kumayl ibn Ziyad al-Nakha\`i, Jundub ibn Zuhayr
al-Ghamidi, Jundub ibn Ka\`b al-Azdi, \`Urwah ibn al-Ja\`d and \`Amr ibn
al-Hamq al-Khuza\`i. The crime for which they were being exiled from
their homes was that they had asserted their rights and had raised their
voices against the tyranny of the ruling class. If, in a state that had
claims of democracy, they protested against the tyranny and encroachment
of a particular tribe on the lands jointly owned by the people, what
wrong did they commit? If the same persons had adopted the policy of
nodding their heads in assent to the deeds of the governor, they would
have remained in his good books. But these were the true practitioners
of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil. If they had adopted an
aggressive attitude, it was because of their moral duty to express the
truth.

When they reached Damascus, they were accommodated at Kunyah-Maryam, and
instead of being harsh with them, Mu\`awiyah adopted a soft political
attitude with them. He told them that Islam had elevated their status
that they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 70

had ascendance over other people. If Quraysh were not there, they would
have remained in the darkness and backwardness. He said that he was told
they were critical of the Quraysh functionaries of al-Kūfah and publicly
criticized them. The state was tolerating their activities so far. If
they did not mend their ways, they might come to great hardship.
Sa\`sa\`ah told Mu\`awiyah that he talked of the superiority of the
Quraysh, but at no time they were ever more than us in numbers nor in
strength. And his saying that the rulers are like shield for them, let
the shield break and they would make their own shield.

The talks proceeded in this manner. Once Mu\`awiyah said that everyone
knew that his father, Abū-Sufyan, was the most respected person of the
Quraysh but Muhammad (a.s) had the Prophethood. If they were the progeny
of Abū-Sufyan they would all be clever and intelligent. Sa\`sa\`ah said
that he was wrong. Adam (a.s) who was certainly better than Abū-Sufyan
was made by Allah and put His spirit in him and ordered the angels to
prostrate to him. In his progeny, there are clever ones, and there are
foolish persons as well. There are good persons as well as bad.
Mu\`awiyah could not reply to this and kept quiet. In another meeting,
he said that they should keep their own welfare in view and they should
adopt an attitude that should be beneficial for their tribe and their
people. Sa\`sa\`ah asked him since when he had started giving sermons
about good behavior? Was there any welfare for them that they disobey
Allah and follow his advice? Mu\`awiyah replied that he was asking them
to fear Allah and follow the Prophet (a.s) and hold the rope of Allah
fast and do not create dissent. Sa\`sa\`ah asked why, Mu\`awiyah, had
acted against the commands of the Prophet (a.s)? Mu\`awiyah said that if
such a thing has happened, he would express his repentance over what
happened in the past. And now he ordered them to adopt piety, obedience
and cooperation with the rulers of the day. He asked them to respect the
rulers and give them advice in an atmosphere of friendship. Sa\`sa\`ah
said that, in that event, they advise him to forsake the emirate of
Syria and clear the way for those who truly deserve the position. Could
he deny that in Arabia there were persons whose services to Islam have
been far superior than his? He agreed, but said that, at the moment,
none was more capable than him to carry the burden of the state on his
shoulder. If he had any shortcomings, \`Umar would not have supported
him and allowed him to hold the position. Thus, there was no question of
his forsaking the position. He added that their suggestion was a satanic
suggestion and following Satan would bring shame and dishonor! At this
Sa\`sa\`ah and others were upset and advanced angrily towards
Mu\`awiyah. He warned them that they were in Syria and not in al-Kūfah
and that they must behave! If people there learned of their behavior
with the emir, they would

lynch them. He stood up at this, went home and wrote to \`Uthman that
the people who were visiting him have no wisdom and intelligence nor any
attachment with the Faith. Their purpose was only to create mischief. He
feared that if they remained there, they might create mischief and
encourage the Syrians to rebel. Therefore, it would be better to send
them away somewhere else. \`Uthman replied to him that they may be sent
back to Sa\`id ibn al-\`As. Therefore, they were sent to al-Kūfah. They
already had a rift with Sa\`id. On returning there, the matters
worsened. When \`Uthman was informed of the situation, he wrote to Malik
al-Ashtar to leave al-Kūfah and go to Hims. On reading the edict, Malik
said:

###### “O Allah! Amongst us the one who is the enemy of the people, send fast Your Retribution to him!”[1]

Those people went to Hims from al-Kūfah. The emir of Hims, \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn Khalid ibn al-Walid, exceeded all limits of decency in
heaping insults on them. When one month passed bearing the torture and
hardships, they were again sent back to al-Kūfah. Now the people were
running out of patience. They were angry on the functionaries of
\`Uthman and his own attitude toward those respected persons. \`Uthman
could not have closed his eyes to the unsavory circumstances. To crush
the rebellion he called a meeting of all the functionaries in
al-Madinah. Sa\`id ibn al-\`As too went to al-Madinah. While returning
from the meetings, he was stopped at a place called Jara near
Al-Qadisiyyah. Malik al-Ashtar and his companions told him that they
would not allow him to enter al-Kūfah. They asked him to return from
where he had come. Sa\`id made some excuses, but they did not relent.
They asked him to return back because it would be beyond him to stop the
onslaught of the people. Therefore, he returned to al-Madinah from
there. \`Uthman appointed Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari as the governor of
al-Kūfah in his place. About this person more when we discuss about the
Battle of the Camel and the arbitration later on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 367
