Retaliation Over `uthman’s Blood
================================

*Qisas* or ‘blood-for-blood’ is a rule that is neither rejected by
intelligence nor the Shari\`ah. All civilized societies and religions
agree on this. But every law has some exceptions, and this law too is
not free of exceptions. Therefore, if someone is killed in punishment
for some crime, or a person, in self-defense, kills someone, in both the
situations, although a killing has taken place, neither the Shari\`ah
permits *qisas* nor intelligence supports it. In this manner several
instances can be mentioned where the law of *qisas* cannot be applied.
While one cannot deny the law of *qisas*, its applicability differs from
circumstance to circumstance.

After Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) assuming the caliphate, when the demand for
the retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman came up, it became a
controversial issue. People were divided into two differing groups. One
group considered that the killing of \`Uthman was legitimate. For them
there was no question of claiming *qisas* in this case. The other group
considered his assassination a sin and a crime and forcefully championed
the need for *qisas*. We are not debating here whether one group was
right or the other. The problem was so intricate that immediate solution
was next to impossible. These complications could have been removed if
\`Ali (a.s) considered the assassination illegitimate and gave attention
to the claim of *qisas*. If he did that, the other group, who thought
that the killing was justifiable in the circumstances the act was
committed, would have reacted strongly. Taking the side of either of the
two groups was fraught with danger. The need was to bring both the
groups to the middle ground and make efforts to resolve the issue. There
were pulls and pushes in all directions and neither the feelings of the
claimants of the *qisas* nor of their opponents could be assuaged. It
was also difficult to round up the culprits who perpetrated the act.
Therefore, when Talhah and al-Zubayr, and other persons of their ilk,
approached Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and demanded retaliation for the blood
of \`Uthman, he gauged the situation and said, “Whatever you know, I am
not unaware of! But presently I do not have the power when the
aggressors are in full flow and are overwhelming us, and we are not
controlling them. Even your own slaves are siding with them and the

Bedouin Arabs too have joined them. At the moment, they are in your
midst and could harm you if they wish to! Have you thought of a way to
control the situation?”

The picture that \`Ali (a.s) drew of the circumstances at that time, the
history upholds as facts. The rebels were ruling the roost in al-Madinah
and they had their influence everywhere. They did what they wished and
none could open his mouth against them. If Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
initiated steps for the *qisas*, it was not possible that the culprits
would bow down their heads meekly to the executioner’s sword. They would
have resisted the move with full force at their command that the lanes
and by lanes of al-Madinah would have been gored with unnecessary
bloodshed. They were not so meek and weak that they would easily
surrender themselves. If it was so, the same claimants of the *qisas*
could have overpowered them during the long siege that they held of
\`Uthman’s palace prior to his assassination. But at that time, they
meekly surrendered their arms and, after the act were done, they were
claiming for revenge. These champions of *qisas* themselves, overtly and
covertly, acknowledged that the strength of the rebels was much more
than their own. Therefore, they decided to battle with \`Ali (a.s) and
\`A’ishah advised them to attack al-Madinah because the killers of
\`Uthman were boldly going around the streets of the city. Talhah,
al-Zubayr and some others said:

###### “O Umm al-Mu’minin! Forget about al-Madinah. Because those who support us cannot fight the rebels. You must come with us to al-Basrah!”[1]

These people, despite having all the paraphernalia of war and men, were
unable to start hostilities in al-Madinah, and made an excuse that they
were not in a position to face the rebels. If they were really, and
truly, seeking *qisas*, there was no need to shift their theatre to
al-Basrah. Their purpose was something else and the *qisas* was just a
ruse. Their aim was to open a front against \`Ali (a.s) and overturn his
rule and pave the way for their own hunger for power. It was not
possible to pin the responsibility for the killing of \`Uthman on, one,
two or a few persons. The populations of al-Madinah, Egypt and al-Basrah
were fed up of the oppressive measures of \`Uthman, and his coterie, and
they had turned mortally against him. Those who instigated the killers
were Muhajirūn, Ansar and even the senior Companions who wrote letters
to the miscreants to teach him a lesson. To identify one or two killers
was not possible and killing thousands for one life was not admissible
in the Shari\`ah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 40

One way to claim *qisas* was to execute all the persons who took part in
the conspiracy, be they the Companions; from al-Madinah, Egypt,
al-Basrah or al-Kūfah. The other way was to identify the real killers
from the rebels and, establish their guilt by getting witnesses and then
executing them. Witnesses were possible if there were some people at the
place and time of the killing. Some Umayyads who were at \`Uthman’s
place had meekly melted away sensing danger or took shelter in
Ummu-Habibah’s house. However, Na’ilah bint Farafisah was there, but she
was not able to identify anyone! Therefore, when Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
asked her about the killers, she said:

###### “I do not know. However with Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr two persons came, whom I do not know.”[1]

If it is assumed that the killers were alive, and the crime of murder
was also established against them, one has to study the reasons that
motivated them to take that extreme step. It is a fact that the crime
was not committed as an act on the spur of the time. It happened after
long parleys and discussions. Therefore, delegations from different
places kept visiting \`Uthman and complaining about the tyrannies
perpetrated by his functionaries. But all these appeals had no effect on
the caliph. In fact, on several occasions he had asked his men to be
more harsh with the complainants. To send the delegates away, he always
promised redressal, that he never seriously meant. He used to tell them:

###### “Whoever you want to be appointed the functionary, I shall appoint him. Whichever functionary you wish to be deposed, I shall do that. This would mean that I have no authority and your rule prevails!”[2]

It was natural that the delegates were upset at this outburst. They said
that removing the tyrants and delivering justice was not in his power,
he might as well demit his office and sit at home. If he did not act,
they said, they might have to take the ultimate step. \`Uthman asked
them for what crime they intended to kill him. He added that killing is
a punishment for recanting from the Faith, adultery or unnecessary
killing. He said that he had not committed any of those sins. The
delegates said that, according to Allah’s Book, those who obstruct or
deny others’ rights deserve to be killed. On the strength of your
officers got the most respected Companions beaten up, frightened them
and exiled them unnecessarily, on the people untold miseries were heaped
by

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Sawā\`iq al-Muhriqah, Page 118  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 86

your hand picked functionaries. Those who fought for their rights, they
were put to sword. If we accept that those who are your protectors with
swords in their hands are perpetrating cruelties on the people without
your consent, then their swords are also upholding your caliphate. If
you demit office, their swords too will go blunt and they will sit
peacefully at their homes! \`Uthman could not reply and went quietly
inside his home.

This conversation proves that they took the ultimate step when they had
already made the matters clear to \`Uthman and were convinced that
according to the Qur’an and Shari\`ah, they were justified in what they
wanted to do. This has been proved right by the thoughts and actions of
the senior Companions. Therefore, \`A’ishah, Talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah,
al-Zubayr ibn Awwam, \`Amr ibn al-\`As and other eminent Companions were
giving fatwas justifying the killing. If the Battle of the Camel fought
by Talhah, al-Zubayr and \`A’ishah has been termed as *khata’ ijtihadi*
(Error in Interpretation), the ijtihad justifying his killing could also
be condoned as their error of interpretation. Any way, they quoted the
Holy Qur’an to justify the killing, and a killing that takes place
because of an interpretation of the Qur’an, is not subject to *qisas*.
Therefore, Mulla \`Ali Qari writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) did not kill the assassins of \`Uthman for the reason that they were rebels, and those who are rebels have their own power and the justification for their act as well. They had the ta'wil for the killing of \`Uthman and the strength to take on the establishment. They deemed the act justifiable because of the undesirable actions of \`Uthman. For such rebels the Shari\`ah ordains that when they become subservient to the Just Imam, whatever harm they had caused to the people, had shed their blood and had injured their bodies, there is no accountability (Malaise) for the acts. Therefore, it was not required of \`Ali (a.s) to execute them or hand them over to those who claimed for *qisas*.”
