The Battle of the Camel
=======================

The Battle of the Camel (*al-jamal*) is the furious battle that was
fought at the beginning of the reign of \`Ali (a.s) with the excuse of
seeking retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. The responsibility for
heavy loss of Muslim lives and the schisms that came about in the Ummah
thereafter rests on the shoulders of Umm al-Mu’minin \`A’ishah bint
Abū-Bakr, Talhah and al-Zubayr! They stood up to claim retaliation for
the blood of \`Uthman. These three, however, were very much against him
during his lifetime and instigated people against him. Therefore,
\`A’ishah used to keep the Prophet’s footwear and cloak in front of
\`Uthman and say that still those things have not turned into relics
when you have changed his Sunnah and the Commandments. \`A’ishah had a
great capability of reading the minds of the masses. She adopted the
method of inflaming the thinking of the people that was most effective.
She knew that the people had great love for their Prophet (a.s). She
also knew that they would love to set eyes on the things that touched
his body. When these things came in their view, there will be a feeling
of ecstasy in their minds. It happened the way she thought. When they
saw these, their anger rose and they surrounded the caliph’s palace.
When Umm al-Mu’minin saw that the siege was strong, despite the best
efforts of Marwan ibn al-Hakam, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Attab and Zayd ibn
Thabit she left for Makkah. During her journey, as well, wherever she
stopped, she went inciting the people against \`Uthman. Therefore, when
she reached Salsal, seven miles from Makkah, she told Ibn \`Abbas, who
was proceeding as the leader of the group of Hajjis, in a very forceful
manner:

###### “O Ibn \`Abbas! You have the gift of oratory and sleight of tongue. In the name of Allah, stop people from helping this person (\`Uthman).Put the people in doubts about him. As it is, people’s eyes have opened. The path of truth and the tower of light have risen. People from different cities have gathered for a decisive act. You know that Talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah has

###### control of the keys of the *bayt al-mall*. If the Caliphate comes to him, he will follow his cousin, Abū-Bakr, step for step!”[1]

\`A’ishah, during the first six years of the caliphate of \`Uthman
backed him completely. But then they had misunderstandings and she
started antagonizing him. The apparent cause of this hatred and
opposition was that \`Uthman had reduced the pension that she was
getting from the previous regime. Therefore, the historian al-Ya\`qūbi
writes:

###### “There was a gulf of hatred standing between \`A’ishah and \`Uthman. He had reduced the pension that \`Umar had fixed for her. He started giving her an amount equal to that which was fixed for the other consorts of the Prophet (a.s).”[2]

Because of the dictatorial attitude of \`Uthman and his functionaries,
the atmosphere was already bad when the provocative talk of Umm
al-Mu’minin added fuel to the fire.

This antagonism became more furious and people started scheming against
him. Particularly Talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah, and the people of Banū-taym,
were in the forefront of the agitation. Talhah left no stone unturned in
instigating the people against him. Buladhari writes:

###### “Among the Companions of the Prophet (a.s) none was as aggressive against \`Uthman as was Talhah.”[3]

Therefore, it was he who asked people not to supply water to \`Uthman’s
house during the siege. It was he who rained the arrows on the house in
the darkness of the night. He instigated people against him and asked
their chief, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Udays, who was one of the attendants
at the *bay\`at al-ridwan*, not to allow \`Uthman to come out of the
house and prevent others from going in and coming out. When \`Uthman
heard about this, he said:

“O Allah! Save me from the mischief of Talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah. He has
instigated people against me and got me besieged!”[4]

Talhah had this attitude not only during the life of \`Uthman. After his
death, there was no change in the attitude. He got stones hurled at the
bier and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 434  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Ya\`qūbī, Vol 2, Page 132  
 **[3]** Ansāb al-Ashrāf, Vol 1, Page 113  
 **[4]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 411

obstructed his burial in Jannat al-Baqi\`. Similarly al-Zubayr, whose
wife was \`A’ishah’s sister, was heard telling to the besiegers:

###### “Kill \`Uthman. He has changed your very faith.”[1]

Only these people established the cause of \`Uthman’s killing. They
created such an environment that resulted in his assassination. If
killing of \`Uthman was a crime, then these persons cannot be absolved
of their involvement in the act. Because abetting a crime too is a
crime. Although Umm al-Mu’minin was not in al-Madinah at the time of his
killing, she had left the place only 20 days prior to the event. When
she was sure that the sapling she had planted would soon bear fruit.
Going away at that time was perhaps to keep herself away from al-Madinah
when the actual event took place. Then she wanted to install Talhah or
al-Zubayr in his place and through them, she would recover the losses
she had suffered because of reduction in her pension by \`Uthman. But
Umm al-Mu’minin could not succeed in her plan and in her absence, the
people of al-Madinah decided on the caliphate of \`Ali (a.s).

Talhah and al-Zubayr were the members of the Shūra composed by \`Umar.
Because of that membership, they could not keep the thought of caliphate
away from their minds. Their efforts for the elimination of \`Uthman too
were directed towards this end. But when they saw that people were
insisting for \`Ali (a.s) to be the next caliph, and none else was
acceptable to them, they took initiative gauging the sentiment of the
people. They took precedence over others to extend their hands in
allegiance to \`Ali (a.s). If they saw the slightest chance of getting
the position for themselves, they would have tried to achieve it. But
they were forced to adopt a discreet silence. At that critical moment,
it was necessary for them to back one of the two groups. But they did
not have the support of any of the two groups. One group was of people
who were angry at the ineptitude and his style of functioning. The other
group was of his friends and supporters who were drawing benefits
through him. The group that was against \`Uthman, had not any intention
of bringing forward any one of the two persons. The reason was that they
were no different from \`Uthman. Therefore, if \`Uthman was fond of
amassing wealth, these two persons too did not have any liking for piety
and frugality. They were very affluent and their avarice knew no bounds.
Therefore, Talhah bought huge properties in Iraq and Sarat, constructed
palaces in al-Kūfah and al-Basrah and left behind huge amount of wealth.
Ibn \`Abd al-Barr writes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 2, Page 404

###### “When Talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah was killed, in his inheritance there were 300 whole skins of animal carcasses that were filled with gold and silver.”[1]

Al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam too was a very affluent person and a big
capitalist. Therefore, al-Dhahbi writes:

###### “He had one thousand slaves who used to pay him tribute.”[2]

Al-Zubayr had constructed palaces in Egypt, al-Basrah and al-Kūfah. In
addition to the fleet of slaves, slave girls and camels, his wealth
cannot be assessed. After giving a third of his estate to his grandson,
as per his will:

###### “Of his four wives, each got one hundred thousand which was a fourth of the eighth part of his wealth.”[3]

Now about the other group, that was in support of \`Uthman. They knew
that both the persons had played their role in the assassination of
\`Uthman and they would not support them to reach the throne of the
caliphate. Although Talhah had gained control over the keys of the *bayt
al-mall* during the lifetime of \`Uthman, neither he nor al-Zubayr
succeeded in getting the caliphate for themselves.

When after evacuating the caliphate they did not succeed in the race for
the succession, they wanted to be content with minor gains. The very
next day of the *bay\`ah* they demanded from \`Ali (a.s) to appoint them
the governors of al-Kūfah and al-Basrah. Their main purpose in taking
precedence over others in owing their allegiance was that they wanted to
establish their priority in the matter of appointments. But the Imam
(a.s) did not want to assign them to those provinces that yielded the
maximum revenues. He knew their avarice and greed. Therefore, he refused
saying that he would do in their regard what he thought was best for
them. He told them that their remaining close to him at the capital was
very essential. They were under the impression that they had good clout
in al-Kūfah and al-Basrah, and that they were instrumental in mobilizing
men to stage the uprising against \`Uthman, they expected \`Ali (a.s) to
accept their demand. They understood that in the new administration they
would not get any chance to do what they wanted to do. Nor will they get
the special privileges that the previous administrations provided to
them. Now they started to think of other ways to achieve their ends.
They now concentrated their attention towards the movements of
\`A’ishah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 103  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Islām, Vol 2, Page 154  
 **[3]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 104

\`A’ishah wanted that after the assassination of \`Uthman, Talhah should
become the caliph. Thus she was aiming at settling it permanently in her
tribe of Banū-taym. After her stay in Makkah she was eager to know the
result of the uprising in al-Madinah. She was asking every fresh arrival
from al-Madinah about the conditions there. In that time one person, by
name of Akhdar, came to Makkah from al-Madinah. \`A’ishah called and
asked him what was the result of the siege of the caliph’s palace? He
informed that \`Uthman had executed the mischief mongers from Egypt and
has established control over the situation. Umm al-Mu’minin’s
expectation was contrary to this and she was very disappointed with the
news. She said in a very disappointed manner:

###### “We are Allah’s and to Him do we return. Has he killed those who were demanding their rights and were raising their voices against the tyrants? By Allah we are not happy with this.”[1]

She was still in a very depressed mood when another person came and said
that Akhdar’s information was wrong and that none of the Egyptians was
killed and they are moving about freely in al-Madinah. To the contrary,
he said, \`Uthman was killed by them. Hearing this she was satisfied and
said:

###### “May Allah keep him away from His Blessing! This is the result of his deeds. Allah is not cruel to His creatures!”[2]

Now, instead of staying in Makkah it was necessary for her to move to
al-Madinah. She now thought of building up opinion in favor of the
person she wanted to promote, the person of her choice as the next
caliph. Therefore, she made immediate arrangements for her journey and
started for al-Madinah. She had hardly traveled six miles when, at
Saraf, she was met by \`Ubaydullah ibn Salamah. She asked him about the
situation in al-Madinah. He said that \`Uthman had been killed and the
people of al-Madinah have sworn their allegiance to \`Ali (a.s). When
she heard this, it seemed that the ground from under her feet was
slipping away. And the sky turned into a cloud of smoke. Not trusting
her hearing she again asked whether \`Ali (a.s) was the caliph? \`Ubayd
replied in the affirmative and said that there was none more deserving
of the position than him. Now it was difficult for Umm al-Mu’minin to
control her emotions. The following words came from her mouth:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 468  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 2, Page 77

###### “If \`Ali’s *bay\`ah* has taken place, how much I wish the sky burst on the ground! I must get back to Makkah!”[1]

Therefore, she ordered her retinue to return to Makkah, and expressing
her sorrow over the assassination of \`Uthman she said:

###### “By Allah! \`Uthman has been killed. I shall avenge his blood!”[2]

\`Ubayd ibn Abi-Salamah was surprised in the sudden face of Umm
al-Mu’minin and said that she used to say, again and again about
\`Uthman:

###### “Kill that Na\`thal. He is an infidel!”[3]

He asked why there was the sudden change in her attitude. She replied
that earlier she held that opinion. But \`Uthman was repentant in his
last days and her present opinion about him was correct.

The excuse of \`A’ishah that \`Uthman had repented was very surprising.
As long as she was in al-Madinah, he had not shown any signs of
repentance. Otherwise, she would not have left him at the mercy of the
rebels and come away to Makkah. When she got the news of the killing of
\`Uthman in Makkah she had no inkling of his repentance and had even
expressed her satisfaction over his killing. During the very short
journey of six miles, there was no source of information which could
have reported about the repentance of \`Uthman. As soon as she heard of
the *bay\`ah* of \`Ali (a.s) she remembered the predicament of \`Uthman
and knew that he was repentant of his past deeds. Even the demand of the
persons besieging his palace was for him to express repentance for his
past deeds and cruelties inflicted by his functionaries on the people of
the realm. He was stubbornly refusing to express his repentance all the
while. If he had agreed to stop the tyrannies and cruelties, there was
no question of his getting killed. The truth is that when Umm
al-Mu’minin was not able to give a plausible excuse for her sudden
change of attitude, she made the false excuse of his repentance. But she
was not able to convince \`Ubayd ibn Abi-Salamah. Therefore, he said:

###### “O Umm al-Mu’minin! By Allah! Your excuse is very weak!”[4]

Umm al-Mu’minin wanted to reach Makkah immediately. She did not pay any
heed to what \`Ubayd said. When she reached Makkah people asked her the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 105  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 105  
 **[3]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 105  
 **[4]** Al-Imāmah was-Siyāsah, Vol 1, Page 52

reason for returning so suddenly. She said, “\`Uthman was killed for no
fault of his! I shall not let his blood go in waste! I shall not go back
until his blood is avenged!” People were certainly surprised at the
change in her attitude, but kept quiet.

Umm al-Mu’minin started beating the drums about the innocence of
\`Uthman and tried to create a strong front against \`Ali (a.s). When
Talhah and al-Zubayr learned that \`A’ishah was doing propaganda that
\`Uthman was innocent and was putting the responsibility on \`Ali (a.s)
for his killing, they sent letters through \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr to
her to run a movement and stop people from owing allegiance to \`Ali
(a.s). These messages further strengthened her determination and with
full force, she started the campaign to demand retaliation for the blood
of \`Uthman. The first person to respond was \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir
al-Hadrami who was the governor of Makkah during the reign of \`Uthman.
Sa\`id ibn al-\`As, al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah and other Umayyad’s followed.

Talhah and al-Zubayr wanted to take shelter behind the claim for *qisas*
to take revenge for their failure to get important positions in the new
regime. But the environment in al-Madinah was not conducive for them.
However, the movement could be successfully launched from Makkah because
Umm al-Mu’minin, \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir, Marwan ibn al-Hakam and the
Umayyads who flew from al-Madinah were there actively promoting the
movement. Therefore, the two somehow spent a period of four months in
al-Madinah and then decided to go over to Makkah to pursue the campaign.
They told the Imam (a.s) that they wanted to go to Makkah for performing
the \`Umrah. He had gauged their intentions from their faces that they
had an ulterior motive in going to Makkah. Therefore, he said:

###### “By Allah! Their intention is not to perform the \`Umrah! They are bent on stealth and rebellion!”[1]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) did not want them to go to Makkah, but they
persisted. In the end the Imam (a.s) took the *bay\`ah* from them a
second time and permitted them to go. In Makkah they started putting the
blame of the killing of \`Uthman on the Imam (a.s) and became active
members of \`A’ishah’s movement.

Some persons might think that when the Imam (a.s) knew that Talhah and
al-Zubayr might break the *bay\`ah* and attempt mischief, then why did
he permit

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Ya\`qūbī, Vol 2, Page 156

them to go to Makkah. If they were not permitted to leave al-Madinah,
they would not have been able to raise an army nor the battle would not
have taken place in al-Basrah. But when the other aspects of the
situation are considered, then this sounds the most plausible
alternative that they were allowed to go to Makkah. One alternative was
to restrict them to their homes in al-Madinah. The other was to concede
their original demand for the emirate of al-Kūfah and al-Basrah. But
both these alternatives were impracticable. In the first case, if they
were confined to their homes, it would be like punishment before
committing the offence. It would then be termed as curbing the freedom
of movement and speech. This would be against the norms of Islam and the
Imam’s own character. During those days only the Imam (a.s) had allowed
persons from Banū-Umayyah to move to Makkah without any objection. If
these two were forcibly stopped from going, there would be a hue and cry
from their supporters. They would say that he had allowed the others to
go where they liked and was refusing permission to the two senior
Companions and important members of the Shūra. Discretion required that
they should not be stopped from going. As far as the other alternative
of assigning to them the governorate of al-Kūfah and al-Basrah was
concerned, it was very clear to the Imam (a.s) that the two neither
wanted to remain under the Imam (a.s) nor they wanted to be obedient to
him. If they were given the governorate, they would certainly try to
declare themselves independent of the center, specially when al-Zubayr
had lot of support in al-Kūfah and al-Zubayr had the backing of the
people of al-Basrah. Those people wanted them to control the entire
realm as the caliph. They had even expressed this desire. If they were
assigned as governors, they would first find their moorings and then
attempt to move ahead. With al-Zubayr in al-Kūfah, Talhah in al-Basrah
and Mu\`awiyah already rebellious in Syria, it would be difficult to
keep the realm together.

Thus they reached Makkah with a predetermined agenda and started putting
blame on Banū-Hashim in general, and \`Ali (a.s) in particular, for the
killing of \`Uthman. A campaign for claiming the retaliation for the
blood of \`Uthman started gaining force. For this campaign, they needed
funds. The solution came about in a manner that the deposed governor of
al-Basrah arrived at Makkah with the entire wealth from the *bayt
al-mall*. Ya\`li ibn Umayyah came from Yemen with 600,000 dirhams and
600 camels. All these funds were earmarked towards the expenses for the
war. Abū-Fida has written:

###### “Ya\`li gathered all the assets and started for Makkah. He joined \`A’ishah, Talhah and al-Zubayr and gave all the wealth in their keeping.”[1]

The people of Makkah too raised funds and they had sufficient finance.
After the preliminary arrangements were over, there was a meeting at the
place of \`A’ishah. In principle, they were agreed on the battle but had
to decide which place to be selected as the theatre of war. \`A’ishah
thought of besieging al-Madinah. But this suggestion was rejected
because with the rebels there, it would not be possible to handle the
campaign there. Some people suggested going to Syria. On this Ibn \`Amir
said:

###### “With Mu\`awiyah in Syria, you are not needed there!”[2]

One more reason was in the way of making Syria the theater of war that
being under \`Uthman, Mu\`awiyah did not help him. How could they, then,
expect any help forthcoming from him? When he had refused to bear
allegiance to \`Ali (a.s), how could he accept Talhah or al-Zubayr as
the caliph without any objection. Of cource, Mu\`awiyah was one with
them to the extent of opposing \`Ali’s caliphate. But after achieving
that end, he would not agree to the accession of Talhah or al-Zubayr to
the caliphate. Ultimately, at the instance of \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir they
decided on al-Basrah as the venue for the battle. One reason was that
they had the support of the local population there. The other advantage
was that Syria is on one side of Hijaz and Iraq on the other. If
al-Basrah was made the theatre of war and Iraq was occupied, then Hijaz
would be sandwiched between the two power centers. In this event it
would be easy to defeat the army of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)

It is evident from the plan that the aim was not to claim the *qisas*
for \`Uthman’s blood. If that was the intention, they should have
attacked Medina and held the persons who had carried out the
assassination. In al-Basrah there was no possibility of the conspirators
of the killing of \`Uthman being there. Any way, after deciding on the
theatre of war, they started to prepare to go for the campaign. Ya\`li
bought a camel of 600 dirhams from a person from the tribe of \`Uraynah
and presented to Umm al-Mu’minin. He made a general announcement that
those who did not have the arms and other materials, they will be
provided wit everything. Therefore, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) has said
about Ya\`li:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh Abul-Fidā’, Vol 1, Page 172  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 106

###### “He was giving to every person a horse, arms and 30 Dinars to fight against me.”[1]

Talhah and al-Zubayr pressurized \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar to support them.
But he refused saying:

###### “It is better for \`A’ishah to sit at home and not in the canopy on the camel’s back, and for you remaining in al-Madinah would be better than going to al-Basrah.”[2]

\`A’ishah asked the other consorts of the Prophet (a.s), who was staying
at Makkah. after the Hajj, to endorse her stand and to accompany her to
the battlefront. Hafsah agreed without any objection. Other wives of the
Prophet (a.s) rejected the proposal. In the end, at the intervention of
\`Abdullah Ibn \`Umar, Hafsah too stayed back. Ibn al-Athir writes:

###### “The consorts of the Prophet (a.s) planned to go to al-Madinah with \`A’ishah. But when she changed her plans and was going to al-Basrah, they cut away from her. Hafsah agreed to go with \`A’ishah but her brother \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar stopped her.”[3]

Hafsah’s agreement was not unexpected. The reason was that there were a
lot of similarities in the thinking of both. Because of this, they were
thought to be associated with a particular group. Therefore, Muhammad
ibn Isma\`il al-Bukhari writes:

###### “The wives of the Prophet (a.s) were in two groups. One group was composed of \`A’ishah, Hafsah and Sawdah. In the other group was Ummu-Salamah and others.”[4]

All the sympathies of Ummu-Salamah were with \`Ali (a.s). When \`A’ishah
tried to win her over to her own side, she refused to listen to anything
against \`Ali (a.s). She opposed the plans of \`A’ishah very much and
wrote to her to desist from her scheme:

###### “If the Prophet (a.s) had known that women can bear the hardships of jihad, he would have ordered you. Do not you remember that the Prophet (a.s) had warned you against excesses in the matter of Faith? He knew that if the pillar of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Islām by al-Dhahbī, Vol 2, Page 14  
 **[2]** Al-Imāmah was-Siyāsah, Vol 1, Page 61  
 **[3]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 106  
 **[4]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 2, Page 59

###### Faith bends, it could not be stopped through women. If it gets breached, the women cannot mend it. The jihad for women is that they keep their eyes down, gather their lapels and keep limited relationships. If the Prophet (a.s) had seen you on the camel back, going from one well to the other in the wilderness, what reply would you give him. Tomorrow you will have to go to the presence of the Prophet (a.s). By Allah, if I am told, ‘O Ummu-Salamah! Enter the Heaven! Then if I had broken the Hijab that he has made binding on me, I shall be ashamed to face the Prophet (a.s). Therefore, you must remain in the veil and stay at home!”[1]

Instead of taking a lesson from the writing of Ummu-Salamah, \`A’ishah
replied that she was going to arrange peace between the two warring
groups and it is necessary for keeping the atmosphere peaceful. This
reply was just an excuse, but the fact is well-known that she was
herself an active participant in the dispute. If she had remained back
at home, the dispute would not have arisen at all. If one agrees that
she was going to arrange truce between two warring groups, then what was
the need for the paraphernalia of war to be accumulated and carried
along?

Umm al-Mu’minin (a.s), with a contingent of 700 men, marched towards
al-Basrah. Enroute several persons joined the group. The numbers rose to
3,000. When the contingent reached Dhat al-\`Irq, from where there is a
diversion to al-Basrah, Sa\`id ibn al-\`As asked Marwan and some others
of the same mind as to where they were heading for through the
wilderness? Marwan said he knew they were going to al-Basrah and the
purpose was to take revenge against the killers of \`Uthman. He said:

###### “The killers of \`Uthman, Talhah and al-Zubayr, are riding with you on camels. Kill them and return home. Why unnecessarily kill each other.”[2]

Marwan said with what face they would go home He said that they must go
to al-Basrah that they were able to take revenge against all the killers
of \`Uthman. Sa\`id, after talking with them, went to Talhah and
al-Zubayr and asked if they won the battle and succeeded with their aim,
who will be their choice to be the caliph? They said, “Without doubt,
one of them would be chosen as the caliph.” Sa\`id said that when you
came out seeking retaliation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 99  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 472

for the blood of \`Uthman, then you must make one of his sons the caliph
and both his sons, Aban and al-Walid, were in the contingent as well. He
warned them that if they did not do this, the people would think that
you have come out in search of power and position. Talhah and al-Zubayr
said in one voice:

###### “Can we keep aside the senior, aged, Muhajirūn, and make his you sons the caliph?”[1]

Sa\`id understood that these persons had not come for the *qisas* and
the entire drama was for personal gains. Therefore, he went away from
them. Along with him went \`Abdullah ibn Khalid, Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah
and the people of Banū-Thaqif. They all headed towards Ta’if. The
remaining troops headed towards their destination. On the way something
happened that shook the courage and determination of Umm al-Mu’minin
momentarily. When the contingent reached a cistern of water that was
named after a woman, Haw’ab bint Kalb ibn Wabrah, as the Cistern of
Haw’ab, it halted there for the night. \`A’ishah heard the sound of dogs
barking from one direction. This was nothing unusual. But Umm
al-Mu’minin had some disturbance in her mind. Nearby was the camel
driver. She asked him what the name of the place was. He replied, “It is
Haw’ab!” Hearing the name of Haw’ab, Umm al-Mu’minin’s limbs started
shivering and shouted:

###### “Let me go back! Let me go back! By Allah! I am the one of the Cistern of Haw’ab!”[2]

Talhah, al-Zubayr and others were surprised in the sudden change in the
attitude of Umm al-Mu’minin. They said what if the place is Haw’ab. Why
are you frightened of the name? She said:

###### “Once the Prophet (a.s) had his wives sitting around him. I heard him say at that time, ‘Who is the one amongst you on whom the dogs of Haw’ab would bark?’”[3]

She said that she did not have any more doubt that the Prophet (a.s) was
mentioning about her on that day. She insisted that she must return back
from there only. When her cohorts felt that the entire campaign would
collapse with her departure, they said that the camel driver was wrong
in saying that the place was Haw’ab. \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr gathered
some fifty persons from the neighborhood, gave them some bribes, and
asked them to tell her that the place was not Haw’ab. Al-Shi\`bi says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 472  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 107  
 **[3]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 107

###### “This was the first false witness that was given in the annals of Islam.”[1]

Umm al-Mu’minin was still in a confused state of mind when a sound was
heard from one direction:

###### “Hurry! Hurry! \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib is arriving!”[2]

Hearing this, there was utter confusion in the rank and file of the
contingent. Umm al-Mu’minin’s thoughts turned in such a way that she
neither remembered Haw’ab nor the Prophet’s words about it. Once again
her spirit revived and she headed towards al-Basrah.

On the other hand Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was thinking of organizing
troops to move towards Syria when Talhah and al-Zubayr recanted from the
*bay\`ah* and the news of the impending attack by \`A’ishah reached
al-Madinah. The Imam (a.s) had a doubt that Talhah and al-Zubayr might
hatch a conspiracy along with Mu\`awiyah. But he never expected that Umm
al-Mu’minin would rise against him and come out of her home against the
commands of Allah and the Prophet (a.s). He was thus forced to alter his
program of going to Syria to attend on this problem. The Imam (a.s)
gathered the important persons of al-Madinah in the al-Masjid al-Nabawi
(the Holy Prophet’s Mosque) and said that they were aware of the
rebellious moves of Talhah and al-Zubayr. He wanted them to be with him
that they were intercepted before they reached al-Basrah. Some persons
were hesitant to confront such eminent names like Talhah, al-Zubayr and
\`A’ishah. And some others like Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, Usamah ibn Zayd,
Muhammad ibn Maslamah and \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar flatly refused to go.
But there were persons like Haitham ibn al-Tayhan, Ziyad ibn Hanzalah,
Abū-Qutadah al-Ansari etc who were guided by the spirit of siding with
the truth and assured of all cooperation. Abū-Qutadah told in an
emotional tone:

###### “O Amir al-Mu’minin! This sword was tied around my girdle by the Prophet (a.s)! For a long time it has stayed in the sheath! Now is the time to take it out against the tyrants, those who do not desist from cheating the Ummah!”[3]

Ummu-Salamah presented her son \`Umar ibn Abi-Salamah to Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) and said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tadhkirat Khawāss al-Ummah, Page 39  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 39  
 **[3]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 113

###### “I am leaving him in your care. He is dearer to me than my own life! He will be on your side in all the campaigns, until Allah makes His final Command that He will! If it were not against the command of the Prophet (a.s), I would have come with you, the way \`A’ishah has gone with Talhah and al-Zubayr!”[1]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed Sahl ibn Hunayf al-Ansari in al-Madinah
and Qathm ibn \`Abbas as his deputies. He started with a contingent of
between 600 and 1,000 strong. In this, there were 400 persons who were
present at the *bay\`at al-ridwan*. When they reached al-Rabadhah, three
miles from al-Madinah, he got the news that the opponents had already
started for al-Basrah and that they were going post haste. Now there was
no likelihood of stopping them on the way and there was no other
alternative that subduing them through battle. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
camped there and sent out some men to al-Madinah to fetch supplies of
the arms and transport animals. To recruit more men, he deputed Muhammad
ibn Ja\`far and Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr to al-Kūfah. When they reached
al-Kūfah, the emir there, Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari, stood like a wall
between them and the people and stopped them from joining saying that
this is the battle for worldly power, whoever wants to go, might go!
Those who want a better Hereafter must stay home. Instead of being a
help to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), he proved an impediment. Muhammad Ibn
Ja\`far and Muhammad Ibn Abi-Bakr tried their best to convince him, but
he was adamant. Therefore, they returned disappointed. \`Ali (a.s)
started from al-Rabadhah and passed through feed, al-Tha\`labiyyah and
Asad to reach Dhi-Qar that is equidistant between al-Kūfah and Wasit. At
this place Muhammad ibn Ja\`far and Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr arrived and
told the Imam (a.s) about the attitude of Abū-Mūsa. Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) sent Ibn \`Abbas and Malik al-Ashtar to al-Kūfah to convince
Abū-Mūsa that he should desist from misguiding those who wish to join
the contingent. The two were still in al-Kūfah when the Imam (a.s) sent
his son, Hasan (a.s) and \`Ammar ibn Yasir. On reaching al-Kūfah they
sat in the Masjid there and invited people to come to the assistance of
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Abū-Mūsa was informed of the arrival of Imam
al-Hasan (a.s). When he came, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) told him that
information has been received concerning him that he was preventing
people from coming to the assistance of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) although
the purpose is to fight against and remove mischief from the Realm. He
said that he had heard the Prophet (a.s) say:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ansāb al-Ashrāf, Vol 1, Page 436

###### “Soon a mischief will break out. Those who sit will be better than those who stand those who stand will be better than those who walk and those who walk will be better than men on horse backs!”[1]

Those persons, the opponents, are our brothers in Islam, and shedding
their blood is taboo for us nor it is permissible to confiscate their
assets. At this \`Ammar ibn Yasir became angry and said:

###### “No doubt, your sitting in a room is better than your coming out!”[2]

They both started arguing with one another. Abū-Mūsa insisted that what
those people were doing was a mischief and it is better to keep away
from it. An argument was going out there, when Zayd ibn Sawhan read out
two epistles from \`A’ishah from near the entrance to the mosque. One
was addressed to him and the other to the people of al-Kūfah. In the
epistles, she urged them to come to her help. She also pleaded that if
they could not come to her rescue, they should not also respond to the
call from \`Ali (a.s). After reading the epistles, he addressed the
gathering:

###### “She was ordered to sit at home. We were ordered that we battle and fight that mischief did not raise its head! But what she had been ordered to do, she is asking us (men) to sit back at home and what we have been ordered to do (to battle) she is doing!”[3]

Then addressing Abū-Mūsa he said, “O Abū-Mūsa! If you can stop the river
flowing, then ask the people not to go! It is better refrain from a
thing that is beyond your control. Instead of stopping the people from
going, go home and sit quietly.” But all the talk did not have any
effect on Abū-Mūsa. He continued insisting that what the opponents were
doing was a mischief and people should keep away from it. When Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) felt that he was becoming too stubborn, he became angry
and said, “Leave our mosque and go wherever you like to go!”[4]

Then he went to the pulpit and gave a sermon. He convinced people to
come to the help of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). \`Ammar ibn Yasir and Hijr
ibn \`Adi al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 117  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 117  
 **[3]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 117  
 **[4]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 145

Kindi too appealed to the people to join. This had an effect on the
people and they started in numbers to join up.

When the environment of al-Kūfah was congenial, Malik al-Ashtar headed
towards Dar al-Imarah, beat up Abū-Mūsa’s slaves and evicted them. He
occupied the palace. Abū-Mūsa came running to the palace and wanted to
enter. But Malik stopped him from entering and said in a loud tone:

###### “O Abū-Mūsa! May your mother die! Get away from our palace! May Allah evict you! By Allah! You have always been a hypocrite!”[1]

Abū-Mūsa pleaded to be given a night’s respite. He was told that he had
time until the Evening Prayer and that he who not be allowed to stay
there in the night. Some people wanted to get into the palace and loot
his belongings. But Malik stopped them and told them that they should
not trouble him because he was ordered to evacuate. People did not
trouble him any more. Abū-Mūsa went in the darkness of night and spent
the night somewhere in al-Kūfah. In the morning, he trudged towards
Syria! Now the people of al-Kūfah got ready to join the ranks in large
number despite the efforts of Abū-Mūsa and the epistles of Umm
al-Mu’minin. 12,000 armed men from al-Kūfah joined Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) at Dhi-Qar!

One is surprised at the mental make-up and actions of Abū-Mūsa. On the
one hand, he was holding a key position in the establishment and on the
other; he was promoting the interests of the opponents of the head of
the state. If he considered the battle with the owners of the Camel
illegitimate, he should have demitted his office at the first instance
and then he could have expressed his views. When he was the functionary
of the state and expressing his opinion against the instructions of the
Head of the State was tantamount to disobedience His attitude indicated
that he was hand in glove with the opponents of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).
Otherwise, there was no reason that he wanted to remain in office and
tried to come in the way of mobilizing the men to fight with the rebels.
He tried to describe the defensive arrangements as mischief and tried to
misinterpret the Prophet’s tradition to make people sit at home and give
a free hand to the rebels. Did he want Talhah, al-Zubayr and their
cohorts to do what they wanted without any resistance? If defensive
measures against the rebels is a *fitnah*, then every defensive war
could be termed as *fitnah*! Amir al-Mu’minin’s battle with the owners
of the camel is one of the battles that had the express approval of the
Prophet (a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 501

Therefore, Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari says:

###### “The Prophet (a.s) had instructed \`Ali (a.s) that he should battle with the recanters of the *bay\`ah* (at the Battle of the Camel), the wayward (at the Battle of Siffin) and the apostates (the Khawarij).”[1]

Then the Prophet (a.s) had forecast the battle between \`Ali (a.s), the
righteous and oppressed, with al-Zubayr, the oppressor and aggressor:

###### “O al-Zubayr! You will battle with \`Ali (a.s) and you will be the oppressor over his right!”[2]

About the Cistern of Haw’ab, the Prophet (a.s) warned \`A’ishah:

###### “Beware! O \`A’ishah! Lest you are the one!”[3]

In addition to these statements of the Prophet (a.s), the Holy Qur’an
too clearly exhorts fighting against the rebellious:

### وَإِنْ طَائِفَتَانِ مِنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا فَإِنْ بَغَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى الْأُخْرَى فَقَاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّى تَفِيءَ إِلَى أَمْرِ اللَّهِ فَإِنْ فَاءَتْ فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا بِالْعَدْلِ وَأَقْسِطُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ.

#### “And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them; but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that which acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command; then if it returns, make peace between them with justice and act equitably; surely Allah loves those who act equitably. (49/9)”

When the troops of Umm al-Mu’minin reached Abū-Mūsa Spring beyond the
Cistern of Haw’ab, and the governor of al-Basrah, \`Uthman ibn Hunayf
got the news of the arrival of the heavy troops, he sent Abul-Aswad
al-Du’ali and \`Umar ibn Husayn to \`A’ishah to inquire about the
purpose of her arrival at al-Basrah. Therefore, reaching there,
Abul-Aswad asked \`A’ishah, “O Mother! On what purpose you have come
here. For what reason you have mobilized such a huge army?” She said, “I
have come to avenge the blood of \`Uthman who was killed mercilessly in
his own house.” Abul-Aswad said, “In al-Basrah there is none of his
killers” She replied, “It is true. But I want the cooperation of the
people of al-Basrah I wish to take revenge on those who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol 3, Page 139  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3. Page 122  
 **[3]** Tārīkh al-Ya\`qūbī, Vol 3, Page 157

have killed him and are in the group of \`Ali (a.s).” Abul-Aswad said,
“You are the consort of the Prophet (a.s) and he has ordered you to
remain within the four walls of your home. What have you to do with
these battles? This activity does not suit your dignity and status that
you have left behind your home and come out for battling.” She said,
“Who will have the courage to come face to face with us and fight!”
Abul-Aswad said, “We shall fight and the world shall see that battles
are fought in this manner!”

Umm al-Mu’minin’s conviction that none will dare to fight against her
was perhaps on the basis that with \`Ali (a.s) only a small contingent
will be there who must have accompanied him from al-Madinah and the
braves of al-Kūfah, who she thought were under the influence of
Abū-Mūsa, would not join him. In this event, the small contingent of the
Imam (a.s) may not be able to contend with her huge army and will be
forced to surrender arms. Either it will be on the basis that out of
respect for the spouse of the Prophet (a.s) they would abstain from
fighting with her or they will get awed with the huge numbers against
them. But the events turned out contrary to her expectation. Huge
numbers of fighters joined the army of the Imam (a.s) from al-Kūfah. The
other thought that the men would abstain from fighting seeing the
consort of the Prophet (a.s) could possibly have had effect on their
thinking only if she had maintained that decorum by remaining at home
and not coming out in full battle cry. When she had not herself
maintained the dignity and respect of her status, how could the fighting
men be expected to respect her?

After talking with \`A’ishah, Abul-Aswad went to Talhah and al-Zubayr
and asked them the same questions as he had put to \`A’ishah. They too
repeated what Umm al-Mu’minin had said that their purpose of coming
there was to avenge the blood of \`Uthman. Abul-Aswad asked, “Have not
two of you on oath owed your allegiance to \`Ali (a.s)? They said, “Yes!
In conditions that a sword was hanging over our heads! There was no
other alternative for us than doing the *bay\`ah*!” Abul-Aswad
understood from their attitude that they were bent on mischief and
rebellion and there was no use for further discussion. He went back to
\`Uthman ibn Hunayf and reported about the parleys to him. He advised
strengthening the fortification of the town. \`Uthman ibn Hunayf
assembled the people in the mosque and ordered them to keep their arms
ready and remain on alert.

Umm al-Mu’minin’s army, after remaining at Abū-Mūsa Spring for sometime
entered into the boundary of the al-Basrah city. It camped at al-Mirbad,
the market yard for sale of camels. When the people of the city heard of
the arrival of \`A’ishah, Talhah and al-Zubayr, they started assembling
in the al-

Mirbad. They started commenting according to each person’s point of
view. One person stood up and said, “These people have come out with
fear and terror from a city where even the birds are in safety. If they
have come to avenge \`Uthman’s blood, we are not his killers! O People
of al-Basrah! Listen to me! Force them to return back from here! “At
this point the supporters of Talhah and al-Zubayr hurled stones and
quietened him. Jariyah ibn Qudamah took courage in his hands, moved
forward, and asked \`A’ishah:

###### “O Umm al-Mu’minin! Your sitting on that accursed camel and coming out is worse calamity than the assassination of \`Uthman. For you there is a Command from Allah you must maintain respect for the Hijab, but you have come out of the curtain and have lost your respect. One, who thinks fighting with you is legitimate, may not refrain from killing you. If you have come of your own will, return home! If you have been forced to come, please seek the people’s help against those who have forcibly brought you”[1]

Umm al-Mu’minin did not take any cognizance of these words. Her
attention was only on increasing her strength and taking more and more
persons under her banner. It was necessary to get the people of
al-Basrah under her sway. She wanted to convince them that \`Uthman was
killed at the instance of \`Ali (a.s) and thus he had personally
occupied the position of the caliph. She said that neither he had the
support of the members of the Shūra nor the people’s support. With this
purpose, she wanted to address the crowd. There was pandemonium all
around and none was able to hear what she wanted to communicate. Effort
was made to quieten the crowd and Talhah made a speech, “O People! We
were the well-wishers of \`Uthman from the depths of our hearts! But
some foolish persons overwhelmed the wiser and assassinated him! Now we
want to avenge his killing!” he was able to speak this far, when the
people said, “O Abū-Muhammad (Talhah)! Your letters contrary to this
kept coming to us! “Talhah could not give any reply and kept quiet. Now
it was the turn of al-Zubayr. He stood up and said, “From my side no
letters came to you about \`Uthman.” He then talked about the
circumstances under which \`Uthman was killed. He blamed \`Ali (a.s) for
everything and used harsh words. At this point a person from the tribe
of \`Abd al-Qays stood up. At his standing, there was some commotion in
the crowd. Some people tried to quieten him. But he did not care for the
shouting and started speaking. At

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 482

the outset he talked about all the three earlier caliphates and then
started talking about the caliphate of \`Ali (a.s), “You people had
pledged your allegiance to \`Ali (a.s) without consulting us and
accepted him as the caliph. What has happened now that you have turned
against him? Do tell us, that we stand with you and fight! Has he
usurped the booty of War? Has he taken any step against the Shari\`ah?
Or has he done anything that you do not like? Tell us, what wrong has he
done, that we side with you? If all this is not there, then there is no
sense in all the noises that you are making!” At this point, the men of
Talhah and al-Zubayr jumped towards him. With the intention of lynching
him. But the men from his tribe saved him. But the next day Umm
al-Mu’minin’s men attacked and killed him and seventy men of his tribe.
The historian al-Tabari writes:

###### “The next day an attack was made on him and his companions and seventy persons were killed.”[1]

After these speeches \`A’ishah’s turn came. In a very pathetic manner,
she described the innocence of \`Uthman and the cruel manner that he was
killed. And that people were very disturbed at his dastardly killing and
were rising to avenge his assassination. She said, “Kill his murderers
one after another and leave the matter of the caliphate to the Shūra
constituted by \`Umar! One who is involved in the assassination should
be excluded from the Shūra” This suggestion of Umm al-Mu’minin was very
meaningful. She suggests following the Shūra and very intelligently
tried to turn the caliphate in the direction she wanted it to go. Only
four members of the Shūra were alive at that time. They were \`Ali ibn
Abi- Talib (a.s), Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, Talhah and al-Zubayr. \`Ali
(a.s), in her view, was involved in the murder of \`Uthman and therefore
had no right to be a part of the Shūra any more. Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas
was not likely to come in the way of what she would have liked to
happen. Since \`Umar had suggested that the candidate who had the
majority with him should be selected as the next caliph, automatically
the candidate of her choice would win hands down! Talhah and al-Zubayr
would certainly not vote for Sa\`d. In that event, one of the two
buddies would vote for the other and get through to the throne! The
situation was such that Sa\`d would be in an unenviable position of
supporting one of the two! If he sided with Talhah, he would be the
caliph and the same was true for al-Zubayr. Either way, that was what
Umm al-Mu’minin wanted! Her wish was to remove \`Ali (a.s) and install
one of the two of her cohorts in the caliphate!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 486

The crowds listened to the speech of Umm al-Mu’minin with quiet
interest. But after the speech was over, they started shouting and
protesting and it was a cacophony of noises. Some people said that Umm
al-Mu’minin was right, and others were against her. The people of
al-Basrah were divided in two groups. One group sided with Talhah and
al-Zubayr and the other group was for \`Uthman ibn Hunayf. They started
pelting stones at each other. However, there was one group that remained
quiet and was not able to decide which side to take. Thus, with the
arrival of Umm al-Mu’minin, divisive tendencies arose in the families
and households! Brother turned against his own brother!

Now, with the strategy of widening their sphere of influence they sent
out messengers in all directions to register support. Therefore, Umm
al-Mu’minin called al-Ahnaf ibn Qays, who was the chief of the tribe of
Banū-Tamim, and other important persons in the neighborhood and told
them that they were refraining from doing the jihad to avenge the
killing of \`Uthman. She asked them what reply would they give to Allah
for this dereliction of their duty. She said that in their tribes, there
was no shortage of men and materials to fight nor will your men turn
down your call. Al-Ahnaf said, “O Umm al-Mu’minin! It was only yesterday
that you were critical of \`Uthman! You left nothing in cursing him!
Today you are seeking *qisas* for his murder!” She said that he was
washed away as if they do the dirt from the utensils. When he was free
of all his ills, he has been killed. Al-Ahnaf said

###### “O Umm al-Mu’minin! I am ready to abide by the instruction that you give in a state of equanimity. But I cannot abide by the order that you give in a fury of rage!”[1]

Al-Ahnaf saved himself from siding her, but the majority of the people
of al-Basrah joined ranks with Umm al-Mu’minin. Now she wanted to
capture the *bayt al-mall* and other important places in al-Basrah
before the arrival of \`Ali (a.s). There she moved towards the city.
\`Uthman ibn al-Ahnaf was not willing to hand over the city to her
without any resistance. He created barricades on the way and, as far as
possible, tried to defend the city. From whichever direction the
attackers tried to advance, \`Uthman’s men resisted them. Some people
hurled stones from the rooftops on the advancing army. But how long
could they stop the onslaught of the advancing army. When \`Uthman felt
that he could not prevent the city any more from their depredation, he
took one small unit of men and went to Talhah and al-Zubayr. He asked
them what their demand was and why they were raising trouble in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 1, Page 320

the peaceful city. They said that their intention was to seek
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. He asked, was it the way of
seeking the *qisas*? He added that they were just interested in somehow
acquiring the caliphate for themselves. They replied that even if that
was true, \`Ali (a.s) was not more deserving of the caliphate than they
were. The discussion became more heated from either side and it almost
went to the extent of drawing the swords. When matters were going out of
control, \`A’ishah demonstrated her liking for peace and intervened
between the two groups. They agreed that until Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
arrived there, no hostilities would be started and that \`Uthman will
continue to be in the Dar al-Imarah and there would not be any change in
the administration. Only two days had gone by since the agreement, when
in the darkness of night \`Uthman was attacked stealthily in the Dar
al-Imarah. He was taken captive, was given forty lashes and the hairs of
his beard, brows and eye lashes were pulled out cruelly. Ibn al-Athir
writes:

###### “Only two or three days had passed when they attacked \`Uthman near the *bayt al-rizq*, took him captive, and tried to kill him. But out of fear that the Ansar might become furious, they were afraid of killing him. But they pulled out the hairs of his head, beard and eyebrows. Then they incarcerated him.”[1]

When \`Uthman ibn Hunayf was kept in captivity, taking \`A’ishah’s
opinion about the treatment to him was felt important. Therefore,
\`Uthman’s son Aban was sent to her to ask whether to keep \`Uthman
captive or he should be killed. \`A’ishah asked them to kill him. One
woman who heard her say this shouted, “O Umm al-Mu’minin! In the name of
Allah! Be kind on him and save his life! After all he is a Companion of
the Prophet (a.s)!” \`A’ishah said, “All right! Call Aban.” When Aban
came back, she asked him not to kill \`Uthman. When Aban heard the
revised order, he said:

###### “If I had known that you are calling me back for this purpose I would not have come.”[2]

With the orders of Umm al-Mu’minin, \`Uthman was saved from the bloodied
swords of her men, but forty companions of his were murdered in cold
blood. After this massacre, the *bayt al-mall* was attacked. The guards
there, who numbered fifty, were tied with ropes. They were then
slaughtered like sheep and goats. Hakim ibn Jibillah, who was an eminent
person of al-Basrah, heard about this massacre and torture of \`Uthman
ibn Hunayf. He took with him 300

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 111  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 485

men of Banū-Bakr and Banū-Qays and proceeded towards *bayt al-rizq*
where \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr was distributing rations to his men. When
he saw Hakim coming, he asked why he had come. Hakim asked him to give
their share of the rations and to release \`Uthman ibn Hunayf and to
allow him to remain in the Dar al-Imarah until Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
arrived. He also added that if they had sufficient numbers, they would
not have tolerated the orgy of killing committed by them. Ibn al-Zubayr
said that they had avenged the killing of \`Uthman. Hakim asked him
whether the innocent persons they had killed were the assassins of
\`Uthman? Why were not they afraid of the Retribution of Allah? Ibn
al-Zubayr told Hakim that however much he shouted and cried, neither he
would release any ration to his men nor \`Uthman ibn Hunayf be released.
He added that if he recants from the *bay\`ah* of \`Ali (a.s) he could
be released. When Hakim heard him, he said, “O Allah! You are Just! You
must be witness to their tyranny!” Then he addressed his companions:

###### “I have no reservation in fighting with these tyrants. Those who have any may go away!”[1]

Saying this, Hakim unsheathed his sword and with a few companions
attacked the adversaries. From that side too men came up with their
swords. In the winking of the eyes, a severe battle was started and
blood was being shed. During the fight, one person hit the leg of Hakim
and cut it. Hakim picked up the severed leg and hit it so hard at the
man that he fell down. Hakim went crawling to him, and sat on the person
until that person was dead. Hakim kept fighting until his strength
lasted. But how could a small group fight with a large contingent. One
by one, they were all killed. Hakim, his son Ashraf and brother Ra-al
ibn Jibillah lost their lives in this battle. This is remembered as the
Battle of the Minor Camel that happened on 25 Rabi\` II, 36 H.

After killing Hakim and his men, Talhah and al-Zubayr wanted to kill
\`Uthman ibn Hunayf as well. \`Uthman understood from their looks that
they intended to kill him. He told them that if the killed him, his
brother Sahl ibn Hunayf would certainly wreak revenge against them. My
brother is the governor of al-Madinah and he will search each and every
relative of theirs and kill them. Hearing this, they changed their minds
and released \`Uthman from captivity. He left al-Basrah and at Dhi-Qar
reached the presence of Amir al-Mu’minin. When he saw the pitiable
condition of \`Uthman ibn Hunayf, \`Ali’s eyes watered. He asked
\`Uthman to tell him about the happening in al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 491

Basrah and about the atrocities of the warriors at the Battle of the
Camel. Hearing the details his face turned red with anger. Immediately
he ordered arranging the left, right and the front flanks of the army.
On the left was \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas in the lead, on the right flank
he put \`Umar ibn Abi-Salamah and the front flank was commanded by
Ya\`li ibn \`Umar. The Standard of the army he entrusted to Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah. They now started moving towards al-Basrah. On the way,
they halted with the tribe of \`Abd al-Qays. The people of this tribe
had great regard for \`Ali (a.s). When they learned about the campaign
for which the Imam (a.s) was going, they too joined the ranks.

When Amir al-Mu’minin’s army reached outer al-Basrah, al-Ahnaf ibn Qays,
who had already owed allegiance to the Imam (a.s) after the death of
\`Uthman, came to his presence and said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! I wish to
say two things. If you order, I shall be with you to take part in the
battle, or I shall stop the 4,000 swords that had been unsheathed
against you. (a.s) agreed with his second suggestion and allowed him to
go. How the Imam (a.s) northern al-Basrah and camped at al-Zawiyah. He
sent some letters and messengers to Talhah, al-Zubayr and Umm
al-Mu’minin. He asked them to desist from battle and bloodshed. The
advice did not appeal to them. Generally, wars are destructive, but the
internecine wars are the worst. The threesome did not agree to any
suggestions of peaceful settlement of the dispute. When Amir
al-Mu’minin’s emissaries returned disappointed, and it became evident
that there was no other alternative than the battle, the troops moved
forward from al-Zawiyah and camped again on reaching Qasr \`Ubaydullah
ibn Ziyad. The army of \`Ali (a.s) was 20,000 strong and the enemy had
registered the cooperation of Banū-Azd, Banū-Dubbah, Banū-Hanzalah,
Banū-Salim etc on the excuse of seeking retaliation for the blood of
\`Uthman. This way their strength was touching the figure of about
30,000 men. When both the armies came to the battlefield, the Imam (a.s)
told them about the destruction that would be cause by the battle in
terms of men and material. But the numbers had gone to the heads of the
two rebels. Their men started shouting the slogan, “Revenge of \`Uthman”
stood in rows. The Imam (a.s) too organized rows of his men opposite
their rows. Instructing his men, the Imam (a.s) said, “Until the enemy
starts hostilities, you should not move forward. Until they attack, you
should not attack. Do not stop those who show their backs to the
battlefield. Do not attack the injured and maimed. Do not cut the limbs
of the vanquished opponents and do not do anything that is taboo against
the dead of the enemy troops. Do not harm any females!” After advising
his men, he came to the front without wearing armor riding on a horse
and shouted,

“Where is al-Zubayr?” First al-Zubayr was hesitant to respond. Then he
put on protective armor and helmet and came near the Imam (a.s) He said,
“O al-Zubayr! Why have you come to al-Basrah? Why have you taken this
step fraught with dangers?” al-Zubayr replied, “To seek retaliation for
the blood of \`Uthman!” The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “You want the *qisas* for \`Uthman’s blood from me although you yourselves have killed him. May Allah inflict a pitiable death on those amongst us who were more aggressive and harsh with him.”[1]

Al-Zubayr could not counter this but said:

###### “We do not consider you capable of being the caliph nor are we ourselves capable of that.”[2]

###### The Imam (a.s) said that today you do not consider me capable of being the caliph, but we have always accepted you as the progeny of \`Abd al-Muttalib, until your accursed son erected between you and us the wall of separation. O al-Zubayr! I ask you in the name of Allah! Have not you heard the Prophet (a.s) say that you will battle with you and me will be the oppressor against my rights?[3]

Reminded of this prediction of the Prophet (a.s), al-Zubayr said, “Yes!
The Prophet (a.s) did say that.” The Imam (a.s) said, “Then! Why have
you come to fight against me?” al-Zubayr replied, “I had forgotten this
saying of the Prophet (a.s). I am now reminded, and, seeing \`Ammar, I
remember the Prophet (a.s) saying, ‘O \`Ammar! A rebel group will kill
you!’ Now I have decided that I shall not fight with you and I will
return home.” Therefore, with a crestfallen face al-Zubayr went to
\`A’ishah and said, “Whatever steps I have taken, I had done that with
due consideration. But my mind does not work in the matter of this
campaign. Therefore, I shall not take part in the battle against \`Ali
(a.s) and I will go home forthwith.” \`A’ishah said, “What are you
talking? “\`Abdullah said, “It appears that you were scared of seeing
the shining swords of the sons of \`Abd al-Muttalib, their fluttering
standard and the death looking into your face!” al-Zubayr said, “It is
not like that! But \`Ali (a.s) has reminded of something that I had
forgotten. For me it is better that I depart from here now!” He said
this and went away from the battlefield.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 520  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 519  
 **[3]** Tārīkh al-Islām, Vol 2, Page 151

At a distance of seven farasangs or Leagues, from al-Basrah, in the
Valley of Al Saba he was killed by \`Amr ibn Jurmūz. And it was proved
what Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had said when he talked of demanding
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman.

This step by al-Zubayr is a proof that what he was doing earlier was
wrong. It cannot be that fighting with \`Ali (a.s) was right and going
away withdrawing from the battle was also right. Therefore, once
\`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr told sarcastically to Ibn \`Abbas, “You people
have fought with Umm al-Mu’minin and with the companion of the Prophet
(a.s), al-Zubayr!” Ibn \`Abbas retorted, “The truth is that your father
brought out \`A’ishah from her home and brought her to confront \`Ali
(a.s) in the battlefield! I ask you! Do you consider \`Ali (a.s) a
mu’min or not? If you consider him believer, then you have become
heretics. If you consider that he was an infidel, then your father was
misguided and subject to Retribution because he refused to fight with an
infidel. Now it is left to you to decide who was the misguided one!”

After al-Zubayr, the Imam (a.s) wanted to talk to Talhah as well to
convince him to refrain from battling. Therefore, he addressed him thus:

###### “O Talhah! You have brought the Prophet’s consort to the battlefield, leaving your own wife at home! Did you not pledge your *bay\`ah* to me?”[1]

When the Imam (a.s) reminded of Talhah’s *bay\`ah* with him, he carried
the Qur’an in his hand and went round the rows of his troops saying
loudly, “Who s there among you who will go with the Book to the rows of
the enemy formation and invite them to follow the teachings of the
Qur’an and ask them to refrain from mischief referring to the same Holy
Book! But he should know that he would thus be going into the mouth of
death. One youth from al-Kūfah, Muslim ibn \`Abdullah Al-Mujashi\`i,
volunteered to go. After the Imam (a.s) made the announcement thrice,
when none other than Muslim volunteered, he prayed for him and handed
over the Qur’an to him. The youth went with the Book before the enemy
troops and talked about the commandments of the Allah. He reminded them
to act on the commands written in the Book. But none paid any heed to
his voice! At that moment, \`A’ishah’s slave attacked him with a sword
and severed both his hands. Muslim tried to protect the Book with his
chest, fell down and was martyred. The Qur’an too was damaged with a
barrage of arrows. Seeing this happening, the Imam (a.s) said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 520

###### “Now there is no doubt left in the veracity of battling with these people”[1]

After this martyrdom of the valiant Muslim Al-Mujashi\`i, \`Ammar Ibn
Yasir came near the enemy formations and addressed them, “O People! You
have kept your women behind the curtains at your homes, and have brought
your Prophet’s spouse to face the swords, spears and the arrows! You
have come to avenge the blood of \`Uthman, although you know it well who
are the killers of \`Uthman and on whom rests the responsibility of that
act! “\`Ammar said this much when there was a barrage of arrows from the
enemy troops that forced him to step back. Turning to the Imam (a.s) he
said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! What is the delay now? These people do
not want to listen to anything other than battling! “Because of the soft
attitude of the Imam (a.s) and his prolonged efforts to avoid
hostilities had made the enemy think that in his weakness he was trying
to avoid hostilities. They started raining arrows on the troops and many
a chest was pierced with them. In that time, one person was brought to
the presence of the Imam (a.s) who had died with the wounds from the
arrows. Another person martyred with the enemy arrows was brought before
him. Then \`Abdullah ibn Badil brought his brother, \`Abd al-Rahman, who
also had died with the wounds from the arrows. The brows of the Imam
(a.s) knit now and said, “We are Allah’s and to Him do we return.”

Now there was no other way than entering the battlefield. He tried his
best to prevent the internecine battle taking place. All the
possibilities for truce had been exhausted and, in fact, the enemy has
commenced attacking. He asked for the Prophet’s armor, Dhat al-Fudūl,
and wore it. On his head, he wore a black turban. He had the sword,
Dhul-Faqar, in his hand. He entrusted the command of the right flank to
Malik al-Ashtar and the left flank to \`Ammar ibn Yasir. He gave the
Prophet’s black standard, \`Uqab, to Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah and
asked him to go ahead. When Muhammad moved forward, a barrage of arrows
stopped him. Seeing this, the Imam (a.s) took the standard from
Muhammad. He now had the sword in one hand and the standard in the
other. He attacked the enemy ranks with full force. He fought with such
valor that everywhere there were enemy dead lying on the ground. When he
returned and gave back the standard to Muhammad, he too demonstrated the
same valor and killed innumerable enemy troops.

In this battle, Marwan was looking for Talhah to settle his score with
him for the blood of \`Uthman. He knew that the responsibility for the
killing of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 522

\`Uthman rested on him as well. Besides revenge, he had a political
purpose too for eliminating Talhah. Marwan knew that as long as Talhah
and al-Zubayr lived, the caliphate would not return towards
Banū-Umayyah. The possibility could present itself after these two
stumbling blocks were removed. Al-Zubayr had already left the theatre of
war. If he had stayed in the battlefield, it was quite possible that
Marwan’s arrow would have targeted him as well. He got the opportunity
of finishing Talhah. From behind the back of his slave, Marwan shot a
poisoned arrow that pierced Talhah’s knee region. Piercing the knee, the
arrow entered the flank of Talhah’s horse. The horse ran fast and fell
in a ruin. Talhah breathed his last at that place. Ibn Sa\`d writes:

###### “On the day of the Camel, Marwan ibn al-Hakam attacked Talhah, who was stationed beside \`A’ishah, with an arrow that hit his knee. Then Marwan said,’ By Allah! After you, I shall not have to look for \`Uthman’s assassin!’”[1]

Even after Talhah’s death and al-Zubayr’s withdrawal from the
battlefield, the morale of the enemy army did not go down in any way.
They remained steadfast in the arena because the main character of the
drama was Umm al-Mu’minin \`A’ishah. They were attached only to her and
were not bothered if anyone else remained or went away. Their dedication
was of such magnitude that they were picking up the droppings of her
camel, crushing them between their fingers and smelling them saying that
they were the droppings of their mother’s camel and they smell of musk
and ambergris. They guarded the camel as they would guard the standard
of the army. They kept the camel encircled all the time \`A’ishah was
watching from the canopy of the camel’s back the men holding the reins
of the camel falling down dead with the arrows of their adversaries.
With one man falling, another would take his place immediately. The rein
holders were mostly from Banū-Dubbah, Banū-Najiyah and Banū-Azd and men
from Quraysh, who held the rein at their turns and recited martial
poetry all the while. Although the number of the rein holders was very
large, only from the Quraysh 70 perished doing this duty. But the
reference of a few of them is there in the books of history. One of them
was the qadi of al-Basrah, Ka\`b ibn Siwar. Although he wanted to remain
neutral in this battle, but Talhah and al-Zubayr had asked \`A’ishah to
call him or personally visit him to register his cooperation. They said
that if Ka\`b did not come, none from the tribe of Banū-Azd would join
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabaqāt, Vol 3, Page 223

campaign. Umm al-Mu’minin sent word through someone calling him. But he
avoided the visit. In the end, she herself went to his place. She called
him, but he kept quiet. \`A’ishah asked, “Why are you mum? Am I not your
mother?” At this Ka\`b opened the door. Umm al-Mu’minin asked him to
take part in the battle. In the beginning, he remained quiet. But he did
yield in the end and she was successful in bringing him to the arena of
the battle. Because of him, Banū-Azd too came to fight. Ka\`b brought a
copy of the Qur’an hanging in his neck. He held a staff in one hand and
the rein of the camel in the other. An arrow came from an unknown
direction and he was killed!

When the famous Arab swordsman, \`Amr ibn Yasri, held the rein of
\`A’ishah’s camel, from the troops of \`Ali (a.s), Hind ibn \`Amr came
forward to challenge him. \`Amr gave the rein to his son and came to
meet the challenge. They tried their skill of swordsmanship on each
other. But in the end, Hind was vanquished and killed by \`Amr. After
Hind, Alba ibn Haitham and Zayd ibn Sawhan came to fight with him and
both were martyred by him. When \`Ammar ibn Yasir saw this, he could not
bear to stay quiet. He tied a belt of the leaves of date palm around his
girdle and came to the battlefield with sword in hand. \`Ammar was a
grand old man of 90 years and very weak when compared to his adversary.
When people saw him, they thought that he would meet the same end as the
persons who came out to fight with \`Amr. When Ibn Yasri saw him coming
with the intention of fighting, he gave the rein to \`Amr Ibn Bajrah and
jumped with speed towards \`Ammar and attacked him with his sword.
\`Ammar fenced the sword with his shield. The shield was made of such
material that the sword got stuck in it. \`Amr tried to pull the sword
out. But in that moment, \`Ammar bent down and struck \`Amr’s legs with
his sword. Both the legs of \`Amr were severed. He fell down helpless.
People picked him up and brought to the presence of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s). The Imam (a.s) ordered his execution in *qisas* for killing the
three persons slain by him. When \`Amr ibn Bajrah saw that Ibn Yasri was
killed, he gave the rein of the camel to someone else and came to the
arena to fight. From the other side Rabi\`ah al-\`Aqili came and both
rushed at one other with swords in hands. Both were killed fighting with
one another.

When the rein of the camel came to the hand of \`Awf ibn Qatan al-Sanbi,
he said that the responsibility of the assassination of \`Uthman was on
\`Ali (a.s) and his two sons. He said that he would fight with them to
avenge the blood of \`Uthman. Therefore, he recited the following
martial poem while coming to the arena:

###### O mother! O mother! I am away from home  
 Now I do not crave for the grave nor the shroud!  
 At this place only \`Awf ibn Qatan will perish  
 If \`Ali (a.s) escaped from our hands it is a certain loss!  
 Or if his two sons al-Hasan and al-Husayn escaped from our hands,  
 I shall die of that sadness and sorrow.

After this recitation, he attacked and kept fighting. At last, Muhammad
ibn al-Hanafiyyahh slew him with his sword. He took his desire of
killing \`Ali and his sons (a.s) to his grave!

Among the rein holders was \`Abdullah ibn Abza too. He first held the
rein, then recited the following martial poem before going to the arena:

###### I shall fence my sword and not even care to look at Abul-Hasan  
 This battle is a pathetic affliction

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) went forward and hit him with his spear. And
said, “You wished to look at Ab al Hasan (a.s). Tell me, how you have
found him?” He left the spear pierced in the person’s chest.

One of the well know warriors who came to the Battle of the Camel,
Khabbab ibn \`Amr al-Rasibi, recited the following martial poem and
threw a challenge for a fight

###### I shall fight with my sword, and if I see \`Ali (a.s), I shall attack him with my sharp, shining sword.

Malik al-Ashtar came forward and killed him with one blow of his sword.

Then came \`Attab ibn Usayd who was from the elite of Quraysh. He
recited the following martial poem:

###### I am \`Attab’s son and my sword is “Walwal”  
 And my death is around the camel

Malik al-Ashtar attacked and killed him. He did die at the feet of the
camel, but his sword did not serve him well!

One warrior of al-Basrah, \`Amr ibn Ashraf al-\`Atiki caught the rein of
the camel in one hand and his sword in the other. Whoever came near him,
he attacked reciting the following couplets:

###### O our mother! In our knowledge, you are the best mother  
 The mother feeds her children and is kind on them  
 Do not you see how many valiant are injured  
 And heads and wrists are falling severed

Al-Harith ibn Zuhayr al-Azdi came to fight with him. Both attacked each
other and fell down injured with each other’s sword and died. Along with
Ibn Ashraf, thirteen men from his tribe too perished fighting.

\`Abdullah ibn Khalaf al-Khuza\`i, an elite of al-Basrah, in whose place
Umm al-Mu’minin stayed as guest on arrival there, came to the
battlefield. He demanded for a combat with \`Ali (a.s) reciting the
following triplet:

###### O Abū-Turab come closer to me  
 Closer you come I shall be closer than that  
 My chest is full of anger against you

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) came forward and with one stroke of his sword
made two pieces of him.

\`Abdullah ibn Hakim, who was the chief of the contingent of the Quraysh
during this battle came out for combat. From the other side came \`Adi
ibn Hatam. He attacked \`Adi and broke one of his eyes with the spear.
In that condition it was difficult for \`Adi to subdue his opponent. At
this moment came Malik al-Ashtar and with his help the opponent was
killed.

Umm al-Mu’minin used to ask every person who came to hold the reins of
the camel as to who he was. In that order, \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr came
to hold the reins. She also asked him who he was. He said that he was
her sister’s son, \`Abdullah. Hearing his name she cried, “Pity! The
womb of Asma’ is ruined!” \`Abdullah was holding the reins when Malik
al-Ashtar passed from the front of the camel. Both stared at each other
and raised their swords. Malik hit the head of \`Abdullah and injured
him seriously. He too got a minor injury from him. Both the injured
persons caught each other with force. Malik threw \`Abdullah on the
ground and sat on his chest. When \`Abdullah saw that he was about to be
killed, he shouted, “Kill both me and Malik”. People did not pay any
heed to his words because everyone knew Malik as al-Ashtar only. If
\`Abdullah had said al-Ashtar instead of Malik, certainly people would
have attacked him. \`Abdullah was a youth and Malik was an old person.
\`Abdullah could somehow free himself from the grip of Malik and ran
away saving his life. \`Abdullah did save his life, but for his entire
life he got the black mark of showing his back to the battlefield. This
was a topic of gossip for long. Once someone ridiculed \`Adi by asking
him when he became one eyed, he said:

###### “When we had hit the spear at your buttocks and you ran away showing your back!”[1]

Umm al-Mu’minin was much worried about \`Abdullah. When she was informed
that he saved his life by running away from the battle, she took a sigh
of relief! She gifted 4,000 dirhams to the person who brought this good
tiding!

Al-Aswad ibn al Bukhtari too was killed catching the reins of Umm
al-Mu’minin’s camel. Jundub ibn Zuhayr al-Ghamidi and \`Abd al-Rahman
ibn Usayd were killed by Malik. When, in the end, the reins came to the
hands of Zufar ibn al-Harith, the battle became intense and row after
row was finished. Everywhere rivers of blood were flowing. When Umm
al-Mu’minin saw this gory scene, she threw a few pebbles towards the
army of \`Ali (a.s) and said, “May these faces blacken!” This was the
copy of that miraculous act of the Prophet (a.s) at the Battle of
Hunayn. But there the Prophet’s act was against the infidels and here
Umm al-Mu’minin was fighting an unnecessary, internecine battle. The
Prophet (a.s) did that under the Command of Allah through a Revelation.
Here \`A’ishah was fighting with Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and the revered
Companions of the Prophet (a.s).

Amir al-Mu’minin asked Malik al-Ashtar to attack the right flank of the
enemy formations and Hashim ibn \`Utbah to take care of the left. Both
of them went with their troops with raised swords and made a severe
onslaught that the feet of the right flank were uprooted. The men left
their position and moved to the center of the formation. The chief of
the right flank, Hilal ibn Waki\` was killed by Malik al-Ashtar and the
men ran to take shelter near Umm al-Mu’minin. The troops of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) chased the fleeing men and there was severe fighting
around the camel of Umm al-Mu’minin. Banū-Azd, Banū-Najiyah and Bahilah
had encircled the camel to safeguard it and were taking the arrows,
swords and spears on their chests. Al-Zamakhshari records the scene
thus:

###### “The swords banging on the heads produced such a sound as the beating of clothes on the wooden plank while washing them.”[2]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw that the battle had not as yet reached the
final stages. Therefore, he decided himself to enter the theatre. He
stood up with a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 2, Page 354  
 **[2]** Al-Fā’iq, Vol 1, Page 35

contingent of Muhajirūn and Ansar. Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn were
on the right and the left of him. Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyyah was
carrying the Standard in front of him. The Imam (a.s) asked him to
bisect the formation and reach with the standard near the camel of Umm
al-Mu’minin. Muhammad started to move, waving the flag. But from the
other side there was a barrage of arrows that stopped him. The Imam
(a.s) went forward. Put his left hand on the shoulder of Muhammad and
took the standard from him. Now he had the Dhul-Faqar in his right hand
and the standard in his left. He attacked the enemies with such ferocity
that innumerable heads fell. He returned for a while amongst his men,
straightened his sword and once again commenced the attack. When he
wanted to commence the battle again, his companions and men pleaded with
him not to expose himself to the danger of injury. Then he told Muhammad
ibn al-Hanafiyyah that battles were fought in that manner. The people
said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! Who has the strength and skill to fight
like you! Who has the strength and capability to fence the sword like
you?”

This intense attack on the owners of the camel showed clear signs of
their imminent defeat. Although their heads were falling continuously,
they could not have thought of leaving the field until the camel was
standing in their midst. Its condition too was such that there were
arrows on the canopy of Umm al-Mu’minin and the saddle of the camel like
the thorns on the back of the porcupine. The camel was unable to bear
the onslaught and was turning round and round like the turning of the
grinding wheel. When the Imam (a.s) felt that as far as the camel stood
in the battleground, the battle would not end. On the other hand the
people from al-Basrah were resisting others from going near it. He
thought of removing the camel from the battlefield. He took youths from
the tribes of Nakha and Hamdan and moved forward. Seeing the Imam (a.s),
the rows were broken, and along with his companions, he reached near the
camel. He told one of his troopers, Bujayr ibn Daljah al-Naqafi to go
and cut the legs of the camel Bujayr went forward and struck the legs of
the camel with his sword. The camel made a shrill sound and slumped on
its side on the ground. As soon as the camel fell, the battle suddenly
stopped. And the men started running helter-skelter. None had any idea
what to do. They were trampling the injured and the dead on their way.
In no time, the battlefield was sparsely occupied. Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr
and \`Ammar ibn Yasir cut the belts of the camel, lowered the saddle to
the ground. Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr put his hand inside the canopy of the
saddle. Umm al-Mu’minin angrily asked who it was? He said, “I am your
brother whom you do not like!” She asked, “Are you the son of
al-Khath\`amiyyah?” He said, “Yes!” She replied,

“Thank Allah! You are living and no harm has come to you” Muhammad asked
her, “Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) is inquiring if any harm has come to you?”
She said, “One arrow had grazed my side, but I suffered no serious
injury!” Then \`Ammar ibn Yasir came near the saddle and said, “O Umm
al-Mu’minin! You have seen your sons battling!” She said very angrily,
“I am not your mother!”[1]

\`Ammar said, “You are the mother, whether you accept or you do not!”
Umm al-Mu’minin’s denial cannot be accepted right from the point of view
of the Qur'anic Commandment! From the Nass Qur’an, the prophet’s wives
are the mothers of Muslims, she was the mother of the Muslims, which
neither the Muslims deny nor there is any way of denying it! The
apparent reason for her denial is that when \`Ammar took part in the
battle against her, he had forfeited his right to be her son! But the
battle was not between the mother and her sons. But it is not binding on
the Muslims to obey the Prophet’s wives as they would their own natural
mothers. They are the mothers of the Muslims because after the Prophet’s
demise they were forbidden from entering into matrimony with others on
account of being the Mothers of the Muslims. Such relationship was Haram
for Muslims as with their own mothers. Therefore, when the verse of
Hijab was revealed, some Muslims uttered that they might marry the
widows of the Prophet (a.s) after his demise. Then to admonish them the
following verse was revealed:

### وَمَا كَانَ لَكُمْ أَنْ تُؤْذُوا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَلَا أَنْ تَنْكِحُوا أَزْوَاجَهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ أَبَدًا.

#### “And it does not behoove you that you should give trouble to the Messenger of Allah, nor that you should marry his wives after him ever. (33/53)”

This banning of matrimony with the Prophet’s widows, are different from
the duties of the children towards their natural mothers, and of the
mothers towards their children. For example, the children are bound to
provide sustenance to their own mothers. But in the case of the mothers
of the believers, such binding is not there. Nor were the mothers of the
believers permitted to discard the Hijab in front of their sons—the
believers. Only in the matter of the forbiddance of marriage that they
were given the status of the Mother of the Believers. While it is
binding on Muslims to obey their mothers, the obedience has to be
subject to the commands being within the norms of Shari\`ah. The Prophet
(a.s) has said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 130

###### “Obedience cannot be in acts of sin and is required only in virtuous deeds.”[1]

Perhaps Umm al-Mu’minin had realized this. That her act was aggressive
and the journey to al-Basrah was for an illegitimate purpose. Therefore,
during her journey she was not offering qasr (shortened form) prayers.
Another interpretation is that this was her attitude only during the
trip to al-Basrah, and considering the trip as a journey of
illegitimacy, she was offering the full mandatory prayers instead of the
curtailed qasr prayers mandated during the journeys. The mandate for
qasr is only in lawful circumstances. Therefore, Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani
has made the following observation:

###### “\`A’ishah was traveling with the intention of battling with \`Ali (a.s) to al-Basrah and was offering all the mandated genuflections of prayers and in her opinion qasr Prayer was mandated only during journey of obedience (to Allah).”[2]

Anyway, Umm al-Mu’minin was still in the battlefield when Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) came near the saddle and tapped at its canopy with his
stick. He said, “O Humayra’! Did not the Prophet (a.s) order you to
follow the dictum of “Once you establish dominance, treat the dominated
well!”

He ordered Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr to erect a tent over the camel’s fallen
saddle and guard it that none came near it. With the dusk, he sent her
to the widow of \`Abdullah ibn Khalaf, Safiyyah bint al-Harith. He
ordered the carcass of the camel to be burnt. And spread its ashes to
the wind. Then he said, “Allah’s curse on this animal.” He said that it
was very similar to the calf, which was worshipped by Banū-Isra’il. He
then recited the following verse from the Qur’an:

### وَانظُرْ إِلَى إِلَهِكَ الَّذِي ظَلَلْتَ عَلَيْهِ عَاكِفًا لَنُحَرِّقَنَّهُ ثُمَّ لَنَنسِفَنَّهُ فِي الْيَمِّ نَسْفًا.

#### “And look at your god to whose worship you kept (so long); we will certainly burn it, then we will certainly scatter it a (wide) scattering in the sea. (20/97)”

After the end of the battle, the Imam (a.s) announced to his men that
they should not chase any person fleeing. They should not harm any
injured person. They should not enter homes of people to loot. Those who
surrender arms, give them amnesty and protection. Those who lock
themselves in their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Mishkāt, Page 319  
 **[2]** Fath al-Bārī, Vol 2, Page 406

homes, leave them in peace. Whatever arms and other materials they found
in the battlefield was theirs. He said that on the women and the slave
girls they did not have any right. On this, some objections were raised.
They said how is it possible that shedding their blood was legitimate
and making them slaves is not allowed. Perhaps this opinion was
expressed because in the earlier period that was the practice when
battles were fought with the infidels and their survivors from the
battles, including women and children, were made slaves. The Imam (a.s)
said that his decision is the same as that of the Prophet (a.s) after
the conquest of Makkah. He said, “if you are insistent, tell me who will
take charge of his mother, \`A’ishah?” Hearing this silence fell on all
the protesters and they realized that their demand was not just. They
said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! The decision made by you is absolutely
correct.”

The Imam (a.s) stayed for three days in the field of Jamal. After the
burial of the martyrs he entered the city of al-Basrah and went straight
to the Masjid. After the prayer, he stood with his back against the wall
on the right side. He chided the people of al-Basrah against their
waywardness and said:

“You were the troops of a woman and the obedient servants of a camel!
When it yelled you went saying, ‘At your service’, when it was hurt you
ran away! You are people with low morals, deniers of promises and your
faith is something to show off and something else in your hearts! Even
the water in your land is polluted! Those who stand to pray amidst you
are entangled in sin. One who left you has the Blessings of Allah.”[1]

After the Sermon, the Imam (a.s) took *bay\`ah* from the people of
al-Basrah and warned them against creating mischief. Then he came out,
and with Abul-Aswad al-Du’ali and others, went to the *bayt al-mall* and
after spot inspection ordered all the funds there to be distributed to
those who participated in the battle. He ordered that every trooper must
get 500 dirhams each. When the distribution was done, not a single
dirham went less than the sanctioned amount for any person, nor any
balance left after the entire amount was distributed! Habbah al-\`Urfi
says that Amir al-Mu’minin too took his share equal to that of others.
After the distribution was over one person came and said that he
intended to take part in the battle, but could not present himself on
time and that he must get a share in the funds distributed. The Imam
(a.s) gave him his share of 500 dirhams and remained empty handed!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah

\`A’ishah was still in al-Basrah. The Imam (a.s) sent Ibn \`Abbas to her
with the message that she must prepare for going to al-Madinah. She was
told that neither she had any work in al-Basrah, nor her remaining away
from al-Madinah for long was desirable. Ibn \`Abbas says that he went
with the Imam’s message and sought her permission to enter, but she
refused him entry. He was forced to enter without permission and sat
down on a rag. Umm al-Mu’minin saw him from behind the curtain and said,
“O Ibn \`Abbas! You have not cared for the manners prescribed by the
Shari\`ah and entered without my permission and came into my house and
you are sitting on the rag too without my permission. Ibn \`Abbas said,
“we have better understanding of the norms of Shari\`ah! If you have
learnt these norms, it is from us. This is not your house that we have
to get your permission to enter here. Your house is there, where the
Prophet (a.s) had left you behind! When you are at that house, we shall
not enter without your permission! I had to come here anyway to convey
to you the command of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). He asks you to move away
to al-Madinah soon. She said, “Amir al-Mu'minin was \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab.” He said, “I meant \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib when I said Amir
al-Mu’minin!” She said, “I do not accept him as the Amir al-Mu’minin.”
Ibn \`Abbas said, “What happens if you accept him as Amir al-Mu’minin or
not. Since when you have been given the authority that if you accept one
as Amir al-Mu’minin, he is, or otherwise, not! “At this Umm al-Mu’minin
started crying and said, “I myself want to go away from this city soon.”

###### “For the reason that I dislike the place where you people live.”[1]

Ibn \`Abbas said, “This is the height of not recognizing others rights.
Is it the return for the fact that we have made you Umm al-Mu’minin and
your father was called the siddiq. She said, “Do you want to claim
superiority over me through the Prophet (a.s)?” he said, “You are only
one of the nine wives of the Prophet (a.s).But because of this your
slightest word is accepted as a command. We are the flesh and blood of
the Prophet (a.s) and it is the same blood that is running in our veins.
If you had this privilege, would you not have claimed superiority over
us?” Umm al-Mu’minin kept quiet at this because she had no reply to
give. Ibn \`Abbas repeated the conversation to the Imam (a.s). He was
very happy to hear this and recited the following Verse:

### ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِنْ بَعْضٍ وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 107

#### “Offspring one of the other; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing. (3/34)”

When Umm al-Mu’minin agreed to travel, Amir al-Mu’minin made
arrangements for her travel and the expenses for the way He asked
Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr to accompany her and sent her safely on the way to
al-Madinah. This journey commenced on 1 Rajab 36 H, The day was Sunday.

Amir al-Mu’minin, from the beginning to the end of this battle, set a
great example searching for peace against all odds. Although he had to
fight a bloody battle to curb the big mischief, he did not commence the
hostilities until the enemy attacked first. Although they had, before
the Imam (a.s) arrived at al-Basrah, inflicted great atrocities on the
people and killed hundred of the friends of the Ahl al-Bayt. They
attacked the governor of al-Basrah, \`Uthman ibn Hunayf, surreptitiously
in the night breaking the commitment they had made with him. They
captured the *bayt al-mall* and *bayt al-rizq* and carried out almost a
general massacre of the Muslims. Although the justification for severe
action was already created by these heinous acts, the Imam (a.s) tried
his best to affect an amicable and peaceful solution. Therefore, he
talked at length with Talhah and al-Zubayr. He sent a copy of the Holy
Qur’an with Muslim al-Mujashi\`i to ask them to follow the injunctions
of the Book. When all these efforts were ineffective, and his efforts
for peace were termed as his weakness, he was left with no other
alternative than fighting it out. When the hostilities started, he
organized his ranks in such a manner that victory was guaranteed.

The things that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had exhorted his men to follow
were:

###### 1. They should not start the hostilities themselves.  
 2. They should not attack any injured person.  
 3. They should not chase any man running away from the arena.  
 4. They should not touch anything other than those permitted as booty of war.

His men followed his commands implicitly. Until his men were getting
hurt, even dying, with the barrage of arrows from the enemy, they did
not start fighting. When blood started flowing in the battlefield, they
did not touch the injured men of the enemy. When the enemy troops
started escaping in defeat, they were not chased. They did not have a
second look at the things left by the vanquished army.

Al-Daynawari has written:

###### “They saw gold, silver and other costly materials in the battlefield but none even looked at those things. They only took the arms and the transport animals of the enemy men who were killed during the battle.”[1]

It is the custom in the world that the victorious armies hold the
officers of the vanquished army as captives on false charges of treason
and rebellion. They either keep them incarcerated for long or execute
them. But the Imam (a.s) rose above the spirit of revenge and did not
question anyone from al-Basrah who were openly against him. He pardoned
such enemies of peace as \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, Marwan ibn al-Hakam,
al- Walid ibn \`Uqbah, \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir with one stroke of his pen.
Umm al-Mu’minin who left no stone unturned in his opposition, was
treated with due respect and was sent safely to al-Madinah. He explained
the subtle difference between the jihad with the Muslims and that with
the infidels. His men wanted to take the women and children as slaves,
according to the prevailing custom after victorious conduct of wars. He
convinced them that they were not permitted to take such women and
children as slaves. Instead of transferring the *bayt al-mall* at
al-Basrah to the center, he distributed the funds equitably to all his
men. Thus, he retained the spirit of the fighting men to willingly
participate in the future campaigns, if required.

Umm al-Mu’minin, who for the common Muslim has the status of a scholar
and adept at remembering the traditions of the Prophet (a.s), was not
ignorant of the fact that she had no right to claim retaliation for the
blood of \`Uthman. That was the right and the duty of the establishment
of the time or the successors of the victim. Neither \`A’ishah was the
representative of the Muslim interests nor was she one of the successors
of \`Uthman. Despite this, she entered into a fight with the caliph of
the day and instigated a huge army of people to fight. This, despite the
fact that the spouses of the Prophet (a.s) were mandated to remain
within the four walls of their homes. The Holy Qur’an says:

### وَقَرْنَ فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ وَلَا تَبَرَّجْنَ تَبَرُّجَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ الْأُولَى.

#### “And stay in your houses and do not display your finery like the displaying of the ignorance of yore. (33/33)”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 151

In obedience to this injunction of the Holy Qur’an, Umm al-Mu’minin
Zaynab bint Jahsh and Umm al-Mu’minin Sawdah never went out of
al-Madinah and their entire lives they followed the dictum. Some persons
asked Sawdah why she was not going on Hajj. She replied that she had
already performed the Hajj and that she was bound to live in the house
where the Prophet (a.s) had left her behind. Therefore, after the demise
of the Prophet (a.s), she never left her room. Besides this, even the
ordinary Muslim women are not required by the Faith to actively
participate in the warlike activities. Therefore, \`A’ishah says:

###### “I sought the Prophet’s permission to participate in the jihad. He said, ‘the jihad for you women is performing the rites of the Hajj.”[1]

And Umm al-Mu’minin’s own saying is:

###### “A spindle in the hands of a woman is better than the spear in the hand of a fighter who struggles in the Cause of Allah.”[2]

Despite knowing all this, she traveled with a crowd of thousands of men
from Makkah to al-Basrah and leading the troops she entered the
battlefield. Although she was witnessing that thousands of children
would be orphaned because of her action. Thousands of young women would
be unnecessarily widowed. And the blood of Muslims will be shed at the
hands of Muslims! But she never bothered about the grave consequences.
The responsibility for the huge loss of lives rests mostly with her.
Even in her own lifetime, the people thought so. Therefore, once
Ummu-Awfa al-\`Abdiyyah, hundreds of men of whose tribe died fighting on
the side of \`Ali (a.s), asked \`A’ishah, “O Umm al-Mu’minin! What do
you say of the woman who had killed her young son?” She replied, “The
woman would go to the Hell!” Then she asked, “What is the order for the
woman who had killed 20,000 young sons only at one place!” Umm
al-Mu’minin understood the intended sarcasm! She got angry and said:

###### “That enemy of Allah should not be allowed to go free!”[3]

Abū-\`Uthman al-Jahiz has expressed the entire matter very subtly in
these words:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 2, Page 101  
 **[2]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 2, Page 6.  
 **[3]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 108

###### In her act, she was like the meek and wicked cat that eats her kitten by cutting them.

Anyway, her act was nothing to boast home about. The people of her own
family considered an insult for themselves. Therefore, Umm al-Mu’minin
once asked her nephew, Ibn Abi-\`Atiq, to provide her a mule for some
work. When he got her message he told the messenger, “Go and tell Umm
al-Mu’minin:

###### “By Allah! Until now, we have not been able to wash away the spot of the Day of the Camel! Does she want to do the Day of the Mule now?”[1]

Ibn Abi-\`Atiq had said this sarcastically, “…but after the Day of the
Camel, the people did see the Day of the Mule!” Therefore, when the
mortal remains of Imam al-Hasan (a.s) were brought to be interred in the
Prophet’s room, Marwan ibn al-Hakam and his men stood in the way fully
armed and obstructed the burial. At that time, \`A’ishah too was with
the men of Marwan! Therefore, Ibn Abil-Hadid writes:

###### Abul-Faraj says that Yahya ibn Hassan the author of the book, al-Nasab, narrates that on that day \`A’ishah was riding on a mule and Marwan ibn al-Hakam, Banū-Umayyah and their cohorts were tempted by her. About this someone has said, “Sometime riding a camel, and some other time a mule!”[2]

In this regard the role of Talhah and al-Zubayr is no different from
that of Umm al-Mu’minin. They reached al-Basrah and in the name of
*qisas* for \`Uthman they started general massacre. And without
investigating who was the criminal, and who was not, everyone was dealt
with naked swords. They had no right to kill anyone because the right
for *qisas* rests with the state and the successors of the victim only.
They were neither the caliphs of the time nor next of kin to \`Uthman.
Then the most surprising thing is that they considered breaking their
*bay\`ah* with \`Ali (a.s) legitimate and their aggressive act
justifiable. For this, they were putting the blame of the assassination
of \`Uthman on \`Ali (a.s). This despite the fact that with regard to
the killing of \`Uthman, what was their own attitude and what was the
attitude of \`Ali (a.s). Therefore, \`Ali (a.s) has said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ansāb al-Ashrāf, Vol 1, Page 421  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 4, Page 17

###### “By Allah! Talhah, al-Zubayr an \`A’ishah know it well that I am on the right and they are wrong.”[1]

If they really considered that \`Ali (a.s) was involved in the killing
of \`Uthman, they would have raised their protests before owing their
allegiance to \`Ali. But neither at the time of the assassination nor
during the period of the *bay\`ah* for \`Ali (a.s), they made any
accusations. Muhammad ibn Asirin says:

###### “I do not know that someone has accused \`Ali (a.s) of the killing of \`Uthman. Even his *bay\`ah* was conducted, it was finalized and after all that people started accusing him.”[2]

The chiefs of the persons who started the blame game were Talhah and
al-Zubayr. They too opened their mouths when they felt that their
interests were not served. This happened when the Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
refused to give them the governorates of al-Kūfah and al-Basrah. If
their claim for the *qisas* of \`Uthman was driven by the spirit of true
sympathy for him, they would have raised it before the *bay\`ah* for
\`Ali (a.s) commenced. They waited until much after the *bay\`ah* and
they failed in their attempts to wangle the governorships for
themselves. In the light of the events, it can be told with certainty
that the purpose behind all the mischief raised by the two and their
cohorts was to usurp power somehow. Therefore, they recanted the
*bay\`ah* and incited others to follow suit. They told Hakim ibn
Jibillah that until \`Uthman ibn Hunayf did not break his *bay\`ah* with
\`Ali (a.s) they would not release him from incarceration. They also
said in the presence of the Imam (a.s) that they did not consider him
capable of holding the position of the caliph. O an inquiry from Sa\`id
ibn al-\`As they told in clear terms that they would not make \`Uthman’s
son the caliph, but one of them, Talhah or al-Zubayr, should get the
caliphate. The search for power egged them on to get \`Uthman
assassinated, and thereafter when Amir al-Mu’minin became the caliph,
they hatched a conspiracy against him. They took shelter behind Umm
al-Mu’minin to create mischief demanding *qisas* for \`Uthman’s blood.
Thus, whether it was Umm al-Mu’minin or Talhah and al-Zubayr, they had
no moral substance for their act nor that of Shari\`ah. However
important their personalities, but crime is, after all, a crime. Whoever
is responsible for a crime, howsoever important the personage, there has
to be punishment for the crime committed. They had taken such a nasty
step that thousands of lives of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istī\`āb, Vol 2, Page 214  
 **[2]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 93

Muslims were lost. But there is one group that tries to shelter them
under the banner of companionship. They seek many excuses and, when they
fail in all their attempts, they take shelter behind the excuse of
khata’ ijtihadi. This excuse of khata’ ijtihadi is not only for this
event, but they bring it forth to cover the aberrations of their
favorites time and again. If this killing of thousands of innocents was
because of error in interpretation, then analyzing the errors of
interpretation of these great personalities is certainly everyone’s
right! First of all, it has to be established under what rules and norms
the ijtihad was made and under what norms thousands of persons were
killed to avenge the blood of one man? Was there a mandate of the Holy
Qur’an for such a rash act? Or there was any tradition of the Prophet
(a.s) directing them towards such precipitate actions? Did they have in
their support the consent of consensus before they went ahead with their
hush-hush campaign? If none of these can be proved, then where is the
question of ijtihad for this act?

Some of the champions of the these persons also concoct the excuse that
some of the persons in the ranks of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), who were the
supporters of the assassins of \`Uthman, finding the signs of compromise
between the two groups, felt that it was against their interests and, at
the instigation of Ibn Saba, before dawn attacked the troops of Umm
al-Mu’minin, and in the garb of the warriors at the Battle of the Camel
attacked the troops of \`Ali (a.s). Thus, they say, that either side
thought that the other party had attacked them and had commenced the
hostilities. Thus, the fighting spread and the responsibility of the
battle does not go to either of the two groups!

This is a self-concocted story of those persons. It has no importance
both from the point of view of narration (riwayah) nor knowledge or
Higher Criticism (dirayah). This story was first recorded by Ibn Jarir
al-Tabari in his famous book of history. Before al-Tabari no historian
has touched on this story. But the historians who followed al-Tabari
started quoting him and gave it a lot of publicity. Closing their eyes
to the deeds of Talhah, al-Zubayr and \`A’ishah, they put the blame for
this bloody war on a fictitious character, Ibn Saba, and his band.
Al-Tabari has quoted this story through Sayf ibn \`Umar al-Tamimi, dead
170 H. According to all the historians, Sayf ibn \`Umar was a liar
according to all the eminent scholars of \`ilm al-rijal (Biographers of
Narrators). Therefore, Al-Dhahbi writes in Mizan al-I\`tidal that Yahya
says, “One shell is better than this”, Abū-Dawūd says, “That is
nothing”, Abū-Hatam says, “Not worth quoting”, Ibn Habban says,
“faithlessness and instigated by recanters.” Not a single scholar has
approved of it and

considered it worth quoting. If there were some truth in the tradition,
it would have acquired currency immediately after the event of Jamal.
The first one to quote it was al-Tabari who came very much after the
event. Even when it comes up, it is through a person who was known for
his falsehoods. Is not it tantamount to closing ones eyes to facts by
believing the narration of such a person? Anyone who studies the events
of Jamal in depth will own that his narration appears out of place and
concocted. The purpose definitely was to prove that the owners of the
camel were not responsible for what had happened there was a mysterious
and slimy person who stage managed the entire battle and remained
incognito until al-Tabari’s narrator broke the story for him! But the
pages of history are witness that before the battle started, several
attempts were made by \`Ali (a.s) to dissuade the trio from going to
war! If that story has to be believed, would not the party of Jamal have
said that \`Ali’s men made a surprise, preemptive attack instead of
trying for peace. To the contrary the three were always bent on settling
the scores and, even before the arrival of \`Ali’s army to al-Basrah
they had killed tens of innocent persons to show their might.

In this connection the fictitious person, Ibn Saba, whom they term
responsible for the outbreak of fighting, does not have a historical
identity according to Dr taha Husayn, Egyptian Scholar, George Jurdac
and other scholars. The person whose name appears prominently in
connection with the assassination of \`Uthman and the Battle of the
Camel, his name is Safin the arbitration. His name is also heard at the
time of the Battle of Nahrawan. In between, his name is not heard as if
he had played the disappearing trick. One would like to know what
happened to him after making his nightly attack. The truth is that his
colorful personality was created to provide protection to the main
characters of the episode. When his need did not remain, he was quietly
withdrawn from the stage!

The Battle of the Camel was fought in the middle of Jumada II, 36 H
(November 656 A.D.). There are different versions about the numbers
killed. From the 30,000 strong army of Umm al-Mu’minin, 10000 or 17000
or 20.000 men killed. And from the 20,000 strong force of \`Ali (a.s)
5000 or 1,070 martyred. Although this battle was a short duration
affair, it had a long lasting effect on the feelings of the people.
Therefore, after the Battle of the Camel, the flames of war rose from
Syria and the swords of Muslims severed the heads of Muslims. If Umm
al-Mu’minin, Talhah and al-Zubayr had not entered the battlefield, then
Mu\`awiyah would never have dared to challenge \`Ali (a.s). But because
of their activities, he got the time and opportunity to

prepare himself to confront \`Ali (a.s). He got an excuse that Umm
al-Mu’minin who was from the tribe of Taym, came out seeking retaliation
for the blood of \`Uthman, then Mu\`awiyah, who himself was from
Banū-Umayyah, like \`Uthman, had more right to seek *qisas* for the
blood of his kinsman. This was such a strong political excuse that
Mu\`awiyah produced as the cause of his fight with \`Ali (a.s).
Therefore, he instigated people to fight the Battle of Siffin with that
excuse. Then he usurped the caliphate and assumed the title of the
caliph of the Muslims. As a consequence of the Battle of Siffin the
group of Khawarij (the Excommunicated) arose and the Battle of Nahrawan
was fought. These battles caused such schisms amongst Muslims that could
not be healed during the past 13 centuries.
