Transfer of the Capital
=======================

During the caliphate of \`Umar, when Iranian territory was annexed, the
Muslims established two new cities in Iraq. One was al-Basrah and the
other al-Kūfah. Al-Basrah is a coastal town and al-Kūfah is in the
hinterland. Al-Basrah is named after the white and soft rocks found
there that are called the same. Al-Kūfah is three miles from al-Hirah.
In 7 A.H., Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas moved from al-Mada’in to that place and
started living in thatched shacks and thus settled one hundred thousand
persons. Because of this settlement of huge numbers the place was called
al-Kūfah. The word al-Kūfah has its root in takūf that means gathering.
There is another etymological reason for the naming of the city. Because
the place is full of small pebbles it is called al-Kūfah. A place that
has plenty of stones and pebbles is called al-Kūfah or Kūfan. Al-Kūfah
is located near the banks of the river Euphrates. Its climate is mild
and it has plenty of gardens and oases. It has good agricultural
production and was of particular interest to the Arabs from the deserts
of Hijaz. After a fire accident in their settlement, they constructed
houses with bricks and stones. When it became the capital during the
caliphate of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), its importance increased very much.
Because of the biographers’ gathering there, it became the center for
scholastic, religious and political excellence.

During the Battle of the Camel the people of al-Basrah sided with the
party of Jamal and the people of al-Kūfah were with \`Ali (a.s). After
the battle was over, he made \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas the governor of
al-Basrah and appointed Hakim and Ziyad for collection of taxes and the
chief of the *bayt al-mal*. Then he went to al-Kūfah to humor the people
there who had wholeheartedly supported him. When he reached al-Mirbad
outside al-Basrah, where Umm al-Mu’minin had camped with her army on
arrival there, he turned his face towards al-Basrah and said:

###### “All praise to Allah who has sent me out of this worst of lands, which is fast moving towards destruction, is near the sea and far from the blessings of the sky.”[1]

When the Imam (a.s) entered the limits of al-Kūfah on 12 Rajab 36 H, the
elite of the town, who had already received the tidings of his victory,
came out of the town to give him a warm welcome. They accompanied the
Imam (a.s) riding alongside him into the town. They wanted him to reside
in the Dar al-Imarah. But the Imam (a.s) did not like to reside there.
He straight went to the mosque, offered two genuflections of prayer of
thanksgiving and gave a sermon to the gathering. He expressed words of
thanks and appreciation to the people of al-Kūfah for their help and
cooperation in the successful campaign an al-Basrah. He then went to the
locality called al-Rahbah and selected a middle class house for his
residence there. He then decided to make al-Kūfah the provisional
capital in place of al-Madinah.

This change was necessitated because of the following factors:

(1) Al-Kūfah was strategically located in the middle of the Islamic
Domain from where logistically all the regions could be better
administered. The borders with Fars were nearby. There were facilities
for land and sea voyages. The means of transportation were good. It was
a meeting place of travelers from many cities and was a good source of
information about the various regions. The edicts of the center could
easily be communicated to other regions very easily. The defensive
measures could also be organized fast in the event of attack by any
alien force. Therefore, when the Syrian forces started attack in
different places in the realm, the defense that was organized from
al-Kūfah would not have been possible if the capital was in al-Madinah.

(2) It was already seven months since Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) assumed the
caliphate, but Mu\`awiyah had neither accepted him as the caliph nor
extended his hand in *bay\`ah*. In such circumstances, one could not be
unconcerned about the possibility of any mischief from him. But there
were clear indications that to safeguard his position Mu\`awiyah might
take military action and commit unnecessary bloodshed. Therefore, the
selection of such a place was necessary from where defensive moves could
be made at short notice. Al-Kūfah was logistically the best place for
the purpose. Al-Kūfah was nearer to Damascus, the head quarters of
Mu\`awiyah and more easily accessible than from al-Madinah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 152

(3) It was experienced from the Battle of the Camel that the number of
men who could be mobilized from al-Kūfah was not possible from
al-Madinah. Despite the opposition from Abū-Mūsa, a large contingent
could be got together from al-Kūfah at a short notice. At the call of
the Imam (a.s), 12,000 swordsmen were mobilized for the Battle of the
Camel. From al-Madinah hardly a thousand men came. Therefore, it was
farsighted to move the capital to al-Kūfah.

(4) Al-Kūfah had the status of a cantonment and military center. Here
traditionally the fighting classes were settled. And even their progeny
had the same propensity. The people of al-Madinah, because of their
affluence were easy going and submissive. Therefore, when the Imam (a.s)
declared al-Kūfah as the capital, the people of al-Madinah did not react
negatively. In fact, they were happy that now on they might not have to
take part in military campaigns! In circumstances when the clouds of war
were hovering, peace-loving people may not be depended upon in the event
of emergencies.

(5) Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had already seen that after the demise of the
Prophet (a.s), with the exception of a few persons, the people had shown
lack of enthusiasm towards him. When they noticed that even after 25
long years of caliphate the conditions were not improving, they opted
for his ascension to the caliphate. But not much time had gone by when
one group from them had recanted the *bay\`ah* and prepared to fight a
battle with him. Those who did not join that group also showed utter
unconcern. Therefore, the Quraysh did not seem like cooperating,
Banū-Umayyah migrated to Syria as partisans of their kinsman,
Mu\`awiyah. Banū-Taym wanted talah to become the caliph. Banū-\`Adi were
in favor of \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar who had abstained from owing
allegiance to the Imam (a.s). Thus many persons, for various reasons,
were abstaining from giving him the required support. How could they be
expected to rise like one if there was an attack from Mu\`awiyah!

(6) Al-Madinah, because of it’s religious sanctity was not so much
exposed to outside dangers as was Iraq. Mu\`awiyah’s sights were focused
on Iraq. He wanted to capture it at any cost. Therefore, it was
necessary for the Imam (a.s) to stay in al-Kūfah until those dangers
subsided. But neither the dangers lessened nor the mischief of
Banū-Umayyah under Mu\`awiyah. The Imam (a.s), therefore, had to spend
the remaining years of his life in al-Kūfah only.
