Appointment of the Functionaries of the State
=============================================

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was free from the Campaign of Jamal, and he
settled down in al-Kūfah, then he considered the appointment of
functionaries to various positions in the realm. Although governors were
already appointed to some places prior to the Jang Jamal, many places
were still without his functionaries. Therefore, he had now to nominate
governors to Hijaz, Egypt, Yemen, Iran, Azerbaijan etc. He selected the
governors for these places. The incumbents were changed depending on the
circumstances from time to time. Brief life profiles of some of the
important functionaries are mentioned here.

*Qays Ibn Sa\`d*
----------------

He was the Prophet’s revered companion and the son of Sa\`d ibn
\`Abadah, the elite of the tribe of Khazraj. Besides being a man of
learning, he was tall, good looking and of robust built. Charity, valor
and oratory were his main characteristics. He was very far-sighted and
thoughtful. In those days, five persons were considered past masters in
politics and diplomacy. They were Mu\`awiyah, Abū-Sufyan, \`Amr Ibn
al-\`As, Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah, \`Abdullah ibn Badil and Qays ibn Sa\`d.
Of these, \`Abdullah ibn Badil and Qays ibn Sa\`d were on the side of
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Although Sa\`d was an authority on politics, he
never bypassed the requirements of the Faith while making the political
moves. Therefore, his saying is:

###### “If Islam was not in the way, I would make such moves that it would not be possible for the Arabs to counter them.”[1]

He remained in the company of the Prophet (a.s) for 10 years and learned
from him the niceties of the Faith. He took part in all the ghazawat of
the Prophet (a.s). In some of those battles, he had the privilege of
carrying the Standard of Islam. He was also assigned for the collection
of taxes by the Prophet (a.s). He inherited the qualities of charity and
kindness from his father. During the battles, he would even take loans
to feed the men. Sometimes he slaughtered the camels meant for his
personal transport for this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isābah, Vol 3, Page 239

purpose. When the men mentioned about this event to the Prophet (a.s),
he said:

###### “Generosity is the habit of his family.”[1]

Ibn Kathir writes in al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah that Haytham ibn \`Adi has
said three persons were conversing near the Ka\`bah and had a strong
argument. One of them was saying that the most generous person was
\`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far. The second said that it was Qays ibn Sa\`d. The
third insisted that \`Arabah al-Awsi was the most munificent person.
When the argument became too heated, one person said that they need not
argue and the matter can be sorted out easily. Each of them should go to
the person he thinks is the most generous and pretending to be the needy
ask for help. It will immediately be known if the assessment was right.
The suggestion was accepted by the three persons. One of them went to
\`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far. At that time he was about to go to his fief. He
went forward and said, “O son of the brother of the Prophet (a.s)!
Neither do I have the money for the travel expense nor the means of
transportation!” Hearing this, \`Abdullah took his foot out of the
stirrup of the horse, got down, and said, “Take this horse and the money
that is kept on it, they are all yours! There is a sword of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) on the horse, keep it with care.” When the person took
an inventory of the materials on the horse, he found 4,000 Dinars, silk
shawls and other things.

The second person went to the house of Qays ibn Sa\`d. On inquiry, he
was told that he was asleep. One maid came out of the house and asked
him the purpose for which he had come there. He said that he was a poor
traveler and was seeking some help from Sa\`d. The maid said that for
this unimportant work he could not be awakened. There are 700 Dinars at
home which she gave him. She asked him to go his stable and take one she
camel and a slave from there. When Qays awoke, the maid reported the
matter to him and told him that she did not want the needy person to go
empty-handed from his threshold. Qays asked her why she did not wake him
up. He thought that perhaps what she gave him was not sufficient for the
need of the person. Then, appreciating the generosity of the maid, he
released her from the slavery!

The third person went to Arabia. He found him going for his prayers
taking support of two slaves. At that time, he had lost his eyesight and
needed others support to move around. The man reached near him and said,
“O \`Arabah! I am a traveler and I have no means of travel! Please help
me!” \`Arabah pushed

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isābah, Vol 3, Page 239

the hands of the slaves from his shoulders and said, “It is a pity that
fulfillment of duties has not left anything with \`Arabah! Take both
these slaves.” The man said, “I cannot take away your supports and leave
you to go around without help!” \`Arabah said, “If you do not take them,
I shall free them anyway!” The man took charge of the slaves and
\`Arabah took support of the wall and moved towards the mosque.

When the three persons returned after their errands and assembled near
the Ka\`bah, they related their individual experiences. They said that
although \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far had given the maximum, considering his
affluence and status, it was nothing for him. But definitely giving away
\`Ali’s sword was a big act of generosity. Some people praised Qays that
his maid could give all the money that was at home and later on, he
freed her for this act of charity! In the end, all of them agreed about
\`Arabah that despite he being blind, gave away everything and in
charity and in the end even parted with his two slaves who were his
support in his blindness.

Once Qays fell ill, very few persons came to inquire about his health.
It was told him that many of his friends had taken debts from him and
were shy to visit because they were unable to clear their dues. Qays
said curse on that wealth that makes friends shy away from visiting!
Then he ordered announcement in al-Madinah that the debts of all those
who have taken loans from him have been converted into gifts and the
agreements have been cancelled. No sooner, the announcement was made;
there was a stream of visitors to his house.

Ibn \`Abd al-Barr writes in Al-Isti\`ab that Kathir ibn al-Salt took
30,000 dirhams as loan from Qays. When he went to return the loan
amount, Qays refused to take it back and said that there was some
misunderstanding, the amount was not a loan and was a gift!

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) became the caliph, in the month of Safar 36
H, selected Qays for the governorate of Egypt because of his family
background, capability and political acumen. And asked him to organize
an army and take it with him. He asked him to treat the people kindly.
However, where softness was not effective, strictness was allowed. Since
he was permitted to take few persons with him, he selected a team of
seven persons and left for Egypt. When he reached Egypt, he went to the
Pulpit of the Mosque and gave a sermon:

###### “All praise to Allah who has manifested the Truth! He has crushed the falsehood and demeaned the unkind! O People! We

###### have owed our allegiance to the person who, after our Prophet (a.s), is superior to all persons that we know of! O people! Rise, and on the basis of the Book and the Sunnah, owe your allegiance to him! If we do not follow the Book and the Sunnah in your affairs, then you will not be bound by this *bay\`ah*!”[1]

Then he took *bay\`ah* from the people. None hesitated in owing his
allegiance to the Imam (a.s), excepting the people of Kharbatah who were
10,000 in numbers. And all of them were fans of \`Uthman. They sent word
through Yazid ibn Harith al-Kinani that they will not raise objections
in any matter. They said that the land belongs to the Realm and they
would regularly pay the tribute. They requested him not to demand for
their *bay\`ah* until the circumstances become better. Qays sent word to
them that they will not be forced for the *bay\`ah*, but they must
refrain from intrigue or mischief of any kind. The people of Kharabta
promised to remain peaceful and Qays left them alone. But Maslamah ibn
Muqallid, who belonged to the tribe of Qays, instigated people to seek
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. Qays sent him a message that he
had created a front against him and tried to and instigated people to do
mischief. He said that he could crush this mischief. He said that he
would not like to shed his blood, even if he was given the territory
from Syria to Egypt. Impressed with his soft attitude, he sent word to
Qays that as long as he remained the governor of Egypt, no step would be
taken against the government there. With the political acumen of Qays,
the mischief that was to raise its head was nipped in the bud. As long
as he remained in Egypt, peace prevailed. But the Umayyad politics
created such a situation that after remaining as governor from the first
of Rabi\` I, 36 A.H. to the fifth of Rajab 36 A.H., a period of 4 months
and 5 days, he had to quit the post. The reasons for this will be dealt
with in the following pages

Qays, in his short tenure constructed a palace in Egypt. When he went
back after demitting office, some people said that Qays had a house in
Egypt. He said that he had constructed it with the help of the Muslims
and it belongs to them only. He added that whoever went to Egypt as the
governor would stay there.

In the year 59 or 60 H Qays died during the caliphate of Mu\`awiyah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 551

*Sahl ibn Hunayf al-Ansari*
---------------------------

He was an important person of the tribe of Aws. He was the brother of
the governor of al-Basrah, \`Uthman ibn Hunayf. He had the privilege of
being the Companion of the Prophet (a.s) and was a close associate of
\`Ali (a.s). He participated in Badr and other campaigns of the Prophet
(a.s). In Uhud, when other persons showed their backs to the enemy, he
stood steadfast with the Prophet (a.s) against heavy odds. He neither
hid behind stones nor ran away from the battlefield, but took an oath on
the hands of the Prophet (a.s) that he would fight to the end!

Ibn Husham writes that after the migration to al-Madinah, \`Ali (a.s)
stayed at Qaba, after midnight he saw a person who was knocking at the
door of a Muslim woman’s house. When she came out, the person quietly
gave her something. She immediately went inside the house. \`Ali (a.s)
was concerned that the woman was all alone. He asked the woman as to who
visited her so late in the night. She said it was Sahl ibn Hunayf. She
said that he knows she was a helpless woman who has none to take care of
her. In the nights, he destroys the idols in the neighborhood and gives
me the broken pieces to use as firewood. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was
pleased with this act of Sahl. Even after the death of Sahl, he used to
talk about it.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) went to al-Basrah to quell the mischief of
the Companions of the Elephant, he appointed Sahl ibn Hunayf as his
representative in al-Madinah. When after the Battle of the Camel, he
moved to confront the forces of Syria in Siffin, he took Sahl along.
After returning from Siffin, he appointed him the governor of Persia.
The people of Persia, encouraged by the rebellion of Mu\`awiyah, were
trying to get rebellious. To save themselves from paying the tribute,
they pushed Sahl out of Persia. In consultation with Jariyah ibn
Qudamah, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) sent Ziyad ibn \`Ubayd to Persia, who,
with his guile created differences amongst the people there and brought
them under control.

In 38 H Sahl died in al-Kūfah. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) gave him the
shroud with his own hands and performed the funeral prayer. Ibn Sa\`d
writes:

###### “Abū-Janab al-Kalbi says, ‘I heard from \`Umayr ibn Sa\`id that \`Ali (a.s) offered the funeral prayer for Sahl ibn Hunayf and said five Takbirs.’”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabaqāt, Vol 3, Page 473

The Imam (a.s) offered the funeral prayer near the bier of Sahl several
times. When he finished the prayer once, people would arrive and he
would have to stand with them and offer the prayer. He had thus to lead
the prayer five times. In every prayer he sounded the Takbir five times.

*Malik ibn al-Harith al-Ashtar*
-------------------------------

Malik was his given name and al-Ashtar the title. He was a valiant
warrior and famous for his swordsmanship and fighting. He was a great
asset in the battles of Jamal and Siffin. He was very close to Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) and a trusted lieutenant. He was so close to the Imam
(a.s) that he said, “His place in my eyes is the same as I had for the
Prophet (a.s)”. About his own status in the eyes of the Prophet (a.s),
the Imam (a.s) said:

###### “The place that I had in the estimation of the Prophet (a.s) none else could get in the entire Universe!”[1]

When Abū-Dharr died in the wilderness of al-Rabadhah making his silent
protest against the cruelty of the establishment of the time, although
there were important person viz Hilal ibn Malik al-Mizani, al-Ahnaf ibn
Qays al-Tamimi, Sa\`sa\`aha ibn Sawhan al-\`Abdi and al-Aswad ibn Qays
al-Tamimi present at the funeral, Malik al-Ashtar had the honor of
leading the prayer. This throws light on the respect the people had for
his knowledge, justice and disposition.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed him the governor of the Arab Peninsula.
This consisted of al-Mawsil, Nasibiyyayn, Miyafarqin, Dar I\`anat,
Sinjar and other cities. In the year 38 A.H., he was sent as the
governor to Egypt. But before he reached there, at the instance of
Mu\`awiyah, he was poisoned with laced honey. When Mu\`awiyah heard of
his death, he said:

###### “Honey too is an army of Allah.”[2]

*\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas*
------------------------

He was the son of the Prophet’s cousin. He was born 3 years prior to the
Migration to al-Madinah. He was brought up under the tutelage of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) and received his education under him. \`Abdullah was a
scholar of repute in Fiqh, Tafsir and several other branches of
learning. There always used to be a gathering of seekers of knowledge at
his place. He was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol 1, Page 85  
 **[2]** Murūj al-Dhahab, Vol 2, Page 40.

remembered with the titles of habr al-ummah (the Scholar of the Nation)
and *tarjuman al-qur’an* (the Interpreter of the Holy Qur'an). He was
with \`Ali (a.s) during the battles of Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan. After
\`Uthman ibn Hunayf he wan nominated the governor of al-Basrah. In his
last days, he lost his eyesight. He died in the year 68 H at Ta’if.
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah led his funeral prayer and laid him to rest.

*Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr*
-----------------------

He was the son of Abū-Bakr born to Asma’ bint \`Umays. He was born in
the year of Hijjat al-Wada\`. After Abū-Bakr’s death, \`Ali (a.s)
married Asma’ bint \`Umays and he took the responsibility for the
upbringing of Muhammad. He looked after and educated him as his own son.
He adopted the same school of thought about which he received
instruction from his mentor. He took part in the campaigns of Jamal and
Siffin. After the removal of Qays ibn Sa\`d he was appointed the
governor of Egypt. When the armies of Syria attacked Egypt, he was
martyred by the enemies mercilessly.

*Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari*
---------------------

His given name was Khalid and his father was Zayd. But he became known
with his kunyah. After migration to al-Madinah, the Prophet (a.s) stayed
at his house for six months. He was a man of piety and was a person with
great valor. He took part in the ghazawat of the Prophet (a.s) with much
enthusiasm. In the battles of Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan he was with
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). He was appointed the governor of Makkah by \`Ali
(a.s). He died in the year 38 A.H. and was interred in Constantinople.
Since centuries, his mausoleum is a place for the visit by thousands of
devotees.

*Mikhnaf ibn Sulaym al-Azdi*
----------------------------

He was among the trusted companions of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). The
famous chronicler of the events of Karbala’, Abū-Mikhnaf, was from his
progeny. Abū-Mikhnaf’s chronology was Lot, his given name, ibn Yahya ibn
Sa\`id ibn Mikhnaf ibn Salim. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed Mikhnaf
ibn Sulaym the governor of Hamdan and Isfahan. When the Imam (a.s)
decided to proceed towards Siffin, Miknaf sought permission to come to
al-Kūfah so that he could accompany the Imam (a.s) for the campaign
against the Syrians. Feeling his spirit of jihad, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
permitted Mikhnaf to come. Therefore, he left Haras ibn Rabi\`ah in
charge of Isfahan and Sa\`id ibn Wahab of Hamdan and proceeded to
al-Kūfah. He held the standard of Banū-Azd in his hand and participated
in the Battle of Siffin.

*Qarazah ibn Ka\`b al-Ansari*
-----------------------------

He was from the Companions of the Prophet (a.s) He participated in the
Campaign of Uhud and other Ghazwat of the Prophet (a.s) thereafter. He
settled down in al-Kūfah and was appointed the governor of Persia by
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). He was present during the battles of Jamal,
Siffin and Nahrawan. In Siffin the standard of the Ansar was given to
him by the Imam (a.s). He died during the period of the caliphate of the
Imam (a.s) and his funeral prayer was conducted by Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s). One of his sons, \`Amr Ibn Qardah al-Ansari was martyred in the
Battle of Karbala’.

*Qathm ibn al-\`Abbas*
----------------------

He was the cousin of the Prophet (a.s) and was much similar in
personality and looks to him. During the burial of the Prophet (a.s), he
went down the grave and was the last to come out. He was generous and
charitable. He used to fulfill the needs of persons to an extent that
they no more required to contact others for help. A poet, Dawūd ibn
Muslim says about him:

###### “O my she-camel! If you take me to Qathm, I shall not have to travel day after day!”

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed him the governor of Makkah. In one of
his letters to him, the Imam (a.s) wrote, “Have meetings every morning
and evening. Those who seek guidance, guide them. Educate the ignorant
and have discussions with the learned” These words indicate Qathm’s
state of learning and wisdom. After the martyrdom of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s), he went away to Samarkand along with Sa\`id ibn \`Uthman and was
martyred there.

*Yazid ibn Qays al-Arhabi*
--------------------------

He was an important person from Banū-Arhab, a branch of the tribe of
Hamdan. He had settled down in al-Kūfah. When the reciter of the holy
Qur’an at al-Kūfah protested against the attitude of \`Uthman and formed
a delegation to meet him, Ibn Qays was selected to lead it. He
participated with his brother Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani in the Battle
of Siffin and fought with great valor. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed
him the governor of Isfahan, Hamdan and Ray.

*Kumayl ibn Ziyad al-Nakha\`i*
------------------------------

He was very close to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). He was a person of great
piety and was the keeper of the knowledge and learning of the Household
of Muhammad (a.s). The Imam (a.s) had taught him a supplication which is
well-known as the *du\`a’ kumayl* and is quoted in the books of
supplications. He was a resident of al-Kūfah He was at the side of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) in the Battle of Siffin and did Jihad with the
Syrians.

When al-Hajjaj ibn Yūsuf al-Thaqafi defeated \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Ash\`ath in 82 H, al-Hajjaj ibn Yūsuf captured al-Kūfah
and massacred the Shi\`ah of \`Ali (a.s). The personality of Kumayl was
not unknown amongst the Shi\`ah of al-Kūfah. He went into hiding seeing
the tyranny of al-Hajjaj. The tyrant inquired about him from his people
but they did not reveal the information. al-Hajjaj therefore
discontinued their pensions as a punishment. When Kumayl learned about
this, he said that he had lived for long and that for a few more days of
life he would not tolerate his people starving. Saying this he himself
went to al-Hajjaj. al-Hajjaj treated him with much severity. Kumayl
replied to his queries firmly and in the same tone as the questions were
asked. He told al-Hajjaj that he was in his control and he could treat
him the way he wanted. But he reminded that their account would be
settled by Allah on the Day of Reckoning! He told al-Hajjaj that he was
not afraid of death. He also told him that his Imam (a.s) had informed
him that he would be martyred at the hands of a tyrant. al-Hajjaj said
that he was searching for him with that purpose only. Then he ordered
beheading of \`Ammar. Therefore, he was instantly beheaded at that place
only. At the time of he was martyred his age was 90 years. His grave is
located at a place between al-Kūfah and Najaf.

*Rabi\`ah ibn Khaytham al-Asadi*
--------------------------------

He was another close companion of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). He was
well-known for his piety. He was sent as the governor of Qazwin by Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s). When the Imam (a.s) stayed at Naqilah on his way to
Siffin, he awaited Rabi\`ah’s arrival with 4,000 men from Ray. He joined
a contingent in 61 or 62 H and proceeded to Khorasan and died there. His
grave is at a place about 6 miles from the mausoleum of Imam al-Rida
(a.s). His place of burial is well-known as *ziyaratgah khajeh rabi\`*.
When Imam al-Rida (a.s) arrived in tūs, he used to often visit
Rabi\`ah’s grave and say, “The advantage of coming to Khorasan was the
visits to Khwaja Rabi\`ah’s resting place!”

*\`Umar ibn Abi-Salamah*
------------------------

He was The son of Ummu-Salamah. His father was \`Abd al-Asad Makhzūmi.
He was born in Abyssinia in 2 H. At the time of the demise of the
Prophet (a.s), his age was nine years. In the Battle of the Camel,
\`Umar commanded the Right Flank of the Imam’s army. Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) had appointed him the governor of Bahrain. When the Imam (a.s)
decided to undertake the campaign of Siffin, he recalled \`Umar from
Bahrain and after the battle appointed him as the governor of Persia. He
died at al-Madinah in the year 83 H.

*Al-Nu\`man ibn \`Ajlan al-Ansari*
----------------------------------

He was the chief of the Ansar Tribes and a poet of repute. He was a
strong supporter of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and used to express his
rights and superiority through his poetry. The Imam (a.s) sent him in
the place of \`Umar ibn Abi-Salamah as the governor of Bahrain and Oman.
He fought on the side of the Imam (a.s) in the Battle of Siffin. His
brother Na\`im ibn \`Ajlan al-Ansari fought in the Battle of Karbala’
and was among the first persons to be martyred on that day al-Nu\`man
died during the period of Imam al-Hasan (a.s).

*\`Uthman ibn Hunayf al-Ansari*
-------------------------------

He was a well-known person from Ansar. He participated in the Battle of
Uhud and the ghazawat thereafter. He was among the very sincere
companions of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Before the Jang al-Jamal he was
appointed the governor of al-Basrah by the Imam (a.s). After the Battle,
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas replaced him. He settled down in al-Kūfah and
died during the time of Mu\`awiyah.

*Sa\`id ibn Mas\`ūd al-Thaqafi*
-------------------------------

He was the paternal uncle of al-Mukhtar ibn Abi-\`Ubaydah al-Thaqafi. In
the Battle of Siffin, he commanded one of the seven contingents of the
people of al-Kūfah. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed him as the governor
of al-Mada’in. When Imam al-Hasan (a.s) was injured at the hands of Ibn
Bashir al-Asadi during the rebellion of his army, he went to Al-Mada’in
and stayed with Sa\`id. Sa\`id made arrangements for the treatment of
his wounds.

*\`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas*
--------------------------

He was the paternal cousin of the Prophet (a.s). Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
had sent him as the governor of Yemen and the commander of the forces in
Yemen was Sa\`id ibn Nimran al-Hamdani. When Busr ibn Abi- Arta’ah
attacked Yemen, he could not bear his onslaught and left Yemen. For this
act Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) too him to task.

*Hassan ibn Hassan al-Bakri*
----------------------------

He was appointed the governor of al-Anbar by Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).
When Mu\`awiyah started his destructive activities on the borders of
Iraq, Sufyan ibn \`Awf al-Khalidi attacked al-Anbar with 6,000 men under
his command. He martyred Hassan and his thirty companions.
