Invasion of Al-dahhak Ibn Qays
==============================

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was busy with the campaign of the Battle of
the Camel, Mu\`awiyah saw the opportunity to attack certain places like
Harran, Qirqisiyah and al-Riqqah. He forced the people there to take his
*bay\`ah* and placed al-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fahri over them. When Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) was through with the Battle of the Camel and arrived
at al-Kūfah he learned that the people of these towns, who were the
supporters of \`Uthman, had owed their allegiance to Mu\`awiyah and
al-Dahhak ibn Qays was acting as the representative of Mu\`awiyah in
that area. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) formed a contingent of men under Malik
al-Ashtar to be sent to al-Jazirah. He had confidence that Malik had the
capability to set the matters right and evict al-Dahhak from that area.
Therefore, Malik set off without any further loss of time. When he
entered the bounds of al-Jazirah, and al-Dahhak learned of his arrival,
he sought help from al-Riqqah that was the refuge of the fans of
\`Uthman. Therefore, Saman ibn Mahzamah al-Asadi moved from there with a
contingent of men. When Malik reached near Harran, both al-Dahhak and
Saman also reached with their armies and the fighting started at a place
called Marj lying between al-Riqqah and Harran. With the intensive
attacks of Malik and his men, the enemy’s morale was shattered. When
al-Dahhak saw defeat staring in his face, he fled with his contingent
and locked himself in the fort of Harran. Malik chased him and besieged
the fort. When Mu\`awiyah learned of the defeat and ignominy of his
forces, he deputed Khalid ibn al-Walid’s son, \`Abd al-Rahman, with a
huge enforcement of men. When Malik learned of this movement, he decided
to lift the siege and deal with the new enemy enforcement. When both the
armies came face to face, the swords were unsheathed and severe fighting
commenced. \`Abd al-Rahman and his men could not stand the onslaught and
they fled to al-Riqqah. Malik besieged al-Riqqah from all sides.
Al-Dahhak learned of the defeat of \`Abd al-Rahman’s contingent and he
came out of the fort of Harran and moved towards al-Riqqah to relieve
the contingent from the siege. In that time, the Syrians sent another
contingent under the command of Ayman ibn Humayzah. Now al-Dahhak’s
morale was boosted and he attacked Malik’s contingent with full force.
Malik and his men took up arms and fought valiantly. The Syrians

fought with enthusiasm for sometime but could not bear the repeated
onslaught of the Iraqis and started running away defeated. The territory
of the al-Jazirah was now devoid of any Syrian army men and the people
of the area, who were the sympathizers of the fans of \`Uthman, sat
quietly at their homes. Malik sufficiently reprimanded those rebels and
took oaths of allegiance and obedience from them and took control of the
administration of the territory of the al-Jazirah in his hands.
