Dismissal of Qays Ibn Sa`d
==========================

After the Battle of the Camel, Mu\`awiyah had the fear that Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) would remove him from the governorate of Syria. He was
not willing to demit that office at any cost. This danger was there for
him from both Iraq and Egypt. If Qays ibn Sa\`d came with his armies
from Egypt and from the other side Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) attacked with
the Iraqi forces, he would not be able to face the two-edged onslaught.
He was thinking of either winning over the loyalty of Qays or to
cunningly get him removed from the governorate of Egypt. Therefore, he
wrote a very cunning letter to him that “\`Ali (a.s) had committed a
grave indiscretion by shedding the blood of \`Uthman and your tribe too
was involved in that act. If you want safety for yourself, you must join
those who are claiming qisas for the Blood of \`Uthman. If you
strengthen our hands, you will be given the control of the region of
Iraq and anyone of your choice, from your family, will be made the
governor of Hijaz. What ever else you need will also be granted to you I
shall await your earliest response.”

Mu\`awiyah had thrown this bait, but Qays was not an easy prey. He
replied, but he neither committed to join hand with him nor totally
turned down his offer. He thought it discreet to keep Mu\`awiyah
expecting a positive response from him. Therefore, he wrote, “I was not
involved in the assassination of \`Uthman, although the people of my
tribe were implicated in the act. You have termed \`Ali (a.s) as a party
to this killing. That is not in my knowledge. As far as joining hands
with you, the decision cannot be made in a hurry. However, I assure you
that I shall not take any step that will not be to your liking.”

When Mu\`awiyah read this letter he was unable to decide whether Qays
was pulling away his hand or extending his hand in cooperation to him.
He wrote back again, “I could not understand whether you are against me
or in my favor! If you are trying to keep me in darkness, I am not the
one to be easily carried away. The time is near when armies will be near
me and the reins of the horses in my hands. Then no excuses will work
with me!”

When Qays read this letter, he understood that Mu\`awiyah cannot be
brushed aside easily. Therefore, he wrote to him in clear terms, “I am
surprised that you have not been able to understand me. You tried to
mislead me with offers of governance and power! Can you imagine that I
move away from the emirate of the person who is most capable of leading
the Muslims, and whose veracity, nobility and nearness to the Prophet
(a.s) is unquestionable? Do you want me to put the yoke of your
obedience in my neck when you do not have anything to do with the
emirate and leadership? You are deceitful and the son of a deceit and
member of the group of the offspring of Iblis! In your letter, you have
talked about the armies. By Allah! If you save your life from my
onslaught, you must count yourself lucky!”

When Mu\`awiyah read this letter, he was very angry. In the end
Mu\`awiyah lost all hope of winning over Qays. When no subterfuge
worked, he turned his mind to cunning. He forged a letter purported to
be from Qays in which it was written, “From Qays ibn Sa\`d to
Mu\`awiyah, emir of Syria: I have decided after much thought that we
should not side with those people at whose hand one pious and noble
leader of Islam was killed. We repent from our sins and expect and pray
to Allah for preserving our Faith. We assure you of our obedience and
are ready to fight with the killers of the oppressed \`Uthman and shall
soon forward our military and monetary help.”

Besides this forged letter, they had also started spreading the story
through the word of mouth that Qays was Mu\`awiyah’s friend and
well-wisher. They said that he had already given all sorts of facilities
to the residents of Kharbatah and he treats all who go to him from there
with kindness.

Mu\`awiyah not only publicized this letter in Syria, but through his
agents he spread the story in al-Kūfah as well to poison the environment
there against Qays. Therefore, the story was taking rounds in the
streets of al-Kūfah. The word also reached the ears of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) as well. He called some of his close persons and had a discussion
with them. They said that Qays ibn Sa\`d is unhappy with him and was
conspiring with Mu\`awiyah and that it would be better to relieve him of
his position. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) understood that it should be the
trick of Mu\`awiyah. Therefore, he told his advisers:

###### “By Allah! I cannot believe these talks about Qays!”[1]

In this period Qays wrote a letter to the Imam (a.s) wherein he wrote,
“In

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 554

these surroundings some fans of \`Uthman who want to be spared from
taking the bay\`ah. Their representatives have told me that until the
circumstances do not normalize, they should be left to their own
scruples. I have thought it discreet for the time being we should not
fight with them. It is possible that they might come to the right
decision in some time.”

When \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far was informed about this letter, he said, “O
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! I feel as if Qays is telling this to gain time.
You must write to him that he should obtain the allegiance of those
people. If they refuse, he must fight with them.”

Other persons too agreed with this suggestion. Considering the opinion
of the people at al-Kūfah, the Imam (a.s) wrote to Qays, that the people
of Egypt who had not as yet pledged their allegiance, seek their
immediate bay\`ah. If they refuse, fight with them. When Qays got this
letter he wrote in the reply, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! If we fight with
them, they will become stronger supporters of your enemies Discretion
requires that they are left to themselves for the time being.”

This reply from Qays convinced people that he was going closer to
Mu\`awiyah and al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays, \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far, Muhammad
ibn al-Hanafiyyah and other important persons of al-Kūfah insisted that
he must be deposed forthwith. They suggested the name of Muhammad ibn
Abi-Bakr to replace him. (a.s) was not in favor of deposing him. But
when the insistence increased, he issued orders for removing Qays ibn
Sa\`d and appointing Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr in his place.

The trick that Mu\`awiyah played was succeeding. The result came about
in the shape of removal of Qays from Egypt. At first Mu\`awiyah tried to
tempt Qays to join hands with him. When he did not succeed in that, he
forged the letter and through propaganda turned the people against Qays.
Thus, through Amir al-Mu’minin’s own companions he got rid of Qays. Ibn
Hajar al-\`Asqalani writes:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) had appointed Qays as the governor of Egypt. Mu\`awiyah tried through several subterfuges to tempt him but he did not take the bait. Then he misguided the companions of \`Ali (a.s) and they proposed appointment of Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr in such a manner that (a.s) appointed him the emir of Egypt.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isābah, Vol 3, Page 239

Qays demitted his governorate of Egypt and came away to al-Madinah and
those people who were scared of his skills at warfare and his
exceptional valor took a sigh of relief. The enemy was pleased and those
who wanted to rejoice at his deposition were rejoicing. Therefore,
Hassan ibn Thabit, who was a person from the \`Uthmanite Group, came to
Qays and said that he was given a raw deal that he was deposed although
you were not a part of the conspiracy to kill \`Uthman. Qays said
angrily:

###### “O person with no vision! Get away from here! If I had not the fear that war would commence between my tribe and yours, I would have killed you now!”[1]

Marwan ibn al-Hakam and al-Aswad ibn al-Bukhtari too threatened him.
When he felt that there was a danger of being made a captive, or even
killed, he went to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) in al-Kūfah with Sahl ibn
Hunayf. When Mu\`awiyah learned about this, he wrote in anger to Marwan
and al-Aswad:

###### “You have both made the way for Qays going away to \`Ali (a.s). By Allah! If you helped \`Ali (a.s) with a hundred thousand armed men, I would not feel so much as I am feeling for your sending Qays to al-Kūfah that with his opinion and suggestions made \`Ali (a.s) more strong!”[2]

After deposition from Egypt, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) appointed Qays the
governor of Azerbaijan. During his journey to Syria, Qays appointed
\`Abdullah ibn Shubayl al-Ahmasi his deputy and took part in the Battle
of Siffin with great valor.

About the deposition of Qays ibn Sa\`d generally people criticize the
political aptitude of \`Ali (a.s). They say that the decision was
contrary to the norms of discretion. He had moved away such a capable
hand from the very important province of Egypt at a time when Mu\`awiyah
was looking for a chance to start hostilities. The need was to make the
administration in Egypt stronger. But by removing him from there, the
position was handed over to Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr who was neither
capable of contending with Mu\`awiyah’s incursions nor did he save the
province from the depredations of the enemy. Because of his poor
political acumen, control over Egypt was lost and Mu\`awiyah had annexed
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 555  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 3, Page 556

Superficially, this objection sounds reasonable, but to make a fair
decision about it is necessary to consider the circumstances obtainable
during that period. That was the time when the means of communication
were meager. Within the same realm, the happenings in one province were
not known to the people in the other regions. Even if some messages got
through, the event would assume an entirely different shape than what
actually happened.

According to the political situation obtainable in Egypt, however much
the attitude of Qays ibn Sa\`d was discreet, but the messages that were
traveling from there, through word of mouth or otherwise, doubting his
attitude was not unlikely. On reaching Egypt, he did not deal strictly
with the people of Kharbata who were loyalists of \`Uthman.

Normally such elements are treated as rebels. There could be
justification of leaving such people to their scruples when the
establishment had neither means nor power to control them. It cannot be
said that Qays did not have the means and the strength to subdue those
10,000 \`Uthman loyalists. Again when Mu\`awiyah tempted Qays to join
his group, he neither accepted the offer nor rebuked it. This attitude
provoked more doubts about him. When he ultimately rebuked Mu\`awiyah’s
offer, what was the need for him to publicize about the rebuff. Instead,
Mu\`awiyah went to the extent of forgery to create an impression in the
minds of the people of Syria and al-Kūfah that Qays was hand in glove
with Mu\`awiyah! Notwithstanding all the pressures, Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) continued to put his trust in Qays ibn Sa\`d.

He never doubted his integrity at any stage. He did not order for any
inquiries about the rumors taking rounds of al-Kūfah about Qays. Despite
this, it was difficult for the Imam (a.s) to continue with him as the
governor of Egypt because the ineptitude of the natures of the people of
al-Kūfah is not a hidden thing. Otherwise, if hostilities had started in
Egypt, they would have refused to mobilize men for the operation. In
such an eventuality, Qays would not have been able to contend with the
Syrians with the force available to him in Egypt. Therefore, when the
armies of Syria attacked Egypt, Muhammad kept pleading for men, but the
people of al-Kūfah did not come to his rescue. Mu\`awiyah was under the
wrong impression that after being deposed from Egypt, Qays would prefer
to sit at home and would not come back to active duty. That was the
pettifogging of a mean mind.

Qays was a person who followed the Truth. It was not his nature to go
away from the Truth when he was deprived of a worldly position. In fact,
such occasions are the acid tests of the people of character. Although
Mu\`awiyah

succeeded in getting Qays removed from the governorate of Egypt, but the
truth is that his remaining in position at Egypt was not so unpalatable
to him than his participation with great valor in the Battle of Siffin.
Mu\`awiyah was heard saying during the battle, “If the battle did not
stop by the morrow, Qays will obliterate us from the face of the Earth!”
