The Battle of Siffin
====================

##### Part 1

Syria was the cradle of Umayyad power and the capital of Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan. He was occupying the region since the times of the second
caliph. Because of this long period in the position of the governor, he
had entrenched himself and was ruling from Damascus like an autocratic
monarch. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) assumed the office of the caliph,
he wanted to bring about a total change in the administration. Hence, he
put all the governors under notice of change. Therefore, Qays ibn Sa\`d
was sent as the governor to Egypt, \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Abbas to Yemen,
\`Uthman ibn Hunayf to al-Basrah as the new incumbents. They took charge
of the provinces without any problems. The Imam (a.s) sent \`Imarah ibn
Shihab towards al-Kūfah and Sahl ibn Hunayf to Syria.

While going to al-Kūfah, when \`Imarah stopped at Zabalah, Talhah ibn
Khuwaylid al-Asadi intercepted him and asked him to return from there or
else he would be killed. Therefore, he returned from there. When Sahl
ibn Hunayf reached the valley of Taboo on his way to Syria, a unit of
men appointed by Mu\`awiyah stopped him and asked who he was and where
he was headed to? I am the governor for Syria appointed by \`Ali Ibn
Abi-Talib (a.s). They said that besides Mu\`awiyah they would not accept
anyone as the ruler of Syria.

They warned him to return to the place from where he came, or else their
swords will settle the matter! Sahl could not have fought with the
patrol consisting of a large number of men. Therefore, he was forced to
return back. He returned to the presence of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and
reported the matter to him. Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s) knew from the outset
that Mu\`awiyah would not vacate the position easily. He also knew that
one day the flames of battle would rise between the Syrians and people
of al-Kūfah. But he did not want to precipitate matters and wished to
make all possible efforts for a peaceful settlement. Therefore, he sent
al-Hajjaj ibn Ghaziyah al-Ansari with a letter to Mu\`awiyah and asked
him to come with a delegation of Syrians to al-Madinah to owe his
allegiance to the Imam (a.s). Mu\`awiyah read the letter but did not
give it any importance and asked al-Hajjaj to go back. He gave one
package

to Qabisah al-\`Absi and sent him to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). When he
opened the package, it was having a small note saying, “From Mu\`awiyah
ibn Abi-Sufyan to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.” The Imam (a.s) asked what the
meaning of the note was. Qabisah put a glance around and asked, “Amongst
you is there anyone belonging to the tribe of Banū-Abs?” The people
replied, “Yes!” He said, “Now! Listen to me with care! And think over
the consequences! I have left behind in the Masjid of Damascus 50,000
persons, sheikhs and elite, crying over the bloodied cloak of \`Uthman.
Their beards are wet with tears and the sounds of wailing are emanating
from the place. They have taken an oath that until they do not color
their swords with the blood of the killers of \`Uthman, they would not
take rest! At this Khalid ibn Zufar al-\`Abasei said:

###### “By Allah! You are a very bad emissary of Syria! Do you want to frighten the Muhajirūn and Ansar with the army of Syria and the wailing over the cloak of \`Uthman! By Allah! \`Uthman’s cloak is not Yūsuf’s raiment nor their wailing the cries and laments of Ya\`qūb (a.s).”[1]

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw this attitude of Mu\`awiyah, he thought
of going to Damascus to admonish the person. He got together an army to
start on the campaign. He had not even commenced the journey when the
news of the mischief of Talhah and al-Zubayr reached him. Instead of
going to Syria he had to go to al-Basrah and crush the rebellion of the
owners of the camel. When he returned to al-Kūfah after that campaign,
he decided to send another messenger to Mu\`awiyah. The deposed governor
of Yemen, Jarir ibn \`Abdullah al-Bujali offered his services for the
task and said that his long-standing relationship with Mu\`awiyah will
help him in convincing Mu\`awiyah for the *bay\`ah*.

Malik al-Ashtar opposed this idea and said that the person was secretly
a friend of the Syrians He expressed his fear that instead of mending
the fences, he might harm the interests of the Imam (a.s). The Imam
(a.s) said that the person be allowed to go and see what results he
achieves. Therefore, he was given a letter and sent to Syria. The
contents were “The Muhajirūn and Ansar have owed their allegiance to me.
Now you do not have any justification to refuse allegiance to me. You
must adopt the same attitude as was done by the people of al-Madinah.

As far as the matter for the *qisas* of \`Uthman is concerned, you can
broach the subject with me after owing your allegiance to me. I shall
decide about it in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 142

the light of the Qur’an and Sunnah.” When Jarir went with this letter to
Mu\`awiyah, he read the letter and told him:

###### “You ask \`Ali (a.s) to give the territory of Syria to me, then I shall do the *bay\`ah*.”[1]

After thinking for a while, he asked Jarir to wait there for a few days
so that he would discuss the matter with the people of Syria and take
their opinion. Therefore, he called his brother \`Utbah ibn Abi-Sufyan
to take his opinion. \`Utbah asked him to call \`Amr ibn al-\`As to his
place and make use of his wisdom. Certainly, he said, \`Amr will give
good advice. Mu\`awiyah liked this suggestion. He wrote a letter to
\`Amr ibn al-\`As, “You must have learned what treatment \`Ali (a.s) has
given to Talhah, al-Zubayr and Umm al-Mu’minin. Now he is turning
towards me. He has sent Jarir ibn \`Abdullah al-Bujali to me seeking my
*bay\`ah*. I do not take any step without consulting you. Therefore,
come immediately to me.”

\`Amr read the letter and understood that Mu\`awiyah did not need any
advice about the *bay\`ah* because the consequence of owing his
allegiance would mean the loss of the Governorate of Syria and at any
cost he would not like to give up the post. Certainly the consultation
he wants to make is for opening up a front to fight against \`Ali (a.s).

\`Amr must have decided whether to go or not to go. But to get further
opinion on his decision he called his two sons, \`Abdullah and Muhammad,
and asked for their advice. \`Abdullah said that he had no chance of
becoming the caliph, it would be better for him to sit quietly at home
and do not compromise the Faith for a little worldly benefit. Contrary
to this, Muhammad opined that he should not miss such a golden
opportunity. He said that such opportunities do not come every day. He
added that he was not an unknown person in Arabia and that his opinion
has certain weight. A new establishment is taking shape and his opinion
would be of great help in the process. He insisted that when decisions
are made about the caliphate, his being away from action was
unimaginable. After hearing both the sons’ opinions, \`Amr said:

###### “O \`Abdullah what you have said is beneficial for my Hereafter and my Faith too will remain firm! O Muhammad! What you have suggested is best for me from the worldly point of view and not for the Hereafter!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Islām, Vol 2, Page 168  
 **[2]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 141

After taking the opinions of \`Abdullah and Muhammad, \`Amr asked his
slave Wardan about his opinion. He said, “You are on such a cross-road
where there is the world on one side and the hereafter on the other. The
world is with Mu\`awiyah and the Hereafter with \`Ali (a.s). Sometimes
you bend towards the world and at others think of the Hereafter. It
would be better if you sit quietly at home and not sided with any one.
But I have a feeling that there is a turmoil going round in your mind
and you will, in the end, opt for the world and prefer Mu\`awiyah over
\`Ali (a.s)” Hearing this \`Amr said, “Only Allah will appreciate the
vision of Wardan. He has exposed the hidden fact!”

\`Amr ibn al-\`As was very desirous of the governorate of Egypt and
there would not be a better opportunity to fulfill this long-standing
wish. Therefore, he prepared to visit Mu\`awiyah and reached Damascus
with his two sons and Wardan. After exchange of pleasantries Mu\`awiyah
said, “I am having several matters troubling my mind and, therefore I
have called you to take your advice. I hope you will be able to help
resolve my troubles. \`Amr asked, “What are the problems?” Mu\`awiyah
replied, “One problem is that I have been informed of Muhammad ibn
Abi-Hudhayfah has escaped from the jail with his men. I fear danger from
him and his men. The second problem is that the Caesar of Rome is
planning to attack Syria to annex this territory. The third problem is
that Jarir ibn \`Abdullah al-Bujali has brought a message from \`Ali
(a.s) that I must owe my allegiance to him or prepare for battle.” \`Amr
said, “If Ibn Abi-Hudhayfah has escaped, you must not have any fear from
him. Send some riders to chase him. If he were held, it would be fine.
Even otherwise, he cannot cause any harm to you.

About the possibility of attack by Caesar, release all the Romans in
captivity with you. And send to him some slave girls and handicrafts of
gold and silver as gifts along with an offer for peace. He would not
turn down this gesture! However, the problem of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib
(a.s) is different. The world knows that he is an experienced general.
He is capable of the position that he is holding. There is no comparison
between him and you.” Mu\`awiyah said, “I do not deny his capability.
But he has given air to mischief and encouraged the killers of \`Uthman
in their heinous deed. Therefore it is our duty to claim *qisas* from
him. I have called you to discuss about the matter of claiming the
*qisas*”

\`Amr said, “You have called me to gather people under your flag, but
you have yourself started tricking me! Who will trust you that you want
to fight a war for avenging the blood of \`Uthman? The world knows that
during the siege \`Uthman had pleaded for help and you, on purpose, did
not pay any

heed to his call! Even I moved away to Palestine leaving him to the
mercy of the rebels! If you really want me to cooperate with you, then
you must talk straight to me. We know each other very well! The truth is
that \`Ali’s services to Islam, his superiority in learning, his
precedence in accepting the Faith and Migration are such that I do not
have the courage to fight with him. It will be the work of a person with
great courage.” Mu\`awiyah understood that \`Amr was just making an
excuse. If he had no intention of cooperating, he would not have come
all the way to Damascus. The purpose in dilly dallying was certainly
that he would claim a huge compensation for his cooperation. Therefore,
after taking a little more time, \`Amr said:

###### If I cooperate with you and you succeed, what will be my share in that?”[1]

Mu\`awiyah knew that \`Amr will not agree to cooperate without tough
bargaining. He asked what price he would have to pay to him. \`Amr said:

###### “Until you rule, the state of Egypt must be under me!”[2]

When Mu\`awiyah heard this claim, he was nonplussed. The price asked was
far more than he expected. Neither he was in a position to turn down his
demand nor did he wish to accept it. He stared at \`Amr and said, “I can
make a false promise, but I do not want to take you up the garden path!”
\`Amr, “Try to cheat me. I have the means of handling every trick!”
Mu\`awiyah said, “Come a little closer to me. I want to whisper
something to you in confidence!” \`Amr went closer and put his ear near
the lips of Mu\`awiyah. Mu\`awiyah said, “What do you say about my
cunning! I did trick you!” “How?” asked \`Amr.

Mu\`awiyah said, “Here! And just now! We are both alone here and there
is no third person in the hearing distance. Then what was the need of
whispering into your ear! When you can be tricked being so alert, then
you can be tricked later on as well! I would only suggest to you to
reconsider your demand. If you remain insistent, people would say that
to grab the emirate of Egypt you have taken the step.” \`Amr said,
“Leave aside what people would say. No excuses will work with me. If you
agree to the demand I have made, I shall support you wholeheartedly.
Otherwise, you do what suits you.” Saying this \`Amr got up and went
towards his residence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 158  
 **[2]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 158

When \`Utbah ibn Abi-Sufyan heard about this conversation, he told
Mu\`awiyah:

###### “We are not willing to buy \`Amr by parting with Egypt.”[1]

Mu\`awiyah said, “I have not made any decision as yet. Tonight I shall
think over it. “Therefore he spent the night in deep thought and decided
that to make use of the cunning and shrewdness of \`Amr he will have to
promise parting away Egypt to him. Therefore, he called \`Amr and
finalized the deal with him. He wrote out a formal agreement and handed
over to him. Taking the document, \`Amr came back to his residence
happily and mentioned about it to a cousin of his. The cousin knit his
brows and said, “I wonder what face you will show to the Quraysh? How
will you spend an honorable life with your tribe when you are already
infamous for your habit of selling your Faith?” \`Amr said, “If I was
with \`Ali (a.s), the four walls of my house would be sufficient for me.
Now I am with Mu\`awiyah and cannot sit content with the four walls of
my house! “His cousin said, “Mu\`awiyah has certainly bought your Faith!
You are after him for worldly gains!” When Mu\`awiyah heard of this
talk, he was very upset.

He ordered \`Amr’s cousin to be arrested that he was not able to
misguide more persons. When he heard about the plans for his arrest, he
quietly slinked away and safely arrived in al-Kūfah to meet Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s). Through him the news of \`Amr’s agreement with
Mu\`awiyah was known by all and sundry.

After the agreement \`Amr gave to Mu\`awiyah the farsighted suggestion
that it was better not to broach the matter of the caliphate for the
time being and the efforts be made to convince the people of Syria that
the responsibility of the assassination of \`Uthman rested on \`Ali
(a.s) and that he had instigated people to commit the act.

Once he was assassinated, then he gave protection to the killers when
this propaganda sank into the minds of the people, then a formal war
could be declared against him. After the war, the question of authority
would automatically resolve. However, to win the public opinion there
will be need for the support of the prominent persons. For this \`Abadah
ibn Samit al-Ansari was present in Syria who had great influence over
the people there. First, he will have to think their way. If they were
able to influence his thinking, then every individual in Syria would be
with Mu\`awiyah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 158

Mu\`awiyah appreciated this suggestion very much and sent out a
messenger to call \`Abadah.

When \`Abadah came to Mu\`awiyah, himself and \`Amr were sitting
shoulder to shoulder. Seeing \`Abadah, they stood up respectfully.
\`Abadah went forward and sat between them. To gain his favor,
Mu\`awiyah praised him very much. And then described the good qualities
of \`Uthman. After this preamble he said that they wanted that his blood
should not go waste and, therefore, they wanted his support for claiming
*qisas* for his blood. \`Abadah said that whatever they had said, he had
heard. But he wanted to know from them that, contrary to the custom, why
he was sitting between them? Mu\`awiyah said that the requirement of his
superiority was that he sat in the center and they on either side of
him. He said that was not the reason. The reason is that during the
ghazwah Tabūk, the Prophet (a.s) was traveling when he saw both of you
together talking, he said:

###### “When you find them sitting together, separate them, because they will never be together for any virtuous work!”[1]

Therefore, \`Abadah said, he wanted them not to come together and sat
between them. As far as supporting their cause was concerned, he said,
he was not willing to do it.

Now Mu\`awiyah, on the advice of \`Amr, made one move that on the way to
Shurahbil, posted Yazid ibn Asad, Busr ibn Arta’ah, Sufyan ibn \`Umar,
Makharaq ibn al-Harith, Hamzah ibn Malik, Habis ibn Sa\`d and some elite
of Yemen with instructions that when Shurahbil passed that way, they
should give an impression that it was a chance meeting and try to create
an impression on his mind that the responsibility for the assassination
of \`Uthman rested on none other than \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s).
Therefore, at every stage, wherever he halted, they were repeating the
story. When he entered the precincts of Damascus, Mu\`awiyah sent the
elites of the city to receive him. They too gave him an impression that
\`Ali (a.s) was responsible for the killing of \`Uthman.

When he reached Mu\`awiyah along with the reception group, he received
him warmly and after exchange of pleasantries, he told him that \`Ali
(a.s) was seeking his *bay\`ah*. He said that although he was not
against this in principle, but has reservations that he is the killer of
\`Uthman. Shurahbil asked him about his decision in those circumstances.
Mu\`awiyah replied that he was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-\`Iqd al-Farīd, Vol 3, Page 117

willing to owe allegiance to \`Ali (a.s) if the people of Syria want me
to. If they wanted him to refuse, he shall abide by their opinion even
in that event. He said that he had invited Shurahbil only to seek his
opinion. He said that he wanted some more time to go round and gather
information on the people’s opinion about the killing of \`Uthman.
Mu\`awiyah said that it would be the right thing to do. He went round
the city and every person, he met, said that \`Ali (a.s) was responsible
for the killing of \`Uthman. What else would they say? Their mouths were
locked with the oppressive pressure of Mu\`awiyah. Everywhere there were
spies of Mu\`awiyah. When Shurahbil came back from his rounds, his
emotions were fully charged. Immediately on arrival, he told Mu\`awiyah:

###### “No one can deny that Ibn Abi-Talib has killed \`Uthman. If you owe your allegiance to him, we shall chase you away from Syria.”[1]

When Mu\`awiyah saw that Shurahbil was totally under his spell, he
matched his tone with his and said that if his opinion was so strong,
his own opinion too was that \`Uthman was killed for no fault of his and
they should not owe allegiance to his killers. Their first duty, he
said, will be to avenge the killing. But for this revenge, they needed
the public opinion solidly behind them. This was possible only if they
show to them that \`Ali (a.s) was the killer of \`Uthman. This task can
only be accomplished by Shurahbil, Mu\`awiyah added stressing that none
else had such influence on the Syrians as he did. He asked Shurahbil to
travel to all parts of Syria and build the public opinion. Shurahbil was
highly emotional at that time. He immediately agreed to take up the
journey.

When the people of al-Kūfah heard that Mu\`awiyah was creating doubts in
the minds of the people and egging on to agree to fighting a war, they
asked \`Ali (a.s) to make a preemptive attack on Syria before Mu\`awiyah
was ready with his war machine. But the Imam (a.s) said that until Jarir
did not return with a decision for war or peace, it was not advisable to
start hostilities. It was already four months since Jarir reached Syria.
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was repeatedly writing to him to get a final word
and return urgently. But Mu\`awiyah was delaying him with some excuse or
other to gain time and prepare the people of Syria for going to war.
When he was assured of the support of Shurahbil, and the events were
shaping the way he wanted, he called Jarir and said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 159

###### “Go to your Emir now and tell him that the people of Syria would not owe their allegiance to him.”[1]

Shurahbil went from town to town, and village to village announcing that
\`Ali (a.s) had killed \`Uthman and they should rise to seek *qisas* for
his blood. Those who claimed *qisas*, \`Ali (a.s) attacked and killed
them and occupied their cities and their properties. He told them that
only Syria was remaining. Only people from Syria must join hands and
fight with him for the *qisas* He appealed to them to join under the
flag of the emir of Syria. Shurahbil was very influential in the
territory. People gathered in large numbers and assembled to join the
forces of Mu\`awiyah.

In addition to the people of Syria, Banū-Umayyah and those who supported
them too assembled in Damascus. The chief of these persons were Mughirah
ibn Shu\`bah, \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`d, Marwan ibn al-Hakam, Sa\`id ibn
al-\`As, \`Abdullah ibn \`Amir, al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah, \`Ubaydullah ibn
\`Umar, Sa\`id ibn \`Uthman, Abū-Hurayrah, Hudhayfah, Abū-Umamah
al-Bahili and al-Nu\`man ibn Bashir. The first to arrive among them was
al-Nu\`man ibn Bashir. With him he brought the bloodied cloak of
\`Uthman and the severed fingers of his wife, Na’ilah bint Farfasah.
Mu\`awiyah fixed the cloak and the fingers over the pulpit of the Masjid
of Damascus to upbraid the feelings of the people. After the men
assembled in Damascus, the paraphernalia of war was arranged.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard of this activity, he decided to
advance his armies towards Syria. On a Friday, giving the Sermon from
the pulpit, he said:

###### “O People! Move towards the enemies of the Qur’an and Sunnah! Go to meet the killers of Ansar and the Muhajirūn! Go to face those mean and impertinent people who had accepted Islam out of fear! They were admitted to the fold just to humor them. Rise that they refrain from killing and destroying the Muslims!”[2]

One person from the tribe of Fazarah, Arbad by name, stood up and said,
“Do you want that, the way you took us to al-Basrah to kill our own
brothers, we attack our brothers in Syria and kill them. By Allah! We
are not ready to do this!” Malik al-Ashtar understood that this was an
agent of Mu\`awiyah and was trying to create a bad heart in the ranks of
\`Ali’s army. He shouted asking people to catch him. But the man ran
away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 160  
 **[2]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 164

Some people chased him. He had reached the neighborhood of al-Kunnasah
when they caught up with him. He was trampled under their feet so much
that he died at the spot. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) decided that his killer
cannot be identified and therefore ordered paying the blood money for
his life from the *bayt al-mal*. The Imam (a.s) was upset with this
happening. Malik al-Ashtar said that the people were solidly behind him
and that he should not give any credence to the episode. He said that
they were obedient to him and would fight for him until they died.
Similarly, other people too came up with their assurances.

When all the fighters of al-Kūfah assembled under his flag, the Imam
(a.s) selected \`Uqbah ibn \`Amr al-Ansari as his representative and
declaring al-Nukhaylah as the cantonment ordered Malik ibn Habib
al-Yarbū\`i to stay in al-Kūfah so that he could direct the late
arrivals to go and join the army. The Imam (a.s) left al-Kūfah with the
army and camped at al-Nukhaylah He sent letters to the functionaries in
the different provinces to mobilize men and materials and immediately
report. Therefore, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas from al-Basrah, Mikhnaf ibn
Sulaym from Isfahan, Sa\`id ibn Wahab from Hamdan and functionaries of
other territories reached with their men and materials. Among them,
there was a group of the participants in the Battle of Badr and those
who took part in the bay\`at al-ridwan. Hakim writes:

“In the Battle of Siffin there were 80 veterans of the Battle of Badr
with \`Ali (a.s) and 250 of those Companions who were present at the
*bay\`at al-ridwan!”*[1]

The Valley of al-Nukhaylah was overflowing with fighting men and Amir
al-Mu’minin was arranging them in order when information reached that
the Syrian army was moving towards the Iraqi borders. The Imam (a.s)
sent an advance guard of 8,000 men under Ziyad ibn al-Nadr al-Harithi
and another of 4,000 men under Shurayh ibn al-Harith for patrolling the
borders and to reconnoiter the strength and dispositions of the enemy
troops. He gave them strict instructions that unless they received the
Imam’s orders, or the enemy attacked, they should not start fighting.

For better management of the troops, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) divided the
army into seven groups. There was a commander for each of these groups.
On the fourth day of the dispatch of the advanced guards, 5 Shawwal 36
H, he started with his huge army from the Valley of al-Nukhaylah. When,
after crossing the river Euphrates, they came outside the limits of
al-Kūfah, he

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Vol 3, Page 104

announced about the ²uhr Prayer and said that those who had come that
far to send away their relatives, should offer all he four genuflections
prescribed for the prayer. Those who were traveling should offer the
Qasr prayer. The Imam (a.s) too offered Qasr. After the prayer, the
journey was again commenced. At a distance of 6 miles from al-Kūfah,
Dayr Abū-Mūsa, the \`Asr Prayer was offered. Moving from there, at
Baras, a place lying between al-Kūfah and al-Hillah, the Maghrib and
\`Isha’ Prayers were offered. The army halted there for the night. After
the morning Prayer, they crossed the Canal of Qabin and halted at a
place called Biyah so that the men had their midday meal. While starting
from there, they set feet on the land of Babylon, and seeing the ruins
of the city, the Imam (a.s) asked his men to ride fast and leave the
accursed land as soon as possible. The reason was that the place had a
curse over it and had sunk into the ground many a time. Therefore, left
the reins of the horses loose and spurred the horses to speed. Then they
crossed the Canal of Sarat on boats and, on the other side offered the
\`Asr Prayer in congregation. After the prayer they commenced the
journey again and via Dayr Ka\`b arrived at the place of Karbala’.
Seeing this land, signs of sadness appeared on the face of the Imam
(a.s) and his eyes were wet. Some people asked the reason for his
sadness. He told them about the sad events of Karbala’ that were to
happen years hence. He also indicated the spots that were to be soaked
with the blood of Sayyid al-Shuhada' (the master of the martyrs) and
others. Proceeding from there, they halted at Sabat for the night.

The people of Sabat offered provisions for the men and fodder for the
animals. But the Imam (a.s) did not accept their offer and said that
they should not be burdened with the expense. On the banks of the River
Tigris, near Sabat, there is the city of al-Mada’in. The people of
al-Mada’in had not yet joined the army of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). He
ordered al-Harith ibn \`Abdullah al-A\`war to tell the people of
al-Mada’in that their strong young men must join the \`Asr Prayer. When
the men came, the Imam (a.s) said, “I am surprised that you are keeping
away from our army! The enemy forces are advancing towards us!” They
said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! We were awaiting your orders. We shall abide
by whatever orders are given to us!” He asked \`Adi Ibn Hatam and his
son Zayd to recruit men from al-Mada’in. \`Adi mobilized eight hundred
men in a stay of three days and Zayd ibn \`Adi recruited four hundred
men. They went and joined the advancing army. From al-Mada’in, the Imam
(a.s) sent a contingent of three thousand men under Ma\`qil ibn Qays
ahead of the army and told him that the army was proceeding to al-Riqqah
and he should go with the contingent to al-Mawsil that was a halting
place for caravans those days and asked him to come to al-Riqqah via

Nasibahin. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) left al-Mada’in and halted at
Bahurasir. This was the picnic spot of the kings of Persia where
pleasant gardens grew and palaces for the kings were constructed in the
past. The cruel hands of time had destroyed everything. In place of the
palaces, there were mounds of rubble. When Hurayz ibn Sahm saw these
ruins, he recited Ibn Ya\`qūb al-Tamimi’s couplet:

###### “Where there houses were, winds are blowing,  
 It appears they were inhabited for a limited period!”

When the Imam (a.s) heard this couplet, he said, instead of the couplet
he should have recited the following Verse of the Holy Qur’an:

### كَمْ تَرَكُوا مِنْ جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ. وَزُرُوعٍ وَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ. وَنَعْمَةٍ كَانُوا فِيهَا فَاكِهِينَ. كَذَلِكَ وَأَوْرَثْنَاهَا قَوْمًا آخَرِينَ. فَمَا بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَا كَانُوا مُنظَرِينَ.

#### “How many of the gardens and fountains have they left, and cornfields and noble places, and goodly things wherein they rejoiced. Thus (it was), and We gave them as a heritage to another people. So, the heaven and the earth did not weep for them, nor were they respited. (44/25-29)”

From Bahurasir they arrived at al-Anbar. The non-Arab inhabitants,
Banū-Khushnushak, started jumping and running when they saw the Imam
(a.s) with the army. The Imam (a.s) asked why they were behaving in that
strange manner. They said that it was their custom to welcome the rulers
in that manner. The Imam (a.s) said that the custom would benefit
neither their ruler nor them. He asked them to stop that futile
practice. After the customary welcome, the people offered supplies of
horses, mules and fodder and wanted to arrange food for the men. The
Imam (a.s) did not agree to have food there. But he accepted the horses
and mules provided their value be adjusted against the tribute they
paid. After spending two days at al-Anbar the army proceeded towards Hit
and from there they went to Aqtar and halted there. Now they crossed the
Euphrates and reached Ard al-Jaza’ir. Here Namr ibn Qasit along with the
tribe of Banū-Taghlib gave a grand reception to the Imam (a.s) and his
army. When they proceeded from there, they reached near Qarqisiyah where
they saw that the advance guards under Ziyad ibn al-Nadr and Shurayh ibn
Hani’ were arriving from different routes. The Imam (a.s) said, “It is a
very interesting advance guard that is arriving after the main army!”
Ziyad and Shurayh were apologetic and they said, “when we started from
al-Nukhaylah, we reached I\`anat along the river bank. Reaching there we
learnt

that you had crossed over to Ard al-Jaza’ir. We had a fear that if our
small contingent came across Mu\`awiyah’s army, our small contingent
would not be able to contend with them and because of the river being
between us; it would not be possible to get immediate relief from you.
We thought of crossing over the river from I\`anat but the people there
removed the bridge and locked themselves up in the fort. We were
therefore forced to retrace our steps and from Hit we have reached here.
“The Imam (a.s) considered their excuse admissible and proceeded
further. When they reached near the town of al-Riqqah, they established
camp near the Balaq Canal. Ma\`qil ibn Qays, whom the Imam (a.s) had
sent with a contingent of 3,000 men from al-Mada’in, via Nasibahin, too
reached al-Riqqah. Al-Riqqah is situated on the Eastern bank of the
River Euphrates and the army had to cross over to the Western bank. But
the population of al-Riqqah consisted of fans of \`Uthman, and Simak ibn
Makhramah al-Asadi, who was staying there with 800 of his tribesmen, too
was a supporter of the Syrians. These people had started from al-Kūfah
to join Mu\`awiyah and under an instruction from him were trying to
create hurdles in the way of the Imam’s movement. Therefore, they
removed the bridge from the river and hid themselves in their homes.
Despite this mischief, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) did not want to have any
conflict with them and, with his army, proceeded further along the bank
of the river to cross it at the next bridge enroute. Malik al-Ashtar was
very disturbed with this mischief of the people of Banū-Asad. When Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) went further, Malik challenged and threatened
Banū-Asad and warned them that if they did not erect the bridge by
joining the boats, he would burn down the entire habitation. This threat
was effective. The people came out of their homes and agreed to erect
the bridge. Malik sent word to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) that he must
return back for the bridge was being erected The Imam (a.s) came back
with his men and crossed to the western bank of the river

From here Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) sent, once again, Ziyad ibn al-Nadr and
Shurayh Ibn Hani’, with small contingents, as advance guards towards
Syria. When they reached Sūr al-Rūm, they saw that Abul-A\`war
al-Salami, with twenty five thousand Syrian troops, was camping there.
They immediately sent a letter with al-Harith ibn Hambahan to the Imam
(a.s) alerting about a sizeable contingent of the Syrians camping at Sūr
al-Rūm. After getting this information (a.s) sent Malik al-Ashtar with
3,000 men and asked him to take command of the situation in his hands.
He was also instructed not to commence fighting until the enemy
commenced it. In the event of fight starting, he was asked to be at the
center of the formation, keep Ziyad on the right flank and Shurayh on
the left. He was also asked not to go very close to

the enemy formation that they think that he was very keen to fight, nor
should he be at such a long distance that they thought he was scared of
the fight. The Imam (a.s) added that he would follow them with the rest
of the army. Malik started immediately, and with the contingents of
Ziyad and Shurayh, he halted at a reasonable distance from the Syrian
force. Although both the armies were face to face, Malik took care not
to give the impression that he had any immediate intention of
hostilities. Abul-A\`war too gave an impression that he did not want
immediate clashes. When day was over and night fell, Malik, and his men,
started to prepare for sleep. They were still half-asleep when
Abul-A\`war took advantage of the darkness and made a surprise attack.
Malik and his men woke up, took their swords in their hands and forced
the enemy to retreat.

The enemy had already commenced the fight. With the dawn, Malik
al-Ashtar and Hashim ibn \`Utbah took a group of Mirqal cavaliers and
footmen and advanced towards the enemy troops. For sometime intense
fighting took place. Then the Syrian’s famous warrior, \`Abdullah ibn
al-Mundhir al-Tanūkhi, was killed along with some of his accompanying
riders. Abul-A\`war withdrew and stopped at a safe distance. Malik
wanted to teach him a lesson for the breach of the norms of war that he
had made. Therefore, he asked a youth of his tribe, Sinan ibn Malik
al-Nakha\`i, to go to Abul-A\`war and challenge him for a man-to-man
fight.

Sinan asked, “Should I ask him for a fight with me or with you?” Malik
asked, “If I order you, will you be ready to combat with him?” The youth
replied, “By Allah! If you order me, I shall break their ranks, attack
and kill him!” Malik smiled and praised the youth’s bravery and said,
“You are not any less in bravery and status. But you are still a youth
and he may not like to combat with a youth. You must go and challenge
for a fight with me!” Sinan got up and reaching near the camp of the
enemy shouted, “I am a messenger, give me protection!” The Syrians
agreed with his demand. He went to Abul-A\`war and gave to him Malik’s
message.

At first Abul-A\`war remained thoughtful with bowed head. Then he said,
“Is it the same Malik who attacked the house of \`Uthman and was
involved in his assassination? He is a mischief monger and all the
problems are because of him!” Sinan said, “Now listen to my reply to
what you have said.” Abul-A\`war said, “I am not willing to hear
anything from you nor will I give any reply to the message you have
brought.”

When Sinan wanted to say something, the Syrians jumped at him and pushed

him out of their camp. This challenge of Malik left such fear on the
heart of al-A\`war that in the darkness of the night he slinked away
from there with his men and reached Afih where Mu\`awiyah was camping
with his army.

When Mu\`awiyah heard about the arrival of the Iraqi army and the
skirmishes, he told Abul-A\`war and Sufyan ibn \`Umar that they should
go forward and select a suitable battlefield and immediately inform him
of the selection. They went and selected Siffin for the purpose that
lies on the western bank of Euphrates between al-Riqqah and Balus. They
selected a strategically suitable place and established camp. Mu\`awiyah
reached the place along with his army. He ordered Abul-A\`war, “Stand
with ten thousand men at the river face and obstruct the Iraqis who come
to draw water.”[1]

Malik al-Ashtar too kept advancing with his men. When they reached
Siffin, they were taken aback seeing the huge army of the enemy and
established camp at a distance from them. The following day, Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) too arrived with his army. He noted that the Syrians
had established camp on the level ground and had blocked the approaches
to the river. Whenever any Iraqis went for water, they were pushed back.
He asked his men to look for some other bank to draw their requirement
of water.

Despite the search, they could not find any suitable spot for their
requirement. Even if any spot was there, the approach was very difficult
because of morasses on the way and dense thorny bushes. When there was
no source of water in sight, the Imam (a.s) sent word to Mu\`awiyah with
Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Sawhan that he did not wish to commence the fight before
placing the facts before the enemy. He had occupied the source of water.
It would be better if he removed the obstruction and discuss with them
the cause of the differences between them. He made it clear to him that
if he, Mu\`awiyah, instead of sorting out the issue, wanted to fight
over water; they were ready even for that. But then, who ever is able to
dominate, will be controlling the source of the water. When Mu\`awiyah
got this message, he consulted his advisers. Al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah said:

###### “Deny them the water and let them die of thirst. May Allah kill them! They had given the same treatment to Amir al-Mu’minin \`Uthman!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 168  
 **[2]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 168

\`Abdullah ibn Abi-Sarh said:

###### “Keep them away from the water the whole night. When they fail in getting supply of water, they will retreat. This retreat will be their defeat. Ban water for them. May Allah keep them thirsty on the Doomsday!”[1]

At this, Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Sawhan was angry and he said:

###### “May Allah deny quenching of your thirst! You evil drunkards! Allah’s curse be on you and on the evil (al-Walid)”[2]

\`Amr ibn al-\`As said, “O Mu\`awiyah! You should know that \`Ali (a.s)
and his companions, as far as there are shining swords in their hands,
they will never remain thirsty. It is better if you give them the water
Otherwise they will force you to remove the vigil from the bank of the
river!” Mu\`awiyah said:

###### “By Allah! Water shall not be given to them until they die! The same way that \`Uthman was forced to die thirsty!”[3]

Although the stoppage of water was advantageous to the Syrians because
men cannot physically fight in a thirsty state, but from the point of
view of morality it was a heinous act. Even some troops of the Syrian
army spoke against this act. Therefore, one person from their army,
Ma\`ri ibn Aqbal al-Hamdani, expressed his displeasure over the ban and
told Mu\`awiyah, “O Emir! We have occupied the source of water. What
would have happened if they had arrived here earlier and imposed a ban
on us! In their army, there are slaves, workers, aged and weak persons.
Denying water to such innocent persons is very cruel! Withdraw your
orders and let them take the water!”

Hearing him, Mu\`awiyah shouted at the man. \`Amr ibn al-\`As too said a
few harsh words to the man. The al-Hamdani, hearing these invectives,
kept quiet and in the darkness of night he left Mu\`awiyah’s army and
crossed over to the side of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). he expressed his
feelings in the following couplets:

###### O son of Hind! What to say of your virtues!  
 When shame departs, what use is shame!  
 Do you want to stop the youth from water?  
 Those in whose hands are shining, swirling lances!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 145  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 145  
 **[3]** Murūj al-Dhahab, Vol 2, Page 38

###### In their necks hang shining swords!  
 You thought they are not men and are women!  
 Do you expect \`Ali (a.s) will remain thirsty near you!  
 And others will drink their fill?

The Euphrates was in the control of the Syrians and the Iraqis looked
with sadness on the gushing waters of the river. On one side, there was
pride and prejudice, and on the other, there was the spirit of peace
that was controlling the emotions of the thirsty men. However, when they
did not get water for a full day and night, the Iraqis could not control
themselves any more. They came to the presence of the Imam (a.s) and
said, “O Emir! How long could we see the Syrians quenching their thirst
and keep us deprived of water?” The Imam (a.s) replied, “Now a battle
for water is inevitable! Rise and, at the strength of your swords,
acquire water!” When permission was received from Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s), Malik al-Ashtar and al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays announced to the men to
prepare themselves to push the enemy away from the source of water on
the riverbank. At this call, twelve thousand troops, with their swords
in their hands and the bows on their shoulders, went forward. Malik
al-Ashtar gave the standard in the hand of al-Harith ibn Hammam
al-Nakha\`i. Al-Ash\`ath gave the flag of his tribe to Mu\`awiyah ibn
al-Harith. Both the commanders, leading their units rushed against the
Syrians who were guarding the waterfront and asked them to move away
from there. They said that they would not leave the place until their
swords quenched the thirst for blood.

On this side too, there were no cowards to be cowed down by the Syrian
swords. Malik shouted and lunged forward. The Syrians took up their
spears and swords and stood up to prevent the Iraqis advancing. One of
their cavaliers, Salih ibn Fayrūz, came forward to fight. Malik struck
his chest with the spear and the man died instantly. Then Malik killed,
one after another, Malik ibn Adham, Riyah ibn \`Atik, Ibrahim ibn Waddah
al-Jamhi, Zamil ibn \`Ubayd al-Khuza\`i, Ajlah ibn Mansūr al-Kindi and
Muhammad ibn Rawdah al-Jamhi. After these casualties, when others had no
courage to come forward, Malik made a thrust on the enemy with his men
From the other side too the bows twanged and the arrows were flying. But
the valiant Iraqis were not deterred. They kept moving forward. When
swords started swinging over their heads, the Syrians started running
for shelter. The Iraqis went further forward and occupied the source of
water.

When the water changed hands, Mu\`awiyah thought they might give the
same treatment to his men as he gave to the troops of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s). His face reflected this worry when \`Amr ibn al-\`As asked him,
“What do you think? Will \`Ali (a.s) ban water for you and your men? The
way he fought and took over the Euphrates, can you do the same?”
Mu\`awiyah retorted in anger, “Do not be sarcastic! Tell me if \`Ali
(a.s) will really give us the same treatment that we gave him and his
men? Or will he permit us to take our requirement of the water?” \`Amr
said:

###### “I have a strong feeling that what you did to him, he may not retaliate the same way. Because his purpose for coming here is not water but something else!”[1]

The Iraqi’s were already very angry on Mu\`awiyah. As soon as they had
control of the source of water, they declared that they would not give a
drop of water to the enemy. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard this, he
said, “If the people of Syria took that barbaric step, it is not fair
for you to forget your own norms of Faith and morality!” He sent word to
Mu\`awiyah immediately that although the control of the source of water
was in the hands of his men, all will be free to draw water from there.
After this declaration, the Syrians came freely to the river and took as
much water as they wanted.

The troops of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) established camp near the river and
became busy with their duties. In the meantime, an arrow came from the
side of the Syrians on which there was a note saying, “I am your
well-wisher! I warn you that Mu\`awiyah has decided to cause a break in
the river that the water gushes and submerges you!” The arrow fell in
the hands of one of the people of al-Kūfah. The note traveled from hand
to hand and in the end it reached Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). The Imam (a.s)
immediately understood that it was a trick of Mu\`awiyah. The purpose
was to scare the Iraqis away from the source of water. Already there was
panic amongst the Iraqis. They were fast gathering their belongings.

The Imam (a.s) said, “This is a trick to move you away from where you
are! Do not leave your stations and remain steadfast.” Some of the men
were convinced, and others shouted that Mu\`awiyah’s men have already
reached the river with their implements and have already started
breaching the embankment. They said that if they did not move away
swiftly, they would all be washed away. The Imam (a.s) asked them not to
worry. He said that it was not in the power of Mu\`awiyah to divert the
flow of the river. But there were

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 169

many cowardly persons in the army. Once they moved, others followed
suit. Despite best efforts to convince them, they did not listen. When
Mu\`awiyah saw the place vacant, he moved into the breach with his men.
When the Iraqis saw the Syrians take their vacated place, they
understood Mu\`awiyah’s cunning trick. Those who were insisting on
vacating the position came shame-faced to the Imam (a.s) and apologized
for their behavior. Now, al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays and Malik al-Ashtar went
with their men and forced the Syrians away from the source of water.

The fight for control over Euphrates was over. Two days had gone by
since the Iraqis got control of the water source. In these two days,
there was no talk between the contesting parties. The morale of the
Iraqis was very high and they were ready to fight. But Amir
al-Mu’minin’s quiet was disturbing them. They started thinking whether
the Imam (a.s) was trying to avoid war or he had some doubts about going
to war with the Syrians. When the Imam (a.s) learned about these doubts,
he said that neither he was avoiding the war nor did he have doubts
about the need for fighting with Mu\`awiyah. The real reason for the
delay was that in that interval better sense prevailed and, at least,
from his side all possible efforts were made to convince the other party
of their faulty stand. After all the waiting, on the first of
Dhul-Hijjah 36 H, for placing the facts before the enemy, he called
Bishr ibn \`Amr al-Ansari, Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani, and Shabath ibn
Rabi\` al-Tamimi and asked them to go to Mu\`awiyah and explain to him
that he should not break the Islamic unity and abstain from divisive
action and peacefully owe his allegiance. Bashir ibn \`Amr said that he
had no hope that the person would give any cognizance to the suggestion.

The Imam (a.s) asked him to go and make his efforts. The three of them
rose and went to Mu\`awiyah. Bashir ibn \`Amr started the discussion. He
said, “O son of Abū-Sufyan! This world does not side with anyone for all
time! It will not also be with you forever! You will have to die one day
or the other and have to go to the Presence of Allah! There your deeds
will be accounted for. Then reward or retribution will be given on the
basis of your deeds in this world! I ask you in the name of Allah to
refrain from mischief and not to create dissensions in the Ummah with
your negative attitude” Mu\`awiyah interrupted saying, “Why do not you
give this advice to \`Ali (a.s)?” Bashir said, “Where he stands, and
where are you! He has precedence in embracing Islam and the nearest of
kin to the Prophet (a.s). He has all the superiority and felicity.

There is none equal to him and deserving of the caliphate!” Mu\`awiyah
asked, “What does he want?” Bashir said, “He wants you to recognize the
Truth and be with it. This way you will be successful in this world and
in the Hereafter as well. Mu\`awiyah said:

###### “Do you want us to forego our claim of *qisas* for the son of \`Affan? By Allah! That shall never happen.”[1]

Then Shabath ibn Rab\`i addressed Mu\`awiyah and said, “O Mu\`awiyah!
Your real purpose is not hidden from us. You have only one weapon to
misguide the people that you tell them that their caliph was killed
cruelly and that his *qisas* must be demanded. With this slogan, you
have gathered some ignorant people around you. This, despite the fact
that you refrained from helping \`Uthman when he was crying hoarse
asking for help! You wanted him to be killed so that you have an
opportunity to start a fight in the name of *qisas* and usurp power.
Remember! There are some people in this world who wish for certain
things but Allah gives them no success. There are also people who
succeed much more than their own expectations. But for you, in success
or in failure, there is no virtue! If you fail in your efforts, there
will be none more shamed than you in Arabia. If you succeed in your
schemes, your Hereafter will be only intense Retribution! O Mu\`awiyah!
Fear Allah Give up your stubborn attitude and refrain from conceit. Do
not challenge the one who is the true claimant of the caliphate!”
Mu\`awiyah was disturbed with the frank talk of Shabath. Instead of
refuting what he said, he spoke angrily:

###### “Get away from my presence and now only the sword will decide the matters between us.”[2]

At this point Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani said:

###### “Do you want to frighten with your swords? By Allah! We shall soon advance towards you with our swords!”[3]

After the return of the delegation, some memorizers of the Holy Qur'an
came to Mu\`awiyah and asked him why he had mobilized the big army of
men? He said that his purpose was to claim retaliation for the blood of
\`Uthman. They asked from whom he was demanding the *qisas*. He replied
that he wanted the *qisas* from \`Ali (a.s). They asked, “Did \`Ali
(a.s) kill \`Uthman? Mu\`awiyah said, “He is the killer of \`Uthman.”
They went to \`Ali (a.s) and repeated the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 146  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 146  
 **[3]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 146

accusations of Mu\`awiyah. The Imam (a.s) said, “It is a false
accusation.” They went back to Mu\`awiyah and related what \`Ali (a.s)
had said. Mu\`awiyah said, “He had not killed \`Uthman with his own
hands but had encouraged others to do the deed!” They came to the Imam
(a.s) and mentioned this to him. He replied, “This too is a false
accusation.”

They reported the Imam’s reply to Mu\`awiyah. He said, “If \`Ali (a.s)
is telling the truth, he should hand over the killers of \`Uthman to us.
They are present amongst his troops and are source of his strength!” The
men came to \`Ali (a.s) and conveyed this to him. \`Ali (a.s) said,
“\`Uthman’s killers prove their justification for the act from the
verses of the Qur’an. The killing that has taken place under an
interpretation (ta’wil) of the verses of the Qur’an does not call for
*qisas*.”

When Mu\`awiyah was told this he said, “If it is like this, then what
right has \`Ali (a.s) to become the caliph without even consulting us.”
(a.s) said in reply, “The Muhajir and Ansar who are the people of
authority unanimously decided on the caliphate and all the Muslims abide
by their decision.” Mu\`awiyah said, “Those Muhajirūn and Ansar who are
with us never owed their allegiance to him nor have agreed to his
accession to the caliphate.”

Thus he went on making such excuses and was not able to give any
positive reason for denying to owe allegiance to \`Ali (a.s). He knew
that if he did the *bay\`ah* then he would not be able to blame \`Ali
(a.s) for involvement in or supporting the killers of \`Uthman. He had
only this weapon to justify his plan to fight a battle with \`Ali (a.s)
for his ulterior motive of coming to power.

In this regard Abū-Umamah al-Bahili and Abul-Darda’ too spoke to
Mu\`awiyah and told him, “You are fighting with \`Ali (a.s) while he is
more deserving of the caliphate than you!” He said, “I am fighting just
to claim the retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman.” They both said, “Is
\`Ali (a.s) his killer?” He said, “Although he has not killed him with
his own hands, he has given refuge to the killers. If he hands them over
to us, I shall be the first to owe my allegiance to him!”

This talk appealed to the two persons. They went to \`Ali (a.s) and
repeated Mu\`awiyah’s words. The Imam (a.s) understood that Mu\`awiyah
wanted to trick him by raising something that was impossible to be done.
He took the two persons to the rows of his troops and asked, “Amongst
you, who are the killers of \`Uthman?” The 20,000 men shouted in unison:
“We have all killed \`Uthman!”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 170

Abū-Umamah and Abul-Darda’ thought that for the blood of one person, the
blood if 20,000 cannot be shed and there was not also any justification
of handing over anyone to Mu\`awiyah for this purpose. Instead of going
to Mu\`awiyah they retired to a quiet coastal place and preferred not to
side any of the two parties.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) tried all the time to avoid fighting and settle
the matter through negotiations. But Mu\`awiyah knew that the final
result of peace was *bay\`ah* and that would be abject defeat for him.
Therefore, he avoided all efforts at negotiations. He termed the efforts
of \`Ali (a.s) to maintain peace as his weakness and started posing
threats to him. At last, the hidden flames were ignited and the
preliminary clashes commenced. From the Syrians, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Khalid ibn al-Walid, Abul-A\`war al-Salami, Habib ibn Muslim al-Fihri,
Ibn Dhil-Kila\` al-Himyari, \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar, Shurahbil ibn Simt
al-Kindi and Hamzah ibn Malik used to come to the battlefield in turns.
Similarly from \`Ali’s army Malik al-Ashtar, Hijr ibn \`Adi, Shabath ibn
Rab\`i, Khalid ibn Mu\`ammar, Ziyad ibn al-Nadr al-Harithi, Ziyad ibn
Khasfah al-Taymi, Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani, Ma\`qil ibn Qays al-Riyahi
and Qays ibn Sa\`d al-Ansari came out in turn to face the opponents and
sent them vanquished. Although they were all men of valor, but Malik
al-Ashtar was a warrior of such caliber that big champions used to be
scared of facing him. Therefore, during the first few days of the battle
of Siffin, Sahm ibn Abil-Ghayrar came out of Mu\`awiyah’s army and
challenged for a combat. He was a well-known fighter from the Syrian
army and had a huge and imposing physique. He used to frighten people
away just through his physical appearance.

Malik al-Ashtar decided to match strength with him. People tried to stop
him. But he did not listen to them. He went away and challenged the
giant. The person was proud of his strength and prowess. He jumped his
steed, came forward, and attacked Malik. Malik avoided his strike and
gave him such a blow that he fell flat from his horse and died at the
spot. One person from the Syrian troops saw Sahm dying and resolved that
he would kill Malik al-Ashtar. Therefore, he challenged Malik for a
combat. Malik attacked him with his sword and he fell down near the
hoofs of his horse. Malik was about to kill him when the Syrians rushed
in a crowd and carried him away alive. Thus, the month of Dhul-Hijjah
was spent in these skirmishes. Everyday they had a couple of combats but
wholesale fighting had not yet commenced.

When Muharram 37 H commenced, respecting the sanctity of the month,
fighting was stopped. Taking advantage of the halt to fighting, Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) again tried for peace and sent a few representatives
across to the enemy. \`Adi ibn Hatam, Yazid ibn Qays, Shabath ibn Rab\`i
and Ziyad ibn Khasfah were sent to Mu\`awiyah to prepare him for peace.
Therefore, they went to him \`Adi ibn Hatam started the talks and told
Mu\`awiyah, “We have come to you with a message of peace. If you listen
to our voice, the fighting can be stopped and differences sorted out.
You know that \`Ali (a.s) has the leadership of the Muslims in his
hands. There is none equal to him in superiority and precedence in
embracing the Faith. Excepting you, and your cohorts, all the Islamic
territories have accepted him as the caliph. Give up your stubbornness
and change your attitude. Otherwise you might fall into troubles as did
the owners of the camel.”

Mu\`awiyah said, “You want to frighten me! I am the son of Harb! I
cannot be cowed down by such threats. By Allah! You are one of the
persons who instigated the killing of \`Uthman. I am certain you will be
killed for that crime.” At this Shabath ibn Rab\`i and Ziyad ibn Khasfah
said, “Forget all that talk! That will benefit neither you nor us! Say
something that is advantageous to both the parties. Let us come closer
than moving away from each other” Yazid ibn Qays said, “We are the
messengers! Our duty was to give the message; that we have done. Now,
whatever you say, we shall communicate to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).
However, we shall make efforts to convince you and invite you not to
create schisms in the Ummah.

As far as the superiority of \`Ali (a.s) is concerned, it is neither
hidden from you nor from us! There is no question of equating you with
him. Therefore, fear Allah and abstain from warlike activities against
him. By Allah! We have not found anyone better than him in piety,
superiority and capability.” Mu\`awiyah said, “You people have invited
me to attach myself to the majority. I must tell you that the majority
is with me! As far as obeying your Emir is concerned, it is beyond me!
The reason is that he assassinated \`Uthman, created rifts in the
majority (the Ummah) and gave refuge to the killers. I have no doubt
that the killers of \`Uthman are present in his army. He must hand them
over to us so that we kill them as the retaliation for the blood of
\`Uthman. Then we shall obey him and abstain from fighting as well.”
Shabath said, “If \`Ammar ibn Yasir is handed over to you, would you
mind killing him? ‘Mu\`awiyah said, “What is coming in the way of my
killing him? What to talk of \`Uthman, Even for his freed slave, Naqil,
I would not hesitate to kill him!” Shabath said, “By the Creator of the
earth and the sky! You are

flying very high! You cannot reach \`Ammar until the battlefield is full
of cadavers and there are piles of heads! “In the end when they found
that the talks were not reaching anywhere, they stood up and started
back for their camp. They might have gone half the distance when
Mu\`awiyah sent a messenger to call Ziyad ibn Khasfah and told him that
he had summoned him for a special purpose. He said, “You know it pretty
well that \`Ali (a.s) got \`Uthman assassinated and is giving shelter to
the killers. If you agree you and your tribe can cooperate with me in
claiming the *qisas*. With Allah’s witness I swear that if I succeed, I
shall give you the governorate of al-Kūfah or al-Basrah.” When
Mu\`awiyah finished talking, he looked expectantly at Ziyad, who said:

“With Allah’s help I have proof and conviction that I cannot bear to
become supporter of the criminals!”

###### Hearing this reply, Mu\`awiyah put down his head and told \`Amr ibn al-\`As, “May Allah destroy them! Their heart beats and movements of the lips are all similar!”[1]

The failure of these embassies gave one impression that the Imam (a.s)
wanted to settle the matters through negotiations, but Mu\`awiyah wanted
to get his way through war! To remove this impression, Mu\`awiyah sent
Habib ibn Maslamah al-Fahri, Shurahbil ibn Simt al-Kindi and Ma\`an ibn
Yazid al-Aslami to \`Ali (a.s). When they came to the Imam (a.s), Habib
ibn Maslamah said, “O \`Ali! \`Uthman was the caliph, pious and follower
of the Qur'anic precepts. But you people did not let him live and killed
him for no fault of his. Hand over his killers that we kill them in
*qisas*! Hand over the caliphate to the Shūra and stay away. Then we
shall select a caliph with unanimity. When the Imam (a.s) saw his style
of speaking, he said:

“Who are you to ask me to demit the caliphate? You are doing this when
you do not qualify to talk such things!”[2]

Habib stood up uneasily and said, “When we are face to face, you will
see how I behave!” The Imam (a.s) said, “Even if you attack with a large
army of men, I would consider you as nothing! Go and do what you wish to
do!” Shurahbil said, “I too wish to say the same that my companion has
said. Will I get the same reply that was given to him? “The Imam (a.s)
said, “The reply I gave him, suited only him! But a different reply can
be given to you!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 148  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 4

Then Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) related the events from the Annunciation of
the Prophet (a.s), the periods of the First and the Second caliphs and
then he said, “When \`Uthman became the caliph he committed such acts
that people did not like them. They criticized him and tried to correct
him. But when no result was achieved from their efforts, they surrounded
and killed him. Then people gathered and came to me. And wanted to owe
their allegiance to me. I thought it advisable to refuse. Therefore, in
very clear terms rejected their offer. But their insistence increased
and they said that other than me they would not do *bay\`ah* with anyone
else. They expressed the fear that if I did not accept their *bay\`ah*
people will get divided and the peace in the realm will shatter. They
felt that in that event Islam would face a major crisis.

In those circumstances I had to agree for the *bay\`ah*. When the
*bay\`ah* was over, two persons, Talhah and al-Zubayr, became
disobedient and rebellious, although they had happily swore their
allegiance to me. Then Mu\`awiyah brought out the banner of rebellion
against me, although he neither has any precedence over me in the Faith
nor does he have any status in Islam. He is a freed son of a freed
father! His father, and himself, had always been the enemies of Allah
and His Prophet (a.s)! If they embraced Islam, it was out of fear in
defeat! I am surprised you have moved away from the Ahl al-Bayt and got
attached to the lapel of Mu\`awiyah and started moving in the direction
he wanted you to! You should, in fact, have been with the Prophet’s
Household and none else. I invite you to follow Allah’s Book and the
Sunnah of the Prophet (a.s) and to do jihad against the evil.” Shurahbil
listened to this talk but did not take any effect and said, “Do you
believe that \`Uthman was killed mercilessly as an oppressed person?
“The Imam (a.s) replied, I neither term him as an oppressed person nor
an oppressor himself!” At this Shurahbil and Ma\`an ibn Yazid got angry
and said, “One who has the belief that \`Uthman was not assassinated as
an oppressed person, we have nothing to do with him.” Saying this, they
got up and left. The Imam (a.s) was not expecting them to be impressed.
However, he tried to convince them. When he saw them departing, the Imam
(a.s) recited the following verse:

### فَإِنَّكَ لَا تُسْمِعُ الْمَوْتَى وَلَا تُسْمِعُ الصُّمَّ الدُّعَاءَ إِذَا وَلَّوْا مُدْبِرِينَ. وَمَا أَنْتَ بِهَادِي الْعُمْيِ عَنْ ضَلَالَتِهِمْ إِنْ تُسْمِعُ إِلَّا مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ.

#### “For surely you cannot make the dead to hear and you cannot make the deaf to hear the call, when they turn back, nor can you lead away the blind out of their error. You cannot make to

#### hear any but those who believe in Our communications so they shall submit. 30/52-53)”

After this, the Imam (a.s) turned his attention towards his companions
and said:

###### “Let it not happen that their efforts at deviation and waywardness surpass your efforts, while your efforts are for Truth and in obedience of Allah.”[1]

When the month of Muharram was over and the crescent of Safar was
sighted on the horizon, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) who had exhausted
exploring all the avenues for possible peace, sent Marsad ibn al-Harith
to the other side where he announced to the Army of Syria:

###### “O people of Syria! Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) conveys to you, ‘I had given you respite to think and turn towards the Right Path. I had made it clear to you through Allah’s Book and invited you to follow it. But you have not abstained from your mischief and stubbornness nor responded to the voice of the Truth. Now I have terminated all negotiations and Allah, certainly, does not befriend the unfaithful.”[2]

As soon as this announcement was made, preparations were started for the
war. They lighted fires and beacons were lighted. Men were arranged in
order overnight and the Iraqis and the Syrians occupied their own
entrenchments. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) gave special attention to the
orderly arrangement of his men. On the cavalry he appointed \`Ammar ibn
Yasir as the commander and on the footmen, \`Abdullah ibn Badil
al-Khuza\`i.

On the riders from al-Kūfah, Malik al-Ashtar was given the command and
Sahl ibn Hunayf was in charge of the riders from al-Basrah. Qays ibn
Sa\`d was given the command of the footmen from al-Basrah. The right
flank was under al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays and the left flank was commanded by
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas. The footmen of the right flank were put under
Sulayman ibn Sarad and of the left flank under al-Harith ibn Marw
al-\`Abdi. The men from every tribe were under a chief from the same
tribe. The standard of war was given to Hashim ibn \`Utbah Mirqal. The
Imam (a.s) addressing the men said: “Until the time they do not attack,
you should not attack them. Because you are, By Allah’s Grace, fighting
for a Cause. Your leaving it to them to start

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 5  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 5

the fight will be another proof of your being on the side of the Right.
Beware! When the enemies start running away, do not kill anyone who has
shown his back! Do not attack the injured and the maimed. Do not attack
women even if they shout invectives against you.”

Mu\`awiyah appointed \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar as the commander of his
right flank and Habbah ibn Maslamah for the left flank. Cavalry \`Amr
ibn al-\`As was the commander and on footmen Muslim ibn \`Uqbah. For the
men from different cities and areas, persons from the same places were
in command. The standard of war was given to \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Khalid
ibn al-Walid.

On Wednesday, the first of Safar, early in the morning, men in both the
armies stood in formation with enthusiasm and regular warfare commenced.
The Iraqi unit was under Malik al-Ashtar and the Syrian unit under Habib
ibn Maslamah. Both the armies gauged each other’s strengths and
weaknesses and then attacked flailing their swords. The entire day the
swords were clashing. And until the dusk, the fighting continued. When
it turned dark, both the armies returned to their respective camps.

The next day Hashim ibn Mirqal took groups of cavaliers and footmen and
entered the arena. From the other side, Abul-A\`war al-Salami came with
a large number of cavalry and footmen from the Syrian army. Both the
sides flailed their swords and attacked each other with intensity.
Swords kept clashing and spears piercing the chests.

On the third day, \`Amr put a black flag on a spear and came out with a
unit of men. People started whispering when they saw the black flag.
Some said it is the same piece of cloth that the Prophet (a.s) had given
to \`Amr attaching to the wooden staff of the standard and gave him the
honor of being the standard bearer. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard
this, he said the truth about the cloth is that “the Prophet (a.s) took
the flag in his hands and said, ‘who amongst you will lift the standard
and justify the honor (by his deeds)’ \`Amr ibn al-\`As said, ‘O Allah’s
Messenger! What are the conditions that will qualify one for the honor’
The Prophet (a.s) said, ‘Taking the Standard he will not run away from
fighting the infidels and will not fight with the Muslims?’ But he has
justified the honor in this manner:

###### “During the lifetime of the Prophet (a.s) he took the flag and ran way from the battle with infidels. And this day he has come with the flag to fight against the Muslims.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 174

The intention of \`Amr ibn al-\`As was to make a show of the standard to
impress on the people that during the time of the Prophet (a.s) he had
the honor of being given the standard by him and was coming to the
battlefield now with the same standard. Then he would do the publicity
that his stand in the conflict was just. But Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s),
before any misunderstanding spread, clarified the position and proved
that only getting the standard from the hands of the Prophet (a.s) is
not the proof of one’s superiority until the person fulfills the
requirements of that honor in totality. Therefore, if any minds were
confused seeing the standard, they were removed. The men did not give it
any importance.

When \`Amr came into the battleground, Ziyad ibn al-Nadr came out with
cavalry and \`Ammar ibn Yasir with footmen among whom were Muhajirūn,
Ansar and the warrior in the Battle of Badr. \`Ammar went decimating the
rows of the enemy troops and told his companions:

###### O People of Iraq! Do you want to see the person (Mu\`awiyah) who is an enemy of Allah and His Prophet (a.s) and fought battles with them, gave air to rebellion against the Muslims and sided with the polytheists. When he saw that Allah had given strength to Islam and gave control to the Prophet (a.s), he came to him and embraced Islam. We know that he has embraced Islam out of fear and he had no interest in Islam. When Allah took away His Prophet (a.s) from the world then, By Allah, he became the enemy of the Muslims and friend of the infidels. Therefore, remain steadfast in fighting him and battle with him. He wants to extinguish Allah’s radiance and strengthen the enemies of Allah.”[1]

Then taking his companions, \`Ammar, attacked with such intensity that
the Syrians lost their footing and \`Amr, who had come proudly waving
his black flag, left his position and disappeared in the back rows.

Ziyad ibn al-Nadr, with his men, attacked the Syrian horsemen. One rider
advanced to combat with him. Ziyad asked who he was. He said that he was
Mu\`awiyah ibn \`Amr al-\`Aqili. Hearing his name, Ziyad was hesitant to
attack him because he was his mother’s son. Their mother was a woman,
Hind, from the tribe of Zubayd. He thought it not proper to fight and
withdrew taking permission from Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 8

On the fourth day, Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah came with his men to the
arena. From the other side, \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar came with a large
patrol. Both arranged rows of men opposite one another. The hands
advanced towards the spears, the swords came out of the sheaths. And the
sparks of fighting started flying. \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar challenged
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah for a combat. Hearing this, he advanced
swiftly. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) asked who was that? They said that it
was Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah fighting with \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar.
The Imam’s filial emotions arose. He put his foot in the stirrup of his
steed and moved near Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah. He dismounted, gave the
reins to his son, and telling that he would come to him soon went away.
Then he went near Ibn \`Umar. When he saw the Imam (a.s) instead of
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, the color of his face fled. He said that he
would not fight with him and went to the back rows.

\`Ali (a.s) returned, and when he came near his horse, Ibn al-Hanafiyyah
said, “O Baba! Why did you stop me from fighting? If you had allowed me,
I would not have returned without killing him.” The Imam (a.s) said, “I
expect the same from you! But I was not fully sure if you would kill him
and come back. That is the reason I had to go myself.” Muhammad said,
“Baba! I had no courage to stop you. Otherwise I would not like your
going to fight with that accursed person!”

On the fifth day \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas went with his men to the arena.
From the other side, al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah came with his horsemen and
footmen. When he saw Ibn \`Abbas he shouted invectives at Banū-\`Abd
al-Muttalib. He told Ibn \`Abbas:

###### “O Ibn \`Abbas! You have done injustice! You have killed your Imam (\`Uthman) and failed in fulfilling your vows!”[1]

Ibn \`Abbas asked him to stop making false accusations and fight with
him. But he had no courage to come forward. He shouted invectives for
sometime and then sat quietly. Ibn \`Abbas attacked the Syrians along
with his men and the fight went on until the time of ²uhr Prayer.

The same day, Samarah ibn Abrahah al-Himyari, along with a group of the
reciters of the Holy Qur’an, left the ranks of the Syrian army and
joined the army of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Mu\`awiyah was very upset
with this because it was a proof of the unfairness of his stand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 175

On the sixth day, from the Iraqi side Qays ibn Sa\`d al-Ansari and from
the Syrian army Ibn Dhul-Kila\` al-Himyari came to the arena and the
fight continued until midday.

On the seventh day, Malik al-Ashtar from Amir al-Mu’minin’s army and
from the other side Habib ibn Maslamah stood opposite each other in the
arena. Hijr al-Sharr al-Kindi from the Syrian forces came astride a
horse and challenged for a combat. The person who came in response too
had the same name, Hijr ibn \`Adi who was known as Hijr al-Khayr. Both
attacked each other. But suddenly one person from the Syrian army,
Khuzaymah ibn Thabit al-Asadi jumped in the arena and broke the spear of
Hijr al-Khayr. Seeing this, the Iraqi troops killed Khuzaymah al-Asadi
and Hijr al-Sharr escaped saving his life. After some time he once again
came to the arena shouting for combat. Al-Hakam ibn Azhar came forward
to fight with him.

The fight went on for some time and then al-Hakam was killed. After
al-Hakam, Ibn Ummi-Rafa\`ah ²alim al-Himyari, seeing al-Hakam fall, came
angrily and attacked Hijr al-Sharr and killed him. When Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) saw this, he thanked Allah that the killer of al-Hakam ibn Azhar
was killed.

The swords were clashing in the arena and the Iraqis and Syrians were
attacking each other when an Iraqi soldier Abū-Ayyūb attacked the
Syrians and came out of their rows when he noticed a Syrian was
returning after attacking the Iraqis When they came near to each other,
both raised their swords and attacked each other. Abū-Ayyūb hit at the
Syrian’s neck with such intensity that the sword cut through it and the
head was severed but it remained on the body. People thought that the
attack went futile. But when the horse moved, the head fell to the
ground. When the Iraqis saw this, they shouted slogans and praised the
swordsmanship of Abū-Ayyūb. When he returned Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s),
recited the following couplet:

###### Our ancestors have taught us swordsmanship,  
 And we shall teach this to our sons!”

In the midst of this gory conflict, it was always the wish of the Imam
(a.s) to bring it to an end as soon as possible and some way to
establish peace was found. Although seeing the stubbornness of
Mu\`awiyah there was little chance of peace without a major conflict,
even then the Imam (a.s) took a copy of the Holy Qur’an and addressed
his troops, “Who is there amongst you who will take this Book to the
Syrians and invite them to accept the verdict of the Holy Qur’an?”

One youth came in front of the Imam (a.s) and offered to go. The Imam
(a.s) announced once again, but none other than the youth came forward.
Then he gave the Book to the youth and sent him forward. The youth
reached the rows of the enemy troops and said, “O people! Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) invites you to follow the teachings of the Holy
Qur’an! Come, let us resolve our conflicts on its verdict and avoid the
unnecessary bloodshed!” But none paid any heed to what he said. He met
the same end as did Muslim al-Mujashi\`i during the Battle of the Camel.
Some Syrians surrounded the youth and killed him.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) thought that the war of attrition would continue
and the blood of Muslims will continue to be shed. Therefore, to bring
the battle to an end, he announced that he was challenging Mu\`awiyah
for a person-to-person combat. He stood between the two armies and told
at a high pitch, “Where is Mu\`awiyah! “When Mu\`awiyah heard this, he
asked his men to ask what the Imam (a.s) wanted. The Imam (a.s) added,
“Ask him to come in front of me. I want to talk with him!” Mu\`awiyah
took \`Amr Ass with him and came to the front. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
said, “O Mu\`awiyah! You are shedding the blood of people unnecessarily!
Come on, we both shall fight and the one who wins shall be deemed to
have won the battle and occupy the seat of the caliphate! “\`Amr said,
“\`Ali (a.s) has said the truth. Both of you are the nucleus of the
conflict! You may fight and come to a decision yourself!” Mu\`awiyah
told \`Amr:

###### “You have not tried to be just! You know it pretty well that whoever came to combat with him, he killed the person!”[1]

\`Amr said, “I do not want that you avoid combat and fall in the
estimation of the people! “Mu\`awiyah said, “Do you think that you will
tempt me to lose my life! Do you wish that I get killed and you become
the ruler?” Saying this, Mu\`awiyah turned back and slowly went towards
the last row of his troops. Mu\`awiyah was already angry at the
impertinence of \`Amr. He called the person and shouted at him. To cool
his temper \`Amr said, “If you do not want to fight with \`Ali (a.s), I
shall do that! Therefore, he decided to go for the combat. At one point
of time he went to the arena and challenged \`Ali (a.s) for a combat.
The Imam (a.s) spurred his horse and came fast to the arena. When he
raised his sword, \`Umar Ass purposely fell down from his horse and put
his legs up. Thus, his private parts were exposed. When the Imam (a.s)
saw this contemptible act of \`Amr, he turned away his face. \`Amr got
up dusting his cloak and ran towards his people. When Mu\`awiyah heard
about this episode, he told \`Amr:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 29

###### “O \`Amr! Thanks to Allah that you saved your life because of your private parts!”[1]

One commander of the Syrian army, Abrahah ibn Sabbah al-Himyari also was
affected with the destruction of the war and said that the best way to
stop the unnecessary bloodshed was to have a man-to-man combat between
\`Ali (a.s) and Mu\`awiyah. Therefore, he addressed his tribesmen
saying, “O people of Yemen! For how long we should expose ourselves to
the swords and arrows! Do something to stop this war! Insist on \`Ali
(a.s) and Mu\`awiyah that they fight themselves and bring about a
conclusion! Whoever comes out the winner between the two, we shall join
with him!” When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard this, he said, “By Allah!
For me nothing could be more welcome than both the armies uniting and
Mu\`awiyah and me fight to come to a final decision!” When Mu\`awiyah
heard about the suggestion of Abrahah, he was scared and slowly, step by
step, he went backwards and reached the back rows of his army! He told
his sycophants, “It seems Abrahah has lost the balance of his mind!” The
people said, “It is not like that! He is wise and intelligent! Nor is he
behind anyone in bravery and valor. Why do not you say that you do not
have courage to fight face-to-face with \`Ali (a.s)!” Mu\`awiyah kept
quiet but \`Urwah ibn Dawūd got angered. He said, “If the emir does not
want to fight with \`Ali (a.s), I shall combat with him!” He then stood
between the two armies and shouted his challenge to \`Ali (a.s) for
personal combat. The Imam (a.s) came forward to punish the impertinent
challenger. Some people asked him not to fight with that impertinent
person and ask someone else to fight. But the Imam (a.s) personally went
and with one strike of his sword, the person’s body was cut vertically
into two! The people who witnessed this shivered in their footwear! When
\`Urwah was thus killed, a cousin of his attacked the Imam (a.s) in
anger. He avoided his attack and hit him with his spear. The spear was
stuck in the person’s chest and he fell dead.

When Mu\`awiyah saw two of his men die like this, he was in a state of
utter confusion. He asked, “Who among you will fight with the killer of
\`Urwah and his cousin or kill him at any opportunity?” al-Walid ibn
\`Uqbah said, “It would be better if you yourself go and personally
fight with him.” He replied, “He has already challenged me! But what use
this army that I have to go and fight in place of my fighting men? I
need not go personally to fight!” \`Uqbah ibn Abi-Sufyan said, “Your
decision is right. Even if he challenges, you should not go to fight!”
When after repeated calls by Mu\`awiyah there was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 77

response from none to go and fight with the Imam (a.s) he asked Busr ibn
Arta’ah if he would go and fight with \`Ali (a.s). Busr said,” It would
be better if you yourself fight with him. But if you insist, I shall go
to fight.” A close relative of Busr told him, “If Mu\`awiyah dies, he
will have some successor for his kingdom! Why do you want to get
killed?” He said, “I have given my word and I must go for the fight
now!” When the person heard this, he recited the following couplets to
Busr:

###### If you were of his caliber, you should certainly fight with him; otherwise, remember the tiger eats away the sheep!  
 O Busr! It seems you are ignorant of \`Ali‘s exploits of valor or on purpose you pretend ignorance!

Busr said, “I shall have to die one day! Why should I die the death of a
coward! I shall certainly combat with him!” Therefore, he proceeded
towards the arena. Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s) holding the hand of Malik
al-Ashtar was going round in search of a promontory when Busr, in full
armor, came near him and challenged him for a combat.

The Imam (a.s) coolly went near him, pierced his spear in the armor and
pushed him down. When Busr saw that he would be killed, he exposed his
private parts in emulation of \`Amr Ass! (a.s) turned his face way.
Malik al-Ashtar recognized him and said, “O (a.s)! This is the enemy of
Allah, Busr ibn Arta'ah!” The Imam said, “Allah’s curse on him! After he
has done the shameful act, let him go!” Busr got up swiftly, hiding his
private parts, ran away. Mu\`awiyah, knowing of his misadventure, told
him, “You need not be ashamed! \`Amr ibn al-\`As too saved his life the
same way!”

Mu\`awiyah rarely came out in the field because he was scared that if
the Imam (a.s) came face to face, he will find it difficult to save his
life. Whenever he came out, he ensured that (a.s) not in the place. Once
he came out and attacked the right flank. The Imam (a.s) chanced to be
in that area. When he saw Mu\`awiyah, thinking that he might escape
seeing him, he exchanged his armor and the horse with another person and
came out of the row. Mu\`awiyah advanced with the intention of attacking
when he recognized the Imam (a.s). He turned his horse back, spurred it
and ran away! Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) chased him for sometime, but
Mu\`awiyah disappeared in the maze of his troops!

Mu\`awiyah used to send his slave Harith in his disguise to the arena to
give an impression that he was actively participating in the proceedings
of the war! Therefore, when he used to be out in Mu\`awiyah’s armor and
guise, people

used to think that it was Mu\`awiyah himself! Mu\`awiyah had warned him
that his life was precious and at any cost he should not take the risk
of fighting with \`Ali (a.s). At that time \`Amr told the slave that
Mu\`awiyah did not want him to fight \`Ali (a.s) to deny him the
singular honor of matching his strength with the champion of the
Quraysh! He added that if he was Qarashi, Mu\`awiyah would willingly
have allowed him to go and fight.

Al-Harith was angered when \`Amr told this. And said that he would not
miss the opportunity of fighting with \`Ali (a.s). Therefore, he went
forward and challenged the Imam (a.s) to combat with him. The Imam (a.s)
was advancing with a troop of men. He heard the challenge of Harith and
put his hand on the scabbard of his sword. Without giving him any
respite, he struck the slave such a blow that he was cut into two
pieces! When Mu\`awiyah learnt about the killing of Harith, he was very
sad and chided \`Amr Ass that because of his tempting him the slave lost
his life. Now people also knew that Mu\`awiyah, in his cowardice, used
to send Harith in his own disguise to the front.

Mu\`awiyah’s practice was that he sent others to the front disguised as
himself. On the other side, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), used to enter the
arena in the guise of \`Abbas ibn Rabi\`ah and others, to ensure that
the enemy fighters did not get scared and ran away without combating.
Therefore, once \`Abbas Ibn Rabi\`ah himself came out to the arena, with
full armor, riding on a horse. Qarazah ibn Adham invited him for a
combat. \`Abbas said that he would dismount from the horse and asked the
opponent to dismount as well therefore the chance of either of them
running away from the fight will not be there! Therefore, they both
dismounted and the fight started. The swords were clashing with swords,
with the shields and with the armors. Both were trying hard to overwhelm
the adversary, but neither succeeded. In that time, \`Abbas noticed that
the armor of Qaraz was loose at one place.

Cleverly, he pierced the tip of his sword at that point and sliced the
armor apart. Then he attacked with such dexterity that Qarz fell to the
ground face down with his sword piercing the ribs of the Syrian. As soon
as he fell, he was dead. The Iraqis loudly shouted the slogan of
“allahu-akbar”! When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard this slogan, he asked
whose valor the men were praising? The people said it was \`Abbas ibn
Rabi\`ah. (a.s) was angry and he asked \`Abbas that he was asked not to
leave his post He said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! How could I resist the call
to combat when it was addressed to me?” The Imam (a.s) said, “Fighting
the enemy was not as essential as is the obedience of the commands of
the Imam (a.s)!” Then he added, “O Allah! Bless \`Abbas for his good
deed! I have forgiven him, You too forgive him!”

When Mu\`awiyah learned about the killing of Qarz, he was very angry and
asked his men if there was someone amongst them who could kill \`Abbas.
At this, two swordsmen of the tribe of Lakhm rose and challenged \`Abbas
for a fight. When he heard the challenge, his blood boiled. But he could
not have left his post without the permission of the Imam (a.s). He
asked the challengers to wait for a while so that he will take the
permission of his leader for the fight. He then went to the presence of
the Imam (a.s) and sought his permission. The Imam (a.s) said, “By
Allah! Mu\`awiyah wants not a single soul of Banū-Hashim to remain alive
on the face of the earth! He wants all those beacons of knowledge and
learning and the world sank in the morass of ignorance! Notwithstanding
all this, Allah will keep His radiant for all time!” Then he asked
\`Abbas to remove his armor and give to him. The Imam (a.s) wore his
armor and rode on his steed to the theatre of the battle. Seeing him the
two swordsmen from the Lakhm thought that it was \`Abbas because the
Imam (a.s) was using his armor and the horse. They asked, “Have you
taken your Emir’s permission to fight with us?” The Imam (a.s) recited
this verse in reply:

### أُذِنَ لِلَّذِينَ يُقَاتَلُونَ بِأَنَّهُمْ ظُلِمُوا وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَى نَصْرِهِمْ لَقَدِيرٌ.

#### “Permission to fight is given to those upon whom war is made because they are oppressed, and most surely Allah is well able to assist them. (22/39)”

Now one of them came forward and attacked with his sword. The Imam (a.s)
evaded his attack and struck him so hard that the person was divided
into two Then the other, in acute anger, rushed to attack. The Imam
(a.s) killed him as well. He returned the armor and the horse to \`Abbas
and asked him to inform whenever he was challenged for a fight!

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) felt that the arrogance of the Syrians was
increasing by the day. As long as their evil designs were not crushed
with full force, the battle of attrition would go on for very long. Near
sunset, the Imam (a.s) addressed a sermon to his men:

###### “See! You will have to battle with the enemy tomorrow! Therefore, spend tonight in prayer and supplication. Recite the Holy Qur’an and pray for Allah’s succor Pray to Allah for patience and steadfastness. Clash with the enemy with full vigor and sense. Then you will be really on the Straight Path!”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 151
