The Battle of Siffin
====================

##### Part 2

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was busy the whole night in preparation for the
battle and arranging the rows of the men. He organized the right and the
left flanks. And the men too checked their arms. They sharpened their
swords and put the tips of the spears to order. By dawn, they were all
ready to attack the enemy.

With this announcement of \`Ali (a.s), Mu\`awiyah was really scared. He
ordered the commanders to arrange their formations and to report to him
thereafter. Therefore, Abul-A\`war al-Salami with the contingent from
Hims, Ibn \`Amr al-Salami with men from Jordan, Zafar ibn al-Harith with
the contingent from Qinnasrin and al-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fahri with the
fighters from Damascus reported to Mu\`awiyah. Then contingent after
contingent was arriving and in no time, a crowd of Syrians was occupying
the horizon. They assured the Emir of Syria to fight with bravery and
valor.

With the dawn, both the armies had their flanks fully organized. The
Imam (a.s) gave the command of the right flank to \`Abdullah ibn Badil.
The left flank was given to \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas. The Imam (a.s)
stayed at the heart of the formation. He took the sword in his hand, sat
on the horse and spurred it on and in no time reached the rows of the
enemy formations and ordered \`Abdullah ibn Badil to attack. Ibn Badil
wearing double armor, having two swords hanging from his girdle, took
the right flank of the army and attacked the left flank of the enemy.
Army and destroyed row after row. With this heavy onslaught, the right
wing of the Syrian Army was totally dislodged. When Ibn Badil saw the
right flank of the enemy getting defeated, he attacked the heart of
their formation. Where Mu\`awiyah was stationed with all the protection.
Although around him there were five units of men like a steel wall, They
were scared of the army advancing towards them. They left their
positions and moved backwards. With them, the heart of the formation to
went backwards. Then the right flank of the Syrians reorganized after
the first defeat and along with the men in the heart of the formation
attacked the right flank of the Iraqis. This attack was so severe that
it uprooted the feet of the troops. They ran helter-skelter for shelter.
With Ibn Badil only three to four hundred men remained steadfast. They
stood back to back with each other and like a wall impregnated with lead
they fought the enemy. Ibn Badil, with this limited force, moved towards
the tent of Mu\`awiyah. From that side the bows started twanging. And
there was a barrage of arrows. But these valiant were not deterred with
the intense attack. They kept moving cutting across the hordes of enemy
troops. In the end, they were surrounded by the enemy on all the sides.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw his right flank getting dislodged, he
felt the gravity of the situation. He asked Sahl ibn Hunayf to go ahead
and help the right flank. But the Syrian cavalry pushed him back. Now,
with the disorganization of the right flank, the heart of the formation
where the Imam (a.s) was located was badly exposed to the enemy
onslaught. When the Imam (as) saw this predicament of the heart of the
formation, he moved towards the left flank of the army. He was neither
wearing the armor nor had a helmet on his head. He only had a spear in
his hand. Imam al-Hasan, Imam al-Husayn (a.s) and Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah were shielding him. The arrows were flying on all the
sides. The shining swords, the vibrating spears and the flying arrows
could not stop his movement. At that time one freed slave of
Banū-Umayyah, Ahmar, came up. He was known as an expert swordsman. The
Imam (a.s) wanted to attack him. when one of his slaves, Kaysan, rushed
towards Ahmar. He fought with him for sometime and was martyred. Now
Ahmar wanted to attack Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). Before he could attack,
the Imam (a.s) lunged forward, put his hand under the armor of the slave
and pulled him off the horse with force. He hit him to the ground with
such force that his bones shattered and he died at the spot.

With unconcern for the huge numbers of the enemies and the danger
lurking around him, the Imam (a.s) moved fast forward. Sensing the
increasing onslaught of the enemy, Imam al-Hasan (a.s) said, “Baba!
Would it not be better if you stayed with the heart of our formation
instead of rushing on in their direction?” The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “Son! By Allah! Your father does not care whether he is moving towards death or death is moving towards him!”[1]

When the Imam (a.s) reached near the right flank, he saw the fluttering
flags and asked as to whose flags they were. He was told that the flags
belonged to the tribe of Rabi\`ah. The Imam (a.s) said that the flags
belonged to the party of Allah! The party whose feet did not shake in
adversity and despite the hardships of the battle they remained
steadfast. Then the Imam (a.s) called close to him the youth, Hudayn ibn
al-Mundhir, who carried a red flag and asked him, “With this flag you do
not move forward the distance of a hand!” The youth said, “Yes! What is
the distance of one hand! I can move the distances of ten hands as
well!” Saying this, the youth came forward. When he was going
dangerously forward, the Imam (a.s) asked him to stay back. He prayed to
Allah for Blessing the youth! Seeing the Imam (a.s) amidst the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 152

people of the tribe of Rabi\`ah said, “O people! Even when only one of
you survived and the Imam (a.s) suffered the slightest hurt, you will be
shamed in the entire Arabia!” Then they stood up and continued to attack
the enemy formations with spirit and gusto.

After the right flank and the heart of the formation were disturbed, the
Imam (a.s) was in the left flank. Then he saw Malik al-Ashtar coming
towards him. When he came near, the Imam said, “O Malik! You give a call
to those who have left their positions and tell them that if the days of
the transient life are over, then the flight will not save them from
death!” Malik went forward and announced, “O people! I am Malik
al-Ashtar! Where are you running away leaving the field of operation?
The enemy is fighting you only because he is against the Faith! He wants
to obliterate the Sunnah and bring back the days of ignorance! He wants
you to revert to the beliefs that you had abandoned with vision and
guidance! Prepare to give your life for the Faith! Remember! Flight will
bring you shame in this world and Retribution in the Hereafter!”

At this call of Malik, the tribe of Mudhhij returned and said that they
would do whatever they were asked to. Malik said that they had shamed
themselves by running away and must make amends for that and give him
support to hold his head high before Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! These
persons, in the company of Malik moved towards the left flank. Which had
almost disintegrated with the onslaught of the enemy. Although everyone
was shaken up in the left flank, the tribe of Hamdan remained steadfast
in their positions. They were the last to leave and 800 of their men
fought with great bravery. When one hundred and eighty of their men were
martyred and eleven standard-bearers too perished one after another,
their feet too shook. Among those standard-bearers were Kurayb ibn
Shurayh, Shurahbil ibn Shurayh, Murthid ibn Shurayh, Hubayrah ibn
Shurayh, Huraym ibn Shurayh and Samir ibn Shurayh. These were six
brothers who valiantly held their standard and fought until the end of
their lives. Then the other standard-bearers who sacrificed their lives
were Sufyan ibn Zayd, \`Abd ibn Zayd and Kurayb ibn Zayd. These three
brothers too laid down their lives fighting for the cause of the Faith.
After them, \`Umayrah ibn Bashshar and al-Harith ibn Bashshar were the
standard-bearers and both brothers were martyred.

After them when Wahab ibn Kurayb took hold of the standard, one of their
tribesmen said, “Under this standard many persons are perishing. You
must take this standard and move away from the arena and save the lives
of your tribesmen and your own life. Otherwise, none of you will go
living from here!” He felt that with the truncated unit, the onslaught
of the Syrians could

not possibly be stopped. He withdrew and with him, the remaining men too
started moving away. They said that if they got a group who pledged that
they would die fighting, and not leave the arena at any cost, they too
would join such a group. When they passed near Malik al-Ashtar, he heard
their talk. And said, “Come! We make a pledge that we shall not leave
the arena until we are killed or finish the enemy! “After making the
pledge they joined the group of men with Malik. Malik arranged the flank
afresh and a new spirit came about in the men.

Malik was busy fighting when he saw men carry an injured trooper. He
asked who he was. They informed that the person was Ziyad ibn al-Nadr
al-Harithi who was in the division of \`Abdullah ibn Badil. When Ibn
Badil was badly surrounded by the enemies, he raised the standard and
was badly injured. Then they saw that another person was brought by men.
They said that it was Yazid ibn Qays who had raised the standard after
Ziyad ibn al-Nadr.

Malik said, “By Allah! This is their patience and courage and a proof of
their valor! People who run away from the battle to save their lives,
instead of giving their lives fighting are cowards.” Saying this he
moved forward and breaking the enemy rows he reached the place where
\`Abdullah ibn Badil was lying semi conscious with his companions having
suffered many severe injuries. When Ibn Badil and his companions saw
their own men. Their hopes and courage revived. They got up like fresh
persons and started towards the camps of Mu\`awiyah. Malik tried to stop
them, but they did not. The Syrian troops tried to obstruct them, but
they advanced like a flood. Whoever came in front of them, they killed
him. Killing seven persons they reached the entrance to the tent of
Mu\`awiyah.

When Mu\`awiyah saw them he told his men that if they were unable to
stop them with swords, lances and arrows, they must throw stones at them
to prevent their coming closer. Therefore, stones started raining at
them. With the injuries from the stones, Ibn Badil and his men were very
tired. The Syrians then tried to come closer to them and finish them
with the swords. But these men got up to fight. However, they could not
contain the increasing onslaught of the enemies \`Abdullah Ibn Badil and
some of his men were martyred fighting and some saved their life and ran
away. The Syrians tried to chase those who were escaping. But Malik sent
one group under Jamhan al-Ju\`fi who fought with the Syrians and chased
them away. The survivors went and joined the contingent of Malik
al-Ashtar.

Malik al-Ashtar attacked from the other direction and under his banner
were

Banū-Madhhij and Hamdan. They were raining the swords over the heads of
the enemies. When they jointly attacked, the Syrians ran in such a
manner as the flocks of sheep and goats run helter-skelter Then they
went after the group that was encircling the camp of Mu\`awiyah. Malik
and attacked the rows that had formed a circle to protect the camp of
Mu\`awiyah. When only one protective circle, of the five, remained,
Mu\`awiyah put his feet in the stirrup of his horse and planned to
escape from the theatre of war, but again he gathered some courage and
gave up the idea of flight!

When the men of the tribe of Rabi\`ah came flailing their flag, from the
side of the Syrians al-Himyari of the al-Himyari tribe and \`Ubaydullah
ibn \`Umar with four thousand Reciters of the Holy Qur’an from Syria
came to attack. This was such a severe attack that people with weak
hearts could not bear it. Those who were steadfast kept fighting but
became weak in comparison with the enemy troops. When Ziyad ibn Khasfah
felt that the Syrians were dominating the fighters from the tribe of
Rabi\`ah, he told the people from the tribe of \`Abd al-Qays that
Dhul-Kila\` and \`Ubaydullah Ibn \`Umar were decimating the men from the
tribe of Rabi\`ah. He asked them to rise and help, otherwise all of them
would perish. The men of the tribe of \`Abd al-Qays took up arms and
spurring their horses fast came to the help of Rabi\`ah. In no time,
they dominated the proceedings of the battle. With the coming in of
\`Abd al-Qays, the morale of the men of Rabi\`ah got a boost and they
fought with redoubled courage. Dhul-Kila\` and \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar
were fighting with great vigor. But with this new onslaught, their
morale nose-dived! The tribe of Himyar too was crestfallen. In this
battle, from the army of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), Abū-Shuja\` al-Himyari
addressed the tribe of Himyar, “O group of Himyar! May Allah put you to
shame and blacken your faces! What has happened to you that in support
of the traitorous rebel you came to fight with \`Ali (a.s)! You thought
that Mu\`awiyah is better than \`Ali (a.s)” Then he addressed
Dhul-Kila\` and said, “O Dhul-Kila\`! We thought about you that you had
spirit of the Faith, But do you too think that Mu\`awiyah is superior
than \`Ali (a.s)?”

He said, “I do not consider Mu\`awiyah superior to \`Ali (a.s) but I
have to fight with him for the *qisas* of \`Uthman’s blood. I do not
want that \`Uthman’s blood goes waste!”

Dhul-Kila\` did acknowledge \`Ali’s superiority but the craze for the
*qisas* took him away so much from sensible thinking that even after
hearing the Prophet’s tradition about the depravity and mischief of the
Umayyads his vision and thinking did not guide him aright. Therefore,
during the battle he

heard the tradition from \`Amr ibn al-\`As, and earlier too he heard the
tradition, that the killer of \`Ammar would be from a rebellious group.
Because of this tradition, he was confused for some time and wanted to
know the stand of \`Ammar about the battle. Therefore, in the army of
\`Ali (a.s), he was searching for a person from his tribe, Abū-Nūh
al-Himyari, to inquire from him about \`Ammar.

When he met Abū-Nūh, he asked, “I wish to ask you something, though you
are from the opposing army, because I have faith in your truthfulness.”
“You may ask!” the man said. He asked, “\`Amr Ass narrated this
tradition during the time of \`Umar that two groups of Syria and Iraq
will clash with one another and the group in which \`Ammar ibn Yasir was
there will be the righteous group. Is \`Ammar there in your army?”

The man replied, “By Allah! \`Ammar ibn Yasir is in our army! He is
determined to kill each and every person of the Syrian forces!” He asked
Abū-Nūh, “Can you take out a little time and come with me to the tent of
\`Amr ibn al-\`As and tell him that \`Ammar is in your army. Perhaps the
fight could possibly stop because of this.” Abū-Nūh said, “I can
certainly go. But I have doubt that I might become victim of your
treachery and deceit!” Dhul-Kila\` said, “In the name of Allah and the
Prophet (a.s)! I promise that no harm will come to you! You just tell
\`Amr that \`Ammar ibn Yasir is in your army!” Now both of them
proceeded to the tent of \`Amr.

When he saw a stranger with Dhul-Kila\`, he asked, “Who is this person?
To me he looks like Abū-Turabi!” Abū-Nūh said, “My face radiates the
felicity of the Prophet (a.s) and the friends of the Prophet (a.s) and
your face reflects the images of Abū-Jahl and Pharaoh.” At this
Abul-A\`war al-Salami put his hand on the scabbard of his sword and
said, “This person is abusing us on our face. We shall teach him a
lesson!” Dhul-Kila\` said, “He is my cousin and I have given him my
protection. If you lift your hand, I shall break your nose! I have
brought him here to tell you about \`Ammar.” \`Amr ibn al-\`As asked,
“Is \`Ammar there in \`Ali’s army?” Abū-Nūh said, “Why are you asking
about him?” \`Amr said, “I have heard the Prophet (a.s) say, ‘\`Ammar
will be killed by a rebellious group” Abū-Nūh said, “By Allah! \`Ammar
is in our army and he will destroy you and your army!” When Dhul-Kila\`
was convinced about the presence of \`Ammar and the veracity of the
tradition, he said, “You are that rebel group!” \`Amr said, “What if he
is in \`Ali’s army! In the end he will come to our side!”

This reply was only to appease Dhul-Kila\`. Superficial minds might
accept such talk, but not convincing for a person with vision. What was
the reason that made \`Amr say that \`Ammar would change sides and come
to them in the end? Did they establish any communication with him? Were
they carrying on some secret parleys with him? Or his actions gave any
indication of such intention? When all this was not there, then what
\`Amr said was nothing but one of his tricks! Allah knows whether what
\`Amr said was convincing for Dhul-Kila\` or not But in practice he
continued to be with the forces of Syria. Although one person from the
Syrian Army, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar al-\`Anzi, hearing about the
incident, advised Dhul-Kila\` to move away from the Rebellious Group.
But he did not follow the advice. Perhaps, he might have convinced his
heart that \`Ammar would ultimately join their group.

However, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar al-\`Anzi left Mu\`awiyah’s army and
joined the forces of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). At that time, he composed a
few couplets. A couple of them are mentioned here:

###### After this Tradition, I shall not fight against \`Ammar until the Trumpet (of the Resurrection Day) is blown  
 I have left Ibn al-\`As and his rebel group. O friend! I cannot help leaving them!

When Mu\`awiyah heard of this event, he was very angry on \`Amr ibn
al-\`As. \`Amr said, “I had only recounted the Prophet’s Tradition. It
is not my responsibility if someone goes away.”

Dhul-Kila\` kept looking for \`Ammar and in the battlefield he was
killed fighting with Farad Khandaf al-Bakri of the tribe of Bakr ibn
Wa’il When Dhul-Kila\`’s son learned of his father’s death, he sent word
with someone to al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays seeking permission to remove his
father’s remains.

Al-Ash\`ath said that if he gave permission, \`Ali (a.s) would become
suspicious of him. He asked him to request the permission from Sa\`id
ibn Qays al-Hamdani who was present in the right flank of the formation.
He said that if Sa\`id gave the permission, no one can make any
objection. Ibn Dhul-Kila\` sent a person to Sa\`id for the permission.
He said that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) does not object about who comes and
who goes.

He said they may come and take away the remains of Dhul-Kila\`. Ibn
Dhul-Kila\` went to the right flank of \`Ali’s army and searched for his
father’s cadaver. While searching his eyes fell on one tent. He saw that
Dhul-Kila\`’s body was lying there tied to the rope of the tent. He
asked the people in the tent to allow him to take away his father’s
body. They said he was permitted

to take it and apologized with him and sought Allah’s forgiveness. They
said if his father were not traitorous to the Imam (a.s), he would not
have been lying there in that state. Ibn Dhul-Kila\` and his slave tried
to lift the body. But it was very heavy. They asked the people in the
tent to give a helping hand. Khandaf al-Bakri asked them to move
backwards. They said that if they moved backwards, how he would lift the
body all alone. He said that the one who rendered him to that state
could also lift him. Therefore, Khandaf put the body on the mule and
tied it with a rope.

With the killing of Dhul-Kila\`, the al-Himyari’s desire for revenge
increased further; they therefore joined with \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar.
At that time, \`Ubaydullah played a trick and gave a message to Imam
al-Hasan (a.s) that he wanted to tell him something. When the message
reached him, he crossed over to the enemy camp and asked Ibn \`Umar what
he wanted to say? He said, “The Quraysh had received many hardships from
\`Ali (a.s). They might accept you as the Emir but cannot bear to be
under him. Cooperate with us to remove him from the caliphate. We
promise that the caliphate will be transferred to you!” Hearing this,
Imam al-Hasan (a.s) looked at Ibn \`Umar with contempt and said, “O
\`Ubaydullah! You are bound to be killed. If not today, it will be
tomorrow! Satan has tempted you to come to this state! Is it possible
that I take part in a conspiracy against Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)? You
have given an example of your evil nature by making the suggestion to
me!” When Ibn \`Umar heard this, he went away with a crestfallen face.

Now Ibn \`Umar organized his forces and attacked at the rear of right
flank of \`Ali’s army. The fighters of the tribe of Rabi\`ah were alert
in that flank. They raised their swords and penetrated into the enemy
forces. From noon until sunset, severe fighting took place. The Iraqis
fought with such bravery and intensity that the flank of the Syrian army
got scattered. But in the darkness of night they all reassembled The
tribe of Rabi\`ah again attacked and scattered them. Only a thousand men
remained under the Syrian flag and came forward for a last ditch effort.
The whole night the fighting continued and piles of dead bodies were
created. In this fighting, the times for prayer came and went. Instead
of the prayers, they just recited the “Takbir”. When the dawn arrived,
the adhan was sounded in the Imam’s army. \`Ali (a.s) hearing the adhan
said:

###### “Blessed be those who say but the truth, and welcome to the prayer.”

In this fight \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Umar was killed at the hands of Hani’
ibn al-Khattab or Muhriz ibn Sahsah or Jabir ibn al-Hanafi. The Syrians
offered 10,000 dirhams for handing over the cadaver of Ibn \`Umar. But
the Imam (a.s) turned down this offer and said:

###### “These are the remains of a dead dog and it is not legitimate to sell it!”[1]

In the end his two wives, Bahriyyah bint Hani’ and Asma’ bint \`Utarid,
came to take his body. Some persons told them that they were incapable
of carrying away the body and, if they wished, they would tie it to the
tail of the mule and push it to your tents. At that moment Ziyad ibn
Khasfah came out of his tent and Bahriyyah bint Hani’ requested him for
taking away the body. He got it loaded on a mule and the two widows took
it along. The body was hanging on the mule in such a manner that his
hands and feet were touching the ground.

After the killing of Dhul-Kila\` and \`Ubaydullah, Mu\`awiyah was under
a spell of fear. He told \`Amr ibn al-\`As, “Allah knows what the Iraqis
are planning to do now.” \`Amr said, “You have already seen the attacks
of the tribe of Rabi\`ah. If they gather around \`Ali (a.s) and attack,
the Syrians would not be able to hold on against them. “Mu\`awiyah said,
“Instead of giving me courage, you are frightening me.” He said, “I am
telling you what I am foreseeing.”

When Mu\`awiyah saw no hope of success, he sent word to Khalid ibn
Mu\`ammar who was commanding the forces of the tribe of Rabi\`ah that if
he withdrew from the conflict, he would give him the governorate of
Khorasan after the war was over. He promised that he would be in that
position for life. Therefore, when the forces of Rabi\`ah were advancing
with ferocity, he pulled them back.

Overwhelmed with greed, Khalid turned his face away from the Hereafter.
But even the world was not in his fate. When Mu\`awiyah sent him the
edict for appointment as the governor of Khorasan, he died while
traveling to take charge of the position.

During the heat of the fighting, a swordsman of the Syrian army, Kurayb
ibn Sabbah al-Himyari came to the arena and challenged for a combat.
From the troops of Iraq Murtada ibn Waddah al-Zubaydi came to fight with
him. But he was defeated and martyred. Kurayb once again challenged for
a fight. Now al-Harith ibn Jalah came to fight with him. He too was
martyred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murūj al-Dhahab, Vol 2, Page 24

When he challenged the third time, \`Ayid ibn Masrūq al-Hamdani came to
the arena. He was also killed. After martyring the three persons, pride
went to the head of Kurayb. He piled the dead, one over the other, and
sitting over them threw a conceited challenge once again. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw this demonstration of conceit and he thought it
better to go himself to combat with the person instead of sending anyone
else. Reaching near him the Imam (a.s) said, “O Kurayb! Remember! The
son of Hind, the cannibal who chewed the human liver, will consign you
to the flames of the Hell. I invite you to the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of the Prophet (a.s).” He replied, “We have been hearing such
talk since long! You have seen my prowess at the use of the sword. If
you have the courage, fight with me!”

The Imam’s visage changed. He went forward and attacked Kurayb. The blow
was so fierce that Kurayb fell to the ground, rolled, and died. After
killing him, the Imam (a.s) asked for another combatant from the Syrian
army. Al-Harith ibn Duwahah al-Himyari came to the arena. (a.s) threw
him dead on the ground. He challenged for another combatant. This time
Muta\` ibn al-Muttalib al-\`Absi came to fight. The Imam (a.s)
dispatched him as well. He then spoke to the Syrian troops, “If you had
not started the fight, we would not have followed suit! Then he recited
the following verse:

### الشَّهْرُ الْحَرَامُ بِالشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ وَالْحُرُمَاتُ قِصَاصٌ فَمَنْ اعْتَدَى عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا اعْتَدَى عَلَيْكُمْ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الْمُتَّقِينَ.

#### “The Sacred month for the sacred month and all sacred things are under the law of retaliation; whoever then acts aggressively against you, inflict injury on him according to the injury he has inflicted on you and be careful of your duty to Allah and know that Allah is with those who guard against evil. (2/194)”

When we consider about this incident, a picture of rights and justice
comes before us. There is hardly any such example in the history of
warfare. After killing three swordsmen the Imam (a.s) held his hand.
Generally, in such circumstances, when a warrior has achieved so much
success, he goes overboard and challenges the opponents with conceit and
pride as if he is invincible in the manner Kurayb behaved earlier. After
settling the score with the Syrians, the Imam (a.s) could have continued
asking for more combatants. But he never let the norms of right and
justice escape his attention. He killed the same number of opponents as
the lives he lost from his group.

During this episode, \`Ammar ibn Yasir could not have remained a silent
spectator. He was a well-known warrior. He had participated in Badr,
Uhud, Khandaq and other campaigns. Although his limbs had started
shaking on account of old age, he had wrinkles on his face, his back was
bent and had already seen ninety-three summers, but he was as active as
a youth could be. He had a wheatish visage and a wide chest. His eyes
were large, he was tall of height. Ever since he got the news about his
impending martyrdom from the Prophet (a.s), he was keenly looking
forward to the day. Seeing the rebels of Syria, he remembered the
Prophet’s saying that he would be martyred by a rebellious group. He
came to the presence of the Imam (a.s), with the sword in his shaky
hand, to seek permission for jihad. The Imam (a.s) looked at him and
said, “Wait! May Allah be kind on you!”

When \`Ammar felt that the Imam (a.s) was hesitant of allowing him to go
for jihad, he said, “The Prophet (a.s) has already given me the tiding
of martyrdom! Now I am in the twilight of my life. I have the arena of
martyrdom in front of me! Give me your consent!” When the Imam (a.s) saw
\`Ammar’s determination, he reluctantly allowed him to go and do jihad.
\`Ammar wore the armor, took his arms, mounted his horse and spurred it
on to the arena. He lifted his head towards the sky and said:

###### “O Allah! You know it well that if I know you want me to jump into the sea, I would do that! O Allah! You are aware that if I know you want me to keep the tip of the sword on my chest and bend so much that it pierced through my body; I would not hesitate to do it. I do not consider any act more worthy of your pleasure than doing jihad with the hypocrites. If I had known that any other act would bring more pleasure to you, I would not have hesitated doing that!”[1]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) prepared a group of men to fight under \`Ammar.
The standard was given to Hashim ibn \`Utbah Mirqal. The Imam (a.s) told
him smiling, “O Hashim! For how long you will keep breaking the bread!
Rise and do jihad with the traitors!”

After taking the Standard in his hand, Hashim looked at Mu\`awiyah’s
army and pointing towards one unit of troops, he asked who they were. He
was told that they were the people from the tribe of Dhul-Kila\`. He
pointed towards another unit of men and inquired about them. He was told
that they were a mix of the Quraysh and people of al-Madinah. Then he
turned in the other

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 26

direction and asked who the people around the dome shaped tent were? He
was told that was Mu\`awiyah and the men guarding him. He asked that
even in the rear of the tent there were some people. He was told they
were \`Amr, his sons and retainers. When the armies were ready, \`Ammar
ibn Yasir addressed them and said, “O valiant! Rise and fight with those
mischief mongers who have started the war on the pretext of seeking
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. To hoodwink the people they say
that \`Uthman was killed as an oppressed person and that they are
claiming the *qisas*. This was just a ploy to start the war. They took
hold of this excuse and tricked people into mobilizing for the battle.
The purpose for this war for them was to grab power. They were not
interested in the Faith nor did they care for the Truth. They wanted to
enjoy material benefits and luxuries” After this talk by \`Ammar, Hashim
waved the standard and both of them started together towards the rows of
the enemy formation. Whichever side \`Ammar went, the Companions
followed surrounding him.

When Mu\`awiyah saw this crowd moving towards his formations, he sent
fresh troops under the command of Abul-A\`war al-Salami. \`Ammar saw
\`Amr al-\`As in the Syrian army. He told him, “Shame on you! For the
governorate of Egypt, you have sold your Faith. But this is nothing new.
You had always rebelled against Islam.” \`Amr said, “We are avenging the
blood of \`Uthman!” \`Ammar retorted, “You have not taken this step to
please Allah! I had fought against you earlier on three occasions as a
part of the Prophet’s army. The aim with which you participated in the
earlier battles, you have the same even now. O \`Amr! Have you forgotten
the Prophet (a.s) saying, ‘O \`Ammar! You will be martyred by a rebel
group. You will be calling them towards the Heaven and they will invite
you towards Hell’. Look at me and recognize me! I am \`Ammar!” What
reply could \`Amr give? He just kept mum.

When both the armies were in readiness, they flailed their swords and
spears and advanced against each other. The flames of battle started
rising. Swords clashed with swords. In this acute fighting, no one has
cared for the others. In the melee, \`Ammar and Hashim were separated
from each other. Despite his old age and shaky hands, \`Ammar was
fencing his sword and kept moving forward killing the enemy troops.
After sometime he noticed that Hashim was standing in front of him He
said, “Hashim! Why are you standing here! Move forward and fight with
the enemy. Today, the doors of the Heaven are open and it is under the
shadow of swords and spears! Even if they push up to the oasis of
Bahrain, we shall have the conviction that we are on the side of the
Truth and they are the supporters of evil.” Hashim waved his sword, like
a

lightening, and attacked the rows of enemy men. Swords were waving over
and severing the heads and the spears were entering the chests of the
enemies. Cadaver after cadaver was falling.

When \`Amr al-\`As saw this he said, “If this person with the black flag
kept fighting like he is now, he will finish the entire population of
Arabia.” With the continued onslaughts of Hashim and \`Ammar, three of
the five rows of the enemy troops were scattered. When they were about
to attack the fourth row, the Syrian army woke up to the reality. From
their units, the tribes of Azd and Bahilah attacked the men from Hamdan
with intensity. They were forced to climb up a hillock to take shelter.
But Bahilah and al-Azd chased and forced them down the hillock. Now the
youths of Hamdan made a concerted attack and killed 3,000 enemy men. The
remainder of the enemy units was forced to withdraw. \`Ammar ibn Yasir,
with his men, moved forward and reached near the groups that were
guarding Mu\`awiyah.

When Mu\`awiyah saw him advancing, he asked his men to push him back.
Therefore, they advanced swords in hands. Among those persons was
\`Amr’s son \`Abdullah too was there. He had one sword in hand and
another hanging on his girdle. When \`Ammar turned in the direction of
\`Abdullah, \`Amr shouted, “O My son!” Mu\`awiyah asked him to be
courageous and not to worry. \`Amr said, “This is my son! If it was your
son, Yazid, I would have seen how patient you would be!” Alas, with the
shouts of \`Amr, some Syrians went forward and brought back \`Abdullah.
\`Ammar ibn Yasir kept on making attack after attack and in the end he
was injured by a Syrian. His strength had totally sapped. One of his
slaves gave him a mix of milk and water. He drank a little of it and
said:

###### “Every word of Allah and his Prophet (a.s) is true. I shall meet my friends today. I shall meet Muhammad Mustafa (a.s) and his Companions. The Prophet (a.s) had said that my last food in the world will be milk mixed with water.”[1]

With milk, his feeble body got some energy. He again rose to continue
the fighting. In his heart was the spirit of fighting and laying down
his life for the Truth! At every step, he saw the coming martyrdom. One
person from the rebel group, Abul-Ghawiyah al-Fazari, hit him with a
spear and Ibn Jawn al-Saksaki came forward and cut away his head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh Abul-Fidā’, Vol 1, Page 176

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) heard of the martyrdom of \`Ammar, he was
very sad and tears dropped from his eyes. He went to the body and
recited the following couplets:

###### O Death! Come and give me tranquility and comfort  
 You have finished my friends, you will not spare me.  
 It seems you know each of my friends  
 As if someone is pointing them out to you!

Then the Imam (a.s) said, “We are Allah’s and to Him do we return. One
who is not saddened with \`Ammar’s death is not conversant with the
norms of Islam!” Then the funeral prayer was offered and \`Ammar was
buried at the same place in the clothes that he was wearing.

The martyrdom of \`Ammar created doubts in the minds of the Syrians and
one aspect of their attitude, rebelliousness, became evident in light of
the saying of the Prophet of Islam (a.s):

###### “He will be killed by a rebellious group that will be astray from the Right Path. \`Ammar’s last meal will be milk mixed with water.”[1]

On the basis of this tradition, Dhul-Kila\` al-Himyari was emotionally
disturbed but \`Amr al-\`As convinced him saying that ultimately \`Ammar
would be in their group. If Dhul-Kila\` was alive, he would have asked
\`Amr as to what happened to his claim. He might have also exposed the
treachery of \`Amr in this matter. He might have also moved away from
the rebel group with the men of his tribe after the martyrdom of
\`Ammar. Therefore, \`Amr made the following observation on the killing
of \`Ammar:

###### “I do not know if I am more happy with the killing of \`Ammar or that of Dhul-Kila\`. By Allah! If Dhul-Kila\` lived after the killing of \`Ammar, he would have moved to \`Ali’s side with the Syrians.”[2]

Khuzaymah ibn Thabit al-Ansari too was in doubt before \`Ammar was
martyred. And he was not able to distinguish between virtues and vice.
When \`Ammar was martyred, he said that he had no doubt after the
incident that the rebel group was one headed by Mu\`awiyah. Then he came
to the arena for jihad and was martyred fighting with the Syrian forces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 158  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 158

\`Abdullah, the son of \`Amr ibn al-\`As, too had some doubt and told
his father, “Today we have killed a person whose face the Prophet (a.s)
cleaned of the dust with his own hands and said:

###### “O son of Sumayyah! People are lifting one brick each and you are lifting two at a time for the sake of felicity and Reward. You will be killed by a rebel group.”[1]

Ibn al-\`As told Mu\`awiyah, “Have you heard what \`Abdullah has said.”
Mu\`awiyah, to dispel the fears of \`Abdullah and other men said:

###### “Have we killed him? Killing has been done by the one who has brought him here!”[2]

When Mu\`awiyah said this, every Syrian was heard saying, “\`Ammar’s
killer is one who has brought him here.” When \`Ali (a.s) heard this
interpretation, he said, “Then Hamzah’s killer was the Prophet (a.s)
because he had brought him to the Battle of Uhud.

Hashim ibn \`Utbah was still in the battlefield. When he saw his men
stopping for a respite he chided them saying, “Those of you who want
Allah’s pleasure and Blessings in the Hereafter, they should move
forward to clash with the enemy!” The contingent now moved and advanced
with their lances poised towards the enemy troops. In that time, a youth
from the tribe of Ghassan came out of the Syrian army and recited the
following couplet:

###### I have heard this saddening news  
 That \`Ali has killed son of \`Affan

Then using invectives against \`Ali (a.s) he came forward with the
intention of attacking. Hashim understood that the youth was misguided
and was under a misapprehension and totally ignorant of the
circumstances of the assassination of \`Uthman. Fulfilling the duty of
enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, he told him, “O young man!
Reconsider your opinion and fear Allah! Tomorrow you will be accountable
before Allah!” The youth said, “Fighting with you, and killing you
people, I consider my Religious Duty because you neither pray nor your
Emir prays. And it was your Emir who, with the cooperation of your
people, killed \`Uthman!”

Hashim said, “What have you to do with \`Uthman! He was killed by the
Prophet’s Companions, their sons, their followers, and the reciters of
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 158  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 158

Qur’an. These people know the Shari\`ah and have a vision of the Faith.
I am sure you neither know anything about the Faith nor do you know what
is good and what is bad for the Ummah”

The youth said, “I consider lying as taboo and what you have said is
true!” Hashim said, “What you do not know, leave it to those who have
the knowledge! Do not grope about in the darkness When you say that our
Emir does not pray, the world knows that he was the first ever in the
world to offer prayers with the Prophet (a.s)! On the face of the Earth
there is none who has a better understanding of the matters of Faith and
the follower of the Shari\`ah than him! He had the special privilege and
honor of the nearness to the Prophet (a.s) that none else had. You have
blamed us of not offering prayers. Do not you see that our men spread
the prayer mats in the nights, offer prayer and recite the Holy Qur’an.
You have been misguided by some evil persons and therefore you are
terming vice as virtue and virtue as vice. You are blindly following
their ill advice and going astray!”

When the youth heard this, curtains of darkness were raised from his
mind and he said, “You seem straightforward and virtuous to me. If I
repent, will my repentance be accepted by Allah? “Hashim replied, “It is
Allah who accepts repentance and forgives mistakes.” Convinced, the
youth decided to abstain from fighting, turned back to return. One
Syrian told him that he was misled by the Iraqi. The youth said,
“Misleading is something and the attraction of the truth is something
else! By advising me to refrain from vice, he has proved his kindness
and concern”

Hashim was standing in the battlefield when a patrol of the Syrian
troops from the tribe of Tanūkh came forward. Hashim went with his men
and attacked them. For sometime swordsmanship went on 9 or 10 Tanūkhis
were killed by Hashim. During the same fight, Harith ibn al-Mundhir
al-Tanūkhi hit his spear on the stomach of Hashim. He fell down to the
ground. The advance of his troops stopped and the men were disheartened.
When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw the men losing heart, he sent word with
a person to Hashim he must take the standard in his hand and move
forward. Hashim asked the messenger to look at his stomach. When the
person looked at the stomach, he saw that it was cut asunder and the
blood was coming out copiously. Hashim was for some time in the pangs of
death and then he breathed his last. With Hashim a group of memorizers
of the Qur’an from the tribe of Aslam too were martyred. When the
messenger returned and conveyed the information about the martyrdom of
Hashim, the Imam (a.s)) came to the mortal remains of the martyrs and
recited the following couplets:

###### May Allah Bless this al-Aslami group who were  
 Radiant of face and died fighting along with Hashim  
 In that group were Burayd, \`Abdullah and Malik’s sons \`Urwah and Munqidh  
 They were those who were counted in the nobility of the Arabs.

At that moment Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) noticed a group under the Syrian
flag. He asked who the people were. He was informed that they were the
people from the tribe of Ghassan. He observed these people were still in
the field of battle. He added that until they were attacked ferociously,
they would not budge from their place! He turned toward his men and
said, “Who amongst you are those who can fight with courage and an eye
on the blessings of the Hereafter?”

At this call, a group of men came forward. He called Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah to take the group with him slowly holding the spears
raised towards the enemy force stand near them and await his orders.
After sending Muhammad, he asked Malik al-Ashtar to go with another
group to the aid of Muhammad and ordered them to attack. Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah and Malik al-Ashtar’s groups jointly attacked the enemy
formation. When they attacked the people of Ghassan with sheer ferocity,
their feet were uprooted. They left their station, suffering lots of
casualties, and withdrew from the arena.

In the heat of this battle, one thousand Iraqis were cut away from their
formations and were surrounded on all sides by the enemy. This
encirclement was so severe that the men were rendered helpless. When
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw this predicament, he asked his companions to
volunteer to go to the rescue of their men. \`Abd al-\`Aziz ibn
al-Harith al-Ju\`fi said that he would obey the Imam’s orders. He
blessed him and asked him to break the encirclement of the Syrians and
approach his troops to help them out of the situation. He asked him to
tell the men to shout the Takbir from there, which will be reciprocated
from his end too. Then they should make a concerted attack on the
encirclers. \`Abd al-\`Aziz al-Ju\`fi put on the armor, mounted his
horse and, went near the encircling hordes of the enemy, advanced
hitting their chests with his lance he reached the encircled Iraqis.
When the men saw him, their morale revived. They asked, “How is Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s)?” He replied that he was well and that he had asked
them to raise the slogan of Takbir and start attacking and he with, his
companions, will raise the same slogans from that end. Therefore, in the
din of the slogan the attack was commenced. The attack was so severe
that there was panic in the enemy

ranks. Seven hundred enemy men were killed in the battle. The
encirclement broke and the Iraqis returned to their base. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) praised \`Abd al-\`Aziz al-Ju\`fi for his valor and
said words of praise for him.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was standing near his formation of men when a
chief of the Syrians came to the arena wearing armor of chain and
shouted, “Abul-Hasan! Where are you?” The Imam (a.s) came in front of
him and the man said, “O son of Abū-Talib! You have precedence in
accepting Islam over all other men! You have participated in all the
ghazawat with great distinction! Stop this bloodshed. We shall leave
Iraq for you and you leave the territory of Syria for us!” The Imam
(a.s) said:

###### “O Person! I have given a serious thought to this matter. For me there is no other alternative than war! Or else I shall have to deny the things that Allah has revealed to His Prophet (a.s). Allah does not like His friends to contravene His Commands on the earth and we sit quiet without exhorting people to virtue and warning them against vice. I feel better facing the hardships of war than going to Hell with manacled hands and feet.”[1]

Swords were clashing in the battlefield and different fighting groups
were engaging one another. (a.s) ordered every unit of his army to
attack some sections of the enemy formation. Therefore, the entire army
entered the arena at the same time. At every nook and corner of the
place the flames of fighting were rising. Al-Qa\`qa\` ibn \`Amr says
that it appeared as if lightning was striking every moment and mountains
were clashing with one other and the Earth was in the throes of a
cataclysm. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) sort of submerged in the rows of the
enemy troops and emerged after some time when his head and face was red
with the gore and the sword too was soaked in blood. In this fierce
battle, the standard-bearers could not stand steadfast and the rows of
men were scattered. When \`Adi ibn Hatam came fighting near the place he
had left the Imam (a.s), he did not find him there. On inquiry, he
learned that he had gone in the direction where the fighting was the
fiercest. Adi went there and finding (a.s) there said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 188

###### “O Amir al-Mu’minin! If you are living, every hardship is small for us! I have trampled the dead under my feet to reach you! Today, none of our chiefs is alive nor theirs!”[1]

Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani sent word to the Imam (a.s) from his
battlefront, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! We have at this moment acquired
ascendancy over the enemy. If any of the units needs our assistance, we
are ready to provide it! “The Imam (a.s) told the tribes of Rabi\`ah and
Hamdan that they were like the spears and the armors for him. He
exhorted them to vanquish the enemy and push him out of the arena. At
this call, twelve thousand troops got ready for the onslaught. The Imam
(a.s) wore the Prophet’s black turban on his head and climbed on the
Prophet’s own horse, Rih. The right flank he entrusted to Malik
al-Ashtar and the left to Ibn \`Abbas. He himself was at the heart of
the formation. Thus they attacked the enemy, with the valiant youths of
Rabi\`ah and Hamdan, and in no time there were piles of enemy cadavers
in the arena. With the intense fighting, the Imam’s sword got twisted.
He came out of the arena, straightened the sword and said, “If this
sword was not twisted, I would not have come out of the arena!” He then
immediately reentered the fray! Fighting, he reached near the tent of
Mu\`awiyah and said:

###### “I shall hit my sword on those enemies and will not spare Mu\`awiyah who has bulging eyes and a fat tummy!”

When Mu\`awiyah saw this state of affairs he put his foot in the stirrup
of his horse and was preparing to escape form the battlefront. But with
one persons shout the Syrian troops reassembled and he abandoned the
idea of escape. Now the Syrians made a concerted attack, but the youths
of Hamdan and Rabi\`ah kept advancing and decimating the enemy fighters.
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) praised their valor and said:

###### Leading them along was the man of honor Sa\`id ibn Qays  
 The upholders of honor and righteous persons protect honor and prestige!”

This was Thursday and the ninth day of the war. When the dusk was near,
and the sun was about to set, the terrible night arrived that is
infamous in the annals of history as *laylat al-harir*. Everywhere there
was pandemonium. With the clanging of swords and the twanging of the
bows, the hearts were getting scared. There was a cacophony of slogans
and the clapping of hoofs of the horses on the ground that were
shattering the drums of the ears of the people. Everywhere there were
lying dead and the severly injured persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 186

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) sometimes remained in the heart of the formation
and at others moved to the left and the right flanks. It appeared that
in the arena of the battle he was everywhere! Wherever he saw the enemy
gaining ascendancy, he moved to that place. He attacked with such
intensity that row after rows of the enemy troops were obliterated. At
last, in this arena of battle, the spears broke and the swords went
blunt. Some men went to the extent of biting the adversaries when they
had no useful instruments of war left with them. At that night, five
hundred and twenty-three times the Imam (a.s) was heard calling the
Takbir (that he usually call whenever he would kill one of the enemies).
In the morning when the count of the enemies killed during the night was
taken, it was exactly five hundred and twenty-three! There is another
narration that says that in that night more than nine hundred Syrians
were killed by the Imam (a.s).

When the dusk came, the war had entered in its last phase. Amir
al-Mu’minin’s forces under the command of Malik al-Ashtar and Ibn
\`Abbas still continued to fight with intensity. The Imam (a.s) was at
the heart of the formation and on all the four sides, the flames of war
were rising. Malik al-Ashtar, on the right flank, with flailing sword,
advanced with the left flank in his close proximity. Whenever he brought
down his sword, it appeared as if it was raining. Whenever he raised it,
its brightness would blind the eyes momentarily. Malik handed over the
standard to Hayyan ibn Hawzah al-Nakha\`i and took the troops to attack
the Syrians. Some men slowed down their advance and he told them, “This
is not the wont of men that they keep milking the sheep and sit with one
hand over the other! Move forward with vigor like men!”

Energy came back in the lazy limbs! The Syrians could not bear these
incessant attacks and withdrew backwards with difficulty. When Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) felt that the victory was nigh, he sent another troop
to support Malik and Ibn \`Abbas. They jointly finished whatever
resistance was left in the enemy. On one hand the Syrian army was
getting decimated, on the other the voice of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was
reverberating, “Yes! You are near the destination of victory! The enemy
is in his last throes! Do not rest on your oars before finishing him!”

This was very difficult time for Mu\`awiyah. Iraqis were advancing with
determination. There was no hope left that the Syrians would be able to
resist them. There was darkness in the eyes of Mu\`awiyah. And on his
head were the dark clouds of failure and ignominy. He looked at \`Amr
ibn al-\`As with dismay. He said, “There is no need to worry! I have
already a plan ready for

such a situation!” Mu\`awiyah asked, “What is the plan?” Ibn al-\`As
said, “Raising the Holy Qur’an on the lances we shall make it the
arbiter in the dispute. The result will be that a group of the Iraqis
will become our supporters and try to stop the war. The other group will
insist on continuing the conflict. Thus creating a rift in their ranks
we shall succeed in postponing the war!” Mu\`awiyah already had the
intelligence from his detectives that al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays wanted the
war to stop before any result was achieved. He was openly telling to the
men of his tribe:

###### “You have already seen the yesterday! How terrible and destructive a battle it was! By Allah! If we fight again tomorrow destruction of the Arab pride and honor is certain!”[1]

Now Mu\`awiyah matched al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays word for word and said that
if the war prolonged, the people of Persia would attack the Arabs and
the Romans would attack Syria and will trample our pride and honor under
their feet. Therefore, Ibn al-\`As’s strategy must immediately be put to
test and make the Holy Qur’an the arbiter by raising it on the lances.
Therefore, from the first rows of the Syrian army five persons raised
the Giant Book of the Holy Qur'an of Damascus on their lances. Besides
this, as many copies as were available too were raised on the lances.
Some persons wrapped pieces of cloth on bricks and raised them on
lances! When the copies of the Holy Qur’an were raised, al-Ash\`ath ibn
Qays who had joined the conspiracy with Mu\`awiyah, came to Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) and said that the Syrians had made the Holy Qur’an the
arbiter and the people are not ready to accept any verdict other than
what the Holy Book gives! He asked his permission to negotiate with
Mu\`awiyah. (a.s) said, “Talk with him and see!”

Al-Ash\`ath went to Mu\`awiyah and asked, “Why the Qur’an was raised on
the lances?” He said, “We want the Holy Book to be the arbiter in this
dispute!” Since they were both conspiring, al-Ash\`ath readily agreed
that it was a good proposal. He returned and told (a.s) what transpired
between him and Mu\`awiyah and he himself stood between the rows of the
two armies and stressed on accepting the Book as the arbiter in the
dispute. The Iraqis, on the temptation by Mu\`awiyah’s agents, started
insisting that they will abide by the verdict of the Holy Qur’an. When
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw a web of deceit being weaved with the Holy
Book in the front, he said:

###### “O creatures of Allah! The path of Truth and Virtue that you were following, keep following! Continue to fight with your

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 188

###### enemy! Whether it is Mu\`awiyah or \`Amr, Ibn Abi-Mu\`it or Habib ibn Maslamah, Ibn Abi-Sarh or al-Dahhak! These people are neither persons of Faith nor those who follow the Holy Book. I know them more than you do. During both childhood and youth, I had been with them. They were evil in their childhood and remained so in their youth! By Allah! They have raised the Holy Qur’an to cover their evil deceit!”[1]

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) tried his best to convince the Iraqis. But
al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays, and his cohorts, who were hand in gloves with
Mu\`awiyah, became rebellious instead of seeing reason. Mus\`ir ibn
Fadki al-Tamimi and Zayd ibn Husayn al-ta’i came forward with 20,000 men
and told the Imam (a.s), “O \`Ali (a.s)! if you refuse to accept the
Holy Qur’an as the arbiter, we shall fight with you! You should
immediately order cessation of hostilities and send a message to Malik
to return forthwith from the arena.” When the Imam (a.s) felt that the
mischief had taken root, and the people are bent on rebellion, he sent
word to Malik al-Ashtar through Yazid ibn Hani’ to come to him
immediately. Malik was surprised at this message and said, “The enemy
will surrender any moment! I shall come to him with the tiding of
victory!” Yazid returned and conveyed what Malik had said. The men
started shouting and said that he had quietly asked Malik to continue
fighting. The Imam (a.s) said, “Whatever I have said was communicated in
your presence. Where was the opportunity to convey anything in secret?”
They asked him to send Yazid once again and order Malik to withdraw
immediately. If there is any delay in Malik returning, the swords that
are hitting the Syrians will turn against you.

The Imam (a.s) sent Yazid once again. He told Malik that if the life of
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was dear to him, he must immediately return to
him. Malik, with a saddened heart, returned to the Imam (a.s) and was
very unhappy seeing the confusion around him. But the steps that had
been withdrawn could not be advanced again! Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) knew
that if the cessation of hostilities was not ordered, his men would
rebel. He very unwillingly accepted the proposal of the arbitration!

After the cessation of hostilities, \`Amr advised Mu\`awiyah to kill all
the enemy men under detention with him. From amongst the detainees,
\`Amr ibn Aws al-Awdi heard this and sent word to Mu\`awiyah that when
the time for killing the detainees came, he should not be killed because
he was his nephew. Men from his tribe, Banū-Awd too recommended that he
may be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 161

released. Mu\`awiyah said, “He says that I am his maternal uncle. If he
is proved right, I will release him. But if he is lying, then your
recommendation is unnecessary!” Therefore Mu\`awiyah called him and
asked how he was the youth’s maternal uncle. He asked, “If I give proof
of that, will you release me?” Mu\`awiyah replied, “Yes!” The youth
said, “Is not the consort of the Prophet (a.s), Ummu-Habibah bint
Abū-Sufyan your sister?” Mu\`awiyah said, “Yes! She is my sister!” The
youth said, “Then! I am her son!” Mu\`awiyah said, “None other than you
had this idea! You have said the truth!” \`Amr ibn Aws was released. In
that time, the Syrians who were in captivity with the Iraqis were
released and came back to their camps. Then Mu\`awiyah told \`Amr ibn
al-\`As, “If I had acted on your suggestion, then none one of these
captives would have returned alive!” Then he released all the Iraqi
captives.

This battle started on the first of Safar, 37 H and finished on Friday
10 Safar. The two armies camped in Siffin for one hundred and ten days
and ninety clashes took place. From Amir al-Mu’minin’s army twenty-five
thousand persons were martyred of whom eighty were participants in the
Battle of Badr and sixty-three from the event of *bay\`at al-ridwan*.
From Mu\`awiyah’s army forty-five thousand men were killed.

This entire episode was because of the greed of Mu\`awiyah and \`Amr ibn
al-\`As for power and pelf. Mu\`awiyah was ruling the province of Syria
since the times of \`Umar and \`Amr too was the governor of Egypt for
some time. Mu\`awiyah wanted to save his position at any cost and \`Amr
wanted once again to get hold of the control of Egypt. It is the nature
of power mongers that once they taste power; they try to hang on at any
cost. Therefore, to keep himself in power he concocted the story of
\`Uthman’s *qisas* and misguided the people to put them in the
conflagration of war. \`Amr Ibn al-\`As played all the tricks in his
repertoire to get the governorate of Egypt for himself. Despite knowing
the truth very well, he took shelter behind falsehoods. Therefore,
acknowledging his worldly-wise nature he told Mu\`awiyah:

###### “By Allah! Although I am with you in fighting for the retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman, whatever is in my heart is there, but you are fighting with the person whose superiority and precedence (in Islam) and his nearness to the Prophet (a.s) is well-known to you. But we are only the seekers of this world!”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 141

Mu\`awiyah made the retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman the excuse for
achieving his end. He gave an impression to the people that the killing
of \`Uthman had taken away his sleep and rest. He told them that he will
not take rest until he achieved the fulfillment of the *qisas*. This,
despite the fact that during the days he was besieged, \`Uthman appealed
to Mu\`awiyah for help, which fell on his deaf ear. He, however, had a
small troop and asked the men to remain outside the ramparts of
al-Madinah and not take any action whatsoever. The purpose was to give
an impression to others that he tried to help \`Uthman with armed men
but before it could reach him, he was assassinated! He was thinking that
the killing of \`Uthman was in his best interests that he will have an
excuse to fight a war with \`Ali (a.s) and get the power in his own
hands. Therefore, he promised the governorate of Egypt to \`Amr and made
him a strong cohort. He started blaming \`Ali (a.s) for the killing of
\`Uthman and started claiming *qisas*. He knew it pretty well that the
circle of the killers of \`Uthman extended from Hijaz to Egypt and Iraq
who came crowding to al-Madinah, besieged him and scaling the walls of
his house they assassinated him. From the huge crowd of his besiegers it
was difficult to identify the real perpetrators of his murder. Those who
were present at his house at the time of the killing too were unable to
identify any one culprit.

In such a situation terming any one person as the killer and claiming
the *qisas* from him was impossible. There was not any justification for
doing a thing like that. There is no justification for putting to death
thousands of persons to claim the *qisas* for one life. Therefore, the
Holy Qur’an says the following about the Law of *qisas*:

### وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَانًا فَلَا يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنصُورًا.

#### “And do not kill any one whom Allah has forbidden, except for a just cause, and whoever is slain unjustly, We have indeed given to his heir authority, so let him not exceed the just limits in slaying; surely he is aided. (17/33)”

Mu\`awiyah was \`Uthman’s cousin, but his own sons around, he was not
\`Uthman’s wali under any law whatsoever and therefore his claim for
*qisas* was not justified because it is only the right of the successors
of the killed person or the government of the day. Mu\`awiyah was
neither the successor of \`Uthman nor was he the caliph of the Muslims.
He was just an ordinary citizen as anyone else. At the most, he was the
functionary appointed to

govern a province by the caliph. It was required of him to first accept
\`Ali (a.s) as the caliph, and respecting his rights he could have
appealed to him to issue orders for *qisas* of \`Uthman. \`Ali (a.s),
therefore, had written to him first to owe allegiance to him as the
caliph and then talk about the *qisas* for \`Uthman’s blood so that a
decision could be made about the claim in light of the Sunnah.

In fact, the claim for *qisas* was a subterfuge of Mu\`awiyah to refuse
allegiance to \`Ali (a.s). The purpose clearly was to put pressure on
\`Ali (a.s) and obtain from him the approval for continuing with the
governorate of Syria. Therefore, he told in clear terms to Jarir ibn
\`Abdullah al-Bujali that if he was continued as the ruler of Syria he
would enter the *bay\`ah* of \`Ali (a.s). After this no doubt remains
that the refusal for *bay\`ah* was to use it as a leverage for remaining
in his position as governor and the claim for the *qisas* was just a
subterfuge. If the emirate of Syria was assured, he would have stopped
talking about *qisas*. If he was interested in the *qisas*, he would
have helped Umm al-Mu’minin \`A’ishah, Talhah and al-Zubayr who rose in
the name of retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. He did not send any
help to them. In fact, he expressed satisfaction at the death of Talhah
and al-Zubayr because he knew that these two persons tempted the killers
to commit the assassination. His strategy was that Talhah, al-Zubayr and
\`Ali (a.s) fought for supremacy, and the party that was eliminated in
the fight was one headache less for him.

He also thought that the survivor of that conflict would become so weak
that handling him would not be difficult. Mu\`awiyah was thus preparing
ground to fulfill his ambition for power! If he was serious about
*qisas*, after the martyrdom of \`Ali (a.s), when Mu\`awiyah was
controlling the entire realm, he could at least have tried to locate the
killers of \`Uthman to give a semblance of his interest in claiming the
*qisas*. Once \`Uthman’s daughter, \`A’ishah, tried to draw the
attention of Mu\`awiyah towards the matter of her father’s *qisas* but
he avoided the issue. Therefore, Ibn \`Abd-Rabbih al-Andalusi wrote in
al-\`Iqd al-Farid that after the Year of Congregation, when Mu\`awiyah
came to al-Madinah, \`Uthman’s daughter \`A’ishah, was visited by him.
When she saw Mu\`awiyah, she started crying and wailing and complained
to him that he had forgotten about the *qisas* for the blood of her
father. Mu\`awiyah said that those people are now subjugated to us and
we have promised amnesty to them. If we act against them, they will
carry rancor against us and will start mischief again.

They might forsake the *bay\`ah* with start fighting and us. Then, he
said, Allah knows, what will be the result of such conflict! He added
that if the rule goes out of their hands, what will be the position of
Banū-Umayyah. He tried to convince her by saying that she herself was
the daughter of a caliph and another caliph’s niece!

Mu\`awiyah gathered a big crowd around him, and in the name of *qisas*,
started a conflict but he knew that the result of the conflict will be
either rise or fall, either the crown or the head would roll! But he did
not leave any stratagem, fair or foul, to win the war. Therefore, as
soon as he set foot on Siffin, the first step was to capture the source
of water on the bank of Euphrates and he tried to justify denying access
to water for the group of \`Ali (a.s) by saying that they too kept
\`Uthman without water for many days before killing him! In fact
Mu\`awiyah should not have banned water for \`Ali (a.s), and his men as
a retaliation for keeping \`Uthman without access to water because it
was \`Ali (a.s) who arranged to send water to \`Uthman when he was
besieged in his own house! To the contrary, when Amir al-Mu’minin’s men
captured the source of water, he allowed free access to Mu\`awiyah’s men
to draw water.

At that time, the Imam (a.s) said that an evil act could not be replied
with an evil act! Similarly, when with the martyrdom of \`Ammar, the
rebellious attitude of Mu\`awiyah was exposed, he immediately put forth
an excuse that the killer, of \`Ammar, is \`Ali (a.s) because he brought
him all the way to the battlefront! This statement is such a blatant
denial of the fact that it cannot be put even in the genre of an excuse!
It is surprising that the people of Syria were getting carried away with
the falsehoods of Mu\`awiyah. If they had some sense of understanding,
the scenario would have been different. They blindly remained attached
to the rebel group! If the excuse made by Mu\`awiyah that \`Ali (a.s)
was responsible for the killing of \`Ammar because he brought him to the
battlefront, then, by the same logic, Mu\`awiyah was responsible for the
killing of thousands of Syrians who were brought to the war by him! The
moot point is that \`Ammar was killed by “the rebel group” and that was
“Mu\`awiyah’s Group”!

Despite all these subterfuges, when Mu\`awiyah saw defeat staring in his
face, he made such a treacherous move that the situation completely
reversed. He sent his men to raise the Holy Qur’an on the lances and
start shouting slogans for making the Book the arbiter to solve the
dispute. He also infiltrated the Iraqi army to instigate the men to stop
fighting and force \`Ali (a.s) to accept the proposal. The ignorant men
did not understand the treachery of

Mu\`awiyah that if the Holy Book was to be made the arbiter for the
dispute, he should have come up with the proposal before the war
commenced. When he saw defeat in front of him, he manufactured this
excuse.

The reason for the success of Mu\`awiyah in all his treacherous acts was
that the Syrians were blindly committed to him. Al-Mas\`ūdi writes:

###### “They were submissive to Mu\`awiyah to such an extent that while going to Siffin that he made them offer the Friday Congregational Prayer on Wednesday!”[1]

The reason for the people of Syria remaining ignorant of the norms of
Faith and the Arab culture was that the territory was under the sway of
outsiders for long. In the initial period of \`Umar, the territory came
under his control. Then he made the mistake of imposing the sons of
Abū-Sufyan, Yazid and Mu\`awiyah, on the people.

Yazid died after a short while but Mu\`awiyah had a long innings and,
with his cunning, entrenched himself and developed vested interest in
the province. How could he inculcate the Islamic norms of do’s and
don’ts in the people when he was himself not bothered about them! Then,
he had also his political strategy in mind that if the people got
awareness of the norms, he would not be able to rule the way he wanted.
He kept the people ignorant of the status of \`Ali (a.s) and the Ahl
al-Bayt and, in fact, poisoned the people’s minds against them.
Therefore during the battle of Siffin on Syrian went to the extent of
saying that they were fighting with \`Ali (a.s) that neither \`Ali (a.s)
offered prayers nor the men in his army were habituated of praying
regularly.

The poor soul was repeating like a parrot what Mu\`awiyah and his
cohorts had drilled into his mind But when Hashim ibn \`Utbah talked to
him, the haze in his mind was cleared and he withdrew from the fighting!
Besides this nasty propaganda, Mu\`awiyah opened the coffers of the
state to create a breed of sycophants who promoted his foul plans!

There were also people in \`Ali’s army, who had joined him because of
some compulsions, but their minds were not with him. Persons like,
al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays and Khalid ibn Mu\`ammar, had sold themselves to
Mu\`awiyah. They got an opportunity to misguide people when the talk of
making the Qur’an the arbiter for solution of the dispute was raised.
Although Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) made it clear to al-Ash\`ath that the
demand for making the Book the arbiter was a trick of Mu\`awiyah, he
remained adamant and shouted, “O

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murūj al-Dhahab, Vol 2, Page 72

people! Force \`Ali (a.s) to accept the arbiter and stop the killing of
men! “It is surprising that when the Imam’s forces were on the verge of
victory, al-Ash\`ath develops sympathy for the dying! If his heart was
so much concerned with the deaths, he could have raised his voice before
the war commenced! He could have done this to stop the war of attrition
when the scale was showing both the parties equal in their gains and
losses! But his raising the voice when Mu\`awiyah was staring in the
face of defeat, definitely proves his complicity with the enemy!

There is no doubt that this trick of Mu\`awiyah was an act of rebellion
against the rightful caliph, but when the act of Talhah and al-Zubayr
was dismissed coolly as *khata’ ijtihadi*, Mu\`awiyah’s evil design too
is called a *khata’ ijtihadi*! It is surprising that when the Prophet
(a.s) terms this act as rebellion, by calling it error in interpretation
they term the perpetrator deserving of Rewards in the Hereafter
(sic)!Are these champions of Mu\`awiyah oblivious of the Prophet’s
saying:

###### “\`Ammar will be killed by a Rebel Group. \`Ammar will be inviting them towards Allah and they will call him towards the Hell!”[1]

After this observation of the Prophet (a.s) calling Mu\`awiyah’s act an
error of interpretation (*khata’ ijtihadi*) and harping on the calumny
that the perpetrator of the act was deserving of Rewards and the Heaven,
is beyond the comprehension of any right thinking person. When some
people have even termed the assassination of \`Ali (a.s) as a *khata’
ijtihadi*, there is nothing beyond them. Therefore, Ibn Hazm and his
group consider the act of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljim as *khata’
ijtihadi*. Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani writes:

###### “Ibn Hazm has made access to exaggeration by saying that from the imams none has denied that Ibn Muljim did ijtihad, and had his justification, that he was right in killing \`Ali (a.s)”[2]

Although the Prophet (a.s) had said about Ibn Muljim, “He is the wicked
man of the Ummah!” Similarly this group terms the killing of \`Ammar ibn
Yasir by Abul-Ghawiyah al-Fazari as error in interpretation, despite the
Prophet (a.s) saying that the killer of \`Ammar and the one who took
away his fighting gear would go to the Hell. The killers of \`Uthman, to
the contrary, are termed by Ibn Hazm, and the men of his ilk, as
traitors, cruel and heretic. They do not consider their act as *khata’
ijtihadi!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Vol 2, Page 92  
 **[2]** Talkhīs al-Hubbayr, Page 348

Just imagine the man of ijtihad, Mu\`awiyah, gives expensive gifts to
the Caesar of Rome to make an alliance with him to fight against one who
had the *bay\`ah* of the Companions of the Prophet (a.s) both Muhajirūn
and Ansar! Was this ijtihad that he was hobnobbing with an infidel to
fight against the caliph of the day?

The great Urdu poet, Mirza Ghalib Dehlavi too has composed a very
interesting couplet on this phenomenon:

###### It is a funny ijtihad that an enemy of the Faith  
 Comes to fight with \`Ali, and they call it an error!
