The Agreement For Arbitration
=============================

When an agreement was reached that there will be arbitrations, the
reciters of the Holy Qur’an from Iraq and Syria decided that there will
be two referees. One will be nominated by the people of Syria and the
other by the Iraqis. Both the referees will give the verdict in the
light of the Qur’an and the Sunnah of the Prophet (a.s).

Their verdict will have to be acceptable to both the parties. The
Syrians nominated \`Amr ibn al-\`As and from Iraq, al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays,
Mus\`ir ibn Fadki, Yazid ibn Husayn etc. nominated Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari
as the referee. He was resident in Syria. When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
heard the name of Abū-Mūsa, he said:

###### “I have no confidence on the opinion and the discretion of Abū-Mūsa. I want to give the authority for arbitration to \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas.”[1]

The persons who suggested the name of Abū-Mūsa said that he, \`Ali (a.s)
and Ibn \`Abbas were the same and it would mean that he was himself the
referee in the matter concerning him. They said that they want a referee
who is independent and impartial. The Imam (a.s) said that in that event
why did not they object to the nomination of \`Amr ibn al-\`As. They
said that they were concerned only about the referee from their side and
not about the Syrian nominee.

The Imam (a.s) said that if they object to the name of Ibn \`Abbas, he
would suggest Malik al-Ashtar, instead. They said that he was the person
who gave wind to the fire of war and how could he allow the arbitration
to succeed. He will look for further opportunity for conflict The Imam
(a.s) then said, “If you insist on having Abū-Mūsa as the referee, I
leave the matter to you.” al-Ahnaf ibn Qays said, “O People! If you do
not like Ibn \`Abbas and Malik al-Ashtar, you may nominate me as the
referee. I am well aware of \`Amr’s cunning ways and he will not be
successful in tricking me. If you do not want me, select

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 192

someone else. But do not select Abū-Mūsa. Instead of setting right the
matters, he will complicate them further.”

It was a part of the conspiracy that Abū-Mūsa’s name was pushed forward.
They adamantly held to their suggestion and Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari was
nominated as the referee.

After the selection of the referees, when \`Abdullah ibn Rafi\` started
writing down the terms of reference, he wrote the following words as a
preamble to the document. “Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali and Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan has decided that…” \`Amr ibn al-\`As objected to the word
“Amir al-Mu’minin” and said that he might be the Emir of others but not
theirs! He therefore asked the word to be deleted from the document.
Only his name and the father’s name are entered. Al-Ahnaf ibn Qays told
the Imam (a.s) that he should not agree to the deletion of the word
“Amir al-Mu’minin” even if it caused renewal of the conflict. He added
that if this word was deleted today, the Emirate would not ever come
back to him. Al-Ash\`ath ibn Qays and his supporters were insisting that
the word be deleted. In utter unconcern, the Imam (a.s) was sitting
quietly in his place and seeing the reflection of the Treaty of
al-Hudaybiyah in the events of the day. After a few moments of quiet he
said, “When I drafted the agreement of the Treaty of al-Hudaybiyah, I
wrote the word “*rasūlullah* (Allah’s Messenger)” in the preamble when
the representative of the Quraysh, Suhayl, said that they did not
recognize him as Allah’s Messenger and wanted me to delete the word and
to enter “Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah” instead. I was hesitant to score away
the word “*rasūlullah*”. But the Prophet (a.s) said:

###### Write what he wants. One day you too will face a similar situation and you will be helpless.”[1]

At this \`Amr said angrily that he considered them infidel like those
people. The Imam (a.s) replied:

###### “O son of al-Nabighah! When were you not the friend of the transgressors and the enemy of the Muslims? You are like the mother who bore you!”[2]

Ibn al-\`As said, “After today, we shall never sit together nor see each
other’s face “The Imam (a.s) replied, “I too wish this! May Allah keep
my company free of persons like you!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Sīrah al-Halabiyyah, Vol 3, Page 33  
 **[2]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 37

When the word “Amir al-Mu’minin” was struck off and the writing of the
document was re-commenced, the Imam (a.s) was asked if he considered
Mu\`awiyah and the people of Syria Muslims? He said:

###### “I do not accept Mu\`awiyah and his companions are Muslims and mu’min. But Mu\`awiyah is free to write what he wants about himself and his men, admit whatever he wishes to admit and suggest whatever name he wants to.”[1]

At last, the agreement was drafted that had the following terms:

(1) It will be binding on the referees on both sides that their decision
will be based on the Qur’an. If they are unable to arrive at a decision
through the Book, they will make access to the Traditions of the Prophet
(a.s) that are acceptable to both.

(2) The decision made by the referees shall be binding on both the
parties, provided the decision is based on the Qur’an and the Sunnah.

(3) The referees to give their verdict within the current month of
Ramadan. If they felt the need to extend the duration, they could
mutually decide to do that.

(4) If the referees required evidences for arriving at a decision, they
will be arranged.

(5) There will be no hostility until the referees come to a final
conclusion about the dispute. Both the parties will ensure safety of the
lives and properties of the referees. There will be no restriction on
the movement of the parties to the dispute.

(6) If, before the verdict, any of the two referees died, his party can
nominate another referee in his place.

(7) The verdict will be announced at a place that lies between Iraq and
Syria.

Most of the terms of this agreement concern the administrative
requirements and the basic requirement was that the verdict of the
referees had to be in accordance to the Qur’an and the Sunnah and that
they had no right to arrive at any decision on their personal intuition
and thinking. If they did not follow this condition, their arbitration
will be void. The earlier events are a proof that making claim for qisas
and raising the Qur’an was with the purpose of misleading the people and
the demand for arbitration too was an evil

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 1, Page 110

subterfuge of the Syrians. The referees neither referred to the Qur’an
nor they talked of the relevant Traditions of the Prophet (a.s). One
referee tried to defeat the other with futile arguments.
