The Verdict of the Referees
===========================

The Agreement of the arbitration was executed on 13 Safar 37 H and
during Sha\`ban 37 H both the referees, Abū-Mūsa al-Ash\`ari and \`Amr
ibn al-\`As met at the place of al-Adhruh lying between Ma\`an and
Wadi-Mūsa. As agreed earlier, four hundred men from each of the two
groups also reached that solace. The chief of the Syrian delegation was
Abul-A\`war al-Salami and the Iraqi team was led by \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas and Shurayh ibn Hani’. Ibn \`Abbas was leading the prayers and
Shurayh was leading the delegation and had brought a message for Ibn
al-\`As from \`Ali (a.s). Therefore, he met \`Amr ibn al-\`As and told
him that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had sent him the message that the best
person is one who moves away from the path of vice and comes to the ways
of virtue. This he dies, in spite of the fact that there are worldly
benefits in vice and hardships in adopting virtue. Therefore, he
exhorted him not to close his eyes to the Truth and make compromises for
the sake of power and pelf. He said that whatever he acquires in the
world, is bound to go away from him one day. He added that the day was
not far away when he will be on the death bed, biting his hands, saying
how he wished he had not cooperated with the unjust and had not given
the wrong verdict accepting bribes. When \`Amr heard this message, he
said, “Did ever an occasion came when \`Ali had given me advice and I
had accepted it? Or ever I acted on his suggestion? Or given any weight
to his suggestions?”[1]

Shurayh said, “O son of al-Nabighah! I you did not consider Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) worthy of advising you, then how is it that Abū-Bakr
and \`Umar would not do anything important without taking his advice?
Certainly, they were better persons than you! \`Amr said, “A person of
my status does not like to talk with you!” Shurayh rejoined, “This pride
and conceit in you is because of your descent from al-\`As ibn Wa’il or
it is because of the infamy of your mother!” Saying this he stood up and
came away from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 167

Before this meeting, Mu\`awiyah wrote to \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar,
\`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, Abū-Jahm ibn Hudhayfah and \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
\`Abd-Yaghūth that they did not take part in the battle of Siffin, but
they must attend the meeting at al-Adhruh as delegates from him.
Therefore, the persons reached the venue before the proceeds of the
meeting commenced. Besides them, there were \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Abi-Bakr, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas and Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah Mughirah met
Abū-Mūsa and \`Amr separately before the meeting commenced, took their
opinion and returned to Mu\`awiyah in Damascus.

Mu\`awiyah asked Mughirah that he must have studied the circumstances
and might have made his own assessment as to whose favor the verdict
would go. He said, “I had met Abū-Mūsa and \`Amr separately I feel from
Abū-Mūsa’s talk that he wants to remove \`Ali (a.s) from the caliphate
and hand over to such a person who have kept away from fights. His ideal
is that only those persons will be beneficial for the people who had not
sided with any of the two contending groups nor their hands were red
with the blood of the Muslims. I think his leaning is more towards
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar and you know the bent of mind of \`Amr ibn
al-\`As. His point of view is diametrically opposite to that of
Abū-Mūsa. He thinks that remaining neutral at the time of war id not
justified. He himself wants to be the caliph or promote his son,
\`Abdullah, to the position. He considers none else capable of holding
the position than himself or his son!” Mu\`awiyah was worried when he
heard this. When he established contact with \`Amr he removed the doubts
from the mind of Mu\`awiyah.

Before declaring the verdict, the referees had to arrive at a mutually
acceptable solution. Therefore, they sat at a predetermined place and
the discussion started. \`Amr ibn al-\`As told Abū-Mūsa, “What is your
opinion about \`Uthman? Was he killed as an oppressed person? “Abū-Mūsa
said, “Yes! He was assassinated as an oppressed person and his killing
cannot be justified!” \`Amr said, “Mu\`awiyah is his successor and
inheritor, and the Qur’an says:

### وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَانًا فَلَا يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنصُورًا.

#### “And whoever is slain unjustly, We have indeed given to his heir authority, so let him not exceed the just limits in slaying; surely he is aided. (17/33)”

\`Amr added, “Besides this, the superior pedigree that Mu\`awiyah has is
not hidden from you. He was a Companion of the Prophet (a.s) and the
writer in the Court of the Prophet (a.s) and the brother of Umm
al-Mu’minin Ummu-

Habibah. We should keep these points in mind when we arrive at a
decision about the verdict. You also know that the benefit that would
accrue if he gets the position, they cannot be expected from anyone
else.” After hearing \`Amr, Abū-Mūsa said, “When you say that Mu\`awiyah
is \`Uthman’s ‘wali’, it is not tenable with the sons of the deceased
being around. \`Uthman’s ‘wali’ is his son \`Amr. How will it be
possible for us to overlook the early Muhajirūn and nominate a person as
caliph who neither has precedence in acceptance of Islam nor he has any
apparent superiority in him to qualify for the position. You speak of
his pedigree. If we make that the yardstick for the selection of the
caliph, we must look for the progeny of Abrahah ibn Sabbah because he
will be from the descendants of the kings who were ruling the entire
East and the West of the world! As far as the questions of benefits are
concerned, I cannot take bribes and sell myself! In my opinion, the most
suitable person for the caliphate is \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar! We can
perpetuate the name of \`Umar by bringing him to the caliphate.”

\`Amr said, “In that case, my son \`Abdullah would be an ideal
candidate. He is a man of learning and piety and has also been a
companion of the Prophet (a.s) and he had the privilege of Migrating
when the Prophet (a.s) ordered movement of the Muslims to al-Madinah!”
Abū-Mūsa said, “But his hands are red with the blood of Muslims! He had
participated with you in the unnecessary battles! I still think that
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar is the best candidate because he has kept away
from conflicts and internecine wars.” \`Amr said, “Power can be vested
in a person who not only takes care of himself, but has concern for the
needs of others as well.”

Abū-Mūsa said, “The Muslims have entrusted to us this matter to us after
a bloody war. We shall have to address the issue with due diligence and
care, lest some new problem raises its head.’ \`Amr said, “Then, tell me
what we shall do?” Abū-Mūsa said, “I have one idea in my mind. We shall
depose both Mu\`awiyah and \`Ali (a.s) and leave the choice to the
Muslims to decide on the most suitable candidate to be their caliph
through a Shūra.” \`Amr said, “This suggestion is not bad. I agree with
it.” Therefore, both the referees decided to announce this to the
delegates.

When both the referees separated after the meeting, Ibn \`Abbas told
Abū-Mūsa, “O Abū-Mūsa! I feel that the decision you have mutually
arrived at, \`Amr will not abide by that. He is a very cunning person
and he will certainly trick you. Therefore, when the time for the
announcement came, you must ask him to talk first and then you must make
your announcement. If you do not take this caution, remember, he will
trick you in such a manner that you will

not be in a position to show your face to anyone. Abū-Mūsa, the matter
on which we have reached unanimity of opinion, in that there is no
chance of trickery or deceit. When the day following the meeting, the
referees and all the observers from Iraq and Syria assembled in the
Masjid, \`Amr told Abū-Mūsa, “You make the first announcement.”

\`Amr was, throughout these negotiations, giving precedence to Abū-Mūsa
as if he was doing it in deference to the age of the person. Because of
his simplicity, Abū-Mūsa was getting carried away. He neglected the
advice of Ibn \`Abbas and very humbly got up and went to the podium. He
first delivered a sermon praising Allah and the Prophet (a.s). Then he
addressed the crowd in these words, “In view of the welfare of the Ummah
we have decided, after much deliberation, that we both shall depose
\`Ali (a.s) and Mu\`awiyah and hand over the matter of the selection of
the caliph to the Shūra. Therefore, I remove both \`Ali (a.s) and
Mu\`awiyah from the positions they are holding. Now you can select
anyone to be the head of the realm.”

This announcement was very shocking for the Iraqis. But they kept
sitting with great patience to hear the same announcement reiterated by
\`Amr ibn al-\`As. \`Amr stood at the podium and uttered some words of
praise for Allah and said, “You have heard whatever Abū-Mūsa has said!
He is the referee nominated by \`Ali (a.s). He has removed \`Ali (a.s)
from his position! I too remove him in a similar manner. But I retain
Mu\`awiyah because he is the wali of \`Uthman and is seeking *qisas* for
his blood. He is deserving of being the successor of \`Uthman!” At this
statement, the Syrians started shouting slogans of joy and the Iraqis
were dumb-founded and looked at each other in surprise. The shouted at
this treacherous announcement, but what had happened, had happened!
Abū-Mūsa, who was responsible for what happened, was numbed with
surprise at the deceit of \`Amr ibn al-\`As. He told \`Amr, “May Allah
take away the capabilities from you! You kept me in the darkness and had
cheated me! You are like the dog which shivers and keeps its tongue out,
whether you hit it or leave it!” \`Amr too forgot all the good manners
and respect for the old man that he was showing a while ago. He said:

###### “You are like the ass on which books have been loaded!”[1]

Shurayh ibn Hani’ could not control himself at this act of treachery and
deceit and going forward he whipped \`Amr ibn al-\`As. He too picked up
his baton. Some persons intervened and separated them. Shurayh used to
say after this event:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, Page 200

###### “I never repented for anything that instead of the whip, why not I used my sword on \`Amr!”[1]

\`Abbas too very angrily told Abū-Mūsa, “You have seen the result of not
heeding my advice. It is none of your mistake! Only such things can be
expected from you! It is the fault of those persons who, despite your
incapability, nominated you for the very important task.”

\`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakr said:

###### “It would have been better for Abū-Mūsa if he died before that day!”[2]

Similarly other persons too expressed their surprise and displeasure at
the simplicity and vulnerability of Abū-Mūsa. But the arrow had been
shot and who would go into the details of how the verdict was
manipulated. The Syrians moved towards Damascus singing and dancing in
procession. Reaching there congratulated Mu\`awiyah for the honor of
caliphate that came his way! The Iraqis trudged towards al-Kūfah sad and
crestfallen. Abū-Mūsa too hid his shamed face and proceeded towards
al-Madinah!

Abū-Mūsa and \`Amr had a binding that their verdict will be only
according to the Qur’an and, if they were not able to arrive at a
conclusive decision through the Book, then they could make access to the
Sunnah of the Prophet (a.s). But none of the felt the need of making
access to the Qur’an and the Sunnah According to which Verse of the
Qur’an or the Tradition of the Prophet (a.s), \`Amr suggested the name
of his son, \`Abdullah, to be nominated as the caliph? Abū-Mūsa
similarly proposed the name of \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar.

They were both making proposals contrary to their terms of reference.
When the early Muhajirūn were alive, how could they come up with the
names of much younger persons. These two persons did not have any
superiority of piety and learning as well. The son of Ibn al-\`As is the
person who, at first, warns his father not to go near Mu\`awiyah because
of his greed for the world. Then he himself joins the ranks of
Mu\`awiyah’s men and fights with \`Ali (a.s) in the battle of Siffin.
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar was the person whom his own father, \`Umar,
considered incapable of becoming the caliph because he was unaware of
the procedure and requirements for divorce.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 168  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 168

When he constituted the Shūra of six persons, he did not include the
name of this son in the list. Then, what right had the referees to
nominate a caliph? Or to depose Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) from the
caliphate and hand it over to Mu\`awiyah? The people who crowded round
Mu\`awiyah, had come to him for the purpose of seeking *qisas* for
\`Uthman’s blood. They participated in the war because Mu\`awiyah had
drilled it into their minds that the responsibility for the
assassination of \`Uthman was on \`Ali (a.s). They did not participate
in the war to put Mu\`awiyah on the seat of the caliphate, but these
referees totally forgot about the *qisas* and made the caliphate the
topic of discussion! The caliphate was neither in dispute nor had
anything to do with the arbitration. They should have discussed about
the assassins of \`Uthman and should have decided whether Mu\`awiyah was
entitled to claim retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman or is it the
right and duty of the center? But when the minutes of this meeting are
studied in detail, not a single reference has been made of the suspected
assassins of \`Uthman nor did they bother to mention about the *qisas*.
However \`Amr said once that \`Uthman was assassinated in oppressive
circumstances and that Mu\`awiyah was his wali and the claimant for
*qisas*. But then, this talk too ends up with the mention about the
caliphate and it is used as Mu\`awiyah’s qualification for the
caliphate. Ibn Hajar al-Makki, and the historians of his ilk, tried
their best to prove that Mu\`awiyah’s heart was free of the greed for
the caliphate. They have stressed that he was not fighting for the
caliphate and his battle was only for seeking the retaliation for the
blood of \`Uthman. Therefore, he writes:

###### “The belief of al-sunnah wal-jama\`ah is that the wars fought between Mu\`awiyah and \`Ali (a.s) were not because Mu\`awiyah was fighting with \`Ali (a.s) for the caliphate. For the caliphate the consensus (majority decision) was already there!”[1]

If Ibn Hajar meant that Mu\`awiyah had no dispute with \`Ali (a.s) about
the caliphate, was accepting his caliphate, then it is only a shallow
claim that has no proof. If he had accepted the caliphate of \`Ali
(a.s), then what was the need to refuse owing allegiance to him? Denying
to extend one’s hand is *bay\`ah* is certainly tantamount to denying
acceptance of his caliphate. If he says that Mu\`awiyah was not aiming
at elevating himself to the caliphate, the events of those days prove
quite the contrary. If he was not aiming at the caliphate, how could he
fulfill his promise of giving the governorate of Egypt to \`Amr ibn al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Sawā\`iq al-Muhriqah, Page 216

\`As! On what strength Mu\`awiyah offered the governorate of al-Basrah
or al-Kūfah to Ziyad ibn Khasfah, a commander of \`Ali’s army as a
bribe? On what basis he offered Khorasan to Khalid ibn Mu\`ammar and
Iraq to Qayl ibn Sa\`d. All these were the prerogative of the caliph,
and Mu\`awiyah was angling for that position. It is clear all these
promises could have been met only after assuming the seat of Caliphate!
All these conflicts were the precursor of the ambition to establish the
Umayyad hegemony!

Mu\`awiyah’s came about against the “consensus” and because of the
treachery of \`Amr ibn al-\`As. It was decided by both the referees that
both \`Ali (a.s) and Mu\`awiyah must be deposed from their positions.
But \`Amr contravened the understanding and announced that \`Amr ibn
al-\`As upheld the removal of \`Ali (a.s) and announced that Mu\`awiyah
was not deposed from his position. A caliphate that was based on this
treacherous act is compared with the caliphate that had the consensus of
the people is something ridiculous that has happened in the annals of
the history of Islam. In the view of the scholars of the Ahl al-Sunnah,
when there is one caliph in position, there cannot be *bay\`ah* for the
selection of another person in his place. In fact, there are several
traditions of the Prophet (a.s) in this regard:

###### “When a situation arise that there is *bay\`ah* for two caliphs, kill the latter claimant.”[1]

The part played by Abū-Mūsa about the arbitration cannot be expected of
a person with average intelligence. First he tried to place \`Ali (a.s)
and Mu\`awiyah at the same level made the move of deposing both from
their positions. This would mean that both were equal and claimants for
the caliphate and that he had been entrusted the duty to make a decision
about that! However there was no question of deposing Mu\`awiyah was not
there because he was neither a caliph nor the candidate for the
position! Amir al-Mu’minin’s caliphate was having the consensus of the
people of Hijaz, Egypt, Yemen, Khorasan and his selection was also
backed by the Senior Companions of the Prophet (a.s).

Treating them on par in the matter of the caliphate is something very
ridiculous. If this was not the result of the Umayyad intrigue, then
what was it? Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) knew this and therefore he was
opposing the nomination of Abū-Mūsa as the referee. He had also
experienced his actions during the Battle of the Camel as well. This
responsibility too goes to the weak shoulders of the persons who
insisted on his selection although they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jāmi\` al-Usūl, Vol 4, Page 442

knew that Abū-Mūsa carried hatred against the Imam (a.s) in his heart.

Abū-Mūsa also knew that in the event of \`Ali (a.s) succeeding, he would
not get any benefits from him However, success of Mu\`awiyah would bring
him some position of importance or other. Therefore, When Mu\`awiyah
came to power, Abū-Mūsa wore a big cap and addressed him with the
appellation, “Peace be upon you, O Allah’s Trustee.” Mu\`awiyah
understood that he had come to get the gratification for his services.
When he was out of sight, Mu\`awiyah told his courtiers:

###### “This reverend old man has come that I appoint him governor to some province. But, by Allah! I shall not give him any position!”[1]

Because of the lopsided decision on the arbitration, the differences
remained as they were. In fact, It gave rise to a second front against
him in the shape of the Khawarij on one side was Syria and on the other
the mischief of the Khawarij!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 245
