The Battle of Nahrawan
======================

Abū-Mūsa announced the deposing of \`Ali (a.s) and with this \`Amr ibn
al-\`As announced the appointment of Mu\`awiyah. The way they played
with the norms set by the Qur’an and Shari\`ah, is a part of the
history. Those who could not defeat Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) in the
battlefield, scored a point in stealth and treachery. They turned their
faces from the truth and honesty and became an instrument to comply with
Mu\`awiyah’s demands.

The verdict of the referees was not a surprise for \`Ali (a.s). He knew
that the referees would do everything to protect the interests of
Mu\`awiyah. Although the Khawarij were forcing the Imam (a.s) to declare
a war before the decision about the arbitration, he patiently awaited
the outcome. The referees bypassed their terms of reference and, instead
of limiting their work to the inquiry about the killing of \`Uthman,
they pronounced their verdict about the caliphate. Further, they neither
referred to the Holy Qur’an nor the Traditions of the Prophet (a.s) for
their deliberations and decisions. In these circumstances Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) had to decide to renew the fight with the Syrians. For
the Imam (a.s), they were only two alternatives—either to bow down his
head to the forces of evil or to attack Syria once again. His duty
demanded that he should adopt the second alternative.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) decided to wage a war against the Syrians,
he wanted to register the cooperation of the Khawarij who were
themselves keen to settle scores with Syria. Therefore, he wrote to
\`Abdullah ibn Wahab and Yazid ibn Husayn, “The two persons whom we had
accepted as the referees, acted against the norms of the Qur’an and were
overwhelmed with their selfish motives. They neither made access to the
norms of the Qur’an nor the Sunnah of the Prophet (a.s). Now our
position is the same as was there before the arbitration. Therefore, you
must cooperate with us and we shall make a joint and concerted move
towards the enemy, until Allah decides between us and them; and Allah
makes the best decisions!”

The Khawarij wrote in their reply that he was now preparing for the
fight to satisfy his own psyche and not to please Allah. They added that
if he

confessed about his infidelity and expressed his penitence, they would
then consider cooperation with him. They also threatened that if he did
not express penitence, they would fight with him. When the Imam (a.s)
saw that the Khawarij were adamant, he ignored them and started
mobilizing his army. He addressed a sermon to the people of al-Kūfah:

###### “O People of al-Kūfah! Remember! One who does not take part in jihad will certainly be confronted with destruction and damnation! Rise and tighten your belts to fight with those who are the enemies of Allah and His Prophet (a.s). They want to extinguish the Radiance of Allah. They are unjust, wayward and deviants from the Right Path. They neither understand the Qur’an nor the Shari\`ah! They are not qualified for the caliphate. By Allah! If they come to power, they will trample the Islamic norms and establish the Herculean and Khusrowite system! Rise and fight those enemies of the Faith! We have sought military help from al-Basrah as well. As soon as it arrives, we shall march towards Syria.”

The Imam (a.s) wrote to the governor of al-Basrah, Ibn \`Abbas, that he
was starting for war with the Syrians. He asked him to mobilize men and
come expeditiously to al-Nukhaylah, their cantonment for the
mobilization of troops. On receiving this message Ibn \`Abbas and
al-Ahnaf ibn Qays informed the people of al-Basrah about the Imam’s
decision and asked them to get ready for departure. At this call, 1,500
men volunteered to join. When Ibn \`Abbas saw this meager number of
volunteers, he arranged a meeting of the people of al-Basrah and told
them, “O people! I have advised you the command of Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s)! He has ordered you to come for fighting with the enemy. I am
disappointed that from this big city where sixty thousand warriors live,
only 1,500 have volunteered to join! If you shirk participating in the
war and keep sitting at home, you will repent your inaction! I have
nominated Jariyah ibn Qudamah al-Sa’idi for the mobilization of troops.
Gather under his flag.” With this exhortation a further one thousand and
seven hundred persons reported. This small contingent of three thousand
and two hundred men marched towards al-Kūfah.

When this contingent arrived, the elite of al-Kūfah came to the presence
of the Imam (a.s). He told them that the cooperation extended by the
people of al-Basrah was before them. You are my supporters and
protectors. Every chief from you must persuade his tribe to come for
fighting the jihad. Every able-bodied man must join. At this point
Sa\`id ibn Qays al-Hamdani, \`Adi ibn

Hatam, Ziyad ibn Khasfah, Hijr ibn \`Adi and other chiefs said that they
will extend the fullest cooperation in mobilizing men for the war.
Therefore, at their instance, they could mobilize 65,000 men. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) wrote to Sa\`d ibn Mas\`ūd, the governor of al-Mada’in
to raise troops Thus 70,000 men were mobilized under the standard of
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).

When all the preparations for war were over, some people said that it
would be better to deal with the Khawarij first, before proceeding to
Syria. The Imam (a.s) said it would be better to leave the Khawarij
alone at the moment and proceed towards Syria. He said that if they got
busy elsewhere, Mu\`awiyah would get more time to strengthen himself
further. The people said that he should do what he thought was the best.
They again assured that they were with him. Sayfi ibn Fasil al-Shaybani
said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! We are in your group and your strength!
We are the friends of those who are your friends and the enemies of
those who are your enemies! You will, Allah willing, find no dearth of
friends and supporters and there would not be any diminution in our
determination. “Muhriz ibn Shihab al-Tamimi said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin!
We are under you and your followers! For your succor we have become one!
Whether you attack the Khawarij or the Syrians, we shall not hesitate to
fight with your enemies! Battle with your enemies is a great jihad and
will bring wondrous rewards!”

In this time, the mischief of the Khawarij had assumed serious
proportions. They had become brigands and attacked all the travelers who
passed their way. Whoever came across them on the way, they would ask
him about the arbitration. If the person expressed his unhappiness about
it, they would leave him. Otherwise, they would kill him. However, they
left the non-Muslims unmolested saying that they were Dhimmis. They
considered that beating a pig was a sin and killing a Muslim an act of
piety. Al-Mubarrad writes in al-Kamil that Khawarij found a Christian
and a Muslim on the way to Nahrawan. They killed the Muslim and left the
Christian saying that the Prophet (a.s) has termed the Christians as
Dhimmis and harming them is a sin and a transgression of the agreement
made by the Prophet (a.s) with them. If someone wanted to save his life
from them, the only way was to pretend that he was a Dhimmi or a
polytheist. Wasil ibn \`Ata called himself a polytheist and escaped from
their harm. The story goes that Wasil and some of his companions came
across a band of Khawarij. Wasil warned his men that they were faced
with Khawarij and must maintain their silence and that he would speak on
their behalf. Saying this he went near the Khawarij and said, “We are
polytheists and want to seek your protection and to learn about the do’s

and don’ts of the Qur’an and act according to them.” Wasil said that
they believed him and started teaching about the norms of the Qur’an and
they kept nodding their heads. When Wasil and his men agreed to what the
Khawarij talked about, they said that now they were brothers and could
go wherever they wanted to. Wasil said that Allah has observed:

### وَإِنْ أَحَدٌ مِنْ الْمُشْرِكِينَ اسْتَجَارَكَ فَأَجِرْهُ حَتَّى يَسْمَعَ كَلَامَ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ أَبْلِغْهُ مَأْمَنَهُ.

#### “And if one of the idolaters seeks protection from you, grant him protection till he hears the word of Allah, then make him attain his place of safety. (9/6)”

Therefore, you must guide us safely to our home.

The Khawarij looked at each other in surprise and said, “Their demand,
in the light of the Qur’an is right. Therefore, we must take them until
their homes.” They therefore guided Wasil’s group safely until their
destination. Thus, he acceded to *taqiyyah* to save his and his
companions’ lives.

Similarly, \`Abdullah, the son of the Prophet’s companion Khabbab ibn
al-Aratt came across the Khawarij with a copy of the Qur’an tied to his
neck. They asked who he was. He said that he was the son of the
Companion of the Prophet (a.s), Khabbab. They said that if he was
frightened coming across them, he should chase away the fear. They said
that they wanted to hear the traditions narrated by his father.
\`Abdullah said that his father had heard the Prophet (a.s) say:

###### “A mischief will rise when the hearts of men will be dead and the bodies inanimate; men will be mu’min in the evening and by the morning they will be infidels. Again by the evening they will become mu’min.”[1]

The Khawarij said that they wanted to hear the same tradition from him.
They asked him, “Now tell us what do you say about \`Ali (a.s) when he
accepted the idea of the arbitration?” He replied, “He understands Allah
more than you and is very careful in the matters of the Faith and has a
perfect vision.”

They said, “You are a worshipper of personalities, and instead of deeds,
you look for names. By Allah! We shall punish you for following the
demands of your psyche! We shall kill you in such a manner that none
else was ever killed that way.” Saying this, they tied him up with
ropes. Then they took him and his pregnant wife near a date palm. One
date fell down from that tree

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 172

which one Khariji picked and put in his mouth. Others shouted, “Haram!
Haram!” The person immediately threw away the date. Then a pig passed
that way and one Khariji killed it. The other Khawarij said that what he
did was mischief and until they convinced the owner of the pig, they
were restless. When \`Abdullah saw this attitude of the Khawarij he
said, “When you exercise such great care in small matters, I have no
fear of harm from you because I am a Muslim and have not committed any
crime to deserve to be killed!” But they did not pay any heed to his
words and throwing him to the ground killed him heartlessly. They slit
the stomach of his pregnant wife and killed her too.

They also killed three women of Banū-al-ta’i and Ummu-Sinan
al-Saydawiyyah. After these heartless murders, they wanted to buy the
fruits of a date palm from a Christian. He said that he did not need any
payment and they could take the fruits if they wanted. They said that
they would not take a Dhimmi’s material without paying for it. The
Christian said that he was surprised that they had killed a good person
like Ibn Khabbab for no sin of his and do not want at the same time to
even take the fruits of a tree without paying for it!

Seeing these acts of barbarity, it was not possible to leave them any
more to their scruples. Further, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had the program
of leaving al-Kūfah for Syria. With little protection there, the
Khawarij could take advantage of the situation. It was possible that
they occupy the capital and commit massacre of the innocents there. In
the army of the Imam (a.s), the majority was of the men from al-Kūfah
and their families would be vulnerable to attack in their absence. It
was therefore thought necessary to deal with the Khawarij before
proceeding to Syria. Therefore, the Imam (a.s) ordered his army to move
towards Nahrawan. When the army started its journey, Musafir ibn \`Afif
al-Azdi said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! I know about the movement of
the stars and this is not auspicious time to start the journey. There
may be great harm in store for us!”

The Imam (a.s) said, “Can you tell me what is inside the belly of my
horse?” He said, “I can calculate and say!” The Imam (a.s) said, “One
who believes in what you say, will be denying the writ of the Holy
Qur’an. The Holy Book says:

### إِنَّ اللَّهَ عِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ وَيُنَزِّلُ الْغَيْثَ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي الْأَرْحَامِ وَمَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ مَاذَا تَكْسِبُ غَدًا وَمَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ بِأَيِّ أَرْضٍ تَمُوتُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ.

#### “Surely Allah is He with Whom is the knowledge of the hour, and He sends down the rain and He knows what is in the wombs; and no one knows what he shall earn on the morrow; and no one knows in what land he shall die; surely Allah is Knowing, Aware. (31/34)”

Then the Prophet (a.s) chided the astrologer and told his troops that
they should not give any cognizance to such words of superstition and
trust on Allah.

When the army moved towards Nahrawan, they learned that the Khawarij had
crossed the canal of Tabristan somewhere between Halwan and Baghdad.
When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) knew about this, he said, “It cannot be!
They are still on this side of the river and will be killed on the land
of Rumaylah.” At that moment a trooper of the advance guard came running
and said, “I have seen with my own eyes those men crossing the bridge.”
The Imam (a.s) asked for his confirmation thrice and every time he swore
that he had seen the Khawarij crossing the bridge to the other side. The
Imam (a.s) then said:

###### “By Allah! They have not crossed the bridge! Their place of death is this side of the bridge! By Allah! Even ten of your men will not be killed and even ten of them (the Khawarij) will not survive.”[1]

On the one hand there were messages that the Khawarij had crossed over
to the other side and here Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was insisting they
will meet their end only this side of the canal. With these exchanges,
some people started getting doubts in their minds. One youth knit his
brows and said, “If the Khawarij have already crossed the canal, I shall
aim my spear at the chest of the Imam (a.s)! Now he has started
predicting about the things to come!”

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) saw this state of mind of the people, he
spurred his horse and galloped fast towards the canal. When he reached
near the bank, he found the Khawarij camped this side of the canal. In
that time, the army too reached the spot. When they found the Khawarij
on their side of the bank, they raised the slogan of “allahu-akbar”! The
Imam (a.s) addressed his army:

###### “By Allah! Neither have I told a lie nor was a wrong message at all given to me!”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 174  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 174

The Imam (a.s) established his camp at a distance of three miles from
the camp of the Khawarij. When the Khawarij saw the Imam’s army, they
started raising slogans of “There is no referee but Allah”. They sent a
word to the Imam (a.s) that he still had the time to repent, and then
they would enter into his *bay\`ah*. As a second alternative, he should
demit his office of caliph to enable them to select an imam of their
choice. The Imam (a.s) sent them word to hand over the killers of his
men, otherwise his army would claim qisas for their blood. He also
informed them that if they agreed to this offer, they would be left
alone until the army returned from Syria. In that time, they could think
over and decide to seek forgiveness for their past misbehavior. The
Khawarij replied, “We have all killed your men. We all consider it
legitimate to shed their and your blood!”

Instead of getting angry over this reply, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) tried
to make them see reason by sending Qays ibn Sa\`d al-Ansari to ask them
to shun mischief. He reached the camp of the Khawarij and told them, “O
people! You are committing a grave sin. Unnecessarily you are calling us
infidels. Beware of thoughtless killing of men! Join with us to do jihad
against the enemy. “At this \`Abdullah ibn Shajarah al-Salami said, “Now
the curtains have been raised from our eyes! The darkness of vice has
vanished! The radiance of the Truth is everywhere. We cannot cooperate
with you now at any cost! “Qays said, “I plead with you in the name of
Allah! Do not indulge in mischief and do not cause your own deaths!”
After him Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari went to their camp and tried to stop them
from doing mischief and said, “We do not understand what is the cause of
your enmity for us? Why are you determined on fighting and battling?” If
you are so fond of fighting, come, we shall together fight with our
common enemy! “The Khawarij said, “If we side with you, you might once
again impose on us the arbitration.”

Abū-Ayyūb said, “You must first look to the present and then you can
bother about the future!” But the Khawarij remained adamant. All efforts
at putting sense in them went futile. In the end Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)
himself went to their camp. And said, “O people! For lack of vision and
understanding, you have veered away from us. Because of your false
emotions, you have gone astray from the Right Path. I want to warn you!
You will be killed in this valley and the turnings of this valley! The
Ummah will demean you and there will be comments against you from all
sides. Your stand was certainly wrong. And your ire unreasonable. You
might remember that I had warned you against accepting the arbitration
and said that it was a trick. But you did not listen to my repeated
appeals and stopped fighting. If I had accepted the

arbitration, it was under pressure from you people. Even then, I did not
accept it with closed eyes. I had taken a commitment from the referees
that their verdict must be only in the light of the Holy Qur’an and the
Prophet’s traditions. But they ruled against the Book and the Prophet’s
Sunnah. Therefore, we have rejected their verdict.

The Khawarij said, “No doubt! We did accept the arbitration and because
of that act, we rendered ourselves infidel. But we have repented. You
too must express penitence for accepting the arbitration and thereby
becoming an infidel. Then we shall enter your *bay\`ah* and fight with
the enemy.” The Imam (a.s) said, “After embracing the Faith with the
Prophet (a.s), migrating from Makkah with him, taking part with him in
the ghazawat that he fought do you want me to accept that I committed an
act of infidelity? How is it possible?” At this juncture, Khuraj raised
noises and said, “If you do not confess that you committed an act of
infidelity, we do not want to talk any more with you!” The Imam (a.s)
said, “By making senseless noises matters cannot be resolved! Let us
decide in this manner. You send a representative to me to discuss the
matter. If he convinced me, I shall agree that the act of accepting the
arbitration was infidelity and I express repentance for that. But if I
convince him, then you must shun the adamant attitude.”

In the beginning, the Khawarij were reluctant. But in the end, they
relented. They appointed \`Abdullah Kava as their mouthpiece. The Imam
(a.s) told Ibn al-Kawwa, “On what matter you are upset that earlier you
had very willingly owed your allegiance to me? You also fought with my
opponents in the Battle of the Camel.” He said, “At that point the need
for the arbitration had not arisen.” The Imam (a.s) said, “O Ibn
al-Kawwa! Is my decision more correct or that of the Prophet (a.s)?” Ibn
al-Kawwa said, “Certainly the Prophet’s decision!” Then the Imam (a.s)
asked, You must have heard these words of Allah:

### فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَكَ مِنْ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءَنَا وَأَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَنِسَاءَنَا وَنِسَاءَكُمْ وَأَنْفُسَنَا وَأَنْفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ لَعْنَةَ اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ.

#### “But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars. (3/61)”

“Did Allah ask the Prophet (a.s) to do Mubahalah because he had any
doubt about the Prophet (a.s) being truthful and those Christians the
liars and He wanted to remove the doubt?” Ibn al-Kawwa said, “Neither
Allah had any doubt nor His Prophet (a.s). It was just a protest against
the Christians.” The Imam (a.s) said, “Then the arbitration too was a
protest” Ibn al-Kawwa said, “Your agreeing to the appointment of the
referees was a proof that you had a doubt whether you are on the right
or not! Although the war was fought on the basis that you were on the
right and the Syrians were wrong. Therefore, you had said in clear terms
to Mu\`awiyah, ‘If the Book of Allah decided in our favor, you follow us
and if It decided in your favor we shall follow you. What other meaning
could be attached to this that you yourself were doubtful whether you
were right or not. When you yourself had a doubt, then we too are
justified to doubt about you.”

The Imam (a.s), “This agreement was conditional that when an agreement
is conditional, there is no question of our doubting the stand we had
taken. Even the Prophet (a.s) had made such conditional agreements.
Therefore, the Holy Qur’an says:

### قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِكِتَابٍ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ هُوَ أَهْدَى مِنْهُمَا أَتَّبِعْهُ إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ.

#### “Say: Then bring some (other) book from Allah which is a better guide than both of them, (that) I may follow it, if you are truthful. (28/49)”

Ibn al-Kawwa said, “This is true. But by agreeing to the appointment of
the referees, you had entrusted Allah’s work to others and thus you
committed infidelity.” The Imam (a.s) said, “I had only appointed
Abū-Mūsa as the referee.” Ibn al-Kawwa said, “Abū-Mūsa is an infidel!”
The Imam asked, “Since when he is an infidel? When he was appointed a
referee for the arbitration or when he gave his verdict?”

Ibn al-Kawwa said, “When he gave the verdict!” The Imam (a.s) said,
“Then you have accepted that when he was appointed as a referee he was a
Muslim and you had expected that he will give the verdict according of
the Commands revealed by Allah. Therefore, it was right to appoint him
as a referee.”

Ibn al-Kawwa said, “But when he gave the verdict he did become an
infidel!” The Imam (a.s) said, “If the Prophet (a.s) sent a Muslim to
some infidels to invite them to the Faith and, instead of preaching
Islam, he started preaching them wrong things, will the Prophet (a.s) be
responsible for the person’s act?”

Ibn al-Kawwa said, “No!” The Imam (a.s) added, “Then! If Abū-Mūsa turned
an infidel, why do you blame me? What justification you have to keep the
swords over your shoulders and keep killing the Muslims? As far as the
second referee, \`Umar ibn al-\`As is concerned, he was appointed by
Mu\`awiyah. How could I name him arbitrator? If \`Umar ibn al-\`As had
his way, he would even kill me.”

Now Ibn al-Kawwa asked, “Then, how did you agree to one Muslim and the
other infidel referee in the arbitration?” The Imam (a.s) said, “Allah
has said the following permitting appointment of an arbitrator in the
matters of dispute between man and wife:

### وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ شِقَاقَ بَيْنِهِمَا فَابْعَثُوا حَكَمًا مِنْ أَهْلِهِ وَحَكَمًا مِنْ أَهْلِهَا.

#### “And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint judge from his people and a judge from her people. (4/35)”

If a Muslim marries a Jewish or Christian woman and differences arise
between them, then it is natural that the man will have a Muslim referee
from his family and the woman an infidel referee from her family! Then,
from the Holy Qur’an, is it not proved that while one referee is a
Muslim, the other can be an infidel?”

When the Khawarij saw that Ibn kava was not able to give satisfactory
arguments, they sent word to him to terminate the discussion and go
back. He therefore left the talks half way and went back to his people.
Although Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) proved his point, there was no change in
the adamant attitude of the Khawarij. Now there was no other alternative
than fighting with them. The Imam (a.s) arranged his troops in proper
formations The right flank was in the command of Hijr ibn \`Adi and the
left under Shabath ibn Ruby. The cavalry was under Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari
and the footmen under Abū-Qutadah al-Ansari. The men from al-Madinah,
who were 700 or 800 in number, were put under Qays ibn Sa\`d al-Ansari.
The Prophet (a.s) himself took position at the heart of the formation.
The Khawarij too organized their rows.

When rows were arranging opposite rows, (a.s) gave a white banner to
Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari and sent him with a contingent of two thousand men
to go towards the Khawarij. He went ahead with his men and announced, “O
people! Amir al-Mu’minin says that those of you who decide to come under
this banner, or return to al-Kūfah or al-Mada’in, or leave company of
that group, there is amnesty for them! “The effect this announcement had
was that

Farwah ibn Nawfal al-Ashja\`i, who was among the elite of Khawarij,
started telling to his tribesmen, “By Allah! I do not know with what
justification we have decided to confront \`Ali (a.s)? Neither we have
any proof to justify this conflict, nor there any reasonable
justification for fighting. We shall stay away from these people and can
later on decide on our course of action!”

Saying this, he moved away from the Khawarij with his five hundred
tribesmen and went to Bandnajin. Another group went towards al-Kūfah. A
hundred persons came under the flag of Abū-Ayyūb joining the Imam’s
army. This was a proof of the just stand of the Imam (a.s) and his
spirit of forbearance and peace.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) talked to the rest of the Khawarij about the
terrifying effects of war. But they were adamant on their stand. Now
only the Khawarij had to make their initial strike for the battle to
commence because the Imam (a.s) had instructed that his men should not
be the first to start fighting. At last one Khariji came out and killed
three men from the Imam’s army. The Imam (a.s) moved forward and
attacked him. When the sword hit him, the man said, “How sweet is going
to the Heaven!”

When \`Abdullah ibn Wahab heard this, he said, “By Allah! I do not know
if you are going to heaven or the Hell!” When one Khariji of Banū-Sa\`d
heard this he said, “I have come here at the temptation of \`Abdullah
ibn Wahab and even he does not know whether our stand is right or not
and is not sure whether fighting for this cause we go to Heaven or the
Hell?” Then along with the men from his tribe, he moved away from the
ranks of the Khawarij. Instead of combating man-to-man, the Khawarij
very soon started general fighting. Therefore, they broke the sheaths of
their swords, put arrows in their bows, put up the spears and shouting
the slogan, “No judgment except Allah’s” started a concerted attack. It
was such a severe attack that the feet of the cavalry were uprooted.

They moved back a little and consolidated their positions once again.
(a.s) told his men, “O youth! Move forward and fight like tigers!”
Saying this he too stood up. Now, when the army attacked as a single
unit under his command, there was blood everywhere. With this concerted
attack, the rows of the enemy troops got uprooted. The Imam’s sword got
twisted with the intensity of use. He had to straighten it putting on
his knee. His army was moving forward killing the enemy troops until
they surrounded the Khawarij from all sides. Now there was no way of
escape for them. Four hundred Khawarij were severely wounded and not fit
for fighting. Nine persons

escaped and saved their lives. Out of them two went to Oman, two to
Sajistan, two to Kirman two towards al-Jazirah, and one reached Taymūrin
in Yemen. The rest of the Khawarij were killed. From the chiefs of the
Khawarij, \`Abdullah ibn Wahab was killed by Ziyad ibn Khasfah, Yazid
ibn Husayn al-ta’i by Abū-Ayyūb al-Ansari,, Hurqūs ibn Zuhayr by Jaysh
ibn Rabi\`ah al-Kinani, \`Abdullah ibn Shajarah al-Salami by \`Abdullah
ibn Zahr al-Khawalani and Shurayh ibn Awfa was killed by Qays ibn
Mu\`awiyah. Only eight persons were killed from the army of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s). They were Rawbah ibn Wabar al-Bujali, Sa\`id ibn
Khalid al-Subay\`i, \`Abdullah ibn Hammad al-Ajni, Fayyad ibn Khalil
al-Azdi, Kaysūm ibn Salamah al-Juhani, \`Ubayd ibn \`Ubayd al-Khawalani,
Jami\` ibn Jath\`am al-Kindi and Habib ibn \`Asim al-Asadi.

When Amir al-Mu’minin’s men saw that most of the Khawarij were killed,
they said, “Now! They have been obliterated from the face of the Earth!”
The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “Not at all! They are still there in the backbones of men and the wombs of women. Whenever any group of them rises, it will be cut off until the last of them turn into thieves and brigands.”[1]

When the battle was over a search was made for a person, Dhul-Thadiyah,
from the ranks of the Khawarij because Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) used to
say before their rebellion:

###### “One group will veer away from the Faith in a manner the arrow goes piercing through the game. Their sign is that among them there will be a person with a maimed hand.”[2]

Some persons searched for him among the dead, but were unable to find
his body. They returned to the Imam (a.s) and said, “We have searched
all over and have failed to find the body of the person.” The Imam (a.s)
said, “By Allah! His body is there among the dead!” Saying this he took
Sulayman ibn Thumamah al-Hanafi and Rayyan ibn Sabrah to search for the
body. When they reached the bank of the canal, about fifty bodies were
lying in a ditch. When they removed some of the bodies, they found the
body of Dhul-Thadiyah. The Imam (a.s) told his companions:

###### “Allah is the Greatest! I neither told a lie nor was false information given to me. If I had not the doubt that you will

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Balāghah  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 175

###### turn your faces from action, I would have informed you about those who fought invisibly with the Khawarij and the right on which we are, they recognize it. I would have also informed you of the blessings that Allah has promised through the Prophet (a.s).”[1]

While returning through the piles of dead Khawarij, the Imam (a.s) said,
“Pity on you! One, who beguiled you, has harmed you!” People asked, “O
Amir al-Mu’minin! Who has beguiled them? “The Imam (a.s) replied, “Satan
and their own baser instinct! These two had spread the web of guile for
them and gave them false hopes. It was etched on their minds that they
would succeed in their nefarious designs.”

After success in this battle, the Imam (a.s) reminded his men about the
astrologer’s forecast that the moment of their departure for the
campaign was inauspicious. The Imam (a.s) said:

###### “If we had started at the moment the astrologer had recommended, the ignorant people would say that the victory has come because of the astrologer’s advice!”[2]

The attitude of the Khawarij was very surprising. In the battle of
Siffin they put down their swords almost at the moment of victory and
paved the way for the swords to kill them ultimately. They themselves
insisted on the arbitration and they turned against it. They shattered
the unity of people through mischief. Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), who was a
paragon of virtue, closeness with him was termed infidelity by the
Khawarij. They wanted him to break the agreement of the arbitration and
fight with Mu\`awiyah. If that was their intent, they should have fought
in the battle of Siffin instead of supporting the idea of the
arbitration initially and then turning against it immediately once an
agreement was reached.

The intention of the Khawarij was only to oppose Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s).
They created mischief and rebellion against him and made all sorts of
false accusations. The Imam (a.s) tried his best to reform them. He
neither caused them any hardships nor did he stop the stipends to their
families. But when they went out of control totally and started harming
and killing innocent persons, action against them became necessary. Even
in the battleground, the Imam (a.s) made a final effort to bring them
back to the right path. But to no avail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tārīkh al-Tabarī, Vol 4, Page 366  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 173

During this battle, and earlier, the Imam (a.s) had made several
predictions that proved true. All these were matters about which he had
received information from the Prophet (a.s). It was as if his eyes were
piercing through the future and seeing the events that were to take
place. Here some of his predictions are mentioned:

(1) The Imam (a.s) told Zar\`ah ibn Burūj al-ta’i that he would be
killed and told Rabi\`ah ibn Shaddad al-Qasimi that his cadaver would be
trampled under the hoofs of horses. Therefore, both these persons were
killed during the battle and Rabi\`ah’s was trampled under the horses
feet. Qubaysah says that when he saw that Rabi\`ah’s face and head was
trampled under the hoofs of the horses he “remembered \`Ali’s word when
he (Qubaysah) said ‘What to say of Abul-Hasan’s virtues that whenever he
said anything, that came out true!”

(2) About the Khawarij the Imam (a.s) said that they would die on a
particular side of the canal and would not cross it to the other side.
Therefore, they met their end on the side of the canal that is called
Rumaylah.

(3) The Imam (a.s) informed that not more than 10 persons from his army
would be killed in the battle and not even ten will survive from the
army of the Khawarij. Therefore, eight persons died from his army and
nine Khawarij escaped alive.

(4) The Imam (a.s) said about Dhul-Thadiyah that he will certainly be
killed and his body was found lying in a heap of the dead enemies.

(5) The Imam (a.s) had said that the Khawarij were not totally finished
and that they would raise their heads again. Therefore, after the battle
of Nahrawan they continued their minor skirmishes and were killed by the
army of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s). They again rose during the Umayyad and
Abbasid regimes and al-Muhallab ibn Safrah kept fighting with them for
twelve years and creating rifts amongst their rank and file rendered
them very weak. They scattered and went towards Oman and parts of
Africa. They still are there in Muscat and Zanzibar.

(6) The Imam (a.s) predicted that they would keep raising their heads
like brigands and dacoits. Ibn Abil-Hadid writes:

###### “This prediction of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) was proved right that the Khawarij will end up as brigands and highwaymen. Therefore, the movement of the Khawarij became weak and their youth were exterminated. Their condition deteriorated so much that their new generations became waylayers who used to commit evil acts and cause mischief.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 5, Page 248
