The Defeat of Egypt
===================

It has been mentioned while writing the profile of Qays ibn Sa\`d that
as long as he remained the governor of Egypt, the administration of the
territory was properly run and the fans of \`Uthman did not get the
opportunity to raise their heads. When he was deposed and Muhammad ibn
Abi-Bakr took over, he was an inexperienced youth of twenty-eight years,
and very early in his tenure he called the fans of \`Uthman of Kharbata
to owe their allegiance to the Imam (a.s) and live like law abiding
citizens. Otherwise, he asked them to go in exile out of the realm. They
neither agreed to owe their allegiance nor they left their place in
exile and said that until the circumstances are improved they would not
owe their allegiance to anyone. Not only this, they surreptitiously
started intrigue and mischief. When they heard about the agreement of
the arbitration, they started open rebellion and wanted to disturb the
law and order of the province. When Muhammad saw their rebellious
activities, he sent Yazid ibn al-Harith al-Kinani and Ibn Hambahan to
ask them to stop their intrigue and mischief. But they killed both the
persons. Then Muhammad sent Ibn Muzahim al-Kalbi and he too was killed
by them. Mu\`awiyah ibn Hudayj al-Kindi, who was quiet until now, found
the atmosphere congenial, and started open intrigue demanding
retaliation for the blood of \`Uthman. The people of Kharbatah were
already with him. Now he was able to register support from other areas
as well. The law and order was affected because of these developments
and it became difficult for Muhammad to contend with the situation.

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) learned about the situation in Egypt, he
observed that the territory could be handled either by Qays ibn Sa\`d or
Malik al-Ashtar. He wanted to keep Qays with him until the verdict of
the arbitration was announced. And he had been nominated as the governor
for Azerbaijan. His other choice was Malik al-Ashtar and he wrote to
him, “I had made Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr the governor of Egypt. But people
have started intrigue and rebellion against him. He is still young and
has little experience in warfare. You appoint Shabib ibn \`Amir al-Azdi
as your deputy to the governorate of Nasibahin and immediately report to
me.” Malik

reached to the presence of the Imam (a.s) expeditiously. The Imam (a.s)
briefed him about the situation in Egypt. He asked him to proceed to
Egypt and handle the situation to the best of his ability and
discretion.

When Mu\`awiyah got the intelligence that Malik al-Ashtar was nominated
the governor of Egypt, he got worried because he had promised the
governorate to \`Amr ibn al-\`As and was under the impression that
Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr could easily be defeated to effect the changeover.
But handling Malik al-Ashtar would be a harder nut to crack. He thought
of getting Malik killed before he reached Egypt. Therefore, he sent a
message to Jayastar, chief of his tributary Qulzum:

###### “Malik al-Ashtar has been appointed the functionary for Egypt. If you remove him from the way, until you and I live, I shall not take any tribute from you!”[1]

The question about the implication of the Shari\`ah here is not
important. The question arises where the person respects and follows the
norms of Shari\`ah. Where power and pelf is the only objective,
Shari\`ah is secondary! Jayistar reached the Red Sea to comply with the
orders of Mu\`awiyah. When Malik al-Ashtar reached there on his way to
Egypt, he welcomed him with much fanfare and after entertaining him
served a beverage of honey that was laced with poison. He drank a little
of that beverage when the poison had its lethal effect on him and he
died shortly thereafter. When Mu\`awiyah was informed of this, he went
to the pulpit and said:

###### “\`Ali (a.s) had two hands; one was severed in Siffin (meaning \`Ammar ibn Yasir) and the other has been cut away today (meaning Malik al-Ashtar).”[2]

When Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) got the news, he said “We are Allah and to
Him do we return,” and added, “What to talk of Malik, he was an
exemplary person in himself! May Allah bless him. He fulfilled his
promise and reached the Presence of Allah! For us the biggest calamity
was the demise of the Prophet (a.s) and thereafter we accustomed
ourselves to forbearance at every step!”

Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr was unhappy over his being deposed from the
governorate. When the Imam (a.s) learned of his feelings, he wrote to
him, “I have not effected this change with any feeling that you were not
performing

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 178  
 **[2]** Al-Kāmil fit-Tārīkh, Vol 3, Page 178

properly. I wanted to place you in an area where you will have less
pressure. The person whom I had sent to replace you as the governor of
Egypt was our friend, well-wisher and a great swordsman. May Allah be
kind on him that he is no more! We were happy with him, and Allah too
will be happy with him! You remain firm to meet the onslaught of the
enemy! Allah will help you!”

Muhammad replied, “I value your satisfaction more than anything else!
Whatever commands you give, I shall abide by them! I shall meet the
enemy with all the energy at my disposal”

Mu\`awiyah, after eliminating Malik al-Ashtar, had a conclave with his
advisers \`Amr ibn al-\`As, Habib ibn Maslamah, Busr ibn Abi-Arta’ah,
al-Dahhak ibn Qays, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Khalid, Abul-A\`war al-Salami
and Shurahbil ibn Samt al-Kindi and told them, “You know for what reason
I have called you today?” They said, “Only you must know what you have
in your mind to communicate to us!” \`Amr said, “Perhaps the purpose of
calling a meeting today is to ask for our opinion about Egypt.”
Mu\`awiyah said, “Yes! I have called you for that purpose only!” \`Amr
said, “Our opinion is not hidden from any one! We think that if Egypt is
annexed, it will enhance your prestige and our prestige as well and we
will raise our standard higher!”

Mu\`awiyah asked others of their opinion and everyone agreed with
\`Amr’s opinion. Mu\`awiyah said, “We have our friends and supporters in
Egypt. We shall strengthen our ties with them offering gifts and
gratifications. We shall have to frighten our opponents out of their
wits that they are left with no courage to face us. How nice it will be
that we succeed in this campaign without fighting!” \`Amr said, “Fight
will be inevitable! There is no other route to success than that!”

After this discussion, Mu\`awiyah wrote a letter to Maslamah ibn
Mukhallad al-Ansari and Mu\`awiyah ibn Hudayj al-Sakūni and sent it with
his slave to Egypt. He appreciated their efforts in the letter and asked
them to be more active. He tempted them with offers of giving them
important positions in the governance of the Province. Maslamah ibn
Mukhallad wrote back, on his and on behalf of Ibn Hudayj, that they
would take this step to improve there Hereafter. They required neither
position nor power. He exhorted Mu\`awiyah to send his troops fast. The
opponents’ morale was at very low ebb. He said that if the help arrived
in time, Allah would help them to succeed! Mu\`awiyah got this letter in
Palestine. From there only he sent a contingent of 6,000 troops under
the command of \`Amr towards Egypt.

When \`Amr reached near Egypt the fans of \`Uthman gathered around him.
\`Amr was carrying a letter from Mu\`awiyah addressed to Muhammad ibn
Abi-Bakr, which he sent him. He had written in the letter, “You were one
of those who besieged \`Uthman. You will be punished for that! “\`Amr
himself wrote a letter to Muhammad, “The people of Egypt have turned
against you! No one is willing to support you! Therefore, you must save
your life and escape from Egypt!”

Muhammad sent both the letters to Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) and wrote to
him, “\`Amr ibn al-\`As is camping outside the city with his contingent!
I do not find any spirit of combat in my men. Therefore, please send
reinforcements urgently so that we are able to fight with the enemy!”
The Imam (a.s) wrote back to him, “Mobilize as many men as you can! Try
to boost the morale of your men! I shall send reinforcements soon.”

Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr mobilized 4,000 troops and divided them into two
groups. On one group, he appointed Kinanah Ibn Bashshar as the
commander, and on the other he was himself in command. When Kinanah
advanced to fight, \`Amr started sending one patrol after another to
fight. But Kinanah pushed back all the advances of \`Amr’s men. Then
\`Amr thought that the contingent of 6,000 men was insufficient and he
sought reinforcements from Mu\`awiyah ibn Hudayj. Mu\`awiyah brought his
men and together with \`Amr’s men they besieged Kinanah’s contingent.

When Kinanah saw that his contingent was surrounded, he alighted from
his horse and his men too came to the ground. They jumped towards the
enemies with swords in hands. But they were unable to break through the
circle. When Muhammad saw this predicament of Kinanah, he rushed to his
help with his contingent.

When Muhammad’s men saw the predicament of Kinanah’s troops, they
started deserting. The men under siege were attacked and killed by the
enemy. Now Muhammad had no way other than somehow escaping from there.
Therefore, he fled and hid himself in a ruin. When Mu\`awiyah ibn Hudayj
learned that Muhammad had escaped, he himself went in his search. He saw
some men at a place and asked them if they saw someone passing that way.
On of them said that he had seen a person enter the ruin near there. Ibn
Hudayj thought it must certainly be his quarry. Therefore, he peeped
into the ruin and found that Muhammad was there. He asked him to come
out, tied him up and took him along. When \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakr,
who was in the Syrian army learned about the arrest of his brother, he
asked \`Amr ibn al-

\`As to order Ibn Hudayj not to kill him. \`Amr sent word to Ibn Hudayj
to send Muhammad to him. Ibn Hudayj said that you people have killed my
cousin Kinanah ibn Bishr and want to rescue Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr. He
will not escape from my hands now. When Muhammad saw that death was
hovering over his head, he asked his captor to give some water to quench
his thirst. Ibn Hudayj refused to give him water and said that they had
kept \`Uthman thirsty for days before killing him.

He said, “May Allah not quench my thirst if I give you a drop of water!
I shall kill you thirsty and Allah will quench your thirst with boiling
water and pus in the Hell!” Muhammad said, “O son of a Jewess! This is
neither in your control nor in the control of \`Uthman! Allah will
satiate his friends and will keep such persons as you are thirsty! By
Allah! If I had a sword in my hand it would not be in your power to take
me captive” Ibn Hudayj said, “Now you are under my captivity. I shall
first kill you and then keep your body in the skin of an ass and burn
you!”

Muhammad said, “If you do such a thing, it would not be strange. You
have been treating the friends of Allah in this manner! I hope Allah
will cool that fire on me the way He did for Prophet Ibrahim (a.s)! He
will consign your friends Mu\`awiyah and \`Amr ibn al-\`As to the
Hellfire. He will increase the flames when they started to go down. At
this Ibn Hudayj hit Muhammad with his sword that fell down to the ground
unconscious. There was still some life in him when they put him inside
the skin of a dead ass and burned him.

When Umm al-Mu’minin \`A’ishah heard about the killing of her brother,
she cried inconsolably. She used to curse his killers after every prayer
until she died.

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had written to Muhammad that he was making
arrangements to send reinforcements of troops. Therefore, when
\`Abdullah ibn al-Qayn and Ka\`b ibn \`Abdullah brought Muhammad’s
message, he asked the people of al-Kūfah to go to Egypt and asked them
to assemble at Jar\`a, a place between al-Kūfah and al-Hirah, the next
day. The next day Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) himself reached there and
waited for the men the whole day. But the number of arrivals did not
cross even a hundred. Disheartened, the Imam (a.s) returned. In the
night he gathered the elites of al-Kūfah and said, “When I give you an
order, you turn away your faces! I am now disgusted with your company.
You have neither the national spirit nor that of the Faith! When
Mu\`awiyah calls for people, they come in hordes! But when I call you
your tongues become dumb although you are intelligent people!” Ka\`b ibn

Malik al-Arhabi said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s)! I am ready to go on
this expedition! “He told the people of al-Kūfah, “O people! Fear Allah!
Say *‘labbayka’* at your Imam’s call and come out to fight the enemy!”
When Ka\`b expressed his willingness to go on the Campaign, the Imam
(a.s) asked his slave, Sa\`d, to make a general proclamation that the
people should gather under the standard of Ka\`b and reach out to
support Muhammad expeditiously. But the men took a month to mobilize.
When Ka\`b started with a contingent of 2,000 men, the Imam (a.s) said
that he had no hope that they would reach in time to help Muhammad ibn
Abi-Bakr.

Only two to four days after the contingent left for Egypt, when
al-Hajjaj ibn Ghaziyah al-Ansari, who was in the army of Muhammad ibn
Abi-Bakr, came to al-Kūfah and brought the sad tiding that Egypt was
captured and Muhammad was killed. \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Shabib returned
from Syria and said that the people were never so happy like when they
learned that Egypt had been conquered and they heard of the killing of
Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr. The Imam (a.s) said that he was much sadder than
those people were happy over the killing of Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr.
Seeing the Imam (a.s) sad, some people asked him, “O Amir al-Mu’minin!
Why are you so sad over his killing?” The Imam (a.s) said:

“Why should not I be sad? I had brought him up and he was the brother of
my sons! I am his father and he considered himself as my son.”[1]

Now there was not any need to send a contingent to Egypt. The Imam (a.s)
sent \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Shurayh to go and ask Ka\`b ibn Malik to bring
back his contingent.

Mu\`awiyah wanted to keep his hold on Syria and to capture Egypt. On
this basis he had promised to make \`Amr ibn al-\`As the governor of
Egypt. He thought that if the people of Iraq and those of Egypt stood up
together, Syria would become like something between the two stones of
the grinder.

He though that Syria was not save until Egypt was annexed. Besides this,
Egypt was a very fertile area and the tribute from there was much more
than that from other provinces. Whether Mu\`awiyah’s sights were on the
tribute from Egypt or not, he wanted to deprive \`Ali (a.s) of the
revenue from there and weaken him economically. That would help him to
subdue him in time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah by Ibn Abil-Hadīd, Vol 6, Page 302

Although there were supporters of \`Uthman in Egypt, they were only
about 10,000 who were concentrated in Kharabta. Generally the Egyptians
were against the supporters of \`Uthman. Therefore, on the initiative of
Muhammad ibn Hudhayfah the largest number of persons rose from here
against \`Uthman who had besieged him. In these circumstances, the fall
of Egypt was the consequence of poor administration. Mu\`awiyah had very
cunningly made efforts to make the administration weak before attacking
it. Therefore, Muhammad ibn Hudhayfah, who had become the emir of Egypt
by removing \`Abdullah ibn Abi-Sarh, was killed treacherously. Then he
tried to win over Qays ibn Sa\`d by offering gratifications. When he did
not agree to his temptations, he wrote counterfeit letters and got him
deposed from the governorate of Egypt. Then he used very mean methods to
poison Malik al-Ashtar who was on his way to take charge of the
governorate of Egypt.

Although Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr was young and inexperienced, he did
everything possible to adopt strategies of warfare to meet the enemy. He
sent half his force to meet the enemy outside and kept the other half
with himself to join them at the proper time. But when his men left him
alone, he had no other alternative than trying to save himself by hiding
in some place. While the men of Muhammad are blamed for this defeat, the
character of the people of al-Kūfah too is under a cloud. If they had
responded on time, the result could have been different!
