Part 2: The Teachings of the Qur'an
===================================

The Universal Import of the Qur'an
----------------------------------

The Qur'an is not directed towards any one particular nation, such as
the Arabs, or to a particular sect of Muslims, but to non-Islamic
societies as well as the Muslim nation as a whole. There are numerous
references to non-believers and idol- worshippers, to the People of the
Book (namely, the Jews, or the Tribe of Israel, and the Christians),
exhorting each one to strive towards a true understanding of the Qur'an
and of Islam.

The Qur'an calls each group to Islam by providing proofs and never
stipulates that they be of Arab stock. Referring to idol-worshippers,
God says,

"***if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due then they
are your brothers in religion”*** (9:11).

Likewise, God talks about the People of the Book, (Jews, Christians and
we include here the Zoroastrians), without referring to them as Arabs: 

***Say O People of the Book come to an agreement between us and you:
that we shall worship none but God and that we shall ascribe no partners
to Him and that none of us shall take others for lords beside
God*** (3:64).

It is true that before Islam spread beyond the Arabian Peninsula,
Qur'anic injunctions were obviously directed to- wards the Arab nation.
From the sixth year after the hijrah (the migration of the Prophet from
Mecca to Medina), when the din of Islam was being propagated beyond the
peninsula, there are references which demonstrate that the Qur'an is
addressing itself to mankind in general; for example:

***"this Qur'an has been revealed to me that I may warn you and whomever
it may reach," (6:19)***

and in 68:52 God says, "***it is nothing else but a reminder to the
worlds.***"

We read too in 74:3936, "***In truth this is one of the greatest signs,
being a warning unto men. ***"

History has amply demonstrated that Islam has been embraced by a number
of leading members of other religions, including the idol-worshippers of
Mecca, Jews, and Christians and by people from diverse communities, such
as Salman of Persia, Suhayb from the Roman people, and Bilal of
Ethiopia.

The Perfection of the Qur'an
----------------------------

The Qur'an shows man the way to a realization of his goal on earth; it
describes this path in the most complete terms. It is a way of correctly
viewing the reality of things; a vision - personal, social and cosmic-
based on a correct manner of behavior and a precise method of
interaction between men.

In 46:30 we read that the Qur'an "***guides to the truth and a right
road,***” meaning the road of right belief and correct action.

On another occasion, mentioning the Torah and the New Testament, God
says, "***We have revealed this Book to you with the Truth, confirming
whatever Book was before it, and We keep watch over it***" (5:48).

The Qur'an thus affirms the truth of the ways of guidance taught by the
earlier prophets. In chapter 42:13, "***He has ordained for you that
religion which He commended to Noah and that which We reveal to you
(Muhammad) and that We commended to Abraham, Moses and Jesus,*** " and
in chapter 16:89, "***And We revealed the book to you as an exposition
of all things.***"

Thus we understand from these verses that the Qur'an not only
encompasses the meanings and teachings of all divine books revealed
before it, but also adds to and completes them. Everything which a man
needs, both in terms of his spiritual and his social life, is contained
and explained in the Qur'an.

The Eternal Quality of the Qur'an
---------------------------------

The perfection and completeness of the Qur'an prove that its validity is
not restricted to a particular time or place, since anything perfect is
in need of nothing to complete it.

In chapter 86:13-14 God confirms that the Qur'an is "***a conclusive
word***" and not a mere "***pleasantry***." It contains the purest of
teachings concerning belief in life-after-death, together with an
exposition of the realities of existence, while, at the same time,
encompassing the fundamentals of correct human behavior.

Since laws governing transactions between men are directly linked to
their beliefs, such a book can obviously not be annulled or changed with
the passage of time. As He says in 17:105, "***We have revealed the
Qur'an with Truth and it has descended with the Truth,***" meaning that
the revelations and their ongoing validity are inseparable from the
Truth.

Thus in 10:32, "***After the Truth what is there except error,”*** and
in 41:41-42, "***In truth it is an impenetrable book, error may not
enter in it from before it or behind it.*** "

In other words the Qur'an repulses, by its own perfection and
completeness, any attempt to alter it; and neither now nor later can it
be annulled or superseded. Many studies have been made of the permanence
of the validity of the laws given in the Qur'an.

The reader is advised to consult them if he requires additional
knowledge of the subject; to pursue the matter here, (namely, the
position of the Qur'an in the lives of Muslims and the manner in which
it demonstrates this), would be outside the scope of this book.

The Qur'an as a Self-Contained Proof
------------------------------------

The Qur'an, being composed of words and meanings like any other book,
explains itself. It does not remain silent when the situation of the
text demands proof. Moreover, there is no reason to believe that
Qur'anic terms mean anything other than the actual words being used.

This means that every man, possessing certain knowledge of the Arabic
language, may clearly understand the meaning of the Qur'an just as he
understands any other words written in Arabic.

There are many verses which are directed towards a specific group, such
as the Tribe of Israel, or the Believers, or the non-believers and,
sometimes, man in general; (they are addressed in phrases such as "***O
you who disbelieve***" or "***O people of the Book***" or "***O tribe of
Israel ***" or "***O Mankind ***") The Qur'an discourses with them,
offering them proof of its validity or challenging them to produce a
book similar to it if they doubt it to be the Word of God.

Obviously it makes no sense to address people in terms which they do not
understand or to demand that they produce something similar to that
which has no meaning for them. In chapter XLVII-24 we read, "***Why do
they not reflect upon the Qur'an,***” implying that if it was from other
than God, people would have found in it many inconsistencies.

It is clearly indicated in the Qur'an that verses which have a subtlety
or particularity of meaning demand that the reader reflect upon them to
remove any seeming differences of interpretation or incongruities that
may appear at first inspection.

It also follows that if the verses themselves contained no apparent
meaning, there would be no point in reflecting upon them in order to
clarify the apparent problem of their interpretation. There are no
indications from other sources, (such as the traditions of the Prophet),
that demand a rejection of the outwardly manifest meaning of the Qur'an.

Some have argued that one should only refer to the commentaries of the
Prophet in elucidating the meanings of the Qur'an. This argument is
unacceptable, however, since the basis of the Prophet's commentary and
of the Imams of his family must be sought for in the Qur'an.

It is difficult to imagine that the validity of the Qur'an is dependent
on the commentaries of the Prophet or the Imams of his family. Rather,
affirmation of prophecy and imamate must be contained in the Qur'an,
which itself is the authentic proof and document of prophecy.

This does not, however, contradict the fact that the Prophet and the
Imams of his family were responsible for clarifying those details of the
shari'ah law (Divinely revealed law) which were not apparent from the
actual text of the Qur'an.

They were, likewise, entrusted with teaching the knowledge contained in
the Book, as seen in the following verse: ***And We have revealed to you
the Remembrance so that you may explain to mankind that which has been
revealed for them*** (16:44).

A similar reflection occurs in chapter 59:7 where, in reference to the
code of practice and law brought by the Prophet to mankind, it states,
"***And take whatever the messenger gives you. And abstain from whatever
he forbids.***"

In chapter 4:64 it says, "***We sent no messenger saw that he should be
obeyed by God's leave***" and, again, in chapter 62:2, "***He it is who
has sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of their own, to recite
to them His revelations and to make them grow and to teach them the Book
and Wisdom.***” According to these verses, the Prophet is the appointed
explainer of the details of the shari'ah law as well as the teacher of
the Qur'an.

Moreover, according to the tradition known as thaqalayn, which was
authenticated by an uninterrupted chain of narrators, the Prophet has
appointed the Imams of his own family as his successors. This is not to
deny that others also, by correctly applying the learning of sincere
teachers, may understand the meaning of the Qur'an.

The Inner and Outer Dimensions of the Qur'an
--------------------------------------------

In chapter 4:36 God says, "***And serve God and ascribe nothing as a
partner to Him.”*** The verse prohibits pre-Islamic Arabs from their
worship of idols, just as chapter 22:30 urges them to "***shun the filth
of idols, and shun lying speech.***" On reflection it becomes clear that
an idol may exist in any form; therefore, idol-worship is forbidden
because it involves submission to an entity other than God.

In chapter 36:60 God treats the devil as an idol when He says, "***Did I
did not charge you, O you sons of Adam, that you do not worship the
devil.”*** It also becomes clear that another form of idol-worship is
submission to one's desires or to the will of others, over and above the
will of God; this is indicated in 45:23 which refers to "***him who
makes his desire his God.”***

Thus it becomes apparent that one should turn to none other for help
than God Himself and not forget Him in any circumstances, since to do
otherwise would be to direct one's attention away from God. To submit to
others is to belittle Him and this is the very essence of idol-worship.

Thus, in chapter 7:179 God says of those who refused to worship Him,
"***Already We have urged into hell many of the jinn and humankind,
These are the neglectful.”*** The verse, "ascribe nothing to Him,”
clearly forbids worships of idols; that is to say, man may not, without
God's permission, submit himself to others including his own desires,
since any such submission would render him neglectful of God.

In this way, the simple, apparent text of the verse unfolds multiple
meanings and exemplifies a feature to be found throughout the Qur'an.
Thus the saying of the Prophet, (related in the books of hadith and
commentary), become clear: *In truth the Qur'an possesses an inner and
outer, and the inner contains Seven dimensions.*

The Wisdom Contained in the Two Facets of the Qur'an: The Inner and the Outer
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Man's primary life, namely, the temporal life of this world, is as a
bubble on the immense sea of the material; and since all his
transactions concern the material, he is throughout his life, at the
mercy of the moving waves.

All his senses are occupied with the material and his thoughts
influenced by sensory information. Eating, drinking, standing, speaking,
listening, like all other human actions, take place in the sphere of the
material and not in the sphere of thought.

Moreover, in reflecting upon such concepts as love, enmity, ambition and
nobility, one comes to better understand them by translating them into
language derived from the senses or from actual material objects; for
example, the magnetic attraction of lovers, a burning ambition, or a
man's being a mine of wisdom.

Capacity to comprehend the world of meaning, which is vaster than that
of the material, varies from man to man. For one person it may be almost
impossible to imagine the world of meanings; another may perceive it
only in the most superficial terms and, yet another, may comprehend with
ease the most profound of spiritual concepts.

One may say that the greater a man's capacity to under- stand meanings,
the lesser he is attached to the world of the material and its alluring,
deceiving appearance. By his very nature, each person possesses a
potential for understanding meanings and, provided that he does not deny
this capacity, it may be cultivated and increased further.

It is not a simple matter to reduce meaning from one level of
understanding to another without losing its sense. This is particularly
true for meanings possessing great subtlety which cannot be transmitted,
especially to ordinary people, without adequate explanation.

As one example, we may mention the Hindu religion: anyone reflecting
deeply upon the Vedic scriptures of India and studying the different
aspects of its message will ultimately see that its basic aim is the
worship of one God.

Unfortunately this aim is explained in such a complicated manner that
the concept of oneness reaches the minds of ordinary people in the form
of idol-worship and the recognition of many gods. To avoid such
problems, it becomes necessary to communicate meanings hidden beyond the
material world in a language which is rooted in the material and readily
comprehensible world.

Indeed some religions deprive their adherents of rights accorded to them
by the religion itself: women, for example, in Hinduism; Jews and
Christians who, in general, are denied access to knowledge of their holy
books. Islam does not deprive anyone of their rights in the din, and
both man and woman, scholar and layman, black and white are equal in
being accorded access to their religion.

God affirms this in chapter 3:195, "***Indeed I do not allow the work of
any worker, male or female, to be lost,***"

And, again, in chapter 49: 13, "***O mankind! Truly we have created you
male and female and have made you nations and tribes that you may know
one another. Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of God is the best
in conduct.***"

In this manner the Qur'an addresses its teachings to mankind at large
and affirms that every man may increase himself in knowledge and,
thereby, perfect his own behavior.

In fact, the Qur'an addresses its teachings specifically to the world of
man. Since, as mentioned earlier, each man has a different capacity of
understanding and since the expounding of subtle knowledge is not
without danger of misinterpretation, the Qur'an directs its teachings
primarily at the level of the common man.

In this manner, the subtlest of meanings can be explained and multiple
meanings and ideas expressed, to the ordinary person, by co-relating
them to concrete sensory meanings; meaning, therefore, is always
inherent in the letter of the words.

The Qur'an reveals itself in a way suitable {or different levels of
comprehension so that each benefits according to his own capacity. In
chapter 43:34 God emphasizes this idea: ***Truly We have appointed it a
lecture in Arabic so that you may perhaps understand and indeed in the
source of the Book, which We possess, it is sublime, decisive.***

God describes the different capacities of man's comprehension in the
following metaphor in chapter 13:17 **He sends down water from the sky,
so that valleys flow according to their measure;**

And the Prophet, in a famous tradition says: "*We prophets talk to the
people according to the capacity of their intellects.*"

Another result of the multiple meanings within the Qur'an is that the
verses take on significance beyond their immediate text. Certain verses
contain metaphors which indicate divine gnosis far beyond the common
man's understanding but which, nevertheless, become comprehensible
through their metaphorical form.

God says in chapter 17:89, "***And indeed We have displayed for mankind
in this Qur'an all kind of similitude, but most of mankind refuse
everything except disbelief.”*** And again in chapter 29:43 God talks of
metaphors as a means of expression, "***As for these similitude, We coin
them for mankind, but none will grasp their meanings except the
wise.***"

Consequently, we must conclude that all Qur'anic teachings which deal
with subtle profound knowledge are in the form of similitude.

The Two Kinds of Qur'anic Verses: The Explicit and the Implicit
---------------------------------------------------------------

In chapter 11:1 God says of the Qur'an, "***This is a book whose
meanings are secure.***” From this we may draw the meaning to read
"***whose meanings are perfected, expanded, firm and strong.***" In
chapter 39:23, it reads, ***God has revealed the fairest of statements
(consistent with and in relation to each other) and arranged in pairs
(according to meaning) which cause the flesh of those who fear their
Lord to creep.***

In chapter 3:7 He says, "***He it is who has revealed to you the Book in
which are clear revelations, (that is, verses whose meaning is
immediately clear and which Muslims use for guidance). They are the
substance of the Book and others which are allegorical. But those in
whose heart is doubt indeed follow the allegorical seeking dissension by
seeking to explain it. None knowest its explanation except God and those
who are of sound instruction say: We believe in it, it is all from our
Lord.***

The first of the verses describes those sections of the Qur'an whose
meaning is explicit, clear and unambiguous, and safe from
misinterpretation. The second verse refers to all those verses whose
meanings are implicit, and which are considered allegorical.

It then proceeds to indicate that both types of verses, (the explicit,
or clear and the implicit, or allegorical), share certain common
qualities: beauty and sweetness of language, and a miraculous power of
expression which are present in the entire Qur'an.

The third verse under consideration divides the Qur'an into two parts:
the explicit and the implicit, the clear and the allegorical, or, in
Qur'anic terms, the muhkam and the mustashabih.

The muhkam and those verses which are explicit, clear and immediate in
their message and, therefore, incapable of being misinterpreted;
the *mutashabih* verses are not of this nature. It is the duty of every
firm believer to believe in and act according to the verses which
are *mahkam*.

It is also his duty to believe in the verses which are *mutashabih*, but
he must abstain from acting upon them; this injunction is based on the
premise that only those whose heart is corrupt and whose belief is false
follow the implicit, mutashibih, verses, fabricating interpretations
and, thereby, deceiving common people.

The meanings of the Explicit and the Implicit Verses, according to the Commentators and Scholars
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is much difference of opinion amongst the Islamic scholars
concerning the meaning of explicit and implicit verses, with almost
twenty different views on the matter. We can, however, conclude from the
views of commentators, ranging from the time of the Prophet to the
present day, that the explicit verses are clear and unambiguous, and
that one is obliged to believe in and act according to them.

The implicit verses, on the other hand, are those which outwardly seem
to express a meaning, but which contain a further truer meaning whose
interpretation is known only to God; man has no access to it. However,
he is enjoined to believe in them but to avoid acting upon them.

This view is held amongst the Sunni scholars. It is also maintained by
the Shi'ite scholars except they believe that the Prophet and the Imams
of his family also understood the hidden meanings. They also maintain
that the ordinary man must seek knowledge of the implicit verses from
God, the Prophet and the Imams.

This view, although held by most commentators, is in several aspects not
in accord with the text of the verse beginning, ***He it is who has
revealed to you the Book in which are explicit verses (whose meanings
are immediately clear)*** ...

The Method of Guidance and Explanation used in the Rest of the Qur'an
---------------------------------------------------------------------

This we may attribute, firstly, to the fact that there is no verse whose
meaning is totally obscure since the Qur'an describes itself as a light,
as a guidance and as an explanation. Thus it is not befitting that there
be verses which fail to reveal their meaning, or to illuminate the
Qur'an as a whole.

We should examine again the verse, ***Will they not ponder on the
Qur'an. If it had been from other than God they would have found much
inconsistency in it*** (4:82).

Thus reflection on the Qur'an would remove all kinds of seeming
inconsistencies making it unacceptable to say, as do most of the
scholars, that the implicit verses cannot be totally understood and that
apparent inconsistencies cannot be resolved.

Other scholars say that what is meant by the implicit verses are the
letters found at the beginning of certain chapters.

(These are known as the muqatta'ah-letters, like Alif, Lam, Mim, Alif,
Lam Ra', Ha, Mim, whose real meaning is unknown).

We must, how ever remember that the implicit verses are so-called when
read in relation to the explicit verses. This denotes that, accompanying
the hidden meaning of the implicit, there is a surface (or literal)
meaning whereby the real and the apparent meanings come together in
intricate relationship with one another.

It should be understood that the letters at the opening of certain
chapters do not have any literal meaning. It seems that a group of
misguided men use the implicit verses to mislead people, but never in
Islam has one heard of anyone trying to use the muqatta'ah-letters to do
so.

Some commentators say that the meaning of the word *mutashabih*, (in the
verse), refers to the famous story of the Jews who wanted to find an
indication of the duration of Islam within the order of the letters, but
the Prophet used to read the letters one after the other and so confuse
their calculations.

This view is also without substance since, even if the story is true, it
is not of sufficient impact nor conviction to be considered as an
interpretation of the implicit verses. Whatever the Jews talked, it
contained no malice because, even if the religion, din, of Islam was for
a limited period of time (and, thus, subject to abrogation), their
remarks would in no way be a criticism of the purity and reality of
Islam considering that all religions revealed by God prior to Islam were
for a specific period and open to abrogation.

Secondly, this view implies that the word *ta'wil* (which may be
translated as "interpretation") in the verse refers to a meaning other
than the apparent literal meaning and that it is used only as a
reference to the implicit verses.

This is incorrect, as we shall see in a later chapter dealing with
exegesis *ta'wil* and revelation, tanzil (the actual text or letter of
the verse) how exegesis in Qur'anic terminology does not refer to one
meaning but to several, encompassing such terms as realization,
fulfilment, interpretation and explanation.

We shall also discuss how all Qur'anic verses have a specific
interpretation, *ta'wil* and not just their explicit and implicit
definitions. On examination, the words of the explicit verses (ayat
muhkamah), are seen to describe the phrase "They are the source of the
Book," meaning that the explicit verses include the most important
subjects of the Book, and the theme of the rest of the verses is
secondary and dependent upon them.

This implies that the real point intended to be conveyed by the implicit
verses refers back to the explicit verses. Thus, the meanings of the
implicit are illuminated by referring back to the source (or explicit)
verses.

Thus we are left with no verses which have no obvious indication as to
their true meaning; they are either immediately clear by virtue of their
being in the class of explicit verses or, in the case of the implicit,
made clear by the other explicit verses.

As for the muqatta'ah-letters at the beginning of the chapters, they do
not have any apparent meaning since they are not words in the normal
sense and possess no meaning comprehensible to man; thus, they are
outside of the classification of explicit and the implicit.

Again, we would refer the reader to an examination of the following
verse in order to emphasize the truth of our view: ***And so why do they
not reflect upon the Qur'an or are there locks upon their hearts. “And,
likewise, the verse, "and why do they not reflect upon the Qur'an, if it
were from other than God they would have found much inconsistency in
it.***"

The Commentary of the Imams of the Prophet's Family concerning the Explicit and the Implicit Verses
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is made clear from the different commentaries of the Imams that there
is always a way to discover the real meaning and aim of the implicit
verses. Each verse, even if its meaning is not apparent, can be
explained by reference to other verses.

Thus the real meaning of the implicit verses can be found in relation to
the explicit verses.

For instance, the verse "***The Beneficent, One who is established on
the throne," (20:5) ***and again the verse, "***And your Lord came,***"
(89:22) appear to ascribe bodily characteristics to God, but when
compared with the verse, "***Nothing is as His likeness,***" (42:11) it
becomes clear that the "***sitting***" on the throne or the
"***coming***" of God has a meaning other than a physical one.

The Prophet, describing the Qur'an, says: *In truth the Qur'an was not
revealed so that one part may contradict the other but rather was
revealed so that one part may verify the other. So that what you
understand of it then act accordingly and that which is unclear for you
then simply believe in it*.

The Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali, said that one part of the Qur'an
bears witness to another and one part clarifies the other. The sixth
Imam said the explicit verse is that which one acts in accordance with,
and the implicit is that which is unclear only for the man who is
ignorant of its real meaning.

From these narrations, we may conclude that the question of explicit and
implicit is relative; it is possible that a verse may seem explicit to
one person and implicit to another. It is said of the eighth Imam that
he considered, "the person who refers to the implicit *mutashabih*,
verses in the Qur'an to the corresponding clarifying explicit verses",
as having "found guidance to the right path."

He is also reported to have said that, *In truth in our traditions are
recorded implicit verses like the explicit of the Qur'an, so refer the
implicit to its corresponding explicit verse. or tradition, and do* *not
follow the implicit and go astray.*

Thus it is clear from the traditions and, in particular, the last
tradition, that the implicit verse is one which does not contain a clear
meaning without reference to the explicit verse, and not that there
exists no means to understand it.

The Qur'an Possesses Revelation and Exegesis
--------------------------------------------

We shall discuss the word, exegesis, *ta'wil*, in relation to three
Qur'anic verses. Firstly, in the verses concerning the implicit
*mutashabih* and the explicit verses: ***But those in whose hearts is
doubt pursue, in truth, that which is allegorical talking dissension by
seeking to explain it. None knows*** ***its explanation except
God.*** (3:7)

Secondly, the verses, ***In truth we have brought them a scripture which
we expound with knowledge, a guidance and a mercy for a people who
believe. Do they await anything but the fulfillment of it.***

(Here the word *ta'wil* is used connoting the appearance or
clarification of meaning). ***On the day when the fulfillment of it
comes, those who are forgetful of it will say: the messenger of our Lord
brought the truth*** (7:52-53).

Thirdly, the verse, ***And this Qur'an is not such as could ever be
invented ... but they denied that, the knowledge of which they could not
encompass and the interpretation (ta'wil) of which had not yet come to
them. Even so it was that those before them deny. Then see what was the
consequence in the wrongdoers.*** (10:37-39).

In conclusion, we should note that the word exegesis *ta'wil* comes from
the word awl, meaning a return. As such, *ta'wil* indicates that
particular meaning towards which the verse is directed. The meaning of
revelation tanzil, as opposed to *ta'wil*, is clear or according to the
obvious meaning of the words as they were revealed.

The Meaning of Exegesis, According to the Commentators and Scholars
-------------------------------------------------------------------

There is considerable disagreement as to the meaning of
exegesis, *ta'wil*, and it is possible to count more than ten different
views. There are, however, two views which have gained general
acceptance. The first is that of the early generation of scholars who
used the word exegesis, *ta'wil*, as a synonym for commentary, or
tafsir.

According to this view, all Qur'anic verses are open to *ta'wil*
although according to the verse, "***nobody knows its interpretation
(ta'wil) except God,***" it is the implicit verses whose interpretation
(*ta'wil*) is known only to God.

For this reason, a number of the early scholars said that the implicit
verses are those with muqatta'ah-letters at the beginning of the chapter
since they are the only verses in the Qur'an whose meaning is not known
to everyone.

This interpretation has been demonstrated in the previous section as
being incorrect, a view which is shared by certain of the late scholars.
They argued that since there is a way of finding out the meaning of any
verse, particularly since the muqattah-letters are obviously not in the
same classification as the implicit verses then the distinction between
the two (muqatta'ah and implicit, *mutashabih*) is clear.

Secondly, the view of the later scholars is that exegesis refers to the
meaning of a verse beyond its literal meaning and that not all verses
have exegesis; rather only the implicit, whose ultimate meaning is known
only to God.

The verses in question here are those which refer to the human qualities
of coming, going, sitting, satisfaction, anger and sorrow apparently
attributed to God and, also, those verses which apparently ascribe
faults to the messengers and Prophets of God (when in reality they are
infallible).

The view that the word exegesis refers to a meaning other than the
apparent one has become quite accepted. Moreover, within the divergence
of opinion amongst scholars, exegesis has come to mean "***to
transfer***" the apparent meaning of a verse to a different meaning by
means of a proof called *ta'wil*; this method is not without obvious
inconsistencies.

Although this view has gained considerable acceptance, it is incorrect
and cannot be applied to the Qur'anic verses for the following reasons.
Firstly, the verses, ***Do they await anything but the fulfillment of
it*** (7:53)

and, ***but they denied that, the knowledge of which they could not
encompass and the interpretation of which had not yet come to
them*** (10:39) indicate that the whole Qur'an has exegesis, not just
the implicit verses as claimed by this group of scholars.

Secondly, implied in this view is that there are Qur'anic verses whose
real meaning is ambiguous and hidden from the people, only God knowing
their real meaning. However, a book which declares itself as challenging
and excelling in its linguistic brilliance could hardly be described as
eloquent if it failed to transmit the meaning of its own words.

Thirdly, if we accept this view, then the validity of the Qur'an comes
under question since, according to the verse, ***Why do they not reflect
upon the Qur'an, if it were from other than God they would have found in
it many inconsistencies.***

One of the proofs that the Qur'an is not the speech of man is that,
despite having been revealed in widely varying and difficult
circumstances, there is no inconsistency in it, neither in its literal
meaning nor in its inner meaning, and any initial inconsistency
disappears upon reflection.

If it is believed that a number of the implicit verses disagree with the
sound, or muhkam, or explicit, verses this disagreement may be resolved
by explaining that what is intended is not the literal meaning but
rather another meaning known only to God.

However, this explanation will never prove that the Qur'an is "not the
speech of man." If by exegesis we change any inconsistency in the
explicit, or sound (muhkam), verses to another meaning beyond the
literal, it is clear that we may also do this for the speech and writing
of man.

Fourthly, there is no proof that exegesis indicates a meaning other than
the literal one and that, in the Qur'anic verses which mention the word
exegesis, the literal meaning is not intended.

On three occasions in the story of Joseph, the interpretation of his
dream is called *ta'wil* (exegesis). It is clear that the interpretation
of a dream is not fundamentally different from the actual appearance of
the dream; rather, it is the interpretation of what is portrayed in a
particular form in the dream. Thus Joseph saw his father, mother and
brother falling to the ground in the form of the sun, the moon and the
stars.

Likewise, the king of Egypt saw the seven-year drought in the form of
seven lean cows eating the seven fat cows and also, the seven green ears
of corn and the seven dry ears.

Similarly, the dreams of Joseph's two fellow-inmates in the prison: one
saw himself pouring wine for the king (in the form of the first pressing
of wine), while the second saw himself crucified (in the form of birds
eating from the bread basket on his head).

The dream of the king of Egypt is related in the same chapter, verse 43
and its interpretation, from Joseph, in verses 47-49 when he
says, ***you will sow seven years as usual, but whatever you reap leave
it in the ear, all except a little which you will eat. Then after that
will come a year when*** ***people will have plenteous crops and then
they will press (meaning wine and oil).***

The dream of Joseph's fellow-inmates in the prison occurs in verse 36 of
the same chapter. One of the two young men says to Joseph, "***I dreamt
that I was carrying upon my head bread which the birds were eating.***"

The interpretation of the dream is related by Joseph in verse 41***O my
two fellow-prisoners! As for one of you he will pour out wine for his
Lord to drink and as for the other, he will be crucified so that the
birds will eat from his head.***

In a similar fashion, God relates the story of Moses and Khidr in the
chapter "The Cave" (18:71-82). Khidr made a hole in the boats;
thereafter, killed a boy and, finally, straightened a leaning wall.
After each event, Moses protested and Khidr explained the meaning and
reality of each action which he had carried out on the orders of God;
this he referred to as *ta'wil*.

Thus it is clear that the reality of the event and the dream-picture
which portrayed the event-to-be are basically the same: the *ta'wil*, or
interpretation, does not have a meaning other than the apparent one.

Likewise God says, talking about weights and measures, "***Fill the
measure when you measure and weigh with a right balance, that is proper
and better in the end,***" (that is, more fitting in the final
determination of the Day of Reckoning) (17:35).

It is clear that the word *ta'wil* used here in respect to the measuring
and weighing refers to fair dealing in business practices. Thus
the *ta'wil* used in this way is not different from the literal meaning
of the words "measuring" and "weighing"; it merely deepens and extends
the significance of the mundane to include a spiritual dimension.

This spiritual dimension is of significance for the believer who has in
mind the reckoning of the final day together with his own day-to-day
reckoning in the affairs of trade.

In another verse God again uses the word *ta'wil*, ***and if you have
any dispute concerning any matter, refer it to God and the messenger ...
that is better and more fitting in the end ***(4:59).

It is clear that the meaning of *ta'wil* and the referring of the
dispute to God and His messenger is to establish the unity of Society
and to show how each action or event in a community has a spiritual
significance.

Thus, the *ta'wil* refers to a tangible ordinary reality and is not in
opposition to the actual text in the verses which refers to the dispute.

In all, there are sixteen occasions in the Qur'an in which the
word *ta'wil* is used but on no occasion does it have a meaning other
than the literal text. We may say, therefore, that the word *ta'wil* is
used to extend the idea expressed to include a further meaning which,
(as will be made clear in the next section), is still in accordance with
the actual word *ta'wil* occurring in the verse.

Thus, in the light of these examples, there is no reason why we should
take the word *ta'wil* in the verse about the explicit muhkam, and
implicit, *mutashabih*, meanings to indicate "a meaning basically other
than the apparent meaning."

The Meaning of Exegesis in the Tradition of the Qur'anic Sciences
-----------------------------------------------------------------

What is apparent from the verses in which the word *ta'wil* occurs is
that *ta'wil* does not indicate a literal meaning. It is clear that the
actual words of the dream described in chapter 12, "Joseph", do not in
themselves contain the literal interpretation of the dream; the meaning
of the dream becomes clear from the interpretation.

Andy likewise, in the story of Moses and Khidr, the actual words of the
story are not the same as the interpretation which Khidr gave Moses.
Moreover, in the verse, ***fill the measure when you measure and weigh
with a right balance, ***the language does not in itself indicate the
particular economic conditions which we are intended to understand.

Again, in the verse ***And if you have a dispute concerning any matter
then refer it to God and the messenger, ***there is no immediate literal
indication that what is meant is the Unity of Islam.

Thus, although the words indicate something not essentially different
from their literal meaning, there is, nevertheless, in all the verses
the same shifting of perspective, namely, from the actual words to the
intended meaning.

Moreover, all the meanings are based on a real situation, an actual
physical event. In the case of the dream, the interpretation has an
external reality which appears before its actual occurrence in a special
form to the dreamer. Likewise, in the story of Moses and Khidr, the
interpretation that the latter gives is, in fact, a reality which is to
take place as a result of his action.

Therefore, the interpretation of the event is rooted in the event. In
the verse which orders man to fair dealing and measuring, the aspect of
the verse is a reality which appears as a social benefit. Thus the order
is connected to the effect it is supposed to have in the raising up of
society and, in particular, of trade. In the verse concerning referral
of the dispute to God and His messenger, the meaning is again fixed to
reality, namely, the spiritualization of the life of the community.

To conclude, we may say that interpretation of each verse springs from a
reality; the interpretation looks forward to or, in a subtle way,
actually brings into being the reality it is talking about. Thus its
meaning both contains and springs from a future or ulterior event. Just
as the interpreter makes the interpretation meaningful, so the
manifestation of the interpretation is already a reality for the
interpreter.

The idea is also present in the form of the Qur'an since this sacred
book has as its source realities and meanings other than the material
and physical or, we may say, beyond the sensory level. Thus it expresses
meanings which are more expansive than those contained in the words and
phrases used by man in the material world.

Although these realities and meanings are not contained in the literal
explanation of man, the Qur'an uses the same language to inform man of
the unseen and to produce correct belief and good action.

Thus, through belief in the unseen, in the last day and in the meeting
with God, man adopts a system of morals and a quality of character which
allows him to achieve happiness and well-being. In this way the Qur'an
produces a spiritual effect which, in turn, produces a physical social
change, the importance of which will become clear on the Day of
Resurrection and the meeting with God.

There is further reference to this same theme when God says in chapter
43:2-4, ***By the Book which makes plain. Take heed, we have appointed
it a lecture in Arabic that perhaps you will*** ***understand. And
indeed the source of the Book which we possess, it is indeed sublime,
decisive.***

It is sublime, in that the ordinary understanding cannot fully
comprehend it, and decisive in that it cannot be faulted.

The relationship of the last part of the verse to the meaning of
exegesis *ta'wil*, (as we have discussed above) is clear. It says, in
particular, that "perhaps you will understand," implying that one may or
may not understand it; it does not imply that one will understand the
book fully, merely by studying it.

As we have seen in the verse concerning the explicit *mahkam* and the
implicit *mutashabih*, knowledge of exegesis *ta'wil*, is particular to
God; moreover, when in this same verse corrupt men are blamed for
following the implicit *mutashabih*, verses and for intending to sow
dissension and conflict by searching for an exegesis, *ta'wil*, or
special interpretation, it does not state that they necessarily find it.

The exegesis of the Qur'an is a reality, or several realities, which are
to be found in the Source Book, the Book of Decrees with God; the Source
Book is part of the unseen and far from the reach of corrupters. The
same idea is treated again in chapter 56:75-80 when God says, ***Indeed
I swear by the places of the Stars - And truly that is surely a
tremendous oath if you but knew - that this is indeed a noble Qur'an, in
a book kept hidden, which none touch except the purified, a revelation
from the Lord of the Worlds.***

It is clear that these verses establish for the Qur'an two aspects,
namely the position of the hidden book protected from being touched and
the aspect of revelation which is understandable by the people. What is
of particular interest to us in this verse is the phrase of exception,
"***except the purified.***" According to this phrase, we can arrive at
an understanding of the reality of the exegesis of the Qur'an.

This positive view of man's capability to understand the Qur'an does not
conflict with the negation of the verse, "And no one knows
its *ta'wil* except God." Since the comparison of the two verses
produces a whole which is independent and harmonious. Thus we understand
that God is alone in understanding these realities, yet one may come to
know these truths by His leave and teaching.

Knowledge of the unseen is, according to many verses, the special domain
of God but in chapter 72:26-27, those who are worthy are excepted from
this: "***He is the knower of the unseen and He reveals to no one His
secret, except to every messenger whom He has chosen.” Again we conclude
that knowledge of the unseen is particular to God and that it is fitting
for no one except Him and for those he gives leave to.***

Thus the purified amongst men take the verse concerning the "***purified
ones***" as leave to enter into contact with the reality of the Qur'an.
In a similar way we read in chapter 33:33, "***God's wish is but to
remove uncleanliness from you, O people of the Household, and clean you
with a thorough cleaning.***" This verse was revealed, (according to a
sound tradition with an unbroken chain of transmission), specifically
with regard to the family of the Prophet.

The Existence of Abrogating and Abrogated Verses in the Qur'an

Among the verses in the Qur'an containing orders or laws, there are
verses that abrogate verses previously revealed and acted upon. These
abrogating verses are called *nasikh* and those whose validity they
terminate are called *mansukh*.

For example, at the beginning of the Prophet's mission, Muslims were
ordered to cultivate peace and friendship with the people of the Book,
"***Forgive and be indulgent (towards them) until God gives command,***"
(2:109).

Sometime later, fighting was allowed and the order to establish peace
was abrogated:***Fight against such as those who have been given the
Book but who believe not in God nor the last day, and do not forbid that
which God has forbidden by His messenger, and follow not the religion of
truth ... ***(11:29)

The common notion of abrogation, that is, a cancelling of one law or
code by another, is based on the idea that a new law is needed because
of a mistake or shortcoming in the previous one. It is clearly
inappropriate to ascribe a mistake in law-making to God, Who is perfect,
and whose creation admits of no flaws.

However, in the Qur'an, the abrogating verses mark the end of the
validity of the abrogated verses because their heed and effect was of a
temporary or limited nature. In time the new law appears and announces
the end of the validity of the earlier law. Considering that the Qur'an
was revealed over a period of twenty-three years in ever-changing
circumstances, it is not difficult to imagine the necessity of such
laws.

It is in this light that we should regard the wisdom of abrogation
within the Qur'an: ***And when We put a revelation in place of (another)
revelation and God knows best what He reveals - they say: you are just
inventing it. Most of them do not know. Say: The Holy Spirit (Gabriel)
has revealed it from your hand with truth and as a guidance and good
news for those who have surrendered (to God)*** (16:101-102)..

Applicability and Validity of the Qur'an
----------------------------------------

Bearing in mind that the Qur'an is valid for all times, the verses
revealed in special circumstances informing Muslims of their specific
duties are also valid for those who, in future, experience the same
circumstances.

Similarly, those verses which praise or reproach certain qualities, and
promise reward or threaten punishment accordingly, are applicable to all
ages and places. Thus the meaning of a verse is not limited to the
circumstances or the times of its revelation. Similar circumstances
occurring subsequent to the revelation of a verse are to be followed;
this is known in Qur'anic Science as jury, or applicability.

The fifth Imam said, "were a verse after its revelation to pass away
with the passing away of that people, then nothing would have remained
of the Qur'an.” As long as the heavens and the earth exist, there are
verses for every people, wherever they be, which they may read and act
upon for the benefit or reject at their loss.

Qur'anic Commentary: Its Advent and Development
-----------------------------------------------

Commentary on the words and expressions used in the Qur'an began at the
time of the first revelation. The Prophet himself undertook the teaching
of the Qur'an and the explanation of its meanings and intent.

Thus, in chapter 16:44 God says, "***And we have revealed to you the
Remembrance that you may*** ***explain to mankind that which has been
revealed for them.***" And He says in 62:2, "***He it is Who has sent
among the unlettered ones a messenger of their own to recite to them His
revelations and to make them grow and to teach them the Scriptures and
wisdom.***"

At the time of the Prophet a group of men, on his orders, were
instructed to read record and learn the Qur'an by heart. When the
Prophet's companions passed away, other Muslims took over the
responsibility of learning and teaching the Qur'an; and so it has
continued until the present day.

The Science of Qur'anic Commentary and the Different Groups of Commentators
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the death of the Prophet a group of his companions, including
Ubayy ibn Ka'b, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah al-Ansari,
Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, 'Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar,
Anas, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Musa, and, above all, the famous 'Abd Allah ibn
'Abbas, were occupied with the Science of Commentary. Just as they had
heard the Prophet explaining the meanings of the verses, they would
transmit it orally to other trustworthy persons.

The traditions specifically concerned with the subject of Qur'anic
verses number over two hundred and forty; many were transmitted through
weak chains of transmission and the texts of some have been rejected as
incorrect or forged. Sometimes the transmission would include
commentaries based on personal judgments rather than on a narration of
the actual sayings, hadiths, from the Prophet.

The later Sunni commentators considered this kind of commentary as part
of the body of Sayings of The Prophet, since the companions were learned
in the science of Qur'anic commentary. They argued that these companions
had acquired their knowledge of this science from the Prophet himself
and that it was unlikely they would say anything which they themselves
had invented.

There is, however, no absolute proof for their reasoning. A large
proportion of these sayings, or traditions, about the reasons and
historical circumstances of the revelation of verses do not possess an
acceptable chain of narration. It should be noted that many of the
narrators like Ka'b al-Akhbar, were learned companions who had belonged
to the Jewish faith before accepting Islam.

Moreover, it should not be overlooked that Ibn Abbas usually expressed
the meanings of verses in poetry. In one of his narrations over two
hundred questions of Nafi' ibn al-Azraq are replied to in the form of
poetry; al-Suyuti in his book, al-Itqan, related one hundred and ninety
of these questions.

It is evident, therefore, that many of the narrations made by the
commentators amongst the companions cannot be counted as actual
narrations from the Prophet himself; therefore, such additional material
related by the companions must be rejected.

The second group of commentators were the companions of the followers
(tabi'un), who were the students of the compan- ions. Amongst them we
find Mujahid, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, 'Ikrimah and Dahhak. Also from this
group were Hasan al-Basri, 'Ata' ibn Abi Rabah,, 'Ata' ibn Abi Muslim,
Abu al-'Aliyah, Muhammad ibn Ka'b al-Qurazi, Qatadah, 'Atiyah, Zayd ibn
Aslam, Ta'us al-Yamani.

The third group was comprised of the students of the second group,
namely, Rabi ibn Anas, 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Zayd ibn Aslam, Abu Salih
al-Kalbi and others. The tabi'un sometimes narrated the commentary on a
verse as a tradition of the Prophet or of the companions and, sometimes,
they explained its meaning without attributing a narrator to the source,
this they did especially when there was any doubt as to the identity of
the narrator.

The later commentators treat these narrations as traditions of the
Prophet, but count them as mawquf in their science of the levels of
hadiths (that is as a tradition whose chain of narration does not reach
back to the Prophet) .

The fourth group comprised the first compilers of commentaries, like
Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah, Waki' ibn al-Jarrah, Shu'bah al-Hajjaj and 'Abd ibn
Humayd; others from this group include Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, the author
of the famous Qur'anic Commentary.'

This group recorded the sayings of the companions and the followers of
the companions with a chain of narrators in their works of commentary;
they avoided expressing personal opinions except, perhaps, Ibn Jarir
al-Tabari who sometimes expressed his views by indicating his preference
when discus- sing two similar traditions. The basis of the work of later
groups may be traced to this group.

The fifth group omitted the chain of narrators in their writings and
contented themselves with a simple relation of the text of the
traditions. Some scholars regard these commentators as the source of
varying views in the commentaries by connecting many traditions to a
companion or a follower without verifying their validity or mentioning
their chain of narration.

Consequently, confusion has arisen allowing many false traditions to
enter the body of traditions, thus undermining the reputation of this
section of hadith literature.

Careful examination of the chains of transmission of the traditions
leaves one in doubt as to the extent of the deceitful additions and
false testimonies. Many conflicting traditions can be traced to one
companion or follower and many traditions, which are complete
fabrications, may be found amongst this body of narrations.

Thus reasons for the revelation of a particular verse, including the
abrogating and abrogated verses, do not seem to ac- cord with the actual
order of the verses. No more than one or two of the traditions are found
to be acceptable when submitted to such an examination.

It is for this reason that Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who himself was born
before this generation of narrators, said, "*Three things have no sound
basis: military virtues, bloody battles and the traditions pertaining to
Qur'anic commentary.*" Imam al-Shafi'i relates that only about one
hundred traditions from Ibn 'Abbas have been confirmed as valid.

The sixth group consists of those commentators who appeared after the
growth and development of the various Islamic Sciences and each
undertook the study of Qur'anic commentary according to his
specialization: al-Zajjaj studied the subject from the grammatical point
of view; al-Wahidi and Abu Hayyan' investigated the verses by studying
the inflection of the verbs, the vowels and the diacritical points.

There is also commentary on the rhetoric and eloquence of the verses by
al-Zamakhshari in his work entitled al- Kashshaf. There is a theological
discussion in the "Grand Commentary" of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi. The gnosis
of Ibn al-'Arabi and 'Abd al-Razzaq al-Kashani treated in their
commentaries. Other narrators, like al-Tha'labi, record the history of
transmission of the traditions. Some commentators, among them
al-Qurtubi, concentrate on aspects of fiqh (jurisprudence).

There also exists a number-of commentaries composed of many of these
sciences, such as Ruh al-bayan by Shaykh Isma'il Haqqi, Ruh al ma'ani by
Shihab al Dm Mahmud al- Alusi al-Baghdadi Ghara'ib al-Qur'an by Nizam
al-Din al Nisaburi.

This group rendered a great service to the Science of Qur'anic
commentary in that it brought the Science out of a state of stagnation
(characteristic of the fifth group before it), and developed it into a
Science of precise investigation and theory.

However, if one was to examine closely the precision of this group's
research, one would see that rnuch of its Qur'anic commentary imposes
its theories onto the Qur'an rather than allowing the content of the
verses to speak for themselves.

The Methods Used by the Shi'ite Commentators and their Different Groupings
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

All the groups mentioned above are Sunni commentators. Their method,
used in the earliest commentaries of this period, was based on ijtihad,
that is, the reports of the companions and the followers of the
companions were examined according to certain rules in order to reach an
acceptable understanding of the text.

This resulted in varying opinions amongst those making ijtihad and
caused disorder, contradiction and, even, fabrication to enter into the
body of the traditions.

The method employed by the Shi'ite commentators, how- ever, was
different, with the result that the patterning of the groups was also
different. The Shi'ite commentators in their study of a verse of the
Qur'an, viewed the explanation given by the Prophet as proof of the
meaning of the verse, they did not accept the saying of the companions,
or the followers, as indisputable proof that the tradition was from the
Prophet.

The Shi'ite commentators only recognized as valid an unbroken chain of
narration from the Prophet and through members of his family.
Accordingly, in using and transmitting the verses concerning Qur'anic
commentary, they restricted themselves to the use of traditions
transmitted by the Prophet and by the Imams of the Prophet's family.
This has given rise to the following groups:

The first group comprises those who have learned these traditions from
the Prophet and from the Imams of the Prophet's family, studying and
recording them according to their own method but not in any particular
order. Among them we may mention such scholars as Zararah, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Ma'ruf and Jarir who were companions of the fifth and sixth
Imams.

The second group comprises the first compilers of the commentaries, like
Furat ibn Ibrahlm al-Kufi, Abu Hamzah al-Thumali, Muhammad al-'Ayyashi,
'Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi and al-Nu'mam who lived between the second and
fourth centuries after Hijrah. The method of this group was similar to
that of the fourth Sunni group of Commentators.

Thus, they avoided any kind of ijtihad or passing of judgment. We should
remember that the Imams of the Prophet's family were living amongst
Muslims and available for questioning (on matters of commentary, for
example) for a period of almost three hundred years. Thus the first
groups were not divided chronologically but rather according to their
relationship with the Imams.

There are very few who recorded the tradition without a chain of
transmission. As an example, we should mention one of the students of
al-'Ayyashi who omitted to record the chains of transmission. It was his
work, instead of the original of al-'Ayyashi which came into common use.

The third group comprises masters of various sciences, like al-Sharif
al-Radi who provided a commentary concerned with Qur'anic language and
Shaykh al-Tusi who wrote a commentary and analysis on metaphvsical
matters.

Included, too, is Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi's philosophic work, al-Maybudi
al-Kunabadi's gnostic commentary and 'Abd 'Ali al-Huwayzi's commentary
Nur al-thaqalayn. Hashim al- Bahram composed the commentary al-Burhan
and al-Fayd al-Kashani compiled the work known as al-Safi.

There were others who brought together many different themes to their
commentaries, like Shaykh al-Tabarsi who in his Majma' al-bayan
researches different fields of language, grammar, Qur'an recitation,
gnosis of death, after-life and paradise, and knowledge of the
traditions.

How Does the Qur'an Lend Itself to Interpretation?
--------------------------------------------------

The answer to this question is contained in the previous section where
we discussed the eternal validity of the Qur'an: it speaks to, instructs
and guides man now as it did in the past.

As we have seen, the whole text of the Qur'an is a challenge to mankind
and particularly to the enemies of Islam in that the Qur'an itself is
proof of its own argument; it announces itself as a light, an
illumination and an explanation of all things.

Thus a document which states and demonstrates that it is
self-illuminating, hardly needs others to illuminate it. As proof that
it is not the speech of man, the Qur'an says that it is a harmonious
speech, without the slightest inconsistency and any seeming
inconsistency may be removed through reflection on the Qur'an itself. If
it were not the word of God, the Qur'an would not be as clear as it is.

Moreover, if such speed needed something or someone else to explain its
meaning and purpose, it would neither be the proof nor the absolute
authority that it is so obviously is. This clarity is absolute, even if
a seemingly contradictory passage becomes the object of dispute; it
could be understood by cross-reference to the text of the Qur'an.

For instance, at the time of the Prophet, such matters could be referred
to him since his knowledge of the Qur'an was perfect and he did not need
to refer to other verses for clarification. Those who insisted on
disagreeing, or disbelieving in the Prophet's fallibility, were not
satisfied.

Therefore, commentaries which solve problems of interpretation by
quoting the commentaries of the Prophet, without giving proofs from
other Qur'anic verses, are useful only for those who believe in
Prophethood and the Prophet's infallibility.

These people do not go unmentioned in the Qur'an; we are familiar with
the following verse, ***if it had been from other than God then they
would have found many inconsistencies in it.***

This is a clear argument against those who would seek for
inconsistencies in the Qur'an and find fault with the Prophet. The
Qur'an itself declares that the commentary and explanation of the
Prophet is valid while the Prophet himself has confirmed the validity of
the Qur'anic commentary of the Imams.

We may summarize this by saying that in the Qur'an some verses may be
explained by comparison with other verses and some by using the
instructions and teachings of the Prophet and the Imams. The latter
commentaries are not, of course, different from the explanation which is
produced by comparing and analyzing different verses.

Conclusion
----------

There are three roads open to us when making commentary upon the Qur'an.
Firstly, by using knowledge that one already possesses. Secondly, with
the help of the sayings of the Prophet or Imams.

Thirdly, by using a combination of methods: by reflection and analysis,
or by allowing the verse to become clarified by comparing it to other
verses, or by use of the sayings of the Prophet and the Imams, whenever
possible.

The third way is the one which we have outlined in the last section and
it is this way which the Prophet himself and the Imams of his family
indicate in their teachings. As we have seen, the Prophet said that,
"The verses were revealed to confirm each other," and Imam 'Ali said
that "One part of the Qur'an explains another and one part witnesses to
the other."

It is, moreover, clear that this method of commentary is other than that
warned against by the Prophet when he said, "Whoever makes a commentary
upon the Qur'an according to his own opinion prepares for himself a
place in the Fire." This method uses the Qur'an to explain itself and is
not based merely on explanation arising from whim or fancy.

The first method is unacceptable and exemplifies commentary based on
opinion, except in cases where it agrees with the third method.

The second method is the one used by the early scholars and for many
centuries afterwards, and is still in use amongst both Sunni and Shi'ite
scholars of the traditions of the Prophet. This method is limited,
considering the vast nature of the subject and the countless number of
questions, (both general and particular), arising from over six thousand
verses.

Where, one asks, is the answer to such questions? Where is the solution
to so many intricate and perplexing questions? Or, should we refer to
the body of tradition concerning the verses?

Let us not forget that the total number of traditions of the Prophet
accepted and transmitted by the Sunni scholars number no more than two
hundred and fifty; we should also remember that many of them are weak
and some even totally unacceptable. It is true that the traditions of
the Prophet and the Imams transmitted by the Shi'ite scholars number a
thousand and that amongst them are to be found a consider- able number
which are fully trustworthy.

Consideration of these traditions is not enough, however, given the
countless questions which arise and the many Qur'anic verses that are
not even mentioned in this body of traditions. Should one refer in such
matters to the appropriate verses?

As we have explained, this is not acceptable according to the method
under consideration here. Should one simply abstain from investigation
and imagine that the need for knowledge is non-existent? In this case,
what is one to understand by the verse, ***And we reveal the Book to you
as an exposition of all things,*** (16:89) which is clear proof that the
Qur'an itself is not a mystery but rather explains, among other things,
itself, by its own light.

Chapter 4:82 contains the injunction, "***Will they not ponder on the
Qur'an.***" Similarly, in chapters 47:24 and 38:29 "***(This book) is a
Book that we have revealed to you, full of blessing, that you may ponder
its revelation and the men of understanding may reflect.”*** Likewise in
Chapter 23:68, "***Have they not pondered the word, or has something
come to them which did not come to their forefathers. ***"

What are we intended to understand by these verses? How are we to act in
the light of the totally trustworthy traditions of the Prophet and the
Imams in which they advise us to refer to the Qur'an itself in case of
problems of interpretation and discordance of opinion?

According to many well known traditions of the Prophet, transmitted in
unbroken chains of transmission, one is obliged to refer the tradition
to the Book of God; if the tradition is in accordance with the Book,
then it is accepted and used in commentary and, if in disagreement, it
is rejected.

It is clear that the meaning of these traditions is applicable when one
discovers through the Science of Commentary that the inner meaning of
one verse is contrary to what is contained in another verse. In this
case, one must reject what one has discovered through the study of
commentaries.

These traditions are the best proof that the Qur'an, like speech or
writing in general, has meaning and will always have meaning, even when
studied independently of the traditions. Thus it is the duty of the
commentators to take into account and reflect upon the traditions of the
Prophet and Imams concerning Qur'anic verses but only use those
traditions which are in accordance with the verse under scrutiny.

An Example of Commentary on the Qur'an with the Aid of the Qur'an
-----------------------------------------------------------------

On four occasions in the Qur'an God says "Allah is the creator all
beings," (39:62). The meaning is clear on each occasion; God is stating
that everything man may possibly imagine in the world has been created
by him and is sustained by Him. However, one should not ignore the fact
that in hundreds of verses the Qur'an affirms the existence of cause and
effect and attributes the action of every doer to the immediate cause.

Thus the effect of the burning of fire is a direct result of the fire
itself, the growing of plants, the action of the plants, the falling
rain caused by the state of the sky; the actions which man chooses to
undertake are, according to the Qur'an, the result (and consequent
responsibility) of man. We may also say that the doer of any action is
the one responsible for that action, but God is the giver of existence,
the Creator of deeds and the owner of deeds.

Keeping in mind this general relationship between the Creator and His
creation, we may read in chapter 32:7 "***Who made all things beautiful
and good which We created.”*** When we join this verse to the previous
one we see that beauty and goodness necessarily accompany His creation
and so anything which has existence in the cosmos is also good and
beautiful.

We should not forget, however, that in many verses, the Qur'an affirms
the existence of good and its opposite, evil, useful things and harmful
things, beauty and ugliness; and it enumerates many bad actions, wrong
doers and bad events.

These are all, however, negative aspects of the human character and are
mentioned as a measure of man; they are relative and not intended as
proof that the creation of man is basically bad. For example, the snake
or the serpent is harmful but only to man and an animal that suffer the
effects of its sting; to stones and earth it is harmless.

Bitter taste and foul smell are unpleasant, but only to the human sense
of taste and smell, not to all animals. Certain behavior may at times
appear wrong but this is often the result of observing human behavior in
relation to one particular society of men; in another society or
circumstance it may not be considered wrong.

Indeed, if we dispense for a moment with those negative aspects of man's
character which are secondary or relative to the miracle and perfection
of His creation, we witness only the beautiful symmetry and proportion
of the cosmos in its entirety and the amazing beneficence of the
Creator. Words are not able to describe this beauty since they
themselves are part of this world of beauty.

In reality the above-mentioned verses awake man to an awareness of the
relative nature of beauty and ugliness; they invite him to a
comprehension of absolute beauty and prepare him for an understanding of
creation as a whole.

In fact, there are Qur'anic verses which explain or comment upon the
different aspects of creation in the universe, either as isolated
individual examples or as groupings and classes. Each creation, whether
a single manifestation or joined to a larger structure and patterning,
is a sign and indication of God.

Whichever way we regard creation, it all points to the existence of God.

This way of understanding or seeing the universe and its signs, leads to
an appreciation of the stupendous beauty which encircles the whole world
and allows us to realize that it is His beauty, emanating from the
domain of His power, and made visible in the signs of the skies and the
earth. Each aspect of the cosmos lends beauty and dimension to
everything surrounding it, yet at the same time it is insignificant in
relation to the whole.

The Qur'an affirms in other verses that perfection and beauty manifest
themselves from the domain of his power; thus He says in chapter 40:65
"***He is the Living One, there is no god save Him,***" and in 2:165
"***... power belongs completely to God,***” and in 4:139, "***Truly all
power belongs to God, " and "He is the knower, the All-Powerful.***" On
another occasion we read "***And He is the Hearer, the Seer,*** " and in
20:8, "***Allah! There is no god save Him. His are the most beautiful
names.***"

We realize from these verses that the beauty which manifests itself in
the visible world has its reality in the domain of His power and
grandeur. All other beauty, all other power, is illusory or metaphorical
of His power.

In affirmation of this explanation, the Qur'an states that the beauty
and perfection created by man is limited and temporal but that of God
boundless and eternal. God emphasizes that all creation is from Him and
under His power. In chapter 54:49, "***Truly we have created everything
by measure***" and in the chapter 15:21, "***And there is not a thing
with us but there are stores of it. And we do not send it down except in
appointed measure.***"

Careful observation reveals that the Book itself declares its own
perfection and beauty, that it encompasses all aspects of creation and
the Creator, and that there is no fault or shortcoming in it. Such is
the perfection of the Qur'an, which itself is one of the signs of God,
that it makes the reader forget himself in rapturous appreciation of its
beauty.

This we read in 2: 165 "***Those who believe are stauncher in their love
of God.”*** Love, of its very nature, demands the self and the giving
over of the self to God. It demands the handing over of one's affairs
completely to Him and allowing Him to be one's Lord: "***And Allah is
the protecting Friend of the believers***" (3:68) .

This idea is also contained in 2:257 which declares, "***God is the
Protecting Friend of those who believe. He brings them out of darkness
into light,***" and also in 6:122, "***Is he who was dead and We have
raised him to life and set for him a light in which he walks among men
...***" Likewise, we read in 58:22, "***As for such, He has written
faith upon their hearts and has strengthened them with a spirit from
Him.***"

This spirit, this new life and light, is given by God to the man who
perceives reality and truth and who understands the path of happiness
and well-being in society. In another verse in 57:28, He explains the
effect of such light: "***O you who believe! Be mindful of your duty to
God and put faith in His messenger. He will give you two fold of His
mercy and will appoint for you a light in which you shall walk.***"

Again, in another verse, He makes a commentary on "faith in the Prophet"
by explaining it as submission and obedience to Him; chapter 3:31,
"***Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): If you love God follow me; God will
love you.***"

The nature of this path is explained in chapter 7:157, ***Those who
follow the messenger the Prophet, who can neither read nor write, whom
they will find described in the Torah and the Gospels (which are) with
them. He will rejoin in than that which is right and forbid them that
which is wrong. He will make lawful for them all good things and
prohibit for them only the foul; and He will relieve them of their
burden and the fetters they used to wear.***

Still more vividly, the path is explained in another verse which is also
a commentary on the previous verse (30:30), ***So let your purpose (O
Muhammad) for the din (of Islam) as a man by nature upright-the nature
of (God on which he has created man. There is no altering God 's
creation. That is the right way of life, but most men to not know
...***"

The right way of life or din refers to the correct path for society to
follow for its well-being and happiness. According to this verse, the
way of Islam is also the way desired by the Creator for man.

In other words, the legislative framework given to man by God is the
very framework which is appropriate for the creature man. This divine
law is in complete harmony with the nature of man, living a life of
piety and obedience.

God says in another verse IXCI:7-81, "***And a soul and Him who
perfected it. And inspired it (with conscience of) what is wrong for it
and (what is) right. ***”The Qur'an is the only revealed book which
equates the happiness and well-being of man with a pure and sincere way
of life.

Moreover, unlike other religions, Islam does not separate worship of God
from the actual program of living; it establishes the word din to mean
not only religion but also life in general as well, the actual day to
day routine of man, both on a personal and social level.

The Qur'an establishes a program of living which is in accord with the
functioning and the reality of the cosmos, and the Qur'an mentions many
of the benefits and virtues to be expected by the man of God and the
lovers of Truth, including a certainty of faith and tranquility of the
heart.

The Validity of the Commentary of the Prophet and the Imams
-----------------------------------------------------------

From an indication in the Qur'an itself, the commentary of the Prophet
and the Imams, (as discussed in the previous sections), is established
as being absolutely true. Authentication of the sayings of the Prophet
and the Imams is clearly established by the existence of fully
trustworthy chains of transmissions. A tradition may not, however, be
recognized as totally acceptable if it has been transmitted by one chain
of narration only.

The validity of the tradition may be disputed amongst the Muslim
Scholars of Commentary: amongst the Sunni's a tradition of a single
chain of transmission, classified in their terms as sahih (sound), must
be accepted and acted upon; among the Shi'ite scholars a tradition with
a single undisputed chain of transmission is also accepted as a proof.

However, in the laws of the shari'ah it is not valid and must be
investigated and checked before use as a proof.

Author's Note: The previous section has been specifically about the use
of commentary or explanation in order to arrive at the true meaning of a
verse. This includes study of the literal meanings and those hidden in
metaphor. It does not include an explanation or a discussion of the
linguistic and literal aspects or the science of Qur'an recitation since
these do not affect the meaning.


