Part 5: The Order of the Qur'an's Revelation and the Growth of the Qur'anic Sciences 
=====================================================================================

The Order in which the Verses of the Qur'an were Revealed
---------------------------------------------------------

That the chapters and verses were not revealed in one place but rather
in stages over a period of twenty-three years during the Prophet's
mission is authenticated not only by historical evidence but also from
evidence from the various verses.

In 17:106 we read: "***And it is a Qur'an that we have divided that you
may recite it to mankind at intervals and we have revealed it by
(successive) revelations.”*** As further proof there are abrogating and
abrogated verses which are directly related to events from different
periods and circumstances and which obviously were not revealed at one
time.

At this point we should note that the chapters and verses were not
revealed in the order in which they are set out; that is the first
chapter "***al-Fatihah***" (The Opening) was revealed after "***The
Cow***", "***The Family of 'Imran,***" "***Women,***" and "***The Table
Spread.***"

This is true also for the order of the verses which do not necessarily
follow chronologically. The content of a Qur'anic text may for example
show that the content of some chapters and verses concord with the first
period of the Prophet's mission - like the chapters "***The Clot***,"
and "***Nun,***" but are recorded at the end of the Qur'an.

Many chapters and verses which correspond to the time after the
migration like "***The Cow***," "***The*** ***Family of 'Imran***,"
"***Women***," "***The Spoils***" and "***Repentance***" have been
placed at the beginning of the Qur'an.

The contents of the chapters and verses are thus directly related to the
events, circumstances and different needs of the period of the Prophet's
mission: the chapter and verses which only deal with the calling of the
polytheists to belief in God's oneness and the struggle against the
idol-worshippers correspond to a time before the migration when the
Prophet was inviting the people to Islam in Mecca.

The verses dealing with battles and those dealing with social laws were
revealed after the events and circumstances associated with the
establishment and progress of the Islamic society in Medina.

Conclusions to be Drawn
-----------------------

We may divide the chapters and Qur'anic verses according to the place,
time and circumstance of their revelation:

Some of the chapters and verses are Meccan and some Medinan; usually
those revealed before the Prophet's migration is counted as Meccan. The
majority of the chapters, and especially the shorter ones, are of this
type. Those revealed after the migration are counted as Medinan even
though they may have been revealed outside Medina or even in Mecca.

Some chapters and verses were revealed while the Prophet was travelling
and some while he was resident in a place. The verses are also divided
according to whether they were revealed by day or by night, in peace or
in war, or when the Prophet was on earth or in the heavens, or whether
he was alone or with others. In the light of these different
classifications we may study the reasons for the revelations.

Some chapters were revealed more than once such as the chapter
"al-Fatihah," which was revealed once in Mecca and once in Medina. Some
verses were revealed several times like, "Which is it of the favors of
your Lord do you deny," in the chapter "The Beneficent" which is
repeated thirty times, and the verse, "And indeed your Lord He is truly
the Mighty, the Merciful,' which is repeated eight times.

Sometimes one verse occurs in more than one chapter such as "***they
say: when is the fulfillment of promise, if you are truthful.***" We
find, too, that a sentence appears as a complete verse in one chapter
and as part of another verse elsewhere; for example, the sentence,
"***Allah! there is no God save Him, the Alive, the Eternal,***" is a
complete verse in the beginning of "***The Family of "Imran,***" Yet, in
"***The Cow***" it is part of the "***al-Kursi***" verse. Most chapters
and verses, however, were revealed in one place at one time and do not
recur in the Book.

Similar verses appear in different places in the Qur'an because of
certain subjects which demand repetition. One of the significant
features of the Quran is the difference in the length of the chapters.
We may compare "***Abundance***" (the shortest chapter) and "***The
Cow***" (the longest).

Likewise we may compare the length of verses, with the shortest being
the single arabic word "***mudhammatan***" (dark green with foliage) and
the longest, composed of thirty sentences being the two hundred and
eighty-second verse of "***The Cow***" (whose subject concerns debt).

All these differences are in accordance with the demands of the
revelation. Sometimes it happens that two verses are closely connected
in meaning but differ greatly in length; for example, the thirtieth and
thirty-first verses of "***The Cloaked One***", the first being a single
sentence and the second more than eleven sentences.

We should not forget that most of the shorter verses like "***The
Dawn***" and "***The Night***" are Meccan, and those whose subject
matter is treated in greater length and detail are Medinan. The first
verse to be revealed to the Prophet was during the revelation of the
first five verses of "The Clot" and the last to be revealed was verse
281 of "***The Cow***": "***And guard yourselves against a day in which
you will be brought back to Allah. Then every soul will be paid in full
that which it has earned and they will not be wronged.*** "

The Reasons for the Revelations
-------------------------------

Many of the verses are connected with events and circumstances which
took place as the Prophet called the people to Islam, for example
"***The Cow***".

Other chapters, like "***The Tribe***", refer to the exile of the Banu
al-Nadir and the chapter "***The Coursers***" was revealed for the
Bedouin Arabs of the Dry Valley and other tribes.

Some chapters or verses were revealed because of the need to explain the
laws and directions of Islam; for example, the chapter "***Women***"
which defined marriage and the inheritance of women, "***The Spirits***"
which explains how to deal with the prisoners-of-war captured as booty
and, the chapter "***Divorce***" which was revealed, as its name
suggests, explaining divorce.

The circumstances leading to the revelation of these chapters are called
"***reasons for revelation***" and there are countless traditions on
this subject.

Amongst the Sunni's there are many traditions which deal with the
reasons for revelation; several thousand narrations may be enumerated
(although in the Shi'ah School only a few hundred may be counted). Many
of these are without a chain of narration and are not accepted as fully
trustworthy; moreover, a considerable number are classified as weak.

The dubious nature of the majority of these may be ascribed to the
following reasons. Firstly, it is obvious from the form of many of these
sayings that the narrator had not learned them through oral transmission
but rather based on his own judgment, that the revelation of a certain
verse was connected with certain events. Thus the narrator links a
certain event to a verse of suitable meaning mentioned in the tradition.

This is a subjective view, carried out through ijtihad or personal
reflection upon the matter, and not the actual reason for revelation
learned orally through transmission from the Prophet. As proof of this
argument, we may cite many inconsistencies amongst these traditions.
There are verses, for example, recorded as having several conflicting
"reasons for revelation" which are totally unconnected with each other.

Ibn 'Abbas, for example, who is not alone in this practice, relates
several "reasons for the revelation"' of one single verse. The existence
of such conflicting reasons is because many have been arrived at through
subjective deliberation rather than transmitted directly from the
Prophet. This results in one narrator attributing a certain verse to a
particular event while another narrator attributes it to another event.

On other occasions a narrator relates two different reasons for the
revelation of one verse and thus implicates himself in two conflicting
views; then he rejects the first view in favor of the second. We are led
to conclude, moreover, that most of these narrations are fabrications or
deceitfully transmitted under the pretence of trustworthy narrators.
Such doubt concerning the validity of many of these traditions greatly
endangers their credibility.

Secondly, it has been related with certainty that the early Caliphs
strictly prohibited the recording and writing down of the narrations
and, whenever a sheet of paper or tablet was found on which a saying had
been written, it was burned.

This prohibition lasted until nearly the end of the first century after
Hijrah, that is, for a period of about ninety years. The effect of this
prohibition was that the narrators and scholars of sayings were free to
make small additions or changes during oral transmission of the saying.
These additions gradually accumulated until the original meaning of the
saying was lost.

This becomes very clear on investigation of an event or subject which
has been related by two different narrators; one may come across a
saying which describes an event and see the same event described in a
different way by another narrator.

False sayings were not only introduced by attributing them to respected
narrators but also by the hypocrites. Their sayings soon became part of
the main body of sayings and this further undermined the credibility of
this particular section of the Science of tradition.

The Method Used in Describing "The Reasons for the Revelations"
---------------------------------------------------------------

Past scholars of Islam, and in particular the Sunni scholars, attached
great importance to the order of revelation of the chapters. Among the
narration on the subject is that of Ibn 'Abbas, who has said that "*the
beginning of each chapter which was revealed in Mecca was recorded as
having been revealed in that very place, then God added what He wanted
to it.*" The following is the order of revelation of the Qur'an
(beginning with the Meccan verses):

(1) Read in the name of your Lord. (96:I) 

(2) Nun. (68:I)

(3) O, you wrapped up in your raiment. (73:1)

(4) O you wrapped up in your cloak. (74:1)

(5) The power of Abu Lahab will perish. (111:1)

(6) When the sun is overthrown. (81:1)

(7) Praise the name of your Lord, the Most High. (87:1)

(8) By the night enshrouding. (92:1)

(9) By the Dawn. (89:1)

(10) By the morning hours. (93:1)

(11) Have we not caused your breast to expand. (94:1)

(12) By the declining day. (103:1)

(13) The Courses. (100:1)

(14) Indeed, we have given you abundance. (108:1)

(15) Rivalry in worldly increase distracts you. (102:1)

(16) Have you observed him who denies the din. (107:1)

(17) Say: O disbelievers! (109:1)

(18) Have you not seen your Lord dealt with the owners of the elephant.
(110:1)

(19) Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of the daybreak. (113:1)

(20) Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of Mankind. (114:1)

(21) Say: He is God, the One (112:1)

(22) By the Star. (53:1)

(23) He Frowned. (80:1)

(24) Indeed we have revealed it on the Night of Power. (97:1)

(25) By the Sun and its brightness. (91:1)

(26) By the heaven, holding mountains of the stars. (85:1)

(27) By the Fig. (95:1)

(28) For the Taming of the Quraish. (106:1)

(29) The Calamity. (101:1)

(30) No, I swear by the Day of Resurrection. (75:1)

(31) Woe to every slandering traducer. (104:1)

(32) By the emissary winds (77:1)

(33) Qaf (50:1)

(34) No, I swear by this city. (90:1)

(35) By the heaven and the morning star. (86:1)

(36) The hour drew near. (54:1)

(37) Sad. (38:1)

(38) The Heights. (7:1)

(39) Say (O Muhammad): it is revealed ... (72:1)

(40) Ya Sin. (36:1)

(41) The Criterion. (25:1)

(42) The Angels. (35:1)

(43) Kaf Ha Ya 'Ayn Sad. (19:1)

(44) Ta'ha'. (20:1)

(45) The Reality. (56:1)

(46) Ta Sin Mim (The Poets). (26:1)

(47) Ta sin. (27:1)

(48) The Story. (28:1)

(49) The Children of Israel. (17:1)

(50) Jonah. (10:)

(51) Hud. (11:1)

(52) Joseph. (12:1)

(53) The Exile. (15:1)

(54) The Cattle. (6:1)

(55) Those who set the ranks.(36:1)

(56) Luqman. (31:1)

(57) Saba. (34:1)

(58) The Troops. (39:1)

(59) Ha Mim (The Believers). (40:1)

(62) Ha Mim Ornaments of Gold. (43:1)

(63) Smoke. (44:1)

(64) Crouching. (46:1)

(65) The Wind Curved Sandhills. (46:1)

(66) The Winnowing Winds. (51:1)

(67) The Overwhelming. (88:1)

(68) The Cave (18:1)

(69) The Bee. (16:1)

(70) Indeed We Sent Noah. (71:1)

(71) Abraham. (14:1)

(72) The Prophets. (21:1)

(73) The Believers. (23:1)

(74) The Prostration. (32:1)

(75) Mount Sinai. (52:1)

(76) The Sovereignty. (67:1)

(77) The Reality. (69:1)

(78) A Questioner Questioned . (70:1)

(79) About What do They question one another. (83:1)

(80) Those who drag forth. (79:1)

(81) When the heaven is cleft apart. (82:I)

(82) When the Heaven is split asunder. (84:I)

(83) The Romans. (30:1)

(84) The Spider. (29:1)

(85) Woe to the defrauders. (83:1)

(86) The Cow. (2:1)

(87) The Spoils of War. (8:1)

(88) The Family of 'Imran. (3:1)

(89) The Clans. (33:I)

(90) She that is to be examined. (60:1)

(91) Women. (4:1)

(92) When the earth is shaken. (99:1)

(93) Iron (57:1)

(94) Muhammad (47:1)

(95) The Thunder. (13:1)

(96) The Beneficent. (50:1)

(97) Man. (76:1)

(98) Divorce. (65:1)

(99) The Clear Proof. (98:1)

(100) Exile. (56:1)

(101) When God's help arrives. (110:1)

(102) Light (29:1)

(103) The Pilgrimage. (22:1)

(104) The Hypocrites. (63:1)

(105) She that Disputes (58:1)

(106) The Private Apartments. (49:1)

(107) Banning. (66:1)

(108) The Congregation . (62:1)

(109) Mutual Disillusion. (64:1)

(110) The Ranks. (61:1)

(111) Victory. (48:1)

(112) The Table Spread. (5:1)

(113) The Immunity (Repentance). (9:1)

Further Traditions Concerning the Order and Place Revelation of the Chapters
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The tradition of Ibn 'Abbas mentions one hundred and thirteen chapters,
the chapter "al-Fatihah" not being counted among them. There is another
saying, related by al-Bayhaqi from 'Ikrimah, which enumerates one
hundred and eleven chapters, the three chapters "al-Fatihah," "The
Heights," and "Counsel" not being mentioned.

When al-Bayhaqi relates this same tradition from Ibn 'Abbas it includes
all one hundred and fourteen chapters. The tradition of al-Bayhaqi
reckons "The Defrauders" as one of the Medinan chapters in opposition to
the other traditions which count it as Meccan. The order mentioned in
these two traditions for both the Meccan and Medinan chapters is
different from that of other tradi-

Another tradition, related from 'Ali ibn Abi Talhah, says: The chapter
"The Cow" was revealed in Medina and "The Family of 'Imran," "Women,"
"The Table Spread," "Spirits of War," "Repentance," "The Pilgrimage,"
"Light," "the Clans," "Those Who Deny," "Victory," "Iron," "She That
Disputes," "Exile," "She That Is To Be Examined," "The Helpers of Allah
(The Ranks)," "Mutual Disillusion," "O Prophet if you divorce women," "O
Prophet why do you ban," "The Dawn," "The Night," "We have revealed it
in the night of power," "The Clear Proof," "When the earth shakes,"
"When the help of Allah comes," and the rest of the chapters were
revealed in Mecca.

The intention of the tradition seems only to establish the difference
between the Medinan and Meccan chapters and to define the order of
revelation of the chapters mentioned. The chapters "Table Spread" and
"Repentance" are, without doubt, later in revelation than that indicated
in this tradition.

Moreover, chapters "The Dawn," "The Night," and "The Night of Power,"
are counted as Medinan chapters, whereas the above tradition counts them
as Meccan. Likewise, "The Thunder," "The Beneficent," "Man," "The
Congregation," "The Private Apartments" are considered as Meccan, where-
as in the above tradition they are counted as Medinan.

In another tradition related by Qatadah, "The Cow," "The Family of
'Imran," "Women," "The Table Spread," "Immunity," "The Thunder," "The
Bee," "The Pilgrim- age," "The Light," "The Clans," "Muhammad,"
"Victory," "The Private Apartments," "Iron," "The Beneficent," "She that
disputes," "Exile," "She that is to be Examined," "The Ranks," "The
Congregation," "The Hypocrites," "Mutual Disillusion," "Divorce," the
first thirteen verses of "O You Prophet! Why do you ban," "When the
earth Shakes" and "When the help of Allah comes," were revealed in
Medina and the rest in Mecca. This tradition is contrary to the previous
traditions and, in particular, with regard to the mention of "The
Defrauders," "Man," and "The Clear Proof."

This tradition is, however, unacceptable according to the Science of
traditions, being disconnected from direct transmission from the
Prophet. It is also unclear whether Ibn 'Abbas learned of the order of
revelation from the Prophet himself or from some other unidentified
person, or arrived at it by subjective decision.

If the latter is the case, it has no value or authenticity but for
himself. It has also no value historically, as Ibn 'Abbas did not have
close contact with the Prophet. It is obvious that he could not have
been present nor a witness to the revelation of all these chapters. Even
if we suppose the tradition to be true, it is still not totally
acceptable in matters outside the law of the shari'ah.

The only way to discover the true order of the chapters, and whether
they are Meccan or Medinan, is to examine the content of the chapters
and to compare them with the circumstances and social reality before and
after the migration.

Such a method is effective in certain cases; the content of chapters
"Man," "The Coursers," and the "Defrauders" testify to their being
Medinan, although some of these traditions only establish them as
Meccan.

The Gathering of the Qur'an into One Volume (Before the Death of the Prophet)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The influence of the Qur'an, which was revealed in separate chapters and
verses, increased day by day. Its eloquence and miraculous clarity
transfixed the Arabs who attached great importance to fine language;
they came from far and wide to hear and learn a few verses from the
Prophet.

However, the notables of Mecca and the leaders of Quraysh, who were
idolaters and bitter enemies of the Prophet and of Islam, tried to
prevent the people from getting close to the Prophet; they tried to
frighten off the Arabs by telling them the Qur'an was magic.

Despite this people came, unknown to friends, family and servants, in
the dark of night to a place near the Prophet's house and listened to
the Prophet reading the Qur'an.

The efforts of the early Muslims in listening to, memorizing and
recording the Qur'an were stimulated by another motive: they valued the
Qur'an as a sacred document, being the word of God; they were also
obliged to read the chapter "al- Fatihah" and a portion of another part
of the Qur'an during their prayers. It was also the Qur'an through which
the Prophet had been commanded to instruct people in the laws of Islam .

This study and devotion to the Qur'an became more ordered and
comprehensive after the Prophet emigrated to Medina and formed an
independent Muslim community. He ordered a considerable number of the
companions to recite the Qur'an and to learn and teach the laws which
were being revealed daily.

So important was this activity that, according to special permission
granted by God in chapter "Repentance," verse 122, these scholars were
relieved of their obligation to fight jihad (so called Holy War).

Since most of the Prophet's companions, (in particular those who had
emigrated from Mecca to Medina), were unable to read or write, the
Prophet ordered them to learn from the Jewish prisoners-of-war the
simple writing of the time. Thus a group of the companions gradually
became literate.

Those of this group who engaged in the recitation of the Qur'an,
learning by heart the chapters and verses were called qurra'; it was
from amongst this group that forty (some report seventy) died as martyrs
in an accident called Bi'r Ma'unah.

The Qur'an was recorded, as it was revealed, on tablets, bones and the
wide flat end of the date palm fronds. There is no doubt that most
chapters were in use amongst early Muslims since they are mentioned in
numerous sayings by both Sunni and Shiiah sources, relating the
Prophet's use of the Qur'an as a call to Islam, the making of prayer and
the manner of recitation.

Similarly, one comes across names of chapters in traditions which
describe the time when the Prophet was still alive, namely the very long
chapters and "al-Fatihah".

After the Death of the Prophet
------------------------------

After the death of the Prophet, 'Ali who, (according to a tradition of
absolute authority), was more knowledgeable of the Qur'an than any other
man retired to his house and compiled the Qur'an in one volume in the
order corresponding to its revelation. Before six months had elapsed
after the death of the Prophet, the volume was completed and carried by
camel to show to other people.

Just about a year after the death of the Prophet, the war of Yamamah
took place in which seventy of the reciters were killed and the Caliphs
conceived the idea of collecting the different chapters and verses into
one volume. They feared that should a future battle take place and the
rest of the qurra ' be killed, the whole Qur'an would disappear with
them.

Thus, on the orders of the Caliph, a group of the qurra' from amongst
the companions including Zayd ibn Thabit, collected the chapters and
verses (written on tablets, bones and date palm fronds and kept in the
Prophet's house or the houses of reciters), and produced several
hand-written copies of the complete Book. They then sent copies of this
compilation to all areas of the Muslim domain.

After a time, during the rule of the third Caliph, it came to the
attention of the Caliph himself that differences and inconsistencies
were appearing in the copying down of the Qur'an; some calligraphers
lacked precision in their writing and some reciters were not accurate in
their recitation.

Since the word of God seemed threatened with alteration, the Caliph
ordered that five of the qurra' from amongst the companions, (one of
them being Zayd ibn Thabit who had compiled the first volume), produce
other copies from the first volume which had been prepared on the orders
of the first Caliph and which had been kept with Hafsah, the wife of the
Prophet and daughter of the second Caliph.

The other copies, already in the hands of Muslims in other areas, were
collected and sent to Medina where, on orders of the Caliph, they were
burnt (or, according to some historians, were destroyed by boiling).
Thus several copies were made, one being kept in Medina, one in Mecca,
and one each sent to Sham (a territory now divided into Syria, Lebanon,
Palestine and Jordan), Kufa and Basra.

It is said that beside these five, one copy was also sent to Yemen and
one to Bahran. These copies were called the Imam copies and served as
original for all future copies. The only difference of order between
these copies and the first volume was that the chapters "Spirits of War"
and "Immun- ity" were written in one place between "The Heights" and
"Jonah."

The Importance Muslims Attached to the Qur'an
---------------------------------------------

As we have pointed out above, the verses and chapters of the Qur'an were
in oral use amongst Muslims at the time of its first and second
compilation into one volume. They were extremely careful in preserving
what they had learnt by heart.

Moreover, a large group of companions and their followers were engaged
only in recitation and learning the Qur'an by heart. The collecting
together of the Qur'an into one volume took place under their scrutiny.
They all accepted, without objection, the volume when it was given to
them and then made copies of it.

It happened that when some men tried to record verse 34 in "Repentance,"
"And those who hoard up gold and silver" without the "and" in the
'Uthmanic (second compilation) volume, they were prevented from doing
so. The companion Ubayy ibn Ka'b swore that if anyone left out the "and"
he would fight him with the sword.

As a result, the word "And" was recorded. One day the second Caliph,
during the time of his own caliphate, read the verse, ***And the first
to lead the way of the Muhajirin and Ansar and those who follow them in
goodness. ***(9:100), without the word "and"; he was opposed and forced
in the end to read it with the "and".

The Qur'an that had been compiled by 'Ali was rejected by several people
when he showed it to them. Despite this, Ali made no objection or
resistance and accepted the Qur'an in circulation for as long as he
lived, even during the time of his own Caliphate.

Likewise, the Imams of the Prophet's family, the successors and sons of
the Prophet, did not mention their objection to the Qur'an to the
intimates amongst their Shiah followers. They always referred to the
Qur'an in common use and in their commentaries and ordered the followers
to recite it as the people did.

Ali's silence in the matter of the difference of order between the two
volumes was in keeping with the preference of the Shiah Imams for
commentary of the Qur'an by the Qur'an; for them the order of the
Medinan and Meccan chapters has no influence on the meanings of the
Qur'an; commentary of each verse is made by comparing it to another
group of verses.

Moreover the Qur'an is eternal and valid for all times and places; such
local and temporary particularities as this time, place and
circumstances of revelation can have no effect on the higher scale of
meanings contained in the Qur'an.

It is true that there are benefits to be gained by knowing certain
details of revelation; they help one to discern the development of
divine wisdom, social laws or stories of the past prophets and nations;
also an understanding of the reasons for revelation show how the call to
Islam progressed during the twenty-three years of the Prophet's mission.

We would like to make clear, however, that it was in order to preserve
the unity of the Muslims that caused the Shi'ites to be silent in this
matter.

The Qur'an is Protected from any Alteration
-------------------------------------------

The transmission of the Qur'an, from the day of its revelation up to the
present day, is flawless. The chapters and verses have been in constant
use amongst Muslims and have been passed on perfectly intact from one
generation to the other. The Qur'an we know today is the same Qur'an
which was revealed to the Prophet some fourteen centuries ago.

The Qur'an does not stand in need of historical proof for its identity
or authenticity, (although history too confirms its validity). Since a
book which claims to be the actual unalterable word of God and attests
to this in its own text, does not need to resort to others to prove its
authenticity.

The clearest proof that the Qur'an we have with us today is the same
that was revealed to the Prophet and that no alteration has taken place
in its text is that very superiority which the Qur'an claimed for itself
at the time of its revelation and which still exists.

The Qur'an says that it is a book of light and guidance, a book which
shows man the truth and reality of existence; it says that it explains
all things, that is, everything necessary for man to live in accordance
with his own natural character; it says that it is the word of God and
challenges man and jinn to produce similar words; it invites them to
find someone like the Prophet, who could neither read nor write and grew
up in an age Of ignorance as an orphan without instruction; the Qur'an
challenges them to find any inconsistency in its method, Sciences, or
laws, such as one might find in any ordinary book.

They obviously cannot for the superiority of the Qur'an remains after
its revelation. Likewise, the guidance for man contained in the Qur'an
is still valid; it still expounds a complete world view which is in
accord with the purest of intellectual proofs and is the source of man's
well being in this world and in the next.

By the benevolence and care shown by the Creator for His creation in the
Book, it still invites man to belief.

The Qur'an cares for the needs of man by giving him a vision of reality
based on Divine Unity. All knowledge and belief spring from this view of
reality. At no point does the Qur'an fail to explain in the most
comprehensive fashion the reality of this oneness.

It devotes much attention to explaining the behavior and transactions
expected of the individual in society and shows how correct action is
that which accords with the natural character and capability (fitrah) of
man. The Qur'an leaves the detailed description of man's behavior to the
Prophet whose daily life was an example of how man was to apply what was
contained in the Qur'an.

Together the Book of God and the example (or Sunnah) of the Prophet
delineated an astoundingly comprehensive life-pattern for man, namely,
the way of living in tune with the reality which is Islam.

The Qur'an deals precisely with all aspects of individual and social
life and, despite having been revealed in another age, does not contain
the slightest inconsistency or in- compatibility even today. It
describes a din, a comprehensive way of life, whose program of living is
beyond the imagination of the world's most capable lawyers and
sociologists.

The miracle of the Qur'an has in it clarity and eloquence, rooted, as it
is, in the language of a nation famed for the purity and power of its
language. The Qur'an is a miraculous sun whose light shines far brighter
than the finest poetry of the time, indeed of any age.

During the Islamic conquests of the first century after Hijra, the
resulting admixing of non-Arabic words with the Arabic lessened the
purity of Arabic language used in the Qur'an causing it to disappear
from the every-day speech of the people.

The Qur'an does not merely challenge man by the use of its language hut
also by the depth of its meaning. Those familiar with the Arabic
language (both prose and verse writings) are reduced to silence and
astonishment when they attempt to describe it.

The Qur'an is neither poetry nor prose but rather seems to draw
qualities from both; it is more attractive and dazzling than poetry and
clearer and more flowing than prose A single verse or phrase from the
Qur'an is more illuminating, more penetrating, and more profound than
the complete speech of most eloquent speakers.

The profundity of meaning in the Qur'an remains as miraculous as ever;
its complex structure of beliefs, morals and laws stands as proof that
the Qur'an is the word of God. Man, and in particular someone who was
born and raised in circumstances similar to those of the Prophet, could
never have created such a system; the Qur'an is a harmonious whole
despite having been revealed during twenty-three years in greatly
varying circumstances.

God Himself confirms that the Qur'an has been preserved from change; in
chapter 15:9 He says, "***Indeed We, even We, reveal the Reminder and
indeed We are truly its guardian,***" and in chapter 41:4142 He says,
'*** for indeed it is an unassailable Book. Falsehood cannot come at it
from before or behind it. (It is) a revelation from the Wise the Owner
of Praise.***" Only a divine Book could remain preserved for fourteen
centuries in a world where the enemies of truth and of Islam are
numerous.

The Recitation, Memorization and Transmission of the Qur'an
-----------------------------------------------------------

There were a number of reciters engaged in learning and teaching the
Qur'an in Medina. Anyone learning from one of them would transmit that
individual's particular style of recitation when he transmitted it to
others as a tradition. Various ways of recitation occur. One may
attribute this, firstly, to the fact that the script used at the time
was the kufic style and had no diacritical points; each word could be
read in various ways'

Secondly, most people were illiterate and, when learning the Qur'an, had
no alternative but to commit it to memory and transmit it orally. This
method continued to be used for many generations.

The Different Groups of Reciters
--------------------------------

The first group of reciters were those companions who were engaged in
learning and teaching the Qur'an during the time of the Prophet. Among
them was a group which mastered the whole Qur'an; one of this group was
a woman by the name of Umm Waraqah bint 'Abd Allah ibn Harith.

Study was also undertaken by four of the Ansars (or helpers, that is
Medinans who became Muslim and welcomed the Muslims from Mecca). They
learned the whole Qur'an by heart but were not concerned with the
ordering of the verses and chapters; other scholars were responsible for
memorization of the order.

Some traditions say that the position of each verse and chapter was
defined at the orders of the Prophet himself but this is generally
refuted by the rest of the traditions.

According to some later scholars, (namely al-Suyuti in his book
al-Itqan, in the chapter dealing with the qualities of the men
responsible for transmission), several of the qurra' became famous,
among them 'Uthman, 'Ali, Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Zayd ibn Thabit, 'Abd Allah
ibn Mas'ud and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari.

The second group of reciters were the students of the first group. They
were generally tabi'un (followers of the compan- ions of the Prophet)
and the more famous amongst them had centres of recitation and teaching
in Mecca, Medina, Kufa, Basra and Sham. The 'Uthmanic volume was used in
these five places.

In Mecca were 'Ubayd ibn 'Amir and 'Ata' ibn Abi Rabah, Ta'us, Mujahid,
'Ikrimah ibn Abi Mulaykah and others. In Medina were Ibn Musayyis,
'Urwah, Salim, 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, Sulayman ibn Yasar, 'Ata' ibn
Yasar, Mu'adh al-Qari', 'Abd Allah ibn al-A'raj, Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri,
Muslim ibn Jundub and Zayd ibn Aslam.

In Kufa were 'Alqamah, al-Aswad, Masruq, 'Ubaydah, 'Amr ibn Shurahbil,
Harith ibn al-Qays, 'Amr ibn Maymun, Abu 'Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami, Zarr
ibn Hubaysh, 'Ubayd ibn Naflah, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, al-Nakha'i, al-Sha'bi,
Abu al-'Aliyah, Abu al-Raja' Nasr ibn al-'Asim, Yahya ibn Ya'mur, Hasan
al-Basri, Ibn Sirin, Qatadah, Mughirah ibn Abi Shihab, 'Uthman, Khallfah
ibn Said, Abu Darda'.

The third group lived during the first half of the second century after
Hijrah; it included a number of Imams famous for their Qur'anic
recitation who received this knowledge from the second group. In Mecca
were 'Abd Allah ibn Kathir (one of the seven qurra), Humayd ibn Qays
al-A'raj and Muhammad ibn Abi Muhaysin. In Medina were, Abu Ja'far Yazid
ibn al-Qa'qa', Shaybah ibn Nassah and Nafi ibn Nu'aym (one of the seven
qurra).

In Kufa were Yahya ibn Waththab, 'Asim ibn Abi al-Najjud (one of the
seven qurra'), Sulayman al-A'mash, Hamzah (one of the seven qurra') and
al-Kisa'i (also one of the seven reciters). In Basra were 'Abd Allah ibn
Abi Ishaq, 'Isa ibn 'Umar, Abu 'Amr ibn al-'Ala' (one of the seven
reciters), 'Asim al-Jahdari and Ya'qub al-Hadrami. In Sham 'Abd Allah
ibn 'Amir (one of the seven reciters), 'Atiyah ibn Qays al-Kalla'i,
Ismail ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Muhajir, Yahya ibn Harith and Shurayh ibn
Yazid al-Hadrami.

The fourth group consisted of the students of the third group, like Ibn
'Ayyash, Hafs and Khalaf and many of the most famous may be classed in
the next section.

The fifth group comprised those concerned with academic research and
writing including Abu 'Ubayd Qasim ibn Salam, Ahmad ibn Jubayr al-Kufi
and Isma'il ibn Ishaq al-Malih from the companions of Qalun al-Rawi.
Included also are Abu Ja'far ibn Jarir al-Tabari and Mujahid. The field
of researeh was widened after them by men like al- Dani and al-Shatibi
who wrote a great number of books on poetry.

The Seven Reciters
------------------

Seven members of the third group achieved considerable celebrity; they
became a focus of learning for others. Each of the reciters appointed
two narrators who each propagated a particular style of recitation. The
following is a list of these seven:

First Ibn al-Kathir, whose narrators were Qanbal and al-Bazzi, with only
one intermediate relator in the chain from Ibn 'Abbas from the leader of
the Faithful, 'Ali. The second was Nafi' and his narrators Qalun and
Warsh. The third was 'Asim and his narrators were Abu Bakr Shu'bah ibn
al-'Ayyash and Hafs; the Qur'an recitation which is in common use among
Muslims today is according to the reading of 'Asim by a narration of
Hafs.

The fourth was Hamzah and his narrators were Khalaf and Khallad. The
fifth was al-Kisa'is and his narrators were al-Dawri and Abu 'Ali
al-Harith. The sixth was Abu 'Amr ibn al-'Ala'; and his narrators
al-Dawri and al-Susi with one intermediate narra- tor. The seventh was
Ibn 'Amir' and his narrators were Hisham and Ibn Dhakwan with one
intermediary narrator. Following the seven famous recitations are the
three recitations of Abu Ja'far, Ya'qub and Khalaf.

The majority of Scholars recognize the seven types of recitation as
mutawatir, that is, as having been related in unbroken chains of
transmissions. One group of narrators have equated the tradition that
the Qur'an was revealed in seven harf (literally, "word" in Arabic) with
the seven different recitations; this tradition is well known amongst
Muslim scholars in general but is not recognised as being trustworthy.

Al-Zarkshi says in his book al-Burhan, "It is true that these seven
recitations from the seven reciters have come to us via unbroken chain
of transmission but their chain of trans- mission from the Prophet are
open to inspection, since the chains of transmission of the seven
reciters are all of the type of single transmission, that is, related by
one single man to another single man."

Al-Makki says in his book, "Anyone who imagines that the recitation of
such men as Nafi and 'Asim are the same seven 'harf mentioned in the
saying of the Prophet is committing a grave mistake." Moreover, the
implication of this saying is that recitations, other than these seven,
are not correct; this also is a grave mistake since early Islamic
Scholars like Abu 'Ubayd al- Qasim ibn Salam and Abu Hatim al-Sijistani,
Abu Ja'far al-Tabari and Isma'il al-Qadi have recorded several other
recitations besides these seven.

At the beginning of the second century A.H. the people of Basra used the
recitation of Abu 'Amr and Ya'qub and in Kufa the recitations of Hamzah
and 'Asim. In Sham they used that of Ibn 'Amir and in Mecca that of Ibn
Kathir. In Medina that of Nafi' was used. This situation remained
unchanged until the beginning of the third century A.H. when Ibn Mujahid
removed the name of Ya'qub and put the name of al-Kisa'i in his place.

The reason why scholars paid so much attention to the seven reciters,
despite there being many others of equal or better standing, was that
the number of recitations had multiplied so cluickly that they lost
interest in learning and recording all the traditions about recitation.
Thus they decided to choose several of the recitations which complied
with the orthography of the Qur'an and which were easier to learn and
record.

Thus for the five copies of the Qur'an which 'Uthman had sent to the
towns of Mecca, Medina, Kufa, Basra and Sham, five reciters were chosen
from the five areas and their recitations were then used. Ibn Jubayr
writes about these five recitations from the five forms.

Ibn Mujahid records a tradition which asserts that 'Uthman sent two
other copies to Yemen and Bahrain, that the number of 'Uthman copies
thus numbered seven and that they chose seven narrators.

Since precise information about this tradition (which states that copies
were sent to Yemen and Bahrain) was not available, they added two of the
reciters of Kufa, to make up the number they had previously chosen, to
seven.

This number, which corresponds with the above-mentioned saying and
affirmed that the Qur'an was revealed in seven recitations, was then
used by others who had no knowledge of the matter. They mistakenly
supposed that what was meant by the seven harf which the Prophet spoke
of, was the seven recitations. The only trustworthy recitations are
those whose text is sound and whose meaning corresponds to what is
written in the Qur'an.

Al-Qurab says in his al-Shefi, "We should look for the seven recitations
amongst the qurra' not from among others." This view is neither
tradition nor sunnah but rather it originated from some of the later
Scholars who collected the seven recitations.

These seven recitations became so well known that people imagined that
other recitations should not be used. This however, has never been
claimed.

The Number of Verses in the Qur'an
----------------------------------

The enumeration and delineation of the verses date from the time of the
Prophet. In a saying the Prophet mentions ten verses from the "Family of
'Imran," seven in the chapter "al-Fatihah" and thirty in the chapter
"The Sovereignty." There are six views concerning the total number of
verses in the Qur'an, as related by al-Dani.

Some have said that the total is 6,000, some 6,204 and some 6,219. From
these six estimations, two are from the reciters of Medina and four from
the other areas to which the 'Uthmanic copies were sent, namely, Mecca,
Kufa, Basra and Sham.

All these scholars support their claims by traditions reaching back to
the companions and thus not directly linked, in a chain of
transmissions, to the Prophet. Such traditions are called mawquf in the
science of the traditions.

From Medina, those who specialized in enumeration and delineation of the
verses, were Abu Ja'far Yazld ibn al-Qa'qa', Shaybah ibn Nassah, Isma'il
ibn Ja'far ibn Abi Kathir al-Ansari, Ibn Kathir, Mujahid, Ibn 'Abbas,
Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Hamzah, al-Kisa'i, Khalaf, Ibn Abi Layla, Abu 'Abd
al-Rahman al-Sulaml, 'Ali, 'Asim ibn al-'Ajjaj al-Jahdari, Ibn Dhakwan,
Hisham ibn 'Ammar.

The reason for the different opinions concerning the total number of
verses is related to the method of delineation and separation of the
verses and letters.

The Names of the Chapters
-------------------------

The division of the Qur'an into chapters, like its division into verses,
is mentioned in the Qur'an itself. In several places God uses the actual
words surah and ayet. In (24:1) He says "***(Here is) a surah which We
have revealed,***" in "Repentance", verse 86, "***And when a surah is
revealed,*** " in "The Cow" verse 23, "***Then produce a surah like it
... ***" and other similar verses.

The name of the chapter is sometimes derived from a name or form
occurring in the chapter or from a subject treated by the chapter; for
example "The Cow", "The Family of "Imran", "The Night Journey" and "The
Unity".

We may note here that in the old Qur'ans it is usual to observe the
following at the beginning of each chapter: "The surah in which the Cow
is mentioned" or "the surah in which the family of Imran is mentioned.”

Sometimes the chapter becomes known by its first phrase; take for
example, the chapter "Read in the name of your Lord" (or "the Clot") or
the chapter, "Truly we revealed it" (The Night of Power) or the chapter
"Those who disbelieve" (also called "The Clear Proof").

Sometimes the chapter becomes known by a certain position or quality it
possesses; thus the chapter "The Opening of the Book" or "The Mother of
the Book" or "The Seven Oft-repeated verses" (all describing the first
chapter, or the "al-Fatihah").

The chapter "The Unity" is also called by the name "al-Ikhlas" (meaning
that it describes the absolute unity of God) or by the name "Nisbat
al-Rabb" (meaning the chapter which describes the divine nature of the
Lord in relation to the slave). This method of naming the chapters was
also used in the early days of Islam and is attested to by the
traditions.

There are traditions, whose chains of authority reach back to the
Prophet, which assert that the name of such chapters as "The Cow", "The
Family of 'Imran", "Hud" and "The Event" were used by the Prophet
himself. We may conclude from this that many of these names came into
being at the time of Prophet as a result of being in common use.

Calligraphy, Orthography and Diacritical Marks Used in the Qur'an
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The first and second copies of the Qur'an were written in Kufic script
at the time of the Prophet. The very basic nature of the script, without
diacritical marks, was suitable for the reciters, relators and scholars
who had learned the Qur'an by heart, since only they knew the precise
pronuniciation of the words. Others found great difficuity if they
opened the Book and tried to read correctly.

It was for this reason that at the end of the first century after Hijrah
Abu al-Aswad al-Du'ali, one of the companions of 'Ali, with the guidance
of the latter, wrote out the rules of the Arabic language and on the
orders of the Umayyad Caliph 'Abd al-Malik produced a Qura'nic text with
diacritical marks. This, to a certain extent, removed the difficulty of
reading the Kufic script.

Several difficulties remained, however; the diacritical marks for
vowels, for example, were for a time only points. Instead of a fathah, a
point was placed at the beginning of the letter and, instead of kasrah,
a point below and, for a dammah, a point above at the end of a letter.

This led to ambiguity. It was not till Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi set
about explaining the maddah, i.e. the lengthening of certain words, the
doubling of letters, the diacritical marks of vowelling and the pause,
that the difficulty of reading script was finally removed.


