What we are looking for in this book?
=====================================

Global stalemates, groans of victims of aggressions, wars, crimes and
increasingly cutting ties of family relations are all true evidences of
one reality, that current rules of world, despite all attempts
apparently made for their reform, improvement and enforcement, not only
have been ineffective in granting an ideal life to men, but also have
killed this hope for the future.

We don't know how long we shall try these worn principles. They cannot
even support their own custodians, what about the others?

These rules are like deep wells, which sometimes reach massive
underground stone pieces, and the more we try to pierce into these
stones and progress inside them, the more we exhaust ourselves, and
finally there is no trace of water.

So we shall look where the fault is, recognize it, contemplate, and
think about the solution.

First, we find that such regulations resemble the drugs which are only
for external use and their effect is completely superficial. They have
neither succeeded to penetrate into the depth of human conscience, which
is the inspiration of his attempts, endeavors, and movements, nor to
mobilize his powers in a bid to eradicate the roots of pain.

For example, which law can revive human intellect and affection of those
riches that have made testament for allocation of their wealth to their
cats and have provided the facilities for establishment of a village for
millionaire cats, and invite them to support millions of African hungry
men? Which law can restore the sense of philanthropy in those who wear
precious diamond pieces, and several millions value stamp albums are one
of the little decorations of their drawing rooms, and invite them to
save the life of millions of leprous, cancerous and tuberculosis
patients?

Which law can manage obstinate and destructive instincts, and control
man's feelings and utilize his great industrial powers for urbanization
and reclamation of the countries?

Is any law able to penetrate into the territory of their spirit and
soul, and cause these changes? It goes without saying that there is not
such law among the existing ones.

It is here that the necessity of training and development of another
principle called "ethic" is clarified. The principle which passes any
obstacle just like the powerful waves of gravity and even passes through
vacuum and accedes to the interior of man's soul, alters him, and
creates a new person which is excellent and heavenly and in the real
sense, humanistic attributes.

The man who sympathizes in grief and distress of others.

The man who considers his own and others' interests the same.

The man who never seeks relief in discomfort of others.

And finally, a man whose wide horizon of thought causes him to be
relieved from disturbances, offences, intolerance and vindictiveness,
and forms a real unity along with his fellowmen, in which there is
welfare and blessing.

Yes, these principles, which are called "ethic", should be revived, and
present book is written for this purpose and has originated from Islamic
rich and powerful resources.

Qom, Theological Center  
 Nasir Makarim Shirazi  
 November 1973


