Factors effective in influencing on the hearts
==============================================

Seeking excellence in discussion or dispute and fussing
-------------------------------------------------------

In the Islamic instructions, it is highly emphasized on the manner of
discussion with people, especially with ignorant and low knowledge
people, and the discussions which do not have any "fact seeking aspect"
are prohibited under the title of "dispute and fussing". Even in some
cases, discussion is absolutely forbidden.

Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُجَادِلُوا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ إِلَّا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And argue not with the People of the Scripture unless it be in (a
way) that is better. (29:46)***

And somewhere else it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَادِلْهُمْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

* **And reason with them in the better way (16:125)***

In the above two verses, the discussions lacking "fairer manner" and
"better way" are prohibited. They are the same discussions having a
sympathetic aspect and accompanied with kindness, courtesy, compassion,
and do not leave any ill or negative effect on the other party.

Even in some cases, God officially instructs His Prophet (S) to choose
silence against the aggression of opponents, and absolutely avoid the
discussions, the end of which is dispute and obstinacy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ جَادَلُوكَ فَقُلِ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if they wrangle with thee, say: Allah is Best Aware of what ye
do. (22:68)***

In the several traditions, discussion is prohibited through different
subtle interpretations disclosing a series of mental points:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ النَّبِیُّ(صلى الله علیه وآله): «ذَرُوا الْمِراءَ فَاِنَّهُ لا
تُفْهَمُ حِکْمَتُهُ وَلا تُؤْمَنُ فِتْنَتُهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said: Avoid dispute because its wisdom is not understood
and there is no security against its sedition.[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قالَ(صلى الله علیه وآله): «لا یَسْتَکْمِلُ عَبْدٌ حَقِیقَةَ
الاِْیمانِ حَتّى یَدَعَ الْمِراءَ وَ اِنْ کانَ مُحِقّاً».
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he said: No one fulfills the reality of belief, unless he leaves
dispute, although he is right.[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ سُلَیْمانُ بْنُ داوُدَ لاِبْنِهِ: «یا بُنَیَّ اِیّاکَ وَ
الْمِراءَ فَاِنَّهُ لَیْسَتْ فِیهِ مَنْفَعَةٌ وَ هُوَ یُهَیِّجُ بَیْنَ
الاِْخْوانِ الْعَداوَةَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Solomon, son of David, told to his son: My son! Avoid dispute because it
has no profit and provokes the fire of enmity among the brothers.[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ النَّبِیِّ(صلى الله علیه وآله): «ما ضَلَّ قَوْمٌ بَعْدَ هُدىً
کانُوا عَلَیْهِ اِلاّ اُوتُوا الْجَدَلَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Prophet (S) said: no nation strays after guidance, save it engages in
dispute.[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ اَمِیرِ الْمُؤْمِنِینَ(علیه السلام): «یا کُمَیْلُ! اِیّاکَ وَ
الْمِراءَ فَاِنَّکَ تُغْرِی بِنَفْسِکَ السُّفَهاءَ اِذا فَعَلْتَ وَ
تُفْسِدُ الاِْخاءَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Commander of the Believers (Imam Ali) (A.S.) said: O Komeil! Avoid
fussing because in this way you impassion the ignorant against yourself,
and destroy brotherhood.[^5]

The ill effects of discussions mixed with dispute and aggression are
precisely studied in the above traditions and it is inferred from them
that:

1- Dispute in discussion is useless, and it has no result (because
hurting affections of the other party causes him to resist).

2- Dispute is not compatible with belief (because it is the sign of
arrogance and seeking excellence, and arrogance is never compatible with
belief, the sense of which is submission and surrender to the truth).

3- Dispute results in sedition and attracting enmity and hostility
(because everyone is sensitive and strict for ruining of his
personality).

4- Dispute causes misguide (because it excites the sense of obstinacy,
selfishness, and prejudice and thereby covers the visage of truth).

5- If dispute is made with the ignorant, it encourages them to violate
the reverence of one's personality and makes them insolent to him
(because when they find their reputation in risk, they will ignore the
reverence, which they observed before the learned in normal conditions).

For salvation from such great dangers, Islam instructs to avoid
discussions and talks having an aggressive, hostile and eristic aspect,
and even do not apply this way for proving the truth.

Stopping selfishness
--------------------

One, who wants to influence on the spirit and thoughts of others, should
never insist them to accept the realities as "an idea belonging to him".
Rather, in contrary, he shall try to express the realities absolutely
and even as the idea of the other party. Pay attention!

As we know everybody loves his ideas like his physical children, and the
reason for love and interest in both cases is the same. His ideas are
considered as a part of him just like his children, and loving them
forms a beam of self-love, which is the most rooted man's instinct. And
in contrast, the thoughts of others are strange to man like the others'
children, and naturally fail to attract his interest, and even sometimes
they provoke his competition sense.

Therefore, accepting the realities the way of attainment to which is
through the man's own mind, is much easier and favourable for him.
Because in such cases "intellect" and "affection" are situated in one
direction and in contrary, if they are entered to his soul as a strange
thing, a contradiction and struggle occurs between his "intellect" and
"affection", the result of which in the most individuals is victory of
affection. Intellect tends to accept it as it is true, but affection
finds it strange and belonging to someone else, and refrains accepting
it.

It is noteworthy that if our real purpose is fact seeking and not
personal victory in the discussion, it is better to pretend that the
idea or its completion belongs to the other party not to us. If our aim
is acceptance of an idea, why shall we insist on it being accepted as
"our own idea"?

Several trials being performed on the individuals have exactly proved
that applying this method for penetration into the thoughts of others
has been successful. Basically, for achievement to this goal following
principles should be observed:

1- It should be tried to say a part of the matter, and the other party
shall perceive the rest of it with guidance of the speaker. In fact, the
speaker should play the role of a mental leader for manifestation of
innate talents of the other party, not the role of an independent being.

2- It should be tried to propound the matters as discussions under study
through mentioning questions and queries, and the other party should
make the final reply as the final decision.

3- It should be strictly avoided to attribute matters to oneself,
particularly with the phrases like "no one has mentioned this before
me", and such like.

4- If there are clarifications or references in the utterances of the
other party in respect to the matter in question, it should be
explicitly remarked and mentioned as a proof. Even if it exists in the
utterance of those being respected and loved by the other party, like
his father, master, family, or intimate friend, it should be remarked.

Holy Qur’an, which is a superior symbol of influential and effective
speech and its influence on people's thought, has been so wonderful that
some have called it as a "magic", often applies this method in its
arguments before the adversaries and self deluded persons in the phrases
like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَإِلَٰهٌ مَعَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is there any Allah beside Allah? (27:61)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who is the god besides Allah?*** ***(28:72)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ مِنْ خَالِقٍ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There is no Allah save Him. (35:3)***

And also the phrases such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَتَكُونَ لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ يَعْقِلُونَ
بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Have they not travelled in the land, and have they hearts wherewith
to feel and ears wherewith to hear? (22:46)***

It stipulates different issues and leaves final judgment on the burden
of the hearers and seeks help from their own conscience in solving the
issues.

Provoking positive affections
-----------------------------

As it was also referred to in the previous discussion, one shall always
try to avoid confliction of intellect and affections in two opposite
parts. Rather, he shall attempt to orient the affections in the same
direction of intellect for supporting intellect's attraction power just
like the power of moon in low and high tide, which is sometimes
supported by sun's gravitation for being in the same direction, and for
attainment to this purpose, following methods should be applied in a bid
to provoke affections.

1- Name of everybody is the most favourable word and most harmonic song
for him. So one shall call him respectfully with his name for provoking
his affections, and if he has several names, the most interested and
respectful name should be selected. We have read in the traditions a man
should be called with his "nickname"[^6]. (Nickname is the most
respectful name with Arabs).

It is also narrated in respect to tempers of Prophet (S) that he called
everybody with his best name and even selected an appropriate nickname
for those lacking any nickname.

2- First, an opportunity should be granted to the others for saying
their utterances, and one shall carefully listen to what they say. This
shows that one is really seeking for the fact, and moreover, he is also
sympathetic and assumes respect and reputation for the other party. Each
of these aspects has an effective share in provoking one's positive
affections.

On other hand, naturally everyone focuses all of his power in expression
of his idea and arguments, and only intends to divulge what is in his
mind, and surely in this condition, he does not have any readiness for
acceptance of others. So, expressing our own matters and arguments
before his complete evacuation is just like seeding in a thorny and
brushy land.

It often happens that individuals have some complexes, which are opened,
through expressing them, and then they are changed to normal individuals
for hearing the truth. We read about Prophet (S) and leaders of right
guidance (A.S.) that they granted an opportunity to the other parties
for speaking.

3- Expressing desire to what the other party likes, and speaking about
those who have a significant share in provoking the individual's
affections. We read about Prophet (S) that sometimes when he was alone
with some of his companions, he asked them about their family concerns
and wife and children and whatever they liked.

4- The admirable or acceptable parts of utterance of the other party
should be remarked so that his soul will become ready for accepting weak
points and mistakes of the others.

5- Practical sympathy, in its real sense, is one of the most critical
factors in provoking affections of others and making their mental
condition ready for acceptance of fundamental matters. If they observe a
real sympathy from the speaker, they may accept his arguments even if
they are not completely acceptable for them, and make themselves
understood that his comments are correct and any of his proposals is
beneficial for them.

One of the reasons for wonderful welcome from the speeches of Prophet
(S) was this point that everybody recognized him as his real sympathetic
one so that non acceptance of the right way by some people appeared in
the Prophet (S) as fatal complexes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَفْسَكَ عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ إِنْ لَمْ يُؤْمِنُوا
بِهَٰذَا الْحَدِيثِ أَسَفًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yet it may be, if they believe not in this statement, that thou
(Muhammad) wilt torment thy soul with grief over their footsteps.
(18:6)***

And we read in respect to the biography of Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَلا یَأْتِیهِ اَحَدٌ حُرٌّ اَوْ عَبْدٌ اَوْ اَمَةٌ اِلاّ قامَ مَعَهُ
فِی حاجَتِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever came to him, either a freeman or slave and bondmaid, he
accompanied him (her) and helped him in his work.[^7]

6- The way of reminding mistakes should be so that if the affections of
the other party are not provoked in the favour of speaker, at least they
should not be hurt, and thereby the mistakes should be minded indirectly
as far as possible.

The phrases like "Don't you think that this is better?", "Isn't it
better to do so?", "I sometimes do so", and such like are all phrases
which could be used for reminding the mistakes indirectly.

7- We shall never provoke obstinacy sense of someone unduly, and if he
insists on a matter which is not the main issue of discussion or
criticizes it, we shall coordinate ourselves with him correctly in the
criticism or supporting and defending it instead of opposition. This
makes the other party disarmed and invites him to more reflection.

For instance, if we what to invite someone to Islam, and find that he
has a negative idea about the Muslims and their situation and insists on
it, we shall not defend the situation of Muslims so much. Rather, we too
shall coordinate ourselves with him and mention some basic criticisms
(of course, without exaggeration and indulgence) and then follow our
main issue. Certainly, we will be more successful.

Belief in one's own speech
--------------------------

The well-known phrase, "The utterance coming from the heart, will be
accepted heartily" indicates a precise and subtle mental reality, which
could be used in the ways of influencing on the others as a vital
principle.

As we know tongue and speech is the interpreter of mind and idea and
also the scale of speaker's own belief determines evaluation of
speeches.

It is not surprising that degree of belief of a hearer to an utterance
has a close relation with the degree of belief of the speaker. One may
say something apparently very excellent and good, but when his tone
shows that he does not believe in it so much, it causes the hearer to
doubt in the correctness of that issue. In contrary, if a subject is not
very acceptable, but there are the evidences of his decisive belief in
it, this provokes the curiosity and precision towards it, and makes them
optimistic to that speech.

This too is noteworthy that not believing in a matter could not be
totally hidden with mannered utterances, especially in speech that
against most deeds, is full of delicacies through which spirit of
emotions and mind of speaker will be manifested willingly or not.

Observing one's own speech is one of the important factors for its
influence because it is possible that the utterance does not indicate
the belief, but one's action is mostly the sign of belief.

Effect of virtue of the speaker
-------------------------------

It is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تَنْظُرْ اِلى مَنْ قالَ، بَلِ انْظُرْ اِلى ما قالَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not consider the speaker; rather consider his (her) utterance.

But its full observance is not possible for anybody, because everybody
assumes the speech as the product of speaker's being. In view of
material tools, speech is the same transformation in man's energies.
Chemical energy is transformed into mechanical energy in the cells and
mechanical energy to acoustic energy.

And in view of spiritual contents and materials, it is the product of
thoughts, education, environment, knowledge, attributes, and spiritual
states.

Thus, any speech has the same colour of its speaker, and carries the
speaker's attributes, either his spirituality or his ugly and bad
attributes, and on this account, when an utterance is issued by a
virtuous individual, all windows of human spirit are opened to it, and
all existence of man receives it.

And in contrast, a speech uttered by an impure and evil person faces
with the unconscious negative reaction of the hearer, and the windows of
his spirit are closed to it.

[^1]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 138/2

[^2]: The same document, narration 53

[^3]:  Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 134/14

[^4]:  Ebne Majeh, Sonan Ebne Majeh, 19/1, published in Beirut

[^5]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 270/77, narration 1

[^6]: HorreAmeli, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, volume 8, chapter 5

[^7]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 226/16


