Relation of ethics and education
================================

The most important issue that a man is faced with is education. Rather,
if we consider education in its broad sense, we shall say that the
purpose of creation of beings of the world is education.

All attempts of divine prophets, scientists and great men of history
have been devoted to this purpose, and for creating a human, fertile,
secure and safe and finally prosperous and happy society, there is no
alternative save "correct education" and mobilization of all powers and
facilities in this way.

In the moral discussions too, after description and explanation of all
good and bad moral habits, the reasons for their formation and
development, and way of achieving good morality, and challenge with the
vices, the final aim is education.

What is education?
------------------

Some psychologists define education as "readiness for achievement of the
truth and undertaking responsibility in the future life".

Others have introduced education as "manifestation of talents and
realization of internal powers".

Some others, like John Dioei, the famous psychologist, have assumed
education as "revision in the experiences of the past and their
re-formation for making the experiences more meaningful, and making the
individual ready for guidance in the future experiences".[^1]

We believe that the above triple definitions may refer to one reality,
and in fact the third definition is the principle of that reality, and
the first is its introduction and the second is its result.

Furthermore, for clarification of the third definition, it should be
explained that a man performs two types of actions:

1- Educational actions

2- Regular, aimless and non-educational actions In the second type, one
either do not know the quality of cause and effect relations at all, or
does not know its limits, just as one does not know how to turn on a
lamp or a factory, and puts his finger on the key without information
and previous experience. But after perceiving this cause and effect
relation, and revising in his previous experiences, and reforming them,
this action will be educational for finding a broader sense and meaning
and making him ready for the future, and consequently he refers to the
key for turning on a lamp without being wandered.

Qur’an and education
--------------------

The phrases like "purification" and "exit from darkness to light" are
applied instead of education in Qur’an. One of the following two verses
refers to "genetic education" and the other to "legislative education":

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي يُصَلِّي عَلَيْكُمْ وَمَلَائِكَتُهُ لِيُخْرِجَكُمْ مِنَ
الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ ۚ وَكَانَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

* *  
***He it is Who blesseth you, and His angels (bless you), that He may
bring you forth from darkness unto light; and He is ever Merciful to the
believers. (33:43)***

We know that God's bless to His servants is his mercy and favours, and
angels' bless seems to be the same mercy and blessings which are
bestowed to the servants by angels, both having a genetic aspect and
anyway their aim is leading from darkness of aberration towards the
light of guidance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي يُنَزِّلُ عَلَىٰ عَبْدِهِ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ
لِيُخْرِجَكُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

* **He it is Who sendeth down clear revelations unto His slave, that He
may bring you forth from darkness unto light. (57:9)***

In the above verse too, which refers to legislative education, leading
from darkness to the light is considered as the purpose.

It is induced from this interpretation that a non-educated man resembles
one being in absolute darkness. Such person possesses several potencies
and talents but does not have any power for leading them, and orienting
towards a goal. He can neither adopt a clear way, nor attain to the
destination.

But when he is educated and trained, it is alike to going from darkness
into the light. Light is the means of training and development and
appearance of talents, and the means of leadership and orientation and
targeting, and so all concepts and meanings of education are included in
this interpretation.

Personality and character
-------------------------

The term "personality" is not only used in the scientific, psychological
and moral discussion environments, but also people always emphasize on
it in their daily utterances and almost everybody knows its meaning.

However, the precise, clear and detailed definition of the term
"personality" is very difficult, and for this reason, today
psychologists have introduced very different definitions for it, and it
is interesting that according to one of the psychologists, hundreds
definitions are presented by scientists for this term that each of them
has studied this complicated concept from a particular point of view.

From among the suggested definitions, followings could be taken into
account:

1- "Personality is the total of all effects of an individual in the
society” and in other words, "personality of each individual is his
social effect".[^2]

The problem of this definition and such like is not merely for the point
that it denies existence of personality in the individuals not having a
social effect (like dissociable and seclusive or disabled persons).
Rather, it is for this reason that personality in this definition has
only a "practical" aspect, not "descriptive". While usually personality
is considered as one of the mental qualities.

2- "Personality is the general quality of an individual's behaviour
which is manifested in his specific habits, thought and interpretation,
desires, procedure of action and philosophy of life".

Although this definition, which is narrated from "Marcois", the famous
psychologist, is free from the problem of denial of personality in the
dissociable individuals, but it shares with that definition in view of
giving an active or passive aspect as well as external effect and
impression to personality.

3- The other definition being presented by some of psychologists is that
"personality is the internal discipline of motives, reactions,
perceptions and remembrances which determines man's manner in the
behaviour".

Since this definition pays attention to internal and descriptive aspect
of personality is free from the previous problems, but if we say:
personality is the total of attributes, conditions and mentalities
having a humanistic value which could be the source of valuable
individual and social external effects, it will be closer to its real
sense.

Character: Most of psychologists have applied "personality" and
"character" in the same meaning, and assume both of them as indicating
the same reality, but some of recent psychologists have considered a
difference between these two terms, and have selected "character" for
the moral aspects and virtuous habits and vices. In other words,
character is for evaluation of personality with the moral scales that is
goodness and vice, while they consider personality as indicator of all
mental, moral, intellectual, emotional and even physical qualities.

Relation of education and personality
-------------------------------------

Whatever we define "personality" as, it has a very close relation with
"education" in any sense.

In fact, there are two types of education: either as a means of
blossoming of innate personality of individuals (and thereby considering
personality as a talent and potential for everybody), or as a means of
developing it (if we consider all or a part of man's personality as
developmental), and in both cases, it has a close relation with
education.

Studying about personality of those who have been far from human society
due to some events and have grown among the animals from childhood, and
their surprising condition and their weakness in perceptions is one of
the most manifest reasons for relation of personality and education.

And also obvious difference of nations being in equal conditions and
levels almost in all aspects, which one of them has rapidly preceded the
other, and has progressed towards perfection for having a competent
leader, is another proof for the role of education in the situation of
individual and society.

Obvious distinction between similar individuals being grown in different
environments, and or one individual being exposed to two different
environments and such like are all good evidences for strong relation of
personality and education, and remind man the utterance of the scholar
who says: Leave some children to me and tell me to nurture them with any
mentality you may desire: brave, coward, generous, stingy.

Factors comprising personality
------------------------------

There are numerous factors effective in man's personality, and
numerating them is not so easy, but the most important of them are:

1- Creation (physical and mental structure)

2- Heritage

3- Secretion of glands

4- Nutrition

5- Family environment

6- Situation of social life (occupation, situation of city and country,
propagation systems, government, economic situation)

7- Education

8- Companions and friends (neighbours, partners, schoolmates)

9- Suggestions (by oneself and others)

10- Studies and mental foods

11- Unpredicted events

12- Will and intent of man and his attempts

It goes without saying that since there is a close relation between
personality and education, we may call all above factors educative in
one respect.

Studying above twelve issues forms an independent science which could be
studied separately under the title of "man and educative concerns". We
hope to have this opportunity in the future.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَ آخِرُ دَعْوانا اَنِ الْحَمْدُ للهِِ رَبِّ الْعالَمِینَ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Ali Shariatmadari, Principles of Education, summarized

[^2]: Developmental personality, page 453


