Ethic and Training
==================

Is it possible to alter individuals' morality and mentality through training?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the question, which clarifies the position of ethics, because if
we accept that morality and mentality of individuals depend on the
structure of their body and soul, ethics will be vain and purposeless.
But if we accept that it is changeable, the importance and value of this
science is manifested well.

Some of the scientists have accepted the first possibility and believe
that as some of trees bear bitter fruits, and as a gardener cannot
change his nature, mentality of the lowborn and impure-hearted will not
be changed through training and even if it is changed, it will be very
transitory and superficial, and will soon be restored to its first mode.

They suggest that structure of body and soul has a close relation with
morality, and in fact morality of each person depends on the disposition
of his soul and body, and for this reason, it is not changeable. They
cite as a proof the traditions like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلنّاسُ مَعادِنٌ کَمَعادِنِ الذَّهَبِ وَ الْفِضَّةِ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The people are like the mines of gold and silver. [^1]

In contrast to this attitude, majority of scientists believe that
morality and mentality of individuals is completely alterable through
training.

A great deal of experiences on the immoral persons has fully proved this
reality that a lot of wicked and vicious individuals are perfectly
corrected by a "healthy environment", "good association" and "high
training". Otherwise, all of divine instructions of prophets and
religious leaders were cancelled, because all of them are concerned with
training men's souls. On the other hand, all punishments having a
corrective aspect, being common among all nations throughout the world,
were vain and ineffective.

We see that even fierce and wild animals are domesticated through
training, and are used for the purposes against their original
disposition. How can we believe the ill-humour in men to be more rooted
than ferocity of wild animals?

We believe that the best way for proving this claim is studying the
procedure of formation of a "moral habit" in a bid to find the way of
eradicating it in the same way it is formed. We know that every good or
bad action leaves a similar effect in man's soul and "attracts" man's
soul to it.

Practice and repetition of the action increases this effect and
gradually a feature called "custom" is achieved and with more practice,
it changes into "habit", and thus man's interior tendency to perform
that action is increased by rooting of customs and habits. This reality
is proved by experience.

Therefore, if moral customs and habits are formed through repetition of
an action, they are removable in the same way. That is to say, first,
"action", then "repetition" and then "formation of a moral attribute and
habit".

Of course, suggestion, reflection, correct instructions and healthy
environment- which have a suggestive effect are very effective in
predisposing soul for acceptance and formation of a good morality.

Ill-humour is a sort of disease
-------------------------------

All of us know that man enjoys a special and particular position among
all living creatures, because his personality is composed of
antagonistic powers. On one hand, rebellious sensual desires as well as
animal instincts and inclinations invite him to insolence, aggression to
the rights of others, sensuality and lechery, lie and treachery, and on
the other hand, the powers of intellect and cognition, humanistic
affections and conscience call him to philanthropy, chastity, honesty
and virtue.

Struggle of these powers exists in all men and relative dominance of one
of these factors causes men to be in completely different levels in view
of humanistic values, and increases the distance of man's "ascending"
and "descending" curve. At times he becomes superior to the
nearest-stationed angels, and at others he becomes more inferior to the
most dangerous predator animals.

This fact is also deduced from several traditions. For instance, Imam
Ali (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِنَّ اللهَ خَصَّ الْمَلَکَ بِالْعَقْلِ دُونَ الشَّهْوَةِ وَ
الْغَضَبِ، وَ خَصَّ الْحَیواناتِ بِهِما دُونَهُ وَ شَرَّفَ الاِْنسانَ
بِاِعْطاءِ الْجَمِیعِ فَاِنِ انْقادَتْ شَهْوَتُهُ وَ غَضَبُهُ
لِعَقْلِهِ، صارَ اَفْضَلَ مِنَ الْمَلائِکَةِ لِوُصُولِهِ اِلى هذِهِ
الرُّتْبَةِ مَعَ وُجُودِ الْمُنازِعِ. »
  </p>
</blockquote>

God granted to the angel only intellect, without lust and wrath, and
gave to the animals only lust and wrath, without intellect, but ennobled
man to granting all of these. So if his lust and wrath are controlled
and ordained by his intellect, he will be superior to the angels,
because he has achieved such station despite the existence of an
opposing power. [^2]

But it should be noted that instincts and dispositions and lusts in an
original, natural and balanced form are not only harmless, but will also
be an essential means for continuation of life.

In other words, as no useless and idle limb is created in the structure
of man's body, any incentive, instinct and disposition has a vital role
in the structure of his spirit and soul, and only in case of deviation
from normal condition and disturbance of the balance, they will appear
dangerous and fatal.

For instance, who can deny the role of "wrath" in man's life? Suppose
when the rights of a person are transgressed; if all of reserve powers
of his body are not excited and mobilized, thanks to the wrath; is it
possible for him to defend his rights in a composed mood, in which he
may not utilize more than one tenth of his reserve powers? But when this
anger and wrath is deviated from its main path, and is not any more a
powerful tool under control of intellect, it alters man into a fierce
animal who does not recognize any boundary.

In addition, the role of man's moderate desire to wealth, rank and such
like in more attempts for development and progress is as obvious as the
destructive effect of Mammonism and ambition that is extravagant in
these desires.

Thus, as disturbance in corporeal balance is always accompanied with
undesirable results called "disease", disturbance in balance of
spiritual powers and instincts and desires too is considered as a sort
of "mental disease", and ethics scholars call it "heart-sickness".

This concept has basically originated from Holy Qur’an that has
considered hypocrisy of a hypocrite as a disease, where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ فَزَادَهُمُ اللَّهُ مَرَضًا ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** In their hearts is a disease, and Allah increaseth their disease. A
painful doom is theirs because they lie.*** ***(2:10)***

Purification of carnal soul or the greater warfare
--------------------------------------------------

Calling purification of carnal soul as "the greater warfare" suffices
for its importance, and this interpretation is derived from the famous
tradition in which Prophet (S) told to the warriors of his companions
after returning from one of the battles:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَرْحَباً بِقَوْم قَضَوُا الْجِهادَ الاَْصْغَرَ وَ بَقِیَ عَلَیْهِمُ
الْجِهادُ الاَْکْبَرُ. فَقِیلَ: یا رَسُولَ اللهِ مَا الْجِهادُ
الاَْکْبَرُ؟ قالَ: جِهادُ النَّفْسِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bravo to the crowd who performed lesser warfare and the greater warfare
is still left undone. They told: what is the greater warfare? He
answered: warfare and conflict with rebellious sensual desires. [^3]

This phrase too is narrated from the Prophet following this tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِنَّ اَفْضَلَ الْجِهادِ مَنْ جاهَدَ نَفْسَهُ الَّتِی بَیْنَ
جَنْبَیْهِ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The highest warfare is warfare with rebellious desires, which are inside
man's chest. [^4]

This statement can explain Islam's logic in this critical issue and
after studying and reviewing, following facts are found out thereof:

1- There are always antagonistic powers in man like a battlefield, and
destiny of man depends on the dominance of one of these two parts of
powers.

2- This warfare is called "the greater warfare" since it is an eternal
and unceasing one. Moreover, an internal battle is always more dangerous
than an external battle, and more importantly, defeat in this warfare
has no result save misery and misfortune, while defeat in common warfare
may result in acquiring the honour of "martyrdom". That is to say,
warfare with external enemy has never a real defeat, but there is a high
possibility of defeat in inner warfare.

3- Although this warfare is painful, it is the code of man's perfection,
because perfection is usually the outcome of conflicts and struggle of
"negative" and "positive" powers, and this is the reason why man does
not become experienced and trained unless he is involved in the events
and struggles with problems as Imam Ali (A.S.) says: The wood of forest
trees (which are always exposed to a lot of incidents) is stronger and
their fire is more durable.

And herein the mystery of creation of these antagonist powers and
sensual desires is manifested.

4- Warfare with outward enemy may occasionally be performed for material
purposes (collecting booties or achieving fame and such like), but inner
warfare will always be for gaining perfection and achieving virtue. So
overcoming therein indicates decision, will and belief power as well as
prominence of ambition and greatness of man's personality.

Prosperity and happiness
------------------------

Ethic scholars have mentioned prosperity and happiness as the final end
of ethics. This is the same reality that men are always trying and
struggling for prosperity and happiness, and are often complaining for
not gaining it.

### What is prosperity?

We can define prosperity in one short phrase: gaining any possible
perfection that man has capacity and competence for achieving, and in
other words, correct utilization of different material and spiritual
powers being available for man.

But since to the same extent that "perfection" and "utilization" are
clear in view of general sense, they are ambiguous and complicated in
view of partial concepts, most often people have mistaken the path of
prosperity so that for example, one egoist rich man, who has exchanged
the heart’s ease and relief of his spirit and body with accumulation of
a massive wealth, may consider himself prosperous, while his capricious
child, after death of father, deems scattering of this wealth for
satisfaction of his lusts as prosperity, and in the meantime both of
them are wrong.

Anyway, herein we shall recognize man's real perfection and the correct
way of utilizing these material and spiritual favours, although this
recognition may need a great deal of study and inconvenience.

### Does prosperity have only a spiritual aspect?

A number of Greek ancient philosophers like Cynics believed that
prosperity has only a spiritual aspect and whatever corporeal and
material condition may be, it does not have the least effect on man's
prosperity, and therefore considered acquiring moral perfection and
virtues as the only way of prosperity.

Rather, they believed that absolute prosperity for man would not be
possible in this world and as far as the spirit is connected to this
material body, and tainted to corporeal impurities, it is deprived of
real prosperity. Only when it is disconnected from body, it may achieve
absolute prosperity. On this end, they spurned and neglected all
material affairs.

The conditions of Dewjanse, the famous physician of Cynics, and his life
in a jar! Instead of house and room, and his contentment to one drinking
cup from all life facilities is well-known. Even it is said that once he
saw someone drinking water from a water course with his hands, then he
threw away that cup too.

Existentialists are on the opposite side to this idea and consider
prosperity only in an unconditional utilization from material pleasures
and condemn any obstacle on this way.

They assume absolute happiness only through material pleasure and go
ahead in this way till the threshold of insanity, and practically
disregard all social and moral limits and habitudes for achieving it.

It is obvious that we cannot call this ideology, which is unfortunately
spread nowadays among some nations, a doctrine. Rather, it is a sort of
delusion and mental disease. However, we can assume it a reaction to the
extremist doctrines like Cynics who have totally ignored corporeal
aspects in prosperity.

Moderate doctrine: since man is not merely a body or a soul, and the
reality of his essence is composed of two parts, he should seek
prosperity too in both parts and surely any program focusing in one part
of his essence, shall not guarantee his prosperity, because it is not in
conformity with the outward realities.

Among Greek philosophers, the first teacher, Aristotle and his followers
advocated this doctrine and Islam's superior instructions have
explicitly supported it, and have mentioned new principles for it. This
reality is reflected in Qur’an and sayings of our great leaders, and
motto of Islam in this regard is summarized in the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَمَا لَهُ
فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلَاقٍ\*
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي
الْآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا كَسَبُوا ۚ وَاللَّهُ سَرِيعُ
الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But of mankind is he who saith: "Our Lord! Give unto us in the
world," and he hath no portion in the Hereafter.***

***And of them (also) is he who saith: "Our Lord! Give unto us in the
world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and
guard us from the doom of Fire."***

***For them there is in store a goodly portion out of that which they
have earned. Allah is swift at reckoning. (2:200-202)***

The point, which should be carefully considered in such discussions, is
that the relation and connection of soul and body is so close that the
effect of any deviation in one of them is manifested in the other.

Today psychoanalysis has proved that a part of moral and mental
deviations is caused by incorrect satiation of corporeal and material
instincts.

Repressed desires and instincts always emerge as mental complexes. Such
complexes are a big problem for ethic scholars, and removing them
through the ways available for training souls, is usually not possible.
Rather, they should be treated in the same way they are created, that
is, physical instincts should be satiated in a correct manner.

There are a lot of people suffering from suspicion, fear, jealousy,
pride and hatred and such like vices and its cause is deprivation and
repression in correct satiation of their physical instincts. Thus for
being successful, now it is necessary for all ethic scholars and mental
trainers to consider both physical and mental conditions for treating
moral diseases.

Islam has studied this issue subtly and it explicitly says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَنْ حَرَّمَ زِينَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَ لِعِبَادِهِ
وَالطَّيِّبَاتِ مِنَ الرِّزْقِ ۚ قُلْ هِيَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي
الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Who hath forbidden the adornment of Allah which He hath brought
forth for His bondmen, and the good things of His providing? Say: Such,
on the Day of Resurrection, will be only for those who believed during
the life of the world.*** ***(7:32)***

And we read in aphorisms of Imam Ali (A.S.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لِلْمُؤْمِنِ ثَلاثُ ساعات: فَساعَةٌ یُناجِی فِیها رَبَّهُ وَ ساعَةٌ
یَرُمُّ مَعاشَهُ وَ ساعَةٌ یُخَلِّی بَیْنَ نَفْسِهِ وَ بَیْنَ
لَذَّتِها فِیما یَحِلُّ وَ یَجْمُلُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The believer's time has three periods: the period when he is in
communion with Allah, the period when he manages for his livelihood, and
the period when he is free to enjoy what is lawful and pleasant. [^5]

And this phrase is added to some traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَ ذلِکَ عَوْنٌ عَلى سائِرِ السّاعاتِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

"And the last part is tonic and refreshing for the other parts."

Individual and Social Morality
------------------------------

Some believe that all moral principles return to the man's special
social relations with others so that if there was no society, and any
man lived completely apart from the others, and any individual lived
unaware of existence of others, "ethics" was basically meaningless
because envy and jealousy, modesty and pride, good opinion, justice and
injustice, chastity, generosity and stinginess, and such like are all
strictly meaningful within the society and contact of man with others.
Thus man minus society will be accompanied with man minus ethic.

But while confessing that most of moral virtues and vices are concerned
with social life of man, we believe this could not be generalized.
Because there are a great number of moral cases which have only an
individual aspect, and are true for a single man too.

For instance, patience or impatience for afflictions, bravery or fear
for events, endeavour or laziness in achievement to one's objective,
ignorance or attention to the Creator of the world, thanksgiving or
ingratitude for His endless favours and such affairs, which ethics
scholars have discussed in ethical books and have called them moral
virtues or vices, that could have an individual aspect, and are truthful
for one living completely isolated from the society.

Hereof division of morality into "individual morality" and "social
morality" is clarified. However, it is obvious that social morality is
more important in ethics, and man's personality focuses on it, although
individual morality too has a considerable part in respect to oneself.

Big Mistake
-----------

It should be mentioned herein that those who isolate themselves from the
society for purification of morals and training their souls, secluding
themselves and supposing that they can achieve this great aim better in
this way, are completely wrong.

Because they actually destroy the subject of social morality, and
although they avoid some vices in this way, it is not really considered
a virtue. It looks like the one who cuts his sexual apparatus for
avoiding adultery and lewdness, although he is not tainted with
unchastity, but this will not be a virtue for him.

Moreover, experience has shown that isolation and seclusion from society
will cause a series of moral vices such as peevishness, suspicion,
vanity and conceit, and suspicion of divine predestination in man, which
will be illustrated in a separate discussion in detail.

So, Islam has encouraged Muslims to have a social life and to live in
large cities and has recommended observance of moral principles in the
heart of society.

Way of treatment of Moral Deviations
------------------------------------

Now, we shall study details of "moral virtues" and ways of treatment of
"moral vices". However, two points are noteworthy:

First point: We shall always treat those involved in moral deviations
like a patient, because as it was already referred, moral deviations are
in fact a sort of mental disease, which sometimes result in physical
diseases too, and or vice versa sometimes they originate from physical
diseases. Thus, we shall observe herein the same principles which we
observe in the treatment of physical diseases.

Second point: we always consider three principles in the treatment of
diseases:

1- Diagnosis of disease

2- Finding causes of disease

3- Way of treatment of disease

We usually use symptoms and consequences of disease for its diagnosis.
Of course, this is a relatively simple task in respect to physical
diseases, especially with existing facilities and equipment. But in view
of moral cases, it is a very complicated matter, because moral
deviations often have similar manifestations and symptoms, or there are
some manifestations which are caused by a mixture of several moral
diseases, and their diagnosis becomes difficult, and thus the ethics
scholar and soul physician should study this science patiently and
carefully for treating himself or the others.

For finding the causes of a disease, one should also carefully study
biography of the deviated person, specially the backgrounds of his
childhood period, which constitutes foundation of man's personality, as
well as his family and social environment, his occupation and job and
geographical area for recognizing the causes of a moral disease. Even
heritage should not be ignored, because ill-humour (like physical
diseases) is sometimes inheritable.

And for treating moral vices, it should be noted that if they have
become chronic, they should be treated patiently and carefully and
vigilantly, and one shall never get tired by lapse of time. However, if
they are superficial and extrinsic, they will be treated in a shorter
period.

For this reason, correction of moral vices of youths and children is
much easier than adults. Because the former are both tainted and treated
soon.

Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«عَلَیْکَ بِالاَْحْداثِ فَاِنَّهُمْ اَسْرَعُ اِلى کُلِّ خَیْر».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Pay attention to the youths, who are ready for quick acceptance of any
goodness. [^6]

Hygiene of morality
-------------------

It is also noteworthy that current medicine is actually divided into two
parts: "therapeutic medicine" and "hygienic medicine". What is meant by
therapeutic medicine is clear. But hygienic medicine refers to
preventing occurrence of diseases and destroying their causes, and since
preventing a disease is much easier than curing it, hygiene has a
precious importance in the life of individuals and destiny of the
societies. On this account, heavy budgets are spent for it.

These two parts exactly exist in moral cases and mental diseases. So, we
shall avoid occurrence of moral deviations as far as possible, and try
for hygiene of morality of ourselves and others through adopting
necessary counsels.

### 1- Avoiding poisonous and suspicious associations

Surely, a lot of moral deviations are caused by association, and just
like contagious and epidemic diseases, particularly in cases that mental
condition is ready for acceptance of morality of others, due to little
age or little knowledge or weak belief and such like, association with
immoral individuals is a fatal and noxious poison.

It is seen in a lot of cases that destiny of a man is completely changed
due to such associations and thereby, direction of life is changed.

Effects of association in correcting man's personality are so
significant that it is said for knowing someone; look at the companions
and friends he keeps. Imam Ali (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنِ اشْتَبَهَ عَلَیْکُمْ اَمْرُهُ وَ لَمْ تَعْرِفُوا دِینَهُ
فَانْظُرُوا اِلى خُلَطائِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

When you are uncertain about someone and do not know his religion, look
at his friends. [^7]

The Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلْمَرْءُ عَلى دِینِ خَلِیلِهِ وَ قَرِینِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

A man has the same religion of his friend and companion. [^8]

Association with evil doers darkens soul, and weakens moral sense, and
reduces ugliness of evil deeds and ill-humour, and it is interpreted as
"heart death" in the traditions. The Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَرْبَعٌ یُمِتْنَ الْقُلُوبَ... وَ مُجالَسَةُ الْمَوْتى; فَقِیلَ
لَهُ: یا رَسُولَ اللهِ! وَ مَا الْمَوْتى؟ قالَ: کُلُّ غَنِیٍّ
مُتْرَف».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Four things extinguish heart ..., including association with the dead.
They asked: O God's messenger! Who are the dead? He said: lavish rich
men. [^9]

Association with evil doers stimulates sense of suspicion in man and
makes him pessimistic to everybody.

Imam Ali (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مُجالَسَةُ الاَْشْرارِ تُورِثُ سُوءَ الظَّنِّ بِالاَْخْیارِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Association with evil doers causes suspicion on good doers. [^10]

In brief, the issue of association is so critical that God even
premonishes His messenger from association with evil doers in Qur’an.

In contrary, association with good doers is one of the most important
means of training, purification and developing moral virtues and
reviving heart and acquiring personality.

Islam emphasizes greatly on association with good individuals and
righteous doers. Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْبِرْ نَفْسَكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ بِالْغَدَاةِ
وَالْعَشِيِّ يُرِيدُونَ وَجْهَهُ ۖ وَلَا تَعْدُ عَيْنَاكَ عَنْهُمْ
تُرِيدُ زِينَةَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَلَا تُطِعْ مَنْ أَغْفَلْنَا
قَلْبَهُ عَنْ ذِكْرِنَا وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ وَكَانَ أَمْرُهُ فُرُطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Restrain thyself along with those who cry unto their Lord at morn and
evening, seeking His Countenance; and let not thine eyes overlook them,
desiring the pomp of the life of the world; and obey not him whose heart
We have made heedless of Our remembrance, who followeth his own lust and
whose case hath been abandoned.(18:28)***

The Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَسْعَدُ النّاسِ مَنْ خالَطَ کِرامَ النّاسِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The most prosperous people are those who associate with good and
honourable people.[^11]

### 2- Correcting Environment

Tainted environments, particularly those in which display of sin and
vice is popular, increase the risk of involvement to moral vices, and
this is an undeniable truth. Thus, one of the actions for hygiene of
morality is conflicting vices in the environment and preventing display
of sin and vice.

Basically, one of the most important hindrances for involvement in sin
and moral vice is the importance and greatness of vice and sin in view
of man and his hatred towards them. Display of moral vices and sins
decreases its importance in view of people and lessens its hatred and
prepares soul for accepting it.

And on this account, for renewing importance of sin in public opinion,
it is instructed in Islam to punish evil doers publicly and in presence
of people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْيَشْهَدْ عَذَابَهُمَا طَائِفَةٌ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And let a party of believers witness their punishment. (24:2)***

Thereby, the significance of sin is renewed for people and the barrier
which was violated, is restored.

Islam has put a great emphasis on open sin and vice, and has assumed
immodesty and open debauchery as the causes of a person's defamation.
Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِذا جاهَرَ الْفاسِقُ بِفِسْقِهِ فَلا حُرْمَةَ لَهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whenever an evil doer debauches openly, is defamed.[^12]

Imam Al-Baqir (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ثَلاثَةٌ لَیْسَ لَهُمْ حُرْمَةٌ: صاحِبُ هَوىً مُبْتَدعٌ وَ الاِْمامُ
الْجائِرُ و الْفاسِقُ الْمُعْلِنُ بِالْفِسْقِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

There shall be no respect for three persons: Innovator, unjust leader,
and evil doer debauching openly. [^13]

Even the narration of stories in respect to vice and adultery which
taints minds and prepares environment for accepting vice, is forbidden
in Islam's view. Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ سَمِعَ فاحِشَةً فَاَفْشاها کانَ کَمَنْ اَتاها، وَمَنْ سَمِعَ
خَیْراً فَاَفْشاهُ کانَ کَمَنْ عَمِلَهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

One, who hears an evil deed and divulges it, is like the one who has
performed it, and one, who hears a good deed and divulges it, is like
the one who has performed it.[^14]

And as for fighting with physical diseases, we shall first destroy
centres tainted with microbe and purify life environment and restrain
contamination of air, water, food and such like, it is necessary to
purify social life environment from morality deviation means.

### 3- Emigration and escaping from tainted environments

We shall do our best for correction of tainted and corrupted
environments, but if, for any reason, it is not possible to correct the
environment, and there is the possibility of being tainted in case of
staying there, and we can immigrate to another healthier place, there is
no alternative save immigration.

The same is observed in most of physical diseases, when those interested
in their health immediately immigrate from the contaminated environment.

"Emigration" enjoys a special concern in Islam and it is interesting
that it constitutes the foundation of Islamic Epic. Emigration of
Islam's Prophet (S) from Mecca to Medina was nothing else than escaping
from a tainted and unfavourable environment to a more favourable one for
spreading belief and virtue.

The immigrants at the beginning of Islam enjoy a special privilege and
prominence in Islam's history, and several verses are found in Qur’an
concerning them. Several traditions are narrated in respect to
immigration from parts tainted to sin and polytheism towards healthy
parts indicating importance of the matter.

In Majmaol Bayan interpretation under verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُهَاجِرْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ يَجِدْ فِي الْأَرْضِ مُرَاغَمًا
كَثِيرًا وَسَعَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoso migrateth for the cause of Allah will find much refuge and
abundance in the earth. (4:100)***

It is narrated from Islam's Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ فَرَّ بِدِینِهِ مِنْ اَرْض اِلى اَرْض وَ اِنْ کانَ شِبْراً مِنَ
الاَْرْضِ اسْتَوْجَبَ الْجَنَّةَ وَ کانَ رَفِیقَ اِبْراهِیمَ وَ
مُحَمَّد».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoso emigrates for his religion from a territory to another territory,
although it may be as much as one palm of land, deserves paradise and
will be companion of Abraham and Mohammad (two great emigrant
prophets).[^15]

Emphasis is indicated by the phrase "although it may be as much as one
palm of land", and friendship and companionship with these two great
prophets is for their immigration. Abraham (A.S.) departed from Babylon,
the centre of idolaters and Nimrod, to Syria and Palestine, and Islam's
Prophet from Mecca to Medina.

In Ali Ebne Abraham interpretation, under the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّ أَرْضِي وَاسِعَةٌ فَإِيَّايَ
فَاعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O my bondmen who believe! Lo! My earth is spacious. Therefore serve
Me only. (29:56)***

It is narrated from Imam Al-Baqir (A.S.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تُطِیعُوا اَهْلَ الْفِسْقِ مِنَ الْمُلُوکِ فَاِنْ خِفْتُمُوهُمْ
اَنْ یَفْتِنُوکُمْ عَنْ دِینِکُمْ فَاِنَّ اَرْضِی واسِعَةٌ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not follow sinful rulers and if you fear of being deviated from your
pure religion (do emigrate) because My Earth is wide.[^16]

Not participating in sin and vice meetings, which is mentioned in
Islamic ordinances, and non-privacy with strangers and such like are all
considered as sort of short term immigration from sin and mistake and
risk area, and surely it is for preventing transmission of moral vices
and not being tainted with sin.

[^1]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 61/65, tradition 51

[^2]: Naraghi, Jami’ as-Saadat 67/1

[^3]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 122/11, narration 1

[^4]: Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 123, narration 9

[^5]: Nahjul Balaghah, aphorisms, no. 390

[^6]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 447/11

[^7]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 197/74

[^8]: Kulayini, Kafi 375/2

[^9]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, volume 2, page 128

[^10]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 191/74

[^11]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 185/75

[^12]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 604/8

[^13]: Wasa’il ash-Shi’a,page 605

[^14]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 609/8

[^15]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 31/19

[^16]: Ali Ebne Ebrahim commentary, vol. 2, page 151


