First step in purification of ethic after familiarity with alphabet of this science
===================================================================================

Tongue is interpreter of heart and key of personality
-----------------------------------------------------

Correction of tongue and speech plays a role of major importance in
moral discussions because tongue is the interpreter of heart,
representative of intellect, key of man's personality, and the most
important window to man's soul.

In the other words, what is depicted on the tablet of man's soul
(including mental, emotional and sentimental events), first of all
emerges on the tongue and within his speech. If in the past, physicians
recognized a major part of moderation and unbalance of temperament
through the condition of tongue, nowadays psychoanalysts mostly seek
mental problems within the individuals' speech.

On these accounts, ethic scholars consider a special importance for
correction of tongue and deem its correction as the sign of spirit's
perfection and strengthening of prominent moral virtues and habits.

This reality is also stated in the traditions of the Prophet's House
(A.S.) in short and interesting phrases. Two following phrases narrated
respectively from Imam Ali (A.S.) and Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) is an
evidence for this claim:

1- Man is hidden under his tongue. [^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلْمَرْءُ مَخْبُوءٌ تَحْتَ لِسانِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is to say not only scientific personality, but also moral and
social personality and in general his humanistic personality is under
his tongue, and as long as he has not spoken, his fault and virtue is
concealed.

2- Firmness and straightness of belief is not possible without firmness
and straightness of heart, and the latter too will not exist without
firmness and straightness of tongue.[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا یَسْتَقِیمُ اِیمانُ عَبْد حَتّى یَسْتَقِیمَ قَلْبُهُ، وَ لا
یَسْتَقِیمُ قَلْبُهُ حَتّى یَسْتَقِیمَ لِسانُهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thirty great sins, which originate from tongue
----------------------------------------------

The importance of correction of tongue is made clearer when we know that
a large part of sins as a large part of good deeds are performed by
tongue.

Ghazali has narrated twenty types of vices and sins for tongue as
follows:

1- Speaking about the affairs not concerned with man.

2- Rant and babbling

3- Speaking about forbidden affairs like description of meetings of
wine, gambling and unchaste women.

4- Dispute and fussing (caviling and objecting others for wrong purposes
as humiliating them or one's own pedantry).

5- Enmity and affray and quarrel in utterance

6- Affectation in speech and trouble in rhythm and such like

7- Abuse and insult

8- Cursing

9- Profane singing and unsound sings

10- Indulgence in humour

11- Irony and mockery

12- Disclosing mysteries of others

13- Lie promise

14- Lie in speech and oath

15- Slander

16- Gossip

17- Hypocrisy in speech

18- Inappropriate eulogy

19- Negligence from speech's elegance and tools and mistakes thereof

20- Vulgar questions in respect to complicated issues related to
beliefs, which cannot understand them

Surely, pests and vices of tongue are not restricted to what "Ghazali"
has numerated. For instance, following affairs are among the vices of
tongue, which are not stated by him:

1- Accusation

2- False evidence

3- Self-admiration

4- Spreading fornication and unfounded rumours, although being mentioned
as a probability

5- Harshness in utterance

6- Improper insist (like Children of Israel, and etc)

7- Molestation of others with one's speech

8- Blaming one who is not despicable

9- Ungratefulness with tongue

10- False propagation and encourage to sin There is no doubt that
correction of tongue should be studied and taught as one of the most
critical moral issues.

The importance of this subject is clear when we consider the fact that
tongue is the simplest and easiest and cheapest means available for man,
and its speedy function is not comparable with anything else, and so we
shall be very careful of it, and in this view, we can resemble it to the
useful materials having an explosive power and capability. As man takes
care of them attentively, he should always be watchful to this sensible
organ.

Silence and reticence
---------------------

Taking into account the above risks caused by leaving the tongue free,
ethic scholars have deemed silence, in cases that speaking is not
necessary, as one of the ways of preventing those great risks, and a lot
of traditions are mentioned about it from Prophet (S) and Prophet's
House (A.S.), and this is the reason why a number of great men have
started purification of their carnal soul from this matter.

Moreover, silence causes a condition of "reflection" and "spirituality"
and "clear-sightedness", which is noteworthy, and perhaps for this
reason we read in the biography of Zachariah, God's great prophet, that
three days of his silence and dumbness were put as the sign of
fulfilment of his supplication concerning his request for a child:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ آيَتُكَ أَلَّا تُكَلِّمَ النَّاسَ ثَلَاثَ لَيَالٍ سَوِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: Thy token is that thou, with no bodily defect, shalt not
speak unto mankind three nights. (19:10)***

And Mary was ordered to vow silence fast:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُولِي إِنِّي نَذَرْتُ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ صَوْمًا فَلَنْ أُكَلِّمَ
الْيَوْمَ إِنْسِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Lo! I have vowed a fast unto the Beneficent, and may not speak
this day to any mortal. (19:26)***

We read about the states of Islam's Prophet (S) that before revelation,
he had been silent and reflected, and meditated about the mysteries of
creation in Hara cave for several days.

We can summarize advantages of silence in following affairs:

1- Silence insures man against a lot of sins. Prophet (S) says in his
short and meaningful phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ صَمَتَ نَجا».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever mums is saved.[^3]

The reason for this issue is clear, because most of the sins are
performed by tongue. As Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِنَّ اَکْثَرَ خَطایَا ابْنِ آدَمَ فِی لِسانِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Most of man's mistakes are in his tongue.[^4]

And it is narrated from the Prophet in another tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اُخْزُنْ لِسانَکَ اِلاّ مِنَ الْخَیْرِ فَاِنَّکَ بِذلِکَ تَغْلِبُ
الشَّیْطانَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Keep your tongue save a good utterance and thereby you will overcome
Satan.[^5]

2- Silence invites man to thinking and reflection which are the sources
of his spiritual life, and thus a silent person is typically
resourceful, a thinker and a man of action. In contrast, talkative
people are often frail and show less action.

It is narrated in a tradition from Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِذا رَأَیْتُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَ صَمُوتاً وَقُوراً فَادْنُوا مِنْهُ
فَاِنَّهُ یُلْقِی الحِکْمَةَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

When you find a believer silent and courtly, contact with him that he
teaches you wisdom.[^6]

And also it is narrated from Imam Ali (A.S.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِذا تَمَّ الْعَقْلُ نَقَصَ الْکَلامُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

As intelligence increases, speech decreases.[^7]

In addition to the fact that silence is the best means for reviving
reflection power, the above phrase may refer to this point that plenty
of mental powers are used for speaking. When these energies are saved,
they will form massive power through which understanding of great
realities will be possible. Furthermore, silence is tranquilizer of soul
and moderator of sentiments.

3- Chattiness as the opposite point of silence, makes man improvident,
because it increases man's errors, decreases his shame, and breaking the
barrier of shame as a result of excess of errors, it simplifies evil
deeds for man as Imam Ali (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ کَثُرَ کَلامُهُ کَثُرَ خَطَأُهُ، وَ مَنْ کَثُرَ خَطَأُهُ قَلَّ
حَیاؤُهُ وَ مَنْ قَلَّ حَیاؤُهُ قَلَّ وَرَعُهُ، وَ مَنْ قَلَّ وَرَعُهُ
ماتَ قَلْبُهُ، وَ مَنْ ماتَ قَلْبُهُ دَخَلَ النّارَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

He, who speaks more, commits more errors. He, who commits more errors,
becomes shameless. He, who is shameless, would have less fear of Allah.
He whose fear of Allah is less, his heart dies. He, whose heart dies,
enters Hell.[^8]

And perhaps on this account, silence is considered as one of the
important sorbs.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلْعِبادَةُ عَشَرَةُ اَجْزاء تِسْعَةٌ مِنْها فِی الصَّمْتِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Worship has ten portions, nine of which exist in silence.[^9]

It should not be mistaken; silence is not like seclusion and
dissociation which removes the object of sin. Rather, it is sort of
avoiding sin, and in cases that man finds a desire to commit some sins
including slander, sin, when he selects continence and silence; he
acquires a virtue for his health.

It should also be mentioned that silence when speaking is necessary, is
considered as one of the greatest faults, and is the sign of weakness,
humbleness, disability, lack of spiritual bravery, and fear of else than
God.

It is also noteworthy that as most sins are performed by tongue, a large
portion of services and good deeds, like God's remembrance, guiding
people, training and education, bid to good, and forbiddance of wrong,
warfare with utterance, too are performed by tongue.

Honesty, the most manifest sign of personality
----------------------------------------------

• Miraculous results of truthfulness

• Lie, source of all sins

• Lie is not compatible with belief

• Lie makes man improvident

• The liar does not trust even himself

• Source of lie

• Way of treating lies

• Lie in exceptional cases

• What is equivocation?

• A new interpretation about equivocation

Undoubtedly, two attributes of truthfulness and honesty (truth and
trust) are the most manifest signs of personality. Rather, we cannot
call a human the one who lacks these two, and both of them originate
from a common source, because truthfulness is nothing else than trust in
speech, as trust is nothing else than truth in action, and as we will
see their social results are similar.

Haply for this respect, "truth in speech" and "trusteeship" are
mentioned together in the sayings of Islamic great leaders, and even in
ordinary speech, truthfulness and honesty are accompanied.

Value and importance of truthfulness
------------------------------------

As it was referred, truthfulness and honesty are the manifest signs of
man's personality as well as magnificence of his mind and purity of his
soul.

Truthful people are usually brave, frank, sincere, disinterested, and
free from wrong prejudices and excessive love and hatred, because
truthfulness is not possible without them.

In contrast, liars are usually cowards, hypocrites, greedy, fanatic,
stubborn, and or involved in wrong love and hatred.

Truthful people are certainly principled. Rarely are such people
guileful, erratic, and hypocrite, because honesty is not in concord with
any of these affairs. As it will be described in incentives of lying,
this attribute originates from one of the above vices, and on this
account, we can consider truthfulness as a key for detecting interior of
individuals in different aspects, and so truth in speech is called as a
means of evaluation of people in the narrations and traditions of
Prophet's House (A.S.):

Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تَنْظُرُوا اِلى طُولِ رُکُوعِ الرَّجُلِ وَ سُجُودِهِ فَاِنَّ ذلِکَ
شَیْءٌ قَدِ اعْتادَهُ فَلَوْ تَرَکَهُ اسْتَوْحَشَ لِذلِکَ، وَلکِنِ
انْظُرُوا اِلى صِدْقِ حَدِیثِهِ وَ اَداءِ اَمانَتِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not regard one's long bowing and prostration, because it may be their
habit, and if they leave it, are disturbed. Rather, look at their
truthfulness and honesty. [^10]

Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَتَعْرِفَنَّهُمْ فِي لَحْنِ الْقَوْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And thou shalt know them by the burden of their talk.(47:30)***

Miraculous results of truthfulness
----------------------------------

In social point of view, the greatest service that truth and trust can
offer to men is attracting confidence and reliance. Of course, we know
that all scientific, industrial and economic developments are the
results of his life system that is social life.

But collaboration and consultation, which are the basis of social life,
are only possible when individuals trust and rely on each other.
Otherwise, people will have the problems of social life, disturbances,
struggles, disputes and sabotages, without enjoying its advantages.

Obviously, the most important and effective means of attracting reliance
and confidence is "truth and trust", and its most dangerous enemy is
lie.

If economical firms lie only in introduction of one of their goods,
people will suspect their best products.

If the rulers lie, people will disregard their promises, invitations,
and warnings, and they will lack powerful public support.

If lie becomes popular in scientific environments, scientists and
scholars will not trust on the speeches, narrations, and judgments of
each other, and thus everybody should personally suffer all required
labours for a scientific research, and could not use the results of
thousands years of others' life. And this type of lie is the ugliest and
dirtiest one.

Lie, source of all sins
-----------------------

In several narrations, it is referred to this reality that trust and
truth cause purity of action, and lie is the key of all types of sins.

For better understanding of effect of truthfulness and lie on the man's
deeds and actions, first we refer to a number of narrations from
Prophet's House (A.S.) in this regard, and then we will analyze it.

Imam Ali (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الصِّدْقُ یَهْدِی اِلَى الْبِرِّ وَ الْبِرُّ یَدْعُو اِلَى
الْجَنَّةِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Truthfulness guides people to goodness, and goodness invites to
paradise.[^11]

Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِذا صَدَقَ الْعَبْدُ قالَ اللهُ: صَدَقَ و بَرَّ، وَ اِذا کَذِبَ قالَ
اللهُ کَذَبَ وَ فَجَرَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

When a God's servant says the truth, God says: he said the truth and
performed a good deed, and when he lies, He says: he lied and performed
an evil deed.[^12]

Imam Askari (A.S.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جُعِلَتِ الْخَبائِثُ کُلُّها فِی بَیْت وَ جُعِلَ مِفْتاحُها
اَلْکَذِبُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

All vices are put in a room and its key is lie.[^13]

It is easily inferred from this tradition that lie is the key of all
vices and evils.

Now we study the effects of truthfulness and lie in man's deeds:

1- Lie is the source of hypocrisy, because truthfulness refers to
harmony of tongue and heart, and lie is disharmony of these two, and
hereof difference between men’s interior and outward is started, and the
liar gradually proceeds to full hypocrisy.

Holy Qur’an refers to this fact and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعْقَبَهُمْ نِفَاقًا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يَلْقَوْنَهُ
بِمَا أَخْلَفُوا اللَّهَ مَا وَعَدُوهُ وَبِمَا كَانُوا يَكْذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So He hath made the consequence (to be) hypocrisy in their hearts
until the day when they shall meet Him, because they broke their word to
Allah that they promised Him, and because they lied. (9:77)***

2- Lie is the tool of most sins. Dishonest and guileful, robber and
treacherous, short weighing and hoarder, tricky and perjurer individuals
cannot continue anymore and reach to a stalemate if they do not lie.

3- An envious person for envying, a proud person for ostentation and
frippery, a subservient and flatterer person for achieving his goals,
greedy and secularist individuals for attaining their objectives,
usually resort to lie. They debase the envied person in public view
falsely, and glorify themselves falsely. They say thousands of
flatteries falsely, and resort to lie for satiation of their greedy
souls.

4- One who is bound to truthfulness has no alternative save restraining
himself from most of the sins, because he thinks that if he is asked
about that issue, he shall say the truth, and if he says the truth, it
will be disgraceful. So, he prefers to forget those deeds on the whole.
Thus, being bounded to this attribute insures man against numerous sins.

5- Most of the lies cause other lies or sins, because it is widely seen
that liars say other lies for justifying their untrue subjects, and or
perform other evil deeds for preventing disclosure of their lies.

It is clarified from what was mentioned above (considering the
explanations mentioned in each part), that if a man is verily bounded to
truthfulness and honesty, he has to leave most sins because each of them
somehow originates from lie. Rather, lie is the key of achieving them
and a truthful man should recede from sin willingly or not.

Lie is not compatible with belief
---------------------------------

It is deduced from different traditions that lie is not in concord with
belief, and lying is the sign of a sort of disbelief.

These traditions have been inspired by Holy Qur’an where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَفْتَرِي الْكَذِبَ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِآيَاتِ
اللَّهِ ۖ وَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَاذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** ***  
***Only they invent falsehood who believe not Allah's revelations, and
(only) they are the liars. (16:105)***

"Forge falsehood" may refer to deliberate falsehood.

And now some of the narrations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«سُئِلَ رَسُولُ اللهِ(صلى الله علیه وآله) : یَکُونُ الْمُؤْمِنُ
جَباناً؟ قالَ: نَعَمْ. قِیلَ: وَ یَکُونُ بَخِیلا؟ قالَ: نَعَمْ. قِیلَ:
وَیَکُونُ کَذّاباً؟ قال: لا».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) was asked: Is it possible for a believer to be coward?
He answered: yes. It was asked: Is it possible for him to be stingy? He
answered: yes. It was asked: Is it possible for him to be liar? He
answered: no.[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«قالَ اَمِیرُ الْمُؤْمِنِینَ(علیه السلام): لا یَجِدُ عَبْدٌ طَعْمَ
الاِْیمانِ حَتّى یَتْرُکَ الْکَذِبَ هَزْلَهُ وَجِدَّهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ali (A.S.) said: A man does not taste the taste of belief, unless
he refuses lie, either seriously or for humour.[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«عنه (علیه السلام): جانِبُوا الْکَذِبَ فَاِنَّهُ مُجانِبُ الاِْیمانِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Avoid lie, which is not in concord with belief.[^16]

And it is concluded from these narrations that believers avoid lie, and
belief and lie do never accompany each other.

This point refers to the fact that the liars do not easily accept
invitation of the prophets based on self-comparison. Since they
themselves lie in little affairs of life, they cannot believe prophets
to be really truthful in such big affairs.

They may be among the believers, but if we explore in depth of their
hearts, we will find that it is not free from doubt and suspicion. Of
course, this is true for those whose life is overshadowed by lie, and as
interpreted in the tradition are liars.

The contrary is also true. That is to say the truthful people are often
credulous, because they themselves are truthful and honest, and accept
whatever they hear based on their superior nature, and so called they
are "ear" unless they are notified.

Liars have a special pessimism and suspicion on everybody and
everything. They assume everything false, untrue, or at least
suspicious. How it is possible for such people to believe in all
speeches of prophets without any doubt and suspicion. So we see in
history that hypocrite, deviated and liars often attribute lying to
divine prophets.

The issue of self-comparison is one of the mental conditions in man,
which could serve as the key for solving a lot of problems. It is often
observed that unusual movements of criminal, thief and treacherous
individuals acquaint the others. Since they are aware of their own
condition, they suppose the same about the others, and so try to conceal
themselves, and such unusual movements attract the attention of others.

Lie makes man improvident
-------------------------

A liar supposes that if he does not perform his different duties, can
justify his violation through false excuses. For such person, not being
faithful to promise and covenant, not observing time, not performing
assigned duties and such like is easy, because he glosses over the issue
with a series of false pretexts and saves himself from any rebuke.

But in contrary, one who is bound to observing the principle of
"truthfulness and honesty” is obliged to observe such affairs and so
cannot be improvident and careless.

The liar does not trust even in himself
---------------------------------------

The liars not only do not trust in others and assume them as themselves,
but also do not trust in themselves, because they are suspicious to the
reality of everything, including the degree of their ability and power
when faced with the problems and different events of life as well as
their determination and will power in performing the works.

We read in aphorisms of Imam Ali (A.S.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِیّاکَ وَ مُصادَقَةَ الْکَذّابِ فَاِنَّهُ کَالسَّرابِ! یُقَرِّبُ
عَلَیْکَ الْبَعِیدَ وَ یُبَعِّدُ عَلَیْکَ الْقَرِیبَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

You should avoid making friend with a liar because he is like a mirage,
making you feel remote things near and near things remote.[^17]

Although the matter of altering the realities is mentioned for the
associates of a liar, but it is also formed in the liar as a result of
getting accustomed to the lie, and they become suspicious and uncertain
to the realities and facts related to themselves and the others, and
this is one of the most painful conditions occurring for man in his
life.

Source of lie
-------------

As it was already referred, lie originates from one of the mental weak
points:

Sometimes, a man lies for the fear of poverty, people leaving him alone
and losing his position and rank.

Sometimes, he lies for the earnest to wealth, dignity, and other sensual
desires, and uses this illegitimate means for achieving his purpose.

Sometimes, passion as well as excessive love and hatred cause a man to
say untruth in favor of one who he loves or against one who he hates.

Once he lies in different scientific, historical and such like issues
for showing himself more than what he really is and expressing science
and knowledge.

But all of these vicious attributes, which are the sources of lie,
actually originate from one's low personality and weakness of spirit and
belief.

Those who do not believe in their own personality, and have a feeble and
humble spirit, resort to lie, falsification, fraud and treachery for
gaining their purposes and escaping losses. In contrary, powerful and
high personality individuals rely on their own personality and ability,
and seek their victory thereon.

Moreover, those having a perfect belief on divine everlasting power, and
considering His dominant will as the source of all blessings, victories
and successes, have identified His power beyond all powers and His
support beyond all supports, do not have any reason for resorting to
untruth and lying for gaining a benefit or escaping a loss.

And sometimes this dangerous vice roots in man for inattention to the
disadvantages of lie and importance of truthfulness, and unhealthy
family, or environment of society and associates.

One of the other important factors in lying is feeling low personality
and inferiority complex. Those who are affected by such complexes, try
to compensate it with all types of lie, exaggeration and
self-glorification.

Way of treating lie
-------------------

Taking into account the factors effective on formation of this attribute
and its rooting, treatment procedure will be relatively clear, and in
general for treating this moral deviation, we shall take following
actions:

1- First of all, the liars should be informed about the painful
consequences as well as spiritual, material, individual and social ill
effects of this unfavourable vice, and it should be evaluated through
meditation and thinking in Qur’anic verses and traditions of great
leaders of religion and aforementioned analyses and speeches of the
great men that assumptive benefits of lie never counterweigh with such a
lot of disadvantages.

Moreover, the liars should be warned that if in some cases, lie has a
personal benefit, it is temporary and very transitory, because no
capital for a man in the society, in any condition and any rank,–is
higher than the capital of people's trust and confidence in him, and the
greatest enemy of this capital is lie.

It is noteworthy that some suppose it is possible for a man to say some
lies, never being disclosed and causing people's distrust.

But this is a big mistake because experience has shown that in most
cases, the untruthfulness of a liar is made clear, and its point is that
any event has different relations with time, place, individuals and
other events. One who wants to create an event, not externally existing,
with his tongue, creates only one discrete event from among all other
relations, and if he is very sharp and smart, he may already think about
some other lies around it, and link the main false event with those
events.

However, he can never predict all possible relations with all other
events, and consider their connections. So, most often after several
questions, he fails to justify his speeches.

For example, consider the interesting judgment of Imam Ali (A.S.) about
the young man whose father had travelled with a lot of wealth together
with some people, and when returning, his companions claimed for his
death.

The accused people, who were in fact the murderers of that young man's
father, were disgraced very soon after Imam (A.S.) asked them several
questions about the details of disease, death, shrouding and burying, as
they had colluded for all together saying that he has become sick and
died, but they had not colluded for where, what time of day and who has
made ablution, and has shrouded, and has performed funeral prayer, and
actually they could not collude for all of these matters.

On this account, even the lie of the sharpest liar may be disclosed
through a simple inspection.

Specially, the false and artificial relations, which a man creates for
his lies, are not kept in his mind properly, because they are untrue,
and if the liar is asked in different intervals, he involves in self
contradiction and confusion, and this contradiction is one of the other
factors for disclosing their lie. If it is commonly said that "a liar
does not have a good memory", it may refer to the fact that whatever his
memory may be strong, it is not possible for a liar to memorize
everything!

2- Personification - One of the most effective ways of treating lies is
developing individuals' personality, because as we know, one of the
important mental causes of lie is feeling inferiority and low
personality, and in fact lying is a kind of reaction for compensating
it.

If the liars feel that they possess powers and talents through
developing of which they can increase their own value and personality,
they do not find any need for resorting to lie for developing a false
personality in them.

Moreover, they should realize that social value of a truthful man, who
has succeeded to attract "public confidence" through this moral virtue,
is beyond all values, and his great spiritual capital of "social
reputation" is the highest capital, with which no material capital can
countervail, and he can provide all material facilities for himself
using this capital.

Such person is not only is respected by people, but also enjoys a rank
among the martyrs and prophets because in Qur’an the rank of truthful
people is mentioned besides the rank of prophets and martyrs, where it
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُطِعِ اللَّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ
أَنْعَمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالصِّدِّيقِينَ
وَالشُّهَدَاءِ وَالصَّالِحِينَ ۚ وَحَسُنَ أُولَٰئِكَ رَفِيقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoso obeyeth Allah and the messenger, they are with those unto whom
Allah hath shown favour, of the prophets and the saints and the martyrs
and the righteous. The best of company are they! (4:69)***

The famous scholar, "Ragheb", in his book, "Mofradat" has narrated
several meanings for "truthful" all proving this fact:

a- One who always says the truth

b- One who never lies

c- One who is truthful in his speech and idea, and his action proves his
truthfulness.

3- Endeavour for strengthening foundations of belief in God in the heart
of liars and notifying this fact to them that God's power is beyond all
powers, and He is able to solve all problems for which weak faith
individuals resort to lie.

The reliance point of truthful people when facing different events is
God, and liars are alone in such cases.

4- The motives of lie and roots of this moral deviation including
avarice, fear, self-conceit, excessive love and hatred and such like
should be eradicated so that this dangerous vice cannot find a
favourable culture for its development in man.

5- The educational and association environments of liars should be
cleaned from other liars so that gradually, according to the principle
of "imitation" and impressibility, their own existence is purified of
this vice.

This is so critical that it is narrated from Imam Ali (A.S.) in Islamic
educational instructions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا یَصْلُحُ الْکَذِبُ جِدٌّ وَ لا هَزْلٌ وَ لا اَنْ یَعِدَ اَحَدُکُمْ
صَبِیَّهُ ثُمَّ لا یَفِی لَهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lying is not proper, either for joke or seriously, and also it is not
proper that one of you give a promise to his child, and then do not
fulfil it.[^18]

It goes without saying that if parents are accustomed to truthfulness
(even in giving small promises to their children); their child will
never be a liar.

Lie in exceptional cases
------------------------

The great jurists and ethic scholars following the traditions narrated
in this respect, have mentioned some cases as exceptional from lie
judgment, and have summarized some of them in two subjects: "exigency"
and "reconciliation among people".

It is narrated in a tradition from the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِحْلِفْ بِاللهِ کاذِباً وَ نَجِّ اَخاکَ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Swear falsely and save your innocent brother from death.[^19]

Herein, two points are notable:

First, all cases of exception actually return to one subject that lie is
only permitted for more important expedients overshadowing its
disadvantages, and of course, this is not restricted to "truthfulness"
and "falsehood". Rather other forbidden things such as "eating carrion",
"eating unclean food", "orphan molestation" and such like are permitted
for survival or correction, and the cases mentioned in the traditions
are some examples.

For instance, since reconciliation among people and joining scattered
hearts and washing out the dust of hatred and enmity from hearts is more
important than the lie, which does not harm anyone else, it is
permitted. The same is true in exigency cases for preserving life and
honour of oneself or others, and or in planning and implementation of
war plans, a lie, causing expedition in termination of war and
preventing blood shedding and or repressing an unjust and corrupter
enemy in this way, and also when two spouses argue about some matters,
the continuation of which may result in their divorce or other
corruption, but it is possible to solve their problem through one lie.
In all of these cases, lie would be permitted for preservation of more
important expedient affairs. If we pay attention accurately, in these
cases, disadvantages and harms of lie which were already mentioned, are
much less and do not overweigh its advantage and benefit.

It is also noteworthy that prescription of "lie" in such cases is just
like prescription of eating carrion, which should be contented as much
as the necessity, and not so that exceptions cause daring performance of
this "capital sin", and saying lie for each little issue with the
pretext of lie permits.

In fact, moral mistakes are always around the exceptional cases and
notes. These are the same ambiguous matters which are the "risk area"
bounded by the "forbidden area":

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَحارِمُ اللهِ حِمَى اللهِ فَمَنْ یَرْتَعْ حَوْلَ الْحِمى یُوشَکُ
اَنْ یَقَعَ فِیها».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The forbidden degrees are divine forbidden areas; one who leads his
animal near the forbidden boundaries, there is the risk of slumping in
them.[^20]

Ghazali at the end of a chapter under the title of leaving lie in
"Ehyaol Oloum" writes: some people believe that fabrication of
traditions in the virtues of actions and intensification of vices is
permitted.

Then he adds: this is just a false desire and fancy, because its
advantages never overweigh corruption of lie. Moreover, there is not any
necessity for this, and there are enough correct verses and traditions
in each respect. On the other hand, introducing this custom may result
in discomposure and perturbation of religion.[^21]

But we believe such foolish actions and ideas belong to the base, fool
and unaware individuals who assume themselves more compassionate than
God and Prophet (S) for Islam. This is a pure evil and is thoroughly
harm and corruption. The danger of this action and such like fool
friends is not less than the danger of enemies for Islam.

What is equivocation?
---------------------

Equivocation refers to the speech, from the appearance of which
something is understood, while the purpose of speaker is something else.

It is well known among our jurists that the cases in which lie is
prescribed for an exigency, equivocation should be applied, and as far
as equivocation is possible, explicit lie is not advisable.

It is inferred from some phrases of Sunnite scholars that the same is
popular among them.

And equivocation is defined to be when a man says something with a
meaning in accordance with the reality, but the speech is so that
listener understands something else, and this is the purpose of speaker
that while willing a correct concept, the listener understands something
else.

For instance, one was asked, who the substitute of Prophet S.A is. He
said, "One whose daughter was in his house". The listener supposed that
he meant the one whose daughter was in Prophet's (S) house, but he meant
"one whose Prophet's daughter was in his house".

A new interpretation about equivocation
---------------------------------------

But herein there is a point which may be the key of solving problems of
this discussion, that is, "equivocation" does not refer to any sort of
intention against appearance. Rather, equivocation appertains to the
cases in which the speech is inherently ambiguous and can bear two
meanings, but the mind attracts one of them in speech.

For example, the phrase (**اِنَّکُمْ لَسارِقُونَ**), "You are robbers"
which was told to Joseph brothers, its primary meaning is the same
"current robbery", but it can also refer to the "previous robbery"
(robbing Joseph from his father), which is in contrary with its primary
meaning.

Or when it is asked from someone, "has that person presented this
clothing to you"? In reply as equivocation, he says: "God may lengthen
his life". The listener supposes that the speaker means "yes, God may
lengthen his life", while he may not have such purpose.

[^1]: Nahjul Balaghah, aphorisms, no. 148

[^2]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 262/75, and Mohajjatol Beisae, 193/5

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 90/77 and Mohajjatol Beisae 192/5

[^4]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 194/5

[^5]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, vol. 5, page 195

[^6]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 195/5

[^7]: Nahjul Balaghah, aphorisms, no. 71

[^8]: Nahjul Balaghah, aphorisms, no. 349

[^9]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 196/5

[^10]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 8/71

[^11]: Tabarsi, Mishqat al-Anwar, 300, Heydarieh Publications, Najaf

[^12]: The same document, page 299

[^13]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 263/72

[^14]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 262/72

[^15]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 249/72

[^16]: The same document, volume 78, page 9

[^17]: Nahjul Balaghah, aphorisms, no. 38

[^18]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 577/8

[^19]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, 134/16

[^20]: Sadough, Faghih, vol. 4, page 75

[^21]: Ghazali, Ehyaol Oloum, 139/3


