Slander, Dangerous weapon of cowards
====================================

One of the greatest and most dangerous and in the meantime most popular
corruptions of tongue is slander.

Slander indicates mentioning hidden weak points and faults of the others
so that if they hear, they will be disturbed. These points are either
concerned with religious, moral, spiritual and social aspects, or with
corporeal aspects, including face, body's limbs, corporal powers, and
actions and behaviours, or his attachments, such as wife, child, and or
his clothing, house, etc.

The most important motives for slander
--------------------------------------

There are several motives for slander:

1- Malice and revenge: as there is no easier and simpler way than
slander and damaging a person's reputation and character for
extinguishing flames of spite and revenge, blazing in the heart of some
people.

2- Envy: as the envious person always wishes for end of blessings of the
envied one, when he cannot achieve his purpose, for compensating it, he
tries to damage the envied person's reputation and credit through
slander and revealing his weak points, and relieves the fire of his envy
in this way.

3- Acquitting oneself from a committed sin: in other words one tries to
simplify or justify his action through mentioning the faults of others.

4- Mockery and deride: of course mockery and deriding others has several
motives, and after rooting of its factors in man's entity, one of the
ways of realization of this goal is slander.

5- Recreation and amusement: there are a lot of people who engage in
mentioning weak points and faults of the others only for recreation and
amusement or warming circles and meetings, because no other sin is
sweeter than slander for people.

It should be also noted that people not only enjoy recreation and
amusement, but also enjoy causing others to laugh.

6- Excitation of curiosity instinct: this instinct which is one of the
most powerful man's instincts, invites man to urge others for slander
and revealing weak points of different individuals, and perhaps the
sweetness of slander for some people originates from the false satiation
of this instinct. Such people enjoy knowing mysteries and faults of
others and are curious about them, and therefore make the others to
slander more eagerly and enthusiastically.

Of course, taking into account these factors can be an effective help to
us for treatment of slander and identifying its senses.

It should be also notified that in most cases, these factors do not show
off themselves simply and naturally in man's existence because his
conscience and mental personality does not allow it. So they change its
appearance and slander about people in the form of compassion or forbid
of wrong and or giving lesson to others, and suppose that they have done
a sacred action, while the main motive is one of the above factors, and
man's spirit changes its appearance for deceiving conscience and
escaping its stress and torment, and on the contrary, it is proved that
such slander is more dangerous than its other types and treating it, is
more difficult.

Dangers of slander
------------------

Now, we mention the importance of this sin in view of Qur’an and
traditions of Prophet (S) and Prophet's Household (A.S.), and then will
analyze the individual and social vices that it will cause.

Although most people do not respect this vital issue, the original
Islamic resources have put an extra emphasis on it. The most vigorous
interpretations are seen in the Holy Qur’an and traditions concerning
slander, and we have selected following ten cases among them, and
perhaps these ten parts are adequate for realizing the importance of
this sin in view of Islam.

### 1- Slander in view of Holy Qur’an

Holy Qur’an has considered slander as an inhuman action, and has
introduced it as eating flesh of a dead brother. Obviously,
anthropophagy in such a way is the most repulsive action which may be
done by a person, and this interpretation is exclusively mentioned for
this sin.

Of course, the reason of this assimilation is clear. Because in Islam's
view, a Muslim brother's reputation and prestige is respectable as his
blood, as it is mentioned in the Prophetic tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«کُلُّ الْمُسْلِمِ عَلَى لْمُسْلِمِ حَرامٌ: دَمُهُ وَ مالُهُ وَ
عِرْضُهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Everything of a Muslim is forbidden for another Muslim: his blood,
wealth and reputation.[^1]

And there is no doubt that slander lowers the reputation of a Muslim
brother, and damages his honour.

It is noteworthy that in Holy Qur’an suspicion, spying, and slander are
respectively forbidden where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنَ الظَّنِّ
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ ۖ وَلَا تَجَسَّسُوا وَلَا يَغْتَبْ
بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا ۚ أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ
مَيْتًا فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ
رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O ye who believe! Shun much suspicion; for lo! some suspicion is a
crime. And spy not, neither backbite one another. Would one of you love
to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Ye abhor that (so abhor the
other)! And keep your duty (to Allah). Lo! Allah is Relenting, Merciful.
(49:12)***

And this interpretation may indicate that first a man is involved in
suspicion, and suspicion leads him to spying, and spying too ends in
revealing hidden faults of individuals and this is the source of
slander.

### 2- Slander is not compatible with belief

As it is stipulated in Barae tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَطَبَنا رَسُولُ اللهِ (صلى الله علیه وآله) حَتَّى اسْتَمَعَ
الْعَوائِقُ فِی بُیُوتِها فَقالَ: «یا مَعْشَرَ مَنْ آمَنَ بِلِسانِهِ
وَ لَمْ یُؤْمِنْ بِقَلْبِهِ لا تَغْتابُوا الْمُسْلِمِینَ وَ لا
تَتَّبِعُوا عَوْراتِهِمْ فَاِنَّهُ مَنْ تَتَبَّعَ عَوْرَةَ اَخِیهِ
تَتَبَّعَ اللهُ عَوْرَتَهُ وَ مَنْ تَتَبَّعَ اللهُ عَوْرَتَهُ
یَفْضَحُهُ وَ لَوْ فِی جَوْفِ بَیْتِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Barae says: Prophet (S) spoke for us, and so loudly that even the girls
in the houses too heard. He said: O the group who has believed by
tongue, but not by heart. Do not slander about a Muslim, and do not spy
their secret affairs, the one who is curious for the secret affairs of
his religious brothers, God shall reveal his own secret affairs and
scandalizes him inside his own house.[^2]

The point of non-compatibility of slander with the spirit of belief may
indicate that the first sign of belief is observing the right of a
believer, and this is in contradiction with slander.

### 3- Slander is considered as spreading obscenity

Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ قالَ فِی مُؤْمِن ما رَأَتْهُ عَیْناهُ وَ سَمِعَتْهُ اُذُناهُ
فَهُوَ مِنَ الَّذِینَ قالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ: ( اِنَّ الَّذِینَ
یُحِبُّونَ اَنْ تَشِیعَ الْفاحِشَةُ فِی الَّذِینَ آمَنُوا لَهُمْ
عَذابٌ اَلِیمٌ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who says what he has seen and heard about a believer, is among those
that God has told about them: those who like the vices to spread among
believers, there shall be a painful chastisement for them.[^3]

The point of this issue is also clear, because considering that in most
cases faults are included among religious faults, revealing hidden
faults of people may cause the others to take impertinence and insolence
for performing sin and disobedience, and consequently spreading
obscenity.

### 4- The corruption of slander is more severe than adultery

In the famous tradition of Jaber and Abou Saeid Khadri, it is narrated
from Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلْغِیبَةُ اَشَدُّ مِنَ الزِّنا».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Slander is worse than adultery.[^4]

The reason mentioned under this tradition for its severity is that an
adulterer may be forgiven by God through repentance (because adultery is
the Right of God), but the repentance of slanderer without satisfaction
of the other party, will not be accepted (because it is the Right of
People).

There may be another point in addition to above aspect as the reason for
intensity of slander comparing with adultery, that is slander ruins the
basis of unity, compassion, intimacy and good opinion in the society,
and damages the society severely in this way,–as will be discussed
later, but adultery does not have such influence despite of its
significance.

### 5- Slander hinders acceptance of deeds and prayers

It is mentioned in Moaze tradition that sometimes deeds of servants
shine as the sun's rays, and ascend to the heaven, but they are returned
and beaten to the face of their owners, and an angel says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَمَرَنِی رَبِّی اَنْ لا اَدَعَ عَمَلَ مَنْ یَغْتابُ النّاسَ
یَتَجاوَزُ اِلى رَبِّی».
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Lord has instructed me to prevent reaching the goods deeds of
slanderers towards My Lord.

This point may indicate that as it is inferred from different
traditions, in general, deeds of those who are indebted to people will
not be accepted by God, and as we know slander is a sort of
transgression to people's rights and damaging the capital of their
reputation.

### 6- Slander is not compatible with Islamic brotherhood

It is narrated from Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تَحاسَدُوا وَ لا تَباغَضُوا وَ لا یَغْتَبْ بَعْضُکُمْ بَعْضاً وَ
کُونُوا عِبادَ اللهِ اِخْواناً».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not envy and spite each other and do not slander about each other,
and O, God's servants be brother with each other.[^5]

It is understood from the last phrase that opposite point of envy,
enmity and slander is God's servitude and Islamic brotherhood. It goes
without saying that the first sign of brotherhood is kindness and
intimacy, which could never be compatible with slander.

And pointing to those two great faults in the tradition may be for being
among the causes of slander, because envy usually is the source of
enmity and spite, and they too in their turn are the sources of slander.

### 7- Slander destroys good deeds

This sense is mentioned in different traditions. In a tradition from
Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) is narrated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلْغِیبَةُ حَرامٌ عَلى کُلِّ مُسْلِم... وَ الْغِیبَةُ تَأْکُلُ
الْحَسَناتِ کَما تَأْکُلُ النّارُ الْحَطَبَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Slander is forbidden for each Muslim, and surely slander destroys good
deeds as the fire destroys wood.[^6]

And it is narrated in a tradition from Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ کانَتْ لاَِخِیهِ عِنْدَهُ مَظْلَمَةٌ فِی عِرْض اَوْ مال
فَلْیَسْتَحْلِلْها مِنْهُ مِنْ قَبْلِ اَنْ یَأْتِیَ یَوْمٌ لَیْسَ
هُنالِکَ دِینارٌ وَ لا دِرْهَمٌ اِنَّما یُؤْخَذُ مِنْ حَسَناتِهِ
فَاِنْ لَمْ تَکُنْ لَهُ حَسَنَةٌ اُخِذَ مِنْ سَیِّئاتِ صاحِبِهِ
فَزِیدَتْ عَلى سَیِّئاتِهِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

One, who is indebted to his religious brother in respect to reputation
or wealth, should seek his forgiveness, before that day in which there
is not any Drachma and Dinar. In that day, it will be deducted from his
good deeds, and if he does not have any good deed, the sins of other
party will be added to his sins.[^7]

Slander destroys good deeds probably because it destroys one of the
greatest spiritual capitals of the one who is slandered about, that is
his reputation, honour and social prestige, and since compensation of
this "Right of People" is often impossible through material ways, thus
Great God compensates it through spiritual affairs: He transfers good
deeds of the slanderer to the book of deeds of the slandered, and if he
does not have any good deed, God transfers sins of the slandered to the
book of deeds of the slanderer, and it is compensated to the same degree
that reputation of that person is damaged through transfer of good deeds
and sins.

### 8- Slander devaluates worships and services

It is realized from some traditions that slander is one of the factors
invalidating ritual ablution and fasting.

God's Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَلْجُلُوسُ فِی الْمَسْجِدِ انْتِظاراً لِلصَّلاةِ عِبادَةٌ ما لَمْ
یُحْدِث; فَقِیلَ: یا رَسُولَ اللهِ! وَ مَا الْحَدَثُ؟ قالَ:
الاِْغْتِیابُ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Waiting in the mosque for prayer is worship, until a ritual impurity is
not performed; it was questioned: what is ritual impurity? He said:
slander.[^8]

And somewhere else he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَ مَنِ اغْتابَ مُسْلِماً بَطَلَ صَوْمُهُ وَ نَقَضَ وُضُوءُهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

One, who slanders about a Muslim, his fasting and ritual ablutions are
broken.[^9]

Its point may indicate that worship creates a condition of proximity to
God and spiritual luminosity in man, and when he stains his tongue to
slander after ritual ablution or when fasting, that spirituality is
significantly decreased, and that individual falls down from the degree
of proximity to God. In the above tradition, this sense is interpreted
as "violator" (breaker).

### 9- Slander excludes man from God's protection and includes him in Satan's protection

As it is narrated from Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) in the tradition of Mofzal
Ebne Omar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ رَوى عَلى مُؤْمِن رِوایَةً یُرِیدُ بِها شَیْنَهُ وَ هَدْمَ
مُرُوَّتِهِ لِیَسْقُطَ مِنْ اَعْیُنِ النّاسِ اَخْرَجَهُ اللهُ مِنْ
ولایَتِهِ اِلى ولایَةِ الشَّیْطانِ فَلا یَقْبَلُهُ الشَّیْطانُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who narrates with the purpose of backbiting and dishonouring a
believer to be reproached before people, God shall evict him from His
protection to Satan's protection, and Satan too does not accept
him.[^10]

Of course, this tradition is not merely concerned with slander. Rather,
slander is one of its senses, because the purpose of slander in all
individuals is destroying character of the other party and cavilling at
him, even indirectly.

But exclusion from God's protection according to the Qur’anic verses
indicates that God, *who leads and supervises believers and guides them
from darkness into the light* [^11], will not lead such people anymore.
Because protector means guide and leader as well as helper and
assistant, as we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لَهُمْ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ يَنْصُرُونَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they will have no protecting friends to help them instead of
Allah. (42:46)***

And it is also mentioned in the sense of saviour from humiliation as we
read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ وَلِيٌّ
مِنَ الذُّلِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who hath no partner in the Sovereignty, nor hath He any protecting
friend through dependence. And magnify Him with all
magnificence.(17:111)***

And it also means forgiver of sins as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتَ وَلِيُّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا ۖ وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ
الْغَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Thou art our Protecting Friend, therefore forgive us and have mercy
on us, Thou, the Best of all who show forgiveness. (7:155)***

Therefore, slanderers are deprived from all of these divine graces for
being evicted from God's protection and entering Satan's protection.

And the phrase "Satan too does not accept him" may indicate that Satan
can not undertake the responsibility of their protection and
supervision, and thereby leaves them alone.

### 10- A part of ill effects of slander remains even after repentance.

It is stated in the traditions of Islamic leaders:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اَوْحَى اللهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ اِلى مُوسَى بْنِ عِمْرانَ اَنَّ
الْمُغتابَ اِذا تابَ فَهُوَ آخِرُ مَنْ یَدْخُلِ الْجَنَّةَ وَ اِنْ
لَمْ یَتُبْ فَهُوَ اَوَّلُ مَنْ یَدْخُلُ النّارَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

God inspired to Moses, son of Emran, that if the slanderer repents, he
will be the last one entering paradise, and otherwise, he will be the
first one entering the fire.[^12]

The point of this tradition may represent that slander has both "Right
of God" and "Right of People" aspects, and its "Right of People" aspect
is more than other rights of people, because slander destroys the
capital of people's reputation, the capital which in contrary with
material capitals is often irrecoverable, and this causes the slanderer
to be saved posterior than the others. On this account, in some
traditions, dishonouring a Muslim is considered as the highest usury as
Ense narrates from Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِنَّ اَرْبَى الرِّبا عِرْضُ الرَّجُلِ الْمُسْلِمِ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The most critical usury is dishonouring a Muslim.[^13]

Social and individual vices of slander
--------------------------------------

### Ill- effects of slander in social view:

Slander causes great vices in social view:

1- When slander is spread in the society, it destroys one of the
greatest social capitals which is the spirit of brotherhood, unity and
intimacy, and ruins the foundations of good opinion and public
confidence which is the first requisite of social cooperation.

As outspread of slander causes the people to become aware of hidden weak
points of each other, and since most of people are not free from any
weak point, knowing them spreads suspicion in the society, and this
pessimism and suspicion annihilates the spirit of cooperation and
collaboration, and the society will be deprived from all of its
concerned blessings, and practically individuals are subjected to
"social seclusion".

The previously described tradition;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تَحاسَدُوا وَ لا تَباغَضُوا وَ لا یَغْتَب بَعْضُکُمْ بَعْضاً وَ
کُونُوا عِبادَ اللهِ اِخْواناً»
  </p>
</blockquote>

may refer to this point.

2- In most cases, slander causes provoking the fire of sedition and
spread of enmity and spite among the individuals, because hidden faults
of individuals may be correlated with others' rights, and or at least be
a pretext for adventurers to revenge and damage reputation of each
other, and this results in enmity, or intensifies it.

3- Slander lowers individuals' personality and respect and thereby their
fear and avoidance of sin is decreased, because most people do not
perform inadmissible deeds for maintaining their honour and prestige,
and or otherwise perform them privately. When their faults and sins are
revealed through slander, there is no reason any more for caring and
fearing of it, and in this way, slander will be an effective factor for
decrease of "social considerations" and spread of corruption.

4- Slander will be also accompanied with irrecoverable losses in
economical view for the society, because credit of individuals and
confidence of people on each other is more effective than social
financial capitals in improvement of the society, and lacking them,
activity of common capitals will be significantly reduced, and will
become stagnant or semi-stagnant.

### Ill-effects of slander in individual view

However, in individual aspect, slander is an explicit injustice and
transgression to the rights of others, and the same moral and humanistic
faults created in an individual due to injustice to another person are
realized through slander. Moreover, since slander originates from a
series of ill-favoured moral motives, its repetition strengthens and
supports those condemned attributes in man.

In this way, slander both lowers the individual in view of humanistic
values, and also weakens and destroys social foundations. So the
previous traditions and holy verses clearly represent these realities.

Limits and types of slander
---------------------------

### 1- Types of slander

Although, at the beginning it seems that slander is the same mentioning
hidden faults of others by tongue, but considering its main criterion,
it is clarified that slander is an extensive and general concept in view
of ethics, including expressing this sense by any means, such as saying,
writing, referring and or imitation.

As it is narrated in a tradition: A woman came to visit Prophet (S) and
when she went away, Ayesheh referred to her height by her hand. The
Prophet (S) said: You slandered about her.[^14]

And it is mentioned in another tradition that Ayesheh imitated a woman,
and the Prophet (S) prohibited her.[^15]

It is deduced hereby that when criticizing the thoughts of others in the
writings, it should be discussed in such a way to avoid slander. When
cavilling and criticizing the speech of someone, there are often
interpretations which are clear senses of slander, disapprobation,
mockery, insulting and or humiliation, for example when it is told that
phrase is "null by necessity" or "funny" or "childish" or "unwisely",
unless its owner is not clear and or humiliating and slandering about
him is permitted.

On the other hand, sometimes a man says a speech figuratively, but there
are some evidences that the other party understands. This too is among
the senses of slander. For example, when some one mentions, today I was
in a meeting, and someone told something, while the listener is aware
about the meeting he has been.

### 2- Slanders mixed with another sin

Sometimes this indecent deed is mixed with other indecent deeds, and
loses completely its shape, and or appears as a righteous deed.

For instance, sometimes for escaping slander, the people say "I fear to
explain for being a slander" or even say "Regretfully, Divine Law has
closed our tongue", or "Divine Law does not allow, otherwise I would say
a lot of things".

Such people not only implicitly commit slander, but also for leaving the
matter ambiguously, provoke the addressee's suspicion on everything in
respect to the other person, and in fact they show the matter greater
and more significant than what it really is. In addition, they have
committed hypocrisy too, and so have mixed dangerously two ill favoured
deeds.

Or when they utter as sympathy, "That poor person slipped and committed
that sin, God may forgive him".

In this case too, hypocrisy and slander are mixed together.

Or when the one making display of himself says: "Thanks to God, I have
not been affected to wine, drugs, like that person. Really, if God does
not protect man, it will be very difficult. The trap is hard, unless God
helps."

And thereby, he commits slander, hypocrisy and self admiration once and
all together.

Or when he says: "I have told these to him too and or will say”.

And in this way, he closes the way of correction, and makes his slander
more emphasized and severe with this suppositious argument.

### 3- Slander has a "Right of People" aspect

If slander is interpreted as we referred at the beginning, its "Right of
People" aspect will be obviously clear, because:

First, it lowers respect, personality and reputation of the said person,
and surely these are not less valuable than properties in view of
intellect and religion.

Second, it is inferred from similitude of slander to eating a faithful
brother's flesh in the Chambers Sura that slander is a sense of
"injustice".

Third, it is referred to in several traditions like the one already
mentioned in respect to "annihilation of good deeds and transfer of
evils", and the well known tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِنَّ صاحِبَ الْغِیبَةِ لا یُغْفَرُ لَهُ حَتّى یَغْفِرَ لَهُ
صاحِبُهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The slanderer is not forgiven unless the slandered person forgives
him.[^16]

And the Prophetic tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«کَفّارَةُ مَنِ اغْتَبْتَهُ اَنْ تَسْتَغْفِرَ لَهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

The atonement of slander is asking pardon of God for the slandered
person.[^17]

And there are traditions, which assume stopping slander as a believer's
rights.

Anyway, slander is a clear sense of injustice and without consent of the
other party; the slanderer will not be forgiven. And we conclude herein
that undoubtedly atonement of slander is not merely asking pardon of God
and repentance.

Indeed, there is no way for asking consent and forgiveness, and or no
damage is practically made to the prestige and reputation of slandered
person, then asking pardon of God may be sufficient.

Exceptions of slander
---------------------

The jurists and ethics scholars agree that there are some cases in which
slander is permitted, but they have some dissidence in specifying those
cases. This dissidence is sometimes in mentioning the examples and
senses, without any difference in the basis of matter, but sometimes it
has a spiritual and real aspect.

However, it is concluded from different proofs and documents that
slander is permitted in two cases:

a- When there is a more important interest, in which slander, while
observing the subject – it is permitted and there are various senses for
it:

1- In case of consultation, for example when someone wants to transact
or participate or marry with the other, and is questioning us.
Obviously, it is permitted to reveal hidden faults of the other party as
far as they are concerned with the said affair, and relieve the one who
seeks consult from the possible risks.

2- In case of forbidding of something wrong

3- In case of averting innovation of an innovator

4- In case of warning a Muslim about the risk and loss which is awaiting
him (though without any consultation)

5- Petition and removal of injustice and restoring right

And in general all cases in which the interest of revealing one's hidden
fault is more than its vice in view of religion.

The reason for exception of these subjects is clear, because it relies
on a clear intellectual reason that is the "principle of important and
more important". Moreover, some points are referred to in the verses and
traditions in this respect (including petition, removal of injustice,
and averting innovation of an innovator).

But the remarkable point in view of ethics is being careful that most
often deviations and errors are caused through exceptions and misuse or
mistake and negligence in determination of their limits and boundaries.
Because no one agrees to violate regulations and commit sins explicitly
and clearly, but most people achieve their purposes through pretence to
using notes and exceptions, even in most cases, man deceives his
conscience in this way, and for getting rid of punishment of conscience,
and not hurting his inward and natural character, seeks refuge from
these notes and exceptions.

And this is one of the contradictory cases of unaware and aware
conscience and conquest of the former over the latter.

So, the advantage of slander should be carefully assessed in these cases
while taking into account all features and aspects, and free from any
love and hatred and other spites, and then one can deduce its excellence
over vice of explicit slander, and do not stain himself to the dangerous
slanders under the pretext of available permit.

b- The cases in which slander is permitted without any special
advantage, and it is solely restricted to those notorious for
debauchery, but although some have included petition in this part, as it
was referred, it is one of the cases of existence of more important
legal advantage, that is restoring right and preventing injustice of
cruel person and supporting right of the oppressed. In addition to the
reason of intellect, there are several traditions narrated by Shiite and
Sunnite as the reason for exception of this issue, like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«عَنْ جَعْفَر عَنْ اَبِیهِ قالَ: ثَلاثَةٌ لَیْسَتْ لَهُمْ حُرْمَةٌ:
صاحِبُ هَوىً مُبتَدِعٌ، وَ الاِْمامُ الْجائِرُ، وَ الْفاسِقُ
الْمُعْلِنُ الْفِسْقَ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

There are three persons who do not have any respect: one who has
innovatory desires, unjust governor, and one who commits sin
publicly.[^18]

And the same is mentioned in some narrations as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ثَلاثَةٌ لا غِیبَةَ لَهُمْ: صاحِبُ الْهَوى وَ الْفاسِقُ الْمُعْلِنُ
بِفِسْقِهِ، وَ الاِْمامُ الْجائِرُ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

2- And also it is narrated from Prophet (S) in a tradition:[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لَیْسَ لِفاسِق غِیبَةٌ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no slander for the sinner.[^20]

3- And also it is narrated from Prophet (S) in another tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ اَلْقى جِلْبابَ الْحَیاءِ عَنْ وَجْهِهِ فَلا غِیْبَةَ لَهُ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who lays aside the veil of modesty; there is no slander for
him.[^21]

4- There are several traditions in respect to Justice in Vassaelo
Shiite. For example, it is narrated from Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَنْ عامَلَ النّاسَ فَلَمْ یَظْلِمْهُمْ وَ حَدَّثَهُمْ فَلَمْ
یَکْذِبْهُمْ وَ واعَدَهُمْ فَلَمْ یُخْلِفْهُمْ کانَ مِمَّنْ حَرُمَتْ
غِیْبَتُهُ وَ کَمُلَتْ مُرُوَّتُهُ وَ ظَهَرَ عَدْلُهُ وَ وَجَبَتْ
اُخُوَّتُهُ».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever is not unjust in transaction with people, and do not lie them
in speech, and do not violate them in promise, is among those whose
slander is forbidden, his personality is perfect, and his justice is
manifest, and brotherhood with him is obligatory.[^22]

Who is notorious for debauchery, and why slandering about him is permitted?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are several subjects here, which should be explained:

a- Is exception of a notorious person a topical exclusion (that is one
who affects a vice, naturally is not disturbed for mentioning it in his
absence. Moreover, it is not a hidden and privacy affair being regarded
as slander) or slandering about a notorious person is one of the slander
types, and has been excluded as so called "appropriation"?

b- Is permit for slandering about notorious one restricted to the sins
which he performs publicly, or it is permitted in all cases?

c- If someone is notorious in one place, and non-notorious and private
in somewhere else, is slandering about him permitted in the second place
too or not?

d- Is in the permit for slandering about notorious person, existence of
conditions for bid to good and forbid of wrong necessary?

The reply to all of these questions depends on understanding the main
point and reason for exclusion of this issue from slander's forbiddance.

It is inferred from above traditions that a notorious individual
basically does not have any respect (the respect which is the hindrance
for slander's permit).

In other words, such people (and cruel and innovator people) are not
respectable in view of social personality, and their desecration is not
forbidden, and therefore, giving up slander and preserving their
reputation is not necessary.

If we deduce so from above traditions, – as the phrase

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا غِیبَةَ لَهُ و لا حُرْمَةَ لَهُ»,
  </p>
</blockquote>

proves, the reply to above questions is clarified, and it does not need
more explanation, because based on rational and traditional proof,
slander does not include such persons.

But it should be noted that apparently the notorious is one who has
completely laid aside the veil of modesty, and is rude and fearless
against all sins, and it does not include all of those who perform a sin
publicly for any reason. Thus, it is possible to slander about such
persons only in respect to the case for which they are notorious.

[^1]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 251/5

[^2]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 251/5

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 240/75

[^4]: The same document, page 222

[^5]: Mohaddes Nouri, Mostadrakol Vassael, 118/9

[^6]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 257/75

[^7]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 273/5

[^8]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 255/5

[^9]: The same document, page 254

[^10]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 168/75

[^11]: «اللهُ وَلِیُّ الَّذِینَ آمَنُوا یُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُماتِ
اِلَى النُّورِ» ; 2: verse 257

[^12]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 222/75

[^13]: Feise kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, page 254

[^14]: Ghazali, Ehyaol Oloum, 145/3, Mohajjatol Beisae, 256/5

[^15]: Ghazali, Ehyahol Oloum, 145/3

[^16]: Feise Kashani, Mohajjatol Beisae, 251/5

[^17]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, volume 75, page 242 & Mohajjatol
Beisae, volume 5, page 273

[^18]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 253/75

[^19]: Ghazali, Ehyaol Oloum

[^20]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 236/75

[^21]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 233/75

[^22]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi’a, volume 5, page 393


