Effect of the Mother on her Offspring
=====================================

Great personalities of the world owe their success mainly to the mothers
who have duly performed their serious duties and played their
fundamental role in building up their children. The great genius of
Islam, the late Haj Sheikh Murtadha Ansari, wept bitterly at the death
of his mother, knelt by her corpse and shed tears of sorrow. One of his
learned pupils said in consolation and sympathy: "It is not fitting that
you, with such a high scholarly position, should act so restlessly and
shed tears on an old woman's death."

That great man raised his head and said: "It seems that you are still
unaware of the lofty position of a mother. I owe my position to the
proper education given to me by this mother and to her hard work. It was
she who laid the foundation of my progress and led me to my present
position as a scholar."

This is the example of a mother's influence on her offspring, and there
have been many mothers whose efforts have contributed to the progress of
great scholars. Edison not only failed to show any talent in childhood,
but also seemed to be quite stupid since he had an excessively large
head. His relatives and acquaintances thought him to be suffering from
mental aberration. The strange questions he asked them from time to
time, too, confirmed this supposition of theirs. Even at school, which
he did not attend for more than three months, he was nicknamed 'stupid'
owing to his repeated questions to the teacher.

So, one day he returned home in tears and narrated the matter to his
mother. She took his hand and they returned to the school. Addressing
the teacher, she said: "You don't know what you say. My son is more
intelligent than you. The trouble lies in this same fact. Now I will
take him back home and undertake his education myself, and will show you
what talent is hidden in him!" Such was the strange prediction of that
mother! Thenceforth she did as she had promised, and undertook his
education.

A friend of Edison's family writes in this connection: "Sometimes while
passing by Edison's house I noticed Mrs. Edison and her son sitting in
the vestibule, while she was engaged in teaching him”.

This place served as a classroom, and he was the only pupil there. His
gestures and movements were like his mother's, and he loved her very
much. When she spoke, he listened attentively, as if she was an ocean of
knowledge.

As a result of his mother's efforts, Edison managed, even before the age
of nine, to read the masterly works of such writers as Gibbon, Hume,
Plato, and Homer. This wise and intelligent mother also taught him
geography, history, arithmetic and ethics. Edison attended school only
for three months, and all he had learnt during childhood was through his
mother. She was a true teacher in every sense of the word, since her
care was not only for his education, but also to discover his natural
talents and develop them. In later years, when Edison rose to the height
of fame, he said: "In childhood, l realized what a fine figure a mother
is. When the teacher called me 'stupid', she defended me. I determined
seriously to prove that she was not mistaken about me." He also said: "I
shall never lose the effects of my mother's education. If she had not
encouraged me, I may not have become an inventor. In my mother's
opinion, if those who went wrong after attaining adolescence had been
educated and taken care of sufficiently, they would not have become
useless parasites in society. The experiences she had gathered as a
teacher, taught her many secrets of human nature. I had always been
careless, and if it had not been for her attention, I would, in all
probability, have deviated from the proper course. But her steadfastness
and goodness were the powerful factors that checked me from deviation
and error.[^1]

Smiles says: "A model and example are the most important factor in a
child's moral education. If a person wishes his children to have fine
qualities, he should definitely provide them with fine models. But the
model that is constantly before their eyes, is the mother.''[^2]

Mothers can, with their personality, sympathy and efforts, lay the
foundation of a happy life for their children and train them for future,
whereas frivolous and selfish mothers, with their wrong acts, drag their
children towards distress and misfortune.

Will Durant says in a discussion of the profound effects of parents'
deeds upon their children: "The best house, the best school and the best
of everything else lie a place where there is less command. It can
clearly be seen how, without punishment and command, a child may be led
to behave well. If this free method produces no effect in some cases, it
is because we parents ourselves do not follow the orders we give to our
children. We give an order for moderation, but we go to excess in eating
and drinking. We recommend kindness, but we ourselves quarrel in others'
presence. We warn our children against eating sweets or seeing films
full of fight, but secretly indulge in them ourselves until the child
finds out our secret one day. We teach mildness by way of coarseness,
and politeness through rudeness. We expect humility from a child, but
wish to show ourselves invincible like the gods. However, children learn
our ways and deeds, not our words, and their worry and rebelliousness
are due to the fact they imitate our past acts. Show me your children,
and then I can say what kind of a fellow you are. If you expect good
manners from your children, be polite yourself, and if you expect
cleanness, be clean yourself.

Nothing else is necessary. Even if in violent anger you show intensity
and use rude words, you will keep alive in his mind those rude words
through imitation. Good behaviour can be taught only through models and
examples, and by means of constant forbearance. This is, of course, a
hard task which requires a new self-education. This is how our children
educate us."[^3]

Islam explicitly declares that one of the main causes of deviation in
children is the devia­ tion of parents themselves. The prophet of Islam
asserts that every child enters the world with a chaste nature which is
ready to accept mono­ theism and moral virtues, but it is the parents
who drag their children with adverse education towards perversion and
corruption and sometimes towards infidelity and dualism.[^4]

It is on account of this undeniable influence of the parents on the
spirit of children that the exalted leaders of Islam have made many
recommendations to parents, and have greatly valued their efforts.

The Holy Prophet of Islam says: "Respect your children and teach them
proper manners so that you may receive divine favour and salvation."[^5]

Elsewhere he says: "If you train your children in good manners and
proper education, it is better than offering a part of your wealth every
day in the way of God."[^6]

Another narration quoted from the Seal of the prophet, says: "When
someone departs this world, his record of deeds is sealed, and he cannot
have access to the world except for three things:

1- If he has performed good deeds in life and has always brought benefit
to people.

2- If he has left behind some knowledge for people to benefit from.

3- If he has left behind honest children who will pray for him.[^7]

When parents perform their duties improperly educating their children,
they can benefit completely from their rights as parents, and enjoy the
advantage of having good offspring. Here, Islam addresses the offspring
and makes recommendations to them about properly treating parents.

Imam Sadiq says: "Kindness and benevolence to parents are an evidence of
a person's godliness, since no religious devotion benevolence to parents
are an evidence of a person's godliness, since no religious devotion
pleases God as much as respecting parents."[^8]

The Holy Prophet says: "A look of affection by an offspring at the
parents is considered a religious devotion."[^9]

The Sixth Imam says: "If you wish God to grant you a long life, please
and satisfy your parents."

The Seal of the Prophets says: "God's satisfaction lies in the
satisfaction of parents, and his wrath in their anger."

Imam Baqir, the Fifth Imam, says: "There are four things the possession
of which will provide a person with a house in heaven through God's
favour:

1- Taking care of orphans and providing refuge for them.

2- To have compassion for the disabled and helpless.

3- To have a kind heart and good conduct towards parents, and

4- To be lenient towards inferiors and servants.[^10]

Benevolence to one's mother is the atonement of sins. Islam considers
benevolence to one's mother a useful way of expiating one's sins, and
regards goodness to her as a means of salvation for the sins and winning
God's consent.

A man went to the Noble Prophet of Islam and said: "O, prophet of God! I
have sinned much in life and committed every wicked act. Is the door of
repentance open to me, and will Cod accept my penitence?" The Prophet
said: "Are any of your parents alive?" He said: "Yes, my father is
alive." The Prophet said: "Then go to him and be good to him (so that
your sins may be forgiven." He bade farewell and went out. Then the
prophet said: "I wish his mother were alive!" What he meant was that if
his mother were alive to receive her son's goodness, his sins would be
forgiven sooner.[^11]

Another Islamic narration says: "A man came to the Prophet of Islam and
said: "O, Prophet of God, I was granted a daughter by Go. I brought her
up till she reached the age of maturity. One day I dressed and adorned
her and then took her to a well and threw her into it. The last word I
heard that innocent girl utter, was: 'O, dear father!' Now I am penitent
of what I have done. How can I expiate my sin? What should I do to
compensate that sin?" The Prophet said: "ls your mother alive?" He said:
"No". The prophet asked: "ls your aunt alive?" He said "Yes". The
Prophet said: "She is tantamount to a mother. Go and be good to her;
then your sin will be expiated."[^12]

[^1]: The Power and Position of Women in History, P. 267.

[^2]: Ethics by Samuel Smiles P. 51.

[^3]: Pleasures of Philosophy, Will Durant, P. 198.

[^4]: Safinatul Bihar,Vol . 2, P. 373.

[^5]: Makarem ul-Akhlaq, P. 255.

[^6]: Makarem ul-Akhlaq, P. 255.

[^7]: The Way of Perfection, Ahmad Amin, P. 144.

[^8]: Misbah al-Shari'a, P. 48.

[^9]: Kashaf ul-Ghama, P. 243.

[^10]: Kisal al-Saduq, Vol. I, P. 106.

[^11]: Bihar Al-Anwar. Vol,74, P.82.

[^12]: Safinatul Bihar, Vol. 2, P. 687.


