Another Recommendation for a Mother
===================================

A man called Zakaria Ibn Ibrahim says: "I was a Christian who embraced
Islam and made pilgrimage to the House of God. I had the honour to visit
Imam Sadiq and tell him that I was recently converted to Islam from
Christianity. The Imam asked: What advantage did you find in Islam to
embrace it ? I quoted this verse of the Quran which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كُنْتَ تَدْرِي مَا الْكِتَابُ وَلَا الْإِيمَانُ وَلَٰكِنْ
جَعَلْنَاهُ نُورًا نَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ نَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"You did not know what the Book was, nor what the faith was, but We
made it a light guiding thereby whom We please." (42:52)***

The Imam said: “Thus God guided you to Islam and illuminated your heart
with its light." Then he prayed for me to receive more guidance.Then I
informed him that my parents and relatives remained Christian, and my
mother was blind. Would it be proper for me to live with them and have
relationship? The Imam asked: 'Do they eat pork?' I said 'no'. Then the
Imam said: 'There is nothing wrong in your association with them,' and
added: 'Take care of your mother and be benevolent to her, and when she
passes away, you yourself can arrange her burial.'

When I returned from my pilgrimage to Mecca and reached Kufa, I showed
such kindness to my mother in accordance with the Imam's command. I fed
her myself, arranged her clothes, combed her hair and served her in many
ways.

When she noticed the change in my behaviour, she said: "My son, in those
days when you professed our religion, you did not behave in this way.
What is the reason for so much affection since you have embraced Islam?"

I said: "A descendant of the Prophet has commanded me to act in this
way."

She said: "Is he your prophet?"

I said: "No! There will come no prophet after ours. He is a son of the
prophet."

She said: "These commands are those of all the prophets, but your
religion is better than mine. Guide me to become a Muslim."

I taught her the way of Islam, and she became a Muslim, and performed
the noon, afternoon, evening and nigh t prayers, but she' felt sick in
the middle of die night. I stayed by her bed and nursed her.

She said: "My boy! Repeat for me the Islamic words of faith" I did so,
and she confessed to all of them, and passed away the same night.

Next morning, her funeral ceremony was performed by a group of Muslims
according to Islamic rites, and I recited a prayer to her corpse and
buried her with my own hands.[^1]

[^1]: Al-Kafi, Vol.2, P.16, Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 74.


