Mother's Day
============

A point to mention here is that for some years, December 16 has been
chosen as "Mother's Day", when certain ceremonies are held every year.
Newspapers publish articles about it on that occasion, poems are
composed, and gifts are given to mothers by their children.

This is, of course, a fine thing, but it is not enough to hold such
ceremonies and offer gifts in appreciation of a mother's efforts.
Attempt should, however, be made to enlighten mothers about their grave
responsibility and make them realize chat the management of a family and
upbringing of children are among the greatest and the most worthy
occupations, compared with which no other job is so significant.

According to Napoleon, a mother rocks the cradle with one hand and the
world with the other. As we have already said, the worthy toils and
efforts of a mother may bring up such a child who may produce a great
upheaval in the world.

Mothers should try to offer society honest and well-educated children,
and take special care about their faith and belief, since experience has
shown that a faithless offspring is not only useless for his parents but
is also sometimes harmful and dangerous.

We have often read in publications many accounts of youths who have
beaten their mother or father or have even killed them.

Why so? Experience tells us that there is no reason for such offenses
and crimes but lack of faith and absence of a spiritual basis to rely
on. If parents wish to have a worldly and eternal benefit from their
children, they should pay full attention to their religious affairs and
beliefs in the same way that they take care of their health and
education.

Children, too, should become deeply familiar with their duties towards
their parents, and remember that an offspring's true happiness depends
on the heart-felt consent of the parents.

If writers, orators and poets adopt such an attitude towards "Mother's
Day" and acquaint mothers and their children with their basic duties, we
may then say that they have rendered a service and performed their
obligation.


