[Introduction]
==============

We find ourselves, in Europe and in America, after centuries of
separation between religion and the state: religion is regarded as a
matter of freedom of conscience, concerning the private life of a
person, while the state deals with the administration, neutral in
relation to the private convictions of citizens, in the public interest.
The modern state is built on the premise of a separation: public
interest actions originate in secular reasons and people have the
unrestricted freedom to promote their religious beliefs, in their
private life and in worship places.

Constitutions have judicially confirmed the separation. For example, in
the*Bill of Rights* (1791), the well-known part of the*Constitution of
the United States* , the First Amendment states that: “Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion, of prohibiting the
free exercise hereof; or abridging the freedom of speech or of the
press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the Government for a redress of grievances”. At the same time,
the*Constitution of France* (1958), in Article 1, stipulates that: ”La
France est une République indivisible, laïque, démocratique et sociale.
Elle assure l'égalité devant la loi de tous les citoyens sans
distinction d'origine, de race ou de religion. Elle respecte toutes les
croyances”, after, in the*Declaration des droits de l’homme et du
citoyen* it was already stated that: ”Nul ne doit être inquiété pour ses
opinions, même religieuses, pourvu que leur manifestation ne trouble pas
l'ordre public établi par la loi”[^1] , the public force (la force
publique) being ”instituée pour l’avantage de tous, et non pour
l’utilité particulière de ceux auxquels elle est confiée”[^2] . The
examples may, of course, continue.

Meanwhile, a new activism in favour of the separation from religion was
added to the classical separation between the state and religion. For
instance, Paul Kurtz recently published a sort of manifesto,
entitled*What Is Secular Humanism* (2007), going beyond the already
established separation: the well-known editor of pragmatic writing
argues in favour of removing religion not only from the public life of
the state, but also from the people’s individual life projects, which
are, by their nature, private. He proposes the vision of a “secular
humanism”, which “rejects supernatural accounts of reality; but it seeks
to optimise the fullness of human life in a naturalistic universe”[^3]
and “holds that ethical values are relative to human experience and need
not be derived from theological or metaphysical foundations”[^4] .

I consider this activism to be on a wrong path, and that the classical
separation between religion and the state must be questioned.*Not only
did religion induce a positive moral sense in the actions of the
overwhelming majority of people, by operating with the Divinity that
divides justice, but, moreover, it can motivate some of the most
democratic behaviours, probably the most democratic one* Therefore,
after considering the relationship between religion and the state from a
historical point of view, I will indicate that the separation thesis is
already encountering many difficulties, so much so that if, especially
in religiously pluralistic societies, the abandonment of secularisation
is not realistic, a new solution to the relationship between religion
and the state must be found, however. I will try to take the road
towards such a solution. I would like to say, from the

outset, that I take up the distinction between the politics-religion
relation and the state-church relation[^5] , but I argue that the latter
relationship can no longer be understood without considering the former.
Religion is not apolitical, and the state cannot remain indifferent to
the beliefs of its citizens anymore if it takes itself seriously as an
organisation based on the recognition of citizens.


