[The First Section]
===================

I will not dwell upon the history of the separation between “secular
(political)” and “religious”, between the Church and the state, this
being well-known. In Dante’s*De Monarchia* (1311) we find the beginning
of the idea of this separation: “the church and the empire have
different «fondamenti»” and are the terms of a relation, the first
“nell’ambito della paternità”, the second “in quello del dominio”. It
is, however, rightfully said that the Peace of Westphalia ended the
Thirty Years’ War, after a series of conflicts of a confessional nature,
and it opened the historical cycle of the separation between the Pope’s
auctoritas and the king’s potestas. “The Church is losing its role as
major supporter of the political power, the latter feeling released from
the responsibilities directly related to the religious ambit”[^6] .

I will not insist either on the paradoxical interaction between the
state and the Church, which determined royal power to try to legitimise
itself through the Church’s control over what is holy, and the two, the
Church and the state, to organise themselves through “mutual mirroring
(gegenseitigen Bespiegelung)”[^7] . One may say that  “seit dem Ende des
18. Jahrhunderts hat die Säkularisierung die Grenzen von Kirchen - und
Staatsrecht überschritten und ist zu einer allgemeinen Kategorie
geworden, die unauflöslich mit der neuen einheitlichen Vorstellung einer
geschichtlichen Zeit verflochten ist. Aus dieser Verflechtung (bei der
die Säkularisierung mit anderen Symbol-Koordinaten der modernen
Befindlichkeit zusammenhängt: mit Emanzipation und Fortschritt,
Befreiung und Revolution) ergeben sich radikale Neudefinitionen und
Sinnverschiebungen des Begriffspaares geistlich/weltlich”[^8] . Today,
however, possessing a wider historical knowledge, we must question the
history of secularisation.

In order to acknowledge the complexity of the issue we are faced with
today, I would like to discuss the matter of emancipation. Few have
approached it as convincingly as Moses Mendelssohn. In*Jerusalem*
(1783), the renowned Rabbi of Berlin considered the “state” and
“religion” to be “piliers de la vie sociale”, which must reach a
“balance”. His intention was to clarify their “areas” and the “limits”
separating them by starting from “the liberty of conscience”: „Le droit
à nos propres convictions est inaliénable, il ne peut transiter d’une
personne à une autre, car il ne donne et ne prend aucun droit à la
richesse, au bien et à la liberté”[^9] Mendelssohn’s predominating
argument was that no institution is entitled to compel people’s
“convictions”. “Car un contrat sur des choses qui, selon leur nature,
sont inaliénables, n’est pas valable en soi et s’annule de
lui-même”[^10] . “The state and religion” refer to areas that are
different from the outset. “Les principes coduisant les hommes à des
actions et à des convictions raisonnables reposent en partie sur les
rapports des hommes entre eux, en partie, sur les rapports des hommes
aves leur Créateur et celui qui les fait exister. Ceux-là
appartiennement à l’*État* , ceux-ci à la*religion* Dans la mesure où
les actions et convictions des hommes peuvent être rendues d’intérêt
commun par raisons découlant de leurs rapports entre eux, ils sont
l’objet de la constitution civile; mais dans la mesure où les rapports
des hommes envers Dieu sont pris comme source de ceux-ci, ils
appratiennent à

l’Église, à la Synagogue ou à la Mosquée”[^11] . Mendelssohn was,
however, rather astute in observing that on the very basis of the
separation, religion motivates people’s behaviours.

Meanwhile, within European culture, there has been a long debate on the
issue of emancipation, with precise distinctions between “political
emancipation”, “civil emancipation”, “social emancipation”, “religious
emancipation”, distinctions that have marked the approaches to the
relation between religion and the state to our days[^12] One cannot,
however, help wondering how things stand today. We may notice that, on
the one hand, we are presented with apologies for the established
separation and with reconstructions of the separation thesis, while on
the other hand, we are taking part in the “religious resurgence” in
modern society.

There are tenacious defences of the established separation between
religion and the state, with the conviction that a better solution would
not be possible. The most eloquent example was given recently by Herbert
Schnädelbach, in his volume*Religion in der modernen Welt* (2009). The
author keeps repeating the obsolete argument that a person’s rights and
liberties, established after 1789, represent not so much a Christian
inspiration, as “the enactment of a world of civil, enlightened life
(*die Verrechtlichung einer bürgerlichen, aufgeklärten Lebenswelt*
)”[^13] , and sees in the “return of religion (*Wiederkehr der Religion*
)”, which we are witnessing, only “the return of a need for religion
(*Wiederkehr eines religiösen Bedürfnisses* ”)[^14] This being said, the
Berlin philosopher continues to build the thesis according to which
“only devised sovereignty, through the exclusion of all religious
reminiscences, makes it possible for a constitution of liberty to
exist”[^15] , and he defends the equivalence of the possibilities of
liberties with the cultivation of “critical reason”. He attributes only
to the Enlightenment the reflexivity which, in time, has put cultures in
motion. “As such, it is convenient to understand the Enlightenment
(*Aufklärung* ) and its engine, criticism, both from a historical
perspective and a structural one, as an intellectual side of cultural
modernisation in the sense of a reflexive progressive becoming of the
cultures”[^16] Herbert Schnädelbach claims that “the idea of critical
reason”, which is of Kantian origin, was not taken over by “the reason
of faith” (*Vernunft des Glaubens* )”[^17] and he holds, obviously
incorrectly, that “obedience (*Gehorsam* )” is nothing more than “giving
up the examining criticism of what is heard”[^18] .

The contemporary offensive philosopher from Berlin wishes to
re-establish, in its entirety, the Kantian criticism of cognitive reason
and keeps proposing the examination of expressions and concepts before
their being used. Only that his analysis of the religious state in
modern world sticks to this kind of conceptual examination without it
being capable, for methodological reasons, of capturing the importance
of religion in democracy and the role of religion representatives in the
defence and renewal of democracy. Most importantly, there is the wise
observation made by Peter L. Berger that “there is a great risk of
neglecting religion in today’s analysis”[^19] , even though the impacts
of religion and of politics are complex, the philosopher from Berlin has
left them aside.

Most conclusive in reconstructing the separation thesis was John Rawls.
The American philosopher sets out by explaining “public reason”, which
conditions a “well-ordered constitutional democratic society”.
In*Political Liberalism* (1996), he shows that, in democracy, the
citizen has the duty to appeal to “public reason”. “The ideal of
citizenship imposes a moral, not a legal, duty - the duty of civility -
to be able to explain to one another on those fundamental questions how
the principles and policies they advocate and vote for can be supported
by the political values of public reason. The duty also involves a
willingness to listen to others and a fairmindedness in deciding when
accommodations to their view should reasonably be made”[^20] The citizen
has the duty of reporting to what, together, the citizens of that state
decide for the common good. It involves a content of rules and neutral
decisions in relation to the various individual convictions, including
religious ones. Each citizen can publicly promote his or her points of
view and arguments which may be shared by the other citizens as well,
leaving rooted in their private life liberties of the person which no
one can take away. The citizens act according to this order, because
they know that „they cannot reach agreement or even approach mutual
understanding on the basis of their irreconcilable comprehensive
doctrines. In view of this, they need to consider what kinds of reasons
they may reasonably give one another when fundamental poltical questions
are at stake”[^21] .

Thus being connected, the private views of the citizens - be they
religious, philosophical or of other nature - and “public reason”,
several questions arise. In John Rawls’ aprioristic approach one such
question is considered: how does the one who shares his religious views
make his vision compatible with the demands of that “public reason”?
In*The Idea of Public Reason Revisited* (1997), the answer determines
the questioning of the way in which “public reason” comes to legitimise
democratic society. Two solutions are possible: the first one,
historically, too, was the acceptance of “tolerance” as a modus vivendi
(such as at the end of confessional confrontations in the 17 th
century), and the second one consisted of the acceptance of democracy
because it allows for a better promotion of one’s own views.

There are, however, other open questions, which have been tackled
head-on by Jürgen Habermas, among our contemporaries. In*Religion in der
Öffentlichkeit. Kognitive Voraussetzungen für den «öffentlichen
Vernunftgebrauch» religiöser und säkularer Bürger* (2005), the renowned
thinker of Frankfurt shows that “ the liberty of conscience and
religious liberty” are, of course, the solution capable of dissolving “
the potential for conflict” which may result from situations of
religious pluralism. But “*für eine gleichmäßige Gewährleistung der
Religionsfreiheit ist nun der säkulare Charakter des Staates zwar eine
notwendige, aber keine zureichende Bedingung* ”[^22] . The situation
when the state declares itself neutral does not, however, eliminate the
possibility that religious liberty may be affected. John Rawls
acknowledged the circumstance, but emphasized not the state’s
neutrality, but “ the normative implications of the role of the
citizen”. Therefore „*nach liberaler Auffassung gewährleistet der Staat
Religionsfreiheit nur unter der Bedingung, dass sich die*

*Religionsgemeinschaften aus der Perspektive ihrer eigenen
Überlieferungen nicht nur auf die weltanschauliche Neutralität der
staatlichen Vernunftgebrauchs der Bürger* ”[^23] . Nonetheless, when one
wants to realistically conceive the relation religion-state, one must
consider, as arguments, not only the exhausted historical fact that
there have been, throughout history, times of repression caused by
religious institutions, and fundamentalisms are dangerous, but also
equally significant facts, such as the movements, in favour of democracy
and human rights, which have been led by religious personalities; also,
in the existing democratic state, churches and religious communities
guarantee human liberties and rights and democratic order. Therefore,
the rigid separation of religion and the state must be overcome by
acknowledging the beneficial role of religion in, at least, inducing a
favourable morality regarding human rights and democracy.

Habermas made crucial observations towards a new understanding of the
relation religion-state: the “liberal state”, actually, claims a
“self-censure (*Selbstzensur* )” on behalf of the citizens and of the
religious communities[^24] ; this state promises its citizens, who are
given the freedom of conscience, that it will not claim anything against
their own belief[^25] ; the state cannot ask of its citizens to split
their conscience by obsessively limiting what is valid according to
their belief from that which is valid according to the state’s
character; the state cannot expect its citizens to manifest themselves
politically, independently of their convictions, be they religious[^26]
Habermas shows that the established separation between religion and the
state is, actually, a “secularist over-generalization (*säkularistische
Überverallgemeinerung* )”, and the philosopher’s conclusion, in his own
words, is that: “the liberal state has, therefore, an interest in
delivering religious voices into the public political life, and an
interest in the political participation of religious organisations. The
state cannot allow itself to discourage religious believers and
communities of faith from expressing themselves as such, including
politically, because the state can’t know whether the secular society
dissociates itself from the important resources of the foundation of
meaning. Secular citizens, or of other belief, too, can learn something
from religious contributions, in certain circumstances, which is the
case when, for instance, in the normative contents on the truth of a
religious expression one may recognise one’s own intuitions, sometimes
shaken”[^27] .

We can assert that John Rawls rebuilt the relation religion-state within
the established terms, by emphasizing individual behaviours as the
ground for solving the tensions resulted between the one living his
religious convictions and the inevitably formalizing order of the state.
Habermas made a step forward by valuing the liberality of the liberal
state, which, regardless of what is being said, does not stay liberal
unless it allows for people’s free manifestations. The distinguished
German philosopher renewed the argumentation by showing that the almost
ritual invocation of the repressions made by religious institutions
throughout history explains only part of the truth, which is irrelevant.
The other part, much more significant today, resides in the strong
commitment of believers and

religious institutions, on a large scale, to human rights, to people’s
liberties and to democracy.

Meanwhile, the culture of the times we are living has seen a “religious
resurgence” and a “religious turn”. We are talking about simultaneous
changes in at least three fields. There are changes in the state of
religion, in the sense that, as the “values surveys” of the last decades
show, “the future of Europe doesn’t seem to reside in the lack of
religiosity”[^28] , and the “over-politicization in society”[^29] and,
especially, globalisation, “enhances, at least in the relatively short
term, religion and religiosity”[^30] There are changes in democratic
conscience, in the sense that contemporary societies suffer from a
“crisis of motivation”[^31] , which cannot be overcome without
questioning secularisation and without re-evaluating cultural resources;
actually, without acknowledging religion’s power of motivation in
democratic behaviours and without reflecting upon a “post-secular
society”[^32] There are changes in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures
which lay the foundation of monotheist religions, so that the path on
which Jesus of Nazareth went on to become Jesus Christ is, for us, who
were born later, much clearer than for any previous Christian
generation[^33] .

It can be said that these changes, made in the three fields, are not
transitory, but truly historical, and they compel us to re-think topics
with far-reaching implications, such as the cultural foundation of
Europe, the functioning of the democratic state, the relation between
science and philosophy, on the one hand, and religion on the other; they
also help us take up new challenges, such as defending firm values
against the wave of relativism and defending human identity against the
naturalism connected to biotechnologies.


