[The Second Section]
====================

Today, at least three series of historical facts make us question the
relation between religion and the state, established with the separation
theory. I am considering: a) the circumstance in which a state, which
proclaims itself to be neutral regarding citizens’ beliefs (including
the religious ones), cannot constrain them to act outside their
convictions and does not remain liberal unless it allows them to act as
citizens with certain convictions (religious included); b) the
circumstance in which democracies are not sustainable unless they
possess cultural resources which are generated, however, by means of
morals, by religious traditions; c) the circumstance in which, in the
name of certain religions, political actions take place, some of which
are positive (such as democratic growth), others are negative
(terrorism). All these series of facts obscure the established thesis of
the separation between religion and state. Let us elaborate.

With regard to a): when in a society, several conceptions, including the
religious ones, co-exist, the citizens usually appeal to two
“strategies” - the “outsourcing” of a conception, by the citizen, to the
detriment of another’s conception, or the “internalizing”, in other
words, considering the other’s conception as one that can be absorbed by
one’s own conception. But, religious attitudes are articulated in
relation to reality as a whole[^34] Whilst scientific attitude is
promoted in the third person, religious attitude is promoted in the
first. “Religious beliefs and practices are, on the one
hand,*expressive* and*individualizing* : they foster man’s deepest and
most powerful individual valorisations, those formative attitudes which
serve self-understanding, that are intimately connected to man’s
specific access to the world. On the other hand, they are*propositional*
and*universalistic* : their content transcends the individual, they
claim to express something about reality in its entirety and they want -
at least when most great religions are concerned - to be valid for all
people”[^35] This being said, the pluralism of views, including the
religious ones, must be taken seriously: the pluralism of views is
approached as “expressivity” and “individualisation”, and it claims the
taking into consideration as such of all religious symbols.

Thus, no citizen - neither the secularised, nor the religious one,
neither the citizen who shares a religion, nor the one sharing a
different one - is absolved of the duty to justify his statements and
actions, in reasonable terms accepted by cohabitation in society, as the
state based on individual liberties cannot legitimately stop the
reasonable manifestation of any citizen, including under religious
aspects. Habermas was right to draw attention to the fact that a state’s
expectations of its citizens “is in vain (*laufen ins Leere* )” if the
“reciprocity of expectations” is not ensured[^36] Any disregard for the
rule of reciprocity is counterproductive. “As long as the secularised
citizen is convinced that religious traditions and religious communities
are somewhat archaic, a relic which was transmitted from modern
societies until the present day, they understand religious liberty only
as a natural cultural protection pertaining to dying species. From their
perspective, religion no longer has an inner righteousness. At this
point, the principle of separating religion from the state can only have
the secular meaning of a satisfied lack of interest (schonenden)[^37] To
get back to the rule of reciprocity, which is,

explicitly or tacitly, contained in the very principles of the
democratic construction of the liberal state as such, is today more
necessary than ever.

Can the state remain neutral in relation to the citizens’ conceptions?
It has been rightfully observed that the state has never been neutral
towards the conceptions citizens have and cannot stay as such in any
condition. Sometimes, the democratic state intended to be detached, it
tolerated conceptions which destroyed it and it paid a high price for
that “detachment”. Generally, the state cannot stay democratic unless it
cares for every citizen, including minorities of any kind (political,
ethnic etc.). The state remains an advocate of tolerance, but it must
tie that tolerance to the truth[^38] It would be advisable, on the other
hand, to go back to the originary acceptation of “secularism” attributed
to the state by the advocates of the separation between the state and
religion. It should be said that “secularism” did not originally mean an
a priori opposition to any religious conception, rather, at least at the
dawn of modern age, the prejudice-free search for the “truth”. As it was
recently put, “«secularism» shows a way of reflecting, of analysing and
generating ideas and contents”[^39] Secularism means independence from
trends of faith, but not necessarily an opposition to the belief.

With regard to b): in many historical circumstances the democratisation
and the well-functioning of democracies have depended a lot on cultural
resources. In one of my books, I spoke about the “cultural turn” of
societies in late modernity and I drew attention to the dependence on
the culture of politics and economy[^40] There is one aspect I wish to
emphasize here: democracy becomes democratura (a false democracy) when
the cultural resources which nurture self-respect, the trust in the rule
of reciprocity, the respect for others and the solidarity on behalf of a
common destiny are deficient.

The problem was signalled under other truly deep aspects. Habermas, for
instance, showed once more (most recently in*Ein Bewusstsein von dem,
was fehlt* , 2007) that “reason”, as it was understood in the modern
age, as one particularly following procedures, has an “immanent
defeatist tendency”[^41] The philosopher draws attention to the fact
that, along with the separation of the state from the church, of
politics from religion, we are left in confusion regarding the relation
between “secular reason” and “religion”, even if, in fact, “there is a
specific dialectic” between “modernity’s enlightened self-understanding
and the theological understanding of the self of universal
religions”[^42] Today, Habermas brings forth solid arguments when
talking about the “complementarity (*Komplementarität* )” of the two
forms of conscience and the need for both to have “learning processes
(*Lernprozesse* )”, after the traditional “syntheses” of faith and
conscience, put in motion from Augustine to Toma, the connection between
Jerusalem and Athens was destroyed. Today, “the immanent defeatism of
secular reason is a major problem that specialisations encounter in
social sciences and in the philosophy of the moments of “Enlightenment
dialectics”, as well as in the naturalism spreading in environmental
sciences. “However, if we set in motion similar learning processes in
the contexts of religious and metaphysical world, then both ways, faith
and knowledge, with their

traditions originating in Jerusalem and Athens, belong to the history of
building secular reason, where the sons and daughters of modernity
understand each other and their place in the world today. This modern
reason will begin to understand itself only if it clarifies its position
regarding contemporary religious conscience become reflexive…”[^43]
Religion must accept the cognitive authority of science, but science
must grasp the fact that in its own construction religion has played a
part. Moreover, from thetheology become reflexive, secular reason
receives even today fertile impulses[^44] .

“Universal politics”, which is able to ensure equal rights and liberties
for all members of a society, remains indispensable. It presupposes the
convergence of interests to rules that have yet to become universal.
What has become clear in the meanwhile is the fact that “it’s not
possible to put up an adequate model of universal politics by
“neutralizing” the substantial visions, especially religious ones”[^45]
Thus, there is a need for a state which ensures “in an adequate form a
civil plural society” instead of a “distanced” state, anonymous and
alien to traditions of human interaction. We are not talking about a new
“confessional state”, but about a “new secularism (*nuova laicità* )” -
a new search for convergences, instead of the separation which, in time,
has become anachronic and rigid.

With regard to c): in his encyclical,*Ecclesia in Europa* (2000), Pope
John Paul II mentioned the commitment of the church to European values,
in the most adequate terms possible: “Mit Freude stellen wir die
zunehmende Öffnung der Völker aufeinander hin fest, die Versöhnung
zwischen Nationen, die lange Zeit verfeindet waren, die fortschreitende
Ausdehnung des Einigungsprozesses auf die Länder Osteuropas. Es wachsen
Anerkennung, Zusammenarbeit und Austausch aller Art, so daß nach und
nach eine europäische Kultur, ja ein europäisches Bewußtsein entsteht,
das hoffentlich, besonders bei den Judendlichen, das Gefühl der
Brüderlickeit und den Willen zum Teilen wachsen läßt”[^46] . By this, no
confusion should be made between religion and politics, between the
state’s and the church’s role. This was emphasized as clearly as
possible by Cardinal Ratzinger, when he showed “Überblickt man diese
Zusammenhänge, so wird eine sehr nüchterne Sicht des Staates deutlich:
Es kommt nicht auf die persönliche Gläubigkeit oder die subjektiven
guten Intentionen der Staatsorgane an. Sofern sie Frieden und Recht
garantieren, entsprechen sie einer göttlichen Verfügung; in heutiger
Terminologie würden wir sagen: Sie stellen eine Schöpfungsordnung dar.
Gerade in seiner Profanität ist der Staat zu achten; er ist vom Wesen
des Menschen als animal sociale et politicum her notwendig, in diesem
menschlichen Wesen und damit schöpfungsmäßig begründet. In alledem ist
zugleich eine Begrenzung des Staates enthalten: Er hat seinen Bereich,
den er nicht überschreiten darf; er muss das höhere Recht Gottes
respektieren. Die Verweigerung der Anbetung des Kaisers und überhaupt
die Verweigerung des Staatskultes ist im Grunde einfach die Ablehnung
des totalitären Staates“[^47] . Cardinal Grocholewski has shown most
convincingly the degree of the commitment of the Catholic Church to the
doctrine of people’s natural rights[^48] On the other hand, politics
remains an “area of reason”, but

of a reason which is not simply instrumental; rather, one that is
infused with morals coming from different sources, including from
religions.

It must be said that the ingression into politics by religions is
inevitable, regardless of how clear the proclaimed separation between
the state and religious institutions, politics and religion may be.
After all, democracy would not have been possible without the cultural
resources originating from the Judeo-Christian tradition, and European
unification cannot even be conceived without the enormous resource of
motivation which was American Christianity. We have many positive
examples of the birth and support of democratisations, and of the
application of human rights by the people acting on behalf of religious
institutions and under the umbrella of religion.

Religion, however, has shown us a different aspect, too: that of
“pathologies”. As there are “pathologies of the reason”, there are also
“pathologies of religion”. “The terrorist attacks of 9/11 have only
shocked many people, and have made them conscious of global terrorist
networks, which see themselves as the result of a specific politisation
of one of the greatest universal religions, that of the Islam”[^49] In
fact, this is a turn to “religious justification for the political act”
(religiöse Rechtfertigung politischen Handeln)”, so that we will have to
accept the shift to “the end of Postmodernity (Ende der Postmoderne)”,
in spite of the a-theoretical demands of Postmodernism. At the same
time, the age of secularisation is over and we can talk about “the end
of the secularisation theory (das Ende der
Säkularisierungstheorie)”[^50] .

But what connotation should we give secularisation? There are multiple
understandings of it. Charles Taylor circumscribed three meanings of
secularisation: setting free the state’s institutions from legitimation
through “devotion to or faith in God”; the decession of religious faith
and of corresponding practices; considering faith an option among
others[^51] As I have shown elsewhere[^52] , secularisation is a term
derived from canonical law (the passing of a person or of goods from an
order or church to civil, mundane statute), it gradually passes to
constitutional law and, eventually, to the philosophy of history. In the
current speech, however, I am more interested in secularisation as the
alleged decrease in the weight of religion in social life and as its
retreat into the private area, due to the increasing share of the state
and politics in people’s lives. The situation and perspectives of this
secularisation are what we have to focus on right now. In fact, the
importance of religion in social life has not diminished and religion
has not withdrawn into private life. If it does, the democracies will
lose.


