[The Third Section]
===================

If the established thesis of the separation of religion from the state
is in difficulty, this does not mean that the state should revert to
religious control. No important contemporary theologian supports the
theory of disguising the state in religious cloth.

Whoever reads John Dewey’s article,*The Ethics of Democracy* (1896),
keeps in mind the distinction between conceiving democracy as a simple
form of governing (narrowing down to the periodic election of
representatives and leaders), and conceiving democracy as a “form of
life”. “Democracy is a form of moral and spiritual association”. Only a
democracy which is constantly nurtured by a social ideal and does not
let itself be reduced to procedures will be sufficiently different from
other forms of government and will avoid its own dissolution, caused by
the corruption of power. John Dewey considered necessary a sort of
“unity (to be one)” between “the church and the state, divine and human
organisation of society”[^53] (*The Early Works 1882-1998* , Illinois
University Press, 1969, pp. 248-249). Certainly, in John Dewey, this
does not mean a return to the old*republica christiana* , but simply the
making of an ethical soul, nourished by religious beliefs, among
democrats. And this has always been a weighty matter throughout history.

The topic is not ignored today, but it is not decisively re-discussed
either. The 2004 debate, between Habermas and Cardinal Ratzinger,
rightfully began with the question asked in 1967 by Ernst Böckenförde:
does the state based on individual liberties draw its vigour from
normative presuppositions (cultural resources, we could say) which it
cannot guarantee itself? Habermas himself asserted that the state needs
“cultural resources” and that “it is in the constitutional state’s own
interest to adopt and conserve all cultural resources from which it
nurtures the norms’ conscience and the citizens’ solidarity”. Religion
is not the only support for democracy, but, out of the resources which
democracy does not highlight, religion remains by far the most profound,
most long-standing and most ample. Habermas approaches it as such.

In today’s Germany, the debate on religion, the Church and theology is
ongoing. Here, not only the theological debate is, as always, at a high
level, but also the current debate over religion, which is, undoubtedly,
among the most advanced. In the context of the latter debate, at a
reunion in Sibiu (Romania), Herbert Schnädelbach, considering my
argumentation[^54] in favour of the idea of looking at procedural
democracy from the point of view of democracy as a form of life, drew my
attention to two aspects: Ernst Böckenförde truly questioned the
cultural resources of democracy, but would not have brought into debate
religion as a source; some theologians would have rushed to
“instrumentalise” the question asked until then. I, then, immediately
read Ernst Böckenförde, finding at hand the “extended edition” (of 2006,
from Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main) of his texts. What can be observed
when reading his works?

In*Die Entstehung des Staates als Vorgang der Säkularisierung* ,
Böckenförde re-constituted with precision the genesis of modern states
in Europe, between the 13 th-18th centuries, not only as a “historical

constitutional” process, but also under the “spiritual-religious” aspect
of breaking off from legitimation by appealing to transcendence. He
observed that the state based on individual liberties always needs “a
binding force (eine Bindungskraft)”[^55] This binding was at first
ensured by religion, but “secularisation” changed the situation. Later
on, the nation, energised by “the tradition of Christian morals”,
ensured the tie, as “national state”. In the meantime, this tie, in its
turn, eroded away under the pressure of “the individualism of human
rights”. After World War II, in particular, there was an appeal for a
re-binding by adhering to “values”, but the subjectivism and positivism
of their understanding are always considered dangerous[^56] As such, we
must ask ourselves: which will the “binding forces” be?

Böckenförde asserts that that “binding force” does not have to be
searched for outside “the state based on individual liberties”, and will
not be imposed by means of “coercions of the legislation and
authoritarian commands”. The appeal to “state ideologies”, as well as
“re-affirming the tradition of the Aristotelian polis” or “the
proclamation of “systems of objective values” are not conclusive in this
case. The state can try to balk at the need to find “binding forces” by
stimulating “the citizens’ life expectations”, but this cannot last.
Ernst Böckenförde’s solution is this: “We should ask ourselves again -
along with Hegel - if the secularised mundane state shouldn’t, per
chance, live out of those inner stimulations and binding forces which
religious faith makes for its citizens”[^57] Obviously (many other
quotes confirm it, as well), the eminent German jurist brought into the
debate “religious faith” as a horizon for his puzzle. I was, therefore,
right to dwell, in my turn, on the problem signalled by Ernst
Böckenförde by bringing into discussion the importance of religion,
since the binding is made in his very works, even if Herbert
Schnädelbach does not want to admit it.


