[Conclusion]
============

Let us consider the topic of separation in the standardised statement of
the French Constitution: the republic (the state) is “laïque,
democratique et sociale. Elle assure l'égalité devant la loi de tous les
citoyens, sans distinction d'origine, de race ou de religion. Elle
respecte toutes les croyances ”. This thesis has merits which cannot be
challenged by rational reasons: any religious conception has the right
to exist and its being shared by someone cannot be prevented, just as no
one, no force in this world, can control people’s opinions; as Charles
S. Peirce would say, no state can affect people’s religious convictions.
Paul Kurtz’ project of “secularised humanism” is just one of the errors
made in the age of information, opinion and subjectivism, so that it has
no objective support. Religion remains an indispensable part of the
individual projects of life.

Not only individual life projects need religion, but also societies. Not
even today do we have stronger and long-standing binding ties of society
than religion. Young Hegel, or the sociologist Durkheim, like many
others (later even Heidegger), observed the connection made by religion
for a society worthy of man. In fact, the values of reciprocity and self
respect and respect for the other, which are presupposed by democracy,
are not possible without values originating in the Judeo-Christian
religion, within which today’s society was born. Because of this general
reason, one cannot say that the state is separated from religion, but
only that the state does not privilege a religion or another, rather, it
allows for people’s religious expression.

We cannot say that the state is separated from religion from any other
point of view, either: the very changes within the state towards
democracy are the effect of certain movements under the auspices of
religious inspiration (like in 1980-1989 Poland and other countries).
The established separation between state and religion has not yet been
confirmed. This separation was not confirmed under any other aspect
either: in the name of certain religions (see Islam), several states
were attacked before and after 2001. I will not ignore the need for a
detailed discussion on the implications of religions in supporting
terrorism: Islam is not the only religion which supported terrorism and
any religion has resources to distance itself from terrorism. Earlier
on, Judaism and Christianity had passed through a process of
enlightenment which made these two religions great forces of the
democracy movement. Such processes are to be expected of any religion in
the world if that religion wants to have a role in the act of
democratisation. But the state can no longer remain indifferent to
practised religion if this religion supports terrorism and it cannot
separate itself from religion in the manner alleged by the separation
thesis. In fact, the thesis of the separation of religion from politics
can only function as an indicator of action if the secularised citizen
and the religious citizen accept to ask from each other justifiable
reasons for their actions and to produce them.

I now wish to draw the conclusion, in the simplest manner possible. Josè
Casanova was right to say, in 1996, that “das Problem des Verhältnisses
von Religion und Politik lässt sich nicht einfach auf die Frage der
verfassungsmäßig klar abgegrenzten Trennung von Kirche und Staat

reduzieren. Gewiss ist diese Trennung unerlässlich, um sicherzustellen
dass die Religion frei von staatlicher Einmischung, der Staat frei von
religiöser Bevormundung und die persönliche Gewissenfreiheit gegenüber
beiden, Staat wie organisierter Religion, frei ist. Doch folgt daraus
nicht, daß die Religion notwendig zur Privatangelegenheit werden muß, um
diese Freiheiten zu garantieren“[^58] . But the renowned analyst is
wrong in thinking that the liberal democratic state will not be able to
function without forcing religion into privatization. That is why his
conclusion - “Religion hat eine Privatsache zu bleiben”[^59] - cannot be
supported any longer in light of the arguments brought so far. In fact,
Marc Lambert’s conclusion - that “l’adoption d’une silence pudique en la
matière n’a pas semblé non plus satisfaisant à nombre des partenaires de
la réflexion”. In a Europe that is in search of cultural foundations on
the basis of appealing to its defining Judeo-Christian heritage - all of
this should put into motion its current active spirits.


