Dialogue on Wudhu
=================

Today, I’ll talk to you about wudhu, ghusl and tayamum”, said my
father.  I murmured, “We are, therefore, at the threshold of the first
purifying agent which renders the body tahir, after it has been stripped
of its purity by an occurance of some kind”.  I soon started recalling
some examples of what happens to the body to render it unclean.  I then
started asking myself why I should cleanse my body with wudhu.  However,
since my father was present, I said I would rather ask him.  
 \*  Why do we perform wudhu?  
 -  We perform wudhu to be in a state of tahara to, for example, say
prayer,  do tawaf around the Ka’ba during hajj or umrah, touch the
writing of the Holy Qur’an [and His names and attributes, such as
ar-Rahman, al-Khaliq].  
 \*  Of course, wudhu is performed with water.  However, are there any
conditions attached to the water?  
 -  Yes.  
 1.  The water must be tahir to cleanse the parts of your body that are
normally washed and wiped during wudhu.  It is sufficient for the water
to be abundant for it to render them tahir as a result of performing
wudhu, if the water was abundant (mu’tasim).  
 2.  The water and the place where you perform the wudhu, must be
ownerless and not usurped.  
 The reason why the place must be free is that if the water was confined
to the usurped place, wudhu would not become obligatory.  You must
perform tayamum instead.  However, should you choose not to comply, you
shall be deemed sinful. Your wudhu, though, will be in order.  
 3. The water must be pure not mixed, such as the running tap water in
our homes and places of work, not, for example, orange juice.  
 \*  How should I conduct wudhu?  
 -  After you have  made your intention, to perform this act of worship
to seek proximity to Allah, you should start thus:  
 1. Wash your face from the forehead, i.e. from the hairline to the chin
vertically and that which falls within the expanse of your hand between
the thumb and the small finger horizontally. [Noting that, you should do
the washing from the top to the bottom of the face, without the need to
soak thick (beard) hair].         
 2. Wash your arms from the elbow to the finger tips, starting with the
right arm.  The manner of washing should be from the elbow down to the
finger tips.  
 3. Wipe with your right hand (while it is still wet) the front of your
hair, preferably with the palm of the hand, starting from the top to the
hairline excluding the forehead.  
 4. Wipe your feet with your hands from the toes to the ankle.  Use your
right hand to stroke the right foot and the left hand to stroke the left
foot, while both hands are still wet with the original water of  wudhu. 
That is, you are not allowed to use new water.  [It is not allowed to
start with your left foot before your right foot].  
 You must also observe the following when performing your wudhu:  
 1.  Wudhu must be sequential, i.e. washing of the face should come
before that of the arms; your right arm has to be washed before the left
one; and wiping the head should be done before that of the feet.  
 2.  The ablution act should be carried out uninterrupted.  In an
emergency, however, such as running out of water or due to
forgetfulness, you should continue the process while the previous parts
washed or wiped are still wet.  Otherwise, the wudhu shall not be in
order.  It is worth mentioning, though, that wudhu can be deemed valid
even though all the parts of the body, that were washed, become dry as a
result of wind, hot weather, or drying up, provided that in the process
of wudhu uninterrupted washing was observed.  
 3.  You must do it yourself as long as you are able to do so.  
 \*  What about if I become unable to perform wudhu myself?  
 -  Someone else can do wudhu for you.  It could be done by aiding you
to do it.  That is, by lifting your hand and washing your face with it; 
then washing both your arms in the same way; and finally, do the wiping
of the head and the feet, using your own hands.  
 4.  There must not be any barrier masking the body skin from wudhu
water, such as paint, glue, or nail polish.  
 5.  There must be a reason that could make using water detrimental to
one’s health.  In such a case, you should perform tayamum instead of
wudhu.  
 \*   If I performed wudhu for an earlier prayer, can I still say
another one later with the same wudhu?  
 -   You do not need to renew your wudhu, unless your wudhu was
invalidated.  
 \*   How and when would a wudhu be invalidated?  
 -   Things that invalidate wudhu are seven: Urination, passing stool,
breaking wind, sleep, anything  that render the faculty of reasoning
idle, such as passing out and drunkenness, medium and minor istihadha
(see Dialogue on Istihadha), and janabah.  
 My father added that it was worth discussing some general rules to wrap
up the topic of wudhu.  
 1.  If after wudhu some doubt lingers in your mind as to whether or not
your wudhu was in order, you should assume that it still be in order.  
 \* Could you give me an example?  
 -   Suppose you performed wudhu in the morning and after few hours, you
wanted to say Dhuhr prayer.  There and then, you harboured some doubt
that you might have used the toilet in between.   In this case, you
should ignore your doubt and assume you are still tahir and say your
prayer.  
 2.   If you did not perform wudhu or did perform one, that was later
rendered invalid, and afterwards became unsure whether you renewed your
wudhu, you should treat such case as if you did not perform wudhu.  
 \*    Such as?  
 -    Suppose you woke up in the morning.  Then the time for Dhuhr
prayer was due.  You could not remember whether you performed wudhu in
between.  You should treat the matter as if you did not perform wudhu. 
You have to start afresh.  
 3.   If you have just completed wudhu, and doubt crept in as to whether
it was properly carried out, your wudhu is in order, i.e. you should not
renew it.  
 \*   For example?  
 -   Suppose you performed wudhu and immediately became doubtful whether
you washed your face, or the washing of your face was properly carried
out, you should assume it was correct.  
 \*   If I became doubtful whether I carried out the wiping of the left
foot, what should I do?  
 -   If the doubt crept up on the spot, you should perform the wiping
afresh. Otherwise, you need not worry.  That is, if you have already
moved on to another act, such as you are in the process of saying
prayer.


