Translator’s Foreword
=====================

In undertaking the translation of this book, al-Fatawal Muyessarah
(Jurisprudence Made Easy), I did my best to convey the meaning to the
English reader in standard English from a pattern of Arabic that is
predominantly jurisdical. I hope I have succeeded in this task. I also
hope that this translation may help, in some measure, to make this
subject accessible to people, interested in Islamic jurisprudence and in
religion, among those who are unable to read and/or understand Arabic.  
 However, I decided to use the same Arabic terminology - appearing in
italic letters - that is, in the main, common to the subject matter,
such as halal and haraam (licit and illicit) with their equivalent in
English, as a first reference. I have done so to ensure consistency, for
the majority of these terms denote specific meanings on which the
mukallaf (the person obligated to observe the precepts of religion) rely
in acting upon the fatwa (religious edict). Thereafter, I have confined
the use to the Arabic term.  
 To further guide the reader through the maze of this broadly technical
terminology, I listed the words and phrases, with their English
definitions, in alphabetical order under the “Glossary”. It is
noteworthy that the glossary is solely my contribution and does not
constitute a section of the book. Where I opted for the English dictum
rather than the Arabic, I found it necessary, at certain instances, to
put the Arabic words between brackets after the English, such as “free
of impurities”: mutlaq. This has been done to reinforce the translated
word or phrase and remove any ambiguity; you may not find these in the
Glossary.  
 Where I thought the meaning of the text would be enhanced or rendered
more understandable, I put the additional words, which do not constitute
part of the original text, between these ( ) brackets.  
 The use of masculine pronouns, such as he, his, him, and himself,
refers to both the sexes, where applicable.  
 For the translation of Qur’anic verses, I used “Holy Qur’an”,
translated by M.H. Shakir, published by Tahrike Tarsile Qur’an Inc. P.O.
Box 1115, Elmhurst, New York 11373, U.S.A, although I have made some
modifications as I deemed fit. For the benefit of those who would wish
to trace the Qur’anic quotations, I have put the numbers of the sura
(chapter) first and the ayah (verse) second between these ( ) brackets
at the end of the quotation.  
 Notwithstanding, whatever knowledge and effort put in such work, it
remains far from perfect, for perfection is the exclusive preserve of
Allah, the Most High. I, therefore, urge the readers to write in, should
they find it necessary to raise any point or make any remarks insofar as
the translation goes.  
 In the end, I pray to the Almighty, to forgive me any inadvertent
mistake or error of judgement I may have made in the course of the
translation. I pray to Him to make this work of mine a step towards
attaining His approval and that He accepts it favourably and makes it of
use. Amen.  
**Najim al-Khafaji, B.A.**  
    
  


