Dialogue on Hajj
================

My father spoke of his experience of his first pilgrimage in a way akin
to someone who had remembered a true love.  I could see his true feeling
in the twinkle of his eyes, the smile on his face, and the reverence of
his words.  
 When I told him what I had noticed of his state, when he recalled that
experience, he said to me:  
 Yes, son, “Haven’t you recited the words of The Sublime, “And when We
made the House a pilgrimage for men and a (place of) security..”.
(2/125).  And His words, quoting His Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.), “O our
Lord! surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive of fruit near Thy Sacred House, our Lord! that they may
keep up prayer; therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them and provide them with fruits; haply they may be grateful”.
(14/37).  
 My heart longs for that Sacred House.  
 My father cast his eyes down and, in a soft and melodious voice,
recited poetry in praise of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and remembrance of the
Holy places he had visited on his first pilgrimage.  Raising his eyes,
and addressing me, he said, “My maiden hajj left an indelible mark in my
heart, the memory of which is rekindled every year, especially, at the
time of hajj.  I always pray to the Almighty to grace me with the favour
of making the trip to Mekkah time and again.    
 There I interjected and asked him:  
 \*  Is it obligatory that you go to hajj more than once?  
 -  No, it is obligatory to do hajj once, provided you can afford it. 
Allah says in His Holy Book, “.. and pilgrimage is incumbent on men for
the sake of Allah, (on) every one who is able to undertake the journey
to it..” (3/97).  
 Any number of pilgrimages made after the first one is mustahab.  
 \*  Would you tell me the story of your first pilgrimage, which is so
close to your heart?  
 -  I went to “al-Juhfa”, one of the mawaqeet (sites appointed by
Islamic sharia law for pilgrims to wear their ihram).  After I took off
my clothes, I made niyyah for umrah tamatu’, leading to hajj, seeking
the pleasure of and closeness to Allah, I put on my ihram (special
two-piece seamless attire worn by pilgrims.  Also, the state of
consecration during which the pilgrim refrains from certain acts, such
as not combing, not shaving, and observing sexual continence). One of
these two white garments is worn like a sarong, and the other used to
cover the shoulder and the upper body.  I, then, chanted the talbiya.  
 No sooner had I uttered the word “Labbayk”, shivers went down my
spine.  I was in a serene state of mind that was triggered by a kind of
devotion I never experienced before.  It was an experience of fear and
submission to the Creator.  
 The other acts you are forbidden from, once you enter the state of
consecration are: a)  looking into the mirror for dressing, b)
protecting oneself against the sun [and rain], c) covering one’s head,
d) wearing sewn clothes and socks, and e) some other acts, as detailed
in the books of jurisprudence.  
 \*  And after ihram, what did you do?  
 -  I headed towards Holy Mekkah, in a state of tahara, to do seven
rounds of tawaf around the Old House (Ka’ba), starting each round from
the Black Stone.  Having completed tawaf, I said a two-ruku’ prayer
behind the station of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.).  
 I then went for Sa’y (seven laps of brisk walking between the mounds of
Safa and Marwah - an obligatory part of hajj rituals), starting from
Safa.  
 On completing the seventh lap, I made taqseer, by cutting some of my
hair.  By this act, I completed the Umrah of Hajj.  Thereafter, I took
off my ihram and waited for the 8th day of Thil Hijja “Yawmut Tarwiyah -
Lit. satisfying thirst or giving attention, i.e. when Ibrahim (a.s.)
gave attention to the vision wherein he was instructed to sacrifice his
son Ismael”.  On that day, I wore my ihram, in Mekkah this time, after
making niyyah for hajj, said the talbiyah, and headed for Arafat, aboard
an open top vehicle.  I had to do wuquf (devotional stay at Arafat,
Mash’ar and Mina as part of hajj rituals).  This was performed at the
start of noon of the 9th of Thil Hijja till sunset.  
 Leaving Arafat, after sunset, I set out for “Muzdalifa” and stayed
overnight, for I had to be there at the sunrise of the 10th of Thil
Hijja.  After sunrise, I set out for “Mina”.  With me were stones I
gathered during my stay at Muzdalifa.  In Mina, I had to perform three
types of obligations:  
 1. Throwing seven stones successively at Jamarah of al-Aqabah (Pl.
Jamarat: Places of the three stone slabs representing the devil, at
Mina).  
 2.  Slaughtering sacrificial offering at Mina.  
 3.  Shaving my head at Mina.  
 On completing these acts, I came out of the state of ihram, whereby I
could do certain acts that were forbidden to me before, except seeking
lawful pleasure with women, wearing perfume, [and hunting].  Thereafter,
I headed for Mekkah for the second time to do tawaf of hajj, say tawaf
prayer, and do sa’y between Safa and Marwah, in exactly the same way I
did, on  my arrival at Mekkah.  Having completed that, I performed
tawafun nisa’ (lit. women’s circumambulation: an integral part of hajj
devotion, after which and  its prayer, sexual relations between man and
wife returns to normal).  
 I, then, returned to Mina to stay the overnight of the 11th and the
12th of Thil Hijja till the afternoon of the 12th.  On each of these two
days, I performed the ritual of throwing stones at the three Jamarat,
the first, the one in the middle, and al-Aqaba, in this
order.                             
 Come midday of the twelfth of Thil Hijja, while still at Mina, I said
Dhuhr prayer and left for Mekkah.  Thus, I performed all the prescribed
duties of hajj.  
 Despite the crowds and sweltering heat, which took their toll on me, I
ensured that I executed all the obligations called for correctly.  Hajj
is a solemn occasion for seeking closeness to Allah Almighty through
prayer, devotion and sincere rectitude.  
 Afterwards, I left Mekkah for Madina where I paid homage to the holy
shrine of Prophet Mohammad (s.a.w.) and the tombs of Fatima az-Zahra’
and Imams al-Hassan, Ali bin al-Hussain, Mohammad al-Baqir, and Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) at al-Baqi’ cemetery.  
 I, also, visited historic mosques, the tomb of al-Hamza, the Prophet’s
uncle, and other sacred sites around Madina.  
 This, in short, was the story of my first pilgrimage.  When the time
comes that you can afford the journey to Mekkah after you have paid
zakat and khums that render your property and other worldly possessions
pure, I’ll explain to you, in some detail, every step you should take. 
May Providence grace you with making pilgrimage to His House.  
 \*  Before we end this dialogue, could I ask you about those religious
dues that, as you put it, purify one’s property.  
 -  Not now, for talking of zakat and khums could take some time. 
However, I’m going to dedicate separate dialogues for each one of them,
Inshallah (God Willing).  
 \*  Very well, father.  Do I take it that you are going to talk to me
about zakat next time round, then about khums?  
 -  If you so choose. Inshallah .  
 \*  Inshallah.


