Short Biography of the Author
=============================

Martyr Murtadha Mutahhari was born in Fariman (Iran) in February 1919.
His father Skaikh Muhammad Husain was a religious scholar and a pious
person. Mutahhari received his elementary education in theology from his
father.

When he was twelve years of age, he joined the conventional Islamic
School at Mashhad and pursued his studies there for five years. Then he
proceeded to Qum, the famous Educational Centre of Shi’ah Muslims. He
stayed there for fifteen years and completed his education under the
supervision of Allamah Tabatabai, Imam Khumayni and many other
distinguished ulema.

During the period of his education Prof. Mutahhari felt that the
communists wanted to destroy the very spirit of Islam by mixing their
atheistic views with the Islamic philosophy and interpreting the verses
of the Holy Qur’an in a materialistic manner. Of course, communism was
misguiding the young generation, which prompted the professor to nip
this threat in the bud.

He wrote extensively against the baneful effects of communism. He also
wrote on exegesis, philosophy, ethics, sociology, history and many other
subjects. He left over twenty books that have been published in Persian,
Arabic, Turkish, Urdu and English. The Islamic Seminary has had the
honour of publishing some of them.

In 1952, he established a council of university students in Tehran and,
in 1955, began teaching theology at the University of Tehran at the
doctorate level continuing until 1978. He remained faithful to his
socio-political commitments. In 1963, he was arrested along with Imam
Khumayni. After the exile of Imam Khumayni to Turkey, he took active
part in the leadership of the Islamic movement, making decisive
contributions to the mobilization of the combatant ulema.

After the success of Islamic Revolution in Iran he was nominated as the
President of the Constitutional Council and was performing his duties in
a very befitting manner.

The activities of this scholar were intolerable for the followers of the
atheistic schools and they, therefore, decided to remove him from the
scene by terroristic methods. Eventually they assassinated this eminent
scholar on May 1, 1979. His martyrdom was a great tragedy. When the sad
news was conveyed to Imam Khumayni he could not control his tears. In
his condolence message he said: “In him I have lost a dear son. I am
mourning the death of one who was the fruition of my life.”

Thousands and thousands of Muslims escorted his funeral. He was laid to
rest in Qum in the precincts of the Holy Shrine of Ma’suma in Qum. May
his soul rest in peace.


