Part 10: When a Divine Decree Comes, Man Feels Helpless
=======================================================

Many reports from the Holy Prophet (s) and the Imams say that when a
divine decree comes, the whole system of caution, especially the
faculties of thinking and reasoning cease to work. This point has been
depicted in Persian and Arabic literature also.

In the book of hadith, Al-Jami’-as-Saghir a number of Prophetic sayings
to this effect have been quoted. One hadith says: “When Allah wants to
carry out his decree, he wrests the power of reasoning and understanding
from the people. They repent when this power is restored to them
afterwards”.

In the Tuhaf-ul-Uqul Imam Reza (a) is reported to have said: “When Allah
wants his decree to be carried out, He wrests their thinking power from
the people concerned. After the decree has been carried out this power
is restored to each one of them. Then they wonder how it was that such a
thing happened”.

The famous mystic poet of Iran, Moulawi says:  
 • “When a divine decree comes, the power of understanding quits. Allah
alone knows what He proposes”.

• “When a divine decree comes, you cease to see deep. Then you cannot
distinguish between a friend and a foe”.

• “When a divine decree come, the physician loses his skill. His
medicine does harm instead of being beneficial”.

A difficulty about all such statements is that they describe fate and
destiny as a force invalidating the general principal of causation and
as a factor stronger than all other factors. This view is contradictory
to what we have said that Allah does not decree anything to happen
except through the normal course of causation. The wording of the
hadiths also supports what we have said. A hadith says: “Allah declines
to carry out the affairs of the world except through their causes. He
has appointed a cause for everything. Every cause has a reason behind
it. Every reason is a piece of knowledge and every piece of knowledge
has an eloquent door”. (Majma’ul-Bahrayn)

Another difficulty is that these statements are contradictory to the
general rule expressly mentioned in the Qur’an that everything is
governed by fate and destiny and there is nothing which may be outside
of their area of control. If everything and every event is governed by
destiny, then divine destiny must every moment be operative. As such
there is no meaning of saying “When a divine decree comes”.

Hence the contents of the above-mentioned hadith and the verses are not
only inconsistent with the generality of the principal of causation, but
are also repugnant to the comprehensiveness of fate and destiny. They
indicate that a divine decree is operative only occasionally and when it
is, everything else ceases to work . Men lose their power of
understanding. Eyes stop to see. Medicines are no longer effective.

Now what should we conclude? Should we think that these hadiths and
reports are spurious and have been fabricated by the predestinarians or
is it possible that they have a sound interpretation?

In our opinion these hadiths and reports have a sense which is not
inconsistent either with the principle of causation or with the
comprehensiveness of fate and destiny.

They are actually applicable to those cases in which spiritual causes
overshadow the material ones.

We have already said that the material causes are not the only effective
causes. The overall system of causation consists of various kinds of
causes, some of which are open and some hidden. Just as some of the
material causes make some other material causes ineffective, similarly
on some special occasions all material causes are put out of action
under the impact of some spiritual ones.

Those who look at the material and perceptible causes only, do not know
that there are thousands of other causes also and when they are in
operation, they make the material causes ineffective.

The Qur’an itself refers to this point in a lucid and forceful manner.
Describing the events of the Battle of Badr, it says: **“*****When you
met the pagans’ army, Allah made them appear fewer in your eyes and you
appear fewer in their eyes so that His miracle of granting you (an
incredible) victory could easily be fulfilled. To Allah do all things
return”*****.** (*Surah al-Anfal*, 8:44)

This incident was a case in which the spiritual causes got the better of
the material causes.

There exists a higher world order, that protects a community, which
because of its excellent behaviour becomes entitled to divine support,
against another community which deserve disgrace and ruin. The first
community is helped though it may be lacking resources and the second
community is condemned though it may be having everything at its
disposal.

The Holy Qur’an says: ***“If someone trusts Allah, He will suffice Him.
He will surely bring about what He decrees. Allah has set a measure for
everything”.*** (*Surah al-Talaq*, 65:3)

In this verse it has been expressly said that Allah has set a measure
for everything. Nothing takes place haphazardly. In other words the
system of causation has been recognized. At the same time it has been
emphatically said that Allah brings. His Command to pass. In other
words, where there is a question of spiritual relations or invisible
Divine succour, the visible causes are made ineffective.


