Part 13: High level of the Logic of Islam
=========================================

A scholar going deep into the study of the questions concerning
monotheism, is filled with wonder when he finds that the special logic
adopted in this respect by the Holy Qur’an and next to it by the sayings
of the Prophet and the Imams, especially Imam Ali is so different and
higher not only from the logic of that time but also from that of the
later period when scholastic theology had developed and philosophy was
flourishing. What the Qur’an and the hadith say about destiny and the
freedom or constraint of human will, is an example of that logic.

This in itself proves that the Holy Qur’an has sprung from a source
which does not belong to this world and that the Holy Prophet who
received the Qur’an looked at the realities from quite a different
angle. Similarly the knowledge of the logic of the Qur’an which the Holy
Family had was different from what the others had.

Where the ideas were too high to be grasped ordinarily, the other people
were bewildered, but the Imams described them very clearly and in a
realistic manner. It is not surprising that even the Shi’ah theologians
were unable to digest this information properly.

When one looks at the statements and comments of such eminent scholars
such a Sheikh Mufid, Sayyid Murtadha, Allamah Hilli, Allamah Majlisi in
their books of theology and their commentaries on hadith, one notices
that they have not been free being influenced by the ideas of the
Ash’arites and the Mu’tazilities. Their way of thinking is often close
to that of either of them. That is why they have been compelled to
explain away many Qur’anic verses and the hadiths. Anyhow, this
short-coming does not lower the position of these eminent scholars. None
else in their position could do better, for the comprehension of the
special logic of the Holy Qur’an is confined to the spiritual leaders
trained in the school of this Holy Book. Others have been able to enter
this circle gradually by going deep into the relevant questions and the
constant study of the Qur’an and the sayings of the Prophet and the
Imams, especially Imam Ali.

Some of our contemporary scholars have shown sufficient ability to
analyze the social questions. But when they take up such problems as
that of fate and destiny, they are as much bewildered as the scholastic
theologians. For instance, we can mention the name of the Egyptian
writer, Ahmad Amin who has written the Fajr al-Islam, the Zuh’l
al-Islam, the Zuhr al-Islam and the Yaum al-Islam.

Ahmad Amin has to a great extent evinced his ability to discuss and
analyze social questions, but as far as the question of fate is
concerned, he has proved as helpless as the scholastic theologians.
Towards the end of his book, Fajr al-Islam he has, in a special chapter,
discussed the question of predestination and freedom of will, but on the
whole it appears that according to him a belief in destiny means
predestinarianism. Hence he is not prepared to believe that the hadiths
regarding destiny are authentic. Similarly he is unable to believe that
the Nahj al-Balaghah is a collection of the sermons and letter of Imam
Ali. Of course, he is not blame, because it is due to his lack of
knowledge that he is so skeptic. As a rule it may e said that no
scholar, whether a European, an Egyptian or an Iranian. Whose knowledge
is confined to social sciences is in a position to express an opinion on
the history of Islamic knowledge.

Whenever the European historians or the orientalists have expressed an
opinion about the question of fate, they have either described Islam as
a religion of predestination or have claimed that the doctrine of fate
and destiny is not found in the Qur’an and that it was created later by
the scholastic theologians.

An orientalist says: “The cardinal principles of Islam are as follows:
God is One: Muhammad is His Prophet …. The theologians have preached
that Allah has foreordained the fate of everybody and that His Will is
unchangeable. This doctrine is called *jabr* (predestination; literally
compulsion)…………………….”.

Gustav Le Bon, in a defending way says that in this respect the Qur’an
has not said anything more than what the other sacred Books say. After
quoting verses of the Qur’an and making certain remarks he adds”

“Islam has been accused of having a belief in fate, but this charge is
as baseless as all other charges. We have already put the Qur’anic
verses on this subject before our readers. They say no more than what is
written in this respect in our sacred Book. All philosophers and
schoolmen are of the view that all events are preordained and totally
unchangeable. Luther, who was a reformer, himself has written: “All
available evidence in the sacred Book is repugnant to the theory of
liberty. This evidence is found in many places of the Scripture. It may
be said that all sacred Books are full of such indications”.

After referring to the belief in destiny as prevalent among the ancient
Greeks and the Romans, he says “It is clear that Islam has not given
more importance to this question than other religions. Islam has not
given to it even as much heed as some of the contemporary scholars”.

Gustav Le Bon admits that a belief in fate amounts to a belief in
predestination and a refutation of freedom of will. But he says that
such a belief is found in all religions and most of the philosophical
systems.

In his History of Civilization, after giving a gist of the Qur’anic
verses on the comprehensiveness of Divine Knowledge and Will and
referring to a well-know hadith found in al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih, Will
Durant says that “Belief in predestination is a part of the Islamic way
of thinking”.

Now let us see what Mr. Dominic Sordell has designed to say in this
respect. He has written a book, named “Islam”. In it he says: “From the
very beginning of the Islamic era the Muslims were conscious of the
contradictions in the Qur’an. According to an available report they even
pointed out some contradictions to the Prophet himself who in reply
said: “Keep believing in what is worrying you”. Later the Muslims who
did not like to accept certain doctrines off-hand, tried to interpret
certain words and expressions of the Qur’an. That is how the science of
exegesis developed. The first question which attracted the attention of
the Muslims was - If man cannot act contrary to what Allah has
preordained and still Allah requits him for his good or bad deeds, does
that not constitute a contradiction between Allah’s Power and human
responsibility? The Qur’an does not answer this question, but the
Omnipotence of Allah has been so much emphasized throughout the Qur’an,
that no room has been left for human liberty. Thus submission to the
Will of Allah prevails over a sense of human responsibility”.

Mr. Dominic Sordell’s book is full of such kind of research.

This is the way of thinking of the orientalists and that is how they
derive their conclusions. This instance shows how far they are able to
express an opinion in regard to such a question.

It is clear from the foregoing that the question of fate and destiny has
been repeatedly mentioned by the Qur'an itself. It is not an invention
of the scholastic theologians. Further, it is also clear that a belief
in destiny as taught by the Qur’an is poles apart from
predestinarianism.

The European orientalists usually extoll the Mu’tazilite for denying
destiny. According to the Mu’tazilites a belief in destiny amounts to a
belief in predestination.

There is no doubt if we compare the Mu’tazilites and the Ash’arites, we
find that the former had considerable independence of thought.
Mutawakkil’s suppression of the Mu’tazilites and his official support of
the Ash’arites may be regarded as a big tragedy of the world of Islam.
But as far as the question of fate and destiny is concerned, the mistake
made by the Mu’tazilites was not less grave than that made by the
Ash’arites. The orientalists who do not have any deep knowledge of Islam
and who are under the impression that a belief in destiny amounts to a
belief in predestination are never tired of praying tributes to the
Mu’tazilites.

Edward Brown in his ‘Literary History of Persia’ says: “The Qadarites or
the Mu’tazilites were more important. They advocated freedom of will or
absolute discretion. The best homage which can be paid to the
Mu’tazilites is that their ideas were a protest which common sense
always makes against unjust orders and rigid teachings. The monotheism”.
They said that the Ash’arite belief in the eternal fate meant that Allah
had pre-ordained the destiny of everyone, that He punished the people
for the sins which He Himself had imposed on them, and that man could
not resist his destiny.

This way of thinking of the Mu’tazilites, namely that destiny meant
predestination, has received the highest approbation of the
orientalists.

Historical Background
---------------------

The origin of the controversy regarding fate is a point worth
discussion. The point is how it was that from the first half or at the
most from the second half of the first century the Muslims entered into
the discussion of predestination and free will.

Undoubtedly the reason was that the Qur’anic verses and the Prophetic
sayings referred to this question. It is a question which naturally
attracts the attention of everybody. As it was raised in the Holy Book
and as some of the verses expressly supported destiny while some others
described man as having liberty, naturally the Muslims had to think over
this question and discuss it.

But the orientalists and their lackeys claim that these ideas have some
other basis.

As we have already said, some European historians believe that the
question of destiny was raised later by the scholastic theologians.
Originally Islam preached neither predestination nor free will. Some
other orientalists are of the view that the Ash’arite theory based on
predestination represents the true teaching of Islam, but the
Mu’tazilites did not acquiesce in it as they did not accept many other
Islamic ideas which were not in conformity with logic and reason. It
were they who for the first time introduced the idea of free will among
the Muslims. These orientalists further say that even the Mu’tazilites
were not the originators of this idea. They were influenced by the
neighbouring nations, especially the Christians.

Edward Brown in the ‘Literary History of Persia’ says: Von Cromer is of
the view that Ma’bad al-Juhani preached the idea of free will in
Damascus towards the end of the 7th century is imitation of an Iranian
named Sanbawayh.

He further says: “According to Von Cromer, Damascus was the place where
the doctrines of the Mu’tazilites developed under the influence of the
Byzantine Christian divines, especially John of Damascus and his
disciple, Theodorus Abu Kurra”.

It appears that in the opinion of Von Cormer even that Iranian who
suggested the idea of freedom and liberty of Ma’bad al-Juhani, was
himself influenced by the Roman-Christian ecclesiastics.

If this view is accepted, we will have to look for a similar historical
basis for prayer, fasting monotheism and the belief in the hereafter.
Probably the Muslims paid attention to these also because they had found
a precedent for them in the Christian circles.

The fact is that the orientalists do not possess enough competence to
make an inquiry into the Islamic tenets, nor mostly do they have good
intention.

When they try to analyze Islamic concepts or deal with Islamic tenets,
mysticism or Muslim philosophy, they put forth such astonishingly absurd
ideas that they are often ridiculous. For instance look at the following
remarks of an orientalist.

Edward Brown in his Literary History of Persia, vol. 1, quotes the Dutch
orientalist as saying in his History of Islam:

“When they (the Mu’tazilites) gave serious thought to the rules of
Islam, they advocated only what was reasonable. Thus one of the points
which they emphasized was that Qur’an was transient and created, though
to say so was against what the Prophet (s) had declared. They said that
the eternity of the Qur’an meant a belief in the eternity of two beings,
while the correct position was that the Qur’an, which was the word of
Allah was His creation. Further, it could not be attributed to His
essence, for that was unchangeable.

Thus the basis of revelation was shaken. Many Mu’tazilites openly said
that it was not impossible to produce a writing like the Qur’an or even
better than that.

This orientalist wants to impress on us implicitly that the Ash’arites
had derived their belief in the eternity of the Qur’an from the sayings
of the Prophet (s) and that though the Mu’tazilite knew that, they
rejected this doctrine because they found it contrary to the dictates of
reason and logic. In this very book he says a little further that the
eternity of the Qur’an was one of the doctrines of the Ash’arites who
faithfully follow the text of the Qur’an.

In fact in the Qur’an there is not even a slightest hint to the eternity
of the Qur’an or to its being uncreated, nor there exists to this effect
a single hadith acceptable to the Mu’tazilites.

That is why they opposed the idea that the Qur’an was a Celestial Book
and that it was revealed.[^1][1]

Their belief about Allah was purer and more sublime, than that held by
the pietists, the adherents to the popular notions and the Ash’arites.
The Mu’tazilites never accepted the idea that the Creator of the world
could ever appear in a corporeal form. They were not willing to listen
to such a thing. There is a hadith, according to which the Prophet said:
“Just as you saw the full moon during the Battle of Badr, one day you
will see Allah also”.[^2][2]

He means a report, which is found in the books of scholastic theology
and not those of hadith. According to this report the Holy Prophet (s)
said: “You will see your Lord on the Day of Resurrection as you see the
full moon”. The learned orientalist mistook in the report the word, badr
meaning the full moon for the Battle of Badr. Then he translated the
future tense into the past so that the sentence might give some meaning.

This report has a long story. There are indications that it was once
deformed by someone among its transmitters. Then it was again distorted
by the scholastic theologians. It is for the third time that the learned
orientalist has put it in a ludicrous form. The Qur’an expressly denies
the possibility that a human eye can see Allah.

As the pietists took this hadith literally, the Mu’tazilites found it to
be a big hurdle in their way and were compelled to explain it away. They
said that man after death would see Allah with spiritual eyes. The
Mu’tazilites also denied that Allah was the Creator of the infidels.[^3]
[3]

This is an example of the valuable research of a learned orientalist.
Edward Brown; the author of the ‘Literary History of Persia’ passed it
over without making any comments.

We wonder whether we should call it ignorance or a crime. What is more
regrettable is that the followers and lackeys of these orientalists,
instead of studying the ideas of the East and the Islamic tenets
directly, continue to repeat the views of their master parrot-like.

[^1]: There is enough historical evidence to show that the Mu’tazilites
were the staunch supporters and defenders of the Qur’an. They fought
relentlessly against the heresies of the Zindiqs (atheists) and the
philosophers. If as Dozy claims, they did not regard the Qur’an as
revealed, why did they take the trouble of defending it?

[^2]: It is an unforgivable mistake of the Ash’arites to believe that
human eye will see Allah on the Day of Resurrection. Such an idea is
contrary to what the Qur’an has expressly said. “No eyes can see Him,
but He comprehends all vision. He is the Subtle, all Aware”. (Surah
al-An’am, 6:103) Anyhow, there is a truth which has been described as
“meeting Allah”. But there are many hadiths which confirm that this is
not a corporeal matter. (For details please see, Murtada Mutahhari,
Master and Mastership, ISP, 1980).

[^3]: In history there has not been a single Mu’tazilite who ever said
that Allah was not the Creator of the infidels. All that the
Mu’tazilites said was that Allah was not the Creator of infidelity,
injustice and sin. They never said that He was not the Creator of the
infidels, the unjust and the sinners.


