Part 15: Could Allah’s Knowledge be Wrong?
==========================================

At the end of this discussion of fate and destiny it will not be out of
place to take up the criticism made in this connection by the
predestinarians and to analyze what they say

They have adduced many and varied arguments to prove their theory. The
Muslim predestinarians mainly rely on the Qur’anic verses regarding fate
which we have already quoted. Sometimes they cite the sayings of the
Holy Prophet or the Imams in this connection.

We have commented upon the intellectual arguments advanced by them in
the footnotes of our book, ‘The Principles of Philosophy’. vol. III.

The most famous argument which they have advanced concerns the Knowledge
of Allah.

They say that Allah knows from eternity what will happen. No event is
hidden from His Eternal Knowledge.

At the same time His Knowledge is unchangeable. Any change in it will
not be in keeping with His perfectness. It is not possible that anything
should happen contrary to what He knows from eternity Otherwise His
Knowledge will prove to be defective, and instead of being knowledge, it
will become ignorance, which is again against the perfectness of His
Being.

Hence on the basis of the two premises that:  
 Allah knows everything; and  
 His Divine Knowledge is unchangeable and nothing can happen contrary to
it.

It may be inferred logically, that every event in the world must take
place in accordance with what He knows from eternity.

Furthermore, Divine Knowledge is active and not passive, in the sense
that in the case of Allah the known springs from His Knowledge of it,
and His Knowledge is not based on the known as is the case with human
knowledge of the things and the events.

On this basis of Allah knew that such and such person at such and such
time would commit a sin, he is bound to commit it accordingly. It will
not be possible for him to behave otherwise. No power on earth can stop
him from committing that sin at the appointed time. Otherwise Allah’s
Knowledge will prove wrong.

The world famous Persian poet Umar Khayyam says:

I drink wine; and a sound person;  
 Should have no objection to that;  
 God knew from eternity that I would;  
 If I don’t, His knowledge would amount to ignorance.

For a man who is aware of the correct conception of fate and destiny it
is easy to refute this specious argument, based on the presumption that
Divine Knowledge in eternity was attached to the occurrences
haphazardly; and now to ensure that the prior Divine Knowledge should
not go wrong and everything should occur according to the prearranged
plan, it is necessary that all events should be controlled.

To advance this argument it has been presumed that Divine Knowledge
attaches to the occurrence and the non-occurrence of events
independently of the system of causation, and that it is imperative to
control this system and, where necessary, to curb the natural laws and
the liberty of human will in order t ensure that there should be no
inconsistency between the Divine Eternal Knowledge and what actually
happens.

On the basis of this conception it is necessary to deprive man of his
power, liberty and will so that his actions may be brought under
control.

But this conception of Divine Knowledge itself is totally wrong and
based on complete ignorance. It is impossible that Allah’s Knowledge
should attach to the occurrence or the non-occurrence of an event
haphazardly and then it should be necessary to bring about any change in
the firm and stable system of causation or to curb a natural law or the
liberty of human will.

In this circumstance it appears to be very unlikely that the above
quoted lines should be genuinely of Khayyam who was at least a
semi-philosopher, Perhaps they have been wrongly ascribed to him after
his death. Anyhow, if they are really his, then it may be said that he
has only versified an idea in a beautiful style, but these verses do not
represent his philosophy. Khayyam is known all over the world for his
striking ideas and beautiful style.

The Eternal Knowledge of Allah cannot be detached from the system of
causation. His Knowledge is actually the knowledge of that system, and
it makes it necessary that this world should exist with its specific
systems. It does not attach to the occurrence or the non-occurrence of
an event direct and irrespective of its causes. The Divine Knowledge in
fact attaches to the emanation of an event from its particular cause and
agent. The causes and agents are varied. Some causes are natural, while
some others are conscious. Similarly some agents are free, having the
power of choosing, whereas some others are not. What the Knowledge of
Allah necessitates is that due effect should be produced by its due
agent. It does not render it possible that the effect of a free agent
should emanate from an agent not actually free.

In other words the Eternal Knowledge of Allah is the knowledge of a
system. Allah knows that such and such effect will be produced by such
and such cause. But all causes and the agents are not alike. Some causes
are conscious and some others are not. Some agents are free and some
others are not. Allah knows them as they are. It would be even better to
say that they are as Allah knows them. What the Divine Knowledge
requires is that the act of a free agent should emanate from a free
agent and the act of a non-free agent should emanate from a non-free
agent.

As we have stated earlier, man in this world has a particular sort of
freedom and choice. As far as his acts are concerned, he has such
potentialities as other things in existence including animals, do not
have divine knowledge being the source of everything in existence, the
whole system as it actually exists is based on what is known to Allah.
His Eternal Knowledge attaches to human acts and deeds in the sense that
He knows from eternity who will do his duty of his own will and who will
commit sins of his own will. Allah’s Knowledge requires that he who
obeys Him does so of his own will and he who disobeys Him also does so
of his own will. That is why it is said that man is free performance. He
cannot help being at liberty. The Eternal Knowledge of Allah does not
force anyone to commit a sin nor does it deprive anyone of his liberty
as already determined by His Knowledge.

Hence both the premises mentioned above on which the criticism was based
are false and do not hold good. It is true that Divine Knowledge is
active and not passive. But that does not mean that man has no choice.
When he commits a sin he is not compelled by an external force. He has
been created free and Allah knows that when man does a thing he does it
of his own free will. If he were forced to do a thing, that would have
meant that Allah’s Knowledge is wrong. The critic who says that Allah
knew from eternity that he would drink wine, should be asked to explain
whether Allah knew that he would drink it of his own will or He knew
that he would be compelled by an external force to do so. Evidently what
Allah knew from eternity was neither forced drinking, nor drinking
simply. It was voluntary drinking that He knew. Hence Divine Knowledge
would prove wrong if he drank by compulsion. The Divine Knowledge of the
acts and deeds of the beings having freedom of will does not mean
compulsion at all. It means just the opposite. Men must enjoy the
freedom of will with which they have been endowed. He was right who said
that it is height of ignorance to regard Divine Knowledge as the cause
of sinning.

All this was about Divine Knowledge from the angle of its being eternal
and prior to every happening. It is this aspect of Divine Knowledge
which the Qur’an has called the Book, the Protected Tablet, the Pen etc.

Anyhow it should be remember that while all things in this world and its
entire system of causation are known to Allah, they at the same time
constitute His Knowledge also. This world and all its systems are
Allah’s Knowledge as well as known to Him. Nothing can be hidden from
Him. He is everywhere and with everything.

The Holy Qur’an says: ***“Wherever you turn, you are always in the
presence of Allah”.*** (*Surah al-Baqarah*, 2:115)

Allah in the Holy Qur’an says: ***“We are nearer to him than his jugular
vein”.*** (*Surah Qaf*, 50:16)

***“He is the First and the Last, and the Manifest and the Unseen; and
He knows all things”.*** (*Surah al-Hadid*, 57:3)

Thus the whole world with all its characteristics and systems is an
aspect of Allah’s Knowledge.

At this stage of knowledge, the known and the knowledge are identical.
They are one and not two. Therefore the question of consistency or
inconsistency between them, does not arise. It cannot be said that in
such and such case Allah’s Knowledge will be right and that otherwise it
will be wrong.


