Part 2: Evil Effects of the Doctrine of Predestination
======================================================

There is no doubt that the doctrine of predestination, as enunciated by
the Ash’arites, who maintain that man absolutely lacks liberty and
freedom is dangerous. It paralyses the spirit and will of man. This
doctrine encourages the oppressors and binds the hands of the credulous
oppressed. Those who are able to occupy wrongly a position which they do
not deserve or acquire wealth by unlawful mean, always talk of the
blessing and favour of Allah.

They say that He favours whomsoever he likes. His bounty is endless.
That is the plea advanced by them to justify their unlawful gains. The
under-privileged do not dare to make any protest, because they think
that their protest would amount to raising objection against what Allah
has ordained. Hence they endure their lot patiently. This doctrine
provides the unjust an easy pretext of absolving himself of the
responsibility of his misdeeds. The persecuted believes that whatever
befalls him, is directed from Allah and therefore to fight against any
act of injustice and tyranny is not only absurd but is also immoral.

A believer in predestination does not care to promote his personality,
to reform his moral conduct and to control his actions because he
disbelieves in the system of cause and effect and gives no heed to the
relationship between man, his deeds and his spiritual and moral
personality on the one hand and his happy or miserable future on the
other. He leaves everything to his fate.

Political Misuse
----------------

History show that during the Umayyad period the rulers made full use of
the doctrine of fate and destiny. They were staunch supporters of
predestination, and persecuted those who preached self-respect, liberty
and free will. That is why this sentence became proverbial:
“Predestinarianism and anthropomorphism are the doctrines of the
Umayyads and justice and monotheism are the doctrines of the Alawis.”

The earliest supporters and advocates of human liberty and free will
during the Umayyad period were Ma’bad al-Juhani, an Iraqi and a Syrian
known as Ghaylan of Damascus. These two persons were known for their
honesty, integrity and faith. Ma’bad took part in the uprising of Ibn
al-Ash’ath and was killed by Hajjaj. Ghaylan was hanged by order of
Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik, who received a report about what he preached.

In his history of scholastic theology Shibli Nu\`mani says: “Though the
stage was now fully set for the eruption of schisms in Islam, they
started under political impetus. As during the Umayyad period injustice
and tyranny were rampant, naturally the people were agitated and
commotion existed everywhere. But whenever anybody made any complaint,
the partisans of the government tried to silence him by saying that
everything was ordained by Allah and none should utter a word against
His will. “We believe that good fortune and ill-fortune both are from
Allah”.

Ma’bad Juhani was a very bold and frank man. One day he asked his
teacher, Hasan Basri if the question of fate and destiny as raised by
the Umayyads, was right. Hasan said: “They are the enemies of Allah.
They are liars”.

The Abbasids were the political enemies of the Umayyads. Their policy
was different. Some of them, especially Mamun and Mu’tasim supported the
Mu’tazilities who believed in human liberty. Still a new leaf was turned
from the time of Mutawakkil, and official support was given to the
doctrine of predestination. Since then the Ash’arite creed became
popular in the Muslim world.

There is no doubt that the popularity and influence of the Ash’arties
had a great impact on the Muslim world. Though the other sects, such as
the Shi’ah did not officially follow them, yet even they could not
escape from being influenced by them. The Shi’ah doctrine differs from
that of the Ash’arites, though it is not in cent per cent agreement with
that of the Mu’azilites also. Anyhow in the Shi’ah literature in Arabic
and Persian there is not so much mention of human liberty as of man’s
being subject to his destiny, though the Imams of the Holy Family have
expressly declared that the belief in fate is not on the whole
inconsistent with the idea of human volition.

The words, fate and destiny have become awful and frightening because
with the domination of the Ash’arite school in the Muslim world and it’s
influenced over Islamic literature, these words have become synonymous
with compulsion, lack of liberty and illogical control of human actions
and behavior by an invisible force.


