Part 3: Onslaught of Christian Europe on Islam
==============================================

This aspect of the question provided a pretext to the Christians of
Europe to assert that the main cause of the decadence of the Muslims is
their belief in fate and destiny and that Islam is a predestinarian
system which totally deprives man of his liberty and volition.

While in Europe, Sayyid Jamal al-Din al-Afghani (1839 - 97), took notice
of this criticism and replied to it in his articles. In the introduction
of an article he said that if the spirit of a people was not pure and
congenial, even the pure tenet of its faith were bound to be perverted.
In their new form they only would add to its misery and error. They
would be converted into a force which would lead it to further wicked
deeds.

He further said: The true doctrine of fate and destiny has been greatly
misunderstood by the uninformed. The Europeans are mistaken when they
say that a nation believing in this doctrine losses its boldness,
courage and other good qualities, and that all the undesirable qualities
of the present day Muslims are the outcome of this very belief. Today
the Muslims are poor. They are politically and militarily weaker than
the European nations. Corruption, malice, dissension, disunity,
ignorance, lack of insight and satisfaction with a subsistence level of
living are rampant among them. They are not concerned with their
progress and are not keen to pushing back their enemy. The ruthless
armies of the enemy are attacking them from all sides, but they are not
perturbed. They submit to every humiliation. They have fallen into
slumber and left the treasures of wealth and independence to their
enemies and the aliens.

He continued to say: The Europeans ascribe to the Muslims all the evils
we have enumerated. According to them all these are the products of a
belief in fate and destiny. They say if the Muslims will continue to
stick to this belief for some time more, they will be doomed.

He added: The Europeans do not differentiate between a belief in fate
and destiny and a belief in predestination according to which man has no
liberty of action.

Mental Complex
--------------

From the foregoing it should not be concluded that the question of fate
and destiny and that of predestination and free will have arisen among
the Muslims for any social or political reasons. As we will explain
later these questions are primarily a scientific problem, a
philosophical unknown, and a mental complex. They arise for every
individual and every nation which is capable of thinking over general
questions. Probably there is no nation in the world which has not
thought over them in one way or other.

Material Philosophy And Destiny
-------------------------------

Some people are under the impression that this dilemma presents itself
only to those who believe in religion, and the materialists are not
faced with any such problem.

This is a false impression. The people having the material way of
thinking are also faced with this problem, though with a little
difference.

According to the law of causation every event and every phenomenon is
the product of one or more causes, and that cause (or causes) in turn is
the product of some other cause or causes. It is an indisputable
corollary of this law that in the presence of the relevant cause the
effect must appear and in the absence of it, the appearance of the
effect is impossible.

The materialists accept this relationship between a cause and its effect
and consider it to be the basis of their material philosophy. Now
obviously the human acts like all other phenomena must be governed by
this law. They cannot be an exception to it. If that is so where can
theory of free will and human liberty stand?

This is why we see that in all old and new philosophical systems the
problem of compulsion and free will exists quite well. As we will
explain later, some variation in the nature of the problem makes no
substantial difference In fact the belief in fate and destiny has
certain advantages that are missing in the belief in physical
compulsion.

Oneness Of Allah And His Purity
-------------------------------

The dilemma faced by the theologians and the religious philosophers was
that they on the one hand believed that nothing could happen without the
Will of Allah and on the other knew that nothing dirty or wicked could
be ascribed to Him. Consequently they wavered. Some of them held that
human acts and deeds, which could often be dirty or wicked, were not
subject to the Will of Allah. Others maintained that everything was
subject to His Will because He alone is the Primary Cause of the
existence of everything.

It is reported that Ghaylan of Damascus who was a supporter of free will
once said to the well-known scholar, Rabi’ah al-Ray: “Do you think that
Allah likes to be disobeyed?” What he meant was the Rabi’ah believed
that even the sins occurred by the Will of Allah. Rabi’ah at once
resorted: “It is you who believe that Allah is disobeyed against His
will”. He meant that according to the belief of Ghaylan it was possible
that something might happen which Allah did not will.

Once while Abu Ishaq Isfarayini was sitting with Sahib Ibn Ubbad, Qazi
Abd al-Jabbar, a Mu’tazilite arrived. As soon as Qazi Abd al-Jabbar who
denied the generality of fate and destiny, saw Abu Ishaq, he remarked:
“Glorified be He who is free from every indecent thing”. He meant that
Allah was above - that indecent things be ascribed to Him. He alluded to
the belief of Abu Ishaq that everything was from Allah which necessarily
meant that indecent things wee also from Him. Abu Ishaq retorted without
hesitation and said: “Glorified be He in Whose domain nothing happens
except that which He Wills”. He meant that according to the belief of
the Qazi, the things which Allah did not will could happen. Such a
belief went against the cardinal tenet of monothesism.

As we have pointed out earlier, so long as this question was not
affected by political and social motives, it was purely a philosophical
problem. A certain section of the people could not acquiesce in the
belief that evils and vices were imputable to Allah. They considered Him
to be far above such things. Another section which was more familiar
with the idea of monotheism, believed that in the universe everything
was sustained by Allah and hence the existence of anything capable of
taking an independent action against His Will was untenable. This
difference of view gave rise to divergent creeds.

Each section tried to prove the correctness of its idea by leveling
criticism against that of the other but without being able to answer the
objections raised against its own point of view. A reference to the
books of scholastic theology will make what we mean clear. The fact is
that neither of the doctrines of fate defensible in the form in which
they are enunciated by their respective exponents. If both sections
could understand that what they say is only partially true, the dispute
would have been settled. In fact the belief in fate, destiny and
monotheism does not necessarily mean predestinarianism, nor does the
doctrine of free will imply the negation of fate.


