Part 5: Freedom and Liberty
===========================

There is no doubt that if the divinely appointed fate is supposed to be
related to the events direct without the intervention of the causes,
human freedom and liberty will have no meaning. Now the next question is
whether it is possible to accept the general principle of causation and
the principle of human liberty simultaneously. Are they not
inconsistent? It appears that the only way to believe in human freedom
and liberty is to consider human will and acts not to be related to any
external causes and to accept the first theory out of the three theories
mentioned above.

Many ancient and modern thinkers are of the view that the principle of
causation is inconsistent with human liberty, and hence they believe in
free will not related to any cause. In other words they are the
proponents of mere chance and accident.

We have established in the foot-notes of our book, Principles of
Philosophy, vol. III that the general principle of causation is
undeniable and it admits of no exception. The denial of relation between
human will and external causes would amount to saying that the acts of
man are totally beyond his control. Thus instead of adding to human
liberty, we will be diminishing it further, by accepting the view.

Man has been created free. That means that he has been endowed with
intellect, will and thinking power. As far as his intentional acts are
concerned, he is not like a stone which if dropped from above will
automatically fall on the ground under the pressure of the gravity of
the earth. Nor is he like a plant which has only a very limited course
open to it and is only subject to the laws of growth and decay.
Similarly he is not like a mere animal which works only instinctively.
Man always finds himself at cross roads, but is not in any way compelled
to choose anyone of them. Other roads are not closed to him. The choice
depends upon his will and personal thinking. It is entirely up to him to
choose a particular way.

His choice will be the outcome of his personality, his moral and
spiritual qualities, his previous training, his hereditary traits and
his intellectual capacity. His happy or unhappy future depends on these
qualities and the choice he makes consequently.

Fire burns; water submerges; a plant grows and an animal walks. They all
work. The difference is that they do not choose, whereas man chooses. He
decides what he wants to do and which way he wants to go. His work is
subject to his own personal desire.

Inevitable And Non-Inevitable
-----------------------------

In the reports and traditions, fate and destiny have been described as
revocable and irrevocable. There are hints in the Qur’an also to that
effect. It appears that there are two kinds of fate and destiny, one
inevitable and unalterable and the other non-inevitable and alterable.

Now the question is: what is the meaning of non-inevitable fate and
destiny? Let us take any particular event in view. Have the Eternal
Knowledge and Will of Allah attached to it? If they have not, there is
no question of destiny. If they have, the event must take place,
otherwise that would mean the nonconformity of the Divine Knowledge to
the reality and the nonfruition of Allah’s Will.

To be more precise we may say that destiny means the emanation of all
the required causes from the Knowledge and Will of Allah, who is the
First Cause. As we know, the general law of causation necessitates
inevitability. This law requires that the occurrence of an event should
be sure under its own special temporal and spatial conditions and its
non-occurrence also should be certain in other circumstances. The
finality of the scientific rules is due to this very law.

Man can make scientific predictions to the extent of his limited
knowledge of the causes. Therefore the decision of fate and destiny
which determines the occurrence of the events through the system of
causation, must be regarded as conclusive. As such to divide destiny
into inevitable and non-inevitable appears to be meaningless.

At this stage a dilemma arises. Either we should, like the Ash’arites,
believe in destiny in its limited sense only or say that it is
absolutely unalterable and that man has no power to change it; or like
the Mu’tazilites deny its role at least as far as human acts and deeds
are concerned. Let us see how we can resolve this dilemma.

It may incidentally be said that just as the Ash’arite view implies the
denial of man’s liberty and his control of his destiny, the Mu’tazilite
view also besides being contrary to the monotheistic principles and the
concept of divine knowledge, does not serve any useful purpose from the
angle of human freedom. Even if we do not accept the fate and destiny in
their divine sense, what shall we do of their material concept,
according to which every event in the world is controlled by the system
of causation? That also amounts to compulsion.

Can we deny the working of the law of causation at least in the case of
free agent, that is man. Some modern European philosophers also have
expressed the same view as was held by the Mu’tazilites. They have
talked of free will not subject to the law that it is applicable only to
the material world composed of atoms, and is not applicable to the
spiritual world or even to the internal world of the atoms. We cannot
here dwell on the law of causation. Anybody interested in its detailed
discussion may refer to our book, **“**The Principles of Philosophy and
the Method of Realism**”,** vol. III, footnotes.

Here it is enough to say that the modern philosophers have denied the
generality of the law of causation, because they think that it is an
experimental law and as such have considered those cases to be out of
its scope in which human experiments have not been able to discover a
definite relationship of cause and effect.

In fact it is a big mistake to presume that all scientific laws, rules,
all mental conceptions are based on human perception and experiment.
This is a mistake which has been committed by many Western systems of
philosophy and from them it has passed to their Eastern followers.

In short, there is no way of denying the law of general causation, and
with its acceptance the problem of the non-inevitability of destiny
remains as it is, whether we believe or not in its divine aspect.
Briefly speaking the problem is that all events including human acts and
deeds are bound to acquire inevitability through their causes which
determine their specifications and characteristics. The system of
causation itself means inevitability and certainty. Hence the question
of a change in destiny does not arise.

All the believers in “the general principle of causation” and they
include the materialists, who believe in determinism and at the same
time hold that the destiny is changeable and that man controls his
destiny, are faced with this dilemma. Therefore the Mu’tazilite theory
of the denial on the view that all the events of the world are not
subject to Divine Will and that Divine Knowledge is not the source of
the entire system of the universe, serves no purpose.

Impossible Fantasy
------------------

If the alterability of destiny and its non-inevitability are construed
to mean that Divine Will and Knowledge necessitate one thing and then an
independent factor arises and necessitates something contrary to it, or
that an independent factor can change Divine Will and Knowledge, then
obviously such an idea is absurd.

Similarly it is also not possible that the law of causation should
necessitate one thing and a factor independent to it may nullify its
effect.

The fact is that all factors in the world flow from the Knowledge and
Will of Allah. Every factor is a manifestation of His Will and Knowledge
and an instrument of the implementation of what He has decreed. At the
same time every factor which we can think of is subject to the law of
causation. It cannot be imagined that a factor which is in itself a
manifestation of the Will of Allah and is subject to the law of
causation can ever go against what He has obtained.

Hence, a change of destiny in the sense that any factor can go against
what has been divinely ordained or what the law of causation
necessitates, is impossible.

What Is Possible
----------------

But a change in destiny in the sense that the factor bringing about the
change should itself be a manifestation of what Allah has decreed, is
possible. Though it may look rather queer, it is a fact that the destiny
can be changed by another destiny.

It may look more surprising if we think of the divine aspect of fate and
destiny, for a change in this aspect implies a change in the celestial
world, in the angelic tablets and books and in the Divine Knowledge. So
can Allah’s Knowledge still undergo a change? The surprise reaches its
height when we admit that certain terrestrial affairs, especially human
will and actions cause changes in the celestial world and the angelic
record.

Is it not a fact that the terrestrial and material system emanates from
the celestial system? Is it not a fact that the terrestrial world is
inferior and the celestial world is superior? Is it not a fact that the
human world is dominated by the angelic world? Is it still possible that
a lower system, or at least a part of it, *viz*. the human world should
influence a higher system and bring about changes in it, even if these
changes also should take place in accordance with an appointed destiny?
Here several remarkable questions crop up consecutively. Is the
Knowledge of Allah changeable? Is a divine decree revocable? Can an
inferior influence a superior?

The answer to these questions is in the affirmative. Yes, the Knowledge
of Allah is changeable. In other words Allah has such knowledge also
which is changeable. A divine decree is revocable. In other words Allah
has decrees which are revocable. An inferior can influence a superior. A
lower system, especially the will, desire and human acts can shake the
higher world and cause changes in it. This is the highest form of man’s
control of his destiny.

We admit that this statement is surprising, but it is factual. This is
that lofty question of Bada’ which for the first time in human history
was mentioned by the Qur’an.

**“*****Allah creates whatever He wants (out of what was recorded
previously) and records whatever He wants (that was not recorded
previously) and with Him alone is the Mother Book*****”.** (*Surah
al-Ra’d*, 13:39)

The doctrine has no precedent in the field of human knowledge. Among the
Muslim sects it is only the Twelver Shi’ahs who have been able to derive
this truth from the sayings of the Imams of the Ahlul-Bayt and they are
proud of this distinction.

We are unable to give a full explanation of this highly philosophical
question in this brief book. It is enough to say that the question of
Bada’ has a Qur’anic basis. It is one of the most subtle philosophical
subjects and only very few Shi’ah philosophers well-versed in the Qur’an
have been able to reach its depth. They were able to do so in the light
of the sayings of the Imams, especially those of Imam Ali (a), the
Commander of the Faithful.

Anyhow, it is obvious that in respect of such a subtle question reliance
cannot be placed on the lay man’s conception of it, which is nothing but
absurd.

For the present we are mainly concerned with the question of the
changeability of destiny. We have to see whether it is true that from
material angle destinies are revocable and some others irrevocable. If
so, how can this phenomenon be explained?

The things existing are of two kinds. Some of them do not have the
possibility of having more than one kind of special existence, like the
heavenly abstracts. Some others have such a possibility, like all
visible and perceptible things. They are composed of some kind of matter
and prepare the ground for coming into being of some other things.
Natural matter can receive various forms and shapes. It can evolve. It
grows, decays and decomposes. It is affected by various factors and
under the impact of each one of them its state and quality changes. A
seed sown in the soil grows and matures if it meets favorable climatic
conditions, receives an appropriate amount of light and heat and its not
affected by the pests. But its growth will naturally be hampered, if any
of the necessary factors are lacking or the seed itself is damaged in
any way. There are thousand and one if’s in the case of any way. There
are thousand and one if’s in the case of any kind of natural matter. If
this happens, the result will be that, and if that happens, the result
will be something different. In other words, the effect varies as the
causes vary.

As the heavenly abstracts do not have more than one kind of existence
and are not influenced by divergent causes, their destiny is irrevocable
and cannot undergo a change. Destiny is always determined by its causes.
As in the case of the abstracts their causes are not changeable, their
destiny also does not change. But the case of the non-abstracts is
different. They are subject to the law of motion, and have countless
forms and colours. They are always at cross-roads and have several
possibilities. Hence their destiny is revocable.

In other words, one single destiny does not determine them. As we have
said, the destiny of every effect is determined by its cause. As the
non-abstracts can have many causes, they can have many destinies also.
As each series of their causes is liable to be replaced by another
series, their destiny cannot be firm. There will always be a possibility
of the change in destiny with the change in the circumstances. If
someone falls sick, there is no doubt that his disease is the result of
some particular cause, which has brought about this particular destiny.
Now suppose he takes some effective medicine. This medicine is another
cause. It will produce a different destiny. If with the taking of
medicine the disease disappears, that means that the destiny of the
patient has changed. Suppose this particular patient is treated by two
physicians and their diagnosis and prescription are different. While the
treatment diagnosis and prescription are different, the treatment
prescribed by one of them has a curative and healing effect, that of the
other is lethal. In this case it may be said that two different destines
are in store for this patient, and as he has an option to choose either
of the treatments, it may be said that neither of his destines is
irrevocable. Naturally his eventual choice will depend upon so many open
and hidden factors. But the fact that he chooses one particular
treatment, does not preclude the latent possibility of the choice of the
other.

Hence it is clear that in many cases a number of destinies are operative
and they can replace one another it a man suffering from a disease takes
a medicine and recovers, he does so in accordance with his fate and
destiny. Again if he does not take any medicine and continues to suffer,
or takes a harmful medicine and dies, that is also perfectly in
accordance with his fate and destiny.

Similarly if a man moves out of an infected area and saves himself from
being affected by a disease, that is also owing to his fate and destiny.
In short everything is within the purview of destiny and one can never
escape it.

The point is that destiny is the source of all factors in the world, but
in itself it is not a factor which may bring other factors into play.
Every factor which comes into play is a manifestation of destiny and at
the same time is subject to the general law of causation. As such,
destiny cannot be a factor independent of other factors nor can it force
any other factor to act in a particular way.

That is why the theory of predestination, which means compulsion by
destiny, is not tenable. As we have said, destiny is the source of all
factors, but in itself it is not a factor to bring into play any other
factors. Hence, destiny cannot force man to do a thing. There is no
doubt that certain manifestation of destiny can be compelling, but that
compulsion is totally different from predestination which is supposed to
influence human will direct as a negative factor to deter man from doing
a thing or as a positive factor to force him to do it. In other words
destiny is changeable because it necessitates the existence of a thing
through its natural causes, which are manifold. The matter in this world
is liable to be influenced by a number of causes simultaneously.

Naturally the position becomes different if like the Ash’arites we hold
that causation is a mere illusion, or like the semi-Ash’arities believe
that in exceptional circumstances the course of events is directly
affected by fate and destiny. But such a fate and such a destiny do not
exist, nor can they exist.


