Part 6: Human Distinction
=========================

Human acts are among the events which have no definite and irrecocable
destiny. They depend on thousand and one causes, including man’s own
will and choice. All the possibilities which exist in the case of
inorganic material, plants and the instinctive acts of the animals, are
valid in the case of man also. In addition he has intellect, will and
choosing power.

Man for his own reasons and of his own will can abstain from doing a
thing which is fully in keeping with his natural and animal instinct.
Similarly without being compelled by any external forces he can do a
thing which is totally against his nature, if he thinks that it is
advisable to do that. Man like animals is influenced by his instinctive
motives and emotional desires, but he is not tied to them. Even in the
presence of all the factors which compel an animal to act instinctively,
man is free to use his will power and to decide whether he should or
should not take a particular action. His performance of an act depends
on like an executive authority. That is why man influences his destiny
as a free agent. He is always at liberty to do or not to do a thing.

Anyhow, his liberty does not mean that he is not subject to the law of
causation, or he can evade it. In fact human liberty does not mean man’s
freedom from the law of causation. In contrast such a freedom will
actually amount to compulsion, for practically there is no difference
between man’s being forced by a particular factor to act against his
will, and the act itself not being dependent on has liberty and freedom,
we mean that his acts emanate from his will with the approval of his
power of discrimination and no-external factor, whether it is destiny or
anything else, forces him to do a thing against his desire.

In short all causes are manifestations of the divinely ordained fate and
destiny. The number of imaginable destines in respect of an event will
be corresponding with the number of the causes and the alternatives
which can be imagined. The particular course which an event takes will
be in accordance with a divinely ordained destiny, and the course which
it does not take will also be in accordance with a divinely ordained
destiny.


