Part 7: A Glance at the Early Period of Islam
=============================================

The Holy Prophet was asked about the amulets used for seeking a cure,
(Ghazzali reports that the question was about both the spell and the
medicine) whether they could forestall a divinely ordained destiny. In
reply the Prophet said that they themselves were a part of destiny
(Bihar al-Anwar). He meant to say that their healing effect was also
divinely ordained.

Imam Ali (a) was sitting under the shade of a bent wall. He moved from
that place and went to another wall. Someone said to him: “O Commander
of the Faithful! Do you flee from a divinely ordained destiny?”. He
said: “Yes, I feel from one destiny to another” (Tawhid by Shaikh
Sadduq). In other words, he said that if he sat under a dilapidated wall
and it fell on him, that would be in accordance with a divinely ordained
destiny, for it is within the normal course of a sequence of causes and
effects that a man sitting under a tottering wall should suffer.
Similarly it was also in accordance with a divinely ordained destiny
that he should be safe, if he moved away.

It is possible that in the course of another sequence of cause and
effect, the same person may be confronted with some other danger. If
that happens, that also will be in accordance with a divinely ordained
fate and destiny.

Anyway, to keep oneself away from a danger amounts to fleeing from one
divinely ordained destiny to another.

History of Islam on the whole indicates that the Muslims of early era
had a firm belief in fate and destiny. They did not see any
inconsistency between their being masters of their own destiny and their
belief in this doctrine. They considered it to be an indisputable fact
that not only destiny was changeable but also that all changes were a
part of an overall destiny. They had a firm belief in destiny, but never
believed in compulsion or predestination. Therefore they did not become
lethargic and insensitive nor did they leave anything to their fate.
They always asked Allah for the best destiny, because they knew that
various destinies existed in every case.

It may look surprising that they asked for the best destiny but not the
best of what had been destined, as is borne out by the wordings of their
prayer. It is all the more surprising that even the simple-minded
Muslims were conscious of this subtle difference.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid in his commentary on the Nahjal-Balaghah says: ‘While
on his way to Syria Umar ibn al-Khattab received a report that plague
had broken out there. He consulted his companions whether he should
visit the affected town. Most of them advised him not to take this risk.
But Abu Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah said: “O Commander of the Faithful! Do you
flee from a divinely ordained destiny?” “Yes, I flee from one divinely
ordained destiny to another”, said Umar. At this stage a man claimed
that he had heard the Prophet saying: “Do not enter a town where plague
is raging. But if you are already in it, do not leave it”. Umar, who was
somewhat hesitant before hearing this hadith, decided not to visit the
place.’

The Shi’ah and the Sunni reports on the whole indicate that the Holy
Prophet (s) raised the question of fate and destiny before his
companions. Similarly Imam Ali (a) on several occasions talked about it.
It is remarkable that they dealt with this question with such a skill
that it did not lead the early Muslims to predestinarianism, nor did it
shake their self-confidence. The reports of their sayings and doings
which have reached us, clearly bear out this fact. Later when the Muslim
scholastic theologians started discussing and analyzing this question,
they could not distinguish between a belief in destiny and in
predestinarianism. Since then the confusion is continuing with a result
that a belief during the past fourteen centuries, very few scholars have
been able to make a clear distinction between the two doctrines.


