Is Qur'an Understandable?
=========================

But the important question which is often asked is whether the Qur’an is
understandable by an ordinary reader, or it requires scholarly
background to comprehend its meaning?

Has this book been introduced for the purpose of studying and
understanding it, or whether it is just for reading and reciting and
obtaining reward and blessing? The student of Qur’an, possibly, may
wonder at raising of such a question. To him it may appear beyond doubt
that the Qur'an is meant for the purpose of knowing and understanding
it.

Nevertheless, in view of various undesirable currents, which due to
numerous reasons came into existence in the Muslim world regarding the
question of understanding of the Qur'an, and which had an important role
in bringing about the decline of Muslims, I shall discuss the necessity
of studying and understanding the Qur’an in brief.

Is the purpose of Qur’an to obtain thawab only?
-----------------------------------------------

There are some people who think that the Qur'an is to be read merely for
the purpose of obtaining spiritual reward (thawab) without need of
understanding anything of its contents. They continuously recite the
Qur'an, but if they are even once asked: "Do you understand the meaning
of what you are reading?" they cannot answer. To recite the Qur'an is
essential and good, being regarded as the first step necessary for
comprehending its contents; and not merely as a means for gaining Divine
reward.

Regrettably, the roots of those degenerate and dangerous notions still
persist in our societies. So I consider it necessary to elaborate on
this topic.

Qur'an must be read and studied with the intention of educating oneself.
The Qur'an itself clarifies this point:

***“A book We have sent down to you, blessed, that men possessed of mind
may ponder its signs end so remember”. (38:29)***

One of the functions of the Qur'an is to instruct and to teach. For this
purpose, the Qur'an addresses human reason and speaks in logical and
demonstrative terms.

Infact, not only the believers and the faithful, but even the infidels
are invited by it to contemplate over its verses. The Qur'an demands
that it verses should be first contemplated over, before forming any
adverse opinion against them. Addressing the opponents, it says, why
they don't ponder over the Qur'an, what sort of hearts they possess,
they are as if shut close and sealed:

***“What, do they not ponder the Qur'an? Or is it that there are locks
upon their hearts?” (47:24)***

The Qur'an also says in one of its verses:

***“(This is) a Book We have revealed to you abounding in good, that
they may ponder upon the verses”.***

That is, We have not sent the Qur'an to be kissed, embraced and put on
the niche to gather dust, but for men to read and to contemplate about
its contents:

***That those endowed with understanding may ponder its signs and so
remember. (38:29)***

Ayatullah Murtadha Mutahhari says: “Scores of verses in Qur’an emphasize
the importance of contemplation in the Qur'an and interpretation of the
Qur'anic verses, although not an interpretation based on personal
caprices and bias, but a just, truthful and balanced interpretation free
of all traces of selfish interests.

“If we try to comprehend the Qur'an in an honest and unbiased way, it is
not at all necessary to solve all problems that we find in it. In this
regard the Qur'an is similar to Nature. In Nature, too, a number of
mysteries have neither been solved yet, nor can they be solved in
present conditions, yet are likely to be solved in the future. Moreover,
in studying and understanding nature, man has to tailor his ideas in
accordance with Nature itself. He is forced to interpret Nature in
accordance with its reality. He cannot define Nature in terms of his own
caprices and inclinations.

“The Qur'an, like the book of Nature, is a book that has not been sent
for a specific age and time. Had it been otherwise, all the secrets of
the Qur'an would have been discovered in the past; this heavenly Book
would not have presented its charm, freshness and vitality. But we see
that the possibility of contemplation, reflection and discovery of new
dimensions is inexhaustible in the case of this Holy Book”.

This is a point that has amply been emphasized and clarified by the
Prophet and the Imams. In a tradition, it is related from the Prophet
(S) that the Qur'an, like the sun and the moon, will present its
movement and continuity; that is, the Qur'an is not static or
monotonous.

In 'Uyun akhbar al-Ridha, from Imam Ridha (as), it is quoted that Imam
Ja'far Sadiq (as) was asked about the secret of it that as the time
passes and the more it is read and recited, the Qur'an increases in its
novelty and freshness day by day. The Imam Sadiq (as) answered:
**“Because the Qur'an is not for an exclusive age or for an exclusive
people”.**

The Qur’an is for all – the learned as well as the ordinary person
------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'an has been sent for all ages and for all human beings. It is so
composed that inspite of changes in knowledge, outlook and approach
through various times and ages, it surpasses all learning and knowledge
in all ages. While it encompasses mysteries and abstruse intricacies for
the reader of every age, at the same time it presents a great feast of
meanings and ideas that can satiate the needs of every one and every
time in accordance with the capacity of that particular age”.

Thus the Qur’an is for all : the learned as well as the ordinary reader.
To make this concept clear, we can compare the Qur’an to an ocean. The
less earned, like children, collect pebbles and shells from its shores.
The Scholars and thinkers, like pearl divers, bring out from it the
highest philosophy, wisdom and rules of perfect way of living.


