The Illustrative Themes of the Qur’an
=====================================

Another aspect of the novelty of the Qur'an language has to do with its
themes. These themes and topics represent a clear departure from those
which had been hitherto familiar to the Arabs. As Taha Husayn explained:

“It does not deal with any such things as ruins, camels, or long
journeys in the desert; nor does it describe longing for the beloved,
love, or eulogy, topics most familiar to pre-Islamic Arabs. But rather
it talks to the Arabs about such things as the oneness of God, His
limitless power, His knowledge, which is unattainable, His will, which
is unstoppable, and His creation of heaven and earth”.

This passage underscores yet another innovative aspect of the Qur'an,
namely the presentation of novel themes through an abundance of examples
all aimed at illustration and persuasion. The use of illustration is one
of the most effective stylistic techniques of the Qur'an. One can hardly
read a verse without experiencing the impact of this technique.

The art of narrative style represents another innovative aspect of the
Qur'an. It relates in astounding detail the stories of Prophet Nuh,
Ibrahim, Yusuf, Musa, and Issa, among others. It presents the dialogues
that took place in such stories and the claims and counter-claims made
by each of the opposing parties. Story-telling may not have been totally
novel in pre-Islamic Arabia given the significant quantity of parables,
epics, and myths that were inherited from that period. What was novel;
however, was the type of integrated, elaborate story involving such
essential items as theme, plot, well-developed characters, and
denouement which are to be found in the Qur’an, which refers itself to
the benefit in telling such stories:

***“We do relate unto you the most beautiful stories, in that We reveal
unto you this [portion of the] Qur'an. Before this you too were among
those who knew it not”. (1:3)***


