The Central Theme of the Holy Qur’an
====================================

What is the central theme of Qur’an?
------------------------------------

Since the advent of Islam and the revelation of the Qur'an in the early
years of the seventh century AD, the Muslim Holy Book has been the
subject of many extensive analytical studies. The focus of the great
majority of these studies has been the theological and legislative
aspects of the Holy Book, for the Qur'an provides Muslims with detailed
guidance on their everyday problems. Together with the sayings, actions,
and recommendations of Muhammad, the Qur'an has been the ultimate source
of legal authority for Muslims over the past fourteen centuries.

Muslim scholars have also painstakingly examined, analyzed and
interpreted the various verses of the Holy Book, detailing the
requirements the Qur'an imposes on Muslims in order for them to achieve
spiritual purity. Thus, in addition to its legislative and theological
value, the Qur'an has also served as a source of spiritual guidance for
the followers of Islam.

Holy Qur’an is a Complete Code of Life
--------------------------------------

However, we cannot claim that the Central Theme of the Holy Qur’an is
only legislation and spirituality; as human life is more complex and
multi-dimensional. Since Islam is a complete way of human life and
Qur’an being its source of guidance, to ascribe the Qur’an to be just
the book of legislation and spirituality only will be misleading,
because the Qur'an has dealt with a vast range of subjects.

Contrary to the opinion of some people who consider the Holy Qur’an to
be of spiritual benefit only, or to be confined to worship, prayers and
morals, we should point out that ony one-twelfth (500 verses) relates to
problems of Jurisprudence; while the larger part of it deals with
matters pertaining to various issues including social, political,
administrative, historical, cultural, faith and other related matters.

Among the recurring themes of the Qur'an is about the universe itself
and its Creator. Another theme treated by the Qur'an is the purpose of
the universe and its creation. Among the other general issues dealt by
the Qur'an is the question about human being: Is man a despicable
creature, or a personality with nobility and dignity etc.?

The other subject dealt with in the Qur'an is the issue of human
society: Is the society considered to be primary and the individual as
secondary, or whether it subordinates the society to the individual? Are
societies, according to the Qur'an, subject to laws governing their life
and death, their rise and decline, or are these conditions applicable to
individuals alone?

The Qur'an deals with numerous other issues. One of them is the point of
view of the Qur'an about itself. The other issue is related to the
Prophet (S) and its manner of introducing and addressing him. Another
issue is its definition of a believer (mu'min) and his characteristics
and so on.

Furthermore, each of these general issues possesses various branches and
divisions. For example, when discussing mankind and its situation, it is
natural to speak about morality. Or, when speaking about society, the
problem of human relationships also unavoidably enters the discussion.
The same is true of such notions as "enjoining good and forbidding
evil," and the problem of social classes.

Now the question is: What is then the Qur’an’s general theme? If
pondered upon the multifaceted contents inside the Qur’an, one can
safely reach to the conclusion that the central theme and aim pursued by
the Qur’an is the **‘training of the human being’** as a being conscious
of his duties. The main aim of the Qur’an is therefore to reinforce and
accelerate the spiritual ascension, together with all the qualities of
human being, toward a state of true loftiness and the dignity of which
the human being is worthy.

In another words, we can say that the main purpose of Qur’an is to
expound truths that are relevant to the ‘life of the human being’ and
the exaltation of his being and conducive to his attaining a life of
true happiness.

Imam Amirul Mu’miniin ‘Ali bin Abitalib (as) narrated the following dua,
from which we can derive very clearly that the Holy Qur’an is the ‘chart
of life for man’. He prayed: **“O Allah! expand my breast with Qur’an,
actuate my body with Qur’an, enlighten my sight with Qur’an, liberate my
tongue by Qur’an, and help me to mould my life according to Qur’an, so
long as You make me live”.**


