Revolutionary Transformation in the Society through the Qur’an
==============================================================

Another aspect of the miraculousness of the Qur’an which has had a great
effect is the revolutionary transformation it brought about in human
civilization. A matter calling for serious attention in the study of
Islam is the fact that it received no assistance from factors external
to itself when it began to create the nucleus of a universal society out
of a scattered and disunited people that lacked all science and free
thought and did not even seek to unify its constituent tribes; and when
it began, moreover, to found a uniquely, vast and spiritual
civilization.

All the factors for changing the world, for putting forward an
international law with the slogan of unity among races, peoples, and
social classes, for creating a movement for the liberation of thought
and the ennobling of knowledge, were derived from the very text of the
Qur’an, from the culture that emerged from the Qur’an and from the
Islamic order. Islam never relied on a government or a power situated
outside the society it had itself brought into being.

Even the aggressors, for example the Mongols, who attacked the Islamic
lands and triumphed over the Muslims, thanks to their military
superiority, lost their dominance in the end when they were confronted
with the spiritual power of Islam, and they adopted the religion of the
people they had conquered. This history of nations does not record any
other example of a victorious aggressor adopting the religion of the
people it had defeated.

Holy Qur’an can Shape the Destiny of the Human Race as a Whole
--------------------------------------------------------------

Therefore, Qur’an is specially essential for those scholars who are
interested in the study of man and society, since this book has been
effectively instrumental not only in moulding the destinies of Islamic
societies, but also in shaping the destiny of the human race as a whole.

A brief glance over history would be enough to provide sufficient proof
of the claim that there has been no such book that has ever influenced
human societies to the magnitude of the Qur'an. It is for the same
reason that the Qur'an automatically steps into the precincts of
sociological discussions, and becomes the elemental constituent of the
subjects of research in this discipline. This means that any deep study
and profound research in the field of world history of the last fourteen
hundred years, is impossible without the knowledge of the Qur'an.

Smith writes in his - Muhammad and Islam: “The teachings of the Qur’an,
which mentions knowledge and the pen in its opening verses, brought
about a tremendous transformation. Islam proclaimed study to be a
religious duty, and made the blank ink of the scribe and the scholar to
be superior to the red blood of the martyr.

“Thanks to the teachings of the Qur’an and its emphasis on the
cultivation of knowledge, countless scholars made their appearance and
wrote innumerable books. Different scientific disciplines were derived
from the Qur’an and spread across the world by Muslim thinkers. The
world was illumined with the light of the Qur’an and culture of Islam”.


