Foreword
========

In the search for the truth, two main approaches may be adopted to help
reach the goal aspired, one is to purely use reason and clear rationale
to arrive at what one is reaching for, or, two, sift through the various
beliefs, ideologies, and schools of thought, checking one against
another – with the aid of reason and rationale – to identify the set of
teachings or the school of thought that gives, beyond any reasonable
doubt, the best means to access the truth.

Presented in this book, are brief works of the author concerning the
two religions, each of which muster some two billion followers – Islam
and Christianity.

In the first part, a few examples of encounters between the prophet of
Islam, Muhammad, as well as the Imams of his progeny, and other
individuals are presented. These reflect the conduct and approaches the
prophet had towards others.

In the second part of the book, debates and discussions the author had
with Christians are presented. In these debates the author adheres to
the same approach and adopts the same attitude as those of the prophet
of Islam and the Imams of his progeny, briefly referred to in part one
of this book. Various issues of concern, ranging from general and legal,
to historic and scientific are addressed, in a calm and a rational
environment, taking lead form the Qur’anic verse {Invite (the people) to
the Way of your Lord (Islam) with wisdom and good exhortation, and argue
with them in a manner that is best.} 16:125 Those who had come with an
acquired perception of Islam, which usually was distorted and incorrect,
were in a better position to see the truth of Islam at the end of these
debates with the author, so much that they were able to embrace Islam as
their own way of life.

The Muslim side in these debates was the most eminent authority on
Islam in recent times, the late Ayatollah al-Udhma Imam Muhammad
Shirazi.

The debates presented here were conducted at the time when he was in
Iraq. Needless to say that the late Imam Shirazi continued this approach
of rational debate and scientific dialogue with others throughout his
life, and throughout his stay in Kuwait (1970-1979) and in Iran
(1980-2001) during which thousands entered into debates with him about
Islam, many of whom subsequently embraced islam, not to mention those
who embraced Islam through listening to his lectures or reading his many
books that vi exceed 1000. Reports of those embracing Islam also usually
echoed in the press, and this continued until his death on 17th December
2001.

This part was first published in Arabic as a separate small book in the
seventies, and it has been translated into English to present those
dialogues to the English reader in an effort to present Islam, however
limited this may be. Islam is a religion of rationale and reason, which
encourages the seeking of knowledge, and is in harmony with the nature
of mankind. Its teachings are suitable and applicable to every time,
place and generation, and it would therefore be beneficial for us to
learn about the teachings of Islam and its laws, help others to learn
about it so that the teachings of Islam are adhered to and implemented
for the common good, and greater enlightenment of mankind.

In the third part of this book, the author carries out a brief and
concise investigation into the contradictions of the Bible, some of
which are in the form of false attributes to God, and also the false and
immoral attributes to the messengers of God. This work was first
published in Arabic as a separate book.

The author rejects the notion that the Prophets of God, who are amongst
the most righteous and pious individuals of the community of mankind
could possibly commit such acts as deception, adultery and even
coldblooded murder. Decent members of a community would not resort to
such acts let alone the most noble of all. They have reached such status
of self-discipline, selflessness, devotion, and piety that it would even
be improbable for them to contemplate to commit such acts.

The conclusion the author draws is that the ‘Bible’ we have today
within our disposal has been distorted and tampered with, and thereby
unreliable as a reference and a source of guidance for mankind.

In the fourth part of this book, some of the teachings of the holy
Qur’an are presented about Jesus Christ and his mother Mary, peace be
upon them. These teachings address various aspects of Jesus and his
mother; as to who Jesus was, and who he was not, his teachings and his
mission, and eventually his ascension to the heavens.


**Z. Olyabek (Editor)
October 2002
Enco**


