The Spread of Islam
===================

A Christian couple came to see me. The wife was not wearing Hijaab. As
soon as I came to know that both of them were Christians and had come to
discuss about Islam, I said to the wife to put on Hijaab in order to
enable me to talk to her. The woman was annoyed over my suggestion.

We have previously faced such situations too. So, I said to her, “This
is my belief and you know that one’s belief is respected everywhere in
the world.” She replied in affirmative and covered her hair, and said,
“Actually, we are from Scotland, but have lived in London where we
attended a few public addresses of Muslims at Hyde Park. We heard there
that Islam had 500 million followers. This was very much surprising for
us.” To make them more surprised, I said to them that in fact Islam has
more than 800 million followers.41

“Why do you wonder?” I asked them. One of them said, and the couple
used to respond alternately “Because Islam is a religion of savagery and
a lot of absurdities, and it has passed its sell by date. So it is
surprising as to how 800 million persons follow such a religion.” I
said, “This attribute is not applicable to Islam. Who told you that
Islam is such a religion as you have said? Have you studied Islamic
books? Or are you just reflecting the biased views against Islam?” One
of them said, “We have not yet discussed this issue with Muslims. We
have not even yet attended any Muslims' religious gatherings anywhere.
This is our first trip to visit Iraq and a few other Arab countries. We
have not yet studied any Islamic book either. We know nothing more than
what we used to hear from our elders or fathers of our churches. We do
not think they would lie to us, we put much faith in our clergymen and
do not hesitate to admit that we respect them and rely on whatever they
say.”

I asked, “Have your Christian priests ever said why Islam was a
religion of savagery? Why Islam ceases to be valid in this age? And
which aspect of Islam is ridiculous?”

The husband said, “Yes, I heard so from them. The reason Islam is a
religion of savagery is that it was spread by sword. To achieve success
by force is an act of savage animals and not of human beings who should
41 This figure refers to the population of the 1950’s. Today’s consensus
is closer to two billion.

achieve success by virtue of reason and good manners. The reason that
Islam is not applicable in our age any more is because of its holy book,
the Qur’an that has favoured horse and donkey but prohibited wine and
music. Such statements might have been acceptable in the past but not in
the current age of industrial and scientific progress. Therefore, this
religion has no place in this age. The ridiculous things in Islam are
those such as polygamy.”

I said; “Were these your only criticisms against Islam?” He said, “For
the time being I say this much only. “ I said, “I could point you to
truly objectionable aspects that exist in Christianity, but I shall
confine myself just to remove the doubts that you expressed about
Islam.” He said, “On the contrary, if there is any criticism against
Christianity, I am ready to welcome it with my open mind.” I preferred
to remove his doubts about Islam, and he first wanted to know the reply
to the criticism that Islam was spread by sword. I said, “The religion
of Islam was spread and expanded because of its good moral manners, and
ethical teachings.

Allah says in the Holy Qur’an about the example character of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (may Allah’s blessings be upon him and his progeny),
{You have the finest manners.}42 When Islam resorted to using sword, it
was just to defend itself, not to gain wider acceptance. That is why the
Holy Qur’an says, {Those who are suppressed are allowed to fight against
their oppressors and Allah is powerful enough to help them.}43 and
{Whoso aggresses over you, you too face them with the same force.}44 I
went on to say, “When Islam was first proclaimed, a small group of
people accepted and believed in it. The infidels condemned that group,
killing some of them, while some others were forced to take refuge in
Abyssinia (Ethiopia). However as the pressure of infidels continued to
increase over the Muslims, they migrated from their homeland (Mecca) to
Medina. The polytheists also imposed economic sanctions against the
Muslims. The Muslims did likewise to confronting their caravan passing
through the Medina area en route from Damascus to Mecca, and as a result
a battle ensued, which ended in favour of the Muslims. After that
battle, the infidels equipped themselves with sufficient fighting
material so as to crush Muslims and eliminate Islam. Muslims defended
themselves till Islam emerged victorious and the infidels were defeated.
This fact is 42 The Holy Qur’an, the Pen (68): 5

43 The Holy Qur’an, the Pilgrimage (22): 39

44 The Holy Qur’an, the Heifer (2): 194

supported and documented in authentic books of history. Do you presume
that self-defence is tantamount to spreading by sword or inviting at
sword’s point?”

He said, “If it is so, I withdraw my words.” For his benefit he was
referred to a number of relevant books on this subject, with the help of
interpreters. He then asked, “How do you treat the word of our fathers
of the churches? Do all of them tell lies?” I said, “With all my respect
for them, whosoever accuses Islam in terms of its spread by sword is
either ignorant or obstinate; otherwise, history is there (to rebut such
falsehood).”

He said, “What do you have to say about the applicability of Islamic
teachings today?” I said, “This is what Islam teaches us: • That there
is a god who is Just, All-Knowing, Powerful, and Able. He sent prophets
for the guidance of human beings. The prophets too had their appointed
successors (to maintain the guidance). All human beings will return to
Allah to have their' reward to their deeds (in this world). The
good-doers' shall enter Paradise and the evildoers into Hell.

• Islam makes it an obligatory duty to worship Allah, and to deal
fairly and kindly with people. Allah has ordained for us the rules for
marriage, divorce, inheritance and all the needs of human beings from
birth to death.

• To maintain the obligation of truthfulness and honesty,
trustworthiness, loyalty and modesty, and to refrain from telling lies,
exercising dishonesty, crime and cruelty.” Then I asked, “Do you presume
that the age of these values has ended?” He replied in negative.

I said, “But as for the horse and the donkey you referred to, do you
think that these are bad things? If Islam admires useful things, is it a
sin? He replied in negative. Don’t you know that nowadays the world
feels pride to defend the horse and other animals? Is it not so that man
meets many of his requirements from horse? Even in this advanced age, a
great number of people make use of donkeys for carrying household
effects and other loads.” When he confirmed my answer, I added, “On the
very same basis, if horse and donkey are admired in Islam, it does not
prove that Islam has passed its sell by date.”

The Christian man next asked for my opinion on the prohibition of wine
and music in Islam. I said, “It has now been proved medically and
psychologically that both wine and music are harmful to man and cause
psychological and physical diseases. So, as prevention against such
diseases, Islam has prohibited both of them. Do you know that prevention
is better than cure?” He agreed again and added, “I have studied about
them being harmful in a few journals.”

“Now kindly let me know as to why polygamy has been allowed in Islam.”
I asked them “Amongst your relatives, how many unmarried women do you
know of?” They laughed and said, “Why do you want to marry them?” I
politely replied “No, but I want to explain a point” They said
“seventeen.” I said, “Why these helpless women are still unmarried?” And
added, “It is quite wise on Islam’s part, and in the best interest of
both man and woman, that it has allowed polygamy (a man can marry up to
four women).

This is to protect the women’s right to marriage, so that they would
not remain unmarried for all of their adult lives.45 It is also a
consideration of those men who are able to manage more than one family.
If a man is able to manage four families and there are four women who
are willing to marry him, why should he be stopped from doing so? If by
law he is to marry only one of them, then not only his ability and skill
have been repressed, but in the process the other women are denied the
opportunity to marry him and raise their families. Do you think that
Islam should not take into account the abilities of such men and the
need of those women, and ensure that they are not repressed or denied
their right? Moreover Islam has declared polygamy permissible and it has
not termed it compulsory. You also might have observed that most of
Muslims are content with one wife only.”

Both of them said that they had never come across such a crystal clear
and eloquent explanation so far. I said, “The only reason is that you
have never contacted Islamic scholars before to discuss such problems,
otherwise, almost all of them are ready to clarify such ambiguities and
solve such religious problems.” Then they asked, “What advantage will we
have if we embrace Islam?” I said, “When someone embraces Islam, he is
bestowed 45 The need for polygamy becomes particularly acute in the
event of war, when men are most likely to be killed than women and
therefore in a society the number of women exceeds that of men. In the
aftermath of war and such circumstances, war widows, if they wish, would
be able to marry married men. In this way society would not be left with
a surplus of woman unable to marry unmarried men, due to their
scarcity.

upon with the goodness of both worlds because Islamic programmes are to
augment the prosperity of mankind. If the Islamic programmes are
followed, it will cause man to win Allah’s pleasure, and will be made to
enter Paradise in the next world.”

Our discussion went on for some time. At last, the Christian woman
embraced Islam but the Christian man was hesitant to embrace Islam. Then
I said to him, “Since your wife has embraced Islam, why do you
hesitate?” He remained silent. I further elaborated Islam to him. At
last he said, “I shall think about it.” But I explained to him that when
the truth becomes clear to someone, there remains no justification to
think it over again. He said, “In submission to your convincing
arguments, should I abandon my religion?” I said, “No, this is not the
case. You shall augment your faith in the Prophet Jesus Christ (upon
whom be peace) with addition of your Islamic faith because the truth of
Islam has become clear to you.” His wife having embraced Islam
encouraged him also. With the grace of Allah the Almighty, he too
embraced Islam. Thereafter, I advised them to contact Islamic scholars
for obtaining more information about Islam when they return to London.
**Trinity**

One day, an Italian Christian tourist came to me, but he seemed to be
in a bitter mood, and visibly upset. He had asked one of the servants of
the holy shrine of Imam Husayn (upon whom be peace) to take him to an
Islamic scholar for enquiring about some issues. The servant brought him
to my house only three hours before sunset. The tourist also spoke
English, and I asked for one of my English-speaking companions to be the
interpreter.

The tourist said, “I had heard about Muslims being savages but did not
think they would be to such an extent.” I said, “Have you seen all
Muslims?” He replied in negative. I said, “Therefore, do not say that
all Muslims are savages. Perhaps some of them might be so.” He nodded,
and I requested him to allow me to ask him some questions before he
could ask me his questions. Then I asked him where he came from, what
religion he followed and what was his level of education. He said that
he had come from Italy; he was a Christian and a graduate from
university.

When I requested him to ask his questions, he said, “Some Muslims in
this city behave savagely.” I said, “What has happened?” He said, “I
wanted to enter the mausoleum of Husayn, but they prevented me. When I
asked for the reason, they said that I was unclean. Does this make any
sense? Is it possible for a person of my age to be unclean?” I said, “Do
not feel so uneasy. Who said so to you? Was that person a scholar or
some ignorant person?” He said, “Surely he must have been an ignorant
person.” I said, “Don’t you Christians have any ignorant people in
Italy?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “So there remains no justification for
your being so uneasy.” He said, “All right, then kindly ask them to let
me enter the mausoleum [shrine] of Husayn.” I said, “I can not do this,
because Imam Husayn, the owner of the shrine who is laid there does not
allow you to enter his place.” He was surprised and asked for the
reason. I said, “You belong to a religion the followers of which had
been offensive to him, his grandfather and his companions.” He said,
“Did Christians offend them?” I said, “Yes. Because Christians treated
Prophet Muhammad – the grandfather of Imam Husayn – like a liar, and
thus they did not believe in him as a prophet after Jesus Christ. If you
prevent a person who offends you from entering your house, do you have a
right to that or not?”

The Christian tourist lowered his head and was pondering over
something. Then he took a sigh and said, “You have also done the same
thing to me when that person called me unclean. After all, how can I
enter that shrine?” I said, “The only way is to admit that Muhammad was
a true prophet.” He said, “It is all right, but having no proof for his
prophethood, how can I believe that Muhammad was a prophet?” I said,
“Here we have come to a point to settle the issue with reason and
argument. You are right. You want me to prove the prophethood of
Muhammad.” Then I added, “Muhammad (may Allah’s blessings be upon him
and his Progeny) is a prophet on the same basis on which Jesus Christ
(upon whom be peace) was a prophet.”

The Christian tourist said, “The proof of the prophethood of Jesus is
his being the son of God.” I said, “Do you really and sincerely believe
that Jesus was the son of God? Has God indeed caused birth to Jesus like
a man? You are a learned man. How do you say this?” He said, “I do not
mean to say that Jesus was the son of God due to actual birth, but he is
the son of God with a view to nobility and dignity. In other words, he
has an attribution of God.” I said, “Good, now can you explain as to how
Jesus obtained this nobility and attribution?” He said, “For the reason
that Jesus was born without a father.” I said, “If this is the case, why
don’t you treat Adam as the son of God since he was not only without a
father but also without a mother.”

The Christian pondered over the matter for a while, then he gave his
proof to prove the prophethood of Jesus, saying, “I mean to say that
Jesus was a prophet on the basis that he was bestowed with miracles.” I
said, “Muhammad had also been bestowed with miracles.” He said, “What
are the miracles of Muhammad.” I said, “Allah split the moon in two.” He
said, “Oh, it is a ridiculous story also narrated to me by one of my
church fathers that Muhammadans believed that the moon had been cleft in
two, came down and entered into Muhammad’s sleeve. Is it logical that
the moon with its so much volume could enter into the sleeve of a
person?” I said, “Firstly, I did not say that the moon entered into the
sleeve of Muhammad. You have added this portion. Secondly, what can
prevent Allah from cleaving the moon into two parts? And if we were to
assume your claim of entering the sleeve, it could be that by the will
of Allah a small fragment of the moon entered his sleeve, and then by
the will of God the moon was returned back to its previous state. He
said, “This is an ambiguous explanation. We should leave it. A logical
mind does not accept it.”

Then to show him the irrational belief they hold, I asked him, “How is
it that you can believe in an irrational claim but cannot admit to a
reasonable one?” He said, “How have we admitted an irrational word?” I
said, “Splitting of the moon, is plausible, but the statement of you
Christians who believe in Trinity that there are three persons, yet at
the same time, they are not three separate persons but one. Isn’t it an
irrational claim? Is it possible that these three fingers,” pointing at
my three fingers “are three and at the very same time are one as well?”
He said, “This concept is like a triangle, which has three sides but is
one triangle.” I said, “Do you mean that God is one but has three
parts?” He said, “No.” I said, “Then what does the example of the
triangle mean?”

Having thought over a little, he could not give a logical answer but
gave the common answer given by the Trinitarians when they fail, “The
priests and Christian scholars say that trinity is beyond reason.” I
said, “It makes clear to both of us that your point (on this issue of
Trinity) is not logical.” Here he was silent. Then I added, “On the very
same basis, Muhammad has shown the miracle in splitting the moon just
like Jesus had shown, other miracles.” He said, “How do you prove the
miracle of your prophet?” I said, our Holy Book, the Qur’an says, {The
hour drew near, and the moon did rend asunder.}46 Had this event been
fabricated the world’s contemporary authorities at the time of the Holy
Prophet would certainly have proved it wrong. The fact that this event
(the splitting of the moon) was not denied by all those concerned proves
that the miracle did actually happen.”

He said he did not believe in the Holy Qur’an. When I asked him for the
reason, he said, “Because the Qur’an insults the Christians.” I said,
“Which verse of the Qur’an abuses Christians?” He said, “Qur’an calls us
Kaafirs, i.e. unbelievers.” I said, “Do you know the meaning of Kaafir?”
He said, “Kaafir is an insulting term.” I said, “No. Whosoever does not
believe in God or in the prophets of God, or in the Day of Judgment, is
called an unbeliever, i.e. Kaafir. As Christians do not believe in
Muhammad, they are called unbelievers and as such this is not an abusive
term but the expression of a fact.” Then I added, “Accordingly, if the
reason for Christians' disbelief in the Qur’an is its use of abusive
language against them, then why do you believe in the Bible in spite of
the fact that it uses abusive language in respect of Jesus Christ peace
be upon him?” 46 The Holy Qur’an, the Moon (54): 1

He surprisingly said, “Does the Bible use abusive language for Jesus?”
I replied in affirmative; and when he asked me to show him that part, I
quoted Paul’s letter to Galatians 3:13 saying that Jesus is “being made
a curse for us.” He said, “This is absolutely wrong. There is no such
verse in the Bible!” I said, “Yes, it is certainly there.” Then I opened
the Bible and showed him the relevant verse. The interpreter translated
the same for him. Astonished by this verse he said, “I had never heard
of this before.”

Then I said to him, “Do you want the Jews to believe in the New
Testament?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “But Jews have a right to say, ‘We
do not believe in a book which use abusive language against us’, because
the Gospel of Matthew, chapter 3, verse 7, calls Jews the off springs of
vipers. What shall be your reply to them? Now let us suppose that the
Holy Qur’an uses abusive language against Christians, but it should also
be kept in mind that if we realise that the Qur’an is justified and
right, then we should mend our ways, not revolt against it and refrain
from believing it. Because Prophet Muhammad is just like Prophet Jesus;
just as you believe in Jesus, you must also believe in Muhammad.”

Thereafter, I explained in detail the high character of Prophet
Muhammad, his splendid virtues, and deep and extensive knowledge, as
well as his battles, which were for the sake of Allah and for the
betterment of humanity. In the process he was so moved by the noble
character of prophet Muhammad as well as his words and teachings, that
drops of tears rolled down his face. He then said, “If I embrace Islam
and the people question me why I did so, what should I say?”

I said, “You say, I have found Muhammad to be a prophet in the same
manner as I found Jesus, Moses, and the others to be the true prophets
of God, and consequently I embraced Islam.” He said, “Such argument does
not convince people.” I said, “It is compulsory for a person to convince
his conscience but not his people. Do you now feel convinced or not that
Muhammad is a prophet?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “So you embrace Islam
and do not have any concern about the people.” He remained silent. To
give an example from his own country, I asked him, “Do you know that
there is a Communist Party in Italy?” He said, “Yes, there is.” I said,
“Do the Communists believe in Jesus?” He said, “No.” I said, “When you
believed in Jesus, what did you say to the Communists? Were your replies
convincing to them?” He said, “No.” I said, “Therefore, you don’t have
any concern about the people (in the matter of religion). Do not fear
from the people. Your efforts must be to please Allah first, and
secondly, to satisfy your conscience.”

Thereafter, I encouraged him to embrace Islam. Eventually, with the
grace of Allah the Almighty, he embraced Islam, and stated the three
declarations of faith. Then I gave him a copy of the Holy Qur’an with an
English translation and a few copies of the magazine “Fundamentals of
Islam”, which was being published in English in Karbala. Then I directed
a servant to lead him to a bathroom (as some of the Islamic
jurisprudents – Faqih – deem it necessary) to perform the ceremonial
Ghusl bath before entering the shrine of Imam Husayn.


