Prophets of the Bible
=====================

The Bible attributes such qualities to the prophets of God Almighty
that are even shameful for the ordinary individual, let alone the
messengers of God who are the most pious human beings sent to guide
mankind towards the right path, righteousness, betterment, chastity,
etc.

**Prophet Jesus Christ**

Q: Does Jesus Christ speak a lie?

A: No, certainly not! Prophets never speak lies. But the Gospel of John
7: 2-10 says:

“Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren therefore
said unto him, Depart hence, and go unto Judea, that thy disciples also
may see the works that thou doest. For there is no man that doeth
anything in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou
do these things, shew thyself to the world. For neither did his brethren
believe in him. Jesus said unto them .... Go ye unto his feast: I go not
up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full come. When he had
said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee. But when his
brethern were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast, not openly,
but as it were in secret.” Q: Does Jesus make wine and make his
disciples drink it? A: No, certainly not! Jesus does not condone
something or encourage his disciples to do something that is condemned
and prohibited in the Old and New Testaments.

But Jesus is accused of making wine; nevertheless, it was his first
miracle to make manifest his glory! God forbid that one should say that,
“ Maybe in the religion of Jesus, wine was lawful.” I seek refuge to the
Almighty God from such accusation, for the Old and New Testaments
prohibit wine. First let us quote the order of the prohibition of wine
in the Bible and then show the false accusation on Jesus Christ peace be
upon him. Hosea 4: 11 says:

“Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.” Isaiah 5: 11-13
also says:

“Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drinks; that continue until night, till wine inflame them!”

And Deuteronomy 21: 18-21 says:

“If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son,.... Then shall his father
and his mother... say unto elders of his city, this our son is stubborn
and rebellious, he will not obey our voice, he is a glutton, and a
drunkard. And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, then
he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall
hear, and fear.” 48

On the other hand, both the Old and the New Testaments point to the
merit of not drinking wine or strong drink, and abstaining from alcohol
consumption is considered a great virtue as can be seen from the quality
attributed to John (the Baptist) by the angel that appeared to
Zacharias, reported in Luke 1: 15 “For he shall be great in t

he sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink;
and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's
womb.”

Now we quote the accusation on Jesus Christ: John 2: 1-11 says

48 There are many other verses that forbid or condemn the consumption
of wine or alcoholic beverages, some of which are reproduced here for
reference:

“Do not drink wine nor strong drink . . . It shall be a statute for
ever throughout your generations” [Leviticus 10:9]; “He shall separate
himself from wine and strong drink . . . neither shall he drink any
liquor of grapes . . .” [Numbers 6:3]; “Now therefore beware, I pray
thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean
thing.” [Judges 13:4]; “But he said unto me, ‘Behold, thou shalt
conceive and bear a son. And now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither
eat any unclean thing; for the child shall be a Nazirite to God from the
womb to the day of his death.’” [Judges 13:7]; “She may not eat of any
thing that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong
drink, nor eat any unclean thing. All that I commanded her let her
observe.” [Judges 13:14]; “And Hannah answered and said, "No, my lord, I
am a woman of a sorrowful spirit. I have drunk neither wine nor strong
drink, but have poured out my soul before the LORD.” [1 Samuel 1:15];
“Wine is a mocker, strong drink is enraging; and whosoever is deceived
thereby is not wise.” [Proverbs 20:1]; “Give strong drink unto him that
is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts.”
[Proverbs 31:6]

“and the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there: And both Jesus was called, and his disciples,
to the marriage. And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith
unto him, they have no wine. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to
do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. His mother saith unto the
servants, whatsoever he saith unto you, do it. And there were set there
six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews,
containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus said unto them, Fill the
waterpots with water. And they filled them up to the brim. And he saith
unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And
they bear it. When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was
made wine, and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the
water knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, And saith
unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine; and when
men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou hast kept the
good wine until now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on
him.”

This shows obviously, according to the New Testament, drinking wine was
not considered as a taboo in the religion. See how Jesus himself made
wine and made others drink it!

On another occasion, Luke 22:15-18 says that Jesus “said unto them,
with desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I
suffer: For I say unto you, I will not anymore eat thereof, until it be
fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And he took the cup,... and said..... I
will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall
come.”

Q: Does Jesus let his disciples in his bosom and love him? A: No! This
is not appropriate for an ordinary individual to do, let alone a great
prophet.

But John 13:23, 25 accuses Jesus of this act by saying: “Now there was
leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved ... He
then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it?”

Q: Is Jesus accursed?

A: No, certainly not! But Galatians 3:13 says

“Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us: for it is written, Curse is everyone that hangeth on a tree.”

Q: Is Jesus the son of God? Does a man’s son become his Lord (God)? A:
No, most certainly not! This does not make sense. But the Bible not only
says that Jesus is a son of David but he is also his Lord!
Matthew 1: 1 says “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son
of David, the son of Abraham.”

Matthew 22:41-45 says “While the Pharisees were gathered together,
Jesus asked them, What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They say
unto him, The son of David. He saith unto them, How then doth David in
spirit call him Lord, saying, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool? If David then call
him Lord, how is he his son?”

**Prophet David**

Q: Does a prophet commit adultery?

A: No, he most certainly does not. A prophet of God can never do such a
ghastly act.

Q: Does a prophet make anyone drink wine? A: No, certainly not! He
would not do a prohibited act such as this. Q: Does a prophet deceive a
man to be killed? A: No, certainly not! A prophet of God cannot do such
an evil act. But Prophet David has been accused of all these appalling
acts in the Bible.

Look at 2 Samuel 11: 2-27 and see what it says “And it come to pass in
an evening tide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the
roof of the king's house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing
herself, and the woman was very beautiful to look upon. And David sent
and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bath-sheba, the
daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite? And David sent
messengers, and took her; and she came unto him, and he lay with her,
for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her
house. And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am
with child.

And David sent Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite..... And David
said to Uriah, go down to thy house, and wash thy feet... Uriah went not
down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy
journey? Why then didst thou not go down unto thine house? And Uriah
said... shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie
with my wife?.. And when David had called him, he did eat and drink
before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his
bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house. And
it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab,...
saying, set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and die...
And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she
mourned for her husband. And when the mourning was past, David sent and
fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son.
But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD.”

Have you ever heard such a story of a cunning device to kill Uriah? How
David committed adultery with the wife of Uriah, and then made him drink
wine so that he could lay with his wife; and then finally sent him to
the battlefield to be killed and how he was killed?

Now read about the offspring of that married woman who committed
adultery with David!

Matthew 1:6 says “And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king
begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Uriah.” Also 2 Samuel
12:9 says “Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the LORD, to
do evil in his sight? Thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword,
and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the
sword of the children of Ammon.”

Now see how the Bible says that God recompensed David by making his
sons commit adultery with his wives!

The book of 2 Samuel 12: 11, 12 says “Thus saith the LORD, behold, I
will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take
thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he
shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun. For thou didst it
secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the
sun.”

Then read the same book 16: 22 saying “So they spread Absalom a tent
upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father's
concubines in the sight of all Israel.”

**Prophet Lot**

Q: Can a prophet commit adultery with his daughters or drink wine? A:
It is impossible for a prophet to commit such ghastly acts. A descent
individual would never do these deeds, let alone a prophet of God who is
amongst he most noble and pious people! But the Bible accuses Prophet
Lot of having committed adultery with his own daughters! Genesis
19:30-38 says

“And Lot went up out of Zoar, . . . and dwelt in a cave, he and his two
daughters. And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old,
and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner
of all the earth: Come let us make our father drink wine, and we will
lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father. And they made
their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay
with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she
arose.

And it came to pass on the morrow, that the first born said unto the
younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink
wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may
preserve seed of our father. And they made their father drink wine that
night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived
not when she lay down nor when she arose. Thus were both the daughters
of Lot with child by their father. And the firstborn bare a son, and
called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this
day. And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi:
the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.”

**Prophet Jacob**

Q: Does a prophet kiss another woman?49 A: No, certainly not! A prophet
of God would not do such a thing! But Genesis 29:11 says

“And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.” Q: Does a
prophet deceive others? A: No, he certainly does not. It is a disgrace
for a prophet, who has been perfected by God, to deceive.

But Genesis 27:1-35 says “And it came to pass, that when Isaac was
old.... he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto
him, My son.. Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons,.. and take
me some venison;... that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I
die. And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son.. And Rebekah
took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the
house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son...

And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am
I; Who art thou, my son? And Jacob said unto his farther, I am Esau thy
firstborn... And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
And he said, Bring it near me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that
my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat:
and he brought him wine, and he drank. 49 This is in reference to cases
when the woman is not the man’s mother, aunt, wife, daughter, nice.
According to the teachings of God, one may not kiss or even touch other
women including one’s female cousin, and Rachel in the above is Jacob’s
cousin. And his father Isaac said unto him, come near now,... kissed
him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him... And it
came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and
Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father,
that Esau his brother came in from his hunting... And Isaac his father
said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn
Esau... And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said... Thy brother
came with subtilty [i.e. deceit], and hath taken away thy blessing.”

It is a strange accusation that a prophet should kiss a woman, or drink
wine, or deceive his father in order to get the blessing by force! Is it
possible for these words to be true?

You read the Bible, and see what accusations are attributed to the
children of the prophets. Read how Dinah, the daughter of prophet Jacob
is accused of adultery.

Genesis 34:1, 2 says

“And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to
see the daughters of the land. And when Shechem the son of Hamor the
Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay her, and
defiled her. “

**Prophet Solomon**

Q: Is it possible for a prophet to do things that are admonished by
God? Or turn his heart to gods? Or build a high place for worshipping
them? Or turn his heart from God?

A: No. It is simply impossible!

But 1 kings 11:1-10 says “But king Solomon loved many strange women,
together with the daughter of Pharaoh, ... Of the nations concerning
which the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in the
them, neither shall they come unto you: for surely they will turn away
your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love. And he
had seven hundred wives, princesses and three hundred concubines: and
his wives turned away his heart. For it came to pass, when Solomon was
old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his
heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as was the heart of David
his father. For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the
Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonities.

And Solomon did evil in the sight of the LORD, and went not fully after
the LORD, as did David his father. Then did Solomon build an high place
for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before
Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon. And
likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and
sacrificed unto their gods. And the LORD was angry with Solomon, because
his heart was turned from the LORD God of Israel, which had appeared
unto him twice. And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he
should not go after other gods: but he kept not that which the LORD
commanded.”

**Prophet Moses**

Q: Is it possible that there could be hatred between God and His
prophet such that He would seek to kill him? A: This is impossible!

But the Bible says that God wanted to kill Moses, but Zipporah saved
him. Exodus 4: 14, 21, 24, 25 says

“And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses .... And it came
to pass by the way in the inn, that the LORD met him, and sought to kill
him. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the fore skin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou
to me.”

Q: Is it possible for a prophet to be such a tyrant that he commanded
children and others to be killed and the cities to be destroyed? A: It
is impossible for a prophet to do such things or to oppress people! But
the Bible says that Moses did! See Numbers 31: 9-11, 13, 17, 18, 27, and
35:

“And the children of Israel took all the woman of Midian captives, and
their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their
flocks, and all their goods. And burnt all their cities wherein they
dwelt, and all their goodly castles, with fire. And they took all the
spoil, and all the prey, both of them and of beast.... And Moses, and
Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went forth
to meet them without the camp. And Moses was wroth with the officers of
the host... And said unto them, Have ye saved all the woman alive? ...
Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every
woman that hath known man by lying with him. But all the woman children,
that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for
yourselves.... And divide the prey into two parts; between them that
took the war upon them, who went out to battle, and between all the
congregation.... And thirty and two thousand persons in all, of woman
that had not known man by lying with him.”

The number of those who have been killed is more than those who have
been spared alive!!

But on another occasion no one was spared alive; see Deuteronomy 2:31-
35:

“And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his
land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land.
Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight at
Jahaz. And the LORD of our God delivered him before us; and we smote
him, and his sons, and all his people. And we took all his cities at
that time, and utterly destroyed the men, and women, and the little
ones, of every city, we left none to remain: Only the cattle we took for
a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

This is what the Bible accuses Moses; to have killed men, women and
even children by the order of God!! Again Deuteronomy 20:13-17 says:
“And when the LORD thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou
shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword: But the
women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city,
even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt
eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given
thee.

Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from
thee, which are not of the cities of these nations. But of the cities of
these people, which the LORD thy God doth give thee for an inheritance,
thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth: But thou shalt utterly
destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the Amorties, The Canaanites,
and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the LORD thy God
hath commanded thee.” Is this the humanity that the Bible teaches? That
nothing that breathes shall be saved alive?!

Q: Can a prophet be angry with God that he requested Him to blot him
from his prophethood?

A: No, most certainly not! No prophet of God would do something like
this.

But Exodus 32: 31, 32 says “And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said,
Oh this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.
Yet now, if thou will forgive their sin; and if not, blot me, I pray
thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.”

**Prophet Isaiah**

Q: Is it possible that God should command his prophet to walk naked
before people for years. Isn't it ridiculous for a prophet who is a
model to the people to do such an act?

A: It is impossible for God to have commanded this, for He has
forbidden man to be naked before other people! For this is an indecent
and obscene act.

But Isaiah 20: 2, 3 says that the LORD spoke to “Isaiah the son of
Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off
thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And
the LORD said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot
three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia.”

**Prophet Ezekiel**

Q: Does God command His prophet to eat bread baked with human dung? Why
should God command such a thing?

A: No, God doesn't command such a thing! But Ezekiel 4:12,13 says “And
thou [Ezekiel] shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with
dung that cameth out of man, in their sight. And the LORD said, Even
thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the
Gentiles, whither I will drive them.”

But Prophet Ezekiel was wise enough; how could he eat bread baked with
dung that comes out of man? So he begged God to retract such a
ridiculous command and God accepted his request, and instead He ordered
him to use the dung that comes out of the cow!!!

Ezekiel 4:14, 15 says

“Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not been polluted: for
from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of
itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable flesh into
my mouth. Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for
man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.”

Q: Does God command His prophet to shave off his hair and beard? Why?
A: God does not command His prophet to do such thing, for he is a model
for the people. But Prophet Ezekiel was ordered to do such odd and crazy
things before. He ate cow's dung after God had pity on him, otherwise he
would have eaten man's dung. Now he is commanded to shave off his hair
and beard! Ezekiel 5:1, 2 says:

“And thou, son of man, take thee sharp knife, take thee a barber's
razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard ... then
take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair. Thou shalt burn with
fire a third part in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege
are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third part, and smite about it with
a knife: and a third part thou shalt scatter in the wind; and I will
draw out a sword after them.”

The aim of this order becomes obvious, when, in Ezekiel 5:12, God says
“A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine
shall they be consumed in the midst of thee; and a third part shall fall
by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third part into all
the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.” Q: Is it appropriate
for God to cause the wife of the prophet to die just to be a sign while
it is possible for him to explain in words? A: No, it isn't! But on two
occasions the Bible shows that these have happened to prophet Ezekiel as
a sign to the people.

Ezekiel 24:15-24 says

“Also the word of the LORD came unto me, saying son of man, Behold, I
take away from thee the desire of thine eyes [i.e. wife] with a stroke:
yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.
Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine
head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy
lips, and eat not bread of men.

So I spake unto the People in the morning: and at even my wife died,
and I did in the morning as I was commanded. And the people said unto
me, wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest
so? Then I answered them, The word of the LORD came unto me, saying,
speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; ... Thus
Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath done shall ye
do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the LORD God.”

**Prophet Hosea**

Q: Is it appropriate that God should command His prophet to take a wife
of fornication, and children of fornication? And why? Is it because the
nation has committed great fornication, departing from the Lord? or was
it a warning and an advice to the children of Israel by mentioning the
names of the children who were born of that woman? Or was it just to
mention how he committed fornication?

A: Never! God can never command any of His prophets to do such an act!
But the book of Hosea 1:2-4 says

“The beginning of the word of the LORD by Hosea. And the LORD said to
Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms:
for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the LORD. So
he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which conceived, and
bare him a son. And the LORD said unto him, call his name Jezreel; for
yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of
Israel.”

And Hosea 2: 2-5 says

“Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I
her husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight,
and her adulteries from between her breasts; Lest I strip her naked and
set her as in the day she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and
set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst. And I will not have
mercy upon her children; for they be the children of whoredoms. For
their mother hath done shamefully......” And Hosea 3: 1-4 says

“Then said the LORD unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved on her
friend, yet an adulteress, according to the love of the LORD toward the
children of Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of wine. So
I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer of
barley, and an half homer of barley: and I said unto her, Thou shalt
abode for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt
not be for another man: so will I also all abode be for thee. For
children of Israel shall abode many days without a king...”

It is a disgrace for such a story to be written in ordinary books let
alone the Holy Book! If a prophet does this, what would other people do?
If the head of the house does an evil deed, then it is certain that the
people of the household would indulge in such an evil deed.
Nevertheless, the prophet is commanded to love an adulteress, according
to the love of the Lord toward the children of Israel! Is it proper to
attribute such words to God?

**Prophet Aaron**

The Bible teaches the Oneness of God; and one of the commandments of
God says that, “Thou shalt have none other gods before me.” (Deuteronomy
5:7) But according to the Bible, the prophets of God, who were chosen to
teach this commandment, they themselves worshipped other gods beside
their God!

Q: Is it possible that a prophet of God should make gods and misguide
the people to worship them?

A: It is impossible! For such is the act of the polytheists; and God is
against this.

But Exodus 32: 1-6 says

“And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the
mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto
him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses,
the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is
become of him. And Aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings,
which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your
daughters, and bring them unto me. And all the people break off the
golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving
tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be thy
gods, O Israel, which brought thy up out of the land of Egypt. And when
Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation,
and said, To morrow is a feast to the LORD. And they rose up early on
the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and people sat down to eat and
to drink, and rose up to play.” Q: Does God argue with His prophet about
His wrath, and later He repents for His evil thought?

A: No, this can never be. God does not do anything that He would repent
for later!

But Exodus 32: 10-14 says “Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath
may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will make
of thee a great nation. And Moses besought the LORD his God, and said,
LORD, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast
brought forth out of the Land of Egypt with great power, and with a
mighty hand? Why should the Egyptians speak and say, ‘For mischief did
he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains and to consume them
from the face of the earth'? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people.... And the LORD repented of the evil,
which he thought to do unto his people.”


