Prophet Jeremiah
================

Q: Is it possible that God should command His prophet to make bonds and
yokes and put them upon his neck? Why should he do such a ridiculous
thing when he is a role model to the people?

A: It is impossible for God to command such stupid things. But Jeremiah
27: 1, 2, 8 says that the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah saying,

“Thus saith the LORD to me; Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them
upon thy neck... And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom
which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and
that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that
nation will I punish, saith the LORD, with the sword, and with famine,
and with pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.”

**Prophet Noah**

Q: Does a prophet drink wine and become so drunk that he does not
realise when he is uncovered?

A: a sensible man would not do such a thing, let alone a prophet of
God, who preaches the prohibition of this (alcohol consumption)! But
Genesis 9: 20-22 accuses this to Prophet Noah by saying “And Noah began
to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard: And he drank of the
wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent. And Ham,
the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two
brethren without.”

**An Old Prophet**

Q: Does a prophet lie?

A: No, he doesn't! A prophet never lies; otherwise no one would believe
his words and follow his teachings. But the Bible, 1 Kings 13: 11-19
says “Now there dwelt and old prophet in Bethel; ... And went after the
man of God, and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him,
Art thou the man of God that comest from Judah? And he said, I am. Then
he said unto him, come home with me, and eat bread. And he said, I may
not return with thee, nor go in with thee: neither will I eat bread nor
drink water with thee in this place: For it was said to me by the word
of the LORD, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn
again to go by the way that thou camest. He said unto him, I am a
prophet also as thou art; and an angel spake unto me by the word of the
LORD, saying, Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat
bread and drink water. But he lied unto him. So he went back with him,
and did eat bread in his house, and drank water.”

**Prophet Elisha**

Q: Is it possible that a prophet should give information while he knows
that it is false?

A: No. It is impossible for a prophet to give false information. But
the Bible accuses Prophet Elisha of falsification in 2Kings 8:7-15 “And
Elisha came to Damascus; and Benhadad the king of Syria was sick; ....
And the king said unto Hazael .... go, meet the man of God,... so Hazael
went to meet him.... and said, Thy son Benhadad king of Syria hath sent
me to thee, saying, shall I recover of this disease? And Elisha said
unto him, Go, say unto him, Thou mayest certainly recover.. howbeit the
LORD hath showed me that he shall surely die... so he departed from
Elisha, and came to his master; who said to him what said Elisha to
thee? And he answered, He told me that thou shouldest surely recover.
And it came to pass on the morrow... he died.”

**The Bastard Prophets!**

Q: Can a prophet be a bastard or a son of an adulteress? A: No, he
certainly cannot! This is because it is a shame for a son to be born out
of wedlock. He will be disgraced before the people. Therefore, people
will neither hear him nor accept his words. As this is not in accordance
with prophethood, God did not send any bastard to be His prophet.

The Bible clearly says in Deuteronomy 23: 2 “A bastard shall not enter
into the congregation of the LORD; even to his tenth generation shall he
not enter into the congregation of the LORD.”

Hence, no prophet can be a bastard. But on the contrary, the Bible
itself says that certain prophets were bastards!

1. Judges 11: 1 says: “Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of
valour, and he was the son of harlot.” Then verse 29 of the same chapter
says: “Then the spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah…” This means he
was a prophet, and inspired one!

2. It was shown earlier in this document how prophet David committed
adultery with Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah. How he deceived Uriah to be
killed! How he made Uriah drink so that he could sent him to the fierce
battlefront to be killed! Therefore according to the Bible, Solomon is,
God forbid, an illegitimate son of David!

2 Samuel 12: 24 says: “And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went
in unto her, and lay with her… and she bare a son, and he called his
name Solomon: and the LORD loved him.” 3. Now look how the Bible accuses
that Jesus also is of the descendants of Pharez, an illegitimate son!

Matthew 1: 1-16 says: “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the
son of David, the son of Abraham. Abraham begat Issac; and Issac begat
Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren; And Judas begat Phares
and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom .... and Jacob begat Joseph
and husband of Mary of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.” In
Genesis 38: 6-30, the Bible depicts how Judah committed adultery with
Tamar, and thus Pharez was born!

May Allah forgive us for reproducing these blasphemies, but it is
necessary to do so to show what the Bible attributes to God and how it
treats His Holy Prophets appointed by Him to wean people out of
disbelief and transgression. {Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of
Majesty, from that which they attribute (to him); and peace be upon
those sent (to warn); and praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.}50 50
The Holy Qur’an, The Ranks (37): 180-182.


