The Migration To Abyssinia
==========================

When the trials became too severe for the Muslims at the beginning of
the mission of prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, he gave permission
for a group of them to migrate to Abyssinia saying: ‘In that land there
is a king7 who does not wrong the people. It is a land of sincerity, and
you should go there until Allah brings about a relief from what you are
suffering.’

Eighty-three men and eighteen women from the tribe of Quraysh, led by
Ja’far ibn Abu Talib left Makkah. Ja‘far, who was the cousin of the
prophet Muhammad, was chosen by the prophet for his bravery and
eloquence in dialogue, not to mention his knowledge of and adherence to
the teachings of Islam.

When the leaders of Quraysh, who were the determined opponents and
persecutors of the Muslims and the prophet Muhammad in Makkah, saw that
the migrants were safe in their land of asylum, together with the
Negus’s good patronage of them, they gathered in the House of Assembly
and said: ‘We have a cause for revenge in those who are with the Negus.
So let us gather some money and gift it to the Negus so that he might
give the Muslims over to us, and let two men of your choice be assigned
to the task.’ So they sent ‘Amr ibn al-‘As and ‘Ammarah ibn al-Walid
with the gift, and they sailed to Abyssinia.

When they entered upon the Negus, they prostrated to him and greeted
him and said: ‘Our people give you sincere counsel. They have sent us to
warn you of those who have come to you for they are the associates of a
liar, of a man who has come out and claimed that he is the Messenger of
6 The Holy Qur’an, Family of Emran (3): 159.

7 He was known to be follower of the teachings of Jesus Christ.

Allah, and none has followed him but the foolish. So we blockaded them
into an area in our land where no one enters and no-one leaves, and
hunger and thirst kills them. When things became severe, he sent his
nephew to corrupt your religion and kingdom. So beware of them and hand
them over to us so we might relieve you of them. The proof of this is
that when they enter upon you they do not prostrate to you and they do
not greet you with the traditional greeting out of distaste for your
religion.’ When the Negus summoned them and they were present, Ja’far
ibn Abi- Talib hailed at the door saying: ‘The party of God ask your
permission to enter.’

The Negus said: ‘Let him say that again . . .’ Ja’far repeated his
words and the Negus said: ‘Indeed, then let them enter with the safety
of God and His protection.’ They entered but did not prostrate to him.

The Negus said: ‘What prevented you from prostrating to me?’ They said:
‘We prostrate only to Allah who created you and gave you your dominion.
We practised prostration as a greeting when we were idolaters but Allah
sent a true Prophet to us and ordered us to use the greeting, which He
sees fit, which is ‘Peace’, the greeting of the people of Paradise. The
Negus realised that this was the truth and it was in the Torah and the
Evangel, and he asked: ‘Which of you called for permission to enter?’
Ja’far said: ‘It was I.’

The Negus said: ‘Then speak.’ Ja’far said: ‘You are a king and long
speeches are not fitting in front of you. I wish to speak on behalf of
my companions so let one of those men speak and you will hear our
conversation.’ ‘Amr ibn al-‘As said: ‘Then speak.’

Ja’far said to the Negus: ‘Ask him whether we are slaves or free men,
and if we are slaves who have escaped from our masters then return us to
them.’

‘Amr said: ‘Nay, they are free and noble men.’ Ja’far said: ‘Have we
spilt blood unjustly to warrant retaliation against us?’

‘Amr said: ‘Not a drop.’ Ja’far said: ‘Have we taken people’s wealth
unjustly which we must repay?’

‘Amr said: ‘Not a penny.’

The Negus said: ‘Then what is it you want from them?’ ‘Amr said: ‘Us
and them were on one religion, the religion of our forefathers, but they
have left that and followed another.’ The Negus said to Ja’far: ‘What
was the religion you followed and what do you follow now? Tell me the
truth.’

Ja’far said: ‘As for the religion we left, that was the religion of
Satan; we used to deny Allah and worship stones. As for the religion
which we have changed to, it is the religion of Allah, Islam, brought to
us from Allah by a messenger, with a book like the book of the son of
Mary and in concord with it.’

The Negus said: ‘You have spoken of a momentous matter so be at ease.’
Then the Negus ordered that the bell be rung and every priest and monk
gathered in his presence. Then he said to them: ‘I ask you by God who
sent down the Evangel upon Jesus, do you find between Jesus and the Day
of Rising another prophet sent?’

They said: ‘Aye by God, Jesus gave us tidings of him and said: ‘Whoever
believes in him has believed in me but whoever denies him has denied
me.’

The Negus said to Ja’far: ‘What does this man say to you? And what does
he order you to do and forbid you from?’

Ja’far said: ‘He recites to us the book of Allah and enjoins the good
and forbids the evil. He orders us to honour our neighbour, our kin and
the orphans, and he orders us to worship Allah alone no partner has He.’
The Negus said: ‘Recite some of what he recites to you.’ So he recited
the chapter of the Spider from the holy Qur’an:8 8 Chapter no. 29 in the
holy Qur’an.

In the Name of Allah the Compassionate the Beneficent Alif Lam Mim9.

Do men think that they will be left alone in saying, "We believe," and
that they will not be tested? We did test those before them, and Allah
will certainly know those who are true from those who are false.

Do those who practise evil think that they will get the better of Us?
Evil is their judgment!

For those whose hopes are in the meeting with Allah (in the Hereafter,
let them strive); for the Term (appointed) by Allah is surely coming:
and He hears and knows (all things). And if any strive (with might and
main), they do so for their own souls: for Allah is free of all needs
from all creation. Those who believe and work righteous deeds, from them
shall We blot out all evil (that may be) in them, and We shall reward
them according to the best of their deeds.

We have enjoined on man kindness to parents: but if they (either of
them) strive (to force) thee to join with Me (in worship) anything of
which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not. Ye have (all) to return to
Me, and I will tell you (the truth) of all that ye did. . . . . . . The
parable of those who take protectors other than Allah is that of the
Spider, who builds (to itself) a house; but truly the flimsiest of
houses is the Spider's house; if they but knew. . . . . . . Then he went
on to recite the chapter of the Romans from the holy Qur’an:10

In the Name of Allah the Compassionate the Beneficent Alif Lam Mim.

The Roman Empire has been defeated11, 9 These are the Arabic alphabet
corresponding to A, L, M. This is a coded message between Allah and His
Messenger. 10 Chapter no. 30 in the holy Qur’an. 11 By the Persian
Empire.

In a land close by: but they, (even) after (this) defeat of theirs,
will soon be victorious,

Within a few years. With Allah is the Decision. In the Past and in the
Future: on that Day shall the Believers rejoice,12 With the help of
Allah. He helps whom He will, and He is Exalted in Might, Most
Merciful.

(It is) the promise of Allah. Never does Allah depart from His promise:
but most men understand not. They know but the outer (things) in the
life of this world: but of the End of things they are heedless.

Do they not reflect in their own minds? Not but for just ends and for a
term appointed, did Allah create the heavens and the earth, and all
between them: yet are there truly many among men who deny their meeting
with their Lord (at the Resurrection)! Do they not travel through the
earth, and see what was the End of those before them? They were superior
to them in strength: they tilled the soil and populated it in greater
numbers than these have done: there came to them their messengers with
Clear (Signs). (Which they rejected, to their own destruction): it was
not Allah who wronged them, but they wronged their own souls.

In the long run evil in the extreme will be the End of those who do
evil; for that they rejected the Signs of Allah, and held them up to
ridicule.

It is Allah Who begins (the process of) creation; then repeats it; then
shall ye be brought back to Him. . . . . .

The eyes of the Negus and his companions had flooded with tears. The
Negus said: ‘Recite more of this excellent speech.’ So Ja‘far recited
the chapter of the Cave from the holy Qur’an:13 12 This is a prophecy
made by the Qur’an before the event, which proved true when subsequently
the Christian Roman Empire defeated the Persian Empire. 13 Chapter no.
18 in the holy Qur’an.

In the Name of Allah the Compassionate the Beneficent Praise be to
Allah, Who hath sent to His Servant the Book, and hath allowed therein
no Crookedness:

(He hath made it) Straight (and Clear) in order that He may warn (the
godless) of a terrible Punishment from Him, and that He may give Glad
Tidings to the Believers who work righteous deeds, that they shall have
a goodly Reward,

Wherein they shall remain forever: Further, that He may warn those
(also) who say, "Allah hath begotten a son":

No knowledge have they of such a thing, nor had their fathers. It is a
grievous thing that issues from their mouths as a saying: What they say
is nothing but falsehood! Thou wouldst perchance fret thyself to death
with grief, sorrowing after them, if they believe not in this Message.
That which is on earth We have made but as a glittering show for the
earth, in order that We may test them, as to which of them are best in
conduct.

Verily what is on earth We shall make but as dust and dry soil (without
growth or herbage). . . . . . . ‘Amr then wanted to anger the Negus and
said: ‘They insult Jesus and his mother.’ Ja’far then read to Negus the
chapter of Mary from the holy Qur’an:

. . . . . Relate in the Book (the story of) Mary, when she withdrew
from her family to a place in the East. She placed a screen (to screen
herself) from them; then We sent to her Our angel, and he appeared
before her as a man in all respects.

She said: "I seek refuge from thee to (Allah) the Most Gracious: (come
not near) if thou dost fear Allah." He said: "Nay, I am only a messenger
from thy Lord, (to announce) to thee the gift of a holy son."

She said: "How shall I have a son, seeing that no man has touched me,
and I am not unchaste?"

He said: "So (it will be): thy Lord saith, 'That is easy for Me: and
(We wish) to appoint him as a Sign unto men and a Mercy from Us': it is
matter (so) decreed."

So she conceived him, and she retired with him to a remote place. And
the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree: she cried
(in her anguish) "Ah! would that I had died before this! would that I
had been a thing forgotten and out of sight!"

But (a voice) cried to her from beneath the (palm-tree): "Grieve not!
for thy Lord hath provided a rivulet beneath thee; "And shake towards
thyself the trunk of the palm-tree; it will let fall fresh ripe dates
upon thee.

"So eat and drink and cool (thine) eye. And if thou dost see any man,
say, 'I have vowed a fast to (Allah) Most Gracious, and this day will I
enter into no talk with any human being'"

At length she brought the (baby) to her people, carrying him (in her
arms). They said: "O Mary! truly an amazing thing hast thou brought!

"O sister of Aaron! thy father was not a man of evil, nor thy mother a
woman unchaste!" But she pointed to the baby. They said: "How can we
talk to one who is a child in the cradle?"

He said: "I am indeed a servant of Allah: He hath given me revelation
and made me a prophet; "And He hath made me blessed wheresoever I be,
and hath enjoined on me Prayer and Charity as long as I live: "(He) hath
made me kind to my mother, and not overbearing or miserable;

"So Peace is on me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the day
that I shall be raised up to life (again)!" Such (was) Jesus the son of
Mary: (it is) a statement of Truth, about which they (vainly) dispute.

It is not befitting to (the majesty of) Allah that He should beget a
son. Glory be to Him! when He determines a matter, He only says to it,
"Be," and it is.

Verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord: Him therefore serve ye: this is
a way that is straight. . . .

When he had finished, the Negus said: ‘By God, the Messiah did not say
an iota more than what these people are saying.’ Then he turned to
Ja’far and the Muslims and said to them: ‘Go as you please, for you are
safe in my land. Whoever insults you will be fined. Even if I were given
a mountain of gold in exchange for hurting a single one of you, I would
not do so.’ Then he said: ‘Return their gifts to them for I have no need
of them. By God, He did not take a bribe from me when he returned my
kingdom to me, so I would take bribe in this kingdom. So the two
Qurayshites left in disgrace and with the returned gifts they had come
with.

According to certain exegeses, the following Qur’anic verse was
revealed about the Negus and his companions: {And if they hear what was
sent down to the Messenger you will see their eyes flooding with
tears}14


