The Negus Embraces Islam
========================

The Negus accepted Islam and believed in the Prophet secretly. He said:
‘If I was able to visit the Prophet I would do so.’ The Prophet wrote to
him suggesting to him to marry Umm Habibah the daughter of Abu Sufyan.

She had made the migration to Abyssinia with her husband ‘Ubeidullah
ibn Jahsh who had died there. The Prophet married the Negus to Umm
Habibah and set the dower at four hundred dinars (gold coins). Khalid
ibn Sa’id ibn al-‘As took care of the marriage. The Prophet also wrote
to the Negus asking him to send back the remainder of his companions. He
transported them in two ships with ‘Amr ibn Ummayah, and they reached
the Messenger of Allah when he had liberated Khaybar, in 7 H, 628 CE.

When the Negus died, in the 9th year after Hijra – around 630 CE, the
Prophet announced it on the same day, went to the Mosque and made five
takbirs. Turning to his companions he said: ‘Seek the forgiveness of
Allah for your brother’, then Holy Prophet performed the
prayers-for-thedeceased for him.

**A Delegation of Abyssinian Priests**

It is known that while the Messenger of Allah was in Makkah, he was
visited by about twenty Christians from Abyssinia who had heard news of
the Prophet. They found him in the sacred mosque and sat with him and
spoke to him and questioned him in the presence of the Quraysh who were
in their usual gatherings around the Ka’bah15.

After they finished questioning the Messenger of Allah, he summoned
them and recited the Qur’an for them. When they heard the Qur’an their
eyes flowed with tears. They then answered his call and believed in him,
as they had recognised him from the descriptions found in their own
books of him.

When they rose and left, Abu Jahl and a group of the Quraysh detained
them and said to them: ‘What a sorry party you are, you were sent by the
people of your religion on a reconnaissance mission for them and to
bring them information about the man Muhammad, but hardly had you sat
down with him but you leave your religion and believe in what he says. I
have never seen a more foolish delegation than you.’

They answered him: ‘Peace be upon you, we will not vie with you in
ignorance, to you your way and to us ours, we do not wish to neglect
what is good.’ Then the following verses were revealed:

{Those who were given the book previously, they are believers in it.
And when it is recited to them, they say: “We believe therein, for it is
the Truth from our Lord: indeed we have been muslims (surrender to
Allah's Will) from before this.” Twice will they be given their reward,
for that they have persevered, that they avert Evil with Good, and that
they spend (in charity) out of what We have given them. And when they
hear vain talk, they turn away therefrom and say: “To us our deeds, and
to you yours; Peace be upon you we do not wish to consort with the
ignorant.”}16 \* \* \*

In modern times, people continue to adopt Islam as their way of life,
after studying the teachings of Islam and realising the truth of its
message. 15 The Ka’bah is the cubical building the in the grand mosque
of Makkah, symbolising the house of God.

16 The Holy Qur’an: The Stories (28): 52-55.

Many go on to express their new findings and the significant impact
Islam had on their lives. The following are a few examples of their
expressions. Why they chose Islam as their way of life?

The renowned French thinker, professor Roger Garoudi tells of the
greatness of Islam and the secret behind the transformation in his life
Only in following Islam can the world find a way out of its crisis.
Islam holds the key to reform. It has two important attributes:
sublimation and the spirit of the group.

The Qur'an teaches us to find in any occurrence, and in everything a
sign of Allah and a symbol of a higher existence moving us, nature and
society. The main goal of religion is the achievement of harmony and
unity which issues from Allah and returns to Him. His will to achieve
the Will of Allah is what grants man his humanity.

The West is now much in need of Islam more than at any other time.
Islam can give life a meaning and history a sense. It can alter the
West's method of separating science from wisdom, thinking from the
means, and thinking from the results. Islam never erects a wall between
science and faith. On the contrary, it ties them together as being an
inseparable whole... Islam calls man to search and seek the final end
and his fate. In our western societies, split apart by individuality,
Islam can revive the hope in our world which is heading toward
suicide.

Marmaduke (Muhammad) Pickthall (1836-1936), the renowned Englishman of
letters, who translated the meanings of the Qur'an Never is there a
worldly grace every enjoyed by man greater than that of being happy and
content after being guided to Islam by Allah: to see, by the light of
Islam, the truths of the world and the Hereafter and to distinguish
between right and wrong and the path of happiness from that of misery. I
prostrate myself gratefully to Allah, for this great grace He endowed me
with, which flooded my being with true happiness and made me stand in
the shade of this great fruitful tree which is the tree of Islamic
brotherhood and family.

Dr. Murad Hofmann, former German ambassador to Algeria & Morocco Nobody
at least halfway alert to cultural phenomena, regardless of geographic
location, will deny that the future development of his world is going to
be influenced, if not determined, by what will happen in the Muslim
world and to Islam itself. Could Islam, as a consequence, turn out to be
the very therapy that could save the West from itself?


