Author’s Foreword
=================

All the praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds, and peace and
blessings be upon the Holy Prophet Muhammad and his Holy Progeny.

This book is a collection of discussions and dialogues held with
Christians who had come to see me to enquire about Islam and, as a
result of the guidance that emerged from the discussions, they embraced
Islam.

In these discussions our chief aim has been to guide them to the right
path, whether through intuitive or philosophical debates, or through
preaching or calling them to Islam, or thorough dialectic arguments.
However, every effort was made to avoid any controversy during these
discussions, which might hurt the other party.

Throughout the discourse, I found an interesting thing, that not even
one of them was an obstinate Christian to deny the truth after knowing
it. This remained a redeeming factor throughout our discussions.

During a period of 15 years, specially after the coupe de tat of July
14 (1958 in Iraq), until I was exiled from Karbala (Iraq) to Kuwait in
1971, I held discussions and debates with hundreds of followers of
different religions and ideologies such as Zaidites, Christianity,
Sabe'ans, Yazidites, Ba’thists, Existentialists, and Communists, but did
not come across any hot-headed or obstinate person except one who was a
secretary-general of the Ba’thist Party in one of the provinces of Iraq,
with whom discussions were held and he showed much obstinacy and
stubbornness.

I had discussions concerning Islamic beliefs and laws with a large
number of individuals and groups mostly of young people many of whom
had, to varying degrees, some inclination towards Eastern or Western
ideologies. It would not be an exaggeration to say that I had
discussions with approximately ten thousand.

Sometimes I did come across stubborn individuals but their ratio may
probably be four or five percent. However, in these encounters, I never
came across prejudiced person who could present firm knowledge with
convincing arguments. In fact, such persons normally used to stick to
their beliefs, and arguments, and kept on insisting on them even though
the bases of their religion and thought were uprooted.

It is much regrettable that I could not note down the details of these
discussions, which would have made it a useful detailed book. All these
discussions, conversations and meetings were held with different
persons, and followers of various religions and creeds who either
happened to see me by chance or were invited for discussions.

After the demise of grand Ayatollah Sayyid Abul-Hasan Isfahani (1356H,
1937 CE), and grand Ayatollah Sayyid Husayn Qumi (1366H, 1947 CE), the
religious headship passed on to my father, grand Ayatollah Sayyid Mirza
Mahdi Shirazi. Since then I continued to receive ambassadors, state
representatives, ministers and political personalities who visited us in
Karbala regularly. My late father used to discuss with them different
religious topics, and throughout that long period and frequent meetings,
I never felt helpless and unable to reply to any question. Most often we
were successful in convincing others that the Islamic teachings are
correct, that it is essential to implement Islamic laws in one’s life,
and that Islam possesses the best solutions, teachings, and laws for the
salvation of humanity.

I have presented in this book the debates that led to the conversion to
Islam of ten Christians in seven narrations. I have described all events
as they occurred without adding anything more except that I have deleted
those parts, which have been repeatedly talked about on the Prophet of
Islam and on the proofs of his prophethood.

The reader will observe the simplicity and introductory style of these
dialogues that were actually conducted in this manner for the benefit of
the addressees.

Let it not remain unsaid that most of the time I used to suggest to
those who embraced Islam to adopt Islamic names, and also I used to
arrange for them to remarry – as a precautionary measure – according to
Islamic criteria for marriage.

I used to present them copies of the Holy Qur’an and other Islamic
books. Our aim in this introduction is to point out that Islam has not
been and will never be defeated in any field. Islam has no weakness or
defect in its principles in any sense of word. There is no possibility
that any religion may afford to lead mankind towards salvation better
than Islam or even equal to it. If the people of the world knew Islam as
it was revealed to and taught by the prophet Muhammad, they would race
one another to embrace it wholeheartedly, save the stubborn and the
narrow minded who are very few. This is a matter the importance of which
I have personally experienced throughout my research work and
discussions.


Muhammad Shirazi
Islam – Christianity debates


