Is Jesus the Son of God?
========================

One of my friends, a grocer, came to me one day and said that his
brother was an Italian-educated engineer. He and two other individuals
from Karbala had each married a Christian Italian woman. The brother had
discussed Islam and Christianity with his wife, but in turn she
questioned the truth of Islam. That woman, like her husband, was also a
learned person. Besides, she was also enriched in Christian religious
knowledge, as her father was a Christian scholar.

My grocer friend sought my permission to bring them before me with an
intention that perhaps Allah might bless them and they could embrace
Islam. I booked a time for them to come and see me. The grocer added
that according to his brother, his wife was well educated and well
versed in current affairs as well as in the religious knowledge. She was
said to be very much argumentative in discussion. I replied, “I hope
Allah the Almighty, would help me to speak the words of truth.” I also
advised my grocer friend that he should bring the three young men along
with their wives so that the discussion could be made with all of them.
The grocer promised to try to bring them together but he expressed his
doubt about their coming together because only one of them, his brother,
being pious and faithful, was keen for his wife to see the truth of and
embrace Islam, whereas the other two were devoid of such
characteristics. I reminded him of the saying “you won’t know until you
try.”

After a few days he came back to me and asked if I could see them that
evening and I said, “You are most welcome.” After the evening prayers, I
went to my house. The three young engineers along with their wives as
well as the grocer friend came over to my house. During the course of
our discussion, the husbands of the Christian women acted as their
interpreters.

I asked those women what was their religion, and they told me that they
followed the Christian religion. I questioned them why they had become
Christians. One of them eye winked to the other and said they believed
in Christianity because they had accepted Jesus Christ was the son of
God. I asked, “Who told you that Jesus Christ was the son of God?” They
replied that all people believe so. I refuted their claim, saying, “This
is not true.

Do you not know that the present population of the world is more three
billion out of which only eight hundred million are Christians?
Therefore, the remaining people of the world do not believe that Jesus
is the son of God.” At this stage the women were silent because they had
no counterargument to present. Then I added, “Moreover, all Christians
do not believe that Jesus is the son of God, but most of them believe
that he was a human being.”

Then one of those women asked whether I could say that millions of
Christians including the great scholars, hermits, nuns and monks were
telling a lie that Jesus was the son of God. I put the same question to
them as to whether they could similarly say that more than two billion
of non- Christian people including great scholars, pious and learned
people were telling a lie that Jesus was not the son of God.

The women were silent for a while. Then they asked me to prove the
prophethood of Muhammad, and on what grounds I am guiding them to the
religion of Islam. I said, “Prophet Muhammad brought miracles with him,
claimed to be a prophet, and his claim was not contrary to reason, and
therefore we believe in him.” She asked me to elaborate my three points,
and I explained it to her thus:

1. “the fact that Muhammad claimed to be a prophet is quite clear and
needs no elaboration, as you too admit that he claimed so.” She
confirmed my first point, 2. “the Prophet of Islam showed miracles to
prove his prophethood out of which the Holy Qur’an alone is sufficient,
since it challenges the people of the world to bring even one chapter
like any chapter of the Qur’an, but no one could do so.”

She asked as to why the people of the world could not bring an example
against the Qur’an. I replied, “It was similar to Jesus who used to give
life to the dead but none of the Jews had such power.” She observed,
“The Qur’an is the word.” I replied, “Yes, of course, but this word is
not like that of the people, it is something supernatural; and that is
why the people of the world could not write a single chapter parallel to
it. If Muhammad was not a prophet, he could not bring a book like the
Qur’an which is beyond the human word.

3. Then I explained my third point to her saying, “His claim was not
contrary to reason. Sometimes it is possible that someone may claim
something and carry out some extraordinary tasks, but his claim is
contrary to reason. The very reason that his claim was contrary to
reason is the proof of his deed’s being not a testimonial from God. For
example, if someone claims that the sun can produce coldness, and in
support of his claim he carries out some extraordinary deed as to cause
the sun eclipse, here we can say that this action of his and the eclipse
of the sun is not a miracle from God, but an act done through sorcery,
juggling or an unnatural act.

Whereas, it is quite obvious that the claim of Prophet Muhammad was
never contrary to reason.”

Then the Italian woman repeated her first argument, saying, “If Jesus
Christ was not the son of God, then whose son was he?” I asked her
whether she had heard the names of Adam and Eve. She replied, “Yes, Adam
and Eve were the first and foremost human beings on earth as stated in
the Bible” Then I said, “Who was the father of Adam and Eve?” She
replied, “Adam and Eve had no father.” I asked. “How did they come to
this world?” She replied, “By the order of God Almighty.” Then I
explained it to her that Jesus came to the world similarly by the order
of God the Almighty, and without any father. She remained silent.

As my argument had inculcated in them a deep impression, I continued by
pointing out to the Christian women that Islam holds Jesus Christ and
his mother Mary in high esteem. I started to praise and glorify Virgin
Mary (upon whom be peace) and then asked them, “What hinders you to
enter this religion which respects and holds in high esteem your Prophet
(Jesus) and his mother?”

The women were very much surprised on my talk that I was saying that
Islam held Jesus and his mother in high esteem. Then I said to them,
“Just now I will bring our holy book, the Glorious Qur’an, for you so
that you may yourself see with your own eyes how much our Holy Qur’an
has praised and held in high esteem Prophet Jesus and his mother Mary.
Nevertheless, there is an entire chapter in the Qur’an entitled Mary.”
Then I fetched the Qur’an, I opened the chapter of Maryam and showed it
to them. I turned its pages one by one before them and showed them each
and every verse concerning Mary in that chapter.

After such arguments and conversations, Islam made a way in their
hearts and I thus taught them to repeat this declaration of accepting
the Islamic faith:

“I bear witness that there is no god but Allah Who is One having no
partner. And I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and messenger.
And I bear witness that Ali and his infallible descendants are the
successors of the Messenger of Allah.”

They recited sincerely all three declarations of the faiths in Arabic
and in their own tongues as well. At the end some refreshment were
served. Their husbands were advised to teach their wives Islamic
injunctions. A set of books on the principles of Islam and its practices
was presented to them as a gift.


