Position of Jesus and Christians in Islam
=========================================

One day, a colleague of mine came to see me and said that, through his
friend, he acquainted with a Christian engineer who served in Iraq and
he wanted to discuss Islam with him but he, my colleague, could not do
so because he was not well informed of Christianity and was afraid of
assuming this responsibility as he had not studied relevant books and
references sufficiently to be able to discharge his responsibility.

A few days later, he brought his friend after the evening prayers, and
after a little courtesy talk he asked me whether I believed Islam to be
a religion, to which I replied in affirmative. He also asked me whether
I also believed that Muhammad was a prophet of God, and whether the
religion of Muhammad was better than that of Christianity. I replied in
affirmative.

Then he asked, “Do you believe that whosoever does not believe in Islam
will be thrown into Hell?” I replied, “Those who do not believe in Islam
are of two groups. The first group are those who do not believe in Islam
since they have no information about the truth of Islam. This group of
people would be tested on the Day of Judgement. If they ‘pass’ the test
they would enter Paradise and if not they would go to Hell.

“The second group are those who, having studied and understood the
truth of Islam, still do not believe in Islam out of stubbornness and
such like. They know that the religion of Islam is a right one, but in
spite of this they deny it. Such group of people are obstinate and if
they do not feel contrite and repent to Allah the Almighty, then they
will be thrown into Hell.”

He said, “If it is so, do you think that millions of Christians will
fall into Hell?” I replied, “I did not say that. What I said was that
only the obstinate ones will enter hell but those who were ignorant,
having no Islamic knowledge would be tested on the Day of Judgment.” He
said, “So far I have never heard such a thing from anyone except from
you. Contrary to it I have heard from many Muslims that all Christians
would fall into fierce Hell. “I said, “Whatever I said is the opinion of
all Muslim scholars and is also recorded in our books of philosophy and
theology.” He said, “So a group of Christians shall enter Paradise!” To
clarify my point, I said, “All those Christians who believed in Jesus
Christ and accepted his religion as true before the advent of Islam
shall certainly enter Paradise. But after the advent of Islam, only
those Christians who ‘pass’ in the test on the Day of Judgement shall
enter Paradise.”

The Christian engineer asked whether I knew about Christianity. I
replied, “Yes”. He questioned me as to how and from where I have learnt
about Christianity. I said that I have learnt about Christianity by
studying their books and by holding debates and discussions with various
scholars. He wondered and asked why I did not embrace Christianity in
spite of the fact that I admitted the greatness of Jesus. I replied that
I was well aware of the greatness of Jesus but I also knew of the
greater status of Prophet Muhammad. Thus I believed in Jesus and after
him I also believe in Muhammad (peace be upon them). He remarked,
“Therefore, as for Christ we feel the same.” I said, “Yes.”

He then asked me, “How can you prove that Muhammad was a prophet?” I
said, “The same proof which establishes the prophethood of Jesus, also
proves the prophethood of Muhammad.” He negated my argument by saying
that Jesus was the son of God whereas Muhammad was the son of Abdullah -
the Servant of God.” I asked him, “What do you mean by Jesus is the son
of God?” and I added, “Do you mean to say that God made Mary to give
birth to Jesus in the same way as a man makes his wife to give birth to
his son? Or do you mean something else? What do you really mean?”

At this juncture the face of the Christian engineer appeared to change
colour and he paused to reflect. After a few minutes he raised his head
and said, “This incident, being a supernatural one, is beyond one’s
reason and imagination.” I asked him, “How do you believe in a religion
which is beyond reason?” Then I gave him an example, saying, “If a
person comes here and says to you, I am a prophet of God, and it is
compulsory upon you to obey me”, and as soon as you ask for a reasonable
proof from him he says to you, “It is beyond your reason to understand
me”, would you not laugh at that person?” Then I explained to him that
it was the nature of human being that he should not accept anything if
he does not understand it.

He asked, “So how do you believe in God despite the fact that your
reason cannot comprehend Him?” I said, “I know that this world has been
brought about by an able creator, but I do not know what is His nature
or reality. This is similar to the fact that one believes in the
existence of electricity, but despite that, does not know its nature.”

He then turned to the same subject of the sonship of Jesus Christ,
saying, “All Christians all over the world claim that Jesus is the son
of God.” I refuted him saying, “Firstly, not all Christians believe in
this creed. Secondly, their statement is not a proof; otherwise, if you
treat it so, then all Muslims too claim that Jesus is not the son of
God. You should then accept this majority’s opinion too!”

He said, “How do you prove that Jesus is the prophet of God?” I
replied, “As the Holy Qur’an and the Prophet of Islam confirm the
prophethood of Jesus Christ (upon whom be peace); I also believe in
him.” He said, “Suppose that the Holy Qur’an and the Prophet Muhammad
did not stand witness to the prophethood of Jesus, in that case would
you have faith in Jesus?” I said, “In this case, I would not believe in
him.” He asked for the reason.

I explained to him that in the absence of the Holy Qur’an and the
Prophet of Islam, the prophethood of Jesus would only be proved either
by the statements of Christians or by the Bible, neither of which is
reliable. He asked for the reason.

1. I replied, “Because the contents of the Bible are contrary to
reason, and it is not possible for such a book to be termed as the Word
of God!” He surprisingly asked, “Is the Bible contrary to reason?” I
replied in affirmative, and when he asked for an example, I said to him
I do not wish to hurt your feelings but you may refer to my book
“Attributes of God and His Prophets according to the Bible”27 which
shows how the Bible accuses Jesus Christ to have been born of adultery
(may God forbid!)

Here the Christian man bit his finger and said, “No! There is no
possibility of such a thing to be in the Bible!” I then, opened the
Bible for him and showed him what I had said. He was shocked to see
that. Then I explained to him that such irrational topics were in
abundance in that book which he would see later on, by the will of
God.

Then I said “I hope you forgive me if my words have hurt you, but I was
compelled by you to do so. Otherwise, Jesus (upon whom be peace) is one
of the Ol-el-‘Azm Prophets (i.e. who had universal mission for his time)
who is holy and righteous in our view. It is compulsory to believe in
him in the same way as we must believe in Prophet Muhammad.”

2. Regarding the reason that I could not accept the statements of
Christians to serve as the purpose of proof, I explained to him that,
offsetting the Christian views and statements, there are so many 27
presented in part 2 of this book.

persons in the world whose number, in total, is many times greater than
that of Christians, for example, the Jews, Buddhists, Zoroastrians and
Confucians, and so many other people of different religions in the
world, who contrary to Christians, do not recognize Jesus as a prophet.
That is why I believe in Jesus on the basis of the Holy Qur’an and
Prophet Muhammad.

He said, “So what is the way out now in your opinion?” I said, “In my
opinion, let us suppose that we have just now entered this world and
want to adopt a religion for ourselves. Then first of all we must remove
from ourselves all sorts of past imitations and thoughts so that we may
be able to find out with a free mind as to which religion is worthy of
following and then opt for that religion sincerely.” He said, “Very
well, so how can we find the fact?” I said, “Here we have two books, the
Bible and the Qur’an. Given the tampering and distortion that have taken
place in the former, such as the many irrational things that are stated,
the Bible can no longer merit to be an authentic book for a religion.
Therefore, either the original of this book was not correct or its
original copy was correct but it was later distorted and corrupted.
Consequently, in both cases, the Bible is not an authentic book to be
relied on. So the Holy Qur’an is left for us to choose.”

He said, “There could be a possibility that there might be some other
religion other than that of the Holy Qur’an, so how can I gather that
Islam is better than the other religion? Similarly, how can I take for
granted that the Qur’an is authentic so that I may accept it and follow
its Prophet?” I said, “Good question! Let me prove the authenticity and
the truthfulness of the Holy Qur’an. The Holy Qur’an says in one of its
verses, {If you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our Servant
(Muhammad), then produce one chapter like that of it (Qur’an) and call
your witnesses other than Allah, if you are truthful.}28 Then I added,
“The Arabs were masters of eloquence, literature, and clarity and
Muhammad was one of them, and he was not known to be able to read and
write nor was he known to have learnt reading or writing from anyone
else. However he brought a literary work that still remains an
absolutely unique masterpiece. Otherwise the Arabs could have easily
competed with him in the Qur’an, but their inability to compete with him
in producing such work proves that no human being is competent to
challenge the Holy Prophet in bringing the likeness of the Holy
Qur’an.

28 The Holy Qur’an, the Heifer (2): 23

This incident provides sufficient proof that there is no doubt in the
revelation of the Holy Qur’an from God the Almighty.” He asked, “There
is a possibility that some of the Arabs might have been successful in
bringing another book similar to the Qur’an but that has not reached
us.” I replied, “Had they been successful in doing so, the Christians
and the Jews would certainly have used that book in order to refute the
claim of the prophet Muhammad, as they were very eager to do so. Since
there is no trace of such a thing in history in this respect, it proves
sufficiently that all the opponents of the Holy Prophet failed
completely to bring another book similar to the Holy Qur’an.”

Then I gave him a philosophical example saying, “The non-existence of a
proof for the existence of something is itself a proof of its
non-existence” i.e. if you do not find a person in this room, it means
that there is no person in this room.

At this point, the Christian engineer seemed to have been convinced by
my argument, and when he asked me for my suggestion, I said to him, “In
my opinion, you should believe in the prophethood of Muhammad.” He
asked, “Does one have to disbelieve in Jesus Christ by believing in
Muhammad?” “Not at all!” I answered him, and added, “But in fact, Islam
clearly commands its followers to believe in the prophethood of Jesus
Christ as well. Moreover, Jesus is recognized by Islam as one of the
Five Great Prophets sent by Allah the Almighty to the east and west of
the world as His Messenger, and they are called Ol-ul-Azm.” He asked,
“Who are the Five Great Prophets?” I replied, “They are Prophets Noah
(Nuh), Abraham (Ibrahim), Moses (Musa), Jesus (Isa) and Muhammad (peace
be upon them all).”

Then I started to encourage him to accept Islam; and by the grace and
blessings of Allah, he embraced Islam and recited the three declarations
of faith for accepting Islam and he also accepted the authority of Imam
Ali and his eleven son-Imams (upon whom be peace).

**Excellences of Islam over other Religions**

During the holy month of Ramadahn, one day I arrived at my house after
the midday congregational prayers. I was very tired as I had stayed
behind for more than an hour to explain various religious issues being
asked by many Muslims in the courtyard of the holy shrine of Imam Husayn
(upon whom be peace) in Karbala. On my arrival at home as I was about to
take a rest, the doorbell rang. There was nobody else in the house to
attend to that, and I thought to ignore it but struck me that someone
might be in need and if fulfilled by me, would accrue a great heavenly
reward to me.

Then I remembered that I had made an appointment to receive an official
from Baghdad. We were to discuss my request to import equipment for
establishing a local radio station at Karbala, and establishing a
college, namely al-Qur’an al-Hakim College and several other items. I
did not want to hold the scheduled meeting before I could take a bit of
a rest. On the other hand, none of my colleagues who were due to be
present in the meeting had arrived yet. I do not like to hold such
meetings without the presence of my companions especially when the
meeting was with government officials.

Reluctantly, I got up and went to open the door. A man in his sixties
was outside. He greeted me and said, “My family members and I have come
from Kadhimayn to see you. Is it possible for you to see us?” I said,
“You are most welcome.” He said, “My son has received his education in
Germany and has returned from there recently with a German Christian
wife. In our discussion with her about Islam she asked us to convince
her about the genuineness of Islam. We tried, but did not succeed. We
decided to seek your guidance in this matter. That is why we have come
here from Kadhimayn taking the advantage of today – Friday – which is
our holiday

.” I said to him, “I am very happy to receive all of you.” Then I
offered the German woman to say what she wanted. Her husband himself
became her interpreter. She said, “My husband and his parents claim that
Islam supersedes Christianity, and therefore I should accept Islam,
although I have not seen any bad thing in Christianity so as to change
my religion. I am a religious woman and have studied the Bible and also
used to attend church. All members of my family are also religious
people. Keeping these conditions in view, is there any reason in your
opinion that I should quit Christianity and enter Islam? and why?” She
tried to explain her contention by quoting an example, saying, “If you
have a beautiful house, will you wish to change it, if there is nothing
wrong with it?” Along the same line I said, “I do not want you to
abandon your religion. I want you to augment the beauty of your religion
with another beauty, the beauty of Islam. I do not want you to change
your house but to add another storey over your house so that you may
have more facilities like brighter space for enjoying better life.”

With much surprise, she said, “But aren’t Islam and Christianity each
other’s enemies and would never come together?” I said, “No. The example
of the religions of Christianity and Islam is like the stages of
education, i.e. high school stage and university stage. So the example
of my inviting you to Islam is like inviting you to university education
after you have cleared successfully the stages of high school, so that
you may complete your education.” She said, “How can I agree with you
when I have learnt from the very beginning in my home, in my school and
in my environment that Islam has always been against Christianity, and
that Muhammad was the sworn enemy of Christ, and Muslims have been the
enemies of Christians?”

I said, “Whatever you have learnt from the very beginning is quite the
reverse because Islam is a well-wisher of Christianity, and the proof
for this is in our Holy Qur’an, {Say (O Muslims!) “We believe in Allah,
and in which is revealed to us . . . and that which Moses and Jesus
received.”}29 Muhammad also is a well-wisher and a brethren of Christ as
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an, {The Messiah, son of Mary, was no other
than a messenger, messengers (the like of whom) had been sent before
him.}30 Muslims too are well-wishers of Christians as can be seen from
the following verse: {You will find the nearest of them in affection to
those who believe (to be) those who say, “Lo! We are Nazarenes.”}31 Then
I asked her, “Having seen these clear-cut verses of the Holy Qur’an, do
you still think that that which you have heard before is right or this
which you hear and see now?” The Christian lady was very much impressed
with my reasoning. Her family members also expressed their 29 The Holy
Qur’an, the heifer (2): 136.

30 The Holy Qur’an, the Table Spread (5): 57
31 The Holy Qur’an, the Table Spread (5): 82

surprise; I said, “This was due to our inadequate publicity at home and
abroad. May Allah help us.”

Then she said, “Now I agree with you as you have proved it from the
Qur’an. If you had not proved it from the Qur’an, I would have said that
you were saying this so just to convince me to accept Islam and is not
based on reality. Now please elaborate as to how the religion of Islam
after Christianity is a ‘university stage' after a high school stage'?”
I said, “You yourself are a Christian and know well that Christianity is
a religion of morality.” She replied in affirmative. Then I said, “But
Islam has augmented the excellences of morals with other issues just as
university education provides new branches of learning to those of the
high school stage.” She said, “Give an example.” I said, “For example,
Islam has established the systems of politics and economics, and laid
down the programmes for the armed forces, health, wealth and others.”

Astonished by my statements the German lady, asked, “Does Islam deal
with these subjects too?” I said, “Oh, yes, and why not?” She said, “I
was made to understand before that Islam was a set of ridiculous stories
and distortions of Judaism and Christianity.” I said, “but the opposite
is true. Islam has distanced true Judaism and Christianity from the
ridiculous stories and distortions that have developed in the course of
time, and that is why the Holy Qur’an says, {And We have revealed to you
the Book (Qur’an) with truth, confirming whatever Book was before it,
dominant/prevailing over it (previous book(s)) [by pointing out the
distortions and corruptions that have taken place in the previous
revealed scriptures]}.”32

She pointed out, “Now, two questions arise for me. Firstly, what are
the ridiculous stories in the Judaism and Christianity? Is it possible
that such things may have crept into Christianity?” I said, “I do not
want to touch this aspect of the matter because I dislike to hurt your
feelings and deprive ourselves from the positive results of the
discussion. Anyhow, I will point out one issue to you. The Christians
believe in the trinity and say that the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost are three persons yet they are one.

Is it possible?” She answered, “What is the objection?” I said to her
while holding three books in my hand, “Are these books three or one?”
She said, “Three.” I said, “If a person comes and says to you that these
books are three as well as one, what will you say to him? Will you not
say to him, It is not possible that three entities to be called as one
entity?” 32 The Holy Qur’an, the Table Spread (5): 48 The Christian lady
was astonished so much as if she had heard that argument for the first
time in her life. She said, “How is it that Christians believe in
trinity?” I said, “I do not know, you ask them. I only know this much
that this notion is false.”

She said, “my second question is: You have said that Islam addresses
all aspects of life. Is Islam a religion? What relation does exist
between religion and politics or economics?” I said, “A religion is
everything. But since Christianity has undergone many distortions, there
remained nothing in it except some ethical teachings.” She said, can you
explain, for example, the economics of Islam?” I said, “Well, let me
quote for you relevant verses from the Holy Qur’an:

{And know that whatever you earn of your profits, one-fifth (Khums) of
it is the share of Allah.}33 {The alms are only for the poor and the
needy.}34 {Allah permitted trading and forbidden usury.}35

{O you who believe, abide by your (commercial) contracts.}36 Then, I
started to interpret these Qur’anic verses dealing with Islamic economy
in some detail relevant to our discussion. She declared, “I now accept
Islam, but only one thing is left, which if you could explain to my
entire satisfaction, I shall embrace Islam, otherwise not. I have
repeatedly inquired about it from my husband and others but none could
give me a satisfactory answer.” I asked her what her question was.
“Since the first days I came to Iraq,” she said while pointing at her
husband and others, “this family has been asking me to wear Hijaab. So,
if wearing Hijaab in Islam is compulsory, then I cannot embrace it at
any rate.

I said, “Have you seen the jewellers how they protect their precious
jewels in safe boxes?” She said, “Yes, I have seen so.” I asked, “Why do
they do so?” She replied, “Just to protect them from the thieves. I
said, “Islamic philosophy of wearing Hijaab is the same. For example,
you are a young lady and know very well that in every society there are
thieves of honour 33 The Holy Qur’an, the public estate (8): 41
34 The Holy Qur’an, Repentance (9): 60
35 The Holy Qur’an, the heifer (2): 275
36 The Holy Qur’an, the Table Spread (5): 1

and chastity. Just As the jewels are safeguarded from the thieves,
Islam has similarly made it compulsory on its followers to safeguard the
chastity, dignity and nobleness of the female members of society, and as
such this order is only in your own interest.” She said, “This is a
plausible explanation. Now, if wearing Hijaab is obligatory in Islam,
why women are seen in Iraqi television not wearing Hijaab? Is Iraq not
an Islamic country?”

I said, “Is your country, Germany, independent or under the yoke of
colonialism?” She said, “After the World War II, we fell under the yoke
of colonialism.” I said, “Do you believe that colonialism allows you to
plan the developments of your country according to your own wishes, to
implement the laws out of your own choice, and to let you live as you
like?” She said with a gloomy heart, “No, not at all!” I said, “We
Muslims too have fallen into the hands of the (politico/economic)
colonialism since early twentieth century and all of our national,
cultural, political and economic programmes are drawn up by them.
Consequently, we Muslims are deprived of implementing any such
programmes according to Islamic in our own countries.” She said,
“Indeed, this is true.”

Here the Christian lady embraced Islam herself and announced the three
declarations of faith; “I bear witness there is not god but Allah, the
One having no partner; and I bear witness that Muhammad is the Servant
and Messenger of Allah.” She also accepted the immediate successorship
of Imam Ali.

All members of her family, especially her husband, knew no bound of
happiness on her embracing Islam.


