Islamic Teachings
=================

One day, a western youngster in a hippy outfit came to our house with a
native youngster of our hometown Karbala. I asked the Karbalai youngster
how he happened to bring that Westerner here, he said that he had
requested him to take him to a religious scholar for he wanted to ask
certain questions about Islam. Therefore, he brought him to me.

I welcomed him and enquired about his name, country and the reason of
his visit to Iraq, and especially to Karbala. I also enquired about his
level of education and profession. In response he said he was an
American. He was a graduate from an American university where he had
studied contemporary religions, and he had come to Iraq as a tourist. He
added that he liked Islam as he found it more rational than all other
religions, but he said, he had some questions concerning Islam, which if
cleared to his entire satisfaction, would enable him to abandon
Christianity and embrace Islam.

I asked him, “Why do you want to abandon Christianity?” He said, “Most
youngsters in America especially those who are well educated and highly
informed, do not have firm faith in Christianity in the true sense of
the word, because they find irrational religious traditions, while they
see some of the senior religious figures lack commendable virtues and
notable characteristics. (He was very frank in his expression about
them.”

I said, “If so then why the youngsters do not discard Christianity?” He
said, “Firstly, most of them have discarded Christianity, and secondly,
those who still show their attachment to it are doing so mainly for two
reasons. Some are bound to follow their elders and fathers, and some do
so from fear of spread of communism and disbelief. They believe that as
soon as they abandon Christianity, communism will creep in. In their
opinion, Christianity is the only barrier against the expansion of
communist influence over the people of their country. In their opinion,
the aims and objects of the communism are to root out every thing; from
their government to their economy, freedom and system of inheritance.” I
said, “Why don’t they take shelter in Islam?” He said, “Because the
Islam that is presented to them is distorted. Moreover, there is no such
preacher of Islam in America who may introduce the true Islam in such an
impressive way that American youngsters may be attracted to it.”

I said, “Do you acknowledge the beauty of Islam?” “Yes, but it is
distorted in my view”, “What sort of distortion?” He replied, “This is
the very purpose I have come to you.” “Have you asked other Muslim
scholar?” “Yes, but I did not receive a satisfactory answer.”

Then he narrated how he happened to meet that Karbalai youngster who
guided him to my house. The young American knew some Arabic; hence there
was no need for an interpreter, except in some instances of the
discussion when we sought the help of one of our English-speaking
friends. Our discussion started on the question of the proof of the
existence of God.

I said, “The proof of His existence is recognized from His signs,
because there is no effect without a cause.” I pointed out to him, “As
you know the United States has some three hundred thousand space experts
and has allocated hundreds of millions of dollars for making artificial
satellites. Can you prove that those American satellites have their
makers but that the moon - the natural satellite - which is millions of
times bigger than an artificial satellite has no Creator?” Being
satisfied with this explanation, he then said, “Why don’t we see God?” I
said, “Do you think that every existing thing is visible?” He said, “I
believe in only tangible things.” I said, “No, this is not the case. You
believe in the tangible as well as rational things.” When he said how, I
said, “Do you believe in the existence of mind, soul, gravitational
force and such like?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “Have you seen the mind,
the soul, or the gravitational force?” His reply was negative. Then I
said, “Therefore, you too believe in those things which your senses do
not perceive, and what you actually perceive is their effect.” He said,
“Good reply.”

The American youngster brought up another topic by asking, “How do you
believe in his prophethood when Muhammad was not a prophet?” I said, “On
what ground do you say he was not a prophet?” He said, “It is clear that
he established his religion with the sword, whereas God is merciful and
does not resort to such measures.” I said, “Firstly, just for the sake
of argument, if we were to assume that claim is true, I would like to
ask you, do you believe in the prophethood of Moses (upon whom be
peace).” He replied in affirmative. Then I related to him the story of
Moses mentioned in the Bible, Deuteronomy 13:15-16, Numbers 31:7-35,
when he resorted to measures worse than the sword. He was (supposedly)
ordered by God to set the cities he conquered on fire, killing not only
the men, but also the children and the animals.

He admitted the fact and said, “That is why I came to you to make it
clear and to find another religion for myself because our Bible has got
many such ridiculous stories.

I continued, “but in fact Islam was not established by the sword.” Then
I went on to ask him, “Have you studied the battles fought by the
Prophet of Islam? Do you know that all of them were defensive ones and
not even a single one was ever offensive?” He said, “It is for the first
time I hear this.”

I said, “You have to consult authentic history references to see the
records of these facts and to satisfy yourself of the truth of my
claim.” At this stage I gave him a copy of my book “In the Shadow of
Islam” and advised him to study it especially the chapter dealing with
the battles of the prophet Muhammad (S).

The Christian youth started studying the book, and one of our
Englishspeaking friends started helping him in the process. Meanwhile, I
took the opportunity of this short period of time to meet those who were
waiting to see me.

Having finished reading the relevant chapter of the book, he was
profoundly surprised as to how the distorted history of Islam has been
presented to them. Then he accepted that Muhammad did not rise up with
the sword, “How could you prove that he was a Prophet?” I said, “How do
you Christians prove that Jesus Christ (upon whom be peace) was a
prophet?” He said, “Actually, I have no proof in support of the
prophethood of Jesus as I myself believe in Christianity through family
tradition.”

I suggested that we should establish the criteria for the recognition
and truthfulness of the prophets, so as to distinguish between a true
and a false prophet. With a strange curiosity he said, “This point has
itself been one of my basic questions.”

I said, “How do you find out that a person is a doctor and another is
an engineer?” He said, “Either through a certificate or degree issued by
a medical centre or a university, or through one’s own experience. For
example, if I see that a person has cured a disease with some medicine,
I will call him a doctor. Similarly, if a person draws up a good plan of
a building meeting the engineering requirements then he can be called an
engineer.”

Then I said, “In the case of a prophet, the same formula applies too.
Though the testimony of God,, you will know he is a messenger from Him.”
He said, “How is that?” I said; “A miracle is an evidence of God which
He bestows upon he whom He sends.” He said, “How can the miracle be
taken as an evidence from God?” I said, “Breaching the (natural) laws is
beyond the control of everybody except God the Almighty. So, when Allah
delegates this power (of performing miracles) to any person, it proves
that that person is a messenger from God.” He said, “It’s an excellent
logical reply. I put the same question to a number of Christian and
Islamic scholars but none of them could ever satisfy me. Anyhow, now we
have reached a stage where you have to prove that Muhammad was provided
with a miracle.”

I said, “The miracle of Prophet Muhammad (may Allah’s blessings be upon
him and his Progeny) is already crystal clear to me and I have also seen
it with my own eyes.” He asked surprisingly, “Have you yourself seen the
miracle of Muhammad?” I replied in affirmative. He asked, “Which is that
miracle?” I said while pointing to Qur’an, “This Qur’an is the miracle
of Muhammad.” He said, “How can the Qur’an be the miracle of Muhammad?”
I said, “Muhammad challenged the people of the world to bring even a
small chapter like that of the Holy Qur’an but none of them could do so
over the last fourteen centuries.” He said, “How can this statement be
authentic that Muhammad challenged the people of the whole world but
none could meet it?”

Then I quoted a verse of the Qur’an that says, {If you are in doubt
about what We have sent down to Our Servant (Muhammad) then produce a
chapter like it and call your witnesses other than Allah, if you are
truthful.}37 and said to him, “Here is the solid proof of that literary
challenge. Nobody on earth could produce even a small chapter like that
of the Holy Qur’an. Had there been so, it would have been recorded in
history. In the course of your studies of religions, have you ever come
across any claim that someone had produced a work that comes anywhere
near the Qur’an?” When he replied in negative, I said, “That is to say
mankind is unable to do so.”

He turned the question around, “If Islam is right, why are Muslims so
backward?” I said, “For the reason that Muslims do not act upon Islam.”
He said, “Being Muslims, how do they not act upon Islam?” I said, “Are
the majority of Americans Christians or not?” He said, “Yes, they are.”
I 37 The Holy Qur’an, the Heifer (2): 23

asked, “Do they act upon Christianity properly?” He said, “No.” I said,
“Similarly, Muslims also do not act upon Islam, hence they are backward.
At the beginning of Islam, they used to follow Islam and as such they
achieved progress and prosperity.” He said, “How do you then invite me
to a religion, the followers of which are so backward?” I said, “If you
are in a highway, but see other road users are deviating to left or
right, will you follow the road or leave it for the reason of those
deviants?” He said, “I would certainly adopt the straight way and not
care for its non-disciplined deviants.” I said, “I also invite you to
Islam not its deviants.” Then he said, “Allah says in the Chapter of
Victory, 48:1-2, “Lo! We have given you (O Muhammad) a victory that
Allah may forgive you of your sin which is past and that which is to
come.” It is possible that a sinful person may become a prophet?”

I answered, “The Holy Prophet was “sinful” in the eyes of Meccan
infidels. They used say Muhammad has ridiculed our beliefs and insulted
our gods. With the help and will of Allah when Mecca peacefully
surrendered to Muhammad and he won over the infidels his “sins” or
“crimes” against the infidels were “dropped” or forgiven, thanks to
Allah Almighty who prepared the ground for this. Furthermore, after the
fall of Mecca the prophet Muhammad went on to demolish more than three
hundred “god” idols which were “sacred” to the infidels of Mecca.”

Needless to say, the ‘sin’ as defined by the infidels and referred to
in the verse is not regarded as sin in the eyes of God Almighty, but the
Almighty is stating that not only He has given His Messenger, prophet
Muhammad, a victory, but in fact through this victory He has brought
about the circumstances in which even the ‘sins’ he is attributed to by
the infidels are null and void.

The American Christian then said, “I met some persons in America who
claimed to be followers of the Qadyani religion. They called on me to
embrace their religion claiming that their religion succeeded Islam,
which was brought by a certain Ghulam Ahmad Qadyani who claimed to be a
prophet. Do you believe in that religion?” I replied in negative, and
when he asked for the reason, I said, “Firstly because the Prophet of
Islam said, “no prophet would come after me.”38 Accordingly, whosoever
claims to be a prophet after him, is an impostor and, his claim of
prophethood is false. Since we proved that Muhammad is a true prophet,
and we believe 38 al-Kafi, vol. 8, p 26, hadith \#4

that true prophets do not lie, therefore the Qadyani is an impostor as
the prophet Muhammad said that there would be no prophet after me.

Secondly, Ghulam Ahmad Qadyani has merely claimed the prophethood but
had not shown any miracle. If prophethood is treated acceptable without
any miracle then thousands of prophets can appear in the world. So you
and others too can claim to be prophets on any fine morning. Do you
think that by mere claim of prophethood one can become a prophet?” He
smiled and said, “No!” Then he added, “But Qadyanis are very much active
and progressive in the propagation of their religion.” I said, “Do the
activity and progress in the propagation of a religion prove its truth?
If so, then the fascists, communists and other followers of various
ideologies will have to be treated as right.”

Then he turned to another question; “There is a verse in the Qur’an
which says that every good and bad thing is from Allah. He continued, if
a bad thing is also from God because it says, {All is from Allah}39 then
why should people be punished for their evil?” I said, “What is meant
here by ‘bad’ things are those things which are beyond mankind’s
control, for example, sudden death, a disease not caused by mankind,
famine, flood, destructive typhoon and similar other calamities. That is
why Allah says in another verse, {whatever of good befalls on you it is
from Allah, and whatever of ill befalls on you it is from yourself.}40

He said, “We used to study in the university that Muslims believe in
the destiny and providence which, according to the interpretation of our
professor, means that God has decreed everything that comes to pass on
one’s life, and therefore, Muslims do not make any efforts, hence they
are backward. Is it so?” I said, “No, it has no reality. Destiny
(Qadha’) means the Decree, that is the Decree of Allah. For Allah
decrees on things for the betterment and in the best interest of human
beings. Similarly, Providence (Qadar) means the appropriate measure,
which Allah, the origin of creation, provides for it as per His Wisdom
in the same manner as an architect who draws up a plan for a building
according to the exact techniques of his professional knowledge. In this
connection, Allah the Almighty has devised a system that is in the
control of, and feasible for human beings, but He has imposed no
compulsion. Man is free in his actions and performances. If something of
good has been done, it has been done at man’s own and if something bad
has been done, it has also been 39 The Holy Qur’an, Women (4): 78

40 The Holy Qur’an, Women (4): 79

done at his own. Anything beyond the control and power of human beings,
that is also designed by God, and human beings shall not be held
responsible and punishable for any of those events.” “Regarding your
professor’s inference that Muslims' backwardness was due to their
inaction because of their belief in the destiny and providence, you
should have asked him that if this hypothesis is true, then why did the
early Muslims performed and progressed so well at the rise of Islam?”

At this stage, the American youngster expressed his satisfaction about
Islam and requested me to show him how to become a Muslim. I thanked
Allah and taught him to declare the Unity of God, the Prophethood of
Muhammad and the successorship of Ali. He said that he had memorized
both declarations before but was ignorant of the successorship and
leadership (Imamate) of Ali ibn Abi-Talib and the infallible Imams
(peace be upon them). Therefore, I explained to him the right of divine
leadership (Imamate) of the Twelve Infallible Imams, and thus he
completely embraced Islam.
