Complete Translation of Sura al Yasin
=====================================

**In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

***(1) Ya Seen.***

***(2) I swear by the Quran full of wisdom.***

***(3) Most surely you are one of the messengers.***

***(4) On a right way.***

***(5) A revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful.***

***(6) That you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned, so they
are heedless.***

***(7) Certainly the word has proved true of most of them, so they do
not believe.***

***(8) Surely We have placed chains on their necks, and these reach up
to their chins, so they have their heads raised aloft.***

***(9) And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them,
then We have covered them over so that they do not see.***

***(10) And it is alike to them whether you warn them or warn them not:
they do not believe.***

***(11) You can only warn him who follows the reminder and fears the
Beneficent Allah in secret; so announce to him forgiveness and an
honorable reward.***

***(12) Surely We give life to the dead, and We write down what they
have sent before and their footprints, and We have recorded everything
in a clear writing.***

***(13) And set out to them an example of the people of the town, when
the messengers came to it.***

***(14) When We sent to them two, they rejected both of them, then We
strengthened (them) with a third, so they said: Surely we are messengers
to you.***

***(15) They said: You are naught but mortals like ourselves, nor has
the Beneficent Allah revealed anything; you only lie.***

***(16) They said: Our Lord knows that we are most surely messengers to
you.***

***(17) And nothing devolves on us but a clear deliverance (of the
message).***

***(18) They said: Surely we augur evil from you; if you do not desist,
we will certainly stone you, and there shall certainly afflict you a
painful chastisement from us.***

***(19) They said: Your evil fortune is with you; what! if you are
reminded! Nay, you are an extravagant people.***

***(20) And from the remote part of the city there came a man running,
he said: O my people! follow the messengers;***

***(21) Follow him who does not ask you for reward, and they are the
followers of the right course;***

***(22) And what reason have I that I should not serve Him Who brought
me into existence? And to Him you shall be brought back;***

***(23) What! shall I take besides Him gods whose intercession, If the
Beneficent Allah should desire to afflict me with a harm, shall not
avail me aught, nor shall they be able to deliver me?***

***(24) In that case I shall most surely be in clear error:***

***(25) Surely I believe in your Lord, therefore hear me.***

***(26) It was said: Enter the garden. He said: O would that my people
had known***

***(27) Of that on account of which my Lord has forgiven me and made me
of the honored ones!***

***(28) And We did not send down upon his people after him any hosts
from heaven, nor do We ever send down.***

***(29) It was naught but a single cry, and lo! they were still.***

***(30) Alas for the servants! there comes not to them an messenger but
they mock at him.***

***(31) Do they not consider how many of the generations have We
destroyed before them, because they do not turn to them?***

***(32) And all of them shall surely be brought before Us.***

***(33) And a sign to them is the dead earth: We give life to it and
bring forth from it grain SQ they eat of it.***

***(34) And We make therein gardens of palms and grapevines and We make
springs to flow forth in it,***

***(35) That they may eat of the fruit thereof, and their hands did not
make it; will they not then be grateful?***

***(36) Glory be to Him Who created pairs of all things, of what the
earth grows, and of their kind and of what they do not know.***

***(37) And a sign to them is the night: We draw forth from it the day,
then lo! they are in the dark;***

***(38) And the sun runs on to a term appointed for it; that is the
ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing.***

***(39) And (as for) the moon, We have ordained for it stages till it
becomes again as an old dry palm branch.***

***(40) Neither is it allowable to the sun that it should overtake the
moon, nor can the night outstrip the day; and all float on in a
sphere. ***

***(41) And a sign to them is that We bear their offspring in the laden
ship. ***

***(42) And We have created for them the like of it, what they will ride
on.***

***(43) And if We please, We can drown them, then there shall be no
succorer for them, nor shall they be rescued***

***(44) But (by) mercy from Us and for enjoyment till a time.***

***(45) And when it is said to them: Guard against what is before you
and what is behind you, that mercy may be had on you.***

***(46) And there comes not to them a communication of the
communications of their Lord but they turn aside from it.***

***(47) And when it is said to them: Spend out of what Allah has given
you, those who disbelieve say to those who believe: Shall we feed him
whom, if Allah please, He could feed? You are in naught but clear
error.***

***(48) And they say: When will this threat come to pass, if you are
truthful?***

***(49) They wait not for aught but a single cry which will overtake
them while they yet contend with one another.***

***(50) So they shall not be able to make a bequest, nor shall they
return to their families.***

***(51) And the trumpet shall be blown, when lo! From their graves they
shall hasten on to their Lord.***

***(52) They shall say: O woe to us! who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent Allah promised and the
messengers told the truth.***

***(53) There would be naught but a single cry, when lo! they shall all
be brought before Us;***

***(54) So this day no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least;
and you shall not be rewarded aught but that which you did.***

***(55) Surely the dwellers of the garden shall on that day be in an
occupation quite happy.***

***(56) They and their wives shall be in shades, reclining on raised
couches.***

***(57) They shall have fruits therein, and they shall have whatever
they desire.***

***(58) Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord.***

***(59) And get aside today, O guilty ones!***

***(60) Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not
serve the Shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy,***

***(61) And that you should serve Me; this is the right way.***

***(62) And certainly he led astray numerous people from among you.
What! could you not then understand?***

***(63) This is the hell with which you were threatened.***

***(64) Enter into it this day because you disbelieved.***

***(65) On that day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their
hands shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they
earned.***

***(66) And if We please We would certainly put out their eyes, then
they would run about groping for the way, but how should they see?***

***(67) And if We please We would surely transform them in their place,
then they would not be able to go on, nor will they return.***

***(68) And whomsoever We cause to live long, We reduce (him) to an
abject state in constitution; do they not then understand?***

***(69) And We have not taught him poetry, nor is it meet for him; it is
nothing but a reminder and a plain Quran,***

***(70) That it may warn him who would have life, and (that) the word
may prove true against the unbelievers.***

***(71) Do they not see that We have created cattle for them, out of
what Our hands have wrought, so they are their masters?***

***(72) And We have subjected them to them, so some of them they have to
ride upon, and some of them they eat.***

***(73) And therein they have advantages and drinks; will they not then
be grateful?***

***(74) And they have taken gods besides Allah that they may be
helped.***

***(75) (But) they shall not be able to assist them, and they shall be a
host brought up before them.***

***(76) Therefore let not their speech grieve you; surely We know what
they do in secret and what they do openly.***

***(77) Does not man see that We have created him from the small seed?
Then lo! he is an open disputant.***

***(78) And he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets his own
creation. Says he: Who will give life to the bones when they are
rotten?***

***(79) Say: He will give life to them Who brought them into existence
at first, and He is cognizant of all creation***

***(80) He Who has made for you the fire (to burn) from the green tree,
so that with it you kindle (fire).***

***(81) Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create
the like of them? Yea! and He is the Creator (of all), the Knower.***

***(82) His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be,
so it is.***

***(83) Therefore glory be to Him in Whose hand is the kingdom of all
things, and to Him you shall be brought back.***


