Ayat no.  12
============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Surely We give
life to the dead, and We write down what they have sent before and their
footprints, and We have encompassed everything in a manifest Imam.
(36:12)***  
*** ***

This world is hidden and the Hereafter is visible
-------------------------------------------------

The hearts of most of the Meccans were dead.  
    
***Surely you do not make the dead to hear, and you do not make the deaf
to hear the call when they go back retreating. (27:80)***  
*** ***  
 It means that you cannot make the dead hear anything. Whatever you say
or may not say would not make any difference at all. They are not going
to believe. It is so in every age. In every city, there are many whom
you may frighten with punishment but they will not stop sinning. So who
fears?  
    
***Only he fears who follows the admonition.***  
*** ***  
 A verse of Quran that you recite before him creates an effect in him.
They say, “He fears God.” Some say, “Secretly” (without seeing God with
physical eyes). Such a person (with a live heart) fears God even where
there is no one except God.

But most of the commentators have said it means covering or veil. So
long as one does not die, one is in a covering; that is, there is a
curtain between him and God, angels, grave and the other world. When
death comes, all this appears before him clearly. So fearing is
important only now (while one is alive) and when one does not see the
above things. When one dies and actually sees the Divine Kingdom fear is
not of any use.

Fearfulness of Yusuf in secrecy
-------------------------------

Quran narrates that when Zulaikha caught hold of Yusuf in a closed room,
she threw her veil on an idol saying, “It is not proper to commit a bad
deed before you.” Yusuf said, “How is it that you are mindful of a
lifeless idol while I should not be mindful of the Omniscient Lord?”

O’ the one who keeps other people’s wealth unlawfully! There is no proof
against you, but God knows it. Others may not be able to recover these
possessions, however, God is able to do it. One who has fear in his
heart is alive. Admonishments can benefit him. Those are the true
worshippers (who pray and fast during Ramadan). Fasting is an act purely
for God:  
    
***…so announce to him forgiveness and an honorable reward…(36:11)***  
*** ***  
 The Arabic equivalent of ‘forgiveness’ above indicates a general or
indefinite adjective for magnifying something. It means a great
admonition accompanied by a valuable prize. Definitely, God will
compensate suitably.  
    
***So their Lord accepted their prayer: That I will not waste the work
of a worker among you, whether male or female, the one of you being from
the other; they, therefore, who fled and were turned out of their homes
and persecuted in My way and who fought and were slain, I will most
certainly cover their evil deeds, and I will most certainly make them
enter gardens beneath which rivers flow; a reward from Allah, and with
Allah is yet better reward. (3:195)***  
*** ***

Tastes ‘Kauthar’ at the last moment and dies
--------------------------------------------

Since you turned towards Him, He would not neglect you, especially with
regard to the dear youths in the earlier part of their lives.  
 At the time of death they would be allowed to taste the water of
Kauthar (the Divine delicious stream).  
    
***Eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days gone
by. (69:24)***  
*** ***  
 They fasted for one whole month. They desired food and drink but
refrained for the sake of and to please Only One God. “So now taste this
drink at the hand of the King of Guidance, Moon of Guidance, Lion of
God, that is, Asadullah al Ghalib Ali bin Abi Talib (‘a).”

There are still some believers whose breath has not yet stopped, but who
continue to taste from it. There is a narration from Imam Baqir (‘a)
wherein he is reported to have said on oath that such noble people will
not die until they taste the Kauthar water.

The moment of death is indeed very hard. How can one taste something
good at that time? But we should know that once he tastes that divine
water offered by the Cup-bearer of Kauthar (Imam Ali) he gives up his
life happily.

I know of a man who was on his deathbed. At his last moment, people
around him experienced a wonderful fragrance of musk and the departing
believer said, “Please leave me alone the Imam is arriving.”

Can one in charge of orphans’ property who due to the fear of Allah did
not misappropriate a single penny and gave up everything be like one who
usurped the orphans’ rights without any qualms?  
    
***Shall We treat those who believe and do good like the mischief-makers
in the earth? Or shall We make those who guard (against evil) like the
wicked? (38:28)***

*** ***

News of Resurrection is a good tiding for the virtuous and a warning for sinners
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is one of the proofs of Resurrection. Life after death must be
true, otherwise it would be against Divine wisdom. One who denies the
world of reward and punishment has denied God. The final result of this
grand universe would be seen in the form of the Great Grace of God in
the Hereafter. Today’s worldly life is an active first phase of sowing
the seeds and the time of harvest is the Hereafter, after death.  
    
***Surely We give life to the dead…***  
*** ***  
 “O Muslims! Congratulations to you. We enliven the dead. O
disbelievers! Beware!”  
 When a man dies, his dress changes. He gets a fresh life. Physical body
and headaches go away. He gets another body which is fine and without
material losses. It is a repose from incompetence. It is the result of a
material body. Various kinds of pains belong to the physical body. The
Barzakh body needs no doctor or medicine.

Once an old lady came to the Holy Prophet (‘s) and, inter alia, said to
him, “Please pray that God admits me to paradise.” The Holy Prophet (‘s)
who wanted to bring in some humor said, “There would be no old women in
paradise.” The poor aged woman began to weep. The Prophet said, “Old
ladies become youthful and *then* enter paradise.”[^1]  
    
***Surely We give life to the dead…***  
*** ***  
 Immediately after death, the soul gets connected with the facsimile
body, which is exactly like this our present body. The earthen body goes
away and a shadowless, fine body takes its place.  
***…and We write down what they have sent before and their
footprints…***  
*** ***  
 Every deed of yours is cognized by the Lord of the Worlds. Every work
that you did for God is a great deed. We record it, not only in your
scroll of deeds but also in the Protected Tablet (Lauhe Mahfooz). All
good and bad deeds are being noted.

Children and everlasting deeds are the imprints we leave at death
-----------------------------------------------------------------

   
***…their footprints…***  
*** ***  
 Most commentators say that “…what they have sent before,” means what
you sent forth before your death and “…their footprints…” means that
which you get after your death. According to some narrations, after
death, man is disconnected from all things except, firstly: Children. If
possible, train you children nicely with piety and entrust them to the
society. Every good deed performed by them would benefit their parents
in the other world also.

Second: An everlasting good deed. For example, you published a religious
book. You benefit from it even after your death. Charitable trusts too
are among the everlasting imprints. If possible, one may spend some of
his wealth in the path of God without depriving his children.

Income of a salt mine and mourning for Husain (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------

Once the late Al Haajj Shaykh Abdul Husain Tehrani, teacher of Haji
Noori, said from a pulpit, “Last night I had a dream. I saw one of the
state nobles, Nasiruddin Shah having a huge apartment and he was in a
very good condition. I said to him, ‘I have known you when I was in
Tehran. I could see that your deeds were not deserving for this present
good condition.’

He replied, ‘Yes, but I have been granted this position after my death
due to one thing. I had a salt mine in Taliqan. I had willed that its
income be sent to Najaf-e-Ashraf during Ashura (First ten days of
Muharram) of Husain (‘a) so that people may arrange mourning
ceremonies.’”

When the Shaykh said these words, the late Haajj Shaykh Nazar Ali
Taliqani spoke up from the base of the pulpit, “I am from Taliqan and I
testify that this is a true dream. The salt mine still exists and the
aforesaid person’s will is still in force.”[^2]

It is mentioned in narrations that, in later ages, the dead will get no
benefit from the living. You can see what they are doing to the
charities. How much misappropriation is going on? They are actually
oppressing the dead.[^3] The poor fellows hoped to derive the rewards
for mourning of Husain (‘a) and feeding people in his name and for that
purpose they bequeathed their property, thus should they be oppressed by
misappropriation?

Among the deeds of everlasting benefit are wells, canals and trees.
Until they last, they benefit the person who dug such canals or planted
such trees.  
    
***And the everlasting deeds are better for you.***

Hours from man’s age after death
--------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (‘s) has given us glad tidings when he said that after
death, there is to come an hour when a treasure will be opened so
extensively that if it is distributed among all the people of hell they
will become happy.

That will be due to the hour, which you spent in remembrance of God.
There also will be an hour when you will see so much pain and trouble
that if that pain is distributed among all the people of paradise they
will become gloomy and restless. That is the hour, which you spent in
sinning. Do not think that such deeds and misdeeds will go away with the
wind. No, they will not vanish or blow away.

An hour is also to arrive which is neither like this nor like that and
that is the time, which you spend in lawful activities. Of course, they
also cause regret because if you only knew you would have spent these
hours also in the path of God.

[^1]: Safinatul Bihar vol.2 pg. 538

[^2]: Darus Salam Haji Noori

[^3]: These lectures were delivered five years prior to the Islamic
Revolution of Iran. It is hoped that now charities are operated
honestly.


