Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لِيَنفِرُواْ كَآفَّةً فَلَوْلاَ نَفَرَ مِن
كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِّنْهُمْ طَآئِفَةٌ لِّيَتَفَقَّهُواْ فِي الدِّينِ
وَلِيُنذِرُواْ قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُواْ إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nor should the Believers all go forth together; if a contingent from
every expedition remained behind, they could devote themselves to
studies in religion, and admonish the people when they return to them,
that thus they (may learn) to guard themselves (against evil)***.[^1]

Man lives in this world and interacts with all that is in it. There are
various relationships between man and the different beings of this world
and there are relationships between man and Allah, the most high.

Every relationship is different. A relationship can be between man and
Allah, a person and his family, a person and society, a person and
government or between one family and another, one society and another or
one government and another. People want to act according to their
knowledge or according to revelation regarding these relationships in
order that they can be prosperous and successful.

The divine commands that create the perfect path for man to walk onto
must be inclusive of all different aspects and dimensions of life.

The Islamic legal system organizes people’s lives in all dimensions,
individual or social. This system is called '*al-ahkām al-shar‛īyyah*'.
Islamic jurisprudence explains this system and is one if the deepest and
widest Islamic science.

Islamic jurisprudence is one of the sciences that glorify the Islamic
civilization.  
 This jurisprudential system started with the proclamation to
prophethood. Its principles were perfected during the life of the
prophet.

We will try, in this humble effort, to describe the important general
and specific topics that are covered under jurisprudence. The style of
this book is in the form of a book to be taught in schools and it is a
prelude to the field of comparative jurisprudence.

I ask Allah, the most high, to make this effort fruitful and to grace me
by accepting it and to correct our intentions and actions. Definitely,
he is the best helper.  
 Also, I give special thanks to professor, Shaykh Mahmūd al-Sayf and
professor, Dr. Ya‛qūb ‛Alī Barjī for their remarks and guidance.

Hassan al-Ridā'ī  
 1426 Hijrī - Qum al-Muqadasah

[^1]: 9:122


