The Literal and Figurative Definition of Jurispudence
=====================================================

The Arabic term for jurisprudence (*fiqh*) literally means: knowledge
about something and understanding it; being clever.[^1]

*Fiqh's* literal definition does not only mean understanding a word,
instead it is a deep knowledge about it. *Fiqh* has been used in the
Qurān in this meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لاَّ يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They have hearts wherewith they understand not***.[^2]

Figuratively, *fiqh* means: knowledge about Islamic legal rulings from
their sources. So, *fiqh's* figurative definition is taken from its
literal one in the sense that deriving religious rulings from their
sources necessitates the *mujtahid*[^3] to have a deep understanding in
the different discussions of jurisprudence. He must look deep down into
a matter and not suffice himself with just the apparent meaning. A
person who only knows the appearance of a matter is not a *faqīh*.[^4]

The subject of thinking deeply (*tafaquh*) about religion has been
repeatedly mentioned in the Qurān and traditions transmitted from the
prophet (s) and the Imāms (a). What is taken from them, on a whole, is
that Islam wants man to deeply understand religion. Of course, this
understanding covers such subjects as Islamic theology, Islamic
ideology, ethics, Islamic upbringing, the Islamic social system,
worship, religious rulings and manners that one must have in his
individual and social life. The term '*fiqh*' has become popular amongst
Muslims since the second century after the *Hijra* A.H. to mean Islamic
jurisprudence or the art of deriving religious rulings from their
sources. It has obtained the following meaning: a precise and deep
understanding and ability to derive religious rulings from their
sources.[^5]

The Meaning of Fiqh
-------------------

Nowadays, the term *fiqh* is generalized to mean Islamic sciences or
Islamic rulings in the broad sense. The broad meaning of Islamic rulings
is broken up into three fundamental categories:

1. Theology; what is obligatory for a *mukallaf* to believe about Allah,
his angels, books, messengers and the Day of Judgment.

2. Ethics; the positive traits that a *mukallaf* must obtain and the
negative traits that he must stay away from.

3. Actions; the actions that a *mukallaf* must perform.

This is proved by the tradition from the prophet (s) who said: “Whoever
wants Allah to treat him favorably must have a deep understanding
(*yafqahu*) in religion.”[^6])

Here, the word *fiqh* is used in its general sense, synonymous of
Islam.  
 When the different sciences are categorized the term *fiqh* is used to
mean the Islamic rulings regarding one's actions.

*Fiqh*, in its specific meaning and what is discussed in books of
*fiqh*, includes everything that has to do with all aspects of man's
life. Everything that is studied today including foundational laws, city
management, family relations, individual actions, management, politics,
etc is found in the different sections of *fiqh*.[^7]

Shari'ah and Fiqh
-----------------

*Sharī‛ah* encompasses what was decreed in the time of prophethood found
in the Qurān and prophetic traditions.  
*Fiqh* is what has been gained from the efforts of scholars after the
prophet's (s) demise.[^8]9

[^1]: Ibn Manzūr, Lisān al-‛Arab

[^2]: 7:179

[^3]: To be discussed later.

[^4]: Tafsīr al-Manār, volume 9, page 420

[^5]: Shahīd Muttaharī, Madkhal Ila al-‛Ulūm al-Islamīyyah, page 3

[^6]: Muslim, Sahīh, volume 3, page 95 (Nayshāpūrī print)

[^7]: Shahīd Muttaharī, Madkhal Ila al-‛Ulūm al-Islamīyyah, page 45

[^8]: Ayatollah Ja‛far Subhānī, Tārīkh al-Fiqh al-Islamī wa Adwārihi,
page 6


