The Importance of Jurisprudence
===============================

Allah, the creator of mankind and the world with all its precision and
secrets, emphasizes in the Holy Scriptures that man needs order in his
worldly life and needs to find the path that leads him to his purpose,
which is the eternal blessings of the next life.

Man's divine disposition (*fitrah*) necessitates him to follow religion
and religious laws. The reason for this is that man, as shown in his
nature and throughout history, is unable to understand what is good and
what is bad for him in every situation.

Jurisprudence, which discusses the divine code, teaches us religious
laws which give order to our worldly life, which give us benefit, which
take us away from corruption and show us the path that leads man to his
purpose.

The Special Qualities of Jurisprudence
--------------------------------------

• Inclusiveness; it includes everything needed to manage and give order
to man's life in every aspect and dimension. Jurisprudence gives order
to man's life in every different situation, for example: worship, social
relations, business deals, personal affairs such as marriage, divorce,
inheritance, adequate support (*nafaqah*), family rights, legal matters,
government, war, enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong, charity
and punishments.

• Easiness; there is no divine law that puts a *mukallaf* in extreme
difficulty.[^1]

• Congruence with man's nature; a law that is against one's divine
disposition cannot be found. The reason for this is that the one who
makes the divine laws is the same one who created man and who knows the
secrets of his soul. For this reason it is possible for Islamic
jurisprudence to be in congruence with man's divine disposition.[^2]

• Balance; There is no excessiveness in jurisprudence.[^3]

Islamic jurisprudence is what connects this world to the next.

[^1]: Refer to 22:78

[^2]: Refer to 30:30

[^3]: Refer to 2:143


