The Jurisprudential Sects of Islam
==================================

We learned that Islamic jurisprudence is the knowledge of Islamic laws,
what is permissible and what is forbidden, what is obligatory, what is
disliked (not recommended, unfavorable) and what is recommended
(favorable), and what is correct and what is incorrect.

We also know that these Islamic laws are derived from the Qurān and
prophetic traditions.

We also know that the Muslims in the time of the Prophet (s) would take
their religious rulings from him. They would take the rulings that had
to do with worship, like prayer, pilgrimage, fasting and spiritual
purification, or the rulings that had to do transactions like trade,
partnership, rent, land, marriage and divorce and other rules that are
found in the religion from him.

Then, after his death, some situations arose in one's prayer, fast,
life, business, partnership or pilgrimage…etc that did not occur during
the Prophet's (s) lifetime. They needed to know what the religious
ruling was. In this case they would refer to some of the companions to
take the ruling from them. Some took rulings from Imām ‛Alī bin Abī
Tālib (a), some from ‛Abd Allah bin ‛Abbās and some from ‛Abd Allah bin
Mas‛ūd. ‛Alī (a) was the most knowledgeable companion; the Prophet (s)
said the following about him: “I am the city of knowledge and ‛Alī is
its entrance.”[^1]

But, we see some different verdicts passed by different companions and
the generation that came after them called the *tābi‛īn*. There were
many *mujtahids* and many differences in verdicts, but there were no
jurisprudential sects like there are today. The Muslims would refer to
the scholars amongst the companions, *tābi‛īn* and Imāms (a) for the
religious rulings that they needed. Imām ‛Alī bin al-Hussayn al-Sajjād
(a), Imām Muhammad bin ‛Alī al-Bāqir (a) and Imām Ja‛far bin Muhammad
al-Sādiq (a) lived in these times.

How Jurisprudence sects were formed and when
--------------------------------------------

The divisions of Muslims became widespread after the murder of the third
*khalīfa*, ‛Uthmān bin ‛Affān. At that time the Muslims swore allegiance
to Imām ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib (a) but Mu‛āwīyah bin Abī Sufyān refused to
swear allegiance to him. Nobody followed him in this except the people
of Syria. He formed his own, autonomous government there. He also took
some jurists and some people who related traditions with him, and thus
the major division was started.

At the same time where the Muslims and the great companions believed
‛Alī (a) to be the rightful *khalīfa* and the most knowledgeable person
war was started between him and Mu‛āwīyah bin Abī Sufyān. Here, the
belief in the Ahlul-Bayt (a) grew. The Ahlul-Bayt are glorified in the
Qurān. Allah said that he removed all impurities from them and purified
them a thorough purification. Allah also made it obligatory to love them
and accept their authority.

A *shi’a* (follower) of the Ahlul-Bayt (a) is one who loves them, obeys
them and believes in their rights.

The Shia had a strong presence during the fight with Mu‛āwīyah and after
Imām ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib's martyrdom when his son al-Hassan (also the son
of the daughter of the prophet) became the *khalīfa*. After that a big
argument arose between Imām al-Hussayn bin ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib (a) and
Yazīd bin Mu‛āwīyah which lead to a war between them in a place called
Karbalā', Iraq. This war took place on the tenth day of the Islamic
month '*Muharram*' in the 61stA.H.. Imām Hussayn and 78 of his
companions and family members were martyred in this war.

With all of this, there were not jurisprudential sects of Islam as there
are today. There were two different sects at that time. One of them
followed the Ahlul-Bayt (a) those that Allah cleansed from all
impurities and purified them a thorough purification, those who did not
say anything except what their forefather, the messenger of Allah (s)
said. The Ahlul al-Bayt (a) are none other than Imām ‛Alī, Hassan,
Hussayn and the nine Imāms that came from his lineage (a). The other
group followed the *Umawī* (Umayyad) judges. Of course amongst the
*Umawī* judges there were different opinions and various verdicts.

At the end of the first century A.H. different jurists appeared and the
Islamic sciences took form. Examples of these jurists are: Sa‛īd bin
al-Mussayab, al-Hassan al-Basrī and Sufyān al-Thawrī who lived in the
same time as Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir bin ‛Alī bin al-Hussayn bin ‛Alī bin
Abī Tālib. The scholars of this time learned from him.

Islamic jurisprudence started to spread out in the second century A.H.
Islamic jurisprudential sects also started to form because many jurists
appeared and they made many religious verdicts which differed from the
verdicts of others. Some of the differences include leaving the arms
down in prayer or crossing them or in some of the rulings regarding
*wudū'*, fasting, divorce, inheritance, etc.  
 The jurisprudential sects of Islam that are taught and have scholars
and students all over the world are:

1. The Ahlul-Bayt (a) sect. It is also called the Ja‛farī sect or the
Shia Imāmīyyah sect.

2. The Hanafī sect.

3. The Mālikī sect.

4. The Shāfi‛ī sect.

5. The Hanbalī sect.

Each of these jurisprudential sects will be described:

The Ahlul-Bayt (a) Sect
-----------------------

It must be stated that the Ahlul-Bayt (a) do not have a separate sect,
or different laws than their forefather Muhammad (s). Instead, they
continued his path and were taught by him. Rules pertaining to worship,
contracts and other miscellaneous subjects are all taken from one source
full of wisdom and light, which is none other than the Prophet (s). Imām
al-Sādiq (a) said: “We do not give any legal rulings or ethical advice
unless it was passed to us by our great father who obtained it from the
Prophet (s).” So, their traditions, unless changed, depict the essence
of Islam that was sent from the lord of the worlds.[^2]

The Ahlul-Bayt (a) sect is also named the Ja‛farī sect attributed to
Imām Ja‛far al-Sādiq bin Muhammad al-Bāqir bin ‛Alī (Zayn al-‛Ābidīn)
bin al-Hussayn (al-Sibt) bin ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib (a).  
 It is also named the Shia Imāmīyyah sect because of their belief in the
12 Imāms from the Ahlul-Bayt (a).

Imām Ja‛far al-Sādiq (a) was the Imām of the Muslims in his time. He was
the teacher of scholars and famous for his greatness, knowledge,
abstinence from the world and worship.

Imām Ja‛far al-Sādiq (a) was born in the 82ndA.H., during the Umayyad
reign. He taught and spread Islamic sciences in the prophet's mosque,
just like his forefathers did. He would relate traditions from his
father, al-Bāqir (a) who related them from his forefathers all the way
up to the messenger of Allah (s). He gave 1000 jurisprudential verdicts
and was ahead of the scholars of his time in Islamic sciences, for
example theology, *tafsīr* (exegesis) and everything else Muslims
treasured.

There were around 4000 religious students that related traditions from
him.

Some of Imām al-Sādiq's (a) students were experts in the prophetic
traditions and leaders of different sects, for example: Imām Abī Hanīfah
(the leader of the Hanafī sect) and Imām Mālik bin Anas (the leader of
the Mālikī sect).

The Ahlul-Bayt jurisprudential sect has spread today to different areas
of the Islamic world, for example Iraq, Lebanon, Iran, Pakistan,
Indonesia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, India, Azerbaijan, etc.

The Hanafi Sect
---------------

This sect is called the Hanafī sect because of its imām, Abī Hanīfah.  
 Abī Hanīfah's full name is al-Nu‛mān bin Thābit bin Zūtī al-Fārsī. His
forefathers were from Kabul. Abī Hanīfah was born in the 80thA.H. and
died in the year 150 in Baghdad.

Abī Hanīfah grew up in Kūfa and spent half of his lifetime working as a
merchant before he became a seminary student and teacher. He studied
under Hammād bin Abī Salamah for eighteen years before he became a
scholar himself. He was one of the big scholars of his time and reached
the level of *ijtihād*. He accepted voting and syllogism *qiyas* in
addition to the Qurān and prophetic traditions as tools for deriving
religious rulings or *fatwa*. Many scholars of his time refuted him on
this issue. In this regard, both Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (a) and Ja‛far
al-Sādiq (a) said that when making a *fatwa* one must stick only to the
Qurān and the prophetic traditions.

His sect spread in Iraq and later in other areas of the Islamic world.
Abī Hanīfah lived for 52 years during the Umayyad reign, but did not
accept them. Rather, he believed that the rule *khilafat* should be
given to the family of ‛Alī (a). He even ruled in favor of the ‛Alawī
uprising lead by Zayd bin ‛Alī bin al-Hussayn bin ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib and
allowed money that was collected from *zakāt* taxe to be spent on the
uprising. It should be mentioned that Zayd bin ‛Alī bin al-Hussayn
tutored Abī Hanīfah for two years and ‛Abduallah bin al-Hussayn bin ‛Alī
bin Abī Tālib was also one of his tutors.

The Umayad rulers asked him to become a judge and he refused. Because of
this, they put him in prison and whipped him for days, until he was on
the brink of death. Then, the prison warden helped him to escape and he
fled to Mecca. Afterwards, he was travelling between Mecca and Medina
pretending to be a nomad. During this period of time he studied for two
years under Imām al-Sādiq (a). He has a famous saying describing this
experience: “If it wasn't for these two years, al-Nu‛mān would have
perished.” He stayed there until the end of rule of the Umayyad dynasty
on the hands of the Abbasid dynasty.

When the Abbasid dynasty came to power, Abī Hanīfah refused to help
them. Al-Mansūr imprisoned him and ordered him to be lashed 120 times
which resulted in his death.

The Maliki Sect
---------------

This sect is named its founder Imām Mālik bin Anas bin Mālik al-Asbahī
who was a member of the Yemenite al-Asbah tribe.

Mālik bin Anas was born in Medina in the 93rdA.H.. He was a student of
some of the Islamic jurists of his time including Nāfi‛, Mawla
‛Abduallah bin ‛Umar and Ibn Shahāb al-Zahrī. He also studied under Imām
Ja‛far al-Sādiq (a) and related traditions from him. He said: “I have
not seen anyone better than Ja‛far bin Muhammad.”

He lived under the Umayyad rule for forty years and during this time he
did not portray himself as a scholar.

When the Umayyad dynasty fell and the Abbasid dynasty came to power he
showed inclination towards the family of ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib (a) and
ruled that they were the legitimate rulers and that rule *khalafah* was
their right. He passed a verdict making it obligatory to aid Muhammad
bin ‛Abd Allah bin al-Hassan bin ‛Alī bin Abī Tālib who revolted against
the Abbasid dynasty. As a punishment, Ja‛far bin Sulaymān, the Abbasid
governor of Medina at the time, ordered him to be lashed 50 times. The
lashes were so hard that his shoes fell off.

Later on, the Abbasid khalīfa, Abū Ja‛far al-Mansūr changed his mind and
improved his relations with Imām Mālik. He asked Imām Mālik to write a
jurisprudential book, in accordance to his sect, to be published. Imām
Mālik wrote the book *Al-Mūattā'*, the book of religious verdicts, and
the Mālakī jurisprudential sect became the official sect of the Abbasid
Empire and missionaries were sent as far as Africa and Indonesia to
preach *Al-Mūattā' and* the Mālakī sect. Imām Mālik differed from Abī
Hanīfah on his views regarding voting and syllogism as valid sources of
religious rulings. He died in the 179thA.H..

The Shafi'i Sect
----------------

This sect was named after its founder Imām Muhammad bin Idrīs bin ‛Abbās
bin ‛Uthmān al-Shāfi‛ whose lineage traced back to Hāshim, the son of
‛Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet's (s) grandfather.

Imām Shāfi‛ī was born in the 150thA.H., the same year that Abī Hanīfah
died. He was an orphan and his mother raised him in Yemen. When he
reached 10 years of age he went to Mecca to learn reading and writing.
He then lived in the desert for 17 years before becoming a religious
student. He studied under the scholars of his time such as Muslim bin
Khālid al-Makhzūmī and Mālik bin Anas (the founder of the Mālikī sect
and the author of al-Mūattā'.) When Imām Mālik passed away he returned
to Yemen.

During Rashīd's reign, he was charged with helping the ‛Alawī movement
along with others by the governor of Yemen. He was then sent to Baghdād
to be tried. Many were killed but Shāfi‛ī was saved.

He then migrated to Egypt and preached his sect there. His sect was also
spread by his students in other parts of the Islamic world. Imām Shāfi‛ī
died in the 198thA.H.

He has said: “If there is a prophetic tradition in opposition to my
view, throw my view against the wall.”[^3]

The Hanbali Sect
----------------

This sect was named after its founder Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Hanbal who
was an Arab.  
 He was born in Baghdād in 164 A.H. He started his studies there at the
age of 15. He studied under both Imam al-Shāfi‛ī's and ‛Ali Abī Yusif
al-Qādī (Abī Hanīfah's student.) He also studied under different
scholars of his time, such as Harīz, one of Imām Sādiq's (a) students.

This sect was spread like the other sects. This sect is still practiced
in the Arabian Peninsula and other parts of the Islamic world. Ahmad bin
Hanbal died in Baghdād in 241 A.H.

[^1]: Al-Sharīf al-Murtada, Tanzīh al-Anbiyā’, page 212

[^2]: Bāqir Sharīf al-Qurayshī, Tuhfaāt min Sīrat A’imah Ahl al-Bayt
(a), page 12

[^3]: Asad Haydar, Al-Imām al-Sādiq wa al-Madhāhib al-Arba‛h, volume 1,
page 175


