The History of the Ahlul-Bayt (a) Jurisprudential
=================================================

The Three Stages of the Ahlul-Bayt (a) jurisprudence Sect
---------------------------------------------------------

An important point about the history of the Ahlul-Bayt (a)
jurisprudential sect is that it is divided into different stages. Each
stage will be described. An important point about the history of the
Ahlul-Bayt (a) jurisprudential sect is that it is divided into different
stages. Each stage will be described.

### The First Stage

This was the stage of the narration of traditions from the Imāms (a).
This stage starts from the early days of Islam and ends at the Lesser
Occultation in 260 A.H.  
 Jurisprudence, in this stage, was narrating traditions. Companions
would hear a tradition from one of the infallibles (a) and spread it to
their communities without organizing them into different subjects.

The first text that was written, other than what the Commander of the
Faithful (a) wrote, was written by Abī Rāfi‛, a companion of the prophet
(s) and Imām ‛Alī (a). He wrote a book called *Kitāb al-Sunan wa
al-Ahkām wa al-Qadāyā*.

His son, ‛Alī bin Abī Rāfi‛, the Commander of the Faithful's (a) scribe,
wrote a book using the different sections of jurisprudence, for example
wūdū and *salat*.

Jurisprudential texts increased during the imamate of Imām Bāqir and
Sādiq (a) due to the weakness of the Umayyad dynasty during its last
days and power being shifted to the Abbasid dynasty.

Jurisprudential texts continued to grow, so much so that during the time
of Hurr al-‛Āmilī there were 6600 texts. 400 of these texts became
famous and were called the 400 principles. The four great books of the
Shia written by the three great scholars[^1] were compiled from these
books.

The city of Medina was the center of Islamic studies for the Ahlul-Bayt
(a) during this period until Imām Sādiq (a) moved to Kufa and the second
center of Islamic studies was formed.

Al-Hassan bin ‛Alī al-Washā' said: “I witnessed 900 scholars who all
said that they heard so and so from Ja‛far bin Muhammad (a) in this
mosque (Masjid al-Kūfa).”[^2]

The Imām had great companions in Kūfa, such as Abān bin Taghlib who
related 30,000 traditions and Muhammad bin Muslim who related 40,000.

When we say that jurisprudence in this stage was just compiling and
spreading traditions rather than organizing them into different
sections, we do not mean that this includes the big scholars of the
time. Each one of them was an authority in themselves, like Muhammad bin
Muslim, Zarārah ibn A‛yan and Abī Basīr. Imām Sādiq (a) said: “Burīd bin
Mu‛āwīyah al-‛Ajalī, Abī Basīr Layth al-Bakhtarī al-Murādī, Muhammad bin
Muslim and Zarārah will be given the glad tidings of Heaven. They
believe in Allah about the obligatory actions and forbidden ones. The
line of prophethood would have discontinued if it were not for
them.”[^3]

The Imām considered them *mujtahids* who had the capability of deriving
verdicts from the Qurān and prophetic traditions. Sometimes he (a) would
order them practice it, for example he (a) said: “It is upon us to tell
you the principles and it is upon you to branch them out.”[^4] He (a)
also told people to refer to some of his companions in religious
rulings, like Yūnis bin ‛Abd al-Rahmān. Someone asked the Imām: “It is
not possible for me to come to you and ask everything that I need about
religious sciences. Is Yūnis bin ‛Abd al-Rahmān trustworthy; can I take
whatever I need from him?”

The Imām answered: “Yes.”[^5]  
 He (a) also ordered some of his companions to give religious verdicts,
such as Abān bin Taghlib. The Imām (a) told him: “Sit in Medina's mosque
and give religious verdicts to the people. Verily I love to see my Shia
to be like you.”[^6]

### The Second Stage

This stage started at the Minor Occultation in 260 A.H., and lasted
until the days of Shaykh Tūsī who lived between 385 A.H. and 460 A.H.

In this stage the Ahlul-Bayt (a) jurisprudential sect transformed from
merely relating traditions without organizing them into different
sections into writing jurisprudential books without adding anything to
the traditions or changing their terminology. This is clear in the book
*Sharāyi*‛ which was written by ‛Alī bin Bābūway for his son Muhammad.
It is said that when someone needed a tradition they would find it in
this book.

Other similar books are *al-Maqna*‛ and *al-Hidāyah* by Shaykh al-Sadūq,
Muhammad bin ‛Alī bin Bābūway and *al-Nihāyah* by Shaykh al-Tūsī.

We are not saying that there weren’t scholars who were spreading
traditions, but we are saying that now the traditions are organized into
different subjects similar to the practice today. This is clearly seen
in the books *al-Kāfī* by Shaykh al-Kulaynī and *Man Lā Yaduruhu
al-Faqīh* by Shaykh al-Sadūq.  
 This is what generally took place in this stage. This does not mean
that there weren't any scholars who added to the traditions by using
intellectual deductions, as seen in the works of al-‛Ummānī and
al-Iskāfī.

If one wants to explain more he can say that this stage had three major
schools:

1. The school of Qum and al-Ray: This school used traditions but did not
use intellectual deductions. Some of the scholars of this school are the
two Sadūqs. This was a strong school and was relied upon by many
scholars.

2. The school of al-‛Ummānī and al-Iskāfī: This school preferred using
intellectual deduction to such an extent that they accepted syllogism
and voting. Al-‛Ummānī’s full name was al-Hassan bin ‛Alī bin Abī ‛Aqīl.
It is said that he is the first person to apply his *ijtihād* to
actions, while mentioning the different sections of jurisprudence and
mentioning the reasons behind the verdicts. He wrote the famous book:
*al-Mustamsik bi-habl Āl al-Rasūl*. Unfortunately this book is not in
existence today. Al-Iskāfī is Muhamamd bin Ahmad bin al-Junayd who lived
after Abī ‛Aqīl. He wrote jurisprudential books, for example *Tahthīb
al-Shī‛ah li-ahkām al-Sharī‛ah* and *al-Ahmadī fī al-Fiqh al-Muhammadī.*
Similarly, these two books do not exist anymore.

3. The school of Baghdād: This is also called the school of Shaykh
al-Mufīd. This school tried to find a common ground between the schools
of traditions and intellectual deductions. The reason behind this might
be Shaykh al-Mufīd, who was a student of Ibn al-Junayd and Ja‛far bin
Muhammad bin Qūlūway who was from Qum and a member of the Qum school of
thought. Shaykh al-Mufīd wrote many books, such as *al-Maqna‛ah* which
was commented upon by Shaykh al-Tūsī in his book *Tahthīb al-Ahkām*.

### The Third Stage

This stage started at the era of Shaykh al-Tūsī and is the prevalent one
today. In this stage the jurisprudential books changed from imitating
the traditions in form and language to writing with different
terminology and mentioning different situations that did not occur at
the time of the revelation of the Quran. All of this occurred with
accepting intellectual deduction perfected by traditions and the
acceptance of intellectual principles. The book *al-Mabsūt* by Shaykh
al-Tūsī serves to ascertain the conclusion that we already reached about
this stage.  
 Other important advancements that have been made during this stage:

1. The sections of jurisprudence have become more specialized.

2. More subjects were introduced in accordance with needs of the time.

3. Intellectual deductions have been made stronger and their proofs have
become clearer.

4. The relationship between jurisprudential rulings and jurisprudential
principles become clearer.

5. Putting more effort into investigating the chains of narration.

6. Disregarding some of the ancient texts which do not have relevance to
the needs of today's world and writing books with today's world's needs.

Sources of Religious Verdicts
-----------------------------

### 1.The Book

What is meant by the book is the Qurān which was sent down by Allah to
Prophet Muhammad (s).  
 Our belief is that the Qurān that is in our hands today, its meaning
and words has not been altered in any possible way.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ هَـذَا الْقُرْآنُ أَن يُفْتَرَى مِن دُونِ اللّهِ وَلَـكِن
تَصْدِيقَ الَّذِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَتَفْصِيلَ الْكِتَابِ لاَ رَيْبَ
فِيهِ مِن رَّبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This Qur'an is not such as can be produced by other than Allah; on
the contrary it is a confirmation of (revelations) that came before it,
and a fuller explanation of the Book- wherein there is no doubt - from
the Lord of the worlds***.”[^7]

It is a holy book and all of the Muslims agree that it was divinely
inspired and that its content is entirely correct. It is the primary
resource of Islam and it is an eternal authority and reference for
mankind until the Day of Judgment. It says that Allah's religion is
Islam and that the Muslims must always follow the Qurān. It is also a
universal legislative reference for all of mankind.

#### The Authority of the Book

It is unanimous amongst Muslims that the Qurān is an authority for
Muslims. The proof behind this is twofold:  
 1. Certainty that it was sent to the Prophet (s): This was established
by multiple and successive accounts passed down by Muslims from one
generation to the next.

2. The Qurān being sent by Allah: The miraculous nature of the Qurān in
regards to both the language and the content is a proof of its composer.
Moreover, no one could produce anything like the Qurān or even a single
verse, in spite of the challenge posed in the Qurān. Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ مِن رَّبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(This is) the Revelation of the Book in which there is no doubt,
from the Lord of the Worlds***.”[^8]

#### Jurisprudential Verses in Quran

There are around 500 verses in the Qurān that deal with religious
rulings. These verses are a part of the sources for obtaining religious
verdicts and are called: *ayyāt al-ahkām*.

### 2. Traditions (Sunnah)

The Arabic term *sunnah* literally means a way of acting, but
figuratively it means: the words, actions and affirmations of one of the
*ma’sumeen* Infallibles. In order to understand this definition
completely we must understand a few terms:

• Infallible: anyone who's infallibility is established. The Infallibles
are the Prophet (s) and the twelve Imāms from the Ahl al-Bayt (a).

• The sayings of an infallible: Whatever the infallible says that has
anything to do with religious rules.

• The actions of an infallible: Whatever action an infallible takes.

• The affirmations of an infallible: The occurrences that happen in the
presence of an infallible to which the infallible does not oppose.

#### The Authority of Traditions

Muslims agree unanimously that the words, actions and affirmations of
the Prophet (s) are considered an authority for all Muslims. Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So take what the Messenger assigns to you, and deny yourselves that
which he withholds from you.***”[^9]

The words, actions and affirmations of the Imāms of the Ahl al-Bayt (a)
are only considered an authority only if their infallibility and their
place in the line of successors to the Prophet is proved. There are
numerous proofs of their infallibility in key resource books about
Imāmate and theology. Please refer to them.

### 3. Consensus

The Arabic term for consensus is *ijmā‛* which literally means
unanimity.

Shiites view consensus as a tool to unearth an Infallible's verdict.
Unlike the other jurisprudential sects, Shiites do not regard consensus
as an independent proof as it is the case with the Qurān, the traditions
and logic.

Whenever a consensus shows us what the Infallible's verdict is, it has
authority. Otherwise, it does not have authority.

The question arises: Why do the Shia include consensus as one of the
sources of religious verdicts when it is not considered an independent
proof?

Shaykh al-Ansārī answered this question in the following way: Consensus
being a source for religious verdicts is a not an accurate statement.
True Consensus is a tool to establish the truth, and in this case, both
the means and the truth are considered a proof.  
 How does Consensus help determine the verdict of an infallible?

There is no single answer. Attempts to find an answer to this question
started at the time of Shaykh al-Tūsī and continue to this day. The
answers fall under two categories:

1. Internal consensus: A consensus of *mujtahids* who lived in a period
of time in which one of the Infallible was present. He was part of the
consensus but nobody knew him personally. Therefore, this kind of a
consensus is an authority. How do we know that the infallible was
amongst them? This answer to that is to be found in the books of the
principles of jurisprudence.

2. Linguistic consensus: This consensus informs us, in an intellectual
way, that the infallible agreed with the ruling but was not part of the
consensus. His duty is to prevent all of the scholars from making an
incorrect consensus. More answers are found in the books of the
principles of jurisprudence.

### 4. Intellect

What is meant by the intellect here is anything that man's intellect can
understand and a religious ruling can be derived from.[^10]

An example is when Allah makes obligatory an action through a Quranic
verse or reliable tradition, but one must perform another action to be
able to perform this obligatory action and there is not any verse or
tradition about this action. Man's intellect understands the
relationship between an obligatory action and its precepts becoming
obligatory. This leads to certainty about the action being obligatory.

An example of this is that Allah made the pilgrimage obligatory on
anyone who has financial ability. This is found in both the Qurān and
traditions. But, Allah did not mention that the travel from one's
hometown to Mecca is obligatory, even though it is a necessary precept
to performing the pilgrimage.

Man's intellect understands the relationship between performing the
pilgrimage and having to travel. It is possible to say that the travel
becomes obligatory by the *mukallaf* having certainty, like some have
said. having certainty, like some have said.

#### The Authority of Intellect

It is self-evident that intellect itself is an authority; it does not
need a proof. The reason for this is that intellect is a foundational
proof for Islamic beliefs.  
 When Intellect is viewed as a fundamental proof for Islamic beliefs it
becomes easy to reach the conclusion that it is an authority for
religious rulings as well. The reason for this is that beliefs are more
important than rules; they are the roots of religion.

[^1]: Muhammad bin Ya‛qūb al-Kulaynī – al-Kāfī, Muhammad bin ‛Alī bin
al-Hussayn al-Sadūq – Man Lā yahduruhu al-Faqīh, Muhammad bin al-Hassan
al-Tūsī – al-Tahdhīb and al-Istibsār.

[^2]: Al-Najāshī, Rijāl al-Najāshī, under al-Washā’

[^3]: Shaykh al-Tūsī, Rijāl al-Kashī, under Abī Basīr Layth al-Murādī

[^4]: Al-Hurr al-‛Āmilī, Wasā’il al-Shī‛ah, the 6th chapter of the
qualities of a judge, tradition 51

[^5]: Al-Hurr al-‛Āmulī, Wasā’il al-Shī‛ah, the 11th chapter of the
qualities of a judge, tradition 33

[^6]: Al-Najāshī, Rijāl al-Najāshī, under Abān

[^7]: Yūnus: 37

[^8]: Sajdah: 2

[^9]: Hashr: 7

[^10]: Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr, Halaqah 2, al-Dalīl al-‛Aqlī


