Subjects of Jurisprudence
=========================

The jurisprudential subjects are divided into two categories: acts of
worship and dealings or transactions. Dealings are further divided into:
contracts, one-party contracts and miscellaneous rulings.

Al-Shahīd al-Awwal divided jurisprudence into these subjects along the
mentioned foundations when he said: “All of this is divided into four
parts; worship, contracts, one-party contracts and miscellaneous
rulings.”

This classification is found in the books early day such as *Sharāya‛
al-Islām* by Muhaqiq al-Hillī.

The subject of *taqlīd* or imitation (following a specific scholar) is
mentioned in the books of jurisprudence, along with subjects relating to
it, in the introduction section. They say that it is obligatory for
every *mukallaf* who has not reached the knowledge level of *ijtihād* to
either follow someone in *taqlīd* or practice precaution in worship and
transactions, even if these are regarded recommended or permissible
actions, except where the ruling is self-evident.

The condition for practicing precaution is that one is knowledgeable of
the situations where precaution is applicable (only a few people
actually do). Without practicing *taqlīd,* the acts of worship and daily
dealings of an individual - unless he or she is capable of precaution-
are considered invalid.[^1]

Then the section of worship is mentioned:  
 Worship is an action that depends on having the intention of being
close to Allah, for example, performing *salat* prayer.

Muhaqiq al-Hillī mentioned ten different subjects under the acts of
worship category:

1. Spiritual purification (*tahārah*): Spiritual purification is the use
of a pure substance conditional upon an intention.[^2] There are two
types of spiritual purification; spiritual purification from physical
impurities that stem from the body (*khabath*) and spiritual
purification from spiritual impurities (*hadath*).

Spiritual purification from a physical impurity consists of cleaning the
body, clothes or anything else from the ten impure substances: urine,
feces, blood, semen, touching carcass, etc. This form of purification
does not stipulate having an intention.

Spiritual purification from spiritual impurities consists of using water
for *wudū'*, *ghusl* and *tayammum*. This form of spiritual purification
is a prerequisite for such acts of worshipping as prayer and circulating
the Ka’aba *tawāf*. This form of spiritual purification is broken by
different natural occurrences such as sleep, urination and ejaculation;
intention is a prerequisite in this form of purification.

There are eleven ways which one can use to spiritually purify something
that has become physically impure. They are as follows: pure water,
touching earth, sunlight, transformation, evaporation of two thirds of a
liquid, transfer of human blood into a mosquito or a bug, converting to
Islam, being part of something or someone pure, removing the physically
impure substance and preventing an animal that has eaten physically
impure substances (instead of food) from eating more physically impure
substances.

2. Prayer (*salāh*): Praying precludes one from committing terrible
actions. It is the foundation of religion and if it is accepted all
other forms of worship will be accepted but if it is rejected all other
forms of worship will be rejected.

In this section the obligatory daily prayers are discussed as well as
the prayers on the two holy days (‛*īd*), the funeral prayer, the Prayer
of the Signs, the prayer after *tawāf* and recommended prayers
*nawāfil*. The conditions of prayer are also discussed along with the
foundations of prayer, the precepts to prayer and the actions that
invalidate the prayer. The different types of prayer are also discussed,
such as the prayer of a traveler, individual prayer, congregational
prayer and compensatory prayers.

3. Taxes (*zakāh*): It is a form of tax which is applicable to nine
different items: gold, silver, wheat, barley, dates, grapes, cows, sheep
and camels. The conditions of these nine items are discussed in
jurisprudence, how much must be paid and how the money should be spent.
This form of tax is mentioned in the Qurān, for the most part, next to
prayer. A verse that mentions how this tax should be spent is in *Sūrah
al-Tawbah*, verse 60.

4. The One-Fifth tax (*khums*): *Khums* is another form of tax taken
from one fifth of one's property. The Sunni sects claim that this tax is
applicable to war-booty alone. One fifth of the war-booty is taken and
added to the Islamic treasury. The Ahl al-Bayt (a) jurisprudential sect
says that war-booty is only one of the items that this tax is applicable
to.

The following items are added to war-booty: mines, treasures, lawfully
obtained money mixed with unlawfully obtained money in such a way that
one does not know how much of it is lawful and how much is unlawful and
one does not know the rightful owner, land that an unbeliever living in
a Muslim country buys from a Muslim, treasures taken from the sea and
money saved for over a year. The proof that the Ahl al-Bayt (a) sect
uses, is the *khums* verse (*al-Infāl*: 41) and traditions from the Ahl
al-Bayt (a).

5. Fasting (*sawm*): Fasting is obligatory for every a *mukallaf* , who
has come of age and does not have a valid exception. One must fast
during the month of *Ramadān* in every year. It is also recommended to
fast on other days throughout the year, except on the two holy days
(‛*īd*), for it is forbidden to fast on those days. It is not
recommended to fast on the tenth day of the month of *Muharram*. A
fasting person must refrain from eating, drinking, sexual intercourse,
soaking the head in water, inhaling thick smoky substances…etc.

6. Staying in a mosque (*i‛tikāf*): The Arabic term *i‛tikāf* literally
means staying in a specific place, but when used as a jurisprudential
term it means staying for an extended time in a mosque in order to
worship. This is an act of worship that a person does by fasting for
three or more days in a mosque. The different rules and conditions of
this are explained in jurisprudence. *I‛tikāf* is essentially
recommended, but if one performs *i‛tikāf* for two days, the third day
becomes obligatory. One must perform this act of worship in the Holy
Mosque of Mecca, the Prophet's Mosque in Medina, the Kufa Mosque, The
Basra Mosque, or, at least, the main congregational mosque of a city.
One may not perform this act in a small mosque. The Prophet (s) would
perform *i‛tikāf* on the last ten days of the month of *Ramadān*.

7. Pilgrimage (*hajj*): The Arabic term *hajj* literally means
intention, but in jurisprudence it is a term which comprises of
different actions performed in a specified place (Mecca and its
surroundings). It is obligatory on anyone who meets all of the
conditions. The actions of the pilgrimage are as follows: putting on the
special *ihrām* clothes in Mecca, stopping in ‛Arafāt, staying in
al-mash'ar, throwing the stones at the *'qabah*, sacrificing an animal,
shaving one's head, walking around the Ka‛bah seven times (*tawāf*),
performing the *tawāf* prayer, running back and forth between Safā and
Marwah, *tawāf al-nisā'*, *tawāf al-nisā'* prayer, throwing stones at
the symbol of *satans*, and staying at *Mina*.

There are three kinds of pilgrimage. The first is called *al-tamatu*‛
and is obligatory on those whose homes are more than 92 kilometers away
from the Holy Mosque of Mecca. The second and third are called *al-qirn*
and *al-ifrād* respectively. These are obligatory on those whose homes
are less than that distance.

8. Lesser pilgrimage (‛*umrah*): There are two types of this smaller
version of pilgrimage. The first is called *al-tamatu‛* and is
obligatory on every *mukallaf* who can perform the pilgrimage and lives
more than 92 kilometers away from the Holy Mosque of Mecca. The second
type is called *al-ifrād* and is obligatory on anyone who is financially
able to perform it, whether the greater pilgrimage has become obligatory
on him or not, and does not live more than 92 kilometers from the Holy
Mosque of Mecca.

The actions that must be performed in the lesser pilgrimage are: putting
on the *ihrām* clothes in one of the specified sites, *tawāf*, *tawāf*
prayer, running back and forth from Safā and Marwah and have one’s her
cut.

9. Declaring War (jihād): There are two types of war in Islam: offensive
and defensive. In Ahl al-Bayt (a) jurisprudential sect only an
infallible can declare war, and that is when it becomes an obligatory
duty. On the other hand, a defensive war can become obligatory at any
time and can also become obligatory upon men as well as women.

War can also be divided into civil and international war. It is also
obligatory to fight a group that leaves the community of an Imām, like
what heepened in the case of the *Khawārij* and the wars of *Jamal* and
*Siffīn*.

The following subjects are also mentioned under the main subject of war:
rules pertaining to followers of other religions living in Muslim
countries and peace treaties between Muslim governments and non-Muslim
governments.

10. Enjoining good and forbidding evil (‛*amr bi al-ma‛rūf wa nahī ‛an
al-munkar*): Islam is a religion that deals with social issues. The
importance of a healthy society is emphasized in the divine laws that
were sent for mankind's success. It is obligatory, according to Islamic
law, for everyone to uphold moral actions and to fight immoral actions.
This is what is mentioned under the subject of enjoining good and
forbidding evil. Refer to the verse in *Sūrah Āl Imran*: 104.

There are conditions pertaining to this are mentioned in the books of
jurisprudence.

After the section of worship, the section of contracts is mentioned.
This section has fifteen different subjects:

1. Trading (*tijārah*): Transactions like buying, criteria of the buyer
and the seller, the items being bought or sold, the contract itself, the
wording of the contract, different kinds of transactions: resale with
specification of gain, resale with the specification of loss, and
*tuliyyah* are also discussed. *Tuliyyah* is the transfer of the sold to
the buyer without any addition or subtraction from it.

2. Collaterals (*rahn*): The item that is given is called a collateral,
the person giving the collateral is called a *rāhin*. The *Rāhin* must
offer this transaction by using any words that relay his offer and the
*murtahan*, or person who takes the collateral, must accept it by using
any words that relay his acceptance.[^3]

3. Bankruptcy (*iflas*): A bankrupt person is one who does not have
enough money to pay back his debts. The Islamic jurist prevents this
person from using his property with the intent of him paying back his
debts, as much as possible.

4. Limitation of legal competence (*hajr*): The Arabic term '*hajr*'
literally means preventing and what is meant is the prevention from
spending one's money. There are many instances where one is prevented
from spending his money due to bankruptcy (which was mentioned), a child
who has not come of age, an insane person, an incompetent person and a
dead person who has made a will for over one-third of his property.

5. Guarantee (*damān*): This is a contract that needs both a proposal
and an acceptance. There is a difference in guarantees between the Shia
and the Sunni. The Ahl al-Bayt (a) jurisprudential sect defines
'*damān*' as the moving over of the responsibility for the debt from the
indebted person to the guarantor.

After this the person who lent money does not have the right to ask the
person he lent the money to for his money, rather he must ask the
guarantor. This way, the guarantor pays back the debt and then seeks out
the person who owed the money in the first place to pay him back.
However, the Sunni jurisprudential sects claim that the person who lent
the money can get his money from either the person he loaned it to or
the guarantor.

6. Peace (*sulh*): The agreement upon giving up one's possession of an
item or the yield of an utilizable thing or the yield of a right. It is
not conditional on there being a fight before it.

The peace that is meant here is not the same as what is meant in the
subject of war (*jihād*). Peace that is mentioned in the subject of war
is a political agreement, but the peace that is mentioned here is
related to financial matters, for example if one owes an unknown amount
of money to another he can make 'peace' with that person by paying him a
specific amount of money agreed upon by both parties.

7. Partnership (*shaarkah*): Partnership means the ownership of property
or a right by more than one person. An example of this is the
inheritance that belongs to a few children. They are partners in the
inheritance before it is divided up. Another example is when two or more
people own a car, horse or piece of land, even if two people share in a
piece of virgin land that they cultivated.

There are two types of partnerships: contracted and non-contracted. What
were mentioned above are examples of non-contracted partnerships.
Examples of contracted partnerships are business partnerships, farmland
partnerships and industrial partnerships. There are many rules mentioned
in the books of jurisprudence pertaining to contracted partnership.

8. Silent partnership (*mudāribah*): this is a type of contracted
partnership where there is a partnership between one's property and
another's work. One or more people give money to another person or
persons to conduct business transactions with that money.

9. Silent partnership in farming and running an orchard (*muzāra‛ah* and
*musāqāt*): These are two types of partnerships similar to *mudāribah*.
They are both partnerships between money and work. The difference
between them is that *mudārabah* is a partnership between money and work
in business while *muzāra‛ah* is a partnership between money and work in
farming.

For example, the owner of a land makes a contract with a farmer and they
split up the profits in an agreed upon fashion. *Musāqāt* is a
partnership between money and work in an orchard, for example, the owner
of the land makes a contract with the gardener and they split the
profits that they make from the selling fruits.

One of the conditions that must be observed in a partnership between
money and work, whether it is *mudāribah*, *muzāra‛ah* or *musāqāt*, is
that if a loss the loss as well as the profit is shared, and that the
profit cannot be a fixed amount of money but rather a certain
percentage. This way, both the person who puts up the money and the
person who works are equal.

10. and 11. Trust and borrowing (*wadī‛ah* and *‛ārīyah*): *Wadī‛ah* is
giving a piece of one's property to another to protect it. *Ārīyah* or
lending is letting another use one's property in order to make a profit.
Both of these are kinds of trusts with the difference that in the case
of *wadī‛ah* one gives his property to another for safe keeping and the
keeper can only benefit from that property with the owner's consent.
This is the opposite of *ārīyah* where the other person uses the
property in order to make a gain from it.

12. Renting (*ijārah*): This is a contract where one rents the yield of
an utilizable thing or a right to specified price. There are two types
of renting. The first is where one rents a piece of property at a
specified price – as in renting a house, a car or even clothes- and the
other is where one hires a person perform a certain work, for example
sowing clothes, cutting hair, building a house or other things.

Renting is similar to buying and selling because two pieces of property
are being exchanged, with the difference that in buying and selling a
piece of property is exchanged with another while in renting a piece of
property is exchanged with the right to make use of another piece of
property.

There is a similarity between renting and *ārīyah*. In both renting and
*ārīyah* utilization occurs, however, with renting the person pays for
the ability to use the other's property while and in *ārīyah* the person
does not pay which means he does not have a right in using the property.

13. Representation (*wakālah*): allowing another to act in lieu of
someone during his life. An example of this is that man, nowadays, needs
someone to represent him in a courtroom or a representative in a
contract, for example, business contracts, renting, *ārīyah*, trusts,
religious endowments, divorce, etc.

The person who is being represented is *muwakkil*, the person who is
representing is *muwakkal* or *wakil* and the transaction is *wakalah*
or representation.

14. Religious endowment and charity (*waqf* and *sadaqah*): *Waqf* means
to give away one's property to a special group of people. There is a
difference of opinion about *waqf* needing an intention of getting
closer to Allah or not. Muhaqiq al-Hillī’s opinion is that it intention
is not a prerequisite because *waqf* and *sadaqah* are mentioned in the
section of contracts, not worship.  
 There are two types of *waqf*, specific and general. Each one of these
has their own special laws.

15. Religious endowment of a house or yield (*sukna* and *habs*): These
are similar to *waqf*. The difference is that in *waqf* the property is
given away forever and the person is not able to retrieve his property.

*Habs* is when a person allows another to use the yield of his property
in order to perform humanitarian services for a specific period of time
after which the property is returned to its owner.

*Sukna* or habitation is when someone allows another to live in his
house for a specified period of time after which the property is
returned to its owner.

16. Gifting (*hibāh*): One of the things that one can do with his
possessions is to give them away. Gifting can be either with receiving
something in return, or without. One is not able to take back a gift for
which something was given in return, but one can take back a gift in
which something was not given in return for it, except if it was gifted
to a relative or the if the gift is no longer in existence.

17. Racing and shooting (*sabq* and *rimāyah*): These are two forms of
contracts that are conditional upon racing, involving the use of horses
or camels, and shooting. Islam has forbid all kinds of gambling except
these kinds because they improve military skills and improve one's
ability to do well in war times. Racing and archery are related to the
section on *jihād*.

18. Will (*wassiyāh*): A will is making someone the possessor of an item
or a yield after one's death. This is according to the will one makes
regarding his possessions and small children (if it is allowed to make a
will regarding the raising and protection of one's children) and occurs
after his death. In a will, a person has control over only one third of
his total possessions, to be given away or used in whatever many he
decides.

Muslim jurists have divided a will into three parts. First is property,
one makes another the owner of a certain part of his property. Second is
contracts, one pays another to represent him in performing a pilgrimage,
*zīyārah*, prayer, fast are any other righteous deed. Third is freeing,
one frees one of his slaves, for example.

19. Marriage (*nikāh*): Jurists mention the conditions of the marriage
contract. Then they mention whom we can’t marry (*mahāram*), for example
a father can’t marry his daughter, a mother can’t marry her son, a
sister can’t marry her brother and so forth. Then they mention the two
forms of marriage; the permanent and the temporary. Then they mention
what happens if the marital duties are violated. Then the jurists
mention the concept of adequate support, which is one of the wife's
rights with the husband.

This is the end of the section on contracts. Muhaqiq al-Hillī mentioned
that there were 15 different subjects within this section, but then
mentioned 19 of them. It is not understood why. Maybe it was a mistake
or maybe he mentioned some of the subjects together.

The third section that Muhaqiq al-Hillī mentioned is one-party
contracts. There are 11 subjects mentioned within this section.

1. Divorce (*talāq*): Divorce is when a man annuls his marriage
contract. Divorce is either forever (*bā'in*) or not (*raj‛ī*). If the
divorce is *raj‛ī*, the man can return to his marriage during the
specified time during which the woman cannot remarry.

For divorce to be valid, it must not be initiated when the wife is
having her menstrual period and that there must be two just witnesses
available. The Prophet of Islam said: “Allah loathes divorce although it
is a permissible action.”

2. When divorce is requested by either the the wife or both parties it
is called *khal‛* and *mubārah*: These are two forms of irreversible
*bā'in* divorce. *Khal‛* is a form of divorce where the wife forces the
husband to divorce her by giving him back part or the entire dowry; i.e.
whatever the man would accept to divorce her. If he chooses to divorce
her he cannot return to her unless she gives him permission.

*Mubārah* is similar to *khal‛*, but in this case both parties opt for
the divorce. Here, the woman can choose what she wants; with the
condition that it does not surpass her dowry.

3. A pre-Islamic form of divorce (*zihār*): *Zihār* is a form of divorce
that was prevalent during the pre-Islamic era, or the so-called Era of
Ignorance. It is where the husband says to the wife: “You are to me like
the back of my mother.” This was enough for the couple to become
divorced. Islam does not accept *zihār* as a form of divorce. Rather,
Islam says that it is forbidden to say this and if one does he must pay
a penalty, which is freeing a slave. If one cannot find a slave he must
fast two months in a row. If one is unable to fast he must feed sixty
poor people. It becomes forbidden for the husband to have intercourse
with his wife after he said the mentioned sentence and before he paid
the penalty.

4. Abstinence vow of a husband (*īlā'*): *Īlā'* is a kind of vow where a
husband vows not to perform intercourse with his wife forever, or at
least more than four months, in order to punish her. If the wife takes
her case in front of a judge the judge will force the man to take back
his vow or divorce his wife. If he decides to take his vow back he will
have to pay the penalty. Taking back a vow is forbidden except in this
case where it becomes obligatory.

4. Cursing (*la‛ān*): *La‛ān* is also related to the relationship
between a husband and wife. It is a kind of curse from one side against
the other. If a husband claims that his wife committed adultery but does
not produce four witnesses, he will be subject to the punishment of
false testimony, except if he performs *la‛ān*. If he performs *la‛ān*
his wife will be forbidden for him forever.

*La‛ān* must be performed in front of a judge. The man must say four
times: I bear witness, in front of Allah, that what I said about this
woman is true. Then he must say: The curse of Allah is upon me if I am a
liar. Then the woman must say four times: I bear witness, in front of
Allah, that he is a liar. Then she must say: May Allah become angry with
me if he is truthful.  
 In this way the husband and wife are separated from each other forever.

6. Freeing a slave (‛*itq*): Islam has many teachings regarding slavery.
Slaves are only taken from prisoners of war. The purpose behind slavery
is not to use the slave but rather it is for them to live in a Muslim
family and to become Muslim. The goal is not to make a slave remain a
slave forever, instead it is to teach a disbeliever Islam and then give
him social freedom after he has attained spiritual freedom. So, the goal
of slavery is to free the slaves and there are many different ways to
free a slave in Islam. For this reason, jurists have called this subject
*freeing a slave*, not slavery.  
 Jurists have said that there are four ways to free a slave:

• A slave owner freeing a slave because of a religious penalty or just
getting closer to Allah.

• Freeing part of the slave, half of him, a third of him, a fourth of
him or a tenth of him for any reason.

• If someone enslaves his parents, grandparents, children or
grandchildren. In Islam this form of slavery does not exist and the
relative would be automatically freed.

• If a slave has certain bodily ailments, for example if he is blind or
has leprosy.

7. *Tadbīr*, *mukātabah* and *istīlād*: These are three cases which
necessitate freeing a slave. *Tadbīr* is when the slave owner makes a
will to free the slave after his death. *Mukātabah* is when the owner
and the slave make a contract for the slave's freedom after he pays a
sum of money. Allah orders the slave owners to make a contract with a
slave if the slave wishes and the slave is a believer. Allah also says
that some money should be given to him to help him with life's
expenses.[^4] *Istīlād* is when a women slave bears the master's child.
After the slave owner's death the mother becomes the slave of the child
and, as was mentioned earlier, a child cannot be the owner of his
mother, so she becomes free.

8. Confession (*iqrār*): Confession is one of the legal subjects of
Islam. If a person claims that another owes him money he must put forth
evidence. If he cannot produce evidence his claim will be dismissed.
However, if the other person confesses to the fact that he owes the
plaintiff money, his confession will take the place of the missing
evidence.

9. Reward (*ju‛ālah*): *Ju‛ālah* is similar to hiring a person to
perform work, except in *ju‛ālah* a specific person is not hired but
rather the person says that he would pay a certain amount of money to
anyone who performs a specific work.

10. Vows (*aymān*): *Aymān* is the plural of the Arabic term *yamīn*
which consists of two types of vows: *halaf* and *qasam*. If a person
vows to perform a certain action it is obligatory on him to perform it.
Of course there are conditions:

• When the vow is taken in Allah's name. It is not obligatory to carry
out a vow taken in the Prophet's, Imām's or Qurān's name.

• The action has to be a permissible one. It is not obligatory to carry
out a vow made to perform a forbidden or disliked action.

Examples of correct vows are to read so and so good book from cover to
cover or to brush one's teeth every day. If one does not carry out a
correct vow he must pay the penalty.

11. Pledge (*nathr*): A pledge is different than a vow and it has
specific wording. If a person wants to pledge to perform the daily
recommended prayers he must say: ”*lillah alayi* (literally translated
as for Allah on me, or I commit to Allah) to perform the daily
recommended prayers every day.” The pledge is conditional on the fact
that the action is beneficial for one's religion or worldly affairs. A
pledge to perform an action that is neither beneficial nor harmful is
invalid.

The wisdom behind carrying out the vow or pledge is because they are
types of contracts made with Allah and it is obligatory to be true to
one's contracts that he makes with other people[^5], so it is also
obligatory to be true to the contracts he makes with Allah.

Miscellaneous Rulings
---------------------

The forth section of jurisprudential rulings is the miscellaneous
rulings. Miscellaneous rulings does not have a specific definition,
rather Muhaqiq al-Hillī put everything that was not acts of worship,
contracts or one-party contracts into this section. He divided this
section into twelve subjects:

1. Hunting and slaughtering animals (*sayd* and *thibāhāh*): Before
anything, we will say: “An animal whose meat is lawful to eat becomes
lawful when it is slaughtered in a specific way, fished in a specific
way, hunted by a trained dog (in relation to some animals) or hunted by
a weapon that has a spearhead, like an arrow or spear.”

If an animal is slaughtered or hunted in the above-mentioned method, the
rulings of a *tathkīyah*[^6] (it becoming lawful to eat) will apply to
it, not the rulings of a carcass. A carcass is spiritually unclean and
is a forbidden item to eat.

Hunting is only allowed on the wild animals whose meat is npermissible,
like gazelle, mountain goats, wild cows and the likes. Hunting is not
allowed on domesticated animals like sheep and cows.

The use of dog that is used to hunt is conditional on it being trained
to do so; the killed animal that is retrieved by an untrained dog is not
permissible to eat. Similarly one is unable to use other predatory
animals.

The weapon used to hunt is conditional on it being made out of iron, or
at least another material that is mined; so it is not allowed to hunt
with a weapon made out of rock. Another condition is that the person
hunting or slaughtering an animal must be a Muslim and must start his
action by the reciting the name of Allah. There are other conditions as
well.

2. Foods and beverages (*at‛amah* and *ashribah*): There are a series of
rulings in Islam regarding eating and drinking, given to make sure one
uses nature beneficially. Examples of these are hunting and slaughtering
animals, which have been mentioned, and food and drinks. Islam generally
permits beneficial items and forbids harmful items, but does not satisfy
itself with this general principle. In some cases the harm of a certain
item is mentioned which necessitates staying away from it or the benefit
of an item is mentioned which allows the usage of it.

There are two types of foods: animal and non-animal. Animals are divided
into two categories: sea animals and land animals. None of the animals
in the sea are allowed except fish types that have scales. Land animals
are divided into two categories: wild and domesticated. From amongst the
domesticated animals cows, camels and sheep are permissible. Horses,
mules and donkeys are also permissible but it is not recommended to eat
them. Dogs and cats are forbidden to eat. From amongst the wild animals,
predatory animals and insects are forbidden to eat, but wild cows, wild
donkeys and mountain goats are permissible. Rabbits are also forbidden
to eat, even though they are not predatory animals.

Different kinds of birds are permissible to eat, for example pigeons,
ducks and chicken. Predatory birds are forbidden to eat.

It is forbidden to eat non-meat items if they are a spiritually unclean
substance or a spiritually clean substance that has become spiritually
unclean. It is also forbidden to eat anything that is harmful according
to the general public. So, for example, it is forbidden to eat poison,
even if it is tasty.

It is forbidden to eat dirt, whether it is harmful or not. It is also
forbidden to drink any intoxicating substance or eat someone else's food
without their permission.

3. Usurpation (*ghasb*): Usurpation is using the property or rights of
another without consent. This is forbidden and one becomes accountable
to the owner if his property becomes destroyed. It is forbidden to use
anything that has been usurped, meaning that *wudū* would become invalid
if performed with usurped water or one's prayer *salat* would become
invalid if performed wearing usurped clothes or on an usurped place.

4. Right of pre-emption (*shuf‛ah*): The right of pre-emption is the
right that a partner has to purchase the partnership of a third party
who bought it from his partner. So, if two people purchase an item
jointly and one of them sells his share the other has the right to
purchase the share from the third party at the same price.

5. Cultivation of virgin land *(ihyā' al-mawāt*): Cultivation or revival
of moorland for farming purposes. The Prophet of Islam (s) said:
“Whoever cultivates a piece of moorland, it becomes his.”  
 There are many issues dealt with in this section.

6. Lost property (*laqtah*): The general meaning of lost property is
property that that the owner lost and nobody else has obtained it. There
are two kinds of this lost property: animal and non-animal.

The finder does not have the right to take the property as his own if it
is an animal and he does not fear that it will die. But, if he does fear
that it will die, for example, if he finds a sheep in the middle of the
desert, he can take it as his own but he must search for its owner. If
he finds the owner he must give the sheep to him, but if he does not
find the owner then it becomes a property with an unknown owner which
sin this case should be spent on the poor with the permission of a
judicator.

If the lost property is not an animal and worth less than half of a
*mithqāl*[^7] of a silver coin, the finder can take it as his own. But,
the finder must declare that he has found the lost item and search for
its owner for one year if it is worth more than the above mentioned
amount (naturally, items that would go bad, like fruit, are not included
in this ruling). If the owner was not found and the finder found the
item in the Holy Mosque of Mecca, the finder can do one of two things:
he can give it away as charity and give the price of the item to the
owner, if he ever finds him, or he can keep it for the owner.

If he found it anywhere outside of the Holy Mosque of Mecca he can do
one of three things: he can take ownership of the item and owe the owner
the price of the item if the owner is found or he can give it away as
charity and pay back the owner if found or keep it as a trust for the
owner.

If there is no sign on the item indicating the owner there is no need to
declare that one has found it, rather, the finder will be able to choose
from the three choices above.

7. Inheritance (*mirath*): The rules of inheritance in Islam are
obligatory to follow. It is not permissible for the deceased (during his
life) to split up the inheritance however he desires or to give all of
his possessions to one person. The division of property is done on three
levels; when there is a person on one level, the next levels do not
receive inheritance.

The first level: Parents and children. If the children are dead at the
time of the division, grandchildren get the inheritance.

The second level: Grandparents, brothers and sisters and if one's
brothers and sisters died, nieces and nephews.

The third level: Aunts and uncles and their children.

These are according to family relations, but if one is related because
of a reason, for example marriage, they inherit in every level.  
 The exact amount that everyone inherits is explained in detail in the
books of jurisprudence.

8. Judgment (*qadhā'*): It is the judgment made between people in order
to settle their disputes. There are many issues addressed in this
section that cannot be explained here, but we will mention some brief
points:

The court system in Islam is a special system that makes sure that
justice is served in a precise way. One of the ways to prove this is by
mentioning the special conditions that Islam gives for one to become a
judge. Some of the conditions are: He must be a *mujtahid* on a
scholastic level and his *ijtihād* must be established. His morals must
also be in congruence with Islam.

Another condition is that he must be pious and stay away from vices,
even the ones that have nothing to do with being a judge. The judge is
not allowed to take money from the defendants or the plaintiff’s, rather
he is awarded a large sum of money from the Muslim nation’s treasury.

Confessions and witnesses (and nowadays oaths) are effective in proving
or disproving one's claim in the Islamic court system.

9. Being a witness (*shahādah*): Witnessing is a branch of the section
of judgment. Confessions fall under the same category. If one claims,
for example, that another person owes him money, the other person can
either confess to the claim or denies it. If he confesses it is enough
for the judge to order that the money be paid. If he rejects the claim,
the plaintiff must bring evidence to prove his claim.

One way of provide evidence is to produce a witness. If he has a witness
and all of the conditions of being a witness and giving testimony are
observed, his claim will be proved. The defendant does not have to
provide a proof that he is truthful. Sometimes the defendant has to
swear an oath that he is truthful.

10. Fixed and open legal punishments (*hudūd* and *ta‛zīrāt*): These
punishments are related to Islam's penal system and are also related to
the sections of judgment and witnesses. Islam has given certain
punishments for certain crimes which are supposed to be carried out in
every situation, every place and every age. These punishments are called
*hudūd*. There are some punishments that are up to the judge to
determine, where he can look at the situation and make the punishment
more or less severe. These punishments are called *ta‛zīrāt*.

We will mention some of the *hudūd*, briefly, because mentioning them in
length should be done in other books.

• The punishment for adultery of two married people who can easily be
with their spouse is stoning. If one of the adulterers was not married
or could not easily be with his spouse he or she would be given 100
lashes, except if the adultery was committed with one of his or her
family members (*mahāram*) where the punishment would be death.

• The punishment for homosexuality is death by the sword, throwing him
or her off of a high mountain or building or burning him alive.

• The punishment for wrongly accusing someone of a crime is 80 lashes.
Wrongly accusing someone of a crime means accusing a man or woman of
committing adultery without having enough witnesses.

• The punishment for drinking alcohol or other liquid intoxicants is 80
lashes.

• The punishment for theft is cutting off the four fingers of the right
hand with the condition that the stolen item was worth at least a fourth
of a *dinār*.

• The punishment of an enemy who takes up arms against the people is
either killing him by the sword, crucifixion or cutting off his right
arm and left leg or his left arm and right leg.

11. Retaliation (*qasās*): Retaliation is another form of punishment
that Islam allows. In reality, this is the right of the victim if he was
injured, but not killed or for his inheritor against the criminal. The
crime should either be murder or seriously injuring one of the victim’s
body parts and the crime would have either committed intentionally,
similar to second-degree murder, or accidentally.

Intentional murder is when the criminal hits the person with the
intention of killing him, with or without the use of a weapon, resulting
in the death of the victim. The important thing here is the intention to
murder.

Second degree murder is when the criminal intentionally hits the person
but without the intention of killing him, resulting in death. For
example the intention was to wound the person but ended up killing him.
Or, if the person wants to discipline a child by hitting him and the
child dies.

Accidental murder is when the killer did not have any intention of harm
at all.

If the murder was committed intentionally the inheritors of the victim
have a right called *qasās*. They can use this right and have the
murderer executed in an Islamic court. *Qasās* does not apply to
second-degree or accidental murder.

12. Fines (*dīyāt*): Fines are another right that is given to the victim
or his inheritors. The difference is that in *qasās* there is the eye
for an eye concept while with *dīyah,* a fine is incurred.

[^1]: Imām al-Khomeinī (r), Tahrīr al-Wasīla, page 4

[^2]: Shaykh al-Tūsī, al-Mabsūt, volume 1, page 4

[^3]: Imām Khomeini (r), Tahrīr al-Wasīla, volume 2, page 3

[^4]: Refer to Sūrah Nūr, verse 33

[^5]: Refer to 5:1

[^6]: Opposite of a carcass.

[^7]: An old unit of measurement.


