Question 28: What Do the Shia Jurisprudents Use As Their Sources?
=================================================================

**ANSWER:**

The Shia, for the purpose of deducing the legal rules, abide by the
divine book of Allah and the tradition of the Holy prophet (p) and
basically benefit from the following four basic resources:

God's book

Prophet's tradition. Consensus. Reasoning.

Among the above-mentioned sources, The Quran and the tradition of the
Holy prophet are the most fundamental sources for the Shia jurisprudents
that we will briefly recount:

Quran, the divine book of Allah.

The followers of the Shia school of thought consider the Quran to be
the most ideal and equitable source for deducing laws in jurisprudence
and for the criterion of identification of the divine commandments, due
the Shia leaders having introduced this heavenly book of Islam as the
most eminent reference for achieving the jurisprudential judgments; such
that if any theory was to be compared to the Holy Quran and it was in
total concurrence with it, then only would it have been accepted, or
else it would be rejected.

The sixth holy Imam Jaffer Sadiq (p) has stated in the light of this
that:

"And every speech that in not in accordance with the Holy Quran is
unfounded."

Imam Sadiq (p) has also narrated form the honorable Prophet that: "O
people, any statement that is attributed to me, if it be in accordance
with the Holy Quran, then it is considered mine and if it is in
disagreement to it, then it is far form mine."

Regarding the above-mentioned Hadith, it is clearly evident that
according to the Shia leaders, the heavenly book of the Muslims is
considered the most credential source for the deduction of legal
judgments.

**Prophet's judgment:**

The tradition of the holy prophet ascribed to his speech, behavior and
his approval of the works, is the second considerable source for the
Shia jurisprudents. The impeccable household of the Holy Prophet (the
Imams) are known as the sole transmitters of the prophet's tradition and
are the treasuries of his knowledge. Of course, if at all the prophet's
speech was transmitted through other reliable methods of transmission,
it can also be accepted by the Shia and can be counted as a relibale
source for them.

Let us discuss the following dividing it into two fields:

Evidences in support of the adhearance to the prophet's tradition:

The Imams of the Shias, inferred from the divine book of Quran to their
followers and alongside the prophet's tradition extolling both the Quran
and the Tradition of the Prophet (p). Imam Sadiq (p) says in this regard
that:

"When coming across a tradition, find the evidence for it referring to
the Quran and the sunnah, then accept its authenticity or else the
speech is only more suitable for the narrater himself."

Imam Muhammed Baqir (p) considered that a tradition must be traced down
from the Holy prophet's for it to be fully qualified and says the
following: "The real jurisprudent is one who is austere in this world,
shows eagerness to the hereafter and the one who strictly adheres to the
Prophet's tradition."

Further more, the beacons of light who are the impeccable household of
the Prophet, consider it disagreeable a matter, that God's Book and the
tradition of the prophet would ever be a cause of ambiguity.

Imam Sadiq (p) to this regard says:

"Whosoever has any disagreement with the Quran and the prophet's
tradition is a non-believer."

Thus, it becomes clear that the Shia, more than any other Islamic
group, hold the tradition of the Holy Prophet in great esteem and so the
baselessness of the ones who accuse the Shias of alienating themselves
from the Holy prophet's traditions is already verified.

The Validation regarding the Adherence to the Holy prophet's
traditions.

In order to elucidate the perspective of the Shias regarding the
tradition of the Holy prophet, we are obligated to explain the matter
into two ways:


