Question 33 : Do the Shia Consider the Prayer of 'witr' Midnight Prayer As Being Obligatory?
============================================================================================

Furthermore, in the territories where each of the mentioned sects are a
majority, the local regulations are all in the limits of the councils
authorities and is in accordance to that particular sect, at the same
time, the rights of the followers of the other sects are also
respected.

Now in order to provide further clarification on this matter, let us go
on and present the twelfth rule of the first section from this
constitution of the Islamic republic to this regard:

The official religion is obviously Islam and the Jaffari Ithna ashri
sect. This rule is unchangeable. Other Islamic sects including the
Hanafi, Shafe-ee, Maliki, Hanbali and Zaidi, who maintain perfect
respect and the followers of these sects are free to apply their own
regulations in performing religious ceremonies, religious teaching and
education, other privileged conditions (marriage, divorce, inheritance,
wills) and the related litigations have officially, in courts and in any
territory where the followers of these sects are in majority. The local
regulations in the limits of the council authorities are according to
the sect, with the protection of the rights of the followers from other
sects.

In the light of this rule, the respect and position of all the Islamic
sects becomes clear from the viewpoint of the Islamic republic
constitution.

**ANSWER:**

The 'witr' is one of the supererogatory night-prayers, and its
performance is recommendary for all the Muslims and the followers of the
messenger of Allah. However, the Shia jurisprudents, in the light of the
book and the tradition, have mentioned certain specific matters as the
'characteristics of the honorable prophet, one of which being the witr
prayer that was made obligatory for him'

Allama Hilli in the , 'Tathkirat Al-Fuqaha' mentions about seventy
things to being unique and exclusive to the prophet (p), it starts by
mentioning,

"As for the duties obligatory only toward him and not the others in his
nation are: a. Brushing of the teeth. b. Al-witr prayer.


**Question 34 : Does the belief in the super-natural power of God's
friends cause polytheism?**

**ANSWER:**

It is quite clear that whenever a human requests something from
someone, it is because of his ability of performing that particular
thing. This ability is in the framework of natural and material powers,
such as asking a person for a glass of water.

Sometimes this ability is an unseen power that is beyond the material
and natural framework. Such a person's belief in such a super natural
power, in case of its dependence, is just as the belief in a natural and
material power to humans, in the same manner can God also can also grant
supernatural ability to some of his pious slaves.

Now in explaining the mentioned answer we say: belief in the
supernatural power of God's friends can be imagined in two ways: Belief
in the supernatural power of a person by accepting him as an independent
and original source for that power such that a Godly work is
independently attributed to him.

It is inevitable that belief in such a power independent of God's power
causes polytheism, because in this case we have considered other than
God as an independent and original power and have attributed a Godly
work to him, while the source for all powers is only the lord of the
worlds Belief in a supernatural power of some upright slaves of God,
with the belief that this power has originated from the everlasting
power of God, and God's friends, with God's permission, are only the
means for the manifestations and appearance of that eternal power, and
have no independence for themselves. Moreover, these slaves are
dependant on the Exalted God in their presence and also in exercising
the supernatural authority.

It is evident that such a belief is not the considering of God's
friends as God, or attributing Godly works to them because in this case
it would mean that the pious slaves are demonstrating their supernatural
God given authority by God's permission and non-violated will.

The holy Quran states in this regard:

And it is not in the power of an apostle to heave a sigh except by
Allah's permission With this explanation, it becomes clearly evident
that such a belief does not cause polytheism, however, has perfect
concordance with the principle of unification.

Super natural authority of God's friends from the Quranic view:

Islam's heavenly book mentions with perfect explicitness that a group
of God's upright slaves whom by God's permission had such a great power.
Some examples in this field are the following: Super natural power of
his holiness Moses: the Exalted God commanded prophet Moses to strike
his stick in a stony rock so that springs of sweet water gush out,
how?

"And when Musa prayed for a drink for his people, we said strike the
rock with your staff. So there gushed from it twelve springs,"

Supernatural power of his holiness Jesus: the superior authority of
Jesus is mentioned in various parts of the Quran that we shall refer to
some:

"that I determine for you out of dust the form of a bird, then I
breathed unto it and it becomes a bird with the permission of Allah and
I heal the blind and lepers, and bring the dead to life with Allah's
permission The Supernatural power of prophet Solomon:

The Holy Quran regarding to the supernatural powers of Solomon states
the following:

"And suleiman was the heir of Dawood and he said: O people, we have
been taught the language of the birds, and we have been given all
things; most surely this is a manifestation of His grace"

It is inevitable that these works such as causing the flow of the
springs of limpid water from robust rocks due to the striking of Mose's
stick on the rock, creating a real bird from mere clay, healing of
incurable diseases, to raise the dead and make them alive by Jesus, or
the perception of the speech of the birds by Solomon, are all examples
of supernatural powers and these are beyond the natural reach of the
natural propensities and are only exercised by a supernatural
authority.

Thus, if the Holy Quran itself mentions the supernatural authorities of
the pious slaves of God accordingly to the mentioned verses among many
other verses, then do our belief in the clear content of these verses
that clearly dictate about the supernatural power of God's friends,
cause polytheism and is it regarded as an innovation in the Religion?!

Hence, it becomes clearly evident that the belief in supernatural power
of the pious slaves is not in the least considering them as God or
attributing Godly works to them. If such divinity as that of Moses,
Jesus, Solomon etc. were considered to as the power attained by
themselves, then they too would be considered as God's according to the
viewpoint of Quran, whilst all the Muslims are aware of the fact that
the Holy Quran considers the friends of God as His pious and righteous
servants.

It therefore becomes clear that the supernatural power of the beloved
of God is based on divine and eternal power that was gifted to him and
declares them as the means for Gods power, and this does not cause
polytheism but rather, has perfect concordance with the real principle
of unification considering the criterion for unification being that all
the powers in the universe are only attributed to the one and only Lord
who is the sole authority and source for all the actions of mankind
towards the road of perfection.

(Ra'd: 38)
(Baqarah: 60)
(Ale-Imran: 49)
(Naml: 16)


