Question 14 : Does Calling Others Imply Worship To Them Or Is It Considered To Be Polytheism?
=============================================================================================

Actually, what motivates such a question is the appearance of some of
the Quranic verses which apparently order us to prevent calling other
than God:

"And that the mosque's are Allah's, therefore call not upon anyone with
Allah."

"And do not call besides Allah on that which can neither benefit you
nor harm you."

By using the above-mentioned verses, they are some who have considered
the calling of the pious friends of Allah and others after their death,
as worshipping them and therefore, polytheism.

**ANSWER:**

In an effort to clarify the answer to this question, it is appropriate
to explain the meaning of the Phrases 'supplication' and 'worship'.

There is no doubt to the fact that the word, 'dua supplication' means
calling and the phrase, 'IBadaat worship' meaning devotion and reverence
to God, and these two phrases can never be synonyms, ie, we cannot say
that every call and request is worship and viceverca due to the fact
that:

Firstly, in the Holy Quran the word, 'Calling' is used in instances
which can certainly not mean 'worship', such as:

"He said, 'O my Lord! Surely I have called my people by night and by
day!"

Considering this ayah, can we imply that p. Noah meant that he
worshipped his people day and night?!

Thus, one cannot deduce that calling and worship are synonyms, because
it would end up meaning that if somebody called help from the H. prophet
(p) or a devout person of God, he has worshipped them since calling is
more general than worshipping.

Secondly, what is meant by calling in all of these verses, is not just
any calling, rather, a special call which can be accompanied with
worship; because the aggregate of these verses talk about the
idol-worshippers who worshipped their idols and accepted them as their
small Gods.

Indisputably, the acquiescence of the idol-worshippers and their
supplication and help-seeking before their idols, was because they
attributed them the power of intercession and forgiveness, and also
because of the fact they considered them to be self-sufficient in
matters related to both the worlds.

Thus it is but obvious that in such conditions, any type of 'calling'
and request of these beings, is worshipping them. The most evident
witness of this calling, is because it is accompanied with the belief in
their divinity and lordship, as in the following verse, it states
clearly that:

"so their God's whom they called upon besides Allah did not avail
them."

Therefore, the previously discussed verses are not relevant to our
subject, which is the request of a slave from another without
considering him as God or the Lord who has the full choice and
possession in the affairs related to this world and the hereafter.
However, he is considered as a beloved slave of Allah who was chosen by
Him, and given the leadership and imamate and the position of
messengership; and such are the persons who have been promised that
their prayers for the servants of God shall be accepted.

The Holy Quran recounts as this stage that:

" and had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked for forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked
forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah to be oft-returning
(to mercy), Merciful."

Thirdly, the previously mentioned verses are a clear evidence of what
is meant by 'calling' i.e., not all kinds of requesting and seeking of
needs. Calling can be considered as worship as in the following verse,
but it should be noted that immediately after mentioning the word,
'calling', the similar meaning is mentioned in the phrase, 'worship'

"And your Lord says: call upon me, I will answer you; surely, those who
are too proud for my service shall soon enter hell abased."

At the beginning of this verse, the phrase, 'odoo'ni call upon me' and
after that the phrase 'IBadaat-service' is used, which shows that which
is meant by call is a special request and a seeking of assistance before
a being believed to have divine attributes.

Result:

Of the three mentioned introductions, a result can be drawn out that
the main goal of the Quran in these verses is preventing the
supplication of the idol-worshippers who considered their idols as
partners to God and possessors of intercession.

Therefore, any other kind of submission, humiliation, help seeking or
the seeking of intercession is prohibited; because they believed them
being their small Gods that undertook their Godly works. Furthermore,
these idol-worshippers believe that God has assigned part of the works
related to this world and the hereafter to them. Thus, what is actually
meant by these verses that raise controversies is that, seeking help
from a pure soul who, according to the supplicator, is a true slave of
Allah who not only never disobeyed the commandments of the Lord, but is
also beloved and dear to Him, can be regarded acceptable.

When the Quran says:

"And that the mosques are Allah's, therefore call not upon anyone with
Allah."

It means the ignorant Arab pagans who worshipped their idols, angles,
jinn and other cosmic bodies and supplicated to them. Thus, this and
other verses similer to this verse are actually related to calling
others besides God, or things accompanied to God. It is indubitable that
the requesting before these beings and the attachment to these false
beliefs is worshipping them in reality. The question arising here is
that what relation do these verses have with those supplicating from a
chosen servant of the Lord without allocating a divine position or
Godhead in his mind, but rather, only making him to be the interceder
because he happens to be the beloved and competent slave of Allah.

One may also imagine that supplicating to these chosen servants of
Allah is only permissible during their lifetimes and after their death,
it becomes null and void rendering to polytheism.

In response to this, we say:

Firstly, we only seek aid from the purified spirits of the pious slaves
of God such as the Prophets and Imams, who according to the Quranic
verses, are still alive receiving their sustenance! They continue to
live in 'Barzakh' (the world between this life and the hereafter). We
usually make such requests for their intercession for us besides their
sacred shrines, so as to attain a connection with their sanctified
spirits. These shrines are also considered places for the speedy
acceptance of prayers.

Secondly: Their life and death cannot be the criterion for polytheism
or unification, whereas our discussion is based on the criteria of
polytheism and monotheism rather than the benefit and uselessness of
these prayers, ofcource this calls for a lengthy discussion that should
be talked about a its proper place.

(Jinn :18)
(Yunus :106)
(Naoh :5)
(Hud :101)
(Nisa :64)
(Mo'min :60)
(Jinn :18)


**Question 15 : What is Badaa', and why do the Shi'ahs believe in
it?**

**ANSWER:**

The Arabic word 'Badaa' means "appearance and disclosure"; and in the
terminology of the Shia scholars, it is used for change in the natural
course of the destiny of a human being due to his good behavior. The
subject of "Badaa" represents one of the sublime teachings of the sh'iah
school of thought, whose origin stems from the logic of revelation and
intellectual research.

From the Quranic point of view, the human being is not always helpless
vis--vis his own destiny; rather, by returning to the path of Truth and
practicing good moral behavior, he can change the end of the course of
his life.

That is why the Holy Quran expresses this truth in the form of an
all-inclusive and abiding principle, as follows:


**Question 16 : Do the Shia believe in the distortion of the Quran?**

**ANSWER:**

It is clearly known among the Shia scholars that no alteration has
affected the Holy Quran; and the Quran that is in our hands today, is
that same divine book revealed to the Holy Prophet (p), and no addition
or subtraction whatsoever has taken place in the order of its verses. In
order to clarify this, we shall point to a few of the clear evidences on
the matter:

The Lord of the worlds has guaranteed the protection of the Muslim's
heavenly book by stating:

"Surely we have revealed the reminder unto you and We will most surely
be its guardian."

It thus becomes quite evident that the Shia around the world pay
special respect to this holy verse, and firmly believe in the message of
protecting God's book, for it is the epitome of their thoughts and
behavior among any other thing in their lives.

The great leader of the Shia: Ali (p), who was always in the company of
the honorable Prophet (p) and of those who wrote down the revelation
that had been sent down, had in various occasions invited the people
towards this unaltered text of Allah. Some of his sayings are as
follows:

"Know that this Quran is an admonisher which never deceives, and is a
guide that never deviates from the truth."

"Allah Glory be to Him- never admonished the people with anything like
He did with the Holy Quran, it is the firm rope (bond) of God and the
clear means."

"Then we revealed to him the book which is a light that never subsides,
a lamp which is never put off, a path which never misleads those who
tread it, and the criterion for distinguishing truth from falsehood, in
which the evidence that lies in it is never abated."

From the eminent speech of this great Shia leader, it is clearly
evident that the Holy Quran is like a bright lamp which illuminates the
way for its followers; it will remain intact, and without any alteration
that could ever cause its light to be extinguished, or even prevent the
human's deviation to get hold of their devilish ways in an effort to
alter it.

The Shia scholars all agree that the honorable prophet (p) has said:

"I am leaving amongst you two heavy and valuable things, one is the
book of Allah (Quran) and the other is my household, as long as you hold
fast to these two, you will never be misguided."

This tradition is one of the widely transmitted traditions by both the
Sunni and the Shia scholars. God's book (the Quran) will never encounter
any change because if the Quran were to be distorted, holding fast to it
will neither be a means for guidance, nor will remove misguidance, and
this is in total disagreement with this widely transmitted narration.

In the narration of the Shia Imams, to which our scholars and
Jurisprudents transmitted- this reality is stated that Quran is the
criterion for distinguishing the truth from falsehood, and causes the
separation of the right from wrong, such that if any transmitted speech
and even narration has to be compared with the Quran, if it is in
agreement with it's verses, then only will it be correct, or else it is
rendered as false and rejected.

There are many narrations in this regard quoted in the Shia books of
jurisprudence and narrations, that we shall point to one of them:

Imam Sadiq (as) said; "Any speech that disagrees with the Holy Quran is
regarded worthless."

It becomes clearly evident from these traditions that alteration and
change cannot get in the way of the Quran, therefore, this holy book
will everlastingly remain the criterion for distinguishing truth from
falsehood.

The great Shia scholars who have always been the pioneers of the
Islamic and Shia culture, admit to this reality, that the Holy Quran
will never be altered. Although enumerating all of them is a difficult
task, however as examples, we shall point to some of them:

Abu-Jaffer Muhammed bin Ali bin Hussein Babawaih Qummi, known as
'Sadooq' (died in 381 hijra) said:

"Our belief regarding the Quranis that it is God's speech and
revelation. A book that in not tinted with falsehood and incorrectness,
revealed by the All Wise and All-Knowing Lord, who is the revealer and
sole protector of it."

Seyyid Murtaza Ali bin Hussein Musawi Alawi, known as 'Alam al-Huda'
(died 436 Hijra) had said:

"A group of the companions of the Prophet (p) such as Abdulla bin
Masood, Ubay bin Ka'ab among others, read the Holy Quran from the
beginning to the end several times in front of the Holy Prophet. This
proves to be a clear witness to the fact that Quran was accumulated,
arranged and compiled in its intact form without any decrease or
dispersion.

Abu-Jaffer Muhammed bin hasan Toosi known as 'Sheikh Al-Taefah' (died
460 Hijra) said:

"As for the matter of the increase or reduction in the Holy Quran, it
is a subject that is quite obvious and raises no objections before all
the Muslims, who agree to the fact concerning the addition or
subtraction of the Quran, and the apparent belief they have is that the
Holy Quran can never be altered. Our belief clearly suggests that there
can never be any additions to the Holy Quran and this fact was also
approved by Seyyid Murtaza, and all the traditions clearly approve of
this reality when considering their apparent meaning.

There are some who have raised controversies, pointing out to certain
traditions relating to the obliteration of particular verses and others
transferred from their original positions; these traditions happen to be
transmitted by both Sunni and Shia; however, such narrations are merely
single chain -of- transmitter traditions (Al-Khabar Al-Wahid) which we
ought not to pay any regard to, and better still, turn away from them
altogether by simply disregarding their authenticity.

Abu Ali Tabarsi, writer of 'Majma Al-Bayan' (interpretation of the Holy
Quran) has said:

"The thought regarding any addition made to the Holy Quran, is but
baseless to which all the Islamic nations fully agree upon. As for the
subtraction in some of its verses, only a few persons, and a group of
'Hashaweyah' of Ahl-Sunna have mentioned some traditions which are
incorrect, and we all believe in its disagreement."

Ali Ibn Tawoos Hilli known as 'Seyyid Tawoos' (died 664 hijra) said:
"The opinion of the Shia's is that there can be no alteration whatsoever
in the Holy Quran."

Shaikh Zainul-Deen Amil (died 877 Hijra) in the commentary of the
verse:

"Surely we have revealed the reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian, explains that,

i.e., we shall safeguard the text of this Holy book from any sort of
change, addition or alteration."

Qazi Seyyid Nur Al-Deen Tustari, writer of the book 'Ehqaq Al-Haq'
(died 1019 Hijra) said:

" The wrong accusation made to the imami Shia, that they believe in the
alteration of the Holy Quran is only an insinuation, and not all the
Shia accept to this, except a small group who are disregarded by the
Shias themselves for their wrong belief."

Muhammed bin Hussein, known as 'Baha Al-deen Amili' (died 1030 Hijra)
said:

" The most precise thing known, is that the great Quran is perfectly
immune to any addition or deletion and these vibes that are wrongly
spread about, that the name of the commander of the faithful (Ali (p)
was omitted from the Holy Quran and therefore, not accepted by our
scholars is utter nonesence! Therefore whosoever makes an attempt to
undertake a thorough research in the History, and all the traditions and
their chain of transmitters relating to their authenticity, together
with all the narrations of thousands of the prophet's companions, will
find out that the Quran is indeed permanent and never-changing; and all
the verses of the Holy Quran were compiled during the time of the Holy
Prophet."

Faiz Kashani writer of the book 'Al-Wafi' (died 1091 Hijri) explains
after mentioning verses such as:

"Surely We have revealed the reminder and We will surely be its
guardian."

This statement already proves to the fact that the Quran can never be
altered. He says that:

"At this point (after reading this verse) how can alteration and change
prevail over the Quran? Furthermore, the traditions of alteration are in
itself opposing God's book, thus we must consider such traditions to be
baseless!"

Sheikh Hur Amili (died 1104 Hijra) said:

"One who specializes in the field of research in History and
traditions, will get clear insight to the fact that the Holy Quran,
according to the widest transmission of narrations and by thousands of
companions, is fixed and permanent; and it was compiled and arranged
during the time of the Holy Prophet,"

The great investigator, 'Kashif Al-Gheta' in his well-known book of
'Kashf Al-Gheta' said:

"Indisputably. The Quran, due to the divine protection of God- remained
safe of any decrease (and alteration), just as the Holy Quran itself
states to this fact, and several of the great scholars during all the
ages witness to that, thus the disagreement of only a few is not worth
considering."

The leader of the Islamic revolution, His holiness Ayatullah Al-Uzama
Imam Khumeini (may his spirit be sanctified) has also said something in
this regard, which we shall mention as another one of our clear
evidences:

"Whosoever works sincerely and wholeheartedly in an effort to make
known that Quran will remain intact, studies it to improve himself,
recites it thought provokingly such that he can get the true light of
it's knowledge, and will witness to the baselessness of the thought of
'alteration of the Quran' and will find it impossible to believe the
narrations mentioned in this regard are weak, and so we cannot use them
for reasoning. These verses are unidentified and disclose signs forgery;
or are narrations with their content being the esoteric interpretation
of the Quran, or other sections.

All of this would require a comprehensive book for it's detailed
explanation, and if at all it was not for the fear of being carried
away, we would have gone along to explain the History of the Holy Quran
and all the instances that transpired alongside, and would clarify the
Holy Quran is the same heavenly book that is now in our hands, unchanged
and unaltered. The difference in opinion among the Quran reciters is
something that has no relation to what was actually revealed by the
honest archangel Gabriel to the pure soul of the honorable Prophet."

Result:

All the Muslims, whether Sunni or Shia agree that this divine Book is
exactly the same Quran which was revealed to the Holy Prophet (p), and
is safe from any kind of alteration, change, addition or subtraction.

Thus the baselessness to this false accusation put on the Shia can be
determined; and if the narrations of the weak chain of transmitters is
the cause of this accusation, then the transmission is not only
restricted to a few individuals among the Shia, but also to a group of
interpreters of Ahl sunnah who are also known to have transmitted these
weak narrations that we shall point out a few examples:

Abu Abdallah Muhammed bin Ahmad Ansari Kurtubi in his commentary of the
Holy Quran, narrates from Abu Bakr Ansari from Uba'y bin Ka'ab that the
chapter of 'Ahzab' (seventy three verses), during the Holy Prophet's
time was as big a sura as 'Baqara' (286 verses); and the verse of 'Rajm-
stoning to death' also existed in this sura. (There is no trace of such
a verse in sura Ahzab presently)

Yet in the same book, it is also narrated from Ayesha' that:

"The sura of Ahzab had two hundred verses at the time of the Holy
Prophet, after the writing of this book, I couldn't find more than what
is present."

The Writer of the book, 'Al-Elan' narrates that the number of the
chapters in the Quran of 'Uba'y' was one hundred and sixteen, because
two other verses, namely 'Hafd' and 'Khal-a' existed in it."

Whilst it is an undoubted fact that the holy Quran has one hundred and
fourteen chapters and there is no sign of the suras, 'Hafd' and 'Khal-a'
in this divine book of God.

Hibat-Allah bin Salamah in the book of 'Al-Nasikh wal Mansookh'
narrates from Anas bin Malik that he said:

"At the time of the Prophet, we usto recite a sura equal to that of
'Tawba' and I have memorized only one verse of it:

"If the one of Adam of two vallies of gold he would have wanted a third
of it, and if he had three, he would want a fourth one and nothing fills
the inside of Ibn-Adam except for the sand, and God accepts the
repentance of one who repented."

Whilst we know that such a verse cannot be traced in the holy Quran and
is fundamentally in disagreement with the style and eloquence of the
Quran.

Jalal Al-Deen Al-Soyuti in the commentary of 'Al-dor Al-Manthur'
narrates from umar bin Khattab that the sura of 'Ahzab' had equal verses
to that of 'Baqara' and in it contained a verse of 'Rajm-stoning'
Therefore, a small group of both the Sunni and Shia sects transmitted
weak narrations regarding the 'occurrence of alteration in the Quran'.
These additional verses are rejected by almost all the Muslims either
Sunni or Shia. Further more, the Quranic verses, authentic narrations,
conformity of thousands of the companions of the Prophet and Muslims all
over the world is based on not having any sort of distortion, change,
addition or subtraction in the divine book, Quran.

(Hijr:9)

Nahjul Balagha (subhi Saleh) speech no. 176

" " " " " 176

" " " " 198

Usool Al-Kafi vol.1 Kitab Fazl Al-ilm, bab Al-Akhth bil Sunnah wa
shawahid al-Kitab, narration 4 Al-e'teqadat, p.93

Majmaul Bayan, vol.1 p.10, quoted from the answer of 'Al-Masnad
Al-tarabul siyat' Seyyid Murdadha. Tibyan, vol. 1 p.3

Majmaul Bayan, vol. 1 p.10. Sad Al-Su'd p.144

Ezhar Al-Haq, vol.2 p.130. Ala a Al-rahman, p.25.

Ala-a Al-Rahman, p.25 Tafseer Al-Safi vol.1 p. 51

Ala-a Al-Rahman p.25 Tahzeeb Al-Usool, Taqreerat Duroos Al-imam Al-
Khumeinivol.2 p.96 (written by Ustad Jaffer Subhani)

Tafseer Al-Qurtubi, vol.14, p.113 at the beginning of the
interpretation of sura Ahzab. same as above.

Eltekan, vol.1 p.67 Al-Dor Al-Manthur, vol.5 p.180 at the beginning of
the interpretation of sura Ahzab.


**Question 17 : What is the opinion of the Shia regarding the
companions?**

**ANSWER:**

From the Shia point of view, the ones who had the honor to meet and
accompany the honorable Prophet (p) are divided into several groups,
before illustrating this, it is suitable to define the word, 'Companion'
in general.

There are different descriptions for each companion, and we shall point
to some of them:

Saeed bin Mosayeb said:

"The companion of the prophet can be regarded as the one who spent his
life meeting him for two years or fought alongside in one or two of his
battles."

Waqidi said:

"The scholars believe that whosoever saw the prophet and accepted
Islam, contemplated in the matter of Religion and was pleased with it as
his creed, is considered the companion of the prophet even it had been
for only an hour or a single day."

Muhammed bin Ismael Bukhari had mentioned:

"Whoever of the Muslims accompanied the Holy Prophet or even saw him,
happens to be one of his companions.

Ahmad bin Hanbal said:

"Whoever had accompanied the prophet for one month, one day, one hour
or had only seen the Holy Prophet once, is regarded as one of his
companions." Among the scholars of Ahl Sunnah, 'Adalat Al-Sahabah
Justification of the companions, is accepted as one of their firm
principles such that whosoever only accompanied the prophet is regarded
'unbiased' in his character.

Let us now review what the Quran has to say about this concept
regarding the opinion of the Shia's who derive it from the logic of
revelation.

History has recorded both names and characteristics of more than twelve
thousand persons as being the companion's of the Holy Prophet (p) out of
which various figures are still present. It is indubitable that those
who happened to be the companions of the Holy Prophet were considered
greatly privileged, and held with high esteem, and Muslims throughout
have always regarded them with due respect because they happened to be
the pioneers of the Islamic religion who for the first time hoisted the
flag of power and dignity in the religion of Islam.

The Holy Quran also praises these pioneers and says on regard of
them:

". Not alike amongst you are those who spent before the victory and
fought (and those who did not): they are more exalted in rank than those
who spent and fought afterwards.."

Meanwhile, one should also be unprejudiced enough to admit to the fact
that all the companions of the Prophet (p) were not the alchemy to
change the humans essence, ensure them till the end of their life-time
and be placed amongst the righteous and just.

For the clarification of this matter, it is ideal to refer to the holy
Quran, which is accepted universally by all the Muslims. Let us seek
help from this heavenly book of guidance in solving this matter:

The Companions According To The Holy Quran:

According to the logic of revelation, the people who attained the
special honor to have met the prophet and accompany him can be divided
into two groups:

The first group:

These are the ones whom the eternal verses of the Quran, extolls, by
mentioning them as the founders of the stronghold of Islam's power and
prestige. Let us refer to some of these verses of the divine book
regarding this group of companions:


The first pioneers:

"And (as for) the foremost, the first of the Muhajirs and the Ansars
and whose who followed them in goodness, Allah is well pleased with them
and He has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide
in them forever; that is the mighty achievement."

Those who took the oath of allegiance under the tree:

"Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree, and He knew what was in their heats,
so He send down upon them tranquility and rewarded them with a near
victory."

The migrates:

"It is for the poor who fled, those who were driven from their homes
and their possessions, seeking the grace of Allah and His pleasure, and
assisting Allah and His Apostle; these are the ones who are truthful."

The companions of the victory:

"Muhammed is the Apostle of Allah and those with him are firm in their
hearts against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves, seeking
grace from Allah and His pleasure; there are marks in their foreheads
because of the effect of prostration."

Second Group:

One other group of the people who also happened to be the companions of
the Prophet were those who were double-faced hypocrites and ill-hearted
tricksters, The Holy Quran has clearly exposed their reality and warned
the prophet (p) of their presence. Let us refer to some of the verses
that talk about these so-called companions:

Examples:

Identified Hypocrites:

"When the hypocrites come to you, they say: We bear witness that you
are most certainly Allah's Apostle; and Allah knows that you are most
surely His Apostle, and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are
certainly the liars.'

Unidentified Hypocrites:

"And from among those who are around you of the dwellers of the desert
they are hypocrites, and from among the people of Madina, (also); they
are stubborn in hypocrisy; surely you are unaware of them; and We know
them, "

The ill-Hearted:

"And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts contained a disease
began to say: Allah and His Apostle did not promise us victory but only
deception."

The sinners:

"And others have confessed their faults, they have mingled a good deed
with an evil one, Allah may turn to them (mercifully); Surely Allah is
The Forgiving, The Merciful."

In addition to these holy verses, they are many traditions transmitted
from the holy Prophet in reproach to some of his companions, for
example, let us mention two of such:

Abu Hazim narrated from Sahl bin Sa'ad that the honorable Prophet (p)
had said:

"I will send you to 'Kawthar' (the heavenly pool), whoever gets there
will surely drink and whoever does so, will never get thirsty again,
while some groups will come to me (whom I know of) and they know me,
then we shall be estranged foone another."

Abu Hazim also said that whilst he was mentioning this tradition, Noman
bin Abi Ayash heard him and asked him whether he had heard Sahl
narrating it in the same manner or not. Abu Hazim replied:

"Yes," adding that,

"I witnessed that Abu Saeed Al-Khidri also added the following, that
the Prophet had said:

"They are of me, and it will be said that you won't be aware of what
they did after you and then I shall say: May Allah's mercy be kept away
from those who distorted the regulations of my religion after me."

Regarding to the sentence,

"I know them and they know me" and also "changed after me"
it can be easily realized that the Prophet's companions who were there
with him for a period of time, as to who their identities were. (this is
a narration also quoted by Bukhari and Muslim.)

2. Bukhari and Muslim have narrated from the Prophet that:

"On the day of judgment, a group of my companions or my nation will
come to me but will be prevented from coming close to the pool of
'Kawthar', then I shall say,

"O God, these are my companions," He will reply,

"You are now aware of what they had committed after you, they returned
to their previous state (time of ignorance)" Result:

Regarding the Quranic verses and the traditions of the prophet, it is
discernible that not all the individuals and companions who accompanied
the Prophet, were at the same rank; However, some of them were
definitely sincere and competent Muslims who shared their efforts for
the betterment of the Islamic society, whereas another group were always
double-faced in their actions, and were ill-hearted hypocrites. Thus the
Shia's view regarding the companions of the Prophet is in accordance
with the divine book of Quran and the tradition and therefore,
explicitly clear.

Usdul Ghabah vol.1 p.11 and 12, print in Egypt.

Usdul Ghabah, vol.1 p. 11 and 12

same as the above,

same as the above.

Al-Esteea'b fi Asma-a Al-Ashab, vol.1 p.2, the margin of 'Al-ashabah',
Usdul ghabah vol.1 p.3 quoted from Ibn Atheer.

(Hadeed: 10)
(Tawbah:100)
(Fath:18)
(Hashr:8)
(Fath: 29)

Munafiqun : from the first to the last verse.

(Tawbah :101)
(Ahzab: 12)
(Tawbah:102)

Jamea Al-Usool (Ibn Atheer) vol. 11, kitab Al-Howd fi Wurood Al-Nas
Alaihi, p. 120, Hadith 7972.

Jamea Al-Usool, vol. 11 p.12. Hadith 7973

For further explanation, refer to the commentary of the holy Quran ,
Sura Munafiqun.


