Querstion 18 : What Is Meant By Temporary Marriage? (muta'a) and Why Do the Shia Believe in It's Permissibility?
================================================================================================================

**ANSWER:** Marriage is contract of union between the husband and wife;
sometimes this relation is done in the permanent manner without any
limits or boundaries mentioned in the marriage contract, and other times
the same relation is formed in essence, but only during a limited span
of time with a specified duration. Both these marriages are considered
legal and the only difference between them being that one is temporary,
while the other one is permanent with a few similarities between them.

The following conditions are as creditable in the temporary marriage as
is with the permanent one.

Both the man and woman should not be legally prevented with kinship,
among other legal formalities or else the marriage contract can be
nullified.

The dowry accepted by both sides should be compromised in the marriage
contract.

The period of marriage ought to be specified.

The legal contract should be formalized.

The child born out of this marriage is their legal child and should be
named after the parents.

The child is dependent on his father and the procedure of inheritance
is also valid for him and is considered his legal right. When the period
of this marriage terminates, and if it happened that the woman has not
reached the stage of menopause, she should consider the waiting period
'Eddah' before entering into another marriage contract, and likewise if
she is pregnant, she should also refrain form getting married until she
gives birth.

Other rules that regard the permanent marriage should also be regarded
in the temporary marriage. The only difference being that since the
temporary marriage is legislated to overcome the necessities, the wife's
maintenance is not upon the husband and if the woman does not stipulate
the right to inherit her husband's property in the marriage contract,
she will not be able to inherit it in the long run. Thus it is quite
obvious that these two differences have no such effect regarding the
essence of Marriage itself.

We all believe that the Islamic religion is of the universal kind that
fulfills all the needs of mankind. Now let us consider the case of a
young man who needs to stay in a foreign country in order to continue
his studies and because of the restricted facilities, he is unable to
have a permanent marriage thus, he is in a traumatic state and there lie
three possibilities before him that are;

To remain single.

To fall in the pollution of corruption, To marry a woman legally for a
temporary period in the framework of the above-mentioned conditions for
the temporary marriage contract. Let us ponder over these three
conditions:

Regarding the first case, one can say that it usually proves to be
unsuccessful because even though some can endure not having sexual
inter-course, but it can be rather difficult for everyone to refrain
themselves due to the cause of mental disturbance.

As for the second case, it's end is nothing but doom and wretchedness
and according to Islam, regarded as prohibited! And considering it to be
ideal for allowing it because of its necessity, is but a deviation of
thought, when there could be a better and purer way, which leaves us
with the best choice to opt for, that is the third way.

Therefore, it is only the third method left to be chosen, which Islam
suggests, and this was also practiced during the Prophet's lifetime,
then later on, dispute arose in the matter and was nullified by the
caliph's of the time.

Let us remind ourselves at his point, of the following:

The ones who fear getting involved in the temporary marriage
considering it as illegal, should realize that all the Islamic scholars
and researchers have accepted something that is similar to it in the
permanent marriage contract; and that is the couple who are involved in
permanent marriage, their contract is valid even if it be on the grounds
of them having an intention of divorce in more or less than an year.

It is obvious that such a marriage is apparently permanent though in
reality it is temporary what with their intention. This type of
permanent marriage differs from that of the temporary one in that the
latter is limited for a certain period of time both apparently and in
reality, whilst the former is apparently permanent but in reality,
temporary.

Thus how could it be so that the ones who are all for the permanent
marriage that is widely accepted by the scholars, fear the
permissibility of the temporary one?

Now that we have gotten acquainted to the essence of the temporary
marriage, let us prove of its legality,

The legality of the temporary marriage at the beginning of Islam.

The non-abrogation of this religious command during the time of the
Messenger of God.

Then again, the obvious clue to its being legal, is stated in the verse
of the Holy Quran such as:

". Then as those whom you profit by, give them their wages as
appointed.."

This verse gives witness to the validity of temporary marriage because
Firstly, the phrase, 'estimation- profit by, and enjoy' is used here,
which is apparently regarded for the temporary marriage; if at all this
meant the permanent marriage, then there was no indication needed.

Secondly, the phrase, 'ujoorahunna' is used in order to portray the
meaning 'wage' which is a clear evidence in itself for 'muta', because
in the case of permanent marriage, words such as 'dowry' and
'sadaqa-nupital gift' is used to substantiate it.

Thirdly, Both the Sunni and Shia interpreters agree that the
above-mentioned verse was revealed for the temporary marriage.

Jalal Al-deen Al-Soyuti in his book ofcommentary 'Al-dor Al-Manthoor'
narrates from Ibn-Jareer and Soddi that the above verse was regarding
'muta' Abu-Ja'afer Muhammed bin Jareer Tabari in his commentary narrates
from Soddi, Mujahid and Ibn Abbas that this verse regards the temporary
Marriage. Fourthly, The owners of Sahah, Masaneed and other
comprehensive books of narration accept to this fact; for instance
Muslim bin Hajjaj in his 'Sahih' narrates from Jabir bin Abdulla and
Salamah bin Akwa who said: "The Prophets call has reached to us saying:
God's messenger has given the permission to 'enjoy', meaning temporary
marriage."

The authentic narrations for this topic are innumerable. Consequently,
the principle of legislating 'muta' in the early Islam and at the time
of the Holy Prophet, is accepted by the Muslim scholars and
interpreters.

**The question arises as to, 'was the verse of 'muta' abrogated?**

It was quite occasional to find anyone still doubting the
permissibility of 'muta' during the time of the messenger of Allah; The
point of discussion lies in the continuation or the abrogation of this
command after the time of the Prophet.

Both the tradition and the history of Islam, mention to the fact that
the practice of this divine commandment was common among the Muslims
until the time of the second caliph who, because of public interests,
made a stop to the practice.

Muslim bin hajjaj in his 'sahih' (book of valid narrations) narrates
that Ibn-Abbas and Ibn-Zubair had a disagreement regarding 'muta' and
the 'muta of pilgrimage'.

Jabir bin Abdullah said:

"We practiced both during the time of God's messenger, then Omar
prevented us from this practice such that we did not resume to the
practice."

Jalal Al-deen Al-Soyuti in his commentary narrates from Abdul-Razaq and
Ibn-Jareer, both of them narrating from Hakim, asked him, "Was this
verse of muta' abrogated?"

He replied, "No",

and Ali (p) had said:

"If it was not for Omar prohibiting the practice of muta, no one except
for the wretched would commit adultery." Ali bin Muhammed Qushchi also
said, "Omar bin Al-Khattab ascended the pulpit and said:

"O people, there are three things that existed during the time of the
Prophet that I now forbid it's practice, and I punish the one who
practices them, these are, 'Muta of women', 'Muta of pilgrimage' and
'Haya ala Khairil amal'

It is imperative to mention that the narrations similar to these kind
are more than can be mentioned.

It is important to point out the fact that 'muta' is one of the
divisions of marriage, because marriage is divided into temporary and
permanent, thus the woman in the temporary marriage contract is the wife
of that person and her spouse is considered to be called her 'husband'
so naturally, such a marriage is definitely included in the verses that
state about the rules concerning marriage, and if the Quran states
that,

"And who guard their private parts except before their mates and whom
their right hands possess, for they surely are not blamable."

The wife in the temporary marriage is as the example states, ".except
for their mates" according to the framework of the previously mentioned
conditions. So it is matter-of-fact that the wife in this marriage is
included in the phrase of "their mates." Therefore, if the above verse
of sura Mominun permits the sexual relation for two groups of women
being the wife and the slave girl, then the woman in the temporary
marriage is obviously of the first group. (i.e, wives.)

It is quite surprising to hear that the mentioned verse in Sura Mominun
abrogated the verse in sura Nisa, whilst we all know that the verse
abrogated, ought to be revealed before the abrogated one, however, it is
the opposite in this case where sura Mominun is considered as the
abrogated verse revealed in Mecca before the migration of the Prophet to
Madina and the sura Nisa having the verse regarding muta was revealed in
Madina, and so how can a 'Macci' sura abrogate a verse in a 'Madani
sura'?

Another evidence that testifies the non-abrogation of the verse of
'muta' during the time of the Prophet are the enormous traditions
denying to the annulment of this practice at the time of the messenger,
such as the previously mentioned narration by Jalal Al-deen Soyuti in
'Al-dor Al-Manthoor' Last but not least, let us remind ourselves of this
point, and that is the fact that the family of the household, our
revered Imams themselves, who according to the narration of 'Thaqalain',
caused the nation's guidance, and will never separate from the holy
Quran, have out rightly declared to the permissibility and authorization
of temporary marriage.

Thus Islam is ready and able to solve all the problems of the human
society at large, and so approves the authorization of such a marriage
by regarding the previously mentioned conditions due to the fact that
one of the methods of rescuing the youths from falling in the pit of
corruption is only solved by the purest method, which is temporary
marriage in the frame work of its special conditions of course.
(Nisa: 24)

Al-dor Al-Manthoor vil.2 p.140 following the mentioned verse.

Jame Al-Bayan fi Tafseer Al-Quran, vol.5 p.9

Sahih Muslim, vol4 p.130, printed in Egypt.

For example, some of the references are the following:

Sahih Bukhari Bab Al-Tamatto.

Masnad Ahmad, vol4 p.436 and vol. 3 p.356

Al-Muwata (Malik) vol. 2 p. 30

Sunan Al-Bihaqi vol. 7 p. 306

Tafseer Al-Tabari vol.5 p. 9

Nehayat Ibn-Atheer, vol. 2 p. 249

Tafseer Al-Razi, vol. 3 p. 201.

Tareekh Ibn-Khalakan, vol.1 p. 359

Ahkam Al-Quran (Jasas) vol.2 p. 178

Muhazirat Raqib, vol. 2 p. 94

Al-Jame Al-Kabeer (Soyuti) vol. 8 p. 293

Fath Al-Bari (Ibn-Hajar) vol. 9 p. 141

Sunan Al-Baihaqi, vol. 7 p. 206 and Sahih Muslim, vol.1 p. 395

Al-dor Al-Manthoor, vol. 2 p. 140, following he verse of Muta.

Sharh Al-Tajreed (Qushchi), subject of Imamat, p. 484

For more information, refer to the following:

Masnad Ahmad, vol. 3 p. 356, 363.

Al-bayab wal- Tabyeen (Jahiz), vol.2 p. 223

Ahkam Al-Quran (Jasas) vol. 1 p. 342

Tafseer Al-Qurtubi, vol. 2 p. 370.

Al-Mabsoot (Sarakhsi Hanafi), kitab Al-hajj, Bab AL-Quran.

Zad Al-Ma'ad (Ibn Qayem) vol. 1 p. 444

Kanz Al-Amal, vol. 8 p. 293

Masnad Abi Dawud Al-tayalesy, p. 247

Tareekh al- Tabari, vol. 5 p. 32

Al-Mustabeen (Tabari)

Tafseer Razi vol. 3 p. 200-202

Tafseer Abu Hayyan vol. 3 p. 218

(Mominun: 5-6)

Al-dor Al-Manthoor, vol. 2 p. 140-141 following the verse of Muta.

Wasa'il Al-Shia vol. 14, Kitab Al-Nikah, bab Al-Muta, 1st bab, p. 436


