Question 20 : Why Do the Shias Kiss the Doors and Walls of Their Holy Shrines Whislt Paying a Visit To Them?
============================================================================================================

**ANSWER:**

Seeking blessings from the beloved servants of God is not considered an
innovation by any group of Muslims, on the contrary, this tradition can
be traced down back in History right from the time of the Holy Prophet
and his companions.

In fact, not only did the Holy Prophet and his companions practice this
recommended act, but also the previous prophets visited shrines and
sought blessings from them. Let us now look at the evidences to the
validity in seeking blessings from the saints of God from the view-
point of both Quran and Sunnah.

In the Holy Quran, when relating about Prophet yusuf and his integrity,
states that when he introduced himself to his brothers and forgave them
for their wrongdoings, he said:

"Take this my shirt and cast it onto my father's face; he will gain
back his eyesight."

The Holy Quran then continues to say:

"So when the bearer of good news came, he cast it on his face, hence
forthwith, he regained his eyesight.."

The significance of this verse of the Holy Quran clearly substantiates
the seeking blessings of Prophet Yaqub by using the sacred attire of
another prophet Yusuf. (p) Moreover, it is through the shirt of prophet
yusuf that restored the vision of Prophet Yaqub (p). Hence, does it
justify to proclaim that the behavior of these two honorable prophets
was not in the framework of unity and veneration to God?

2. It is significant to point out the fact that the Holy prophet of
Islam, whilst circumambulation of the holy Ka'aba used to touch and kiss
the black stone.

Al-Bukhari in his Sahih said:

" A man asked Abdullah bin Omar about the touching of the black stone",
to which he replied:

"I saw God's messenger (p) touching and kissing it."

If this touching and kissing was regarded as polytheism, then the
honorable Prophet (who was the caller to monotheism) would never have
performed such an action.

3. In the authentic books of narrations and in the course of History
and tradition, there are many narrations pertaining to the seeking of
blessings of the companions of the Holy Prophet using the various
belongings of the Holy Prophet such as his clothes, water for ablution,
water pot, etc, which when we refer to them, we shall be removed from
any speck of doubt and will be convinced that such behaviour is
considered lawful and recommended.

The traditions that mention this concept are more than can be mentioned
however, we shall point to a few of them;

a. Al-Bukhari in his Sahih described in a lengthy tradition that some
of the characteristics of both the Holy Prophet and his companions
related that "Whenever the Prophet performed the ablution, the
companions would be closely gathered around."

b. Ibn Hijr said:

"The children were brought to the Holy prophet (p) for them to get
blessed with his prayer."

c. Muhammed Taher Makki said:

"It was narrated from Om-thabet that, "The honorable Prophet (p)
visited me and drank from the opening of a water-skin (Large leather
bottle) that was hanging, I got up and cut that part."

Then heard:

"This narration was transmitted by Tirmidhi who said: it is a correct
tradition in the book of 'Riyaz Al-Saleheen'" adding that: "Om-Thabet
cut the opening part of the water skin in order to keep the place of the
Prophet's mouth to get his blessings and also the companions use to
drink from the place where the prophet drank."

"The servants of Madina used to bring pots of water during the time of
morning prayers towards the Holy prophet; The Holy prophet would immerse
his blessed hand in each of these pots, some times the weather would be
chilling cold, in spite of which, He would still immerse his hand."

Thus in this way, the evidence for the permissibility of blessing
seeking with the beloved and chosen servants of Allah became quite
apparent; and the ones who accuse the Shia because of this practice
considering it to be tantamount to polytheism, have not yet analyzed the
meaning of monotheism or polytheism because the latter is to consider
another being as God or to attribute Godly actions to it to the point of
considering him as independent regarding the essence of existence and
affectivity, whereas the Shia consider the things related to the chosen
servants of Allah only a creation of Allah Himself and fully dependent
on Him for their existence and their actions.

The Shia preferred blessings towards these pioneers and leaders of
God's religion only for the purpose of according their respect and
sincere devotion to them.

If at all the Shia, when visiting the sacred precinct of the Holy
Prophet and his household, tend to kiss the shrine or touch the doors
and walls, it is only because they show their reverence to the honorable
Prophet and his household; and this is but a human emotion that becomes
manifested in them during the act.

(Yusuf:93)
(Yusuf:96)

Sahih Al-Bukhari, vol.2 Kitab al-Hajj, Bab Taqbeel Al-Hajar, p.
151-152, printed in Egypt.

Sahih Al-Bukhari, vol.3 Bab Ma Yajoosi Min Al-Shuroot Fi Al-Islam, Bab
Al-Shuroot Fi Al-Jihad wal Musalaha, p. 195.

Al-Esabah, vol.1, Khutubat Al-Kitab, p.7 printed in Egypt.

Tabaruk Al-Sahabah, (Muahmmed Tahir Al-Makki), 1st chapter, p.29,
translated by Ansari.

Sahih Muslim, vol.7 Kitab Al-fazael, Bab Qurb Al-Nabi (p) Min al-Nas wa
Tabarukihim behi, p.79

For more information, refer to the following:


**Question 21 : According to the Islamic point of view, is religion
supposed to be regarded separate from politics?**

**ANSWER:**

Before we begin answering this question, it is befitting to clarify the
meaning of 'politics' in order to discover the relation between religion
and politics. There are two meanings for the phrase 'Politics':

Taking it to be the meaning of 'dissimulation or deception and using
any means for achieving the goal.' (a goal justifying the means)

It is quite obvious that such a meaning other than not being the real
one is not in accordance with religion.

Taking the term 'politics' to mean the managementof the affairs of a
society as a whole through the correct Islamic principles in various
fields is can be more precise.

Politics, in the meaning stated above, which is the management of the
Muslim affairs according to the Holy Quran and the tradition of the holy
Prophet, is part and parcel of religion and can never be considered
separate from it.

Now let us remind ourselves of some of the evidences for the
concordance of religion with politics and the necessity of establishing
a government.

The most substantial proof for this is the fact that the Holy prophet
himself during the challenging period he had to face while propagating
the message of Islam, had to go through a great deal of hassle and face
a lot of ups and downs. It was through the speech and action that when
we analyze, becomes crystal clear to us that the Holy Prophet worked
effortlessly right from the beginning in order to spread the mission of
God, and due to which he established a strong government based on the
conviction in God. Such a government it was that it established all the
plans for the future set up of Islam and laid a foundation for it.

Here, let us point to some of the examples that demonstrate the
ingenuity and strategy of the holy prophet (p).

The Prophet, Founder of The Islamic Government:

When God revealed that the message of Islam should be propagated, he
engaged in various ways that constituted the struggle and guidance, not
to mention the gathering of Muslim forces. In this way, he would meet
the different groups who came from close and distant areas to visit the
ka'aba and would invite them to Islam. He also had negotiations with two
certain groups from Madina at 'Aqabah' where he concluded the agreement
whereby the Holy Prophet was invited to their city and was offered
protection by them.

Thus, the initial steps of the Holy Prophet's policy in an effort to
establish the Islamic government, was undertaken successfully.

After migrating to the city of Madina, the Holy prophet (p) worked hard
for the organization of a strong army; an army that participated in a
number of eighty-two battles during the time of propagating the message
of Islam had achieved glorious victories, which removed all the hurdles
in the way to the establishment of the Islamic government.

After the settlement of the Islamic government in Madina, the Holy
Prophet, by sending envoys and letters of Invitation established
relations with all the powerful and socio-political pivots of his time,
in addition, he also made economical, political and military agreements
with many of the leaders from different groups of people. The history of
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet records the details of the letters sent
by the Holy prophet to 'khosroe', the Iranian king, 'Caesar', the Roman
emperor, 'Mokowkas', the Egyptian sultan, 'Negus', the Abyssinian ruler
and other rulers during the time of the Holy prophet. Some of the
researchers have accumulated most of the letters that have been
mentioned into separate pamphlets.

The messenger of Allah appointed leaders from different tribes and
cities for the purpose of achieving the objective of Islam and
concordance of the pillars of the Islamic government. For example, the
Holy prophet sent Rafaah bin Zaid as his representative to his tribe and
wrote a letter:

"In the name of Allah the beneficent the Most merciful,
(This is a letter) from Muhammed, God's messenger (p) for 'Rafaah bin
Zaid', whom I have sent him to all of his people and those who joined
hands with them to accepting his call, to invite them towards Allah and
His messenger, so whosoever accepted it, is of Allah and the Messenger's
party and whoever rejected, has a respite for two months."

By taking into consideration these proceedings of the Holy prophet to
spread the word of God, there is no doubt left to the fact that the Holy
prophet, right from the very beginning of his appointment of
prophethood, worked for the establishment of a strong government in
order to achieve an Islamic government with implementing the Islamic
rules in a world-wide basis, dealing with all the aspects of life in the
human society.

Therefore, the question arises here that are such actions such as
concluding treaties with powerful groups and tribes, establishing a
strong army, sending envoys to different countries, advising the rulers
and kings to accept Islam and warning them against the hellfire through
sending letters to them, sending governors and commanders to close and
distant cities and areas, among other such works, regarded other than
politics which means the management and running of the society and its
affairs on the whole?

Apart from the prophet's history of his political activities, the
practice of the rightly guided caliphs and especially the method adopted
by the commander of the faithful, Ali Ibn Abi talib, accepted by both
the Sunni and the Shia, at the time of his caliphate, the government
established by him testifies the concordance of religion with
politics.

The scholars of both the Islamic sects have brought forth broad
evidences of the Holy Quran, and the prophet's tradition proving the
necessity for a government and a management of the society's affairs.
Let us cite some examples to prove this fact;

Abul-Hassan Al-Mawardi in his book, 'Al-Ahkam Al- sultaniah' says:

"The imamate and government are put to replace and continue prophethood
in order to protect the religion, politics and management of the worldly
affairs; and the establishment of the government by the qualified,
according to the agreement of all Muslims, is obligatory."

The above-mentioned Islamic scholar, who is one of the renowned
scholars of the Ahl-Sunnah, justifies this point according to two
logical evidences: Logical proof.

Legal proof.

Regarding the logical proof, he writes the following:

"Due to the fact that the nature of the wise is to follow a leader who
prevents the nation from opposing each other and separation from each
other, the result of which creates disunity between them when involved
in a dispute. Hence, if we lacked such rulers in the management of the
society, the people would be scattered and confused and will loose their
efficiency."

As for the legal evidence, he states:

"However, the legal evidence for entrusting the affairs to the guardian
and the leader is present in religion, for the Exalted and Glorious Lord
says in His divine book that:

"O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Prophet and those in
authority from among you."

Thus, God has made it obligatory for us to have obedience towards the
guardians, making them the leaders over us."

Sheikh Sadooq narrated from Fazl bin Shathan from Imam Ali bin Musa,
the necessity for the establishment of an Islamic government that is
included in this long narration to which we shall mention a part of
it:

"We cannot find a group or nation that can live and persevere without
having a ruler or a chief that are needed in the affairs concerning this
world and those relating to the religious affairs too. Therefore, it is
far from God's wisdom to neglect what the people need and cannot
withstand without. Thus the people fight their enemies with their
leader's consent and according to his command, divide the spoils of war,
and perform Friday and congregational prayers, and it is the ruler who
prevents the oppressors from (oppressing) the oppressed."

Of course the explanation of all the narrations and analyzing of
statements by various Islamic jurisprudents from their jurisprudential
view is a tedious task and far from possible in this brief writing
requiring a whole volume to elucidate it.

When studying Islamic jurisprudence, it becomes clear that a large part
of these religious laws cannot be achieved without the establishment of
a powerful government.

Islam calls for struggle, defense, litigation of the oppressor,
protection of the oppressed, executing legal punishments, enjoining the
good and forbidding the unlawful in a broad framework, establishment of
a codified financial system and guarding the unity of the Islamic
society. It is evident that the mentioned goalcannot be achieved without
the enjoyment of a powerful system and a harmonious government due to
the fact that the sacredness of the religious laws and defense of the
sanctuary of Islam needs an organized army, and the formation of such a
powerful army needs the establishment of a powerful government based on
Islamic values.

Furthermore, the executions of punishments on account of the
obligations that are set, the preventing of sins, taking the rights of
the oppressed from the oppressors among other cases mentioned, will be
rendered impossible without an organized system and a powerful and
concordant organization which would otherwise cause chaos and
disturbance.

Although the evidences for the necessity of establishing a government
in Islam is not limited to what has been already explained, however it
becomes clear that not only is religion separate from politics, but also
the establishment of an Islamic government based on the system of values
of this illuminated religion of Islam is indispensable that we cannot
afford to refrain and it is a obligation for all the Islamic societies
around the world.

Seerat Ibn Hisham, vol.1 p.431 subject of Al-Aqabah Al-Ula, 2nd print
in Egypt.

Such as 'Al-Wataeq Al-seyasiyyah' (Muhammed Hameedallah); and 'Makatib
Al-Rasool' (Ali Ahmadi)

Makatib Al- Rasool, vol1 p. 144.

Al-Ahkam Al-Sunnatiyyah (Al- Mawardi), 1st chapter, p.5 1st print in
Egypt.

same as the above.

Al-Ahkam Al-Sunnatiyyah, 1st chapter, p.5, 1st print in Egypt.

Ilal Al-Sharayit, Bab 182, narration 9, p.253.


