Question 22 : Why Do the Shia Regard the Offspring's of Ali Bin Abi Talib (hassan and Hussein) To Be the Offsprings of the Holy Prophet?
========================================================================================================================================

**ANSWER:**

When studying the books of various commentaries, history and
narrations, it becomes clear that such a belief is not exclusive for
only the Shia, rather it can be said that all the Muslim researchers of
the different Islamic groups have agreed upon this matter.

At this point, let us mention evidences that clarify this matter by
referring to the holy Quran, different narrations and the speech of
well-known interpreters.

Basically, the Holy Quran considers the consanguineous children of a
person as his own children. The children born of ones children (either
son or daughter) are also considered as ones children.

From the Quranic point of view and the tradition, there are many
evidences proving this fact, some of which are as follows:

The Holy Quran, at the end of the following verse considers Esa (p) of
the children of P. Ebrahim whilst H. Esa is the son of Maryam (p) and is
related to H. Ebrahim through the mother:

"And we gave him Ishaaq and Yaqub; each did we guide, and Nuh did we
guide before and of his descendents, Dawood and Sulaiman and Ayyub and
Yusuf and Haroon; and thus we reward those who do good (to others) and
Zechariah and Yahya and Esa"

The Muslim scholars consider this verse as clear evidence that Imam
Hasan (p) and Imam Hussein (p) are the offsprings of the holy Prophet
(p). Yet in other instances, we look up at the following examples in the
Holy Quran:


**Question 23 : Why do the Shias consider caliphate to be through the
appointment of God?**

**ANSWER:**

It is evident that the sacred religion of Islam is a universal and
eternal religion, and as long as the honorable Prophet was alive, the
leadership of the person after him is assigned only to the Prophet;
after him it would be assigned to the best person of the nation.

The point noteworthy here is whether the position of leadership afthe
honorable prophet is an appointed one (according to the command of the
Lord of the worlds and the statement of the messenger of Allah) or is it
an elected one, to answer this, there exist two views worthy to
consider:

The Shia believe that the position of leadership is an appointed one
and that the successor of the Prophet must be appointed by God alone;
while the Ahl-sunnah believe that it should be an elected one and it is
up to the nation to elect a person after the Holy prophet to manage the
affairs of the states.

The Social Consideration Testify That The Caliphate Should Be
Appointed.

The Shia scholars have expressed many evidences in their books of
ideology stating the necessity for the position of caliphate to be an
appointed one. However, the only thing that can be considered to prove
our point is by analyzing the conditions dominating over, during the
time of the messenger, which clearly certifies the correctness of the
view of Shias.

When studying the internal and foreign policies of Islam during the
time of the Holy prophet, one would quickly realize that the successor
appointed by the Holy prophet had to be done by Allah through the Holy
prophet, due to the fact that there was a bi-lateral danger considering
the political condition (the Roman empire, the Iranian kingship and the
hypocrites.) that was continuously threatening the Muslim society of
defeat and destruction. Moreover, the nation's interests made it
necessary for the prophet to appoint a political leader who will unite
the whole nation in a unified raw against the external army and in this
way, remove the ground for the enemy's penetration and domination- which
were aided by the internal conflicts.

**Explanation:**

On the one hand, there was danger lurking from the Roman empire which
was seated in part of the Northern peninsula and the Holy prophet seemed
to worry of this danger to the last moments of his sacred life.

The first military collision with the roman Christian army was in the
eighth year of Hijra in Palestine. This clash lead to the death of three
Muslim commanders namely, 'Ja'afer Al-Tayyar', 'Zaid bin Harith' and
'Abdullah bin Rawaha' and terminated with a bitter defeat of the Muslim
army.

This retreat of the Muslim army before the infidels, caused the daring
of Cezar's army; and there was danger of attack at any moment to the
Islamic centre. Therefore, the holy Prophet moved with a fully equipped
army that was very costly, towards the borders of Syria around the ninth
of Hijrat. This he did because he wanted to personally command any kind
of military encounter faced. The toil and trouble the Muslims had to
undergo in this journey was compensated for, and proved to be
constructive for the Muslim army which was able to recover its former
dignity and thereby renew its political life.

The second adversary of Islam was the king of Iran 'Chosroe' who when
read the Prophet's letter of invitation, was so much perturbed that he
tore the letter disrespectfully and expelled the messenger's slave and
even wrote the governor of Yemen to arrest the Holy prophet if not kill
him.

Although the king of Iran 'Chosroe Parviz' died at the time as the Holy
prophet, however, the subject of independence of yemen-, which was the
colony of Iran, was not far from their perspective and the arrogance of
the Iranian politics never allowed the tolerance of the existence of
such a power.

The danger lurking from the third side was the danger from the
hypocrites that was continuously busy causing havoc and disruption
through their hypocrisy among the Muslims. This was to such an extent
that they planned to kill the Holy prophet wanted to assassinate him on
his way from 'Tabuk' to Madina. These were a group that used to be happy
thinking that with the demise of the prophet of Islam, the whole of the
Islamic movement will be terminated and rest will be in peace!

The destructive power of the hypocrites was such that the Holy Quran
mentions in the chapters of Nisa, Maidah, Anfal, Baraat, Ankabut, Ahzab,
Muhammed, Fateh, Mujadilah, Hadeed, Munafiqun and Hashr.

Thus was it possible to think that the holy Prophet did not introduce a
successor to control the religious, political and leadership for the
newly established Islamic society considering all the dangers at lurk,
not to mention the presence of these fierce enemies ambushing the
Islamic state?

As for looking at it from the social point of view, we say that the
Holy prophet , through the introduction of a prominent leader did so in
order to prevent any kind of dispute after him, with the formation of a
firm defensive line ensuring the Islamic unity and preventing it from
any bitter accident; and it was not possible to prevent every group
after the death of the Prophet from having the claim that "The leader
should be from us", except through the introduction and appointment of a
divine leader.

These social calculations guide us towards he correctness and firmness
of the theory of the appointment of the position of leadership to
succeed after the Holy Prophet (p).

The testimony of the statements given by the God's Messenger.

Based on this social ground among other considerations, the Holy
prophet right from the early days of his mission to the last days of his
life, time and again presented the matter concerning the one succeeding
after him, and infact he had already appointed his successor during the
beginning of his sacred mission (in the ceremony that he held for his
relatives on the occasion of announcing his prophecy) and in addition to
this, he also announced it during his last days in life- (when returning
back from Hajjatul wida, his farewell pilgrimage to Mecca in Ghadeer
Khum.), and all along his lifetime, there are three examples of the
mentioned texts which have already been explained in the answer of our
second question accompanied with references from the Islamic scholars
and books of narrations.

Thus by considering the social conditions that we have already
mentioned at the early period of Islam and by referring to the texts of
God's messenger (p) regarding to the introduction and appointment of the
master of the faithful as his successor, it becomes quite obvious that
the position of caliphate is an appointed one and is absolutely
necessary and an unavoidable matter.

Tur: (30)

Depicted from 'Furoogh Abadiyyat' written by ustad Jaafer subhani.


**Question 24 : Is the swearing of other than God considered to be
polytheism?**

**ANSWER:**

The interpretation of the phrases 'Monotheism' and 'Polytheism' should
be looked for, through the refererence of the Quranic verses and the
tradition of the Holy prophet (p), because it is the Holy Quran and the
narration of the Holy prophet that is the best criteria for disguising
the truth from falsehood and likewise, monotheism from polytheism.

Thus, it is worthy to evaluate any concept or behavior that occurs in
us with the reference to the criteria of the logic of revelation and the
lifestyle of the honorable Prophet (p).

Let us look at some of the disicive proofs in order for us to clarify
the permissibility of swearing of other than God, from the viewpoint of
Quran and tradition.

The holy Quran amongst its eternal verses swears by valuable phenomenon
such as 'prophets life', 'humans soul', 'the pen', the manifestation of
writing, the sun, the moon, the stars, day and night, sky and earth,
time, the mountains and the sea, some examples are as follows":


**Question 25 : Does imploring for help through the friends of God
('Tawassul') apply to polytheism or innovation?**

**ANSWER:**

"Tawassul" is the appointing of an intermediate between oneself and God
in order to gain proximity to God. Ibn Manzur in 'Lesan Al-Arab'said:

"He made 'tawassul' with so and so, meaning that he gained proximity to
Allah by means of according respect to the beloved servant's lofty
status, of that which was of his concern."

The Holy Quran says:

"O you who believe, be careful of (your duty towards) Allah and seek
means of nearness to Him and strive hard in His way so that you may be
successful."

Jawhari in 'Sahah Al-Loqah' defines 'Waseelah' as such that:

'Al-Waseelah is the means by which we seek proximity to another."

Therefore, that precious being through whom we tend to seek proximity
can also sometimes be our own good deeds and sincere worship to the Lord
that we can use as a strong means to bring us in close proximity to the
Lord of the Worlds, and other times it could also be through a revered
person who enjoys exceptional esteem and a high status before the
Exalted and Glorious Lord.

Different Sections of tawassul.

'Tawassul' can be divided into three sections:

'Tawassul' through the good deeds, as Jalal Al-deen Al-Soyuti narrated
the following holy verse that:

"And seek means of nearness to Him"

Qutadah said regarding the verse that:

" By obedience to God and performing a deed that is pleasing to Allah
will he then gain proximity with Him."

'Tawassul' through the sincere supplications of the pious slaves of
Allah as the Holy Quran speaks about Yusuf's brothers:

"They said: O our father! Ask forgiveness for us for the faults that we
have committed for surely we are sinners. He said: I shall ask
forgiveness for you from my Lord; surely he is the forgiving the
Merciful."

When pondering over the aforementioned verse, it becomes clearly
evident that the sons of Yaqub made 'tawassul' through their prayers and
amnesty; and considered it as their means to attain salvation. Prophet
yusuf at this incident, did not object to their 'tawassul' and promised
them that he would pray for them and ask for the recompence of their
deeds.

'Tawassul' through the highly spiritual and respected personalities,
who have a special status of dignity before God, for the purpose of
gaining proximity to Him.

This kind of 'tawassul' was proficient and accepted right from the
early period of Islam by the companions of the prophet.

At this point, let us refer to the concept deriving benefit from
various traditions that show the practice of the companions of the
prophet and the leaders of the Islamic world.

Ahmad bin hanbal in his 'Masnad' narrated from uthman bin haneef that:
"A blind man came to the honorable prophet of Islam and said:

"Request God to cure me."

The prophet hearing this, replied,

"If you wish, I can make my prayer right now and if you desire, I can
even postpone it and make it later which is better."

The blind man insisted,

"Do pray for me."


The prophet (p) ordered him to make ablution and do so accurately; then
to pray two units, and then make supplication that:

"O my Lord, I ask from Thee, and through the means of Muhammed, the
prophet of mercy, I come towards you. O Muhammed, I attend to my lord
through you, that my need be fulfilled. O God, make him my
interceder."

The authenticity of this narration is accepted by all the narrators
such that Hakeem Al-Nishaboori in his 'Mustadrak' after trathis
narration, described it as 'Sahih-sound'. Ibn Majah too, narrating from
Abu-'Isha'q said:

"This is indeed a correct narration,"

Tirmidhi in the book of 'Abwab Al-adeyah' approved the soundness of
this narration, Muhammed Naseeb Al-Rufaee in his book 'Al-Tawassul Ela
Haqeeqat Al-Tawassul' said:

"There is no doubt that this narration is sound and is unanimously
accepted.. and it was proven in this narration that the blind man
recovered his eye-sight through the prayer of the messenger."

This narration makes it apparent that 'tawassul' by the honorable
prophet of Islam for the purpose of fulfillment of a need through his
asking, is permissible. Moreover, the Prophet (p) ordered the blind man
to pray in that specific way, and stated that by presenting the prophet
as a means between him and God, he should make his request from God; and
this states the actual meaning of 'Tawassul' through the close friends
of Allah and those who are very beloved in His eyes.

Abu Abdullah Bukhari in his 'Sahih' said:

"Whenever there was a draught, Omar bin Al-Khattab would request to God
for rain through the prayers of Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib-the prophet's
uncle, and would say:

"O God, in the life time of the prophet, we used to make 'Tawassul'
through him and you would descend the rain of mercy upon us, now we make
'tawassul' through your prophet's uncle so that you may satiate us with
rain," and they would be satiated!

'Tawassul' by the friends of God was so prevalent that the Muslims,
during the early period of Islam, would introduce the prophet as their
means for 'tawassul' in their poems.

For example, Sawad bin Qareb composed a poem where he said the
following:

"I bear witness that there is no God but Allah and you are the reliant
one as regards all the secrets, and I bear witness that you- O son of
the pure and the honored- among other prophets are the closest means
towards God."

Although the Prophet (p) heard this poem being recited from Sawad bin
Qareb, he neither stopped him from reciting the verse in praise of him
nor did he accuse him of polytheism and innovation.

Shafe-ee pointed out regarding this, in the following two verses:

"The prophet's household are my means towards God and I anticipate
through them, to receive my book of deeds in my right hand."

Although there are many narrations quoting the permissibility of
'tawassul' through God's chosen servants, however the mentioned
narrations are enough for the clarification the matter regarding
'tawassul' and its desirability from the view of the prophet's tradition
and of course the practice of the companions of the prophet and the
great Islamic scholars. Hence, there is no need for further
discussion.

Thus, the ambiguity of those claiming that 'tawassul' through the
beloved ones of God is nothing but polytheism and innovation, is already
substantiated.

Lisan Al-Arab, vol.11 p. 724 (Maidah: 35)

Al-dor Al-Manthoor vol.2, p. 280 printed in Beirut, following the
mentioned verse. (Yusuf: 97-98)

Masnad Ahmad bin hanbal, vol.4 p. 138, section of narrations othman bin
Haneef; 'Al-Mustadrak' for Hakeem, vol.1, Kitab Salat Al-tatawo, ptinted
in Beirut, p. 313, Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 1, p. 441, printed by Dar Ehya
Al-Kutub Al-arabiyah; 'Al-Taj' vol. 1, p. 286 Al-Jame-a Al-Sagheer' for
Soyuti, p. 59; Al-tawassul wal-waseelah, (Ibne-taymeyah) p. 98, printed
in Beirut.


Al-tawassul Ela Haqeeqat Al-tawassul, p. 158 1st print, Beirut Sahih
Al-Bukhari, vol. 2 Kitab Al-Jumah, Bab Al-Estesqa, p. 27 printed in
Egypt.

Al-dor Al-Saneyah (Sayyid Ahmad bin Zaini Dahlan) p. 29, depicted from
Tabarani.

Al-Sawaeq Al-Muhreqah (Ibn Hajar Al-asqalani) p. 178, printed in
Cairo.


