Question 22 : Why Do the Shia Regard the Offspring's of Ali Bin Abi Talib (hassan and Hussein) To Be the Offsprings of the Holy Prophet? Question 26 : Is the Celebration of the Birthdays of the Chosen Servants of Allah Regarded To Be an Innovation Or Polytheism?
======================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

**ANSWER:**

Although the holding of memory of the pious servants of God such as
celebrating their anniversaries and birthdays are accepted by the
prudent, however, just in order to remove any trace of doubt left in
this regard, we shall introduce the proofs to its admissibility.

Holding ceremonies is a sign portraying affection and love:

The Holy Quran invites the believers to love the prophet and his
household:

"Say, I do not ask of you any favor but love for my near relatives"

It is quite obvious that holding the ceremonies in the honor of God's
saints is a manifestation of the love of the people towards them, and is
also acknowledged by the Holy Quran.

Holding ceremonies in the glorification of the prophet:

The Holy Quran considers the glorification to the position of the
prophet in addition to supporting him as a decisive factor for
salvation:

"So those who believe in him, and follow the light that has been sent
down, these are the ones who are the successful."

In relation to the mentioned verse, it is clearly evident that honoring
the prophet is a recommended act according to the Islamic point of view.
The holding of ceremonies in the memory of the prophet and thereby
glorifying his position, gratifies God because this verse explains that
there are four characteristics for the successful:


**Question 27 : Why do the Shias cut short the five daily prayers
joining them to three times a day?**

**ANSWER:**

Firstly, in an effort to clarify the subject to this discussion, it is
worthy to mention the view that the jurisprudents hold in this regard.

All the Islamic sects agree that on the day of 'Arafah', one can
perform both the noon as well as the afternoon prayers uninterruptedly
during noontime. Also in 'Muzdalifah', it is permissible to perform both
the 'Maghrib' and the 'Isha' prayer at the time of 'Isha'

The 'Hanafi' claim that: joining of the noon and afternoon prayer, and
that of 'Maghrib' and Isha is only permissible in the two cases of
'Arafah' and 'Muzdalifah' and ought not to occur at any other
instance.

The 'Hanbali', Maliki and Shafa-ee say: The joining of the noon and
afternoon prayer or the 'Maghrib' and Isha one, at a special situation
in addition to the two mentioned cases and whilst traveling becomes
permissible. Some of these groups consider it permissible to join the
prayers when necessary such as sickness or fear of an enemy at lurk.

The Shia believe that each of the noon as well as the afternoon, and
the 'Maghrib' and the Isha prayers, have a 'special time' and a 'joined
time'.

The special time of the noon prayer begins from mid-day till the time
when the four units of prayers have been recited and this is a limited
period in which only the noon prayer can be performed.

The special time for the afternoon prayer is the time starting from
that particular moment until sunset, only considering up to the period
of performance of the afternoon prayer.

The joint time that is between the two prayers of the noon and
afternoon, starting from the end of the special time noon prayer to the
commencing of the special time of the afternoon prayer.

The statement of the Shias to this regard is that between any time of
the joined period, one can perform both the noon and the afternoon
prayer jointly and without any interruption. However the Sunnis believe
that from the beginning of the legal noon (mid-day) up to the time when
the shadow of everything is equal to its length, is the specific time
for the noon prayer and during that time, one should not pray the
afternoon prayer, but after this time has elapsed to the time of sunset,
it becomes exclusive for the afternoon prayer and one cannot pray the
noon prayer during this interval.

The specific time for the 'Maghrib'prayer is from the beginning of the
legal 'Maghrib' time until the time that the three units can be
performed.

The special time for Isha prayer is the time starting from that
particular moment up to the time of being able to perform the Isha
prayer, from midnight.

The joined time for the two prayers of 'Maghrib' and Isha is from the
end of the special time of 'Maghrib' prayer and prolongs up to the
beginning of the special time of Isha prayer.

The Shia believe that in the midst of this joined period, one can
perform the 'Maghrib' as well as Isha prayer jointly without any
interruption, however, the Sunnis say that: It ought to be recited from
the beginning of sunset until the fading of the evening twilight that is
exclusive for the 'Maghrib' prayer and 'Isha' should not be recited
during this particular time; and from the time of the fading away of the
evening twilight up to the legal midnight, is exclusive for the Isha
prayer and one cannot perform the 'Maghrib' prayer during this
particular time.

**Result:**

According to the theory of the Shias, after the arrival of the legal
noon, one can perform the noon prayer and immediately after performing
the afternoon prayer or can delay the noon prayer till close to the
beginning of the special time of the afternoon prayer such that he can
finish the noon prayer before the specific time of the afternoon prayer
and perform the afternoon prayer. Thus, to jointly pray the noon and
afternoon prayers is perfectly alright although it is recommended to
perform the noon prayer after 'mid-day' and the after noon prayer when
the shade of things turn out equal to their lengths.

One can also perform the 'Maghrib' prayer when the specific time of
'Maghrib' arrives, and immediately after that, can perform the Isha
prayer, or delay the 'Maghrib' prayer till close to the specific time
for the Isha prayer so as to terminate the 'Maghrib' prayer before the
specific time for Isha prayers, then perform the Isha prayer and in this
way, join the 'Maghrib' and Isha, although it is recommended to perform
the 'Maghrib' prayer after the legal 'Maghrib' time and 'Isha' after the
fading of the evening twilight from the western frontier.

This is the prospect that the Shias have. However, the Sunnis do not
accept it as being permissible to pray the noon and afternoon prayers
together or the 'Maghrib'and Isha for that matter, in the same manner,
and at all times and places. Hence, the subject of discussion lies
whether the joining of two prayers can be performed in the likely manner
just as it is in 'Arafah' and 'Muzdalifah', or not.

All the Muslims agree that the honorable prophet (p) also prayed the
two prayers together and this tradition can be elaborated in two ways:

The Shias state that at the beginning of the time for noon-prayers, one
can perform the afternoon prayer as well after completing to recite the
noon prayer, and likewise, if one recited the 'Maghrib' prayer at its
specific timing, then he can recite his Isha prayer after completing the
'Maghrib', and this does not relate to only particular instances, rather
at all times and places can this be applicable and permissible.

Others claim that: What is meant by this tradition is that the noon
prayer can be performed at the end of it's time and the afternoon prayer
at the beginning of it, just as the 'Maghrib' prayer at its end time and
the Isha, at its specific time.

In an effort to clarify this matter, let us ponder over the traditions
regarding this discussion and prove what is meant by these narrations in
the Shia perspective; i.e., performing both the prayers whilst it ought
to performed at its specific times and not to perform it at the end of
its time and performing the other one at the specific time.

**Narrations:**

Ahmad bin Hanbal leader of the Hanbali sect in his Masnad, narrates the
following from jabir bin Zaid:

"Jabir bin Zaid said:

"I heard Ibn Abbas saying:

"We performed the eight units of (noon and afternoon) prayers together
and also the seven units of ('Maghrib' and 'Isha') prayers
simultaneously. He then added, I asked him:

"O Abal-Shatha, I assume hedelayed the noon and performed the afternoon
prayer earlier and did the same with 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayers."

Abul Shaatha replied:

"I also hold the same opinion as you."

Hence it becomes evident from this narration that the honorable Prophet
joined both noon and afternoon as well as 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayers
without interruption.

Ahmad bin Hanbal narrated form Abdulah bin Shaqeeq the following:

Ibn Abbas gave a short sermon to us after the afternoon prayer until
the time of sunset had reached and the stars had started to appear. The
people called for prayers; amongst them was a man present from the tribe
of bani Tameem who repeated the prayer. Ibn Abbas got perturbed and
said:

"Do you want to teach me the prophet's tradition? I witnessed the
Prophet joining both the noon and afternoon prayers, not to mention that
of 'Maghrib' and 'Isha'

Abdullah said:

" I became dubious regarding this matter and so I decided to visit
Abu-Huraira and asked him about this regard, to which he approved the
speech of ibn Abbas."

In the mentioned tradition, two of the companions of the prophet
'Abdullah bin Abbas' and 'Abu Huraira', testified this reality that the
Holy prophet himself recited the noon and afternoon prayers
simultaneously, and like wise, the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayer, and the
fact that Ibn Abbas followed his practice.

Malik bin Anas leader of the Maliki sect in his book, 'Muwata' has
written the following that:

"God's messenger prayed both the noon and the afternoon prayer as well
as the 'Maghrib' and the 'Isha' prayer without fear from being attacked
or even if he was not traveling."

Malik bin Anas narrated from Ma-ath bin jabal the following: "God's
messenger joined the noon and afternoon prayers and the 'Maghrib' and
'Isha' prayer."

Malik bin Anas from Nafe-a, narrated the following from Abdullah bin
Omar:

"Whenever the prophet seemed too be in a hurry for traversing a path,
he would join the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayers."

Malik bin Anas narrated from Abu-Huraira the following:

"God's messenger used to join the noon and afternoon prayers when
traveling to 'Tabuk."

Malik in 'Al-Muwata' from Nafe-a narrated the following: "Whenever the
leaders joined their prayers by reciting both 'Maghrib' and 'Isha'
together, it happened to be raining, and Abdullah bin omar did the
same."

Malik bin Anas from Ali bin Al-Hussein wrote the following:

"Whenever the Prophet wanted to travel during the day-time, he would
join the noon and afternoon prayers and recite them together and
likewise, when he wanted to travel during the night, he would join the
'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayers and recite them together one after the
other."

Muhammed Al-Zarqani in the explanation of 'al-Muwata' narrated the
following from Abi-Shatha:

"Abdullah bin Abbas in the city of Basra recited the noon and afternoon
prayer together and also the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayer in a manner
that there was no interruption between the two."

Al-Zarqani narrated from Al-Tabarani who narrated from Ibn masood
that:

"The honorable prophet joined the noon and afternoon prayer reciting
them together and also the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha'. He was asked in this
regard as to why he did so, to which he replied:

"So that my nation are not put in toil and hardship."

Muslim bin Hajjaj through Abu Zubair from Saeed bin Jubair who from Ibn
Abbas narrated the following, "The Holy prophet whilst in Madina, joined
the noon and afternoon prayer without fear (of an enemy) or the
intention to travel."

Ibn Abbas, regarding the prophet's intention towards such an act, said
the following:

"Because the prophet didn't want to cause hardship for anybody in his
nation."

Muslim in his 'sahih' from saeed bin Jubair who form Ibn abbas narrated
the following:

"The honorable prophet in Madina joined the noon and afternoon prayer
as well as the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayer without having the fear of
downpour."

Abu-Abdullah Al-Bukhari has allocated one section exclusive to discuss
this particular matter and clarify it. 'Bab Ta'kheer Al-zohr Ela
Al-Asr', and this title in itself is the most evident witness that the
noon prayer can be delayed and both the noon and afternoon prayer at the
time of the afternoon prayer. Al-Bukhari in that very section narrated
to the following tradition that:

"The prophet (p) prayed seven units ('Maghrib'and 'Isha') and eight
units (noon and afternoon prayers) in Madina."

It is quiet clear from this narration that not only can we delay the
noon prayer and that of the afternoon to the time of 'Asr' then pray
both of them together, but also from the context, one can benefit that
by following the holy prophet, one can also delay the 'Maghrib' prayer
and perform it at the time of Isha prayer.

Thus, al-Bukhari in another volume of his 'Sahih' says: "Abdullah bin
Umar, Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari and Abdullah bin-Abbas had narrated:

"The Prophet performed the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayers without any
interruption."

Al-Bukhari, whilst deriving benefit from this Hadith, goes on to quote
that according to this narration, the honorable prophet performed the
'Maghrib'and 'Isha' jointly because it is obvious that the holy prophet
never neglected his prayers, Muslim bin hajjaj in his 'Sahih' writes the
following:

"A man announced the call of prayer near Ibn-Abbas saying 'Al-Salat-get
ready for prayers' Ibn Abbas was quiet and did not respond, the man once
again said the same phrase and once again Ibn Abbas didn't respond. The
man kept on repeating the same phrase until he did so four times. The
fourth time Ibn Abbas said: "Do you want to teach me how to pray? Whilst
you are aware that we join the two prayers and recite it behind the holy
prophet performing it together one after the other."


Muslim narrated:

"The Holy Prophet recited both the prayers together during the time of
his expedition to Tabuk; he joined the Zohr and Asr prayers, and the
'Maghrib'and 'Isha' as well, and recited them one after another.

Saeed bin Jubair commented:

"I asked Ibn Abbas to explain me the reason behind it, to which he
replied: "The prophet wanted his nation not to undergo toil and hardship
and not have any burden in their minds whilst praying."

Muslim Ibn hajjaj spoke after Maath mentioning the fact that:

"We were going along with the Holy prophet during the Battle of tabuk
when the Holy prophet performed both the 'Zohr' and 'Asr' prayers
together not to mention that of 'Maghrib' and 'Isha'.

Malik bin Anas in his book 'Al-Muwata' writes the following:

Ibn Shihab asked Salim bin Abdullah:

"should the noon and afternoon prayers be joined whilst traveling?" He
replied:

"Yes, it is alright to do so; did you not see the prayers of the people
in Arafah?"

It is necessary to mention that the Muslims consider it permissible to
join the Zohr and Asr prayers on the day of Arafah, performing both the
prayers uninterruptedly. Regarding this point, Salim bin Abdullah
said:

"In the same manner that the people join their prayers and recite in
together in the day of Arafah, they can do so at other instances
also."

Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi in his book, 'Kanz Al-Amal' mentioned, Abdullah bin
Omar said:

"The honorable Prophet joined the reciting of the noon and afternoon
prayer as well as 'Maghrib'and 'Isha' whilst still settled in a
particular place and not only when he was travelling."

A man when heard this statement, asked as to why the prophet continued
with this practice even whilst he was not travelling and was at ease. He
answered:

"So that his nation would not have to go through any toil or difficulty
when reciting their prayers."

In the book of 'Kanz Al-Amal' we read the following that:

"Jabir bin Abdullah said:

"The holy prophet prays the noon and afternoon prayer with a single
'Adhan' and two 'Eqamah's."

Once again in 'Kanz Al-Amal' the following narration is mentioned that:
Jabir bin Abdullah said:

"It was the time of sun-set when the honorable prophet was in Mecca and
when he reached the area where they had to pray in straight rows, he
joined one of the rows and prayed both the 'Maghrib' and 'Isha' prayers
together."

In 'KaAl-Amal', the following is narrated from Ibn Abbas: "The holy
prophet whilst residing in Madina, joined the noon and afternoon prayers
and the 'Maghrib'and the 'Isha' prayers whether he was travelling or
not, or i'f there be a downpour. The narrator said:

"I asked Ibn Abbas as to why the Prophet did so, to which he replied
that:

"Due to the fact that the prophet wanted for his nation to be at
ease."

Result:

Considering all the traditions we have already mentioned, we sum up the
clear evidences for the correctness of the explanation regarding the
joining of prayers according to the Shia point of view.


