From the Author
===============

"Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, 0 people of
the House! and to purify you a through purifying." (Sura Ahzab 33:33)
The Lord of the worlds honoured the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) and his
Ahlul Bayt (A.S.) with the robe of infallibility and purity; and thus
never did they waverfrom the right path. We could only achieve salvation
and perfection if we follow the example set by them. They are such
exemplary personalities that they haveno peer on the road of guidance.

However in order to achieve this aim we must refer to'the authoritative
books of the scholars of Islam. So that we can easily understand the
lofty position of this exalted Tamily', and their uncomparable knowledge
and deeds.

The aim of this booklet is to educate the muslim masses about Ahlul
Bayt (A.S.) and specially for the youth who can profit greatly by this
endeavour. Each chapter of this booklet begins with a brief historical
introduction followed by the virtues andexcellences of the exalted
'family'. It must be mentioned that the virtues of Ahlul Bayt Alaihimus
salaam are such that no amount of words could suffice. However If you
cannot draw all the water of thesea. At least obtain enough of it to
quench your thirst. (Persian Couplet). A cue is sufficient for those who
understand. We have attempted to glean from the corpus of ahadith only
those traditions which are considered authentic and reliable. So as to
enable the reader to derive maximum benefits.

It is hoped that the radiance of these divine personalities will light
up our life, and that we may be included among their helpers. May Allah
hasten the reappearance of the last of them, Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.)


