A Short Biography of Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
======================================

Hazrat Imam Mahdi (A.S.) is the twelfth and last of the chain of the
Purified Imams (A.S.) and the divine successors. He was bom at the time
of dawn, on Friday the 15th of Shaban 255 A.H. in the city of Samarrah
(Kamaaluddin vol. 2, Pg. 428, 433 424, 430). His respected father is
Imam Hasan al-Askari (A.S.). His beloved mother is Janab-e-Nargis
Khatoon (R.A.). She was the descendant of the caeser of Rome from her
father's side and from her mother's side she had descended from shamoon
the vicegerant of Hazrat Isa (A.S.) (Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg. 420,
424,).This exalted personality has the same name and kunniyat (agnomen)
as the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.). His titles are Mahdi, Hujjat, Qaem,
Montazer, Sahibuzzaman and Khalaf-e-saleh.

His most famous honourific however is Al-Mahdi (A.S.)(Al Fusoolul
Muhimma Pg.292, Nurul Absaar Pg. 168)Ibn Khallikaan writes; "His
well-known title is Hujjat. The shias know him by the titles, Montazar,
Qaem and Mahdi"(Wafayatui Ayaan vol.4 Pg 176).The great scholar
Mohaddith-e-Noori has collected 182 titles of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) from the
Islamic texts. Each of these titles signify each of his virtuous
qualities(Najm-us-saaqib Pg.

41-98).The tyrant Abbasid rulers were aware of the prophecies of the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.). That the son of Imam Hasan al-Askari (A.S.) by
the name of Mahdi will appear to remove all kinds of corruption and
tyranny. Hence they planned to eliminate the child when he is bom. Due
to this the birth of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) was kept a secret like that of
Hazrat Ibrahim (A.S.). So much so that except for the most trusted of
the shias and his own family, no one knew of the existence of Hazrat
(A.S.). Inspite of this whenever there was an opportunity, Imam Hasan
al-Askari (A.S.) showed his son to his trustworthy followers; that in
future they may follow him. This was in order that the shias may remain
firm upon the right path, and not be led astray.A servant Abu Ghanim
says:"Abu Mohammed (A.S.) has a son whose name is Muhammed." On the
third day of his birth he brought him before his companions and said:
"After me he is your Master of the affair, he is my successor, he is the
same 'Qaem', who is awaited by alt When the earth will be fraught with
injustice and oppression then he will reappear and fill the earth with
justice and righteousness."(Kamaaluddin Vol. 2 Pg. 431) The early years
of his life were spent in the usual way. When he was in his fifth year,
he lost his respected father.(Al Kaft Vol. 1 pg. 503)After this tragic
event the responsibility of guiding the shias was transferred upon him.
At this time, Hazrat (A.S.) possessed all the qualities and the divine
knowledge that was bestowed upon the previous Imams (A.S.), by the
Almighty. In the same way as Hazrat Yahya (A.S.) in his childhood and
Hazrat Isa (A.S.) in his infancy was favoured with the divine office of
Prophethood by Allah.(Quran: sura Maryam, Ayat 12 and 30)Although all
the Imams (A.S.) were holding the divine office of wilayat, the efforts
of the enemies to eliminate the twelfth Imam (A.S.) were maximum.

Hence Imam-e-Zamana (A.S.) was entrusted to ghaibat and being away from
the sight of people, he had to fulfill all the duties of an Imam.It is
said that the concealed life of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is not something
extraordinary. Rather, in the life of so many Prophets (A.S.) and even
Imams (A.S.) it is seen, that they were at some time, in concealment
from the people. The Holy Quran records the concealment of various
prophets (A.S.) like Hazrat Ibrahim (A.S.) (Sura Maryam: 48-49), Hazrat
Musa (A.S.) (Sura Qasas:21-22) and Hazrat Isa (A.S.) (Sura Nisa:
157).The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) and the Imams (A.S.) had pointed out to
the people the imminent occultation of their last proof (Imam Mahdi
A.S). So that no doubt or misunderstanding should remain, regarding this
problem. The occultation (Ghaibat) of the twelfth Imam consists ,of two
phases. One is Ghaibat-e-Sughra (The lesser occultation) and the second
is Ghaibat-e-Kubra (The greater occultation).Imam Jaffar as Sadiq (A.S.)
said:

'There are two occultations for Qaem. One is short and the other
prolonged. In the short occultation only the special shias will know of
his whereabouts. And in the longer occultation only his trustworthy
servants will know where he is" (Al Kafi Vol. 1 Pg. 340. Ghaibat Nomani
Pg.

180)According to the well-known reports, the lesser occultation
(ghaibat-e-sugra) commenced from the year of his Imamat in 260 A.H and
continued for 69 years. Some of the scholars like Shaykh Mufeed and Syed
Mohsin Amin Amili maintain that ghaibat-e-sugra began right from the
time of his birth. (Al Kafi Vol. 1 Pg. 340. Ayan ush shia Vol. 2 Pg.
46)Because, even in those early years, Hazrat (A.S.) was concealed from
the common people. According to this method, the period of
ghaibat-e-sugra comes to seventy four years.During the period of
ghaibat-e-sugra. Imam Mahdi (A.S.) himself appointed his deputies from
among the righteous shias.

Four of them succeeded each other and continued to fulfill the duty of
intermediaries. These four personalities conveyed the questions and
problems to Imam (A.S.) and brought back the Imam's (A.S.) answers for
the people.The first of these deputies was Janab Abu Amroo Usman Bin
Saeed Amri. Before this he was a representative of Imam Hasan al Askari
(A.S.)(Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg. 353) Shaykh Tusi writes:On the fortieth day
the shias were sitting in the company of Imam Hasan al-Askari (A.S.),
when Imam Askari (A.S.) wished that they recognise his Hujyat after
him.....Suddenly a handsome child was brought before them. He resembled
Abu Mohammed (A.S.). Then Imam al-Askari (A.S.) said:"He is your Imam
after me. And my successor upon you. Obey him, and do not go astray
after me (after my death), otherwise your religion shall be destroyed
and you will be annihilated. Know that, after today you shall not see
him, even if you spend your whole life for it. Hence, accept what Usman
tells you, obey his commands and listen to what he says. Because he is
the representative of your Imam and holds the responsibility.

(Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg. 357)After the death of Usman bin Saeed, his pious
son, Muhammad bin Usman succeeded his father upon the post of the
deputyship of Imam-e-Zamana (A.S.) (Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg. 362). Shaikh Tusi
has recorded the letters sent by Imam Hasan al Askari (A.S.) and Imam
Mahdi (A.S.) to Usman bin Saeed and his son Abu Jafar Mohammed ibne
Usman for the shias. These letters consists of commands, prohibitions
and replies to the questions of the shias.(Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg.
356).Mohammed ibne Usman passed away from this world at the end of
Jamadi-ul-Awwal in the year 304 or 305 A.H.(Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg.366)During
the time of his illness, as he laid on the sick-bed, the shias and their
children came and surrounded him. They asked: "If something happens,
whom should we consult instead of you?" He answered, " This Abul Qasim
Husayn ibn Ruh ibne Bahr Nawbakhti is successor. And he is the
intermediery between you and the Master affair (Imam Mahdi a.s.), and
his agent. He is trustworthy and reliable. Consult him, and in case of
important matters, rely upon him. I have been ordered to announce this,
and I have announced it" (Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg.

371-372)Husain Ibn Ruh Nawbakhti was. one of the agents of Muhammed ibn
Usman in Baghdad. He had been working closely with him for a long time.
These agents used to be in contact with the people and when ordered they
handed over the goods to them (Gaibat-e-Tusi Pg. 369/372). Husain ibn
Ruh died in Shaban 326 A.H (Ghaibat-e-Tusi Pg. 387).The last safir was
Abul Hasan Ali Ibn Mohammed Seymoori. He became the deputy of Imam Mahdi
(A.S.) according to the will of Husain ibn Ruh. He died after three
years on the 15th of Shaban 329 A.H,(Ghaibat -e- Tusi Pg. 394)The graves
(tombs) of these four respected deputies (Nawwab al -Arba, as they are
commonly known) are situated in Baghdad(Ghaibat -e- Tusi Pgs. 358, 366.
376, 396).The most sensitive and crucial period of ghaibat-e-sugra was
when Ali Ibn Mohammad died. Because till his death the people were is
contact with Imam-e-Zamana (A.S.) through him. After his death, it was
the commencement of Ghaibat-e-Kubra.Six days before his death, Ali ibn
Mohammed Seymoori received a communication from Imam-e-Zamana (A.S.)
:"...so be prepared, but appoint no one in your place, because from the
day of your death, the period of my major occupation (Gaibatui Kubra)
will begin. Henceforth, no one mil see me, unless and until Allah makes
me appear. My reappearance will take place after a very long time, when
the world will be full of injustice and violence".(Kamaaluddin Vol.2
Pg.516 Ghaibate Tusi Pg.395)Ultimately, the shining sun of the divine
proof went behind the curtain of Ghaibat, completely. And the period of
communication with Hazrat (through Nawab-e-Arba) came to an end. Inspite
of this (his Ghaibat) Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) is the Imam of the time and
Imam of the world.

He is the Divine Proof. Even though his person may be hidden from our
eyes but his commands are clear.Amirul Momineen Ali (A.S.) announced
from his pulpit at Kufa:"Even if the person of the Divine Proof is
hidden while he guides the people, his knowledge and manners will be
clear for them to follow"(Kamaaluddin vol. I Pg.302)It is clear that the
knowledge and practice of Imam Asr (A.S.) is impeccable like the Quran.
As was the sunnat of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.). It is obligatory for
the people of faith (muslims) to act upon the Quran and sunnat, and to
refrain from what they prohibit. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said:"I
leave behind two weighty things among you: The Book of Allah and my
Progeny, my Ahlul Bayt If you adhere to those two you shall not go
astray. And know that these two shall not separate till they meet me at
Hauz (Kauthar)"(Yanabiul Mawaddah Pg. 35)During the period of
Ghaibat-e-Kubra, when it is not possible to establish communication with
Imam-e-Zamana (A.S.) at will, the people have been ordered to follow the
true teachings of the Quran and Ahlul Bayt (A.S.) through the pious and
religious scholars and the just jurists. The people must follow them to
know what obligations they are supposed to fulfill.Imam as-Sadiq
(A.S.):

"And among jurists (Fuqaha) are those who protect their selves (from
sins) guard their religion, defy their carnal desires and are obedient
to their master. It is incumbent upon the people to follow them. Such
characteristics are found only in a few of them (Shias) and not
all".(Tafsir Al Imam Pg. 300)The jurists issue decrees for the people
and explain to them truth about faith. They endeavour to fulfill the
exalted duty of preparing the grounds for the reappearance of their
master, Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.). So that by the coming of Hazrat (A.S.) the
Islamic faith may strengthen and that he may fill the earth with justice
and equity.


