The Earth Will Never Be Devoid of the Divine Proof
==================================================

Amirul Momineen Ali (A.S.) said,"The earth shall never be devoid of the
Divine Proof, He may be apparent and prominent or he may be concealed
and hidden. And it is because of him that the proofs and signs of Allah
are not wasted."(Kamaaluddm Vol.1 Pg. 291)

Imam Jafar as Sadiq (A.S.) said "The (Divine) Proof was existing before
creation (of other things), during creation and after
creation".(Kamaaluddm VoL I, Pg.23J.232) Imam Jafar as Sadiq (A.S.)
said."Because Allah is great and mighty, He has never made the earth
devoid of a just Imam".(Kamaaluddin Vol. 1 Pg.229 and 234) Imam Jafar as
Sadiq (A.S.) said,"Even if two people remain on the earth. One of them
shall be a Hujjat upon the other. And if one of them dies, it will be
the Hujjat that remains".(Kamaaluddin Vol.1 Pg.233) Imam Raza (A.S.)
said,"Certainly, the earth shall never be devoid of one of us.
Imams".(Kamaaluddin VoU Pg.229)

**Necessity Of Recognising the Imam Of The Time**

Usman Al Amri says:"I asked Abu Mohammed Al Hasan bin Ali (A.S.) when I
was in his presence, regarding the saying of his forefathers (A.S.)
that, 'The earth shall never be devoid of Allah's proof upon His
creatures till the day of quiyamat. And certainly one who dies without
recognising the Imam of his time, dies the death of Ignorance".He (A.S.)
said, "This is as true as the bright morning".It was asked to him
(A.S.),"O son of the Prophet (S.A), then who is the Hujjat and the Imam
after you?".He (A.S.) said,"My son, Muhammed. He is the Imam and the
Hujjat after me. One who dies without recognising him, dies the death of
Ignorance".(Kamaaluddin Vol.2 Pg.409, Kifayatul Asar Pg.292)

According to Imam Jafar as Sadiq (A.S.)the death of ignorance is the
death in a deviated and astrayed condition.(Al Kafi Vol.1 Pg.376) The
importance of recognising the Imam of the time is also clear from the
following tradition. When Zurarah asked Imam Jafar as Sadiq (A.S.),
"What should I do if I reach the time of his ghaibat ?".Imam (A.S.)
replied, "Recite this Dua; 'O Allah, make me recognise Your Self.
Certainly if You do not make me recognise Your Self, I will not
recognise Your Messenger. O Allah make me recognise Your Prophet.
Certainly if you do not make me recognise Your Prophet, I will not
recognise Your Hujjat. O Allah ! make me recognise Your Hujjat.
Certainly if You do not make me recognise Your Hujjat I mil go astray in
my religion."(Kamaaluddin Vol.2 Pg.342.343; Ghaibate Nomani Pg.166:Al
Kafi VoU PgJ37)


