Reasons For the Occultation of Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
================================================

1. Free From Allegience Of Every TyrantAmirul Momineen Alt (A.S.)
said,"Certainly', when the Qaem from among us shall arise, he will not
have the allegience of any one upon his neck. It is for this reason that
his birth is secret and his person is in Ghaibat."(Kamaaluddin Vol.1.
Pg.303)It must be mentioned that all of our Imams had to pledge
allegience to every tyrant ruler except for a short period during the
rule of Umar ibne Abdul Aziz. This was because, on the face of it, it
would seem that they are not against the ruler, In this way they could
protect Islam. In the absence of popular support, the Imams were left
alone and thus they entered into an understanding with the rulers. Thus
even Imam Husain (A.S.) for a particular period did not find it
necessary to revolt against the regime of Muawiya.

In this regard Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.) says:"Verily each of my ancestors
had the oath of allegience, upon their necks, of their contemporary
tyrant rulers. But I will reappear at such a time that I will not have
any tyrant's allegience upon my neck."(Ghaibat Tusi Pg.292, Kamaaluddin
VoL2. Pg.485)

2. Test Of The PeopleImam al Kazim (A.S.) said,"My son ! when the fifth
descendant of the seventh of the Imams is not visible to you ! It is
when Allah will test your belief. Ghaibat is inevitable for the Master
of this affair. Till the time when the religion is completely
transformed, and only a few people will have belief in him. My son !
That Ghaibat, It is atrial through which Allah, the Almighty tests His
servants."(Ghaibat-e-Toosi Pg.166 & 337. Al Kafi vol.1 Pg.336.
Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.359 and 360. Kifayatul Asar Pg.264-265)

3. Fear Of The Enemy

Imam Musa al-Kazim (A.S.) said,"The Qaem is the one who will purify the
earth from the enemies of Allah, the High and the Mighty. And he will
fill the earth will justice and equity just as it is filled with
injustice and tyranny. He is the fifth of my descendants. He will go
into occultation due to the fear of his own (life)."(Kamaaluddin vol.2
Pg.361. Kifayatul Asar Pg.265-266)

According to common sense it is necessary for man not to throw away his
precious life without a legitimate aim. Thus, the prophets (A.S.) and
the Imams (A.S.) have taught the people that it is their duty to protect
their life under every circumstance and should never put their life in
danger. Therefore it is the duty of the last of these exalted
personalities to protect himself till the time of his reappearance when
he will establish the new world order.

4. Weakness And Lack Of Co-operation Of The People.Imam Mahdi (A.S.)
said."If our shias; may Allah help them in His obedience; would have
fulfilled their covenant with united hearts then there would have. been
no delay in our meeting, and they would have been blessed with our
visitation at the earliest, along with the recognition of truth and
confirmation of our rights."(Al Ihtejaj vol.2 Pg.602)

**Benefits Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) During His Ghaibat**

Imam Mahdi (A.S.) said, "As for deriving benefit from me in my
occupation, (it) is like deriving benefit from the sun when it hides
behind the clouds."(Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.485. Ghaibat-e-Toosi Pg.292)

Favours Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.) Upon His Shias.

Imam Mahdi (A.S.) says,
"Surely, we do not neglect your condition nor are we forgetful of your
remembrance. Had it not been so, then, terrible calamities would have
struck you and your enemies would have destroyed you."(At Ihtejaj vol.2
Pg.598).


