Awaiting For the Reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
==================================================

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said,

"The best worship is to await for the reappearance."(Kamaaluddin vol.1
Pg.287, Faraidus Simtain vol.2 Pg.335) Amirul Momineen Ali (A.S.) said,
"Await for the reappearance and do not despair of the divine mercy.
Because the best deed in the eyes of Allah, the Great and the Mighty is
to wait for the Reappearance. It is the duty of those who are
believers."(Al Khisaal vol.2 Pg.616)

Imam as-Sajjad (A.S.) said."The greatest success is to wait for the
reappearance"(Al Ihtejaj vol.2 Pg.154. Kamaaluddin vol.1 Pg.320) Imam
Jafar as-Sadiq (A.S.) said,"Those of you who die on this affair (shia
faith) while you are in a condition of awaiting, are like those who has
served the Qaem (A.S.) in his tent."(Ghaibat-e-Nomani Pg.200)

Imam Al-Jawad (A.S.) said,"Certainly the Qaem from among us is the
Mahdi. Awaiting for whom is obligatory during (his) ghaibat and obeying
him is obligatory after his reappearance. And he is the third of my
descendants."(Kamaaluadw vol.2 Pg.377)

Imam as Sadiq (A.S.) said,"One who desires to be among the companions
of the Qaem, must await, adopt piety and behave courteously. If he dies
in such a condition before the advent of Qaem, then his reward will be
similar to the one who attains his era. Hence, congratulations to you
all for your relentless awaiting."(Ghaibat-e-Nomani Pg.200)

**Be Prepared For Being Among The Helpers Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

"0 You who believe! be patient and excel in patience and remain
steadfast and be careful of (your duty to ) Allah, that you may be
successful".(Ale Imran 3:200)

Hazrat Imam Baqir(A.S.) explains the tafseer of this ayat :"Have
patience in fulfilling the religious obligations, Excel in patience in
facing your enemies. And be in contact with your Imam who is
awaited".(Ghaibat-e-Nomani. pg.27, Yanabiul Mawadda pg.421)

**In Service Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

Imam Jafar as Sadio (A.S.) said, "If I am able to reach him, I shall
serve him for my whole life."(Ghaibat-e-Nomani Pg.245)

**Religiousness During The Occultation Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said:"O Ali know that the most strangest of
the people of Imaan and the greatest of them in certainty are those
people who will be in Aakheruzzamaan (the last period of time). They
will not meet the Prophet. And their Imam will be hidden from them. But
they will believe (only) due to black upon white."(Kamaaluddin vol.1
Pg.288) The "black upon white" means the writings on paper. It means
that these people will believe in the Quran and the sunnat as recorded
in the books, even though they may not see their Imam (A.S.).

Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (A.S.) said:

"Certainty, the master of this affair has an occupation. Then those who
are the pious servants of Allah, will hold firmly to their faith".(Al
Kafi vol.1 Pg.335 and 336, Ghaibat-e-Toosi Pg.455. Ghaibat-e-Nomani
Pg.169) Imam Musa al-Kazim (A.S.) said: "Blessed are our followers (the
shiites) who during the time of occupation (Ghaybah) of the Imam of the
Age, identify themselves with our Authority (wilayah) and keep away from
our enemies. They belong to us and we belong to them. They have accepted
our leadership and we are pleased with their adherence. Therefore,
blessed are they. I swear to Allah that they will be with us in our rank
in Paradise".(Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.361. Kifayatul Asar Pg.265-266)

It is related from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (A.S.) that the following dua
must be recited during the time of ghaibat. "O Allah ! O Beneficient ! O
Merciful ! O the knower of the thoughts (of the hearts) ! make my heart
firm upon your religion."(Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.352)


