Longing For Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
=============================

Hazrat Imam Hasan al-Askari (A.S.) said, regarding his son Imam Mahdi
(A.S.) "And know that! Those who are obedient and pious will rush
towards him like the birds head for their nests."(Kamaaluddin vol.2
Pg.448)

**Sorrow And Grief Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

Imam Reza (A.S.) said:"The most pious of believing men and women are
those who are sorrowful for the (time of) flowing water (Imam Mahdi
A.S)" Flowing water indicates that it is a part of the ayat:

"Say ! Have you considered if your water should go down, who is if then
that will bring you flowing water?"(Sura Al Mulk 67 : 30) According to
Imam as-Sadiq (A.S.) "the flowing water" in this Ayat means Hazrat Mahdi
(A.S.). Hence the exegesis of this Ayat is as follows: "Say, if your
Imam (A.S.) goes into ghaibat, who is it that will bring back your Imam
to you. Who, like a gushing spring will teach you what is haraam and
what is halal, and quench you thirst with good tidings (news) of the sky
and the earth."(Refer Kamaaluddin Pg.325-326)

**Weeping For Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

Imam Jafar as Sadiq (A.S.) said:

"Know him ! The one who would be hidden from you in your time until it
would be said, He is dead! He is killed ! He has gone into wilderness.
And the eyes of the believers will be tearful."(Ghaibat-e-Nomani Pg.152.
153)

**Praying For The Early Reappearance Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

Imam Hasan al-Askari (A.S.) said,"By Allah they do not truly wish for
his reappearance, and do not attain salvation. Except those, whom Allah
the High and the Mighty, has made firm upon the sayings of their Imams,
and gave them the tawfeeq (opportunity) to pray for the hastening of the
reappearance."(Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.384)

Imam Mahdi (A.S.) says:

"And pray more for an early reappearance. For certainly, in it, is your
success."(Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.485, Ghaibat-e-Toosi pg.292-293)

**Advent Of Imam Mahdi (A.S.)**

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said,"Even if a single day remains for
quiyamat, Allah will send a man from my Ahlul'Bayt. He will fill the
earth with justice just like it is filled with tyranny."(Sunan Abu
Dawood vol.4 Pg.107)

Dibil Ibne Ali al-Khuzai says:

When I was reciting the Qasida (Panegeric) before my master, Raza
(A.S.), I reached to the following lines." I hope in the advent of my
Imam. Who will rise up with the name of Allah and the divine blessings
will accompany him.He will separate the truth from falsehood (for us)
and he will reward and punish." Imam (A.S.) said to me: ."O Khuzaee !
Ruhul Qudus (the angel) has made you recite these two couplets. Do you
know who this Imam is ? One who will rise ?"

I replied,"No my master, I only know that one of you, Imams will rise
up and clear the earth of all injustise and fill it will equity." Imam
Reza (A.S.) said,"O Dibil after me my son Muhammad shall be the Imam and
after him his son Ali, and after him his son Hasan al Askari, and after
him his son Al-Qaim who shall be the awaited one during the period of
his ghaibat. And when he shall be revealed, all the world shall bow down
to him. Even if a single day remains for this world, Allah the High and
the Mighty shall prolong this day till he will appear and fill the earth
with justice as it has been filled with tyranny. And who knows when it
will come to pass ! I have heard it from my father, (who had heard it)
from his father, and they had heard it from the Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.S.) when he was asked, "O Prophet of Allah (S.A)


