Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

Some Convincing Things about the Hereafter
------------------------------------------

Many things have been written and said about death. But I could not find
anything more effective and convincing than what the Martyr of the
Prayer niche, the God-loving hero, Ayatullah Sayyid Abdul Husain
Dastghaib (q.s.) had once said 25 years ago[^1]and it is well known that
he had full knowledge of Qur’anic verses, traditions and religious
books.

Once during the month of Ramadhan, he delivered a speech in which he had
said that death was the door of life and the first step in attainment of
God’s Mercy. He described *Barzakh* (Purgatory) and its comforts in such
a way that the audience became captivated by it.

Thereafter he also described the tortures of *Barzakh* in such a manner
that people began to tremble due to fear. Consequently after hearing the
quotations from Qur’an and Tradition many people gave up sins and turned
towards good deeds and righteousness.

His Blood Proved More Effective Than His Speech
-----------------------------------------------

May your soul remain ever-happy O’ teacher of morality and O’ leader and
teacher of the faithful! You guided people towards the truth during your
lifetime. You became the means of taking people away from falsehood. But
much more than that, you fulfilled your duty of propagating the truth
through your martyrdom. As this dear friend has written, the blood of
Ayatullah Dastghaib has proved more effective than his sermons.

He constantly said in his speeches and also wrote and published that
“Death is not Extinction; rather it is the beginning of an everlasting
life.” He repeatedly gave good tidings to the family members of martyrs
that the Holy Qur’an has adjudged that your (martyred) relatives are
alive.

***“And do not speak of those who are slain in Allah’s way as dead; nay,
(they are) alive, but you do not perceive. “(2:154)***

Certainly we are the dead in comparison with them because (our life is
perishable and) they have attained the everlasting life after which
there is no death.

The Precious Pearl which could not be Appreciated
-------------------------------------------------

O Martyr of the Prayer niche! May your soul remain ever happy. You have
made this matter clear through your martyrdom. Even two months have not
yet passed since you have left us. But so many of your miracles have
been seen and heard that many people are feeling sorry and restless
because they could not know you as you should have been known. They feel
strongly and ask themselves why they did not take proper benefit of your
graceful life among them?

Here, regarding the discussion about this book and about Hereafter as
well as with reference to your oft-repeated statement that “The martyrs
are forever immortal” we’d like to mention an event which took place on
the seventh day of your martyrdom which has become known to most of the
residents of Shiraz to such an extent that it has also been reported in
the press.

A Strange Request
-----------------

On the day after the 40th day of martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.) of the
year 1402 A.H. in the morning when I went, according of the routine, to
my father’s house. The office secretary came to me and, after Salaam and
inquiries about health etc, and began to talk about the dream of a
Sayyid lady as follows:

“A respectable Sayyid lady whom I know very well and who lives in our
neighbourhood, says, “Last night I saw the late Martyr of the Prayer
niche (q.s.) in my dream. He told me, ‘Some pieces of my flesh are stuck
between bricks in the wall in this street (where the late Ayatullah was
shot). Please recollect those pieces and join them with my body.’”

At first I did not give importance to this news. I heard the discussions
of people in the office and this continued for about two hours.
Thereafter I stepped out along with some of them with the intention of
participating in a program of ‘Fatihakhaani’ (recitation of Qur’an for
gifting the divine rewards to the departed soul).

Per chance, we had to pass through the aforesaid street where my father
was martyred. So when we reached that fateful spot, I suddenly
remembered the aforesaid dream and I told about it to my companions as
it was related to me that morning and said that there was nothing wrong
if we walked looking around. Then suddenly our eyes fell for the first
time on that wall and all of us saw that some pieces of flesh were stuck
in the gaps between bricks at a spot on that wall.

Double Burial
-------------

Two of our companions went forward to collect those pieces of the body
of the Martyr of the Prayer Niche (so they collected them and placed in
a plastic bag safely). The news of this event spread in the city like
wild fire especially due to fact that the 40th day of Imam Husain’s
martyrdom had just passed and there was a total holiday in Shiraz.

During Friday eve, in the Jame Masjid of Shiraz, as usual, and as per
the tradition of the Martyr of the Prayer niche for the last several
years, a Dua Kumail prayer meeting was held and a huge gathering of
mourners heard the event. Then and there it was announced that: This
night at ten o’clock the remaining parts of the martyred Ayatullah will
be buried.

So it was done and several groups of mourners continued their mourning
rituals till late night in the courtyard of the shrine of Ahmed bin Musa
Kazim. Finally, on the day of Arbaeen, with the fresh remembrance of the
burial of the remaining part of the Holy body of Imam Husain (a.s.) the
aforesaid two plastic bags containing the remaining parts of the
Ayatullah’s body were brought and the contents were placed in the foot
side hole dug in the grave of the great martyr.

Two Other Persons also had that Dream
-------------------------------------

In fact, this event was very wonderful and strange. I forgot to mention
that on that very day when the scattered pieces of the Holy body were
retrieved from the bricks of the said wall, a gentleman, who is one of
the sincere persons belonging to the clergy and commands respect and
reliability, told me that last night two other persons including a
relative of the martyr had also seen the same dream.

After hearing this narration, this event assumed much importance in my
opinion. So finally I sent a messenger to the aforesaid Sayyid lady and
requested her to write back to us her full description of the said dream
and also to mention her full name and address along with the names of
her husband and other family members.

So the lady conceded to my request and sent me the accurate and detailed
account, which is presently before me. I seek the consent of the
honourable readers to quote a few parts of the said report so that it
may be preserved as a part of history and be a means of admonition and
guidance for future generations.

The lady writes, “Some particles of my flesh have been left stuck up in
the wall.”

The vision (dream) was, “I was in a big garden. Suddenly I saw Ayatullah
Dastghaib walking ahead of me. I was walking behind him. This was the
middle part of the garden and the Ayatullah had put on a coffee coloured
cloak. He asked me, “Please go and tell the people that some particles
of my flesh have been left in that wall. He repeated these words several
times. So I was extremely astonished when I woke up.”

A Story More Revealing Than a Book
----------------------------------

You yourself may decide what truth this true dream tells. Talking
testimony of a truth, which is more convincing than a whole book of
admonition. The Martyr of the Prayer Niche had mentioned, “Death is not
destruction; rather it is the door for attainment of Divine Mercy.” ‘The
martyrs in the path of God are alive and they are getting provision from
their Lord.

This learned Scholar has, in this book, given detailed description of
events in the world of Barzakh (Purgatory between Death and
Resurrection). Then he has turned towards the return of the soul to
body. All these things are true. The martyr has personally proved this
and announced thus.

Ocean in a Nutshell
-------------------

Despite the limitations of this book, looking towards the contents, we
conclude how nicely the author has encompassed all the conditions of
death and Hereafter. The martyr (r.a.) has, in a very attractive style,
in very appealing and effective words, described the journey to the
Hereafter, which begins, from the moment of death. Then he describes the
kind of death for the righteous and the offender. He has described the
last moments on deathbed in such a way that the reader feels he himself
is on the deathbed.

Thereafter he describes the conditions in Barzakh and quotes at length
verses picturing the pleasing comforts of Paradise in the grave and
thereafter a number of verses and traditions throw ample light on what
happens during the torturous punishments in the grave (Barzakh period).
He also narrates many true events and visions in support of this and
shows what the reader has to pass through.

Thereafter he has presented arguments, verses and traditions concerning
the events preceding Resurrection and the Day of Judgement and has
discussed all this in a very simple style. He has also talked at length
about the bridge (Sirat) and the Balance (Mizan) and the Paradise
(Behisht) and the Hell (Dozakh) and Reward (Sawaab) and Punishment
(Azaab) through several sources.

In short, it can very well be claimed that hundreds of thought provoking
and eye-catching events have been covered like an ocean in a nutshell in
this brief book.

May your soul remain ever happy and pleased, O Ayatullah Martyr of the
Prayer Niche! So also the souls of your eighteen- year-old grandson,
Sayyid Muhammad Taqi Dastghaib and all of your faithful companions may
remain in peace and comfort forever.

Sayyid Muhammad Hashim Dastghaib  
 Shiraz  
 4th February 1981

[^1]: This preface was written on 04/02/1981.


