Death
=====

No Other Source of Knowledge Except Revelation
----------------------------------------------

The root of 'Ma’ad' (Hereafter) is 'Aud' which means to return or to
come back. As on the Day of Resurrection souls will be made to return to
their bodies, it is called Ma’ad.

'Ma’ad' is one of the principles of the Holy religion of Islam and to
have faith in it is absolutely essential or obligatory and it is that
everyone will, after his death, become alive again and would be rewarded
or punished according to ones belief and deeds.

'Ma’ad' which begins with death and then passes through grave and then
Barzakh and then Qiyamat al-Kubra (the great resurrection) and ends with
either Paradise or Hell cannot be comprehended by the apparent senses
and even though the occurring of the original 'Ma’ad' or Resurrection is
proved by logic or brain (the details of which will be discussed later
on), it is impossible for one to ponder in solitude over it and to
understand what will happen after death, and through which stages one
will have to pass.

For understanding this, there is no way except to rely on and take help
from divine revelation because man wherever he is, his power of
understanding cannot cross the limits of his world. For example, it is
impossible for a baby in the womb to get the idea of the outside world
and to fathom its vastness. Similarly it is also beyond his powers to
understand the endlessness of the space and to know about the things
therein.

Likewise, the man who lives in this world like a captive of matter and
nature cannot have the ability to understand the world of angels and
spirits, which is hidden from him. To reach that state will be possible
only after getting freedom from this material world. In short, a man who
is living in this material world, can never be able to know the details
of the world after death, unless he puts faith and trusts in the truths
made known by the Creator of this Universe.

Characteristics of the Hereafter have nothing to do with Intellect
------------------------------------------------------------------

So if anyone says, “It is far from my brain that such and such thing
will happen after death,” then his saying so is absolutely unacceptable
because the conditions and events after death have no relation with the
bodily brain.

Even if all the thinkers and philosophers join together and make
collective efforts to understand the conditions beyond death (in the
other world) through the materials available to them in this earthly
life they can never succeed in their manoeuvrings. So if we do have any
source, it is only those things and those words, which the Holy Prophet
Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.s.) and His Holy Progeny have shown to us. Hence
we also confirm them, as all of those great persons who are Infallible
are those to whom God Almighty, the Lord of the Universe sends
Revelation.

Does a Dead Body Talk?
----------------------

This discussion will prove that the doubts and distrusts expressed by
some senseless people are totally baseless. For example, they say that
the body of a man who has died is just like dust and stone or like dry
wood and so how can it be questioned in a grave? In other words, can
stones talk? If we fill up the mouth of a dead body with something and,
on the next day, open his grave and see we will find that nothing has
gone out of that mouth. (The answer to this question will be given
soon).

Talking is not Limited to the Tongue
------------------------------------

Possibilities and probabilities are essential to intellect. An
intelligent man (having brain) hears a thing and if it is impossible
according to intelligence, he doubts it's being either true or untrue.
But if the one from whom he heard that thing is an infallible person
then the former will at once say that whatever he has said is true.

But if the hearer is unwise and ignorant he would exclaim, “What kind of
talks are these, which we fail to understand!” So not to accept the
words of the infallible would be based on senselessness and foolishness.
Such a fellow is like a quadruped but has two feet whose senses are
limited only to eating, sleeping and intercourse with the opposite sex.

Obviously if it is told to an ox or an ass that an angel appears before
our eyes at the time of death or that there will be a questioning in our
graves, they will not be able to agree because their intelligence is
limited and cannot go far from their bellies and genitals. Only a higher
level of soul can accept such news and matters.

There is no scope here to deal at length and with full details.
Therefore, we mention briefly what has been narrated by Ahlul Bayt
regarding what happens right from the first stage (death) up to the last
one (Resurrection).

Death: The First Station
------------------------

Truth About Death: The dislocation or the breaking of the relationship
between body and soul is called death. Several examples have been quoted
to explain this connection. Some say it is like the relation between a
ship and its captain wherein death snatches away the ship from the
control and authority of the captain. When you say my hand, my leg and
my eye, this means 'I' (my) is something other than the said hand, leg
and eye.

When you say: I walked, it is true that you moved but you walked through
your legs. This shows that 'You' are something other than the limb
called leg. Likewise, you say: I saw, I heard, I said. In all these
three sentences the word 'I' (my) refers to a person and this person is
the same as your soul which becomes manifest through the said scenes and
which has been expressed through the above sentences.

It is the soul that sees and hears but through the eyeballs in the eyes
and the holes in the ears respectively. These eyes and ears are, of
course, the means of seeing and hearing. Soul is a lamp lighted by God's
Might in the dark house of body, which shows its light through eyes,
ears and other organs.

What is Death?
--------------

Death is like shifting of the lamp from one place to another place. For
instance, suppose there is a hut having many holes. If a lamp is placed
in it, its light would be emitted through those holes. But as soon as
that lamp is moved out of that hut it will make the hut dark. Similarly,
so long as the lamp of soul remains in the body it manifests its
existence known through the light, which comes out from limbs like eyes
and ears etc. But as soon as this lamp of soul is removed from the body,
all its manifestations also cease and the body becomes dark. This is
Death. This was just and explanatory example. Otherwise

The Soul Neither Enters the Body nor Gets Out of it
---------------------------------------------------

It must be understood that the relation between the soul and the body is
not by way of Hulool (penetrative migration). It is not like the
entrance of water in a utensil or of air in vacuum. It also cannot be
said that it remains out of body or it goes out of it at the time of
death because soul is essence, not matter. There is no question of its
entering or vacating. The only thing is that its relation with body is
such that it remains fully attentive to the body. Death disconnects this
relation.

It is also obligatory for us to believe that death occurs by the command
of God. The same Power, which had, established this relation in the
womb, at the last moment of the worldly life, disconnects this relation
between the body and soul. Only He is the bestower of life and death.
The Holy Qur’an says,

***“God gives life and only God causes death also. “(39:42)***

Some common people are very angry with Izra'eel (The angel of death).
They do not even like to hear his name. They even condemn him though
they know that these angels do not do anything of their own wish or
authority. They have been employed by the Lord of the Universe and hence
do everything by His order or command.

How the soul is taken
---------------------

How soul is retrieved from body has been narrated in the traditions
about the Me'raj (ascension) of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). In short,
there is a board in front of Izra'eel, which contains names of all the
people. The name of the person whose time for death arrives is removed
from that board and Israel at once takes possession of his or her soul.

It is also possible that names of thousands of people may be wiped out
at one moment whereupon Israel takes the souls of all of them instantly.
This is not astonishing. It is just like a gust of breeze blowing off
thousands of lamps in a split second. All of it is by the power of the
Almighty. Doubtlessly it is Israel who snatches souls but, as a matter
of fact, it is only God Who causes it because it is only His command and
Will.

Who causes death? God, Izra'eel or the angels?
----------------------------------------------

Here comes up a question: Who takes away the soul? It is God or Izra'eel
or the angels? There are three verses about this in the Holy Qur’an. At
one place it says: God causes Death. At another place it is mentioned
that:

***The angel of death takes away the soul. (Surah Sajdah 32:11)***[^1]

On yet another occasion it is mentioned:

***Angels collect the souls. (Surah Nisa 4:97)***[^2]

The fact is that all these statements are true because, the angel of
death and his subordinate angels collect souls as commanded by God
Almighty. Doubtlessly it is just like this: A king, through his army and
its chiefs, conquers a country. It is correct to say that such and such
army won such and such territory. Similarly, it is also correct to
mention that such and such commander captured such and such country.

But in both the statements the fact remains that the country has been
conquered by the king who owns, manages and directs the affairs of his
state through officers and personnel under his command. This example
also is only for making the matter understandable. Otherwise such
examples cannot fully describe and explain the power of the Almighty.

The Lord of the Universe has fixed Some Causes for Death
--------------------------------------------------------

It is agreed that it is only God who takes away life at the time of
death. But you should also remember that God has made this world a world
of causes. He has created causes for death also like falling from roof,
becoming ill or being murdered etc.

Surely all these events become causes of death but the same is not
absolutely essential because it can be also be seen that some people
were seriously ill but they did not die of that illness. Of course when
their lifespan comes to end even a light and ordinary thing can also
become the reason of death and the Lord of the universe takes away his
life. It is also seen that some people die without even the slightest
illness.

Appearance of Izra'eel According to the Deeds of the Dying Person
-----------------------------------------------------------------

A matter pertaining to the angel of death is that when he comes to take
the soul of any person he assumes a face according to the deeds of the
dying person.

It is mentioned in narrations that once Ibrahim (a.s.) asked the angel
of death, “What shape do you assume while fetching the soul of
unbeliever?” The angel replied, “You will not be able to look at that
frightening shape.”

The Friend of God repeated, “I intend to see it.” He saw the angel in
the form of a black man. His hair was standing on its end all over his
body. A foul stench emanated from that frightening figure. His clothes
were dark and flames and smoke leapt out from his mouth and nose.
Ibrahim (a.s.) became unconscious. When he came to sense he said, “Even
if the unbeliever is not given any other punishment, seeing you in this
form is torture enough for him.”

On the other hand the shape in which the angel of death appears before a
believer has been mentioned in a number of traditions.[^3]

Arrival of Angels and Satans at the time of Death
-------------------------------------------------

During the last moments of man's life, angles arrive and stand on his
right side. Likewise the Satans (devils) also approach him and stand on
the left side of the deathbed.[^4] The job of Satans is to deceive and
betray, particularly at the time of death so that, if that person has
any faith, it could be destroyed. The scale of man's luck or misfortune
is his last word and deed.

The way in which he passes his life is the same manner and the state in
which he has died, will be his state when he will be made to rise in
Qiyamat. His wish at the time of his death will be what it was during
his life and so he will die with the same ambitions.

If in your heart there was an aspiration to see the charm of Amirul
Mu’minin (a.s.) you will be able to observe that beauty at the last
moment. But if, God forbid your wish throughout your life was only the
fulfilment of desire and passion then that lust of yours will become
more intense at the time of death. But the one who had perfect faith is
promised by God that He will protect him and Satan will not be able to
gain control over him.

***“Allah confirms those who believe with the sure word in this world's
life and in the hereafter... “(14:27)***

When Abu Zakaria Razi was about to die, those sitting around him asked
him to recite, Laa Ilaaha Illallaah (There is no God except Allah). He
replied, “I will not recite it.” Then he became unconscious. When he
gained sense he said, “Just now a man had come to me who said, 'If you
wish to be lucky and fortunate then say: Isa is the son of God. I said,
'I will not say.' After a number of requests and denials that fellow
said, 'Okay then say: There is no God but Allah.' Yet I said, 'Since you
are asking me to say so I will not.' Suddenly there appeared a weapon,
which killed that fellow. Now I am conscious and am reciting the Kalimah
(formula of faith).” Then he recited the two formulae (Shahaadatain) and
passed away from this world.

Verily, how Satan can subdue a man who had the belief that there is only
one God at the time of his death? Of course the man who had been the
follower of devil throughout his life will be a companion of devil on
his deathbed also.

Comfort and Discomfort at the Time of Death
-------------------------------------------

Much has been mentioned in narrations about comfort and discomfort at
the time of death. In some, it (the trouble or pain) has been compared
with the pain experienced when one's skin is peeled. In some it is said
that the pain of death is much less compared to the revolving of a large
stony door of a castle having nails, in one's eyes.

In yet another narration it is said that the pain of death is like that
experienced when one's body is cut into pieces by scissors or torn with
a saw. So it has come to notice that some dying persons have suffered
pains beyond description, which make the observers tremble.

But, on the other hand, for some persons death has been as pleasing as
smelling a fragrant flower.

***“Those whom the angels cause to die in a good state, saying: Peace be
on you: enter the garden for what you did. “(16:32)***

In some traditions it is mentioned by the infallibles, that for some
people, death is like taking off dirty clothes and putting on a clean
dress. In some other narrations it is compared with liberating the body
from chains and yokes, as if death is like being freed from the
imprisonment of this material world.

Sometimes Discomfort at the Time of Death Redeems Sins
------------------------------------------------------

Discomforts or comforts at the time of death mentioned above do not
represent a hard and fast rule. It is not that a righteous person never
experiences trouble at death time. There are many a faithful whose souls
depart easily. Also there are some good and faithful people who get
God's mercy whereby their sins are wiped out through the death pains and
discomforts.

This is because though one is faithful, he must also leave the world in
a clean state (after removal of the blemishes of sins) so that he may be
clean in the Hereafter also and may become eligible for divine grace
right from the first stage of grave. In the case of infidels the death
time pain is the starting point of his post-mortem punishments and
tortures.

***“But how will it be when the angels cause them to die smiting their
backs. “(47:27)***

Comfort on Deathbed, Reward of Good Deeds of the Dying Disbeliever
------------------------------------------------------------------

It is also sometimes seen that infidels and sinners die easily. It is so
because they had some good deeds in his life? His soul departs
comfortably so that this account may be cleared in this world (he never
believed in the post-mortem accounting). So he gets the reward here
instead of the Hereafter. For example, a man spent his money for some
good cause or helped a poor oppressed person. As a reward of this good
deed he is given ease at death so that he may get the reward of this
good deed in this very world and may have no claim in the Hereafter.

The same is regarding the trouble faced by a believer at death time,
which makes him, clean from the impurities of the sins of his lifetime.
Anyway the fact of the matter is that, for an unbeliever, death is the
beginning of his misfortune, be it comfortable or painful. For a
faithful both pain as well as ease is the start of bounties and comforts
of everlasting nature. So the deathbed condition indicates no fixed
rule.

Confiscating a disbeliever's Soul through Torture
-------------------------------------------------

There is a tradition in the third volume of Biharul Anwar according to
which once the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) went to visit his cousin ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (a.s.). The latter was suffering from an illness of the eyes.
He was sighing and groaning due to acute pain despite the fact that he
was a mountain of patience in bearing troubles. At that time the Holy
Prophet gave ‘Ali frightening news, which made the latter forget his
pain.

The Holy Prophet said, “O ‘Ali! The archangel Jibraeel has informed me
that when the time of taking the soul of a disbeliever comes, some
angels of torture arrive and retrieve his soul hitting him with bars and
whips of fire.” ‘Ali (a.s.) asked, “O Messenger of Allah! Does such a
terrible thing happen to anyone from your Ummah also?” The Holy Prophet
said, “Yes, even in Muslims there are three groups whose souls are taken
in this harsh manner: First is a tyrant ruler, secondly, who usurps the
orphan's property and third is the one who gives false testimony.”

A Student of Fuzail who Died the Death of a Disbeliever
-------------------------------------------------------

Biographers have written that when the time of death approached for his
most knowledgeable and intelligent student, Fuzail and some other
persons went to see him. Fuzail began to recite the Surah Yasin[^5]The
unfortunate student at that time hit his teacher Fuzail saying, “I don't
want you to recite the Surah (Qur’an).”

Just think over the bad luck of a man who had learnt the Holy Qur’an
throughout his life and who had spent his lifetime in mosques, madressas
and assemblies of worships and prayers, and at his last moment he says,
“I don't want you to recite Qur’an before me!” The unfortunate fellow
did not recite even the Shahaadatain[^6]and passed away from this world.

This made Fuzail extremely sorrowful. He took to a corner of his house
and stopped going out until he saw his unlucky student in a dream and
asked him the cause of his bad behaviour on his deathbed. The late
student said, “I had three evil habits due to which I left the world in
a state of a disbeliever. They were: I was jealous and never liked that
anyone should surpass me.”

Yes, jealousy is the bad habit, which destroys faith just as fire
reduces wood to ash.

***“Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected
the communications of Allah and used to mock them. “(30:10)***

Dying in Disbelief Due to Sinning
---------------------------------

The second evil habit was backbiting and inciting one against another.
It causes separation even between a man and wife. Therefore if someone
backbites about a person before you, you should not tell the latter the
former was speaking ill of him. Rather, in order to remove dislike
between the two, you may tell one that the other was praising and using
good words.

Remember that it is no evil to tell untruth with a view to remove ill
will and mistrust between two persons because the intention is only to
improve relations between two brothers. There is a Persian proverb:
Untruth resulting in improvement of relations is better than a truth
causing strife.

Contrary to it, backbiting is the worst evil as besides increasing ill
will and enmity between two human beings, it deprives the backbitten one
of peace and calm. Then it sows seeds of trouble and unrest, which is
worse than murder.

***“And kill them wherever you find them, and drive them out from whence
they drove you out, and persecution is severer than slaughter, and do
not fight with them at the Sacred Mosque until they fight with you in
it, but if they do fight you, then slay them; such is the recompense of
the unbelievers. “(2:191)***

***“...and persecution is graver than slaughter; and they will not cease
fighting with you until they turn you back from your religion, if they
can; and whoever of you turns back from his religion, then he dies while
an unbeliever- these it is whose works shall go for nothing in this
world and the hereafter, and they are the inmates of the fire; therein
they shall abide. “(2:217)***

The third evil, which was found in Fuzail's student, was that of
alcoholism. These were the three greater sins, which cause a man
faithless death even though he were a scholar and a high-class
teacher.[^7]

Being Pleased with Death
------------------------

It is also very important to remember that one must be eager to meet the
Lord. It means that a faithful servant should not dislike death and must
never be afraid of it. This is not to say that one must long for death.
May God protect! One must never think of suicide because it is possible
that one may, in ones lifetime repent for sins and do more good deeds.

The meaning of being pleased with death is that whenever Almighty wants
to him to die he should, in those circumstances, consider death a bounty
because (according to Islam) he is a loyal and an obedient one of God
and he will get great reward very soon and taste the sweetness of his
good deeds and if he had been a sinner, his sins would come to an end
and so also his punishment would decrease.

In short, a wise man should be pleased with death at the moment of God's
will because death is the only means of scaling the peak of his good
fortune, that is, to get rid of the web of deceptions and conspiracies
and to enter the house of eternal happiness (Paradise) and to get
nearness to God Almighty and to see the Holy Prophet and His Holy
Progeny (a.s.) as well as to meet the shining souls of all pious people
and Holy saints. The only way to get all this is death.

Similarly one must also like and be pleased with a long life and delay
in death at the will of God so that he may, to the best of his or her
ability, make provisions for the journey to the Hereafter.

Love for the World-Condemned by reason and Shariat
--------------------------------------------------

It is also wrong and misplaced to abhor death and to be crazy after
worldly life for enjoying more and more pleasures, as is the way of
many. It is against both reason and Shariat.

It is unwise because, firstly, real pleasure cannot be achieved in this
worldly life. There is a proverb that says: Until a mouth does not taste
a hundred fists it cannot swallow a morsel. There is no pleasure in the
world, which is not surrounded by hundreds of pains and troubles. If
there is youth, old age and weakness is bound to follow it.

If there is health, which is primarily essential for enjoying every
pleasure of life, then there are a number of ailments and illnesses,
which pose threats to it. If there is wealth, which makes it possible to
get comfort and ease, then it is not possible to gain it (wealth)
without hard labour. Thus earning of wealth is also not without hazards.
Any high position is not attained without labouring hard and facing
deterrents and oppositions. Besides all this, what is most significant
is that all such worldly gains and benefits, and comforts and positions
etc are bound to perish one day.

According to a meaningful Persian proverb couplet: “Do not become an
ardent lover of this world because this disloyal bride had not passed
even a single night with sincere love to anyone”.

Love for this World is an Attribute of Infidels and a Source of Sins
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Deep involvement in material world is, from viewpoint of religion
condemnable because the Holy Qur’an has regarded love for world an
attribute of disbelievers. Almighty says,

***“Surely those who do not hope in Our meeting and are pleased with
this world's life and are content with it, and those who are heedless of
Our communications: “(10:7)***

It means that the unbelievers are happy with their worldly life.

At another place:

***“...are you contented with this world's life instead of the
hereafter? But the provision of this world's life compared with the
hereafter is but little. “(9:38)***

Which means: Have you given preference to the material worldly life over
the Hereafter?

Referring to Jews it says:

***“...everyone of them loves that he should be granted a life of a
thousand years, and his being granted a long life will in no way remove
him further off from the chastisement, and Allah sees what they do.
“(2:96)***

This means that every one of them likes that he should live in this
world for a thousand years.

There are many verses like this in Holy Qur’an. Similarly there are
innumerable traditions and narrations. Here we mention a famous
tradition of the Holy Prophet from the book Usul al-Kafi:

The root all evil is love for this world.

Dislike for Death and Weeping Over Demise of the Beloved
--------------------------------------------------------

Whatever we have mentioned above makes clear that if the dislike for
death and longing for living longer in this world is because of one's
madness (excessive affection) or due to the thought that death becomes a
barrier between his beloved things depriving him of worldly pleasures
and luxuries, then it is unwise from the viewpoint of reason and an
unpleasant attitude from religious viewpoint too.

But if one dislikes death and desires its delay thinking that, in that
case (in a longer life), he will continue to make more and more
provision for his post-mortem journey to the Hereafter because death
closes all possibilities to do good deeds in this world and hence he
desires that death may not come very soon then it is a very good
intention.

But if the wailing, crying and lamenting over the demise of beloved
persons and to become angry on such occasions and to denounce the death
is due to material reasons and thoughts then it also is wrong and
undesirable. For example, to weep asking why the happiness of this
worldly has been snatched from him or why he has been deprived of the
comforts available from his deceased beloved relative then such wailing
is also wrong and misplaced.

But if the unhappiness and sorrow and mourning is only because of the
separation, like that of a co-traveller (who reaches first of all to his
beloved native place) then his other companions will naturally be
emotionally affected (even though the departing soul has reached his
beloved place and joined his beloved ones) then also the said sorrow and
unhappiness is very well, rather it is desirable that a faithful should
mourn over the demise of his faithful brother especially when the
departing person was helping the living one in his good deeds which
formed a kind of provision for journey to Hereafter.

Expression of Impatience is the Result of Carelessness about the Hereafter
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since most of the people, especially women, are more inclined towards
worldly matters they become all the more restless and agitated and go to
extremes in crying and complaining, thinking as if they were to live in
this world forever and imagining that the one who died has been
annihilated. Had they thought correctly they would have realized that
the departed person was a traveller who has reached his or her
destination earlier and that he or she had to go there. Then they will
not show such excessive impatience and restlessness.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) once saw a man whose son had died. He was crying and
complaining too much. The Imam told him, “How is it that you are crying
over this little calamity and have totally forgotten the far more hard
and troublesome calamity (of the Hereafter)? If you yourselves would
have been properly busy making provision for your travel to the other
world, you would not have ever exhibited so much impatience and dislike
over the demise of your beloved son. Your not being anxious and careful
about your Hereafter is a calamity, which is harder than the calamity of
your son's death.”[^8]

Divine Mercies and Bounties
---------------------------

Similarly, the condition of a man, regarding death should be like that
of the one who had been in the service of a king for a few days. In the
meanwhile he gets a word from the king that you will be, at an unfixed
time, be made to stand in front of the king so that you may be rewarded
and honoured by the king for your good service and loyalty.

Surely that man will feel happy due to these good tidings. But at the
same time he will also wish that he might be called up somewhat later so
that he may perform some more functions liked by the king and get more
rewards.

Similarly a faithful person, though he feels happy at his death which is
the door to the place of rewards and gifts, also likes and wishes that
the said hour may be delayed somewhat so that he may perform more
worship and at the same time remain satisfied and happy when God decides
to call him up, with the conviction that God is most merciful and kind
and with the longing to meet the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his Holy
Progeny (a.s.) whom he respected and honoured very much during his
lifetime.

The Arrival of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) at the Moment of Death
-------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in many traditions that the Holy Prophet and ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (a.s.) and, according to some narrations, even the Holy five
(Panjetan), and also all the fourteen Infallibles (a.s.) arrive at the
head of the dying person. (More about their radiant faces and
appearances will be mentioned henceforth).

One of the companions of Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) was on deathbed. The Holy
Imam went to him and stood near his head. That man had closed his eyes
at his last moments. Yet he said once, “At present the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and Amirul Mu’minin (a.s.), Siddiqa Fatima Zahra (a.s.), Imam
Hasan (a.s.), Imam Husain (a.s.) and all the Holy Imams right up to Imam
Kazim (a.s.) have arrived here and I am getting the honour of seeing
their Holy faces,” and added, “O Sir! Your honour's radiant face is also
visible to me here.”[^9]

In short, it is agreed that every person sees the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) at
the time of his or her death and derives happiness in proportion to his
or her love and respect for them.

According to a famous tradition narrated by Harith Hamadani, Amirul
Mu’minin (a.s.) said, “Everyone sees me on his or her death bed and will
do so in future also, be he a believer or an unbeliever.[^10]

Of course what is significantly important is that, for the faithful, the
visit of ‘Ali (a.s.) will be a bounty because the handsome face of the
Imam is the sweetest pleasure for the faithful, whereas, for an
unbeliever, his frowning face will be showing God's terrible anger.[^11]

Even After Death
----------------

After the soul leaves the body it remains hovering over it. Angels take
the soul of the faithful towards the sky and that of the unbeliever is
dragged downwards. When the corpse is being taken to the grave, if it is
that of a faithful, it cries out, “Carry me to my destination as soon as
possible.” If it is a disbeliever the soul says, “Do not make haste and
do not rush me so speedily to my grave.” At the time of bathing body if
the body is that of a believer, an angel tells him, “Do you desire to go
back to the world?” The body (of the faithful) replies, “I do not want
to be entangled in difficulty and sorrow again.”

The soul of the dead body remains present at the time of washing (Ghusl)
and also during the funeral procession. It sees the washer as well as
the carriers. It hears their talks. This is why it has been advised that
people should not engage in unnecessary talk near the body and that they
should be busy with reciting the Holy Qur’an and remembrance of God.

After the burial, as some tradition writers have said, “The soul gets
reconnected with the body. It becomes gloomy observing that people have
gone away leaving it alone in the grave.”

The very first good news given to a faithful in grave is: The Most
Merciful God has forgiven you and all those who participated in your
burial.

Here it may be mentioned that the faithful should take care to see that
all religious rituals are performed at the time of death, washing,
shrouding and burying etc. All that is desirable (Mustahab) must be
performed. The legal heir of the deceased should, after all others leave
the graveyard, return to the grave and recite Talqeen sitting near the
grave. This has to be the last Talqeen. According to tradition it has to
be recited twice before this: First when the body breathes its last and
second after placing the body in the grave.

Questioning of the Grave
------------------------

Among those things in which one must have faith and which form the
essentials of the Shi’a faith is that the deceased one will have to face
questioning by Munkar and Nakeer (angels) in the grave. It is agreed
that man must believe that there will be questioning in the grave.

We need not go in details like whether this material worldly body will
confront the said questioning or another Misaali (similar) one or it
will be this dusty grave or any another pit or whether the questions
will be addressed to the soul and/or whether the material physical body
will also be affected by it or not etc.

It is not obligatory for us to know all these details also because there
is no source of knowing it except traditions and there is no specific
description in traditions and reports. Of course, Allamah Majlisi has,
in Biharul Anwar Vol. 3 and also in Haqqul Yaqeen, mentioned that
reliable traditions show that this worldly body in which the deceased
had lived in the world will experience questioning in the grave and the
squeeze.

It is understood that the departed soul will be made to return to either
the entire body or in some part of it (that is up to the chest or the
waist as mentioned in traditions) so that the deceased may be able to
understand the questions and give replies.

Questioning about Beliefs and Deeds
-----------------------------------

We should also know about the things involved in questioning in the
grave. It will be about beliefs and actions or deeds. It will be asked,
“Who is your God? Who is your Prophet? Which religion were you
following?”

These questions will be asked to everyone, the believer as well as the
unbeliever. Of course lunatics or mentally retarded persons and minor
children will be exempted from it. If the dead had faith in true beliefs
it will state his or her beliefs and will testify to the Oneness of the
Lord of the worlds and the Messengership of the Holy Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) and to the Imamat of the Holy Imams (a.s.). Otherwise the
dead will remain dumb and will not be able to speak. Frightened by the
said two interrogating angels some will say, “You are my Gods.”
Sometimes they will say, “People say Muhammad is the messenger of God
and Qur’an is the Book of God.”

They will not give clear and correct replies. In short, if the deceased
is able to give correct replies a gate is opened near his or her head
and the grave is widened as far as one can see. Thus the door of Barzakh
(which will continue till Resurrection) is the door of comfort and
spaciousness:

***“Then if he is one of those drawn nigh (to Allah), Then happiness and
bounty and a garden of bliss. And if he is one of those on the right
hand, Then peace to you from those on the right hand. And if he is one
of the rejecters, the erring ones, He shall have an entertainment of
boiling water, “(56:88-93)***

Then the body will be told: Have a sweet and restful sleep.[^12]

If the deceased is unable to give correct answers, a door of the Hell of
Barzakh will be opened for him or her and a breath from the breaths of
Hell will fill up his or her grave. (All these sentences have been taken
from narrations. Original text has not been mentioned for the sake of
brevity).

Why this Questioning?
---------------------

God already knows that this person is faithful or faithless, righteous
or sinful. Then what is the use of this interrogation? Questioning in
the grave is, in fact, for the faithful, the beginning of the
manifestation of Divine bounties. How much happy and pleased will be the
faithful; when he will see the beautiful and pleasing face of the angel
and smell the fragrance of the gardens of paradise accompanying the said
angels. That is why such angels are called (have been named “Mubasshir
and Basheer” (announcers of good tidings).

Moreover, the said questioning will be a cause of happiness for a
faithful person. You must have seen students who had carefully and
painstakingly studied their lessons in the school. They feel happy at
the thought of being examined or questioned so that they may be able to
show their talents and merits. Likewise a faithful servant of God also
entertains a wish that he should be questioned about his Lord so that he
may to give satisfactory testimony to the Oneness of the only one God
and the Messengership of His Beloved Messenger Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).

Unbelievers will see the Divine Punishment and the Beginning of their Pains
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Whereas the questioning in grave will make a believer happy, as it will
herald an era of eternal happiness for him, the same questioning will
for the faithless turn out to be the start of misfortune and torture.
The very arrival of angels will terrorize the unbelievers. It is
mentioned in narrations that the frightening angels will threaten the
infidels in a terribly harsh tone. Flames will be leaping out from their
eyes. Their hair will be very long, dragging on the ground. These are
the angels who will approach the unbeliever and this is why they are
named 'Munkar and Nakeer' (the abhorring ones).

The Disbeliever will Fail to Reply all Questions
------------------------------------------------

A man who had passed his entire life without any thought of God and who
never cared to know his Lord Creator. It can be well imagined what he
will face. He will be asked about his God. But he had worshipped (was
mad after) only money and wealth. He was devoted only to name and fame.
He only longed for power. He had nothing to do with the Lord of the
worlds. So he will tremble and shiver in such a way that he will not be
able to reply any question.

Some of such fellows will reply rightly about God but they will fail to
reply regarding the Holy Prophet. Some will be unable to reply rightly
about all the true beliefs. Some who will reply rightly about beliefs
will fail in the questioning about their deeds and actions.

There will be Questioning about Deeds too
-----------------------------------------

It is mentioned in Biharul Anwar, vol. 3 that a man was questioned about
his beliefs in the grave. He gave correct replies. Then only one
question was put to him, “Do you remember that on such day you had seen
that a person was being oppressed but you did not go to help him? You
saw that his honour was being trampled upon and his wealth was being
grabbed. You were in a position to help him but you did not do so?”

That fellow did not give any reply. (Do remember that it is one of the
obligatory duties of every faithful to help the oppressed). As he failed
in fulfilling his responsibility in this respect, the angels told him,
“A punishment of a hundred lashes has been ordered for you.” Then they
inflicted the first lash, which filled his grave with fire. Yes, this is
the punishment of giving up an obligatory duty or deed.

The aim is that you should not say that all your deeds are good and that
there is no risk or danger. Suppose your beliefs are true and you leave
the world with the same beliefs in your heart. But then, what about your
deeds? Can you say that you have committed no mistake?

The Infallible complains, “I am weeping remembering the questioning by
Munkar and Nakeer in the grave.” Then who are we?

Deeds are the Companions in Grave
---------------------------------

It is agreed that, in the grave, everyone's companions will be their
deed as specifically stated in the Qur’an and traditions. Sadooq (a.r.)
has in Khisaal, Amali and Maniul Akhbar, narrated from Qais bin Asim
that once he went to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) along with a group of
people from the tribe of Tameem.

He submitted, “O Messenger of God! Give us some admonition by which we
may benefit, because, most of the time we roam in wilderness and deserts
(and have few chances of visiting your honour).” The Holy Prophet gave
them a number of admonitions. One of them is: O Qais! It is necessary
for you to have a companion to be buried in the grave. That companion
will be alive whereas you will be dead.

So if that companion (you will necessarily have) is a nice and kind
person, he will keep you in a respectable condition. If he is a bad
fellow he will leave you there in your grave in total solitude without
any help or assistance. (Also remember that) that companion will be
necessarily with you in the grand gathering (Hashr) on the Day of
Judgement. You will also be asked only about him. So it is very
essential for you to select a good companion. If he is a good person he
will make you happy. But if he is a corrupt fellow he will frighten you
terribly and that companion is your deeds.

Qais instantly turned this admonition into a poem of advice in Arabic
language:

*Select a companion from your deeds because, in the grave, the only
companion of a man will be his deed.*

*It is essential for you to reserve a companion for life after death,
for the Day when man will be called and he will attend at once the Grand
Gathering.*

*So if you are busy in any deed then beware and never engage yourself in
any deed disliked by God.*

*Be it before death or after death, man will have nothing with him
except his deeds.*

*Beware! Man is only a guest among his family members in this world.*

*He stays with them only for a few days and then marches off.*

The Lord of the World Warns
---------------------------

There are many Qur’anic verses showing that after a man dies his
companion will be his deeds, that is, the result of the deeds done by
him in the world.

Here we suffice with only one verse. The Almighty God says,

***“On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and
that (evil) there were a long duration of time; and Allah makes you to
be cautious of (retribution from) Himself; and Allah is Compassionate to
the servants. “(3:30)***

It is God's Mercy that He has conveyed innumerable admonitions and
warnings to mankind through His Messengers.

The Disbeliever will be accompanied by a Fearsome Face
------------------------------------------------------

His honour, Qazi Saeed Qummi, in his book Arbaeen, quotes Shaykh Bahai
(a.r.) thus: A friend of mine was living in the graveyard of Isfahan. He
used to remain busy praying near a tomb. I used to visit him frequently.
Once I asked him, “Have you ever, during your stay in the graveyard,
observed any astonishing thing?”

He said, “Yes. Only the other day people brought here a body, buried it
in this corner and went away. After sunset, a very foul smell spread,
the like of which I had never known. Then all of a sudden I saw a
terribly horrifying form of a black dog. The foul smell was emanating
from its body. That fearsome form came nearer and disappeared after
approaching the aforesaid new grave.

After a little while, a very sweet and pleasing fragrance began to
spread around the like of which also I had never felt in my life. In the
meantime, I observed a very handsome form, which also approached the
aforesaid grave and disappeared. (All these are the wonders of the world
of spirits, which appear in such forms).

Anyway, after a few moments, that beautiful shape (form) emerged out of
that grave but in a wounded and bloodstained condition. I exclaimed, 'My
Lord! Explain to me what is this all that I am observing? Who are these
two forms?' (In my sleep) I was informed that the good-looking form was
that of the good deeds done by the dead person and the ugly form was of
his evil deeds.

As the bad deeds were more than the good ones, the latter (bad deeds)
remained with him as his companion in the grave. Only God knows when
this fellow will become clean of his sins! Who knows when he will have a
good companion in the form of that handsome being?”

Squeeze of the Grave is a Fact
------------------------------

Allamah Majlisi says in Haqqul Yaqeen:

Muslims have a unanimously agreed belief that the squeezing of grave and
both reward and punishment therein are real facts. According to reliable
traditions, the grave will press the same body, which was been buried.
Of course, every body is not necessarily squeezed in the grave. It
depends upon the deeds, that is, this punishment is inflicted only on
those who have earned it by sinning. The degree of squeeze will also
depend on the severity of his sins. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is
reported to have said that the squeezing of the grave is the expiation
of the sin of wasting away the bounties granted by God.

Shaykh Kulaini (r.a.) has, reliably narrated from Abu Baseer that he
asked Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s), “Is any body spared the squeeze in
grave?”

The Imam replied, “Refuge God from this matter! Very few people escape
the squeeze of the grave.”

When Ruqaiya, the stepdaughter of the Prophet expired, the Prophet stood
at her grave raising his head towards the sky. Tears flowed from his
eyes. Then he told the people, “I remembered the calamity this lady has
just passed. It made me extremely gloomy and I prayed: O Allah! Forgive
her. You are Most Merciful. Please save her from the squeeze of the
grave.'“ Then he said, “God has pardoned her.”

It seldom so happens that a person is saved from the squeeze of grave.
This is because the squeezing of the grave is the result of sins. The
matter is so sensitive that even an unwise and unjust behaviour with
one's own family members can cause squeeze in the grave. As a testimony
to this statement and with a view to show the importance of this
squeeze, we narrate below a tradition related to Saad bin Muaaz Ansari.

Saad was a chief of the Ansars as well as a respected person in the eyes
of the Holy Prophet and also in the opinion of all Muslims. Once he was
riding to visit the Holy Prophet. The latter asked Muslims to receive
him.

The Holy Prophet himself had also stood to welcome him. The Holy Prophet
had once appointed Saad as arbiter in a case concerning some Jews. When
he (Saad) expired, seventy thousand angels joined his funeral
procession. The Holy Prophet shouldered all the four corners of his
coffin and said, “There were columns and rows of angels in the funeral
of Saad. My hand was in the hand of Jibraeel. I was following him
(Jibraeel) wherever he moved.”

In short, he was such a nice gentleman that, besides all these things,
the Holy Prophet lowered his body in the grave. Seeing this, the mother
of the deceased cried out, “Congratulation to you, O Saad!
Congratulations for winning paradise.”

The Holy Prophet asked that lady, “From where did you know that your son
has reached paradise? Right now he is under squeeze of the grave.” The
companions asked, “O Messenger of God! Is a pious man like Saad is also
being squeezed in the grave?” The Holy Prophet replied, “Yes.”

According to another narration, when people asked the reason for the
squeeze of Saad's grave, the Holy Prophet replied that Saad was not
behaving nicely with his family members and his attitude towards his
wife was rather bad.

Squeeze of Grave is Possible Everywhere
---------------------------------------

The respectable scholar, Kulaini (r.a.) has narrated from Yunus that he
asked Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) in the matter of one who was hanged. (In the
past people were not only being hanged but their corpses were also left
hanging for days. Zaid, the martyr was kept thus hanging for three years
and birds had made nests in his body). The Imam replied, “Yes. The
Almighty God commands air to squeeze the body.”

Imam Ja'far (a.s.) has been quoted in another tradition saying that the
Lord of the earth and air is one. He orders air to squeeze the hanging
body more forcibly than the force of a grave. The same is the case of
those who drown in water.

Reasons of Squeeze of the Grave
-------------------------------

It is known from the above that wasting (not appreciating) the bounties
granted by God causes grave squeeze. Similarly not behaving nicely with
family members is also a reason for such squeeze of the grave. (Details
about non-appreciation of Divine graces and bad behaviour with wife can
be seen in the second volume of Ayatullah Dastghaib's book Gunahane
Kabira (Greater Sins)).

Some other causes of such squeeze are, not purifying oneself after
urinating, backbiting, making false allegations etc. The soul is
squeezed. It is also likely that the body is also affected.

Contrary to this, the graves of those whose behaviour and attitude
towards all is good become spacious in proportion to their nice manners.
For some the width goes up to seven yards or seventy yards. For some it
is up to the reach of one's eyesight. Consequently their souls live in
comfort and ease.

[^1]: Say: The angel of death who is given charge of you shall cause you
to die, then to your Lord you shall be brought back.

[^2]: Surely (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their souls, they shall say: In what state were you? They
shall say: We were weak in the earth. They shall say: Was not Allah's
earth spacious, so that you should have migrated therein? So these it is
whose abode is hell, and it is an evil resort.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, Vol: 3, Chapter on Angel of death.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, Vol: 3, Chapter on Angel of death.

[^5]: Holy Qur’an Chapter 36

[^6]: Dual formulae of faith in Islam

[^7]: Greater sins have been discussed in detail in Ayatullah
Dastghaib's book Gunahane Kabirah, Greater Sins, available also on line
at:
http://www.al-islam.org/greater-sins-complete-ayatullah-dastaghaib-shirazi

[^8]: Uyoon al Akhbar ar Ridha’, Vol.2, P.81.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, Vol.3.

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, Vol.3.

[^11]: Ziyarat no. 6 of Amirul Mu’minin.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi.


