Day of Judgement (Qiyamat)
==========================

Qiyamat from viewpoint of Logic
-------------------------------

Suppose we had no religious texts and had there been no arrival of all
Prophets and messengers who have informed us that a day will certainly
come for taking account of human deeds and who told people that, “You
will have to, on one day, answer for all of your words and deeds,”
reason and logic itself is a very big proof and testimony indicating
that this revolving of skies and the initiation of the creation of every
being and everything is not without any aim or intention.

Every wise and intelligent man, whenever he looks all around him, he
observes that day and night come one after another and man eats and
drinks and sleeps and goes in privacy and fulfils all of his desires;
that a child grows up and turns into a youth and then an old man and
then dies.

Is all this huge and vast unending movements and happenings which all of
us always observe with our own eyes aimed only at these movements and is
it limited only up to here? Has it no aim or object? If it is so, then
it only means that man has been created just for creating dirt. This is
merely a false and aimless notion. There were animals to fulfil such
deeds like eating, drinking, sleeping and gratifying passions. There was
no need at all for the creation of man.

Unbelievers of Hereafter do not understand God's Wisdom
-------------------------------------------------------

Those who do not believe in the Hereafter, in fact, do not believe in
the wisdom and intelligence of God Almighty (God forbid). This denial
only means that all of this vast and huge universe has been created
without any aim or object.

***“And Allah's is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allah's purpose; surely Allah is Amplegiving, Knowing.
“(23:115)***

But to think thus is the fault and error of their thinking. Whenever and
wherever we look at anything we find that it has thousands of wisdoms
(proper aims) and that man can hardly comprehend even a few of them.
Even the most trifling and ordinary atom is not without wisdom behind
its creation. Then what to say about bigger and higher things!

Nail as a Support
-----------------

This hair and fingernail too are not aimless. For example, take the case
of a fingernail. One of the wisdoms behind its creation is that, despite
it's being a short and apparently insignificant part of human body, it
serves as a support for fingers. Whenever one wants to pick up
something, it is only this fingernail, which enables the fingers to bear
the pressure. Otherwise it was not possible to bear such crushing weight
for the fleshy fingers. That is why; if nails are drawn out from their
base it will be difficult to lift things. What would then have happened
had there been no nails at all?

Moreover, these nails help us in scratching. Again, dirty and excessive
matters within the body also go out through these nails. That is why it
has been ordered that nails must be cut at least once a week (specially
on Friday).

Exit of Excessive Matter through Hair
-------------------------------------

Not a single strand of hair on our body is without wisdom or strategy.
Imam Sadiq (a.s) tells Mufaddal Ibne Umar, “Some ignorant people say it
would have been better were hair not to grow on certain parts of the
body. They do not know that those are the parts where excess and dirty
(impure or unclean) body matter concentrates. Was that dirt not to be
driven out through hair human body would become ill and diseased.”[^1]
That is why we have been commanded to remove this hair as soon as
possible (within two weeks at the most).

If man ponders deeply he will realize that all the elements of the world
of creation are full of wisdom and strategy.

Medicine from Cow dung Beetle Proved Effective for Eye Trouble
--------------------------------------------------------------

It is said that the famous physician Galen once looked at the dirty
insect cow dung beetle and expressed his opinion saying, “I do not see
any wisdom in the creation of this thing. Why, after all, had God
created it?” After sometime he developed severe pain in his eyes.
Despite using all medicines in his expert knowledge no remedy worked on
that trouble. Other doctors also tried in vain. At last there came an
old woman and said, “I have a pill. It is very effective for the illness
of eyes.” When Galen used it, he became all right. He asked how the pill
was prepared. She said it was a paste having cow dung beetle as one of
its ingredients.

Is the World's Existence Void of Wisdom?
----------------------------------------

Not even a single particle in the world of existence is created without
any wise aim. Can then the entire universe be aimless at all? In the
human body, even a nail and a hair are not without utility. Can then the
whole human body have been created without any aim or intention? Never!
All modern day scientists are unanimous in their opinion that they have
not been able to comprehend all the wisdoms and strategies behind all
the things in this world.

Only God knows how many new and astonishing things will come to light in
future. About half a century ago, people in Europe were of the opinion
that in our body at the end of intestines there is an extension called
appendix; that it is of no use. So, many healthy persons got it removed.
But soon thereafter they were to realize that they were wrong.

So, they announced that healthy persons should not remove it because now
they had come to understand that the said extension was a sort of alarm.
When much impurities pile up in intestines, this extension exudes pain
thus cautioning them before the impurities could havoc. So, the patient
becomes alerted and resorts to remedy. It is also possible that it may
have other benefits too which have not yet come to our notice despite
research and about which we may know in the days and years to come.

Not a Single Tooth is Without Wisdom
------------------------------------

In human mouth not a single tooth is void of usefulness. The job of the
molars cannot be performed by canines. Not a single bone out of the 248
in human body is useless, that is, if even one of them is missing, and
it renders the whole body defective. Similar is the case with veins,
nerves and fats etc. Can then the entire body be ever void of utility
and wisdom behind it?

After recognizing the creator of the universe as most wise and after
realizing that even the tiniest atom is not useless here, it is now our
duty to try to understand the wisdom and aim behind the great creation.
We see how many benefits we derive from various kinds of innumerable
stones, vegetables and animals.

The clouds, wind, moon and sun all are busy in their duties so that, O
Man! You may get bread and do not eat it unheeding. All these are busy,
worrisome and obedient to you. Is it, then, not very unjust that you do
not obey the commands of your Lord?

Creation would have been Aimless had there been Only Happiness
--------------------------------------------------------------

Is the aim of man's creation only this worldly and material life? Is
there nothing after death? Are we to be totally and suddenly
annihilated? If it is taken for granted that the only aim of human life
in this universe is eating, drinking, resting and pleasure-hunting to
gratify passions, lust, greed and desires and had it been so that man
would not ever taste what is pain, trouble and difficulty and grief and
sorrow throughout his life then, in that case, also the creation would
have been aimless.

The reason for this conclusion is that even though the said life is full
of pleasure and happiness it is yet unreliable and untrustworthy
because, after all, it is passing and it is bound to end one day. So it
is unthinkable that such a wide and huge universe should be for
anything, which is to perish while human life is, from it's beginning to
end, full of different kinds of difficulties, troubles, pains and
sorrows.

As the poet Aasoodeh has said:

I have seen in this world only one person called 'happy' (Aasoodeh). But
then, it was only his penname.

Another poet says:

You will not find any man in this world who has no worries. If he has no
worry then he is not the son of Adam.

Every Gulp after Thousands of Stings
------------------------------------

The fact is that, if man is to perish after his death and if his life is
limited only to this world of matter which is made up of various kinds
of sorrows, physical and spiritual and mental troubles, sufferings,
mischiefs, fornications, usurpations, illness of children, death of
progeny, separation from friends then this life is totally senseless and
void of wisdom.

This is against the divine attribute like the Just, the Kind, the Most
Merciful, the Most Wise etc. In that case the creation of human beings
in the world would be like an example in which, suppose, a generous man
invites guests in a house which has all kinds of harmful animals like
tigers, leopards, wolves snakes, scorpions and wasps.

And when the guest arrives he may be served with eatables in that very
horrible house, but any morsel taken by him is accompanied by the stings
of several troublesome and poisonous insects. Not only this, there also
may be some attackers with swords in their hands ready to attack that
guest even before he completes his feast (and thereafter nothing at
all)! Just say, is there any use of such a feast? Is it not a futile
endeavour?

For the Sake of a Joy which will be Without Sorrow or Pain
----------------------------------------------------------

What can be surmised from the above discussion is that, for man, another
life or world will surely arrive in which all of his pleasures and joys
will be available. It is absolutely essential that he (a good man or
woman) must get a joy and relief and comfort which has no pain with it
and also an everlasting happiness which must not be followed by any
trouble, grief or sorrow. The deserving persons must get comforts which
should never end.

Very happy will be the day when I will walk away from the passing world
for finding out peace for soul and to meet the beloved. (Persian
Couplet)

So it has been established from viewpoint of logic and reason and it is
now realized that God Almighty has created man for eternal and
everlasting happiness. He has detained man for a little temporary period
so that he may prepare to be eligible for the sure and permanent life,
which is full of joys and bounties. God has given him two wings of
knowledge and action with which he may fly high to gain extreme heights
in the eternal realm.

Qiyamat Cannot be Doubted
-------------------------

The fact is that if man turns towards his God-given mind and nature and
thinks deeply he will very soon find that there can be a doubt in each
and every possible thing but there is no room for any doubt at all in
the belief in God, His creation and the Hereafter, eternal life after
death and reward or punishment in the everlasting Hereafter.

***“And because the hour is coming, there is no doubt about it; and
because Allah shall raise up those who are in the graves. “(22:7)***

Of course, some people, because of their drowning in desires and
constant engagement in material affairs and continuous commitment to
sins have disfigured their nature thereby falling in doubt about the
above-mentioned doubtless matters.

***“Nay! man desires to give the lie to what is before him. “(75:5)***

So the verdict of reason has established that there is an aim, utility
and wisdom behind the creation of the earth, the sky and each and every
part of the human body which will be known to him on the day when he
will have to leave this material world. On the basis of all this, the
coming of another world or realm is a must after the end of this world.

Divine Justice Demands a Day of Judgement
-----------------------------------------

While describing the attributes of the Lord Almighty during the
discussion of the Oneness of the Creator of the Universe, we have said
that God is Just and so He has provided each and every essential thing
for everything and every being, without being requested.

A Persian couplet says:

We were inexistent and we never requested to come into existence. But
the Mercy and Kindness of the Merciful Lord even hears our unsaid pleas.

One of the demands of God's justice is to give reward to those good
people who, as we see, passed their whole lives in obedience, worship
and piety but, in this world of ours, they got no reward in proportion
with their labours and hardships.

Likewise, the Just Lord's attribute of Justice also demands that He
should punish offenders who, as we see, have indulged in various
mischiefs and conspiracies and devastating corruption but no punishment
is or has been given to them in this world. They pass away from this
world continuing their offences and sins. Often it also happens that
mischievous offenders live easy and luxurious lives whereas good people
live in difficulties.

We also see how much cruelty man shows towards man. They loot one
another's property; kill one another and trample others' honour under
their feet. Since God Almighty is Just, certainly a day will come when
everyone will get his due based on his good or bad deeds. Right of
everyone will be restored to him or her.

***“This day every soul shall be rewarded for what it has earned; no
injustice (shall be done) this day; surely Allah is quick in reckoning.
“(40:17)***

Those who had oppressed others will, surely be thrown into fire on that
Day as warned:

***“Surely We have prepared for the iniquitous a fire, the curtains of
which shall encompass them about… “(18:29)***

The poor person who was unjustly killed will be able to take revenge
from the evil oppressor.

***“And when the female infant buried alive is asked for what sin she
was killed, “(81:8-9)***

And God may give reward/compensation to the oppressed victim. Good
people may get rewards and evil ones may get chastisement so that His
justice is manifested.

True People have Informed about Qiyamat
---------------------------------------

All the Messengers and Prophets who were most true in the entire
universe and whose word is an exhaustive argument for us have given the
news that Qiyamat will surely come. Pious and religious minded people
belonging to every religion and sect believed in life after death. In
fact religion is based only on two principles: Origin and returning to
life. Most verses of Holy Qur’an concerning faith in God at the same
time demand faith in the Hereafter and Resurrection.

***“The love of desires, of women and sons and hoarded treasures of gold
and silver and well bred horses and cattle and tilth, is made to seem
fair to men; this is the provision of the life of this world; and Allah
is He with Whom is the good goal (of life). “(3:14)***

And all the religions and faiths are unanimous about the aforesaid two
principles of Origin and Hereafter.

In short, not one or two but thousands of true announcers have given the
news of the arrival of the Day of Judgement. (So also) logic demands it
must be accepted, understood and believed that the Day will certainly
come.

The Best Proof of Resurrection is the Possibility of its Coming
---------------------------------------------------------------

As said earlier, the issue of resurrection is not against logic.
Whenever mind thinks about it, it says that it is a 'possibility or a
likely' thing. Moreover, all the true informers whose number is one lakh
twenty-four thousand (Messengers and Prophets) and so also all of their
legatees have said so and the word of each and everyone of them is
sufficient for the intellect to accept.

Some ill informed persons have tried to create a doubt that coming back
of a perished thing is impossible. They say how is it to appear again?
But they have no proof (argument) in support of this claim. The only
word which they have with them is 'necessity'. Taking support of this
word they say our argument in this matter is the said necessity. In any
case, if anybody puts forth a logical argument, our reply is as given
earlier.

There is no Return of a Perished Thing in Qiyamat
-------------------------------------------------

First, we put forth the words of Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi. He says: In
Qiyamat, there is no returning of a perished thing. It is, rather, the
reconnection of separated and scattered elements. The explanation of
this word is that the body was a mixture and collection of many atoms
and elements. After death it got scattered in different particles.

When Qiyamat will occur, all of these scattered particles will, by the
Command of God, rejoin one another. Thus the meaning of 'Ma’ad' is the
rejoining of scattered particles and the joining of soul with body after
their separation. Thus it is understood that Resurrection is not the
return of perished things. (Apart from this, this issue is also not an
agreed one).

The Strongest Argument is the Possibility of its Occurrence
-----------------------------------------------------------

Secondly, for the existence of anything, the possibility of the
existence of something similar to it is the best and greatest argument
or proof. Every man should think over the earlier condition of his body.
He will know that in the beginning there were many innumerable particles
including dust, air, and some were mixed with air in atmosphere.

With God's imperative power they came together, and took the forms of
various different things like food articles, vegetables, seeds, grains,
fruits and animals etc. All these things, after getting down the throat
of a father entered his stomach and, for a second time, scattered in the
forms of the limbs of the father.

Then at the time of passion or sexual arousal the substance which was
made up of all digested materials and which contained the essence of all
useful eatables and had taken the form of semen, got dragged from all
parts of the body and jumped out of his sexual organ and settled in the
womb of a mother. (This is why it is obligatory to wash each and every
part of the human body while taking the post-coital bath). It is because
the semen was drawn from all body.

In short, everybody was, in the beginning, in different forms of
separate elements. God collected them in one substance, first in the
hearts of earth (dust), water and air,

***“O people! if you are in doubt about the raising, then surely We
created you from dust, “(22:5)***

Secondly, it remained scattered in the physical parts or organs of a
father's body.

He will Gather them for the Third Time too
------------------------------------------

After seeing and knowing about the said separation and recollection on
two occasions, is there anything which cannot be believed if it is said
that in the grave, for the third time, after the decomposing of body and
scattering of body particles, the said elements will be recollected for
the third time too?

***“And certainly you know the first growth, why do you not then mind?
“(56:62)***

You have known about the first worldly creation and the first birth,
then why do you not, O man! Recollect that you were dust, Our Hand of
Power collected you, that you became a part of the father's body in the
form of edible matter, then, after these parts were scattered in the
father's different body organs, We recollected you, that is, after
ejecting you in the form of semen made you enter your mother's womb.

You have already seen this scattering and recollection in the worldly
life. Now, even after this observation, why do you get astonished when
you are told that We will after the scattering your body particles
throughout the universe, recollect them for the third time too?

Dead Coming to Life in the World
--------------------------------

On several occasions the dead do come to life in this world also. Just
look at the vegetable world. You observe in the spring season that trees
become alive after their death due to drying up. They once again get a
fresh spirit or life. The earth, which had died, also becomes alive.

***“then gives life therewith to the earth after its death; “(30:24)***

On a number of occasions a dead man has also become alive again. People
who had died had come to life through Isa (Jesus, a.s.) and also
Infallible Imams (a.s.). Some such events are recorded in history and
biography books we present here two events mentioned in the Holy Qur’an.

Uzair (a.s.) Remained Dead For a Hundred Years
----------------------------------------------

The Lord of the Universe has, in verse 259 of Surah Baqarah, mentioned
the story of Uzair (a.s.).

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen
down upon its roofs; he said: When will Allah give it life after its
death? So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life. “(2:259)***

The summary, cause of revelation and explanation of this verse is that
Uzair was one of the Prophets in Bani Israel. He had memorized the whole
Torah by heart and also was a leader and teacher of Jews in Jerusalem.
Once he was travelling on his donkey. He had some bread and few grapes
with him.

When he reached a village wherein all its residents had died years ago
and there was no sign of their life except their worn and torn bones.
Uzair threw a glance full of gloom and astonishment at those bones and
exclaimed: How will God turn these torn and worn bones into living
beings again? (This statement of Uzair was only by way of wonder. He
never doubted God's might and never denied Resurrection).

The Lord of the Universe, in order to make Uzair (a.s.) understand that
Resurrection might be an astonishing thing for him but for Him it is
nothing strange or difficult, made him die instantly. So Uzair (a.s.)
remained in the condition of death for one hundred years. The bones of
his ass decayed. Of course what was wonderful to human eye was that
grapes were fresh and sweet despite passing of such a long time. There
was no change even in their colour!

God made Uzair (a.s.) alive after one hundred years. An angel came to
him in human form and asked him, “How long have you remained here?” He
replied, “For one day or a part of it.” The angel said, “No, but you
have stayed for a full period of a hundred years. Just look at your
food. It has not at all decayed or deteriorated. (But) look at your
donkey. Its bones have become rotten. Now you see what happens before
your eyes and realize the Might of your Lord.”

Uzair (a.s.) saw that the particles of the decayed body of the ass began
to move and instantly joined with one another, restructuring its legs,
head, eyes and ears etc. The donkey soon got up. Then Almighty Lord
said, “See how We are able to recollect and reassemble the particles of
the body of the donkey and to give it a new life. So understand that God
is able to do everything.”

When Uzair (a.s.) returned to Baitul Maqdas (Jerusalem), there also he
found a totally different scene. The city had been totally altered. None
of the people known to him was found there. In a very astonished state
of mind he knocked at the door of his house. People inside asked, “Who
is it?” He said, “It is I, Uzair.”

People rushed out and said, “Are you joking? There is no trace of Uzair
for the last one hundred years. Have you any of his signs of
identification?” (Uzair was one of those whose prayer was answered by
Almighty God). An old lady stepped forward and said, “If you are Uzair,
then I am his aunt and I have become blind. Pray to God so that I may
regain my eyesight.”

Uzair (a.s.) prayed to God Almighty and that lady could see again. Then
both described what had happened during the past years. All understood
what had happened and the story became a reminder for all.

Four Birds whom God Made Alive after Dissection
-----------------------------------------------

Another event mentioned in the Holy Qur’an concerns Ibrahim (a.s.). Once
he submitted to the Almighty God, “My Lord! I want to see how You make
the dead alive, so that my heart may get satisfaction.” Came the
Command, “Take four birds (four kinds viz. a crow, a cock, a dove, and a
peacock).

Slaughter them and dissect their bodies into pieces and mix up their
pieces of all of them with one another. Then make four heaps of the said
mixed up meat and put one heap each on four different hills. Then call
up each one of the birds by their names. Every one of them will fly and
come to you within no time.

***“And when Ibrahim said: My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to the
dead, He said: What! and do you not believe? He said: Yes, but that my
heart may be at ease. He said: Then take four of the birds, then train
them to follow you, then place on every mountain a part of them, then
call them, they will come to you flying; and know that Allah is Mighty,
Wise. “(2:260)***

It is mentioned in the commentary that Ibrahim (a.s.) had held the heads
of all the four birds in his hands and he was calling them one by one.
Then he saw that the body particles (dissected portion) began to join
with one another and to reform the bodies as they were re-assembled the
head-less birds flew speedily towards their heads in the hands of
Ibrahim (a.s.).

In order to check the accuracy, Ibrahim (a.s.) tried to make the body of
one bird join with the head of another but he could not succeed as every
body was rushing towards its own head and finally got joined. All the
four birds thus became alive.

Almighty Allah has Power over Everything
----------------------------------------

It is likely that some may think how many forms (due to change) might
have been taken in the scattered particles of a dead body. How then it
is possible for them to reassemble as before? But such thinking is only
the result of ignoring the all al-ncompassing power of Almighty God.

When we have learnt in the discussion about God's Oneness that God's
knowledge covers everything and that not a single particle from the
particles of each and everything is beyond His knowledge. He also has
power of everyone and everything. After this there is no scope at all
for any doubt about the fulfilment of His Wish.

It is true that a dead body, after a long time, becomes scattered and
also emanates foul smell and also becomes the food of ants and many
other insects and that even if it does not go in the stomach of any
animal it does turn into dust which also is swept far and wide by winds.
Then it becomes the ingredients of wheat, barely, seeds and vegetables
or is used up in house building materials. In any case it still remains
in this world and by no means goes out of the all al-ncompassing
Knowledge of God.

Then, at His Will, Almighty Allah recollects and reassembles them from
wherever they may be and in whichever form they may be (rather they
themselves get remixed at God's Command). We have seen this in the story
of Ibrahim (a.s.) and four birds. It is mentioned there that, as ordered
by God, Ibrahim (a.s.) cut the birds in to pieces and then mixed up that
meat. Then dividing the mixed meat into four heaps, he placed those
heaps on four hills…

In short, Almighty Allah knows each and every particle in the universe
(His creation) even if they have changed forms on thousands of
occasions. Likewise, He is also able to reassemble them and to take them
to the station (place) of either reward or punishment.[^2]

To show the Might of Allah and in order to prove that He can do whatever
He likes and that He can do everything, we give below some examples as
testimony to this truth.

Fire and Water Together
-----------------------

***“He Who has made for you the fire (to burn) from the green tree, so
that with it you kindle (fire). “(36:80)***

The trees named Markh and Aqaar are such that if a branch is torn off
from any of the two, waters, drips therefrom. One of the two is
masculine and the other feminine in nature. Water drips from both. But
when one is brushed against the other, it gives out fire. These two
trees are considered very important in the Arabian Peninsula. In olden
times there were no matchboxes.

People used to ignite fire with the help of the branches of these trees.
How wonderful that if they remain apart they give out water but if they
are brushed against one another they give out fire! How these two
opposites are placed in one and the same thing? If it is wet and has not
yet become dry it should not emanate water. Scholars of science say that
except the tree of Unnab, there is hidden fire in every other tree. Then
cannot such Mighty and Powerful creator reassemble a dead body and put
soul (life) in it again?

How will the Powdered Bones Become Alive?
-----------------------------------------

And he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets his own creation. Says
he: Who will give life to the bones when they are rotten?

***“Say: He will give life to them Who brought them into existence at
first, and He is cognizant of all creation, “(36:78-79)***

Once Ibne Abi Khalaf came to the Holy Prophet with an old bone in this
hand. He was pressing and crushing it with his hand. When it all became
powder he blew it off with his mouth and asked, “Who will make this
stuff alive?” In the above verse, Almighty Creator of the universe,
talks about this foolish and ignorant talking of this man and scolds
him. God Almighty says, “This man gives us an example but forgets his
own creation. (O the one who takes such objections! You were nothing.
God brought you into being after you were nothing; from non al-xistence
to existence).

Say (O Messenger!) Only He will make them alive, Who had created them
first. He has knowledge of every creation.” O Man! You also were nothing
before and now you are something. The same powered elements of human
body of faithful persons are like particles of gold, distinct from all
other particles. When it rains, it sweeps aside the particles of dust
and golden particles begin to shine out. Here there is no room for
doubt. The elements of everybody's will be re-assembled by Almighty
Allah through His Command.

No Scope for Doubt in Divine Knowledge
--------------------------------------

As we have described in the story of Ibrahim (a.s.) and four birds, he
caught and cut into pieces a crow, a cock, and dove and a peacock. Then
he mixed their minced meat so that it could not be separated from one
another. Then, as per a narration, made seventeen heaps of it and put
them at seventeen places on different hills.

Then he took the head of dove in his hand called it out. In response,
all the particles of its meat flew from every station and re-assembled
to form the body as it was before being slaughtered and then it joined
with its head. Then Ibrahim (a.s.) called out the peacock; all the
particles of its meat flew from every station and re-assembled to form
the body of the peacock. Ibrahim (a.s.) put the head of the cock before
it but it did not join. One's head was not being joined with another's
body. In short, there is no chance of any error in the knowledge of God.

Creation of Skies is More Difficult and Important than Creation of Man
----------------------------------------------------------------------

***“Certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than
the creation of the men, but most people do not know. “(40:57)***

To create the skies and the earth, to fix separate orbits for the
rotation of each of them, and to arrange their affairs etc are works,
which are greater and more complex than the creation of man. Now what is
to be seen is that the One who created skies will He not be able to
create a man again and to take account of his deeds?

***“His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be, so
it is. “(36:82)***

As and when He will wish, the Qiyamat will come up instantly. The moment
Allah wishes all will become alive.[^3]

It is obligatory to remove the Harm if there is any Likelihood of it
--------------------------------------------------------------------

If intelligence tells that there is a likelihood of harm at a certain
place something must be done which can avoid or remove that harm.

For example, while passing through a forest or path there is a danger of
a carnivorous animal or of bandits or thieves who can harm our lives and
or property then, even if this possibility is not certain, reason
demands that we should not take that path and go by any other avenue
where there is certainty of safety.

Of course, such harms can also be of various degrees and kinds. For
instance, if the danger is about falling down due to rough roads then
man does not pay much attention to it. But if there is a danger of
jumping over a pass, which can risk life, then surely it is a very
serious matter. Then how dangerous and risky it would be to cross the
bay of hell?

So it is absolutely essential to take utmost care for avoiding every
likely danger. Even the slightest possibility of a great harm makes it
compulsory to take defensive steps. Here is an example for further
clarification.

If Mind Hints at a Danger or Harm, Attention Must be Paid
---------------------------------------------------------

If a child tells you that there is a scorpion under your clothes and
that it is crawling upwards. Will you tell him, “You are a child. You do
not know anything. We cannot believe you?” No. You will never say so
because there is a likelihood of a great harm. What is more important is
a scorpion, not a straw or a stalk. You will, at once, take off your
shirt and try to find out the scorpion even though you had no certainly
of its presence. There was merely a likelihood or possibility. Yet
intelligence says that such possibility is worth taking cognisance.

Or for example, you want to proceed on a journey. Someone tells you that
you will not get any water anywhere on this route. The demand of
intelligence then is that you should keep a container full of water with
you. Now, if you get fresh water on your way, you will throw away the
old water and fill up your container with fresh water.

By so doing you will suffer no loss and save yourself from the
possibility of remaining thirsty. But, if thinking that this is merely a
possibility, you did not take water with you and found no water enroute
then you will have to die of thirst and you will get nothing except
grief and sorrow.

All Prophets and Messengers Warned People
-----------------------------------------

After understanding this logical problem, now we say that one hundred
twenty-four thousand (124,000) Messengers and Prophets came to the world
and all of them unanimously warned humanity of a danger saying, “O
People! All of your words and deeds are being constantly and instantly
being recorded. God has appointed two angels for every person. Whatever
good or bad you do, they note it down:

***“He utters not a word but there is by him a watcher at hand.
“(50:18)***

Suppose even if you are not sure about the coming of Qiyamat or of the
Day of Judgement (Resurrection), if you have any brain, your
intelligence will call upon you to take precautionary action and to be
cautions. There is indeed a possibility of Qiyamat if not certainly.

So, responding to this demand of reason, do not oppress anyone, do not
be unjust towards anybody, and do not attack anyone's honour. I would
now like to give some admonition and give a logical argument about
Resurrection to make one understand that it is the demand of reason and
logic to put faith in Resurrection.

Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) Admonishes an unbeliever of Resurrection
-----------------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in Usul al-Kafi, Tradition 2; in Kitabut Tawheed that
Imam Sadiq (a.s.), during his sermons, told Ibne Abil Awjaa, “If what
the religious people say is true, and doubtlessly it is true, then the
believers will certainly get salvation, and you will be destroyed. And
if what you say (denial of Hereafter and accounting) is true, though it
is certainly not true, even then both of you (the believers and the
unbelievers) will be on an equal footing.”

Ibne Abil Awjaa said, “Is not our and their word the same?” The Imam
said, “How can it be same or equal when they (religious people) believe
that Qiyamat will surely arrive and there also will be reward or
punishment and when they also believe that the sky is full of its
residents and that the Creator of all the skies and the earth is Only
One God, you say that skies are void and that there is no God…”

You have seen that in this tradition Imam (a.s.) used the argument of
cautiousness for proving Resurrection. This is the minimum argument.
Otherwise there must be certainty of belief about the Day of Judgement.
Doubtfulness or hesitation is not at all enough, not even mere
imagination.

Resurrection is Great
---------------------

We hear news about Qiyamat but imagine that it is an ordinary matter,
though we give much importance to this world, the same world which the
Lord Creator of the Universe has termed a 'plaything':

***“The life of this world is only idle sport and play,“ (47:36)***

But about Qiyamat, which is an ordinary thing in our (mistaken) view has
been given much importance by God and He has called its news “The Great
Event”:

***“Of what do they ask one another? About the great event, “(78:1)***

Doubtlessly Qiyamat is very great. It will be the Day when all the first
and last (earlier and latter) human beings will be made to assemble.
Such a huge gathering will be such that in it, everyone will be worrying
about his or her result (consequences of deeds before death). All will
be weeping and wailing save a few about whom we shall talk later on.

Amr Became Frightened by Qiyamat
--------------------------------

Amr bin Ma’adikarb was one of the most famous brave and courageous men
among Arabs. History of Islam has recorded him as one of the greatest
warriors in a number of battles. Once, when he was a polytheist, he
visited the Holy Prophet. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) invited him to
Islam, and said, “If you believe in Islam, God Almighty will protect you
from the greatest fright on the Day of Resurrection.”

He asked, “O Muhammad! What is the great fright? I am so tough-hearted
that nothing can frighten me.” The Holy Prophet said, “O Amr! It is not
so, as you imagined. It will be a tremendously frightening sound, which
will make all the dead alive and make the entire living die, except
those whom God wishes that they should not die. Then again there will be
terrible roar which will make all the dead stand and line up. The sky
will be fragmented. All the mountains will break up and become
scattered. Thus there will be no living being whose heart will not be
palpating due to fear, remembering the sins committed by it. All will be
worrying only about their own selves except those whom God wills (that
they may not become restless). O Amr! What do you think?”

In short, the Holy Prophet described the frightening events of Qiyamat
in such a manner that the whole body of Amr began to tremble. He said,
“What should I do to avoid that fright on the most terrible day?” The
Holy Prophet said, “Say 'Laa Ilaah Illallaah' (There is no God except
Only One God).”

So Amr instantly became a Muslim then and there along with his entire
people.

Red Hot Earth Under the Unbeliever's Feet
-----------------------------------------

On that day, wherever will a man look he will see only frightening
things. The condition of this earth will be totally changed. In addition
to all that we have said earlier, the ground of Resurrection will also
become alive and intelligent. It will remain stable, calm and wise under
the feet of the believers but, the same ground will turn into a burning
piece of land under the feet of an unbeliever and will be red hot,
giving out flames.

No curtain or barrier will be seen over there, no tree or a mountain.
Everyone will look at one another. All will be human beings but their
faces will be changed. In this world all are alike but on the Day of
Judgement, they will take shapes and forms according to their deeds
(before death).

Different Faces in the Field of Mahshar (Grand Assembly)
--------------------------------------------------------

***“The day on which the trumpet shall be blown so you shall come forth
in hosts, “(78:18)***

It is mentioned in Tafsir Majmaul Bayan that Muaaz asked for the
explanation of this verse from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) who replied,
“You have asked a very important thing.” Then the eyes of the Holy
Prophet became tearful.

He said, “On the Day of Judgement, my community (Ummah) will be divided
into ten groups. God Almighty will cut all those ten from the Muslims.
He will change theirs faces and appearances. Some will come in the shape
of monkeys, some in the form of swines, hands and legs of some will be
cut off, and some will be blind, some deaf and dumb. One of those groups
will arrive in the grand field chewing their own tongues, dirt dripping
from their lips the bad foul of which will make all restless.

One group will arrive upside down and will get punishment in the same
position. One group will be hanging on branches of fire. One group will
be spreading an obnoxious and foul smell, which will be worse than that
of corpses. One group will be wearing shirts made of Qitraan, which will
stick to their bodies.

People asked, “O Messenger of God! Who will be these people?”

Fate of Backbiters, Usurers and Corrupt People
----------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said, “Those who will assume the forms of
monkeys will be backbiters. They create enmity between two parties and
carry one's talk to the other, and make them quarrel.”

“Those who will be seen as swines will be eaters of unlawful earning.
For example, who give (in trade or business or bargaining) less then
due, who are dishonest in their dealings with others and who mix up bad
things with good to earn unlawfully and who usurp the properties of
others. Those who will arrive on their heads will be eaters of interest,
the usurers.

Those who will be chewing their own tongues will be the scholars who did
not act according to what they taught to others, whose deeds were
different from their words. They had given many sermons but never acted
accordingly. Others had benefited from their advices and admonitions but
they themselves had remained unfortunate and unlucky. Such scholars will
chew their own tongues and will worry very much but to no avail.”

Those who Harassed Their Neighbours, the Oppressive Rulers and the Proud
------------------------------------------------------------------------

“Those who will arrive with their hands and feet cut off will be those
who had harassed their neighbours. Those who will come blind were
oppressive rulers who did not do justice. Who were proud and
self-centred will come dumb and deaf. Those who were putting innocent
people to trouble by reporting falsely against them before rulers will
be clinging to branches of fire. Foul smell will emanate from those who
were gratifying their passions by resorting to unlawful sexual pleasures
and also those who did not pay poor tax (Zakat or purifying deductions).
Those who were making a show of their pomp by wearing clothes of pride
will be, on that Day, wearing shirts of fire.”

It is mentioned in another tradition that there will also be some people
with rods of fire in their eyes. They will be those who were casting
their lustful eyes starring at prohibited men and women.

Offenders will be Recognised by their Faces in the Grand Gathering
------------------------------------------------------------------

Muhaddith Faiz quotes in his book Ainul Yaqeen, “When a drunkard will
arrive in the Grand Gathering (Mahshar), a bottle of wine will be
dangling from his neck and a cup of wine will be stuck to his hand. His
body will be spreading obnoxious and foul smell, which will be worse
than any dead body's smell. All in the gathering will understand that
this fellow was a drunkard in his worldly life. Everyone passing by him
will curse him.”

The singers and musicians will have their music instruments in their
hands, which will be hitting their heads. On that Day everyone will be
recognized by his condition as to what he was in the world.

***“The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be
seized by the forelocks and the feet. “(55:41)***

How will they Walk with their Disfigured Faces?
-----------------------------------------------

In the aforesaid book it is also mentioned that some people will arrive
with faces looking worse than the faces of monkeys and pigs. (These
animals will seem good looking compared to them).

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said, “People will be made to come to
the Mahshar field in three conditions: Some on backs of animals, some on
foot and some on their own heads (upside down).” People asked, “O
Messenger of Allah! How will they walk on their heads?” The Prophet
replied, “The one who enabled them to walk on their feet in the world
will also enable to walk on their heads.”

Hearts will Stick to Throats
----------------------------

***“And warn them of the day that draws near, when hearts shall rise up
to the throats, “(40:18)***

The fear and fright of that terrible Day will make hearts jump from
their chests and to stick to their throats. They (hearts) will neither
go back to their original place (so that they may feel ease) nor they
will jump out so that life may end and one may feel freed. On that Day
people's hearts will be full of worries and sorrows.

In short, the fear of that Day will make hearts jump from their chests
and they will be sticking to throats and block the passage of breathing.
This is a Divine Word of the Holy Qur’an. Lord Almighty has repeatedly
warned of such a fear some day and also said that, on that Day, a
brother will run away from his brother and hide his face from him. Man
will keep distance from his own parents too and so also from his family
members.

***“The day on which a man shall fly from his brother, And his mother
and his father, And his spouse and his son”(80:34-36)***

In this Holy verse the Lord of the universe has described the frightful
condition of man saying that the terrific fright will disrupt even the
closest relations like that between man and wife, father and children
and brothers and sisters. All relations will be cut off and everyone
will worry breathlessly about himself or herself and will find no time
to think about others. So, he will avoid everyone.

The reason for such avoidance could also be that he will fear the demand
of their rights, which were trampled by him in the world. Man will
become almost breathless. Despite such a big gathering the only voice
audible on that Day will be like that of bees.

***“On that day they shall follow the inviter, there is no crookedness
in him, and the voices shall be low before the Beneficent God so that
you shall not hear aught but a soft sound. “ (20:108)***

The Fortunate Ones who will be Safe from the Fear of Qiyamat
------------------------------------------------------------

There will also be some groups about whom the Holy Prophet has promised
that they will be in safety and peace on that Day of Resurrection. One
such group will be of those who became old and aged as Muslims. Giving
honour and respect to such Muslims will provide safety and peace from
the great calamity of Qiyamat.

If those (respectable) people were their weak aged parents, then giving
respect to them will bring further peace. Secondly, help and assistance
to poor and suffering people. If a man had helped such deserving
persons, for instance had raised up a fallen man or had removed the
worry of someone etc.[^4]

Masjid will be the Ark of Salvation in Qiyamat
----------------------------------------------

The mosque in which one was praying regularly with a sincere and zealous
heart will be, on the Day of Judgement, be brought in the form of a
saddle to the grave of that person and he will be made to ride thereon
and thus he will be carried to Paradise.

It is mentioned in narrations that a faithful believer will ask, “Where
is Sirat (the Bridge)?” Angels will reply that it has already passed
from beneath your mount. He will ask, “What kind of a rider is it? He
would be replied, “This is the changed form of those Masjids in which
you were regularly and zealously offering Prayers sincerely.”

Undoubtedly Mosque is the house of God. So it must be given every
respect. No stone should be left unturned in maintaining its dignity.

Death in or En-route to Mecca
-----------------------------

Among those who will be saved from the fear and fright of the Day of
Judgement are also those who die or get buried either in Mecca or
Medina. Similarly those also who die while going to the said Holy places
or while returning from there.

Among such fortunate persons are also those who had regarded their
desires as their enemies (they did not consider others as their foes).
The apparent meaning of a tradition sentence is that while passing life
in the society, if he finds unpalatable things in others he would not
blame others but only himself. He will scold only himself for having
hoped otherwise from others. Such people would ask themselves, “Why not
find fault with one's own self? Why find faults with others at all?”

It is no manhood and fortitude to find faults with others. Look also
into your own self. You will realize that you too are full of sins.[^5]

Patience in Passion and Anger
-----------------------------

The third group which has been promised to be protected and safe are
those who, despite being able to react angrily and thereby to do
something unwise, restrain themselves just due to remembrance of God.
Thus, they suppress their anger only for God's sake.

Such are the people who will be protected from the fright on the Day of
Judgement because they did not indulge in any carnal desire and any
selfish act to save their prestige but only for fear of Almighty Allah.
One of the Divine Mercies mentioned in books is that if a Faithful puts
his hand on one's grave and recites Surah Qadr seven times, the body in
that grave also remains protected from the fear and fright of Qiyamat.

The Love and Guardianship (Wilayat) of ‘Ali is a Guarantee of True Safety and Protection
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The real and true guarantee of protection from the terrible fright on
the Day of Judgement is the guardianship and love of Amirul Mu’minin
(a.s.). It is called the greatest good (Hasana). No other good can
surpass this good. Everyone having this good in his heart will remain
safe on the Day of Judgement:

***Surely (as for) those for whom the good has already gone forth from
Us, they shall be kept far off from it;***

***They will not hear its faintest sound, and they shall abide in that
which their souls long for.***

***The great fearful event shall not grieve them, and the angels shall
meet them: This is your day which you were promised.***

***“On the day when We will roll up heaven like the rolling up of the
scroll for writings, as We originated the first creation, (so) We shall
reproduce it; a promise (binding on Us); surely We will bring it about.
“ (21:101-104)***

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said, “O ‘Ali! You and Your Shi’as
(followers) will remain in peace from the terrible fright. And this
refers only to you.”

The Absolute 'Hasana' (Good) is the Wilayat of ‘Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Similarly, the Hasana, which is the 'absolute good', is the Love and
friendship of ‘Ali (a.s.) and the progeny of ‘Ali (a.s). Qur’an has
promised that on the Day of Resurrection, the one who will come with
'absolute good' will get the best reward and he will remain in peace
from the fright of that Day:

***“Whoever brings good, he shall have better than it; and they shall be
secure from terror on the day. “ (27:89)***

In the Qur’anic commentaries of the Ahle Sunnat people like Tafsir
Kashshaf of Zamakhshari, Tafsir Kabir of Fakhruddin Raazi, Tafsir of
Tha'labi and Tafsir Ruhul Bayan etc, it is mentioned that the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said that the one who dies with the love and

friendship with Aale Muhammad (a.s.) in his heart will die as a
repentant and clean one and when he is raised from the grave he would
enter the grand field of gathering (Mahshar) happily. He will neither
feel afraid nor any uneasiness overtake him. Paradise will be decorated
for him just as the bridal apartment is adorned for the bride…(till the
end of the lengthy narration).

What I wanted to present was the part showing that the followers of ‘Ali
(a.s.) will be in peace in Qiyamat.

Precaution or Preparation for the Future
----------------------------------------

The aim of this admonition is to create the fear of the Almighty God
through these Holy verses and thereby to make ourselves ready for the
forthcoming events. So, make arrangements for protecting yourselves from
the fears and terrors about which you have read; for example, the three
or four matters just mentioned.

Efforts for Betterment of Future and Entanglement in Greed
----------------------------------------------------------

All say that we should think and worry about the future and make
preparation for it. It is true and wise. But what is regrettable is that
they take precautions in the wrong way. They do not understand the
reality. If we want to prepare for the future (Hereafter/life after
death) what is the way to be safe there? Is it to deposit amounts in
banks?

Is the life span of fifty years (even less in some cases) so
insignificant that man should spend this precious time of his life only
for gathering wealth and then go away leaving it all here? This is sheer
ignorance and nonsense. Is one to remain hungry materially after death
so that he should collect more and more wealth and money? How many
people have you met who died of hunger?

Yes, of course, if there is a famine, hunger may be one of the reasons
for people's death, which has been destined. But, in normal conditions,
no one's future is in danger of starvation to death, however long his
age. It is so because, God Almighty has guaranteed sustenance for
everyone:

***And in the heaven is your sustenance and what you are threatened***
***with.***

***“And by the Lord of the heavens and the earth! it is most surely the
truth, just as you do speak. “(51:22-23)***

He provides sustenance to every living being and He will continue to do
so.

***“And there is no animal in the earth but on Allah is the sustenance
of it, “(11:6)***

But, in the matter of Hereafter (life after death) it is ordered, with
emphasis and encouragement and warning also that everyone must worry
before reaching the dangerous place (Hereafter) and make advance
arrangement for it. Man must try and make efforts so that he may not
stand empty-handed in the grand gathering (for giving accounts) in
Mahshar.

The True Savings Account is with God
------------------------------------

All of us say that God is Bountiful and Generous (Kareem). Quite true.
But if we really consider Him bountiful then why do we not regard Him so
in the worldly (material) matters. Why do we make so much strenuous
efforts in the worldly affairs, especially in the matter of sustenance?
This shows that what we say is not based on real conviction. We are not
truly convinced that God is Bountiful.

If you really and factually want to make arrangements for your future
(after death) then you should open your 'Saving Accounts' with God.
These prayers and charity are your savings, which are being credited to
your account with God and the Generous God protects it in a better way
and also gives better reward for it on the Day of Resurrection and in
this world also.

***“Whatever of good you send on beforehand for yourselves, you will
find it with Allah; that is best and greatest in reward; “(73:20)***

The Lord of the Universe has, in the Holy Qur’an, told His Prophet
(s.a.w.s.): Warn My servants about the events of future (Hereafter). Now
all of us know very well that all of us have to face a Day, which will
be full of hardships, dangers and anxieties.

Israfil will Blow the Trumpet
-----------------------------

When God will intend to bring forth Resurrection, the first thing to
happen will be the blowing of the Trumpet as described earlier. God of
the Universe mentions this several times in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And the trumpet shall be blown, so all those that are in the heavens
and all those that are in the earth shall swoon, except such as Allah
please; then it shall be blown again, then lo! they shall stand up
awaiting. “(39:68)***

Qur’anic verses, traditions, and narrations show that there will be two
blowings of the trumpet. First, when the trumpet will be blown all will
die except those about whom God desires otherwise. Then the trumpet will
be blown again which will cause all formers and latters to become alive.

God says in the above quoted verse: “When the Trumpet will be blown all
in the earth and the sky will be destroyed except those whom God may
desire that they should not die. Then the trumpet will be blown for the
second time when all the formers and the latters will become alive and
it will be Resurrection and all will stand staring.”

Four Favourite Angels and their Responsibilities
------------------------------------------------

The summary of this discussion is that there are four favourite or
esteemed angels with God (Jibraeel, Mikaeel, Israfil, and Izra'eel).
Each of them has a separate and distinct responsibility. Jibraeel has to
convey Divine Message (Revelation) from God to Prophets and Messengers
(a.s.).

Mikaeel has been entrusted with the responsibility of providing
sustenance. Izra'eel is in charge of collecting of souls and the job of
Israfil is to blow the trumpet at the time of Qiyamat. He is ready to
carry out his work with the trumpet in his hands, waiting for Divine
Command. (As mentioned in narrations) when Almighty God will order him,
he will come down to the earth from the sky and perform his duty.

Noise in Skies at the Thought of Qiyamat
----------------------------------------

When Israfil will proceed from the sky, those in the sky will tremble
with fear. When he will reach the earth and reaching the Holy House,
stand opposite the wall of Ka'ba and announce through the

trumpet, “Die, all of you.” Then no living thing will survive. There
will be none who will not breathe his or her last. It is mentioned in
narrations that at that time many people will be busy in markets. They
will die then and there. No one will get any respite even to make his
will or to return home. So the Lord of the Universe says, in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“So they shall not be able to make a bequest, nor shall they return
to their families. “(36:50)***

Then will come the Divine Command that the trumpet should be blown
towards those who are in the sky. So (Israfil will do so). No one in the
skies will remain alive. Then Israfil will be commanded, “You too die.”
So he also will be no more.

Only God will be there
----------------------

***“(Of) the day when they shall come forth, nothing concerning them
remains hidden to Allah. To whom belongs the kingdom this day? To Allah,
the One, the Subduer (of all). “(40:16)***

Then a voice will be heard: O Revolters! O Traitors! O Arrogants! O
those who were always shouting 'I'! Where are you now? Tell whose
kingdom and rule prevails today?” No one will reply. Then again a voice
will be heard, “Today rule and kingdom belongs only to Allah, the Only
One, the Almighty.” A period of time will pass after the blowing of the
first trumpet. Then will come the blow, which will make everyone alive.
After that would be the Day of Judgement.

Wonders before the Arrival of Qiyamat
-------------------------------------

People asked the infallibles as to what will be the length of the gap
between the first trumpet (killing) and the second one (making all
alive)? It is mentioned in narrations that the Imam replied, “Forty
years.”

According to another report it will be a period of four hundred years.
Yet another tradition says that astonishing events (as mentioned by us
earlier) like splitting of skies, their breaking into pieces,
earthquake, crushing of mountains into dust and the flaring up of oceans
etc will take place during the said period. Then will come the Divine
Command for rain. So it will rain for forty years continuously all over
the entire earth.

Blowing of the Second Trumpet
-----------------------------

After all living things will die and after the intermediate period
passes, the first one to become alive will be Israfil who will have to
blow the trumpet for the second time. Taking the trumpet to his mouth,
Israfil will announce, “O the souls! Come out of your scattered bodies.
O flesh and O worn out bones and O hair! All of you come together so
that your account may be taken. Run and rush speedily for giving the
account of your deeds.”

***Then it will be revealed to the earth, “Throw out whatever is inside
you.” “And the earth brings forth her burdens, “(99:2)***

Thereafter earth will, through severe jerks, throw out all the particles
of bodies lying in it. In short, all the particles of bodies will come
together and retake the form of their earlier bodies. Souls would be put
into them once again and all will rise up at once.

There is no deterrent or impossibility in the collection of particles
and the entering of spirit in them after the second formation of bodies.
For God Almighty, there is no difference in the affair of creating one
person and the recreation of millions of people:

***“Neither your creation nor your raising is anything but as a single
soul; surely Allah is Hearing, Seeing. “(31:28)***

God will command and all would become alive and gather at once.

Thank God who Fulfilled His Promise
-----------------------------------

Though all the earlier and the latter will come together in the grand
field of Mahshar their appearance and talk will be different. The
obedient and faithful servants of God will, while coming out from their
graves, would be praising and thanking their Lord Who fulfilled His
promise and held the Judgement so that they may get rewards of their
good deeds.

***“And they shall say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made***
***good to us His promise, “(39:74)***

But, on the other hand, there also will be people who will lament
regretfully, “Alas! Who made us rise from our graves?”

***“They shall say: O woe to us! who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? “(36:52)***

According to some narrations, one of their legs will be in the grave and
the other one out of it and they will stand there spell bound for three
hundred years. This will be the beginning of the chastisement.

How will they Raise their Heads from Graves?
--------------------------------------------

One day Jibraeel came to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and asked, “Would
you like to observe the condition of people on the Day of Gathering?”
“Yes,” the Prophet replied. Jibraeel, the trustworthy angel, took the
Holy Prophet to the graveyard of Baqi (Medina). He kicked a grave and
said, “Get up at the order of your Lord.” The grave split at once and a
man with radiant face raised his head from the grave saying,

***“(All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made good to us His promise,
“(39:74)***

Thereafter, he kicked another grave and said, “Rise up at the command of
your Lord.” At once, another man with a very ugly and frightened face
came out of this grave and said, *O woe to us!*

Jibraeel said, “The faithful and the unbelievers will rise up from their
graves in this condition.”

Two Contradictory Hopes about Qiyamat
-------------------------------------

It is mentioned in narrations that the faithful would wish in their
graves that God may establish Judgement soon as they had already tasted
samples of the bounties of Paradise and hence they desire it early. On
the other hand, the unbelievers and offenders will say, “O God! Let us
remain here only, because they have seen samples of the chastisement of
hell here.”

***“Abasing (one party), exalting (the other), “(56:3)***

On the Day of Resurrection, those who were low and weak materially but
had the riches of God's fear will become masters and great. Contrary to
this, those who were materially great and powerful in the world but had
no piety will become dishonoured and degraded. 'Degrader' and 'Upgrader'
are two Qur’anic names of the Resurrection Day.

All Secrets will become known
-----------------------------

Another thing, which will happen on the Day of Judgement is all those
things, which were kept hidden in hearts, will become open and manifest.
In this world there are veils on everyone's beliefs and deeds. But in
Qiyamat both the inner and outer state will become same, fully apparent.

So, O people who are very mindful of your positions! Have you also
thought about protecting yourselves from shame on that Day? On that Day
those whose hearts are clean and bright like angels will have similarly
shining faces. Those whose hearts are full of passions and lust will, on
that Day, have faces of monkeys and dogs.

Have you done anything for the stages to come after death so that you
may not have to be ashamed in front of all the past and later people? Do
you know how difficult problems you will have to confront, like being
naked in the Great Gathering? Have you done anything to save your honour
on that Day?

The Dress on the Day of Judgement will be Piety
-----------------------------------------------

***“And clothing that guards (against evil), that is the best.
“(7:25)***

On the Day of Judgement, when all will come out of their graves,
everyone will be naked, except some people who have been promised that
they will not be without clothes on that Day. They are those who feared
God in the world.

The one who will leave this world as a God fearing person will appear in
the Grand Gathering of Mahshar adorned in the Divine attire of Taqwa.
Likewise, also those faithful people who died without repenting but who
became purified by suffering hardships in graves. Of course, God forbid,
if anyone enters Field of Mahshar without becoming purified, he will
aspire to go to hell at the earliest so that his shamefulness in front
of the greatest gathering may end.

Adam (a.s.) Covered his Body with Leaves
----------------------------------------

The father of mankind, Adam erred by discarding a desired thing (Tark
al-Oolaa) and he was driven of out of paradise naked. Now, finding
himself naked in front of angels, he hid his organs of shame with
foliage at once:

***“And they both began to cover themselves with the leaves of the
garden; “(7:21)***

Remember that the one who is sinful will not be eligible for Divine
raiment. It may be you or I. No day ever passes in which we do not add a
sin in our account of deeds. Should we not worry about the hardships of
Qiyamat, if we don't have the dress of Piety?

It was the Infallible Imam Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) who used to pray till
dawn during nights of the Holy month of Ramadhan, remembering the
nakedness of the Day of Judgement:

*I am weeping remembering the naked rising from grave.*

Come; let us all join the prayer of the sinless Imam (a.s.):

*O Lord! Dress me in Your Bountiful Mercy so that my mistakes may be
covered and forgiven.*

The Sinners will be Recognized
------------------------------

***“The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be
seized by the forelocks and the feet. “(55:41)***

The first stage in the Gathering field will be astonishment which is
mentioned a number of times in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Hastening forward, their heads upraised, their eyes not reverting to
them and their hearts vacant. “(14:43)***

Eyes will make no movement due to extreme astonishment when one will be
a sinner having a sign of that sinfulness along with him or her, which
will make known to all in the grand gathering what sin he or she had
committed.

A bottle of wine will be stuck to his hand when a drunkard will arrive
in the field of Mahshar. (If you can remember, we have quoted the
narration of Muaaz while explaining this.) God has sworn by His Might
and Honor saying He will make the drunkard drink as much wine in hell as
he had drunk in the world.

Scene of a Drunkard in the Gathering
------------------------------------

It is mentioned in the book Layaliul Akhbaar that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said, “When a drunkard will arrive in the field of Qiyamat
his face will be dark, he eyes blue, his lips hanging and his saliva
flowing over his chest up to his feet. His tongue will project out of
his mouth.

Anyone who passes by him will suffer a lot of uneasiness due to the
stench emanating from the drunkard's mouth.” The Holy Prophet also said,
“By the God Who made me His messenger, the drunkard will die thirsty;
that he will remain thirsty in his grave; that he will continue crying
due to thirst for a thousand years. Thereafter, he will be made to drink
the water of Hell (Hameem).”

Faces of Usurers and Musicians
------------------------------

When a usurer will rise from his grave, his belly will be so enlarges
that it will drag on the earth. He will not be able to get up despite
trying to do so. He will be sitting head bowed down. Everyone in the
field of Mahshar will recognize him as the usurer.

The Musician's Instruments will be with him
-------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in the book Anwarun Nomaniya that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said, “One who plays violin will have a dark face and will be
holding a violin of fire in his hands which will be knocking at his
head. Seventy thousand angels of chastisement will hit on his head and
face. A singer will rise deaf, dumb and blind.”

The Condition of Double Talkers
-------------------------------

It is mentioned in narrations that those who have two tongues, meaning
those who say one thing in front of people and another (opposite) thing
behind their backs will be having two tongues of fire on the Day of
Judgement. Those who were harming others with their tongues will have
their tongues uprooted from their base in their mouths.

Arrogant People and Adulterers
------------------------------

There also will be a group in the field of Mahshar, which will be weak
and insignificant like ants. They would be the people who showed their
pride before others in the world. Such an offensive smell will emanate
from the private parts of adulterers in the field of Mahshar that all
will shriek and complain against them. Narrations indicate that every
bad and sinful habit will give a similar shape or form to the sinner in
Qiyamat whereby all will know what kind of deeds he was doing in the
world.

Day of Fifty Thousand Years' Duration
-------------------------------------

***“The measure of which is fifty thousand years. “(70:5)***

A tradition related from the Infallible is recorded in the third volume
of Biharul Anwar, which says that there will be a halt of one thousand
years at every station according to our system of counting of days
(solar or lunar).

***“The measure of which is a thousand years of what you count.
“(32:5)***

Why Qiyamat is Called a 'Day'?
------------------------------

There arises a question that when, in the realm of Qiyamat, there will
be no day or night, in the absence of the sun and the moon, then what is
the meaning of 'The Day of Judgement'? Why is it called a Day?

The answer is: We call that part of time a Day in which things become
bright because of the light of the sun and thereby human eyes can see
those things which are not visible to them during night. Likewise those
things, which were hidden from people in the world such as their inner
condition, their right or wrong beliefs, their good or bad deeds and
their consequences will come to be known to all and their consequences
too would become apparent in Qiyamat.

Qiyamat is the Day on which all the secrets and hidden things of man
would be unravelled.

***“And what they never thought of shall become plain to them from
Allah. “(39:47)***

Sun of truth will shine in Qiyamat
----------------------------------

This world is a night, darkness. No one knows about others. Rather man
is unaware of even his own self (inner self). People's deeds are hidden
from one another. But Qiyamat is a Day, which is a 'day' in its real
meaning with which there is no night.

The Day will be of fifty thousand years' duration when the sun of truth
will shine. In Qiyamat we will realize what we are and what others are.

The Station of Fear in Qiyamat
------------------------------

We have mentioned above that there will be several stations in Qiyamat.
The station astonishment has been described earlier. Another station is
that of fear which causes silence and stillness as mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“And the voices shall be low before the Beneficent God so that you
shall not hear aught but a soft sound. “(20:108)”***

***And warn them of the day that draws near, when hearts shall rise up
to the throats, “(40:18)***

The third station is that of talks and conversation, of questions and
answers between people:

***“And some of them shall advance towards others, questioning each
other. “(37:27)***

They will ask one another about their good and bad deeds.

Flying Away from one another like Locusts
-----------------------------------------

One of the stations will be that of fleeing and running away wherein all
will run to avoid one another. Father will run away from son, wife and
husband from one another, brother from brother. Everyone would try to
avoid one another. All will try to hide their faces. The Holy Qur’an has
likened it with scattered moths:

***“The day on which men shall be as scattered moths, “(101:3)***

In Surah Qamar God says:

***“Their eyes cast down, going forth from their graves as if they were
scattered locusts, “(54:7)***

Fear will show out of the eyes of the unbelievers. When they will come
out of their grave, they will scatter like locusts in the field of
Mahshar.

You must have observed that when an army of locusts arrives how everyone
of them flies in different direction, some upward, some downward, some
in the right, some in the left. They remain scattered in an unorganised
manner. Husband and wife, father and son etc will also, in the field of
Mahshar, on the Day of Resurrection, remain scattered likewise for
avoiding one another. But this fleeing of theirs will be useless.

Their Fleeing will be of no Use
-------------------------------

As mentioned in the explanation of Surah Rahman on that day, God will
command that angels on the first sky should come down to earth and take
the entire mankind in their control. The angels of the second sky will
stand encircling the angles of the first sky. Similarly angels of all
the seven skies will line up. These will be the Divine armies, which
will encircle and the Grand Field of Gathering (Mahshar):

***“O assembly of the jinn and the men! If you are able to pass through
the regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through; you cannot
pass through but with authority. “(55:33)***

On that Day men will ask, “Where should I run away?” There is no place
or room for escaping except towards the Lord. This also is only for one
who had some connection with God. Otherwise, for others, there is no
escape.

They will beg even for a Single Good on the Day of Judgement
------------------------------------------------------------

One more station will be that of asking and begging. Everyone will
request his acquaintance to offer one of his goods (reward fetching
deeds) but no one will oblige because he himself is also in dire need of
it.

A father will say to his son, “How many hardships I suffered for you
sake in the world. How much trouble I took for training you? Now, you
please give me one of your good deeds.”

The son will reply, “At this time, I myself am in dire need of the good
and I am more needy than you.” Similarly a brother will tell his
brother. But none would be able to help the other. All would be in
terrible anxiety and will not care for others.

Records of Deeds
----------------

Whether they use paper and ink or have any other way. Only the eye of
the Messenger can see it.

In short, Even the slightest step that you take is being noted down by
the angels. They record even the intention of doing a good deed. Of
course no evil (sin) is noted until it is committed.

The Fragrance of Good Intention Alerts the Angels
-------------------------------------------------

The narrator asked the Imam (a.s.) how angels know good intention of a
faithful person? The Imam replied, “As soon as a servant thinks of doing
a good deed his body emanates a pleasing fragrance. So the angels
understand it and they record that good intention.”

When a fellow thinks of committing an evil, the bad smell of it hurts
the angels. If a man thinks of doing good, a good is at once noted in
his record of deeds. Then, if he carries out that good deed, ten goods
are noted in his record.

***“Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, and whoever
brings an evil deed, he shall be recompensed only with the like of it,
and they shall not be dealt with unjustly. “(6:160)***

Just see His generosity. The one who will do a good deed will get
ten-fold reward of it. But if a man commits an evil he will be punished
only for that one crime or offence and he will not be dealt with
unfairly.

Respite in Recording Good and Evil
----------------------------------

One of the mercies and generosities of the Most Merciful One is also
this kindness that when a servant intends to do an evil the angel named
Ateed wants to note it down. But the angel Raqueeb tells him, “Just
wait. Give him some respite. Perhaps he may feel ashamed at his
intention and may repent over it.”

So that person is given a respite of about five to seven hours and no
evil is entered in his work sheet. It is all right if he repents during
this time. Otherwise, the angels say, “How shameless is this servant.”
Then they enter his crime.

They Note Even the Blowing at Fire
----------------------------------

Narrations show that there are two records for every person. One is the
record of good and another of evils. Each and every deed is recorded in
one of the two records. So much so that if a man blows in furnace or
fire that action too is noted down. It is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And everything they have done is in the writings. And everything
small and great is written down. “(54:52-53)***

The Master of the Universe ‘Ali (a.s.) Addresses Indecent Youth Talkers
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.) has mentioned in his book Aqaid that one day,
Amirul Mu’minin (a.s.) was passing by a place where he saw a group of
youths who were busy in senseless talking and joking. The Imam said,
“Are you darkening your records of deeds by such foolish deeds?” They
replied, “O Amirul Mu’minin! Do angels note even such gossips?” The Imam
(a.s.) replied, “Yes, they record even a blow in fire.”

Yes, even if you pick up and throw away a little thorn from a
thoroughfare, your eyes will be bright and cool tomorrow in Qiyamat,
because you saved the servants of God from harm. If you find a peel of
banana or any other fruit on a road and if you remove it with an
intention of saving God's servants from falling down, then remember,
even this small and insignificant deed will also not go unrewarded.

Wisdom Behind Record of Deeds
-----------------------------

Here arises a question that when God is All-knowing Himself why any need
of recording deeds of His servants?

***“Nay! Most surely the record of the righteous shall be in the Iliyin.
“(83:18)”***

***Nay! most surely the record of the wicked is in the Sijjin.
“(83:7)***

Why all this giving the record of good people in their right hands by
the angels and their carrying upwards and the records of evil fellows
downwards? The answer is that the Most Merciful God likes it that His
servants may not even go near evils and sins. If he knows that there is
someone who is recording his deeds as per God's Command, he will remain
cautious.

O sinful servant! Beware! The Lord of the Universe has appointed two
spies over you in addition to your own body organs so that man may have
some shame. On the other hand, they may be encouraged to do good through
their knowledge about the recording of deeds and its importance and
their good consequences. For a clearer understanding we explain as
follows:

Come! Look at My Mark sheet
---------------------------

How much happiness the student feels who stands first in the
examination. He jumps and shouts so that all may know about his shinning
success. “Come and look at my mark sheet!” shouts the student, “I have
stood first.”

Tomorrow, on the Day of Judgement too, a believer will be given his
scroll of Deeds in his right hand his happiness will know no bounds and
he will very joyfully tell everyone, “O friends! O my acquaintances!
Just read my Record of deeds.”

***“Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will
say: Lo! read my book: “(19:69)***

Look at this testimonial about the acceptance of my prayers, my fasting
and my good deeds! I was always worrying about the accounting of this
Day.

***“Surely I knew that I shall meet my account. So he shall be in a life
of pleasure, “(69:20-21)***

But how unlucky is the child who has failed in his examination. He will
walk towards his home bowing his head in a very unhappy state of mind.
He will be telling to himself: Had I died and not seen this dark day of
shame.

Sometimes such badly affected child also becomes ill. Multiply the
degree of effect of this example a thousand times. You will have an idea
of the pitiable condition of sinners when they will be given their
record of deeds in their left hand.

I Wish they had not Given me my Record of Deeds
-----------------------------------------------

And as for him who is given his book in his left hand he shall say: O
would that my book had never been given me:

***“And I had not known what my account was: O would that it had made an
end (of me): My wealth has availed me nothing: My authority is gone away
from me. “(69:25-29)***

He will say so only because he will observe that his record has nothing
but shame. He will wish for death after which there would be no death
again and everything would end permanently. Then he will wail, “Neither
my money help me nor my land and my power all have left me lurking in
pain and shame.”

How the Record will be Given from Behind
----------------------------------------

There also will be some people in the field of Mahshar on the Day of
Judgement, who will be handed over their records of deeds from behind:

***“And as to him who is given his book behind his back, He shall call
for perdition, And enter into burning fire. “(84:10-12)***

This (giving of record from behind) can be in two ways: First, both of
his hands may be tied to his back and his head will be turned so that he
can read his record. Another way can be that his left hand will pierce
in his chest forcing it to come out of his back and then his face will
be turned and he will be ordered to read his record:

***“Read your book; your own self is sufficient as a reckoner against
you this day. “(17:14)***

He will himself read back-biting, false allegations, lies, shameless
utterances and actions, assaults on others' honour and all other evils
committed by him in his worldly life. Likewise, he will also read the
offences done by his physical organs. He would start wailing, “This book
is such that it has not left even any big or small deed of mine without
writing it down.” Whatever he has done in the world will be now before
his own eyes.

***“And the Book shall be placed, then you will see the guilty fearing
from what is in it, and they will say: Ah! woe to us! what a book is
this! it does not omit a small one nor a great one, but numbers them
(all); and what they had done they shall find present (there); and your
Lord does not deal unjustly with anyone. “(18:49)***

Severe Pain after Reading the Record
------------------------------------

Some people will be such that reading their records of deeds all the
joints of their bodies will disintegrate. Blood and dirt will begin to
flow from their eyes. It is mentioned in a tradition of the Holy Prophet
that, at that time, a voice will come, “Is there in this record even a
single deed which you had not done?” He will reply, “No, O My Lord!
Everything recorded in this sheet is true.” Then he will bow his head in
shame.

No Suspension or a Suspension for a Thousand Years
--------------------------------------------------

On the Day of Judgement, man will, in a split second, remember all of
his lifelong deeds and also see them recorded in a scroll or sheet. It
would be a very strange realm. Everyone's record will appear clear
before everyone's eyes. Some people will be able to become free of
accounting within seconds. They will be the righteous people.

But some would remain suspended in their accounting for a thousand
years, not because their record will be very lengthy but what will be
aimed at will be the pain and hardship due for them. Some people's
accounting will take very little time, just as for milking a sheep. The
time taken for some people's account will be, so to say, from noon to
Asr afternoon. Some will remain suspended in accounting for forty years,
a thousand years and even up to fifty thousand years in some cases.

Good Tidings for the Friends of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------

And the return of the creation is towards you and their accounting is
upon you.

It is mentioned by Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.) through consecutive evidences in
Biharul Anwar vol. 3 that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said, “On the Day of
Judgement God Almighty will entrust the accounting of our Shi’as to us.
Then if there will be anything due to God, we will request God to grant
it to us and it will be granted. Then whatever will be due to us from
them we will forgive. Then the Imam recited this verse:

***“Surely to Us is their turning back, Then surely upon Us is the
taking of their account. “(88:65-66)***

The Holy Prophet will Pay-Up for the Rights of the Shi’as
---------------------------------------------------------

In the third volume of the same book of Biharul Anwar there is another
narration relating to the accounting on the Day of Judgement wherein the
Imam says after the mention of God's rights and Imam's rights (which
will be forgiven), “If Shi’as have to pay up the dues of people, the
same will be paid up to the concerned people by the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.).”

May the Most Merciful Allah make us the Shi’as of Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
and also raise us with them on the Day of grand gathering. Amen.

Thanks to God our Account has been Entrusted to Generous Persons
----------------------------------------------------------------

The good tiding for Shi’as is that, on the Day of Judgement, Almighty
Allah will call every community with their Imam. Glory be to Allah! How
lucky is the deed the auditor of which will be Hazrat Hujjat
Ibn-ul-Hasan (a.t.f.s.).

When the Imam will look at our deeds, though we will be bowing our heads
down due to our shameful deeds, we will be hopeful because of being his
lovers that he will intercede for us. Thanks to the Merciful God that
our accounting will be in the hands of the one who will be extremely
generous and who will be having a very high status in the court of God
Who alone is worth worship.

Balance (Mizan)
---------------

The Balance (Mizan) of the Divine Justice in which there is not the
slightest chance of deviation or mistake is the Holy Prophet or Amirul
Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.). If the Prayers of all the earlier and the latter
people are compared with the prayer of ‘Ali (a.s.) the latter's prayer
will surpass all other's prayers.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said, “The balances or scales
which will be established on the Day of Judgement, for weighting the
deeds of people will be the Prophets and their legatees.” They are the
Aale Muhammad (a.s.). Our prayers will be brought to the field of the
Grand Gathering (Mahshar) and it will be observed whether or not they
have any resemblance with the prayers of ‘Ali (a.s.).

Whether or not we have anything like the high virtues of ‘Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) like generosity, courage, bravery, self-respect, manliness,
kindness, justice and fair-play etc. Have we any of it and up to what
extent?

Of course, it is established fact that doubtlessly it is impossible that
our deeds, prayers, fasting and our virtues could ever be like those of
Imam ‘Ali (a.s.). The only thing to be seen is that our deeds must not
be contrary to the character of Amirul Mu’minin and the Holy Imams
(a.s.); that they should not be deviated or divergent from that. So, God
forbid, if you have extended your hand towards any prohibited thing or
have eaten the property of others unlawfully then do remember that you
have turned away from the balance of the truth.

What Wrong have we ever seen in Truth and Justice that we may turn towards the Wrong Path
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Has a man who is religious, who walks straight and acts with justice any
deprivation compared to one who adopts an irreligious and unfair path?
What does the former lack? These veiled women who observe religious
commands; are they lacking in anything when compared with the free
thinking unveiled women?

What comfort is not available to the religious woman? Do not imagine
that more pleasure of life is available to the unveiled women. If there
is any happiness, it is for the faithful also. If there is illness and
pain, it inflicts both.

There is no difference between them. Both are participating in the
pleasures of marriage. Both are equal in the matter of legal and lawful
worldly joys, though such joys too are not permanent. On the contrary,
we often see how an irreligious person suffers several deprivations. Let
me give an example.

Such an irreligious man looks at a beautiful woman in a cinema hall and
his heart becomes uncontrollable. Sometimes he becomes mad after such
desire. But does he succeed in what his heart longs for? Whatever
troubles he may take, it is not necessary that he must succeed in his
desire, because, it is possible that the said woman may be married.

How sorry will that man be after knowing this? Or think of the
drunkards. It is quite possible that in their condition of intoxication
they may quarrel or kill one another and then lead a lonely life behind
bars for several years. This applies to other matters too.

Peace and Comfort is Only for the Faithful
------------------------------------------

A trader who cares for what is permissible and what is unlawful knows
that the guarantor of his sustenance or provision is Almighty God. So he
does not indulge in dishonestly and unfair dealing in his business. He
does not worship the buyer. He does not flatter or deceive his buyers.
But the unlucky trader who does not care for truth and justice and fair
play, flatters his buyers and deceives them in various ways.

From every angle, we find such trader wrong and wayward. If we look from
the material viewpoint, we will find that the deviated people are in no
way superior to the righteous ones. Rather if there is anything like
true happiness and peace of mind and comfort it is available only to the
righteous and religious people:

***“Those are they who shall have the security and they are those who go
aright. “(6:82)***

The Profit of Materialists is Doubtful
--------------------------------------

The summary of our discussion is that those who abide by the balance of
truth have not lost or missed anything in this world also, nor are they
now at any loss. Rather, even if there is any profit they alone are
benefited by it. On the contrary, those poor people who deviate from the
true path are certain to bear the loss in the Hereafter. Their profit in
this world is also doubtful. Rather, they get nothing but loss and harm.

For example, if he has gained a profit of ten dollars by way of cheating
or unfair dealing, he spends its hundred fold in medicines. So, O people
who seek satisfaction in this world! Never deviate from the true path.
Let me know, have you ever suffered any loss due to walking on the
straight path? If you have not told a lie even in any single matter,
have you definitely suffered any loss due that truthfulness? Then why
should we ever leave the path of truth?

Come, let us all take an oath that we will never deviate from the
balance of truth and the balance of truth is the person of the Amirul
Mu’minin (a.s.).

Four Groups of People according to their Accounting
---------------------------------------------------

On the Day of Resurrection, people will be divided into four groups on
the basis of their accounting: Some people will enter paradise without
any accounting. They will be the friends of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) who never
committed any unlawful deed or they left the world after repenting.
Another group will be quite opposite of them, that is, they will go to
hell straight away without any accounting. About them God Almighty says
in the Holy Qur’an:

***“These are they who disbelieve in the communications of their Lord
and His meeting, so their deeds become null, and therefore We will not
set up a balance for them on the day of resurrection. “(18:105)***

There will be no accounting of those who leave the world without Faith.
There will be no value of their deeds because they had died without
Faith.

Punishment for a Hundred Years due to One Sin
---------------------------------------------

The third group is of those people whose deeds will be worth weighing.
They will remain suspended at the stage of Qiyamat. But at last, since
their good deeds will be more (than evils) they will get salvation. Of
course their suspension in the station of accounting will be in
proportion to their sins. Therefore, once the Holy Prophet told Ibne
Masood, “Man will remain suspended for a hundred years in Mahshar due to
one sin (though finally he will enter paradise).”

Of course, the narration does not specify as to what kind of sin it will
be. So a faithful must fear the suspension in the station of Mahshar
accounting. He should refrain from all big or small sins.

The fourth group will consist of those people the number of whose sins
will be more than that of their good deeds. If they are lucky to get the
intercession of the Infallibles and if God showers His mercy on them,
they will get salvation and will go to paradise. Otherwise they will be
awarded the punishment in hell.

They will have to remain in hell till they get purified by the
chastisement. Then they will get salvation and angels will take them to
paradise. No person who had even the slightest Faith will remain in hell
forever.

Only the unbelievers and the enemies of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) will live in
hell permanently. It means they will get no reward (everything will be
given to them either in the world or in Barzakh). Even if his good deeds
are numerous, he will never get a place in paradise because the basis of
entrance to paradise is belief in Almighty God and His Signs (verses).
How can one who does not have faith in God and who dies in such a
condition ever see paradise?

The Provision of Righteousness is to Die with Faith
---------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in the tradition regarding a Bedouin and the lizard that
the Holy Prophet once said, “I will guarantee the provision of
righteousness to the one who provides journey provisions to this
Bedouin.” Salman asked, “O messenger of God! What is the provision of
righteousness?” The Prophet said, “Saying Laa Ilaah Illallaah at the
time of death. If you say so at that time, you will see me. Otherwise
you will not see me.”[^6]

It must be understood here that reciting the formula faith in the
oneness of God means dying with faith in heart. So if one is in the
state of dying and is unable even to move his tongue and to utter
anything, the said faith in heart is enough. In such a condition if
people recite the reminder (Talqeen) to him, he must take it to heart.

Nullifying of Deeds and Expiation of Sins
-----------------------------------------

***And (as for) those who disbelieve, for them is destruction and He has
made their deeds ineffective. That is because they hated what Allah
revealed, so He rendered*** ***“their deeds null. “(47:8-9)***

We intend to describe this matter in a style understandable for all. The
fact is that if a man leaves this world with no faith in God even after
doing only good deeds throughout his life, he will not be benefit by it.
'Ahbaat' means to nullify, making void, to end and finish. Dying
faithless nullifies all good deeds. If somebody asks, “Is it not written
in the Holy Qur’an:

***“So he who has done an atom's weight of good shall see it. “(99:7)***

The reply is: The person who died faithless has himself destroyed his
deeds, because, after denying God, there is no meaning for him of
getting any reward and entering paradise (that is, whatever good he did,
he did not do in obedience to God, but he did it only because it was
good in his thought).

Therefore, God also paid him the reward of that good deed in the world,
as He has said that He does not destroy anyone's deed. As we have said
earlier, for example, it is possible that he may get relief during the
agony of death or he may not become ill or regain health soon, may not
suffer any monetary losses etc.

Curtain between Hatim and Nausherwan and the Fire of Hell
---------------------------------------------------------

It is also likely that good deeds of an unbeliever may cause curtailment
in his punishment in the Hereafter. Accordingly it is said that since
the generosity of Hatim Tai and the justice of Nausherwan was famous,
hellfire does not burn them though they are in it.

***“And repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds, until
when death comes to one of them, he says: Surely now I repent; nor (for)
those who die while they are unbelievers. “(4:18)***

Also it is mentioned at another place:

***“And (as to) those who reject Our communications and the meeting of
the hereafter, their deeds are null. Shall they be rewarded except for
what they have done? “(7:147)***

That is, One who goes as an unbeliever from this world, his deeds will
go in vain.

Sins which make a Man Die Faithless
-----------------------------------

All the verses and traditions, which were mentioned so far, about going
of deeds in vain, were regarding atheism and polytheism. But what about
other sins or offences? Do they also make good deeds go in vain?

Yes! Some of the sins are such according to some specific narrations.
For example, regarding disobedience to parents, it is mentioned by the
Infallibles (a.s.) that:

A voice will be heard: O disobedient to parents! Do whatever you wish;
none of your good deeds will ever be accepted.

If someone has made his or her mother unhappy, her complain will burn
down into ashes good deeds even if they are Himalayan in size. Some
other sins like making false allegations against others also make one
faithless. Likewise it is also mentioned that if one is much jealous and
openly so, causing pain to others, then according to a narration:
Jealousy devours faith like fire devours wood.

Faith is the Expiation of Disbelief and Repentance is the Atonement of Sins
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The root of 'Takfeer' (disbelief) is 'Kufr'.

***“That He may cause the believing men and the believing women to enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow to abide therein and remove from them
their evil… “(48:5)***

It means covering (hiding) and to remove the effect of sins. There is no
doubt that becoming a believer removes the effects of earlier disbelief.
So if one was faithless from the beginning of his life but he believed
(became Muslim) at the end and dies, he will certainly get salvation.

But the thing, which can remove the effects of sins committed by a
faithful person, is true repentance. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“So these are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones;
“(25:7)***

It means that the kind and Merciful God changes their sins and offences
into good deeds and virtues.

Good Deeds which Remove Evils
-----------------------------

Do any other good deeds except true Repentance also remove sins? The
answer is:

***Surely good deeds take away evil deeds; (11:114)***

This apparently shows that doing good deeds removes the effects of evil
ones. But it could not be made specific as to which good deeds are so
effective. Of course there are many narrations that speak about such
good deeds.

For instance, it is mentioned in Biharul Anwar, vol. 15, that a person
came to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and submitted, “O messenger of God I
have committed a very big sin (he had, when he was an unbeliever, buried
his daughter alive). So please show me a good deed that may result in my
forgiveness by God.” The Prophet asked, “Is your mother alive?”

He replied in the negative. (This indicates that behaving nicely with
mother is the best remedy for the removal of great consequences of great
sins). The Holy Prophet then asked, “Is your aunt (mother's sister)
alive?” He said, “Yes.” The Prophet said, “Go and behave nicely with
your aunt (it will turn into a good behaviour with your mother due to
her close relation with your late mother).” Then the Holy Prophet added,
“It would have been better had his mother been alive,” because good
behaviour with mother is very effective in removing consequences of such
sins.

Questions on the Day of Resurrection
------------------------------------

It is mentioned at many places in the Holy Qur’an that the Messengers
and the communities will be asked,

***“Most certainly then We will question those to whom (the apostles)
were sent, and most certainly We will also question the apostles;
“(7:6)***

The messengers and Prophets will be asked, “We had sent you to invite
people towards Us. Did you convey the message to them?” They will
submit, “Our Lord! You are witness that we left no stone unturned in
this matter.” A voice will be heard “Who is your witness?” All will
reply, “O Our Lord! Our witness is the last prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.).”

***“And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation that you may be the
bearers of witness to the people and (that) the Apostle may be a bearer
of witness to you; “(2:143)***

Similarly, Isa (a.s.) will be asked, “Did you tell people to worship you
and your mother?” Prophet Isa (a.s.) will tremble and say, “My Lord! Had
I said so, You must have known it at once. What I said was only that I
am a servant of God. So worship only my Lord and your Lord.”

***“And when Allah will say: O Isa son of Marium! did you say to men,
Take me and my mother for two gods besides Allah, he will say: Glory be
to Thee, it did not befit me that I should say what I had no right to
(say); “(5:116)***

Communities will also be questioned, “Did your messenger not inform you
about the events of today?” All would reply, “Yes, O Lord, they did!”

Bounties would be Questioned
----------------------------

On the Day of the Grand Gathering one of the questions will also be
about bounties granted to us by the Lord of the Universe as to what was
our attitude regarding the same.

***“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons. “(102:8)***

Meaning, “Did you thank God for the bounties or you lived and behaved
ungratefully?”

There are different narrations regarding thanklessness. The combined
summary is that there are several standards of bounties, the most
important and the highest rank is that of the bounty of guardianship
(Wilayat) of Aale Muhammad, rather it is the only absolute bounty.

Imam (a.s.) said to Qatadah, “What do you Sunnis say about the Holy
verse:

***“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.” “(102:8)***

He replied, “There will be questioning about these food articles like
bread and water etc.” The Imam (a.s.) said, “God is far higher than the
questioner of such queries. Will you ever invite a guest and, after
serving him good food, ask him about what he ate?” Qatadah asked, “Then
what is meant by 'boons'?” The Imam replied, “It is the bounty in the
form of our, the Aale Muhammad's love.”

How was your Behaviour with the Bounty of Wilayat?
--------------------------------------------------

It will be asked on the Day, “How did you deal with Aale Muhammad? To
what extent you loved them? How much did you obey them?” Enemies of
Ahlul Bayt would be asked, “Why did you have enmity towards this great
bounty?”

Nothing would be asked about food and water, except extravagance made in
it or about gaining it from prohibited sources and about spending it in
prohibited ways. Likewise it will be asked, “Why did you commit such and
such prohibited deed?”

Everyone will be Questioned about Four Things
---------------------------------------------

Specific questions will be asked regarding some bounties. One of them is
man's lifespan. It is mentioned in narrations that angels will not allow
people to go further in the field of Mahshar until they reply four
queries:

1. How did he spend his life and in which deeds was he engaged during
his youth.

2. Where from and how he or she earned money and where and how they
spent it?

3. There will be questioning about the Wilayat of Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
and the Divine Law will be enforced very strictly in this matter.

4. Where did one spend the wealth? If it were given to poor for making a
show of generosity, it will draw punishment.

Questioning about Worship Acts
------------------------------

***“And stop them, for they shall be questioned: “(37:24)***

The first question in the Gathering would be about Prayer.

If Prayer is accepted all other deeds would also be accepted…[^7]

Were the obligatory prayers offered in their proper times or not? Since
Prayer is the greatest pillar of religion and the greatest trust of God,
was it offered properly? Then there will be inquiry about all other
worships and prayers.

Sins are of Three Kinds
-----------------------

Amirul Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.) says in Nahaj-ul-Balagah:

Sins are of three kinds: The one, which will be forgiven, two; the doer
of which can hope for pardon and three; the sin which would never be
forgiven.

The forgivable sin will be that which might have been paid for in the
world. For example, the offender might have been punished according to
Shariat Law because God is far higher than to punish anybody twice for
one and the same offence. Another kind of sin, which can be hoped to be
pardoned, is the sin the compensation for which might not have been made
in the worldly life but the offender had made a true repentance.

Mirsad or the Valley of People's Rights
---------------------------------------

The third type of sin, which is not at all forgivable, is the taking
away of someone's right or oppressing somebody. These are the rights of
people. God will never overlook them. If one has taken unfairly or
oppressively even a little trifling thing of somebody unjustly, Almighty
Allah will make the oppressor repay it to the oppressed. That is meant
by 'Mirsad' in the verse:

***“Most surely your Lord is watching (Mirsad). “(89:14)***

It is described as the 'Valley of people's rights', that is to say; your
Lord is there to secure everyone's right.It is described as the 'Valley
of people's rights', that is to say; your Lord is there to secure
everyone's right.

Suspension for One Year because of a Straw
------------------------------------------

Muhaddith Qummi has, in Manazelul Aakhirah, recorded the story of a
famous pious man Sulaiman Daaraai, the well-known worshipper. He writes
that after he died, some people saw him in their dreams and asked about
his condition.

He said, “I have remained suspended for one year in a valley. The reason
is that, one day, some people were carrying bundles of hay to the city.
I just took one straw from a bundle for using it as a toothpick. After
my death, I am in this chastisement for the last one year for the sin of
not obtaining the consent of the owner of the hay before taking up the
straw from his bundle. They (the angels) ask me, 'Did you know that the
owner would have permitted it?'“

A Thousand Years in the Valley of Oppressions
---------------------------------------------

Do not ask, “Does a straw have any worth?” It is true that its value is
insignificant. Yet, it is anyway a property of someone. Some people take
up some things from the property in the presence of the owner (and the
owner keeps quiet by way of regard or respect). Such taking away of
other's property is called 'Shameless taking' about which it is
mentioned in narrations that it is just like usurpation and hence
prohibited.

Perform such deeds that, while leaving this world, there may not be even
the slightest burden on your shoulders. If you were careless about this
till now, still try to obtain the agreement of the owners of the usurped
things. This valley of rights too has stages depending on the people. It
is written that for some, such suspension will be for a thousand years.

Encroachment of Others' Rights
------------------------------

God Almighty will deal with people in two ways. One dealing will be
based on Justice and another on Grace. Everyone who has to pay someone's
rights will be compensated by snatching away some good deeds of the
oppressor and giving them to the oppressed one. This dealing will be
based on Justice. For instance, somebody had put a

false allegation on someone or had backbitten him or her. Now only God
knows how many of the good deeds of the backbiter should be taken from
him and given to the oppressed one. Now, in case, the oppressor has
nothing like a good deed in his account, the demand of Divine Justice
will be that a proportionate sin of the oppressed may be added to the
account of the oppressor or backbiter.

No Oppressor will Escape the Punishment due to Him
--------------------------------------------------

There is a lengthy tradition in Rauzatul Kafi regarding the accounting
and dispensing of justice on the Day of Resurrection. Therein Imam
Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) is reported to have said, “God Almighty says, 'I
am the Only One God. No one except Me is worth worship. I am the Ruler
and the Judge Who says nothing against truth. I deal with you on the
basis of justice. Today no one will wronged in My Most Supreme Court.

Today I will take from the mighty wrongdoer the compensation of the
oppressed weak. I will recollect from the debtor the due debt and will
make the payment of one another through exchange of good and bad deeds
done by them. Today is the Day on which, from this difficult path, no
one can pass from My sight without accounting for the rights, which were
usurped by him. O people who have gathered in the Grand Field of
Mahshar! Catch hold of every concerned oppressor and obtain whatever is
due to you. I Myself am the witness against the oppressors.'”[^8]

Repayment of Dues of Believers from Unbelievers and Vice Versa
--------------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned at the end of the aforesaid tradition that a Quraishite
man asked the Imam (a.s.), “If some dues are to be paid to a faithful by
an unbeliever what will he obtain from the latter who will be in hell?”

The Imam (a.s.) replied, “A proportionate cut will be made in the sins
of the believer and its punishment will be added to the chastisement of
the unbeliever.”

The Quraishite inquired, “If a Muslim has to obtain his right from
another Muslim how will it be retrieved?”

The Imam replied, “A proportionate cut will be made in the good deed
(reward) of the oppressor and it will be added to the reward of the
latter whose dues had remained unpaid.”

Again the Quraishite asked, “What if there is no good in the scroll of
the oppressor?”

Imam (a.s.) said, “A proportionate cut will be made in the sins of the
oppressed and its punishment will be added to that of the oppressor.”

Cut in Punishment Equal to Right
--------------------------------

It must not go unmentioned that if an unbeliever has to get his right
from a Muslim, since the unbeliever is not qualified to obtain a
believer's good, the demand of divine justice will be that a
proportionate cut be made in the punishment due to the unbeliever. For a
further understanding of this problem please refer to the story of a Jew
who had to be paid five Qiraan from a worshipper believer. It has been
mentioned in this book earlier.

Fear of the Claim of Rights
---------------------------

Imam Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) has been quoted in Layaliul Akhbar at p. 548
that on the Day of Resurrection, the hand of a person will be held and
raised high so that all could see it. Then it will be announced, “If
anyone has to take his dues from this person he should come forward and
take it.” No other thing will be more difficult than this situation for
the people in the field of Mahshar that one's acquaintances should see
one. He will fear lest they may not claim their unpaid dues from him.

Most Poor on the Day of Judgement
---------------------------------

In the same book, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is reported to have said
to his companions, “Do you know who is poor?” They replied, “He among us
is poor who does not have any money nor any property or assets.”

The Holy Prophet replied, “In fact, the poor in my Ummah is the one who
will bring with him his prayers, fasts, Zakat and Hajj but he had also
given a bad name to somebody, had taken someone's property unjustly or
had shed somebody's blood wrongly or had beaten someone unlawfully. So
all of his good (rewards) will be distributed to the aforesaid claimers
in proportion to their usurped rights until all of his good will be
finished and yet he will remain indebted. Then the sins of the rightful
claimers will be thrown in the account of the indebted fellow.”

Dealing Based on Grace
----------------------

The person, who will be showered with Divine Mercy, will, even though he
remains suspended in the station of people's rights, as he will have to
repay some unpaid rights he will be dealt with gracefully. At the time
some persons will be drowning in their own perspiration. The Most
Merciful Allah will, and then show to the gathering a palace of
paradise. Then a voice will be heard, “O people! Who claim any right
from this one of my servants! Listen. If you desire to dwell in this
heavenly palace then, give up your dues and free him.”

Truly, a man who behaves straight with God, his dealing remains straight
everywhere. How it is ever possible that God may not straighten it? That
is why Imam Sajjad (a.s.) weeps, “O God! Who except You will save and
protect me tomorrow from the claimers of their rights.”

Come, let us all also pray, “O Lord! Please deal with us on the basis of
Your Grace and Generosity and Kindness.” The Imam had taught a prayer to
Abu Hamzah Thumali in which it is mentioned at many places: My God! I
beseech Your Grace and Mercy.

The Cistern of Kauthar
----------------------

The Qur’an says,

***“Surely We have given you Kauthar, “(108:1)***

One of the Islamic matters about which there is specific mention in the
Holy Qur’an and so also in both Shi’a and Sunni narrations is The Pool
of Kauthar: “That abundant good which has been granted by the Lord of
the Universe to His Messenger Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.s.).”

The length of this cistern, as mentioned earlier, is equal to the
distance from Sana to Basra. Cups equal to the number of stars in the
sky will be on its bank, which will be filled by the hands of *Houries*
and will be served to the Believer. These cups will be of various kinds;
some will be made of heavenly silver and some of flint glass.

Kauthar, Heavenly Wine - Springs of Milk and Honey
--------------------------------------------------

According to some narrations, this Hauz or cistern will be divided into
three parts:

Heavenly wine, milk and honey will be flowing in streams.

Anyway, it is certain that the contents of this cistern of the Holy
Prophet will be sweeter than honey and cooler than ice. Glory to God.
What to talk of the cistern the drinking from which will be very
pleasing and after drinking which one will ever be thirsty.

And quench our thirst from the Cistern of his ancestor, by his cup and
by his hand…(Dua Nudbah)

Shaykh Shustari has, in Khasais, and other tradition writers too, have
in their works, mentioned that the distributors of the Pool of Kauthar
will be the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Amirul Mu’minin (a.s.) and that
every believer will get the water of Kauthar.

Kauthar becomes Happy with the Mourners of Husain (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------

The mourners of Husain (a.s.) have one additional distinction with
respect to the Pool of Kauthar. Imam Sadiq (a.s) says, “The mourners of
Husain (a.s.) will on arrival at the Pool of Kauthar make the pool
happy.”

For more details please refer to the first part of the late Khaybani's
book Muharram *Wa Waqaiyal Aiyaam*.

The Ears Acquainted with the Heavenly Song
------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said, “The Lord of the universe has
created a thousand tress around this pool. Every tree has three hundred
and sixty branches full of leaves and every leaf gives out (releases)
different songs. If you want to hear those sweet and pleasing sounds,
then you must make your ears worthy of it, that is, you should not lend
your ears to worldly music and the non-sense that accompany it.”

Appearance of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad
----------------------------------------

Owner of the Liwaul Hamd flag and the praised position (Maqam
al-Mahmood)

One of the stations of Qiyamat will also be that of appearance of the
grandeur and greatness of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and the progeny of
Muhammad (a.s.).

Liwaul Hamd means the flag the high span of which will be equal to the
distance covered in a thousand years' journey. There will be three parts
in that flag and each one of them will be equal to the distance between
the east and west. It is mentioned in another narration that every part
of that flag will be bigger than the sun and the moon. On one of them
will be written 'In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful', on
the second, 'Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds' and on the
third, 'There is no god except Allah, and Muhammad is the messenger of
Allah'.

All the messengers, prophets, pious and righteous people and the
faithful will camp beneath that flag the bearer of which will be the
conqueror of Khaibar Amirul Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).

The Pulpit of the Medium (Wasilah)
----------------------------------

“And bring near to the Wasilah”

In the aforesaid words of the prayer, 'Wasilah' means that particular
pulpit of light, which will be established in the field of Mahshar. It
will have one thousand steps and every step would be cemented with
another by emerald, chrysolite, ruby and gold and all these precious
things will be from paradise.

The topmost step will be reserved for the last Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) and the one below it will be for the immediate legatee of the
Holy Prophet, Amirul Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.) and those lower will be for
Ibrahim (a.s.) and other messengers and legatees according to their
ranks.

Praised Position (Maqam al-Mahmood)
-----------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) will occupy the pulpit so elegantly and will
be initiating the praise of Almighty Allah in such a magnificent way
that none of the formers and the latters will have ever heard such
praise.

After the said glorification of the Lord Almighty, the Holy Prophet will
say to the angels, the messengers, the righteous people and the
faithful, “What to say about the fortune whereby of the first person of
the realm of existence who he may remember on this high place. O Lord!
Place us among this pious group.” Read this sentence carefully in the
Ziyarat of Ashura:

I beseech Allah for reaching the Maqam al-Mahmood (the praised stage)
which (O Aale Muhammad!) God has reserved for you.

This high station is the reward of the Holy Prophet's waking during
nights and early rising at dawn:

***“And during a part of the night, pray Tahajjud (the midnight prayer)
beyond what is incumbent on you; maybe your Lord will raise you to a
position of great glory (Maqam al-Mahmood). “(17:79)***

The Holy Prophet did not rest during nights for ten years till dawn and
he worshipped so much that his legs became swollen.

‘Ali Ibne Abi Talib, the Distributor of Paradise and Hell
---------------------------------------------------------

At the said Maqam al-Mahmood, the most beautiful angel will come to the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and salute him and say, “I am Rizwan, the keeper
of paradise.” Then he will submit the keys of paradise to the Holy
Prophet.

Thereafter a very fearsome and ugly angel will approach the Holy Prophet
and submit the keys of hell to him. The Holy Prophet will entrust all
the keys to the Amirul Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.). The Amir (a.s.) will come
to the Sirat Bridge and only he will go to paradise those he permits.
The leaping flames of hellfire will drag others to Hell.

The Holy Prophet will tell Amirul Mu’minin, “O ‘Ali! The obedience of
the hell fire to you is much more than the obedience of a slave to his
master.”

Sirat Bridge
------------

***“And most surely those who do not believe in the hereafter are
deviating from the way. “(23:74)***

Sirat too is one of the things belief in which is obligatory and it is
one of the Essentials of Faith. So one must have an overall faith in it.

The literal meaning of Sirat is 'Path'! Those people who had remained on
the right path, that is, who had not deviated from the right way of
truth, honesty and righteousness will, in the Hereafter too, pass
securely and safely on the path over hell.

Some of them will cross that bridge as swiftly as lightning, some like
mounted men and some falling and rising. Briefly speaking, they will
cross that bridge in the same way in which they had crossed the path of
their lives in the world.

A Thousand Bridles of Hell in the Hands of a Thousand Angels
------------------------------------------------------------

Explaining the Holy Verse:

***“And hell is made to appear on that day. On that day shall man be
mindful, and what shall being mindful (then) avail him? “(89:23)***

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said, “On the Day of Resurrection,
hell will be brought forth in such a manner that it will have a thousand
bridles and every bridle will be held by a thousand angels. Thus a
million angels will be dragging hell. Hell will be shrieking and flames
will be leaping high from it. It will encircle the entire gathering in
Mahshar like the bezel of a ring.

People of hell will be so restless that some of them will be almost
dead. At that time will come the Command of God to bring forth Sirat. A
bridge will be raised over hell and each and everyone will have to pass
over it without any exception. The following verses explain this matter:

***And there is not one of you but shall come to it; this is an
unavoidable decree of your Lord. And We will deliver those who guarded
(against evil), and We will*** ***leave the unjust therein on their
knees. (19:71-72)***

Both the people of paradise and the people of hell will have to cross
that bridge. Then the Holy Prophet said, “There will be seven valleys in
that path and there will be some stations in every valley and every
station will be of a length of seventeen thousand farsakhs (1 farsakh=6
km) and seventy thousand angles will be posted in every valley. All will
have to cross all of these valleys compulsorily.”

The First Valley
----------------

### Ties of kinship, trust and Wilayat

You will be stopped at the beginning of the bridge. “O the one who had
broken off relations with your father and mother and brother!” Bad
consequences of bad behaviour with these close relatives do appear even
before death like decrease in lifespan and removal of bountifulness from
wealth. One will be asked about this offence in Qiyamat at the start of
Sirat also. The Holy Qur’an asserts:

***“And be careful of (your duty to) Allah, by Whom you demand one of
another (your rights), and (to) the ties of relationship; “(4:1)***

If anyone of your close relatives becomes ill, visit him, help him if he
is poor and needy. Support him if required. Do visit him at appropriate
hours without fail.

### Dishonesty in Wealth and Talk

Another station is that of trustworthiness. It is not concerned only
with money. If someone tells you something and also says that it should
be kept secret and then if you tell it to someone else then also you
have done a dishonest thing (a breach of trust).

A gathering is a trust. That is whatever is disclosed to you in a
private gathering is considered a trust with you.

If you have dishonoured or disgraced somebody, then you have been
dishonest with him. For example, someone pledged his house with you and
took a loan from you. Now, if he returns your money at the fixed time
and you do not return his house to him, you have committed dishonesty,
because, it will be an excessive use (contrary to contract conditions).

Similarly, if you have taken someone's house or shop on hire or lease
you must vacate the said premises as soon as the period ends. In short,
be the dishonesty verbal or in deed, you will be questioned about it.

### Permit of the Wilayat of ‘Ali (a.s.) for Crossing the Sirat

One more station in the very first valley, which has been mentioned in
many Sunni and Shi’a narrations, is the Wilayat of ‘Ali (a.s.). In
commentaries like that of Thalabi, the explanation of verse:

***“And stop them, “(37:24***)

Is shown as: Stop them! They will be asked also about the Wilayat of
‘Ali, that is, whether or not they were friendly with ‘Ali (a.s.)?

Hamuyuni and Tabari both are famous Sunni scholars. They have said that
the Holy Prophet remarked, “O ‘Ali! The one who will possess the permit
of your Wilayat (friendship) will cross the bridge.”

There are many other narrations also which we omit for brevity sake.

Second Valley -Prayer
---------------------

After crossing the first valley (Wilayat, Trust and Family relations)
man will reach the second valley where he will be asked about daily
prayers (Salat), prayers for Signs (such as eclipses) and missed prayers
etc. as hinted earlier.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said, “The one who missed prayers will not
receive my intercession. The last Will of Imam Sadiq (a.s) was, “Our
intercession can never reach those who underestimated the value of
Prayer”[^9], for example, who prayed Morning Prayer at sunrise or just
before it, or offered Afternoon Prayers near the sunset. Such people
will also not get the intercession of the Infallibles (a.s.). Then what
to say about those who do not pray at all? “

It is mentioned in narrations that one who gives up prayers dies thirsty
and he will also rise thirsty on the Day of Judgement.

### Teach the Prayer to Children and make them Habituated to it

A point which I want to emphasize and which I wish that all should know
and convey it to others also is the responsibility, which is on us with
regard to our children. We must make our children habituated to prayers
even before they become adult.

It is incumbent on all of us to train our children in such a manner they
may become regular worshippers. There is no doubt in it that we will get
its reward. The reward of whatever good deeds the children do before
majority (as a result of the parents' efforts) will reach the parents.
Even after the children become adults, their parents will benefit by
their good works, as God will be pleased with the parents who trained
their children nicely.

### Reciting 'Bismillah' by a Child Ends the Chastisement of his father

You might have heard that once a messenger was passing by a graveyard
with his companions. At one spot, the Prophet told his companions, “Walk
away from this spot quickly because the person in this grave is being
punished.”

One year thereafter, that messenger was again passing with the same
companions by the same graveyard but then there was no sign of any
chastisement. The messenger said to God, “O Lord! How is it that now
this body is not being punished?”

Came a voice, “He had a son. After this man died, people took his son to
a Madressa where the teacher taught the child to recite
'Bismillah-ir-Rahmaan-ir-Raheem'. So when the child recited this and
remembered Me with my attributes of Rahman (kind) and Rahim (Merciful)
We too removed from this child's father his punishment as he was the
means of this child's birth.”

Thus a child's prayers and worship acts also benefit the parents. So it
is our duty and the first demand of Amr Bil Maaroof and Nahy Anil Munkar
(Commanding of good and prohibition of evils) that we should pay our
attention first to our children and thereafter to other near and dear
ones.

***“O you who believe! Save yourselves and your families from a fire
whose fuel is men and stones; “(66:6)***

Third Valley - Khums and Zakat
------------------------------

If someone had failed to pay even one dirham of Khums or Zakat (poor
tax) then he will be stopped in the third valley. There are many
narrations regarding those who do not pay Zakat. In one of them the
Infallibles (a.s.) have said, “God will make 'aqraa' overpower the
fellow who did not pay Zakat and it will cling to his neck.” (When a
python becomes too much full of poison its hair fall down and such a
gigantic bald python is called 'aqraa' in Arabic).

In another narration, the Imam says, “If a farmer does not pay Zakat on
his land, the same land along with all of its seven layers turns into a
heavy stone clung to his neck.

Similarly, it is mentioned that Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will, in the time
of his appearance, kill the one who stopped Zakat payment.

So beware! Not a single dirham of Zakat should remain unpaid because, if
you had collected gold, silver and wealth and had not paid the Zakat for
it, those dirhams and dinars will be made red hot in hellfire for
branding the sides of that offender.

***“On the day when it shall be heated in the fire of hell, then their
foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be branded with it; this
is what you hoarded up for yourselves, therefore taste what you hoarded.
“(9:35)***

By the way, let it also be understood that there is no difference
between the Zakat of wealth and the Zakat of body. You should pay the
Zakat of your body (Fitrah) during the night of Eid-ul-Fitr.

### When the Intercessor himself will become the Opponent (claimant)

Now remains the problem of Khums. Narrations in this matter show that
this questioning will be harsher than that regarding Zakat. Only one of
many such narrations is sufficient for emphasis.

In Kafi and in Tahzeeb and also in Man Laa Yahzaruhul Faqih, it is
written that Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s) said, “On the Day of Judgement,
that hour will be extremely hard for people when those entitled to Khums
will raise their claims and they will ask their dues from those who did
not pay the same.” It is enough (for showing the importance of this
matter and the seriousness of this offence) to mention that those who
are intercessors will come up as opponents.

Fourth Valley - Fasting
-----------------------

There will be questioning about the fasts of the Holy month of Ramadhan
in the fourth valley.

Fast is a shield against fire.

The Holy Imam (a.s.) said that one who fasts gets two pleasures: The
first is at the time of breaking the fast (sunset) when one gets a very
pleasing feeling. Another is at the time of death or while crossing the
Sirat when he or she will meet his or her Lord.

Fifth Valley - Hajj
-------------------

If a person, during any period of his life, gets the ability to perform
Hajj (according to relevant conditions) and yet he does no perform it,
then he will be stopped in this valley. Rather, on the basis of a
narration, there are two groups who will be told at the time of their
death:

You are dying as a Jew or a Christian (non at as a Muslim).

Those two groups consist of people who did not pay the due Zakat and
those who did not perform Hajj. It is enough for the condemnation of one
who does not perform obligatory Hajj to say that the Lord of the
Universe has, in the Holy Qur’an, used the word unbeliever for him:

***“And pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of
Allah, (upon) every one who is able to undertake the journey to it; and
whoever disbelieves, then surely Allah is Self-sufficient, above any
need of the worlds. “(3:97)***

No more discussion on these subjects is advisable as, by so doing, we
will be going out of the discussion of Principles of Faith. Our only
intention is to provide their list to most of the believers.

Sixth Valley - Ritual Purity
----------------------------

Ibne Abbas is reported to have said that Taharat (ritual purity) means
all the three types of cleansing, that it, Wuzu (ablution), Ghusl (bath)
and Tayammum (dry ablution). Some tradition writers have said that what
is meant is absolute cleanliness.

If someone is not regular in cleaning (women must especially take care
of their cleanliness at particular times, otherwise) such persons will
be stopped in the sixth valley for questioning in this regard. Rather,
it is also found in some narrations that, as mentioned by us earlier,
that being careless about cleanliness results in the punishment of the
squeeze of the grave.

Seventh Valley - Oppression
---------------------------

This valley is also called the Valley of Justice and the Valley of
People's Rights. In the Holy Qur’an, it is called Mirsad, which means
ambush:

***“Most surely your Lord is watching (in ambush). “(89:14)***

If anyone was slapped unjustly the offender will be detained in this
valley for five hundred years and his bones will be crushed as a
punishment for this crime.

O shopkeeper! What right have you to beat your servant? O teacher! On
what legal ground are you punishing a child whereby it leaves bruised on
the child's body? O Mr. Husband! Why are you beating your wives? From
where did the husband get a right to whip his wife?

Of course, there are some exceptions. But such circumstances are rare
and they are out of our subject and hence not discussed here. Otherwise
we would have dealt with them also. The Qur’an says:

***“And (as to) those (women) on whose part you fear desertion, admonish
them, and leave them alone in the sleeping-places and beat them (but
only to the extent that there is no bleeding and no limb breaks); then
if they obey you, do not seek a way against them; surely Allah is High,
Great. “(4:34)***

### Forty Years Imprisonment and Forty Years of Chastisement and Scolding

In short, who is there who can claim that he has never breached and
trampled the rights of others? The Infallible (a.s.) has said, “If
somebody has withheld someone's right, for example, not returned his
trust then he will be detained in the valley for forty years and that
nothing will be said to him. H

e will keep crying and weeping during all this time. Then an announcer
will announce, 'This is the fellow who kept some property of others with
him.' Then he will be reprimanded for another forty years. Then he will
fall down in hell.”

Of course, this punishment will be awarded in case his scroll of deeds
had no good deed. Otherwise, his good will be, proportionately, given to
the rightful claimant as mentioned earlier. It is mentioned in some
narrations that the reward of seven hundred units of prayers will be
given for non-payment of single dirham.

### A Strange Story about Burning in Barzakh

It is written in Mustadrak of Noori that according to what is mentioned
in Anwaar-ul-Maziyyah (by Sayyid Gayasuddin Najafi, a Shi’a jurisprudent
and a famous scholar among Imamiyah): In our village situated near Hilla
there lived a man named Muhammad bin Abi Azeenah.

He was the trustee of a mosque. He used to attend that masjid daily as a
routine. One day, when he did not come to mosque, we inquired about him.
We came to know that he was ill. We wondered very much because on the
very previous day, we had seen him hale and healthy. When we went to see
him, we found him burnt from head to feet. He used to faint; them become
conscious and again faint. In one such interval, I asked him what had
happened to him?

He replied: Last night in my dream I was shown Sirat and then I was
ordered to walk over it. So I proceeded. In the beginning the ground
under my feet was levelled. Then I found that it has become thin.
Initially, it was soft but later on it turned very sharp. I was putting
my steps very slowly, balancing myself to avoid falling. Dark flames of
fire from beneath leapt upwards. I observed that many people were
dropping down like leaves in autumn.

Once I felt that there was nothing except a hair like rope under my
feet. Then suddenly the fire dragged me to it and I also fell down in
that cave of fire. The more I tried to come up the more I was going
down. (Hellfire has the quality of drawing people to it, and that,
according to a narration; the depth is equal to the length of a
seventy-year journey).

As soon as I realized that I was about to be finished, I remembered that
whenever I was falling or stumbling or falling, I used to exclaim O
‘Ali! And saying O my master, O Amirul Mu’minin, save me. I felt
inspired to look upward. So when I looked up I found that a saintly
person was standing by the side of the Sirat.

He extended his hand, caught me and fetched me out. I submitted, “O
Master! I am burnt down. Please help me.” The Imam passed his Holy hand
over my body from my knee to femur. Suddenly I woke up to find that
particular part of my body had no sign of burning and that it had healed
but the rest of my body was burning.

That person remained bedridden for three months, weeping and
complaining. Various medicines were given by a number of doctors and he
became healthy after three months when new flesh appeared on his body.
It is also written in the book of Mustadrak that whenever that person
was describing this even he was getting fever and was trembling.

Doubtlessly there is only one medicine and it is to cling to the Wilayat
of the pious Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Imam Ridha’ (a.s.) has promised that he
will guide the visitors of his shrine on the bridge of Sirat. Moreover,
Imam Husain (a.s.) is also reported to have given many good tidings to
those who cling to the Wilayat of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) with regard to
Sirat. So much so that, in one narration, Imam Sadiq (a.s) is reported
to have said that the Chief of Martyrs (Imam Husain) will obtain
salvation of Muchtar (r.a.) also.

Intercession
------------

Another thing, which has been accepted as an essential is the belief in
intercession on the Day of Judgement. Those pious persons who have
attained nearness to God and who are also respectable in the Divine view
will hold the hand of the fallen weak and unable ones to free them from
the chains and shackles of hell. It can also happen that they will raise
someone's rank in paradise.

For instance, a man enters paradise due to his good deeds but as he got
a lower rank he is unable to be benefited by nearness to Muhammad and
Aale Muhammad (a.s.). So the Pure Imams (a.s.) will intercede on their
behalf and get a higher rank for them. In brief, everyone is in need of
such intercession.

### The Entire Creation including Messengers will need the Intercession of Prophet Muhammad

According to Biharul Anwar, Abu Aiman is reported to have said that he
once requested Imam Baqir (a.s), “O Son of the Messenger of Allah! You
saints have made people proud (careless) by promising intercession to
them.” This infuriated the Imam. He said, “Woe unto you. On the Day of
Resurrection, all the formers and the latters, including even
messengers, will be in need of the intercession of my great grandfather,
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). Have you become proud imaging that you need no
intercession?”

### Greater Intercession is the Prerogative of Only Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.)

The main intercession is the intercession by Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and the
Aale Muhammad (a.s.). rest of intercessors are branches of the main one.
This is to convey that they got this privilege because of the former.
For example, among the rest of the intercessors are scholars and
righteous people who will help many in entering paradise. Can they ever
be other than the followers of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.)?

Likewise, among the intercessors will be the faithful. The Infallible
(a.s.) says that every believer will intercede in favour of a hundred
persons. From where did the believers get this honour? Only from
Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Also for instance, the intercessors will also include the Sayyids. Have
they not been given this respectable position only due to their
belonging to the Holy Progeny? Similarly the Holy Qur’an and the Holy
mosques will also intercede on the Day of Resurrection. They too are
among the symbols of the aforesaid Holy persons.

Intercession at Every Stage
---------------------------

The main place of intercession is the field of Mahshar (Qiyamat). But
there are evidences to show that intercession is effective not only in
Barzakh but also in this world. For example, some kind of calamity is
about to fall at a certain place but that trouble is removed as a result
of the intercession of Hazrat Waliul Asr (a.t.f.s.).

Or, for instance, a body is under chastisement in the grave (barzakh)
but someone from his relatives in the world approaches the Holy Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) and after much weeping makes them a medium. The Merciful God
pardons the aforesaid dead relative or friend due to the holiness of the
said saints. If all our said masters will intercede God will surely
forgive us. Many such events have taken place.

In this connection, Martyr Dastghaib Shirazi has, in his commentary of
Surah Najm quoted two events. Those who wish may refer to the chapter
'Shafat by Hazrat Abul Fazl Abbas'. The story of Sayyid Humairi is also
to be found in many books.[^10]

### Student who Became a Doctor

An event of healing by Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.) is also
recorded in our world and that is the story of Haji Mirza Khalil. It is
a recent event. Some aged people even today may remember it.

At first Haji Mirza Khalil was a student in Madressa Darus Shifa in Qum.
Once when he was sitting in his room, an old lady came running anxiously
and said, “My mistress has a serious heart trouble. Do you know of any
medicine?” The Haji who had no concern with medical science, at once
replied, “Give such and such medicine to her.”

The next day he saw people coming to him with plates full of tasty foods
as compensation for his prescription. Thereafter neighbours knew that a
very knowledgeable doctor has arrived in the Madressa who cures serious
illnesses only through prescriptions. As a result, people began to rush
to the Haji's room.

He also thought that the arrangement wouldn't do. So he purchased Hakim
Momin's book 'Tohfaa' and after studying it, engaged in the work of a
medical practitioner regularly. He became an expert physician soon and
people took him to Tehran and he remained in that profession for long.
Once he thought of going to Karbala’ but he was not in a hurry for it.

One night, he saw someone in his dream who was telling him, “If your
intention is to visit Karbala’, then make haste for there is a
likelihood of a ban on visits to the Holy Place after about two months
(and the same happened).”

### An Indian Sayyid Lady and Leprosy

The late Haji Khalil proceeded towards Karbala’ within two months and
witnessed what he had seen in his dream and understood that it was a
true dream. He stayed in Karbala’ for quite a long time and continued
his medical practice there also. One day, two ladies came to him. One of
them showed him her hand, which had a strange kind of wound on it.

The Haji said, “This illness is called Khorah, which has reached the
bone and hence become incurable.” That lady returned very disappointed.
But her companion came back and said, “O Haji! Did you not recognize
that lady?” “No,” said the Haji. She said, “That woman is a Sayyid lady
and she is one of the Indian princesses. Her longing for Ziyarat of
Husain (a.s.) has dragged her up to Iraq along with all her wealth. Now
she has also become poor due to this ailment since long. You too have
made her hopeless!”

The Haji said, “Please bring her back at once.” When that lady returned,
the Haji said, “O respected madam! Though this ailment is very
complicated and hard, I will give you some medicines. Insha Allah you
will soon recover.”

So the treatment began and the lady's hand was cured. After this, that
lady was so impressed by the Haji that she stayed in his premises and
behaved like a kind mother with him.

### You will Die after Ten Days

After a few days, Haji Khalil saw the same person in his dream that he
had seen earlier (and who had advised him to hasten to Karbala’). Now he
told the Haji, “You will fall ill and die after ten days.” Haji made his
will. He became ill after a few days and his condition turned for the
worse until on the tenth day; he was almost dead.

When the Haji was breathing his last, that Sayyid lady came up to him.
Seeing the Haji's serious condition she became very fearful. She told
the people not to touch the Haji until she returned. She proceeded
directly to the Holy tomb of Imam Husain, caught hold of the enclosure
and said, “O Grandfather! I will obtain the Haji from you. Please take
back his life from Almighty God.”

Then she wept so much that she fainted. In her consciousness she saw
that the Imam (a.s.) was telling her, “O My Daughter! What has happened
to you? The lifespan of the Haji has ended and the time of his death has
arrived.” That lady persisted, “I know nothing of it. I want the Haji
from you.”

### Double Life Due to Blessings of Husain (a.s.)

The Imam (a.s.) said, “All right. Since you insist so much, I am praying
to Almighty Allah. If He wills, He will return the Haji to this world.”
After a short time, the Imam smiled and said, “God has answered my
prayer and He has returned the Haji to the world and has also doubled
his lifespan.” At that time the Haji was thirty years old. Thereafter he
died at the age of ninety years. During that period he had four sons,
one of them being the great Jurist Al-hajj Mirza Husain and another was
a famous doctor.

Briefly concluding, when the Sayyid lady heard this good tiding and
returned to Haji's residence, she found him sitting in a good condition.
He exclaimed, “O respected Sayyid Madam! May God give you a great good
reward.”

One of the admonitions mentioned in Haji Khalil's will was his
instruction to his son that he must take care of Sayyids, especially
their respected and honourable ladies, as they are very esteemed in the
highest court of Almighty Allah.

There are many similar examples in books. In Darus Salaam of Iraqi, the
last chapter of which is about wonders resulting from the medium of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) there is a story of a child who had died after falling
from the ceiling of his house.

Our Hope is Closely Connected with the Intercession of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

(O Mercy for the Mankind!) What fear is there to the wall of the
community when a personality like you is its support?

What fear can there be of ocean waves for one whose ship is being
navigated by Noah (a.s.)![^11]

It is mentioned in the third volume of Biharul Anwar that the Holy
Prophet said, “A prayer of every messenger is necessarily answered.
Earlier messengers made that prayer concerning this world and God
accordingly answered it here and fulfilled their aim. I have left that
prayer for the Hereafter so that the sinners of my community may be
forgiven.” Let us hope that this great mercy will include us also.

There are several narrations regarding intercession by Fatima Zahra
(s.a.) based on the sayings of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams
(a.s.). According to one of such narrations, the Infallible (a.s.) has
said, after making a mention of Fatima's arrival in the field of Mahshar
and her welcome there, “Every woman who never missed an obligatory
prayer, compulsory fast, Hajj and payment of Zakat dues and whose
husband was also not displeased with her, will certainly be entitled to
the intercession of Fatima Zahra (s.a.).”

Intercession is the Anchor of Hope, not of Pride
------------------------------------------------

Of course it must always be remembered that intercession must not make
one proud or careless, imagining that as the said intercession is
certainly from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) we may do whatever we please. No,
it is never so. There are some sins, which result in man's departure
from this world as an unbeliever. In that case there is no question of
intercession. Again there are some sins the punishment for which must be
suffered in hell till the sinner is purified and only thereafter he may
become qualified for intercession. So one must remain fearful of God at
every moment and along with it, he must also remain hopeful of the Most
Merciful's Mercy.

The Raised Places (Araaf)
-------------------------

***“And on the most elevated places there shall be men who know all by
their marks, “(7:46)***

That is some people will be on Araaf who will recognise everyone by
looking at their foreheads.

According to the news given by Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) Araaf is a high place
on Sirat Bridge. God Almighty will allow room for the Holy Prophet and
Ahlul Bayt there. One with a shining forehead will be recognized as a
friend of Aale Muhammad and ‘Ali (a.s.) will allow him to proceed to
paradise. Accordingly the meaning of the above verse will be: Muhammad
and ‘Ali (a.s.) will recognize everyone passing over the bridge by their
faces.

Wall between People of Paradise and People of Hell
--------------------------------------------------

Another explanation of Araaf is that it is a wall, which will be erected
between people of paradise and people of hell on Sirat as mentioned in
Surah Al Hadid. The Lord of the Universe says: (O My Dear Messenger!) On
that Day, you will see the Faithful in such a condition that their
radiance will enlighten their front and their side. (A voice will be
heard): Good tidings to you for you will get the eternal paradise
beneath which rivers flow. It is indeed a great success of yours.

On that Day, the hypocrites will tell the Faithful: Just look at us
also! We too may benefit from your radiance. They will be told: Return
to the world and find out some other light. Then a wall will be raised
between the said two groups. There will be a door in that wall. On one
side of it will be only Mercy (for the Faithful) and on the other only
punishment (for the unbelievers and hypocrites).

***“Then separation would be brought about between them, with a wall
having a door in it; (as for) the inside of it, there shall be mercy in
it, and (as for) the outside of it, before it there shall be punishment.
“(57:13)***

One's Radiance (Noor) will be of no use to others
-------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in commentaries that the Radiance is front of believing
men and believing women will be the light of their beliefs and love and
friendship of Aale Muhammad (a.s.). The Noor at their right will be the
radiance of the prayers and worship acts. The Noor of some will be so
bright that it will make things visible for eyes and that of some will
be sometimes bright and sometimes dim. Such people will go on falling
down and getting up and crying:

***“Our Lord! Make perfect for us our light, “(66:8)***

Here one's noor will be of no avail to another. Though the hypocrites
and the offenders will go on asking for the light of the fortunate ones
it will be of no use. A wall will be erected between them and the
believers. According to Qur’anic commentary, it is Araaf.

Be Anxious about that Day's Noor only Today
-------------------------------------------

***“They will cry out to them: Were we not with you? They shall say:
Yea! But you caused yourselves to fall into temptation, and you waited
and doubted, and vain desires deceived you till the threatened
punishment of Allah came, while the arch deceiver deceived you about
Allah.***

***So today ransom shall not be accepted from you nor from those who
disbelieved; your abode is the fire; it is your friend and evil is the
resort. “(57:14-15)***

By the way, let there be some admonition also so that we may worry today
about the light of that Day before the arrival of the moment when there
will be no remedy or escape.

Araaf, a Place between Paradise and Hell
----------------------------------------

Third explanation of Araaf is that it is a place (between paradise and
hell where those people will dwell who were helpless such as minors,
lunatics, and children. Though they will not be as happy as those in
paradise, they will be saved from the punishment of hell.

For the fairies of heaven, Araaf is hell. But if you ask the people of
hell, they will reply that Araaf is paradise.[^12]

Paradise, the Greatest and Everlasting Bounty
---------------------------------------------

The Lord of the universe has reserved a place in the Hereafter for those
people who leave this world with fear of God in their heart. There, God
has kept innumerable and unimaginably tasteful things for the righteous
befitting that highest host. To get an idea of those comforts, tastes
and pleasures of that place in the Hereafter is as difficult for the
residents of this world now as are the things in this world for an
unborn child.

That is why, it is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes; a reward for what they did. “(32:17)***

It is also said as a general hint about the heavenly bounties:

***“They have therein what they wish and with Us is more yet.
“(50:35)***

It means, in paradise, there are all those things, which they (the
people of paradise) will desire and what is with Us is even more than
what they can wish.

At yet another place it is said:

***“They will not hear its faintest sound, and they shall abide in that
which their souls long for.“ (21:102)***

### True Abode of Peace (Darus Salaam) is Paradise

In brief, paradise is the place wherein there will be no sign of
failure, grief, sorrow, difficulty, hardship, trouble, weakness, old
aged, illness, tiredness and idleness. There will be safety and security
in every sense. That is why it is named the abode of peace (Darus
Salaam). It is the real kingdom, in a sense that man has so much power
that whatever he wishes will be available at once. It is available only
to the people of paradise.

***“And when you see there, you shall see blessings and a great kingdom.
“(76:20)***

Here we hint at some of the heavenly bounties mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“And the flesh of fowl such as they desire. “(56:21)”***

***And fruits such as they choose, “(56:20)”***

***And abundant fruit, Neither intercepted nor forbidden,
“(56:32-33)”***

***In both are fruits and palms and pomegranates. “(55:68)***

In paradise, there will be springs of pure and clean water which will
never get depleted and there will be rivers of milk the taste of which
has neither changed nor will change and there will be canals of grapes
wines which will be pleasing to drinkers (will not be foul smelling as
is the case with worldly wines and which are also intoxicating and
harmful) rather the heavenly wine will be good, fragrant, tasty,
harmless, awakening and purifying.

***“And their Lord shall make them drink a pure drink. “(76:21)***

Also,

***“And rivers of honey clarified and for them therein are all fruits
and protection from their Lord. “(47:15)***

### Heavenly Rivers mentioned in the Holy Qur’an

There will also be many springs in paradise. The speciality and
tastefulness of each and every one of them will be different. They have
been named as per their specialities, for example: The Camphor Spring,
The Zanjabil Spring, The Salsabeel and The Tasneem.

The most important of them all is The Kauthar which is flowing from
beneath the Divine Throne and which is whiter than milk and sweeter than
honey, softer than butter. It will contain precious stone pebbles (at
the bottom) and they will be of Chrysolite, Ruby and coral. Its grass
will be saffron and its mud will be more fragrant than musk.

Narrations mention that Kauthar will flow from beneath the Divine
Throne; that it is flowing like a river in paradise and that it takes
the shape of a big cistern in the field of Mahshar, as said earlier.

### Heavenly Dresses

Almighty Allah says in Surah Kahf:

***“Ornaments shall be given to them therein of bracelets of gold, and
they shall wear green robes of fine silk and thick silk brocade
interwoven with gold, “(18:31)***

At another place in the Holy Qur’an it is mentioned:

***“They shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and (with)
pearls, and their garments therein shall be of silk. “(22:23)***

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is reported to have said that when a
believer will enter his heavenly palace a crown of glory will be put on
his head and he will be made to wear seventy robes of various colours
embedded with heavenly precious jewels. It is also mentioned that if any
of those dresses is brought to the people of this world they will not be
able to gaze at its brightness.

Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that the Lord of the
Universe will provide a miracle to the faithful every Friday in
Paradise. On that day, He will send to the believer dresses through an
angel. Then that believer will put one of it on his waist and another on
his shoulders. Then from wherever that man will pass the entire
environment will brighten up with his radiance (Noor).

### Palaces and Precincts in Paradise

God has promised in many places in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Allah has promised to the believing men and the believing women
gardens, beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them, and goodly
dwellings in gardens of perpetual abode; and best of all is Allah's
goodly pleasure- that is the grand achievement. “(9:72)***

God Almighty says:

***“But (as for) those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord,
they shall have high places, above them higher places, built (for
them),*** ***beneath which flow rivers; (this is) the promise of Allah:
Allah will not fail in (His) promise. “(39:20)***

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said that those chambers will be made of
pearls, Rubies and Emeralds and their roofs will be golden. There will
be two golden gates in every chamber and there will be a guard and a
sentry at every gate.

### Sample of Heavenly Chambers

According to Qur’anic commentary the Holy Prophet is reported to have
said, “There is a palace made of pearls in paradise, in that palace
there are seventy apartments made of red topaz, in every apartment
seventy halls made of Emeralds. In every hall there are seventy thrones.

On every throne there are seventy carpets of various colours. There is a
Hourie on every carpet. In every hall there are seventy dining tables.
Tasty eatables of seventy kinds are served on every table. There are
seventy maids in every hall. Almighty God will grant the faithful
strength enough to enjoy all these bounties.”

### Chairs, Carpets and Vessels in Paradise

***“Reclining therein on raised couches; excellent the recompense and
goodly the resting place. “(18:31)***

He says in Surah Waqiah:

***On thrones decorated, Reclining on them, facing one another.
(56:15-16)***

He says in Surah Rahman:

***Reclining on beds, the inner coverings of which are of silk brocade;
and the fruits of the two gardens shall be within reach. (55:54)***

The Holy Qur’an has named some heavenly attires such as Israbraq,
Hareer, Sundus, Rafraf, Namaariq and Zarabiyya which can only be seen
and enjoyed as their description is beyond words and description.

Regarding the heavenly vessels or containers. Almighty Lord says:

***“Round about them shall go youths never altering in age,*** ***With
goblets and ewers and a cup of pure drink; “(56:17-18)***

In paradise handsome lads will be taking rounds with goblets of gold,
silver and various jewels for the people of the paradise. Their
containers will be overflowing with the wine of grapes. They will enjoy
the 'pure drink'.

It is mentioned in Surah Dahr:

***“And there shall be made to go round about them vessels of silver and
goblets which are of glass, “(76:15)***

The people of paradise will be served drinks in cups made of silver and
flint glass, that is, those containers will have the clarity and sheen
of flint and softness and whiteness of silver.

### Heavenly Women and Houries

Since the greatest physical bounty in paradise are houries the Holy
Qur’an makes a mention of them on various occasions. The *houri* is
called a *houri* because it denotes a female having a fair body and
'*Een*' means a large al-yed lady.

As both these specialities are found in houries they are called *Hourul
Een*. It also may be so because the whiteness in their eyes will be
extremely white and the blackness extremely black and it will make them
highly attractive. The reason of naming them *Houries* can also be that
eyes will become *'hairaan'* (spellbound) by looking at them.

Almighty Allah says:

***“And Hoorun Eenun (pure, beautiful ones), The like of the hidden
pearls: “(56:22-23)***

Meaning: The *Houries* will be like pearls hidden in shells. There will
be no dust on them. Neither any man nor jinn will have touched them.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is reported to have said that, in paradise,
light would flash. The people of paradise will exclaim, “What radiance
is this?” A voice will ring, “A Hourie has just smiled to her husband.
This light spread from her teeth.”

The Lord Almighty also said:

***“Surely We have made them to grow into a (new) growth, Then We have
made them virgins, “(56:35-36)***

Meaning: We have created these *Houries* with Our perfect might (without
parents) and We have made them ever youthful.

The *Houries* would love their husbands. They will be sweet- voiced
having pleasing gestures. All of them will be 16 years old. So men in
the paradise will be of 33 years of age.

Almighty Allah says:

***“In them shall be those who restrained their eyes; before them
neither man nor jinni shall have touched them. “(55:56)***

Meaning: There are *Houries* in heavenly gardens who keep their eyes
lowered except before their husbands. They have not been touched by
anyone from men or jinn except by their husbands. All of them will be as
if carved in Ruby and Pearls.

***“As though they were rubies and pearls. “(55:58)***

It is reported that despite wearing seventy robes the inner part of the
calf of the *Houries* will be visible as a white lining is visible from
behind a Ruby.

### Houries are Very Far from Impurities

The Lord of the Universe says:

***“And they shall have pure mates in them, and in them, they shall
abide. “(2:25)***

Meaning: For the faithful and righteous people there are Houries in
paradise who are pure and clean in every sense. They do not menstruate.
They are always free from impurity and uncleanness. They are also not
proud and self-centred and they do not envy one another.

It is reported that on the right hand of the *houri* is written in
shining letters:

“Praise be to Allah who has fulfilled what He promised.”

And on her left hand:

“Praise be to Allah who has relieved us of grief.”

### Heavenly Women are Much More Beautiful and Attractive

It must not remain unmentioned that the beauty and charm of those
faithful ladies who will die with perfect faith and will enter paradise
will have a charm and beauty far more surpassing that of Houries of
Paradise. While explaining the meaning of the verse:

***“In them are goodly things, beautiful ones. “(55:70)***

It is said that there will be women in the gardens of paradise who will
have the best of bodily charm and the best of spiritual excellence.
Thereby it is meant only those faithful Muslim and believer women who
will be entitled to paradise.

Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) has narrated Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that 'goodly
things' means faithful, knowledgeable Shi’a women who will enter
paradise and who will be married to the believers.

### The Marriage of the Women of Paradise will be of their Own Choice

It is related that those women who did not marry in this world, or those
women whose husbands had not entered Paradise, will be given the freedom
to choose the believer whom she desires, and they shall be married to
them. But if a woman's husband is present in Paradise, she will be
permitted to marry him with her consent. If in the world she married
more than once, the man who has the greatest status (in Paradise) and
has performed more good deeds will be chosen for her.

### Flowers and Scents in Paradise

In Surah Rahman Allah refers to that person who fears standing in front
of his Lord for accounting (for his deeds), and thus refrains from
sinning:

***“And for him who fears to stand before his Lord are two gardens.
“(55:46-47)***

It means that one who fears of standing in front of his Lord (that is
for the accounting in Qiyamat as mentioned earlier and who will not have
sinned) will get two gardens in paradise wherein will be all kinds of
bounties and various vegetables, flowers and fruits.

Allamah Majlisi narrates from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that he said,
“If one of the '*houries*' of Paradise descends on the first heaven on a
dark night and looks down towards the earth, the entire universe will be
filled with her fragrance.”

It is related from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that the fragrance of the
perfume of Paradise will reach up to the distance equal to a thousand
years. The sand of Paradise is of musk. It is related in many traditions
that the walls, doors, and the floor of Paradise are covered with grass
of saffron.

Fragrance will be emitting from it, and the effect of its fragrance will
be such that an old man proceeding towards Paradise will reach such a
place which is far from Paradise at a distance of a thousand years, yet
he will turn young by just the fragrance.

### Light in Paradise

The Lord Almighty says:

***“They shall find therein neither (the severe heat of) the sun nor
intense cold. “(76:13)***

Which means that people in paradise will not see the sun and its heat
nor will they experience cold and chill, that is, they will dwell in a
moderate atmosphere. They will not require sun or its heat. Rather their
own light of faith and good deeds will be enough for them as has been
mentioned earlier.

It is related that the light of the '*houries'* will be more than the
light of the sun, they will be like walking lanterns. Palaces of
Paradise adorned with pearls, corals, rubies, topaz and emeralds will
emit a colourful light and make a pleasant environment. The floor,
vessels, and dresses will be scattering light, and these glowing
lanterns will turn Paradise into an illuminated place.

### Songs and Voices in Paradise

The bounties of various kinds which we see in this world and so also all
the good tastes and feelings are but only an atom of what is available
in the paradise. This applies to good sound and voice too. The best and
perfect of it all is found in paradise only. If even a single song of
paradise is made to be heard in this world the residents of this world
will not be able to hear it and they will die.

The voice of the Prophet Dawood (a.s.) is well known as called as 'Lahne
Dawudi'. Though this voice was in this world none was able to bear it.
When he was reciting Zaboor different kinds of animals used to gather
around him and were fainting together and some even died.

### Prophet Dawood (a.s.) and the Singing Houries of Paradise

Describing the events of messengers (a.s.) Amirul Mu’minin (a.s.) says
in one of his speeches in Nahjul Balagha: In Paradise Prophet Dawood
will entertain its inhabitants with his pleasant voice, and will be a
reciter of Paradise.

It means that he will make the people of paradise hear his recitations.
Of course it will be a melodious song of paradise and those in paradise
will have the ability to hear it.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is reported to have been quoted in Majmaul
Bayan: The best of the songs of paradise will be those sung by the
houries for pleasing their husbands. Their voice will be so wonderfully
pleasing that none before would have ever heard like it. It will not be
in the tune of musical instruments but would be based on the
glorification and praising of the Lord of the universe, Only One God.

### Reward of Discarding Singing in this World

It is mentioned in narrations that the birds of paradise will sing in
the best of voices.

People once asked Imam Sadiq (a.s), “Will there be music and songs in
the paradise?” He replied, “There is a tree in paradise. God will order
the winds of paradise to move. It will make the tree give out various
kinds of songs. The sounds will be such as never heard by anyone in this
world from neither any singer nor any musical instrument.” Then the Imam
said, “This is the reward of discarding music and songs for fear of God
in this world.”

### Spiritual Favours and Tastes

There also will be various kinds of spiritual bounties to imagine which,
is beyond our power of understanding. One of them is that veils will be
lifted off the eyes, that is, eyes will here witness what we had only
known to exist. What one had wished to know from Divine Truths, one
would gain it here, especially the sight of and meeting with Muhammad
and Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

In Tafsir Safi, in explanation of the Holy verse:

***“Then shall some of them advance to others, questioning each other.
“(37:50)***

It is mentioned that the people of paradise will discuss matters about
knowledge and Grace of God and the Holy Prophet with one anther.

Among all other bounties will also be the respect and honour granted by
God. For example, everyone who will be fortunate to enter paradise will,
by his intercession, keep his parents, wives and children with him,
provided they had died with faith and were entitled for paradise.

This will be as a respect to the true faithful, though his parents and
wives and children etc were not entitled to the high status. Hence the
Lord of the universe says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“The gardens of perpetual abode which they will enter along with
those who do good from among their parents and their spouses and their
offspring; “(13:23)***

### Greetings by Angels and the Honour of Communicating with the Lord of Universe

When the righteous people will reach their respective places in
paradise, God Almighty will appoint one thousand angels for visiting
them. They will give them greetings. There will be a palace for the
believer and that palace will have a thousand doors. There will be an
angel at every door to salute the faithfuls.

And the angels will enter in upon them from every gate:

***“Peace be on you because you were constant, how excellent, is then,
the issue of the abode. “(13:23-24)***

The highest honour available to the faithful will be the honour of
communicating with the Lord of the universe. There are many narrations
in this respect. But what the Lord in Surah Yasin mentions is
sufficient:

***““Peace! A word from a Merciful Lord.” “(36:58)***

In Tafsir Minhajus Sadiqeen a narration of Jabir bin Abdullah has been
quoted according to which the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said that the
people of paradise will be immersed in the bounties of gardens when a
light will suddenly flash on then giving out a voice 'As Salaamo Alaikum
Yaa Ahlal Jannah'.

Hence it is said that all those bounties which were available only to
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in the world, including having a word with
the Almighty Lord, will be made available, to the people of paradise
also in the Hereafter.

There are detailed traditions about the divine lights in volume two of
Biharul Anwar, one of them being the 'Position of Satisfaction' (Maqame
Rizwan), which is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an too:

***“Their Lord gives them good news of mercy from Himself and (His) good
pleasure and gardens, “(9:21)***

***“And best of all is Allah's goodly pleasure- that is the grand
achievement. “(9:72)***

### Neighbourhood of the Prophet and his Progeny

Among all other bounties of paradise is the neighbourhood of Muhammad
and Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and meeting with them. The Holy Prophet has
said, “O ‘Ali! Your Shi’as will be sitting with bright faces on the
pulpits of light and all of them will be my neighbours in paradise.”

Also among the said bounties is permanent dwelling in paradise. When the
faithful will know that these highly precious bounties will never end
(nor will they be diminished) they will experience a wonderful delight
in their hearts, which is indescribable.

One of the spiritual bounties is that one will be meeting frequently
with the messengers, the righteous and faithful persons. Almighty God
says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“On thrones, facing each other. “(37:44)***

Meaning they will be sitting on thrones facing one another happily.

### Daily Feasts Hosted by the Messengers (a.s.)

It is mentioned that the people of paradise will be going to visit a
Messenger (a.s.) daily and they will be their guests. Of course, on
every Thursday, they will be the guests of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.),
the Last Prophet. On every Friday they will be invited to the nearness
of the Highest One.[^13]

Admonition - Why Do We Not Try To Get Paradise?
-----------------------------------------------

Above was a brief narration of the bounties of paradise. We will have to
fairly think, will any wise man want to deprive himself of the said
spiritual joys and pleasures and high positions?

How much trouble a man takes for getting the worldly positions and ranks
even though it is not always certain that he will attain the same.

Even if he gets them after suffering and undergoing a lot of
difficulties and hardships, there is every possibility of being deprived
of the same due to his death. But the same person does not make any
effort for getting the exalting places and everlasting bounties even
though here it is certain that if he strives he would reach his goal.

The reason for this carelessness is man's lack of courage and his
drowning in the engagement in the world's short-lived pleasures,
passions, lusts and greed even though there are thousands of impurities
in them as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Nay! man desires to give the lie to what is before him. “(75:5)***

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) says in one of his sermons in Nahjul Balagha:

“(O Lord!) I believe You are pure and clean of all those things which
are not fitting Your greatness. You are the Creator of all the creation
and You are, in the sight of Your creation, the Owner of all secrets
concerning nice taste. Accordingly You have created a place named
Paradise. Therein You have provided, for Your guests, all niceties of
feasts and of dining and beautiful houries and handsome servant boys and
highly comfortable apartments, extremely pure and clean springs and
rivers of tasty drinks and green fields and gardens and delicious
fruits.

Then You raised Your representative Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.s.) who goes
on inviting people to the said paradise of lasting pleasures. So (it was
the misfortune of mankind that) they neither responded to the true
caller towards Truth nor did they incline towards the things You called
them to nor did they like what You desired them to like and long for. On
the contrary, they remained stuck to fraudulent and dead world as a
result of which they became disgraced.

They befriended one another on the basis of their connection with this
valueless world. So whoever befriended this untrustworthy world and
became mad after it, became totally blind, so blind that he does not
understand what is detrimental and a loss for him. His heart became sick
for what was beneficial to him and befitting to him. So he sees with
weak and sickly eyes and hears with unhealthy ears. Doubtlessly, worldly
desires have made his heart and soul dead and destroyed his
intelligence. He has become a slave of this world and also of everyone
who owns anything from the worldly wealth.”

In spite of the fact that there are only two paths before us - no third
alternative - man will either to go to Paradise or to hell - Now if one
does not take and follow God's path He will not only be deprived of all
the bounties mentioned by us above briefly, his dwelling place forever
will also be only hell which is full of pains. Only an iota of its pain
and troubles are described in the following pages.

The Hell
--------

Hell is a fathomless, wide and spacious pit. God's anger will turn into
fire in it. It is the last prison wherein will be various kinds of
punishments, chastisements, pains, troubles, hardships and calamities.
They will be such that we cannot even imagine them.

We cannot even understand them. In fact it is exactly opposite to
paradise. In paradise, there will be every kind of comfort, pleasure and
joy and not even an iota of pain or trouble. But in hell, there will be
nothing except hardships, troubles, sorrows, griefs and sufferings.
There will be no room at all for peace, happiness and comfort. Here are
some of the tortures being meted out to offenders in hell as mentioned
in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Then shall you, O you who err and call it a lie! Most surely eat of
a tree of Zaqqoom, “(56:51-52)”***

***And fill (your) bellies with it; “(56:53)***

That is due to sheer hunger you will have to fill your stomachs with it.

***“Then drink over it of boiling water; “(56:54)***

That is you will have to drink extremely hot water (due to extreme
thirst you will have no alternative but to drink it).

### Punishment of Hunger and Thirst in Hell

It is mentioned in traditions that the people of hell will be given the
punishment of hunger so that they will willy-nilly eat the fruit of the
Zaqqoom. Thereafter they will be made to taste the chastisement of
thirst so they may drink more and more from Hameem (boiling hell water):

***“Like those who abide in the fire and who are made to drink boiling
water so it rends their bowels asunder. “(47:15)***

That water will be so hot that it will tear their intestines into bits.
It is related that if a drop of that water be put on a mountain (in this
world), it will be reduced to dust.

***“And drink as drinks the thirsty camel. “(56:55)***

They will drink that water like a camel who is thirsty for many days,
and drinks whilst shivering. 'Heem' (the water referred to in this
verse) is the plural of 'Aheem' which means a camel suffering from a
disease. This disease is equivalent to dropsy, which usually happens to
a camel, in which it keeps drinking water but is not satiated until it
dies. this will be the state of the dwellers of hell.

***“This is their entertainment on the day of requital. “(56:56)***

This 'Zaqqoom' and 'Hameem' will be given to them in Qiyamat as an
introduction to Allah's wrath. And whatever is destined in hell (for the
disbelievers) is far more harsh and beyond description.

### Zaqqoom - Burning Food for Sinners

The Lord of the universe says:

***“Surely the tree of the Zaqqoom, Is the food of the sinful Like dregs
of oil; it shall boil in (their) bellies, Like the boiling of hot water.
“(44:43-46)***

It is said that they will be unbelievers and inimical fellows and that
Zaqqoom is a thing, which will be melted in fire like copper. It is also
said that 'Muhl' will be the boiling olive oil, which will boil in
stomach like boiling water.

### It will Melt the Outer and the Inner Bodies of the Offenders

Zaqqoom will boil in the stomachs of unbelievers like water boiling on
fire or like olive oil heated on fierce fire. Then this boiling water
will be shed on their heads, which will melt all the outer and inner
organs of the sinners:

***“Then (as to) those who disbelieve, for them are cut out garments of
fire, boiling water shall be poured over their heads. “(22:19)***

It means that We have huge shackles which cannot be unlocked and
fiercely leaping fire and foods which will get stuck up in throats and
very a painful punishment.

Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said that the tree of Zaqqoom will
rise up from the deep pit of hell. Its leaves, thorns and fruits all
will be of fire. It will be bitter than Aloes and worse than a stinking
corpse and harder than iron.

### Ghisleen, Zaree, Sadeed and Ghassaq

*Ghisleen* is one of the food to be given in hell:

***“Nor any food except refuse, “(69:36)***

It is mentioned in Tafsir Majmaul Bahrain that whatever will come out
the stomachs of the people of hell after eating *Zaqqoom* will be their
food once again.

One of the hell foods will also be *Zaree*. It is said that it will be
like a thorn, bitter than aloes and worse smelling than a corpse or
carcass and more inflammable than fire itself.

One more hell food is *Sadeed*:

***“Hell is before him and he shall be given to drink of festering water
(Sadeed): “(14:16)***

It will be the dirty blood and pus flowing from the private parts of the
adulterers in hell.

Another hell food will be *Ghassaq*:

***“But boiling and intensely cold water (Ghassaq), “(78:25)***

Some commentators have written that it is a spring in hell. Poisons of
various poisonous animals flow in it.

### Dress of the People of Hell

***Then (as to) those who disbelieve, for them are cut out garments of
fire, (22: 19)***

Clothings of fire have been prepared for the people of hell. It is said
that it will be a dress made up of molten copper.

Almighty Allah says:

***“Their shirts made of pitch and the fire covering their faces.
“(14:50)***

*Pitch* is a black foul-smelling thing, which grows in the skin of a
camel afflicted by a disease-causing itch. It is being burnt along with
the afflicted part of the animal's skin and it burns out very swiftly.

It is mentioned that if such a dress of hell is made to hang between the
sky and earth its foul smell and heat will kill all on the earth.

### Discharge, Shackles and Chains

***“The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be
seized by the forelocks and the feet. “(55:41)***

It means that the sinners will be identified by their facial signs,
which will be blue eyes and black cheeks. At that time they will be
dragged towards hell by catching hold of their forelocks and sometimes
their legs; or that some would be caught by their forelocks and some by
their legs and flung into hell.

***“When the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks; they shall
be dragged. Into boiling water, then in the fire shall they be burned;
“(40:71-72)***

***“And on the day of resurrection you shall see those who lied against
Allah; their faces shall be blackened. “(39:60)***

***“The fire shall scorch their faces, and they therein shall be in
severe affliction. “(23:104)***

It means that fire will burn their faces and they will become very ugly.
Like the burnt down heads of sheep their teeth will be visible and their
lips hanging.

### Guardians of Hell

***“Over it are angels stern and strong, they do not disobey Allah in
what He commands them, and do as they are commanded. “(66:6)***

It means that the Guardian angels of hell will be harsh who will never
be kind or soft to the people of hell. They will never do anything
against the command of God, which is their duty.

***“And for them are whips of iron. “(22:21)***

There will be iron clubs with which they will hit those trying to flee
from hell.

About the weight of the said club it is mentioned that even if all the
men and jinns join together to lift that club they will not be able to
lift it.

It is also mentioned that both the eyes of the said guards of hell will
be dazzling like lightning flashes and their pointed teeth will be as
big as mountains and flames of fire will be leaping out of their
fearsome mouths. The distance between their two shoulders will be equal
to a year's journey. They are able to throw seventy persons in hell with
one hand at a time.

Hell and its Gates
------------------

***“It has seven gates; for every gate there shall be a separate party
of them. “(15:44)***

Sinners will enter hell through these gates as fixed for them. According
to ‘Ali (a.s.) the seven gates of hell are as under:

The last and the lowest level is '*Jahannam*'. The zone above it is
'*Lazzaa*', above it '*Hutamaa*', above it '*Hutamaa*', above it
'*Saqar*' and above it '*Jaheem*'. Above it is '*Saeer*' and above it
'*Haaviyah*'. There is no doubt that chastisements in all of them will
be different in harshness and pain.

### Hellfire has Intelligence

The words of the Holy verses indicate that, contrary to this world's
fire, the fire in hell possesses sense and intelligence. Almighty Allah
says:

***“On the day that We will say to hell: Are you filled up? And it will
say: Are there any more? “(50:30)***

Meaning: The Day when We will ask hell: Are you full? It will reply: Are
there more worthy of punishment still? It means: I still have room to
accommodate them and a wish to burn these who are worthy of being burnt.

Moreover, hellfire recognizes those who deserve punishment. It will
attack them. It has power of drawing (magnetic attribute). It will also
scream.

Almighty Allah says:

***“When it shall come into their sight from a distant place, they shall
hear its vehement raging and roaring. “(25:12)***

Meaning that when hellfire will see the people of hell from a distance
it will, out of anger scream fiercely and it will be heard by the
sinners.

### The Light of the Faithfuls will Lower Flames of Hell

***“Almost bursting for fury. “(67:8)***

It is mentioned in narrations that, when a faithful will be passing over
the Sirat Bridge he or she will hear the voice of hell. O faithful!
Please pass away quickly from above me as your light is cooling my
flames. Since a believer has kindness and hellfire has anger, the Mercy
of the Lord overtakes His anger.

O, One Whose Mercy precedes His Anger.[^14]

Thus there are many evidences with us to show that hellfire too, like
all other substances in the Hereafter, possesses life, wisdom and
intelligence. It is the friend of the friends of God and the enemy of
the enemies of God.

### Sinners will Live in a Very Congested Place

On of the attributes is also that despite its ability to accommodate all
men and jinn and even then remaining empty, the sinners will live in
extreme congestion like a nail in a wall:

***“And We will proceed to what they have done of deeds, so We shall
render them as scattered floating dust. “(25:23)***

When the sinners will be hurled in the congested corner of hell, bound
by chains of fire. Being harshly pressed they will desire death and say:
Woe unto us!

As the righteous will be in ease and comfort and spaciousness and in
light, those in hell will be in darkness and eternal terror quite like
the one who is caught at the bottom of a sea, engulfed by layers of
darkness over darkness.

Almighty Allah says:

***“When he holds out his hand, he is almost unable to see it; and to
whomsoever Allah does not give light, he has no light. “(24:40)***

That is the darkness will be so grave that he will not be able to see
his own hand despite trying to.

### Mental or Spiritual Torture

For the people of hell, there will be mental and spiritual tortures too
in addition to physical punishments and pains. One of them will be that
they will always remember and realize that they have to remain in this
terrible condition forever and to bear these troubles endlessly.

They will never be saved from this chastisement. This will be the most
unbearable thing for the sinners. There is no doubt that those
unbelievers and hypocrites who died faithlessly despite the fact that
arguments were completed before them, will forever remain in hellfire
torture.

Lord Almighty says:

***“Their reward with their Lord is gardens of perpetuity beneath which
rivers flow, abiding therein for ever; Allah is well pleased with them
and they are well pleased with Him; that is for him who fears his Lord.
“(98:8)***

And at another place:

***“That is the reward of the enemies of Allah- the fire; for them
therein shall be the house of long abiding; a reward for their denying
Our communications. “(41:28)***

So the punishment for the enemies of God is hellfire in which they will
dwell forever.

### Unbeliever will not Enter Paradise

Rather, God has termed the exit of an unbeliever from hell as
impossible. He says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Surely (as for) those who reject Our communications and turn away
from them haughtily, the doors of heaven shall not be opened for them,
nor shall they enter the garden until the camel pass through the eye of
the needle; and thus do We reward the guilty. “(7:40)***

That is, it is impossible, for an unbeliever to enter paradise. There
are many traditions in this connection. Anyone who will have even an
iota of Faith will not remain in hell forever.

### Deprivation from Divine Bounties is the Worst Punishment

Another spiritual torture is that a sinner in hell will always remember
and lament that he has been deprived of innumerable Divine bounties of
various kinds. Not only that, he will never get God's mercy but only His
anger.

Says the Holy Qur’an:

***“Nay! most surely they shall on that day be debarred from their Lord.
“(83:15)***

That is, they will not obtain Divine mercy, grace and reward. At another
place:

***“Surely they shall have no portion in the hereafter, and Allah will
not speak to them, nor will He look upon them on the day of resurrection
nor will He purify them… “(3:77)***

It means that there is no reward in the Hereafter and God will not even
communicate with them and will have no mercy or kindness for them.

### Deadly Regrets in Hell

One of the spiritual or mental tortures in hell will be the regret and
sorrow, which will make one desirous of death, had it been possible to
die there daily. The Lord of the universe says about their grief
pointing to their deeds:

***“Thus will Allah show them their deeds to be intense regret to them,
and they shall not come forth from the fire. “(2:167)***

And also,

***“And the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands saying: O!
would that I had taken a way with the Apostle. “(25:27)***

Imam Sadiq (a.s) is reported to have said that when the people of
paradise and the people of hell will be settled in their respective
places windows will open up between paradise and hell. An announcer will
announce: O people of Paradise! Just look at the situation of the people
of hell and their condition.

Had you also disobeyed the Divine Commands you too would have been in
this state in hell. Then will come another voice: O people of Hell! Look
at the high-rise apartments of the people of Paradise. Had you obeyed
Allah this comfort would have been for you also. This will make the
sinners so gloomy that had it been possible to die in the Hereafter they
would have died of their sorrow.

### Scolding and Spiritual Punishment in Hell

Among various tortures is the scolding, threatening and humiliation. All
of theses will be meted out to the hell dwellers not only by God and
Angels but by the people of paradise also, even by satans as mentioned
in the Holy Qur’an:

***“O assembly of jinn and men! Did there not come to you apostles from
among you, relating to you My communications and warning you of the
meeting of this day of yours? They shall say: We bear witness against
ourselves; and this world's life deceived them, and they shall bear
witness against their own souls that they were unbelievers. “(6:130)***

Again God says:

***“Did We not preserve you alive long enough, so that he who would be
mindful in it should mind? And there came to you the warner; because for
the unjust, there is no helper. “(35:37)***

There are many other similar addresses: The angels guarding hell will
also scold them as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Whenever a group is cast into it, its keeper shall ask them: Did
there not come to you a warner? They shall say: Yea! indeed there came
to us a warner, but we rejected (him) and said: Allah has not revealed
anything, you are only in a great error. And they shall say: Had we but
listened or pondered, we should not have been among the inmates of the
burning fire. So they shall acknowledge their sins, but far will be
(forgiveness) from the inmates of the burning fire. “(67:8-11)***

### Taunting by Satans and Withholding of Weeping by Hell Dwellers

Even devils will taunt people of hell and they will make a mockery of
them. It is mentioned that the sinners will not weep and cry and
complain loudly for fear of being mocked by the devils. Says the Lord:

***“And the Shaitan shall say after the affair is decided: Surely Allah
promised you the promise of truth, and I gave you promises, then failed
to keep them to you, and I had no authority over you, except that I
called you and you obeyed me, therefore do not blame me but blame
yourselves: I cannot be your aider (now) nor can you be*** ***my aiders;
surely I disbelieved in your associating me with Allah before; surely it
is the unjust that shall have the painful punishment. “(14: 22)***

### You too Found it True what was Promised to you

The people of paradise will also scold the hell dwellers. God Almighty
says:

***“And the dwellers of the garden will call out to the inmates of the
fire: Surely we have found what our Lord promised us to be true; have
you too found what your Lord promised to be true? They will say: Yes.
Then a crier will cry out among them that the curse of Allah is on the
unjust. “(7:44)***

Also God says:

***“So today those who believe shall laugh at the unbelievers;
“(83:34)***

It means that indeed today the faithful will laugh over the unbelievers
and make them targets of mockery and humiliation. It will be an answer
to what the unbelievers were doing to the believers in the world.

***“Surely the disbelievers are rewarded as they did. “(83:36)***

### Stay with the Satans in Hell will be a Painful Punishment

Among the spiritual punishments is also that of living with Satans and
with all other hell dwellers. While the people of paradise will enjoy
one another's company, the hell dwellers will abhor one another and they
will be hating one another strongly. This has been hinted at in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the
Beneficent God, We appoint for him a Shaitan, so he becomes his
associate.***

***And most surely they turn them away from the path, and they think
that they are guided aright: “(43:36-37)***

It means: “Those who will close their eyes from remembering Allah, We
will make Satans overpower them who will be their permanent companion.
Those Satans will restrain them from adopting the true path. But such
people will (falsely) imagine that they had found the true path until
the unbeliever will, along with his same devil fellow traveller come
before Us in the place of punishment. Then he will say to the Satan:
Alas! How nice it were had there been a distance of east and west
between you and me because you are a bad companion.”

It is narrated that both will be bound in one and the same chain and
hurled into hell.

### They will Deny one another

Regarding the enmity between the helpers of oppressors and the followers
of misguiding leaders, the Lord says:

***“When those who were followed shall renounce those who followed
(them), and they see the chastisement and their ties are cut asunder.***

***And those who followed shall say: Had there been for us a return,
then we would renounce them as they have renounced us. Thus will Allah
show them their deeds to be intense regret to them, and they shall not
come forth from the fire. “(2:166-167)***

Regarding enmity between hell dwellers, God Almighty says at another
place in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Then on the resurrection day some of you shall deny others, and some
of you shall curse others, and your abode is the fire, and you shall not
have any helpers. “(29:25)***

Again He says:

***“The friends shall on that day be enemies one to another, except
those who guard (against evil). “(43:67)***

Meaning that those who were friends in the world will become enemies,
except faithful and righteous people. They will be friendly with one
another as they were in the world.

It is mentioned that a friendship, which was not for the sake of God in
the world will turn into enmity in the Hereafter.

Further the Almighty says:

***This (shall be so); and most surely there is an evil resort for the
inordinate ones; Hell; they shall enter it, so evil is the
resting-place. This (shall be so); so let them taste it, boiling and
intensely*** ***cold (drink). And other (punishment) of the same kind-
of various sorts. (38:55-58)***

### Blaming One Another in Hell

It is mentioned that when the misguiding leaders will be thrown into
hell and when their followers will also be made to join them therein,
the leaders will ask: Who are these people? (The keeper of hell will
reply): This is a group, which will remain with you in all the hardships
of hell. The leaders will say: Bad indeed (ominous) is their arrival.

They are people of hell. The followers will reply: But you are ominous
because you are the cause of our chastisement. So hell is a bad dwelling
place. Then they will say: O our Lord! Give double punishment to those
who caused this chastisement to us because they themselves were
misguided and they misguided others also.[^15]

The events, condition and dialogues quoted above are doubtlessly true.
That is how the people of hell will quarrel with one another.

### Will this Weak Body be able to bear such Punishments?

Some doubts can possibly arise, in people's minds. We are briefly
hinting to them here with their replies. One such question can be how
man will be able to bear so much hard and painful punishment the lowest
degree of which cannot even be imagined in the world?! He will be
finished in the first strike. How hard is the punishment and how weak is
man's body?!

### Man's Body will also become as Hard as his Heart

The answer to the above mentioned doubt is that though it is quite true
that man will have this same body in the Hereafter too, but, by the
power of God the Almighty, it will be made so strong that it cannot be
compared with its previous form. In fact, in the Hereafter, the physical
condition of man will be subject to his spiritual condition, both in
hardness and softness. Just as the soul of the faithful was very soft
and smooth in the world and it was being affected while facing every
truth (as has been said by the Amirul Mu’minin (a.s) in Nahjul Balagha
similarly, in the Hereafter too his body will be soft and smooth like
their souls. Likewise bodies of unbelievers will be as hard and tough as
their souls were in the world.

God says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Then your hearts hardened after that, so that they were like rocks,
rather worse in hardness; “(2:74)***

Just as it is not bending before truth in the world it will remain harsh
and stiff in the Hereafter too (like his heart).

In the Hereafter, Truth will Overtake Appearance
------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned that, in the Hereafter, the teeth of unbelievers become
as big as the mountain of Uhad (then what would be his body like?). In
other words, in the Hereafter the reality will overcome outward
appearance. All facts will come out in the open and the inner and outer
will become manifest.

***“On the day when hidden things shall be made manifest, “(86:9)***

*Qiyamat* is the Day of the unveiling of secrets. It is also mentioned
that when the inner and outer organs of body will disintegrate and tear
up by chastisement (such as eating *Zaqqoom* and drinking *Hameem*) all
these body parts will recover soon again (rather the skin will be
changed a number of times).

The Holy Qur’an mentions this clearly:

***“(As for) those who disbelieve in Our communications, We shall make
them enter fire; so oft as their skins are thoroughly burned, We will
change them for other skins, that they may taste the chastisement;
“(4:56)***

Is Painful Punishment Becoming Divine Justice?
----------------------------------------------

Another doubt, which can come to man's mind, is: Are such severe
punishments commensurate with Divine Justice?

Such doubt is the result of thinking that the Divine punishment is like
the tortures inflicted by the despotic rulers of this world. But this
imaginary likeness is in no way correct because what the worldly tyrants
do is for taking personal revenge and for pleasing themselves by
punishing their offenders. They want to cool their anger in that way.
They frown upon those who oppose them; they boil in anger.

In order to subside their wrath, they order their imprisonment, torture
and even killing etc. But the Divine punishment will not be like that.
There, whatever will happen will be caused by what had happened in the
world. If the sin is serious its punishment will also be serious and if
the error was light its punishment will also be proportionately light.

The result of faithlessness will be to remain in perpetual darkness.
Turning away from God will result in permanent sandwiching and squeeze.
The result of every trampled right will be everlasting blindness and
deafness. The consequence of following devilish leaders will be dwelling
with them forever. The essential result of eating the property of an
orphan will be flaring of fire in the devilish devourer's stomach.

This makes it clear that man will get hell fire by way of his own
earning. He will be liable to various punishments in hell only because
of his own misdeeds and evil character and misbehaviour. In the light of
what is said in the Holy Qur’an the fuel of hell fire also will be
wrongdoer persons:

***“Then be on your guard against the fire of which men and stones are
the fuel; “(2:24)***

Self Prepared Punishment
------------------------

It can be understood from the above that the reasons of getting
punishments in hell will have been provided by the sinner himself. He
had behaved wrongfully, unjustly and oppressively with himself. God
never oppresses anyone:

***“Surely Allah does not do any injustice to men, but men are unjust to
themselves. “(10:44)***

How at all an unbeliever ever be given entrance to paradise which is
extremely Holy and soft place while that fellow had indulged in
dirtiness, harshness, rebellion, deviation and disobedience to God?
Paradise is a very secure and peaceful place where only healthy people
can enter who do not have any foul illness.

How can a man who is full of internal illnesses like envy, malignity,
enmity, stinginess, pride, egotism, be allowed to enter paradise? The
residence of such ill people is a hospital of hell, not the paradise
that is a place of permanent peace.

Adoration Before the Blind and Singing Before the Deaf!
-------------------------------------------------------

The truth is that to allow an unbeliever entry to paradise is just like
pouring scented oil on the head of a man who has lost his faculty of
smelling due to severe cold. It is like putting a thing at an
inappropriate place. (It is never commensurate with Divine Wisdom). It
is called 'injustice' (*zulm*) in Arabic.

Therefore hurling an unbeliever in hell is in no way against Divine
Justice because in Arabic, Justice (*Adl*) means to put a thing in its
appropriate place (God is Adil=Just). That is why entry of an unbeliever
in paradise is impossible.

It is totally against divine justice. He (the Unbeliever) can never
enjoy paradise because it is just like a beautiful bride who adorns
herself for a blind fellow or sings before a deaf person.

What has the Merciful to do with Punishment!
--------------------------------------------

Even after all that has been said above, it is likely that someone may
ask: How can God, the Most Merciful, Who loves His creation beyond
measure, will put his beloved creation to fierce punishments? The answer
is that though God is most soft and lenient, He also is wrathful and
mighty. Just as He is 'Rahman' and 'Rahim', so also He is 'Jabbar' and
'Qahhar'.

Just as paradise is the manifestation of extreme kindness, so is the
hell the manifestation of extreme anger and wrath. “O, One Whose Mercy
precedes His Wrath…” is the attribute according to which He is not happy
that His creation should become Unbeliever by disobeying Him and go to
hell. “He is not pleased with the disbelief of His servants.”

But when the creation, despite knowing His displeasure, opts for the
road leading to hell, He also does not prevent them forcibly because it
is against His wisdom. God is absolutely independent of every or any
need. He is also not in need of our faith.

Forced Repentance is Useless
----------------------------

Yet He has, on the basis of His mercy and kindness, towards His creation
made true repentance the cause of protection from the above-mentioned
punishments. He has kept this door open until the last breath of man.
But if the creation turns away its face from this kindness also, He also
does not force them to repent because a forced repentance will not be
repentance at all.

Doubtlessly, God is Merciful and Beneficent and it is because of it that
He has ordered the creation to follow His commands and to carry out all
obligatory and voluntary good deeds leading to paradise and He guided us
towards it. Similarly He also commanded us to refrain from all evil,
prohibited and indecent things, which take one away from God and make
him near to Satan and consequently lead to hellfire.

Thus it can be understood that all these religious commands and duties
are due to His vast mercy and kindness. Therefore, a faithful person
should also take care and he should never lag behind in fulfilling his
religious duties. He must realize that failure to do any obligatory duty
is his permanent loss, which is irreparable. In this way he will be
depriving himself of divine mercy. No other thing can avert this loss.

A Short Lifespan and Permanent Punishment
-----------------------------------------

One more objection can also be that if an unbeliever got a lifespan of
say fifty or sixty (or more) years. Then, how can it be justified that
he should suffer forever endlessly in hell? The answer is: The
unbeliever who, spent his entire life in disbelief had, in reality, in
that very short lifespan by misusing his freedom of action, gathered
such a huge and permanent evil that its essential consequence is
entrance to everlasting hell.

In other words, he opted for such a darkness for himself, where no ray
of light can ever reach till eternity. Likewise, the faithful who left
this world with piety and fear of God earned in his short life an
undiminishing success, that is, he earned an inextinguishable light.

Eternity will be Based on the Intention of Good or Evil
-------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in Biharul Anwar that Abu Hashim asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
why the dwelling in paradise or hell would be permanent? The Imam (a.s.)
replied, “The people of hell will live in hell forever because their
intention in the world was that had they to live in the world forever
they would disobey God forever.

Likewise the reason of the people of paradise living therein permanently
is also that their intention in the world was that if they had to live
in the world forever they would always obey God and would never defy His
commandments. So, it is the intention that results in the permanent
residence of the people of paradise in paradise and the permanent
dwelling of the people of hell in hell. Thus Allah says in the Holy
Qur’an that everyone acts according to his intention.

*Wa Aakhiru Daa Waanaa Ani Hamdu Lillaahi Rabbil Aalameen Wa Sallaallahu
Alaa Muhammad Wa Aalihit Taiyibeen Wat Taahireen*

[^1]: For further details please refer to Tawheed Mufaddal

[^2]: For removal of doubts regarding the eater and the eaten one, refer
the Ayatullah's book, 80 questions.

[^3]: For more details please refer Martyr Ayatullah Dastghaib's
commentary Qalbe Qur’an (Explanation of Surah Yasin) on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/the-heart-of-the-quran-commentary-of-sura-yasin-...

[^4]: Safinatul Bihar, Vol. 2, p. 360

[^5]: Persian Couplet.

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 10.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar vol.3.

[^8]: Rauzatul Kafi, tradition no.79.

[^9]: Safinatul Bihar

[^10]: Refer Gunahane Kabirah by the same author. Published in English
under the title of 'Greater Sins'. Available on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/greater-sins-complete-ayatullah-dastaghaib-shirazi

[^11]: Persian Couplets.

[^12]: Persian Couplet.

[^13]: What is meant by this week long hosting? We could not know it
because these our worldly weeks will not be there in Hereafter. May be
the timing is explained according to our system of calculation.

[^14]: Dua Kumail.

[^15]: See Surah Saad 38:59-63.


