Foreword
========

In our continuous effort to propagate Islam through our numerous
publications we have had a persistent desire to include amongst our
publications translations of the most important reference books recog-
nized by the Shi'ah.

To be able to publish such key books in the Shi'ah heritage in foreign
languages does not only give us great pleasure and pride but it conforms
very well to our wishes and our true sincere objectives.

No doubt the non-Arab speaking researchers would now have better access
to the true Islamic heritage since such books contain the ahadith
(traditions) of the holy Im?ms (peace be upon them) and the Holy Prophet
(peace be upon him and his progeny).

Moreover, these books constitute the second source - the holy Qur'an
being the first - whereby one would have better understanding of the
Islamic ideology, jurisprudence, history, tradition, manners, Islamic
laws pertaining to worship, business, Islamic considerations for the
individual, family and society. . .

One of the important books in question is al-K?fi whose author was
ash-Shaykh Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni ar-R?zi ( 328/329 =
940/941).

We need not introduce either the book or its author since the
introduction to the book takes care of that and also shows its religious
significance and its status in our heritage, namely the heritage
transmitted to us through Ahlu'l-bayt (the House-hold of the Holy
Prophet - p.b.u.t.).

-2-

Our gratitude to All?h, the Almighty, for being able to commence the
translation of al-K?fi to English. So far, the translation of the
section pertaining to the "Reason and Ignorance" ('aql and jahl) has
been completed. No doubt we had to utilize all the means at our disposal
and to rely on Allah's unlimited strength in order to accomplish this
translation.

As a matter of fact, we had to do a lot of screening before coming up
with this version. Furthermore, we took every possible effort to make
sure that the translation is satisfactory and acceptable in terms of
accuracy and grammar.

We do not wish to claim perfection in this humble effort to trans-late
one section of al-K?fi. Nevertheless, we have taken the first step and
we are confident that subsequent steps would be taken, either by us or
by somebody else, to both remove any errors and optimize the translation
so that exactness in the narration process is improved.

We have decided to speed up the printing and publication of the
translated section of al-K?fi. The other sections, it is hoped, would be
published in due course on individual basis; this process would be
continued until all the sections of al-K?fi are translated and
published.

You will note that we have also included along with the English
translation, the complete original Arabic version, this being placed at
the top of each page with the corresponding English translation below.

-3-

We believe, and so does everybody who studied it believe, that

(22)

al-K?fi is both of such a high status as a source of religious
knowledge and so holy in the Shi'ah circles and that the author is
considered highly honest and highly reliable.

However, we should emphasize that neither the ah?ad?th are equal in
value and significance nor are the supporting evidence for the
narrations or the persons relating the ah?ad?th equal in terms of
reliability and credibility and in no way can one give them the same
appraisal.

A glance at the book entitled mir'?tu'l- 'ug?l (reflection of the
minds) would reveal to the researcher this very point in more detail.
Mir'?tu'l-'uqul is an explanatory book to al-K?fi and is authored by the
great scholar Muhammad B?qir al-Majlisi (1037/1628-1111/1700).

al- Majlisi is one of the prominent scholars of h?ad?th (tradition) and
one of the most loyal and faithful to the book (al-K?fi) and its great
author and one of the most faithful and pious scholars of Islam.

Because of this - that is, the question of unequal credibility of the
ah??dith, narrations and narrators - and for completeness we have
retained the complete supporting evidence of the ah??d?th as in the
original Arabic text. We have not omitted any original support for any
ah?ad?th, neither have we omitted any of the links in a narration
chain.

In order to reveal the credibility, or otherwise, of the support for a
par- ticular h?ad?th, one has to refer to special books dealing with the
biogra- phy and the religious and moral status of the narrator/s; such
books also carry an appraisal of what the narrator transmits and
relates. We would like to re-emphasize that the inference of any
religious or ritual doctrine or any law pertaining to jurisprudence from
these ah??d?th is a long process.

To start with, the researcher would have to refer the nar- rations
along with their supporting chain of evidence - to the special
biographic books referred to above. The narrations would have to be
cross-checked against one another. Later the researcher would have to
consider all other declarations and citations on the same topic from
other references and then use the holy Qur'an as the arbitrator.

Of more significance still, one has to abide by the rules and
regulations laid down by the specialists and which rules can never be
ignored. Therefore, the researcher would have to go back either to the
ideological and linguistic books or to the books of jurisprudence and
legislation, that is, those books which cover the inference aspects and
the evaluation of various proofs and evidence used to back-up (23)

any ideological principle or jurisprudence. This is the approach to be
adopted if he wants his research to be systematic and if he wants the
results to be sound, accurate and reliable, thus satisfying his
scientific conscience and obliging others to honour and follow such
inferences.

This very point has been ignored - intentionally or otherwise - by many
researchers and we are stressing it here in order that other researchers
would neither make the same mistake of ignoring it nor suffer the same
deviation.

And for several considerations we refrained from introducing
unnecessary explanatory notes, except where it was absolutely necessary,
so as to stick to our . original aim of merely translating and
publishing the book.

-4-

In the translation we have retained the Islamic format and Arabic
pronunciation of the names and proper nouns encountered in various
ah??d?th. We were not content with the Biblical equivalents, but,
instead, retained the Islamic articulations in the text, following each
proper noun or name (especially those mentioned in the holy Qur'an)
like, Mus? (Moses), 'Is? (Jesus), Maryam (Marry), Jibr?l (Gabriel). . .
with its Biblical equivalent in brackets.

We took this measure because we strongly believe in preserving the
original Islamic character even with respect to names and proper nouns.
We believe in originality even when it comes to appearances, and we will
completely avoid imitation and reproduction even if it were merely with
respect to pronunciation and expression. . .

-5 We have put a table at the beginning of each section giving general
particulars and information in tabular form about the Holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) and F?tima az-Zahra' (p.b.u.h.) and the twelve Im?ms
(p.b.u.t.). For each of them we have assigned a number according to
their sequence.

It is hoped that this table would help the reader - even the
non-specialist to understand some important expressions encountered in
the process of the narration of haadith.

Furthermore, we have included four indexes at the end of each
section:-

a) The first index lists the originators of the ah?ad?th to be found in
the section - the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) and the Im?ms
(p.b.u.t.).

It begins with a number corresponding to the serial number of the
originator of the h?ad?th, the originator being the Prophet or one of
the Im?ms. The serial number has already been assigned in the table at
the beginning of the section.

After the number, the format of the name used in the h?ad?th appears.

After that, the serial number's of ah?ad?th related to the originator
is/are listed.

For example, in the first index of this section:

(7) - Abu Ja'far, 1, 7 . . . etc.

The number (7) preceding the name (Abu Ja'far) indicates that the
originator is Im?m Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-B?qir (p.b.u.t.) who
was assigned with this number in the table at the beginning of the
section. The number following the name are the serial number of the
ah?ad?th in the book (or section) related to him:

that is, the first and the seventh h?ad?th are related to him. . . etc.
b) An index containing symbols for terminology commonly encountered in
the process of narration of hadith.

We have introduced these because scholars of h?ad?th often use them. In
this index we have also explained some of those terminologies for which
no simple English equivalent can be found. We have explained such
terminology in the index and when it appears in the text we also mention
the Arabic text in the Latinized form: e.g. "rafa ahu" - Ref. Index
no.3

c) Index of the names of key personalities. Following each name the
serial numbers of ah??d?th in which such a name appears are cited. We
were content with citing only those names that appeared in the contexts
of the ah??d?th proper and ignored the names of narrators.

d) Index of key places, names of tribes and families and sects.
Finally, it is All?h, the Almighty, from Whom we seek help and guidance
and upon Whom we rely for the success of our efforts. Moreover, we pray
that He paves the way for us to complete what we have commenced and to
redeem us in order to achieve what we have planned. . .

We strongly believe that He is the reconciliator and that He is the
best guide and the best artisan.


WORLD ORGANIZATION FOR ISLAMIC SERVICES
Tehran - IRAN.


