Al-kulayni and Al-kafi
======================

An abstract from the preface by Dr. Husayn \`Ali Mahƒufuzƒw,
introducing AL-KULAYNI and AL-KAFI, with some additions. (29)

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

**PLACE OF HƒmAD.TH (TRADITION) FOR SHI،¥AH1**

The first book of hƒmad.th (tradition) compiled in the world of Islam
was the book of \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (p.b.u.h.) which was dictated by the
Holy Prophet (Muhammad ،X p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) himself and which was put down
in black and white by \`Ali himself on a sheet of paper. This book
contains all the details about what is lawful and what is unlawful.2
This book also contains a document regarding blood money and indemnity
for bodily injuries and its (document) used to be hung by the scabbard
of his sword.3 And al-Bukhari has quoted from it.4

Thereafter, Abu Rafi،¥ al-Qibtƒzi ash-Shi،¥i the emancipated slave of
the Holy Prophet compiled another book named ،X Kitab as-Sunan
wa'l-ahkam wa'l-qadƒuaya. 5

Then the great scholars duly acquainted with the categories of the
traditionists, assorted and composed various books of traditions and
they also composed four hundred books named as usƒw.l 6 ،X the
originals, which were, later on, collected, connected and compiled by a
group of reliable experts in the art of traditions in the shape of their
collections of traditions. The greatest among these collections are the
books of:-

1. al-Kafi,7 collected and compiled by al-Kulayni (d. 329/941);

2. Man la yahduruhul faqih,8 compiled by ash-Shaykh asƒw-Sƒladuq, Abu
Ja،¥far Muhammad ibn \`Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Babawayh al-Qummi (306/919
،X 381/991);

3. Tahdh.b al-ahƒukam9 and al-Istibsƒwar10 by ash-Shaykh Abu Ja،¥far
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn at-Tus. (385/995 ،X 460/ 1076);

4. Jami،¥ al-akhbar fi .dƒuah al-istibsƒwar by ash-Shaykh 'Adul-Lat.f
ibn Abi Jami،¥ al-Hƒmarithi al-Hamadani (d. 1050/1640);

5. al-Wafi12 by Muhammad Muhƒusin al-Faydƒu al-Kashani (1010/ 1599 ،X
1091/1690);')

6. Tafsƒwtl wasa،¦il ash-Shi،¥ah ila tahƒusƒwil masa،¦il
ash-shar.،¥ah13 by Muhammad ibn al-Hƒmasan al-Hƒmurr al-،¥Amili
(1033/1625 ،X 1104/1693);

7. Bihƒuar al-anwar al jami\`ah li durar akhbar ala'immah al-atƒzhar14
by Muhammad Baqir ibn Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi (1037/ 1928 ،X
1111/1700);

8. al- ،¥Awaliml6 (in 100 volumes) by ash-Shaykh \`Abdullah ibn
Nuru'1-lah al-Bahƒurani (contemporary, of al-Majlisi);

9. ash-Shifa fi hƒmad.th Al al-Musƒwtafa16 by ash-Shaykh Muhammad
Ridƒua ibn \`Abdu'l-Latƒz.f at-Tabrizi (d. 1158/1745);

10. Jami،¥ al-ahƒukam (in 25 thick volumes)17 by as-Sayyid \`Abdul-lah
ibn Muhammad Ridƒua Shubbar (1188/1774 ،X 1242/1827);

11. Mustadrak al-wasa'il wa mustanbat al-masa'i118 by al-Haj Mirza
Husayn ibn Muhammad Taqi an-Nuri at-Tabarsi (1254/ 1838 ،X 1320/1902);

12. Jami،¥ ahƒuadith ash-Shi،¥ah (in a number of volumes) by the Grand
Shi،¥ite Mufti as-Sayyid Aqa Husayn ibn ،¥Ali ibn Ahƒumad at-Tabataba،¦i
al-Burujirdi (1292/1875 ،X 1380/1961). So far, out of this voluminous
book, seven volumes have been already published in Iran, and the rest of
the volumes are being gradually published.

The Shi،¥ite scholars and the narrators of the traditions from the
progeny of the Holy Prophet (the twelve Imams) have consistently made
efforts, one after the other, to pay great attention to the narra-tion
of the traditions to the keeping of them intact, to their criticism and
collection to their regulation, to the acquisition of the knowledge of
this art,19 to the skill of its authentication and to the specialisation
in the research regarding the dates and categories of the narrators.20
They used to issue detailed certificates (to their students) with
liberty to quote them in relating the\` traditions. In this regard
voluminous books have been written by some of the Shiite scholars, not
to speak of the small collections which are countless and which are
scattered.21

What significance does the tradition (hƒmad.th) have in the eyes of
Sh.،¦ah, can be judged from this example of hƒmad.th.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (p. b. u. h.) addressed Jabir (his companion)
saying, "O Jabir! by Allah, a tradition (hƒmad.th) emerging from an
authentic source is infinitely better for you than any thing the sun
shines over, till it sets down."22

Further, Imam Ja،¥far asƒw-Sƒladiq (p.b.u.h.) has observed (in this
regard), "A tradition received from a truthful person regarding what is
lawful and what is unlawful is far better than the whole world and
whatever wealth like gold or silver it contains."23

An idea of the importance of the tradition for the Sh.،¦ah is also
known from these traditions which indicate the close attention paid by
the associates of the Imams in picking them up from the Imams,24 in
remembering them by heart and also from their eagerness, high esteem and
long journeys they 25 undertook to get them from the scholars and
narrators of the traditions.

In addition, there are numerous traditions which urge people to acquire
the knowledge (of traditions). Other traditions indicate the need of
their verification and the need for precaution in matters of faith and
also the need to acquire them, to adhere to them and to make deduction
from sunnah ،X the sayings and doings of the Prophet and the Imams (from
the progeny of the Holy Prophet - peace be upon him and his progeny).

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (p. b. u. h.) used to say, "When I receive a
young person from amongst my followers having no under-standing of
religion I would like 'I deal with him very strictly till he acquires
the knowledge of religion."26


**KULAYN**

Kulayn was the name of a village under the jurisdiction of \`Ray' ،X
the well known city of Iran. This village is now in ruins which are
still to be found 'near Tehran ،X the capital city of Iran even this
day. This village was the birth place of Muhammad ibn Ya،¥qub Kulayni,
the compiler of this book al-Kafi.27

The fact of his belonging to this village Kulayn, can also be proved by
his relationship with Ray.28 He was the Shaykh ،X the religious head of
the Sh.،¦ah scholars of Ray in his time.29


**Biography of al-Kulayni, the Compiler**

Muhammad ibn Ya،¥qub ibn Ishƒuaq al-Kulayni ar-Razi al-Baghdadi
belonged to a noble family of Kulayn which has produced a group of
outstanding scholars in Islamic Jurisprudence and hƒuadith. Among them
was his uncle al-،¥Allamah al-Kulayni himself was the Shaykh ،X head of
the. Sh.،¦ahs and was the most prominent religious figure of his time in
Ray (the most important ancient city of Iran).

Afterwards he stayed at Baghdad (Iraq) at Bab K.fa (name of a locality
in Baghdad) as the Chief of the Shi،¥ite Scholars in Islamic
Jurisprudence during the reign of al-Muqtadir ،X the Abbasid Caliph. The
unique qualification of al-Kulayni, the compiler of al-Kafi, is that
among all other compilers of /Judith, he alone was the cotemporary of
all the four successive representatives and ambassadors of Imam al-Mahdi
،X the twelfth Imam. Hence he had all the facilities of collecting
traditions from the requisite sources.

Therefore, al-Kafi is rightly regarded as a unique collection and
compilation during the life time of all the four successive ambassadors
of Imam al-Mahdi. al-Kulayni compiled this book on the request of the
prominent Shiite scholars who wanted to have a comprehensive book
containing all information of Islamic literature which would be
sufficient for them.

His court was the rendezvous of the great scholars in Islamic studies
who used to go in search of knowledge to different places. The great
scholars of the time used to present themselves in his court to discuss,
to exchange notes and to confer with him and to acquire full
understanding of Islamic problems.

al-Kulayni was a great scholar, a reliable traditionist and a man of
great learning. He was among the outstanding jurist and an authority in
traditional science. He was the chief of the Islamic jurists and an
outstanding scholar of Islamic literature. He was a man of great
abstinence, piety, integrity and holiness.

His book al-Kafi is no doubt an outstanding collection of reliable
traditions in the largest measure. It is a treasure of Islamic
literature, Shari \`ah (code), divine commandments inclusive of
imperatives, prohibitions, reprimands and sunan ،X the sayings and
doings of the Holy Prophet and the twelve Imams. It is a collection
about Islamic education and culture. It contains the record of the
sayings and doings of the Holy Prophet and the twelve Imams.

al-Kulayni has himself written preface of his book al-Kafi and has also
added some needed explanatory notes on some of the chapters which are
indicative of his high skill and proficiency in the art of writing and
in his knowledge of Arabic literature, its depth and its hidden wisdom.
It also indicates his convincing presentation, his fluency, his
eloquence and also his high place in the art of Arabic composition.

He was an expert historian and was well versed in categorising the
narrators of hƒmad.th and the traditionists. He is also an author of a
book in the art and science of traditions (hƒmad.th) and was an expert
in scrutinising the narrators. He was so great an expert of the science
of scholastic theology that he has written a book refuting
al-Qaramitƒzah (one of the several names applied to the sect of
Isma،¥ilis who were once very active in their political activities).

Regarding his association with education and literature, it is quite
sufficient to point out his two books namely:-

1) Rasa،¦il al-a،¦immah on the letters of the Imams.
2) A book on verse ،X a compilation of eulogies to the Imams.
In addition, his book on the interpretation of the dreams is regarded
to be the best book in this field.


