Supplement
==========

may not be included among those whom God has described with the
following words:

"And among men 'there is such a one as worships God upon the very edge
،X if good befalls him he is at rest in it, but if a trial befalls him
he turns completely over; he loses this world and the world to come;
that is indeed the manifest loss" (al-Hajj, 22:11).

For this reason, the entrance of such a type of man in religion without
knowledge and belief in it and his exist also therefrom, is without
knowledge and belief. The \`Al.m (the Imam) has observed:

"The faith of a man accepted knowingly remains steadfast, and is of
profit for him. Whoever enters the house of faith without knowledge,
makes his exit from that house in the same way in which he entered it."
The Imam (peace be upon him) has said, "Whoever derives his faith from
the knowledge of the Book of Allah and the precepts of the Prophet of
God (peace be upon him and his progeny) is more difficult to be
dislodged from his faith than the mountains are, from their places. And
the faith of a person derived from the words of the mouth of the, people
is repudiated by the people themselves."

The Imam added, "He, who does not recognize our (Imams from the progeny
of Prophet Muhammad - p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) case in the light of Qur'an, will
not be able to turn the errors aside."

For this reason false and detestable faiths fulfilling all the
conditions of infidelity and polytheism hold their sway over the people
of our time. All this, (the recognition and non-recognition of our
position) depends upon the favour and disfavour of God. Whomsoever God
grants His favour of keeping his faith steady, He also creates such
conditions for him as will lead to derive his faith from the Book of
Allah and the precepts of Prophet (Muhammad) with knowledge, belief and
insight. It is such people that are firmer in their faith than the high
mountains in their places.

Should God intend alienating Himself from a person, then, the faith He
lends him is rendered superficial and temporary ،X may God protect us
all from this situation. God provides such a person with ways and means
on account of which he begins perceiving only the superficial beauty of
every thing.

He takes to following every thing blindly, and he starts interpreting
(the scriptures) without knowledge and insight. The case of such a
person entirely rests on the Will of God the Almighty whether to rectify
his faith or to forfeit it from him altogether. Such a person cannot
remain in peace when he is a believer in the morning and infidel in the
evening or vice versa. All this is because he falls in for everything
that appears great to him and accepts every-thing with a glittering
appearance.

The ،¥Alim (the Imam) - peace be upon him - has observed: "God, the
Almighty has so created His prophets as to infuse prophethood into their
blood and so they cannot remain except as prophets (peace be upon them
all). He has also created their vicegerents in the same mode; so they
cannot remain except as the vicegerents (of the prophets). He lent faith
temporarily to another group of people, so that should He so like, He
may perfect it into them or forfeit it from them altogether. These words
of Allah hold true in the case of such people: "... And then a
lodging-place, and then a repository, ..." (al-An،¥am, 6:98).

You (the interrogator) have spoken of matters that are difficult for
you. Your main difficulty is that you do not know the truth because of
the conflicting versions of traditions coming from different narrators.
And you know that conflicting versions of traditions have their own
causes and effects. Further, your problem is that you do not find
whether any expert knowledge (of the authenticity of narrators) can be
relied upon and whom you can approach, talk to and have your problem
solved.

And for all this you earnestly want to have a book with you, inclusive
of all branches of the science of religion, which could wholly satisfy
all the students of religion and which seekers of guidance could turn
to,

and from which they could derive the specific knowledge of religion
they intend to, and they could act thereon with genuine traditions from
the truthful Imams, (the divinely appointed guides) which (Book) ensures
the practice on the codified divine law.

And finally by means of which (Book) the divine obligations and the
precepts of the prophet could be implemented. And you have said, "In
case such a book is compiled then I can hope by God that with His grace
and help it will lead our brethren in faith their and our (Muslim)
community to their truthful guides ،X the Imams."

O،¦ brother! may God guide you. It is upto no person to discriminate
between different versions of the traditions of the Imams according to
his own light and except on the basis of the verdicts (criterion) laid
down by the Imam himself. The verdict of the Imam is:

"Check it up with the text of the Book of God (Qur'an), accept it if it
agrees with the text and reject it if it does not." 18

The verdict further lays down, "Let alone the agreeing with what is on
the lips of general people since the truth is just the opposite." The
third verdict lays down: "Accept what is held in common by all the
narrators quoting us. Since there can be no doubt about what is
unanimously held by all." (The narrators of our traditions - ahƒuad.th.
) But, to our knowledge, very few such contradicting traditions can be
solved on the basis of the above described criterion. In the case of
such (contradicting) traditions the best, the simpler and the more
compre- hensive solution is to leave all knowledge (regarding
contradicting traditions) to the Imam himself.

Imam has given us the easiest solution to choose and follow any of the
version among such contradicting traditions. The Imam has said,
"Whatever you have accepted and followed with the 'intention of obeying
(the Imam) is valid for you." Thus has Allah made (the task of selecting
and collecting the traditions) easy. All praise is due to Allah, that He
has enabled me to compile the book you have requested for. I hope this
book will be after your liking.

There may be some deficiency (in this work of mine) but there is none
in the sincerity of intention to counsel my people, which is essential
(especially) in the case of our brethren and co-relitionists.
Simultaneously we ourselves earnestly desire to be among the
participants deriving benefits (from this book) and among those who act
upon it in this age and in the ages hereafter coming, till the Day of
Judgment.

God the Almighty is one, His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and
his progeny) the last of the prophets, is one and the divine code is
also one. What Muhammad, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) declared to be
unlawful is unlawful till the Day of Judgment. The chapter on divine
proofs has slightly been expanded although the expansion is not in the
measure the chapter deserves, since it was distasteful for us to
reducing any portion thereof.

We hope that Allah, the great and the Almighty, will make it easy for
us and will grant us further span of life for the fulfilment of our
objective of making this chapter widest and fullest, in the manner it
deserves, provided Allah wills since all power and might is His. With
Him are all our longings for increased help and favour. May Allah's
peace and blessings be upon our chief, Muhammad the Prophet and upon his
progeny ،X the purified, the excellent.

I have commenced and inaugurated this book of mine with the chapter on
reason, the greatness of knowledge, the great status of those who
possess it, their high worth, the defectiveness of ignorance, the
baseness of its possessor, and their lowered rank. Since reason is the
axis on which every thing revolves, it is on the reason that all the
argument rests. All divine rewards and punishments are in accordance
with it. (It is Allah that grants the favour of reason.)


