Reason and Ignorance
====================

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful.

1. Abu Ja،¥far Muhammad ibn Ya،¥qub (al-Kulayni, the compiler of this
book al-Kafi) informed us (al-Kulayni's disciples) saying: "A group of
our (al-Kulayni's) associates handed down this tradition. Muhammad ibn
Yahya al-،¥Attar quoted Ahmad ibn Muhammad who quoted from al-Hƒmasan
ibn Mahƒubub who quoted from al-،¥Ala،¦ Razin who quoted from Muhammad
ibn Muslim on the authority of Abu Ja،¥far (Muhammad al-Baqir ،X peace
be upon him), as saying:

،¥When Almighty Allah created reason, He tested it. Then He ordered it
to come forward and it came forward. Then He ordered it to go back and
it went back. On this Almighty God said: I swear by my power and majesty
that no creation of Mine is dearer to Me than you are, and I have only
made you perfect in those whom I love.

Lo! To you are My orders and prohibitions addressed. And for you are My
rewards and retributions reserved.،¦ "

2. ،¥Ali ibn Muhammad (،X) Sahl ibn Ziyad (،X) ،¥Amr ibn ،¥Uthman
(،X)Mufadƒudƒual ibn Sƒlalih (،X) Sa،¥d ibn Tƒlarif (،X) al-Asƒwbagh ibn
Nubatah (،X) ،¥Ali (ibn Abi Tƒlalib - p.b.u.h.) as saying :

"Jibr.l (Gabriel) came to Adam, and informed him: ،¥O Adam! I have been
ordered to let you choose one out of three things. Therefore, choose one
and leave the other two.،¦ Adam asked: ،¥What are the three things?،¦ He
replied, ،¥Reason, modesty and religion (din).،¦ Then Adam said: ،¥I
choose reason.،¦ So Jibr.l ordered modesty and faith to withdraw and
leave reason but they said: ،¥O Jibr.l! we both have been instructed (by
God) to remain with reason wherever it may be.،¦ Jibr.l answered: ،¥Then
that is your situation,،¦ and he ascended towards Heaven."

3. Ahƒumad ibn Idr.s (،X) Muhammad ibn ،¥Abd al-Jabbar (،X) some of his
associates (rafa ahu) who made a reference climaxing into Abu ،¥Abdillah
(p.b.u.h.) that the narrator inquired of the Imam;

"What is reason?" The Imam replied: "Reason is that by which God is
worshipped and a place in Paradise earned." The Imam was then asked:
"What did Mu،¥awiyah have?" The Imam replied: "That was just wickedness
and cunning, which seemed like reason, but it was not reason."

4. Muhammad ibn Yahya (،X) Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ،¥Isa (،X) Ibn
Fadƒudƒual (،X) Hƒmasan ibn al-Jahm, as saying:

"I have heard ar-Ridƒua (p.b.u.h.), as saying: ،¥The friend of every
man is his reason and his foe is his ignorance.،¦" 5. Muhammad ibn
Yahƒuya (،X) Ahmad ibn Muhammad (،X) Ibn Fadƒudƒual (،X) al-Hƒmasan ibn
al-Jahm, as saying:

"I asked Abu'l-Hƒmasan (p.b.u.h.) about a group of people that were
among us who had love (for prophet and his progeny) but had not the
resolution of will to confess the belief in your Imamate. The Imam
replied: ،¥Such men are not among those whom God will blame (for their
failure in finding truth) verily, Allah has said: ،¥. . . therefore take
heed, O you have eyes.،¦ " (al-Hƒmashr, 59:2)

6. Ahmad ibn Idris (،X) Muhammad ibn Hƒmasan (،X) Abi Muhammad ar-Razi
(،X) Sayf ibn ،¥Amayrah (،X) Is'hƒuaq ibn ،¥Ammar

(،X) Abu ،¥Abdillah (p.b.u.h.) as saying:

"One who has reason has faith. And he who has faith will have a place
in Paradise."

7. A group of our (compilers') associates (،X) Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid (،X) al-Hƒmasan ibn ،¥Ali ibn Yaqtƒzin (،X) Muhammad ibn Sinan
(،X) Abi al-Jarud (،X) Abu Ja،¥far (p.b.u.h.) as saying:

"On the Day of Judgment, Almighty Allah will exact a detailed account
from His servants, in exact proportion to the reason with which He had
endowed them in the worldly life."

8. ،¥Ali ibn Muhammad ibn ،¥Abdillah (،X) Ibrah.m ibn Is'hƒuaq
al-Ahƒumar (،X) Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Daylami (،X) his father, who
said : "I told Abu ،¥Abdillah (p.b.u.h.), ،¥Such and such a person is
praiseworthy for his devotion and religious practice.،¦ The Imam
inquired, ،¥How his reason is?،¦ I replied, ،¥I know nothing about his
reason.،¦ Upon this, the Imam explained, ،¥The Divine reward is in
relation to one's reason. There was a person from Bani Isra'.l

who used to worship God devotedly in an island full of lush green and
clear water. An angel happened to watch that person, asked God, ،¥Kindly
show me the rewards meant for that person.،¦ When the angel was shown
the rewards by God, they appeared to be very little to him. Upon this
God suggested to him to go and stay with that person (for some time).
The angel appeared before that man in human guise. The man asked the
angel, ،¥Who are you?،¦ The angel replied, ،¥I am also one of the
devotees of God and I have heard about this place and your worship in
it.

Therefore, I have come to you so that I can also pray to Almighty God
with you.،¦ So the angel stayed with him for a day. When it was morning,
the angel remarked, ،¥This is a pleasant place; no place could be better
than this for worshipping God.،¦ Then the devotee-replied, ،¥There is
only one defect in this place.،¦ The angel asked what it was and the man
replied, ،¥My Lord has no animal. If He had a donkey, we could pasture
it in this place, for the grass is going waste.،¦ The angel remarked,
،¥Your Lord has no donkey?،¦ The man further said, ،¥If He (Allah) had a
donkey such a quality of grass would not be wasted.،¦ Then Almighty God
revealed to the angel, ،¥My rewards are in relation to a person's
reason.،¦ "

9. ،¥Ali ibn Ibrah.m (،X) his father (،X) an-Nawfali (،X) as-Sakuni
(،X) Abu ،¥Abdillah (p.b.u.h.) as saying:

"The Holy Prophet said, ،¥Whenever you hear about the good act and
behaviour (hal) of a man, you should consider the goodness of his
reason, since the divine rewards are based upon ones reason.،¦ "

10. Muhammad ibn Yahya (،X) Ahmad ibn Muhammad (،X) Ibn Mahbub (،X)
،¥Abdillah ibn Sinan as saying:

"I praised before (Imam) Abu ،¥Abdillah (p.b.u.h.), the reason of a
person who was wrought with anxiety about ritual ablutions and prayer.
The Imam remarked, ،¥What reason has he got when he is actually obeying
the Devil?،¦ I inquired of the Imam, ،¥How, is he obeying Shaytƒzan
(Satan)?،¦ The Imam replied, ،¥Ask him from where this anxiety comes to
him. Surely he will tell you that (it comes) from the work of
Shaytƒzan.،¦ "

11. A group of our (al-Kulayni's) associates (،X) Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Khalid (،X) some of his companions (rafa،¥ahu) the Holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.), saying:

"Almighty God has endowed upon mankind nothing better than reason. The
slumber of the man of reason is better than the waking hours of the
ignorant. Comforts of the stationary life of the man of reason is better
than the movement of the ignorant. God has sent no prophet nor messenger
without first perfecting his reason. And his reason stands superior to
all the reasons of (the people of) his community.

What the Prophet has hidden in his heart is better than all the
striving after knowledge of those who strive after it. No creature of
God can ever discharge his obligations to God unless he comprehends them
consciously. All the worshippers taken together cannot reach that height
of excellence in their devotion to God as the man of reason does. The
men of reason who are the possessors of understanding minds about whom
God has said, ،¥... But none mindeth save the possessors of
understanding minds." (al-Baqarah, 2:269; Al- ،¥Imran, 3:7)

12. Abu ،¥Abdillah al-Ash،¥ari (،X) some of our (Shi'ite) narrators,
(rafa'ahu) Hisham ibn al-Hakam who states that Abu'l-Hƒmasan M.sa ibn
Ja،¥far (peace be upon them), addressed him thus:

"O،¦ Hisham،¦ Almighty God has given good news to the people of reason
and understanding to this effect, ،¥... So bear thou the glad tidings
unto My servants. Those who hearken unto the word and follow the best of
it; those are they whom God has guided and those they are men possessed
of mind.،¦ (az-Zumar, 39:17،X18)

"O،¦ Hisham! It is through reason and understanding that God has
completed evidence and proof (in respect of Himself and His religion)
for mankind. He has helped His prophets and messengers by endowing them
with the gift of elocution and guided them to comprehend His
overlordship through reason and understanding. As He Himself has said:
،¥And your God is one God! There is no god but He, the All-merciful, the
All-compassionate.

Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation
of night and day and the ship that runs in the sea with profit to men,
and the water God sends down from heaven therewith reviving the earth
after it is dead and His scattering abroad in it all manner of crawling
thing, and the turning about of the winds and the clouds compelled
between heaven and earth ،X surely there are signs for a people having
understanding.،¦ (al-Baqarah, 2:163،X164)

"O،¦ Hisham! This consciousness (that there is some Master mind working
behind this cosmos) has been presented by God as a 32 proof and
demonstration for His recognition as He Himself has declared: ،¥And He
subjected to you the night and day and the sun and moon; and the stars
are subjected by His command. Surely in that are signs for a people who
understand.،¦ (an-Nahƒul, 16:12)

"And He has further said, ،¥It is He who created you of dust then of a
sperm-drop, then of a blood-clot, then that you may come of age, then
that you may be old men ،X though some of you there are who die before
it ،X and that you may reach a stated term; haply you will understand.،¦
(al-Mu'min, 40:67)

"He has again said: ،¥And in the alternation of night and day, and what
God sendeth down from heaven, of the provision and therewith revives the
earth after its death, and the turning about of the winds, there are
signs for a people who understand.،¦ (al-Jathiya, 45:5) "And He argued
further, ،¥. . . God revives the earth after it was dead, we have indeed
made clear for you that haply you will understand.،¦ (al-Hƒmad.d,
57:17)

"And He (God) argues still further: ،¥... And gardens of vines, and
fields sown, and palms in pairs, and palms single, watered with one
water; and some of them We prefer in produce above others. Surely in
that are signs for a people who understand.،¦ (ar-Ra،¥d, 13:4)

،¥And of His signs He shows you lightning, for fear and hope, and that
He sends down out of heaven water and he revives the earth after it is
dead. Surely in that are signs for a people who understand.،¦ (ar-R.m,
30:24)

،¥Say: Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden you; that you
associate not anything with Him, and to be good to your parents, and not
to slay your children because of poverty; We will provide you and them;
and that you approach not any indecency outward or inward, and that you
slay not the soul God has forbidden, except by right. That then He has
charged you with; haply you will understand.،¦ (al-An،¥am, 6:152)

،¥... do you have, among that your right hands own, associates in what
We have provided for you so that you are equal in regard to it, you
fearing them as you fear each other? So We distinguish the signs for a
people who understand.،¦ (ar-R.m, 30:28)

"O،¦ Hisham! God has counselled the people of reason and has drawn
their attention towards the life hereafter with the words:

،¥And the life of this world is naught but play and vain sport;
certainly the abode of the hereafter, is the best for those who guard
(themselves against evil). Do you not then understand?،¦ (al-An'am,
6:32)

"O،¦ Hisham! God has put fear of His chastisement in the hearts of the
people who do not act with reason and understanding to the affect,
،¥Then We destroyed the others. And you pass by them in the morning and
in the night; will you not understand?،¦ (asƒw-Sƒlafat, 37: 136،X138)

"And He declared once again: ،¥Verily, We are bringing down upon the
people of this town a punishment from heaven for what they were
transgressing. And indeed We have left a clear sign of it for a people
to understand.،¦ (al-،¥Ankab.t, 29:34،X35)

"O،¦ Hisham! remember that reason is in alliance with knowledge, as God
has said: ،¥And those similitude We strike them for the people, but none
understands them save those who know.،¦ (al- ،¥Ankab.t,29:43)


