Introduction
============

This is a new story of Islam. It is the story of the movement which was
launched by Muhammad, the Messenger of God, in A.D. 610 in Makkah, and
was consummated with the support of his cousin, collaborator and
vicegerent, Ali ibn Abi Talib, in A.D. 632 in Medina. It covers a period
of ninety years from A.D. 570 when he was born in Makkah, to A.D. 661
when his successor, Ali ibn Abi Talib, was assassinated in Kufa.

Countless histories of Islam have been written in the past and will be
written in the future. The spectacular advance of Islam in the
missionary field in our own times; the renaissance of the Muslim nations
after many centuries of slumber; the obtrusion of oil as a new factor in
world politics in this century; but above all and most recently, the
success of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, all are acting, both in the
east and in the west, as catalysts of a new interest in Islam. The
Revolution in Iran, has, in fact, triggered a world-wide explosion of
interest in Islam, and many new books are being written on the subject –
both by Muslims and non-Muslims.

In these days when the leaders of the Christian world are quietly
working to realize the old dream of Christian ecumenism, many Muslims
are also looking back nostalgically toward that ideal state when Islam
was monolithic.

Islam, however, was monolithic only during the lifetime of its Prophet,
Muhammad, the blessed one. As soon as he died, the first crack appeared
in the “monolith” of Islam. His followers – the Muslims – were polarized
into two groups.

In this polarization, most of his companions were on the one side and
the members of his family on the other. While the members of his family
were occupied with his obsequies, some of his companions were occupied
in “electing” a new leader to succeed him. During the interval between
his death and his burial, the latter gathered in the outhouse of Saqifa
in Medina, and elected one out of themselves as the new head of the
Muslim *umma* (community).

They, then, confronted the members of the bereaved family with a fait
accompli. This confrontation, most unfortunately, became a permanent
feature of the history of the Muslims.

Muhammad, the Messenger of God, may God bless him and his Ahlul-Bayt
(family), belonged to the clan of Banu Hashim. After his death in A.D.
632, his cousin, son-in-law and heir-apparent, Ali ibn Abi Talib,
succeeded him as the new chief of Banu Hashim. Many of the companions of
Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, had nursed a secret antagonism toward
him.

They could not show him their antagonism during the lifetime of the
Prophet but once they were in control of his government in Medina, they
were resolved, not to let it fall, through any miscalculation, into the
hands of Ali ibn Abi Talib. The members of the family of Muhammad, the
Apostle of God, were thus precluded, by human force majeure, not only
from direct succession but also from all positions of authority and
power in the successive governments of his followers.

The friends, followers and supporters of the family of Muhammad Mustafa,
the Messenger of God, have been historically called Shia; and the
friends, followers and supporters of the companions, i.e., the party
which succeeded in seizing power in Medina, have been called Sunni. I
shall also identify these two groups by these names.

M. Shibli, the famous Indian historian of Islam, says that almost all
histories of Islam have been written by Sunni historians. This statement
implies that Shia scholars did not write any histories of Islam. Why
not? They did not write history for an obvious reason. All khalifas,
sultans and kings were Sunni.

A Shia could not publish an interpretation of Islamic history that was
divergent from the official interpretation, and he had no desire to
perpetuate what he believed to be the distortions of truth. He,
therefore, preferred not to write any history at all.

In this manner, it was the “official” account of the history of the
early days of Islam that gained currency and found acceptance. It was
the most logical thing for the governments of the early centuries of
Islam to do to put into circulation only that story which was consistent
with the party line.

It was also most logical for the supporters of the policies of the
governments in question, to toe the party line. And in toeing the party
line, if they felt that it was necessary to smother truth, or at any
rate, to smother the other side of the story, it was just as logical to
do so.

There is nothing strange, surprising or shocking in this attitude of the
Sunni historians. The most logical thing for them to do, was, and is, to
uphold the legitimacy of the events which transpired in Saqifa, where
some of the companions, in a pre emptive strike, seized the government
of Muhammad, the Sovereign of Arabia.

What however is strange, surprising and shocking, is that the Western
historians of Islam, i.e., the Orientalists, have swallowed up, as
gospel truth, whatever the Muslim “court” historians have dished out to
them as “facts.”

The Orientalists are supposedly objective, non-partisan, and in no way
emotionally involved. The outcome of a certain contest in the distant
past of Islam, one way or the other, could not make any difference to
them.

And yet, the works of many of them reflect, not the facts but the
interpretations and propagandas of the party in power. In this sense,
their works are the imitations of the books “inspired” by what the
Communists call the “ruling circles” of the Muslims.

The works of the Orientalists can have scientific value only if they
heed the advice of the great historian of Muslim Spain, Dr. J. A. Conde.
He says:

“A sort of fatality attaching itself to human affairs would seem to
command that in the relation of historical events those of the highest
importance should descend to posterity through the justly suspected
channels of narrations written by the conquering parties. The mutation
of empires, the most momentous revolutions and the overthrow of the most
renowned dynasties seem all to be liable to this disadvantage. It was by
the Romans that the history of their own aggrandizement was written; the
narration of their rivalry and sanguinary wars with the Carthaginians
has come down to us from themselves; or if Greek writers have also
treated the subject, these men were the tributaries and dependents of
Rome, nor did they spare the flatteries best calculated to conciliate
her favor. Scipio thus appears to us the most admirable of heroes, but
is not that in part because the history of his life is the work of his
admirers and flatterers? It is true that the noble and illustrious
Hannibal cannot look otherwise than great and glorious even in the
narratives of his mortal enemies, but if the implacable hatred and
aggressive policy of Rome had not commanded the destruction of all the
Punic annals, the renowned general would doubtless appear to us under an
aspect differing much from that presented by the ruthless barbarian,
described by Livy and accepted by his readers as the portrait of
Hannibal. Therefore a sound and just discrimination forbids us to
content ourselves with the testimony of one side only. This requires
that we compare the relations of both parties with careful impartiality,
and commands us to cite them with no other purpose than that of
discovering the truth.” *(History of the Dominion of the Arabs in Spain
translated from Spanish by Mrs. J. Foster, Volume I, page 1)*

It cannot be gainsaid that many Orientalists have made most invaluable
contributions to the study, knowledge and understanding of Islam. It is
only through their labors that many priceless treasures of Islamic
history, art and literature have been rescued from oblivion, and have
been preserved. It is entirely possible that many such treasures would
have been lost forever if it were not for their efforts to salvage them.

Among them are men who have amazing grasp of the details of Islamic
studies, and whose knowledge is encyclopedic in range. They have read
and assimilated vast quantities of detail, and then they have condensed,
organized and edited them in most masterly and critical analyses. Some
of them devoted their lives and their fortunes to the study of Islam,
and to them the world of Islam owes a profound debt of gratitude.

But notwithstanding the love of and zeal for knowledge, and devotion to
truth of the Western students, it appears that when many of them
interpret Islam, its history and its institutions, something goes awry.
It is incredible but true that some of them show a curious inability to
penetrate through the conventional and stereotyped appearance of events
to the sometimes deliberately obscured facts and forces, and significant
realities. And some of them fail even to see the obvious.

I have quoted above the principles of writing scientific and impartial
history as laid down by Dr. Conde, who is himself a most distinguished
Orientalist. The principle, viz., no expert judgments in history, rests
upon plain common sense, and there is nothing mystical about it.

And yet, many of the Orientalists have accepted, with a credulity that
is idiotic, the account of the events that took place immediately
following the death of Muhammad, as given by the party that succeeded in
capturing his throne for itself.

A most glaring example of the gullibility, and basic misperception of
the Orientalists, in this regard, is the acceptance by them, as a
historical “fact” of the canard that Muhammad, the Messenger of God,
died without designating anyone as his successor, and that he left the
problem of finding a leader for the Muslim *umma* (community) to the
discretion of his followers themselves.

No Orientalist has paused, as far as I am aware, to investigate if this
is true or even plausible that Muhammad abandoned the Muslims without a
leader, and they had to find one in a no-holds barred, ruthless,
free-for-all, struggle for power. Eschewing the laborious search for
truth, the Orientalists have merely concurred with the Sunni historians
that Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, had no wishes or preferences in the
matter of his own succession; and whatever happened in Saqifa was,
therefore, right and justified, and also, was in the best interests of
the Muslim *umma* (community).

This pro-Saqifa tilt of the Orientalists has led them up a blind alley
in which they cannot find answers for some fundamental questions in the
history of Islam, and they find themselves caught, like the Sunni
historians, in a net of paradoxes and contradictions.

Many Sunni historians and many among the Orientalists have made a
deliberate attempt to minimize the importance of the role played by Ali
ibn Abi Talib in the story of Islam. They are, of course, entitled to
their opinions and assumptions even if these are not attested by facts.
In my presentation, I have made an attempt to place the emphasis on
facts.

In doing so, it has been my hope that the facts themselves would act as
“judges”. Since facts are impartial “judges,” they can be counted upon
to restore balance to the assessment of the roles played by the various
protagonists in the history of nascent Islam. I have picked them up and
have tried to string them, like pearls, into a “necklace”, so that most
of them can be seen in one place.

History has no supreme court rendering verdicts; it has only fallible
chroniclers. And yet, history can find its own supreme court or
objective tribunal in the logic of facts.

I have another and very pragmatic reason for depending upon facts. For
writing the story of the early days of Islam, there are three primary
sources, viz., Al-Qur’an al-Majid (the revealed book of Islam); the
Hadith (the memorials of the attributed acts and sayings of Muhammad, as
transmitted by a chain of informants or narrators); and the events as
recorded by Arab historians. Out of these three, the first, i.e., the
Qur’an, is acknowledged by all Muslims to be divine in origin.

If a Muslim challenges the authority of Qur’an, he immediately becomes
an apostate. But whereas the authority of Qur’an, as far as the Muslims
are concerned, is inviolate, its verses are subject to varying and
sometimes conflicting interpretations, and there is no such thing as a
consensus on which or whose interpretation is right.

The Hadith also suffer from a handicap; too many of them are spurious
although there are some which are acknowledged both by the Sunnis and
the Shias to be authentic. I have, therefore, made an attempt to be
selective in quoting only those verses of Qur’an and only those Hadith
(statements of the Prophet) in the interpretation of which the
difference between the Sunnis and the Shias is minimal. But historical
facts belong to an area in which there is not much room for
disagreement.

I have made very frequent use of quotations, both from classical and
modern historians, in this book, often on the same subject or event. I
have done so to present to the reader more than one point of view or
more than one interpretation of the more important events. The same
event seen from different angles appears different to different
observers and is, therefore, subject to different interpretations.

It is in the hope that the reader shares this opinion that I have tried,
on many occasions, to let more than one historian tell the same story.
“Let the professionals do the job,” has been my motto in the restatement
of most of the vital facts of the history of Islam.

Another reason why I have presented testimony of the historians on such
a vast scale, is to underpin my thesis with evidence, so that the
reader, if he so wishes, may advert to sources which he may consider to
be unimpeachable.

It has been said that daring as it is to investigate the unknown, even
more so it is to question the known. Many of the so-called “known facts”
in the history of nascent Islam are little more than pious assumptions
or even pious wishes which through persistent repetition by the long
chain of the generations of Muslims, have acquired the “patina” if not
the status of the “articles of faith”.

When I questioned some of the assumptions of many Muslims which are
disguised as historical “truths”, I noticed that they cannot withstand
the scrutiny of critical analysis. The reader himself may, therefore,
decide if he would cling to them or would accept truths some of which he
might find extremely bitter and brutal. There are those people who are
afraid of truth. Truth threatens their illusions, their favorite myths,
and their assumptions.

These latter, through long propinquity, have become so familiar to them
that they feel it is safe and comfortable to live with them without the
“intrusion” of truth. They equate truth with “insecurity.” And yet,
truth alone can bring them real security. Truth must be upheld at all
costs, and by all, but especially, by the historians. Truth must be
upheld even if it hurts a friend and benefits a foe. The first loyalty
of the historian must be to truth, and nothing whatsoever must deflect
him in its quest.

The war of ideas and the conflict of opinions become even more
interesting when the spotlight of investigation is turned away from
philosophical concepts and abstract political doctrines to characters
and personalities which played the key roles in the events under review.
History springs to life with characterization; it becomes vibrant with
sharply delineated characters who “make” events or act on them or react
to them. They invest history with the “human interest” element, and the
touch of drama.

Whatever history is – accident, or inevitable causality, or the pressure
of economic determinism, or the actions of strong leaders, or the result
of forces nobody understands, or the collective aspirations of a people
– whatever history is, the Arabs themselves see and interpret their own
history more in terms of personal action than anything else. And they
may be right.

After all, as in every other area of endeavor, history is made by those
who act. It consists, in the interaction, not of blind forces but of
human beings. The conflicts of history are not between the abstractions
of philosophy, economics or sociology but between human beings. It has
been said that even in its most sociological moments, history cannot
overlook the factor of human personality.

The history of the first 23-years of the career of Islam which
comprehends the entire ministry of Muhammad as the Messenger of God, is
made, for the most part, next to himself, by the personal actions of his
collaborator, Ali ibn Abi Talib. This is the testimony of history. But
it is a testimony which many historians have consistently tried to
conceal. It is to this testimony that I have tried to draw the attention
of the readers of this book.

But notwithstanding the past and present lopsidedness of Western
historiography on Islam, there is new hope that historians of the future
will make restitution for the omissions and failures of the historians
of the past.

All that they have to do is not to be tendentious, and not to accept
blindly those interpretations and conclusions which have become the
clichés of the history of Islam, but to rediscover truth for themselves
through collation and examination of the evidence.

In the introduction to the *Cambridge History of Islam*, Volume I,
published by the University Press, Cambridge (1970), P.M. Holt, writes:

“The study of Islamic history is now developing, many of the apparent
certainties of the older Western historiography (often reflecting the
assertions and interpretations of the Muslim traditional historians)
have dissolved, and it is only gradually through detailed research that
a truer understanding of the past may be attained.”

The certainties of the older Western historiography reflecting the
assertions and interpretations of the Muslim traditional historians have
not dissolved yet but let us hope that they will, and a truer
understanding of the past will be attained in due course.

An attempt to interpret the history of Islam, especially the history of
its first century, is like stepping into a mine field; it's seething
with controversy, diatribes and polemics, and one may approach it only
extremely gingerly.

Nevertheless, interpretation remains basic to the understanding of
history. Without interpretation, history becomes a mass of uncoordinated
information and a catalogue of “dead” events and dates unrelated to each
other.

Yet these “dead” events bounce back to life when effects are related to
causes, and a concatenation of facts is established. A fact in
correlation with other facts has historical significance; in isolation
it may be meaningless.

Even Einstein's Relativity is the understanding of the world not as a
series of events but as relations.

As stated above, there is a plethora of books on Islam but most of them
are stereotypical interpretations of the story of its birth and growth,
and its religious experience, just as handed down to their authors by
the court historians of the government which was born in Saqifa, and its
successor governments – the governments of Damascus and Baghdad. The
story, however, has another side also.

A principle of the ancient Roman law was *audi alteram partem* (in any
dispute, hear the other side); or *audiatur et altera pars* (let the
other side be heard). Concerted human action – which is called politics
– is full of immense, heart-breaking tragedies that have damaged the
lives of everyone on the planet. Most would have been averted had this
law been heeded by all.

This principle that in any dispute, both sides of the case should be
heard – is entrenched in the legal systems of most nations, but most
particularly in those of the United States and Western Europe. Thomas
Jefferson was only paraphrasing this principle, without which there
cannot be any justice, when he exclaimed: “For God's sake, let us freely
hear both sides.”

The American and European students of Islam, in most cases, have heard
only one side of its story; this book is an attempt to present the other
side. It is with this intent that I deliver it to the judgment of its
readers.

From the cowardice which shrinks from new truth;

From the laxness that is content with half-truth;

From the arrogance that thinks it knows all truth;

O God of Truth deliver us!

Transliteration
---------------

The system of transliteration employed in this book was devised with
particular regard for simplicity. In most cases, those forms of spelling
for names of persons and places have been used which are most familiar
to Western readers, such as Qur’an, Muhammad, and Yemen in preference to
Coran, Koran or Kuran, Mohammad, and al-Yaman.

At the same time, some other forms of Western usage such as Moslems,
Sunnites and Shi'ites have been discarded in favor of the simpler and
more correct forms such as Muslims, Sunnis and Shias.

The Arabic word for “son” is transliterated to conform with the Arabic
spelling as ibn or bin, and both variants have been used.

The words caliph and khalifa or caliphate and khilafat have been used
interchangeably.


