Early Converts to Islam and their persecution
=============================================

Though Abu Lahab frequently succeeded in dispersing the crowds that
gathered to hear the Apostle's homilies, word nevertheless spread in
Makkah about them. Some people talked about the message of Islam. The
thoughtful ones among them posed the question: “What is this religion to
which Muhammad is inviting us?” This question showed curiosity on their
part regarding the message of Islam, and a few among them wanted to know
more about it.

In the days that followed, Muhammad made numerous attempts to preach to
the Makkans. Abu Lahab and his confederate, Abu Jahl, did what they
could to sabotage his work but they could never deflect him from his
aim.

Muhammad, may God bless him and his Ahlul-Bait, realized that his work
was not going to be easy. He knew that he would encounter many
obstacles, and that he would have to contend with fierce and sustained
opposition of the idolaters. But he counted upon God's mercy to enable
him to overcome opposition.

It was a strange message that Muhammad brought to the Arabs, and it was
unique. No one had ever heard anything like it before. Muhammad, the
Messenger of God, told the Arabs not to worship the multitudes of
inanimate objects made of stone or wood which they themselves had
fashioned, and which had no power either to give anything to them or to
take anything away from them.

Instead, he told them, they ought to give their obedience to Allah, the
One Lord of the whole universe. He also told them that in His sight, in
the sight of their Creator, they were all equal, and if they became
Muslim, they would all become brothers of each other.

Muhammad also wished to reorganize Arab society. The new doctrine that
he put forward for this purpose, made Faith instead of Blood, the
“linchpin” of the community. But the Arabs were bred in the code of
pagan custom and convention; they believed in the basic tribal and
kinship structures. For them “Blood” was the only basis of social
organization. In their perception, if Faith were allowed to supplant
Blood in this equation, it would wreck the whole structure of the Arab
society.

Muhammad also called upon the rich Arabs to share their wealth with the
poor and the under-privileged. The poor, he said, had a right to receive
their share out of the wealth of the rich. Such sharing, he further
said, would guarantee the equitable distribution of wealth in the
community.

Many of the rich Arabs were money-lenders; or rather, they were “loan
sharks.” They had grown rich by lending money to the poor classes at
exorbitant rates of interest. The poor could never repay their debts,
and were thus held in economic servitude in perpetuity. Sharing their
ill-gotten wealth with the same people they had been exploiting, was for
them, tantamount to a “sacrilege.” By suggesting to them that they share
their wealth with the poor, Muhammad had tampered with a hornets' nest!

For the Arabs, all these were new and unfamiliar ideas; in fact they
were revolutionary. By preaching such revolutionary ideas, Muhammad had
infuriated the old establishment. Most furious amongst them was the
Umayyad clan of the Quraysh. Its members were the leading usurers and
capitalists of Makkah, and they were the high priests of the pagan
pantheon.

In Muhammad and the message of Islam, they saw a threat to their social
system which was based upon privilege and force. They, therefore,
resolved to maintain the status quo. In the years to come, they were to
form the spearhead of an implacable war against Islam, and of die-hard
opposition to Muhammad.

But there were also a few individuals who found a strong appeal in the
new ideas which Muhammad was introducing, collectively called Islam. In
fact, they found them so irresistible, that they accepted them.

Among the earliest converts to Islam were Yasir; his wife, Sumayya; and
their son, Ammar. They were the first family all members of which
accepted Islam simultaneously, thus making up the *First Muslim Family*.

Islam held special appeal for the depressed classes in Makkah. When
members of these classes became Muslim, they also became aware that as
pagans they were despised and rejected by the highly class-conscious and
race-conscious aristocracy of Makkah but Islam gave them a new
self-esteem. As Muslims they found a new pride in themselves

Most of the early converts to Islam were “poor and weak.” But there were
a few rich Muslims also like Hudhayfa bin Utba and Arqam bin Abil-Arqam.
And all those men whom Abu Bakr brought into Islam – Uthman, Talha,
Zubayr, Abdur Rahman ibn Auf, Saad ibn Abi Waqqas and Abu Obaidah ibn
al-Jarrah – were also rich and powerful. They were members of the
various clans of the Quraysh.

We can assume that at the beginning, the pagan aristocrats of Makkah
witnessed the efforts of Islam to win recognition, more with amusement
than with irritation, not to speak of the hatred and the hysteria which
gripped them a little later.

But as the new movement began to gather momentum, they sensed that the
ideas which Muhammad was broadcasting, were really “dangerous,” and
there was nothing funny about them. They argued that their forefathers
had worshipped idols for countless generations, therefore idolatry was
right; and they could not allow Muhammad to meddle with their mode of
worship.

But Muhammad was not content merely with denouncing idolatry. Far more
dangerous and frightening to the all-grasping Umayyads were his ideas of
economic and social justice which threatened to pull down the fortress
of their privileges; the old structure of authority and hierarchy; and
all the fossilized institutions of the past. They made it clear,
therefore, that privilege was something they were not going to
relinquish – at any cost – come hell or high water.

But the one idea that the self-selected elite of the Quraysh found most
outrageous, was the “notion,” fostered by Muhammad, that the members of
the depressed, despised and exploited classes, many of them their
slaves, now converted to Islam, were their equals – the equals of the
high and the mighty Quraysh! The staple of their life was conceit and
arrogance, and equality with their own slaves, ex-slaves and clients,
was utterly unthinkable to them. They were obsessed with delusions of
their own “superiority” to the rest of mankind.

By promulgating the “heterodox” doctrine of equality – the equality of
the master and the slave, the rich and the poor; and the Arab and the
non-Arab; by repudiating claims ofsuperiority of the bloodline, and by
teaching that in the sight of God, the status of a believer was
infinitely higher than the status of all the unbelievers in the world,
Muhammad had committed “lese majesty” against the Quraysh!

The Quraysh worshipped many idols, and race was one of them.

But racial pride is discounted by Islam. According to Al-Qur’an
al-Majid, all men have descended from Adam, and Adam was a handful of
dust. Iblis (Satan, the Devil) became the accursed one precisely because
he argued for the superiority of what he presumed to be his *high*
origins as against what he considered to be the *lowly* origins of man.
“Man,” he said, “was created from dust whereas I was created from fire.”

Such a sense of exclusivism which also comes to a people purely out of a
desire to claim superior quality of blood in their beings, has been
denounced by Islam in the strongest terms. Islam has knocked down the
importance of race, nationality, color and privilege, and has forbidden
Muslims to classify men into groups on grounds of blood and/or
geographical contiguity or particular privilege which they might claim
for themselves

In the sight of Qur’an, the most exalted person is the *muttaqi* – that
is, one who loves and obeys God at all times. In Islam, the only test of
a person's quality, is his or her love for the Creator. All other
trappings of individual life are meaningless.

But as stated above, the Quraysh were not in a receptive mood for such
ideas. They were perhaps intellectually incapable of grasping them. They
considered them as rank blasphemy, and therefore, utterly intolerable.

It was then that they resolved not only to oppose Muhammad, the Prophet
of Islam, but also to destroy the “heresy” called Islam itself before it
could strike roots and become viable. They were driven by Hubris – the
pride that inflates itself beyond the human scale – and by lust for
power to make such a resolve against Muhammad and Islam.

With this resolution, the Quraysh declared their intention to fight in
the defense of their idols and fetishes as well as in the defense of
their economic and social system.

Makkah was in a state of war!

The Quraysh opened the campaign against Islam by harassing and
persecuting the Muslims. At the beginning, persecution was confined to
jeers, jibes and insults. But as time went on, the infidels moved from
the violence of words to the violence of deeds.

They refrained from inflicting physical injury upon Muhammad himself for
fear of provoking reprisals; but they had no inhibitions in hurting the
rank-and-file Muslims. For a long time, it were the latter who bore the
brunt of the wrath of the Quraysh.

**Ibn Ishaq**

Then the Quraysh incited people against the companions of the Apostle
who had become Muslims. Every tribe fell upon the Muslims among them,
beating them and seducing them from their religion. God protected His
Apostle from them through his uncle (Abu Talib), who, when he saw what
Quraysh were doing, called upon Banu Hashim and Banu Al-Muttalib to
stand with him in protecting the Apostle. This they agreed to do, with
the exception of Abu Lahab.

Some victims of persecution:
----------------------------

Bilal, the Ethiopian slave of Umayya bin Khalaf. Umayya and other
infidels tortured him in the savage glare of the torrid sun of Makkah,
and they tortured him beyond the limits of human endurance. But he was
fortified by inner sources of strength and courage which never failed
him. Love of God and the love of His Messenger made it possible for him
to endure torture with cheer. Abu Bakr bought him from his master and
set him free.

When the Apostle migrated to Medina, he appointed Bilal the first
Muezzin of Islam. His rich and powerful voice rang through the air of
Medina with the shout of *Allah-o-Akbar* (Great is the Lord). In later
years, when the conquest of the peninsula was completed, the Apostle of
God appointed Bilal his secretary of treasury.

Khabab ibn el-Arat was a young man of twenty when he accepted Islam. He
was a client of Banu Zuhra. The Quraysh tortured him day after day. He
migrated with the Prophet to Medina.

Suhaib bin Sinan had been captured and was sold as a slave by the
Greeks. When he became a Muslim, the Quraysh beat him up savagely but
could not shake his faith.

Abu Fukaiha was the slave of Safwan bin Umayya. He accepted Islam at the
same time as Bilal. Like Bilal, he was also dragged by his master on hot
sand with a rope tied to his feet. Abu Bakr bought him and emancipated
him. He migrated to Medina with the Prophet but died before the battle
of Badr.

Lubina was a female slave of Mumil bin Habib. Amin Dawidar writes in his
book, *Pictures From the Life of the Prophet* (Cairo, Egypt, 1968), that
Umar bin al-Khattab, the future khalifa of the Muslims, tortured her,
and whenever he paused, he said: “I have not stopped beating you out of
pity. I have stopped because I am exhausted.” He resumed beating her
after he had rested. Abu Bakr bought her and set her free.

Zunayra was another female slave. When she declared her faith in Islam,
Umar ibn al-Khattab, and Abu Jahl, took turns in torturing her until she
became blind. Amin Dawidar states that many years later she recovered
her sight, and the Quraysh attributed this recovery to the “sorcery” of
Muhammad. Abu Bakr bought her and set her free.

Nahdiyya and Umm Unays were two other female slaves who became Muslims.
Their masters tortured them for accepting Islam. Abu Bakr bought them
and gave them their freedom.

There were some other Muslims who were not slaves but they were “poor
and weak.” They too endured torture. Among them were Ammar ibn Yasir and
his parents. Another member of this group was Abdullah ibn Masood, a
young Muslim. He was distinguished among the companions of the Prophet
by his knowledge and learning, and he was one of the earliest *huffaz*
(men who knew Al-Qur’an al-Majid by heart) in Islam. As each new verse
was revealed, he heard it from the Prophet and memorized it.

It is reported that whenSurah Rahman (the 55th chapter) was revealed,
the Apostle of God asked his companions who among them would go into the
Kaaba and read it before the infidels. Other companions hung back but
Abdullah ibn Masood volunteered to go.

He went into the Kaaba and read the new chapter out aloud. Next to the
Apostle himself, Abdullah ibn Masood was the first man to read Qur’an in
the Kaaba before a hostile crowd of the infidels. The latter mauled him
repeatedly but could not intimidate him into silence.

**Ibn Ishaq**

Yahya b. Urwa b. al-Zubayr told me as from his father that the first man
to read the Qur’an loudly in Mecca after the Apostle was Abdullah bin
Masud.

Another member of this group was Abu Dharr el­Ghiffari. He belonged to
the tribe of Ghiffar which made its living by brigandage. From travelers
he heard that a prophet had appeared in Makkah who exhorted the Arabs to
abandon idolatry, to worship only Allah, to speak nothing but the truth,
and not to bury their daughters alive. He felt that he was strongly
attracted to this Prophet, and traveled to Makkah to verify the veracity
of the reports he had heard about him.

In Makkah Abu Dharr was a stranger. He had heard that Muhammad had made
many enemies for himself by preaching against Arabian polytheism. He,
therefore, hesitated to ask anyone about him. He spent the whole day in
the shade of the Kaaba watching passers-by.

In the evening, Ali ibn Abi Talib chanced to walk past him. Ali noticed
that Abu Dharr was a stranger in town, and invited him to his home for
supper. Abu Dharr accepted the invitation, and later appraised Ali of
the purpose of his visit to Makkah. Ali, of course, was only too glad to
conduct his guest into the presence of his master, Muhammad Mustafa.

Abu Dharr learned from the Messenger of God the meaning of the message
of Islam. He found both the messenger and the message irresistible. He
was carried away by the power of the appeal of Islam. After accepting
Islam, the very first thing that Abu Dharr wanted to do was to defy the
infidels. He went into the Kaaba, and shouted:

“There is no God but Allah; and Muhammad is his Messenger.”

As expected, the infidels fell upon him, and started raining blows upon
him. From this brawl he was rescued by Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib, the
uncle of the Prophet. He told the Makkans that Abu Dharr belonged to the
tribe of Ghiffar whose territory lay astride the caravan routes to the
north, and if they did any harm to him, his tribesmen would bar the
access of their merchant caravans to Syria.

Abu Dharr el-Ghiffari is one of the most remarkable men in the history
of Islam. He was the most fearless and the most outspoken man among all
the companions of Muhammad Mustafa who once said that “the sky did not
spread its canopy on any man who was more truthful than Abu Dharr.”

Fear of violence by the Quraysh did not deter these heroic and noble
souls from accepting Islam, and each of them left a mark upon it by his
or her sacrifices.

Also notable among early Muslims was Mas'ab ibn Umayr, a cousin of the
father of Muhammad. Many years later, at the First Pledge of Akaba, the
citizens of Yathrib requested the Prophet to send with them a teacher of
Qur’an, and the choice fell upon him. This made him the first “official”
in Islam. He was also the standard-bearer of the army of Islam in the
battle of Uhud but was killed in action.

If a member of a Makkan family accepted Islam, he was ostracized by it
for all time, without any hope for him of rapprochement. Many Makkans
saw Islam as a “divisive force” which was breaking up their families,
and some of them thought that they ought to check this “divisiveness”
from spreading. But beyond the threat of using force to suppress the new
movement, they could not think of anything else that would prove more
efficacious in halting its progress.

They also thought that if they did not act swiftly and resolutely
enough, it was not unlikely that every house in Makkah would become a
battleground in which the protagonists of the old and the new faiths
would be locked up in a sanguinary struggle against each other.

There were some others among the pagans who imagined that Muhammad was
prompted by ambition to denounce their ancestral mode of worship and
their idols. All of them put their heads together and tried to think of
some unconventional solution of the problem. After a long discussion,
they decided to send Utba, one of the chiefs of Quraysh, to meet
Muhammad, and to try to “talk him out” of his mission. Utba was noted
for his persuasive ability.

Utba called on the Apostle of God and said: “O Muhammad! Do not plant
seeds of dissension and discord among the Arabs, and do not curse the
gods and goddesses our ancestors have worshipped for centuries, and we
are worshipping today. If your aim in doing so is to become a political
leader, we are willing to acknowledge you as the sovereign of Makkah. If
you want wealth, you just have to say so, and we shall provide you with
all that we can. And if you are desirous of marriage in some noble
family, you name it, and we shall arrange it for you.”

Muhammad heard everything that Utba said but instead of showing any
interest in rank or wealth or beauty, he read before him *Surah Sajda*,
(32nd chapter of Qur’an), the newest revelation from Heaven.

When the recitation was over, Utba returned to the Quraysh and advised
them to leave Muhammad alone and not to meddle with him any more. He
also told them that if Muhammad failed in his work, then they (the
Quraysh) would lose nothing; but if he succeeded in it, then they would
share all his power and glory.

But the Quraysh did not accept Utba's advice for restraint in dealing
with Muhammad and his followers. They continued to persecute the Muslims
as before and kept trying to think of some new wrinkle which would yield
better results in halting the progress of Islam than all their violence
had done until then.

Muhammad was protected by his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib. As long as
Abu Talib was alive, the pagans could not molest his nephew. It occurred
to some of them that they ought perhaps to persuade Abu Talib himself to
waive his protection of Muhammad in the name of tribal solidarity. After
all, tribal solidarity was something much too important to be treated
with levity even by Abu Talib, notwithstanding all his love for his
nephew

The Quraysh decided to send a delegation, composed of the leading
figures of the tribe, to Abu Talib. The delegation called on him, and
appealed to him in the name of the tribal solidarity of the Quraysh to
waive his protection of Muhammad who was “disrupting” it so recklessly.

Abu Talib, of course, had no intention of waiving his protection of
Muhammad. But he mollified the Qurayshi delegates with pious platitudes
and placatory words, and they returned to their homes “empty-handed.”

The delegates also realized that they had come home from a
“phantom-chase;” but they were unfazed by their failure, and sometime
later, they made another attempt to break up the “alliance” of Abu Talib
and Muhammad. A new delegation went to see Abu Talib, and this time, its
members took with them a handsome young man, one Ammarra ibn Walid, whom
they offered to Abu Talib for a “son” if he surrendered Muhammad to
them.

Abu Talib must have laughed at this new gambit of the Quraysh. Did they
really believe that he would give them his own son for them to kill him,
and that he would rear one of their sons as his own? The idea was most
ludicrous but once again, Abu Talib handled the situation with his
customary finesse, and they went back.

The second attempt of the Quraysh to coax Abu Talib into giving up
Muhammad, had also failed. When the meaning of this failure sank into
their minds, they realized that peaceful attempts to solve the problem
had all been fruitless. They decided to try something more drastic.

In sheer exasperation and frustration, the policy-makers of Quraysh
adopted a tougher stance and sent their third and the last delegation to
Abu Talib. Its purpose was to compel him to surrender Muhammad to them.
The leaders of the delegation presented an ultimatum to Abu Talib:
either he had to surrender Muhammad to them or else he would have to
face the consequences of his refusal to do so.

Abu Talib was a man of cheerful temperament and sunny disposition, but
it was a somber day in his life. The Quraysh, he knew, were not
bluffing. He therefore called Muhammad and appraised him of the purport
of the Qurayshi representation, and then added: “O life of your uncle!
Do not place a burden upon me that I may find beyond my strength to
carry.”

Muhammad answered: “O my uncle! If the Quraysh place the sun on my right
hand and the moon on my left, I shall not refrain from proclaiming the
Oneness of God. In the execution of this duty, either I shall succeed
and Islam shall spread; or, if I fail, I shall perish in the attempt.”

Abu Talib was not the one to dissuade Muhammad from preaching Islam. But
he was testing his resolution. Muhammad's forthright answer convinced
and satisfied him that he would not falter, and he said: “Go my son, and
do whatever you like. No one will dare to do any harm to you.”

**Sir William Muir**

...but the thought of desertion by his kind protector (Abu Talib)
overcame him (Muhammad). He burst into tears, and turned to depart. Then
Abu Talib called aloud: “Son of my brother! Come back.” So he returned.
And Abu Talib said: “Depart in peace, my nephew, and say whatever thou
desirest. For by the Lord, I will not, in any wise, give thee up ever.”
*(The Life of Mohammed, 1877)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Abu Talib said: “Go forth, my nephew, and say what you will. By God I
swear I shall never betray you to your enemies.”

Abu Talib communicated his resolution to Banu Hashim and Banu
al-Muttalib and spoke to them about his nephew with great admiration and
deep appreciation of the sublimity of Muhammad's position. He asked them
all to protect Muhammad against the Quraysh. All of them pledged to do
so except Abu Lahab who declared openly his enmity to him and his
withdrawal to the opposite camp.

.....Quraysh inflicted upon Muhammad's companions all sorts of injuries
from which he was saved only through the protection of Abu Talib, Banu
Hashim, and Banu al-Muttalib. *The Life of Muhammad)*

Foiled and checkmated repeatedly in this manner by Abu Talib, the
patience of the idolaters reached the breaking point. After the failure
of their third embassy to Abu Talib, they resolved to let loose all
their frustrations and pent-up fury on the unprotected Muslims. They
hoped to crush the new faith with terror and cruelty.

The first victims of pagan attrition and aggression were those Muslims
who had no tribal affiliation in Makkah. Yasir and his wife, Sumayya,
and their son, Ammar, had no tribal affiliation. In Makkah they were
“foreigners” and there was no one to protect them. All three were
savagely tortured by Abu Jahl and the other infidels. Sumayya, Yasir's
wife, died while she was being tortured. She thus became the *First
Martyr in Islam*. A little later, her husband, Yasir, was also tortured
to death, and he became the *Second Martyr in Islam*.

Quraysh had stained their hands with innocent blood! In the roster of
martyrs, Sumayya and her husband, Yasir, rank among the highest. They
were killed for no reason other than their devotion to Allah and their
love for Islam and Muhammad Mustafa.

Those Muslims who were killed in the battles of Badr and Uhud, had an
army to defend and to support them. But Yasir and his wife had no one to
defend them; they bore no arms, and they were the most defenseless of
all the martyrs of Islam. By sacrificing their lives, they highlighted
the truth of Islam, and they built strength into its structure. They
made the tradition of sacrifice and martyrdom an integral part of the
ethos of Islam.

Bilal, Khabab ibn el-Arat, Suhaib Rumi, and other poor and unprotected
Muslims were made to stand in the torrid sun, and were flogged by the
infidels. Food and water were denied to them in the vain hope that
hunger and thirst will compel them to abandon Muhammad and Islam

If the Quraysh found Muhammad alone, they seized the opportunity to
molest him. They of course wished to kill him but they had to curb this
urge. If they had killed him, they would have touched off vendetta or
even civil war.

On one occasion, Muhammad, the Messenger of God, went into the Kaaba to
read Al-Qur’an al-Majid. He was reading Qur’an when suddenly he was
surrounded by the idolaters. They mobbed him, and they might have done
him some great harm but for the intervention of Harith ibn Abi Hala, the
nephew and the adopted son of Khadija, who happened to arrive on the
scene just then. He entered the melee to defend the Messenger of God
from the violence of the polytheists of Makkah.

Harith ibn Abi Hala kicked the infidels and fought with his fists. Most
probably, he too was carrying a sword as all Arabs did but he did not
wish to draw it, and to cause bloodshed in the precincts of the Kaaba.

But in the fracas, one of the idolaters drew his dagger, and stabbed him
repeatedly. He fell in a pool of his own blood, and died from multiple
wounds in his chest, shoulders and temple. He was the first Muslim to be
killed in the precincts of the Kaaba.

Harith was a young man of seventeen, and he made his life an oblation
for Muhammad, the Apostle of God. He was the youngest victim of the
spiraling and escalating violence of the infidels. He won the aureole of
martyrdom to become the *Third Martyr in Islam*. His death, so early in
life, made the Prophet extremely sad.

The Arab historians are silent on this subject but much bitter fighting
must have taken place in Makkah between the Muslims and the idolaters
during the years before the migration of the Prophet to Medina. Abu
Talib protected his nephew as long as he lived. After his death, this
duty devolved upon his son, Ali.

Ali was still a teenager when he appointed himself the body-guard of
Muhammad, the Apostle of God. After the murder, in Kaaba, of Harith ibn
Abi Hala, Ali accompanied his master whenever the latter went out of his
house, and stood between him and his enemies. If a ruffian approached
Muhammad menacingly, Ali at once challenged him, and came to grips with
him

**D. S. Margoliouth**

The persons whose admission to Islam was most welcomed were men of
physical strength, and much actual fighting must have taken place at
Mecca before the Flight; else the readiness with which the Moslems after
the Flight could produce from their number tried champions, would be
inexplicable. A tried champion must have been tried somewhere; and no
external fights are recorded or are even the subject of an allusion for
this period. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1931)*

There were no external fights in Makkah before the Migration of the
Prophet to Medina but there were many fights in the streets and open
spaces of the city. It was in these “battlefields” that Ali, the young
lion, acquired all his martial skills. These “battles” in Makkah were a
“dress rehearsal” of the role he was destined to play a few years later
in Medina in the armed struggle of Islam and paganism.

It was also in these early days, before the Migration of the Prophet to
Medina, that Ali became “the first line of the defense of Islam.” In
fact, he also became, at the same time, the second line and the last
line of the defense of Islam. This he and he alone, was to remain for
the rest of his life.

Quraysh tortured the bodies of the unprotected Muslims in Makkah in the
hope that they would compel them to forswear Islam, but they failed. No
one from these “poor and weak” Muslims ever abjured Islam. Adverse
circumstances can collaborate to break even the strongest of men, and
for the Muslims, the circumstances could not have been more adverse. But
those circumstances could not break them. Islam held them together.

For these “poor and weak” Muslims, Islam was a “heady” experience. It
had pulled life together for them; had put meaning into it, had run
purpose through it, and had put horizons around it. They, therefore,
spurned security, comforts and luxuries of life; and some among them
like Sumayya and her husband, Yasir, spurned life itself; but they
upheld their Faith. They died but they did not compromise with
Falsehood.

May God be pleased with these heroic and noble souls and may He bless
them. Their faith and morale were, as the Quraysh discovered, just as
unconquerable as the faith and morale of their master and leader,
Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of God. They were diamonds that Muhammad
found in the rocks of the world. They were few in number but priceless
in value; to be expressed, not by quantity but only by quality, and that
quality was sublime.


