The Economic and Social Boycott of the Banu Hashim
==================================================

**The Economic and Social Boycott of the Banu Hashim (A.D. 616-619)**

The year 6 of the Proclamation was drawing to a close. The pagans had
already spent three years campaigning against Islam. They had generated
much bitterness and hostility against the Muslims during these three
years, but they had very little, if anything, to show for their efforts.
They had used every weapon against the Muslims ranging from temptation
to persuasion, to insults to jibes, and mockery to the threat of using
force and the actual use of force, but to no avail. The strength of the
faith of the Muslims had baffled them.

Their repeated failures compelled the Quraysh to reassess the situation
vis-à-vis Muhammad and Islam, and some of them tried to see their
problem from a new angle. In their search for a solution to the
vexatious problem, it slowly began to dawn upon them that their enemy
was not the group of rootless and poverty-stricken Muslims in Makkah.
The real enemy – the enemy of the idolaters and the polytheists – they
realized, was Abu Talib!

After all it was Abu Talib who was protecting Muhammad and Islam so
consistently and tenaciously. The Muslims, on the other hand, had no
power to protect Muhammad. In fact, they were themselves in desperate
need of protection.

This success in “enemy identification” had the impact of revelation upon
the leaders of Quraysh in their campaign against Islam, and enabled them
to map out a new strategy.

**Abd-al-Rahman 'Azzam**

Finally, the Makkan oligarchy decided in desperation to take steps
against Abu Talib. In their opinion, he was the real protector of the
blasphemy, although still a revered upholder of Makkan institutions and
unconverted to Muhammad's faith (sic). They agreed to send him an
ultimatum... *(The Eternal Message of Muhammad, London, 1964)*

In the past, the Quraysh had made many attempts to “isolate” Muhammad
from his clan, and they had hoped that they would either coax or bluff
Abu Talib into waiving his support and protection of his nephew and of
Islam. If they could isolate Muhammad from his clan, they were
convinced, they would be able to solve the complex and thorny problem by
the simple process of “liquidating” him.

But Abu Talib did not let the Quraysh “isolate” Muhammad. Not only he
was himself protecting his nephew, he had also rallied the whole clan of
Banu Hashim behind him. The clan of Banu Hashim was monolithic in its
support of Muhammad, and the leaders of the Quraysh found themselves
powerless before it.

After long deliberation and debate, the Quraysh agreed that the
“intractability” of Banu Hashim called for sterner measures, and they
decided to isolate and ostracize not only Muhammad but all his
protectors as well, viz., the clan of Banu Hashim.

It was inevitable that any attempt to ostracize Banu Hashim would lead
to a polarization of the groupings in Makkah. Everyone in Makkah would
have to declare himself for or against Banu Hashim. But it soon became
obvious that in this confrontation, Banu Hashim would find the whole of
Arabia ranged against itself.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

It is nearly impossible for us to imagine the intensity and extent of
the efforts which Quraysh spent in its struggle against Muhammad, or its
perseverance during many long years of that struggle.The Quraysh
threatened Muhammad and his relatives, especially his uncles. It
ridiculed him and his message, and it insulted him as well as his
followers.

It commissioned its poets to revile him with their sharpest wits and to
direct their most caustic sting against his preaching. It inflicted
injury and harm on his person and on the persons of his followers. It
offered him bribes of money, of royalty and power, of all that which
satisfies the most fastidious among men.

It not only Banushed and dispersed his followers from their own country
but injured them in their trade and commerce while impoverishing them.
It warned him and his followers that war with all its tragedies would
befall upon them. As a last resort, it began a boycott of them designed
to starve them. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

A few days before the beginning of the year 7, the leaders of the
various clans of Quraysh met in a solemn conclave in the “town hall” of
Makkah, and there, by consensus, they drafted and signed a document
which stipulated that unless the clan of Banu Hashim surrendered
Muhammad to them, it would be subjected to an economic and social
boycott. They pledged themselves not to buy anything from, nor to sell
anything to, the members of the Banu Hashim, and they placed
intermarriage with them under proscription.

This covenant was sent to the other tribes for ratification. When they
had ratified it, it was solemnly suspended on the wall of the Kaaba. The
ratification of the covenant was a belligerent act!

Abu Talib could clearly see that a storm system was converging upon the
Banu Hashim. The atmosphere in Makkah had become so explosive that Banu
Hashim found itself in great peril. Abu Talib realized that it would not
be prudent to live in the city where any moment, the enemy could set
fire to their houses.

In the interests of the security of the clan, he, therefore, decided to
leave Makkah, and to seek safety for it in a ravine near Makkah which
later came to be known as Sh'ib Abu Talib. The ravine had some natural
defenses, and it was in any case safer to live in it than to live in
their houses in the city which were highly vulnerable to attack.

On the first day of the year 7 of the Proclamation, therefore, the two
clans of Banu Hashim and Banu al-Muttalib moved out of Makkah and took
abode in a ravine. The clans were in a state of siege.

It was going to be a long siege!

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

The pact into which the clans of Quraysh had entered for boycotting
Muhammad and blockading the Muslims continued to be observed for three
consecutive years. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

**Marmaduke Pickthall**

For three years, the Prophet was shut up with all his kinsfolk in their
stronghold which was situated in one of the gorges which run down to
Mecca. *(Introduction to the Translation of Holy Qur’an, 1975)*

The story of the siege of Banu Hashim is a stirring chapter in the epic
of Islam, and has been told by every historian of the subject, among
them:

**Sir William Muir**

.....the Coreish entered into a confederacy against the Hashimites –
that they would not marry their women, nor give their own in marriage to
them; that they would sell nothing to them, nor buy aught from them; and
that dealings with them of every kind should cease.

The ban was carefully committed to writing, and sealed with three seals.
When all had bound themselves by it, the record was hung up in the
Kaaba, and religious sanction thus given to its provisions.

The Hashimites were unable to withstand the tide of public opinion which
set in thus violently against them, and apprehensive perhaps that it
might be only the prelude of open attack, or of blows in the dark still
more fatal, they retired into the secluded quarter of the city known as
Sheb of Abu Talib.

It was formed by one of the defiles or indentations of the mountains,
where the projecting rocks of Abu Cobeis pressed upon the eastern
outskirts of Mecca. It was entered on the cityside by a low gateway,
through which a camel passed with difficulty. On all other sides it was
detached from the town by cliffs and buildings.

On the first night of the first month of the seventh year of the mission
of Mohammed, the Hashimites, including the prophet and his family,
retired into the quarter of Abu Talib; and with them followed also the
descendants of Al-Muttalib, the brother of Hashim. The ban of separation
was put rigorously in force.

The Hashimites soon found themselves cut off from their supplies of corn
and other necessities of life; and a great scarcity ensued ... the
failing stock of the Hashimites replenished only by occasional and
surreptitious ventures, reduced them to want and distress. The citizens
could hear the wailing of the famished children within the Sheb ...
among the relatives of the isolated band, were found some who ventured,
in spite of threats of the Coreish, to introduce from time to time
provisions by stealth at night, into the quarter of Abu Talib. Hakim,
grandson of Khuwalid, used, though the attempt was sometimes perilous,
to carry supplies to his aunt Khadija. *(The Life of Mohammed, London,
1877)*

At the beginning of the siege, Ali was 16 years old, and he was charged
with the difficult and dangerous duty of victualling the whole clan. He
discharged this duty at great risk to his life and brought water and
grain whenever he could find any.

For one goatskin of water, he had to pay one piece of gold, and he
considered himself lucky if he succeeded in bringing it to the ravine.
His efforts, however, brought only partial relief to the beleaguered
tribe.

Abu Talib himself didn't sleep at nights. For him the physical safety of
his nephew took precedence over everything else. When Muhammad fell
asleep, Abu Talib woke him up, and asked him to sleep in the bed of one
of his four sons, and ordered his son to sleep in his (Muhammad's) bed.
A little later, he would wake his nephew again, and ask him to go to the
bed of another of his sons.

He spent the whole night shifting Muhammad out of one bed and putting
him in another. He had no illusions about his enemies; they were
tenacious, treacherous, vicious and vindictive. He, therefore, did not
underestimate them. If one of them crept into the ravine with the
intention of killing Muhammad, he would most probably, kill one of the
sons of Abu Talib. Abu Talib and his wife were ever ready to sacrifice
their sons for Muhammad.

There were times when Ali, notwithstanding his daring and his
resourcefulness, was unable to find any provision, and the children (and
the adults) went hungry. But going hungry and thirsty was a norm in the
ravine. When water was available, mothers boiled dead leaves in it to
comfort their crying children. The cry of hungry children could be heard
outside the ravine, and Abu Jahl and the Umayyads responded to it with
derisive laughter. They gloated over their “triumph” in making the
children of Banu Hashim cry for water and food.

The most precious gift for the besieged clans during these three years,
was water. Water was the gift of life, and the two clans received it
from Khadija. She gave Ali the pieces of gold with which he bought
water. Her concern for those around her manifested itself in various
ways. She prayed to God and invoked His mercy upon the besieged. Prayer
was her “strategy” for handling adversity. It was, she found, a simple
buteffective strategy.

Occasionally, the few friends that the members of Banu Hashim had in
Makkah, tried to smuggle food into the ravine, but if the pagans caught
it, they seized it.

One of the friends of Banu Hashim in Makkah was Hisham ibn Amr
al-Aamiri. He brought food and water for them as often as he could. The
time he had chosen to deliver the provisions into the ravine, was a few
hours before daybreak; but eventually the Quraysh caught him, and they
threatened to kill him if he persisted in bringing his loaded camels to
the ravine for Banu Hashim.

Another secret friend of Banu Hashim was Hakim ibn Hizam, the nephew of
Khadija. He and his slave carried food and water to Khadija which she
immediately gave to the children.

Abul Bukhtari was one of the friends of Hakim. He too brought essential
supplies to Banu Hashim. One night he and Hakim were driving a camel to
the ravine when they were surprised by Abu Jahl. He told them that he
was going to confiscate the provisions and the camel. At first, Abul
Bukhtari tried to conciliate him with words but he didn't want to hear
anything. He barred the access to the ravine and refused to let them
pass.

Abul Bukhtari tried to force his way past Abu Jahl, and this led to a
violent fist fight between them. Brawls like this erupted quite
frequently near the ravine but the few friends that the clan of Banu
Hashim had in the city, did not lose heart, and did everything they
could to bring succor to it.

Hisham bin Amr al-Aamiri, Hakim bin Hizam, and Abul Bukhtari, were not
Muslims but they did not want to see any child or even a slave of Banu
Hashim perish from hunger, and they risked their own lives time and
again in bringing food and water to the Sh'ib Abu Talib. They were also
very happy to pay the bill for such relief operations for three years,
and all they sought in return was the safety of the besieged clans.

It should be pointed out here that the hatred and anger of the Umayyad
clan of Quraysh was directed not against the Muslims but against the
clan of Banu Hashim. Their aim was to destroy Islam. But they could not
destroy Islam without killing Muhammad. They made numerous attempts to
kill him but they failed because he was beyond their reach. He was safe
and comfortable in the “fortress” which Abu Talib and the Banu Hashim
had built for him.

The Umayyads rightly pinpointed the Banu Hashim as responsible for all
their failures and frustrations in their war on Islam, and never
condoned it for checkmating them in their long and bitter struggle
against it.

As for the Muslims who did not belong to the clan of Banu Hashim, there
were many, and they were all in Makkah. They did not go to Sh'ib Abu
Talib with the Banu Hashim. Some among them are said to have been rich,
powerful and influential, and all of them claimed that they loved their
Prophet; but curiously, not one of them ever came to see him much less
bring any aid to him, during the three years of siege.

They enjoyed the comfort and security of their homes in the city for
three years while their Prophet, Muhammad Mustafa, lived on the edge of
a sword, surrounded by enemies thirsting for his blood, and in a state
of unmitigated suspense never knowing what terrors the next day or the
next night might bring to him and to his clan.

The siege of Banu Hashim was raised three years later in A.D. 619, and
the clan returned to the city. Ten years had passed since Muhammad, may
God bless him and his Ahlul-Bait, had first proclaimed his mission. The
boycott of the Quraysh had failed to produce the intended result. The
members of Banu Hashim were defiant, and their morale was high. It was
just as unthinkable for them, at the end of the siege, as it had been at
the beginning, to surrender Muhammad, their darling, to his enemies.

Banu Hashim and Banu al-Muttalib returned to their homes in Makkah after
three years. During these three years, the vast fortunes of Khadija and
Abu Talib had run out. They had to make, as it were, a new beginning in
life, by putting their blocks into place – one by one.

If the leaders of the Quraysh abandoned the siege, it was not because
there was any “change of heart” on their part. They abandoned the siege
because there were other forces at work against it. Following is the
account given in the earliest extant authority, the biography of the
Prophet of Islam by Muhammad ibn Ishaq, of the events which culminated
in the return to Makkah of the clans of Banu Hashim and Banu al-Muttalib
from Sh'ib Abu Talib, after three years of exile.

The Annulling of the Boycott
----------------------------

“The Banu Hashim and the Banu al-Muttalib were in the Shi'b (mountain
hideout) as the Quraysh had made a covenant to ostracize them. Then some
members of the Quraysh itself took steps to annul the boycott against
them. None took more trouble in this than Hisham Bin Amr ... for the
reason that he was the son of a brother to Nadla b. Hashim b. Abd Manaf
by his mother and was closely attached to the Banu Hashim. He was highly
esteemed by his people.

I have heard that when these two clans were in their Shi'b, he used to
bring a camel laden with food by night and then, when he had got it to
the mouth of the alley, he took off its halter, gave it a whack on the
side, and sent it running into the alley to them. He would do the same
thing another time, bringing clothes for them.

He went to Zuhayr B. Abu Umayya B. Al-Mughira whose mother was Atika
daughter of Abdul Muttalib, and said: ‘Are you content to eat food and
wear clothes while you know of the condition of your maternal uncles?
They cannot buy or sell or inter-marry. By God, if they were the uncles
of Abu'l-Hakam b. Hisham (Abu Jahl), and you asked him to do what he has
asked you to do, he would never agree to it.’

He (Zuhayr) said, ‘Confound you, Hisham, what can I do? I am only one
man. By God, if I had another man to back me, I would soon annul it.'

He said, ‘I have found a man – myself.' ‘Find another,' said he.

So Hisham went to Al-Mutim B. Adiy and said, ‘Are you content that two
clans of Banu Abd Manaf should perish while you look on consenting to
follow Quraysh? You will find that they will soon do the same with you.'

He (Mutim) made the same reply as Zuhayr and demanded a fourth man.

So Hisham went to Abu’l Bukhtari B. Hisham who asked for a fifth man,
and then to Zama’a B. Al-Aswad B. Al-Muttalib, who asked for a sixth
man, and reminded him of their kinship and duties. He asked whether
others were willing to cooperate in this task. He gave him the names of
the others. They all agreed to meet at night near Hujun, above Makkah,
and when they did, they bound themselves to take up the question of the
document until they had secured its annulment.

On the following day, when people got together, Zuhayr put on a robe,
went round the Kaaba seven times; then came forward and said: ‘O people
of Mecca, are we to eat and clothe ourselves while the Banu Hashim
perish, unable to buy or sell? By God, I will not rest until this evil
boycotting document is torn up!

Abu Jahl shouted: ‘You lie. It shall not be torn up.'

Zama'a said: “You are a greater liar; we did not want this document even
when it was first drafted and signed. Abu'l Bukhtari said, ‘Zama'a is
right. We were not satisfied with this document when it was written, and
we are not satisfied with it now.'

Al-Mutim added: “You are both right, and anyone who says otherwise, is a
liar. We take Allah to witness that we dissociate ourselves from the
whole idea and what is written in the document.” Hisham spoke in the
same sense, and supported his friends.

Then al-Mutim went up to the document to tear it in pieces. He found
that worms had already eaten it except the words, “In Thy Name O Allah.”
This was the customary formula of the Quraysh to begin their writing.
The writer of the deed was Mansur b. Ikrima.”

Mutim ibn Adiy tore the infamous document of the Quraysh into pieces.
Those pieces were blown away by the wind, and no vestige was left of
them. It was an act that called for conviction and courage – conviction
that Banu Hashim were the innocent victims of iniquity, hostility and
attrition; and courage to defy the Quraysh. His resolute act was the
signal that the siege of Banu Hashim was over, and that its members
could now return to the city.

Mutim himself and the young warriors of his clan rode in full
battle-dress into the ravine and escorted Muhammad Mustafa and all
members of the two clans of Banu Hashim and Banu al-Muttalib, back into
Makkah and into their homes.

Dr. Muhamed Hamidullah writes on page 10 of his book, *Introduction to
Islam*, published by the International Islamic Federation of Student
Organizations, Salimiah, Kuwait (1977):

After three years, four or five *non-Muslims*, more humane than the rest
and belonging to different clans, proclaimed publicly their denunciation
of the unjust boycott.

Dr. Hamidullah has attributed the failure of the boycott to the humanity
of “four or five *non-Muslims*. They were, he says, “more humane than
the rest.” He is right. But were they more humane even than the Muslims
who were living in Makkah?

Astoundingly, incredibly, the answer to this uncomfortable question is
in the affirmative. After all, apart from these five paladins – all
*non-Muslims* – humanity did not impel anyone else in Makkah –
*non-Muslim* or *Muslim* – to defy the Quraysh and to act in defense of
the Banu Hashim.

There is one more question, viz., why did Zuhayr consider himself alone?

When Hisham first broached the subject of annulling the Agreement of the
polytheists to boycott the Banu Hashim, to his friend, Zuhayr, and
taunted him for being insensitive to the sufferings of Banu Hashim, and
for his failure to act to bring that suffering to an end, the latter
said, “Confound you, Hisham, what can I do? I am only one man. By God,
if I had another man to back me, I would soon annul it.”

Zuhayr's answer is cryptic. Why did he consider himself alone? Why did
he not make any attempt to enlist the support of the Muslims of whom
there were many in Makkah? According to the historians, some of the
Muslims in Makkah were men of rank and substance, and had considerable
clout with the polytheists. But for some mysterious reason, it did not
occur either to Zuhayr himself or to any of his friends, to recruit
these Muslims into the “team” which brought the long siege of Banu
Hashim to an end.

Zuhayr and his friends were successful in their efforts to bring the
Banu Hashim back into the city. But by their action, they had
demonstrated that the Muslims who were living in Makkah, were not
“indispensable” for Muhammad or for Islam.

It is one of the supreme paradoxes of the history of Islam that the hand
that reached out and tore into shreds, the covenant of the infidels to
isolate and to ostracize the clan of Banu Hashim, belonged, not to a
“believer” but to an “unbeliever” Mutim ibn Adiy! Neither Mutim nor any
of his four friends, viz., Hisham ibn Amr, Zuhayr b. Abu Umayya, Abu'l
Bukhtari b. Hisham, and Zama'a b. Al-Aswad, was a Muslim. But all five
of them were high-minded paladins, and they did not acquiesce in the
injustice being done to the Banu Hashim. They did not rest until they
had restored justice in Makkah.

Technically, these five paladins were not Muslims. But they and they
alone had the grit and the gumption to uphold a principle that is
Islamic, viz., the Principle of Justice. They upheld justice, and by
their heroic deed, won immortality for themselves in the saga of Islam.

The Muslims, on the other hand, not only did not act; they did not even
protest against the cynicism and highhandedness of the Quraysh in
Banushing the Banu Hashim from Makkah. They maintained, for three years,
a discreet detachment and an unconvincing silence.Their deeds,
apparently, were governed by prudence. Therefore, all that they did, was
to temporize, and to watch the drift of events, like disinterested
observers.


