Muhammad's Visit to Ta'if
=========================

More than ten years had passed since Muhammad, may God bless him and his
Ahlul-Bait, had first begun to preach Islam. His success in these ten
years had been rather modest, limited as it was to the conversion of
fewer than 170 men and women in Makkah. But after the death of his wife,
Khadija, and his uncle, Abu Talib, it appeared that the Quraysh would
wrest even that limited success from his hands.

Makkah had proved inhospitable to Islam and it occurred to the Prophet
that he ought, perhaps to try to preach the new faith in some other
city. The nearest city was Ta’if, 70 miles in the south-east of Makkah,
and he went there in late 619. Zayd bin Haritha went with him.

In Ta’if, Muhammad, the Messenger of God, called on the three chiefs of
the local tribes, and invited them to abandon their gross idolatry, to
acknowledge the Oneness of God, to repudiate man-made distinctions of
high and low, and to believe in the equality and brotherhood of all men.

The chiefs of Ta’if were a conceited and arrogant crew, and they did not
want even to listen to Muhammad. They greeted him with mockery and
ridicule and set upon him the idlers and the louts of the city. They
pelted him and Zayd with clods and rocks. Wounded and covered with
blood, Muhammad staggered out of Ta’if.

Once he was outside the city walls, he almost collapsed but a certain
gardener took him into his hut, dressed his wounds, and let him rest and
recuperate until he felt strong enough to resume his journey across the
rough terrain between Ta’if and Makkah.

But when Muhammad arrived in the environs of Makkah, he sensed that he
could not reenter his native city now that his uncle, Abu Talib, was not
there to protect him. Pagan hostility toward him had reached the flash
point. He realized that if he entered Makkah, he would be killed

Muhammad could not enter his hometown, and there was no other place to
go to. What was he to do?

In this extremity, Muhammad sent word to three nobles in the city asking
each of them to take him under his protection. Two of them refused but
the third one – the gallant Mutim ibn Adiy – responded to his signal of
distress. It was the same Mutim who had, earlier, flouted the chiefs of
Quraysh by tearing into pieces their covenant to boycott the Banu
Hashim, and had brought the two clans of Banu Hashim and Banu
al-Muttalib from the Sh’ib Abu Talib back into the city.

Mutim ordered his sons, nephews and other young men of his clan to put
on their battle-dress. He then marched, in full panoply of war, at their
head, out of the city. He brought Muhammad Mustafa with him, first into
the precincts of the Kaaba where the latter made the customary seven
circuits, and then escorted him to his home.

**Abd-al-Rahman ‘Azzam**

None of the Makkan chieftains from whom Muhammad requested protection
for safe entry into the city would extend him help; but a good-hearted
pagan chief, al-Mut’im ibn-‘Adi, took him under his protection and
brought him home. Thus did Muhammad re-enter Makkah - *guarded by a
polytheist*! *(The Eternal Message of Muhammad, published by the New
English Library, London, 1964)*

**Sir John Glubb**

In Taif the Prophet was stoned and chased. Afraid to return to Mecca now
that he no longer enjoyed the protection of Abu Talib, he sent a message
to several leading idolaters, asking their protection. Two refused but
eventually Mutim ibn Adi, chief of the Nofal clan of Quraysh, agreed to
protect him.

Next morning, he, his sons and nephews went fully armed to the public
square of the Kaaba, and announced that Mohammed was under their
protection. The protection of Mutim ibn Adi enabled the Apostle to
return to Mecca. *(The Life and Times of Mohammed, New York, 1970)*

The application of Muhammad Mustafa, the Apostle of God, upon his return
from Ta’if, to Mutim ibn Adiy, a non-Muslim, seeking his protection,
raises once again, a most uncomfortable question, in a most pointed
manner, on the attitude and conduct of the Muslims.

Why didn’t the Apostle ask any of them to take him under his protection
even though some of them were said to have been rich and influential,
and some others were touted to have been the terror of the pagans? Why
is it that the Apostle sought the protection of a non-Muslim but didn’t
condescend even to inform the Muslims that he wanted to reenter Makkah
and was in need of protection?

Or another question! Why didn’t the Muslims themselves go to the city
gate and escort *their* Prophet to his home? Here they had a splendid
opportunity to demonstrate to him that they were worthy of his trust
even if he had considered them unworthy. But they missed the
opportunity. They did not do anything that would show that they had any
anxiety for his personal safety.

Pagan Arabia, however, was not devoid of its share of chivalry and
heroism. These qualities were personified in Mutim ibn Adiy, Abul
Bukhtari and a few others. They were the knights of Arabia, and it was
their chivalry that was to make their country famous in later centuries.
Pagan Arabia never produced nobler figures than these. Even Muslims
ought to acknowledge their debt of gratitude to them.

After all it were they who dared the Quraysh in some of the most
critical moments of the life of the Prophet of Islam. In doing so, they
were inspired only by their own ideals of chivalry. They considered it
their duty to defend the defenseless.

The failure at Ta’if was utterly heart-breaking for the Prophet, and he
knew that but for the heroic intervention of Mutim ibn Adiy, he might
not have been able to enter Makkah at all. To a casual observer it might
appear that the Prophet had reached the limits of human endurance and
patience. The progress of Islam had come to a standstill, and the
outlook for the future could not look bleaker.

But did Muhammad give way to despair in the face of persistent failures
and in the face of violent confrontations with the polytheists? It would
only be natural if he did. But he did not. He never despaired of God’s
boundless mercy. He knew that he was doing God’s work, and he had no
doubt at all that He would lead him out of the wilderness of
hopelessness and helplessness to the destination of success and
felicity.

It was in one of the darkest and most dismal moments in his life that
Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, was elevated by God to the highest
heavens, perhaps in recognition of his refusal to accept defeat and
failure in the line of duty. God honored His Messenger with Isra’ and
Me’raj. Isra’ is his nocturnal journey from “the Sacred Mosque” to “the
Distant Mosque” (Masjid el-Aqsa); and Me’raj is his ascension to the
Heaven. Isra’ and Me’raj foreshadowed the great and the historic events
that already loomed over the horizons, though at the moment there was no
way to perceive them.

The mystic meaning of Me’raj refers to the constant struggle of the
individual soul against evil. It has its setbacks and failures. But if
it is true to itself, and is true to Faith in God, He will give it
victory against evil.

The story of Me’raj, therefore, is a fitting prelude to the journey of
the human soul through life. The first step on this journey is to be
taken through moral conduct – a sense of personal responsibility for the
welfare of fellow human beings, service to God through service to His
creation, and an awareness of His presence with us at all times.

Isra’ is referred to in the first verse of the 17th chapter of Al-Qur’an
al-Majid as follows:

***Glory to God who did take His slave for a journey by night from the
sacred mosque to the farthest mosque whose precincts We did bless, in
order that We might show him some of Our signs: for He is One who
heareth and seeth all things.***

Isra’ and Me’raj took place on the night of the 27th of Rajab (the
seventh month of the Islamic calendar) of the twelfth year of the
Proclamation, i.e., one year before the Migration of the Prophet from
Makkah to Medina.


