The Geography of Arabia
=======================

It is a convention of historians to begin the history of a region with
its geography. They do so partly because the drama of history is played
out in the “theater” of its geographical backdrop; and partly because of
the factor known in geopolitics as the “determinism of geography.”

It has been said that not only institutions but geography, climate, and
many other conditions unite to form the influences which acting through
successive generations, shape up the character of individuals and
nations, and character plays a vital role in shaping up their history.

The Arabian peninsula is the cradle of Islam. Islam was “born” in it,
and “grew up” in it, and was already “full-grown” when it came out of
it. It was in the Arabian cities of Makkah and Medina that the classic
Islamic identity was evolved, and Islam actually “jelled.” A grasp of
the geography of Arabia, therefore, is necessary for the understanding
of the drift of its history.

Following is a synopsis of the geography of the Arabian peninsula:

Arabia, like any other region, has the kind of terrain that molds and
modifies those who live in it and move through it. It's a stern, grim
and inhospitable land, and is or was, until the obtrusion of oil, a
constant challenge for survival to the wits of man. His survival in it
depended upon his ability to come to terms with it.

Contrary to popular notions, Arabia is not all a wilderness of sand. It
has considerable variety in the configuration of its surface, the
salient features of which are broiling sand, mauve mountains, jagged
gulches, grotesque peaks spiking a copper sky, friable rocks, flinty
plains, startling geometrical and conical shapes of crags, constantly
shifting sand dunes and oases, and mirages of lakes, streams and
gardens.

Though most of the surface of the desert is bleak and desolate, Arabia
has many parts which are highly photogenic. They possess a peculiar,
rhythmic, haunting, elusive and illusive beauty – the beauty of textured
sand, which like the waves of the sea, is forever in motion.

This beauty is even more evanescent than the beauty of the patterns of
fern and feather in frost, and even more ephemeral than the cosmetic of
freshly-fallen snow. The ripples of sand extend as far as the horizons
and beyond, in a world of silence and emptiness. The sun makes bright
scales on the sand, and the wind makes strange, surrealistic, and
“futuristic” patterns in it only to obliterate them a few moments later.

Thus the wind is constantly creating, destroying and recreating beauty.
And this beauty, in all its infinite similitudes, is born to blush
unseen in the desert air, and to perish and vanish unsung. In the
immensity of sand, the landscape keeps changing and assuming forever
newer and more fantastic shapes, and keeps erratically “moving” from one
place to another. Sand can be piled up into massive dunes which can rise
more than 150 meters above bedrock.

Depending on the direction and force of the wind, the dunes assume a
variety of shapes like the spectacular crescent moon or long parallel
ridges or great pyramidal massifs which may be called sand mountains.

If the desert has many faces, it also has many moods, and most of them
are unpredictable. One moment it may be deceptively benign and tranquil
but the very next moment, it may become vicious, temperamental, menacing
and treacherous like a turbulent ocean. Whole caravans of men, camels
and horses, are said to have disappeared in it, devoured, as if, by the
cruel and hungry sands.

In a sandstorm which can last for several days, the sun, the moon, the
stars, the contours of the landscape and the horizons are all
obliterated, and towering columns of dust spin crazily, flashing surreal
shadows over the surface of the roiling desert.

In summer, the vertical sun generates thermal whirlwinds which scorch
the land as if with a torch, and the desert becomes a composite of two
elements – heat and sand. Sometimes a dust storm is followed by a brisk
shower which sports a “double-rainbow” – a full rainbow inset with a
smaller one. Thus horror and beauty both fit strangely into the
“life-cycle” of the desert.

But through it all and forever, the desert remains remote, silent,
sinister, savage, forbidding and formidable; and it remains overwhelming
in its vast and awesome loneliness. Some people believe that the
brooding desert has its own “mystique” which profoundly affects men. It
is against this backdrop that the Arab – the son of the desert – played
out his life.

Arabia is the world's largest peninsula but the Arabs themselves call it
*Jazirat-ul-Arab* (the Island of Arabia), which in a sense it is.
Bounded on the east by the Persian Gulf, on the south by the Arabian
Sea, and on the west by the Red Sea, it is bounded on the north by the
great “sand sea” of the Syrian desert.

In outline, Arabia is a quadrilateral with an area of 1.2 million square
miles. The Red Sea littoral from the Gulf of Aqaba in the north to the
Bab-el-Mendeb in the south, is 1200 miles long; and the distance from
Bab-el-Mendeb in the west to Ras-el-Hadd in the east is roughly the
same.

In configuration, Arabia is a vast plateau rising gently from east to
west. Except for Yemen and the valleys interspersed in the western
mountain ranges, the whole country is sandy or rocky, and dry and
barren.

Following are the political divisions of the Arabian peninsula (1992):

1. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

2. The Republic of Yemen

3. The Sultanate of Oman

4. The United Arab Emirates

5. The State of Qatar

6. The State of Bahrain

7. The State of Kuwait

**Following is a brief description of each of these seven political
units:**

1.The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
-----------------------------

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia accounts for 850,000 square miles of the
Arabian peninsula. Its population is estimated at ten million, and its
capital is Riyadh.

The “maritime” provinces of the Kingdom are Hijaz and Aseer on the Red
Sea. The narrow coastal plain of Tihama runs parallel to the Red Sea.

The twin cities of Makkah and Medina are in the province of Hijaz.
Hijaz, therefore, is the holy land of Islam. The population of Hijaz is
estimated at two million, and its area is 135,000 square miles. Other
cities and towns in Hijaz are Jeddah, the port of Makkah, and the
country's major commercial center; Yenbo, the port of Medina; Ta'if, a
hill station in the south-east of Makkah, and the summer capital of the
kingdom; Khyber, Tabuk and Tayma.

The “Great Design” of Islam was perfected in Hijaz, and the history of
its birth and growth is inextricably bound up with this province which
makes it the hub of the Muslim world.

Aseer is the relatively fertile strip of coastal plains and mountains in
the south-west, north of Yemen, with some peaks rising as high as 10,000
feet, and sufficient rainfall to permit terraced farming. The famous
hill station of Abha and the important agricultural settlement of Jizan
are in Aseer. Jizan is the port for Aseer.

Najd is the central highland of Arabia with a mean elevation of 3000
feet. The dominant feature of its topography is the mountain system
called Tuwayq. Riyadh, the capital of the kingdom, is in Najd. The oases
of Buraydah and Hayil are in the northern part of Najd.

Al-Hasa or the Eastern Province is on the Persian Gulf. All the oil and
gas of the kingdom are found in this province. It also has the important
oases ofHofuf and Qatif. The leading commercial centers of the province
are Al-Khobar and the port city of Dammam. Other important cities are
Dhahran and Ras Tanura.

The Ruba'-al-Khali (the Empty Quarter) in the south is the largest
continuous body of sand in the world, and covers an area of 250,000
square miles. To the Arabs, it is known simply as “Ar-Ramal” (the
Sands). It is an almost lifeless desert, and is one of the most isolated
and desolate regions of the world.

An-Nufud in the north of the peninsula is the second largest desert in
Arabia. It is 30,000 square miles in area.

2. The Republic of Yemen
------------------------

The Republic of Yemen is in the south and south-west of the Arabian
peninsula, with a population of 11 million and an area of 190,000 square
miles. It is the only part of the peninsula that receives monsoon rains,
making it the most fertile and populous part of the area. The highest
mountain of Arabia, An-Nabi Sho'aib, is in Yemen, and reaches a height
of 12,350 feet.

Sana'ais the capital and the largest city in the country. It is at an
elevation of 7200 feet, and is noted for its healthful climate. Aden is
the commercial capital. Al-Mocha, Al-Hodaydah, Ta'izz, and Mukalla are
other cities. Sayun and Shibam are towns which are famous for their
skyscrapers.

3. The Sultanate of Oman
------------------------

The Sultanate of Oman occupies the south-east corner of the Arabian
peninsula and consists of the regions of Oman and Dhofar. It has a
population of one million and an area of 90,000 square miles. Muscat is
the capital and Matrah is the largest town.

4. The United Arab Emirates
---------------------------

The United Arab Emirates comprise the seven states of Abu Dhabi, Dubai,
Ajman, Sharjah, Fujairah, Ras el-Khaimah, and Umm el-Quiwain. They add
up to a total of 32,000 square miles, and a population of 500,000. The
capital of the Union is Abu Dhabi which is also the largest and most
important city of the Emirates.

5. The State of Qatar
---------------------

Qatar has an area of 4250 square miles and a population of 200,000. Its
capital is Doha. Qatar has the smallest population of any Arab state.

6. The State of Bahrain
-----------------------

Bahrain is a group of 30 islands, with a total area of 240 square miles,
and a population of 300,000. Manama, the capital, is on Bahrain Island,
and Muharraq is the second largest city in the group of islands.

7. The State of Kuwait
----------------------

Kuwait is 6200 square miles in area, and has a population of 1.5
million. Kuwait City is the capital.

Climate
-------

Although the Tropic of Cancer passes through the center of the Arabian
peninsula, the land is not tropical. Its summers are long and extremely
hot, with temperatures rising as high as 130 degrees Fahrenheit in many
places. Winters are short and cold. Rainfall is scanty, averaging four
inches a year. The south-west corner, however, gets relatively heavy
rainfall, as much as twenty inches.

Vegetation
----------

Vegetation is generally very sparse due to lack of rain and due to the
high salt content of the soil. True trees are rare, and shrubs are
common. All plants have had to adapt themselves to the conditions of
desert existence.

The date-palm grows wherever there is water. It is the most important
cultivated tree in the whole peninsula. Date fruit is the staple of many
Arabs, and the tree supplies valuable wood and other by-products.
Tamarisk and acacia trees are also found in many parts of the country.

The principal cereals of Arabia are wheat, barley, oats, maize and
millet. Coffee grows in Yemen; and cotton grows, in varying quantities,
in Yemen and in Oman. The mango fruit has been successfully cultivated
in the oases of Al-Hasa province of Saudi Arabia, and the coconut palm
grows in Oman. Such “forests” as Arabia has, are a few clusters of
junipers in the highlands of Yemen.

**The Ecology of Arabia** The most important component of the ecology of
the Arabian peninsula is water. Its presence or absence has shaped its
history to a great extent. Settlers were attracted to the site of Makkah
in Hijaz by the presence of the spring discovered by Hajra, the wife of
Ibrahim and the mother of Ismael, and was named by her as *Zamzam.*
Assured by the availability of its tart waters in all seasons, they
built the city of Makkah around it.

The hydrosphere of the region consists of wells, torrents and
flash-floods. The whole area is devoid of rivers and streams with the
exception of the sixty-mile long Hajar in the Republic of Yemen. But
even this is not a perennial stream; it becomes a stream only when
torrential rains fall in its basin.

A new and complex factor of tremendous geopolitical significance is the
presence of vast reservoirs of oil in the Arabian peninsula. In 1900 the
whole peninsula was thinly populated, and was desolate, poverty-stricken
and isolated. It was one of the few regions in the world almost
untouched by western influence.

Then came oil and everything changed. Saudi Arabia sold her first
concession in 1923, and the first producing well was drilled in 1938.
Within a few years, annual revenues from petroleum exceeded $1 million.
The kingdom passed the $1 billion mark in 1970; the $100 billion mark in
1980.

Life in Saudi Arabia and in the other oil producing sheikdoms in the
Persian Gulf was transformed by the effects of the new wealth –
spectacular fortunes, rapid economic development, the arrival of foreign
labor, international clout – perhaps more radically than life has been
transformed anywhere else at any time in human experience.

The oil wealth is changing the face of the land in numerous parts of
Saudi Arabia and the Gulf sheikdoms. It has made it possible to enlist
modern technology to draw water from great depths or to convert sea
water through desalination, and to bring barren lands under cultivation
by using it for irrigation.

Reclamation of land for farming is also changing the demographic
character of the peninsula. Nomadic tribes are striking roots in
permanent settlements wherever availability of water is assured.Most
sophisticated techniques are being applied in an attempt to control sand
movement and to tame a hostile environment.

The most important animal in Arabia was the camel. The Arabian camel is
the single-humped variety, or dromedary, as against the two-humped camel
of Central Asia, the Bactrian. The dromedary has flat, broad,
thick-soled cloven hoofs that do not sink into the sand, and it can
travel long distances in the desert.

The milk of the camel formed an important part of the diet of the desert
Arabs, and camel hair was used by them to make their tents. The camel,
therefore, was indispensable for survival in the desert.

But amazingly and incredibly, the camel has almost disappeared from
Saudi Arabia and all the sheikdoms of the Persian Gulf. William J. Polk
writes in his book, *Passing Brave*, published by Alfred A. Knopf, New
York, in 1973:

“Shortly before his death in 1960, the great English desert explorer,
St. John Philby, prophesied that within thirty years Arabia would have
no camels. He was laughed at then but today it seems that his prophecy
may have been overly generous. The camel and its parasite, the nomad,
have almost disappeared from Arabia.

Thus the era which began about 3000 years ago with the domestication of
the camel, is ending. The camel has played a major role in the rise of
civilization.”

Diesel trucks, trains, and jet airplanes have taken the place of camels
and camel caravans. Most Arabs now travel by automobile or by air. The
camels and the camel caravans have become “obsolete” in Arabia.


