The Battle of Badr
==================

The war of nerves between the Quraysh and the Muslims could escalate
into open hostilities at any time. Abu Jahl was one of the “hawks” in
Makkah who carried on a non-stop private war against Muhammad Mustafa
and his followers. His jingoism kept Makkah in a state of constant
agitation.

**V. C. Bodley**

Abu Jahl's monomania about Mohammed had remained at boiling point. He
kept raiding parties continually on the move, attacking any isolated
parties of Moslems which could be ambushed. He made forays into the
suburbs of Medina and damaged crops and gardens. He let Mohammed see
that his feelings had not changed, that his intentions were still
murderous. *(The Messenger, the Life of Mohammed, New York, 1946)*

In early March 624, reports were received in Medina that a caravan of
Quraysh was returning to Makkah from Syria. The caravan was carrying not
only merchandise but also weapons. It was estimated that the caravan had
made a profit of 50,000 dinars (pieces of gold). The weapons and the
newly-acquired wealth were to be used, according to the same reports, to
equip an army to fight against the Muslims. The caravan was led by Abu
Sufyan, the chief of the clan of Banu Umayya.

Muhammad Mustafa decided to intercept the Makkan caravan. He appointed
Abu Lababa as governor of Medina, and left the city with a force of 313
men. Of these 80 were Muhajirs, and 233 were the Ansars. Their
destination was Badr, a village in the south-west of Medina where they
expected to make contact with the Makkan caravan.

The Muslims did not know it then that they would never see the caravan
of the Quraysh, and that they would, instead, be engaged in an
encounter, on the battlefield, with the army of the Quraysh.

In the meantime, the Makkan spies also informed Abu Sufyan that a body
of Muslims had left Medina, and was rapidly moving toward his caravan.
As soon as he heard this, he abandoned thecustomary caravan route, led
the caravan westward to the Red Sea coast, and then turned south toward
Makkah via an off-beat track.

He also sent a messenger to Makkah asking for aid. In Makkah, Abu Jahl
was already busy whipping up public fury against the Muslims, following
the incident at Nakhla. He eagerly responded to Abu Sufyan's appeal, and
led out of Makkah a force of 1000 warriors including a cavalry of 100,
against the Muslims. A train of 700 camels carried materials for war and
other supplies. The infantry was wearing chain-mail and armor.

Muhammad Mustafa did not know that an army had left Makkah and was
marching toward Medina to protect the caravan of the Quraysh, and to
challenge the Muslims. When the Prophet arrived in the environs of Badr,
he sent Ali ibn Abi Talib to reconnoiter the surrounding country. At the
wells of Badr, Ali surprised some water-carriers. In reply to his
questions, they told him that they were carrying water for an army which
came from Makkah, and which was encamped on the other side of the nearby
hills.

Ali brought the water-carriers before the Prophet of Islam. From them he
learned that the caravan of the Quraysh had already escaped, and that
the Muslims, at that very moment, were confronted by the army of Makkah.

**Sir William Muir**

On reaching the neighborhood of Badr, Mohammed sent forward Ali, with a
few others, to reconnoiter the rising ground above the springs. There
they surprised three water-carriers of the enemy, as they were about to
fill their sheepskins. One escaped to the Coreish; the other two were
captured and taken to the Moslem army. From them Mohammed discovered the
proximity of his enemy. There were 950 men; more than threefold the
number of the Moslem army. They were mounted on 700 camels and 100
horses, the horsemen all clad in mail. *(The Life of Mohammed, London,
1877)*

This most vital intelligence was received through Ali ibn Abi Talib. His
action, on the one hand, alerted the Muslims; and on the other, robbed
the enemy of the advantage of surprise. The Muslims were ready to meet
him.

Nevertheless, the presence of an active, aggressive and menacing enemy,
instead of a rich caravan, within close proximity, had changed the
entire situation for the Muslims, and they had to make a fresh
assessment of the perils and possibilities of a confrontation with him.
They were poorly equipped, and had only two horses and 70 camels with
them. Some of them had swords but no shields and others had shields but
no swords. The Prophet who was aware of these apparent handicaps, called
a council of war, and put the matter before his companions for
consideration and decision.

The first man who rose to speak on this critical occasion, was Miqdad.
He voiced the feelings and thoughts of the Muhajireen when he said: “O
Messenger of God, do what God has commanded you to do. We are with you,
now and at all times; and we shall not tell you what the Israelites told
Moses: ‘You and your Lord should go and fight against the enemy; as for
us, we shall stay here, and sit here.' No, we shall not imitate the
Israelites. We shall follow you and obey your orders.”

Muhammad gave his blessings to Miqdad. But Miqdad was a Muhajir, and
Muhammad was anxious to know what the Ansar would do. He had assumed
that the Ansar would fight in the defense of Medina itself but might not
like to fight outside their city.

Sensing his anxiety, Saad ibn Muadh, one of the leaders of the Ansar,
rose and said: “We have borne witness that you are the Messenger of God.
We have given you our pledge to obey you. Wherever you go, we shall go
with you. If there is a showdown with the polytheists, we shall be
steadfast in our support to you. In war and in peace, we shall be
consistently faithful to you.”

This unequivocal declaration of support by the leader of the Ansar,
pleased the Apostle, and he invoked the blessings of God upon them all.
He knew that neither the battle of Badr nor any other battle could be
fought without the support of the Ansar. The Ansar were, in fact,
indispensable for success in the struggle between Islam and paganism, as
noted before.

Materially and numerically, the Muslims were at a disadvantage but these
disadvantages were offset by their morale. They had faith in the
inspired leadership of Muhammad. And they were united. Their unity and
singleness of purpose were going to be a source of immense strength to
them in the forthcoming contest with the Makkan army.

With the support of the Ansar assured, Muhammad Mustafa took the
decision to accept the challenge of the Quraysh. He and the
rank-and-file of the army of Medina appear to have been fully aware that
the outcome of the contest with the foe on the following day, would be
overwhelming in its effects.

**Sir William Muir**

Mohammed was fully alive to the critical situation. The fate of Islam
hung upon the issue of the approaching battle. *(The Life of Mohammed,
London, 1877)*

The Prophet ordered the Muslims to pitch their tents on the ground where
they had halted. But a young man of the Ansar pointed out the advantages
of choosing another campsite where the ground was higher and firmer, and
he also suggested that the Muslims take possession of all the wells of
Badr. His suggestions were forthwith accepted.

**S. Margoliouth**

Hubab son of al-Mundhir, the Prophet's junior by twenty years, having
ascertained that they were engaged in ordinary warfare, and possessing a
special knowledge of the wells in the neighborhood, advised the Prophet
to get in front of all except one, round which they should make a
reservoir, so as to have a constant supply of water for the troops; the
possession of this valuable element would then save the day. The Prophet
welcomed the suggestion and placed his force under Hubab's guidance.
*(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1931)*

Events soon proved that Hubab's suggestion was an excellent one, and its
acceptance by the Prophet gave the Muslims a great tactical advantage
over the enemy.

The battle of Badr was fought in the second year of Hijra, on the 17th
of Ramadan, the ninth month of the Islamic calendar (March 15, 624). The
Makkan army moved out of its camp early in the morning to meet the
Muslims. The two armies ranged themselves in battle formation. The
Prophet took a bow in his hand and walked between the lines dressing the
rows of the Muslims. His last act before the battle began, was to pray
to God to grant victory to His humble slaves.

The battle began in the traditional Arab manner of warfarein which a
champion of one side rode or stepped out of his line, and challenged the
heroes of the enemy to meet him in single combat. This gave him an
opportunity to win personal glory by showing his own bravery, his
strength and his skills at horsemanship. The two armies often served as
a kind of chorus for combats between a few boastful heroes. After these
initial duels, it was customary for the two armies to attack each other,
and to engage in hand-to-hand fighting.

From the Makkan side, three warriors, Utbah the son of Rabia; Shaiba,
his brother; and Walid, his son; came out into the open space between
the two armies, and challenged the Muslims. Their challenge was taken up
by Hamza, an uncle of Muhammad and Ali; Obaida ibn al-Harith, a cousin
of Muhammad and Ali; and Ali ibn Abi Talib.

Walid bin Utbah was one of the fiercest warriors of Makkah. Ali found
himself facing him. They were the youngest pair, and they were the first
to engage in fighting. The other two pairs paused, to watch the young
warriors in action. The two young men exchanged a few blows, and then
Ali struck the blow which killed Walid.

As soon as Walid was killed, the other warriors also charged at each
other. Hamza killed Utbah. But Obaida was mortally wounded by Shaiba.
When Ali saw Obaida collapsing, he attacked Shaiba, and killed him too.
With their opponents dead, and no one in the field, Ali and Hamza
carried Obaida back into the Muslim lines where he succumbed to his
wounds. He was the first Muslim to be killed in the battle-field.

**Sir William Muir**

The two brothers, Shaiba and Otba, and Walid, the son of Otba, advanced
into the space between the armies, and defied three champions from the
army of Mohammed to meet them singly. Mohammed turning to his kinsmen,
said: “Ye, sons of Hashim! Arise and fight, according to your right.”

Then Hamza, Obeida, and Ali, the uncle and cousins of the Prophet, went
forth. Hamza wore an ostrich feather in his breast, and a white plume
distinguished the helmet of Ali. Then Otba called on his son, Walid,
“Arise and fight.” So Walid stepped forth and Ali came out against him.
They were the youngest of the six. The combat was short; Walid fell
mortally wounded by the sword of Ali.

*(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)*

**Sir John Glubb**

Three Meccan chiefs, Otba, Shaiba and Waleed, the son of Otba, advanced
in front of the line of Quraish and defied three Muslims to meet them in
single combat. Mohammed turning to the Emigrants called out: “O Beni
Hashim, stand up and fight.” Three men in chain-mail stepped from the
Muslim ranks. They were Hamza, the Prophet's uncle; Ali ibn Abi Talib,
his cousin, and the first male convert; and Ubaida ibn Harith.

The youngest pair engaged first, Ali stepping forward to meet Waleed.
After a few moments of fencing, Waleed fell by the sword of his Muslim
opponent. Then Hamza engaged Otba and cut him down. Ubaida ibn Harith,
the third Muslim champion, received a fatal wound from Shaiba. Ali and
Hamza hastily dispatched Shaiba, carrying Ubaida to die in the Muslim
lines. *(The Great Arab Conquests, 1963)*

Badr was the first encounter, on the battle-field, between Islam and
Heathenism. It was opened on the side of Islam, by Ali ibn Abi Talib,
the young lion, and his victory was the signal of the triumph of Islam.
All other battles of Islam followed the same pattern; Ali was the victor
in every one of them

Quraysh had sent three champions against the Muslims, and all three had
been slain. Abu Jahl, therefore, was not very eager to take further
chances with Ali and Hamza, and he ordered his troops to advance. The
Makkans charged the Muslims but could not break their formations. They
charged again and again but the Muslim line held firm under the command
of Ali and Hamza.

The Makkans were regrouping for a new attack when the Prophet signaled
the Muslims to advance. Ali and Hamza led the counter-charge, and both
of them carried slaughter and dismay into the thickest of the enemy
ranks. Many of the Makkan leaders and officers were killed, among them
Abu Jahl himself. After his death, the idolaters were unable to regroup,
and they began to retreat. The Muslims pressed their advantage, and the
Makkan retreat soon became a rout.

Islam had won its first and the most important victory!

**S. Margoliouth**

It certainly appears that the winning of this most important fight was
in the main due to the prowess of Ali and Hamza. The Prophet is said to
have bestowed especial praise on the valor of Simak s/o Kharashah;Sahl
s/o Hunaif; al-Harith s/o al-Simmah; and Kais s/o al-Rabi; all of them
Medinese. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1931)*

**Tor Andre**

By noon the battle was over. The Quraysh fled. Forty-nine of the enemy
had fallen and Ali had killed twenty-two, either alone or with the help
of others. An equal number was captured. The believers had lost fourteen
men on the field of battle. *(Mohammed, the Man and his Faith, 1960)*

As noted above, Badr is the most important battle in the entire history
of Islam, and one of the most important in world history. Victory
guaranteed the existence of Islam, and the physical survival of the
Muslim community of Medina which heretofore had appeared, at best, to be
precarious.

**A. Nicholson**

But the importance of Mohammed's success (in the battle of Badr) cannot
be measured by the material damage which he inflicted (upon the pagans
of Mecca). Considering the momentous issues involved, we must allow that
Badr, like Marathon, is one of the greatest and most memorable battles
in all history. *(A Literary History of the Arabs, 1969)*

**Ali ibn Abi Talib and the Battle of Badr**

The architect of the Victory of Islam at Badr, without any doubt, was
Ali ibn Abi Talib. M. Shibli, the Indian historian who wrote the most
authoritative biographies in Urdu of Umar bin al-Khattab and of the
Prophet of Islam, says in his *Life of the Apostle*, that the hero of
the battle of Badr is Ali ibn Abi Talib.

**F. E. Peters**

Badr was a Muslim triumph, as total as it was unexpected; the Muslims
lost 14 men and the Quraysh from 50 to 70, including their leader, Abu
Jahl. It was an immense psychological victory and there was plentiful
booty for the economically distressed Emigrants. This was no mere raid,
however. It pitted Muslim against non-Muslim in Holy War, and fathers
against sons in civil strife. The Quraysh casualties were
extraordinarily high, and since most of them had occurred among the
chiefs, *the leadership at Mecca was permanently crippled. (Allah's
Commonwealth, 1973)*

The leadership of the polytheists of Makkah was indeed permanently
crippled at Badr. The hero responsible for this was Ali. He alone killed
22 Makkans, twelve of them being the leading members of the clan of Banu
Umayya. The rest of the army of Islam killed another 27 pagans.

Among the spoils of the battle of Badr was a sword which was to become
the most famous sword in the whole history of Islam. Its name was
*Dhul-Fiqar*.

**Washington Irving**

Among the spoils of the battle of Badr was a famous sword of admirable
temper called *Dhul-Fiqar*, or the Piercer. Mohammed ever afterwards
bore it when in battle, and his son-in-law, Ali, inherited it at his
death. *(The Life of Mohammed)*

Abdullah Yusuf Ali, the translator and commentator of Qur’an, says that
the battle of Badr is called the *Furqaan* in Muslim theology, because
it was the first trial of strength by battle, in Islam, between the
powers of good and evil. *Furqaan* means criterion between right and
wrong; decision between the forces of Faith and Unbelief. The battle of
Badr is called by this name.

The Prisoners of War
--------------------

The Muslims captured fifty prisoners of war. They were brought before
the Prophet who had to decide what to do with them. He consulted his
companions in the matter. Umar advised him to kill them all, but Abu
Bakr advised him to set them free for ransom. The Prophet accepted Abu
Bakr's advice.

Since there was no house of detention in Medina, the Prophet distributed
the prisoners among the Muslim families. These families treated their
prisoners as if they were their guests. Some of them fed their own food
to their “guests” and themselves went hungry. They actually embarrassed
their prisoners by their solicitude for their welfare. The rich
prisoners were released for a ransom. Those prisoners who could not pay
a ransom but could read and write, were asked to teach these arts to the
Muslim children, and when they did, they were also released. Those
prisoners who were destitute, were released without any ransom.

Results of the Battle of Badr
-----------------------------

Victory at Badr invested Islam with immense prestige. The threat to the
security of Medina was averted, and Muhammad Mustafa could now lay the
foundations of the first and the last Kingdom of Heaven on Earth.

**S. Margoliouth**

No event in the history of Islam was of more importance than this battle
(Badr); Koran rightly calls it the Day of Deliverance, the day before
which the Moslems were weak, after which they were strong. Wealth, fame,
honor, power, all of them were secured or at any rate brought within
reach by the Day of Deliverance. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam,
London, 1931)*

One lamentable outcome of the battle of Badr, however, was that Islam's
victory kindled new and fiercer fires of hatred and hostility in the
breasts of the Banu Umayya against Muhammad Mustafa and Ali ibn Abi
Talib. Their hatred and jealousy of Banu Hashim had spanned many
generations. But after the battle of Badr, their hostility was focused
on Ali and on the children of Muhammad Mustafa.

If to the Muslims, Ali was the symbol of the triumph of Islam, to the
Banu Umayya, he was the symbol of the destruction of their polytheism
and their privileges. Therefore, they, their generations to come, and
their friends and their supporters, never forgave Ali for the role he
played before, during and after the battle of Badr. Their hatred is
understandable. It was Ali, and Ali alone who had struck, not only at
Badr, but in every encounter, at the massive, coordinated and
concentrated power of heathendom, and had destroyed it.


