The Battle of Uhud
==================

The battle of Uhud was a reprisal against the Muslims following the
battle of Badr. Some of the leading members of Quraysh such as Abu Jahl,
Utbah, Shaiba, Walid, Umayya bin Khalaf, and Hanzala bin Abu Sufyan, had
been killed in the battle of Badr. After the death of Abu Jahl,
leadership of the Makkans had passed on to his compeer, Abu Sufyan, who
was the chief of the clan of Banu Umayya.

There was profound sorrow in Makkah at the loss of so many chiefs but
Abu Sufyan had forbidden the bereaved families to cry and to lament
their losses. Tears, he knew, could wash away malevolence from the
hearts. But time and tears, he asserted, would not be allowed to heal
the wounds received by the Makkan aristocracy at Badr. He himself had
taken an oath that he would remain a stranger to every pleasure until he
had paid the Muslims back in their own coin. He and the other leaders of
the Quraysh spent a whole year of feverish activity in which they
equipped and trained a new army.

One year after the battle of Badr, the new army of the idolaters of
Makkah was ready to take the field against the Muslims. In March 625 Abu
Sufyan left Makkah at the head of three thousand seasoned warriors. Most
of them were foot soldiers but they were supported by a strong
contingent of cavalry. Also accompanying the army, was a band of warlike
women. Their duty was to wage “psychological warfare” against the
Muslims by reading poetry and by singing amatory songs to spur the
courage and the will-to-fight of the soldiers.

They knew that nothing held such terror for the Arabs as the jibes of
women for cowardice, and they also knew that nothing was so efficacious
to turn them into utterly reckless fighters as the promise of physical
love. These amazons included the wives of Abu Sufyan and Amr bin Aas,
and the sister of Khalid bin Walid.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

Abu Sufyan appears to have done his best, and, as a substitute for
military music, caused or permitted the army to be followed by a company
of ladies, who, by threatening and promising, were to keep the courage
of the troops to its proper level; for nothing did the refugee from the
battle-field dread more than the reproaches of his women-folk. The
Kuraishite ladies did some certainly curious service.

The wife of Abu Sufyan made the suggestion that the body of Mohammed's
mother should be exhumed and kept as hostage; but the Kuraish rejected
this suggestion (of which the practicability was surely doubtful) for
fear of reprisals. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, 1931)*

As if the heavy overtones of sex introduced by the women of the Quraysh
were not enough, Abu Sufyan invested his campaign with “religious
sanctity” as well. To leave no doubt in anyone’s mind that he was
engaged in a holy war against the Muslims, he placed Hubal, the idol
that the clan of Banu Umayya worshipped as its supreme deity, on a
camel, and carried it with him into the battle. Hubal's duty was to
boost the morale of the idolaters by his presence in the battle-field.

Sex and religion were the two new components mobilized by the Quraysh in
their war against Mohammed and Islam.

**Betty Kelen**

In one howdah rode Hubal, on holiday from the Kaaba. Abu Sufyan had well
grasped that quite apart from considerations of revenge and caravan
routes, he was engaged in a holy war. *(Muhammad, the Messenger of God,
1975)*

Muhammad Mustafa, the Prophet of Islam, also heard reports of the
impending invasion of Medina by the Makkans, and he too ordered his
followers to prepare themselves for defense. Seven hundred Muslims were
ready to follow him into battle.

The prophet stationed his army with the mountain of Uhud in its rear so
that it stood facing Medina. When the Makkan army came up, it took its
position in front of the Muslims so that it was standing between them
and Medina which was in its rear.

**Sir William Muir**

Abu Sufyan, as hereditary leader, brought up the Meccan army; and facing
Ohod, marshaled it in front of Mohammed. The banner was borne by Talha
son of Abd al Ozza. The right wing was commanded by Khalid; the left by
Ikrima son of Abu Jahl. Amr bin Aas was over the Coreishite horse. *(The
Life of Mohammed, 1877)*

**Sir John Glubb**

The Muslims advanced with 700 men against 3000 warriors from Mecca.
Moreover, while the Muslims could muster only one hundred men with coats
of chain-mail, and no horses, Quraish and their allies included 700 men
in armor and 200 horsemen.

Wishing to cover their rear in view of their small numbers, the Muslims
posted themselves at the foot of Mt. Ohad. Their right flank and rear
were covered by the mountains, but their left flank lay in open ground
and was thus exposed to a charge by the enemy cavalry. To guard against
this, Mohammed posted fifty archers on this flank, with orders on no
account to leave their post, from which they could protect the Muslim
left wing from the Quraish horse.

The Meccans drew up their line facing the Muslims in such a way that the
latter, with their backs to Ohad, were facing Medina, while the Quraish
line confronted them with Medina in its rear, thereby interposing
between the Muslims and the town.

Quraish had brought a number of women with them, riding in
camel-litters. These now, as the two lines drew towards one another,
proceeded to rouse the enthusiasm of the Meccans, beating upon
tambourines, reciting martial poetry and letting down their long hair.
*(The Great Arab Conquests)*

The battle of Uhud began just as the battle of Badr had begun, with a
Makkan warrior advancing from his lines and challenging the Muslims to
single combat.

**Sir William Muir**

Flourishing the Coreishite banner, Talha, the standard-bearer of the
Meccan army, advanced, and challenged the enemy to single combat. Ali
stepped forth, and, rushing on him, with one blow of his sword brought
him to the ground. Mohammed, who had intently watched the rapid combat,
exclaimed, with a loud voice: Great is the Lord! and the cry, repeated,
arose in an overwhelming shout from the whole Muslim army. *(Life of
Mohammed, London, 1877)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Talha ibn Abu Talha, carrier of the Meccan flag, sprang forward asking
the Muslims to duel with him. Ali ibn Abi Talib advanced forth to fight
with him. The encounter was soon over as Ali struck his enemy a single
fatal stroke. Exalted, the Prophet and the Muslims yelled, “God is
Great.” *(The Life of Muhammad, 1935, Cairo)*

**R.V.C. Bodley**

The Meccans, generously assisted by the women who had brought their
timbrels, flung insults at the Moslems. These were alternated by Hind,
the wife of Abu Sufyan, who led triumphant choruses as she danced round
the idol which perched on the camel.

Talha, the hereditary standard-bearer of the Koreishites, was the first
Meccan challenger. As he stepped out of Abu Sufyan's ranks, Ali stepped
out of Mohammed's. The two men met in the middle of ‘no man's land.'
Without words or preliminary flourishes the duel began. Talha never
stood a chance. Ali's scimitar flashed in the morning sun and the head
of the standard-bearer leaped from his shoulder and rolled away on the
sand.

‘Allah-o-Akbar!' cried Mohammed. ‘Allah-o-Akbar!' ‘Allah-o-Akbar!'
echoed from the eagerly watching Moslems. *(The Messenger, the Life of
Mohammed, New York, 1946)*

**Sir John Glubb**

The two lines drew up opposite one another. Talha ibn Abdul Uzza, of
Abdul Dar, burning with resentment at the taunts of Abu Sufyan, and
bearing the standard of Quraish, stepped out before the line and
challenged any Muslim to single combat. Ali ran forward and slew him
with a single slash of his sword, the *Quraish standard falling to the
ground*. From the Muslim line rose a great shout, Allah-o-Akbar, God is
Most Great.” *(The Life and Times of Mohammed)*

This is one of the most dramatic scenes in the history of Islam.
Muhammad, the Messenger of God, was watching his cousin, Ali, in action,
and was thrilled by his swift victory. When the tremendous stroke of
Ali's sword killed the pagan general, Muhammad shouted Allah-o-Akbar,
and the battle-cry was taken up by the whole army of Islam.

Ali's irresistible stroke had caused the standard of the Makkans, the
emblem of idolatry and polytheism, to fall into the dust. He had won the
first round for Islam, and had dealt the death blow to the morale of the
Quraysh.

When Ali returned to his lines, Talha's brother, Uthman ibn Abu Talha,
made an attempt to retrieve the Makkan banner. But Hamza came out of the
Muslim line, and killed him.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

When Ali ibn Abu Talib killed the carrier of Makkan flag, Talhah ibn Abu
Talha, it was immediately raised again by Uthman ibn Abu Talha. And when
Uthman fell at the hands of Hamzah, it was raised again by Abu Sa'd ibn
Abu Talhah. At the moment he raised the Makkan flag he shouted at the
Muslims. “Do you pretend that your martyrs are in paradise and ours in
hell? By God, you lie! If anyone of you truly believes such a story, let
him come forward and fight with me.” His challenge attracted Ali who
killed him on the spot. The Banu Abd al Dar kept on carrying the Makkan
flag until they lost nine men. *(The Life of Muhammad)*

Ali, the young lion, alone had killed eight standard-bearers of the
idolaters of Makkah.

Ibn Atheer, the Arab historian, writes in his *Tarikh Kamil* “The man
who killed the standard-bearers (of the pagans) was Ali.” After the
death of the ninth of his standard-bearers, Abu Sufyan ordered his army
to advance and to attack the Muslim formations. When the Prophet noticed
the enemy moving, he also alerted the Muslims. He held a sword in his
hand, and offered it to anyone who would bring honor to it. Some
hopefuls moved toward him to take it but he withheld it from them.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

The Apostle wore two coats of mail on the day of the battle of Uhad, and
he took up a sword and brandished it saying: “Who will take this sword
with its right?” (use it as it ought and deserves to be used). Some men
got up to take it but he withheld it from them until Abu Dujana Simak b.
Kharasha, brother of B. Saida, got up to take it.

Umar got up to take it, saying: “I will take it with its right,” but the
Prophet turned away from him and brandished it a second time using the
same words. Then Zubayr b. al-Awwam got up and he too was rejected, and
the two of them were much mortified. *(The Life of the Messenger of
God)*

The Prophet gave the sword to Abu Dujana, an Ansari. He took it and used
it as it ought to have been used. He justified the confidence his master
had placed in him. The Makkan women were squatting on top of their
camels and were watching the swift action.

When their army advanced to charge the Muslims, they also moved into
action. They began to incite their warriors to kill the Muslims. They
sang songs which were full of invitation and scorn – invitation to the
heroes and scorn for the cowards. With their music and highly suggestive
poetry, they whipped up the impetuous sons of the desert into fighting
furies.

**Betty Kelen**

Perched on the summits of many camels were little huts, or howdahs, in
which rode a squadron of women well trained by Hind to sing warlike
ballads that would keep their menfolk in a fever pitch of rage and
discourage cowardice.

The battle was joined. Hind and her women moved forward with the troops,
scattering about the field as closely as they dared to the fighting men,
beating their tambourines with terrible clash and shouting:

*“Daughters of the shining Morning Star,*

*Watching you from silken beds we are,*

*Thrash them! in our arms we'll fold you;*

*Run, and nevermore we'll hold you.”*

*(Muhammad, the Messenger of God)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Before Islam women (in Arabia) used to show themselves off not only to
their husbands but to any other men they pleased. They used to go out
into the open country singly or in groups and meet with men and youths
without hindrance or sense of shame. They exchanged with them glances of
passion and expressions of love and desire. This was done with such
blaze frankness and lack of shame that Hind, wife of Abu Sufyan, had no
scruples whatever about singing on such a public and grave occasion as
the Day of Uhud.

*“Advance forward and we shall embrace you!*

*Advance forward and we shall spread the carpets for you!*

*Turn your backs and we shall avoid you!*

*Turn your backs and we shall never come to you.”*

Among a number of tribes, adultery was not at all regarded as a serious
crime. Flirting and courting were common practices. Despite the
prominent position of Abu Sufyan and his society, the chroniclers tell,
concerning his wife, a great many tales of love and passion with other
men without implying any stain on her reputation...” *(The Life of
Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

The Makkans had better equipment and they were more numerous than the
Muslims. Furthermore, the presence, in the battlefield, of their deity,
Hubal, and their women, was assurance that their morale would not sag,
especially, after the latter had introduced into the struggle, the new
and the deadly component of temptation.

But notwithstanding these tangible and intangible advantages, the
Makkans were making little, if any, progress. In fact, at the beginning,
the battle appeared to be going against them.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

It appears too that at the commencement events were going as the Prophet
had imagined. The champions of Badr, Ali and Hamza, dealt out death as
unsparingly as before; the heroism of the Kuraish compelled them to meet
these champions in a series of single combats, in which their own
champions were killed, and their overthrow spread discomfiture and
panic. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1931)*

The charge of Ali, Hamza and Abu Dujana spread panic and consternation
in the ranks of the Makkans, and they began to waver. The Muslims
pressed their advantage.

**Sir John Glubb**

Ali ibn Abu Talib pressed on undismayed into the enemy ranks – it was
Badr again; the Muslims were invincible. *(The Great Arab Conquests,
1963)*

Ali had broken the ranks of the Quraysh, and he was already deep inside
their lines. Unable to resist his attack, they began to yield ground.
Not far from him, his uncle, Hamza, was busy hacking his way through the
dense mass of the enemy. Between them, they were grinding the army of
Quraysh.

It was at this time that two incidents occurred which caused a reversal
in the fortunes of the Muslims, and which wrested victory from their
grasp. The first of them was the death of Hamza.

Hinda, the wife of Abu Sufyan, had brought with her from Makkah, a
certain Wahshi, an Ethiopian slave, to kill Hamza, and had promised to
give him not only his freedom but also much gold, silver and silk in the
event of his success. He was noted for his skill in the use of his
“national” weapon, the javelin.

Wahshi hid behind a rock awaiting an opportune moment, and it soon came.
Just when Hamza killed an idolater, and lunged after another, Wahshi
stood up, took deadly aim, and hurled the missile weapon against which
there was no defense. The javelin caught Hamza in the groin. He fell on
the ground and died almost immediately.

The other incident involved the main body of the army of Medina. The
unsteadiness and the confusion of the army of Makkah had become very
much visible at this time, and the Muslims assumed that they had already
won a victory. In great anxiety not to miss the opportunity to plunder
the enemy, they forgot their discipline. This maneuver was seen by the
archers who had been posted by the Prophet at the strategic pass.

They also imagined that the enemy had already been beaten, and was in
retreat. They thought that if their comrades in the battle-field
captured the baggage of the enemy, then they themselves would lose their
share of the booty. This fear prompted them to descend into the plain
below against the express orders of the Prophet. Their captain, Abdullah
ibn Jubayr, adjured them not to abandon the pass but they paid no heed,
and swept into the valley. Their love of booty cost the Muslims victory
in the battle of Uhud!

Presently, a Makkan general, one Khalid bin al-Walid, noticed that the
strategic pass to the left of the army of Medina was unguarded. He
immediately seized the opportunity to attack the handful of the pickets
still at the pass, with his cavalry. The pickets fought bravely but all
of them including Abdullah ibn Jubayr, were overpowered, and were
killed. Once Khalid captured the pass, he attacked the army of Medina
from the rear.

The army of Medina was busy in gathering booty, utterly oblivious of
everything else. Suddenly, it was startled by the charge of the Makkan
cavalry in its rear. Abu Sufyan also noticed the maneuver of Khalid, and
the bewilderment of the Muslims. He rallied his troops, returned to the
scene of action and launched a frontal attack upon them. They now found
themselves caught in a pincer movement of the enemy, and they panicked.
It was now their turn to be routed. They started running but not knowing
in what direction to run, and everyone ran every which way.

The surprise was not confined merely to the rank-and-file of the Muslim
army; it was total. Some of the leading companions of the Prophet were
also carried away with others before the charge of the enemy. Among the
fugitives were both Abu Bakr and Umar.

It is reported by Anas bin Nadhr, the uncle of Anas bin Malik, that Abu
Bakr said in later times that when the Muslims fled from the battle of
Uhud, and left the Messenger of God, he was the first one to return to
him. Umar often said that when the Muslims were defeated in Uhud, he ran
and climbed up a hill (Tabari, *History*, vol. IV, p. 96). Some of the
companions managed to reach Medina and others sought refuge in the
mountain caves and gullies.

Uthman bin Affan, the future third khalifa of the Muslims, had not taken
part in the battle of Badr but he was present in Uhud. However, he found
the clangor of sword and spear a little too much for his nerves, and was
among the first fugitives.

Shaikh Muhammad Khidhri Buck says in his biography of the Prophet that
Uthman was a bashful man, and that though he fled from the battle-field,
he did not enter Medina. His bashfulness prevented him from doing so.

As the Muslims ran past the Prophet, he tried to stop them but no one
seemed to listen. In a short time the tables were turned on them, and
victory was wrenched out of their hands. It was the price they had to
pay for their disobedience to their Prophet, and for their obsession
with gathering booty.

Following is the testimony of Qur’an on the conduct of the Muslims in
the battle of Uhud:

***Behold! You were climbing up the high ground, without even casting a
side glance at any one, and the Apostle in your rear was calling you
back. there did God give you one distress after another by way of
requital, to teach you not to grieve for the booty that had escaped you,
and for (the ill) that had befallen you. For God is well aware of All
that you do. (Chapter 3; verse 153)***

The Prophet had given the banner of Islam to his uncle, Masaab ibn
Umayr, in the battle of Uhud. He was killed by the enemy, and the banner
of Islam fell on the ground. When Ali noticed the banner falling, he
rushed forward, picked it up, and raised it high once again.

**Washington Irving**

Hamza was transfixed by the lance of Wahshi, an Ethiopian slave, who had
been promised his freedom if he should kill Hamza. Mosaab ibn Omair,
also, who bore the standard of Mohammed, was laid low, *but Ali seized
the sacred banner, and bore it aloft amidst the storm of battle*.

As Mosaab resembled the Prophet in person, a shout was put up by the
enemy that Mohammed was slain. The Koreishites were inspired with
redoubled ardor at the sound; the Moslems fled in despair, bearing with
them Abu Bakr and Omar, who were wounded. *(The Life of Mohammed)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Those who thought that Muhammad had perished, including Abu Bakr and
Umar, went toward the mountain and sat down. When Anas ibn al-Nadr
inquired why they were giving up so soon, and was told that the Prophet
of God had been killed, he retorted: “And what would you do with
yourselves and your lives after Muhammad died? Rise, and die like he
did.” He turned, charged against the enemy, and fought gallantly (until
he was killed). *(The Life of Muhammad, 1935, Cairo)*

Most of the Muslims had fled from the battle-field but Ali was still
fighting. He was carrying the banner of Islam in one hand, and the sword
in the other. He too heard the cry “Muhammad is dead.” But it only made
him more reckless of his own life.

The Prophet, however, was in another part of the battlefield. He had
been wounded, and his head and face were bleeding. A few Muslims, mainly
the Ansar, were defending him. It was this little group, and its battle
cries that caught Ali's attention. He tore his way through the enemy
lines and came up to his comrades-in-arms.

They stood surrounding the Prophet, and led by Abu Dujana, were doing
the best they could to shield him from the missile weapons of the enemy.
Ali was thrilled to see his master alive but he had no time to exchange
greetings. The idolaters had renewed their attacks, and now it was Ali
who had to beat them back. They charged repeatedly but he repulsed them
each time.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

...when somebody raised the cry that Muhammad was killed, chaos reigned
supreme, Muslim morale plunged to the bottom and Muslim soldiers fought
sporadically and purposelessly. This chaos was responsible for their
killing of Husayl ibn Jabir Abu Hudhayfah by mistake, *as everyone
sought to save his own skin by taking flight except such men as Ali ibn
Abu Talib whom God had guided and protected*. *(The Life of Muhammad,
1935, Cairo)*

In the battle of Uhud, many of the companions who were touted to be very
brave and faithful, turned their backs upon the enemy, and ran for
cover. But there were a few who did not run. One of them was Umm Ammarra
Ansariyya, a lady from Medina. She was a fearless believer, and all
Islam can be justly proud of her courage. She was noted for her skills
as a surgeon and a nurse, and came to Uhud with the army of Medina.

At the beginning of the battle, Umm Ammarra brought water for the
soldiers or tended them if they were wounded. But when the Muslims were
defeated and they fled from the battle-field, her role changed from that
of a nurse to that of a warrior. At one time the enemy brought archers
to shower arrows upon the Prophet. Umm Ammarra seized an enormous shield
and held it before him to protect him from the flying missiles.

Shortly later, the Makkans charged with swords and spears whereupon Umm
Ammarra threw away the shield, and attacked them with a sword. One
idolater came dangerously close to the Prophet but she came in front of
him, and when he (the idolater) struck, the blow fell upon her shoulder.
Though she was wounded, she was undismayed, and resolutely stood between
the Prophet and his enemies, defying them and defying death.

Presently there was a momentary lull in fighting. Taking advantage of
it, Ali took the Prophet away from the danger spot to a ravine where he
could get some rest, and where his wounds could be dressed.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

The doughty Ali with (some) other brave men finding him (the Prophet)
huddled him into a ravine where he could be tended. *(Mohammed and the
Rise of Islam)*

Fatima Zahra, the daughter of the Prophet, came from the city with a
group of Muslim women when she heard the news of the defeat of the
Muslims. Ali brought water in the hollow of his shield, and Fatima Zahra
washed blood from the face of her father, and dressed his wounds.

**The Role of the Makkan Women**

The rout of the Muslims from the battle-field was an invitation to the
ladies from Makkah to seek and to find gratification of their blood-lust
upon the bodies of the martyrs. They cut their noses, ears, hands and
feet, and they cut open their abdomens, removed the organs, and made
necklaces with them as trophies of war.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Saleh bin Kaysan told me that Hind, daughter of Utba, and the women with
her, mutilated the dead companions of the Prophet. They cut their ears
and noses and Hind made them into anklets and collars and she gave her
(own) anklets, collars and pendants to Wahshi, the slave of Jubayr b.
Mutim. She cut out Hamza's liver and chewed it, but she could not
swallow it and threw it away.

Al-Hulays b. Zabban, brother of the B. al-Harith b. Abdu Manat, who was
then chief of the black troops, passed by Abu Sufyan as he was striking
the corner of Hamza's mouth with the point of his spear, saying: “Taste
that, you rebel.” Hulays exclaimed, “O Banu Kinana, is this the chief of
Quraysh acting thus with his dead cousin as you see?” *(The Life of the
Messenger of God)*

Seventy-five Muslims were killed in the battle of Uhud, and bodies of
most of them were mutilated by Hinda and the other harpies from Makkah.

The hatred of Muhammad, Ali and Hamza was a fire that consumed Hinda.
Though Hamza alone was the victim of her cannibalistic appetites in the
battle of Uhud, Muhammad and Ali could not expect any different
treatment from her if they had fallen into her hands. She transmitted
her hatred of Muhammad and Ali to her children and grandchildren, and
the generations to come.

The Withdrawal of the Makkan Army
---------------------------------

After the first shock of defeat had passed, some of the Muslims returned
to the battle-field. Abu Bakr and Umar were among them. They also went
into the ravine where Ali had taken the Prophet.

At this moment, Abu Sufyan who was ready to return to Makkah, is
reported to have come near the ravine. Standing at the foot of the
hills, he exchanged a few remarks with Umar.

**Sir John Glubb**

...the Quraish could have climbed Mount Uhud at the cost of a few
casualties and possibly killed the Messenger of God and the little group
of devoted followers who had remained with him. When Abu Sofian asked
Umar ibn al-Khattab if Mohammed were dead, he had replied, “No, by God,
he can hear you speaking.” But it never occurred to Abu Sofian to take
advantage of this dangerous breach of security.

The cold-blooded brutality of these killings (in the battle of Uhud)
illustrates once more the extraordinary contrast between the easy-going
and often chivalrous warfare of the Arabs and the brutalities of their
blood-feuds. Abu Sofian talks familiarly with Umar ibn al-Khattab on the
battle-field of Uhud, for neither had killed a relative of the other.
But Abu Sofian's wife, Hinda, the daughter of Utba ibn Rabia, mutilates
the dead body of Hamza, who had killed her father. *(The Life and Times
of Mohammed)*

The Quraysh had, ostensibly accomplished their mission. They had
defeated the Muslims and had salvaged their honor. Thus satisfied with
themselves, they left the battle-field and marched toward their hometown
in the south. But the Prophet, still not sure about their intentions,
sent Ali to watch them from a distance and to report their movements to
him.

Ali returned and informed the Prophet that the Quraysh had bypassed
Medina, and were moving toward Makkah. This reassured the Prophet. The
Muslims then descended from the hill, prayed over their dead, and buried
them.

Ali and the Battle of Uhud
--------------------------

In the battle of Uhud, Ali killed the first standard-bearer of the pagan
army. When the standard-bearer fell to the ground, the standard also
fell with him. Ali thus felled the emblem of paganism.

Later, when the battle was raging, the pagans killed Masaab ibn Umayr,
the standard-bearer of the army of Islam. Masaab fell to the ground, and
the standard fell with him. But the very next moment, Ali was on the
scene; he lifted the fallen banner from the ground, and unfurled it once
again. He was thus as much a symbol of the destruction of idolatry and
polytheism as he was the symbol of the rise and rebirth of Islam.

In Uhud, friend and foe both beheld with their own eyes the fantastic
deeds of Ali's heroism and chivalry, and his devotion to his master,
Muhammad, the Messenger of God. Ali fought the battle of Uhud with the
famous sword, Dhu'l-Fiqar.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

The Prophet's sword was called Dhu'l-Fiqar. A traditionalist told me
that I. Abu Najih said, ‘Someone called out in the battle of Uhud:

*There is no sword but Dhu'l-Fiqar*

*And there is no hero like Ali.'*

*(The Life of the Messenger of God)*

In Ali's grip, Dhu'l-Fiqar was the lightning that struck and consumed
paganism, idolatry and polytheism. But to Islam, it was the bringer of
new hope, new vigor, new life, and honor, glory and victory. Commenting
upon the events of Uhad, following the rout of the Muslims when the
Prophet was beleaguered by his enemies, M. Shibli, the Indian historian,
says:

It was a most critical moment in the history of Islam. The idolaters
charged upon the Messenger of God like furies but each time they were
repelled by the edge of the Dhu'l-Fiqar.

Shibli further says that the idolaters came like “dark and threatening
clouds ready to burst upon the Muslims.” If Ali had not blunted the
Makkan offensive, then this cloudburst would have hit Medina, and Islam
would have been carried away in the spate of idolatry. If Ali too had
failed in his duty as many others did, the idolaters would have killed
the Messenger of God, and they would have extinguished the flame of
Islam.

But Ali and a handful of other Muslims, including Abu Dujana and Umm
Ammarra Ansariyya, averted this catastrophe. In this lamentable battle,
75 Muslims were killed. Out of them four were Muhajirs, and the rest
were Ansars.

The Martyrs of Uhad
-------------------

The most tragic episode of the battle of Uhad was the death of Hamza and
the mutilation of his body. After the departure of the Makkans, the
Prophet went to see the corpse of his uncle. The ears and the nose had
been cut; the abdomen had been slit open, and its organs had been
removed. He was overwhelmed with sorrow to see the martyr's body in that
state, and ordered it to be covered.

Hinda, the wife of Abu Sufyan and the mother of Muawiya, is called the
“liver-eater” in the history of Islam. Ibn Ishaq says that she chewed up
the liver of Hamza but could not swallow it. But Ibn Abdul Birr says in
his book, *Al-Isti'aab*, that she actually made a fire in the
battle-field, roasted Hamza's liver on it, and ate it!

When the Prophet returned to Medina, he heard the heart-rending
lamentations of the members of the bereaved families. The kith and kin
of the martyrs of Uhad were mourning their dead. He exclaimed: “Alas!
there is no one to mourn the death of my uncle, Hamza.” The leaders of
the Ansar, upon hearing this remark, went to their homes, and ordered
their women to go to the house of the Prophet, and lament the death of
his uncle.

Presently a crowd of women of Medina gathered in the house of Muhammad,
and they all wept over the tragic death of Hamza, the hero of Islam. The
Prophet invoked the blessings of God upon them all. Thereafter it became
a custom in Medina that whenever anyone died, his mourners began their
lamentations with dirges on Hamza. The people of Medina mourned first
for Hamza and then they mourned for their own dead.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

The Prophet passed by the quarters of the Banu Abdul Ashal and Zafar and
he heard them wailing for the dead. His eyes filled with tears and he
said: “But there are no weeping women for Hamza.” When Sa’d bin Mu’adh
and Usayd b. Hudayr came back to the quarter, they ordered their women
to gird themselves and to go and weep for the Prophet’s uncle. *(The
Life of the Messenger of God)*

Besides Hamza, three other Muhajirs won the crown of martyrdom in the
battle of Uhad. They were Abdullah ibn Jahash, a cousin of the Prophet;
Masaab ibn Umayr, an uncle of the Prophet; and Shams ibn Uthman. The
losses of the Ansar were very heavy. They left seventy-one dead on the
field, and many more wounded. May God bless them all.

The battle of Uhad was the climactic moment of pagan opposition to
Islam. Though victorious in the battle, the Quraysh were unable to
follow up and to exploit their victory, and their gains were soon
dissipated.


