The Death of Fatima bint Asad, the Mother of Ali ibn Abi Talib
==============================================================

In 4 A.H. (A.D. 626) Fatima bint Asad, the widow of Abu Talib and the
mother of Ali, died in Medina. She had reared Muhammad, the future
Prophet, as her own son, and he called her his mother. She was the
second lady in Arabia to accept Islam, the first being Khadija, the wife
of the Prophet.

Muhammad was deprived of his mother early in life but he soon found a
second mother in Fatima bint Asad. He, therefore, did not miss the love
and affection that a mother alone can give. When his foster-mother died,
he attended the funeral, and said: “May God bless your noble soul. You
were to me like my own mother. You fed me while you yourself went
hungry. Your aim in doing so was to please God with your deeds.” He gave
his own cloak for her shroud, and she was given burial in it. He often
said, “I was an orphan and she made me her son. She was the kindest
person to me after Abu Talib.”

When the grave was made ready, Muhammad, the Messenger of God, entered
it; he lay down in it, and said: “O God! Life and death are in Thy
hands. Thou alone will never die. Bless my mother, Fatima bint Asad, and
give her a mansion in Heaven. Thou art the Most Merciful.”

When Fatima bint Asad was buried, Muhammad Mustafa repeated
*Allah-o-Akbar* (God is Great) forty times, and prayed: “O God! Put her
in the Light, and fill her heart with Light.”

Muhammad Mustafa was the Executor of the last will and testament of
Fatima bint Asad.

Fatima bint Asad was a most remarkable lady since two of the children
she brought up, Muhammad and Ali, turned out to be the two most
remarkable men in the history of Islam. Her home was the real cradle of
Islam. Both Muhammad, the future Prophet of Islam, and Ali, the future
paladin of Islam, were born in her house, and they grew up in it. Both
of them were the “products” of her education.

Fatima bint Asad was also the mother of Jaafer, the hero of the battle
of Mootah, and the Winged Martyr of Islam. The name of her husband, Abu
Talib, figures in history as the greatest benefactor of Islam, but her
role in the service of Islam was no less important than his. She shares
the distinction with him of rearing and educating Muhammad, the future
Messenger of God. If her husband protected Muhammad from his enemies
outside, she provided him love, comfort and security at home.It was in
her home that Muhammad found emotional security and the emotional
closeness of a family.

If Khadija was the first Muslim lady and the greatest benefactress of
Islam, Fatima bint Asad was the second Muslim lady, and the second
greatest benefactress of Islam. May God be pleased with His slaves,
Khadija and Fatima bint Asad, and may He bless them.


