The Battle of the Trench
========================

After the battle of Uhud, Abu Sufyan and the other pagan leaders
realized that they had fought an indecisive action, and that their
victory had not borne any fruits for them. Islam had, in fact, resiled
from its reverse at Uhud, and within an astonishingly short time, had
reestablished its authority in Medina and the surrounding areas.

The pagans considered Islam a threat to their economic security and
political supremacy in Arabia, and they could never be reconciled to its
existence. They knew that if they could kill Muhammad, their interests
would be safeguarded, and their hegemony would be restored in Arabia.
With this aim they decided to strike a final and a crushing blow upon
Medina, and to exterminate all Muslims.

Montgomery
----------

The strategic aim of the Meccans was nothing less than the destruction
of the Muslim community as such, or – what amounts to the same thing –
the removal of Muhammad from his position of authority *(Muhammad,
Prophet and Statesman)*

Inspired by this aim, and by their ardor to make restitution for
failures of the past, the Makkan leaders began preparations for an
all-out war; a war that would put an end to all other wars by blotting
Islam out!

In two years the Quraysh raised a fighting force of ten thousand
warriors. This was the largest force ever assembled by the Arabs till
that time. With great fanfare and aplomb, this formidable force left
Makkah in February 627 to capture Medina and to obliterate Islam.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

When news of this tremendous mobilization reached Muhammad and the
Muslims in Medinah, it struck them all with panic. The mobilization of
the whole of Arabia against them instilled fear in their hearts as they
faced the prospect of being not only defeated but wiped out. The gravity
of the situation was evident in the fact that the army the Arab tribes
had now raised surpassed in number and equipment anything the Peninsula
had ever seen before... *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

The Prophet convened an emergency meeting of his principal companions to
consult them in the matter of defending the city. One thing was obvious.
The Muslims were so few in number and so poor in equipment that they
could not meet the invading force on the open ground. Medina had to be
defended from within. But how? How could the tiny Muslim garrison
prevent the Makkan army from overrunning Medina which would be
overwhelmed by sheer numbers, was a question on everyone's mind.

One of the closest friends of Muhammad, the Messenger of God, was Salman
the Persian. He was born and brought up in Persia (Iran) but had spent
many years in Syria and Palestine, and he had familiarity with the
warfare and the siege operations of both the Persians and the Romans.
Medina had natural or man-made defenses on three sides but was exposed
on one, i.e., the north side. Salman told the Prophet that if a trench
were dug on the north side, the city could perhaps be defended
successfully.

The idea, though new and unconventional in Arabia, appealed to the
Prophet. He accepted it and ordered Muslims to dig the trench.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Salman al-Farsi, who knew far more of the techniques of warfare than was
common in the Peninsula, advised the digging of a dry moat around Medina
and the fortifications of its buildings within. The Muslims hurried to
implement this counsel. The moat was dug and the Prophet – may God's
peace and blessings be upon him – worked with his hands alongside his
companions lifting the dirt, encouraging the Muslim workers, and
exhorting everyone to multiply his effort. *(The Life of Muhammad,
Cairo, 1935)*

Since the Makkan army was known to be approaching Medina rapidly, there
was no time to lose, and the Muslims worked frantically – in relays. In
six days the trench was dug, just in time to prevent the invaders from
taking the town by assault.

The Makkan cavalry came like a whirlwind but was suddenly checked, in
its career, by the trench. The horsemen reined in their horses at its
edge. Their grand strategy had been to take Medina by storm in a few
hours but now it appeared to them that they could not do so. Here there
was a trench, a new obstacle which they could not surmount. How did it
fit into their strategy? They were utterly nonplused by the trench.

Eventually, and after long deliberation, the Makkan commanders decided
to lay siege to Medina, and to force the Muslims to surrender, through
attrition. They sealed all exits from Medina, and hemmed in the Muslims.
Medina was in a state of siege!

Though it was Abu Sufyan who had organized the whole campaign, and he
was its director of operations, he was no fighting man himself. The
fighting man of his army was Amr ibn Abd Wudd, the fiercest of the
warriors of pagan Arabia. Abu Sufyan's hopes of a swift and decisive
victory over the Muslims lay in him. M. Shibli, the Indian historian,
and Abbas Mahmood Al-Akkad, the Egyptian historian, say that Amr ibn Abd
Wudd was reckoned, by the Arabs of the time, to be more than a match for
one thousand cavaliers.

Amr ibn Abd Wudd had no interest in the static warfare of a siege. He
panted for action. When a few days had passed, and nothing had happened,
he lost patience, and he decided to capture Medina by personal action.
One day, prowling around Medina, he and three other Makkan knights
discovered a rocky point where the trench was not too wide. They spurred
their horses from it, and succeeded in clearing the trench!

Now Amr was inside the perimeter of Medina. He boldly advanced into the
Muslim camp, and challenged the heroes of Islam to come out and fight
against him in the classical Arabian tradition of duels.

Amr's first challenge went unanswered whereupon he repeated it but still
got no answer. Such was the prestige of his name that no one in the
Muslim camp dared to meet him in a trial of strength. If the idolaters
saw in him their hope of victory, the Muslims saw in his challenge the
sentence of their death.

Amr ibn Abd Wudd threw his insolent challenge a third time and taunted
the Muslims at the same time for their cowardice.

To Amr it must have seemed that the Muslims were paralyzed with fear,
which most of them, in fact, were. Al-Qur’an al-Majid has also drawn a
portrait of the state of the Muslims at the siege of Medina in the
following verses:

***Behold! They came on you from above you and from below you, and
behold, the eyes became dim and the hearts gaped to the throats, and you
imagined various (vain) thoughts about God! (Chapter 33; verse 10)***

***Behold! A party among them said: “you men of yathrib! You cannot
stand (the attack). Therefore go back” and a band of them asked for
leave of the Prophet saying, “truly our houses are bare and exposed.”
Though they were not exposed: they intended nothing but to run away.
(Chapter 33; verse 13)***

Amr ibn Abd Wudd even expressed amazement that the Muslims were not
showing any eagerness to enter paradise where he was ready to send them.

It is true that most of the Muslims were terror-stricken but there was
one among them who was not. He had, in fact, volunteered to accept Amr's
very first challenge but the Prophet had restrained him, hoping that
someone else might like to face him (Amr). But he could see that no one
dared to measure swords with him.

The young man who was willing to take up Amr's challenge was no one
other than Ali ibn Abi Talib, the hero of Islam. When Amr hurled his
third challenge, and no one answered him, Ali rose and solicited the
Prophet's permission to go out and to fight against him.

The Prophet of Islam had no choice now but to allow his cousin, Ali, the
Lion of Islam, to go and to silence the taunts and the jibes of Amr ibn
Abd Wudd.

Ali put on the battle-dress of the Prophet of Islam. The latter himself
suspended the Dhu'l-Fiqar to his side, and prayed for his victory,
saying: “O Allah! Thou hast called to Thy service, Obaida ibn al-Harith,
on the day the battle of Badr was fought, and Hamza ibn Abdul-Muttalib,
on the day the battle of Uhud was fought. Now Ali alone is left with me.
Be Thou his Protector, give him victory, and bring him back safely to
me.”

When the Prophet saw Ali going toward his adversary, he said: “He is the
embodiment of all Faith who is going to an encounter with the embodiment
of all Unbelief.”

A few moments later, Ali was standing before Amr. The two heroes
identified themselves, and sized up each other. Ali had a set of
principles which he applied in all situations whether of war or of
peace. In the battle of the Trench, the Muslims and the pagans saw a
demonstration of the application of those principles. Whenever he
confronted an enemy, he offered him three options. They were:

**1.**Ali presented Islam to his opponent. He invited him to abandon
idolatry and to accept Islam. This invitation made Ali a missionary of
Islam in the battlefield itself.

**2.**If the enemy did not accept Ali's invitation to accept Islam, he
advised him to withdraw from the battle, and not to fight against God
and His Messenger. Fighting against them, he warned him, would only
bring eternal damnation upon him in the two worlds.

**3.**If the enemy did not accept the second option also, and refused to
withdraw from the battle, then Ali invited him to strike the first blow.
Ali himself was never the first to strike at an enemy.

Amr ibn Abd Wudd disdained even to consider the first and the second
options but accepted the third, and struck a mighty blow with his
ponderous sword which cut through the shield, the helmet and the turban
of Ali, and made a deep gash in his forehead. Blood leapt out from the
wound in a jet but Ali was not dismayed. He rallied, and then struck a
counter-blow with the famous Dhu'l-Fiqar, and it cleft the most
formidable warrior of Arabia into two!

When Amr was killed, the three knights in his entourage turned round and
spurred their horses to retreat. Ali let them retreat. It was one of his
principles not to pursue a fleeing enemy. Whoever wished to save his
life, Ali let him save it.

The death of Amr ibn Abd Wudd broke the back of the Makkan offensive
against Islam, and destroyed their morale. The elements also declared
against them. The temperature fell to freezing point, and a dust storm
arose which blew in their faces.

Discouraged and disheartened, the fickle tribesmen began to desert their
Makkan allies, first in ones and twos and threes, and then in tens and
twenties, and a little later, in hundreds. The confederacy began to
dissolve visibly. Abu Sufyan was compelled to raise the siege, and to
give the signal to his army to retreat from Medina. His army was
dispersed, and his campaign was a dismal failure. Medina was saved.

The failure of the siege of Medina by the idolaters of Makkah was a most
significant event in the history of Arabia. It meant that they would
never be able to mount another invasion of Medina. After the battle of
the Trench, the initiative passed, finally and unmistakably, from the
polytheists of Makkah to the Muslims of Medina.

Medina and Islam had been saved by an idea and a hero. The idea was the
trench which immobilized the Makkan cavalry. It was an entirely new
concept in Arabian warfare, and the Arabs had no familiarity with it.
Without the trench, the ten thousand marauding tribesmen would have
overrun Medina, and they would have killed everyone in it.

The honors for saving Medina-tun­Nabi, the City of the Prophet, and the
Capital of Islam, go to Salman the Persian, and to his master, the
Prophet himself. The former broached a new idea in military doctrine;
the latter showed himself receptive to it, and immediately implemented
it.

Everyone in Medina claimed that he was a friend or companion of
Muhammad, the Messenger of God. That city had its own share of
tuft-hunters. But there were a few, in fact very few, men whom Muhammad
himself acknowledged as his friends. Salman the Persian belonged to this
select group, the inner circle of the friends of the Messenger of God.

Salman was a man of gigantic stature and prodigious physical strength.
When the trench was being dug, he worked as much as six other men. This
prompted one of the Muhajireen to claim that Salman was one of them,
i.e., the Muhajireen. But he was at once challenged by the Ansar one of
whom said that Salman was an Ansar and not a Muhajir. The two groups
were still arguing when the Apostle arrived on the scene. He too heard
the claims of both sides and was amused by them. But he put an end to
the argument by giving his own “verdict”. He said that Salman was
neither a Muhajir nor an Ansar but was a member of his own house – his
Ahlul-Bait – a member of the House of Mohammed Mustafa himself!

The Arab historian, Ibn Atheer, has quoted the Prophet in his book,
*Tarikh Kamil*, vol. 2, p. 122, as saying: “Salman is one of us. He is a
member of our household.” This is the greatest honor ever bestowed upon
any of his companions by Muhammad, the Messenger of God.

Salman was a Christian living in Ammuria in Asia Minor when he first
heard vague reports of the appearance of a prophet in Hijaz. To verify
these reports, he came to Medina. When his first glance fell on the face
of the Prophet, he exclaimed: “This cannot be the face of a man who has
ever told a lie,” and he forthwith accepted Islam.

Islam adopted Salman as much as he “adopted” Islam. Islam became the
synthesis of his emotions, and he became a part of its “blood-stream.”
In Medina, a stranger once asked him the name of his father. His answer
was: “Islam! The name of my father is Islam. I am Salman the son of
Islam.” Salman “blended” into Islam so thoroughly that he became
indistinguishable from it.

The threat to the security of Medina, however, did not pass with the
digging of the trench. Medina was still vulnerable. At a point where the
trench was narrow, the general of the Makkan army and three other
champions, were able to leap over it and to ride into the Muslim camp.
If they had succeeded in establishing a bridgehead over the trench, the
whole Makkan cavalry and infantry, and the irregular freebooters would
have entered the city and captured it. But Ali checkmated them. Thus the
wits of Salman, the sagacity of Muhammad and the sword of Ali proved to
be the best defense of Islam against the most formidable coalition of
the polytheists in the history of Arabia.

It was a custom in Arabian warfare to rob a vanquished foe of his
weapons, his armor and his horse. At the siege of Medina, Amr was
wearing the finest armor in all Arabia. Ali killed him but did not touch
anything that belonged to him to the great surprise of Umar bin
al-Khattab.

Later, when Amr's sister came to his corpse to mourn his death, she too
was surprised to notice his weapons and armor intact. When she was told
that it was Ali who had killed him, she composed some verses praising
him (Ali). These verses have been quoted by the Egyptian historian,
Abbas Mahmood Al-Akkad, in his book, *Al-Abqariyyat Imam Ali* (the
Genius of Imam Ali), and can be roughly translated as follows:

“If someone other than Ali had killed Amr,

I would have mourned his death all my life.

But the man who killed him is a hero and he is peerless.

His father was also a lord.”

Commenting upon these lines, Abbas Mahmood Al-Akkad says that a tribe
did not consider it a disgrace if any of its heroes was killed by Ali.
Ali was the most gallant and most chivalrous of foes, and also he was
invincible.

After the failure of the siege of Medina, all the tribes between Medina
and the Red Sea and between Medina and Yammama to the east, signed
treaties of peace with the Prophet of Islam.

In the same year, i.e. in 5 A.H. (A.D. 627), Hajj (pilgrimage to Makkah)
was made mandatory for all those Muslims who were in good financial
standing and were in good physical health.


