The Treaty of Hudaybiyya
========================

According to the Muslim tradition, the Kaaba in Makkah was built by the
Prophets Abraham and his son, Ismael. They consecrated it as the
spiritual center of the world of the monotheists. And now Kaaba was the
“Qibla” of the Muslims which means that they had to turn toward it when
offering their prayers. But the custodians of the Kaaba were the
idolaters of Makkah, and they were using it as the national pantheon of
polytheism, housing in it 360 idols of their tribes.

By ancient Arab custom, everyone was free to visit the Kaaba – unarmed.
Also, by ancient custom, fighting of any kind was prohibited during the
four sacred months of the year. One of these months was Zilqa'ada, the
11th month of the calendar.

The Muslims longed to see what for them was the House of God. Therefore,
in Zilqa'ada of the sixth year after the Migration, their Prophet
declared that he would visit Makkah to perform *Umra* or the Lesser
Pilgrimage – unarmed but with his followers. With this intent, he left
Medina in late February A.D. 628 with 1400 of his followers. They had
taken camels and other animals for sacrifice but no weapons except their
swords.

When this caravan of the pilgrims reached the outskirts of Makkah, the
Prophet was informed that the idolaters would not allow him to enter the
city, and that, they would use force to prevent him from doing so. This
report caused great agitation among the Muslims. They halted near a well
in a place called Hudaybiyya in the north of Makkah.

The Prophet sent a message to the Quraysh that he wished only to make
the customary seven circuits of the Kaaba, sacrifice the animals, and
then return to Medina, with his followers. The Quraysh did not agree.
Many other messages were sent but the Quraysh said that they would not
admit the Muslims into Makkah.

Eventually, the Prophet ordered Umar bin al-Khattab to go to Makkah to
explain to the idolaters the purpose of the visit of the Muslims, to
assure them that they (the Muslims) had no intention of fighting against
anyone, and to give them a pledge that after performing the rites of
*Umra* they would leave Makkah immediately and would return to Medina.

But Umar refused to go. He said that there was no one in Makkah to
protect him. He suggested, however, that the Prophet ought to send
Uthman bin Affan with his message to Makkah since the idolaters would
not do him any harm.

**Sir William Muir**

The first messenger from the Moslem camp to Mecca, a convert from the
Beni Khozaa, the Coreish had seized and treated roughly; they maimed the
Prophet's camel on which he rode, and even threatened his life. But the
feeling was now more pacific, and Mohammed desired Umar to proceed to
Mecca as his ambassador. Umar excused himself on account of the personal
enmity of the Coreish towards him; he had, moreover, no influential
relatives in the city who could shield him from danger; and he pointed
to Othman as a fitter envoy.

*(The Life of Mohammed, 1877)*

**S. Margoliouth**

Presently it was determined to send a representative to Mecca, but the
consciousness that most of the Moslems were stained with Meccan blood,
rendered the heroes of Islam unwilling to risk their lives on such an
errand; even Omar, ordinarily so ready with his sword, hung back. At
last the Prophet's son-in-law, Othman s/o Affan, who had preferred
nursing his wife to fighting at Badr, was sent as a grata persona..
*(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, 1931)*

It is really strange that Umar was unwilling to risk his life by
visiting Makkah. There was no risk involved for him because he was not
one of those Muslims who were “stained with Meccan blood.” Since Umar
had not killed any Makkan, he would be grata persona with the idolaters
at all times. His refusal to obey the command of the Messenger of God,
therefore, is incomprehensible.

Umar did not go to Makkah. Nevertheless, he solved the problem by
producing his stand-in, Uthman bin Affan. Instead of him, therefore,
Uthman was sent to Makkah to parley with the Quraysh. Like Umar himself,
Uthman also was not stained with any pagan blood.

The idolaters welcomed Uthman and told him that he was free to perform
the *Umra*. But he said that he alone could not perform *Umra,* and that
they had to admit the Prophet and all the Muslims with him, into the
city. This was not acceptable to the Quraysh, and it was reported that
they had arrested him. It was even rumored that they had killed him.

When the rumors of Uthman's execution reached the Prophet, he construed
the action of the Quraysh as an ultimatum, and asked the Muslims to
renew their pledge of fealty to him. All Muslims pledged their obedience
to the Messenger of God regardless of the events which might take place
thenceforth.

This pledge is called the “Pledge of Ridhwan” or the “Covenant of
Fealty,” and those Muslims who gave it, are called the “Companions of
the Tree,” because the Prophet of Islam stood under a tree as they filed
past him renewing their oath of allegiance to him. Their numbers are
given as 1400.

The resolution of the Muslims to dare the consequences appears to have
put the Quraysh in a more reasonable frame of mind, as they realized
that their intransigence could lead to unnecessary bloodshed. Uthman, it
turned out, had not been killed as it had been rumored but had only been
arrested, and now they released him – an act reflecting a change in
their attitude.

Also reflective of this change was the selection by them of one, Suhayl
bin Amr, whom they sent to the camp of the Muslims to conclude a treaty
with the Prophet of Islam. Suhayl was a man known to be a skillful but
not an inflexible negotiator.

Suhayl arrived in Hudaybiyya and opened negotiations with Muhammad, the
Messenger of God. After long and wearisome discussions and debate they
succeeded in hammering out a treaty, the more important terms of which
were as follows:

**1.** Muhammad and his followers would return to Medina without
performing *Umra* (the Lesser Pilgrimage) of the current year.

**2.** There would be peace between the Muslims and the Quraysh for a
period of ten years from the date of the signing of the treaty.

**3.** If any Makkan accepts Islam and seeks sanctuary with the Muslims
in Medina, they would extradite him to Makkah. But if a Muslim, fleeing
from Medina, seeks sanctuary with the pagans in Makkah, they would not
extradite him.

**4.** All the tribes of Arabia would be free to enter into treaty
relations with any party – the Muslims or the Quraysh.

**5.** The Muslims would visit Makkah to perform the pilgrimage in the
following year but they would not stay in the city for more than three
days, and the only weapons which they would be allowed to bring with
them, would be their swords in the scabbards.

This treaty is called the Treaty of Hudaybiyya. It is the most important
political document in the history of Islam. The secretary selected to
indite its terms was Ali ibn Abi Talib.

When the Treaty of Hudaybiyya was being indited, an incident took place
which throws a revealing sidelight upon the character of the various
protagonists engaged in drafting its terms.

Dictating to Ali, the Prophet said: “Write, In the name of Allah, the
Most Merciful, the Most Beneficent.” Suhayl, the Makkan envoy, at once
raised objection, and said, “Do not write this. Instead, write, ‘In Thy
name O Allah.'“ The Prophet complied with this demand.

The Prophet next asked Ali to write: “This is a treaty of peace between
Muhammad, the Messenger of God and the Quraysh...” Suhayl again
objected, and said: “If we had acknowledged you a messenger of God, why
would we be fighting against you? Therefore, do not write the words,
‘the Messenger of God,' and write only your own name and the name of
your father.”

The Prophet was agreeable to comply with this demand also but Ali had
already written the words, “Muhammad, the Messenger of God,” and he
refused to delete them. He said to his master: “This high rank has been
bestowed upon you by Allah Himself, and I shall never delete the words
‘Messenger of Allah' with my hand.” Thereupon, the Prophet took the pen
in his own hand, and deleted the words which were offensive to the
idolaters.

The Treaty of Hudaybiyya was signed on two copies, one for each party.

**R.V.C. Bodley**

The original of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya was retained by Mohammed while
the duplicate was handed to Suheil for safekeeping in the archives of
Mecca. *(The Messenger – the Life of Mohammed, 1946)*

In Makkah the leaders of the Quraysh hailed the Treaty of Hudaybiyya as
a triumph of their diplomacy. They assumed that Muhammad had at last
been outmaneuvered, and that the treaty was tantamount to, even if it
was not a formal declaration of, “surrender.” The Quraysh gloated over
what they fancied to be the surrender of the enemy but events were soon
to show that they were wrong. Far from being a surrender, the Treaty of
Hudaybiyya was one of the greatest triumphs of Islam.

Among the followers of the Prophet, however, the Treaty of Hudaybiyya
was to produce some violent allergic reactions. Oddly, just like the
pagans of Makkah, the “chauvinists” in the Muslim camp also equated it
with “surrender.” They were led by Umar bin al-Khattab. He considered
its terms “dishonorable,” and he was so much distressed by them that he
turned to Abu Bakr for answers to his questions, and the following
exchange took place between them:

Umar: Is he (Muhammad) or is he not the Messenger of God?

Abu Bakr: Yes. He is the Messenger of God.

Umar: Are we or are we not Muslims?

Abu Bakr: Yes, we are Muslims

Umar: If we are, then why are we surrendering to the pagans in a matter
relating to our faith?

Abu Bakr: He is God's Messenger, and you must not meddle in this matter.

But Umar's defiance only escalated another notch after the admonition by
Abu Bakr, and he went to see the Prophet himself. He later said: “I went
into the presence of the Prophet, and asked him: ‘Are you not the
Messenger of God?' He answered, ‘Yes, I am.' I again asked: ‘Are we
Muslims not right, and are the polytheists not wrong?' He replied: ‘Yes,
that is so.' I further asked: ‘Then why are we showing so much weakness
to them? After all we have an army. Why are we making peace with them?'
He said: ‘I am the Messenger of God, and I do whatever He commands me to
do.'“

But it appears that Umar was not satisfied even with the answers of the
Prophet himself to his questions. The terms of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya
had generated grave doubts in his mind, so he said: “I repeatedly
questioned the Prophet regarding the terms of this treaty, and I had
never before talked with him in this manner.”

**Sir John Glubb**

Many of the Muslims were disappointed at the outcome of Hudaybiyya,
having anticipated a triumphant entry into Mecca. Umar ibn al-Khattab,
as usual, voiced his indignation. ‘Is he not God's Apostle and are we
not Muslims and are they not polytheists?' he demanded angrily from the
quiet and faithful Abu Bakr. ‘Why not fight them; why compromise thus?’
*(The Great Arab Conquests)*

**Tor Andre**

Umar turned excitedly to Abu Bakr and other leaders who were near the
Prophet to ascertain whether they really intended to submit to this
humiliation (sic). He declared later that never before had he such
doubts concerning Mohammed's truthfulness, and if he had found merely a
hundred like-minded men, he would have resigned from the umma of Islam.
*(Mohammed – the Man and his Faith)*

**Maxime Rodinson**

Umar and some others were angry at the idea of treating with these
pagans. The future caliph came to upbraid the Prophet. He declared later
that if he had a hundred men on his side, he would have seceded. But
Muhammad was immovable. *(Muhammad,translated by Anne Carter)*

**R.V.C. Bodley**

Most of the pilgrims, and Omar especially, were deeply mortified that
Mohammed had given in to the Koreishites on practically every point. It
seemed incredible to them that, after being brought all this way by
their leader who had not been afraid to pursue an enemy which had
defeated him, they should be halted outside their objective.

It seemed even more incredible that he should humiliate himself before
the Meccan envoy to the extent of neither calling his God by His
rightful name nor using his own title, merely because the infidel had so
demanded. Omar went as far as to ask: “Are you really God's messenger?”

Omar went to see what the other Moslems felt. He found them much in the
same frame of mind as he. For the first time since Islam had come into
being, there were signs of revolt. *(The Messenger* – *the Life of
Mohammed)*

Umar declared later that ever since he accepted Islam, he had never had
such doubts about the truthfulness of Muhammad as he had on the day the
Treaty of Hudaybiyya was signed.

This means that Umar was assailed by doubts from time to time about the
truthfulness of Muhammad and his prophetic mission. He probably
repressed them each time when they surfaced. But at the touchstone issue
of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, his chronic doubts erupted with such
terrific force that he could not suppress them. Haunted by his doubts,
he actually considered leaving the fraternity of Islam itself but could
not find anyone in the camp who would give him moral support in his
“enterprise.”

The traditional Sunni line has been that in showing defiance and
insolence to Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless
him and his Ahlul-Bait), Umar was prompted by his love of Islam.
According to them, he loved Islam so much that he was “carried away.”
Earlier, he had refused to obey the Prophet's order to carry a message
to the Quraysh in Makkah. That refusal, probably, was also prompted by
the same love.

Those people who attribute Umar's histrionics to his love for Islam,
are, in fact, suggesting that he loved Islam more than Muhammad, the
Prophet of Islam, himself did! Also, by his conduct, he was suggesting
that God's Messenger was wrong in seeking peace with the Quraysh but he
himself was right, and that it was his duty to “correct” him (Muhammad
Mustafa).

Only a day or so earlier, Umar had taken an oath to “obey the Messenger
of God” through thick and thin, in peace and in war, in prosperity and
in adversity. It was perhaps this pledge that impelled him to show
himself more “royalist” than the “king” himself!

If it is a coincidence that both the Quraysh in Makkah, and Umar and his
supporters in the Muslim camp, read in the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, the
“surrender” of the Muslims, then it was truly remarkable. But if Umar's
saber-rattling that day had led to a showdown with the Quraysh, then one
can surmise what part he would have played in it, judging by his own
“track record” both before and after.

Writing about the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, Lt. General Sir John Glubb says
in his book, *The Life and Times of Mohammed*:

The anxieties endured by the Muslims at Hudaybiyya are emphasized by the
way in which those days of suspense remained etched on their memories.
Many years after, when the Muslim armies had already built up a great
empire, when veteran comrades spoke of the early days, the deepest
respect was always shown to the men who had fought at Badr and to those
who had taken the oath at Hudaybiyya – the two most tense crises of the
rise of Islam. *(The Life and Times of Mohammed)*

There was no one among all the companions of Muhammad Mustafa who
acquitted himself so honorably, both in the battle of Badr and at
Hudaybiyya, and in fact, in all the critical moments in the history of
Islam, as Ali ibn Abi Talib.

In the past, he had shown himself to be the first in war; in Hudaybiyya
everyone saw that he was also the first in peace. He had demonstrated
many times in war that he had absolute trust in Muhammad and his
mission, and now he was demonstrating in peace that there was nothing
that could ever shake his faith in his master.

After the departure of the Makkan emissaries, the Prophet ordered the
Muslims to shave their heads and to offer their animals as sacrifice, as
rites of *Umra*. But he was shocked to notice that many of them were in
a rebellious mood and did not want to obey his commands.

What actually had happened was that Umar had publicly defied the Apostle
of God, and by his example, he had encouraged his followers also to do
the same. The Apostle entered his tent, and told his wife that the
Muslims were disobeying his orders. She said that if he ignored them,
and performed the operations himself, they would follow him.

**S. Margoliouth**

The Moslems were sulkily silent when told by him (the Prophet) to shave
their heads and offer their sacrifices. At last (by the advice of his
wife, Umm Salamah), he performed the operations himself, and his
followers did the same.

*(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam)*

His mission accomplished, Muhammad, the Messenger of God, left
Hudaybiyya with the pilgrims, to return to Medina. He was still at seven
days' journey from Medina, when the following revelation came from
Heaven:

***Verily we have granted thee a manifest victory (Chapter 48; verse
1)***

It was the Treaty of Hudaybiyya that the new revelation called “The
Manifest Victory.”

Amin Dawidar, the Egyptian historian, writes in his book *Pictures From
the Life of the Prophet* (Cairo, 1968, p. 465) that when the Messenger
of God promulgated this latest revelation called “Victory,” Umar bin
al-Khattab came to see him, and asked: “Is this what you call a Manifest
Victory?” “Yes,” said the Messenger of God, “by Him in Whose hands is my
life, this is the Manifest Victory.”

The Treaty of Hudaybiyya was truly the “Manifest Victory” as the
unfolding drama of history was to reveal, notwithstanding the
reservations about it of many Muslims in the camp of the Prophet.

Muhammad Mustafa was the Apostle of Peace. If he had yielded to the
pressures of the “chauvinists” in his camp to use strong-arm methods,
his whole mission would have been compromised, and the generations of
the future would have indicted him for his love of “aggression.” But he
resisted pressures to appeal to the arbitration of arms, and instead,
appealed to the arbitration of peace, and achieved results which no
military victory could have gained.

The Treaty of Hudaybiyya was a product of inspired statesmanship and
political genius of the highest order. It brought immense advantages to
Islam. Among them:

**1.** The Quraysh of Makkah acknowledged Muhammad as an equal.
Heretofore, they had considered him a rebel and a fugitive from their
vengeance.

**2.** By signing the treaty, the Quraysh gave tacit recognition to the
nascent Islamic State of Medina.

**3.** Those Muslims who were in Makkah, concealed their faith from the
idolaters for fear of persecution by them. But after the Treaty of
Hudaybiyya, they began to practice Islam publicly.

**4.** Till 6 A.H., Muhammad, the Messenger of God, had been locked up
in a ceaseless struggle with the pagan Arabs and the Jews, and there had
been no opportunity for them to see Islam in action. After the Treaty of
Hudaybiyya, they could “appraise” Islam for the first time. This
“appraisal” led to the conversion of many of them, and Islam began to
spread rapidly. The Treaty of Hudaybiyya opened the gates of
proselytization.

**5.** Many Arab tribes, though still heathen, wanted to enter into
treaty relations with the Muslims but felt inhibited by the opposition
of the Quraysh. Now they were freed to make alliances with the Muslims.

**6.** The Treaty of Hudaybiyya is the best answer to those critics who
allege that Islam was spread on the point of the sword. There is no
better proof than this Treaty of the repudiation, by Muhammad, of war,
as an instrument of policy, and of his genuine love of peace. The pagan
Arabs were strongly influenced by the Qurayshite propaganda that
Muhammad lusted for war. Now they could see with their own eyes that
Muhammad retired to Medina without even a “quid pro quo,” even though he
had an army with him, and even though he had defeated the Quraysh twice
– in 624 and 627.

The Treaty of Hudaybiyya also points up the aversion of Qur’an for war.
Before the treaty, the Muslims had won the two historic battles of Badr
and Ahzab (Trench). If they had been defeated in either of them, Islam
would have vanished for all time from the face of the earth.

Victory in both of these battles guaranteed the physical survival of
Islam. And yet, Al-Qur’an al-Majid didn't call either of them a manifest
victory. In the sight of Qur’an, among all the campaigns of Muhammad,
the Treaty of Hudaybiyya alone was the Manifest Victory.

The Treaty of Hudaybiyya was the prelude to the victory of Islam over
the forces of paganism, polytheism, idolatry, ignorance, injustice and
exploitation. Umar bin al-Khattab had bridled at the third clause of the
Treaty since it was not reciprocal; but it was precisely this clause
that put the Quraysh on the defensive almost immediately, and they came
a-begging to the Prophet to repeal it.

Eighteen months after the signing of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, Muhammad,
the Messenger of God, marched into Makkah, as a conqueror, and he was
accompanied by ten thousand believers. The conquest of Makkah was a
direct result of this Treaty.

Because of these results, many historians have rightly called the Treaty
of Hudaybiyya the tour de force of Muhammad's statesmanship.

**Marmaduke Pickthall**

There was dismay among the Muslims at these terms (the terms of the
Treaty of Hudaybiyya). They asked one another: ‘Where is the victory
that we were promised?' It was during the return journey from
Al-Hudeybiyah that the surah entitled *Victory* was revealed. *This
truce proved, in fact, to be the greatest victory that the Muslims had
till then achieved*.

War had been a barrier between them and the idolaters, but now both
partners met and talked together, and the new religion spread more
rapidly. In the two years which elapsed between the signing of the truce
and the fall of Mecca, the number of converts was greater than the total
number of all previous converts.

The Prophet traveled to Al-Hudeybiyah with 1400 men. Two years later,
when the Meccans broke the truce, he marched against them with an army
of 10,000. *(Introduction to the translation of Holy Qur’an, 1975)*

Two important principles of Islam can be seen in their application in
the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, viz.

**1.** War must be eschewed at all costs unless it is absolutely
inevitable. Solution of all problems must be sought and found through
peaceful means, without, of course, compromising with the principles of
Islam. To the pagans and to many Muslims, it had appeared that Muhammad,
the Messenger of God, had given “carte blanche” to Suhayl, the Makkan
emissary, so that he (Suhayl), in a sense, dictated his own terms.

Notwithstanding such appearances, Muhammad had accepted those terms. Of
course, there was no compromise with any principle. It was unthinkable
that the Prophet of Islam would compromise with any principle of Islam

**2.** A Messenger of God does not have to defer to the opinions or
wishes of his followers, or of the people in general. An overwhelming
majority of the companions of Muhammad had been opposed to the signing
of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya. But he ignored their opposition, and went
ahead and signed it.

He, in fact, did not even seek the advice of any of them in the matter.
From beginning to end, he was guided, not by the wishes of the “people”
or by the wishes of the “majority” of the people but only by the
commandments of God, enshrined in His Book, specifically in the
following verse:

***So judge between them by what Allah hath revealed, and follow not
their vain desires, diverging from the truth that hath come to thee...
(Chapter 5; verse 51)***


