The Conquest of Khyber
======================

Khyber is a township 90 miles north of Medina, in a *harra* or volcanic
tract, well-watered with many springs issuing forth from its basaltic
rocks. It has an excellent irrigation system and produces rich harvests
of dates and grain.

Long before the time of the Prophet of Islam, the valley of Khyber and
other valleys in its north and south, were colonized by the Jews. As
noted before, these Jews were not only the best farmers of the country,
they were also its leaders in industry and business, and they enjoyed a
monopoly of the armaments industry.

In the times of the Prophet, the best arsenals of Arabia were all in
Khyber. Those Jews who had been banished from Medina, had also resettled
in Khyber, and they were noted for their skills in metallurgy.

**Betty Kelen**

The Qaynuqa were banished from Medina. Chiefly they were metalworkers,
having learned the art of beating out the splendid shining armor, the
moon-curved swords and sun-catching helmets that glorified warfare in
the desert. They made fine bronze armor, beaten and burnished, with
helmets to match and gleaming swords whose swift cut could make the very
air whistle. *(Muhammad* – *the Messenger of God)*

The Jews of Khyber also heard about the Treaty of Hudaybiyya and its
terms. Just as the Quraysh in Makkah and Umar bin al-Khattab and some
other “hawks” among the Muslims in Medina had interpreted the treaty as
the “surrender” of the Muslims, so also did the Jews of Khyber consider
it a symptom of the incipient decline of the power of the State of
Medina.

Banking on this theory of “decline,” they began to instigate the Arab
tribes between Khyber and Medina to attack the Muslims. One of these
tribes was the Ghatafan, the allies of the Jews of Khyber.

They began to send their raiding expeditions into the pastures around
Medina. One of these pastures belonged to the Prophet himself. On one
occasion, the son of Abu Dharr el-Ghiffari was grazing the camels of the
Prophet when the Ghatafan struck. They killed him, and captured his
mother who was with him, and they drove with them the herd of camels.
The Muslims, however, were able, just in time, to overtake the marauders
and to rescue the wife of Abu Dharr el-Ghiffari.

Muhammad decided to put an end to these gratuitous provocation. He
thought that it would not be prudent to wait until the Jews and their
allies laid another siege to Medina, and that it would be better to
forestall them. He, therefore, ordered the Muslims to mobilize, and to
march on Khyber.

In September 628 the Prophet left Medina with 1600 soldiers. Some Muslim
women also accompanied the army to work as nurses and to give first aid
to the wounded and the sick.

Khyber had eight fortresses. The strongest and the most important of
them all was the fortress of al-Qamus. The captain of its garrison was a
famous champion called Merhab. He had, under his command, the best
fighting men of Khyber, and they were the best-equipped soldiers of the
time in all Arabia.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

The campaign of Khaybar was one of the greatest. The masses of Jews
living in Khaybar were the strongest, the richest, and the best equipped
for war of all the peoples of Arabia. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo,
1935)*

The Muslims, however, were able to capture all the fortresses of Khyber
except al-Qamus which proved to be impregnable. Muhammad send Abu Bakr
on one occasion, and Umar on another, with hand-picked warriors, to
attempt the conquest of al-Qamus. Both made the attempt and both failed.
Some other captains also tried to capture the fortress but they also
failed. These repeated failures began to undermine the morale of the
army.

Muhammad realized that something dramatic had to be done to restore the
wilting morale of the Muslims, and immediately. And when one more
attempt to capture al-Qamus had also aborted, his mind was made up, and
he declared: “Tomorrow I shall give the banner of Islam to a hero who
loves God and His Apostle, and God and His Apostle love him. He is one
who attacks the enemy but does not run, and he will conquer Khyber.”

The companions knew that the prediction of the Messenger of God would
come true, and that Khyber would be conquered on the following day.
Everyone of them, therefore, became a candidate for the glory and honor
of conquering it. Many of them were kept awake all night by the ambition
to become “the beloved of God and His Apostle,” and to become the hero
who would capture Khyber.

On the following morning, the companions gathered in front of the tent
of the Prophet. Each of them was decked out in martial array, and was
vying with others in looking the most impressive figure.

Presently, the Messenger of God came out of his tent, and the vast
throng began to show signs of restlessness. Each of the companions tried
to make himself more conspicuous than others in the hope of catching the
eye of the master. But the latter didn't appear to notice any of them
and only posed one question: “Where is Ali?”

Ali at this time was in his tent. He knew that if he was the “beloved of
God and His Apostle,” then he, and no one else would capture the
fortress of al-Qamus. The Prophet sent for him.

When Ali came, the Prophet solemnly placed the banner of Islam in his
hand. He invoked God's blessings upon him, prayed for his victory, and
bade him farewell. The young hero then advanced toward the most
formidable fortress in all Arabia where the bravest of the Hebrew
warriors were awaiting him. He fought against them all, overcame them,
and planted the banner of Islam on its main tower.

When the conqueror returned to the camp, the Messenger of God greeted
him with smiles, kisses and embraces, and prayed to God to bestow His
best rewards upon His lion.

**Ibn Ishaq**

Burayda b. Sufyan b. Farwa al-Aslami told me from his father Sufyan b.
Amr b. Al-Akwa: the Apostle sent Abu Bakr with his banner against one of
the forts of Khyber. He fought but returned having suffered losses and
not taken it. On the morrow he sent Umar and the same thing happened.
The Apostle said: “Tomorrow I will give the flag to a man who loves
Allah and His Apostle. Allah will conquer it by his means. He is no
runaway.” Next day he gave the flag to Ali. *(The Life of the Messenger
of God)*

**Edward Gibbon**

North-east of Medina, the ancient and wealthy town of Khyber was the
seat of the Jewish power in Arabia: the territory, a fertile spot in the
desert, was covered with plantations and cattle, and protected by eight
castles, some of which were esteemed of impregnable strength. The forces
of Mohammed consisted of 200 horse and 1400 foot: in the succession of
eight regular and painful sieges, they were exposed to danger and
fatigue, and hunger; and the most undaunted chiefs despaired of the
event.

The Apostle revived their faith and courage by the example of Ali, on
whom he bestowed the surname of the *Lion of God*, perhaps we may
believe that a Hebrew champion of gigantic stature was cloven to the
chest by his irresistible scimitar; but we cannot praise the modesty of
romance, which represents him as tearing from its hinges the gate of a
fortress and wielding the ponderous buckler in his left hand (sic).
*(The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)*

**Washington Irving**

The city of Khyber was strongly defended by outworks, and its citadel,
Al-Kamus, built on a steep rock, was deemed impregnable. The siege of
this city was the most important enterprise the Moslems had yet
undertaken. When Mohammed came in sight of its strong and frowning
walls, and its rock-built citadel, he is said to have prayed for Lord's
succor in capturing it.

The siege of the citadel lasted for some time, and tasked the skill and
patience of Mohammed and his troops, as yet little practiced in the
attack of fortified places. Mohammed directed the attacks in person; the
besiegers protected themselves by trenches, and brought battering-rams
to play upon the walls; a breach was at length effected, but for several
days every attempt to enter was vigorously repelled.

Abu Bakr at one time led the assault, bearing the standard of the
Prophet; but, after fighting with great bravery, was compelled to
retreat. The next attack was headed by Omar ibn Khattab, who fought
until the close of day with no better success.

A third attack was led by Ali, whom Mohammed armed with his own
scimitar, called Dhu'l-Fiqar, or the Trenchant. On confiding to his
hands the sacred banner, he pronounced him “a man who loved God and His
Prophet; and whom God and His Prophet loved; a man who knew not fear,
nor ever turned his back upon a foe.”

And here it may be well to give a traditional account of the person and
character of Ali. He was of the middle height, but robust and square,
and of prodigious strength. He had a smiling countenance, exceedingly
florid, with a bushy beard. He was distinguished for an amiable
disposition, sagacious intellect, and religious zeal, and, from his
undaunted courage, was surnamed *the Lion of God*.

Arabian writers dwell with fond exaggeration on the exploits of Khyber,
of this their favorite hero. He was clad, they say, in a scarlet vest,
over which was buckled a cuirass of steel. Scrambling with his followers
up the great heap of stones in front of the breach, he planted the
standard on the top, determined never to recede until the citadel was
taken. The Jews sallied forth to drive down the assailants.

In the conflict which ensued, Ali fought hand to hand with the Jewish
commander, Al-Hareth, whom he slew. The brother of the slain advanced to
revenge his death. He was of gigantic stature; with a double cuirass, a
double turban, wound round a helmet of proof, in front of which sparked
an immense diamond.

He had a sword girt to each side, and brandished a three-pronged spear,
like a trident. The warriors measured each other with the eye, and
accosted each other in boasting oriental style. “I,” said the Jew, “am
Merhab, armed at all points, and terrible in battle.” “And I am Ali,
whom his mother, at his birth, surnamed Al-Haider (the rugged lion).

The Moslem writers make short work of the Jewish champion. He made a
thrust at Ali with his three pronged lance, but it was dexterously
parried; and before he could recover himself, a blow from the scimitar,
Dhu'l-Fiqar divided his buckler, passed through the helm of proof,
through double turban, and stubborn skull, cleaving his head even to his
teeth. His gigantic form fell lifeless to the earth.

The Jews now retreated into the citadel, and a general assault took
place. In the heat of the action the shield of Ali was severed from his
arm, leaving his body exposed; wrenching a gate, however, from its
hinges, he used it as a buckler through the remainder of the fight.

Abu Rafe, a servant of Mohammed, testified to the fact: “I afterwards,”
says he, “examined this gate in company with seven men and all eight of
us attempted in vain to wield it.”

(This stupendous feat is recorded by the historian Abul Fida. “Abu
Rafe,” observes Gibbon, “was an eye-witness; but who will be witness for
Abu Rafe?” We join with the distinguished historian in his doubt yet if
we scrupulously question the testimony of an eye-witness, what will
become of history?) *(The Life of Mohammed)*

**Sir William Muir**

The Jews rallied round their chief Kinana and posted themselves in front
of the citadel Camuss, resolved on a desperate struggle. After some vain
attempts to dislodge them, Mohammed planned a general attack. “I will
give the eagle,” he said – the great black eagle – “into the hands of
one that loveth the Lord, and His Apostle, even as he is beloved of
them; he shall gain the victory. Next morning the flag was placed in
Ali's hands, and troops advanced.

At this moment, a soldier stepped forth from the Jewish line, and
challenged his adversaries to single combat: “I am Merhab,” he cried,
“as all Khyber knows, a warrior bristling with arms, when the war
fiercely burns.” Then Ali advanced saying: “I am he whom my mother named
the Lion; like a lion of the howling wilderness. I weigh my foes in a
giant's balance.”

The combatants closed, and Ali cleft the head of Merhab in two. The
Moslem line now made a general advance, and, after a sharp conflict,
drove back the enemy. In this battle, Ali performed great feats of
prowess. Having lost his shield, he seized the lintel of a door, which
he wielded effectually in its stead. Tradition, in its expansive
process, has transformed this extemporized shield into a gigantic beam,
and magnified the hero into a second Samson. The victory was decisive,
for the Jews lost 93 men; while of the Moslems only 19 were killed
throughout the whole campaign. *(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)*

**R.V.C. Bodley**

He (Mohammed) began the campaign (of Khyber) by reducing individually
the minor strongholds. When this was done, he marched against Al-Kamus,
the main fortress of Khaibar. It was a formidable looking place with
frowning walls built out of the living rock. All accesses were strongly
fortified, and within the ramparts was a well-equipped and
well-provisioned garrison.

Siege warfare was unfamiliar to these nomads accustomed to desert
raiding. However, Mohammed had a number of improvised siege engines put
together on the spot. The most effective of these were palm-trunk
battering rams which, eventually, made a small breach in the walls.

Into this Abu Bakr led a heroic attack, but he was driven back. Then
Omar tried, but while he reached the mouth of the breach, he had to
retire, losing most of his men. Finally, Ali went up against the wall,
bearing the black standard. As he charged, he chanted: “I am Ali the
Lion; and like a lion howling in the wilderness, I weigh my foes in the
giant's balance.”

Ali was no giant, but he made up for his lack of height by his great
breadth and prodigious strength. Today he was formidable in a scarlet
tunic over which he wore his shining breastplate and backplate. On his
head gleamed a spiked helmet encrusted with silver. In his right hand he
brandished Mohammed's own scimitar, Dhu'l-Fiqar, which had been
entrusted to him with the black banner.

Again and again Jewish veterans rushed at Ali. Again and again they
staggered away with limbs or heads severed. Finally, the champion of all
the Hebrews, a man called Merhab, who towered above the other warriors,
planted himself before Ali. He wore a double cuirass, and round his
helmet was a thick turban held in place by an enormous diamond. He was
girt with a golden belt from which swung two swords. He did not use
these, however, and killed right and left with a long three-pronged
spear. For a moment the battle paused and the combatants rested on their
arms to watch the duel

Marhab, like Goliath of Gath, had never been defeated. His size alone
frightened opponents before they came close to him. His barbed fork
disheartened the most skilled swordsman.

Marhab attacked first, driving at Ali with his trident. For a moment,
Ali, unaccustomed to this form of weapon gave ground. Then he steadied
himself and fenced with the Hebrew. A feint and a parry sent the spear
flying. Before Merhab could draw one of his swords, Ali's scimitar had
cloven his head through his helmet and turban so that it fell on either
side of his shoulders. The Jews, seeing their champion dead, retreated
into the city.

Mohammed gave the signal for a general assault. The Moslems surged
forward. Ali led the onslaught. He had lost his shield during the duel
and, to replace it, had torn a door from its hinges, which he carried
before him. *(The Messenger* – *the Life of Mohammed, 1946)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Realizing that this was their last stand in Arabia, the Jews fought
desperately. As the days went by, the Prophet sent Abu Bakr with a
contingent and a flag to the fortress of Na'im; but he was not able to
conquer it despite heavy fighting. The Prophet then sent Umar bin
al-Khattab on the following day, but he fared no better than Abu Bakr.

On the third day, the Prophet called Ali ibn Abu Talib, and, blessing
him, commanded him to storm the fortress. Ali led his forces and fought
valiantly. In the engagement, he lost his armor and, shielding himself
with a portal he had seized, he continued to fight until the fortress
was stormed by his troops. The same portal was used by Ali as a little
bridge to enable the Muslim soldiers to enter the houses within the
fortress... *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

The Results of the Conquest of Khyber
-------------------------------------

The conquest of Khyber is a landmark in the history of Islam as it is
the beginning of the Islamic State and Empire. The Indian historian, M.
Shibli, says in his biography of the Prophet:

Khyber was the first campaign in which non-Muslims were made the
subjects of the Islamic State. It was the first time that the principles
of government in Islam were defined and applied. Therefore, Khyber is
the first successful campaign of Islam.

At Khyber, the nascent Islamic State acquired new subjects and new
territories. It was the beginning, not only of the Islamic State but
also of its expansion. If the conquest of Khyber is the beginning of the
Islamic State, then Ali ibn Abi Talib, its conqueror, is its principal
architect.

Before the conquest of Khyber, the Muslims were destitutes or
semi-destitutes. Khyber suddenly made them rich. Imam Bukhari has quoted
Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab as saying: “We were hungry at all times
until the conquest of Khyber.” And the same authority has quoted Ayesha,
the wife of the Prophet, as saying: “It was not until the conquest of
Khyber that I could eat dates to my heart's content.”

The Muhajireen in Medina had no means of making a living and therefore
had no steady income. They had barely managed to survive until the
conquest of Khyber. Once Khyber was conquered, there was a sudden change
in their fortunes.

**Montgomery Watt**

Until the capture of Khyber the finances of the Islamic community were
precarious, and the Emigrants lived partly off the charity or
hospitality of the Helpers. *(Mohammed, Prophet and Statesman)*

Khyber spelled the difference for the Muslim community between abject
poverty and material abundance.

**S. Margoliouth**

When the Muslims came to apportion their spoils they found that the
conquest of Khaibar surpassed every other benefit that God had conferred
on their Prophet. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, 1931)*

The conquest of Khyber conferred unlimited benefits upon the Muslims;
some of them were:

**1.**Immense quantities of gold and silver that the Jews had been
accumulating for many generations.

**2.**The finest arsenals of Arabia containing the newest weapons of the
times such as swords, spears, lances, maces, shields, armor, bows and
arrows.

**3.**Vast herds of horses, camels and cattle, and flocks of sheep and
goats.

**4.**Rich arable lands with palm groves.

**Sir John Glubb**

The people of Khyber, like those of Medina, made their living by
agriculture, particularly the date palm. Even today, the tribes have a
saying, “To take dates to Khaiber,” which means the same as our
expression, “To carry coals to Newcastle.” Khyber was said to be the
richest oasis in the Hijaz. *(The Life and Times of Mohammed)*

After the surrender of the Jews in Khyber, the Prophet had to make some
new arrangements for the administration of the newly-won territories.

**S. Margoliouth**

Presently Mohammed bethought him of the plan which became a prominent
institution of Islam. To kill or banish the industrious inhabitants of
Khaibar would not be good policy, since it was not desirable that the
Moslems, who would constantly be wanted for active service, should be
settled so far from Medina. Moreover, their skill as cultivators would
not equal that of the former owners of the soil. So he decided to leave
the Jews in occupation on payment of half their produce, estimated by
Abdullah son of Rawahah at 200,000 wasks of dates. *(Mohammed and the
Rise of Islam, 1931)*

One mighty stroke of Ali's sword solved the economic problems of the
Muslim community, and put an end to its poverty forever. He also put an
end to the dependence of the Muslims upon a fickle and temperamental
nature, to feed them, once he delivered the fertile lands of Khyber to
them.

There is yet another sense in which the campaign of Khyber was of
immense importance not only to the Muslims of the time of the Prophet
but also to the generations of the future. It was a departure, for the
first time, from the classical tradition of Arabian warfare. The Arab
mode of fighting was often chivalrous but most often inefficient. The
Arabs knew less than nothing about strategy, and all that they knew
about tactics was hit-and­run. They placed their hopes of victory in
their ability to catch their victims by surprise.

For centuries, they had fought against each other, and had consistently
followed the ancient pattern of hit-and-run, with no variation in
tactics. We have seen how a trench checked an army of ten thousand
warriors, and immobilized it at the siege of Medina in A.D. 627. The
greatest captains of the idolaters like Khalid bin Walid and Ikrama bin
Abu Jahl were baffled by the moat, and became helpless before it.

All this was to change after Khyber. Ali ibn Abi Talib taught the
Muslims the art of laying siege to, and of capturing fortified
positions. He taught them how to map out the strategy of a campaign, and
how to fight pitched and decisive battles like disciplined armies. At
Khyber, Ali placed the key to the conquest of the whole world in the
hands of the Muslims.

**The Estate of Fadak**

Fadak was another Jewish settlement near Khyber. The people of Fadak
voluntarily sent their representatives to the Prophet offering to
negotiate the terms of surrender. He accepted their offer of surrender,
and gave them the right to stay on their lands as subjects of the
Islamic State. Fadak was acquired in this manner without any effort on
the part of the army of the Muslims. It was, therefore, considered to be
the private property of the Prophet.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

The wealth of Khaybar was to be distributed among the members of the
Muslim armed forces according to rule because they had fought to secure
it. The wealth of Fadak, on the other hand, fell to Muhammad, as no
Muslims and no fighting were involved in its acquisition. *(The Life of
Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

In the early days of the history of Islam, the Muslims, when they were
still in Makkah, were very poor, and had no means of making a living.
Khadija, the wife of the Prophet, fed and housed most of them. She spent
all her wealth on them so that when she died, there was nothing that she
could leave for her daughter, Fatima Zahra.

Now when the estate of Fadak was acquired by the Prophet, he decided to
make it a gift to his daughter as a recompense for the great sacrifices
her mother had made for Islam. He, therefore, gave the estate of Fadak
to his daughter, and it became her property.

The Jews of Wadi-ul-Qura and Tayma, other oases in Hijaz, also agreed to
surrender to the Prophet on the same terms as those of Khyber and Fadak,
and stayed on their lands.

**Jaafer ibn Abi Talib**

Muhammad, the Messenger of God, was still in Khyber when his cousin,
Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, returned from Abyssinia after an absence of nearly
fourteen years. When Jaafer learned in Medina that his master was in
Khyber, he at once headed there. By a coincidence, his arrival in
Khyber, synchronized with the capture of the fortress of Al-Qamus by his
brother, Ali. Muhammad loved Jaafer as his own son. He threw his arms
around him and said: “I do not know what makes me more happy; the
conquest of Khyber or the return of Jaafer.”

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Muhammad was so pleased to be reunited with Ja'far that he said he could
not tell which was the greater: victory over Khaybar or reunion with
Ja'far. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

**The Umra or the Lesser Pilgrimage – A.D. 629 (8 A.H.)**

One year after the Treaty of Hudaybiyya, Muhammad, the Messenger of God,
visited Makkah to perform the pilgrimage. He was accompanied by two
thousand Muslims. As per the terms of the Treaty, the polytheists
vacated Makkah for three days. The Muslims entered the city from the
north, and hardly saw any Makkan. The Messenger of God rode his
she-camel, al-Qaswa. His friend, Abdullah ibn Rawaha, held her reins as
he entered the precincts of the Kaaba. He was reading the verses of the
chapter called, *Victory,* from the Qur’an. Other Muslims were chanting
“At Thy command, O Lord! At Thy command, O Lord!”

When all Muslims had assembled in the concourse of the Kaaba, Bilal went
on top of the building and called *Adhan* (the Muslim call to prayer) –
the first one in the House of Allah, and two thousand believers
responded to his call.

The polytheists were witnessing the scene from the heights of the hills
surrounding the valley of Makkah. They had never seen such discipline
before, when high-born Muslims were tamely obeying the call of a former
slave nor they had seen such a demonstration of equality and unity. The
vast mass of the Muslims moved as one body, and the Quraysh could see
with their own eyes that it was a body in which there were no
distinctions between rich and poor, high and low, black and white, and
Arab and non-Arab.

The Quraysh could also see that the brotherhood, equality and unity of
men which Islam fostered, were not theoretical concepts but were very
real. It was a most impressive sight and could not have failed to touch
the hearts of even the most hard-bitten idolaters.

The deportment of the Muslims was exemplary. They were most anxious not
to do anything that was forbidden, and they were most eager to do only
one thing – to obey the commandments of Allah.

And yet this demonstration in the Kaaba of discipline by the Muslims,
was so unrehearsed, so spontaneous. To nothing in this world was the
Arab more allergic than to discipline; but he was transformed, within a
few years, by the magic of Islam. The “touch” of Islam had made him a
model of discipline among the nations of the earth.

M. Shibli, the Indian historian, writes in his *Sira-tun­Nabi* (Life of
the Prophet), Volume I, page 504, 11th printing (1976), published by the
Maarif Printing Press, Azamgarh, U.P., India, that at the end of three
days, the leaders of Quraysh called on Ali ibn Abi Talib, and said to
him: “Please inform Muhammad that the stipulated time has passed and he
and his followers should, therefore, leave Makkah.” Ali gave the message
to the Prophet. The latter immediately complied, and ordered the Muslims
to vacate Makkah whereupon they left Makkah and began their long march
toward home.

The Muslims had performed the *Umra*, and then they returned to their
homes in Medina. It was at this time that Khalid bin al-Walid and Amr
bin Aas decided to accept Islam. They went to Medina, accepted Islam and
joined the ranks of the Muhajireen. They were both destined to become
famous in later days as the generals of Abu Bakr and Umar bin al-Khattab
respectively.


