The Battle of Mootah
====================

In 629 the christian arab tribe of ghassan was ruled by Shorhail, a
prince who was a vassal of the Byzantine emperor. He was one of those
rulers who had received letters from Muhammad Mustafa inviting them to
accept Islam. In those days he held court in Mootah, a town east of the
Dead Sea. When the Prophet's emissary, Harith bin Umayr, arrived at his
court bearing the letter for him, he ordered his execution.

The murder of Harith bin Umayr was an unprovoked outrage, and the
killing of an ambassador is considered an unpardonable crime in many
nations. The Prophet decided to take punitive action. He equipped an
army of 3000 men, and sent it under the command of his friend and
freedman, Zayd bin Haritha, to Mootah, to demand reparations. At the
same time, he designated a chain of command and responsibility. In the
event of Zayd's death, the command of the army was to pass on to Jaafer
ibn Abi Talib. If he too were to be killed, then the third general was
to be Abdullah ibn Rawaha.

When Shorhail heard that an army was approaching his capital from
Medina, he also mobilized his men, and was soon ready to meet it. He
deployed his troops on the south-side, out of the walls of Mootah. They
were composed of the Roman garrison of Mootah, and the freshly raised
tribal levies. When the Muslims arrived and took stock of the situation,
they realized that it was going to be an unequal fight as they were
heavily outnumbered by the enemy.

The Muslim leaders held a war council. Zayd bin Haritha proposed that
they immediately send a messenger to the Prophet apprising him of the
imbalance in the strength of the two forces, and requesting him to send
reinforcements.

But Abdullah bin Rawaha opposed him, and said that the decision to fight
or not to fight did not rest upon their numbers, and if they were
outnumbered by the enemy, it was immaterial for them. “We fight to win
the crown of martyrdom, and not the laurels of victory, and here is our
chance; let us not miss it,” he said.

Abdullah bin Rawaha clinched the debate with his powerful argument, and
the Muslims advanced to meet the enemy. At the very first clash of arms,
Zayd bin Haritha, the first general of the Muslims, was killed.

**Betty Kelen**

Zayd took the Apostle's standard and was killed almost at once, the
first Muslim to die for the faith on foreign soil. *(Mohammed, Messenger
of God)*

The command of the army then passed to Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, the elder
brother of Ali. He fought most gallantly and for a long time, killing so
many of the enemy that their bodies were stacked like cordwood all
around him. But then a Roman soldier crept up from behind, unseen, and
struck a blow with his sword at his right arm, and severed it. Jaafer
didn't let the banner fall, and kept pressing the enemy.

A little later, another Roman came from behind, and with a blow of his
sword, cut his left arm also. The hero, still undismayed, held the
banner under his chin, and kept advancing. But with both arms gone, he
was unable to defend himself, and in a few moments, a third Roman
approached him, and killed him with a blow of his mace on his head.
After Jaafer's death, Abdullah bin Rawaha took charge of the army, and
he too fell fighting against heavy odds.

**Washington Irving**

Among the different missions which Mohammed had sent beyond the bounds
of Arabia to invite neighboring princes to accept Islam, was one to the
governor of Bosra, the great mart on the confines of Syria. His envoy
was killed at Mootah by an Arab of the Christian tribe of Ghassan, and
son to Shorhail, an emir, who governed Mootah in the name of Heraclius.

Mohammed sent an army of 3000 against the offending city. It was a
momentous expedition, as it might, for the first time, bring the arms of
Islam in collision with those of the Roman Empire. The command was
entrusted to Zaid, his freedman. Several chosen officers were associated
with him.

One was Mohammed's cousin, Jaafer, the same who, by his eloquence, had
vindicated the doctrines of Islam before the king of Abyssinia, and
defeated the Koreishite embassy. He was now in the prime of life, and
noted for great courage and manly beauty. *(The Life of Mohammed)*

As Jaafer charged the enemy, he sang a song. Sir William Muir has given
the following translation of his song:

Paradise! O Paradise! How fair a resting place!

Cold is the water there, and sweet the shade.

Rome, Rome! Thine hour of tribulation draweth nigh.

When I close with her, I will hurl her to the ground.

When Jaafer was killed, his body was brought into the camp. Abdullah bin
Umar bin al-Khattab, who was with the army, says that he counted the
wounds on the hero's body, and found more than fifty of them, and they
were all in front. Jaafer had dared sword and spear even after the loss
of his arms, but had not flinched.

When all three generals appointed by the Prophet had been killed, the
Muslims were left leaderless for a time. Then Khalid bin al-Walid who
was also fighting in the ranks, seized the banner, and managed to rally
the Muslims.

At night the armies disengaged, and this gave him the opportunity to
reorganize his men. He is said to have fought a defensive action on the
following day but realizing that it was impossible to win a victory,
ordered a retreat from Mootah, and succeeded in bringing the remnants of
the army back to Medina.

When these warriors entered Medina, they got a “reception” that must
have made them forget the “reception” that the Romans gave them in
Mootah. They were greeted by jeering crowds which cast dust in their
faces and garbage on their heads, and taunted them for fleeing from the
enemy instead of dying like men if not like heroes. Eventually, the
Prophet himself was compelled to intervene on their behalf to rescue
them from indignity and molestation.

**Sir William Muir**

The ranks of the Muslims were already broken; and the Romans in full
pursuit made great havoc among the fugitives. So, distinctly, in the
secretary of Wackidi. Some accounts pretend that Khalid rallied the
army, and either turned the day against the Romans, or made it a drawn
battle.

But besides that the brevity of all the accounts is proof enough of a
reverse, the reception of the army on its return to Medina, admits of
only one conclusion, viz. a complete, ignominious, and unretrieved
discomfiture. *(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1861)*

**Sir John Glubb**

In the battle of Mootah, Jaafer ibn Abu Talib, the brother of Ali,
seized the banner from the dying Zaid and raised it aloft once more. The
enemy closed in on the heroic Jaafer, who was soon covered with wounds.
Tradition relates that when both his hands were cut off gripping the
banner, he still stood firm, holding the staff between his two stumps,
until a Byzantine soldier struck him a mortal blow.

When the defeated Muslims approached Medina, the Prophet and the people
of the town went out to meet them. The citizens began to throw dirt at
the crestfallen warriors, crying, “You runaways, you fled from the way
of God!” But Mohammed, with that kind paternalism which he knew well how
to use, interposed on their behalf.

Next morning in the mosque, the Prophet announced that he had, in a
vision, seen the martyrs of Mootah in Paradise, reclining upon couches,
but Jaafer was there in the guise of an angel with two wings, stained on
their feathers with the blood of martyrdom. It was as a result of this
vision that the martyr has since been known as Jaafer the Flyer, Jaafer
at-Tayyar. *(The Great Arab Conquests)*

**Betty Kelen**

When the army came riding home, he (Mohammed) went out to meet them,
Jafer's son on the saddle before him. It was a terrible homecoming for
these men who had returned from battle alive, following Khalid, while
the Prophet's own relatives and beloved companions had fallen. The
people of Medina picked up sand and dirt along the way to throw at the
returning force, shouting, “Cowards! Runaways! You fled from God.”
*(Muhammad, the Messenger of God)*

Some Muslim historians have made desperate efforts to “prove” that
Mootah was a Muslim victory which it was not. It is not clear why a
defeat is being dished out by them as a victory. The attempt to prove
that Muslims won the battle, may have been prompted by their desire to
present the Muslim soldiers as invincible. But will they smother truth
merely to prove that Muslims were invincible. After all, the Muslims
were defeated in the battle of Uhud!

Abul Kalam Azad, the Indian biographer of the Prophet, says that the
Muslims inflicted a crushing defeat upon the Romans at Mootah. He takes
notice of the reception that the citizens of Medina gave to the
“victors” when they came home, but he attributes it to their
“ignorance,” and says that they had received wrong reports of the
outcome of the battle.

But if the citizens had received wrong reports, then it is curious that
no one among the warriors tried to correct them. No one among them, for
example, said to the citizens: “Is this your way of welcoming the heroes
of Islam, with dirt and garbage? Do you reward the defenders of the
Faith by booing them and insulting them?” But they did not pose any such
questions.

Even if the citizens of Medina had been misinformed that the Muslims
were defeated at Mootah, as Azad claims, then how long it ought to take
them to learn the truth? In the first place, the soldiers themselves did
not protest when the citizens covered them with garbage, as already
noted. In the second place, some among them were too embarrassed to go
out of their homes.

They did not want to be seen in public for fear of being upbraided or
even rough-handled by the citizens for the abject cowardice they had
shown before the enemy. Their greatest desire was to hide themselves
from everyone else.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

The survivors of this disastrous fight (Mootah) were greeted by the
Moslems as deserters, and some were even afraid to appear in public for
some time. Such Spartans had the people of Medina become in their eight
years of warfare. *(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, 1931)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

As soon as Khalid and the army reached Medinah, Muhammad and the Muslims
went out to meet them, Muhammad carrying on his arm, Abdullah, the son
of Ja'far, the second commander of the Muslim force. Upon learning the
news, the people flung dust in the face of the Muslim soldiers and
accused them of fleeing in the face of the enemy and abandoning the
cause of God.

The Prophet of God argued with his people that the soldiers did not flee
but simply withdrew in order, with God's will, to advance again. Despite
this justification on the part of Muhammad of the Muslim army, the
people were not willing to forgive them their withdrawal and return.
*Salamah ibn Hisham, a member of this expedition, would neither go to
the mosque for prayer nor show himself in public in order to avoid being
chastised for fleeing from the cause of God*.

Were it not for the fact that these same men, especially Khalid ibn
al-Walid, later distinguished themselves in battle against the same
enemy, their reputations would have remained forever stained. *(The Life
of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

Another “proof” that Abul Kalam Azad has found of the “victory” of the
Muslims at Mootah, is that the Romans did not pursue them. He says that
if the Romans had won the battle of Mootah, they would have pursued the
Muslims to the gates of Medina itself, and beyond.

But the Romans might have had other reasons for not pursuing the
Muslims. One of them was that with their cavalry, they could not
maneuver in the desert. The desert to them was like the sea, and neither
they nor the Persians had any “ships” in which to “navigate” in it. The
best they could do, was to operate on the “shores” as “land-powers”
which they, in fact, were, and at a decided disadvantage strategically
and tactically against a “maritime” nation like the Arabs

If the Arabs retreated into the desert before an active foe, their
safety was assured. He was simply not equipped to penetrate the desert.
The logistical problems alone of attacking them in their own element
discouraged the most enterprising spirits of those days. The desert was
the “fortress” which protected the Arabs from the ambitions of all the
conquerors of the past, and guaranteed their freedom and independence.

**Sir John Glubb**

The key to all the early operations, against Persia and against Syria
alike, is that the Persians and Byzantines could not move in the desert,
being mounted on horses. The Muslims were like a sea-power, cruising
offshore in their ships, whereas the Persians and Byzantines alike could
only take up positions on the shore (that is, the cultivated area)
unable to launch out to “sea” and engage the enemy in his own desert
element.

Similarly the Arabs, like the Norse or Danish pirates who raided
England, were at first afraid to move inland far from their “ships.”
Raiding the areas on the “shores” of the desert, they hastened back to
their own element when danger threatened. *(The Great Arab Conquests,
1963)*

**Joel Carmichael**

There is a remarkable resemblance between the strategy of the Bedouin
and that of the modern sea power. Viewed from the vantage point of
nomads, the desert, which only they could make use of, was like a vast
ocean on which they controlled the only vessels. The Bedouin could use
it for supplies and communications - and as a haven when defeated. They
could appear from its depths whenever they wished and slip back again at
will. This gave them enormous mobility and resilience, as long as they
were moving against sedentary communities *(Shaping of the Arabs, 1967)*

The battle was fought just outside Mootah. If the Arabs had defeated the
Romans and had routed them, then what did they do with the city which
lay at their feet? As conquerors they ought to have occupied it. But no
historian has claimed that the Muslims entered Mootah and occupied it.

The Arabs were notorious for their love of booty. This is a fact
well-known to every student of their history, and historians like Abul
Kalam Azad cannot be ignorant of it. The same historian says that the
number of the Romans and their allies who fought at Mootah was two
hundred thousand. If the Muslims had defeated the Romans, then they
ought to have captured thousands of Romans, and they ought to have
returned to Medina laden with plunder and the treasures of Mootah. But
they did not.

The annals are silent on this point. There is no reference to any booty
or to any prisoners of war in the accounts of the battle of Mootah. This
silence is the most eloquent proof that the Muslims were not the
victors. Actually, they considered themselves lucky to have escaped
alive from the battlefield.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

After the campaign of Mootah, the Muslim army led by Khalid ibn al Walid
returned to Medinah neither victorious nor vanquished, *but happy to be
able to return at all*. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

We admire those Muslims who were aware that they had shown cowardice in
the battle of Mootah, and were ashamed of it. But there were other
Muslims, some of them companions of the Prophet, who fled from battle,
not once, but several times, and they were not ashamed of their
performance. One may admire them for their brazenness though. To save
their own dear lives, they could flee from a battlefield, and then
return to it when the scales tilted in favor of the Muslims.

The battle of Mootah was a defeat for the Muslims. As for the Romans, it
was nothing more than a minor border skirmish. They drove the Arabs back
into the desert, and for them the incident was closed.


