The Campaign of Dhat es-Salasil
===============================

The battle of Mootah was fought in September 629. In the following
month, the Prophet received reports that the tribesmen of Qadha'a were
massing in the north of Wadi-ul-Qura with the intent of raiding Medina.
This was a direct result of the defeat of the Muslims at Mootah. The
pagan tribes believed that the power of the Muslim was broken at Mootah,
and that if they attacked Medina, they would hardly meet any resistance.

The Prophet had to take counter-measures to forestall a tribal excursion
into Medina. He, therefore, sent three hundred soldiers under the
command of Amr bin Aas, to watch the Qadha'a in their own territory, and
to disperse them, if necessary.

Amr left Medina, and halted in the north of Wadi-ul-Qura, near a spring
called Dhat es-Salasil. He was alarmed to see multitudes of armed
tribesmen roving in the valley and sent a messenger to the Prophet
requesting reinforcements. The Prophet immediately complied, and sent
another two hundred men under the command of Abu Obaidah ibn
al-Jarrah.This second group included both Abu Bakr and Umar.

When Abu Obaidah arrived in the camp of Amr bin Aas, he indicated that
he would like to take command of both contingents. But Amr's answer to
this suggestion was an emphatic no. He made it clear to Abu Obaidah that
he (Amr) was the supreme commander of all the troops, his own as well as
the reinforcements which the latter had brought, all five hundred men.

At night there was a sudden drop in the temperature, and the weather
became unseasonably cold. The troopers lighted small fires for warmth,
and sat around them. Amr, however, ordered them to put them out. All of
them obeyed except Abu Bakr and Umar. Amr repeated his order. But they
still demurred whereupon Amr threatened to throw both of them into it if
they persisted in disobeying him. Umar turned to Abu Bakr and complained
to him about the brusque and abrupt manner of Amr.Abu Bakr told him that
Amr understood the art of war better than they did, and therefore they
ought to obey him. They then extinguished the fire.

On the following day there was some desultory fighting but the tribesmen
fought without any order or discipline and were soon dispersed. The
Muslims wanted to pursue them into the hills and valleys but Amr forbade
them to do so. The tribesmen had abandoned their baggage and the Muslims
collected it. They also captured many camels and sheep, and then
returned to Medina.

During the campaign, and on the return journey, Amr bin Aas led his
troops in prayers. He thus demonstrated to them that he was their
commander in both spheres – military and religious. Abu Obaidah, Abu
Bakr and Umar, all three, took their orders from him, and said their
prayers behind him.

When the expedition returned to Medina, Umar complained to the Prophet
about the unceremonious and highhanded manner in which his commanding
officer, Amr bin Aas, had treated him and Abu Bakr at Dhat es-Salasil.
It was a custom of the Prophet to debrief his captains when they
returned from an expedition. They had to give him a comprehensive report
on the conduct of the campaign.

Amr was ready to defend his actions. He told the Prophet that the
Muslims were very few, and the bonfires would have betrayed their lack
of numbers to the enemy. It was in the interests of their own security,
he said, that he had ordered them to extinguish them.

He further said that the reason why he forbade his men to pursue the
enemy was that the latter was in his own territory, and could have
easily regrouped to attack them. The Muslims, he pointed out, were
fighting in unfamiliar country, and were, therefore, at a disadvantage.
The Prophet was satisfied with Amr's explanation, and dismissed Umar's
complaints.

**Sir William Muir**

The repulse of his army from Mootah affected dangerously the prestige of
Mohammed among the tribes of the Syrian frontier. There were rumors that
the Bedouin tribes of that neighborhood had assembled in great force,
and were even threatening a descent upon Medina. Amru, the new convert,
was therefore placed at the head of three hundred men including thirty
horse, with instructions to subjugate the hostile tribes and incite
those whom he found friendly, to harass the Syrian border.

After a march of ten days he encamped at a spring near the Syrian
confines. There he found that the enemy was assembled in great numbers,
and that he could look for little aid from the local tribes. He halted
and dispatched a messenger for reinforcements. Mohammed at once
complied, and sent two hundred men, among whom were both Abu Bakr and
Omar, under the command of Abu Obeidah.

On joining Amr, Abu Obeidah wished to assume the leadership of the whole
force, or at the least to retain the chief authority over his own
detachment; but Amru, giving promise of the decision and firmness which
characterized him in after days, insisted on retaining the sole command.

Abu Obeidah, a man of mild and pliant temper, succumbed. “If you
refusest to acknowledge my authority,” he said, “I have no resource but
to obey thee; for the Prophet strictly charged me to suffer no
altercation, nor any division of command.”

Amru replied imperiously: “I am the chief over thee. Thou has only
brought a reinforcement to my army.” “Be it so,” said Abu Obeidah. Amru
then assumed command of the united troops, and led their prayers; for
thus early were the spiritual functions in Islam blended with the
political and military. *(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

A few weeks after the return of Khalid, Muhammad sought to make up the
losses in Muslim prestige in the northern parts of the peninsula which
the previous engagement with the Byzantines had caused. He, therefore,
commissioned Amr ibn al-Aas to rouse the Arabs to march against al-Sham.
He chose Amr for this task because the latter's mother belonged to one
of the northern tribes, and he hoped that Amr could use this connection
to facilitate his mission.

As he arrived at a well called al-Salassil, in the land of Judham,
fearing the enemy might overtake him, he sent word to the Prophet asking
for more forces. The Prophet sent Abu Ubaydah ibn al Jarrah at the head
of a corps of Muhajirun which included Abu Bakr and Umar... *(The Life
of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

Amr bin Aas was a new Muslim. But once he became a Muslim, he rose very
rapidly from ranker to general in the army of Medina. He was, it is
obvious, endowed with extraordinary ability both as a general and an
administrator. The Prophet, therefore, placed men who were many years
older than him, and who had accepted Islam long before him, under his
command.

Abu Obaidah and Abu Bakr had become Muslim twenty years before Amr, and
thus represented the “brass” in Islam whereas Amr bin Aas was only a
“rookie” in faith at this time. And yet the Prophet ordered Abu Obaidah
to serve under Amr.

This only proves that when the time came for the Prophet to select a man
to take command in a certain situation, he took into account, not his
age, but his ability – the ability to get results!


