The Battle of Hunayn
====================

The conquest of Makkah triggered the mass conversion of the Arabs to
Islam in many parts of the country. But there were some tribes living in
the east and south-east of Makkah which did not wish to abjure idolatry.

They were alarmed at the rapid progress of Islam, and they thought that
if it continued to spread at the same speed, they would soon be
surrounded by the Muslims, and would become isolated from other pagan
tribes. Their leaders figured that it would be unwise on their part to
let the Muslims consolidate their recent gains and become too strong.

They, therefore, decided to act immediately by attacking the Muslims in
Makkah and destroying them. The leading tribes among them were the
Thaqeef, Hawazin, Banu Sa'ad and Banu Jashm, all fierce warriors,
jealous of their independence and proud of their warlike traditions.

They had noted that Makkah had surrendered to Muhammad without striking
a blow but they attributed the failure of the Quraysh to resist him, to
their effeminacy. As for themselves, they were confident that they were
more than a match on the battle-field for the warriors of Islam or any
other warriors.

In late January 630, the Prophet received intelligence that Thaqeef and
Hawazin had left their home base, and were moving toward Makkah. When
these reports were confirmed, he too ordered a general mobilization in
the newly-conquered city.

The Prophet didn't want Makkah to become a battle-ground. He, therefore,
hastily left Makkah on January 26, 630 at the head of 12,000 warriors,
to meet the enemy. Out of this force, ten thousand men were from Medina,
and the other two thousand were recruits from the newly-converted
Makkans.

This new army was the largest force ever assembled in Arabia to that
date. As its various formations marched out of the city gate, in full
panoply of war, Abu Bakr who was watching, was much impressed, and
exclaimed: “We cannot be defeated this time because of lack of numbers.”

But very soon he was proven wrong. Muslims were defeated at the
beginning even though they were thrice as numerous as the enemy. Qur’an
itself called attention of the Muslims, rather pointedly, that numbers
alone were no guarantee that they would be victorious.

**Sir William Muir**

Four weeks had just elapsed since he (Mohammed) had quitted Medina, when
he marched forth from Mecca at the head of all his forces, swelled now,
by the addition of 2000 auxiliaries from Mecca, to the large number of
12,000 men.

Safwan, at his request, made over to him one hundred suits of mail and
stand of arms complete, and as many camels. The array of tribes, each
with a banner waving at its head, was so imposing that Abu Bakr broke
forth, as the marshaled forces passed, with the exclamation: “We shall
not this day be worsted by reason of the smallness of our numbers.”
*(Life of Mohammed, London, 1861)*

When the first column constituting the Muslim vanguard, commanded by
Khalid ibn al-Walid, entered the valley of Hunayn in the south-east of
Makkah, the enemy was already lying in ambush, ready to greet it with
his missile weapons. The pass was narrow, the road was very rough, and
the Muslims were advancing apparently unaware of the enemy's presence.
It was just before dawn when all of a sudden, the Hawazin launched their
attack.

The surprise was complete and the charge of the enemy was so impetuous
that the Muslims could not withstand it. The vanguard, composed of the
tribesmen of Banu Sulaym, broke and fled. The main body of the army was
just behind.

Khalid's column ran smack into its face, and struck panic into its men
so that they also turned their backs to the enemy, and began to run.
Soon everyone in the army was running, and it was not long before
Muhammad was left alone with a handful of his faithful followers around
him.

The men led by Khalid were the first to run before the charging enemy,
and they were followed by the newly-converted Umayyads of Makkah and
their friends and supporters. Behind them were the citizens of Medina.
Many Muslims were killed in the stampede, and many others were wounded.
The Apostle called out the fugitives but no one listened to him.

The army of Islam was in headlong rout with the enemy at full tilt in
pursuit. The Apostle, of course, did not abandon his post, and stood
firm like a rock. Eight men were still with him, all watching the
spectacle of the flight of their army. They were:

**1.** Ali ibn Abi Talib

**2.** Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib

**3.** Fadhl ibn Abbas

**4.** Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith ibn Abdul Muttalib

**5.** Rabi'a, the brother of Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith

**6.** Abdullah ibn Masood

**7.** Usama ibn Zayd ibn Haritha

**8.** Ayman ibn Obaid

Out of these eight, the first five belonged to the clan of Banu Hashim.
They were the uncle and the cousins of the Prophet.

The Prophet asked his uncle, Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib, to call the
fleeing Muslims. Abbas had a very powerful voice, and he shouted: “O ye
Muhajireen and O ye Ansar! O ye victors of Badr and O ye men of the Tree
of Fealty! Where are you going? The Messenger of God is here. Come back
to him.”

The voice of Abbas boomed in the narrow valley and almost everyone heard
it, and it proved effective in checking the flight of the Muslims.

The Ansar were the first to halt, and to return to the battle. Inspired
by their example, others also rallied. Soon they were able to regroup. A
fierce skirmish took place. At first, the issue appeared uncertain but
then the Muslims began to press the enemy. Once they recovered their
morale, they went on the offensive. The enemy still fought bravely but
was hampered in his mobility by the vast number of women and children he
had brought with him. The Muslims pressed their advantage and then it
was the Bedouins who were running in all directions.

Sir William Muir has told the story of the rout and rally of the Muslims
in the battle of Hunayn at some length. He writes in his book, *The Life
of Mohammed*, (London, 1877):

Very early in the morning, while the dawn was yet gray, and the sky
overcast with clouds, the army of Mohammed was in motion. Clad in full
panoply, as on the day of Ohod, he rode on his white mule, Duldul, in
the rear of the forces.

The vanguard, formed of the Banu Sulaim and led by Khalid, were defiling
leisurely up the steep and narrow pass, when on a sudden the Hawazin
sprang forth from their ambuscade, and charged them with impetuosity.

Staggered by the unexpected onslaught, the Banu Sulaim broke and fell
back. The shock was communicated from column to column. Aggravated by
the obscurity of the hour, and the straitness and ruggedness of the
road, panic seized the whole army; all turned and fled. As troop by
troop they hurried past him, Mohammed called out: “Whither away? The
Prophet of the Lord is here! Return! Return! – but his words had no
effect, excepting that a band of devoted friends and followers gathered
round him.

The confusion increased, the multitude of camels jostled wildly one
against another; all was noise and clamor, and the voice of Mohammed was
lost amid the din. At last, seeing the column of Medina troops bearing
down in common flight, he bade his uncle, Abbas, who held his mule, to
cry aloud: “O citizens of Medina! O men of the Tree of Fealty! Ye of the
Sura Bacr!”

Abbas had a stentorian voice, and as he shouted these words over and
over again at the pitch of his voice, they were heard far and near. At
once they touched a chord in the hearts of the men of Medina. They were
arrested in their flight, and hastened to Mohammed, crying aloud, “Ya
Labeik! Here we are at thy call!”

One hundred of these devoted followers, disengaged with difficulty from
the camels that jammed the narrow pass, threw themselves upon the
advancing enemy and checked his progress. Relieved from the pressure,
the army rallied gradually, and returned to the battle. The conflict was
severe; and the issue, from the adverse nature of the ground and the
impetuosity of the wild Bedouins, remained for some time doubtful.

Mohammed ascended an eminence and watched the struggle. Excited by the
spectacle, he began loudly to exclaim: “Now is the furnace heated: I am
the Prophet that lieth not. I am the offspring of Abdul Muttalib.”

Then bidding Abbas to pick up for him a handful of gravel, he cast it
towards the enemy, saying, “Ruin seize them!” They had indeed already
wavered. The steadiness of the Medina band, and the enthusiasm of the
rest when once recalled, had won the day. The enemy fled, and the rout
was complete. Many were slain and so fiercely did the Moslems pursue the
charge, that they killed among the rest some of the little children – an
atrocity which Mohammed had strictly forbidden.

**Betty Kelen**

They (the Muslims) camped short of Hunayn Valley and at dawn advanced on
the enemy through a defile. Umar's son described what happened then:

“We came down through a wadi, wide and sloping descending gradually in
the morning twilight; but the enemy was there before us and had hidden
in the by-paths, side-tracks and narrow places. They were in force,
fully armed and knowing exactly what to do, and by God, we were
terrified when we descended and suddenly the Hawazin came down on us as
one man!

The Bedouin attacked with stones, boulders, arrows, lance and sword.
Muhammad's van, under General Khalid, broke, the camels jostling and
crashing, screeching and tangling up their long legs.

He (Muhammad) saw among the fleeing men his new converts from Mecca, and
he called to them as one of their own: 'Where are you going men? Come
back! Come to me! I am God's Apostle. I am Muhammad, son of Abdullah!'

Not one of them heeded, and why should they? There was a Hawazin warrior
after them on a russet camel, his standard flying from the long lance,
and every time he dipped the blade of that lance, it showed up on the
other side of someone's chest.

The Prophet's voice was drowned in the uproar of men, the clamor of
camels. He asked his uncle Abbas, a man with a mighty lung, to take up
the cry, 'O comrades, remember the acacia tree...' And Ali, so quiet in
peace but in battle like a demon, lunged viciously about him, fighting
to get behind the Hawazin leader's camel and hamstring it...”
*(Muhammad, Messenger of God)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

The Muslims arrived at Hunayn in the evening and camped at the entrance
of the valley until dawn. At dawn the following day the army began to
move, and Muhammad, riding his white mule, was in the rear while Khalid
ibn al-Walid, commanding a group of soldiers from Banu Sulaym, was in
the vanguard.

As the Muslims passed through the canyon of Hunayn, Malik ibn Awf
ordered his army to attack in the darkness before dawn, first with
arrows and then with a general charge. The Muslims' ranks broke up and
were stricken with panic. Some of them ran out of the canyon as fast as
they could in search of safety. Witnessing what had befallen the
Muslims, Abu Sufyan felt no little pleasure at the defeat of his
previous enemies who until now had been celebrating their victory over
Makkah. He said, “The Muslims will not be checked until they are thrown
into the sea.” *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

The pagan tribesmen were defeated but they were able to regroup, and are
said to have retreated in good order from the valley of Hunayn.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

The general, Malik son of Auf, is said to have rallied his horsemen
sufficiently to make them hold their ground till the weaker members of
the party were covered, and then to have brought them safely to an
eminence whence they could make their way to Taif. There apparently some
of the women were saved, though others fell in the hands of the Moslems.
Khalid son of al-Waleed, whose savagery had already won a rebuke from
the Prophet, earned a fresh one by thinking it his duty to kill these
amazons; an act which was totally against the Prophet's ideas of
gallantry.

Just as he found it necessary to rebuke others who had thought it their
duty to slaughter the children of the unbelievers. “What are the best of
you,” he asked, “if not the children of unbelievers?”

A highly important success was gained, and the Prophet's fortune proved
constant at a time when a reverse would have had serious consequences;
for Abu Sufyan might have been equal to taking advantage of a disaster,
though not sufficiently energetic to have caused one. *(Mohammed and the
Rise of Islam, London, 1931)*

Hunayn was the last battle led personally by Muhammad Mustafa, the
Messenger of God. The battle began with the rout of the Muslims, and
they fled every which way to save their own lives, utterly oblivious of
the presence, in the battlefield, of their Prophet. In the end, however,
they were victorious, thanks to the courage and resolution of the
Prophet himself and a few of his kinsfolk.

M. Shibli, the Indian historian, writes in his biography of the Prophet:

Instead of victory (of the Muslims) one could see their rout (in the
battle of Hunayn). The Prophet looked around and found no one with him
except a handful of his friends. Abu Qatada, a Companion, who was
present in Hunayn, says that when the army was on the run, he saw Umar
bin al-Khattab, and asked him: “What is the state of the affairs of the
Muslims?” He said: “Such is the Will of God.” *(The Life of the Prophet
(Seeratun-Nabi, Vol. I, pp.535-536), 1976, Azamgarh, India).*

**Sir William Muir**

The reverse sustained at the opening of the day, was attributed by the
Prophet to the vainglorious confidence with which the believers looked
upon their great army. The subsequent success was equally ascribed tothe
aid of invisible hosts which fought against their enemy. The engagement
is thus alluded to in the Coran:

*Verily God hath assisted you in many battlefields: and on the day of
Honein, when indeed ye rejoiced in the multitude of your host. But their
great number did not in any wise benefit you: the earth became too
strait for you with all its spaciousness. Then ye turned your backs and
fled. (The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877, p. 143)*

The “invisible hosts” which assisted the Muslims, means, in this
context, high morale. At the beginning of the battle, they were defeated
and routed. But they were inspired by the example of the Prophet himself
whose courage restored their morale, and they fought the enemy with new
zeal and vigor.

The battle of Uhud had begun with the victory of the Muslims and had
ended with their defeat; the battle of Hunayn began with their defeat
and ended with their victory. There was a great slaughter of the Muslims
at the beginning which was caused by their own panic and irresolution.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Victory was not gained cheaply. The Muslims paid a very high price. They
could have done it at much lesser cost had they not fallen back at the
beginning and occasioned Abu Sufyan's derisive remark that they would be
thrown into the sea.

Although the primary source books have not listed all the casualties of
the battle, they did mention that two Muslim tribes were almost totally
annihilated, and that the Prophet held a funerary prayer for them.

Partially offsetting this tremendous loss of human lives, was the
unquestioned supremacy the victory brought to the Muslims. Moreover,
victory brought more captives and booty for them than they had ever seen
before. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

Ali and the Battle of Hunayn
----------------------------

The hero of the battle of Hunayn was Ali ibn Abi Talib just as he was
the hero of all the preceding battles. At a time when all the companions
had fled from the battlefield, and only eight men were left with the
Apostle, it was Ali who stood between him and the enemy, and defended
him. The tribesmen charged repeatedly but he repulsed them each time
same as he had done in Uhud. For sometime, it was Uhud again.

Eventually, Ali succeeded in turning the tide of the battle. First he
caused Uthman bin Abdullah, one of the leaders of the enemy, to fall
from his camel, lose his balance, and be killed; and later, he killed,
in a hand-to-hand fight, Abu Jerdel, the Hawazin leader. When these two
generals were killed, the enemy lost heart; when he lost heart, he lost
the battle.

**M. Shibli**

Banu Malik of the Thakeef fought with determined bravery but when their
leader, Uthman bin Abdullah, was killed, they began to waver... *(The
Life of the Prophet, Azamgarh, India, 1976)*

Abu Sufyan, the chief of the Banu Umayya, was present in the camp of the
Muslims, as noted above. Though he had “accepted” Islam, he was thrilled
to see the flight of the Muslims, and hoped that they would be thrown
into the sea. When Hikda bin Umayya, another “Muslim” of the clan of
Banu Umayya, saw the rout of the Muslims, at the beginning of the
battle, he remarked: “At last the spell of Muhammad is broken.” Both of
them must have conjured up, in their imagination, pictures of
reinstating Hubal, their dynastic god, to his throne in the Kaaba.

Abu Sufyan and other members of his clan, were unable to conceal their
pleasure when to them it appeared that the Muslims were defeated by the
pagan tribesmen. But their pleasure proved to be too short-lived. Soon
there was a reversal in the fortunes of the battle, and then it were the
latter who were finally and decisively defeated. This reversal must have
caused great heart-burning to Abu Sufyan and his clansmen as they lost
the last, best hope they had of reviving “the Times of Ignorance.”

The tribemen had abandoned all their baggage and thousands of their
animals. The Apostle ordered the baggage to be collected, the animals to
be corralled and taken to Jirana, a place mid-point between Taif and
Makkah, and to be kept there pending his own arrival.

In the meantime, he decided to capture Taif which still held out as the
last stronghold of the infidels, and ordered the main body of the army
to march on that city. The fugitives from the battle had also found
sanctuary in the fortress of Taif.

On his way to Taif, the Apostle rode past a small crowd of people who
were standing around the body of a slain woman. Upon enquiry, he learned
that she had been killed by Khalid bin al-Walid.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

One of our companions told us that the Apostle that day (just after the
battle of Hunayn) passed by a woman whom Khalid bin al-Waleed had killed
while men had gathered around her. When he heard what had happened, he
sent word to Khalid and forbade him to kill child, woman or hired slave.
*(The Life of the Messenger of God)*

The Apostle laid siege to Taif but it was abortive and was abandoned.
Taif, however, voluntarily surrendered some weeks later.

From Taif, the Apostle went to Jirana to distribute the spoils of war
which had been amassed at the field of Hunayn. The share he gave to Abu
Sufyan and his sons, the leaders of the clan of Umayya, was larger than
the share he gave to anyone else in the camp of Islam. The Umayyads
could not believe they had such good fortune. Abu Sufyan, who had good
reason to expect less than nothing, after his “performance” in the
battle of Hunayn, was carried away by the generosity of the Prophet, and
gushed forth to him: “You are generous in war no less than you are
generous in peace.”

Some Orientalists have suggested that the share which the Apostle gave
to Abu Sufyan and his sons, was actually a bribe to keep them Muslims,
and that there was no other way he could have won their loyalty. They
further say that the Apostle never hesitated to bribe the idolaters if
he thought that they would sell their “faith” to him in exchange for
camels, sheep, and trinkets and baubles.

We disagree with them. After the conquest of Makkah, Abu Sufyan, his
sons and other members of Banu Umayya, were at the mercy of Muhammad. He
could have exterminated them, and all the idolaters of Arabia could not
have done anything to save them. It was not necessary for him to bribe
them or anyone else into accepting Islam.

Of little worth was their acceptance of Islam anyway. In bestowing gifts
upon Abu Sufyan and his sons, the Prophet of Islam was only
demonstrating his own freedom from vindictiveness. For Arabs, it will be
remembered, vindictiveness was second nature. He tried to wear out their
hostility to Islam by his kindness and generosity. The gifts were a
gesture symbolic only of this attitude.

Abu Sufyan, his sons and other Umayyads - the recipients of the gifts,
were called, ever after Muallafa Qulubuhum – those whose hearts were
gained over. The Prophet gave his enemies large shares out of the booty
only for their Taleef al-Qulub – gaining over their hearts.

Dr. Muhammad Hamidullah says in his book, *Introduction to Islam*, p.
80, (1977):

Those whose hearts are to be won are of many kinds. The great jurist,
Abu Ya'la al-Farra, points out: “As for those whose hearts are to be
won, they are of four kinds:

**1.** Those whose hearts are to be reconciled for coming to the aid of
the Muslims;

**2.** Those whose hearts are to be won in order that they might abstain
from doing harm to Muslims;

**3.** Those who are attracted towards Islam;

**4.** Those by whose means conversion to Islam becomes possible for the
members of their tribes.

It is lawful to benefit each and every one of these categories of ‘those
whose hearts are to be won,' be they Muslims or polytheists.” Abu Sufyan
and his clan belong to the second category; their hearts were to be “won
in order that they might abstain from doing harm to the Muslims.”

The Ansar and the Spoils of Hunayn
----------------------------------

Some young men of the Ansar were disgruntled at what they considered to
be an “unfair” distribution of the spoils of war. A few among them
murmured that when time came to distribute the booty, the Prophet gave
“preferential treatment” to the Quraysh. When the Prophet heard this, he
ordered the Ansar to assemble in a tent, and he addressed them thus:

“What is it that I hear from you, O Ansar, about the apportionment of
booty? Are you roiled up because I gave a larger share of the booty to
the Makkans than I gave you? But tell me this: is it not true that you
worshipped idols and God gave you guidance through me? Is it not true
that you were riven by civil discord and God united you through me? Is
it not true that you were poor and God made you rich through me?”

In answer to each question, the Ansar said: “Yes, that is so, and it is
the grace of God and His Apostle.”

But these questions were merely rhetorical, and the Apostle of God
himself answered them.

**Sir William Muir**

“...but ye might have answered (and answered truly, for I would have
verified it myself) – thou camest to Medina rejected as an impostor, and
we bore witness to thy veracity; you camest as a helpless fugitive and
we assisted thee; an outcast, and we gave thee an asylum; destitute, and
we solaced thee. Why are ye disturbed in mind because of the things of
this life, wherewith I have sought to incline the hearts of these men
(the Quraysh of Makkah) unto Islam, whereas ye are already steadfast in
your faith? Are ye not satisfied that others should obtain the flocks
and the camels, while ye carry back the Prophet of the Lord unto your
homes? No, I will not leave you for ever. If all mankind went one way,
and the men of Medina another way, verily, I would go the way of the men
of Medina. The Lord be favorable unto them, and bless them, and their
sons and their sons' sons for ever.” *(The Life of Mohammed, London,
1861)*

When the Ansar heard these words, they were smothered with tears, and
they cried: “Let others take the sheep, the cattle and the camels with
them. All we want is Muhammad, and nothing else.”

The Ansar had also entertained the fear that the Prophet might decide to
stay in Makkah, and make it his capital. But he reassured them that he
would never leave them or Medina, and that he and they were inseparable
forever.

From Jirana, the Muslims returned to Makkah where the Prophet performed
the seven circuits of the Kaaba, and carried out the rites of the Lesser
Pilgrimage (*Umra*).

The Battle of Hunayn was the last “flash in the pan” of pagan Arabia.
When the Muslims won the victory, the curtain finally fell on the savage
and pagan prologue of the drama of the Arabian history. But pagan or
rather crypto-pagan Arabs were still going to fight a long and bitter
rearguard action against Islam.

In Makkah, the Prophet gave finishing touches to matters relating to
administration and policy. Before leaving Makkah for Medina, he
appointed Akib bin Usayd as governor of the city. This was the first
permanent civil appointment in Islam. He also declared Makkah to be the
religious capital of Islam.

After spending a most eventful month in Makkah and its environs,
Muhammad, the Messenger of God, and his army, returned to Medina.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

By giving the empire of Islam a religious capital, at no time utilized
as a political capital, the founder got for it a mainstay which has
secured the continuity of the system amid the most violent convulsions.

The visit to Mecca which had been accompanied by so many vicissitudes
was terminated by the Prophet going through the ceremonies of the lesser
pilgrimage. Afterwards, Akib, son of Usaid, was appointed governor of
Mecca at a salary of a dirhem a day; this was the first permanent civil
appointment made in Islam; at Khaibar, the only other city of importance
which the Moslems had captured, the local government had been left.

Besides the governor, a spiritual official was left, Mu'adh, son of
Jabal, a native of Medina, in whose competence to teach the new religion
the Prophet had confidence.The Apostle returned to Medina with the
Muslim host after an absence of more than a month. *(Mohammed and the
Rise of Islam, London, 1931)*


