The Expedition of Tabuk
=======================

The battle of Mootah in which the Muslims were defeated, was fought in
September 629. Their defeat was interpreted in many circles as a sign of
decline in the power of the new Islamic State. The Arab freebooters must
have found it very tempting to attack Medina after this fancied decline.
But in the summer of 630, rumors were circulating in Medina that it were
not the North Arabian tribes but the Roman troops which were massing at
the Syrian frontier for an invasion of Hijaz.

Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, decided to take preventive action for
the defense of Medina, and ordered his followers to prepare themselves
for a long campaign in the north.

It was the month of September, and the weather in Hijaz that year was
exceedingly hot. Furthermore, a protracted draught threatened the
province with conditions of semi-famine. The response of the Muslims,
therefore, to the call-up was very lukewarm. They did not wish to leave
their homes at a time like this.

**Sir John Glubb**

In September or October 630 the Messenger of God gave orders to prepare
for an expedition to the Byzantine frontier. The weather in the Hijaz
was still oppressively hot, water and grazing were scarce, and the
movements of a large force would be extremely difficult. Perhaps the
memories of the disaster at Mootah deprived many men of the wish to face
the Byzantines again. *(The Life and Times of Mohammed)*

The hypocrites in Medina seized this opportunity to plant disaffection
in the minds of the neophytes in Islam. They not only did not take part
in the campaign but also tried to dissuadeothers from doing so.

In an attempt to undermine the will and purpose of the Muslims, they
began to spread alarmist stories that the antagonists this time were not
the poor, ill-equipped, backward and ignorant tribal levies which fought
without order and without discipline but the Romans who were the most
civilized and the most powerful nation in the world, and who, in effect,
would exterminate them (the Muslims).

Nevertheless, many Muslims responded to the appeal of the Prophet, and
took up arms to defend the faith. When a head-count was taken, there
were found to be 30,000 volunteers. It was the largest force ever
assembled in Arabia until then.

The Prophet appointed Ali ibn Abi Talib his viceroy in Medina during his
own absence. He selected Ali to be his viceroy for the following
reasons:

**1.** He wanted to show to the rest of the world that he considered Ali
to be more qualified than anyone else to be the ruler of all Muslims,
and to be the head of the Islamic State. He, therefore, appointed him as
his representative in his capital.

**2.** All fighting men were going with the expedition, leavingMedina
without any troops. In the event of an attack upon the city by the
nomadic predators, Ali could be counted upon to handle the situation by
dint of his courage and ability.

**3.** Many hypocrites had stayed behind in Medina, and many others had
deserted the army to return to the city. They were a potential threat to
the security of the capital of Islam. The Prophet, therefore, selected a
man to rule in his place who was capable of defending Medina against any
pagan advance, either by external aggression or through internal
subversion.

For the hypocrites there was nothing more disagreeable than to see Ali
in authority over them. When the army left Medina, they began to whisper
that the Apostle had left Ali in Medina because he wanted to get rid of
him.

Ali was mortified to hear that his master had found him a “burden.” He,
therefore, immediately went after the army and overtook it at Jorf. The
Apostle was surprised to see him but when he (Ali) explained why he
came, he (the Apostle) said:

“These people are liars. I left you in Medina to represent me in my
absence. Are you not content to be to me what Aaron was to Moses except
that there will not be any prophet after me.”

**Washington Irving**

Many have inferred from the foregoing that Mohammed intended Ali for his
caliph or successor; that being the significance of the Arabic word used
to denote the relation of Aaron to Moses. *(The Life of Mohammed)*

Ali was satisfied by the assurance that the Prophet gave him, and
returned to Medina to take charge of his duties as viceroy.

When the Prophet gave audience to Ali in his camp at Jorf, some of his
companions were with him. One of them was Saad bin Abi Waqqas, the
future victor of the battle of Qadsiyya against the Persians. He
reported to the other Muslims that it was in his presence that Muhammad
Mustafa, the Messenger of God, told Ali that he (Ali) was to him
(Muhammad) what Aaron was to Moses, except that he (Ali) was not a
prophet.

After a laborious march the army arrived at the Syrian frontier, and
halted at a hamlet called Tabuk but the Prophet could find no sign of
the Roman army or of any other army or enemy. The frontier was peaceful
and quiet. The reports he had heard in Medina about an imminent invasion
by the Romans, were false.

Peace and tranquillity on the Syrian frontier is another proof that the
Romans considered the battle of Mootah as nothing more than a foray by a
band of desert Arabs. If Mootah had been such a titanic battle as some
Muslim historians claim it was, the Romans would have maintained their
garrisons on the border. But they didn't maintain even pickets much less
garrisons!

The Messenger of God then pondered the next step to be taken in Tabuk.

**Washington Irving**

Calling a council of war, he (Mohammed) propounded thequestion whether
or not to continue forward (from Tabuk). To this Omar replied drily: “If
thou has the command of God to proceed further, do so.” “If I had the
command of God to proceed further,” observed Mohammed, “I should not
have asked thy counsel.” *(The Life of Mohammed)*

Eventually, the Prophet decided not to advance into Syria but to return
to Medina.

The army spent ten days in Tabuk. Though it had not been engaged in any
action, its presence at the frontier had some salutary effects. Many
northern tribes of Bedouins accepted Islam. Dauma-tul-Jandal, a
strategic post between Medina and Syria, was acquired as new territory.

Just before the army left Tabuk, the monks of the monastery of St.
Catherine in the valley of Sinai, came to see the Prophet. He gave them
audience, and granted them a charter which is comparable to the Charter
of Medina which he had granted to the Jews. Its main terms were:

**1.** The Muslims would protect the churches and monasteries of the
Christians. They would not demolish any church property either to build
mosques or to build houses for the Muslims.

**2.** All ecclesiastical property (of the Christians) would be exempt
from every tax.

**3.** No ecclesiastical authority would ever be forced by the Muslims
to abandon his post.

**4.** No Christian would ever be forced by the Muslims to become a
convert to Islam.

**5.** If a Christian woman marries a Muslim, she would have full
freedom to follow her own religion.

The army recuperated from the toil and fatigue of the long journey, and
the Prophet gave it the signal to return home. He arrived in Medina
after an absence of one month.


