Banu Hashim - Before the Birth of Islam
=======================================

In the fifth century A.D. a man called Qusay, was born in the tribe of
Quraysh. He won great honor and fame for his tribe by his wisdom. He
rebuilt the Kaaba which was in a state of disrepair, and he ordered the
Arabs to build their houses around it. He also built the “town hall” of
Makkah, the first one in Arabia.

The leaders of the various clans gathered in this hall to ponder upon
their social, commercial, cultural and political problems. Qusay
formulated laws for the supply of food and water to the pilgrims who
came to Makkah, and he persuaded the Arabs to pay a tax for their
support.

**Edward Gibbon**

Qusay, born about A.D. 400, the great-grandfather of Abdul-Muttalib, and
consequently fifth in the ascending line from Mohammed, obtained supreme
power at Mecca. *(The decline and fall of the Roman Empire)*

Qusay died in A.D. 480, and his son, Abd Manaf, took charge of his
duties. He too distinguished himself by his ability. He was noted for
his generosity and good judgment. He was succeeded by his son Hashim.

It was this Hashim who gave his name to the clan which became famous in
history as Banu Hashim.Hashim was an extraordinary man. It was he who
made the Quraysh merchants and merchant princes. He was the first man
who instituted the two caravan journeys of Quraysh, summer and winter,
and the first to provide *thareed* (broth) to the Arabs. But for him,
the Arabs might have remained shepherds forever.

Enlightened and benevolent leadership and generosity were only two out
of many qualities which Muhammad, the future prophet, “inherited” from
his fore-fathers. Hashim was married to a woman of Yathrib and from her
he had a son – Abdul Muttalib. In due course, Abdul Muttalib was to
succeed his father as the chief of the clan of Hashim.

**Edward Gibbon**

The grandfather of Mohammed(Abdul Muttalib), and his lineal ancestors,
appear in foreign and domestic transactions as the princes of their
country; but they reigned, like Percales at Athens, or the Medics at
Florence, by the opinion of their wisdom and integrity; their influence
was divided with their patrimony.

The tribe of Koreish, by fraud or force (sic), had acquired the custody
of the Kaaba; the sacerdotal office devolved through four lineal
descents to the grandfather of Mohammed; and the family of Hashemites,
from whence he sprang, was the most respectable and sacred in the eyes
of their country.

Mohammed's descent from Ismael was a national privilege or fable (sic);
but if the first steps of the pedigree are dark and doubtful (sic), he
could produce many generations of pure and genuine nobility; he sprang
from the tribe of Koreish and the family of Hashim, the most illustrious
of the Arabs, the princes of Mecca, and the hereditary guardians of the
Kaaba. *(The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)*

Hashim had a younger brother called Al-Muttalib, the son of Abd Manaf.
For a time, he was chief of the clan, and when he died, his nephew –
Abdul Muttalib – the son of Hashim, succeeded him as the new chief.
Abdul Muttalib exhibited all the qualities which had made the names of
his father and grandfather great and famous.

As noted before, the city of Makkah, like the rest of Arabia, was
without a government and without a ruler, but it was dominated by the
tribe of Quraysh. Quraysh was composed of twelve clans, and Banu Hashim
was one of them. Reacting to the depravity of the times, the members of
Banu Hashim, were prompted, a half-century before the birth of Muhammad,
to make some tentative efforts to arrest the moral decline of the Arabs
and to improve the social, economic and intellectual climate of the
country.

They, therefore, forged the *League of the Virtuous*. The major aims of
the League were to prevent wars from breaking out and to protect the
weak and the defenseless from their enemies.

The Banu Hashim also interested itself in the economic welfare of the
Arabs, and inaugurated a system of trade with neighboring countries by
sending caravans to Syria in summer and to Yemen in winter, as noted
before. These caravans left Makkah loaded with such products as date
fruit, harness for horses and camels, blankets made from wool or camel
hair; perfumes and aromatic herbs; spices, incense, hides and skins of
the desert animals, and pedigreed horses. They brought back with them
textiles, olive oil, weapons, coffee, fruits and grain.

Both the *League of the Virtuous* and the caravan trade were
unquestionably great gifts of the Banu Hashim to the Arabs. But their
greatest gift, not only to the Arabs, but to the whole world, was going
to be the child to be called Muhammad, the son of Abdullah ibn Abdul
Muttalib and Amina bint Wahab.

He was going to be the greatest benefactor not only of the Arabs but of
all mankind. One of the notable events that took place during the
incumbency of Abdul Muttalib as the guardian of Kaaba, was the invasion
of Makkah by an Abyssinian army led by the Christian general, Abraha.
The attempt to capture Makkah failed as reported in the following verses
of the Holy Qur’an.

***“And He sent against them flights of birds, Striking them with stones
of baked clay, Then He made them like an empty field of stalks and
straw, all eaten up.” (Chapter 105, Verses 3, 4, 5.)***

Since the invaders had brought some elephants with them, the year of
their campaign came to be known as the “Year of the Elephant”. The Year
of the Elephant coincides with the year A.D. 570 which also happens to
be the year of the birth of Muhammad, the future prophet. The invading
army withdrew from Makkah, and the terms of truce were negotiated, on
behalf of the city of Makkah, by Abdul Muttalib.

**Sir John Glubb**

In 570 Abraha, the Christian Abyssinian viceroy of the Yemen marched on
Mecca. Quraish were too timid or too weak to oppose the Abyssinian army
and Abdul Muttalib, at the head of a deputation, went out to negotiate
with Abraha. *(The Great Arab Conquests, 1963)*

One of the distant cousins of Hashim was one Abd Shams. A certain Umayya
who claimed to be his son, was jealous of Abdul Muttalib's ascendancy
and prestige. At one time, he made an attempt to grab his power and
authority but failed. The failure rankled in his heart. He nursed a
hatred against Abdul Muttalib and his children, and passed it on to his
own sons and grandsons who came to be known as the Banu Umayya.

But there was more than mere tribal jealousy in the hostility of the
Banu Umayya toward Banu Hashim. The two clans were the antithesis of
each other in character and temperament, and in their outlook on and
attitude toward life, as the events were soon to reveal when the former
led the pack in opposition to Islam.

The Banu Hashim were destined to be the bulwark of Islam. God Himself
chose them for this glorious destiny. Ibn Khaldun, the famous historian
and sociologist, writes in his *Muqaddimah* (Prolegomena) that all true
prophets must enjoy the support of some powerful group. This support, he
says, is necessary, because it serves as a buffer that protects them
against their antagonists and gives them a measure of security without
which they cannot carry out their Divine mission.

In the case of Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, the Banu Hashim
constituted the “powerful group” that protected him from the malevolence
of the Banu Umayya, provided him security and enabled him to carry out
his Divine mission.Abdul Muttalib had ten sons. Four of them became
famous in history. They were:

**1.**Abdullah, the father of Muhammad.

**2.**Abu Talib, the father of Ali.

**3.**Hamza, the hero-martyr of the battle of Uhud.

**4**.Abbas, the forebear of the Abbasi caliphs of Baghdad.

Abdullah and Abu Talib were the children of the same mother whereas the
other eight sons of Abdul Muttalib were born of his other wives.


