Usama's Expedition
==================

Zayd bin Haritha was the freedman and friend of Muhammad Mustafa. He was
killed in the battle of Mootah in A.D. 629 in which he had led the
Muslims against the Romans. The Muslims had been defeated in that
battle, and they had retreated into Hijaz.

The Prophet of Islam wanted to efface the memory of that defeat but he
was awaiting an opportune moment for doing so. Ever-since the Prophet,
may God bless him and his Ahlul Bait, had migrated to Yathrib (Medina)
in 622, he had worked very hard. He had carried a burden of
responsibilities that even a syndicate of men would have found
excessively heavy.

Since the Farewell Pilgrimage in March 632, he had worked almost
non-stop. Unremitting labor and lifelong austerity inevitably took their
toll, and he fell ill. This illness was going to be fatal. Though he had
felt weak even before his illness set in, he had not allowed weakness to
interfere with his duties as the Messenger of God and as the Sovereign
of the Muslims.

The long-awaited “opportune moment” appears to have arrived at last. The
Prophet equipped and organized a new expedition to mount an invasion of
the Syrian frontier. The prestige of Islam had been destroyed at the
battle of Mootah, and time had come to restore it.

To command the expedition, the Prophet chose Usama, a youth of 18, the
son of Zayd bin Haritha, the martyr of Mootah. Both father and son had
been great favorites of the Prophet. But he did not make them generals
because of favoritism; he made them generals because they were qualified
by their ability to command other men, and to lead them in war.

On the 18th of Safar of 11 A.H., Muhammad Mustafa placed the banner of
Islam in the hands of Usama, briefed him on the aims of the campaign,
and gave him instructions on how he had to conduct it. He then ordered
all his companions, with the exception of Ali and other members of Banu
Hashim, to report for duty to Usama, and to serve under him.

These companions included the oldest, the richest and the most powerful
men of Quraysh such as Abu Bakr, Umar, Abdur Rahman bin Auf, Abu Obaida
ibn al-Jarrah, Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas, Talha, Zubayr, Khalid bin al-Walid,
and many others. The Prophet ordered Usama to march immediately at the
head of the companions and the army toward his destination.

**Sir William Muir**

On the Wednesday following, Mohammed was seized with a violent headache
and fever; but it passed off. The next morning he found himself
sufficiently recovered to bind with his own hand upon the Flagstaff a
banner for the army.

He presented it to Usama with these words: 'Fight thou beneath this
banner in the name of the Lord, and for His cause. Thus thou shalt
discomfit and slay the people that disbelieveth in the Lord.' The camp
was then formed at Jorf; and the whole body of fighting men, not
excepting even Abu Bakr and Umar, were summoned to join it. *(The Life
of Mohammed, London, 1877)*

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

The Muslims did not stay long in Madinah following their return from the
Farewell Pilgrimage in Makkah. The Prophet had immediately ordered the
mobilization of a large army and commanded it to march on al-Sham. He
sent along with that army a number of the elders of Islam, the earliest
Muhajirun, among whom were Abu Bakr and Umar. He gave the command of the
army to Usama ibn Zayd ibn Harithah. *(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo,
1935)*

The Prophet wished the army to leave Medina at once. But strangely, the
army did not show any eagerness to obey him. Instead of obedience, the
Prophet met resistance – from some of his companions!

Thenceforth, the Prophet had to grapple with two problems; one was to
overcome his illness and the other was to overcome the resistance of his
army. The last few days of his life on this earth were dominated by this
two-pronged struggle.

The senior members of the Quraysh bitterly resented the elevation of a
boy of 18 over all of them, and that too, the son, not of a “high-born”
Qurayshi, but of a former slave! Therefore, instead of reporting to him
for duty, many among them began to play truant and to temporize. Some
among them were so disgruntled at the selection of Usama as their
general that they openly expressed their displeasure.

**R.V.C. Bodley**

...The veterans did not like the idea of attacking the still redoubtable
Romans with a lad, who had little military experience, as their leader.
Mohammed was, however, unmoved by the protests. He was establishing the
precedent, observed ever since among Moslems, that age and social
standing do not necessarily make the best generals.

He was ingraining in them the message of democracy which they were to
carry to the world. Without discussing the nomination he summoned Osama
to the mosque and handed him the banner of Islam with recommendation to
bring it honor. *(The Messenger, New York, 1946)*

The appointment of Usama as general was not, however, the only reason
why some of the companions did not want to go to Syria. There were some
other reasons also why they believed it was absolutely essential for
them to stay in Medina, regardless of the orders of the Messenger of
God. Usama asked the Prophet if it would not be better to defer the
invasion of Syria until his recovery from fever. But the Prophet said:
“No. I want you to leave this very moment.”

Usama went to his camp at Jorf but few of the companions came to report
for duty. They knew that the sickness of the Prophet had brought a
“crisis” upon the *umma* (community), and they considered it “unsafe” to
leave Medina at a time like this though they considered it quite “safe”
to defy his orders. They put the golden rule of “Safety First” ahead of
the orders of the Messenger of God.

The Prophet had fever and severe headache but he managed to go into the
mosque, and to address the assembly there which included many of the
stragglers, thus:

“O Arabs! You are miserable because I have appointed Usama as your
general, and you are raising questions if he is qualified to lead you in
war. I know you are the same people who had raised the same question
about his father. By God, Usama is qualified to be your general just as
his father was qualified to be a general. Now obey his orders and go.”

**Betty Kelen**

Soon after the farewell pilgrimage, with his ambition speeding ever
northward as if in advance of destiny, Muhammad organized a new
expeditionary force to Syria, putting Zayd's son, Usama, in charge of it
– against the advice of some of his generals, since Usama was only
twenty. Muhammad told them sharply, 'You carp at him as you carped at
his father, but he is just as worthy of command as his father was.'

He no longer needed to waste time excusing his actions. He placed his
standard in Usama's hands and sent him off to the mustering ground, but
the argument rankled in his mind all the same. *(Muhammad, Messenger of
God)*

Whenever the Prophet felt slight relief from his fever and headache, he
questioned those present if Usama's army had left for Syria. He kept
urging them, 'Send off the army of Usama immediately.'

The rank-and-file of the army obeyed the orders of the Prophet, and
reported for duty to their commanding officer at Jorf but most of the
senior companions did not. Some among them lingered in the city; others,
under constant prodding by the Prophet, went to Jorf but came back. They
kept plying between the camp and the city.

Some of them came to the city to take items which were missing in the
equipment, and some others wanted to hear the news. Still others
returned to “enquire after the health of the Prophet.” There were also
those companions who didn't go to Jorf at all. They stayed in the city
out of their “love” for the Prophet since they did not have the “heart”
to leave him at a time when he was critically ill.

But these protestations of “love” and “solicitude” for his welfare did
not impress the Prophet himself. The touchstone of their love for him
was their obedience to his commands. He ordered them to leave for Syria
but they did not. They disobeyed him during the last days of his life.

**Betty Kelen**

His (the Prophet's) illness worsened, but he tried valiantly to throw it
off for Usama's sake, for as word of Muhammad's sickness spread about,
the young man was having a hard time recruiting his troops. Some men who
had joined him, were returning to Medina, and *certainly none were
leaving*. *(Muhammad, Messenger of God)*

Eventually, the inevitable took place. Muhammad, the Last Messenger of
God on this earth, died. His struggle to send his companions out of
Medina, came to an end, with a note of “triumph” for the latter. They
did not report for duty to Usama and the army did not go on the campaign
– in his lifetime!

For Muslims, every command of Muhammad is the command of God Himself
because he is the Interpreter to them, of God's Will and Purpose.
Disobedience to Muhammad is disobedience to God Himself. Therefore,
those men who disobeyed him, earned the displeasure of God.

The battle of Mootah was fought in A.D. 629, ending in the rout of the
Muslims. The Prophet wanted to blot out that stain of defeat. But it was
not until three years later – in 632 – that he ordered Usama to invade
the Syrian frontier in retaliation for the disaster of Mootah.

The timing of Usama's expedition raises a whole tangle of questions. Why
did the Prophet not send his punitive expedition to Syria at any time
during the intervening three years? Why did he choose the time just
before his own death to send it? Why, all of a sudden, it became so
desperately important for him to send his companions and fighting men
out of Medina?

As noted before, after the Farewell Pilgrimage, the health of the
Prophet had begun to show signs of stress. Two months later, his
condition further deteriorated, and some days later, he died.

Also, as noted earlier, the Prophet told the Muslims on more than one
occasion that he did not have much longer to live in this world. Tabari,
the historian, has quoted Abdullah ibn Abbas as saying: (About two
months after the Farewell Pilgrimage) “The Messenger of God told us that
he would perhaps die in a month's time.” (History, Vol. II,, page 435).

It is also reported that one night the Prophet went into the cemetery of
Al-Baqi, accompanied by a domestic. After praying for the dead, he said
to his companion: “They (the dead) are in a better state than those who
are alive. Soon many new evils will appear, and each will be more
frightful and hideous than its forerunner.”

On the one hand the Apostle of God was predicting his own demise, and
was also predicting the appearance of new evils and outbreak of new
disturbances; and on the other, he was exhorting his Companions to leave
Medina and to go to Syria!

In view of the imminence of his own death, what was more important for
the Apostle to do: to seek retaliation for the death of a friend who was
killed three years earlier on a distant frontier or to protect the State
of Medina and the Muslim *umma* from the new perils which, he said, were
soon going to appear?

The obvious answer to this question is that if retaliation for the death
of Zayd could wait for three years, it could wait a little longer, and
that the security of the State and the safety of the *umma*, were far
more important than anything else. Therefore, the Prophet ought to have
deployed the army in and around Medina, instead of sending it abroad.

But it appears that the Apostle himself would not have agreed with such
an assessment. He considered nothing more important than to send his
companions to Syria out of Arabia itself. When he noticed that they were
ignoring his orders, he cursed them. Shahristani, the historian, writes
in his book, *Kitab al-Milal wan-Nihal* (page 8): “The Apostle of God
said: 'Usama's army must leave at once. May Allah curse those men who do
not go with him.'“

It was the first time in his life that Mohammed Mustafa, the Messenger
of Mercy and Mercy for the whole Universe, cursed anyone. Before this,
he had never cursed anyone – not even his most rabid enemies like Abu
Jahl and Abu Sufyan. He didn't curse the people of Ta'if when they
stoned him and drove him out of their city.

Also, in the past, if anyone was unable to go into battle, he did not
press him to go, and let him stay at home. But in the matter of Usama's
expedition, he did not want to hear any reason or excuse from anyone for
his failure to go with it. His orders to the companions to go with the
expedition were inexorable, inflexible and emphatic.

In the last moments of his life, a man wishes that all his folks and
friends should be around him. He wishes and hopes that after his death,
they would take part in his funeral; they would pray for him, and would
comfort his family. But contrary to all norms of conduct at a time like
this, Muhammad Mustafa was doing all that he could to send his
companions and friends away from Medina. He did not want any of them to
stay with him.

The Sunni Muslims claim that Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, did not
appoint his own successor, and he left the matter of choosing a leader
for the community to his companions. If they are right in their claim,
then the Prophet's order to the companions to leave Medina and to go to
Syria, poses a most thorny problem for them.

It was obvious that the Prophet was going to die. He had himself said so
repeatedly. The time had come, therefore, for his companions to put
their heads together and to determine the new locus of authority. But
the Prophet was insisting that they go hundreds of miles away from him –
and from Medina. If he had wished them to elect or select his successor
through their “mutual consultation,” would he have ordered them to quit
Medina?

Also, he himself had warned the *umma* that it was threatened by new
perils. Would he not, therefore, want his companions to stay in Medina,
and defend the umma from those perils? After all, who would defend the
*umma* of Muhammad from those perils if not his own companions?

Since the Prophet knew that he was going to die, he should never have
equipped and organized Usama's army. Instead, he should have suggested
to his companions that they ought to work out a strategy, through mutual
consultation, to avert the new evils and perils which already loomed on
the horizons of Medina.

But Muhammad Mustafa did not do this. He, in fact, did just the
opposite. He ordered his companions to get out of Medina, and he was
never so abrupt with them as he was on this occasion. Could it mean that
it were the companions themselves whom he saw as the authors of the new
evils and perils threatening his *umma*?

Actually, the safety and salvation of the Muslims lay in their
unquestioning obedience to the orders of their Prophet. When they
disobeyed him, they threw open the door to all evils, disturbances and
perils.

In the context of the events of the time, it appears that Muhammad
Mustafa had most important reasons for deferring Usama's expedition
until the last minute. He had declared clearly, precisely and repeatedly
that Ali ibn Abi Talib was going to be his successor. But he was also
aware of the presence of a strong undercurrent of the opposition of his
companions to Ali.

The Prophet also knew that the group opposed to Ali, was extremely
powerful and vigilant. Therefore, he figured that if at his death,
members of the group in question, were out of Medina, he (Ali) would
succeed him without any incident. The real purpose of the Prophet, in
organizing the expedition of Usama, therefore, was to send all those men
away from Medina who might challenge Ali in his accession to the throne
of the caliphate. He hoped that in the absence of the companions from
Medina, Ali would ascend the throne, and upon their return, they would
find him firmly in control of the government.

The expedition of Usama, therefore, was the prelude to the transfer of
sovereignty from Muhammad to his successor, Ali ibn Abi Talib.

But the companions were not going to leave Medina. To stay in Medina,
they dared the Prophet himself, and they even ignored his curses. They
knew that if Ali once ascended the throne, then they, i.e., the
Companions, would be shut out from the “mansions of power” forever, and
they had, for this reason, to prevent Ali's accession to the throne *at
all costs*. They had no intention of being shut out of the “mansions of
power.”

The following points should be borne in mind by the reader for a
reassessment of the episode of Usama's expedition:

**1.** The battle of Mootah had been fought in A.D. 629. In the summer
of A.D. 632, the Syrian frontier was peaceful and quiet, and there was
no threat, real or fancied, of an invasion of Medina from the north. In
fact, there were not even any rumors of an attack upon Medina or Hijaz
by anyone. And yet, Muhammad Mustafa was showing the greatest anxiety to
send his army to Syria.

**2.** Usama's expedition was organized, apparently, to restore the
morale of the Muslims after their rout in the battle of Mootah, and to
chastise those people who had killed his father, Zayd bin Haritha.

The Apostle charged Usama with the task of exacting retribution from the
killers of his father. Now Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, the Winged Martyr of
Islam, and the elder brother of Ali, was also killed in the same battle.
But the Prophet did not send Ali or any other member of the clan of
Hashim with the expedition. He kept them all with him in Medina.

**3.** Despite his fatal illness, the Prophet was urging the army to
march on Syria. He brusquely dismissed the professed solicitude of some
of his Companions for his welfare, and ordered them to go with Usama
forthwith.

**4.** Usama bin Zayd bin Haritha was the commanding officer of those
companions of the Prophet who were old enough to be his grandfathers
such as Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Abu Obaida bin al-Jarrah, Abdur Rahman
bin Auf, and many others. The Prophet was thus stressing the principle,
just before his death, that the Muslims were not to consider a man
worthy of leadership merely because he was old.

**5.** If a qualified person is available to become a leader, then an
unqualified person must not displace him. The companions raised
objection to Usama's leadership on this ground. The Prophet agreed that
only the most qualified person ought to be invested with supreme
authority. But he maintained that Usama was more qualified than all
those men who were ordered to serve under him, his extreme youth
notwithstanding.

**6.** The Sunni Muslims say that the Prophet “consulted” his
Companions, and this made his government a “democracy.” It is true that
he “consulted” them occasionally in some minor matters but he himself
made all decisions without reference to them. At Hudaybiyya, Umar bin
al-Khattab led the opposition to him when he was negotiating terms of
peace with the pagans. He ignored the opposition, went ahead and signed
a treaty with them.

Later, Sunni jurists explained that the Prophet ignored Umar's protests
because he (the Prophet) was acting under the commands of Heaven. They
are right. But the appointment of Usama as general of the army had
nothing to do with the commands of Heaven and the Prophet was free to
rescind his orders when confronted with opposition from the Companions.
But he refused even to talk with them on the subject much less to
“consult” them in the matter.

**7.** The Prophet's orders to his Companions to serve under Usama, and
to leave Medina for Syria, were most emphatic. But they did not leave
Medina, and he died. They, thus, realized their aim which was to be
physically present in Medina at his death.

**8.** Those Companions of the Prophet whom he had ordered to report for
duty to Usama – their general – were defying him while he was still
alive. If they could disregard his orders and his wishes in his
lifetime, they could just as casually, disregard his orders and wishes
in the matter of his succession after his death. They put their own
ambitions and interests ahead of the commands and wishes of Muhammad
Mustafa, the blessed Messenger of God.


