The Reaction of the Family and the Companions of Muhammad Mustafa to his Death
==============================================================================

The Reaction of the Family and the Companions of Muhammad Mustafa to his
Death.

THE MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY OF MUHAMMAD MUSTAFA were overwhelmed by a
tidal wave of sorrow at his death. His daughter, Fatima Zahra, was the
“Light of his eyes.” But now those eyes were closed forever; they would
not greet her and her children anymore. Nor would she hear from his lips
the voice of love and kindness bid her welcome home; they were silenced
forever. For her, he was a father, a “mother,” a guardian angel, and
Mercy of God upon earth. For her, he was the hub of existence itself.

For Muhammad, his daughter, Fatima, and her little family, were the
epitome of all his love, his affections, his joys and his happiness. As
long as he lived, he had treated her with the greatest respect, and had
shown her the deference which is due only to a sovereign. But for him,
she was far more than a sovereign. Of all the people he knew, she was
the first and the foremost in his heart.

Now Fatima had only one wish – to meet her father in heaven. She
realized this wish early – only ten weeks after his death. Her death
left her husband and her children to endure not one but two sorrows.

Hasan and Husain were the grandchildren of Muhammad Mustafa. They were
his darlings. They sat in his lap when he was in the mosque or at home,
and they rode his shoulders when he walked abroad. His lap was their
“haven,” and his shoulders were their “carriers.” Now the “haven” and
the “carriers” were lost to them forever. Their eyes, misty with tears,
searched vainly for their loving grandfather everywhere.

His pulpit and the alcove of his mosque were now empty, and its somber
walls themselves appeared to be in mourning. His mosque was like a shell
from which the pearl had gone. The wails and the moans of the two little
children bounced back from the walls of his mosque in mournful echoes.

Both children were haunted by a strange, unfamiliar and uncomfortable
feeling, and they were gripped by vague and nameless fears. They were
too young to define these feelings or to understand these fears; but
even they sensed the new feeling of insecurity which assailed them. For
the first time in the few years they had lived, they were preyed by
insecurity. Their grandfather was, for them, the sign and symbol of
security, and now he was gone.

For Ali, the death of Muhammad was the greatest disaster in life. His
world had revolved around Muhammad ever since he was born. Muhammad was
the center and the circumference of his world. From that world, Muhammad
had disappeared, and now Ali did not know how to grapple with it. He
felt cut loose from his moorings, and life suddenly appeared to have
lost its raison d’être for him.

Ali was the genius of Islam. His character was sublime and his
personality incomparable. But he had depended upon Muhammad to act as a
catalyst for his genius and personality to burgeon. He had all the
potentialities that made him indispensable for Islam but it had taken
the magic touch of Muhammad to make them rise to the surface.

And now when he was 32 years old, when he was in the prime of his life,
when he was at the zenith of his powers, and when he could give to Islam
and to the rest of the world, far more than he had already given,
Muhammad died. Muhammad's death was a setback to Ali from which he never
recovered the rest of his life.

The reaction of Fatima Zahra, Hasan, Husain and Ali, to the death of
Muhammad, was normal and predictable. All five of them made up a family
circle, united in their love for, and obedience to God. Muhammad was the
“axis” of this little circle.

With his death, the “circle” was broken, leaving the other members of
the family totally disoriented. Perhaps they did not know at the moment,
though they were going to know very soon, that Muhammad's death only
foreshadowed a whole series of new shocks and sorrows for them.

Thenceforth, they were going to be in a state of “siege” by sorrow. Each
new day was to bring a new shock, and a new sorrow. But through this
welter of disaster and tragedy, their faith in the mercy of God, and in
the ultimate triumph of justice and truth, remained rocklike, and
constant. Their hope of winning the pleasure of God, kept growing ever
stronger with each new wave of shock and sorrow.

To withstand the shock of the death of Muhammad, the members of his
family, sought and found succor from the One Source that never fails –
the unbounded Mercy of God.

The Death of Muhammad Mustafa and his Umma
------------------------------------------

The Muslims owed Muhammad a dual allegiance; first in his capacity as
the Messenger of God; and second, in his capacity as the Sovereign of
Arabia. None could withhold his loyalty and obedience to him in either
capacity, and still remain a Muslim.

In his character as the Messenger of God, Muhammad had given them
deliverance from the indignity of worshipping idols, and he had taught
them to worship One God; and in his character as the Sovereign of
Arabia, he had given them deliverance from political chaos and ruinous
wars. He had given them law and order.

He had also given them deliverance from their moral anarchy, economic
poverty and cultural barrenness. He had made them rich and civilized,
and he had made them an imperial nation. In short, he was their greatest
benefactor. The least they could do for him was to give him their
loyalty and their love. Loyalty to and love for Muhammad was going to be
the touchstone of the faith of the Muslims in his mission – in Islam!

There were those Muslims, most of them from the rank-and-file, who gave
Muhammad their love and no one would deny that their love was genuine.
When he died, they were stricken with grief; they were heart-broken, and
to them the mosque, the city and the whole world looked desolate.

But the reaction of the principal companions of Muhammad to his death,
was different.

When Muhammad died, his principal companions did not react to his death.
If his death made them sad, they didn't show any sadness. One thing they
didn't do, was to offer their condolences to the members of the bereaved
family. No one among them came and said to them: “O you members of the
House of Muhammad, we share with you your sorrow at his death. His death
is a loss not only to you but to all of us.”

At a time when commiseration is expected even from strangers, in fact,
even from enemies, it's incredible but true that the Companions of
Muhammad, the Messenger of God, withheld it from his own family. They
left his family to mourn his death alone.


