Muhammad Mustafa and his Succession
===================================

As a statesman, Muhammad ranks among the greatest in the whole world. He
was endowed with amazing perspicacity, vision and political genius.
During the last ten years of his life, he was called upon to make the
most momentous decisions in the history of Islam. Those decisions
affected not only the Muslims or the Arabs but all mankind. He was also
aware that his actions and decisions would affect the actions and
decisions of every generation of the Muslims to the end of time itself.

Muhammad, the Messenger of God, therefore, did not make any decision, no
matter how trivial, on an *ad hoc* basis; nor did he make decisions by a
“trial and error” method. His decisions were all inspired. They were
precedents for the Muslim *umma* (nation or community) for all time. It
was with this knowledge and understanding that he said or did anything
and everything.

Muhammad had succeeded, after a long and sanguinary struggle against the
idolaters and polytheists of Arabia, in establishing the Kingdom of
Heaven on Earth so that his *umma* (people) may live in it in peace and
security, admired and envied by the rest of mankind.

The Kingdom of Heaven on Earth was the lifework of Muhammad. He knew
that he was a mortal, and would die some day, but his work, as embodied
in the “Kingdom” would live. He knew that after his death, someone else
would have to carry on the work begun by him. He also knew that orderly
succession is the anchor of stability. He knew all this and much else
besides. No Muslim would ever presume to imagine that Muhammad, the
Messenger of God, did not know all this better than anyone else.

The succession of Muhammad was also a subject of much speculation among
many Muslims. One question that had been uppermost in the minds of many
of them, especially since the conquest of Makkah, was, who would succeed
him as the new head of the State of Medina, after his death.

This question admits of only one answer, viz., the best Muslim! The
successor of Muhammad ought to be, not a second rate person, but the
finest product of Islam; someone that Islam itself might uphold with
pride as its “masterpiece.”

Such a “masterpiece” was Ali ibn Abi Talib. Muhammad had “discovered”
him early in life; he had groomed him and designated him as his
successor, thus assuring peaceful and orderly transfer of sovereignty.
He was most anxious to avert a struggle for power among his companions
after his own death.

But, unfortunately, this arrangement did not work out, and the
succession, after the death of the Prophet, was not peaceful and
orderly. There was a grim struggle for power among his companions in
which some new candidates for power succeeded in capturing the
government of Medina. Their success signaled an abrupt end of the
Kingdom of Heaven on Earth, and signaled, at the same time, the birth of
the Muslim State – a State run by people who were Muslims. The Kingdom
of Heaven on Earth or the Islamic State did not survive the death of its
Founder.

This demise of the Islamic State, while still in its infancy, may arouse
the curiosity of the student of history. He may wonder why it was so
short-lived, and how it was possible for these new candidates to subvert
the arrangement made by the Prophet himself for a peaceful and orderly
transfer of power, and to foist an arrangement of their own upon the
Muslim *umma*.

Following is an attempt to answer this question.
------------------------------------------------

The new candidates for power had not endorsed the arrangement made by
the Prophet for transfer of sovereignty. They and their supporters had
many reservations about it, and they were resolved to capture the
government of Medina for themselves. For this purpose, they had mapped
out a grand strategy and they had gone to work at implementing it even
before the death of the Prophet.

The principal ploy in the strategy of these candidates for power was to
put into circulation the canard that neither the Book of God had
expressed any views on the subject of the leadership of the Muslim
*umma* nor the Messenger of God had designated anyone as his successor.

They figured that if the Muslims believed such a claim to be true, then
they (the Muslims) would assume that the Prophet left the job of finding
the future head of his government to the *umma* itself, and in the
*umma*, of course, everyone was free to enter the “lists” and to grab
power for himself, if he could.

**Dr. Hamid-ud-Deen**

Al-Qur’an al-Majid has not mentioned anything about the manner of
selecting a khalifa. The reliable traditions (Hadith) of the Prophet are
also silent in this regard. From this, one can make the deduction that
the *Shari'ah* (Holy Law) left this matter to the discretion of the
*Umma* itself so that it may select its leaders according to its own
needs, and according to the conditions prevailing at the time. *(History
of Islam by Dr. Hamid-ud-Deen, M.A. (Honors), Punjab; M.A. (Delhi);
Ph.D. {Harvard University, U.S.A.}, published by Ferozesons Limited,
Publishers, Karachi, Pakistan, page 188, 4th edition, 4th printing,
1971)*

This ploy had a most astonishing success, and it has amazing longevity.
It was used then and it is being used today. In the past it was used
only in the East; now it is used in both East and West. Few in the East
and none in the West have challenged it. Its success is attested by the
testimony of the following historians:

**Marshall G.S. Hodgson**

Qur'an had, typically, provided for no political contingencies on the
Prophet's death. *(The Venture of Islam, Vol. I, 1974)*

**Dr. Muhamed Hamidullah**

The fact that there have been differences of opinion, at the death of
the Prophet, shows that he had not left positive and precise
instructions regarding his succession. *(Introduction to Islam, Kuwait,
1977)*

**Francesco Gabrieli**

Mohammed died, after a brief illness, on June 8, 632. He did not or he
could not make a political testament and he did not designate the one
most worthy to succeed him. *(The Arabs, A Compact History, New York,
1963)*

**G.E. Von Grunebaum**

The Prophet died on June 8, 632. He had made no provision for a
successor. *(Classical Islam* – *A History 600-1258)*

**John B. Christopher**

The most urgent political problem faced by the young Islamic
commonwealth was the succession to the leadership of the *umma* when
Mohammed died; this problem was met by the institution of the caliphate.
Because Mohammed made no provision for the succession, the stricken
Muslim community turned back to tribal precedents of electing a new
sheikh as soon as the Prophet died. *(The Islamic Tradition,
Introduction, New York)*

**Bernard Lewis**

In its origins, the great Islamic institution of the Caliphate was an
improvisation. The death of the Prophet, with no succession arranged,
precipitated a crisis in the infant Muslim community. *(The Legacy of
Islam* – *Politics and War* – *1974)*

**George Stewart**

Reviewing the history, one pauses to wonder how the Caliphate came into
being. Mohammed left no will; he nominated no one to follow in his
steps, he delegated no spiritual power, and he did not deliver the keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven to an apostle... *(George Stewart in his
article, Is the Caliph a Pope? published in the book, The Traditional
Near East, edited by Stewart Robinson, published by Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
N.J., 1966)*

Robert Frost once said: “A theory, if you hold it hard enough and long
enough, gets rated as a creed.” This statement may be modified slightly
to read as follows: “A falsehood, if you hold it hard enough and long
enough, gets rated as a creed.”

An overwhelming majority of the historians of Islam have claimed that
the Prophet did not specify anyone as the future head of the State of
Medina after his own death. For them, and for many others, this claim
has become a creed now.

But not for the Shia Muslims. They maintain that Muhammad, the Messenger
of God, declared repeatedly and unequivocally that Ali was his
vicegerent and the sovereign of all Muslims.

Muhammad charted a course for his *umma*, and warned it not to deviate
from it after his death. But the *umma* deviated nevertheless, and this
deviation led it, knowingly or unknowingly, into reviving a pagan
tradition.

After the death of the Prophet, some of his companions gathered in an
outhouse of Medina called Saqifa, and elected Abu Bakr as the leader of
the Muslims. There was no precedent in Islam for such an election but
there was a precedent for it in the political institutions of the
pre-Islamic times.

Three contemporary Pakistani historians write in their *History of the
Islamic Caliphate* as follows:

“After the death of Muhammad (S), the most important and the most
complex problem which the Muslims had to face, was that of electing a
khalifa. Qur’an is silent on this subject, and the Prophet also did not
say anything about it. In pre-Islamic times, the custom of the Arabs was
to elect their chiefs by a majority vote. (Unable to find any other
precedent) the same principle was adopted in the election of Abu Bakr.”
*(History of the Islamic Caliphate (Urdu), Lahore, Pakistan. Professor
M. Iqbal, M.A., L.L.B.;* Dr. Peer Muhammad Hasan*, M.S., Ph.D.;
Professor M. Ikram Butt, M.S).*

According to the three historians quoted above, the most important task
before the Muslims at the death of their Prophet was to find a leader,
since the latter had left them leaderless. Lacking precedent in Islam
itself for finding a leader, they were compelled to adopt a pagan
tradition, and they elected Abu Bakr as their new leader.

This mode of finding a leader for Muslims was alien to the genius of
Islam. It was, therefore, a deviation, as already mentioned. This
deviation has been noted by many Orientalists, among them:

**R. A. Nicholson**

That Mohammed left no son was perhaps of less moment than his neglect or
refusal to nominate a successor. The Arabs were unfamiliar with the
hereditary descent of kingly power, while the idea had not yet dawned of
a Divine right resident in the Prophet's family. It was thoroughly in
accord with Arabian practice that the Muslim community should elect its
own leader, *just as in heathen days the tribe chose its own chief. (A
Literary History of the Arabs)*

Professor Nicholson says that the Arabs were unfamiliar with the
hereditary descent of kingly power. He may be right. The Arabs, however,
were unfamiliar with many other things such as belief in the Oneness of
God, and they had great familiarity with their idols of stone and wood;
they clung to them tenaciously, and many of them died for them.

Nevertheless, the “unfamiliarity” of the Arabs with hereditary descent
of kingly power did not last long; it proved to be very short-lived. In
fact, their “unfamiliarity” lasted less than thirty years (from 632 to
661). After those first thirty years of unfamiliarity with the principle
of hereditary descent of kingly power, they became very much familiar
with it, and their new familiarity has lasted down to our own times.

Being “unfamiliar” with the principle of hereditary descent of kingly
power, the Arabs were groping in darkness, when suddenly they stumbled
upon a precedent from their own pre-Islamic past, from the days when
they were idolaters, and they grabbed it. They were thrilled that they
had found “salvation.”

**Francesco Gabrieli**

With the election of Abu Bakr the principle was established that the
Caliphate or Imamate (Imam in this case is a synonym of caliph) had to
remain in the Meccan clan of the Quraysh from which Mohammed came. But
at the same time the elective character of the post was sanctioned, as
that of the sayyid or *chief of the tribe had been in the pagan
society,* by rejecting the legitimist claims of the family of the
Prophet (Ahl-al-Bayt), personified by Ali. *(The Arabs, A Compact
History, 1963)*

Franceso Gabrieli says that with the election of Abu Bakr the principle
was established that the Caliphate would remain in the Meccan clan of
the Quraysh. But he does not say who established this “principle.” Does
it have the authority of the Qur’an or the traditions of the Prophet to
support it? It doesn't have.

Actually, it was an *ad hoc* “principle” invoked by those men who wanted
to appropriate the Caliphate or Imamate for themselves. They found this
“principle” very profitable because it enabled them to seize the
government of Muhammad, and to hang on to it while precluding his
children from it. But as pragmatic as this “principle” is, it has its
sanction, not in Qur’an but in “the pagan society,” as pointed out by
the historian himself.

**Bernard Lewis**

The first crisis in Islam came at the death of the Prophet in 632.
Muhammad had never claimed to be more than a mortal man - distinguished
above others because he was God's messenger and the bearer of God's
word, but himself neither divine nor immortal.

He had, however, left no clear instructions on who was to succeed him as
leader of the Islamic Community and ruler of the nascent Islamic state,
and *the Muslims had only the meager political experience of pre-Islamic
Arabia to guide them*.

After some arguments and a moment of dangerous tension, they agreed to
appoint Abu Bakr, one of the earliest and most respected converts, as
khalifa, deputy, of the Prophet – *thus creating, almost incidentally,
the great historical institution of the Caliphate. (The Assassins,
1968)*

As stated earlier, the canard that Muhammad, the Messenger of God, did
not leave any instructions on who was to succeed him as leader of the
Islamic community, has become an Article of Faith with most historians,
both ancient and modern, Muslim and non-Muslim.

One may perhaps condone the Sunni historians for clinging to this
“article of faith” but it is incredible that scholars of such range and
distinction as Nicholson and Bernard Lewis have done nothing more in
their works on Islam than to recast a stereotype of history which was
“handed down” to them by the court historians of Damascus and Baghdad of
earlier centuries.

Bernard Lewis, however, has conceded, like Nicholson and Franceso
Gabrieli, that those Muslims who appointed Abu Bakr as their khalifa,
*had only the meager political experience of pre-Islamic Arabia to guide
them.*

Bernard Lewis further says that the great historical institution of the
Caliphate was born “almost incidentally.”

The most important political institution of Islam – the Caliphate – was
thus born “almost incidentally!”

**George Stewart**

The office of the Caliphate came into being not from deliberate plan or
foresight, but almost from accident ... the Caliphate was molded by the
turbulent accidents of the age that gave it birth. *(The Traditional
Near East, 1966)*

Writing about the pre-Islamic Arab society, Professor John Esposito,
says:

“A grouping of several related families comprised a clan. A cluster of
several clans constituted a tribe. *Tribes were led by a chief (shaykh)
who was selected by a consensus of his peers* – *that is, the heads of
leading clans or families.” Islam – the Straight Path, 1991, page 5)*

In the same book (and the same chapter), Professor Esposito further says
– on page 16:

“...A society based on tribal affiliation and man-made tribal law or
custom was replaced by a religiously bonded community (the Muslim umma)
governed by God's law.”

(Abu Bakr was selected chief *(shaykh)* by “*a consensus of peers* –
*that is, the heads of leading clans or families.”* It was the
“*man-made tribal law or custom”* which invested him with power. One
thing that was not invoked in his selection, was the *“God's law.”)*

All the historians quoted above, are unanimous in stating that:

**1.** Muhammad, the Messenger of God, gave no instructions to his
*umma* regarding the character of the future government of Islam, and he
did not designate any person to be its head after his own death. In the
matter of succession, he had no clear line of policy; and;

**2.** When Muhammad died, the Muslims had to find a new leader for the
community. Lacking guidance and precedent, they had no choice but to
fall back upon the political institutions or traditions of the Times of
Ignorance to find a leader, and Abu Bakr was their choice.

If these historians are right, then it was a most egregious omission on
the part both of Al-Qur’an al-Majid and its Interpreter and Promulgator,
Muhammad, not to enlighten the Muslims in the matter of selecting their
leaders.

But there was not and could not be such an egregious omission on the
part either of Qur’an or of Muhammad. Qur’an has stated, in luminous and
incisive words what are the qualifications of a leader appointed by God,
and Muhammad has told the *umma*, in luminous and incisive words, who
possesses those qualifications. (This subject has been dealt with in
another chapter).

At the moment, however, Abu Bakr was elected khalifa of the Muslims.
God's Law was not invoked in his election. His election, therefore,
raises some fundamental questions, such as:

**1.** The wishes of God and His Apostle did not figure anywhere in Abu
Bakr's election. Since he was elected by some companions of the Apostle,
he was their representative or the representative of the Muslims. The
Apostle alone could select his successor, and he did not select Abu
Bakr. Can Abu Bakr still be called the successor of the Apostle of God?

**2.** The most important role in any social organization is played by
the government or rather, by the head of the government. Qur’an asserts
that it is comprehensive and has not omitted anything of importance. But
the partisans of Abu Bakr say that Qur’an has not told the Muslims how
to find the head of their government. If they are right, then can we
claim before the non-Muslims that Qur’an is a complete and a perfect
code, and has not overlooked any important detail of man's life from
consideration?

**3.** If Muhammad Mustafa himself did not guide the Muslims in both the
theory and the practice of government, then can we claim before the
non-Muslims that he is the perfect model for all mankind in everything?

**4.** Were the teachings of Muhammad so imperfect and inconclusive that
as soon as he died, his followers were compelled to invoke pagan
customs, precedents and traditions? Since they did, doesn't he leave his
own conduct open to question?

The truth is that Al-Qur’an al-Majid is a comprehensive and a perfect
code of life. But only those people will find enlightenment in it who
will seek it. There is no evidence that enlightenment from Qur’an was
sought in the election of Abu Bakr. The “principle” invoked in his
election was lifted out of the political experience of pagan Arabia. His
leadership rested on a custom grounded in pre-Islamic tribal mandate.

Just as Qur’an is the perfect code of life, Muhammad Mustafa, its
Bringer and Interpreter, is the perfect model for mankind. He knew that
he was subject to the same laws of life and death as were the other
mortals. He was also endowed with a sense of history, and knew what
happened when great leaders died.

One thing he could not do, was to let his people became mavericks once
again as they were in the Times of Ignorance. One thing that could not
escape and did not escape his attention, was the principle of succession
in the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth.

Abu Bakr was elected in the outhouse of Saqifa as the head of the
government of the Muslims with the support of Umar bin al-Khattab.
Therefore, his government, as well as the governments of his two
successors – Umar and Uthman – all three, were the “products” of Saqifa.
I shall identify their governments as the governments of Saqifa to
distinguish them from the government of Ali ibn Abi Talib which was
*not* a product of Saqifa. Ali's government was the (restored) Kingdom
of Heaven on Earth.


