The Sunni Theory of Government
==============================

Those Muslims who claim that they follow the traditions (the statements
and practices) of Muhammad Mustafa, the Prophe of Islam, *and* of his
companions, are called Ahl-es-Sunnat wal-Jama'at or Sunni. They also
call themselves “orthodox” Muslims, and they make up the overwhelming
majority of the Muslims in the world.

The Sunni Muslims believe that the Prophet of Islam did not designate
anyone as his successor, and he (probably) assumed that after his death,
the Muslims would find a leader for themselves. They further say that
the Prophet did not even tell his followers how they ought to select
their future leaders or what qualifications those leaders should have.

Thus, lacking both precedent and guidance in the matter of finding their
leaders, the companions had no choice but to take recourse to
improvisation.

But improvisation is not policy, and inevitably, it turned out to be a
rather erratic manner of finding leaders of the Muslim *umma*
(community). In one case the companions found a leader through what was
supposed to be an election.

In another case, the first incumbent (who was elected), nominated and
appointed his own successor.

In the third instance, the second incumbent (who was nominated),
appointed a committee of six men and charged them with the duty of
selecting one out of themselves as the future leader of the Muslim
community.

The third leader, so selected, was killed in the midst of anarchy and
chaos, and the *umma* was left without a head. The companions then
turned to the family of their Prophet, and appealed to one of its
members to take charge of the government of the Muslims, and thereby to
save it from breakdown and dissolution.

The fourth incumbent was still ruling the Muslims when a new candidate
for leadership arose in Syria. He brushed aside the hoax of election,
challenged the lawful sovereign of the Muslims by invoking the principle
of brute force, and succeeded in capturing the government. His action
brought the number of the “principles” for finding leaders of the Muslim
*umma* to four, viz.

1. Election:
------------

Abu Bakr was elected khalifa (successor of the Prophet) by a majority
vote in Saqifa.(Ali ibn Abi Talib, the fourth incumbent, was also
elected khalifa by a majority of the Muhajireen and Ansar who were
present in Medina at the death of the third khalifa).

2. Nomination:
--------------

Umar was appointed by Abu Bakr as his successor.

3. Selection by plutocrats:
---------------------------

Uthman was selected khalifa by a committee of six men appointed by Umar.

4. Seizure of the government by naked force:
--------------------------------------------

Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan seized the government of the Muslims by military
action.

The Sunni Muslims consider all these four “principles” as lawful and
valid. In this manner, four different “constitutional” modes of finding
a leader for the Muslim *umma* came into being.

Here it should be pointed out that though the Sunni Muslims have given
to each of these four different modes of finding leaders for the *umma*,
the “status” of a “principle,” none of them was derived from the Book of
God (Qur’an) or from the Book of the Prophet (Hadith). All of them were
derived from the events which took place *after the death of the Prophet
of Islam.*

In the history of any country, constitution-making is the first step
toward nation-building. The constitution is the organic law of the land.
It is the basic framework of public authority. It determines and defines
the responsibilities, duties and powers of the government.

All major decisions affecting the interests of the nation, are taken in
the light of its principles. Whatever is in agreement with it, is held
legal and valid; whatever is not, is discarded as unconstitutional.

**H.A.R. Gibb**

The law precedes the state, both logically and in terms of time; and the
state exists for the sole purpose of maintaining and enforcing the law.”
*(Law in the Middle East)*

But the Sunni theory of government suffers from a built-in anomaly. As a
rule, policies and actions of the political leaders ought to follow the
principles of the constitution; but they do not. Instead, it is the
constitution that follows the events resulting from the decisions and
actions of the political leaders. In other words, it is not the
constitution that runs the government; it is, instead, the government,
i.e., the political leaders heading the government who “run” the
constitution.

Actually, there is no such thing as a Sunni theory of government.
Whenever a new event took place, the Sunni jurists invoked a new
“theory” or a new “principle” to rationalize it. In this manner they
invested their theory of government with a protean character and a
flexibility which is truly remarkable.

The Sunni theory and practice of government have been studied and
analyzed by many students of Islamic political development, both ancient
and modern, Muslim and non-Muslim. The author of *Sharh-Mawaqif*, a
classical Arab writer, believes that the only requirement in a candidate
for leadership, is his ability to seize and to hold power. He says:

“When an Imam dies and a person possessing the necessary qualifications
claims that office (without the oath of allegiance, i.e., *Bay'a,*
having been taken for him, and without his having been nominated to
succeed), his claim to caliphate will be recognized, provided his power
subdues the people; and apparently the same will be the case when the
new caliph happens to be ignorant or immoral.

And similarly when a caliph has thus established himself by superior
force and is afterwards subdued by another person, the overpowered
caliph will be deposed and the conqueror will be recognized as Imam or
Caliph.”

Another analyst of classical times, Taftazani, is of the opinion that a
leader may be a tyrant or he may be immoral; he is nevertheless a lawful
ruler of the Muslims. He writes in his book, *Sharh-Aqa'id-Nasafi:*

“An Imam is not liable to be deposed on the grounds of his being
oppressive or impious.”

Stewart Robinson has quoted Imam Ghazzali, in his book, *The Traditional
Near East*, as saying:

“An evil-doing and barbarous sultan must be obeyed.”

Some modern analysts of the Islamic political thought have also noted
the inconsistencies in the Sunni theory of government. Following is the
testimony of a few of them:

**H.A.R. Gibb**

Sunni political theory was, in fact, only the rationalization of the
history of the community. Without precedents, no theory, and all the
imposing fabric of interpretation of the sources, is merely the *post
eventum* justification of the precedents which have been ratified by
*ijma. (Studies on the Civilization of Islam, 1962)*

**Bernard Lewis**

The first four caliphs, sanctified by Muslim tradition as the righteous
rulers, did indeed emerge from the Muslim elite on a non-hereditary
basis, by processes which might be described as electoral in the Sunni
legal sense; but three of the four reigns were ended by murder, the last
two amid civil war.

Thereafter, the Caliphate in effect became hereditary in two successive
dynasties, the Umayyads and the Abbasids, whose system and style of
government owed rather more to the autocratic empires of antiquity than
to the patriarchal community of Medina.

The subject's duty of obedience remained, and was indeed reinforced; the
Caliph's obligation to meet the requirements of eligibility and fulfill
the conditions of incumbency was emptied of most of its content.

This disparity between theory and practice – between the noble precepts
of the law and the brutal facts of government - has led some scholars to
dismiss the whole political and constitutional system of the classical
Muslim jurists as an abstract and artificial construction, as little
related to reality as the civil liberties enshrined in the constitutions
of modern dictatorships. The comparison is exaggerated and unjust. The
great jurists of medieval Islam were neither stupid nor corrupt –
neither ignorant of reality, nor suborned to defend it.

On the contrary, they were moved by a profound religious concern,
arising precisely from their awareness of the gap between the ideals of
Islam and the practice of Muslim states. The problem of the juristic
writers on Muslim government was deeper than that posed by the conduct
of one or another individual ruler. It concerned the direction taken by
Muslim society as a whole since the days of the Prophet – a direction
that had led it very far from the ethical and political ideas of
prophetic Islam.

Yet to impugn the validity of the system of government under which the
Muslims lived was to impugn the orthodoxy of the Islamic *umma*, a
position unacceptable to the Sunni ulema, whose very definition of
orthodoxy rested on the precedent and practice of the community.

The jurist was thus obliged, in some measure, to justify the existing
order, so as to vindicate the Sunni faith and system against the charge
that they had gone astray and had led the Muslims into a state of sin.
*(The chapter on Politics and War published in the volume, Legacy of
Islam,* *1974)*

**G. E. Von Grunebaum**

In the presentation of the role of the caliph, one senses the uneasy
efforts of the author to harmonize the ideal task and the humble facts
of his period. The law has laid down unalterable principles, never
envisaging the increasing incapacity of the prince of the Believers to
exercise even his more modest duties.

So theory is compelled to compromise, to stretch the concept of election
to include election by one qualified voter - in other words, to sanction
the actual situation in which the caliph is appointed by his predecessor
or the military leader who happens to be in control. Even the
possibility of a plurality of leaders of the community has to be
admitted. As in other ages and other civilizations, the theory of power
comes to be a weapon in the fight for power. *(Islam, London, 1969)*

**John Alden Williams**

A representative statement of how Muslim legalists of the later medieval
period viewed the problems of power and Islamic leadership is shown by a
Syrian contemporary of Ibn Taymiya (and with whom the Hanbali naturally
disagreed).

Ibn Jama'a (d. 1333) who was one of the highest officials of the Mamluke
religious establishment, and twice Chief Qadi of Cairo. Although he was
a Shaf'i, like al-Mawardi, it is Ibn Jama'a's view which conforms to
that of Ahmad ibn Hanbal in the creedal statement found in the dogma:
the Imam in power is to be obeyed regardless of how he came there.

In a conflict between unity and justice, the unity of the *umma* must
have precedence. By extension, whoever wields effective power in any
area must be recognized by the Imam, if he has no means of removing him.
In short, rulers must be treated as if they were perfect whether they
are or not: the need of the Community guarded from error require it. It
is a logical view but Ibn Taymiya felt that it was morally bankrupt.
*(From Imam and Legality. From Emancipated Judgment in the Governance of
Muslims. By Ibn Jama'a (d. 1333 A.D.), Al-Ahkam fi Tadbir Ahl
al-Islam).*

‘The Imamate is of two sorts: that by election, and that by usurpation.
The elected Imamate is confirmed by two methods, and the usurped Imamate
by a third method. The first method in the elected Imamate is by an oath
*of those with power to loose and bind*. The second method is for the
Imam to be chosen as successor by the one before him.

‘As for the third method, by which the acclamation of a usurper is made
valid, it is effected by overcoming the wielder of effective power, and
if there is no Imam at the time, and one sets himself up who is
otherwise not qualified for the office, and overcomes people by his
power and by his troops without any election or appointment to the
succession, then his acclamation is valid and one is bound to obey him,
so that the unity of the Muslims be assured and they speak with one
voice.

It makes no difference if he is ignorant or unjust, according to the
most correct opinion, and then another rises and overcomes the first by
his power and troops, and the first is deposed, then the second becomes
the Imam, for the sake, as we have said, of the welfare of the Muslims
and their unity of expression. For this reason, Umar's son said at the
Battle of Harra: “*We are with the one who wins” (page 91).*

In effect, the *Umma* entrusted its affairs to a Caliph, and asked him
to be a perfect absolute ruler. Apart from the question of whether this
is not usually a contradiction in terms, there was no sure apparatus for
choosing him or ensuring a peaceful transmission of his power, and often
or even usually men came to power by violent means. Once they were
there, there was no mechanism for removing them except more violence,
which was forbidden by law.

It was a melancholy fact that in most states, except those few like the
Ottoman and Mughal empires who succeeded in establishing the principle
of hereditary succession, “*nothing so well suited a man for power as
criminal instincts.”. (Themes of Islamic Civilization, 1971, University
of California Press, Berkeley)*

The Sunni jurists and theorists were capable of making endless
adjustments and compromises. They were willing to acknowledge as lawful
rulers, not only the Muslim tyrants and usurpers but also the non-Muslim
ones.

**Bernard Lewis**

Much has been written about the influence of the Crusades on Europe.
Rather less has been written about the effects of these and related
struggles on the lands of Islam. For the first time since the beginning,
the Muslims had been compelled by military defeat to cede vast areas of
old Islamic territory to Christian rulers, and to leave large Muslim
populations under Christian rule. Both facts were accepted with
remarkable equanimity.

In both West and East, Muslim rulers were willing to have dealings with
their new neighbors, and even on occasion to make alliances with them
against brother Muslims - as an obligation of the Holy Law - of
submitting to tyrants, had little difficulty in extending the argument
to include unbelievers.

*Whose power prevails must be obeyed,'* provided only that he allows
Muslims to practice their religion and obey the Holy Law. The realm of
such a sovereign may even, according to some jurists, be considered as
part of the House of Islam. *(Politics and War,* *published in the book,
Legacy of Islam).*

The sum and substance of the foregoing analysis is that the Sunni theory
of government admits of only one principle, viz., brute force. Almost
all Sunni jurists and theorists have given their blessings to this
“principle.” As a principle, brute force has been the only constant of
the Sunni theory of government ever since Muawiya seized the caliphate
in A.D. 661.

It means that if a man can revive, in the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth, as
elsewhere, the ancient law known as “Might is Right,” he is the lawful
ruler of the Muslim *umma*. The government has no theory or structure or
instrumentality beyond arbitrary force. The commandments of God
enshrined in Al-Qur’an al-Majid, the wishes, the precedents and the
commandments of His Messenger, and the code of ethics, all are,
irrelevant.

Not so surprisingly perhaps, this attitude of the Sunni jurists persists
into modern times. The Congress of the Caliphate meeting in Cairo,
Egypt, in 1926, laid it down that a Muslim can legitimately become a
caliph if he establishes his claim by conquest, even if he does not
fulfill any of the other conditions required by the jurists.

In his analysis given above, Dr. Williams has quoted Abdullah the son of
Umar bin al-Khattab (the second khalifa) as stating that he (Abdullah)
is with the winner whoever he may be. This Abdullah was noted for his
piety and religious zeal and knowledge. He spent or tried to spend as
much time in the company of the Prophet as he could, and if he
(Abdullah) said anything, it was (and still is) considered something
most authoritative in the entire Sunni establishment. It's amazing that
he didn't think that in any conflict between two individuals or two
groups, the question of right and wrong had any relevance. The only
important thing was winning.

According to him, whoever wins, is right. If a gangster succeeds in
liquidating all his competitors and becomes the unquestioned winner in a
struggle for power, then the logic of success would make him the ideal
material for the most important executive office in the Muslim world.
All he has to do to prove that he is the most highly qualified candidate
for the throne of caliphate, is to demonstrate that he can seize it by
brute force, and if he does, it will be his - no credentials in Islam
like brute force!

The Sunni jurists, theorists and political analysts have shown
astonishing consistency, in all their expositions, in upholding the
principle that obedience must be given to whoever has power in his
hands. This probably is the reason why passive obedience to the ruler
has been, in the words of Elie Kedourie, “the dominant political
tradition in Islam,” and why the excessive respect of the Muslims for
the *fait accompli* has given “its unmistakable character to Muslim
history.”

The Shia Muslims discount the Sunni theory of government for its lack of
moral consensus and its lack of consistency. They say that a principle
must either be right or it must be wrong, and the only touchstone to
test if it is right or wrong, is Al-Qur’an al-Majid. Muslims of the
whole world may unanimously enact a law but if it is repugnant to
Qur’an, it cannot be Islamic. The source of moral consensus in Islam is
Qur’an, and not the “majority.”

The Shia Muslims also say that there must be consistency in the
application of a law or a principle. But if there is not, and a new
“law” or a new “principle” has to be invoked to fit each new situation,
then it will have to be called not policy but expediency.

As noted above, the only consistency in the Sunni theory of government
is to be found in the unqualified acceptance, by Sunni jurists and
scholars, of the “principle” that power is the arbiter of this world,
and Muslims, therefore, must kowtow to it. Even Imam Ghazali says that
this “principle” must be upheld because it is a commandment to the
Muslims of Al-Qur’an al-Majid itself.

Imam Ghazali is one of the most prestigious figures in the Muslim world.
He is generally considered the greatest theologian of Sunni Islam. Some
Sunni scholars have gone so far as to claim that if any man could be a
Prophet after Muhammad Mustafa, he would be Imam Ghazali.

And yet, he advised Muslims to acquiesce in the abuse of autocratic
power by a dictator or a military leader because (he said that) their
obligation to obey the established authority rested upon the text of
Qur’an itself: “Obey God, His Apostle and those at the head of the
affairs.” It is amazing that a man like Imam Ghazali could do nothing
more than endorse a most stereotypical interpretation of this verse.

Al-Qur’an al-Majid, incidentally, is a stranger to all the theories of
government and principles of political organization discovered,
articulated and codified by the majority of the Muslims, and this for a
very simple reason, viz., it has its own theory of government and its
own political philosophy. It does not have, therefore, any interest in
any alien theory or philosophy of government.

Qur’an's political philosophy has been dealt with in another chapter in
this book.


