The Struggle for Power 1
========================

The Sunni Muslims assert that all companions of Muhammad Mustafa, the
blessed Messenger of God, were models of exemplary deportment, and that
they were untouched by greed for money, lust for power or any other
worldly ambition. They also say that all companions loved each other and
that their mutual relations were uncontaminated by any cynicism or
jealousy.

Such, unfortunately, is far from being the case. We wish it had been so
but the evidence of history does not support such an assumption, and
brutal facts rip apart the myth and rhetoric the admirers of the
companions have passed on to us.

Their most rabid admirer cannot deny that the struggle for power among
them erupted even before the body of the Prophet was given a burial. The
evidence of history, therefore, should make it possible for us to make a
more realistic assessment of the character of the companions of the
Prophet, and their various roles in the story of Islam.

It would, of course, be humanly impossible for all the companions of the
Prophet to be alike in all respects. No two individuals register
identical behavior reactions to extraneous events and circumstances.
Acceptance of Islam, and the companionship of its Prophet did not
necessarily sublimate the instincts of every Arab. They were a mixed
group. After accepting Islam, some of them reached great heights; other
remained where they were.

The difficulty in evaluating the role of a companion of the Prophet is
compounded by the looseness of its definition. According to one
definition, any Muslim who saw the Prophet of Islam, was his companion.

A great many Muslims saw him during the 23 years of his ministry as
God's Messenger, and all of them, therefore, were his “companions.” But
the Shia Muslims do not accept this definition. They say that the title
of a companion was something that Muhammad alone could bestow upon
someone. If he did not, then it was not for others to claim this honor.

The Sunni Muslims quote a “tradition” of the Apostle in which he is
alleged to have said: “All my companions are like stars. No matter from
which one of them you seek guidance, you will find it.” He is also
reported to have said: “All my companions are fair, just and right.”

If these traditions are authentic, and all companions of the Prophet are
indeed “stars,” then very strangely, very surprisingly, one of the stars
themselves; in fact, one of the most dazzling stars in the whole galaxy
of the companions, expressed some serious reservations about them. The
star in question is Umar bin al-Khattab, the second khalifa of the
Muslims.

Not only did he show that he disagreed with these two and other similar
traditions; he even defied them. During his own caliphate, he ordered
the companions of the Prophet– the stars–to stay in Medina or not to
leave Medina without his permission. He thus restricted their freedom of
movement, and they resented this restriction. But he took pains to
explain to them that he was doing so in their own interest!

In this regard, Dr. Taha Husain writes in his book, Al-*Fitnatul-Kubra*
(The Great Upheaval), published in 1959 by the Dar-ul-Ma'arif, Cairo,
Egypt:

Umar had a policy vis-à-vis the leading Muhajireen and Ansar. They were
among the earliest men to accept Islam, and they were held in great
esteem by the Prophet himself. During his lifetime, he put many of them
in charge of important affairs. Umar also consulted them in all matters
of public interest, and he too made many of them his companions and
advisers.

Nevertheless, he feared *fitna* (mischief) for them, and he also feared
mischief *from* them. Therefore, he detained them in Medina, and they
could not go out of Medina without his permission. He did not allow them
to go to the conquered countries except when he ordered them to go. He
feared that people in those countries would “lionize” them (because of
their status as companions of the Prophet), and feared that this would
lead them (the companions) into temptations.

He also feared the consequences of this “lionization” of the companions,
for the government. There is no doubt that this restriction was resented
by many of the companions, especially by the Muhajireen among them.

It would only be fair if we critically examine the policy of Umar
vis-à-vis this distinguished group among the companions. When he ordered
them to stay in Medina, he was perhaps right in his policy. Why should
we not call things by their right name? Or, better still, why not
translate the reason that prompted Umar to detain the companions in
Medina, in modern terms? Umar feared that the companions, if they go
into the provinces, might yield to the temptation of exploiting their
influence and prestige!

If the events following the death of the Prophet are studied in their
human context, it will provide a cushion to absorb the shock for those
Muslims who expect the companions to be angels but find them common,
garden-variety men. If many of the companions revealed themselves as men
driven by ambition and self-interest *after* the death of the Prophet,
it was so because in his lifetime they had no hope or opportunity of
realizing them. But as soon as he died, they felt that they were free to
pursue their own goals in life.

The traditional Sunni approach to the assessment of the role of the
companions has been what Thomas Fleming has called “the golden glow
approach.” This approach depicts everyone of the companions as a
combination saint-hero and genius. But this depiction is not true to
life, and because it is not, it puts them out of focus.

A more realistic view would be that the companions were human like the
rest of mankind, and that they too could yield to the temptation of
taking advantage of an opportunity or of power in their hands.

Lord Action, the famous British historian, and himself a devout
Catholic, once offered the following admonition to those people who made
excuses for the excesses of the Catholic Church's Renaissance Popes:

“I cannot accept your canon that we are to judge Pope and King unlike
other men, with a favorable presumption that they did no wrong ... Power
tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely ... There is no
worse heresy than that the office sanctifies the holder of it.”

Al-Qur’an al-Majid has paid rich tributes to those Muslims who proved
themselves worthy of the companionship of Muhammad. But it has also
indicted those among them who were unworthy of it. Many verses were
revealed in their indictment.

The reputation of many of the companions of the Prophet was smudged with
jealousy. Their resentment at the appointment of Usama bin Zayd bin
Haritha as Supreme Commander of the Syrian expedition, was a
manifestation of this jealousy. In later years, the same jealousy led to
the murder of one caliph, and led to rebellion against another. Not many
among the companions made a conscious effort to suppress their jealousy
in the broader interests of Islam, and of the *umma* of the Apostle.

The conflicts of the companions have long since passed into history. It
should, therefore, be possible for the modern Muslim to rise above the
emotional commitments of the past, and to take a critical look at the
“track record” of all of them. It may be difficult but it is possible to
do so if the object of his devotion is not the personalities but only
truth. What is important after all, is perception and not sentiment!

Muhammad Mustafa had formally “crowned” Ali ibn Abi Talib as his
successor at Ghadeer-Khumm, and had declared him to be the future
sovereign of all Muslims. There were a few companions who were aware
that the actions of the Prophet were beyond any question.

They believed that all his deeds were inspired by heaven, and that they
were not prompted by any tribalism. They knew that if he had elevated
Ali as the Chief Executive of the Islamic State, it was because the
latter had all the qualities essential for such responsibility.

But there was another group of the companions which believed that the
Prophet was not altogether free from the feelings of *asabiyya* (tribal
solidarity; a kind of tribal nationalism; “my tribe, right or wrong;”
clan spirit).

They attributed his declarations and statements pointing out Ali's
excellence, to his *asabiyya*. The sovereignty of Ali was not acceptable
to them. They considered themselves just as well-qualified to run the
nascent state of Medina as Ali, and they were aware that to actually run
it, they would have to act before it was too late.

There was only one way for members of this group to realize their
ambition, and that was to capture the government of Medina at the
opportune time. With this aim in view, they began to publicize a
doctrine of their own, viz., the Prophethood and the caliphate ought not
to combine in the same house. There was no way for them to take
Prophethood out of the house of Muhammad but perhaps it was possible to
take caliphate out of it.

They decided to try. The campaign was opened by Umar bin al-Khattab. He
was the leader of the group which wished to capture the government.
There is on record a brief exchange he once had, during his own reign,
with Abdullah ibn Abbas, in which he said that since the Prophet was a
member of the clan of Hashim, the “Arabs” did not like the idea that the
caliph should also be a member of the same clan. Their exchange went as
follows:

Umar: I know that the Arabs did not want that you (the Banu Hashim)
should become their leaders.

Abdullah ibn Abbas: Why?

Umar: Because they did not like the idea that both spiritual and
temporal authority should become the monopoly of the Banu Hashim for all
time.

Abbas Mahmood Al-Akkad, the modern Egyptian historian, says in his book,
*'Abqariyyat al-Imam Ali,* published in Cairo in 1970:

Umar disclosed the reason in the following statement why after the death
of the Apostle, Ali could not become his successor:

‘The Quraysh elected a khalifa out of its own freewill. They were not
willing to see that Prophethood and Caliphate both should belong to the
Banu Hashim.

Those Qurayshites who were impelled by their ambition to seize the
government of Muhammad, had worked out an elaborate plan for this
purpose, leaving nothing to chance.

Bukhari, Abu Daud and Tirmidhi (the collectors of traditions) have
quoted Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab as saying:

In the times of the Prophet we used to say that the best men in the
*umma* are Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman. *(The Virtues of the Ten
Companions* – *by Mahmood Said Tantawi of the Council of Islamic
Affairs, Cairo, Egypt, 1976)*

**John Alden Williams**

Ahmad ibn Hanbal said: “The best of this *Umma* - after the Prophet – is
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, then Umar ibn al-Khattab, then Uthman ibn Affan. We
give preference to those three (over Ali) as the Companions of God's
Messenger gave preference. They did not differ about it. Then after
those three come the Five Electors chosen by Umar as he lay dying
(as-hab al-Shura): Ali ibn Abi Talib, Zubayr, Talha, Abd al-Rahman ibn
Auf, and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas.

All of them were suited for caliphate, and each of them was an Imam. On
this we go according to the hadith of Umar's son: When the Messenger of
God was living – God bless him and give him peace – and his Companions
were still spared, we used to number first Abu Bakr, then Umar, then
Uthman, and then keep silent.” (Some Essential Hanbali Doctrines from a
Creedal Statement). *(Themes of Islamic Civilization, 1971)*

The statement of Abdullah bin Umar is a testimony that the campaign of
the companions to elevate Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman at the expense of
Ali, was launched in the lifetime of the Apostle himself, in
anticipation of and in preparation for, the times ahead. The Quraysh had
decided beforehand who would be the leaders of the *umma* after the
death of the Apostle, and in what order.

When the Apostle of God died, Abu Bakr was not in Medina; he was at his
home in Sunh, a suburb of Medina. But Umar was present at the scene. He
drew his sword and began to shout:

“The hypocrites say that the Apostle of God is dead. But he is not dead.
He is alive. He has gone, as Moses did, to see his Lord, and will return
in forty days. If anyone says that he is dead, I will kill him.”

Many Muslims were thrown in doubt when they heard Umar ranting. By
brandishing the sword, and by threatening to kill, he had succeeded in
silencing the people. Some of them thought he might be right, and the
Apostle might not be dead.

Some others began to whisper to each other and to ask if the Apostle had
really died. But presently Abu Bakr arrived in the Mosque and read the
following verse from Al-Qur’an al-Majid before the crowd of the Muslims:

***Muhammad is but the Apostle of God. If he dies or if he is killed in
battle, will you all relapse into idolatry? (Chapter 3; verse 144)***

When the Muslims heard this verse, they were convinced that Muhammad,
the Apostle of God, had really died, and no doubt was left in anyone's
mind about it.

As noted before, Umar did not let Muhammad Mustafa write his last will
and testament fearing that he would designate Ali as his successor. Then
the Prophet died. But during the interval between the death of the
Prophet and Abu Bakr's arrival, Umar was still fearful lest the Muslims
present in the Mosque, acknowledge Ali as their sovereign.

To forestall this possibility, he drew the sword, and began to shout
that Muhammad was not dead but was alive so that it would not occur to
anyone that a new leader of the *umma* had to be chosen. Umar was
suggesting by his manner that while the Prophet was still alive, who
would need a successor; after all successors were for the dead and not
for the living!

Many politicians, both before and since Umar, have concealed the news of
the death of a king or the head of a state from the public until his
heir has succeeded him into the purple.

The death of the Prophet was a fact. But was Umar going to kill a man if
he stated that fact? Was he going to kill someone for speaking the
truth? Is it a crime to say that a dead man is a dead man, and is the
penalty for saying so death?

To convince the Muslims that Muhammad was not dead, Umar brought up the
analogy of Moses. But the analogy suffered from an obvious flaw. The
Israelites had seen Moses going away from them until he had gone out of
their sight. But here the body of Muhammad Mustafa was lying in his
chamber, and it had not gone out of the sight of any one. The Muslims,
including Umar himself, could see it, and touch it, and feel that it was
cold and lifeless.

Umar's Indian biographer, M. Shibli, and some others say that he (Umar)
was threatening to kill Muslims out of his love for Muhammad. He was,
they say, in a state of shock, and was unable to come to grips with
reality!

Umar was in his mid-fifties when the Prophet died. Is it possible that
he had never seen any man dying, and he didn't know what it means to
die?

The brutal truth is that Umar was only playacting. His histrionics were
a screen for his real intentions. His insistence that Muhammad was not
dead, was one of a series of maneuvers to obscure the locus of authority
and sovereignty from the public eye.

One moment he was ready to kill anyone for saying that the Prophet had
died but the very next moment, when Abu Bakr arrived, and read a verse
from the Qur’an, he became an instant convert to the idea that he (the
Prophet) was a mortal, and being a mortal, could die, and had actually
died. He even pleaded his ignorance of the Qur’an, and said that it
seemed to him that it was the first time that he heard the verse which
Abu Bakr read to him and to the other Muslims in the Mosque.

Abu Bakr's arrival had reassured Umar, and all his senses returned to
him with a vengeance. Then he rushed, with Abu Bakr, to Saqifa, to stake
claims to khilafat, and to capture it before the Ansars could capture
it. The burial of the body of the Prophet was something they could leave
to the members of his own family.

Umar's campaign to prove that Muhammad Mustafa was alive, had suddenly
collapsed. He was, at last, able to come to grips with reality!

A rule of the ancient Roman law was that *suppressio veri* is equal to
*suggestio falsi*. This means that suppressing truth is equal to
disseminating falsehood!

Earlier, in this chapter, I quoted a passage from the book,
Al-*Fitnatul-Kubra or The Great Upheaval*, by Dr. Taha Husain, apropos
of the restriction, imposed by Umar bin al-Khattab, the second khalifa
of the Muslims, on the freedom of movement of the Muhajireen.

Umar forbade the Muhajireen to leave Medina without his permission. But
who were these Muhajireen who were forbidden to leave Medina? All
Muhajireen had left Medina – with two exceptions, viz., Uthman bin Affan
and Ali ibn Abi Talib!

Since Uthman had little aptitude for conquest or administration, he
might have voluntarily stayed in Medina. Umar, therefore, had to enact
this ordinance exclusively for Ali.

Umar could not openly say that of all Muhajireen, Ali alone was
forbidden to leave Medina. For what reason Umar could forbid Ali to
leave Medina? Apparently none. He, therefore, had to employ the generic
term “Muhajireen” to restrict Ali's freedom of movement.

And yet, it was Ali, if anyone, who would not be tempted to exploit his
influence with the army, if that is what Umar was afraid of.


