The Birth of Muhammad and the Early Years of his Life
=====================================================

Abdullah was the favorite son of Abdul Muttalib. When he was seventeen
years old, he was married to Amina, a high-born lady of Yathrib, a city
in the north of Makkah. He was not, however, destined to live long, and
died only seven months after his marriage.

Muhammad, the future apostle of God, was a posthumous child.Shaikh
Muhammad el-Khidhri Buck, professor of Islamic History, Egyptian
University, Cairo, says in his book, *Noor-ul­Yaqeen fi Seeret Sayyed
al-Mursaleen* (1953). He (Muhammad ibn Abdullah) was born in the house
of his uncle, Abu Talib, in the “quarter” of Banu Hashim in Makkah, on
the 12th of Rabi al-Awal of the Year of the Elephant, a date that
corresponds to June 8, 570.

His midwife was the mother of Abdur Rahman ibn Auf. His mother, Amina,
sent the tidings of the auspicious birth to his grandfather, Abdul
Muttalib, who came, took him in his arms, and gave him the name
Muhammad.

Muhammad's share in his patrimony was one maid servant, Umm Ayman; five
camels and ten sheep. This is proof that prophets can inherit property,
and if they can inherit property from their parents, they can also
bequeath property to their own children.

Being a prophet does not disqualify them from receiving their own
patrimony nor does it disqualify their children from receiving theirs.
This statement may appear to be a non-sequitur in this context but it is
not. Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, may God bless him and his
Ahlul-Bait, had bestowed upon his daughter, Fatima, as a gift, the
estate of Fadak.

But when he died, Abu Bakr, the khalifa, and Umar, his adviser, seized
the estate on the plea that prophets do not bequeath any property to
their own children, and whatever wealth they possess, belongs, after
their death, not to their children, but to their *umma* (the people).

It is a grim penalty that one has to pay in Islam for being the son or
daughter of its Prophet. Everyone else in the *umma* has the right to
inherit the wealth and property of one's father but not the daughter of
Muhammad, the Messenger of God!

It was a custom among the Quraysh to send their children into the desert
to spend their early years in a climate that was more salubrious than
that of Mach. Children built up stronger bodies in the wide open spaces
and pure air of the desert than they could in the stifling and noisome
air of the City.

There was one more reason why the Arab aristocrats sent their children
to live in the desert. They were purists in speech, and were great
“aficionados” of words. They were fascinated by the Arabic language, its
words, their meanings and the various nuances of their meaning; and they
took great pride in their own eloquence. In fact, the upper classes in
Makkah predicated their authority on their rhetorical power. Makkah was
the meeting-place of many caravans and its Arabic had become corrupted
into a kind of “pidgin Arabic”.

The Arab aristocrats did not want their children to learn and to speak
the pidgin Arabic of Makkah; they wanted them to speak only the pure and
uncontaminated language of the desert. They, therefore, sent their
children away from Makkah to protect them from all such deleterious
effects during the early years of their lives.

Amina gave her child, Muhammad, to Halima, a woman of the tribe of Banu
Asad, living in the east of Makkah, for nursing. The infant Muhammad
spent the first four years of his life in the desert with his wet-nurse.
Sometime in the fifth year of his life, she is reported to have brought
him back to his mother in Makkah.

Muhammad was six years old when Amina, his mother, died. He was then
taken by Abdul Muttalib, his grandfather, to his home. But only two
years had passed when Abdul Muttalib also died.

Just before his death, Abdul Muttalib called all his sons together and
told them that he was leaving two “bequests” for them; one was the
leadership of the clan of Banu Hashim, and the other was Muhammad ibn
Abdullah, their nephew, an orphan of eight.

He then asked them who among them wanted his power and authority as the
leader of the tribe, and who among them would take charge of the boy who
had lost both parents. Most of his sons showed much eagerness to be
named the leader of the tribe but no one volunteered to take charge of
Muhammad.

As Abdul-Muttalib surveyed the assembly and contemplated the future of
the boy, Muhammad, an uneasy silence fell over the scene. But it didn't
last long. Abu Talib, one of his sons, stepped forward and said that he
wanted the son of his late brother, Abdullah, and that he had no
interest in authority and power.

Abu Talib's forthright declaration clinched the matter for Abdul
Muttalib. He decided to make Abu Talib not only the guardian of Muhammad
but also the guardian of the clan of Banu Hashim.

Abdul Muttalib announced on his death-bed that his son, Abu Talib, would
succeed him as the new chief of Banu Hashim, and that he would also be
the guardian of Muhammad. He then ordered the assembly to acknowledge
Abu Talib as the new leader of Banu Hashim. The latter complied, and was
then dismissed.

History ratified the judgment of Abdul Muttalib. His son and successor,
Abu Talib, discharged both duties most honorably.

**Sir John Glubb**

In 578 Abdul Muttalib died. Before his death, he charged his son, Abu
Talib, to look after Muhammad. Abdullah, Muhammad's father, had been the
brother of Abu Talib by both their father and mother. Abdul Muttalib's
other sons had apparently come from different wives. *(The Life and
Times of Mohammed, 1970)*

Abu Talib and his wife were very happy and proud to receive Muhammad
into their family. They took him not into their home but into their
hearts, and they loved him more than they loved their own children.

Abu Talib was a man of great dignity and commanding presence. During his
incumbency as the leader of Banu Hashim he bore the titles of the “Lord
of Quraysh,” and “Chief of the Valley.” Like other members of his tribe,
he was also a merchant, and his caravans traveled to and from Syria and
Yemen

In every season, Abu Talib's caravans left Makkah for their various
destinations. Occasionally, he himself accompanied a caravan to
supervise the sale and purchase of merchandise in the foreign markets.
Young Muhammad is reported to have traveled with him to Syria with one
of the caravans when he was twelve years old.

Early in life, Muhammad, the future prophet, built up a reputation for
truthfulness, integrity and sound judgment. Since there were no banks in
those days, he became a “banker” for the Makkans. They brought their
cash, jewelry, and other valuables to him for safe-keeping, and whenever
they wanted anything back, he returned it to them. They called him Amin
(trustworthy) and Sadiq (truthful).

**Sir William Muir**

Endowed with a refined mind and delicate taste, reserved and meditative,
he (Mohammed) lived much within himself, and the pondering of his heart
supplied occupation for leisure hours spent by men of a lower stamp in
rude sports and profligacy.

The fair character and honorable bearings of the unobtrusive youth won
the approbation of his fellow-citizens; and he received the title, by
common consent, of Al-Amin, ‘the Faithful.' Thus respected and honored,
Mohammed lived a quiet and retired life in the family of Abu Talib.
*(Life of Mohammed, 1877, p. 20)*

When Muhammad was twenty years old, a war broke out between Quraysh, his
tribe, and the tribe of Hawazin. Though he was present in the campaigns
of this war, he did not take any part in fighting. He did not kill or
wound anyone, thus showing at this early period, his hatred of
bloodshed. He is, however, said to have picked up arrows from the
ground, and to have given them to his uncles who were fighting.

A few years later, Muhammad was admitted as a member into *the League of
the Virtuous*. As mentioned earlier, this League had pledged itself to
protect the weak, to oppose the tyrants and the oppressors, and to put
an end to exploitation in all forms.

It is noteworthy that it was the clan of Banu Hashim, to which Muhammad,
the future prophet belonged, which inaugurated the *League of the
Virtuous*. Was it a mere coincidence? There is no way to answer this
question. But by their demarche, the Banu Hashim had declared war upon
iniquity and injustice. They made it clear that they would not connive
at the crimes of the strong against the weak; nor would they acquiesce
in the exploitation of the poor by the Quraysh of Makkah.

Not many years later, Muhammad was to launch a program for the
reconstruction of human society the economic component of which would
comprehend precisely the destruction of exploitation. He would take the
“privileges” of the Quraysh, and their “right” to exploit the poor and
the weak, away from them.

**Montgomery Watt**

The League of the Virtuous seems to have played an important part in the
life of Mecca, and in large part to have been directed against the men
and the policies to which Mohammed later found himself opposed. In
particular his clan of Hashim came to have a leading role in the League
of the Virtuous. *(Muhammad, Prophet and Statesman, 1961)*


