The Struggle for Power 3
========================

Saqifa Banu Sa'eda
------------------

Bukhari has quoted Umar bin al-Khattab as saying:

“When he (the Apostle) died, the Ansar opposed us. They gathered in the
Saqifa Banu Sa'eda. Ali, Zubayr and their friends also opposed us.”

What was it that Umar and his friends were doing, and which the Ansar
opposed?

When the Apostle died, the Ansar, always sensitive to subsurface
political currents, and fearful of the ambitions and intentions of the
Muhajireen, gathered in an outhouse of Medina called Saqifa, and they
told Saad ibn Ubada, their leader, what they knew about the plans of the
Muhajireen. Saad was sick and he said to his son, Qays, that he did not
feel strong enough to address the assembly, and that he would tell him
what he wished to say, and he (Qays) should repeat it to the audience.

Saad spoke to his son, and he relayed its purport to the Ansar.

Saad's Speech
-------------

O group of Ansar! You enjoy a precedence in Islam which no one can deny,
and this alone makes you something special in all Arabia. The Apostle of
God preached Islam among his own people for 13 years and only a handful
of them accepted his message. They were so weak that they were incapable
of protecting him or of defending Islam. God in His mercy was pleased to
bestow the honor of protecting him (Muhammad) upon you.

He selected you out of all other people to give sanctuary to His
Messenger and to other Muslims from Makkah. He was pleased to strengthen
Islam through you so that you fought against the enemies of His Faith.
You protected His Messenger from his enemies until the message of Islam
spread in all Arabia.

Through your swords, he conquered Arabia for Islam, and it was through
your swords that all pagans were overcome. Then the time came when the
Messenger of God departed from this world; he was pleased with you when
he was going into the presence of his Lord. Therefore, after his death,
it is your right to rule Arabia.”

The Ansar expressed unanimous agreement with Saad, and they added that
in their opinion, there was no one better qualified than him to be the
ruler of all Muslims.

It was at this time that Abu Bakr, Umar and Abu Obaida ibn al-Jarrah,
arrived into the Saqifa. When the Ansar saw them, one of them – Thabit
bin Qays – rose and addressed them as follows:

“We are the slaves of God, and we are the supporters of His Messenger.
And you, the fugitives from Makkah, are a mere handful of men. But we
know that you want to seize the government of Medina, and you want to
exclude us from it.” *(Tabari and Ibn Atheer)*

This is a revealing statement. It means that the Muhajireen were drawing
up plans to grab power, and the gathering of the Ansar in Saqifa was
only a response to their gambit.

When Thabit bin Qays made his disclosure, no one of the three Muhajireen
contradicted him. Umar says that when Thabit bin Qays sat down, he rose
to say something appropriate. “I had prepared a very good speech
anticipating an occasion just like this,” he said. (Tarikh-ul-Khulafa).

This is admission by Umar himself that he had made elaborate
preparations beforehand to meet every contingency. But Abu Bakr
restrained him, and himself rose to address the Ansar. He said:

“There is no doubt that God sent Muhammad with the true Faith and with
the light of His religion. He (Muhammad) therefore, invited people to
God's religion. We were the first to respond to his call. We were the
first to accept Islam. Whoever accepted Islam after us, followed our
lead.

Furthermore, *we are related to the Apostle of God, and we are the
noblest of all Arabs in blood and country.* There is no tribe that does
not acknowledge the ascendancy of the Quraysh. And you, the Ansar, are
those who gave sanctuary and who helped. You are our brothers in faith.
We love you and respect you more than any other people. But the leaders
must be from the Quraysh. We shall be the rulers and you shall be the
wazirs.

You should not be jealous of us. You have helped us in the past, and now
you ought not to be the first to oppose us. I call upon you to give your
pledge of loyalty to one of these two men, Umar or Abu Obaida. I have
chosen both of them for this purpose; both of them deserve this honor,
and both of them are qualified for the position of the Amir.”

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Umar and Abu Bakr came to the courtyard of Banu Saidah. Joined by a
number of Muhajirun, they took their seats in the assembly. Soon, a
speaker rose and addressed the Ansar as follows: “All praise and thanks
belong to Allah. We are al-Ansar, i.e., the Helpers of God and we are
the army of Islam. You, the Muhajireen, are merely a small group in the
army. Nevertheless, you are trying to deprive us of our right of
leadership.”

Actually, for the Ansar, it was an old complaint, even in the lifetime
of the Prophet. Now when Umar heard it again, he was very angry, and he
was ready to put an end to it by the sword, if necessary. But Abu Bakr
restrained him and asked him to act gently. He then turned to the Ansar
and said: “O Ansar! *We enjoy the noblest lineage and descendence.*

We are the most reputable and the best esteemed as well as *the most
numerous* of any group in Arabia. Furthermore, *we are the closest blood
relatives of the Prophet.* The Qur’an itself has given us preference.
For it is God - may He be praised and blessed – Who said, *First and
foremost were al-Muhajirun, then al-Ansar, and then those who have
followed these two groups in virtue and righteousness.*

We were the first to emigrate for the sake of God, and you are the
Ansar, i.e., the Helpers. However, you are our brothers in faith, our
partners in war, and our helpers against the enemy. All the good you
have claimed about yourselves, is true, for you are the most worthy of
mankind. But the Arabs will not accept the leadership of any tribe
except the Quraysh. Therefore, we will be the leaders, and you will be
our ministers.”

At this an Ansari stood up and said: “Every verdict will depend upon us.
And our verdict is that you may have your own leader; we shall have our
own.” But Abu Bakr said that the leader of the Muslims must be from the
Quraysh, and the wazirs from the Ansar. At this point he held the hands
of Umar and Abu Obaida and said: “Any one of these two men is qualified
to be the leader of the Muslims. Choose any one of them.” *(The Life of
Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)*

But Umar rose and said in protest: “O Abu Bakr, it is not proper for
anyone to take precedence over you because you are the best of all of
us. You were the ‘companion of the cave,' and you are the ‘second of the
two.' And has anyone forgotten that the Apostle ordered you to lead the
prayer when he was sick? Therefore, you are the most qualified man to be
his successor.”

Another Ansari got up to answer Abu Bakr and Umar, and said: “We
acknowledge your precedence in Islam and your other qualities, and we
love you too. But we are afraid that after you, other people will
capture the government, and they would not be fair and just to us.
Therefore, we suggest that there should be two rulers, one a Muhajir and
the other an Ansar (this was the first dead giveaway on the part of the
Ansar of their own weakness).

If the Muhajir dies, he should be replaced by a Muhajir, and if the
Ansari dies, he should be replaced by another Ansari. If you accept this
plan, we shall give you our pledge of loyalty. This is the best
arrangement that can be made because if a Qurayshite becomes the sole
head of the state, the Ansar will live in fear, and if an Ansari becomes
the khalifa, the Quraysh would live in fear.”

Abu Bakr spoke in reply thus:

“God sent Muhammad with His Book to mankind. At that time everyone
worshipped idols. When Muhammad told them to destroy those idols, they
resented it. They did not want to abandon them. Therefore, God selected
the Muhajireen to bear testimony to Muhammad's prophethood. The rest of
the Arabs insulted and persecuted the Muhajireen but they were steadfast
in their support to him. They were the first to worship God, and they
were the first to obey His Apostle. *They are related to him, and they
are his own folks*. Therefore, they alone deserve to be his successors,
and no one will challenge them in this except the unjust.

And you, O Ansar! you are a people whose excellence cannot be denied. No
one can challenge your high position in Islam. God made you the
supporters of His religion and His Apostle, and it was toward you that
he migrated. Therefore, your rank in Islam is highest after the
Muhajireen. We love you and esteem you. But it is only proper that the
leaders should be from the Muhajireen and the ministers from the Ansar.
Whatever we do, we shall do by consulting you.”

The next speaker was Hubab ibn al-Mandhir of Medina. He said:

“O group of Ansar! These people (the Muhajireen) are under your
protection. They do not have any power to oppose you. You are the people
of honor and power. The eyes of all Arabia are fixed on you, and you
have the same precedence in Islam that they have. By God, they (the
Muhajireen) never dared to worship God in public until you gave them
sanctuary in your city.

Nowhere has prayer been said openly except in your city. The idolaters
and the polytheists have not been overcome except with your swords.
Therefore, leadership is your right and not theirs. But if they do not
agree to this, then let there be two leaders, one from each of the two
groups.”

Umar answered the speech of Hubab ibn al-Mandhir saying:

“It is impossible that there should be two kings in one realm. Arabs
will never submit to the rule of anyone who is not a member of the
Quraysh since the Apostle of God himself was a member of that tribe. The
khalifa of the Muslims, therefore, must be a man of the same tribe as
the Apostle himself. The fact that he was a Qurayshite, clinches all
argument. We are Qurayshites, and no one can challenge us in our
leadership role.”

Hubab ibn al-Mandhir again said:

“O Ansar! Do not pay any attention to this man and to his companions.
Caliphate is your right. Take it. If they do not acknowledge this right,
kick them out of your city. Then you select a ruler from among
yourselves. What you have won with your swords, do not give that away to
these people, and if anyone opposes me now, I shall silence him with my
sword.”

Abu Obaida ibn al-Jarrah then stood up, and said:

“O group of Ansar! You were the first to support the Apostle of God and
to give sanctuary to his religion. Are you now going to be the first to
cause disruption in that religion?”

The next speaker was another Ansari, one Bashir bin Saad. He knew that
the Ansar were determined to choose Saad ibn Ubada as the leader of the
Muslim *umma*. He was jealous of Saad and did not want to see him as the
sovereign of Arabia. Therefore, what he said in Saqifa was prompted, not
by the love of Abu Bakr or the Muhajireen but by his jealousy of Saad.
He said:

“O group of Ansar! Without a doubt we have precedence in Islam, and in
the wars of Islam. But since it is so, we must not become self-seekers.
Our aim should only be to win the pleasure of God, and to obey His
Messenger. Our services to Islam were for the sake of God, and not for
the sake of any worldly gains, and He will reward you for them.

Therefore, we should not try to capitalize on those services now. The
Apostle of God was from the tribe of Quraysh; therefore, it is right
that his successors should also be from the same tribe. They deserve to
be his heirs. Caliphate is their right and not ours, and we should not
oppose them in this matter. Therefore, fear God, and do not try to take
what is not yours.”

This speech of Bashir bin Saad emboldened Abu Bakr to stand once again
and say:

“As I said before, the leaders should be from the Quraysh. Therefore, O
Ansar! do not create divisions among the Muslims. It is my advice to you
that you give your pledge of loyalty to one of these two men present
here, Umar and Obaida bin al-Jarrah. Both of them are worthy
Qurayshites.”

But Umar interrupted him saying, “How is it possible that anyone else
should receive the pledge of loyalty while your are present among us.
You are the oldest man in Quraysh, and you have spent more time in the
company of the Apostle than any of us. Therefore, no one should put
himself ahead of you. Extend your hand so that I may give you my pledge
of loyalty.”

Umar held Abu Bakr's hand, and placed his own hand on top of his as a
sign of fealty. He had, by this act, acknowledged Abu Bakr as the
khalifa.

Abu Obaida bin al-Jarrah and Bashir bin Saad Ansari also stepped
forward, placed their hands on the hand of Abu Bakr, signifying their
allegiance to him.

Bashir bin Saad Ansari was showing much eagerness in taking the oath of
loyalty to Abu Bakr. Hubab ibn al-Mandhir who was watching him, shouted:

“O Bashir! you are a traitor to your own people. We know why you have
leapt forward to take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. You are
jealous of Saad ibn Ubada, you miserable renegade. How you hate to see
him become the Amir of the Muslims.”

It was at this fateful moment that many of the Bedouin tribesmen who
lived between Medina and Makkah, appeared on the scene. They were
hostile to the Ansar, and they had entered the city when they heard the
news of the death of the Apostle of God.

Finding out what was afoot in Medina, they spread themselves around
Saqifa. Their sudden appearance gave a tremendous boost to the morale of
Abu Bakr and Umar; and at the same time, it put a crimp upon the
assurance of the Ansar. The tribesmen were all armed. With their
arrival, the leverage in the long debate between the Muhajireen and the
Ansar, passed to the former.

**G. E. Von Grunebaum**

At the stormy session the Ansar were finally persuaded not to insist on
the succession going to one of their own members nor on the double rule
of a Companion and a Helper, and partly *under pressure from the Bedouin
who were streaming into the city*, they agreed to do homage to Abu Bakr.
*(Classical Islam - A History 600-1258)*

Umar said later that until the arrival of the tribesmen in Saqifa, he
had grave doubts about the outcome of the debate with the Ansar. Their
timely arrival, and the application of pressure by them on the Ansar,
guaranteed the acquiescence of the latter in the accession of Abu Bakr
to the throne.

Bashir's ploy had succeeded. He undermined the Ansar's will-to-fight.
The protests of Saad ibn Ubada and Hubab ibn al-Mandhir were of no
avail. When Umar, Abu Obaida and Bashir took the oath of loyalty to Abu
Bakr, the others followed like sheep. The Ansar had lost the battle!

The key to Abu Bakr's success in being elected khalifa in Saqifa was the
mutual hostility of the two Medinan tribes of Aus and Khazraj. Both of
them had fought a “Hundred Years' War” of their own, and they had
suspended hostilities only because of their extreme physical exhaustion.

**G. E. Von Grunebaum**

The Aus and the Khazraj, had been in continuous state of guerrilla
warfare against each other for generations. Their conflict came to a
bloody climax in 617 in the “Battle of Bu'ath,” after which the
protagonists were so exhausted that it gradually dwindled into an
armistice, interrupted only by occasional acts of vengeance. *(Classical
Islam - A History 600-1258)*

The last great battle between the Aus and the Khazraj had been fought
only four years before the arrival of the Prophet in Medina as
Peace-Maker. Once both of them acknowledged him as their sovereign, they
also agreed to defer to his judgment all their disputes, and they called
a truce to their interminable wars. But as soon as the Peace-Maker and
the Judge died, their old jealousies, fears and suspicions flared up
once again.

When the leaders of the Aus noticed that the Khazraj had put forward
Saad ibn Ubada – a Khazrajite – as the candidate for caliphate, they
thought that if he was elected khalifa, then they – the Aus – would be
reduced to the status of serfs for all time. Their interests, they
figured, would be safeguarded better if the leader of the *umma* was a
Muhajir from Makkah instead of a Khazrajite of Medina.

They, therefore, hastened to assure Abu Bakr that they were loyal to him
before the Khazraj could proclaim Saad ibn Ubada as the new lord of
Medina. It were thus the Aussites of Medina who were actually
instrumental in securing Abu Bakr's success in his election as khalifa.
Other factors, such as the treachery of Bashir bin Saad, himself a
Khazrajite, to his own tribe, the Khazraj; and the intervention of the
Bedouin tribesmen, at a critical moment, also contributed to Abu Bakr's
success.

**Maxime Rodinson**

The Medinians, especially those belonging to the tribe of Khazraj,
sensed that the Qurayshite Emigrants who had come from Mecca with
Mohammed of whom they had always been jealous, would now attempt to
claim the leadership for themselves.

The Prophet was dead. There was no longer any reason why they should
submit to these foreigners. They called a meeting in the outhouse of one
of their clans, the Banu Saida, to talk over the best way of
safeguarding their interests. What they proposed to do was to elect one
of their own leading men, Sa'd ibn Ubadah, as Chief of Medina.

Abu Bakr was in Mohammad's house, was warned of this and *he hurried to
the place along with his fellow politicians, Umar and Abu Ubayda.* They
were joined on the way by the chief of another Medinian tribe, *the Aws,
rivals of the Khazraj. The last thing they wanted was to see power in
the hands of Khazraj.*

In the streets the excitement was spreading to the members of other
tribes in Medina, who had no desire to play the part of pawns in any
power game that was about to begin. As night fell, everyone had
forgotten the body (of Mohammed) still lying in Aisha's little hut
(sic).

The discussion that went on by the light of torches and oil lamps was
lengthy, heated and confused. One Medinian proposed that two chiefs
should be elected, one Qurayshite and one Medinian. Most people realized
that that would be the way to court dissension and disaster for the
community. Everyone was shouting at once; they may even have come to
blows. *(Mohammed translated by Ann Carter, 1971*)

They did come to blows. Saad ibn Ubada seized Umar by his beard. Umar
threatened to kill him if he pulled a single hair out of his beard. Umar
said to Hubab ibn al-Mandhir: “May God kill you,” and the latter said to
him: “May God kill you.”

Hubab ibn al-Mandhir made desperate efforts to save the situation. As he
tried to stop the Ansar from taking the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr,
a crowd rushed upon him, snatched his sword, and pushed him out of the
way. They were the Bedouin supporters of the Muhajireen.

Hubab lost his sword but he still struck at the faces of the citizens of
Medina who were giving fealty to Abu Bakr. He cursed them and said: “O
Ansar! I can see with my own eyes that your children are begging for
food at the doors of the houses of these Makkans but instead of getting
food, are being kicked in the teeth by them, and are being driven away.”

Abu Bakr asked Hubab: “Do you entertain such fears from me?” He said:
“No. Not from you but from those who will come after you.” Trying to
reassure him, Abu Bakr said: “If that happens, you can always repudiate
your allegiance to your khalifas.” He bitterly retorted: “It would be
too late then, and it would serve no purpose.”

It was this chaotic, bohemian and raucous assembly in the outhouse of
Saqifa which elected Abu Bakr as khalifa. The Ansar gave his election
only a negative endorsement. They didn't, by any means, designate the
best-qualified man. Umar very deftly shelved the question of
qualification, and never let it pop up in the debate. The question of a
candidate's qualifications was buried under a cloud of evasive rhetoric.

Saad ibn Ubada, the leader of the Khazraj, and the “runner-up” in the
Saqifa no-holds-barred, free-for-all, was one of those men who refused
to take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. He said to the latter: “O
Abu Bakr! If I were not in this state of helplessness because of my
debilitating sickness, I would have sent you and your friends back to
Makkah to your own folks.”

Saad then asked his friends to take him out of Saqifa. For some time Abu
Bakr did not meddle with him, and then one day sent word to him asking
him to come and to give him the pledge of loyalty. Saad refused. Umar
pressed Abu Bakr to get the pledge by force.

But Bashir bin Saad Ansari interposed by saying: “Once Saad has refused,
he will never give you his pledge of loyalty. If you force him, it could
lead to bloodshed, and all the Khazrajites will rise with him against
you. In my opinion, it would not be prudent to force the issue. He is,
after all, only one man, and left alone, cannot do much harm anyway.”

All those men who were present in the court of the khalifa, applauded
Bashir's opinion, and Saad was left in peace. He recovered from his
sickness, and three years later, migrated to Syria.

The text of the speeches delivered in Saqifa, and the account of the
events which took place there, have been taken from the following
sources:

**1.** *History* – Tabari

**2.** *Tarikh al-Kamil* – Ibn Atheer

**3.** *Kitab-al-Imama was-Siyasa* – Ibn Qutayba Dinwari

**4.** *Seeret-ul-Halabiyya* – Halaby


