The Struggle for Power 4
========================

When Abu Bakr was acknowledged khalifa in Saqifa, he, Umar bin
al-Khattab and Abu Obaida bin al-Jarrah returned to the Mosque of the
Prophet. In the Mosque there were many people, among them, members of
the clan of Umayya; Saad bin Abi Waqqas; Abdur Rahman bin Auf; and some
other Muhajireen.

Seeing them huddled in little clusters, Umar shouted: “Abu Bakr has been
elected khalifa of the Muslims. Now all of you here give him your pledge
of loyalty. The Ansar, Abu Obaida and I have already done so.”

The Umayyads present in the Mosque were the first to respond to Umar's
call, and to take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. Saad bin Abi
Waqqas, Abdur Rahman bin Auf and others followed them, and took the oath
of allegiance to Abu Bakr.

Almost all the “patricians” took the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr on
Monday. The “commoners” didn't know about Abu Bakr's election yet. They
came to the Mosque on Tuesday. All day long they were coming and going
in and out of the Mosque, and Abu Bakr was occupied in accepting their
assurances of loyalty to him. It was only on Wednesday that he was at
last free to give his attention to other matters.

In the meantime, during the entire furious scramble for power in Saqifa,
and later, Ali ibn Abi Talib and the members of Banu Hashim, had been
busy with the obsequies of Muhammad, the Messenger of God. When the
latter had been given a burial, Ali and the Banu Hashim retired to their
homes.

Many people in Medina had taken the oath of loyalty to Abu Bakr but
there were some who had not. Most important among them all was Ali ibn
Abi Talib, the new head of the clan of Banu Hashim. The new khalifa and
his advisers believed that it was absolutely essential that Ali should
also take the oath of loyalty same as other people.

They, therefore, sent for him from his home but he refused to come. His
refusal infuriated Umar. A little earlier, he was the king-maker but now
he had become the Chief Executioner of the new government of Saqifa. He,
therefore, went with an armed escort to enforce the orders of the
government, and threatened to burn down the house of the daughter of
Muhammad, the Messenger of God, if Ali did not come to the court to take
the oath of loyalty to Abu Bakr.

Someone pointed out that the house belonged to the daughter of the
Prophet, so how could Umar burn it. But Umar said it did not matter if
the house belonged to the daughter of the Prophet. What really mattered,
he asserted, was the oath of allegiance that Ali had to take.

**Edward Gibbon**

The Hashemites alone declined the oath of fidelity (to Abu Bakr); and
their chief (Ali), in his own house, maintained above six months (sic),
a sullen and independent reserve, without listening to the threats of
Omar, who attempted to consume with fire the habitation of the daughter
of the Apostle. *(The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)*

Even a man like Shibli, the biographer of Umar, and one of his greatest
admirers, has been compelled to admit that “Umar was a most
violent-tempered man, and it is not improbable at all if he made an
attempt to set fire to the house of the daughter of the Prophet.”
(*Al-Farooq*)

How utterly charming, how utterly sweet, and how utterly heroic of Umar
to try to burn down the house of Fatima Zahra! Three days after the
death of Muhammad, the Last Messenger of God to mankind, Umar arrived at
the door of the house of Fatima Zahra. A gang of other incendiaries was
with him, and he demanded Ali's allegiance to Abu Bakr.

This demonstration of “heroism” must have “pleased” God very much,
especially, when one remembers that besides Ali and Fatima, there were
also present in their house, their four little children – the
grandchildren of Muhammad Mustafa. They ranged in ages from two to eight
years. The children must have been “thrilled” to hear the voice of Umar.

To them, he must have seemed to be a kind of “Santa Claus,” the Santa
Claus of the desert, standing at the door of their house with the “gift”
of fire for them. His “gift,” he might have told them, had the power to
change the drab grey walls of their little house into leaping and
crackling flames of many hues.

What else could he do for them to “comfort” them and to “cheer them up”
after the death of their grandfather, Muhammad, who had loved them so
much? Did they ever see a spectacle of “fireworks” so flamboyant as the
one he could show them just then if their father, Ali ibn Abi Talib, did
not take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr?

At this time, Zubayr bin al-Awwam was also with Ali. His wife was one of
the daughters of Abu Bakr but his mother was Safiya bint Abdul Muttalib,
the aunt of Muhammad and Ali. He, therefore, claimed that he was also a
member of the clan of Banu Hashim.

Umar ordered him to take the oath of loyalty to Abu Bakr. But he refused
and threatened to use his sword if pestered too much. Umar shouted to
his myrmidons to snatch his sword. They succeeded in overpowering him.
He was disarmed, and was taken to the court of his father-in-law. It was
in this state that he gave his pledge of loyalty to him.

Umar tried to achieve domination with threats, bluster, and bluff. In
the past, one could call his bluff but now it was not possible to do so.
With Zubayr thus disposed of, Umar turned his attention to Ali, and he
was taken to the court. In the court, Umar repeated his demand for oath
but Ali said:

“I am the slave of God and I am the brother of Muhammad, His Messenger.
A slave of God cannot become the slave of anyone else. If you have
succeeded in capturing the government of Muhammad because you are, as
you said, closer to him than the Ansar, then I am his brother, and who
among you can claim to be closer to him than myself? All Muslims should
give me their allegiance, and not to anyone else.

You are robbing the family of your late master of their right. You
convinced the Ansar with the argument that the Messenger of God was one
of you, and he was not one of them, and they surrendered the khilafat to
you. Now I use the same argument - your argument - which you used
against the Ansar. We are the heirs of the Messenger of God in his
lifetime and after his death. If you believe in his mission, and if you
have accepted Islam sincerely, then do not usurp our rights.”

Umar replied to him thus:

“You are a slave of God but you are not a brother of His Messenger. In
any case, you will have to take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr, and
we will not release you until you do so.”

Ali said:

“O Umar, if you are advocating Abu Bakr's case with such zeal, it is
understandable. Today you are making him a king so that tomorrow he
would make you a king. I will not do what you are asking me to do, and I
will not give him my pledge.”

Abu Obaida bin al-Jarrah was a member of the “troika,” and was,
therefore, an ardent advocate of the government of Saqifa. He too made
an attempt to persuade Ali to recognize the new government, and to take
the oath of loyalty to its head. He said:

“O cousin of the Prophet! you are younger than these men. They are much
older than you and they have much more experience than you have. You
should take the oath of loyalty to Abu Bakr now, and then, someday, your
turn may also come. You deserve to be the chief of the Muslims because
of your precedence in Islam, your courage, your intelligence, your
knowledge, and your services to Islam. And then you are the son-in-law
of our Prophet.”

Ali answered him as follows:

“O Muhajireen! do not take the power and the authority of the Messenger
of God out of his house into your own houses. By God, succession of
Muhammad is our right. He himself made this declaration, and not once
but many times. Is there anyone among you who has a better knowledge and
understanding of Qur’an than I have? Is there anyone among you who has
better knowledge of the practices and sayings of the Messenger of God
than I have? Is there anyone among you who can run his government better
than I can?

If there is, name him, and I will defer to him. But there is not. I
alone can give true peace, prosperity and real justice to all Muslims.
Therefore do not yield to your temptations, and do not put your own
ambitions and desires ahead of the commandments of God and His
Messenger. If you do, you will deviate from Truth, and you will fall
into Error.”

Bashir bin Saad, the same who was the first Ansari to take the oath of
allegiance to Abu Bakr in Saqifa, interrupted Ali's speech, and said:

“O Ali! if you had told us all this before, we would not have given our
pledge of loyalty to anyone other than you.”

Ali said to him:

“Didn't you know all this? What you are suggesting is that just as all
of you abandoned the Messenger of God as soon as he died, I too should
have abandoned him, and I too should have entered the Saqifa to contest
the khailafat with you. This I could not do. Doing so would have been
most unworthy of me. I could not forsake the Messenger of God in his
death as I did not forsake him in his life.”

After these remarks, Ali left the court of Abu Bakr which was held in
the Mosque of the Prophet. Such were the mechanics of the election of
Abu Bakr as the khalifa of the Muslims – a series of desperate, often
convulsive improvisations.

When both the private oath-taking in the outhouse of Saqifa, and the
public oath-taking in the Mosque of the Prophet, were over, Abu Bakr,
the new khalifa, delivered his inaugural speech. After thanking God and
praising Him, he said:

“O Muslims! those of you who worshipped Mohammed, let them know that he
is dead; but those of you who worshipped God, let them know that He is
Alive, and will never die.

O Muslims! though you have made me your chief, I am not the best among
you. If someone else among you had taken charge of this burden which you
have put upon me, it would have been better for me. If you expect that I
should rule you just as the Apostle of God did, then I must tell you
that it is not possible. The Apostle received *Wahi* (Revelation) from
Heaven, and he was infallible whereas I am an ordinary man.

I am not better than you. Therefore, if you see me walking on the
straight road, follow me; but if you see me deviate from it, reprove me.
If I do right, support me; if I do wrong, correct me. Obey me as long as
I obey God and His Apostle. But if you see that I am disobeying them,
you too disobey me.

You have the Qur’an with you, and it is complete. God's Apostle has
shown you both by precept and example how to conduct yourselves in this
life. The strongest among you all is he who fears God. The weakest among
you in my sight is he who is sinful. A people that gives up jihad, loses
its honor. Be punctual in saying your prayers, and do not miss them. May
God have mercy on you, and may He forgive you all.”

The new khalifa's speech was little more than some self-deprecating
platitudes, a themeless pudding, devoid of uplift or insight. The
opening remark, however, was significant. He told Arabs that if they
worshipped Muhammad, he was dead! Did any Arabs worship Muhammad?

For 23 years, Muhammad, the blessed Messenger of God, was hammering the
lesson of Tauheed (Oneness of God) into the heads of the Arabs. If after
all that tremendous effort, they started worshipping him instead of
worshipping God, then his whole mission as a prophet, must be adjudged a
fiasco.

But Muhammad's mission was not a fiasco. The Muslims worshipped God and
they did not worship Muhammad. They, in fact, repeated many times every
day that Muhammad was a slave and a messenger of God, and Abu Bakr knew
it. So why did he find it necessary to tell them that if they worshipped
Muhammad, he was dead?

Abu Bakr's remark was a clever ploy. Muhammad Mustafa had just died, and
it was natural for Muslims to feel sympathy for the members of his
family in their great loss. But Abu Bakr was apprehensive of this
sympathy. He considered it dangerous for his own security on the throne.
A period of official mourning could also be dangerous for him.

He, therefore, equated mourning for the death of Muhammad with
“worshipping” Muhammad, and what can be so reprehensible in Islam as
“worshipping” Muhammad – a mortal – instead of worshipping God!

Abu Bakr, in this manner, turned the attention of the Muslim umma away
from any sympathy it might have felt for the sorrowing family of
Muhammad.

The Arabs did not worship anything better than pieces of rock or wood;
Muhammad made them worshippers of Allah – the One Creator and Lord of
the Universe. The Arabs were little better than shepherds or bandits;
Muhammad made them kings and conquerors. The Arabs were barbarous and
ignorant; Muhammad made them the most civilized nation on earth. He was
the greatest benefactor not only of the Arabs of his own time but of all
mankind for all time.

When such a man died, the Arabs, the Muslims, who were the beneficiaries
of his work for them, ought to have been pulverized by sorrow. But
astoundingly, shockingly and incredibly, they were not! Though they had
lost the greatest blessing that God had ever sent to them – in the
person of His Own Beloved, Muhammad – they didn't register any sense of
loss at all.

It didn't occur to the Muslim umma that Muhammad who was its guide, and
leader not only in life but also in death, ought to have a state
funeral, and that there ought to be a period of official mourning for
him.

The Muslim umma apparently figured that mourning for the death of
Muhammad, and giving him a burial, were duties that could best be left
to the members of his own family. The members of his family mourned for
him, and gave him a burial.


