A Critique of Saqifa
====================

Muhammad ibn Ishaq, the biographer of the Prophet of Islam, writes in
his *Seera* (Life of the Messenger of God):

Umar said: “And lo, they (the Ansar) were trying to cut us off from our
origin and wrest authority from us. When he (an Ansari) had finished
(his speech), I wanted to speak, for I had prepared a speech in my mind
which pleased me much. I wanted to produce it before Abu Bakr and I was
trying to soften a certain asperity of his; but Abu Bakr said, ‘Gently,
Umar.'

I did not like to anger him and so he spoke. He was a man with more
knowledge and dignity than I, and by God, he did not omit a single word
which I had thought of and he uttered it in his inimitable way better
than I could have done.

He (Abu Bakr) said: ‘All the good that you have said about yourselves
(the Ansar) is deserved. But the Arabs will recognize authority only in
this *clan of Quraysh, they being the best of the Arabs in blood and
country.* I offer you one of these two men: accept which you please.'
Thus saying he took hold of my hand and that of Abu Ubayda b.
al-Jarrah's...”

Muhammad, the Messenger of God, had not been dead an hour yet when Abu
Bakr revived the arrogance of the Times of Ignorance by claiming before
the Ansar that the Quraysh, the tribe to which he himself belonged, was
“better” than or “superior” to them (the Ansar) “in blood and country!”

How did Abu Bakr know about this “superiority” of the Quraysh? Qur’an
and its Bringer, Muhammad, never said that the tribe of Quraysh was
superior to anyone or that it had any superiority at all.

In fact, it were the Quraysh who were the most die-hard of all the
idolaters of Arabia. They clutched their idols, and they fought against
Muhammad and Islam, with cannibalistic fury, for more than twenty years.
The Ansar, on the other hand, accepted Islam spontaneously and
voluntarily. They entered Islam en bloc and without demur.

The “superiority” of the Quraysh which Abu Bakr flaunted in Saqifa,
before the Ansar, was a pre-Islamic theme which he revived to reinforce
his claim to khilafat.

Only a few days earlier, Umar had withheld pen, paper and ink from
Muhammad when the latter was on his deathbed, and wished to write his
will. A will, Umar said, was unnecessary because “the Book of God is
sufficient for us.” But in Saqifa, he and Abu Bakr forgot that Book,
according to which superiority is judged not by *blood and country* but
by piety. In that Book this is what we read:

***Verily, the most honored of you in the sight of God is he who is most
righteous of you. (Chapter 49; verse 13)***

In the sight of God only those people are superior who have high
character, who are God-fearing and who are God-loving. But the one thing
to which Abu Bakr and Umar did not advert in Saqifa, was the Book of
God. Before entering Saqifa, they had forgotten that the body of the
Apostle of God was awaiting burial; and after entering, they forgot the
Book of God – a curious “coincidence” of forgetfulness!

**Dr. Muhammad Hamidullah**

The Qur’an has rejected all superiority on account of language, color of
skin or other ineluctable incidences of nature, and recognizes only
superiority of individuals as that based on piety. *(Introduction to
Islam, Kuwait, 1977)*

Abu Bakr's claim of the superiority of the Quraysh on the grounds of
blood and country, was the first symptom of the recrudescence of
paganism in Islam!

**Sir John Glubb**

On events following the death of the Prophet of Islam.

This wild scene was scarcely over when a man hastened up to Abu Bakr to
inform him that the people of Medina were gathering in the guest hall of
the Banu Saeda clan, proposing to elect Saad ibn Ubada, shaikh of the
Khazraj tribe, as their successor to the Prophet. *Mohammed was not dead
an hour before the struggle for power threatened to rend Islam into
rival factions.*

The mild and quiet Abu Bakr and the fiery Umar ibn al-Khattab *set off
in* *haste* to meet this new challenge. They were accompanied by the
wise and gentle Abu Ubaida, one of the earliest converts, of whom we
shall hear more later.

Ten years before, the Helpers had welcomed the persecuted Prophet into
their homes and had given him their protection, but Mohammed had
gradually become famous and powerful, and had been surrounded by his own
Quraish relatives (sic). The men of Medina, instead of being the
protectors, of the Muslims, found themselves in a subordinate position
in their own town.

Criticism was silenced during the Prophet's lifetime, but he was
scarcely dead when the tribes of Aus and Khazraj decided to throw off
the yoke of Quraish. “Let them have their own chief,” the men of Medina
cried. “As for us, we will have a leader from ourselves.”

Once more Abu Bakr, a frail little man of sixty with a slight stoop, was
faced with a scene of excited anarchy. He confronted it with apparent
composure. “O men of Medina,” he said, “all the good which you have said
of yourselves, is deserved. But the Arabs will not accept a leader
except from Quraish.”

“No! No! That is not true! A chief from us and another from you.” The
hall was filled with shouting, the issue hung in doubt, the anarchy only
increased.

“Not so,” replied Abu Bakr firmly. *“We are the noblest of the Arabs.*
Here I offer you the choice of these two, choose to which you will swear
allegiance,” and he pointed to his two companions, Umar and Abu Ubaida,
both Quraishis. *(The Great Arab Conquests, 1967)*

Sir John Glubb has referred to the “wild scene” which followed
immediately at the death of the Apostle. It is true that there was much
chaos and confusion. But most of it was engineered by pragmatic
necessity. As soon as Abu Bakr arrived on the scene, he convinced
everyone that the Apostle was dead, and confusion came to an end.
Confusion was kept up as long as it was needed but now it was needed no
more.

The Ansar were watching the events. It occurred to them that the refusal
of the Muhajireen to accompany the army of Usama to Syria; their refusal
to give pen, paper and ink to the Prophet when he was on his deathbed
and wanted to write his will; and now the denial of his death, were all
parts of a grand strategy to take the caliphate out of his house.

They were also convinced that the Muhajireen who were defying the
Prophet in his lifetime, would never let Ali succeed him on the throne.
They, therefore, decided to choose their own leader.

But the Ansar were outmaneuvered by the Muhajireen. The Ansar did not
have an intelligence system working for them but the Muhajireen had. The
man who informed Abu Bakr and Umar what the Ansar were doing, was
himself an Aussite of Medina. As already pointed out, he squealed on the
Khazraj.

Actually this spy met Umar and informed him about the assembly of the
Ansar in Saqifa. Abu Bakr was in the chamber of the Prophet. Umar called
him out. He came out and both of them sped toward Saqifa. They also took
Abu Obaida with them. They formed the “troika” of king-makers.

The Ansar in Saqifa were not conspiring against Abu Bakr or Umar or
against anyone else. They were debating a matter that affected Islam and
all Muslims. The arrival of the “troika” in their assembly, surprised
the Khazraj but pleased the Aussites. The latter now hoped to foil their
rivals – the Khazraj – with the help of the “troika.”

Sir John Glubb says that Abu Bakr and Umar “set out in haste to meet
this new challenge.” How is it that Abu Bakr and Umar alone had to meet
a challenge that was “threatening” not them but the whole Muslim umma?
Who gave them the authority to meet this “challenge?” After all, at this
time, they were just like any other member of the community. And how is
it that they did not take anyone else into their “confidence” except Abu
Obaida as if they were on a secret mission?

The historian further says that the men of Medina found themselves in a
subordinate position in their own hometown. It is true but it did not
happen in the lifetime of the Prophet. The latter had treated the Ansar
as if they were kings, and they had the first place in his heart. But as
soon as he died, everything changed for them, and they ceased to be
masters in their own homes.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal***:*

“How much more exacerbating must this brief outing have been for
Muhammad when at the same time he had to confront such momentous matters
as Usama's mobilized army and *the threatened fate of al-Ansar* as well
as of the Arab umma, newly cemented together by the religion of Islam?”
*(The Life of Muhammad)*

The underlined part of this question is highly cryptic. It appears that
there was a recognition of the threat. Both the Prophet himself and his
Ansari friends, had a presentiment of some evil which hung like a cloud
over them. But who could threaten the Ansar and for what reason?

In the context of the events, it was plain to see that the only people
who could threaten the Ansar were their own erstwhile guests from Makkah
– the Muhajireen. No one other than the Muhajireen, in the whole Arabian
peninsula, was in a position to pose a threat to the security of the
Ansar.

The Aus and the Khazraj were jealous and suspicious of each other. They
were, therefore, open to exploitation by their opponents. And since
their leaders were aware of this weakness in their ranks, they were on
the defensive in Saqifa. And when one of their leaders said to the
Muhajireen: “We shall choose two leaders – one from us and one from
you,” it became obvious that he was speaking from a position of
weakness, not strength. Merely by suggesting joint rule, the Ansar had
betrayed their own vulnerability to their opponents.

Clausewitz wrote that a country could be subdued by the effects of
internal dissension. A party can also be subdued by the same effects. It
was essentially the effects of internal dissension which defeated the
Ansar. The Ansar had taken the fatal false step. Saad ibn Ubada had
warned them that they were revealing their own weakness to their
opponents but the harm done could not be reversed especially since the
Aussites believed that the Muhajireen would be more even-handed with
them than Saad ibn Ubada of the Khazraj.

In the animated, bitter and protracted debate in Saqifa, Abu Bakr told
the Ansar, among other things, that the Arabs would not accept a leader
who is not from Quraysh. But he would have been closer to the truth if
he had said that a non-Qurayshi leader would not be acceptable to
himself, to Umar and to a few other Muhajireen.

After all, how did he know that the Arabs would not accept the
leadership of a non-Qurayshi? Did the Arab tribes send delegations to
him to tell him that they would not acknowledge an Ansari as a leader?
Abu Bakr lumped all Arabs with a handful of Muhajireen who wanted to
capture power for themselves.

**John Alden William**

The origins of the caliphate-imamate have been the most troubled
questions in Islamic history. The majority party, the Sunnis, have left
documents that seem to indicate the caliphate came into being suddenly,
and as a response to the death of the Prophet in 632. So long as the
Prophet lived, he had been the perfect ruler - accessible, humane,
fatherly, a warrior and a judge, and “always right” for his people. Now
he was unexpectedly dead.

Confronted by this loss, and with no successor to him, the Community
began to split into its component tribes. *By quick action, Abu Bakr and
Umar, succeeded in having one of themselves accepted by all as a ruler.*
A detailed version of the events by Umar, when he in turn was ruler, is
as follows:

“I am about to say to you something which God has willed that I should
say. He who understands and heeds it, let him take it with him
whithersoever he goes. I have heard that someone said, ‘If Umar were
dead, I would hail so-and-so' (i.e. Ali – Editor). Let no man deceive
himself by saying that the acceptance of Abu Bakr was an unpremeditated
affair which was (then) ratified.

Admittedly it was that, but God averted the evil of it. There is none
among you to whom people would devote themselves as they did to Abu
Bakr. He who accepts a man as ruler without consulting the Muslims, such
acceptance has no validity for either of them ... (both) are in danger
of being killed.

What happened was that when God took away His Apostle, the Ansar
(Medinians) opposed us and gathered with their chiefs in the hall
(Saqifa) of the Banu Saida; and Ali and Zubayr and their companions
withdrew from us (to prepare the Prophet's body for burial – Ed.) while
the Muhajireen (emigrants from Mecca) gathered to Abu Bakr.

‘I told Abu Bakr that we should go to our brothers the Ansar in the hall
of Banu Saida. In the middle of them was (theirleader) Sa’ad ibn Ubada
(who) was ill. Their speaker then continued: We are God’s helpers and
the squadron of Islam. You, O Muhajireen, are a family of ours and a
company of your people came to settle.

And lo, *they were trying to cut us off from our origin* (in the
Prophet's tribe – Ed.) and *wrest authority from us .* I wanted to
speak, but Abu Bakr said, Gently, Umar. I did not like to anger him so
he spoke in his inimitable way better than I could have done. He said,
‘All the good that you have said about yourselves is deserved. But the
Arabs will recognize authority only in this clan of *Quraysh, they being
the best Arabs in blood and country.*

I offer you one of these two men: accept which you please. Thus saying
he took hold of my hand and that of Abu Ubayda ibn al-Jarrah who (had
come with us).'“ *(Themes of Islamic Civilization, 1971)*

By quick action, Dr. Williams says, Abu Bakr and Umar, succeeded in
having one of themselves accepted as a ruler. Actually, by quick action,
Abu Bakr and Umar succeeded in having both of themselves accepted as
rulers. Their quick action also guaranteed that Ali (and the Ansar)
would be kept out of the ruling conclave.

In Saqifa, power and authority passed into their hands, and there they
were to remain. Even after their death, the rulers of the future were
going to be men groomed only by themselves. This was the master-stroke
of their grand strategy. “Quick action” yielded an astonishingly rich
payoff to them!

The keynote of Abu Bakr's speeches in Saqifa was subtlety. It was also
one of the secrets of his success. Though he was a candidate for
caliphate and was a member of the opposition to the Ansar, he presented
himself to them as a disinterested, non-partisan, third party. If he had
entered Saqifa as a candidate or as a spokesman for the Muhajireen, the
opposition of the Ansar would have stiffened. But he said to them:

“I offer you one of these two men – Umar and Abu Obaida. Acknowledge one
of them as your leader.”

Abu Bakr praised the Ansar and acknowledged their great services to
Islam but above all, by successfully affecting to be uncommitted and
disinterested, he succeeded in disarming them. About the Muhajireen, he
said that they had precedence in accepting Islam, and that they belonged
to the tribe of the Prophet himself. The Ansar, of course, could not
deny these claims. He further strengthened the case of the Muhajireen by
quoting before them a tradition of the Prophet in which he was alleged
to have said:

“The leaders will be from the Quraysh.”

As a quid pro quo for recognizing him as amir (prince, khalifa), Abu
Bakr offered to make the Ansar his wazirs (ministers). But this offer
was a mere sop to the Ansar. They never became wazirs or advisers or
anything in the government of Saqifa.

In recapitulating the events of Saqifa, Umar groused that the Ansar were
“trying to cut us off from our origin.”

What were those origins from which the Ansar were trying to cut Umar
off, and by what means? This statement lacks precision. In point of
fact, was it not Umar who was trying to cut the Ansar off from their
origins?

From time to time, it appears that Umar suffered a loss of memory. There
were times when he forgot the commandments of God as revealed in
Al-Qur’an al-Majid, as he himself admitted; and there were also
occasions when he forgot the declarations and statements of the Apostle
of God. Thus it appears that he had no recollection of two incidents in
the life of the Apostle, one connected with the Second Pledge of Aqaba
(A.D. 622), and the other connected with the battle of Hunayn (A.D.
630), and both connected with the Ansar.

At the Second Pledge of Aqaba, Abul Haithum of Yathrib (the future
Medina), asked Muhammad Mustafa the following question:

“O Messenger of God! what will happen when Islam becomes strong; will
you then leave Yathrib and return to Makkah, and make it your capital?”

“Never,” was the emphatic reply of the Messenger of God to Abul Haithum
and his companions. “From this day, your blood is my blood, and my blood
is your blood. I shall never forsake you, and you and I shall be
inseparable,” he assured them.

The time came when Islam became strong and viable, and Muhammad Mustafa
remembered his pledge to the Ansar. He made Medina – their city – the
capital of Islam. Muhammad never told the Muhajireen that his blood was
their blood or their blood was his blood. It was, therefore, Umar who
was trying to cut the Ansar off from their origins, and not the other
way round. The second incident took place immediately after the battle
of Hunayn. The Prophet ordered the Ansar to assemble in a tent in
Jirana, and when they did, he addressed them as follows:

“...I shall never abandon you. If all mankind went one way, and the men
of Medina went the other; verily, I shall go the way of the men of
Medina. The Lord be favorable unto them, and bless them, and their sons,
and their sons' sons for ever.”

Muhammad, the Messenger of God, told the Ansar that he would go their
way even if the rest of the world went some other way. In opposing and
checkmating the Ansar, one can see which way the Muhajireen went.
Muhammad and the Ansar had chosen one direction in which to travel; but
in Saqifa, the Muhajireen chose a divergent direction for themselves!

Umar also griped about the “authority” which, he said, the Ansar were
trying to “wrest from us.” This statement again lacks precision. What
“authority” was Umar talking about? And what “authority” did he have
anyway? Who gave him the authority that the Ansar were trying to wrest
from him? And why did he go into Saqifa? Didn't he go there to wrest
authority from the Ansar?

The meeting in the outhouse of Saqifa had only one item on its “agenda,”
and that was “authority.” It were Abu Bakr and Umar who succeeded in
grasping that authority. Once it was in his grasp, Umar could afford to
become a critic and he could afford to berate the Ansar for trying to
cut him off from his “origin,” and for trying to wrest “authority” from
him.

As noted before, when the Prophet died, Abu Bakr was not present in the
Mosque. He was in Sunh, at some distance from Medina. His absence threw
Umar into the greatest agitation. He brandished a sword in the air and
threatened to kill anyone who said that the Prophet had died. This
near-hysteria was caused by the fear lest the Muslims in the Mosque give
*bay'ah* (the pledge of allegiance) to Ali ibn Abi Talib, and
acknowledge him as their ruler. But not knowing when Abu Bakr might
come, he turned to Abu Obaida, and said to him:

“O Abu Obaida! hold out your hand, and I will give you my pledge of
loyalty so that you will become the *amir* of the Muslims. I have heard
the Apostle of God say that you are the *Ameen* (trustee) of this umma.”

But Abu Obaida refused to accept Umar's pledge of loyalty, and
reproached him, saying:

“How on earth, O Umar, can you offer khilafat to me while a man like Abu
Bakr is present among us? Have you forgotten that he is the ‘sincere'
one, and is the second of the two when both of them were in the cave?'“

Abu Obaida's reply left Umar speechless. He probably became “hysterical”
again, threatening to kill anyone who might say that the Apostle was
dead, and remained that way until Abu Bakr came. When Abu Bakr came, he
(Umar) was at once cured of his “hysteria.”

Moments later, the “troika” of Abu Bakr, Umar and Abu Obaida, barged
into Saqifa. There Abu Bakr invited the Ansar to give their pledge of
loyalty to Abu Obaida (or to Umar).

Within less than an hour, Abu Obaida ibn al-Jarrah, the grave-digger of
Medina, had received the offer of the crown of Arabia *twice* – first
from Umar and then from Abu Bakr. He must have been truly a most
remarkable man to be courted, not by one, but by two king-makers!

Actually, apart from the fact that he was an early convert to Islam, Abu
Obaida had little else to show. About him, the British historian, Sir
William Muir, writes in his *Life of Mohammed:*

“There was nothing in the antecedents of Abu Obaida to sustain a claim
to the caliphate. He was simply named by Abu Bakr as being the only
other Coreishite present.”

Sir William Muir is right in pointing out that there was nothing in the
antecedents of Abu Obaida to sustain a claim to the caliphate. But then,
what was there in the antecedents of Umar himself to sustain such a
claim? When and where did he distinguish himself in service to Islam,
either in the field or in the council?

Here the historian is expressing surprise that Abu Bakr could offer the
caliphate to Abu Obaida, a man who had nothing in his antecedents. But
he probably didn't realize that in the situation under study, the matter
of the antecedents of a candidate for caliphate, had no relevance at
all. The king-makers would offer the caliphate to any man among the
Muhajireen as long as that man was not Ali ibn Abi Talib or any other
member of the clan of Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of God!

Sir William Muir says that Abu Bakr named Abu Obaida simply because he
was the only other Coreishite present. Again he is right. It should,
however, be borne in mind that Abu Bakr and Umar were engaged in the
most important task of appointing the supreme head of the Kingdom of
Heaven on Earth.

One may ask if they could afford to be so casual as they were. And what
would have happened if instead of Abu Obaida, another Qurayshi – Abu
Sufyan – had been present? Would Abu Bakr have offered the caliphate to
him? Most probably, he would have. After all, Abu Sufyan was not only a
member of the tribe of Quraysh but also was one of its chiefs which
neither Abu Obaida nor Umar nor even he himself was.

Umar and Abu Bakr were going around offering the throne of Arabia to
some “eligible” man. But was this throne their personal property which
they could bestow upon anyone they happened to like? If it was, then who
gave it to them?

After all they did not inherit it. If it was not, then what right they
had to offer it to anyone? They were going around offering something
that was not theirs. If they did not come into its possession by lawful
means – by means approved by God – then they were in possession of
something they clearly had usurped.

The contest for leadership, after the death of Muhammad, was open only
to members of the tribe of Quraysh, and to no other Muslims. Abu Bakr,
Umar and Abu Obaida – “the troika” – had made the rules of that contest,
and those rules were inflexible. Now the Banu Hashim were also a clan of
the Quraysh, and they too had to be excluded from the contest for power.
But how? This posed a problem for the “troika.”

The “troika” managed to circumvent the problem with the resourcefulness
that is essential for survival in the desert. It declared in effect that
the clan of Banu Hashim had produced a Prophet for the Arabs – a very
great honor for them – and that they ought to be content with it; as for
his successors, it would *not* be in the interests of the *umma* if Banu
Hashim produced them also; therefore clans other than the Banu Hashim
ought to produce them.

Who those clans were going to be, it was for the “troika” to decide. The
clans to which the members of the “troika” themselves belonged, would,
of course, come first.

Thus what proved to be the most valuable asset for the tribe of Quraysh,
viz., membership of Muhammad, the Apostle, in it, proved to be a severe
“liability” for the Banu Hashim. The latter were “disqualified” from
taking part in the contest for power merely because Muhammad belonged to
them!

Umar made a 180-degree veer in Saqifa. Before going into Saqifa, he was
predicting that if the family which produced the Prophet, were also to
produce his successors, the “Arabs” would rebel against it. But when he
confronted the Ansar in Saqifa, he prophesied that the “Arabs” would
never accept the leadership of a man if he did *not* belong to the tribe
to which the Prophet himself had belonged. He and Abu Bakr laid claim to
the caliphate on the ground that both of them were members of the same
tribe as Muhammad whereas the Ansar were not.

The late Maulana Abul Ala Maududi of Pakistan has bestowed some
extravagant encomiums upon the Quraysh. He says that the members of the
tribe of Quraysh were men of extraordinary skills and abilities, and
they produced all the leaders of the Muslims. To make his claim
convincing, he has quoted statements purporting to their excellence,
which he says, were made by the Prophet and Ali ibn Abi Talib.

But it is entirely possible that the Ansar would have produced leaders
just as great or in fact even greater than the Quraysh did. But the
“troika” blackballed them in Saqifa, and the Muslim umma could never
benefit from their talents for leadership.

The authenticity of the statements in praise of the Quraysh which
Maududi has attributed to Ali, is open to question. Ali would have found
very little to praise in Quraysh. He was not even fourteen years old
when they made the first attempt to thwart Muhammad. Ali took up their
challenge. His sword was always dripping with their pagan or
crypto-pagan blood. He and they were in a state of life-long
confrontation with each other.

The Shia Muslims are opposed to the principle of selection of a leader
on the basis of assumptions or mere “seniority.” According to them, the
controlling considerations in choosing a leader must not be his
affiliation to the Quraysh or his age; but his character, integrity,
competence and experience. Character comes first. How does the leader of
the Muslims orient himself toward life – not just to this or that role,
not for the moment, but enduringly, comprehensively?

The choice of a leader deserves the most serious investigation reaching
far beyond the ethical conduct. After all, the leadership of the Muslims
(caliphate) is not the prize in a morality contest. The leader (caliph)
must be a man not only of high character and integrity but also of
outstanding ability and vast experience.

In other words, selection of the best candidate – best in every sense of
the term; high in personal integrity but one with ability which has been
demonstrated, proven – not once or twice but repeatedly, must be the
rule. And of course, he must have that extra but indispensable and yet
elusive quality called *taqwa.*

The electors, if there is such a body, have an obligation for a careful
and thorough examination of all the attributes of fitness and personal
background of the man who would be a candidate for the highest office in
Islam. They must weigh his competence, judgment, independence and
philosophical outlook in terms of whether he is the man whom they can
conscientiously endorse as the potential caliph.

As we have seen, character and competence of the candidate or candidates
for caliphate were not discussed in Saqifa. They were “irrelevant”
issues. The rhetoric of the Muhajireen and the Ansar was generated by
only one question, viz., should the leader of the Muslims be a Muhajir
or an Ansari?

The Ansar conceded defeat in Saqifa when confronted with the sophistry
of their opponents, the Muhajireen, that the caliphate of the Muslim
umma was the exclusive “right” of the Quraysh because Muhammad himself
was a Qurayshi!


