Saad ibn Ubada, the Ansari Candidate for Caliphate
==================================================

Saad ibn ubada was the leader of the khazraj tribe of medina. The
Khazraj and the Aus, the two tribes of the Ansar, had distinguished
themselves by their services to Islam. Their services were acknowledged
even by Abu Bakr when he was bickering and dickering with them in
Saqifa.

In the battles of Islam, the Ansar were invariably in the forefront.
They fought against the combined might of all the idolaters of Arabia.
Abu Qatada, an Ansari, claimed with truth that no tribe in all Arabia
had produced more martyrs for Islam than the Ansar. More Ansaris were
killed in defending Islam than men of any other tribe.

There was a time when Islam was “homeless.” No tribe in Arabia offered
sanctuary and hospitality to Islam and to its Prophet except the Ansar.
They invited Muhammad to be their guest, and they made him the king of
their city – Yathrib (Medina).

It was the city of the Ansar that won the honor and the glory of being
the cradle and the capital of Islam. It was in their city that Muhammad,
the Messenger of God, built the “edifice” of the first and the last
Kingdom of Heaven on Earth.

In A.D. 623 (2 Hijri), Muhammad led an expedition to Waddan, and he
appointed Saad ibn Ubada as governor of Medina during his own absence.
Saad, therefore, was the first governor of Medina.

In the battle of Uhud, the Apostle of God gave the banner of the Khazraj
to Saad. In the same battle, the Muslims were defeated. With the
exception of 14 companions, everyone else fled from the battlefield.
Saad was one of these 14 heroes who fought against the enemy, and
defended the Apostle of God.

In the expedition of Mustaliq and in the siege of Medina (the battle of
Khandaq), Saad carried the banner of the Ansar.

In 6 Hijri the Apostle went on a campaign and he appointed Saad governor
of Medina in his absence.

The Ansar had two leaders, Saad ibn Ubada and Saad ibn Mua'dh. Saad ibn
Mua'dh died from a wound he received in the battle of Khandaq. After his
death, Saad ibn Ubada was the sole leader of the Ansar.

In Saqifa, the Ansar told Saad that he was the worthiest man to be the
khalifa, and they declared their support for his candidacy.

Saad was famous for his generosity. Sometimes he entertained as many as
80 guests. Anyone – friend or stranger, could count on his hospitality.

Saad refused to take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. Three years
later, he left Medina, went to Syria and settled there. He was in Syria
when he was hit by an arrow shot by some unknown person, and he thus
died in mysterious circumstances.

Saad ibn Ubada was the first and the last Ansari ever to become a
candidate for khilafat. He didn't become a khalifa. In Saqifa, the door
of khilafat was slammed in the face of the Ansar, and they were shut out
for all time.


