Abu Bakr the first Khalifa of the Muslims
=========================================

Abu bakr was the son of abu qahafa, and made his living as a merchant in
Makkah. He accepted Islam after Khadija, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and Zayd bin
Haritha.

It is said that Abu Bakr gave more material support to Muhammad than
anyone else. In Makkah, he freed many slaves but there is no evidence
that he gave any help to Muhammad. Muhammad, of course, did not want any
help from Abu Bakr or from anyone else, but at one time in Makkah, his
clan, the Banu Hashim, was in a state of siege for three years, and was
in great distress.

There is no evidence that Abu Bakr made any attempt to relieve the
distress of the beleaguered clan but there is evidence that several
unbelievers brought essential supplies to it, and they did so at grave
peril to their own lives.

When Muhammad was ready to migrate from Makkah to Yathrib, Abu Bakr
offered him a camel. But Muhammad refused to ride the camel without
paying its price. First he paid the price of the camel to Abu Bakr, and
then he rode it.

Abu Bakr accompanied Muhammad in the journey, and was with him in the
cave.

Abu Bakr's daughter, Ayesha, was married to Muhammad, and she was one of
his many wives in Medina.

Dr. Montgomery Watt writes in his article on Abu Bakr in the
Encyclopedia Britannia, Vol. I, page 54 (1973), as follows:

“Before the Hegira (Mohammed's migration from Mecca to Medina, A.D.
622), he (Abu Bakr) was clearly marked out as second to Mohammed by the
latter's betrothal to his young daughter 'A'isha and by Abu Bakr's being
Mohammed's companion on the journey to Medina.”

According to this article, these then were the two essential
qualifications of Abu Bakr to become the “second” to Muhammad, viz. (1)
his daughter was married to Muhammad, and (2) he traveled with Muhammad
from Makkah to Medina!

Are the heads of states and leaders of nations chosen on the basis of
qualifications like these? If they are, then Abu Bakr had no fewer than
sixteen competitors for the throne of Arabia. There were at least
sixteen other men whose daughters were married to Muhammad at various
times; one of them was Abu Sufyan himself, and two of them were Jews.

The second argument in this article is no less “forceful” than the
first. According to this argument, Abu Bakr became the head of the state
of Medina because once upon a time he traveled with Muhammad from one
city to another – a truly remarkable exercise in “scientific logic.”

In Makkah, the Prophet had made Abu Bakr the “brother” of Umar bin
al-Khattab; in Medina, he made him the “brother” of Kharja bin Zayd.

At the siege of Khyber, Abu Bakr was given the banner, and he led troops
to capture the fortress but without success.

In the campaign of Dhat es-Salasil, Muhammad Mustafa sent Abu Bakr with
200 other ranks under the command of Abu Obaida bin al-Jarrah to
reinforce the troops of Amr bin Aas. The latter took command of all the
troops. Abu Bakr, therefore, served two masters in the same campaign –
first Abu Obaida and then Amr bin Aas.

There were many battles and campaigns of Islam but there is no evidence
that Abu Bakr ever distinguished himself in any of them.

In the Syrian campaign, the Apostle of God placed Abu Bakr under the
command of Usama bin Zayd bin Haritha.

The Apostle never appointed Abu Bakr to any position of authority and
responsibility, civil or military. Once he sent him to Makkah as the
leader of a group of pilgrims to conduct the rites of Hajj (pilgrimage).
But after Abu Bakr's departure, the Apostle sent Ali ibn Abi Talib to
promulgate, in Makkah, the ninth chapter of Al-Qur’an al-Majid (Surah
Bara'ah or Immunity), the newly revealed message from Heaven. Abu Bakr
was not allowed to promulgate it. Ali promulgated it.

The only other distinction of Abu Bakr was that just before the death of
the Apostle, he led the public prayers.

**Montgomery Watt**

From 622 to 632 he (Abu Bakr) was Mohammed's chief adviser, but had no
prominent public functions except that he conducted the pilgrimage to
Mecca in 631, and led the public prayers in Medina during Mohammed's
last illness. *(Encyclopedia Britannia, Vol. I, page 54, 1973)*

Some writers have claimed that Abu Bakr belonged to the “first Muslim
family.” Probably, it means that all members of his family accepted
Islam before all members of any other family did. But if the son and the
father of a man are members of his family, then this claim cannot but be
false.

Abu Bakr's son, Abdur Rahman, fought against the Prophet of Islam in the
battle of Badr. It is said that when he challenged the Muslims, Abu Bakr
himself wanted to engage him in a duel but was not allowed to do so by
the Prophet.

Abu Bakr's father, Abu Qahafa, lived in Makkah. He did not accept Islam
until Makkah surrendered to the Prophet in A.D. 630. Abu Bakr himself is
said to have brought him before the Prophet, and it was only then that
he accepted Islam.

The family all members of which accepted Islam before any other family,
was the Yasir family. Yasir, his wife, and their son, Ammar, all three
accepted Islam simultaneously, and they were among the earliest Muslims.

When Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of God, died, Abu Bakr (and Umar)
did not attend his funeral. They went first to the outhouse of Saqifa,
and then to the Great Mosque, to get and to count their votes. In the
meantime, Muhammad had been buried.

When Abu Bakr took charge of the government, he did not allow the
Muslims to observe a period of mourning at the death of their Prophet.
There was neither a state funeral for Muhammad Mustafa, the Last and the
Greatest Messenger of God on Earth; nor there was any official or even
non-official mourning over his demise. It appeared as if his death and
his burial were matters of least importance in the psyche of his own
companions.


