Principal Events of the Caliphate of Abu Bakr
=============================================

The First Civil War in Islam
----------------------------

As soon as the news of the death of Muhammad Mustafa spread beyond the
environs of Medina, false Prophets appeared in many parts of the
country. More well-known among them were Musailama in Yamama; Tulaiha
Asadi in Nejd; Laqait bin Malik in Oman; and Aswad Ansi in Yemen. Some
of them wanted the government of Medina to share its authority with
them, and some others wanted “autonomy” in their territories. Abu Bakr
sent his troops against them which suppressed them.

Usama's Expedition
------------------

As noted earlier, the Prophet had organized, from his deathbed, a new
army to attack Syria. He had appointed Usama, a lad of 18, as the
general of this army, and he had placed all his companions under his
command. His orders to this army were to leave Medina immediately. But
the companions did not want to leave Medina, and they did not – until
the Prophet died.

But after the death of the Prophet, when Abu Bakr felt secure in the
seat of power, he showed great promptness in sending Usama's army to
Syria. He said that one thing that he could not do, was to countermand
the orders of his late master.

Abu Bakr walked with Usama's army for some distance to acquire “merits”
for himself. When he thought he had acquired enough merits, he sought
the General's permission to return to the city. He also requested the
General to allow Umar to stay with him (with Abu Bakr) in Medina since
he would need his advice in running the government.

Usama granted both requests and Abu Bakr and Umar returned to Medina.

At length Usama left Medina and marched toward the north at the head of
his army minus Abu Bakr and Umar. But his army had lost its élan. He now
perhaps did not know what to do, and returned to Medina after an absence
of two months.

**Sir John Glubb**

In September 632, after two months' absence, Usama returned to Medina
with plundered sheep and camels, though few details of his operations
have been handed down to us. It appears that he raided Bedouin tribes
rather than Byzantine troops. *(The Great Arab Conquests, 1963)*

Usama bin Zayd bin Haritha, the favorite of Muhammad, and the general of
the expedition to Syria, appears soon to have faded out of history; very
little is heard about him after he returned from his campaign. He might
have taken part in the campaigns of Abu Bakr and Umar in some minor
capacity.

Malik ibn Nuweira and the Massacre of his Tribe
-----------------------------------------------

Ibn Khalikan, the historian, says that Malik ibn Nuweira was a man of
high rank in Arabia. He was a famous cavalier, a knight, a distinguished
poet, and a friend of Muhammad Mustafa.

Ibn Hajar Asqalani says in his biography of the companions that when
Malik accepted Islam, the Apostle of God appointed him a Revenue Officer
for the tribe of Banu Yerbo. He collected taxes from his tribe, and sent
them to Medina. But when he heard the news of the death of the Apostle,
he stopped collecting taxes, and said to his tribesmen that before
making any remittances to Medina, he wanted to know how the new
government in the City of the Prophet had taken shape.

Malik did not pay taxes to the new government in Medina, and Abu Bakr
sent a punitive force under the command of Khalid bin al-Walid to assert
his authority, and to collect the defaulted taxes.

Khalid had a brief meeting with Malik, and the latter knew that he was
going to be killed. Some historians say that Khalid was in love with
Malik's wife, and he ordered his execution. Malik turned to his wife,
and said: “You are the one to bring death upon me.”

But Khalid denied this and said: “No. You have become an apostate, and
your apostasy is responsible for your death.” Though Malik protested
that he was a Muslim, Khalid did not listen, and the former was
executed.

Abu Qatada Ansari was a companion of the Prophet. He came with Khalid
from Medina. He was so shocked at Malik's murder by Khalid that he
immediately returned to Medina, and told Abu Bakr that he would not
serve under a commander who had killed a Muslim.

After killing Malik ibn Nuweira, Khalid “married” his widow. In Medina,
Umar was so scandalized that he demanded, from Abu Bakr, the immediate
dismissal of Khalid. He said that Khalid had to be put on trial for the
twin crimes of murder and adultery. According to Islamic law, Khalid had
to be stoned to death. But Abu Bakr defended Khalid, and said that he
had simply made “an error of judgment.”

The tribesmen of Banu Yerbo had withheld taxes (zakat) but apart from
that they were Muslims in every sense of the term. Abu Qatada himself
testified that he heard Adhan (the call to prayer) in the village of
Malik, and saw his tribesmen offering congregational prayers. Even so,
Khalid ordered his troops to massacre them.

Tabari writes in his *History* that when Khalid and his troops entered
the Banu Yerbo territory, they said to the tribesmen: “We are Muslims.”
They said: “We are also Muslims.” Khalid's men asked: “If you are
Muslims, why are you bearing arms? There is no war between us. Lay down
your weapons so that we may all offer our prayers.”

The tribesmen put down their weapons. But no sooner they had done so,
than Khalid's warriors seized them, bound them, and let them to shiver
in the cold night. On the following morning, they were all put to death.
Khalid then plundered their houses, captured their women and children,
and brought them as prisoners of war to Medina.

**Sir John Glubb**

“Abu Bakr sent Khalid b. Waleed into Nejd with 4000 men. Many clans of
Beni Temeem, hastened to visit Khalid but the Beni Yerboa branch of the
tribe, under its chief, Malik ibn Nuweira, hung back. Malik was a chief
of some distinction, a warrior, noted for his generosity and a famous
poet. Bravery, generosity and poetry were the three qualities most
admired among the Arabs.

Unwilling perhaps to demean himself by bowing to Khalid, he ordered his
followers to scatter and himself apparently moved away across the desert
alone with his family. Abu Bakr had given orders that the test to be
applied to suspected rebels was that they be asked to repeat the Muslim
formula and that they answer the call to prayer.

Khalid, however, preferred more aggressive methods and sent out parties
of horsemen to round up the fugitives and plunder their property. One
such party seized Malik ibn Nuweira and his family and brought them in
to Khalid, although they claimed to be Muslims. The men of Medina who
were with the army protested vigorously against Khalid's ruthlessness,
but without avail. The prisoners were placed under guard but, during the
night, Malik ibn Nuweira and his supporters were killed in cold blood.
Within 24 hours Khalid had married the widow of his victim.

Malik ibn Nuweira had been executed while professing to be a believer.
Indeed Khalid's marriage to the beautiful Leila gave rise to the
suspicion that Malik had been killed with the object of making her
available to the conqueror.

The men of Medina, who had already opposed Khalid's ruthless actions,
were outraged by the death of Malik. A certain Abu Qatada, an erstwhile
friend and companion of the Prophet, hastened to Medina to complain to
Abu Bakr, who summoned Khalid to answer the accusation. Umar b. Khattab
pressed the caliph to deprive Khalid of his command. Khalid returning to
Medina, claimed that he had not ordered the execution of Malik, but that
his instructions to the guards had been misunderstood. The wise Abu
Bakr, whatever he may have thought of the morals of his lieutenant, was
aware of his prowess. ‘I will not sheathe a sword which God has drawn
for His service,' he exclaimed. Khalid's excuses were accepted.” *(The
Great Arab Conquests, 1963, p. 112)*

The tribesmen of Banu Yerbo declared that God is One, and Muhammad is
His Messenger, and they said their prayers regularly. They even accepted
the principle of paying Zakat, and they were paying it to the Prophet.
But they withheld payment of Zakat to the government of Abu Bakr
whereupon he said that they had become apostates, and declared war upon
them.

Toeing the official line, the Sunni historians have bracketed all those
tribesmen who withheld taxes from the Saqifa government as “apostates.”
Were they really apostates?

The Muslim jurists have defined “apostasy” as the repudiation of Islam.
But failure to say prayers or to fast in Ramadan or to go to Makkah for
pilgrimage or to pay zakat (poor tax), is not the repudiation of Islam.
A man who does not carry out the mandatory duties imposed by Islam but
claims that he is a Muslim, cannot be called an apostate. If one were to
become an apostate for missing a prayer or a fast or payment of zakat,
then many Muslims of each generation would have to be called apostates.
But they are not.

There is no verse in Qur’an calling upon a Muslim government to kill
those Muslims who do not pay zakat. There is no tradition of the Prophet
of Islam stating that the penalty for refusal to pay zakat is death.

Far from killing the Muslims for their failure to pay zakat, the Prophet
actually granted exemption from payment of taxes (zakat), at least in
one case. This is what the modern Sunni historian, Dr. Muhammad
Hamidullah, writes in his book, *Introduction to Islam,* (Kuwait, 1977):

“...a delegation from Ta'if came to Medinah offering submission. But it
requested exemption from prayer, taxes and military service... *The
prophet consented to concede exemption from payment of taxes* and
rendering of military service... This act of the Prophet shows that
concessions could be given to new converts...”

Here was a new precedent. The Prophet had granted exemption to the
residents of Ta'if from payment of taxes. But Abu Bakr did not follow
the prophetic precedent; he decided to make a precedent of his own; all
men of the tribe of Malik ibn Nuweira were to be killed, and women and
children to be made prisoners of war.

Besides Qur’an and Hadith, the Sunni Muslims also acknowledge the
authority of “consensus.” In fact, consensus in Sunni jurisprudence is
such an important principle that it is rated as something almost
infallible. There was consensus of all companions including Umar himself
in opposing Abu Bakr's decision to fight against those Muslims who had
not paid taxes. But Abu Bakr overrode their consensus and said that if
the tribes withheld even that piece of rope with which they tied a calf,
out of the share of zakat, he would fight against them, and would take
it from them. His orders to his troops were categorical: Exterminate all
those people who do not pay zakat.

Abu Bakr's troops carried out his orders. They subjected the Muslim
tribesmen to unspeakable horrors, and committed acts of supreme cruelty
upon them for withholding the poor-tax.

The so-called “wars of apostasy” fought in the caliphate of Abu Bakr,
were actually a civil war – the first in Islam. These wars were fought
by Muslims against Muslims – the casus belli in their case being the
refusal of some tribes to pay the poor-tax to the government of Abu
Bakr.

Abu Bakr began his reign with a civil war but he called it a war of
apostasy. When a civil war was given the name of a war of apostasy, it
became “respectable” and “holy,” and it became the duty of all Muslims
to participate in it.

In their anxiety to defend Khalid, many Muslims blandly assert that
after the death of the Prophet, Malik and his tribe had become
apostates, and the penalty prescribed in Islam for apostasy is death. If
their reason for defending Khalid is that he was a companion of the
Prophet, then Malik was also a companion of the Prophet. Companionship
of the Prophet, therefore, cannot be their reason for defending Khalid.
There must be some other reason or reasons.

Actually they defended Khalid because he was an instrument of the policy
of the Saqifa government. Malik ran afoul of the Saqifa government when
he withheld taxes from it. Apart from this, he and his tribesmen were
practicing Muslims. But for their “indiscretion” they paid a frightful
penalty – they were extirpated!

In the face of overwhelming evidence against Khalid, Abu Bakr was
compelled to arraign him but as a grateful master, he defended him, and
attributed his crimes to a minor “error of judgment.” As a reward for
his quickfix exploit, he bestowed upon him the title of “the sword of
God,” and one year later, when the whole peninsula came under his
control, he (Abu Bakr) appointed him (Khalid) the supreme commander of
his armies in Syria.

Such offenses as adultery and the mass murder of Muslims could not only
be overlooked as minor “errors of judgment,” but could actually be
rewarded if their authors lent their blind support to the government of
Saqifa.

The “error of judgment” syllogism proved to be a serendipitous discovery
for many Muslims. It enabled them to rationalize every crime, and to
defend every criminal. In the years to come, they drew a veil over some
of the most ghastly acts and egregious deeds in the history of Islam
with the explanation that they were only “errors of judgment.”

Here one can see an interesting case of the application of the
proverbial double-standard. In the caliphate of Abu Bakr, all those
Muslims who had withheld the poor-tax, were denounced by him and by the
Sunni historians as “apostates,” and were put to the sword. But in the
caliphate of Ali ibn Abi Talib, all those people who rose in rebellion
against the lawfully constituted authority, and who caused the death of
tens of thousands of Muslims, were exonerated and exculpated because
they had committed merely an “error of judgment,” and they had
“repented.”

The “error of judgment” was a remarkably expansive blanket!

As noted above, Abu Bakr inaugurated his caliphate with a civil war. But
he was able to disguise it as a war of apostasy, and by resolute action,
succeeded in crushing all opposition to himself.

Other Conquests of Abu Bakr
---------------------------

The Apostle of God had appointed one Ziad bin Labeed as governor of
Hadrmaut and Kinda. When he died, a certain Ash'ath bin Qays rose in
rebellion against the government of Medina which now was headed by Abu
Bakr. The latter sent his general, Ikrima bin Abu Jahl, to restore his
authority in South Arabia. Ikrima defeated Ash'ath, captured him and
sent him as a prisoner to Medina. Ash'ath asked for pardon. Abu Bakr not
only pardoned him but also gave his sister in marriage to him.

In Bahrain, the tribes of Banu Bakr and Banu Abdul-Qays had refused to
pay taxes. Punitive action was taken against them, and they were
compelled to pay their taxes.

These campaigns are known in history by the generic name of the “Ridda”
wars.

Abu Bakr spent full one year in fighting against the Ahl-er-Ridda and
the false Prophets. At year's end all of them had been reduced to
submission, and his authority was established in the country. However,
at the successful termination of these campaigns, he did not want his
troops to be idle; he sent them to invade the neighboring countries of
Syria and Persia.

**John Alden Williams**

“When Abu Bakr was done with the case of those who apostatized, he saw
fit to direct his troops against Syria. To this effect, he wrote to the
people of Mecca, al-Taif, al-Yaman, and all the Arabs in Nejd and
al-Hijaz calling them for a holy war and arousing their desire in it and
in the obtainable booty from the Greeks (Byzantines).

Accordingly, people including those actuated by greed as well as those
(in) hope of divine remuneration, flocked to al-Madina. It is reported
on the authority of al-Waqidi that Abu Bakr assigned Amr (ibn al-Aas) to
Palestine; Shurahbil (ibn Hasana) and Yazid (ibn Abu Sofyan) to
Damascus.” *(Themes of Islamic Civilization, 1971)*

The campaigns against Syria and Persia were begun by Abu Bakr but he
died before he could conclude them. They were brought to a successful
conclusion by his successor, Umar bin al-Khattab.

Seizure by Abu Bakr of the Estate of Fadak
------------------------------------------

Fadak was one of the estates acquired by the Prophet of Islam after the
conquest of Khyber in 7 A.H. But since his troops did not have to fight
for it, and it was surrendered voluntarily to him, it was considered to
be the property of God and His Messenger.

As noted before, the Messenger of God made Fadak a gift to his daughter,
partly as a recompense for the great sacrifices her mother, Khadija, had
made for Islam.

When Abu Bakr took charge of the government of the Muslims, one of his
first acts was to take forcible possession of Fadak. He evicted the
agents of Fatima Zahra from her estate, and he also confiscated the
property her father had given her in Medina itself.

When Fatima Zahra protested against these seizures, Abu Bakr answered
her with a “tradition” of her father. He said that he had heard the
Apostle of God saying that the apostles do not have any heirs, and such
wealth, property or material goods as they possess in their lifetime,
belong, after their death, not to their children, but to the *umma* (the
people).

Fatima said that Fadak was not a bequest of her father; it was a gift.
She claimed that Fadak was the private property of the Apostle of God,
and it was as his private property that he had given it to her.

Abu Bakr asked if there were any witnesses.

This was truly fantastic. Only four years had passed since the conquest
of Khyber. Abu Bakr was not only present at the siege but had also made
an abortive attempt to capture the fortress. He had seen with his own
eyes what the Apostle had done with Fadak. Now four years later, he was
acting as if he did not know anything. According to Bukhari, the
collector of Hadith, the following dialogue took place between the
plaintiff and the defendant.

Fatima: O Abu Bakr, if your father dies, who will be his heir?

Abu Bakr: I, who am his son.

Fatima: Who is the heir of my father?

Abu Bakr: You, his daughter.

Fatima: If I am his heir, then why have you seized Fadak?

Abu Bakr: I have heard the Apostle of God saying: “We are the group of
Prophets, and we do not have any heirs to inherit our property. Whatever
property we have, belongs to the *umma* when we die.”

Fatima: But my father bestowed Fadak upon me as a gift during his
lifetime, and it has been in my possession all these years.

Abu Bakr: Do you have any witnesses?

Fatima: Ali and Umm Ayman are my witnesses.

Abu Bakr: The testimony of one man and one woman is not enough. There
must beeither two men or one man and two women. But since it is not so,
the case is dismissed.

The ears Fatima was addressing were not willing to listen to any
argument or reason. The witnesses would have made no difference to those
who were resolved not to be convinced. The accused party had one very
conclusive argument in its favor, viz., Brute Force! It was an argument
that had the power to silence every other argument, and it did.

To support his action in seizing the estate of Fadak, Abu Bakr quoted a
“tradition” of the Apostle of God. But it is strange that he alone heard
this “tradition.” And it's just as strange that Muhammad did not tell
members of his own family that they would not inherit his property after
his death because he was God's messenger, but he went around whispering
“traditions” into the ears of outsiders.

Abu Bakr is the only man in the *umma* of Muhammad who reported this
“tradition” and who set it against the authority of Al-Qur’an al-Majid.

The verdict of Qur’an is as follows:

***From what is left by parents and those nearest related there is a
share for men and a share for women, whether the property be small or
large, – a determinate share. (Chapter 4; verse 7)***

***To benefit every one, We have appointed sharers and heirs to property
left by parents and relatives. To those, also, to whom your right hand
was pledged, give their due portion. For truly God is Witness to all
things. (Chapter 4; verse 33)***

According to these verses, God has given the children the right to
inherit the property left by their parents. Is there any other verse
which denies this right to the children of the messengers of God,
specifically, to the daughter of Muhammad?

Even if it is assumed that the “tradition” quoted by Abu Bakr is not
spurious, and the heirs of Prophets cannot inherit their property, then
this “law” ought to apply to the children of all the Prophets, and not
just to the daughter of Muhammad. But according to Qur’an, the Prophets
of the past had their heirs, and those heirs inherited the property left
by their Prophet – fathers.

***And Solomon was David's heir. (Chapter 27; verse 16)***

Translator's Note to this verse

The point is that Solomon not only inherited his father's kingdom but
his spiritual insight and the prophetic office, which do not necessarily
go from father to son. A. Yusuf Ali)

At any rate, it was not necessary for Fatima Zahra to bring witnesses.
She was already in possession of Fadak. Her ownership of Fadak rested
upon a solemn decree or pragmatic sanction of Muhammad Mustafa as the
Messenger of God and the Sovereign of all Muslims, and could not be
lawfully challenged. The burden of proof that Fatima's possession of the
estate was illegal, was on Abu Bakr.

An important point is that the judiciary should be separate from the
executive, and the executive should not interfere with the judiciary.
But in the case of Fadak, Abu Bakr who was the accused party, was
himself the judge and the jury, and his verdict inevitably went against
the plaintiff as it would have done in any kangaroo court or star
chamber.

The seizure of Fadak was a highly arbitrary act. Not long after Fadak,
Abu Bakr was confronted with many new and complex problems. To solve
them, he set two important precedents. One was the appointment of the
companions as judges. For these positions, he selected men who were
noted for their knowledge and sound judgment. If he had been fair, he
ought to have referred the case of Fadak to one of his judges for
adjudication instead of taking unilateral action on it by seizing it.

The second precedent was consultation with the companions. If Abu Bakr
had a difficult problem, he sat in the mosque, summoned the leading
companions, and put it before them. After some deliberation, they solved
the problem. If Abu Bakr had been fair, he ought to have requested them
to give their impartial judgment on Fadak. But he did not do so.

The “tradition” which Abu Bakr quoted as his “reason” for taking
possession of Fadak, was actually an ad hoc juridical formulation
designed to meet a situation which threatened to compromise his
position. It was a “principle” invoked for the first and the last time.
Once the crisis had passed, it was given a burial, never again to be
exhumed.

In her legal confrontation with the government of Saqifa, over the
seizure of Fadak, Fatima Zahra hardly expected any justice. The death of
her father, naturally, was the greatest shock and greatest sorrow for
her. But some of his companions didn't think that her sorrow was great
enough, and they sought to make their own “contribution” to it. It was
just when she was in the midst of mourning for her father that Abu Bakr
evicted her estate manager from Fadak, and his agents took possession of
it.

A long time after the plaintiff and the defendants in the case of the
estate of Fadak had left this world, Umar bin Abdul Aziz, the Umayyad
caliph, restored it to the heirs of Fatima Zahra. He was pious and
God-fearing, and realized that the seizure of Fadak had been an wanton
act and an outright usurpation.

The action of the Saqifa government in seizing Fadak had little to do
with law or its interpretation. Its leaders were inspired by a single
aim, viz., to deprive the children of Muhammad Mustafa of their means of
living. Sadaqa was unlawful for them, and they could not accept it. The
property which he gave them, was confiscated from them, and their right
of inheritance was not recognized.

Ali's Retirement from Public life
---------------------------------

After these revolutions, Ali spent most of his time at home where he
occupied himself with the task of collecting the verses of Qur’an, and
in arranging them in their chronological order. He was thus
demonstrating that his duty was to serve Islam regardless of the
extraneous circumstances. He often quoted, before his friends, the
tradition of the Prophet that the members of his family and Qur’an were
his “legacy” to the Muslim *umma*, and that both of them were
inseparable from each other.

No one among the companions was better qualified than Ali to collect the
verses of Qur’an. He was one of the few companions of the Prophet who
knew Qur’an by heart. Incidentally, Umar bin al-Khattab had spent
fourteen years trying to memorize the second chapter of Qur’an
(Al-Baqarah), but was unable.

Collecting all the scattered verses of Qur’an in the same order in which
they were revealed, was a job that could be done by someone especially
tutored by Muhammad Mustafa himself. Such a person was Ali. He had spent
more time with him than anyone else. He had literally grown up with
Qur’an. He himself said that there was not a verse in Qur’an about which
he did not know when it was revealed, where it was revealed, and why it
was revealed. He had the knowledge of the time, the place and the
occasion of the revelation of every single verse of Qur’an.

Ali completed the self-imposed task. But unfortunately for Islam, the
party in power, in line with its policy, did not want to give
recognition to his work. Nothing was more unwelcome to it than to
acknowledge Ali's services to Islam. It did not, therefore, “accept” his
collection of the verses of Qur’an.

In the days immediately following the death of the Apostle, many people
came to see Ali, and some of them counseled him to seize by force what
was his by right. Among these people there were a few sincere friends,
and also there were many unscrupulous opportunists. They all offered him
their support. The latter, of course, offered their support for ulterior
reasons. They hoped to kindle war in Islam and to profit by the
infighting of the Muslims.

Immediately after the death of the Prophet, his uncle, Abbas ibn Abdul
Muttalib, called on Ali, and said: “Hold out your hand, and I will give
you my pledge of allegiance. This gesture of mine will have a great
psychological effect upon the Muslims. They would say that the uncle of
the Prophet has given his pledge of loyalty to Ali; we too, therefore,
should give him our pledge.”

Abbas, of course, was one of the few sincere friends. In another
category of Ali's “well-wishers” was Abu Sufyan, the leader of the Banu
Umayya, the life-long antagonist of Muhammad, and the symbol of the
pagan opposition to and hatred of Islam.

In the events following the death of the Prophet, he perceived his
opportunity to subvert Islam, and he seized it. He came to Ali and said:
“It is outrageous to see men of the humblest clans of Quraysh usurping
your right, and capturing the government which is yours. All you have to
do to take it from them, is to give me the signal, and I shall fill the
streets of Medina with infantry and cavalry, ready to die at your
command.”

What mortal could have resisted this offer? And what did Ali have to
lose now anyway? What he could lose, he had lost. But then who in the
Muslim *umma* loved Islam more than he did? He never allowed temptation
or provocation to make him do anything that would militate against the
broader interests of Islam and the Muslims. Islam was still a highly
fragile achievement quite capable of being aborted and corrupted by
forces inside and outside Medina but in Ali it had a protector who did
not let it happen.

If Ali was “the best judge in Islam,” he was also the best judge of men.
His reply to Abu Sufyan, framed as a question, was characteristic.
“Since when you have become a well-wisher of Islam?” asked Ali. It was
only a rhetorical question, and with it he spurned Abu Sufyan's offer
with the contempt that it deserved, and squelched him.

With this answer, Ali demonstrated once again that he and he alone was
the true guardian of Islam. In this fateful moment, he forswore his own
interests and ambitions but he saved Islam from shipwreck.

It was a truly critical time in the history of nascent Islam. Rebellions
against the government of Abu Bakr were breaking out all over the
country. If Ali had accepted the offers of his uncle, Abbas ibn Abdul
Muttalib, and of Abu Sufyan, he might have succeeded in capturing the
government of Medina. But his success would have come only at a cost, to
Islam, of a civil war in Medina which was the core of the Muslim state
and society. War in Medina at this juncture might have brought the
career of Islam to an abrupt end.

Ali passed this test as he had passed many others in life. He did not
yield to temptation.

The Society of Cincinnati, formed at the close of the American
Revolution by officers who served with Washington, has long maintained
ties with those descendants of French officers who served the American
cause. The English translation of the Society's motto is: “He
relinquished everything to save the nation.”

Perhaps even more appropriate would be a motto designed for Ali ibn Abi
Talib which might read:

“He relinquished everything to save Islam.”

The Death of Fatima Zahra
-------------------------

Ali had sustained two terrible shocks in one day; the first was the
death of his friend and benefactor, Muhammad, the Apostle of God. The
Apostle's death had put an emphatic end to Ali's and his family's
happiness and welfare in this world. The second was the usurpation of
his right of succession. The companions had taken caliphate out of his
house, and had appropriated it for themselves.

Ali was trying to recover from these two shocks when a third shock came,
just as devastating as the first two. About seventy five or ninety five
days after the death of the Apostle of God, his beloved daughter, and
Ali's wife – Fatima Zahra – also died. Ali was overwhelmed by sorrow at
her death. Fatima Zahra was given burial at night, as per her own
request. Only the family members knew about her burial and the site of
burial. The people of Medina did not know when and where she was buried.

After the death of her father, Fatima Zahra wished nothing more than to
be reunited with him in Heaven. Her death was hastened, rather caused,
by the series of shocks which came like waves, one after another,
following the death of her father. Most of the companions of her father
had not attended his funeral; from her funeral they were purposely
excluded. She met her father in Heaven, and she found the happiness
which had eluded her since his death, once again.

Ali was only 32 years old when the Apostle of God and his daughter died.
But after their death, the time still left to him, was like twilight
years in which he tried to drown his sorrows in devotion to God and in
service to Islam. Notwithstanding his differences and disagreements with
the rulers of the times, he never adopted an obstructionist policy. He
was ever ready to serve the Muslims. Everything he ever said or did, was
calculated to strengthen Islam or to benefit the Muslims.

Ali demonstrated over and over again that his love and his hatred, his
friendship and his animosity, were for God and for God alone. His
attitude toward personalities was invariably impersonal. His love and
his hatred were equally impersonal. He loved and he hated – only for the
sake of God. He loved those who loved God, and he hated those who
disobeyed God.

Abu Bakr's Policy
-----------------

Abu Bakr and Umar knew that the Arabs had two obsessions: love of
plunder and vindictiveness. They skillfully used both these obsessions.
They gave the Arabs a taste of plunder by denouncing those Muslims as
apostates who had withheld the payment of taxes to their government.
Once the latter were branded as apostates, it became lawful to kill
them, to plunder their homes, and to enslave their women and children.

But the eradication of “apostasy” was a small-scale and local affair. To
solve their long-term problems, Abu Bakr and Umar hit upon a bolder plan
of action. They did not let the victors of the skirmishes and the
battles of apostasy return to Medina. Instead, they ordered them to
march upon the frontiers of Syria and Persia, and to invade those
countries simultaneously. This decision was a stroke of political genius
as events were soon to show.

Noldeke
-------

It was certainly good policy to turn the recently subdued tribes of the
wilderness towards an external aim in which they might at once satisfy
their lust for booty on a grand scale, maintain their warlike feeling
and strengthen themselves in their attachment to the new faith. *(from
the Sketches* *from Eastern History)*

Noldeke would be more correct if he were to modify his statement to read
that the tribes “might strengthen themselves in their attachment to the
new government of Saqifa,” instead of the “new faith.” Faith is not
strengthened by killing other people and by plundering their homes and
cities. But the tribes were certainly strengthened in their attachment
to the government of Saqifa which gave them most splendid opportunities
to “satisfy their lust for booty on a grand scale.”

**Geoffrey Blainey**

Professor Quincy Wright, who completed in Chicago in 1942 an ambitious
study of war, concluded that a major and frequent cause of international
war was the aggressive tendency “to indulge in foreign war as a
diversion from domestic ills.” Wright's argument is more forceful in the
current edition of the Encyclopedia Britannia, for which he wrote the
article on causes of war: he doubted whether a totalitarian dictatorship
could exist without taunting or attacking a foreign scapegoat. *(The
Causes of War, New York, 1973)*

**Sir Basil H. Liddell Hart**

Dictators make war on some other state as a means of diverting attention
from internal conditions and allowing discontent to explode outward.
*(Why Don't We Learn From History? 1971)*

When the Muslim armies attacked the outposts at the frontiers of the
Roman and the Persian empires, their discontent exploded outward.

**Professor James M. Buchanan**

“We must beware the shades of Orwell's ‘1984,' when external enemies are
created, real or imaginary, for the purpose of sustaining domestic moral
support for the national government.” *(Quoted by Leonard Silk in the
New York Times, October 24, 1986)*

A modern Pakistani historian, Dr. Hamid-ud-Din, says that Abu Bakr had
very strong reasons for attacking Persia and Rome. In his *History* he
writes:

The Arabs were united under the banner of Islam, and the Persians
considered them a perennial danger. The Christian Arab tribes of Iraq
often instigated the Persians against the (Muslim) Arabs. (Iraq in those
days was part of the Persian Empire). But the Persians were unable to
give any attention to the Arabs because of their own civil wars which
had ruined their country.

Nevertheless, Abu Bakr was convinced that if internal peace returned to
Persia, the Persians would attack the Arabs. He was, therefore, always
cautious, and never overlooked the principle of “safety first.”
Skirmishes had already begun between the nomads of Iraq and the Muslim
tribe of Wael. Mathanna bin al-Harith, chief of the Wael, went to Medina
and sought permission from Abu Bakr to attack Iraq.

Khalid bin al-Walid had recently been freed from the campaigns against
the apostates in Central Arabia which he had successfully terminated.
Abu Bakr appointed him as second-in-command to Mathanna. *(History of
Islam by Hamid-ud-Din, Ph.D. [Harvard University], Lahore, Pakistan,
1971)*

Abu Bakr, apparently, had equally strong reasons for attacking the
Romans. Dr. Hamid-ud-Din further writes in his *History:*

Just like the Persians, the Romans were also afraid of the newly
consolidated government of the Arabs. They considered it a threat to
themselves. There was, therefore, always the danger of an attack by them
on Medina. Abu Bakr was never unmindful of this threat.

Therefore, he sent an officer, one Khalid bin Saeed, at the head of a
company of soldiers, for the surveillance and reconnaissance of the
Roman frontier. It appears that this Khalid was “provoked” into
attacking the Romans.

Abu Bakr's generals “pacified” Arabia, collected poor-tax from the
tribes which had not paid them earlier, and when nothing was left for
them to do at home, they made the first tentative excursions into the
Persian and Byzantine (Roman) territory. Minor successes were followed
by major victories. A steady stream of gold and silver, of women and
slaves, began to pour into Medina. The Muhajireen and the Ansar forgot
their debates of right and wrong. They also forgot their mutual
jealousies and suspicions. The campaigns in Persia and Syria
consolidated the Saqifa government in Medina.

The Aims of the Wars of Abu Bakr and Umar
-----------------------------------------

**1.** To silence the critics of the Saqifa government, and to put an
end to interrogations of all kinds.

**2.** To convince the Muslims that the policies of the Saqifa
government were inspired by true religious zeal.

**3.** To give the Arabs an opportunity to gratify their lust for
plunder. The theory was that once the Arabs tasted the pleasures of
conquest and plunder, they would have little time or inclination to
ponder moral, ethical or philosophical questions. Their self-interest
would take precedence over everything else.

**4.** To assure the security of the government of Saqifa by all means.
Its leaders figured that in the tumult of war and conquest, the Arabs
would gradually forget the family of their Prophet, and this would be
their real triumph.

**5.** To give an opportunity to the enemies of the family of Muhammad
Mustafa to rise to high positions so that they would buttress the Saqifa
power structure.

Though Ali had never challenged Abu Bakr and Umar, they saw his mere
presence as a “threat” to their security. To make themselves “secure”
they believed that they had to find a new base of power. This they
readily found in the family of Abu Sufyan and the other Umayyads of
Makkah, and they forged an alliance with them.

**Sir John Glubb**

The three column commanders (of Abu Bakr in the Syrian campaign) were
Amr bin Aas, Shurahbil bin Hasana, and Yezeed bin Abu Sufyan (his
father, old Abu Sufyan, the victor of Ohod, and Mohammed's old opponent,
had meanwhile been shelved by being given a governorship in the
Yemen.*(The Great Arab Conquests. 1963)*

The Saqifa government appointed Abu Sufyan its governor in Yemen, and
his eldest son, Yazid, its general in the Syrian campaign. Yazid's
younger brother, Muawiya, was appointed a staff officer, and he
accompanied him to Syria.

New possibilities were created for the all but moribund Umayyads, and
from their total obscurity in the time of Muhammad Mustafa, they
suddenly vaulted to top ranks in the time of Abu Bakr.

Abu Bakr and Umar, both exhibited a powerful tropism toward the Umayyads
throughout their reigns. They might have done this for insuring party
dominance and integrity. Abu Bakr, it appears, was much impressed by Abu
Sufyan and his children. M. Shibli, the historian, has recorded the
following incident in his *Life of the Prophet:*

In the sight of Muhammad, rich and poor, master and slave, white and
black, were all equal. Salman, Sohaib and Bilal, all three had been
slaves at one time but in his sight, they were in no way inferior to the
chiefs of the Quraysh.

One day Salman and Bilal were going somewhere when they came across Abu
Sufyan and Abu Bakr. Salman or Bilal (one of the two) said: “Why the
edge of the sword has not found the neck of this enemy of God yet?”

Abu Bakr was horrified to hear this remark, and said: “How do you dare
to use such language for the lord of the Quraysh?” He then immediately
went to see the Prophet and complained to him about what he had heard.
But the Prophet said: “I hope that you have not made Salman and Bilal
angry. If you have made them angry, then you have made God angry.”

Abu Bakr went back to Salman and Bilal, and asked them: “Are you angry
with me?” They said: “No. May God forgive you.” *(Life of the Prophet,
Vol. II, Azamgarh, India, 1974)*

**Dr. Hamid-ud-Din**

When Muhammad died, Abu Bakr became khalifa. Abu Bakr was highly
conscious of the high status of the Umayyads, and he was very mindful of
their honor and glory. He appointed Yazid, the son of Abu Sufyan, the
general of an army. At this time, the Umayyads performed such great
deeds for the sake of Islam that the people forgot their past hostility
to Islam.

When Damascus was conquered, Umar bin al-Khattab (who had succeeded Abu
Bakr as khalifa) appointed Yazid bin Abu Sufyan its governor. When Yazid
died, he (Umar) appointed Muawiya (Yazid's younger brother), as the new
governor of Damascus. *(History of Islam, Lahore, Pakistan, 1971)*

In this appraisal, the historian has interjected a purely subjective
note. What great deeds did the Umayyads perform “for the sake of Islam”
during the caliphate of Abu Bakr or even of Umar? The Umayyads performed
great deeds, i.e., they conquered new lands, but much later, and not for
the sake of Islam but for their own sake. And who were the people who
forgot the past hostility of the Umayyads to Islam? The people who were
the first to forget the Umayyad hostility to Islam were none other than
Abu Bakr and Umar themselves!

The alliance of Abu Bakr and Umar with the family of Abu Sufyan and the
Umayyads against the family of Muhammad and the Banu Hashim was
permanent and unbreakable.

As the spiritual heirs and the “instruments” of the policy of Abu Bakr
and Umar, the Umayyads served a period of “apprenticeship” at the end of
which they were ready to claim and to receive their reward. Their reward
was the government of Saqifa itself!

This is the story of the rise of the Umayyads to power. It was in this
manner that in the words of Gibbon, “the champions of idolatry became
the supreme heads of his (Mohammed's) religion and empire,” –one of
history's most consummate touches of irony.

Abu Bakr's sickness and death
-----------------------------

In 13 A.H. (A.D. 634) Abu Bakr fell ill, and when he sensed that he was
going to die, he bethought of appointing his own successor.

Abu Bakr called his secretary, Uthman bin Affan, to write his will. When
the latter came, he sat up in his bed, and began to dictate to him as
follows:

“In the name of God Who is Most Merciful and Beneficent. I, Abu Bakr,
successor of the Apostle of God...”

Abu Bakr had gone only as far as this when he had a fainting spell and
he lost consciousness. While he was still unconscious, Uthman, his
secretary, himself added the words:

“appoint Umar as my successor and your ruler.”

When Abu Bakr recovered consciousness, he asked Uthman to read what he
had written, and he read:

“I, Abu Bakr, successor of the Apostle of God, appoint Umar as my
successor and your ruler.”

When Abu Bakr heard this, he was immensely pleased with Uthman. He gave
him his blessings, and then went ahead with the rest of the dictation.
*(Tabari* – *History, Vol. 4, page 52)*

Uthman had no way of knowing if Abu Bakr would ever regain consciousness
and would complete the dictation of his will. On his part, he (Uthman)
had already forged a document, and he and some others were going to
foist it upon the *umma* – the *umma* of Muhammad – as Abu Bakr's will
and testament!

Though Abu Bakr had many other fainting spells when he was dictating his
will, Umar did not shout that he (Abu Bakr) was delirious and was
talking nonsense. It was the same Umar who had refused to let the
Apostle of God dictate his will even though the latter did not faint,
and did not lose consciousness at any time.

Umar took Abu Bakr's will in his hand, and went around asking people to
obey what the khalifa of the Prophet had written in it.

Abu Bakr's election and democracy
---------------------------------

Many historians claim that Abu Bakr's election was governed by
democratic principles. But such a claim cannot be sustained on the
following grounds:

**1.** When Muhammad Mustafa died, most of the Arabs had accepted Islam.
According to the principles of democracy, all of them ought to have
taken part in the election of their leader. But if it was not possible
to do so, then the chiefs of all the tribes ought to have been consulted
in the matter. But if this also was not possible, then the successor of
the Prophet ought to have been chosen in *his* Mosque, in an assembly of
all the Muhajireen and the Ansar who were present in Medina. This, very
definitely, was possible.

But none of these methods was adopted. What actually happened was that
some members of the two tribes of the Ansar, viz., the Aus and the
Khazraj, gathered in Saqifa to select their own chief. The spies of Abu
Bakr and Umar informed them about the assembly of the Ansar, and they
went running to it. On their way they took Abu Obaida ibn al-Jarrah
along with them.

Abu Bakr and Umar are touted to be great champions of democracy. If they
were, they ought to have told the Ansar to dissolve their meeting in
Saqifa, and then to reassemble in the Great Mosque to elect a leader in
the presence of all the Muhajireen and all the Ansar. But they did not.

**2.** Abu Bakr and Umar, in their speeches in Saqifa, acknowledged the
services of the Ansar to Islam, but added: “The government which you are
eager to seize, was created by Muhammad. Now that he is dead, it should
belong only to his heirs, and not to you. We are his heirs. We are
Qurayshites same as he was.”

In democracy, a basic rule is that a candidate for office runs in an
election on the strength of his personal qualifications. He must be
qualified by ability, experience and integrity etc. He does not claim
that he is running for office and ought to be elected because he is
related to an erstwhile head of state. Yet Abu Bakr told the Ansar that
he had a better claim to leadership than they had because he was nearer
to the Prophet than they were.

**3.** In the matter of appointing Umar as his successor, Abu Bakr did
not go through the motions of the farce of an election. He went ahead
and arbitrarily declared Umar as the next khalifa.

The Sunni Muslims claim that Muhammad, the Messenger of God, did not
appoint his own successor, and left his (the successor's) choice to the
umma. But Abu Bakr appointed his own successor, and in doing so, he
deviated from the practice of the Prophet. If it was a tradition of the
Prophet *not* to appoint his own successor, then Abu Bakr defied it by
appointing his own successor. He also defied, at the same time, a
tradition of democracy.

Abu Bakr was not alone in repudiating democracy by his deeds. The man
most responsible for his (Abu Bakr's) election, viz., Umar bin
al-Khattab, himself denounced it. He warned Muslims not to try to find a
leader through election again, and said that God had saved them from the
pernicious effect of this mode of finding a leader in the case of Abu
Bakr.

Abu Bakr died in August 634, and was buried by the side of the Prophet
of Islam in his tomb.


