Democracy and the Muslims
=========================

Most modern Muslims believe and claim that government in Islam is
democratic in character. A government run by the Muslims may be
democratic in character but an Islamic government is not.

Till the end of World War I, Muslims lived everywhere under the rule of
kings and sultans. They called their kings and sultans *Zillullah* (the
Shadow of God), and they were very happy to live in that “shadow” (as if
God has a shadow), even though, with rare exceptions, those kings and
sultans were the most despotic, autocratic and authoritarian of rulers.
They exercised absolute power over their subjects, and could kill anyone
who displeased them.

After the World War I, the power of the kings and sultans began to wane.
In the changing perceptions of the twentieth century, the kings and
sultans became “anachronistic,” and the Muslims made the discovery that
democracy was Islamic. They began to sing the praises of democracy, and
most of them became “converts” to it. Their “conversion” to democracy
means that during the first fourteen centuries of its history, Islam was
“undemocratic,” and it is only sometime after 1919 since when it has
become “democratic.”

Those Muslims who claim that democracy is Islamic, say that after the
death of the Apostle of God, his companions set up the *al-Khilafat
er-Rashida* (the Rightly-Guided Caliphate), and it was the best example
of democratic government.

*Al-Khilafat er-Rashida* lasted only thirty years. After those thirty
years, the Islamic democracy was supplanted by absolute monarchy. That
system of government called “Islamic democracy” ceased to exist. Islamic
democracy proved to be a highly perishable commodity. It lasted, in
fact, less than thirty years – not even a generation!

The Islamic democracy died unclaimed, unmourned and unsung. Who killed
it? The pagans? The idolaters? The polytheists? The Magians? The Jews?
The Christians? No. The Muslims themselves killed it. And who were the
Muslims who killed Islamic democracy? They were not the Muslims of later
centuries. They all belonged to the generation of Muhammad Mustafa
himself, and all of them were his “companions.”

If the program of Islam comprehends the establishment of democracy as
the ideal form of government for the Muslims, then what is the position
of those saboteurs who destroyed it in its infancy? Islamic democracy
was created by the companions of the Prophet but those men who destroyed
it, were also his companions.

While one group of companions, headed by Abu Bakr and Umar, had founded
the institution of Islamic democracy (as claimed by the Sunni Muslims),
another group of companions, headed by Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan and Amr
bin Aas, had demolished it.

A third group of companions, headed by Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab
and Abu Hurayra, had witnessed the struggle between Islamic democracy
and its grave-diggers. They had been the silent spectators of the death
throes of Islamic democracy. When no doubt was left that Muawiya was the
“winner,” they, being realists and pragmatists, declared that they were
with him – with Muawiya – the destroyer of Islamic democracy!

**Faris Glubb**

Islamic government was completely undermined in the greater part of the
Muslim world by the seizure of power by Mu'awiya in 40 A.H. Mu'awiya
destroyed the Kingdom of God established by the Prophet and replaced it
with a worldly kingdom. He substituted a just and democratic caliphate
with a tyrannical hereditary monarchy... *(Article captioned “The
Islamic Ideal of Ethical Government,” published in the Muslim News
International, London, March 1963)*

Abu Bakr, Umar, Muawiya, Amr bin Aas, Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab,
and Abu Hurayra, all were companions of the Prophet of Islam. Abu Bakr
and Umar established Islamic democracy; and Muawiya and Amr bin Aas
destroyed it. Does it mean that the builders and the destroyers – both
groups – are right, and democracy and absolutist monarchy both are
“Islamic?”

We can suspend judgment, at the moment, on “Islamic” democracy but the
present-day Sunni jurists and scholars are not willing to extend that
courtesy to monarchy as also being “Islamic.” According to them, there
is no such thing as Islamic monarchy. They are unanimous in billing
monarchy as “unIslamic.”

**G. H. Jansen**

The political nature of the Islamic state or order is naturally of
primary interest. When engaged in the practical task of drawing up a new
constitution for Pakistan that ‘would be in consonance with the
teachings and history of Islam,' (President) Ayub Khan asked his experts
to study Islamic history and the constitutions of other Muslim
countries. Two things emerged clearly from this study: *There was no
place for Kingship in Islam,* and succession could not be on a
hereditary basis.

The community as a whole must have the right to choose its leader and
the right to remove him. (This means that all Muslim monarchies,
whatever their pretensions to religiosity, have been totally unIslamic).
On these two fundamentals there is indeed agreement among our political
reformers, but on every other aspect of Islamic policy there are
differences of substance and of emphasis. *(Militant Islam, New York)*

The Ikhwan al-Muslimeen (the Muslim Brotherhood) of Egypt, has indicted
all military regimes (dictatorships) also as unIslamic.

**G. H. Jansen**

The Muslim Brotherhood stressed that no government established by force
can be accepted, for consultation is mandatory according to Sura 42
verse 35 of the Koran. Hence military regimes produced by coups are
unIslamic. *(Militant Islam, New York)*

It is, therefore, the consensus of the Sunni scholars of Pakistan and
the Sunni spokesmen of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, that monarchy
and military regimes both are unIslamic.

But it is a latter-day consensus. The Sunni jurists and scholars of the
classical times would not have endorsed this view. Their consensus was
entirely different from this. They upheld the supremacy of brute force,
as noted before.

And isn't the term “unIslamic” a euphemism for “pagan”? If it is, and if
according to the Sunni jurists of Pakistan, monarchy is a pagan
institution, then what is their verdict on the monarchs themselves. Can
the monarchs run an unIslamic establishment, and still be true Muslims?
And what is their verdict on the man who first seized the Right-Guided
Caliphate in a coup, and then converted it into monarchy, viz., Muawiya
bin Abu Sufyan? He often boasted that he was the first of the kings of
the Arabs.

The views of the Sunni jurists of Pakistan and the views of the Muslim
Brotherhood in Egypt on the character of monarchy and military regimes,
are shared by Muhammad Asad, a modern, European, Sunni scholar. He
writes in his book, *State and Government in Islam* (1980):

“...let us be clear in our minds on one point at least: there has *never
existed a truly Islamic state* after the time of the Prophet and of the
Medina Caliphate headed by the Prophet's immediate successors, the four
Right-Guided Caliphs, Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali.”

According to the foregoing judgment, the Islamic State ceased to be
Islamic as soon as Muawiya seized it.

But Muawiya went beyond changing the Right-Guided Caliphate into an
unIslamic, i.e., pagan monarchy. He passed on monarchy as his “legacy”
to the Muslim *umma*. The Muslim *umma*, therefore, has been ruled for
all these centuries, by kings, and is saddled with them even today in
the 1990s - in countries like Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Morocco.

And yet, the same Muawiya is, for the Sunni Muslims, a “companion and a
scribe” of the Prophet, and oh yes, “may God be pleased with him” (for
changing Islamic caliphate into a pagan monarchy).

It is perhaps an interesting exercise to ponder if Sunni scholars can
see the fallacies in their own logic, and the glaring contradictions in
their own consensus. If they can, then it would be interesting to see
how they rationalize them.

Many Muslims look back longingly toward the thirty-year reign of the
al-Khulafa-er-Rashidoon (the rightly-guided caliphs) as the “golden age”
of Islam. Actually, it was not so golden as it appears to them, or, at
best, it was golden for those Muslims who had amassed vast quantities of
gold for themselves during those “golden” years.

There were only four of these “rightly-guided” caliphs. Three out of
them met violent deaths, two in the midst of civil war. One of them,
i.e., Abu Bakr, who was not killed, and who died a natural death, was
khalifa for only two years.

**G. H. Jansen**

Yet another source for legal precedent are the traditions of the
Khalifah-al-Rashidun, the ‘rightly-guided caliphs,' the first four
rulers to succeed Muhammad. They were Abu Bakr, Omar, Osman and Ali, and
their four reigns lasted from 632 to 661 A.D. This brief space of
twenty-nine years is viewed, nostalgically through the obscuring mists
of time, as the ‘golden age' of Islam. Why it should be so considered is
debatable, for its brevity was because, of the four caliphs, two were
assassinated and one was cut down by his enemies, in his home, when
reading the Koran.

All the divisions that have plagued Islam and the Arab world ever since
then, were born during that ‘golden' age. It was certainly a glorious
age, the period when the Muslim Arabs conquered the whole vast area
extending from Tripolitania in the west to the frontiers of India in the
east. So the ‘traditions' of what these four glorious but ill-fated
rulers said and did were added to the growing corpus of Islamic law.
*(Militant Islam, New York)*

Two modern Pakistani historians, Professor Sayed Abdul Qadir and
Professor Muhammad Shuja-ud-Deen, have quoted Abul Kalam Azad in their
*History of Islam* (Lahore, Pakistan) in the chapter captioned “The
Meaning of Khilafat” as follows:

“There should be a government for the guidance, welfare and happiness of
mankind which would give the world deliverance from cruelty, tyranny,
oppression and exploitation; and which would restore peace and security
to all so that it may become possible to promulgate the Law of God upon
this earth, thereby transforming it into heaven.”

There was such a government – the one founded by Muhammad, the Messenger
of God (may God bless him and his family), in Medina – which was
transforming this earth into heaven by promulgating the Law of God upon
it. But its career was interrupted by his death. After his death, new
people took charge of his government. But their aims, policy and program
were not the same as his, and they, therefore, changed the character of
his government.

Muhammad's government was the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth, but after his
death, it became an “Aristotelian” government.


