The Marriage of Muhammad Mustafa and Khadija
============================================

Khadija, the daughter of Khuwaylid, was a resident of Makkah. She also
belonged to the tribe of Quraysh. She was held in high esteem by the
Makkans because of her exemplary character and her organizing ability.

Just as the Makkans called Muhammad ‘Sadiq' and ‘Ameen,' they called
Khadija *Tahira*, which means “the pure one.” She was also known among
the Arabs as the ‘Princess of the Merchants.' Whenever the caravans left
Makkah or returned to Makkah, they noted that her cargo was larger in
volume than the cargo of all other merchants of Makkah put together.

When Muhammad was 25 years old, his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib,
suggested to Khadija, with his tacit understanding, that she appoint him
as her agent in one of her caravans, which was ready to leave for Syria
just then.

Khadija was in fact in need of an agent at that very moment. She agreed
andappointed Muhammad as her agent. He took charge of her merchandise,
and the caravan set out for Syria. Her slave, Maysara, also accompanied
him and served him as an aide.

This commercial expedition to Syria was successful beyond expectations,
and Khadija was so impressed by her agent's ability and integrity that
she decided to put him in charge of all her future business
transactions. The expedition also proved to be the prelude of their
marriage.

**Edward Gibbon**

At home and abroad, in peace and war, Abu Talib, the most respected of
Mohammed's uncles, was the guide and guardian of his youth; in his 25th
year he entered into the service of Khadija, rich and noble widow of
Mecca, who soon rewarded his fidelity with the gift of her hand and
fortune.

The marriage contract, in the simple style of antiquity, recites the
mutual love of Mohammed and Khadija; describes him as the most
accomplished of the tribe of Koreish; and stipulates a dowry of twelve
ounces of gold and twenty camels, which was supplied by the liberality
of his uncle. *(Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)*

Abu Talib read the *khutba* (sermon) of the marriage of Muhammad and
Khadija, and his speech proves beyond any doubt that he was a
monotheist. He began the speech in the “Muslim” style by offering thanks
and praise to Allah for His mercy and for His countless gifts and
blessings; and he concluded by invoking His mercy and blessings upon the
newly-weds.

The marriage of Muhammad and Khadija was most successful. It was blessed
with felicity unlimited for both husband and wife. Khadija dedicated her
life to the service of her husband and of Islam. She spent all her vast
wealth in strengthening Islam, and on the welfare of the Muslims.

Khadija had the same sense of mission as Muhammad had, and she was just
as eageras he was to see Islam triumph over paganism. To her eagerness
to see the triumph of Islam, she added commitment and power.

She freed her husband from the necessity of making a living, and thus
enabled him to devote all his time to reflection and contemplation in
preparation for the great work which lay ahead of him. This is a most
significant contribution she made to the work of her husband as
messenger of God. She was the fulcrum that he needed in all the years of
preparation for the prophethood.

The marriage of Muhammad and Khadija was also blessed by the birth of
their daughter, Fatima Zahra. Though the gifts which God bestowed upon
them, were many, there was none that they treasured more than their
daughter, Fatima Zahra. She was the “light of the eyes” of her father,
and the future “Lady of Heaven.” The father and mother lavished their
love on her, and she brought hope and happiness and the mercy and
blessings of God with her into their home.


