Ali ibn Abi Talib, the Fourth Caliph of the Muslims
===================================================

Ali belonged to the clan of banu hashim, the most distinguished clan in
all Arabia; and in Banu Hashim, he belonged to the most distinguished
family – the family of Abdul Muttalib. Abdul Muttalib had ten sons. Two
of them were Abdullah, the father of Muhammad Mustafa, and Abu Talib,
the father of Ali. Abdullah and Abu Talib were the children of the same
mother whereas their other brothers were born of the other wives of
their father.

Ali's mother, Fatima, also belonged to the clan of Hashim. She was the
daughter of Asad the son of Hashim. Asad and Abdul Muttalib were
brothers. She was thus the first cousin of Abdullah and Abu Talib.

Ali's mother, Fatima bint Asad, was the second woman in all Arabia to
accept Islam, the first being Khadija.

Fatima bint Asad was the foster-mother of Muhammad Mustafa, the
Messenger of God. She brought him up as her own son, and in fact, loved
him more than her own children, and he called her his mother.

Ali's father, Abu Talib, was the Defender of Islam, and he was the
Protector and Guardian of Muhammad. He supported Islam and Muhammad
consistently, and he was undaunted in the face of opposition and threats
from the pagans.

Both in Makkah and Medina, Muhammad Mustafa declared that Ali was his
brother in this world and in the Hereafter.

Ali was the victor of the battle of Badr. He alone killed half the
number of all the Makkans who were killed in that battle.

Muhammad Mustafa, the Apostle of God, gave his only daughter, Fatima
Zahra, in marriage to Ali. God blessed this marriage with children.
Those children were God's most devout servants. Their greatest pleasure
in life was to wait upon their Lord.

In the battle of Uhud, most of the Muslims fled from the battlefield.
One who did not flee, was Ali. He saved the life of his master,
Muhammad, that day.

At the siege of Medina, Ali killed Amr bin Abd Wudd, and thereby saved
Medina from being overrun, and its people from being massacred.

Ali captured Khyber. With Khyber's conquest, Islam became a state with
territory. Until the conquest of Khyber, Islam was only a city-state,
confined to the walls of Medina.

Ali was the secretary who indicted the Treaty of Hudaybiyya.

When Makkah capitulated to the Prophet, Ali rode his shoulders, and
smashed the idols in the Kaaba. He and his master, Muhammad, purified
the House of God for all time by removing all vestiges of idolatry and
polytheism from it. In this manner, Ali collaborated with Muhammad, the
Messenger of God, from beginning to end, in constructing the framework
of the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth.

In the battle of Hunayn, the Muslims fled once again. Ali put himself
between the Apostle and the pagan warriors who wanted to kill him. He
fought against them until the Muslims rallied.

In October 630 (9 A.H.) the Apostle led an expedition to Tabuk, and he
appointed Ali his viceroy in Medina.

Among all the companions of the Prophet, Ali was the most knowledgeable.
He had thorough knowledge of the Qur’an, and its interpretation. He was
the best of all judges, and he was the most eloquent orator of the
Arabs.

Just before his death, the Prophet equipped and organized an expedition
to Syria, and he appointed Usama bin Zayd bin Haritha, its general. With
the exception of Ali, he ordered all the Muhajireen to serve under
Usama. Ali was to stay with him in Medina.

In the defence of Islam, it was Ali's family which offered the greatest
sacrifices. Obaidullah ibn al-Harith who was killed in the battle of
Badr, and was the first martyr of Islam in the battlefield, was his
first cousin. Mas'ab ibn Umayr and Hamza were killed in the battle of
Uhud, and both of them were his uncles. Jafar Tayyar who was killed in
the battle of Mootah was his elder brother.

When Muhammad Mustafa died, Ali performed his obsequies, and gave him
burial. He knew what the other companions were doing when he was busy
with these duties but he did not allow anything to distract him. He kept
his duty ahead of his interests, and his principles ahead of politics.

**Edward Gibbon**

“The birth, the alliance, the character of Ali, which exalted him above
the rest of his countrymen, might justify his claim to the vacant throne
of Arabia. The son of Abu Talib was, in his own right, the chief of the
family of Hashem, and the hereditary prince or guardian of the city and
temple of Mecca. The light of prophecy was extinct; but the husband of
Fatima might expect the inheritance and blessings of her father; the
Arabs had sometimes been patient of a female reign; and the two
grandsons of the Prophet had often been fondled in his lap, and shown in
his pulpit, as the hope of his age, and the Chiefs of the Youth of
Paradise.

The first of the true believers might aspire to march before them in
this world and in the next; and if some were of a graver and more rigid
cast, the zeal and virtue of Ali were never outstripped by any recent
proselyte. He united the qualifications of a poet, a soldier, and a
saint: his wisdom still breathes in a collection of moral and religious
sayings; and every antagonist, in the combats of the tongue or of the
sword, was subdued by his eloquence and valor.

From the first hour of his mission to the last rites of his funeral, the
Apostle was never forsaken by a generous friend, whom he delighted to
name his brother, his vicegerent, and the faithful Aaron of a second
Moses. The son of Abu Talib was afterwards reproached for neglecting to
secure his interests by a solemn declaration of his right, which would
have silenced all competition, and sealed his succession by the decrees
of Heaven.

But the unsuspecting hero confided in himself: the jealousy of empire,
and perhaps the fear of opposition, might suspend the resolutions of
Mohammed; and the bed of sickness was besieged by the artful Ayesha, the
daughter of Abu Bakr and the enemy of Ali.

The hereditary claims and lofty spirit of Ali were offensive to an
aristocracy of elders, desirous of bestowing and resuming the scepter by
a free and frequent election; the Koreish could never be reconciled to
the proud pre-eminence of the line of Hashem.” *(The Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire)*

The foregoing characterization is correct in general but some statements
in it need qualification.

Gibbon has erred in stating that Ali did not secure his interests by a
solemn declaration of his right by the Prophet. The Prophet had made
such a declaration, not once but many times, as noted before.

The historian has also spoken of the Prophet's “fear of opposition.” The
Prophet had no fear of anyone. He had overcome much more formidable
enemies than those whose opposition could “frighten” him in his hour of
triumph.

Gibbon further speaks of “a free and frequent election.” The aristocracy
of elders was desirous of bestowing and resuming the scepter but only to
itself, and not by a free and frequent election. Abu Bakr's accession to
the throne was an “improvisation,” and Umar was the “king-maker” in his
case. When Abu Bakr was dying, he appointed Umar as his successor by a
fiat. In doing so, he dispensed with the farce of election. Umar, before
his death, formed a panel of six electors, and restricted the choice of
khalifa to it. No one outside this panel could be chosen as khalifa.

The only election which was really free was that of Ali ibn Abi Talib.
He was elected in the first and the last free election ever in the
entire history of Islam.

Lastly, Gibbon says that Koreish could never be reconciled to the proud
pre-eminence of the line of Hashem. He is right. But the same Koreish
who could not be reconciled to the proud pre-eminence of the line of
Hashem, were very eager to be reconciled to the proud pre-eminence of
the line of the erstwhile idol-worshippers and the usurers of Makkah. In
their eagerness to be reconciled to the latter, the Koreish who had
resumed the scepter earlier, now bestowed it upon them.

The Restoration of the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth – (The Caliphate of Ali ibn Abi Talib)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the murder of Uthman, fear and panic seized the companions of the
Prophet. The members of Umar's electoral committee retreated into the
safety of anonymity. The fate of Uthman had struck terror into their
hearts. The whole country was seething with agitation, and no one, no
matter how daring and ambitious, was willing to put his neck into the
loop by accepting the responsibility of running the government. It was a
responsibility fraught with the gravest perils.

But something had to be done. The vessel of Islam could not be left
adrift for long, and a firm hand had to be found to keep it on an even
keel.

Twelve years of misgovernment had shaken the Muslims out of their long
slumber and smudginess. Now they realized that the leadership of the
community ought to be in the hands of a man who would put public
interest ahead of the interests of his own family. Therefore, as soon as
Uthman died, all eyes turned to Ali. The companions of the Prophet could
not think of anyone else who had the ability and the grit to put an end
to graft in the government and to anarchy in the land, and to restore
peace, and law and order to the Dar-ul-Islam which was battered by
economic and social conflict, and was buffeted by a rapid succession of
traumas.

All the leading Muhajireen and Ansar, therefore, gathered in the Mosque
of the Prophet, and agreed, at a caucus, to ask Ali to take charge of
the government, and to steer the ship of state to safety. A delegation
then called on Ali, and requested him to accept this responsibility.

Tabari says in his *History* that the Muhajireen and the Ansar almost
mobbed Ali. They told him that the *umma* was without a leader, and the
government was without a head, and that he, i.e., Ali, alone was the
most *qualified* person to fill the position, not only because of his
propinquity with Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of God, but also
because of his personal qualities and his services to Islam.

It was the first time since the death of the Apostle of God that it
occurred to anyone in Medina that there was such a thing as a
“qualification” to be a caliph. In the past the question of
qualification had been shelved each time a new ruler had to be found.

Umar made Abu Bakr khalifa because the latter was the oldest of the
companions. Abu Bakr reciprocated Umar's gesture by choosing him as his
successor. Uthman was chosen khalifa because he was rich and weak.

Ali, however, did not accept the offer of the companions, and said that
he preferred to be an adviser rather than the caliph.

But the companions also did not accept Ali's refusal, and said:

“No man has given more distinguished service to Islam, nor is anyone
closer to Muhammad than you. We consider you to be the worthiest of all
men to be our Khalifa*.” (Tarikh Kamil, Vol. III, p. 98, Ibn Atheer)*

Ali still did not agree, and the companions still persisted, and said:

“We appeal to you in the name of God to accept the caliphate. Don't you
see the state of the umma? Don't you see new perils rising everywhere in
the lands of Islam? Who will check them if not you?” *(Tarikh Kamil,
Vol. III, p. 99, Ibn Atheer)*

But Ali was unmistakably cool to the idea of accepting the caliphate. It
was not a conventional coolness but was the result of long and sober
reflection.

In the past, on one occasion, “ambition” had cost Ali the throne of
Arabia. Umar had remarked that he would have appointed Ali as ruler of
the Muslims if he (Ali) had not been too “ambitious.” Umar spoke as if
to be ambitious was something reprehensible. His remark also presupposed
that he himself and some others had become khalifas without any
ambition.

Perhaps the khilafat was something that had been forced upon them much
against their will; and they had no choice but to accept the burden of
its responsibility!

Since Umar and Abu Bakr had no ambition, both of them, and Abu Obaida
ibn al-Jarrah, all three, must have been either driven or dragged into
the outhouse of Saqifa!

The reception by Ali of the request of the companions to accept the
khilafat, would suggest that he had, at last, said farewell to ambition.
In the past, he had never missed an opportunity to draw public attention
to the primacy of his own rights, and to the justice of his case. He
believed that it was his inherent right to become the first successor of
the Apostle of God. This right was not something that other people could
“give” him, even though they could take it away from him, and they did.

The keystone in the policy of the government of Saqifa, as noted before,
was to debar Ali and the Banu Hashim from the caliphate. In this its
first two incumbents were successful. The third incumbent, however, was
killed in the midst of a breakdown of law and order, and he did not have
the time to appoint his own successor. But if he had lived, he would
have, without a doubt, appointed his son-in-law, Marwan, or his cousin,
Muawiya, his successor.

Ali was bypassed on three successive occasions in the past. But now,
after the death of Uthman, the Muslims felt that they were, for the
first time, really free to elect or select a caliph for themselves, and
their choice for the position was Ali. A coincidence of events had, at
last, brought the long-sought caliphate within his reach.

But to everyone's surprise, Ali was not showing any eagerness to grasp
it. Why?

Actually, Ali's desire to become caliph was not prompted by ambition as
Umar had claimed even though there is nothing wrong in being ambitious.
Ali wanted to become caliph because he knew that he and he alone had the
ability to steer the vessel of Islam on the same course which the
Apostle of God had charted for it. Other people, he knew, lacked this
ability.

The institution of khilafat which was the legacy of Muhammad, the
Messenger of God, and which, therefore, ought to have been the symbol of
the moral and spiritual authority of Islam to the rest of the world, had
become, instead, in the course of the quarter-century since his death,
the symbol of undiluted materialism and naked imperialism. Profound
changes had taken place in the lifestyle of the Muslims.

Instead of imitating the pure and austere life of Muhammad, most of them
imitated alien lifestyles. What propelled them now, was not the ideals
of Islam but the lust to become rich and powerful at any cost. The
pristine simplicity and the egalitarianism of the times of the Prophet
of Islam, had become demoted. The quality of the life of the *umma* had
visibly declined.

Ali knew all this better than anyone else. He had kept his finger on the
pulse of the Muslim umma, and he had monitored its progress or its lack
of progress in all directions.

Ali also knew that the caliphate was no longer something that one could
take with “its roses and its thorns.” The roses were all gone; and all
that was left, were the thorns. Accepting the caliphate now would only
mean wearing a crown of those thorns.

In 656 the caliphate was little more than a legacy of turbulence and
deficits.

Ali figured that if he accepted the caliphate, there would be two
courses open before him, and he would have to adopt one of them. One
course would be to follow the drift of events; to acquiesce in the
general moral decline; to connive at the corruption and rapacity of the
provincial governors; to give the bureaucracy a free hand in exploiting
and oppressing the umma; and to tolerate the anti-Islamic and neo-pagan
practices of the new aristocracy. But such a course is repugnant to
Islam, and therefore, was even more repugnant to him.

The second course for Ali, was to accept the challenge of the whole
world that would inevitably array itself against him, and to fight
against it regardless of consequences as long as it disobeyed the
commandments of God. If he did, he would only be imitating his late
friend and master, Muhammad.

The latter had also challenged the whole world and had fought against it
regardless of consequences when he had first proclaimed his mission. Ali
knew that if he accepted the caliphate, the new Arab aristocracy would
challenge him, and his reign would begin with a civil war. A civil war
is not an auspicious beginning but what was the alternative for him?

The choice before Ali was not between winning the civil war if there was
one, or not fighting at all; it was instead, between what is right and
what is wrong; between truthfulness and deception; between adherence to
principle and pursuit of *realpolitik.* He wanted to rebuild the
infrastructure of the Islamic society or rather to restore the
infrastructure just as it was in the times of the Apostle of God but he
realized that he could do this only in the teeth of most determined
opposition from the Quraysh.

Ali considered all this, and then wishing not to inaugurate his
caliphate with a civil war, turned down the request of the companions to
become the khalifa of the Muslims.

The author of the book *Kitab-ul-Imama was-Siyassa* gives the following
account of these events:

When the delegation of the Muhajireen and the Ansar called on Ali and
requested him to accept the khilafat, he refused. The delegation
returned to the Mosque and reported its failure to the companions who
were present there. But the latter said, “When the news of the murder of
Uthman reaches the other parts of the empire, no one will pause to ask
if a new khalifa has been elected or not, and the anarchy which now is
confined to Medina, will spread to all the provinces.

There is only one way to check lawlessness from spreading, and that is
to compel Ali to become caliph. Therefore, go back to him, and insist
upon his taking charge of the government, and do not return until he
agrees to do so. In this way, the news of the death of Uthman and the
accession of Ali to the throne, will travel together to every part of
the Dar-ul-Islam, and the situation will remain under control.”

The delegation returned to see Ali, and this time, its members went
beyond customary entreaties. They said that the Muslim umma was in an
impasse, and if he didn't extricate it, he would be answerable to God
and His Messenger for it. Would he abandon the umma of Muhammad in the
impasse, they asked. This new wrinkle seemed to work. But being aware of
the massive opposition to himself of the Quraysh, Ali was still lukewarm
in accepting the proposal. He, therefore, hedged his acceptance with
conditions of his own, and said to the delegates:

“I have perfect knowledge and understanding of the Book of God, and of
the practices and precedents of His Messenger. In ruling the Muslim
umma, I shall put their commandments and prohibitions before everything
else. I shall not show any flexibility in this matter. I shall take
charge of the government only if this condition is acceptable to you. If
it is, and the Muslims are willing to take the oath of allegiance to me,
then tell them to assemble in the Mosque of the Prophet.” The delegation
was ready to accept any conditions, and readily agreed to abide by Ali's
terms.

*(Kitab-ul-Imama was-Siyassa)*

After the death of Umar, his confidante, Abdur Rahman bin Auf, had
offered khilafat to Ali on condition that he would give a pledge to
follow the policy and the regulations of Abu Bakr and Umar. Ali refused
to give any pledge, and kicked at the offer made by Abdur Rahman bin
Auf.

Now the same khilafat was being offered to him once again but without
any conditions. In fact, it was he (Ali) who was placing conditions upon
acceptance by him of the offer being made by the Muslim umma.

Ali told the companions that he would not defer to their judgment;
instead, they would have to defer to his judgment if they insisted on
his taking charge of the government. And he added that they – the
Muslims – would have to give him unquestioning obedience – in peace and
in war. They agreed. Their agreement was the victory of principle. The
Muslim umma had, at length, surrendered to Ali's principles!

The umma of Muhammad, the blessed Messenger of God, in quest of security
and salvation, had “drafted” Ali ibn Abi Talib to reverse the drift
toward anarchy and chaos in Dar-ul-Islam. Tabari, the historian, says
that Ali was “drafted” on Thursday. The citizens of Medina were very
happy with their success in “drafting” him, and they said that they
would offer their Friday prayer with their new caliph.

“Why not the best?” was the question in the mind of the Muslim umma when
it “drafted” Ali as the caliph of Islam. When it was at last free to
choose, it chose, instinctively and inevitably, *the very best.* Also,
when the Muslim umma was insisting that Ali should occupy the highest
position in Islam, it was unconsciously spurning all “the gluttons of
privilege” who were infesting Dar-ul-Islam.

On Friday, 18th of Dhil-Hajj, 35 A.H. (June 17, 656), Ali ibn Abi Talib
entered the Mosque of the Prophet in Medina, and walked to the pulpit
through the crowd of the Muslims. The crowd sat in an expectant mood,
the currents of excitement flashing through it, and it appeared to heave
convulsively. There was an almost palpable sense of tension and renewal
in the “national” spirit of the Muslims.

Ali held a bow in his hand, and he leaned against the pulpit as the
Muslims began to take the oath of allegiance to him. Between him and
them, it was “an open covenant openly arrived at,” and there was nothing
clandestine about it. Most of the Muhajireen and the Ansar who were in
Medina, gave him their pledge of loyalty.

Ibn Hajar Makki writes in his famous book *al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah:*

“The veterans of Badr said (to Ali):’No one is more worthy of khilafat
than you. Put out your hand so that we may give you our pledge of
loyalty.' And they gave him the pledge of their loyalty.”

It was the first time, and the last time, in the history of Islam, that
a ruler was not foisted upon the Muslims. They chose their own ruler,
and their choice was spontaneous. Neither force, nor the threat of the
use of force, nor pressure nor bribes, nor double talk, were employed in
his election.

There was no hysteria to grab power. Everyone was free to give or to
withhold his pledge. Ali himself was accepting the pledges almost
mechanically, lost as he was in the reverie of the times of his master,
Muhammad, when he was accepting the pledges of the Quraysh just after
the conquest of Makkah in 630.

**Edward Gibbon**

A tumultuous anarchy of five days was appeased by the inauguration of
Ali; his refusal would have provoked a general massacre. In this painful
situation he supported the becoming pride of the chief of the
Hashemites; declared that he had rather serve than reign; rebuked the
presumption of the strangers; and required the formal if not the
voluntary assent of the chiefs of the nation.*(The Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire)*

Talha and Zubayr were the first of the companions of the Prophet to take
the oath of allegiance to the new caliph. The Muhajireen and the Ansar
were the next. They were followed by the commoners. The first
non-companion who took the oath of allegiance to Ali, was Malik ibn
Ashter, the most famous swordsman of Arabia.

Hudhaifa ibn al-Yamani was one of the leading companions of Muhammad. He
was living in Kufa and was confined to bed with a protracted sickness.
When he heard the news of the accession of Ali to the throne, he asked
to be taken to the great mosque of Kufa. When the Muslims gathered to
say prayers, he ascended the pulpit and read the sermon (khutba). He
thanked God for His blessings, and he invoked His blessings upon His
Messenger, Muhammad, and upon the members of his family, and said:

“O Muslims! I have received news that in Medina, Ali ibn Abi Talib has
been elected the successor of the Messenger of God. I call upon you to
give your pledge of loyalty to him because he is with Truth and Truth is
with him, and next to the Prophet himself, he is the best of all those
who have been created or will ever be created.”

Hudhaifa then symbolically placed his right hand on his left hand, and
said: “O Lord! Be Thou a Witness that I have taken the oath of
allegiance to Ali, my new caliph. Accept my thanks that Thou hast given
me enough time to see him become the sovereign of the *umma* of
Muhammad, Thy Apostle.”

Hudhaifa was taken back to his home, and a few days later he died. He
was one of the most trusted and most beloved friends of Muhammad
Mustafa.

The Ansar, in general, had shown very great enthusiasm in bringing Ali
to the throne but among them there were some men who withheld their
pledge of loyalty from him. They were:

Zayd bin Thabit

Hassan bin Thabit

Kaab bin Malik

Abu Saeed Khudri

Muhammad bin Maslama

Nu'man bin Bashir

Rafa' bin Khudaij

Maslama bin Mukhalid

Kaab bin 'Arja

Among the Makkans, the following companions did not take the pledge of
loyalty to Ali:

Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab

Saad bin Abi Waqqas

Mughira bin Shaaba

Abdullah bin Salam

Qadama bin Ma'azoon

Suhaib bin Sinan

Wahban bin Saifi

Usama bin Zayd bin Haritha

When Ali's attention was drawn to those men who had not given him their
pledge of loyalty, he said that loyalty was not something that could be
obtained by force. To be meaningful, he said, it had to be voluntary.
Later, it was reported to him that the same men were quietly slipping
out of Medina. Ali made no attempt to stop them. He said that under his
rule, everyone was free to stay in Medina or to leave it, and that he
himself was not going to force anyone to stay or to leave. His political
opponents all left Medina, and most of them went to Syria or to Makkah.

(A few months later, the battle of Basra or the battle of the Camel was
fought. Abdullah bin Umar bin al-Khattab and Saad bin Abi Waqqas
declared their neutrality in it. Theirs was a moral neutrality over
issues of right and wrong though they knew who was right and who was
wrong. Some others also claimed that they were “non-aligned,” but they
were “non-aligned” in favor of Ali's enemies).

Yaqoobi, the historian, says that after the inauguration, Sa'sa'a ibn
Sauhan 'Abidi, a companion, said to Ali:

“By God, you have brought honor and glory to the khilafat. Khilafat has
not brought honor and glory to you. You have elevated it by accepting
it; it has not elevated you. You didn't need it; it needed you.”

Another historian, Khatib Baghdadi, has quoted Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal as
saying:

“Khilafat was not an ornament for Ali; he was an ornament for khilafat.”

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal put the whole truth in a nutshell. Ali was indeed
the ornament and glory of khilafat.

Presently, the *Muezzin* called *adhan* for the Friday prayer. Ali, the
new caliph, led the congregation. After the prayer, he delivered the
inaugural speech. He began his address by praising God, and by thanking
Him for His countless and uncountable blessings and mercies one of which
was that He had restored his (Ali's) right to him. He invoked God's
blessings upon Muhammad Mustafa, and upon the members of his family, and
then said:

“O Muslims! You have given me your pledge of loyalty, and I know that
you have not done so without forethought. Yet, your aims and my aims in
the tasks lying ahead of us, may not necessarily be the same. I want to
mobilize you for obedience and service to God; but many among you are
hoping that I will give them rich estates or high ranks in the
government. This is something that will not happen.

“Remember that there are two ways of life; the right and the wrong. Some
of you will adopt the right way and others the wrong. You are free to
choose. But if you see that a majority has adopted the wrong way, do not
be dismayed or surprised by it. It has often been like that, and the
world is full of paradoxes. But Justice and Truth will triumph in the
end even if at a given moment they may appear to be on the defensive.

“Verily, when God sent Muhammad as His Messenger to this world, there
was not a single soul in all Arabia who knew anything about guidance and
rectitude. He led the Arabs out of the wilderness of sin and iniquity
until they saw the light of guidance, and found the road to eternal
salvation. I was by his side from the beginning of his mission to its
end, and I fought against disobedience to God all my life. I never felt
weary of the struggle nor I was ever dismayed by the opposition of the
guardians and champions of the pre-Islamic order, no matter how
formidable it was.

“O Muslims! I call upon you to assist me in my program of
reconstruction. God is a Witness to my statement that my paramount
objective is to restore justice in Dar-ul-Islam, just as it is His wish
that I do so. I shall not rest until I have destroyed injustice. Listen
to this with attention: I shall not transgress the bounds of the Book of
God for anything. I will not be partial to anyone whoever he may be. In
my sight, all of you are equal. I shall promulgate the Laws of God which
are enshrined in His Book, and I shall do so in the light of the
precedents only of His Apostle, Muhammad, the blessed one.

“My mission today is the same as it was in the times of the Messenger of
God, Muhammad; may God bless him and his family, and it's to establish
or to reestablish the Kingdom of God on this earth.”

In these words, Ali expressed the policy of his government. He defined
his aims, and explained how he would realize them. He focused on
refurbishing the highest office in Islam, and he outlined the principles
of his political philosophy.

The men of perception could sense that Ali's government was going to be
very different from the governments of the past, not only in style,
expression and emphasis, but also in character, substance and
philosophy. They sensed that there was going to be an absolute and
qualitative difference between them. They knew that he would check the
erosion and corrosion of private and public standards of morality. His
accession to the throne, therefore, was not welcome to the guardians of
a social system the underpinnings of which were privilege and force, and
laxity and license.

Astoundingly, it appeared as if history was going to repeat itself. In
Makkah, Muhammad Mustafa was confronted by the guardians of a social
system which rested upon privilege, force and exploitation. When he
tried to change that system, its guardians challenged him. Their
challenge led to armed conflict. Now Ali was confronted with the same
system, and his attempt to change it, was also going to end in armed
conflict with its guardians.

On the other hand, Ali's accession to the throne was very welcome to
another class of people – the one composed of the poor, the destitute,
the disabled, the powerless, the exploited, and those who lived in fear
and terror. The members of this class knew, as if by instinct, that Ali
would give them freedom from fear and poverty. They knew too that given
the opportunity, Ali would work on the whole ecology of Muslim society,
and would change it. The rhythm, the lilt and the tenor of his speeches
lighted little candles of new hope and new idealism in their hearts, and
they could foresee that he would revive the political heritage of
Muhammad, the Apostle of God, in his government.

The State of the Umma at Ali's Accession to the Throne
------------------------------------------------------

When Ali took the reins of the government in his hands, he was
confronted with a most alarming situation. The whole country was
seething with agitation, and his enemies swarmed everywhere like
hornets. Two modern Pakistani historians, Professor Sayed Abdul Qadir
and Professor Muhammad Shuja-ud-Din, have summed up the state of the
Dar-ul-Islam in 656 as follows:

Muslims were no longer united. They had split into many camps. Most
Muslims put their own interests ahead of the collective interests of the
umma.

The recent conquests had delivered into the hands of the Muslims the
immense wealth of two of the richest empires of the world – the Persian
and the Roman. Everyone wanted a share out of this bonanza, and tried to
grab all that one could. In the ruthless quest for money, most Muslims
quietly put aside the ideals of Islam as if they were irrelevant.

Though Talha and Zubayr, two of the most powerful companions, were the
first to take the oath of allegiance to Ali, they were also the first to
repudiate it. By breaking their pledge, they pushed the umma into civil
war.

Muawiya was Uthman's governor in Syria. The rebellion of Talha and
Zubayr against the lawful authority in Medina, encouraged him also to
defy it. Ali invited him to give his pledge of loyalty to him but he
refused, and instead, demanded from him (from Ali) action against the
murderers of Uthman. Muawiya had little interest in Uthman, but he had
great interest in compounding Ali's difficulties. He hoped that Ali
would try to penalize all those men who had rebelled against Uthman;
they would resist him, and their resistance would lead to civil war.
Civil war in Medina, he figured, would make it possible for him to seize
the khilafat.

But Ali did not walk into this trap, and said to Muawiya: “First give me
your pledge of loyalty, and let me restore peace in the empire. Once
conditions return to normal, then we shall, all of us, bring the killers
of Uthman to trial, and justice shall prevail.” But Muawiya had no
intention of taking the oath of loyalty to Ali. He, therefore, kept
insisting on the arrest and the execution of the murderers of Uthman.

Commenting upon Muawiya's answer to Ali, the two professors further say:

“In our opinion, Ali was absolutely right. The interests of individuals,
no matter how important they may be, cannot be sacrificed over the
interests of the ‘nation.' Whatever the personal tragedies of some
important figure, the integrity of the state must be protected at all
costs.

‘National' interests remain paramount, and cannot be sacrificed over the
interests of an individual. To assure the security of the dominion of
Islam is the first responsibility of the head of the Muslim umma.

If Ali had acted upon Muawiya's suggestion, war would have erupted in
every part of the empire. But Ali's enemies did not share his solicitude
for peace, and their attitude led to civil war among the Muslims. If
Talha, Zubayr and Muawiya had any sincerity, they would have
subordinated their own interests to the interests of Islam, and Muslims
would not have shed each other's blood.” *(History of Islam, Part I)*

The foregoing is a correct assessment of the political scene in the
House of Islam when Ali took charge of the government. Many other
historians have also analyzed the events which took place before the
civil war of the Muslims. They have tried to pinpoint its causes but
most of them, it appears, have missed an important point, or if they
have not, then they have tried to suppress it.

The collapse of the house of Saqifa was bound to be followed by much
turbulence. But the point which the historians have been unwilling to
admit is that the dragon's teeth which sprouted during Ali's caliphate,
had all be sown in the times of his predecessors. The rebellions which
broke out in his time, all had their roots in the past. Sir John Glubb,
a modern historian, writes about the caliphate of Umar bin Abdul Aziz as
follows:

“The reign of Umar bin Abdul Aziz, was remarkably free from sedition and
civil strife, yet it may be argued that it was in his time that the
seeds were sown of that revolution which was utterly to destroy the
dynasty. This was not surprising but rather in accordance with normal
political development.

For it has often occurred that a country has remained quiet throughout
periods of arbitrary and autocratic rule but that sedition has broken
out as soon as a more just and liberal administration has been
established. Thus the benevolent khilafat of Umar bin Abdul Aziz
inaugurated the movement which was to lead to the ruin of his family.”
*(The Empire of the Arabs, p. 175, 1963)*

Sir John Glubb has made both a right and a wrong deduction in the
foregoing paragraph. He is right in stating that “it has often occurred
that a country has remained quiet throughout periods of arbitrary and
autocratic rule but that sedition has broken out as soon as a more just
and liberal administration has been established.”

The empire of the Arabs was quiet throughout the periods of the
arbitrary and autocratic rule of the Saqifa government but sedition
broke out as soon as the just and liberal administration of Ali was
established.

But we cannot agree with the historian when he claims that it was in the
time of Umar ibn Abdul Aziz that “the seeds were sown of that revolution
which was utterly to destroy the (Umayyad) dynasty.” Such seeds were
sown not in the time of Umar bin Abdul Aziz but were sown both by his
predecessors and successors.

Nor can we agree with the assertion of the historian that “the
benevolent khilafat of Umar ibn Abdul Aziz inaugurated the movement
which was to lead to the ruin of his family.” The truth is just the
contrary. It is most probable that the saintly conduct of Umar bin Abdul
Aziz gave a reprieve to the Umayyads, and that, but for him, they might
have perished much earlier than they did.

Umar bin Abdul Aziz does not fit the stereotype of the Umayyads. He was
so God-fearing and God-loving and they were so godless that they just
could not coexist. They liquidated him through poison.

**Dr. Hamid-ud-Din**

There was no great campaign nor any new country was conquered in the
caliphate of Umar bin Abdul Aziz. And yet, his caliphate is very
important in the history of Islam because of the reforms he instituted.
He revived true Islamic democracy and the traditions of the
Khulfa-i-Rashida (the rightly-guided caliphs).

From the time of Muawiya, the caliphate had become the personal
government of the caliph. All those evils which are a part of the
autocratic and despotic governments, had entered the caliphate. The
people had lost their freedom. *Bayt-ul-Mal* (the public treasury) had
become the private purse of the ruler.

Nothing from it was spent to relieve the distress of the poor, and all
of it was spent on the luxury and the pleasures of the ruling class.
Umar bin Abdul Aziz resolved to put an end to these practices. The first
thing he did, was to seize the vast estates which the Umayyad barons had
appropriated for themselves.

Many unfair and illegal means were adopted to bring extra revenues in
the state treasury. For example, those Dhimmis (non-Muslims living under
the protection of the Islamic State), who accepted Islam, were forced to
pay jizya (poll-tax).

According to the Qur’anic law, only non-Muslim citizens of the Islamic
State have to pay jizya. Umar bin Abdul Aziz sent orders to all the
governors in the provinces that if a Dhimmi accepts Islam, jizya must
not be charged from him. He put an end to this practice, and many
hundreds of thousands of Dhimmis became Muslim after the promulgation of
this order.

Muawiya had begun the custom of cursing Ali ibn Abi Talib in public. He
himself and his governors and state functionaries used most intemperate
and abusive language from the pulpits in the mosques for Ali. After
Muawiya, his successors carried on this practice. But Umar bin Abdul
Aziz stopped it. He ordered his governors to read verses of Qur’an from
the pulpits instead of cursing Ali.

These reforms were not welcomed by the Umayyad hierarchy, and the
caliph's love for fair-play and justice did not make him very popular
with it. The Umayyad barons believed that if he ruled the empire for any
considerable length of time, then they would lose their power and their
perquisites.

They, therefore, hatched a conspiracy, and administered poison to him in
his food. He died from the effects of this poison in Rajab of 101 A.H.
(A.D. 720). *(History of Islam, published by Ferozsons Ltd., Karachi and
Lahore, Pakistan, pp. 324, 331, 332, 333, 1971).*

It was inevitable that a man like Umar bin Abdul Aziz would become a
martyr. He is one of the martyrs of Islam. May God have mercy on his
noble soul.

Ali faced challenges of monumental scope. But he was not overawed by
them. With a pure heart and a mind totally committed to God's Will, he
began the work of restoring peace and God's rule to the House of Islam.
Oath-taking for Ali was hardly over when rebellions erupted all around
him. If he dealt with one of them, another reared its head. Thus the few
years of his reign were spent in trying to quell them. Some of his
critics insinuated that the rebellions were the result of his
“imprudence.”

The rebellions in Ali's reign were not caused by his imprudence. As
pointed out above, they had their roots in the past. Any other man would
have faced the same set of problems, and it is most probable that he
would have been unable to grapple with them.

Under the circumstances, Ali ran the administration of the country, and
also tried to contain the rebellions as was his duty. He defeated one
group of rebels in Basra, and he would have defeated the other in Siffin
if the latter had not taken recourse to treachery. Even during these
turbulent times, he carried out important economic and social reforms.

Though the causes of the rebellions antedate the caliphate of Ali
himself, a few of them may be amplified as follows for a better
understanding of the events which took place later.

**1.** Ali's policy was purely Qur’anic. He was not going to compromise
with Islamic ethics and principles for the sake of hanging on to power
and authority. If he had also adopted the policy of realpolitik, he
would have been eminently successful but doing so would have changed the
character of his government from Islamic to “Aristotelian.”

Ahmad Hasan Zayyat of Egypt, says in his book, *Adab al-Araby* (p. 174):

“Ali knew absolutely no flexibility in matters of religion, and he knew
no double-dealing in worldly matters. It was this sublimity of his
character of which Muawiya took every advantage.”

**2.** Ali did not try to please the rich and the powerful at the
expense of the poor and the weak. He invariably put the interests of the
poor and the weak ahead of the interests of the Arab aristocracy. The
Arab aristocracy resented this, and showed him its resentment.

When distributing the revenues of the state treasury, Ali made no
distinction between high and low, rich and poor, and Arab and non-Arab.
In his sight, they were all equal. The Arab lords protested against such
treatment but he ignored their protests. Soon their protests exploded in
civil war.

**3.** As soon as Ali took charge of the government, he dismissed all
the governors and officers appointed by Uthman. But many of them had no
intention of giving up their positions.

Dismissal of Uthman's Governors
-------------------------------

When Ali took charge of the government, Uthman's governors and tax
collectors were plundering the country without any fear of being
questioned by the central government. Ali's first act was to issue
orders of their dismissal.

Mughira bin Shaaba was one of the companions of the Prophet. Umar had
appointed him governor of Kufa but Uthman had dismissed him. He had not
taken the oath of allegiance to Ali but he advised him against making
any radical changes in policy and personnel.

He said that if the governors appointed by Uthman did not acknowledge
his (Ali's) authority as caliph, then he could not remove them from
their jobs. He warned Ali that if he dismissed them summarily, before
consolidating his own power, they would rebel against his authority.

Ali's first cousin, Abdullah ibn Abbas, also gave him advice which, in
substance, was the same as that of Mughira. Prudence, he said, dictated
caution at the moment.

But such advice was not acceptable to Ali. He believed that he was
accountable to God for all his deeds, and he could not, therefore, allow
unworthy and corrupt men to rule over the Muslims. He, in fact,
considered himself accountable to God, not only for his own deeds, but
also for the deeds of his governors. He, therefore, placed his trust in
God, knowing that he was doing the right thing, and refused to rescind
his orders.

**Colonel Osborne**

Ali had been advised by several of his counselors to defer the dismissal
of the corrupt governors previously appointed until he himself was
secure against all enemies. The Bayard of Islam, the hero without fear
and without reproach refused to be guilty of any duplicity or compromise
with injustice. This uncompromisingly noble attitude cost him his state
and life, but such was Ali. He never valued anything above justice and
truth.

Some people imagine that if Ali had not dismissed Uthman's governors, he
would not have provoked them into challenging him. But such an opinion
rests upon naiveté. The governors of Uthman would have challenged Ali
regardless of what he had done. They were his old enemies.

Following are some of the reasons why Ali dismissed Uthman's governors:

**1.** Ali's aim was to restore the government of Muhammad Mustafa, and
to enforce the Islamic system. To do this, he had to “purify” the
government which he had inherited, by excising from it the ravening pack
of the Umayyads. In their stead, he had to appoint God-fearing men who
believed they were accountable to God for all that they did.

**2.** Muslims had requested Uthman to remove his conceited and egoistic
governors, and to appoint pious men in their stead. But he turned a deaf
ear to their request whereupon they took other steps to force a change
of governors. If Ali had temporized in this matter, they would have
toppled his government just as they toppled the government of his
predecessor.

**3.** If Ali had not dismissed the governors of Uthman, he would have
made himself vulnerable to the charge of “guilt by association.”

**4.** Muawiya was not content with ruling Syria alone; he wanted to
rule the whole empire of the Muslims as its khalifa. When he noticed
that Uthman had made many enemies for himself, he tried to take
advantage of the situation. He suggested to Uthman that he should leave
Medina, and go with him (with Muawiya) to Syria, where, he assured him,
he would be safe whereas in his own capital, he warned him, he might be
killed.

Muawiya had very good reasons to try to take Uthman to Damascus. Once in
Damascus, Uthman would have become a “figurehead khalifa.” Muawiya would
have taken all his authority out of his hands into his own, and would,
thus, have become khalifa *de facto* in his (Uthman's) lifetime, and *de
jure* after his death.

But Uthman did not go to Syria, and Muawiya's strategy did not work. But
when Uthman was killed, he launched his campaign against Ali seeking
vengeance for his blood. Ali had little choice in the matter but to
dismiss him.

**5.** Uthman had appointed governors not because they had any ability
or because they loved to serve the Muslims. He appointed them only
because they were related to him. Ali considered these appointments a
trespass on the rights of those men who were qualified by their ability,
piety, and service to Islam, to rule the Muslims. He, therefore, removed
them.

**6.** Uthman had appointed members of his own family as governors of
the provinces. His governors had men and materials necessary for war.
Uthman was in a state of siege in his palace for 49 days. He sent many
appeals to them to come and rescue him but they did not come, and he was
killed. If these governors could abandon their own benefactor so
casually, how could Ali depend upon them in an exigency to obey him? He,
therefore, decided not to be at their mercy.

A certain Abu Tufail Kinani, a resident of Medina, once went to Damascus
to see Muawiya. When they met, the following exchange took place between
them:

Muawiya: Where were you when Uthman was killed?

Kinani: I was in Medina.

Muawiya: Did you do anything to save his life from his enemies?

Kinani: No.

Muawiya: Why not? You knew that it was your duty to do your utmost to
save him.

Kinani: I suppose it was. But whatever it was that prevented *you* from
trying to save his life, also prevented me from trying to save his life.

The New Governors
-----------------

In Moharram of 36 A.H., Ali appointed the following governors:

### 1. Qays ibn Saad Ansari, the governor of Egypt.

Qays was able to enter Egypt without opposition and to take charge of
the government. In Egypt, he found the Muslims divided into three
groups. One was composed of his own supporters; the second of his
opponents, i.e., the supporters of Uthman; and the third group was
undecided in its loyalty. Qays decided not to meddle with the last two
groups, but to give his whole-hearted attention to the administration of
the country.

Qays, in physical appearance, was the most impressive man in Medina. He
was tall, stern and powerful in build; and he was noted for his
knowledge, piety and eloquence. He was also a man of great perception
and foresight, and was more than a match for men like Muawiya, Amr bin
Aas and Mughira bin Shaaba in ingenuity and intelligence.

But like his own master, Ali, he too did not believe that ends justified
the means. His philosophy of life was governed by the principle that
political policy must be subject to the ethics of Qur’an.

### 2. Uthman bin Hunaif, the governor of Basra.

Uthman was also able to enter Basra and to take charge of the
government. He too found the Muslims in Basra divided into three groups
as Qays had found in Egypt, and he too adopted the same policy as Qays
had in Egypt.

Uthman bin Hunaif belonged to a distinguished family of the Ansars. He
was a close friend of the Prophet. During the khilafat of Umar, he was
the financial commissioner of Iraq.

### 3. Ammara bin Shihab Ansari, the governor - designate of Kufa.

Ammara left Medina to take charge of his duties in Kufa. But when he
reached Zabala, a way-station on the road to Iraq, he met one Talha bin
Khuwaylid Asadi, coming from Kufa. He advised Ammara to return to
Medina, or else, he said, he would be killed in Kufa. Thereupon, Ammara
did not go to Kufa, and returned to Medina.

### 4. Sahl bin Hunaif Ansari, the governor - designate of Syria.

Sahl left Medina. Before he reached the Syrian frontier, he met a body
of cavalry. They asked him who he was and where he was going. He told
them that he was the new governor of Syria. They said they were Syrians
and that they did not acknowledge anyone as their ruler except Muawiya.
They also added that if he went any further, he would be killed.
Thereupon, Sahl did not enter Syria, and returned to Medina.

Sahl was the brother of Uthman bin Hunaif. He too was a companion of the
Prophet, and had fought in all his battles, distinguishing himself in
them by his gallantry.

### 5. Obaidullah ibn Abbas, the governor of Yemen.

Obaidullah was the first cousin of Muhammad and Ali. He entered Yemen
without opposition and took charge of the government. Yayla bin Umayya
who was Uthman's governor in Yemen, had left before his arrival, and had
taken the state treasury with him.

Qathm ibn Abbas, the governor - designate of Makkah.
----------------------------------------------------

Qathm was the younger brother of Obaidullah. He is said to have borne a
striking resemblance to the Prophet. He was still in Medina when Makkah
became a center of opposition to Ali. He, therefore, had to wait until
conditions returned to normal in Makkah. After the death of Ali, he left
Arabia, went to Samarkand in Central Asia, and died there.

A few months after his accession to the throne, Ali had to leave Medina
for Basra to take up the challenge of the rebels, and he appointed Sahl
bin Hunaif Ansari as governor of the capital in his own absence.

After the battle of Basra, Ali appointed Abdullah ibn Abbas as the new
governor of that city. Abdullah was an “understudy” of his master, Ali,
and won great fame for his knowledge. He was one of the earliest
authorities on the science of the exegesis of Qur’an. He died in Ta'if
at the age of 70.


