The Assassination of Ali
========================

From the second half of 658, Muawiya, the governor of Syria, had been
steadily escalating violence against the dominions of Ali. Some of his
inroads reached Ain-at-Tamar and Anbar, only 170 miles north of Kufa.
The men of Kufa were so unwilling to fight against the Syrians that Ali
found it impossible to take effective punitive action.

Muawiya himself led a raid right across the Jazira from Raqqa to Mosul,
and met no resistance anywhere. At last, Ali declared in the mosque of
Kufa that he would leave the city with the few of his faithful followers
in an attempt to halt the Syrian aggression against Iraq, even if it
cost him his life. This threat awakened the citizens of Kufa to the
specter of being left leaderless if Ali was killed fighting against the
Syrians. They were stung into action and they began to mobilize for
defense.

The battle of Siffin had been the first trial of strength between Ali
and Muawiya. Militarily, the battle had been a near-victory for Ali, but
politically, it had become a stalemate. After some time, it began to
appear that Ali would take up the challenge of Muawiya. But just then
Ali was assassinated in the mosque of Kufa, and the second trial of
strength never took place.

According to the historical accounts some of which are quite plausible,
three Kharjis met in Kufa (some say in Makkah) to hatch a conspiracy.
Each of them volunteered to kill each of the three leading political
figures of the Dar-ul-Islam – Ali, Muawiya and Amr bin Aas. By killing
them, it is alleged, they hoped to put an end to civil wars in Islam,
and to restore peace to the Muslim *umma*.

One of the three conspirators was a certain Abdur Rahman bin Muljam. He
stayed in Kufa to kill Ali, and the other two went to Syria and Egypt to
kill Muawiya and Amr bin Aas. The plans of the would-be assassins of
Muawiya and Amr bin Aas, according to the stories in circulation, went
awry, and they were captured and were executed.

The Kharjis had been defeated at Nehrwan, and most of them had perished
in the battle but a few had escaped. Abdur Rahman bin Muljam was one of
those who had escaped. He was consumed with the desire to kill Ali, and
was in quest of an opportunity to do so. By a coincidence, he met a
Kharji woman, one Qattama, whose father and brothers had also been
killed in Nehrwan, and she too had nursed an undying hatred of Ali.

Abdur Rahman fell in love with Qattama, and proposed marriage to her.
She told him that the price of her hand was the head of Ali ibn Abi
Talib. This only strengthened Abdur Rahman in his resolution. He
promised his inamorata the moon if she asked for it, but she said that
nothing was of interest to her if she could not get the head of Ali ibn
Abi Talib!

Abdur Rahman bin Muljam carefully worked out his plans to kill Ali. A
few other trusted Kharjis also volunteered their services to him, and
together they rehearsed the assassination. Abdur Rahman bin Muljam took
one extra precaution – he put his sword in deadly poison, and let it
soak in it for three days.

On the morning of the 19th of Ramadan of the year 40 A.H., Ali came into
the Great Mosque of Kufa, and called Adhan (the call to prayer). He took
his place in the alcove, and moments later, the worshippers began to
arrive. They stood behind him in serried ranks, and the prayer began.
Standing in the front row, with other worshippers, were Abdur Rahman bin
Muljam and his confederates. They were watching Ali's movements. In the
folds of their cloaks, they were carrying swords burnished to a high
sheen, and soaked in poison.

Just when Ali touched the ground with his forehead for *sajda,* Abdur
Rahman bin Muljam stepped out of his row, and crept into the alcove. And
just when Ali lifted his head from the ground, ibn Muljam struck the
fatal blow at his forehead with such deadly force that it split open.

Blood squirted from Ali's forehead in several jets, and he exclaimed:

“By the Lord of the Kaaba, I am successful!”

The members of the congregation realized what had happened, and as soon
as they concluded the prayer, they surrounded him. His sons, Hasan and
Husain, carried him to his house. A physician came, and tried to dress
the ghastly wound but could not stop the bleeding. The blow of the sword
was fatal anyway, but the poison from its blade was also spreading
rapidly in his body.

The Arab historians say that it was the second time that Ali was wounded
in the forehead, the first time being when, in the battle of the Trench
fought in 627, the sword of Amr bin Abd Wudd cut through his shield and
helmet, and struck it. His forehead still bore the scar left by the
sword of Amr.

This is the account left by the Arab historians of the assassination of
Ali, and it has been accepted as authentic by the vast majority of the
Muslims.

Though this account has the authority of “consensus” of the historians
behind it, its authenticity, nevertheless, is suspect on the grounds of
“circumstantial evidence.” There are too many “coincidences” in it.

No one questions the fact that it was Ibn Muljam who killed Ali. But was
it his own idea to kill him? It is quite probable that the idea was
planted in his mind by someone else who used subliminal techniques for
doing so. Ibn Muljam didn't know that he was only a cat's paw, and he
went ahead and killed Ali.

At this time no one in Dar-ul-Islam was more interested in the
assassination of Ali than Muawiya. The plot to kill Ali, the skill
displayed in its execution, and its success, show the touch of
consummate subtlety and a high degree of professionalism which were
characteristic of Muawiya alone, whereas Ibn Muljam was nothing more
than a bumpkin. Muawiya employed the same “skill” in removing from the
scene, real or fancied threats to his own security and power, on
numerous other occasions in later times, with the same results.

Muawiya's spies had informed him that Ali was making preparations for
the invasion of Syria. In the battle of Siffin, Muawiya had not
responded to chivalrous treatment by Ali. This time, therefore, Ali had
decided, not to fight a lingering action but a swift one that would
quell Muawiya's rebellion, and would restore peace to the embattled
empire of the Muslims.

Muawiya also knew that Ali had, this time, both the ability and the
resolution, to bring the conflict to a speedy and successful conclusion.
His only hope, therefore, for his safety in future, as in the past, lay
in the succor that he could get from his old and trusted “allies” –
treachery and intrigue. He, therefore, mobilized them, and they didn't
disappoint him.

Muawiya made the act of the assassination of Ali look absolutely
spontaneous and convincing by making himself and his crony, Amr bin Aas,
the potential and intended “victims” of the conspiracy and fanaticism of
the Kharji anarchists. But both of them “escaped” assassination by a
rare “stroke of good luck.”

One of them “fell ill” on the day he was to be “assassinated,” and did
not go into the mosque; the other did not fall ill, but went into the
mosque wearing his armor under his cloak. He was “attacked” by his
“assassin” but was “saved” by his armor. “Falling ill” would have been
an indiscreet act, and would have exposed both “victims.” In this
manner, “illness” and the armor “saved” both Muawiya and Amr bin Aas
from the daggers of their Kharji “assassins.”

But Ali was not so “lucky.” He did not fall ill, and he did not put on
his armor when entering the mosque. In the mosque, Ibn Muljam was
awaiting him with a sword soaked in poison. When Ali rose from *sajda,*
he struck at his forehead, and cleft it. The blow proved to be fatal.

Most of the Arab historians wrote histories which were “inspired” by
Muawiya and his successors. He was of course free to inject any account
into those histories. He, therefore, managed to save himself and Amr bin
Aas from the indictment of history, and it was Ibn Muljam alone who went
down in history books as the real and the only villain of the crime.

By a coincidence, the assassination of Ali took place on the eve of his
invasion of Syria.

Though the Kharji anarchists had aimed their daggers at all three of the
leading political figures of the Muslim world, viz., Ali, Muawiya and
Amr bin Aas, by a coincidence, the latter two escaped the attempts on
their lives, and Ali alone was killed.

By still another coincidence, the two men who escaped, i.e., Muawiya and
Amr bin Aas, were intimate friends of each other, and both of them were
– coincidence again – the mortal enemies of the third, i.e., Ali, who
was the only one to be killed.

There are too many mysterious coincidences that saved the lives of
Muawiya and Amr bin Aas but took the life of Ali.

Ali spent the time still left to him in prayer and devotions; in
dictating his will; in giving instructions to his sons, ministers and
generals regarding the conduct of the government; and in urging them all
never to forget the old, the sick, the poor, the widows and the orphans
at any time.

Ali declared that his elder son, Hasan, would succeed him as the head of
the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth, and as the sovereign of all Muslims.

Though Ali was steadily weakening from the loss of blood and from the
action of poison, all his faculties were sharp and clear right to the
last moment. To all those people who came to see him, he said that they
ought to be aware, at all times, of the presence of their Creator in
their lives, to love Him, to serve Him, and to serve His Creation.

The poison had done its work, and on the morning of the 21st of Ramadan
of 40 A.H., Ali ibn Abi Talib left this world to go into the presence of
his Creator whom he had loved and served all his life. He was
“God-intoxicated.” His greatest ambition in life was to wait upon his
Creator, every moment of his existence, and he realized it, and this is
the meaning of his exclamation in the alcove of the mosque when he felt
the edge of the sword at his forehead: “By the Lord of the Kaaba, I am
successful.”

Hasan and Husain washed the body of their father, draped it in a shroud,
offered the funeral prayers for it, and then buried it silently at
midnight at Najaf Ashraf, at some distance from Kufa. No markings were
placed on the grave, and the grave-site was kept a secret, as desired by
Ali himself.

Ali, Islam's greatest saint, hero, statesman, philosopher and martyr,
had left this world, and the world was not to find a man sublime like
him to all eternity.

Many among the Muslims were the mourners of Ali's death but none mourned
him more dolorously than the Dhimmis (the Jews, the Christians, and the
Magians). They were utterly heart-broken. And when the sick, the
disabled, the cripples, the orphans and the widows in the empire heard
that he had died, they felt that their world had collapsed. He had been
a father to them all. He had taken them all by the hand. He had taken
them all into his prayers. Many among them did not know until after his
death that it was he who had fed them and had taken care of them. He had
taken all mankind into his grasp.

Whereas Ali was accessible at all times to the poor and the weak, his
own greatest anxiety and fear were lest any of them be inaccessible to
him. It was only in his dominion that the Dhimmis (non-Muslims), the
powerless and the defenseless enjoyed complete security. No one could
terrorize them or exploit them. With his death, their security was gone
forever!

It is a truism that exercise of power cannot be combined with saintly
purity, since once a man assumes responsibility for public affairs, the
moral simplicities within which it is just possible, with luck, to be
able to lead a private life, are soon hideously complicated to an extent
that precludes all clear distinctions between right and wrong.

This truism, however, has its own exception – in Ali. He upheld
principle, in public life as in private, regardless of cost. He
invariably put the right thing ahead of the smart thing, regardless of
cost. The source of the principles which guided his private and public
life, was Al-Qur’an al-Majid as it was also the source of his political
philosophy.

Ali has many critics and enemies but they cannot point out a single
instance when he deviated from a principle. They cannot point out any
conflict between his thought and speech on the one hand, or between his
speech and deed on the other. He was consistently consistent in thought,
speech and action.

Ali represented the ultimate triumph of character and ideology. He was a
rare combination of love of God, devotion to duty, strength tempered
with tenderness, symmetry of disposition, and inflexible integrity. His
greatest legacy to the world of Islam will remain forever his sublime
character.


