Some Reflections on Ali's Caliphate
===================================

When in 656 the Muslims acknowledged Ali as their Caliph, and gave him
their pledge of allegiance, religious and temporal authority were
combined in one person. They thus “endorsed” an arrangement which had
been made, as early as 632, by the Messenger of God himself for his
succession.

There is no commandment in Islam, major or minor, doctrinal or formal,
which has been left to the whims or the wishes or the votes of the
masses. The most important political institution in Islam is the
caliphate. It is important because the existence of the Muslim community
and the survival of Islam depend upon it. It would, therefore, be
unthinkable that it would be left to the whims or the wishes or the
votes of the street crowds.

Law in Islam is the expression not of man's will but of God's.

After the death of Muhammad, Ali did not have any political power but he
was still his successor. Whether or not he had power in his hands,
obedience was due to him as the successor of the Prophet of Islam. The
only thing that changed, after Ali's election, was that those people who
had withheld their obedience to him in the past, now gave it to him,
voluntarily.

Of those Muslims who took the oath of loyalty to Ali, there were two
groups. Both groups took the oath of loyalty to him but for different
reasons. The first group knew him to be the head of the Kingdom of
Heaven on Earth; the second group acknowledged him only as the Chief
Executive of the government of the Muslims.

The first group knew that Muhammad himself had designated him as the
leader of the Muslim *umma*, and it knew that it was not free to take
the oath of loyalty to anyone else. The second group, however, would
have given its pledge of loyalty to anyone who would have succeeded in
seizing power.

Muhammad was not only a teacher and an ideal leader but was also the
pioneer of a new age on earth for all mankind. He opened the gates of a
new age, introduced into history a new force called Islam, let loose in
the world a new dynamic that can, and does, and will, change human life
and transform human relationships. He was the “pioneer” of all those men
and women who seek the salvation of all mankind.

The basic aim of Muhammad was to establish the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth, i.e., the Government of Islam. He taught mankind the lesson of
*Tauheed* (the doctrine of the Oneness of the Creator), and he invited
it to acknowledge His paramountcy. He promulgated God's laws, enforced
them, and created a society the hallmark of which was purity.

In that society there was the reign of justice, knowledge and
enlightenment, and he eliminated exploitation, tyranny, ignorance and
superstition from it. Islam, the only monotheistic religion that
represents a complete socio-economic-political system, is inherently
hostile to all secular governments, especially those that adopt alien
values which are repugnant to the value-system of Islam.

The establishment of the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth was the first part
of the mission of Muhammad. The second part of his mission was to assure
its continuity. He did not establish the “Kingdom” only for his own
lifetime but for all time, and not only for the Arabs but for all
mankind. He, therefore, designated as his successor a man he knew would
give continuity to his work. Such a man was Ali ibn Abi Talib, as noted
before.


