The birth of Ali ibn Abi Talib
==============================

Ali was born on the 13th of Rajab of the 30th year of the Elephant (A.D.
600). His cousin, Muhammad, was now 30 years old. Ali's parents were Abu
Talib ibn Abdul Muttalib, and Fatima, the daughter of Asad, both of the
clan of Hashim.

Ali was born inside the Kaaba in Makkah. The great historian, Masoodi,
the Herodotus of the Arabs, writes on page 76 of Volume II of his book,
*Murooj-udh-Dhahab* (The Golden Meadows), that one of the greatest
distinctions that Ali enjoyed was that he was born in the House of
Allah.Some of the other authorities who have affirmed Ali's birth in the
Kaaba, are:

1.Muhammad ibn Talha el-Shafei in *Matalib-us-saool*, page 11.

2.Hakim in *Mustadrak*, page 483, Vol. III.

3.El-Umari in *Sharh Ainia*, page 15.

4.Halabi in *Sira*, page 165, Vol. I.

5.Sibt ibn al-Jauzi in *Tadhkera Khawasil Ummah*, page 7.

6.Ibn Sabbagh Maleki in *Fusoolul Mohimma*, page 14.

7.Muhammad bin Yousuf Shafei in *Kifayet al-Talib*, page 261.

8.Shablanji in *Nurul Absar*, page 76.

9.Ibn Zahra in *Ghiyathul Ikhtisar*, page 97.

10. Edvi in *Nafhatul Qudsia*, page 41.

Among the modern historians, Abbas Mahmood al-Akkad of Egypt writes in
his book *Al-'Abqarriyet al-Imam Ali*, (Cairo, 1970), that Ali ibn Abi
Talib was born inside the Kaaba.

Another contemporary historian, Mahmood Saeed al-Tantawi, of the Supreme
Council of Islamic Affairs, Arab Republic of Egypt, writes on page 186
of his book, *Min Fada-il al-‘Ashrat al-Mubashireen bil Janna*,
published in 1976 by Matab’a al-Ahram at-Tijariyya, Cairo, Egypt:

“May God have mercy upon Ali ibn Abi Talib. He was born in the Kaaba. He
witnessed the rise of Islam; he witnessed the Da’wa of Muhammad, and he
was a witness of the *Wahi* (Revelation of Al-Qur’an al-Majid). He
immediately accepted Islam even though he was still a child, and he
fought all his life so that the Word of Allah would be supreme.”

An Arab poet composed the following distich on the birth of Ali:

He (Ali) is the one for whom the House of Allah was turned into a
maternity home; And he is the one who threw the idols out of that House;
Ali was the first and the last child ever to be born in the Kaaba.

It was a custom of the Arabs that when a child was born, he was placed
at the feet of the tribal idol or idols, thus symbolically “dedicating”
him to the pagan deity. All Arab children were “dedicated” to the idols
except Ali ibn Abi Talib. When other Arab children were born, some
idolater came to greet them and to take them in his arms.

But when Ali was born, Muhammad, the future Messenger of God, came into
the precincts of the Kaaba to greet him. He took the infant into his
arms,, and dedicated him to the service of Allah. The future prophet
must have known that the infant in his arms was some day going to be the
nemesis of all idolaters and polytheists and of their gods and
goddesses. When Ali grew up, he extirpated idolatry and polytheism from
Arabia with his sword.

Birth in Kaaba was one out of many distinctions that God bestowed upon
Ali. Another distinction that he enjoyed was that he never adored the
idols. This again makes him unique since all Arabs worshipped idols for
years and years before they abjured idolatry and accepted Islam.

It is for this reason that he is called “he whose face was honored by
Allah.” His face was indeed honored by Allah as it was the only face
that never bowed before any idol.

Ali was the youngest child in the family. Of the three of his brothers,
Talib and Aqeel, were many years older than him; Jaafer was ten years
older.

The birth of Ali filled the heart of the future Apostle with boundless
happiness. The child was someone “special” for him. After all, Muhammad
had many other cousins and they had their own children, and Ali himself
had three elder brothers; but he didn't show any interest in any of
them. Ali and Ali alone was the focus of his interest and love.

When Ali was five years old, Muhammad adopted him, and from that moment
they were never to part with each other.

There is a story that once there was a famine in Makkah, and the
surrounding areas, and Abu Talib, being in dire straits at the time, was
finding it difficult to support a large establishment. It occurred to
Muhammad that he ought to try to mitigate some of his uncle's burden of
responsibilities, and was thus prompted to adopt Ali.

It is true that Muhammad adopted Ali but not for the reason stated
above. In the first place, Abu Talib was not in such dire straits that
he could not feed a child of five; he was a man of rank and substance,
and his caravans plied between Hijaz and Syria or between Hijaz and
Yemen. In the second place, feeding a child of five years would have
hardly made any difference to a man who fed even strangers if they were
hungry.

Muhammad and Khadija adopted Ali after the death of their own sons. Ali
thus filled a void in their lives. But Muhammad, the future prophet,
also had another reason for adopting Ali. He picked out Ali to bring him
up, to educate him, and to groom him for the great destiny that awaited
him in the times to come. Dr. Taha Hussain of Egypt says that the
Messenger of God himself became Ali's guide, teacher and instructor, and
this is one more distinction that he enjoys, and which no one else
shares with him (Ali).

About Islam it has been said that of all the universal religions, it is
the only one which has grown in the full light of history, and there is
no part of its story which is in obscurity.

**Bernard Lewis**

In an essay on Muhammad and the origin of Islam, Ernest Renan remarks
that, unlike other religions which were cradled in mystery, Islam was
born in the full light of history. “Its roots are at surface level, the
life of its founder is as well known to us as those of the Reformers of
the sixteenth century”. *(The Arabs in History, 1960,)*

**G. E. Von Grunebaum**

Islam presents the spectacle of the development of a world religion in
the full light of history. *(Islam, 1969)*

Similarly, it may be said that of all the friends and companions of
Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, Ali is the only one who grew up in the
full light of history. There is no part of his life, whether it is his
infancy, childhood, boyhood, youth, manhood, or maturity, that is hidden
from the spotlight of history. He was the cynosure of all eyes from his
birth to his death.

On the other hand, the rest of the companions of the Prophet come to the
attention of the student of history only after they accept Islam, and
little, if anything, is known about them until then.

Ali was destined to become the right arm of Islam, and the shield and
buckler of Muhammad, the Messenger of God. His destiny was inseparably
linked with the destiny of Islam, and the life of its Prophet. He was
present at every juncture in the history of the new movement, and he
played the stellar role in it.

It was, incidentally, a role that he alone could have played. He
reflected the “image” of Muhammad. The Book of God itself called him the
“soul” or the *alter ego* (a second self) of Muhammad in verse 61 of its
third chapter, and paraded his illustrious name across the horizons of
history.

In the years to come, the creative synergy of Muhammad and Ali – the
master and the disciple – was going to place the “Kingdom of Heaven” on
the map of the world.


