The “Indispensability Equation” of Islam
========================================

The early years of Islam were a time of stern tests and grim trials for
the Faithful. Every day brought for them new confrontations with, and
new challenges from the polytheists, and merely existing in a hostile
environment, was an unending struggle. The entire ministry of Muhammad
as God's Last Messenger to this world, which spanned the last 23 years
of his life, was overshadowed by this struggle.

It was a titanic struggle. Only men and women of invincible faith,
indomitable courage, and unflagging strength could have lived through
its stresses and tensions. To grapple with it, therefore, Islam produced
its own “titans.” The “titans” of Islam were two individuals and two
groups. The two individuals were Abu Talib ibn Abdul-Muttalib and his
son, Ali; and the two groups were the Banu Hashim in Makkah, and the
Ansar in Medina.

The “base of operations” of Abu Talib and the Banu Hashim was Makkah
whereas the “theater” of the conflicts in which Ali and the Ansar were
drawn, was Medina. Together, they made up what might be called the
“indispensability equation” of Islam. Each of the four components of
this “equation” was indispensable for the existence of Islam, and each
of them was destined to play a very special role in its history.

The first component of this equation was Abu Talib. God charged him with
the duty of protecting Muhammad and defending Islam. His house in Makkah
was the cradle of Islam. Muhammad, the future Prophet, was born in his
house. Later, the same house became, first the “school” of Muhammad, and
then the “fortress” of Islam.

Abu Talib was a man of great prestige, resourcefulness and power but the
problems he faced, as the defender of Islam, were of such magnitude that
he could not have overcome them all by himself. He had, therefore, to
enlist support. But who in Makkah would support him against the Quraysh
except the members of his own clan – the Banu Hashim? He rallied them,
and it was their collective support that guaranteed the existence and
the survival of Islam in Makkah.

The clan of Banu Hashim was consistent and monolithic in its support of
Muhammad and Islam. Its members dared three years of perils and
privations as exiles in a mountain ravine but they did not forsake
Muhammad. The polytheists were daunted and dismayed by the united and
defiant front presented by the Banu Hashim to them, and to the rest of
the world.

The day Abu Talib died, it appeared to Muhammad that the mighty bulwark
of Islam had caved in. The death of Abu Talib did not, however,
interrupt the tradition of protecting Muhammad and defending Islam that
he had founded; it was carried on by his son, Ali, who was destined to
distinguish himself even more than his illustrious father in service to
Islam.

His genius unfolded in Medina. He busted up the pagan monolith of
Arabia. But just as the support of Banu Hashim was found to be
indispensable for Islam in Makkah, the support of the Ansar was found to
be indispensable for it in Medina. The Ansar rallied behind Muhammad in
Medina just as the Banu Hashim had rallied behind him in Makkah.

Abu Talib and Ali, and the men and women of the Banu Hashim and the
Ansar were extraordinary by the standards of their day as well as by our
own. They took up every challenge to Islam, and they overcame ever
crisis in its career. They alone protected and defended the principles,
the honor and the heritage of Islam. The names of all these heroes are
not known to history but each of them was indispensable for Islam. Each
of them, man or woman, made up the “indispensability equation” of Islam.
Without the contribution in services of each of them, the “equation” of
Islam might not have “jelled” at all.

There were other Muslims also – the companions of the Prophet – who
played roles of their own in varying degrees of importance in the
history of Islam. Some of them played major roles and others played
minor roles but no one among them played roles that were great enough to
make them indispensable.

Many of them distinguished themselves *after* the death of the Prophet
but if they had died in his lifetime, they would not have even been
heard of. In his lifetime, they were secondary and marginal characters
who assumed individual reality and complexity only after the death of
their master.

John Kenneth Galbraith, the American economist and diplomat, once
isolated the journalistic malady he called “the build-up.” The essence
of the build-up, he said, is to recast a personage of average attributes
into historic, indeed immortal image. This appears to have been done in
the case of many of the Muhajireen.

Most extravagant praise has been lavished on some of them, and in many
cases, the praise has been attributed to the Prophet himself, and has
thus been given the “status” of hadith (tradition of the Prophet).
Actually, countless of these “hadith” or traditions are nothing more
than fanciful embroideries of the fertile and fervent imagination of
some admirer or admirers of the companions.

Examples of “hadith” glorifying some of the companions of the Prophet
are legion but here it is possible to quote only one of them. One of the
most famous “traditions” is the one called the “Hadith of Ashra
Mubasharra.” The Prophet is alleged to have given his personal assurance
to ten of his principal companions that all of them would enter heaven.
They were:

**1.** Abu Bakr

**2.** Umar

**3.** Uthman

**4.** Ali

**5.** Talha

**6.** Zubayr

**7.** Abdur Rahman bin Auf

**8.** Saad bin Abi Waqqas

**9.** Abu Obaida Aamir bin al-Jarrah

**10.** Saeed bin Zayd

The authenticity of this tradition is open to question on the following
grounds:

**(1).** All these ten companions are Muhajireen and not one of them is
an Ansari – a very curious omission indeed! Just as the Ansar had no
share in the Saqifa government, now it would appear that they had no
place in heaven either. It is truly fantastic that the Prophet could not
find a single Ansari who was worthy of belonging to this group of ten.
And yet, it were the Ansar who gave sanctuary to Islam and to the
Muhajireen themselves.

Muhammad Mustafa was neither ungrateful nor forgetful. He could not have
forgotten the hospitality shown by the Ansar to him. He had, in fact,
accepted the hospitality of the Ansar with great pleasure. On the other
hand, he appeared to have had many reservations in accepting any
obligation from any of the Muhajireen, and he never did. If he was not
ungrateful, and he was not, then this “tradition” cannot be genuine.

**(2).** Some of these citizens of paradise, when they were living on
this earth, were fighting against each other, and were trying to kill
each other. Two of them – Talha and Zubayr – were rousing the mob to
kill an incumbent khalifa – Uthman – who was also a member of the same
group. Later, both of them broke their solemn pledge of loyalty to
another incumbent khalifa – Ali – and shed the blood of thousands of
innocent Muslims. Ali had, in fact, tried to save the same Muslims from
butchery. And yet, according to this tradition, the potential killers
and the potential victims – both would enter heaven!

**(3).** Even among the Muhajireen, there were men who were more
distinguished than some of these ten men but the Prophet didn't assure
any of them that they would enter heaven. Mas'ab ibn Umayr, Abdullah ibn
Masood, Bilal ibn Ribah, Zayd ibn Haritha, and his son, Usama, and
Abdullah ibn Rawaha, were far more distinguished than Uthman, Abdur
Rahman bin Auf, Obaidullah bin Aamir al-Jarrah, and Saeed bin Zayd, and
yet the Prophet did not give them any assurance that they would enter
heaven.

It is not known what was the standard for judging who would enter
heaven, and who would be refused admission to it. If piety was the
touchstone for admission to heaven, then among the companions – both
Muhajireen and Ansar – there were many others who were more pious and
more devout than some of these ten men. Five out of them were great
capitalists. They were the pillars of the capitalist system of the
Muslims.

There is nothing wrong in being a capitalist as such; but capitalism,
especially in its undiluted form, was the symbol of an economic system
against which Muhammad, the Messenger of God, had fought all his life.
He fought against it because it rested upon the principle of ruthless
and unconscionable exploitation of the poor.

He found predatory capitalism nursed and protected by the powerful
cartel of the Quraysh of Makkah. The cartel was entrenched, fortified
and impregnable but through long and persistent effort he was, at last,
able to demolish it.

Muhammad never identified himself with the guardians of the capitalist
system. On the other hand, he identified himself with the poor. He often
said: *Alfaqru fakhri* (Poverty is my pride). But after his death, the
capitalist system was exhumed and was resurrected. The Electoral
Committee which Umar had appointed to select a new khalifa, was a cartel
of the (new) capitalists, reconstituted in Islamic times. It is true
that he had made Ali one of the electors but the latter did not belong
to the group. Actually, his relationship with this cartel was the same
as that of Muhammad with the cartel of the Quraysh in Makkah.

Both cartels were exclusive. The cartel in Makkah excluded the
non-Qurayshites and the poor from its membership; the cartel in Medina
excluded the Ansar and the poor from its membership. Both cartels were
run by the Qurayshites for the exclusive benefit of the Qurayshites.

The new capitalism was “sanctified” because of its connection with the
principal companions of the Prophet, and very soon it rose into such a
position of dominance in Dar-ul-Islam that it could not be dislodged
again. When Ali made an attempt to dislodge it, its guardians challenged
him, and Dar-ul-Islam erupted into civil war.

Soon Ali was assassinated, and after his assassination, predatory
capitalism found itself free to swagger unchecked and unbridled over the
landscape of Islam.

The Shia Muslims consider the “Ashra Mubasharra” a fake tradition
because it does not jibe with reason, and still less with the ethos of
Islam. They consider it a product of the malady called “the build-up.”
Its essence, they believe, was to recast common, garden-variety men into
historic, indeed immortal image.


