The Sacrifices of Muhammad for Islam
====================================

Great aims, to be achieved, call for great sacrifices, and success in
making a reality out of them comes at high cost. The greater the aim,
the higher is the price one has to pay to realize it. Man's struggle to
free himself from the chains of slavery and tyranny is thousands of
years old, and it has taken countless lives. The struggle goes on today
as it did in the past, and its story is endless because the struggle
itself is endless.

Three of the most important landmarks in man's struggle for freedom are
the French Revolution of 1789, the Russian Revolution of 1917, and the
Chinese Revolution of 1949. They are also three of the most momentous
events in world history.

Tides of blood rose in the wake of these revolutions, and as they
receded, they carried away the old systems and symbols of oppression and
exploitation with them. These revolutions generated new forces which
are, even today, churning the whole world. They were the price man had
to pay to buy his political and economic freedom.

(The Russian Revolution and the Soviet Empire collapsed from within,
after 73years – in 1990. They did not prove to be viable.)

Many centuries earlier, i.e., in the seventh century, another revolution
had changed the course of history. It was one of the greatest
revolutions of all time but the remarkable thing about it was that it
was peaceful. It did not whip up any tides of blood, and in fact, ought
to be called a “bloodless” revolution. It was a message of peace. Peace
was its insignia, and peace or Islam was its name.

Though Islam upheld peace in the world, it did not become viable without
a struggle. It was, in fact, locked up, for 23 years, in a sanguinary
struggle for survival, and just like the other great movements of
emancipation, it also called for sacrifice. It is remarkable that
Muhammad – the Messenger of God and the Prophet of Islam – did not
imitate other leaders who push their followers into the flames of war in
the name of “sacrifice” for an ideal. He himself was the first one to
offer sacrifices for Islam.

Webster's definition of a sacrifice is to suffer loss for an ideal.
Parting with one's most highly treasured possessions for the sake of an
ideal, constitutes sacrifice. Most of the apostles and prophets lived
lives of sacrifice.

Abraham offered his son, Ismael, as a sacrifice; and John the Baptist,
offered his own life as a sacrifice. Ismael might have been killed but
was replaced just in time by an ibex. John the Baptist, however, was
executed, and his head was presented to a wanton to soothe her vanity.
He is one of the greatest martyrs of all time.

These are two out of many examples of sacrifice that called for great
courage and great faith. But both from the qualitative and quantitative
points of view, the sacrifices which Muhammad offered for Islam, remain
unparalleled in history.

A distinction must be made here between material sacrifices and the
sacrifices of life. Muhammad made both. He sacrificed all his personal
comforts, and all his material possessions for the sake of Islam. This,
of course, everyone knows. What is perhaps not so well-known, is the
fact that some of his nearest and dearest kinsfolk were killed in the
defense of Islam. The relatives of Muhammad who made their lives an
oblation for Islam, are as follows:

**1.**Al-Harith ibn Abi Hala, adopted son, and nephew of Khadija. He was
killed in Makkah.

**2.**Obaida ibn al-Harith ibn Abdul-Muttalib, cousin. He was killed in
the battle of Badr.

**3.**Hamza ibn Abdul-Muttalib, uncle. He was killed in the battle of
Uhud.

**4.**Mas'ab ibn Umayr, uncle. He was killed in the battle of Uhud.

**5.**Abdullah ibn Jahash, cousin. He was killed in Uhud.

**6.** Zayd ibn Haritha, adopted son and friend. He was killed in the
battle of Mootah.

**7.**Jaafer Tayyar ibn Abi Talib, cousin. He was killed in the battle
of Mootah.

**8.**Aymen ibn Ubayd, foster-brother. He was killed in the battle of
Hunayn.

This is a roster of some of the most distinguished names in all Islam,
and it includes two uncles, three cousins, two adopted sons, and one
foster-brother of Muhammad. It was through such sacrifices that he made
Islam invulnerable and indestructible.

Muhammad never made any attempt to be protective to his own loved ones.
It were, in fact, his loved ones who were the foremost in taking up the
challenge of an enemy. There was no one he loved more than Ali, and yet,
the position of the greatest danger in every confrontation with the
pagans – in Makkah or in Medina – was invariably reserved for him.

The greatest sacrifices for Islam were all made by Muhammad and Ali.

On the other hand, Abu Bakr and Umar did not make any sacrifice. As for
sacrifice for Islam is concerned, they have nothing to show. Whenever a
challenge came from the pagans, as it did in the battles of Badr, Uhud
and Khandaq, they (Abu Bakr and Umar), did not accept it; and no member
of their families was killed in the defense of Islam at any time. The
only relative that Umar ever lost in the struggle of Islam and paganism,
was his maternal uncle, Abu Jahl, who was killed in the battle of Badr.

The crown of martyrdom is the greatest honor and the greatest glory that
Islam can bestow upon a Muslim in this world. The loved ones of Muhammad
and Ali won eight of them in the lifetime of the former, and they were
destined to win many more after his death. May God bless them all.


