The Major Failure of Abu Bakr and Umar
======================================

The difference between a politician and a statesman, it has been said,
is that the politician thinks of the next election, the statesman of the
next generation. What it means is that the impact of a politician on the
public is transitory whereas that of a statesman is enduring.

In the case of leaders who are dead, people remember them according to
whether their actions and ideas changed the course of history, and
whether their works have become part of the national heritage.

Abu Bakr and Umar were great statesmen and their actions and ideas
changed the course of history. Without a doubt, they were great leaders,
conquerors and administrators.

But notwithstanding all the greatness of Abu Bakr and Umar, there is one
area in which their vision as statesmen failed them, and it failed them
totally. The area in question relates to the leadership of the Muslims.
They failed to create an apparatus of succession for the Muslim umma.
They failed to develop a system of peaceful transfer of sovereignty from
one incumbent to another.

Before Abu Bakr and Umar, their master, Muhammad, the Messenger of God,
had designed an apparatus for orderly and peaceful transfer of power.
But most unfortunately, they (Abu Bakr and Umar) dismantled it. In its
stead, they designed an apparatus of their own. Their apparatus was
workable but it had too many “bugs” in it.

In contradistinction to the inspired plan of Muhammad for succession,
Abu Bakr and Umar adopted a makeshift system of their own in Saqifa.
Their system was successful in the sense that it put power in their
hands; first one and then the other of them became the successor of
Muhammad. After all, nothing succeeds like succession!

But as events were soon to show, their system was incompatible with a
coherent strategy. Coherence, and not visceral ad hoc-ery is the essence
of statesmanlike strategy.

When Muhammad, the Apostle of God, died, Abu Bakr and Umar inaugurated
the *al-Khilafat er-Rashida* (the Rightly-Guided Caliphate), and Abu
Bakr became the first “rightly-guided caliph.” Two years later, when he
was dying, he appointed Umar as his successor who then became the second
“rightly-guided caliph.”

Ten years later, Umar lay dying, and he was confronted once again with
the problem of transferring power. But all that he did, was to design a
jerry-built apparatus to find a leader for the umma even though he had
gained long experience of government and politics.

The dismantlement by Abu Bakr and Umar of the apparatus for transfer of
power which Muhammad had given to his *umma*, proved to be the greatest
tragedy in the history of Islam.

Maurice Latey, writing about the Roman Emperors, in his book, *Patterns
of Tyranny,* published by Atheneum, New York (1969), says:

“The means color the end: and for all Augustus' statesmanship, the
methods by which he seized power, left a fatal flaw in the foundation of
his empire which repeatedly shook the edifice and finally destroyed it.”

For all the statesmanship of Abu Bakr and Umar, the methods by which
they seized power, left a fatal flaw in the foundations of *al-Khilafat
er-Rashida,* which repeatedly shook the edifice and finally destroyed
it.

*Al-Khilafat er-Rashida* collapsed in the midst of civil wars,
assassinations and chaos, just as Umar himself had predicted. Muawiya
bin Abu Sufyan, who had been awaiting the opportunity for thirty years,
to grab the caliphate, moved in to fill the power vacuum, and he did so
with no pretense of piety or even of sanctimony.

As noted before, Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, was still alive when
the potential candidates for power, and their supporters had worked out
a plan or a master-plan which was designed to supersede his plan for
succession. According to their plan, Abu Bakr was to be the first
successor, and Umar and Uthman were to be the second and the third
successors of Muhammad. The latter knew what some of his companions were
trying to do, and it was because of this knowledge that he placed all of
them under the command of Usama bin Zayd bin Haritha, ordered them to
leave Medina, and to go on a campaign to the Syrian frontier. But they
defied his orders and did not go.

The companions discarded Muhammad's plan for succession, and elevated
Abu Bakr to the throne of khilafat. Before his own death, two years
later, he appointed Umar as khalifa. Ten years later, when Umar was
dying, he “stage-managed” the selection of Uthman as his own successor,
as noted before, and the “master-plan” worked with perfect precision.

But there is no way of knowing what did Abu Bakr and Umar think would
happen after Uthman. It appears that Umar tried to look beyond Uthman.
Thinking of the times after Uthman, he “adopted” Muawiya as his protégé.
Just as Muhammad had groomed Ali for ruling the Muslim *umma* after
himself, Umar groomed Muawiya for the same purpose.

Muawiya had heard Umar denouncing the mode of election of Abu Bakr to
khilafat as *“an unprémeditated affair,”* one from the “evil effects” of
which God had saved the Muslims.

Therefore, when he became khalifa, he gave a burial to the method by
which Abu Bakr was elected khalifa. He abolished the elective systemthus
putting an end de jure to the institution which had been deprived of its
power de facto by Abu Bakr himself when he designated Umar as his
successor instead of leaving the choice of a leader to the Muslim
*umma*.

Muawiya demolished the house built by Abu Bakr and Umar in a reversal of
ideology.

Muawiya's rise to power signalized the spectacular failure of the
“Islamic” or rather of the Saqifa democracy.

**Charles Yost**  
 “Democracy is not a matter of sentiment, but of foresight. Any system
that doesn't take the long run into account, will burn itself out in the
short run.” *(The Age of Triumph and Frustration).*

The Saqifa democracy didn't take the long run into account, and burned
itself out in the short run, and out of its ashes sprang Muawiya the son
of Hinda into super-stardom! Just as Abu Bakr had inaugurated the
*al-Khilafat er-Rashida*, Muawiya inaugurated monarchy, and founded a
dynasty. On the ruins of the *al-Khilafat er-Rashida*, he reared the
edifice of the empire of the Umayyads. His political philosophy rested
upon long-range, sequential and coherent strategy.

Ninety years later, Muawiya's empire folded up. On the debris of his
empire, the Abbasis reared the edifice of their empire. Abbasis also
inaugurated dynastic rule, and their political philosophy also rested
upon long-range, sequential and coherent strategy, and they ushered in
the “Golden Age” of the Arabs.

The Golden Age of any nation symbolizes peace and prosperity. The Golden
Age of the Arabs might have brought prosperity to some people but it did
not necessarily bring peace to the Muslims. Even when the Abbasi power
was at its zenith, their empire did not have any real peace.

**G. E. Von Grunebaum**

Religion too was the motivation of the uprisings which repeatedly
convulsed the Abbasi empire. Even under the first Abbasids, who held
power firmly, not a year passed without rebellion of some kind, large or
small. *(Classical Islam - A History 600-1258, p. 88, 1970).*

Warfare inside the Dar-ul-Islam was a norm, and it was expected that
wars would take place. The struggle for power was considered normal and
inevitable. This struggle was the “legacy” of Saqifa to the Muslims.
Most Muslims had become “addicts” of civil war. But if there was no war,
it was considered a phenomenon so extraordinary that it boggled belief.
Transition of power without bloodshed was considered a “freak.”

**G.E. Von Grunebaum**

Abu Yaqub Yusuf, the son of Abd al-Mumin (Almohads), took over power
without incident. He fell in the holy war before Santarem (Spain) in
1184. The next three rulers also, of whom the most important was Abd
al-Mumin's grandson, Yaqub al-Mansur (1184-1199) mounted the throne
without having to put down any rebellion, *a dynastic stability almost
without parallel in the Dar al-Islam.* (emphasis added) *(Classical
Islam - A History 600-1258, p.187, 1970)*

A statesman is endowed with a vision that can penetrate generations and
even centuries. Almost every nation has produced such statesmen. Those
men of the 18th century who drafted the Declaration of American
Independence, the Constitution of the United States of America, and the
Bill of Rights, were such statesmen. They were prophetic.

They designed apparatus for orderly transfer of power, and by doing so,
they saved the American people from the trauma of war and bloodshed.
They put “built-in” safeguards in the Constitution so that since 1789,
sovereignty has passed from one incumbent or from one party to another
without any incident. They condensed in 52 words a Preamble that is the
most satisfactory statement of the purpose of government ever written.

**RobertB. Downs**

The nineteenth-century (American) historian, George Bancroft, believed
that the Founding Fathers had acted under divine guidance, that they had
been directed by God first to stage a democratic revolution, and then to
write a democratic constitution. *(Books that Changed America, London,
1970)*

Considering the ephemerality of the *al-Khilafat er-Rashida*, it might
appear that it did not have any divine guidance or divine blessing.

On January 20, 1981, Mr. Ronald Reagan, the fortieth President of the
United States, said in his inaugural address:

“The orderly transfer of authority as called for in the Constitution
takes place as it has for almost two centuries and few of us stop to
think how unique we really are. In the eyes of many in the world, this
every-four-year ceremony we accept as normal, is nothing less than a
miracle.”

The “Founding Fathers” of America achieved this miracle in the 18th
century. Twelve centuries before them, Muhammad, the Apostle of God, had
achieved the same miracle in Arabia. Here a student of history can see
two miracles in “orderly transfer of authority.” But whereas the miracle
of the American Founding Fathers turned out to be viable, the miracle of
the Arabian Prophet turned out to be “still-born!”

Why?

For a very simple reason, viz., the young American nation gave massive
and whole-hearted support to the principles enshrined in the American
“miracle” but the key figures in the young Muslim umma withheld their
support to the principles enshrined in the Islamic miracle.

As noted before, Muhammad was stymied by his own companions in the
execution of his inspired design for orderly transfer of authority in
the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth. The latter had a design of their own,
and they succeeded in putting it into effect at his death. But with
their “success,” they and their proxies opened the Pandora's Box of
polarization, confrontation and conflict in the Dar-ul-Islam which took
a dreadful toll from the Muslim umma. Countless Muslims were killed in
their countless wars which were fought only because there was no
apparatus for peaceful transfer of power from one ruler to another.

Many modern historians have noted and have commented upon the paradox of
war and bloodshed in the Dar-ul-Islam, i.e. “the House of Peace.”

**Sir John Glubb**

“Politically, the Muslim states, throughout their long centuries of
leadership, constantly were torn by civil wars between rival claimants
to rule. We see them once again frequently the scene of internal
upheavals and of army seizures of power, precisely as they were 800
years ago Throughout history, Muslim armies have been employed in
internal struggles more often than in external wars... “ *(The Lost
Centuries, 1967)*

Another historian has commented upon the political and moral decline of
the empire of the Muslims in which young men perished fighting the
interminable wars of their rulers, while the rulers themselves rotted
away in gilded, bejeweled, be-eunuched palaces.

**Herbert J. Muller**

They (the Umayyads) established a dynasty, set up a worldly court,
introduced eunuchs into their harems, and in general ruled like Oriental
kings, no longer associating with their fellows in the manner of Arab
chieftains. Church and State, theoretically one, became in fact
separate. Islam retained a misty devotion to the theory, but had no real
political doctrine.

The Abbasids built a new capital at Baghdad, a cosmopolitan city that
became the site of the Arabian Nights, and of a civilization much richer
than Arabian. They brought Islam to the summit of its material wealth
and power and its cultural creativity, producing the famous symbol of
its splendor in the reign of Harun al-Rashid (786-809).

Yet in this reign the basic rottenness of the Abbasid regime was already
apparent. Harun had ascended the throne more easily because his brother
had been murdered in the harem; he had to contend with many revolts in
his empire; and his death was followed by civil war between his sons.
The Islamic world shortly began to fall apart, as Persia, Spain, Egypt
and other provinces became independent kingdoms. The empire built in the
name of Mohammed and Allah had nothing of the staying power of the
secular Roman Empire.

Strictly it had never been a real empire with a uniform government. The
spiritual unity of Islam failed to inspire political unity; its rulers
displayed little political intelligence and less idealism. While the
Abbasid caliphs made a show of orthodox piety, most of them were
recklessly impious and still more recklessly extravagant, squandering
the wealth of Islam in luxurious living. They consciously modeled
themselves crowned with the diadem, became increasingly autocratic and
remote from their subjects, and made the army their personal property,
recruiting it from among foreign slaves.

Another innovation was the executioner who always accompanied them. The
founder of the dynasty, Abul Abbas, had taken the name of Bloodspiller;
his successors often had their own blood spilled, in assassination
resulting from court intrigue. By the tenth century the caliphs of
Baghdad were puppets of their “slave” army, lacking any real political
or spiritual authority over their dwindling domains. The sorry pretense
of their rule was ended in 1031.

More caliphs popped up elsewhere in Islam, as in Egypt and Spain, but
they too had only nominal authority. Other Islamic states repeated the
Baghdad story of imperial splendor, intrigue, and civil war. An Arabian
poet summed up the moral for their subjects: “Get sons - for Death!
Build high - for Ruination! March on - this road goes to Annihilation!”
*(The Loom of History, pp. 286-287, 1958)*

Judging by this portrait, *peace* itself must have been at bay in the
House of Peace (Dar-ul-Islam) since bloodshed and war were a far more
familiar experience of its citizens. The Muslim umma has indeed paid a
very high price for its failure to accept the plan of Muhammad, the
Apostle of God, for transfer of authority.


