Who Wrote the History of Islam and How?
=======================================

**History, it has been said, is the propaganda of the victorious
party.**

What this means is that in any conflict, the victor can manipulate
history just as it pleases him, and there is nothing that the vanquished
can do about it. The victorious party can cook up a story and broadcast
it as the absolute truth without any fear of being challenged by anyone.
It has not only the power to cook up its own story; it also has the
power to spike the story of an opposing party.

M. Shibli, the dean of India's Sunni historians of Islam, writes in his
famous biography of Prophet Muhammad, *Sira-tun-Nabi,* volume I, 4th
printing, published by the Maarif Printing Press, Azamgarh, U.P., India,
in 1976:

“Among all those extraneous forces which affect and influence the
writing of history, none is more powerful than the government. But it
will always be a source of pride for the Muslims that their pen was
never subdued by the sword. Work on the compilation and collation of
*Hadith* was begun in the times of the Banu Umayya. For full 90 years,
from Sind in India (Indo-Pakistan) to Asia Minor and Andalusia in Spain,
Ali and the children of Fatima were cursed from every pulpit in every
mosque after every Friday sermon.

Thousands and thousands of *hadith* (traditions; statements of the
Prophet) glorifying Muawiya, were manufactured, and were put into
circulation. In the times of the Abbasis, *hadith* were invented
foretelling the birth and the excellence of each (Abbasi) khalifa by
name. But what was the result of all this stupendous effort? The
traditionalists (the collectors of the statements of the Prophet)
declared publicly at the same time (during the caliphates of the
Umayyads and the Abbasis) that all these *hadith* were spurious, and
they rejected them. Today, we are proud to say that the science of
*hadith* is free from all that filth and garbage.”

Almost but not quite!

In the case of innumerable *hadith,* the attempt to excise a false
report from *hadith* literature, or to correct it, never caught up with
the original untruths.

Even after expurgation, if there was one, that part of the *hadith*
literature which relates to the personal life of Muhammad, the blessed
Prophet of Islam, is full of the quaint, the curious, the fanciful and
the false. There are many *hadith* which make him appear as lustful and
licentious; vindictive and cruel; opportunistic and unprincipled; and
treacherous and unethical. Then there are some other traditions which
can only be called smutty.

But the evidence of history runs counter to such characterization of
Muhammad. He could have been all these things but he was not. It is
important, therefore, for Muslims and non-Muslims alike, to separate
bunk and junk from fact and truth in studying the history of Islam.

How did such “traditions” which defy commonsense and logic, insinuate
their way into the *hadith* literature, and how were the deeds and
statements which can only be called shocking, attributed to the man
whose real life was the epitome of all purity, truthfulness, sincerity
and simplicity?

Shibli has made a rather perfunctory attempt to answer this question in
the passage quoted above. He says that the most powerful extraneous
“agent” influencing the writing of history in the times of the Umayyads
and the Abbasis (661-1258) was the government. The government in those
days had the power to get history written to its own “specifications.”

Both dynasties felt they were free to distort history or to suppress
history, and whenever they believed it was in their interest to do so –
to invent ‘history.' Whereas many *hadith* were invented for political
reasons, there were also those *hadith* which were invented for sensual
reasons. The sybarites of the courts of Damascus and Baghdad sought
“sanction” for their own pleasures in these *hadith*.

A *hadith* means a statement. If a man saw the Prophet doing something
or he heard him saying something, and then he reported it to others, it
would be called a *hadith* or a tradition. The companions considered it
their duty to preserve all the traditions of the Prophet for the benefit
of the Muslim umma for all time.

A *hadith* could also be a comment of the Prophet on some person. If he
paid a compliment to any of his companions, or if he criticized someone,
his remarks gained wide publicity among the Muslims. During the khilafat
of Muawiya, many of these *hadith* were in circulation. He was quick to
grasp their importance, and he decided to make them a political weapon
in his campaign against Ali ibn Abi Talib and the Banu Hashim.

Muawiya who was the founder of the Umayyad dynasty, won for himself
another “distinction.” He founded the “cottage industry” for the
production of *hadith*. His successors, and after them, the Abbasi
khalifas, patronized the “industry” which for a long time was busy
churning out *hadith*.

Though Shibli claims that *hadith* was expurgated by highly critical,
perceptive and analytic censors, there was much that escaped detection
by them, and is accepted today as genuine by a vast majority of Muslims.

Muawiya appointed a team of men to make up statements favorable to
himself and to the other enemies of Ali, and to attribute them to the
Apostle of God as his own *hadith*. At the same time, he suppressed or
tried to suppress the genuine *hadith* which were complimentary to Ali,
and ordered his team to manufacture *hadith* derogatory to him. The
members of this team concocted *hadith* of both varieties, and he put
them into circulation.

After the death of Muawiya, this campaign was carried on by his
successors. Their “ghost-writers,” “public relations personnel,” and
“image-makers” skillfully blended fake *hadith* with genuine *hadith*,
and synthetic history with factual history, hoping that the “mix” would
“jell,” as part of the sacred lore of the Muslims.

Muawiya had one more reason for going into the business of
“*hadith*-production.” He knew that the generations of the future would
judge every Muslim ruler against the ideal ruler – Muhammad. He knew too
that if they did, they would find him poles apart from Muhammad. He was
also aware that no matter what he did, he could never rise as high as
Muhammad; he knew in fact that he could not reach the heights attained
even by the slaves of Muhammad.

But it occurred to him that though it was not possible for him to reach
the sublime plane on which Muhammad stood, it was possible for him to
bring him (Muhammad) down to the plane on which he (Muawiya) stood by
the simple process of tarnishing his (Muhammad's) reputation, so that he
too would look like other mortals.

Muawiya hoped that the indictment of the historians against him would be
less severe if it was shown to them that even the most perfect man –
Muhammad, God's Own Messenger – was not altogether free from blemishes
of character. Clearly, much of the content of *hadith* literature was a
conspiracy for the character assassination of Muhammad, the Messenger of
God.

Muawiya and the other entrepreneurs of his “cottage industry” were
“successful” in their attempt at the character assassination of
Muhammad. They interspersed *hadith* literature with countless stories,
anecdotes and “incidents” the intent of all of which was to make
Muhammad look, in the eyes of posterity, less than prophetic.

Following is a sample of one of the “printable” traditions which has
come down to us. It is quoted by Hakim Muhammad Saeed in an article
published by the Hamdard Academy, Karachi, Pakistan, in 1972, in a book
called *Tazkar-i-Muhammad:*

“Shortly after their marriage, Muhammad, the Apostle of God, suggested
to his new bride, Ayesha, that both of them run in a race. Ayesha was
thin and lean, and she easily outran her husband. Some years later, the
Apostle challenged Ayesha to run against him once again. (She had put on
weight during the years since the first race). Both of them ran, and
this time the Apostle outran her. His comment: ‘Last time you were the
winner, O Humayra (Ayesha's nickname) but this time I have won, and now
the score between us is even.'“ (Perhaps the defeat in the first race
had rankled in the mind of the Apostle all these years.)

Muhammad, the Apostle of God, was 54 years old when he ran in a race
against a girl of 9 or 10, and he lost; and he was 60 years old when he
ran against her a second time, and won!

Muslims are very jealous of the dignity of their Prophet. Is this
“tradition” which most of them believe to be true, a portrait of that
dignity?

It appears that the “foremen” and the “production managers” whom Muawiya
had appointed in his “*hadith* factories,” had only one love, and that
was quantity. They had geared the “industry” only to mass produce
“traditions.” It is obvious that they had no interest in the “quality
control” of their products. They planted lies in their books, and each
lie left in its wake, as it invariably does, “a drop of poison,” that
polluted the minds of generations of Muslims. Some of their products are
extremely crude. They are, in fact, unprintable. The critics and the
enemies of the Prophet, inevitably, have shown great eagerness in
accepting them as authentic, and they have quoted them in their books.

These critics and enemies of the Prophet have not, however, taken into
account those facts the authenticity of which is beyond any question.
For example, they overlooked the fact that in Makkah, the Quraysh had
offered to him the most beautiful woman or women as a quid pro quo if he
would give up preaching Islam. They also forgot the fact that Muhammad
was the sovereign of Medina, and that he could have married any girl.
The Arab chiefs would have been proud to give him their daughters.

The Prophet married many women in Medina but most of them were widows,
and they were not very young either. With the exception of Khadija, all
the other women entered his household when he was in his mid-fifties or
late fifties. They entered his life at a time when the spring and the
bounce and the sheen and the vigor of his youth had long since departed,
and their place was taken by the ever-growing burdens of an ever-growing
State, and other problems of superlative complexity and magnitude,
leaving him little time or inclination for such dalliance as is reported
in many of the “traditions.”

For the compilation of *hadith*, Muawiya had given the following orders:

**1.** All the traditions of the Prophet in praise of Ali or upholding
his superiority in any way, should be suppressed.

**2.** Any man narrating the virtues of Ali or quoting the *hadith* of
the Prophet in this regard, would do so at his own risk. His subsidies
and stipends would be withheld from him. His house and other property
would be confiscated. His testimony as a witness would not be accepted
in the courts, and he would be ostracized by other Muslims.

**3.** On the other hand, every conceivable virtue should be attributed
to Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and of course, to Muawiya himself. People
should be encouraged to make up “*hadith*” of the Prophet in praise of
these four men and their friends. Whoever invents such *hadith*, would
become a favorite at the royal court, and would receive rich rewards in
rank or cash or estates etc.

Concurrently with the founding of his “cottage industry” for
manufacturing “*hadith*” of the Prophet, Muawiya also set up a “brain
laundry” for the Muslims. He instituted the practice of anathematizing
the memory of Ali and his children from the pulpit in every mosque in
his empire so that the Muslim children were born, they grew up, and they
died hearing curses upon Ali, and not knowing who he was.

Whole generations lived and died in ignorance. Falsehoods were put into
circulation by the government on a scale so vast that they became the
staple of their lives. Muawiya and his successors kept their “brain
laundries” just as busy as their “cottage industry.”

Muawiya mobilized every means for waging propaganda war against Ali and
the Banu Hashim. The momentum of the blitz he launched against them, has
lasted down to our own times. He waged his war from the mosques. The
prayer-leaders in them were paid to put weird and fantastic
interpretations upon the verses of Qur'an in an attempt to show Ali at a
disadvantage. They tried to convince the rank-and-file Muslims that it
would be in their interest “in both worlds” if they supported Muawiya
against Ali and the Banu Hashim.

**Michael C. Hudson**

Incumbents have the advantage of the media and educational arms of the
state, and they control through subsidies the religious establishment
itself. *(Islam and Development, p. 16, 1980)*

It must now be clear to the reader that the history of Islam was written
under the direction of the party which held all the instruments of power
in its hands. It must also be obvious to him that much of the historical
material was “laundered” at the “brain laundries” established by Muawiya
before it got into his hands. Muawiya was a most consummate master of
the art of propaganda.

**Sir John Glubb**

The full effects of propaganda have not yet become plain, yet it is
already obvious that whole nations can be indoctrinated with wrong
opinions and evil moral standards. Few, if any, minds are strong enough
to resist the ideas constantly projected at them. *(The Course of
Empire - The Arabs and Their Successors, 1965)*

If any *hadith* of the Prophet of Islam was complimentary to Ali, its
narration was placed under proscription by Muawiya. This proscription
was not lifted when he died in 680. It was not lifted even when his
dynasty, the Umayyads, perished in 750, and it was not lifted even
through the long centuries of the caliphate of the Abbasis.

The Abbasis exterminated the Umayyads but they shared with them their
animosity to Ali and to the children of Muhammad. In this matter, the
aims and interests of the governments of Saqifa, the Umayyads, and the
Abbasis converged; there was ideological compatibility among them all.

The Umayyads and the Abbasis did their utmost to suppress the facts of
history. Many of their khalifas had forbidden their subjects to say or
to write anything about Ali except falsehoods. Truth was under a siege
and falsehood was rampant in their dominions. And yet, Truth asserted
itself.

***Truth has (now) arrived, and falsehood perished: For falsehood is (by
its nature) bound to perish. (Qur'an. Chapter 17; verse 81)***

True statements were volunteered by sources which, in most cases, were
inimical to Ali. Even his most rabid enemies like the Umayyads and the
Kharjis, conceded the sublimity of his character. As noted before, M.
Shibli, the Indian historian, pointed out that the Shia Muslims did not
write any history. Whatever history we have, has, therefore, come down
to us from the non-Shia or the anti-Shia sources. It has come down to us
from the archives of the governments of Saqifa, the Umayyads and the
Abbasis. The story of the glorious deeds of Ali ibn Abi Talib, like the
radiance of Truth itself, has filtered out of those archives.

But the modern historians are not threatened by any government for
writing factual history nor are they being seduced by promises of rich
rewards for writing false history. They should, therefore, curb the
temptation to stifle or to distort truth. If they yield even now to this
temptation, as many of their forerunners did in the past, then it can
mean only that they give their loyalty, not to principles but to
persons; not to truth but to the organizations and the governments; and
not to their integrity but to their emotional commitments.

Loyalty is a noble quality as long as it is not blind, and does not
exclude the higher loyalty to truth and to decency.

If the loyalty of the modern historians is not blind, and if it does not
exclude the higher loyalty to truth and to decency, then they should
scrape away the excrescences and barnacles of history, and they should
also resist the temptation to invoke the “Meyers' Law” in their works.
The “Meyers' Law” stipulates that:

*“If the facts do not fit the theory, discard the facts.”*

A historian will inevitably run into truths which may be unpleasant to
him but he must not suppress them. He must state all the facts as he
uncovers them if he wishes to vindicate truth.

But the historian, if he is a Muslim, has no choice in this matter. He
is not free to write “inspired” or “synthetic” history. All he can do,
if he is writing history, is to cling tenaciously to truth. If he writes
false “history” for any reason, he will only merit the displeasure of
God. Here, as elsewhere, al-Qur'an al-Majid, the Book of God, is
explicit, emphatic, and unequivocal in its judgment which reads as
follows:

***And cover not truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth when ye
know (what it is). (Qur'an. Chapter 2; verse 42)***

***Those who conceal the clear (signs) We have sent down, and the
guidance, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book – on
them shall be God's curse, and the curse of those entitled to curse.
(Qur'an. Chapter 2; verse 159)***

If the Muslim historians make these two verses of Qur'an their “guiding
stars,” they will be protected from error, and they will also be
protected from becoming either the agents or the victims of propaganda,
consciously or unconsciously.

In trying to smirch the name of Ali ibn Abi Talib; in trying to play
down his services to Islam; and in desperately trying to conceal his
glorious deeds, behind a screen of propaganda, from the eyes of
posterity, his enemies were casting dust into the bright face of the
sun. They raised clouds of dust in the form of most virulent and
sustained propaganda against him, and yet, the sun only shone brighter
and brighter.

***And God blots out vanity, and proves the truth by His words. (Qur'an.
Chapter 42; verse 24)***

God blessed Ali's name to all eternity. His name is the symbol of love
of God, and the symbol of Justice and Truth. His name will endure as
long as Love of God, and Justice and Truth, will endure in this world.


