Fifth Greater Sin: Murder
=========================

Murder
------

The fifth Greater Sin is the murder of that person whose execution has
not been ordered by Allah (S.w.T.) and the Holy Prophet (S). Traditions
which confirm that murder is a Greater Sin have already been mentioned
at the beginning. Moreover the verses of the Holy Qur’an mention clearly
the Divine punishment for the murderers.

***“And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is Hell;
he shall abide in it, and Allah will send His wrath on him and curse him
and prepare for him a painful chastisement.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’
4:93)***

Five types of punishments have been ordained for those who kill the
believers. First, Hell; Second, Eternal abode in Hell; Third,
involvement in the Divine wrath; Fourth, being the accursed by Allah
(S.w.T.); Fifth, the Great Chastisement.

Permanent Chastisement is Exclusively For unbelievers
-----------------------------------------------------

One of the beliefs of the Shia Ithna Ashari school of thought is that
eternal punishment is only for the Kuffar (Unbelievers). In other words,
if a person dies in belief, he will not remain under punishment forever,
even if he has killed a believer (or someone else whose killing has been
prohibited according to the Divine command), or even though he has
committed other greater sins. Hence the verse mentioned above has been
explained in various ways. One possible explanation is that: one becomes
eligible for eternal punishment only if he murders the believer because
of his Imān (belief). If such is the case, then, the killer is indeed
liable for everlasting chastisement, for he considered the murder of a
Mu’min as Halāl, whereas it is Harām. To consider a murder of a believer
Harām is an article of faith. Consequently one who does not have this
belief is a Kafir.

The Life and Property of a Muslim are Protected
-----------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) announced on the occasion of the Farewell
Pilgrimage (*Hajjatul Wida’*):

“O People! It is not permitted to kill the Muslims. Similarly to
appropriate their property is not allowed. So do not be unjust upon
yourselves and do not revert to disbelief after my death.”[^1]

Another explanation of the afore-mentioned hadith is that “abide in
Hell” denotes being under punishment for a very long period. It does not
mean that the sinner will be involved in eternal chastisement.

One Murder is Equal to the Killing the Whole of Humanity
--------------------------------------------------------

***“Whoever slays a soul, unless it be for a manslaughter or for
mischief in the land, it is as though he slew all men; and whoever keeps
it alive, it is as though he kept alive all men.”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida
5:32)***

All the believers are sons of Adam (a.s.) and brothers to one another.
One who kills another person perpetrates a great evil and instigates a
feeling of malice, revenge and hatred among people.

Suicide is Murder
-----------------

The Almighty Allah says:

***“....and do not kill ourselves; surely Allah is Merciful to you. And
whoever does this aggressively and unjustly, We will soon cast him into
Fire; and this is easy for Allah.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:29-30)***

Allah (S.w.T.) prohibits the believers from suicide even in times of
turmoil.

Enlivening the People
---------------------

***“.....and whoever keeps it alive, it is as though he kept alive all
men.”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:32)***

If one saves the life of a “protected soul” whose killing has been
prohibited by religion, be it forgiving, or not avenging, or protecting
him, it is as if he has given life to the whole humanity. By saving one
person he has; in a sense; saved humanity.

Murder is the worst sin in the eyes of Allah (S.w.T.) and severe
punishment has been prescribed for a killer. The opposite of this, that
is, saving the life of a person is accordingly regarded as the greatest
form of worship.

A Murderer Does Not Die a Muslim
--------------------------------

The following tradition is indicative of the fact that murder is a
Greater Sin:

Regarding the killing of a believer, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

At the time of his death the killer is told. ‘Die as you wish, die as a
Jew or a Christian or as a Magian.’[^2]

Another tradition:

“A believer is free in the vast expanse of his belief till he colours
his hands with the blood of a Mu’min.”

Imam (a.s.) further says:

“One who kills a believer intentionally is deprived of the ‘Tawfīq’ of
repenting (for his sins).”[^3]

One Who Instigates a Murder is the Actual Killer
------------------------------------------------

The third tradition, also from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“The Holy Prophet (S) was told that a Muslim has been killed and his
corpse is lying on the street. When the Holy Prophet (S) and his
companions reached the site of the murder, he enquired as to who the
killer was.”

The people said, “We do not know.” The Prophet was surprised,

“A person has been killed among the Muslims, and no one knows of his
killer?”

“By the Almighty who appointed me with Prophethood, If all the creatures
of the heavens and the earth participate in the murder of a Muslim and
be pleased upon that, then Allah would surely involve them in punishment
and send them all to Hell.”

The lesson derived from this hadith is that there is no difference
between the killer and those who support or co-operate with him.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) has said,

“On the day of Qiyāma a person would be presented before Allah. He will
be having a streak of blood (like one gets a cut while shaving). He will
say,

‘By Allah, I have not killed anyone. Not have I co-operated with
anyone’s murder.’ Allah will say, ‘Yes, but one day you spoke about a
believer and your words caused him to be killed. Hence you are
responsible for his murder.’”

Hazrat Imam Riďa (a.s.) said,

“If someone is killed in the east and one who lives in the west is
pleased upon this, then he is a partner in this murder.”[^4]

Abortion is Harām
-----------------

It is Harām to abort an unborn child. Like in the case of a murder,
*diyah* (prescribed fine) has to be paid here too. There is no
difference between a foetus and a full-grown man. Even if the killers
are its own parents. If a woman takes medicine that causes abortion, she
would be liable for the punishment of a murderer.

The penalty (*diyah*) for killing a ‘protected soul’ (*Nafs
al-Muhtaram*) is one thousand misqal of gold.

If the killers are the parents themselves they do not inherit any part
of *diyah* but the other relatives who are eligible for the inheritance
are qualified for it.

To Abort a Foetus Intentionally is Harām
----------------------------------------

It is evident from the foregoing discussion that human life is
considered sacred by the Islamic Shari’a. Nothing has been given so much
importance like the one reserved for the ‘protected soul’ (*Nafs
al-Muhtaram*). So much so that the beginning point of the human life,
that is, the fertilised ovum is also not to be wasted. Once conception
has taken place, no abortion is allowed. The ‘*diyah*’ (penalty) for
abortion is as follows:

If the fertilised ovum is aborted the ‘*diyah*’ is sixty misqal.

If bones have formed it is eighty misqal.

If an incomplete child is aborted whose features have become distinct
but the soul not entered the body, the penalty is one hundred misqal.

If soul had entered it and it was a male child, *diyah* is one thousand
misqal, and if female, it is five hundred misqal.

If a pregnant woman dies, it is necessary to remove the unborn child by
operation. Any carelessness in this regard is ‘Harām’.

If due to carelessness the child dies, *diyah* is Wajib upon the one who
was responsible for the lapse.

Repenting For Murder
--------------------

By way of repentance, a person who has committed a willful murder should
surrender himself to the heir of the murdered person. The successors of
the murdered person have a choice of either avenging the death or
accepting the ‘diyah’. That is, they can forgive him or kill him in
retribution.

If the murderer is forgiven, Three things become obligatory on him:

1) Freeing a slave

2) Feeding sixty poor people

3) Keeping sixty fasts

If freeing a slave is not allowed by the law, the other two penalties
should be fulfilled.

Accidental and Intended Murder
------------------------------

Even in the case of an accidental murder the heirs of the victim are to
be paid the ‘diyah’. But they should forgive the killer.

Apart from this the Three penalties should be imposed, that is, freeing
a slave, feeding sixty people and fasting for sixty days.

Similarly cutting off a part of someone’s body is a Greater Sin. Those
who intend to study this subject in detail are requested to refer to the
books of Jurisprudence.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: al-Kāfi

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia


