Sixth Greater Sin: Āq al-Walidayn (Disobedience to parents)
===========================================================

Those Who Are Disobedient to Their Parents
------------------------------------------

The sixth Greater Sin is to be disobedient to one’s parents as expressly
mentioned in the traditions from the Holy Prophet (S) and the Pure Imams
(a.s.). These have already been quoted in the first chapter. A tradition
of the Prophet (S) says that the greatest sins are Shirk and to be
disobedient to one’s parents. The seriousness of disobedience to parents
as a Greater sin can be gauged from the fact that the Holy Prophet (S)
has mentioned it along with Shirk which is the greatest of all Greater
sins, and unforgiveable. “Āq” is a sin, the punishment of which is
promised in the Qur’an and the traditions.

The words of Hazrat Isa (a.s.) as quoted by the Qur’an are:

***“And dutiful to my mother, and He has not made me insolent,
unblessed.”*** ***(Surah Mariyam 19:32)***

As Isa (a.s.) did not have a father, his mother is alone mentioned. In
the same Surah, both the father and mother of Hazrat Yahya (a.s.) are
mentioned.

Both the verses mention Three characteristics of the disobedient child
(*Āq al-Walidayn* ).

1) ‘Jabbar’ (insolent)

2) ‘Shaqī’ (unblessed)

3) ‘Āsi’ (disobedient)

Each of these negative qualities render one liable for severe
punishment. Regarding ‘Jabbar’ (insolent) the Qur’an says:

***“And they asked for judgement and every insolent opposer was
disappointed. Hell is before him and he shall be given to drink of
festering water: He will drink it little by little and will not be able
to swallow it agreeably, and death will come to him from every quarter,
but he shall not die; and there shall be vehement chastisement before
him.”*** ***(Surah Ibrahīm 14:15-17)***

The one who is Shaqī will be punished as follows:

***“So as to those who are ‘Shaqī’, they shall be in fire; for them
shall be sighing and groaning in it; Abiding therein so long as the
heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord pleases.”*** ***(Surah
Hūd 11:106-107)***

Those with the third characteristic, that is, those who are ‘Āsi’ will
be dealt with severely by Allah (S.w.T.).

***“And whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle and goes beyond His
limits, He will cause him to enter fire, to abide in it, and he shall
have an abasing chastisement.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:14)***

Tradition Regarding Āq al-Walidayn
----------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“Beware! Abstain from angering the parents. The fragrance of Paradise is
perceived even at a distance of a thousand years, but those who are
disobedient to parents and those who cut off ties with relatives will
not be able to smell it.”[^1]

The Holy Prophet (S) also said.

“One who displeases the parents, (it is as if) he has displeased Allah.
One who angers both his parents (it is as if) he has angered Allah.”

Elsewhere, it is mentioned,

“One who hurts his parents, hurts me and one who hurts me has hurt
Allah. And the one who hurts Allah is accursed.”

Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

The Prophet (S) has also stated:

“Allah will not speak to Three kinds of people on the Day of Qiyāma.
Neither will He have mercy upon them, nor will He purify their sins.
There is for them a horrible chastisement. The Three types of people are
the believers in destiny, the drunkards and those who disobeyed their
parents.”[^2]

Āq al-Walidayn is Not Eligible For Divine Forgiveness
-----------------------------------------------------

The wretchedness of the Āq al-Walidayn is sufficiently evident from the
fact that the trustworthy Jibrīl (a.s.) has cursed him and said,

“One who is blessed with parents but does not fulfill their (his
parent’s) rights will not be forgiven (his sins) by Allah.”[^3]

When Jibrīl (a.s.) said this, the Holy Prophet (S) uttered, ‘Amen’!
Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“Accursed, Accursed is the one who beats his parents. Accursed is the
one who distresses his parents.[^4]

Prayer is Not Accepted
----------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“Allah will not accept the Salāt of the person who stares angrily at his
parents. Even though they (parents) may be unjust.”

A Young man is interceeded by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
-------------------------------------------------------

A young man was on his deathbed when the Holy Prophet (S) came, sat near
him, and told him to recite two kalimas (*Shahadatain*). But the youth
could not speak. The Holy Prophet (S) enquired if his mother was
present? A woman sitting near his head said, “Yes, I am his mother.”

The Holy Prophet (S) asked, “Are your displeased with him?”

‘Yes, O Prophet (S), we have not spoken to each other since the last six
years.’

The Holy Prophet (S) asked this woman to forgive her son. Thus at the
Prophet’s instance she forgave his mistakes and was reconciled. At once
the young man was able to recite the Kalima al-Shahadat.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked him,

“What do you see, at this moment.” “ O Prophet of Allah a dark and
smelly man has got hold of me and is not leaving me.”

The Holy Prophet (S) told him to recite the following Du’a,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يامن يقبل اليسير ويعفوعن الكثير اقبل مني اليسيرواعف عني الكثيرانك انت
الغفور الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Ya man Yaqbalul yasīra wa y’afo ‘Anil Kathīra Iqbal minnil Yasīra Wa
‘Āfo ‘Annil Kathīra.”

Then asked, “Now what do you see?” He replied, “A fair complexioned man,
handsome and fragrant, is moving towards me.”

The Holy Prophet said, “Keep repeating this Du’a.” When the youth
repeated this Du’a he said “O Prophet of Allah (S) both of them have
disappeared from my sight.” After this the face of the Holy Prophet (S)
was illuminated with joy. He said, “O Allah forgive the sins of this
young man.” Then the youth passed away.[^5]

This tradition shows how difficult are the last moments of the Āq
al-Walidayn. He leaves this world in disbelief and remains, forever, in
Divine punishment. The tutor of Kalima for this young man was the Holy
Prophet (S). In spite of this his tongue did not move till his mother
forgive him. The blessings of the Holy Prophet (S) and the forgiveness
of his mother brought salvation for this youth.

What is Āq al-Walidayn?
-----------------------

Allama Majlisi (r.a.) writes in his commentary on al-Kāfi:

Āq al-Walidayn means that the son or the daughter cause disrespect to
parents by speech or actions. Or they do not obey them in matters which
are within reason and matters which are not in any way against religion.

Āq al-Walidayn is absolutely Harām. The books of traditions of both the
Shias as well as the Sunnis validate this fact.

To look at the parents with anger is *Āq*, to cause unhappiness to the
parents results in *Āq*. It is Harām to take any step, which one is
sure, will displease the parents.

Benevolence to Parents is Wajib
-------------------------------

The verses of the Qur’an as well as the traditions of the infallible
Imams (a.s.) not only prohibit displeasing and angering the parents, but
also stress that benevolence towards them is *Wajib*.

A few examples of the Qur’anic Ayats are presented for the readers:

1) ***“And We have enjoined on man goodness to his parents.”***
***(Surah Al-’Ankabūt 29:8)***

2) ***“Be grateful to Me and both your parents...”*** ***(Surah Luqmān
31:14)***

The above verse is specially worth noting for the fact that Allah
(S.w.T.) has mentioned together gratefulness towards Himself and to the
parents. Certainly thankfulness to Allah (S.w.T.) is *Wajib*, and in the
same way it is *Wajib* for the children to be thankful to their parents.

***3) “And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but
Him, and goodness to your parents. If either or both of them reach old
age with you, say not to them (so much as) “Uff” nor chide them, and
speak to them a generous word. And make yourself submissively gentle to
them with compassion, and say: O my Lord! Have compassion on them, as
they brought me up (when I was) little.*** ***(Surah al-‘Isrā’,
17:23-24)***

In this Ayat Allah (S.w.T.) has mentioned goodness to parents. In the
same sentence He exhorts about service to Him. As service to Allah
(S.w.T.) is Wajib, benevolence to parent is Wajib too.

When the Imam (a.s.) was asked to explain the meaning of the term “Bil
Walidayn Ihsana” (and goodness to your parents), he said,

“Be good to your parents and if they are in need of something, procure
it for them before they ask for it.”

Then the meaning of the words, “Taqullahuma Qualan Karīma” (speak to
them a generous word) was explained by the Imam (a.s.)

“If the parents beat you, say ‘May Allah forgive you’. The phrase
‘*Wakhfiz Lahuma*’ (and make yourself submissively gentle to them) is
elaborated by the Imam (a.s.):

“Do not look at them with distaste. Do not raise your voice above
theirs. When you walk with them do not precede them. When you go to a
gathering, do not sit before they do. Never keep your hand above theirs
(while giving them something).”

Service to Parents is Better Than Jihad
---------------------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrates that a young man presented himself
to the Holy Prophet (S) and said that he wanted to participate in Jihad.
The Holy Prophet (S) told him:

“Certainly, go for Jihad in the way of Allah. If your are killed you
will be alive near Allah and be provided sustenance from Him. The
recompense for your sacrifice would be with Allah. If you return alive
your sins would be washed off as if your were a newborn child.”

This man said: “O Prophet of Allah, my parents are alive and they are
aged and have great expectations from me. They do not like me to be away
from them.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

“If that is so, then stay behind to serve your parents. By Allah in
whose hands is my life, to serve parents for a day and night is equal to
a year of Jihad.”

Another tradition from Holy Prophet (S) says:

“Acquire your place in Heaven by serving your parents. If you are guilty
of ‘Āq’ then make Hell your abode.”

Goodness to Parents is the Expiation of Sins
--------------------------------------------

Goodness towards the parents is the expiation of various sins. It is
related in a report that a man came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said,
“O, Prophet of Allah (S) there is not a single misdeed, that I have not
committed. Is there repentance for me?” The Holy Prophet (S) told him,

“Go and do goodness to your father in order that your sins may be
expiated.”

When the man left the assembly the Prophet (S) said,

“If his mother had been alive, it would have been more meritorious to do
good to her.”

Satisfaction of Parents is Satisfaction of Allah (S.w.T.)
---------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) has stated,

“In the happiness of parents lies the happiness of Allah and in their
dissatisfaction is Allah’s dissatisfaction.”[^6]

He (S) further said,

“A person who is good to his parents will be just a grade below the
prophets in Heaven. And the Āq al-Walidayn will be only a grade higher
than the Fir’ons in Hell.”[^7]

Angels Pray for Those Who do Good to Their Parents
--------------------------------------------------

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“Benevolence to parents is the greatest of the religious obligations.”

The Holy Prophet (S) says that Allah (S.w.T.) has two Angels one of whom
says, “O Allah! Protect those who do good to the parents.” The other
Angel prays, “O Allah! Destroy those people by retribution, with whom
their parents are angry.” Needless to say, the prayers of the Angels are
always accepted by Allah (S.w.T.).

The Material Effects of Āq
--------------------------

The previous traditions mention the ill effects of ‘Āq al-Walidayn’ in
the hereafter. The following traditions describe the evil repercussions
of Āq al-Walidayn in this life.

The last of the Prophets (S) says:

“There are Three kinds of sins which are punished in this world, rather
than being given respite till Qiyāma. The first is Āq al-Walidayn. The
second, injustice upon men and third, thanklessness for favour.”

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) stated,

“Secret charity cools down Divine anger while goodness to parents and
benevolence to relatives, prolongs life.”[^8]

Another tradition says,

“Benevolence to parents and secret charity, ward off poverty, and both
(these deeds) prolong life. Seventy types of death are kept away.”[^9]

“Those who assure me that they will be benevolent to parents and do good
to the relatives, I will give them excess of wealth and a long life and
assure them of being close among our group.”[^10]

Hazrat Imam Naqi (a.s.) said,

“The displeasing of parents causes decrease in sustenance and
degradation (also follows).”

Āq al-Walidayn Cause Poverty and Misfortune
-------------------------------------------

There was a young man from Madinah. His parents were very old. He never
did any good towards them. He neglected them and did not expend any of
his wealth for their well-being. After sometime he became a destitute
and fell sick. His wretchedness and misery reached such extreme, that he
became a pitiable character. The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“Those who cause hurt to their parents should derive lessons from the
life of this man. See how his wealth and property has been taken away.
His affluence and independence has changed to poverty and his health has
turned into disease. Whatever position he was to get in Heaven, he has
been deprived of due to his sins; in its place the fire of Hell has been
prepared for him.”[^11]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrates:

“When Hazrat Yaqūb (a.s.) went to Egypt to meet his son Hazrat Yūsuf
(a.s.), he (Yūsuf a.s.) did not alight from his horse to pay respect to
his father. Hazrat Jibrīl (a.s.) descended, and told Hazrat Yūsuf (a.s.)
to open his fist. As he did so, a light shot out from his palm and rose
towards the sky. Hazrat Yūsuf (a.s.) enquired, “What was this light
which came out of my hand and shot to the sky?.” Jibrīl (a.s.) replied,
“The light of Prophethood has departed from your loins. You did not pay
due respect to your father hence none of your descendants will get
Prophethood.” It is true that Hazrat Yūsuf (a.s.) did not descend from
his horse to pay respect to his father. However, this was not due to any
feelings of pride and vanity. The Prophets are sinless and could never
harbour such emotions. His intentions were merely to maintain his
dignity as a King among his subjects.”

Evil Consequences of Āq al-Walidayn
-----------------------------------

Āq al-Walidayn brings disgrace in the Hereafter, and goodness to parents
brings honour and glory. As Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said,

“Those who wish an easy death should do good to the relatives and be
kind to parents. When one does this, Allah will make easy the agony of
death. In this world he will not face difficulties and poverty.”[^12]

Prayers of the Parents Are Accepted Soon
----------------------------------------

The supplication of parents for the welfare of the child are quickly
answered by Allah (S.w.T.) and in the same way their ill wish (curse)
due to displeasing them also takes quick effect. Numerous traditions
have been recorded in this connection. One such tradition is connected
with the merits of Du’a al-Mashlūl. It is said that a young man had lost
the use of his right hand which was paralysed due to the curse of his
father. After his father’s death, the man prayed the entire night,
continuously for a period of Three years in Masjidul Haram. One day
Hadhrat ‘Ali (a.s.) saw him and took pity upon him. He taught him Du’a
al-Mashlūl. By the virtue of this Du’a the young man was cured.

The Mother Has More Rights Than the Father
------------------------------------------

Goodness towards the mother is more rewarding. The Holy Prophet (S)
emphasized that benevolence shown to the mother should be three times
the magnitude of that shown towards the father. When he was asked as to
which of the parents had more rights, he replied,

“Was it not your mother who suffered the birth pangs to give birth to
you and provided you with your natural diet from her breasts? Indeed the
rights of a mother far outweigh those of the father.”[^13]

Rights of the Parents
---------------------

Someone asked the Holy Prophet (S) about the rights of the father. He
(S) replied,

“He should be obeyed always, as long as he lives.”

Then he was asked, “What is the right of the mother?”. He answered,

“If the service to a mother equals the quantity of the particles of sand
in the desert and the drops of rain on earth, it (this service) will not
repay for a single day that she kept you in her womb.”

(Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il)

A Young Man and His Invalid Mother
----------------------------------

It is reported that a young man approached the Holy Prophet (S) and
asked,

“O Prophet of Allah (S), I have a mother who is an invalid. She cannot
even move by herself. I carry her on my back and feed her with my hands.
I also clean her excreta. Have I fulfilled her rights?”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied,

“No. Because you have remained in the womb for a long period during
which you derived your nourishment from her body. She was every busy in
caring and protecting you at all costs. Inspite of such hardships she
always wished a long life for you. But you are waiting for her to die so
that you may relieved of the responsibility of taking care of her.”

The Holy Prophet (S) described the eminence of a mother’s position in
the following statement:

1) “If you are praying a mustahab prayer and your father calls you, do
not break your prayer but if your mother calls, break the prayer.”

Truly, this assigns a remarkably high status to a mother. The Prophet
(S) states,

“Paradise is at the feet of your mother.”

Hence one need not go far in search of Paradise.

Be Good to Parents Even if They Are Kafirs
------------------------------------------

Whether the parents are believers and pious or Kafirs and sinful,
goodness towards them is Wajib. And ‘Āq al-Walidayn’ is Harām.

The verse of Surah Luqmān says thus,

***“And if they contend with you that you should associate with Me what
you have no knowledge of, do not obey them, and keep company with them
in this world kindly...”.*** ***(Surah Luqmān 31:15)***

Du’a For Sunni Parents
----------------------

Muammar Ibn Khallad asked Imam Riďa (a.s.) whether one is allowed to
pray for one’s parents if they had not followed the truth and had not
been Shia.

Imam Riďa (a.s.) replied,

“If they are dead, pray for them and give Sadaqah on their behalf. If
they are alive keep them happy.”

The Holy Prophet (S) says;

“A-llah the Most High has sent me as the Mercy for the worlds, except to
the ‘Āq’ (of parents).”

Jabir Ibn Abdullah (r.a.) reports that someone asked Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.), “My parents are against the truth, i.e. they are not
the Shia of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.)”. Imam replied:

“Be good towards them like you would be towards out Shias.”[^14]

Mu’mins and Kafirs Are Equal Under Three Circumstances
------------------------------------------------------

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said;

“Allah has not given superiority to a Mu’min in three circumstances.

First, to return what has been entrusted to you for safe keeping whether
it belongs to a Mu’min or a Kafir.

Second, fulfilling an oath, whether given to a Mu’min or a Kafir. Third,
doing good to the parents, whether they be Mu’min or Kafir.”[^15]

A letter on various aspects of Islamic Shari’a, written by Hazrat Imam
Riďa (a.s.) to Mamun, include the following:

“Benevolence to parents is Wajib even if both of them are ‘Mushrik’.
However obedience to parents is not Wajib if their order is against the
orders of the Creator.”[^16]

Advice of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) to Zakaria Ibn Ibrahīm
-----------------------------------------------------

Zakaria, the son of Ibrahīm, was a Christian. Later he converted to
Islam and had the honour of meeting Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.). He told
Imam (a.s.) “My mother is a Christian and she is old and blind.” The
Imam advised him,

“Serve your mother and behave kindly towards her. Upon her death, do not
leave her dead body to others. Perform her funeral rites yourself.”

Thus this statement of the Imam (a.s.) is pregnant with two prophecies.
Her death, and her conversion to Islam.

When Zakaria returned to Kufa he began to behave very kindly with his
mother. He fed her with his own hands. Changed her clothes, washed and
bathed her too. In short, he served his mother in every possible way.
His mother asked, “My son you were not so dutiful when you were a
Christian. Why is it that now you serve me day and night?”

Zakaria replied, “O my mother. I have a master who is the son of the
Prophet of Allah (S). He advised me to serve you in this way.” The
mother asked, “Is he a prophet?” “No. But he is a son of the Prophet
(S).” “Such a person must be a Prophet because only prophets teach such
manners.” The mother remarked.

Zakaria explained to his mother, “The chain of the Prophets came to an
end with the Prophet of Islam (S). He was the seal of the Prophets. The
one who has guided me is the son of the Prophet (S).” The mother said,
“My son, the religion of Islam that you have embraced is better than all
the religions. Teach me, so that I too may become a Muslim.”

So, Zakaria made her recite the ‘Kalima’ and taught her the true
beliefs. Later, this lady performed the Zohrain and the Maghrebain
prayers. The same night death approached her. She told her son: “Dear
son, repeat to me again whatever you have taught me.” Zakaria began to
recite while she listened carefully and in this way she passed away.

Displeasing the parents is Harām and goodness towards them is Wajib,
whether they are alive or dead. In other words parents have rights upon
their children even after they (the parents) are dead.

If the son or the daughter forgets the parents after their death and
does not perform good deeds on their behalf, it is ‘Āq al-Walidayn’
irrespective of the fact that the child had fulfilled all his or her
rights and served them till the time of their death.

Rights of Parents After Their Death
-----------------------------------

First: To carry out the Wajib acts which they did not perform during
their life time, like Salāt, Siyyam, Hajj and repayment of debts.

Second: To Act on their will and testament.

Third: To perform various good deeds for their salvation, i.e., to give
Sadaqah, to perform charitable acts, and to carry out recommended acts
on their behalf. In short, one should strive to the utmost in doing good
deeds on their behalf so that Allah (S.w.T.) may shower His blessing and
mercy on them.

The Disobedient Children After the Death of Their Parents
---------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from Hazrat Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.):

“Certainly, if a person is good to his parents when they are alive but
forsakes them after they die and does not repay their debts or pray for
their forgiveness, Allah will record ‘Āq al-Walidayn’ in the account of
his deeds. On the other hand, if a person is ‘Āq al-Walidayn’ when they
are alive but after their death repays their debts and prays for their
forgiveness and salvation, Allah will include him among the righteous
people”.

Single Action, Multiple Rewards
-------------------------------

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“What prevents you from serving your parents in their life and death?
The Holy Prophet (S) remarks about the goodness to parents after death.
“Perform their ‘Salāt’ (if some Wajib prayers have been omitted by them,
the eldest son should perform them himself, or have them fulfilled by
someone else on payment. However, if no Wajib prayer is remaining upon
them, then he could pray Nawafil Salāt for them or have them performed
on payment.) Pay Sadaqah on their behalf. Complete their Qaža fasts and
fulfill the obligation of their Hajj. Whatever you do, both of you will
be rewarded (i.e.you and your parents).

Apart from this, goodness to parents carries double rewards. One for the
action itself, and second for the benevolence towards the parents.

Praying (Du’a) For the Parents and Seeking Forgiveness On Their Belief
----------------------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that a man approached him and
asked whether his parents have any rights upon him after their death?
The Holy Prophet (S) replied,

“Yes, pray Salāt for them, seek forgiveness on their behalf, respect
their tradition, and be good to their relatives.”[^17]

When is Obedience to the Parents Wajib?
---------------------------------------

The orders and restraints of the parents are of no significance with
respect to the Wajib acts and the Divine prohibitions. For example if
the parents order the child to drink wine or restrain him from the
obligatory prayers and fasts, they should not be obeyed. It is expressly
mentioned in this Verse of Surah Luqmān:

***“And if they contend with you that you should associate with Me what
you have no knowledge of, do not obey them...”*** ***(Surah Luqmān
31:15)***

The traditions also support this Ayat:

“No Obedience of a creature in contravention to the Divine
command.”[^18]

Apart from these circumstances, obedience to parents is obligatory with
regards to the Makruh and Mubah acts. The same applies to the Wajib
al-Kifai.

If by performing these actions, the parents are displeased or hurt, it
is ‘Harām’, a Greater Sin and causes one to be ‘Āq al-Walidayn’. Suppose
the son wishes to proceed on a non-obligatory journey and the parents
restrain him as they fear some harm for him, or because they cannot bear
to be separated from him; and the son disobeys them and goes ahead with
the journey, such a journey is Harām. It is a journey of sin. Salāt and
Fasting is not Qasr for this journey. In short, anything that causes
displeasure and hurts the parents, is absolutely Harām.

Obedience to parents is not obligatory in the following cases:

When it causes unbearable hardships or harm. For instance, if they
restrain the son from marriage when he feels the need for it. Or they
order the son to divorce his wife without a sound reason. If such an
action will result in harm to both the spouses, it is not obligatory to
obey the parents.

As far as I know, it is not obligatory to obey parents even in cases
where they do not get angry or hurt if their commands are disobeyed.

As far as possible one should obey their orders and restrain from
opposing them. Especially when the parents advise their children for
their own benefit and without any selfish motive.

Disagreement among the Parents
------------------------------

If a situation arises when there is a disagreement between the parents
on any subject, as far as possible, one should try to pacify and satisfy
both of them. However, if it is not possible then the wish of the mother
should be given precedence.

We have already seen the reasons why her rights far exceed those of the
father. She is also more deserving of obedience because being a woman
she is more sensitive in comparison to men. The mother is easily
disturbed by the slightest hurt caused by her child. She becomes
restless and uncontrollable due to her motherly feelings. In contrast,
the father exercises reason and intelligence and being less emotional,
is much less affected. He would realize that the son is obeying the
mother because of the very special status granted to her by Allah
(S.w.T.) and not because he intends to disobey his father due to
disregard for him.

Permission of the Parents is Necessary
--------------------------------------

The Islamic Shari’a has prescribed certain matters wherein it is
necessary to obtain the permission of both the parents. Or at least of
one of them. For example, the Wajib al-Kifai acts like Jihad, or the
Mustahab acts like the recommended fasts, or matters like taking an
oath, vow and promises. In all such cases it is Wajib to obtain the
parents’ permission. The First Martyr[^19] had mentioned ten topics on
the rights of parents in his book “Qawaid”. It will be appropriate to
mention them.

Journey of the Child and the Martyr’s viewpoint
-----------------------------------------------

1) Mubah and Mustahab journey without the permission of parents is
Harām. However a business journey and the journey undertaken for
acquiring knowledge is allowed according to some Mujtahids.

2) Some Jurists are of the opinion that, obedience to parents is Wajib
upon the child in every condition where there exists a doubt. Hence if
the parents order their son or daughter to eat with them, and if there
is doubt regarding the food, it is incumbent to obey the parents.
Because, obedience to parents is Wajib while avoiding food in case of
doubt, is Mustahab.

3) If it is time for prayers and the parents would like to get some work
done, it is necessary to carry out the orders before offering Salāt.
Here again the offering of Salāt at the earliest is Mustahab whereas the
obedience to parents is Wajib.

Refraining From Salāt al-Jama’a
-------------------------------

1) Parents cannot prevent their child from performing Salāt in
congregation unless it causes some problem to them. For example, the
absence of the son, while he goes for Fajr or Isha prayers, may cause
them anxiety regarding their own safety or the safety of their property.
Or, it may make them apprehensive about the son’s safety.

2) If it is not absolutely obligatory (Wajib al-A’ini) the parents can
stop their son from going on Jihad.

3) Regarding the commands, which are Wajib al-Kifai, the parents can
prevent their son or daughter only if there is a certainty or a chance
of the Wajib being fulfilled by other people.

4) Some jurists are of the opinion that if one is praying a recommended
prayer, he can interrupt it if his parents call him.

5) One must forgo recommended fasts if the father disallows them.

6) In the matter regarding vows and promises, if the parents are against
it, then one must not disobey them.

7) It is the duty of the son to ensure that he causes no harm to his
parents. And if someone else intends to harm them, the son must do
everything in his capacity to ward off the harm.

Respect For Parents
-------------------

As it is Wajib to fulfill the rights of the parents, it is also
necessary to give them due respect and honour. Numerous traditions have
been recorded from the Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.)

1) One must not address the parents by their names. However, they can be
addressed by their title or kunniya.

2) One must not precede them while walking, nor should one sit down
before them.

3) While having meals one should not begin before the parents. Hazrat
Imam Zayn ul-’Abidīn (a.s.) did not have meals with his mother for the
fear that he may pick a morsel which she intended to.

4) One must never sit with one’s back to our parents in a gathering.

5) While speaking, one’s voice should not rise above the voice of one’s
parents.

6) One should not do anything that would cause the parents to become a
butt of criticism. We must not insult the parents of others, or they
would insult our parents in retaliation.

7) Hazrat Sajjad (a.s.) saw a young man walking on the street with the
support of his father’s hand. He was much displeased and did not even
speak to the boy again.[^20]

It is the unanimous opinion of the jurists that ‘Ahsan’ of parents means
refraining from everything that displeases them.

The following actions are considered disrespectful:

1) Not providing them with the necessities, thus compelling them to beg
for them.

2) Not inviting them to a function where others have been invited.

3) Not getting presents for them from a place where one had been to, on
a journey.

All the above acts are Harām. In addition, the jurists also consider the
following actions Harām:

1) To turn away from the parents with disdain.

2) To sit with one’s back towards the parents.

3) To speak in a voice louder than the parents.

4) Walking ahead of the parents.

If any of them do not cause disrespect or displeasure, they are allowed.
However, to refrain from them is ‘*mustahab*’.

Rights of the Children Upon Their Parents
-----------------------------------------

Just as it is Wajib for the children to respect, honour and fulfill the
rights of their parents, it is incumbent upon the mother and the father
to fulfill the rights, which the children have upon them. If the parents
do not fulfill these rights, it would amount to Qat’a ar-Rahm (cutting
off the relationships). Since children are the closest to parents it is
a must to refrain from Qat’a ar-Rahm with them, and Qat’a ar-Rahm is a
great sin, as would be described later.

Just as the children become ‘Āq al-Walidayn’ by not complying with their
duties, the parents also become ‘Āq’ if they fail to perform their
duties towards their children. Further, the parents should not impose
unbearable commands upon the children such that the children are forced
to find excuses for not obeying them and thus become ‘Āq’.

The parents should not ridicule their children for their actions. Rather
the children must be corrected by constructive criticism. Ridicule makes
the children stubborn and creates enmity between them and the parents.
When the parents fail to fulfill the rights of the children, it induces
the children to forsake the rights of the parents in retaliation. As a
consequence, both the parents and the children are involved in a Greater
Sin.

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

“The parents are liable to be ‘Āq’ in the same way as the children who
do not fulfill the rights of the parents become involved in the sin of
‘Uqūq’ (plural of Āq).”

It is therefore a solemn duty of the parents to behave kindly with their
children and give them a good training and education. They should keep
them under gentle control and must not do anything that would cause them
to be ‘Āq’.

For example, the parents should overlook the minor faults of the
children. They should appreciate insignificant favours and show
happiness and gratitude for these favours which would encourage the
child to further good actions. They should make the children aware that
they wish them the best and pray for their happiness in the world and
the Hereafter.

We will now put forward the rights of children upon their parents, as
enunciated by educated jurists and propounded in the books of Islamic
Law.

Maintenance of Children
-----------------------

It is Wajib upon the parents to bear the expenses of the children right
from the time of their birth till they become independent, and in case
of a daughter, till she gets married.

Arranging the Marriage
----------------------

One of the most important duties of the father is to arrange for the
marriage of the son when he attains maturity. In case of the daughter
too the father must strive to find a good match for her. The parents
cannot restrain their daughter from matrimony. The Holy Qur’an states
clearly:

***“...then do not prevent them from marrying their husbands when they
agree among themselves in a lawful manner.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:232)***

Religious Education and Training
--------------------------------

Another important duty for the parents is to give a good education to
their children. The parents must strive to instruct the children with
regard to the fundamentals of Islamic faith. The seriousness and
significance of observing the laws of Shari’a should be inculcated in
the children, and no leniency must be shown if the religious laws are
not strictly followed.

However, the aspect of Amr bil Ma’rūf and Nahy Anil Munkar must be kept
in mind. The details regarding the same shall be explained in the
chapter of Amr bil Ma’rūf (enjoining good) and Nahy Anil Munkar
(forbidding evil).

Various traditions stress upon the duty of the parents to shower their
love and affection upon the children. A few of these are quoted below.

Love and Affection For the Children
-----------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

“Be affectionate to your children and have mercy upon them. When you
promise them something, fulfill your promise because the children repose
hope only in the parents. When a promise is not fulfilled, it causes
dissatisfaction and strains relationships. Certainly Allah is most
wrathful when the women and children are disheartened.”

Kissing the Children
--------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) has told that when a person kisses his child, a
good deed is recorded in his *Sahifat al-Amāl* (Scroll of deeds).[^21]

Daughters Are More Deserving of Kindness
----------------------------------------

The parents have been ordered to be more kind towards the daughters. It
is mustahab that when a father brings something for the children he must
first offer it to the daughter; especially the one who is named Fatima.

If the children oppose the parents, they must never be abused or
reviled. The curses of the parents cause an increase in the misery of
the children.

Spiritual Fathers Are More Qualified For Kindness
-------------------------------------------------

Whatever has been mentioned till now concerns the biological parents;
however the spiritual fathers or the guides of humanity are Hazrat
Muhammad (S) and his Purified Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.). All of us are
spiritually related to them. In every circumstance their followers can
be enriched by virtues and get protection from calamities. The Holy
Prophet (S) has informed, “I and ‘Ali (both) are the fathers of this
Umma.”

The spiritual fathers are superior to the biological parents in a manner
that the soul is superior to the physical body. Similarly the punishment
of the ‘Āq’ of the spiritual fathers is much more severe than that of
the ‘Āq’ of ordinary parents.

High Rewards and More Punishment
--------------------------------

The rewards for kindness to the spiritual father is a thousand times
more than kindness to the real parents. In the same way the ‘Āq’ of a
spiritual father is far more severely punishable, i.e., Heaven is
prohibited for the person who disobeys the spiritual father, and none of
his deeds are accepted even if he prays in the nights and fasts during
the day.

The punishment for those who do not acknowledge the Wilāyat of Ahl
ul-Bayt (a.s.) is more severe because the Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) are the
real spiritual fathers. It would be wrong to consider all the Qur’anic
verses and traditions in connection with Uqūq al-Waledain to be
restricted to biological parents. The Holy Qur’an and hadith are
unanimous in declaring that the commands for Uqūq al-Waledain apply
equally and more stringently to the spiritual as well as biological
parents. The ultimate argument in this connection is the Qur’anic verse
wherein Allah (S.w.T.) has ordered obedience towards the parents along
with His own worship.

***“Be grateful to Me and both your parents.”*** ***(Surah Luqmān
31:14)***

***“And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but Him,
and goodness to your parents.”*** ***(Surah al-‘Isrā’, 17:23)***

A similar reference to the Holy Prophet (S) and the Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.)
is to be found in the chapter of Silet ar-Rahm. Two traditions are
reported from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)

The first tradition is when Umrū bin Yazid enquired about the meaning of
the following Ayat of Surah ar-Rā’d:

***“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined and have
awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning.”*** ***(Surah ar-Rā’d
13:21)***

The next tradition is concerned with the tafsir of the same ‘Ayat’. It
says that the above Ayat has been revealed about the Silet ar-Rahm to
Muhammad (S) and the Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.), the close relatives of the
Mu’min being included in it. The tradition further says,

“And do not be of those who restrict the Ayat to some particular
personalities. But whenever you hear of a verse regarding a kind of
people you must consider it to be applicable to the other people of the
same kind.”

The Uqūq of Spiritual Fathers
-----------------------------

The *Uqūq* of the spiritual fathers means to disobey their commands and
to be heedless of their orders. To sever relationships with them in this
world by not acknowledging their leadership. Imam Riďa (a.s.) asked,

“Won’t you feel bad if your parents are displeased and say that you are
not their child?”

Those who were present answered, “Yes”. Imam (a.s.) continued,

“The spiritual parents are superior to your biological parents. Do not
give them an opportunity to say this. Rather consider yourself lucky be
to their son or daughter”.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: al-Kāfi

[^3]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^4]: Mustadrak

[^5]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^6]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^7]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^8]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^9]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^10]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^11]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^12]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^13]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^14]: al-Kāfi

[^15]: al-Kāfi

[^16]: Uyūn al-Akhbar ar-Riďa

[^17]: al-Kāfi

[^18]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^19]: Al-Shahīd Al-Awwal Faqih Al-Sarbidaran

[^20]: al-Kāfi

[^21]: Wasa’il ul-Shia


