Ninth Greater Sin: Usury
========================

The ninth Greater sin is usury. That it is classified as a Greater Sin
is clear in traditions recorded from the Holy Prophet (S), Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.), Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.), and
Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.).

According to the glorious Qur’an, taking interest is a sin that incurs
severe Divine punishment. The punishment for usury as mentioned in the
Qur’an is far more severe than the punishment for other sins. It is
announced in Surah Āli- ‘Imran:

***“O you who believe! Do not devour usury, making it double and
redouble and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, that you may be
successful. And guard yourself against the fire that has been prepared
for the unbelievers.*** ***(Surah Āli- ‘Imran 3:130-131)***

It means that the fury of the fire that is prepared for those who take
interest will be just as intense as the fire prepared for the
unbelievers.

The verse of Surah al-Baqarah says,

***“Those who swallow down usury cannot arise except as one whom Shaitan
has prostrated by (his) touch does rise. That is because they say,
trading is only like usury; and Allah has allowed trading and forbidden
usury. To whomsoever then the admonition has come from his Lord, then he
desists, he shall have what has already passed, and his affair is in the
hands of Allah; and whoever returns (to it) - These are the inmates of
the fire; they shall abide in it.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:275)***

The above verse confirms that the usurer will remain in Hell eternally
and there is no salvation for him. Allama Muhammad Husain Tabatabai, in
his Tafsir, ‘al-Mizan’ says that the punishment ordered by Allah
(S.w.T.) for usury is so severe, that such severity is not mentioned
even for disobedience to any of the *Furu’ ad-Dīn*. Another equally
serious offence is to nurture friendship with the enemies of Islam. The
direct ill-effects of usury are clear and evident. Hoarding of wealth
increases the disparity between the rich and the poor. Poverty is a
malady that can degrade and humiliate its victims, erode his values and
destroy his morals. This in turn leads to corruption, theft and murder.
Those directly responsible for destroying the social equilibrium, are
the hoarders, who amassed wealth and thus it was unavailable to those
who needed it. The total disintegration of the social fabric can
precipitate a civil war and further a world war which brings with it
only death and destruction. In the world of today with the advances of
the nuclear and chemical weapons, war does not only bring death to the
humans, but leaves them a caricature, sick and maimed and deformed for
generations to come.

The direct ill effects on the Muslim society as a result of friendship
with those opposed to Islam, are also clear and evident.

History has recorded that friendship with the enemies of Islam can only
be bought at a price. The price in this case is to compromise.
Compromise on the tenets, the culture and the spirit of Islam, till a
time comes when the country loses its identity as an Islamic society.

Usury is Against Intellect and Shari’a
--------------------------------------

The verse of Surah al-Baqarah which is quoted above, says that those who
take usury (interest on loan) shall be counted among mad people (whom
Shaitan has touched). On the Day of Judgement people will recognize them
from their madness that they had been taking usury. Their sanity would
be destroyed, because in this world they have acted against intellect
and Shari’a.

They have been oblivious of humanity and the needs of humanity. They did
not deal equitably with others and disobeyed the law of co-operation.
Actually these people had been insane in the world, because they have
followed the direction of Shaitan and performed such insane acts.

Is Trading and Usury One and the Same?
--------------------------------------

This argument is obviously foolish. There is nothing comparable between
interest and trade. There is equity in business transactions because
there is a mutual agreement between the two parties and both stand to
gain or lose. In trading, a seller sells an article to the buyer at a
price mutually acceptable to both, and the matter ends there.

But taking interest is a clearcut case of exploitation. A person with
surplus money, which he does not need, lends it to someone who is in
dire need. The needy person agrees to pay interest which he can ill
afford; not because it is acceptable to him but because of his
compelling situation.

Interest and Inequality of Classes in Society
---------------------------------------------

Undoubtedly, usury is an unjust and oppressive evil. It is against human
nature and human dignity. It increases the riches of the wealthy and
drives the impoverished to further depravation.

Understandably, the exploited poor begin to hate the rich. The pent-up
hatred then finds an outlet in the form of violence and bloody
revolutions.

In the book “Islam and World Peace” it is written, “Islam says that
earning should be only in return of efforts and work. because capital
itself cannot do any work and make any effort. Hence the wealth of the
rich man should not be increased by taking usury.”

Increasing wealth by usury is the easiest form of making money but Islam
forbids it. Wealth cannot be accumulated by forcing the helpless poor
into further destitution; and usury does just that, causing economic
imbalance and trampling upon human rights, equity and justice. Maulana
Sayyid Abul ‘Ala Maududi of Pakistan has written a comprehensive and
interesting book on usury that describes its evil effects and the
arguments are supported by statistics.

The needy person ends up returning not only the amount loaned to him but
far in excess of it. The excess can even amount to more than the
principal amount if the repayment is delayed. Taking interest imposes an
excruciating financial burden on one who is already needy and it is
nothing short of blackmail. Needy people should be given loans without
interest. This promotes a feeling of friendship, co-operation and
charity.

Interest for Goodly Loans
-------------------------

To give a loan on interest not only destroys the economic balance in the
society, it also inflames the feelings of hatred, enmity and
selfishness.

The One Who Indulges in Usury is Deprived of Goodness
-----------------------------------------------------

There are too many disadvantages of taking interest. The earnings of one
who takes interest, loses ‘Barakat’ (abundance and prosperity). Whereas
the earnings of hard labour have much ‘Barakat’.

The Holy Prophet (S) says in one of his traditions:

“Worship consists of seventy parts. The most important is lawful
earnings.”[^1]

The Prophet (S) also says:

“The truthful trader shall be counted among the prophets on the Day of
Judgement. His face would glow like a full moon.”[^2]

The Usurer Does Not Place Trust in Allah (S.w.T.)
-------------------------------------------------

Another misfortune of the usurer is that he loses trust in Allah
(S.w.T.). He does not pray to Allah (S.w.T.) to give him ‘Barakat’. All
his hopes are pinned upon the interest that he collects from his debtors
and this is polytheism as discussed in the section on ‘Shirk’.

Another point to be noted is that in normal business there is a
possibility of both gain and loss. So the businessman not only puts in
sincere efforts but prays to Allah (S.w.T.) for success and profit in
his endeavour. An usurer has no fear of loss and feels no intuitive need
to pray to Allah (S.w.T.) for his ‘Rizq’. He is thus deprived of an
important facet of religion.

The Reward of Giving a Loan is More than that of Sadaqah
--------------------------------------------------------

One who takes interest is deprived of the rewards that are prescribed
for giving a goodly loan. If there are ten merits in giving Sadaqah, the
interest-free loan has eighteen merits. An interest-free loan is
therefore more rewarding than Sadaqah in the way of Allah (S.w.T.).

A person who gives respite to his debtors and does not take interest is
given a reward that is equivalent to charity of the said amount every
day for the number of days that he extends. It is evident that the
usurer does not qualify for such rewards. In fact he is afflicted with
miserliness and greed, which only increase day by day. Surely the result
of miserliness and greed is Hell.

The Fate of the Usurer
----------------------

We have already seen from the verses of the Holy Qur’an, the sayings of
our Holy Prophet (S) and of our Imams (a.s.) that the punishment for
usury in more severe than that of other sins. We have also discussed the
reasons for this. Islam classifies usury as the greatest of the Greater
Sins and its punishment is the severest of all punishments. If the
usurer does not repent for his acts, his end will be with the
disbelievers and those whose eternal abode is Hell. The usurer shall
never be released from Hell.

***“To whomsoever then the admonition has come from his Lord, than he
desists, he shall have what has already passed, and his affair is in the
hands of Allah, and whoever returns (to it) these are the inmates of the
fire, they shall abide in it.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:275)***

However there are certain ways to compensate for this sin and pray for
forgiveness. Certain sinful acts are forgiven by just repenting
sincerely. If a Polytheist repents for his sins and becomes a Muslim, a
great sin like ‘Shirk’ is forgiven. He does not have to do anything more
than that. But there are some sins that require compensation in addition
to sincere repentance i.e. like the one who has Qaža prayers and fasts.
Along with repentance he must perform all the prayers and observe all
the fasts due on him. Similarly in the case of interest, the penitent
should give back the amount that he has taken as interest from his
debtors.

No Barakat in Interest
----------------------

The above Qur’anic Ayat continues:

***“Allah does not bless usury, and he causes charitable deeds to
prosper, and Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner.”*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:276)***

Charity spreads peace, promotes beneficence and love in society, whereas
usury destroys peace and hardens the hearts of the people.

When usury spreads its roots in society, people have no hesitation in
usurping each other’s rights. They are only driven by a feeling of
enmity, hatred and a passion of revenge. A society devoid of harmony and
co-operation cannot progress, it destroys itself with its own
corruption. Charity and Sadaqah on the other hand promote feelings of
friendship, love and brotherhood. An atmosphere of peace and prosperity
prevails which inspires people to further good deeds.

War With Allah (S.w.T.) and the Holy Prophet (S)
------------------------------------------------

The Noble Qur’an says,

***“O You who believe! Be careful of (your duty) to Allah and relinquish
what remains (due) from usury, if you are believers. But if you do (it)
not, then be appraised of war from Allah and His Apostle...”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:278-279)***

The proof of one’s belief is in obedience of Divine orders. The same
verse continues,

***“...And if you repent, then you shall have your capital, neither
shall you make (the debtors) suffer loss, nor shall you be made to
suffer loss.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:279)***

One who does not obey this command must be prepared for war with Allah
(S.w.T.) and His Prophet (S).

Tafsir Minhaj us-Sādiqīn gives an explanation of this verse. It could
mean that the severity of the sin of usury is such that if in this world
a usurer were to come face to face with the Holy Prophet (S), the
Prophet’s (S) sword would be against him and the Prophet (S) would be
prepared to fight him. In the Hereafter the fire of Hell shall keep him
in torment by the order of Allah (S.w.T.). The usurer must be fought
till he submits to the Divine orders and refrains from taking usury.
Traditional reports state that after the revelation of this verse, the
Holy Prophet (S) informed the Commissioner of Makkah that if the tribe
of Bani Mughaira does not desist from taking usury, they must be fought
against.

The Holy Prophet (S) also said inter alia in a sermon at Makkah: “Know
that the usury which has been accumulated in the period of ignorance is
now condoned completely. First of all I condone the interest (that is
upon your neck) of (my uncle) Abbas Ibn Abdul Muttalib.”

Traditions Denouncing Interest
------------------------------

It is reported from Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.):

“Taking a Dirham as interest is worse in the eyes of Allah than doing
illegal intercourse with Mahram women.”[^3]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

“The Holy Prophet (S) has cursed one who accepts interest, one who pays
interest, one who buys interest, one who sells interest, one who writes
the contract of interest and one who is the witness of this
transaction.”[^4]

Ibn Baqīr relates that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) was informed about
the person who took interest and considered it as permissible as
mother’s milk. Imam (a.s.) said:

“If Allah gives me power over this man, I would strike off his
head.”[^5]

It is clear that to consider interest Harām is an article of faith. One
who disregards this and says that interest is not Harām becomes an
apostate. The Imam (a.s.) can also have him killed.

Interest is Denounced in the Holy Qur’an
----------------------------------------

Samā says that he asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) as to why Allah
(S.w.T.) has mentioned the illegality of usury at various places. Imam
(a.s.) replied:

“So that people may not forgo acts of charity (like giving interest-free
loans).”[^6]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said:

“The worst transaction is that which involves interest.”[^7]

The Sinner is Deprived of Religious Faith
-----------------------------------------

Zurarah says that I asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) concerning the
Qur’anic verse:

***“Allah does not bless usury, and he causes charitable deeds to
prosper...”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:276)***

And added:

“But I see that wealth of usurers goes on increasing?”

Imam (a.s.) replied,

“What could be a greater loss? That in return of a Dirham of interest he
loses his faith. And if he repents of his deeds in the world all his
wrongfully earned wealth comes to an end and he becomes a
destitute.”[^8]

The Belly of the Usurer Shall Be Filled With Fire
-------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) says,

“One who takes interest, his belly shall be filled with an equal
quantity of fire by Allah. If he has earned more from the interest
money, Allah will not accept any of his deeds. And till even a grain of
interest remains with him, Allah and his angels will continue to curse
this man.”[^9]

Punishment of Usurers in the Barzakh
------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) has also stated:

“On the night of ascension (Miraj) I saw some people trying to stand up
but did not succeed because of their huge bellies, I asked, O Jibrīl,
who are these people?”

Jibrīl replied, “They are those who have taken usury. Now they can only
stand up like those who have been possessed by the Devils.”

The Prophet (S) continues,

“Then I saw them herded upon the path of the followers of Fir’on. Seeing
the extreme heat of the fire they exclaimed. O God! Then when will be
Qiyāma?” (It is clear that the fire mentioned in the tradition is of the
punishment of Barzakh).

Usurers Under the Feet of Fir’on
--------------------------------

In another tradition it is said that when these people saw the followers
of Fir’on they tried to get up and run away. But due to overlarge
bellies they could not rise up and consequently the followers of Fir’on
trampled them under their feet and moved on.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said:

“When adultery and interest becomes common in a town the angels are
given permission to destroy its inhabitants.”

Another Prophetic tradition in the same vein says:

“When the people of my Umma start taking interest, tremors and
earthquakes will be frequent.”[^10]

Usury is Worse Than Adultery
----------------------------

The Noble Prophet (S) says:

“If a man commits adultery with his mother in the Holy Kāba this act
shall be seventy times lighter than the act of usury.”[^11]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“In the eyes of Allah, taking one Dirham of interest is worse than
thirty incestuous acts.”[^12]

A previous tradition describes this sin to be seventy times more than
adultery. There is one more report where taking a Dirham is equated with
twenty such acts.[^13]

Even in today’s world, the scourge of interest has spread to such a
magnitude that economies are on the verge of collapse. Some economists
say that interest is necessary for development. If this had been true
then Islam would not have prohibited it. At the present time there are
two schools of economics whose ideology is not based on interest. One is
Communism and the other Islam. Whereas the foundation of imperialist
economy is based upon interest. Even the Communist and the Islamic
schools of economies differ greatly.

Unlike the Communists, Islamic government has never felt the compulsion
to accept interest as inevitable, in order to fit the logistics of
economy. And yet, Islamic economy is not known to have weakened because
it does away with interest.

Yes, it is a necessity for the few selfish and greedy people who wish to
add to their already enormous wealth, by increasing the miseries of the
poor and the destitute. Their aim is to enslave the deprived people. We
are well aware of the logic of these hoarders.

Loan On Interest
----------------

A loan on interest is one whereby a person lends something with the
precondition that it would be returned with fixed increment at a fixed
time. The loan given may be money or any other article, say, one loans
five Mounds of rice and expects to get back six Mounds. The increment
demanded may be in the form of cash or kind, labour or even a favour.

For example, one may lend money with the condition that the borrower
will return the money and also carry out some household chores for him.
Or a lender may lend a sum of money for a year and in return stay in the
house of the borrower for a year without paying any rent. Or a person
may give gold as a loan and expect the borrower to make some jewellery
free of cost. Whatever is taken in excess of what was given,
irrespective of its form, is interest and is Harām. Also it does not
matter whether such conditions for giving loan were stated in the
beginning or decided later. It is Harām in any case.

### Some Important Points

1) A transaction involving interest is Harām. Charging interest is Harām
and paying interest is Harām too. So if the borrower takes money on
interest and uses it and earns some profit, the actual owner of the
profit is the lender. For example, if he borrows some wheat and plants a
crop, the crop that grows from this, rightfully belongs to the lender.
However, if the lender has agreed that his loan can be utilised in such
a manner, then the profit from it is the right of the borrower.

2) If one gives an amount to a trader with the understanding that he can
return a lesser amount, it is permitted. For example, he gives a
thousand Tumans to a trader in Shiraz and agrees to take nine hundred
and ninety Tumans in Tehran, he is allowed to do so. This type of
transaction is knows as ‘Sarf al-Barāt’, since there is no involvement
of interest.

3) If at the time of disbursement of the loan there had been no mention
of interest and the loanee wishes to return the loan amount with an
increase out of his own wish, it is not Harām. In fact it is Mustahab.
It is also Mustahab to repay the loan, if possible, before its due-date
or before the lender demands it. It is also Mustahab for the debtor that
when repaying the loan he should add something to it with the intention
of giving it as a gift to the creditor. But the intention must be of
‘gift’. It must not even remotely be thought of as interest. Similarly,
it is Mustahab for the creditor to accept whatever extra is given to him
as a gift, not think of it as an interest, and accept it as a goodwill.

Transaction Involving Interest
------------------------------

If any of the following conditions are present in a transaction, it
becomes a transaction of interest, and is Harām:

1) Whatever is taken and whatever is given back are of the same material
but the quantities are unequal. Or if the quantities are equal, there is
disparity in quality etc.

2) When only one standard of measure and weight is employed, the amount
taken and given back is of unequal measure or weight. However, at the
time of borrowing if the measure of weight is kilogram but while
returning it, it is Sīr or Pound it is allowed. In the same way whatever
was taken by the unit of measurement as metre and returned by the units
of measurement as foot or yard, is valid too.

In the same way it is Harām for a person to lend one Mound of wheat for
a month and in return borrow one mound of wheat for two months from the
same person. Even though the quantity is the same, the transaction is
Harām because time is also a significant factor.

### Three Important Points

1) In the matter of interest, wheat and barley are considered
equivalent. Then if one gives a Mound of wheat and takes one and-a-half
Mound of barley, it is interest, and thus Harām.

Similarly, whatever constitutes the same basic material is regarded as
equivalent. As an analogy one may think of the roots, branches and
leaves of a tree as equivalent. For example, milk and curd are
equivalent, grape-vinegar and grapes are equivalent, sugar and sugarcane
are equivalent too. All these have to be loaned and given back in equal
quantity or it will constitute interest and will be Harām.

2) If a person gives one Mound of wheat and a handkerchief and takes
back one and-a-half Mound of wheat, it does not constitute interest and
is not Harām. In this transaction one Mound of wheat shall be considered
in lieu one Mound of wheat that is returned. And the remaining half a
mound of wheat shall be in the lieu of the handkerchief. It is also
possible that a person may give one Mound of wheat and a handkerchief
and take back one Mound of wheat and some other article, for example,
soap. In this way too he has not committed usury.

3) If a person first sells one Mound of his wheat for two Tumans and
later purchases one and a half Mound of wheat for two Tumans, it is
permitted. Since both these transactions are separate. It does not
constitute usury.

It may be possible that Zaid sells a Mound of wheat to Khalid, and
Khalid gives half a Mound of his wheat to Zaid as a gift. This is also
permitted.

When taking interest is permitted
---------------------------------

There are Three types of people between whom the taking and giving of
interest is allowed:

(1) Father and son: The father and son can enter into a transaction of
interest. But a transaction of interest between mother and son is Harām.

(2) Husband and wife: The husband and wife can charge interest from each
other. For example one of them gives a hundred rupees and demand one
hundred and fifty rupees in return. It is permitted.

(3) The Kafir who is not staying in an Islamic country: A Muslim can
take back more but he cannot give him more. As far as the Zimmi Kafir
(one who is staying in an Islamic country) is concerned it is Harām to
enter into a transaction of interest with him. Taking and giving of
interest both are Harām in this case.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: Muhajjatul Baidha

[^3]: al-Kāfi

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^5]: al-Kāfi

[^6]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^8]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^9]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^10]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^11]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^12]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^13]: Wasa’il ul-Shia


