Tenth Greater Sin: Fornication
==============================

The tenth Greater sin is adultery (zina) according to the traditions of
Masūmen (a.s.). Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.),
Imam ‘Ali Riďa (a.s.) and Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) have all described
it as a Greater Sin.

In the following ayat the Almighty says:

***“And they who do not call upon another god with Allah and do not slay
the soul which Allah has forbidden except in the requirements of
justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he who does this shall
find a requital of sin. The punishment shall be doubled to him on the
day of resurrection, and he shall abide therein in abasement.”***
***(Surah al-Furqān 25:68-69)***

The meaning of Ithm and ghayyi
------------------------------

The book Minhāj us-Sādiqīn states that *Ithm* (sin) in this ayat denotes
a valley of Hell. Fornicators shall be punished in this valley. It is
also said that *Ghayyi* means the secretions of blood and puss from the
private parts of the people of Hell. It is a black puss.

Another ayat says:

***“But there came after them an evil generation, who neglected prayers
and followed the sexual desires, so they will meet perdition.”***
***(Surah Maryam 19:59)***

Some traditions record that the Ithm of the previous verse and *ghayyi*
of this verse are two wells in Hell. These two wells are so terrible and
deep that if a stone is dropped into one of them, it will take seventy
years to reach the bottom.

It is mentioned in Surah al-‘Isrā’:

***“And go not nigh to Fornication, surely it is an indecency and an
evil way.”*** ***(Surah al-‘Isrā’, 17:32)***

It is an evil due to which paternity is not established. It leads to
corruption and mischief. The child that is born is bereft of
inheritance. The child that is born and its father do not have rights
upon each other like the legal father and son.

An Evil Way to Fulfill the Sexual Urge
--------------------------------------

In the book, Balahae al-Ijtemai the above ayat is explained as follows:

“One must not even go near fornication for it is a lowly act. It is a
very dirty action and leads one astray.”

The seriousness of this sin as mentioned in the Qur’an is evident from
this ayat;

***“... It is an indecency and an evil way.”*** ***(Surah al-‘Isrā’,
17:32)***

These words clarify the Islamic point of view, which opposes all types
of indecencies and carnal desires. It shows that adultery is an indecent
act and an evil way of satisfying the sexual urge. The Almighty Allah
(S.w.T.) has created the sexual urge for continuation of the human race.
He has also created a feeling of love and physical attraction between
man and woman. If this sexual urge is satisfied in a disciplined manner,
the human race is assured of peace and prosperity. It must be remembered
that fornication contaminates the progeny.

But when this evil becomes prevalent in a society just to satisfy the
basic instincts, it leads to destruction and despair.

Also, as a result of an immoral life countless people and their children
suffer from debilating, deforming and incurable diseases. Huge sums of
money are drained from the budget to take care of victims and to find a
cure for such diseases. Innumerable illegitimate children are born ill
and undernourished; destitutes without a home and with no one to care or
be concerned for them.[^1]

Page number 131 of the same book describes the evil that has spread due
to sexual crimes and illicit relationships. Such destruction and evil
does not have an equivalent in the 20th century.

In the highly competitive world of today, man strives to use all his
assets to optimal capacity. His efforts are fully concentrated in
deriving the maximum efficiency from all his inputs so that he can
achieve unprecedented progress in minimum time. So it is pity to see him
make a wasteland of his most precious possessions, his natural instincts
and desires gifted to him by Allah (S.w.T.) for his happiness and
prosperity.

Like all branches of science, nuclear and medical science has also made
a progress. Vast sums of money are poured into research for discovering
new drugs that may save mankind from the scourge of these diseases. Yet,
the number of people suffering from debilitating maladies resulting from
immoral conduct are ever on the increase. In every country, countless
such people have to be hospitalised over extended period of time. They
wreck their own lives and are also a burden to society.

Every country makes ambitious plans to achieve progress and prosperity.
But all these development plans come to naught as millions of illicit
children are born, posing a challenge to the economy of even the most
affluent countries. For the poor undeveloped countries the results are
disastrous. Not only are the uncared children a drain on the country’s
economy, they even pose a law and order problem as they grow up
uneducated in a condition of abject poverty and crime. A shocking survey
of statistics reveals the enormity with which sexual crime has gripped
the world.

According to Encyclopedia Britannica a majority of Americans contract
venereal diseases. America has hundreds of special hospitals for
patients with venereal diseases.

The book “Qawānīne Jinsi” says that every year thirty-four thousand new
born children die of hereditary diseases. The deaths caused by these
diseases are more than the deaths due to any other cause (except
tuberculosis).

The ‘Kahyan Daily’ (no.5356) has mentioned,

“Dr. Maulin Norjoe who practices in North London, writes in his article
that every year 50000 abortions of illicit children are carried out in
London. One child out of every twenty newborns is illegitimate.”

The daily ‘Ittelat’(no.1414) writes that in 1957 America had
illegitimate children numbering 201700. There has been a five fold
increase in the next twenty years. This year, unmarried pregnant women
numbered 24000. It is astonishing and pathetic that a majority of them
are less than eighteen years of age. In Paris, of the total of 43515 new
born children, 4145 are illegitimate. In the Soviet Union, every year
17000 illegitimate children are born.

The Evil Effects of Adultery in this World and the Hereafter
------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) says:

“Fornication has six types of effects. Three are for this world and
Three for the Hereafter. The Three evils which become evident in this
world are:

The face of the adulterer loses countenance.

He falls into depravity and destitution.

His death draws near.

And the Three punishments for Hereafter are:

(1) He is liable for Divine anger.

(2) His reckoning is severe.

(3) He abides forever in Hell.”

Fornicator in the Barzakh
-------------------------

The fifth Imam (a.s.) has also said,

“Whoever commits Fornication with a Muslim, Jew, Christian or Magian
woman, whether she is a slave or a free woman; and dies without
repenting of his sin, then the Almighty Allah opens Three hundred doors
of punishment in his grave. From each door many snakes, scorpions and
pythons emerge from the fire and burn and torment him till the Day of
Qiyāma.”

Fornicator on the Day of Judgement
----------------------------------

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) describes the fornicator in detail and says
that when he would be raised from his grave on the day of judgement he
shall be in a horrible state.

The Imam says,

“When a fornicator will rise from his grave the stink of his body shall
hurt the people. The people will know what deeds he had committed in the
world. Till the Almighty Allah would order him to be thrown into the
fire.”

Then Imam Baqir (a.s.) continues,

“Know that Allah has prohibited Himself the Harām things. He has also
prescribed the rules and regulations of life. No one is more modest than
Allah. It is His modesty that He has prohibited Fornication.”

The stench of the Fornicator will be a nuisance for the people on the Day of Judgement
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

“On the day of Qiyāma a bad smell shall be released by the order of
Allah. And all the people will become restless because of it. So much so
that it would be difficult to breathe. Then a caller will proclaim
loudly, ‘O people of Mahshar! Do you know what this stench is?’

They would reply, “We do not know! However this stink is causing great
discomfort”, then Imam (a.s.) continued,

“It is the bad smell from the sexual organs of the fornicators who died
without repenting for their sins. O people, Allah curses these people,
you too invoke curse upon them.” Then there will be not a single person
who would not say, ‘O Allah send your curse (anger) upon these
fornicators’[^2]

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“After me when Fornication will increase, sudden deaths will also
increase.”

He also said:

“Fornication causes depravity and destitution, and because of it,
populated places become deserted.”

Unknown progeny
---------------

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“*Allah has made adultery Harām because it causes many evil things.
Murder of innocent, lack of lineage and paternity, lack of training of
children and lack of proof of inheritance*.”

Fornication With Pure Women
---------------------------

The punishment for illegal sexual act with a woman is hundred lashes.
The penalty of illicit sexual intercourse between a married woman and
married man is stoning to death.

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“There are Three types of people with whom Allah will not even speak on
the day of Qiyāma. There is a terrible punishment for them. One of these
Three group will be of the women who inspite of having husbands commit
adultery with others.”

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“Whoever commits Fornication with a married woman, both of their sexual
organs will give out such a stink that it would be felt even at the
distance of five hundred years. This stench will hurt the people of
Hell. And such fornicators will be subjected to the most severe
punishment.”

Islam Views the Problem from Every Angle
----------------------------------------

The book “Burhan al-Qur’an” examines the punishment for adultery as
prescribed in Islam keeping in mind the factors of human desires and
sexual feeling, Islam has also enunciated the easiest ways of satisfying
sexual desires and fulfilling sensual feelings. It has ordered its
followers to marry at the beginning of puberty. It is the most
recommended way.

The book also describes the punishment prescribed in Islam for adultery.
It also discusses the way of life recommended by Islam which; if
followed strictly; would minimise or even eradicate the practice of
illicit relationships.

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“Marriage is my practice. One who forsakes this practice of mine is not
from me.”

The rules and regulations of marriage in Islam are simple so that there
are no encumbrances in finalising a marriage. An Islamic government is
bound to provide financial support to the unmarried people who are
unable to marry because of poverty. In this way, youthful passions and
desires are contained and illicit relationships are minimised. In order
to eradicate this evil, Islam directs us to fulfill a social as well as
a spiritual code of conduct. At the social level it is obligatory for
those more fortunate amongst us to fulfill the needs of the less
privileged.

The wealthy amongst us are duty bound to take care of the financial
needs of the poor. It is likewise obligatory to make a sustained and
dedicated effort to educate the people for both social welfare and
spiritual upliftment. Islam expects every individual to help the members
of the community in whichever manner he can. The philosophy of Islam, if
adhered to, can ensure the removal of poverty and ignorance which in
turn ensures the removal of envies, perversion and illicit and illegal
affairs associated with these. With an early marriage, the basic
material needs of man are taken care of and an individual is well
equipped to resist getting involved in degrading acts like adultery.

Self-control is further strenthened by practicing the laws of Islam
which are encoded at the spiritual level. Islam has defined some acts of
worship as obligatory. Our Holy Prophet (S) and our Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.)
have taught us and guided us to innumerable recommended acts of worship
like mustahab fasts, Mustahab prayers and Etekaf. Every prayer
essentially refines a person’s character and raises him to greater
heights of nobility. By earnestly keeping up prayers and fasts, an
individual can strengthen his inner resources and develop his
spiritualism. Such an individual will have the power to exercise control
over his passions and natural instincts and will not stoop to commit
adultery which is declared as a Greater sin by his religion.

Islam prescribes very strict and severe laws of punishment for the wrong
doers. This is necessary. It is only the severity of a law that compels
average individuals to abide by it. But, however severe the punishments
prescribed in Islam may be, they are always tempered by Allah (S.w.T.)’s
Mercy and Compassion. Hadd (punishment) for adultery can only be
executed if there are four just witnesses who have seen the sin being
committed with their own eyes. Obviously the worldly punishment can be
given only to those who publicly and shamelessly behave like beasts. It
is truly amazing that even for such loathsome behaviour, Islam orders
leniency in punishment. For example, only a married person who commits
adultery is to be stoned to death. The punishment for an unmarried
person is a hundred lashes.

The present day youth is caught in the mire of economic and moral
decline. They are mentally disturbed and unstable. They believe it is
advantageous to avoid the bonds and responsibilities of marriage and
satisfy their natural needs with illicit relationships.

Undoubtedly, these problems have arisen because we do not implicitly
practice the code of conduct as laid down by Shari’a and we do not fully
implement the rules and regulations as defined in Islam. Had there been
an Islamic government, it would have endeavored to eradicate this
immorality from the society by providing the basic needs to the poor and
facilities for an early marriage.

An Islamic government would strictly ban pornography, bars, night clubs
etc., all of which arouse sexual desires in people and lure them to
indecencies and indiscriminations. Islam prohibits all activities that
excite passions and promote shameful and degrading behaviour.

The strict laws of punishment in Islam should not lead us to think that
Islam only wishes to punish the wrong doers. Its laws are designed to
rid the society of all evil. In fact, Islam takes a very compassionate
view of sinners. On the one hand, the stern orders of punishment are
strictly regulated so no injustice is done in carrying them out. On the
other hand, Islam outlines a code of social obligation that creates an
atmosphere of joy and dignity for all. No one in an Islamic society
would be compelled by helplessness and desperation into bad conduct. It
is a pity and our misfortune that we fail to implement fully our social
obligations.

Islam has not ignored the punishment for the wrong-doers. Punishment is
prescribed for sins in order that law and order are maintained in the
society. Hadd (punishment) for adultery is prescribed only when a person
performs this act shamelessly and openly, in the presence of four just
witnesses. He defiles the chastity of some women and satisfies his
beastly desires in the worst manner. Islam orders the punishment only
when four just witnesses state that they have witnessed the actual act
with their own eyes. Islam punishes the fornicator when he plays with
the honour of the society. It is surprising that even in this case,
Islam has been lenient with the wrong doers to a great extent. If the
adulterer is unmarried a hundred lashes is his punishment. Stoning to
death is only for that sinner who has a legal wife and indulges in this
serious crime only to give vent to his lewdness.

It is necessary to mention this remarkable fact. In today’s world, the
youth is having such a state of mind that due to the economics and
morals of the society they try to escape from the bonds of marriage and
are attracted towards sexual perversions.

It is true that our youth is involved in economic difficulties and moral
problems. But what is the root of this problems? A simple answer to this
is that Islamic rules and regulations are not being followed and are not
being put into practice. If the Islamic laws are fully implemented we
would remain safe from immorality. If there had been an Islamic
government it would have endeavoured to eradicate the lewdness and
immorality from society. It would have provided the means of an early
marriage. It would have also endeavoured to provide the basic
necessities to the common people. It would save its youth, who are its
future, from falling into the abyss of destruction.

If the Islamic government is in power, such things like shameful films,
pornographic magazines, bars and night clubs would not have any
existence because these things arouse the sexual desires. The Islamic
law prohibits all such activities that promote sins and evils. In
Islamic society, the youth is not compelled to remain celibate due to
such created problems. Rather, such an atmosphere and society is created
wherein all the people spend their life with chastity and dignity. Islam
is not only for punishing the people. Its laws are designed to rid the
society of all evils.

For this very reason, Islamic law first takes into consideration the
condition and helplessness of the fornicator, and only then does it
prescribe the punishment. The fornicators are divided into seven groups
and different penalties are fixed for them.

1) Stoning to death.

2) Stoning and lashes - both.

3) A hundred lashes and exile from the city after shaving the head.

4) Fifty lashes.

5) Seventy five lashes.

6) “Zighas”- it means picking up the lash many times to hit once.

7) The penalty of Fornication and fine - both.

Here, we shall describe the legal rulings, according to jurisprudence
and traditions, for the information of our respected readers.

1) In order to establish the crime of adultery, four just male witnesses
are required or Three just male and two just female witnesses or two
just male and four just female witnesses. If two just male witnesses and
four just female witnesses state that they have witnessed the act, and
if the sinner or the fornicator does not have a legal wife, or the
fornicator woman does not have a legal husband, than they are not stoned
to death. They are only given a hundred lashes each.

2) All the witnesses must testify that the crime had occurred at one and
the same place.

3) All the witnesses must testify that the crime had occurred at the
same time.

4) All the witnesses must testify in the same sitting.

5) If four just people quote the testimony of four just witnesses it is
not sufficient.

6) If four just witnesses testify that a certain woman has committed
fornication, their testimony shall not be accepted if they are not
familiar with this woman since they do not know her and it could be that
she is the legal wife of that man.

7) If Three of the four witnesses testify and the fourth one refrains
from testifying, or if his testimony differs from the previous Three
witnesses, the Three witnesses who have testified shall be punished for
‘qazaf’ (defaming a chaste man or woman of adultery).

8) If the fornicator confesses his crime thrice, but refrains from the
fourth confession, he cannot be punished. For a penalty to be lawful, it
is necessary to confess four times.

9) He must make four confessions in four different sittings. He cannot
be penalised if he makes four confessions in one sitting.

10) It is not permitted for the Judge to goad the accused to confess. He
must also not be prompted to complete sentences (that is, words must not
be put into his mouth). The Judge must try to maintain purity, chastity
and dignity among the common people and must try his utmost that the
crime of adultery is not proved. The Judge must try to give such
suggestions to the accused that he may be able to save himself from the
penalty by falling into doubts and uncertainties. It is also the duty of
the Judge to encourage the accused to plead innocence.

11) When a married man confesses of adultery four times but later pleads
innocence, the penalty of stoning will not be imposed upon him. His
punishment shall be reduced.

12) A new convert to Islam who is unaware of the punishment shall not be
punished.

13) If the adulterer is unmarried and he is suffering from some illness,
the jurist is authorised to beat him with a broom of twigs or a branch
of the date palm. He should consider these as lashes. He could also beat
him with a branch or broom and consider each of its twig equivalent to
one lash.

14) The lashing should be so controlled that the flesh of the body is
not affected. The accused can only be punished when he has committed the
crime willingly. (If someone is forced to commit fornication, penalty
cannot be imposed upon them ).

15) If a man mistakes a woman to be his legal wife and has sexual
intercourse with her, then he cannot not be punished.

This is thus the detailed analysis of the laws prescribed by the all
Beneficent and the all Merciful Allah (S.w.T.), who knows His creatures
very well. He has prescribed such regulated punishments for a serious
sin like fornication. Now we shall quote a tradition that proves the
extent to which the saints of Allah (S.w.T.) strived to protect the
dignity of the people. How much precaution they took in passing a decree
of fornication.

In the time of the rule of Umar a woman came to him and confessed of
adultery. She also said, “Please impose the penalty of fornication upon
me.”

When Umar heard this, he ordered that the penalty of fornication be
executed upon this woman. ‘Ali (a.s.) happened to be there and was
surprised at this. He said, “Umar, inquire from this woman the
conditions when she had committed fornication.”

The woman explained, “I was extremely thirsty in the desert. When I went
far in search of water, I sighted a black tent which belonged to an
Arab. I approached him and asked for water. But he refused to give me
any water without my having adultery with him. I did not agree to his
devilish desires and ran away into the desert. My eyes became sunken and
I felt as if each of my bones were breaking. I returned to this man and
in exchange of a drink of water I gave my body to him.”

‘Ali (a.s.) said,

“It is this compulsion which is mentioned in the ayat,

***‘...But whoever is compelled by hunger, in inclining willfully to
sin, then surely Allah is Forgiving Merciful,’*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida
5:3).***

This woman is not at all guilty of the crime.”

Then Imam (a.s.) ordered for her release and she was released.[^3]

Reasonable Precautions
----------------------

Adultery is the root of degradation of society in the world and eternal
punishment in the hereafter. Islam has therefore prescribed some
obligatory rules for our protection. Allah (S.w.T.), in His unsurpassed
wisdom made these rules incumbent upon us. If these rules are obeyed,
the Muslims can protect themselves from such a serious sin.

### 1. The Order for Hijab in the Qur’an

The Holy Qur’an has ordered women to cover themselves in some
situations.

***“And say to the believing women that they cast down their looks and
guard their private parts and do not display their ornaments except what
appear thereof. And let them wear their head coverings over their
bosoms, and not display their ornaments...”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr
24:31)***

It is also mentioned in Surah al-Ahzāb,

***“O Prophet! Say to your wives and daughters and the women of the
believers that they let down upon them their over garments, this will be
more proper, that they may be known and thus they will not give trouble.
And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** ***(Surah al-Ahzāb 49:59)***

In the same chapter, Allah (S.w.T.) says:

***“O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other of the women, if
you will be on your guard, then be not soft in (your) speech, lest he
whose heart has a disease yearn and speak a good word.”*** ***(Surah
al-Ahzāb 49:32)***

Another verse states,

***“And when you ask them (the wives of the Prophet) any goods, ask of
them from behind a curtain, this is purer for your hearts and (for)
their hearts.”*** ***(Surah al-Ahzāb 49:53)***

In the above verses, the Muslim woman is ordered to veil herself. She
must not come before non-mahram without Hijab. She should dress in such
a manner that strange men do not get an opportunity to glance at those
parts of her body which arouse passion; and thus make her an object of
desire. It is the responsibility of a woman to assume such poise and
behaviour that she does not excite a man’s passions. Even a glance of
lust can infatuate a man and a seemingly harmless encounter eventually
lead to mischief and corruption in society, destroying entire families.

In Iran, during the rule of the Shah when the law of Hijab had been
revoked, the cases of fornication increased sharply. Every day many
cases related to sexual crimes were heard in the courts of law. Every
month many married mothers used to forsake their homes to enter into a
perverse life of illicit sex. Five thousand such parents established a
new township outside the city of Tehran. The condition steadily
deteriorated and came to a stage that every day approximately seven
infants were found abandoned in the streets of Tehran, as reported by
the commissioner.

It is obvious that illicit children born as a result of fornication,
whose parentage is not established, cannot create a position for
themselves and are a burden to society. Due to the absence of Hijab,
adultery and fornication became common and thousands of chaste women
become immoral. One of the highly effective ways of protecting the
society from the sin of adultery is that women wear hijab and ward off
the evil glances of sensuous men.

### 2. Looking at the Non-mahram

The women are also ordered not to look at non-mahram men, and the men
are similarly warned.

It is ordered in Surah an-Nūr,

***“Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them; surely Allah is aware of
what they do.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr 24:30)***

The Poisonous Arrow of Satan
----------------------------

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.):

“An evil glance is one of the poisonous arrows of Satan. Many of such
glances becomes a cause of prolonged jealousy.”[^4]

Fornication of Organs
---------------------

Both Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) have
informed,

“There is no man who is not to some extent guilty of fornication. The
fornication of the eyes is the evil glance, the kiss is the fornication
of lips and touching a non-mahram woman is the fornication of
hands.”[^5]

It is also recorded that,

“Those who look at a non-mahram woman with an evil intention and fill
their eyes with this sight (that is they look for a long time) Allah
will, on the day of Qiyāma fill (pierce) their eyes with burning rods.
They will continue in this way till Allah completes the hearing of the
cases of all the people. Only after that will He order them to be thrown
into Hell.”[^6]

In the Chains of Fire with Iblīs
--------------------------------

That person who embraces a non-mahram woman will be tied with chains,
together with Iblīs on the day of Qiyāma. These chains shall be of fire
and both of them shall be tossed into Hell together. The following are
also the words of the tradition:

“One who glances at a woman, but instantly looks away at the sky or
turns his gaze down; before he could remove his gaze fully, Allah
marries him to a black-eyed houri and he creates such a freshness of
belief in his heart that he is extremely delighted.”[^7]

It is reported from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said;

“The wrath of Allah is very severe upon the married woman who apart from
her husband sees another non-mahram man with a prolonged glance. When
this woman does this, Allah the mighty invalidates all her good deeds
and does not give her any rewards.”[^8]

A few traditions mention that looking at a woman in hijab is also not
allowed. Although it is a generally considered a makrūh act. Although
there are numerous traditions that denounce glancing at non-mahrams
these shall suffice for our purpose.

Alone in the Company of Non-mahram
----------------------------------

It is Harām for a stranger or non-mahram man to remain alone in company
of a non-mahram woman when there is a risk of committing a sin, even
though they may be busy in worship. In the same way women are ordered
not to stay in company of non-mahram men when there is a chance of
sinful act.

The Holy Prophet ( s.a.w.s.) says:

“One who believes in Allah and the Day of Judgement does not remain in a
place where (even) the sound of breathing of the non-mahram women is
perceived.”

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Prophet (a.s.) took allegiance from the women he told them to
take an oath that they shall not sit alone in company of non-mahram
men.[^9]

A lonely place means the one where there is no chance of anyone else
entering or coming. Like a room, the door of which is locked from
inside. Or a place not frequented by people.

Islam has prescribed severe penalty for a serious offence like adultery.
Some of the aspects are given in the points mentioned below.

1) If a person commits an incestuous fornication he is to be killed
according to Islamic laws.

2) If one sees that a stranger is fornicating with his wife, then he can
kill both of them if he considers himself safe in doing so. But if he
does not feel safe or if he does not wish to kill them, then apparently
his wife is not prohibited for him.

3) If a Kafir commits adultery with a Muslim woman, he is to be killed
according to Shari’a. Similarly, if a Muslim is punished thrice for
fornication and is again proved guilty for the fourth time, he is to be
executed.

4) If the person is sane, major, and legally married, and has a wife
with whom he could establish sexual relation whenever he wants, and
inspite of this he commits fornication with another sane, mature woman,
he has to be stoned to death according to the Islamic law. And according
to some Mujtahids, he must first be given a hundred lashes.

5) If a man does not fulfill the conditions listed in the above point,
and if he commits fornication with a woman then his penalty according to
Islamic law is a hundred lashes. Similarly, the married woman who
willingly commits fornication should be stoned to death. If she is
unmarried, then the penalty for her is a hundred lashes.

***“As for the fornicatress and the fornicators, flog each other of
them, (giving) a hundred lashes, and let not pity for them detain you in
the matter of obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the Last
Day, and let a party of believers witness this chastisement.”***
(***Surah an-Nūr 24:2)***

After quoting the above ayat, the Journal of Anjuman al-Tablighat
al-Islam writes:

Two points are derived from this. The first is that the punishment of
the adulterer is carried out in the presence of other people. This will
be a warning and a lesson to them. They will be terrified of committing
the same sin after witnessing the horror of the punishment.

Another point, although its truth is not established, is that the
punishment acts as a cure for the diseases of the sinner. It could be
that due to the hundred lashes, the bodies of the sinners are so much
heated that the germs that have entered their bodies are annihilated
before they could multiply and spread.

One more point to be noted is that the germs of disease like syphilis
etc. are not confined only to those who commit fornication. The spouse
of the fornicator may also contract these diseases. Marriage with an
adulterer is therefore detestable and is discouraged. If an adulterer
man marries an adulteress woman, an innocent person is not victimised,
but their deeds will definitely affect their progeny adversely. Their
future generations will be contaminated with the evil of their sin and
there will be some deformity or the other in their progeny. It is for
this very fact that the religion of Islam says;

***“The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or idolatress,
and (as for) the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or
an idolater; and it is forbidden to the believer.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr
24:3)***

When Adultery is Proved According to Shari’a
--------------------------------------------

It must be clarified that the penalty for adultery could be imposed when
the sin is proved from the viewpoint of Shari’a. As it has been stated
earlier, adultery is only proved if the conditions necessary for it are
fulfilled. One of the conditions is that all the four just witnesses
should testify unanimously as to the time and place of the crime. They
must also know the woman by sight. Otherwise, there arises the
possibility that the person who performed the sexual act with the woman
may have been her husband.

### Two Important Points

1) If a person commits adultery with an unmarried woman or the woman who
is not in the *Iddah ar-raj’aia* (the waiting period after divorce in
which the husband can resume relation with her without another nikah),
he can later marry her. But if she is married or in *Iddah ar-raj’aia*,
and he has had a sexual intercourse with her, he can never ever marry
her legally. She is Harām for this man forever. Even if the husband dies
or divorces, she cannot legally marry the person who has committed
adultery with her when she was married with another man.

2) If a man commits fornication with a woman, then her mother and
daughter become Harām for this man. That is, he can never ever marry
them but they are not counted among his mahram women. Similarly, the
father of the man with whom a woman has committed adultery becomes Harām
for her. There are minor differences of opinion among the Mujtahids in
these problems. Any one who wishes to study further should refer to the
knowledgeable jurists.

The opponents of Islam take objection to the law of Islam and support
the sexual ethics of the West. They praise the sexual freedom of these
countries and say that the Europeans and Americans are not hypocrites
and express whatever feelings they have, freely and openly. They say
that sexual desire is the legitimate desire of all human beings. If this
desire is suppressed, it shall have a damaging effect upon man. These
desires should therefore be satisfied so that man can rid himself of
various limitations and inhibitions. He can then perform his day to day
activities efficiently to achieve progress and development.

These words express the misguided thoughts of the enemies of Islam. They
have forgotten the Second World War when France had surrendered to
Germany in the very first attack. The German forces freely indulged in
the satisfaction of their carnal passions. Even the French people began
to pray for peace.

Freedom must also have a limit and must be disciplined. If the sexual
drive is uncontrolled, man behaves worse than an animal. The defeat of
France was also to an extent due to the promiscuous way of life
prevalent in France. It is written in the book “Khun France Shikast
Khund” (When France was defeated):

“When the German planes started to bomb the French cities, the Prime
Minister ‘Patrino’ tried to contact the Central Headquarter of the air
force so that additional bombers could be summoned for defence. He
continously tried to phone the Central Headquarters, and each time he
dialed the number of the Major on duty, each time the phone was attended
by the beloved of the Major, Madam Dolly. Madam Dolly answered the phone
and spoke foolishly to the Prime Minister in a demure way whereas there
was bloodshed all around, and France was being converted into a sort of
Hell”

As far as America is concerned, 38 % of the middle school female
students become pregnant. As these girls reach high school, colleges and
universities, the incidence of unwanted pregnancies reduce. These girls
use their past experiences to avoid getting pregnant. American society
is plagued with this evil, but its laws are unable to cope with the
situation.

There is no doubt that the sexual urge is a natural instinct, but it
must be controlled and disciplined.

Islam does not expect the sexual urge to be suppressed, nor does it
order anyone to forsake productive activities. On the contrary, Islam is
against celibacy. However, Islam, as any other decent society, cannot
allow for absolute freedom as seen in the animal kingdom. What Islam
does is to lay down the golden rules for the satisfaction and
fulfillment of natural desires and instincts such that neither the
personal freedom of man is endangered nor is the peace of society
disrupted.

There is no doubt that the West is far ahead in the field of science and
technology and has progressed and prospered as a result of it. But their
success is hollow. The excessive affluence has eroded human values and
deluded them to search for happiness in immorality and perversity. Their
culture deprives them of true happiness and comfort that comes with
peace and stability of mind.

The women of these countries have also taken great strides. They work
shoulder to shoulder with men in practically all walks of life. But many
of them fail in what is their primary duty, as loyal wives and caring
mothers. It is quite common to come across women having extra marital
relations and neglecting their home and children. These children
deprived of parental love and care in turn search for happiness by
following the degraded examples set by their misguided parents and the
vicious circle continues. The result is that couples just live together
without being married and go their own way when they choose to. If there
are marriages, they often end in divorce.

The divorce rate in America today is 40 % and is on the increase. Women
have come to occupy high positions in governmental and commercial
organizations, but this does not solve the human problems facing these
societies. It is a pity that these societies have no guidelines that
will help them to realize that their well being lies in maintaining
well-knit families where husband and wife care for each other, are loyal
to each other and the children are secure and happy.

This is what Islam aims to achieve for its followers. By upholding the
laws of Islam our lives are automatically canalized into maintaining a
healthy family life which provides for physical satisfaction, mental
peace and spiritual upliftment, where the family members are a source of
strength, solace and comfort to each other.[^10]

[^1]: Balahae al-Ijtemai

[^2]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^3]: Burhan al-Qur’an

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^5]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^6]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^8]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^9]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^10]: Adapted from Burhan al-Qur’an


