Twelfth Greater Sin: Qažaf
==========================

The twelfth Greater Sin is Qažaf. Qažaf means to wrongfully accuse a
chaste Muslim man or chaste Muslim woman of adultery or homosexuality.
We have the authority of our Holy Prophet (S), Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.), Imam Musa al-Kadhim, Imam ‘Ali ar-Riďa (a.s.) and Imam Muhammad
al-Taqi (a.s.) that qazaf is a Greater sin. The Holy Qur’an also speaks
of the punishment for this sin.

***“Surely those who accuse chaste believing women, unaware (of the
evils), are cursed in the world and the hereafter and they shall have a
grievous chastisement. On the day when their tongue and their hands and
their feet shall bear witness against them as to what they did.”***
***(Surah an-Nūr 24:23-24)***

The above verses clarify that those who falsely accuse chaste men or
women of adultery are cursed by Allah (S.w.T.) as long as they are
alive, and in the hereafter they shall be deprived of His Divine Mercy.
We should maintain our distance from such people on whom the wrath of
Allah (S.w.T.) has descended and be very careful not to believe their
false accusations. False accusers have to be penalised in this world
according to the Islamic law. Once their testimony is proved false, they
can never ever testify in a court of Islamic law.

Organs of the Inhabitant of Hell
--------------------------------

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) has said,

“The organs and the parts of the body of a true believer shall not
testify against him. But they will testify against the one who, after
all, has to burn in Hell.”[^1]

The person who accuses anyone falsely of adultery and sodomy belongs to
this category. Because his punishment is Hell-fire, his organs,
according to the Holy Qur’an shall testify against him.

Penalty for Qažaf : Rejection of Testimony and its Invalidation
---------------------------------------------------------------

It is also mentioned in Surah an-Nūr:

***“And those who accuse free women then do not bring four witnesses,
flog them, (giving eighty lashes), and do not admit any evidence from
them ever, and these it is that are the transgressors.”*** ***(Surah
an-Nūr 24:4)***

Three commands are issued in this ayat regarding one who commits qazaf.
The first is that he has to be punished with the Islamic penalty imposed
upon him. The second is that his evidence is never ever to be accepted
and the third is that such a person must always be considered as
unreliable and a transgressor.

Islamic society which is geared to promote the dignity and welfare of
its members cannot allow a false accuser to go unpunished. This
falsehood dishonours an upright person, and a society which cannot
uphold the honour of its members, cannot possibly give them peace and
security.[^2]

The book ‘Islam and World Peace’ mentions that in order to curb
frivolous propaganda, a slanderer who cannot furnish four witnesses, is
given lashes. If Three witnesses testify and the fourth witness is not
available then the former Three are also punished with eighty lashes
each. However, if a husband accuses his wife of adultery but cannot
support his accusation with witnesses, he cannot be lashed. This is to
avoid domestic upheavals. In this case the husband is made to repeat
four times by calling Allah (S.w.T.) as a witness that his wife has
committed adultery. And the fifth time he has to say that if he is
lying, the curse of Allah (S.w.T.) be upon him. His wife is also given a
similar right that she can say four times, calling Allah (S.w.T.) as a
witness that her husband is lying. And the fifth time she has to say
that if her husband is telling the truth, then the curse and the wrath
of Allah (S.w.T.) may be upon her. She can escape punishment in this
way. This law is derived from the sixth and the seventh ayat of Surah
an-Nūr.

Whether it is true or false it must be known that it is Harām to accuse
anyone of adultery or homosexuality till he sees with his own eyes the
penetration of the sexual organ. Even after being the eye witness of
this he must not testify before a Qazi till Three other just witnesses
testify (he must himself be just (adil) too). As stated earlier, if the
witnesses are less than four, their testimony is rejected. In this case,
the witnesses are considered as transgressors instead of the alleged
sodomist and the fornicator, and penalised with eighty lashes each.

Those Who Commits Qažaf are not Believers
-----------------------------------------

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) has informed;

“One who commits qazaf is removed from the ranks of the believers of
Allah and considered as a transgressor. Transgressor is also the
opposite of believer as Allah himself says,

***‘Is he then who is the believer like him who is the
transgressor?’”*** ***(Surah as-Sajda 32:18)***

The Holy Prophet (S) has been reported to have said,

“The person who accuses falsely a chaste man or a chaste woman of
indecency, Allah invalidates all his good deeds (and does not give him
any reward) and on the Day of Judgement seventy thousand angels lash him
from the front and behind and continue to do so till the order is passed
for him to be put in Hell.”

Penalty for Qažaf
-----------------

***“And those who accuse free women then do not bring four witnesses,
flog them, (giving) eighty lashes, and do not admit evidence from them
ever.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr 24:4)***

The above verse, numerous traditions and the rules promulgated by the
Mujtahids indicate that every one of the false accusers of sodomy and
fornication must be lashed eighty times (provided four just witnesses
are not available simultaneously). However, the following conditions
should be noted.

1) The sinner must be major and sane. A minor child or an insane person
cannot be punished for false accusations. Also, the major and the sane
person should have made the allegation after careful consideration and
not under compulsion. No penalty can be imposed on an accuser if he has
made a genuine mistake or if he has made the accusation in jest.

2) One who has been accused of adultery or sodomy must possess five
characteristics. First of all, he must be a major. Secondly, he must be
sane and not a madman. Thirdly, he must be free and not a slave.
Fourthly, he must be a Muslim and not a Kafir. Lastly, he must
apparently be chaste. A person who strongly objects to being blamed of
adultery and fornication or is shocked and dismayed by such an
accusation is taken to be a chaste person. So if the accused does not
fulfill the above conditions or is notorious for being corrupt and
indecent, the accuser is not penalised for qazaf.

3) The accusation should clearly mention adultery or sodomy. If an
accuser is vague in his allegations and merely hints at adultery or
sodomy or addresses the accused as ‘adulterer’ or ‘sodomist’, then he
can be exempted from punishment. But in this case, the accused has a
right to demand action against the accuser.

Sometimes, the allegation is against someone other than the one who is
addressed. For example, One says, “Your father was an adulterer! Your
father was a sodomist!” In such a situation, it is the right of the
father, of the one who is addressed to insist upon the penalty. The son
is not directly accused but insulted in the process. Consequently, he
cannot demand the sentence of qazaf against the accuser but must insist
upon a lighter penalty like reprimanding or beating so that the sin is
not repeated.

In the same way, if someone says “bastard” or “adulterously born!’ etc.,
the right of having the punishment decreed rests upon the one who is
actually accused. The person who is addressed can only claim a reduced
penalty.

Expiation of the Sin on the Day of Judgement
--------------------------------------------

A woman presented herself before the Holy Prophet (S) and said, “O,
Messenger of Allah, I called my maid adulteress.”

The Prophet (S) said,

“Have you ever seen her committing adultery?”

“No,” she replied.

The Holy Prophet (S) told her,

“Know that ! On the day of Qiyāma, some of your good deeds will be
transferred to this maid and it would be the expiation.

This woman returned and handed a whip to her maid and said, “lash me”
but the maid refused, so she freed her. Again, she returned to the
Prophet (S) and related the incident. The Holy Prophet (S) remarked,

“May be this action of yours will act as the expiation of your utterance
and you may not suffer it’s consequences in the hereafter.”[^3]

Repenting for Qažaf
-------------------

One who accuses a Muslim of adultery or sodomy should know that qazaf or
false accusation is a sin that trespasses upon the right of man as well
as the right of Allah (S.w.T.). As far as the human rights are
concerned, the one who is falsely accused can take the accuser to the
Qazi. If qazaf is proved by the confession of the accuser or by the
testimony of two just witnesses who testify having heard the accuser
making the false allegation, the legal sentence is executed. It is Wajib
for the person who has committed qazaf to submit himself to the accused
for trial.

However, he can request the one he has falsely accused to forgive him
and must try his best to do so. If he is condoned, he escapes
punishment. But if he is not forgiven and nor is the sentence carried
out, and the falsely accused dies, the right of having the penalty
executed is transferred to the legal heirs of the falsely accused. Now
it is Wajib upon the one guilty of qazaf either to surrender himself to
the heirs so that he may be taken to a Qazi or he could ask for their
forgiveness. If the heirs of the deceased forgive, he is saved from
punishment.

Samā says: “I asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the person who
commits qazaf but is forgiven by the one whom he accused falsely. If
later, this person regrets having forgiven and wishes that the accuser
be punished, can the punishment for qazaf be executed now?”

Imam (a.s.) replied;

“No penalty can be imposed upon him after being respited.”

Samā further enquired,

“What if the man says, “O son of a fornicatress.” And the one who is
falsely accused condones him but leaves the matter to Allah?” Imam
(a.s.) replied;

“If his mother is alive, the son does not have the right of forgiving
the accuser. His mother has the right to forgive. She can exercise her
right whenever she wants. If his mother has died, only then does he have
the right to forgive.”[^4]

It is Wajib upon the accuser, that after he has received the penalty or
after he has been condoned by the one whom he falsely accused that he
must publicly announce that whatever he has uttered is absolutely false.
For example, he should say, “I had accused this person of fornication.
It was a false accusation.” His announcement should be to the extent
that those who have heard the false accusation must hear his confession
too.

In an authentic report Ibn Sinan asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), “If
a person makes a false allegation and undergoes the Islamic punishment
and also repents. Can his evidence be accepted in future?” Imam replied,

“If he repents and his repentance consist of taking back the words he
has uttered and confesses before the Imam (a.s.) and the Muslims to have
uttered a lie... Then it is incumbent upon the Imam to accept his
evidence and consider him just.”

The book al-Kāfi and Al-Tahzīb contain other reports concerning the same
issue. If the accuser has made a false accusation, it is obvious that to
falsify his accusation is a must. But there may be a situation where the
accuser has really witnessed the act of adultery and sodomy but the
crime is not proved due to lack of four witnesses and as a result he
becomes liable for penalty. In this case too, he has to falsify his
statement.

Since adultery or sodomy could not be established according to the
stipulation laid down by Islam, from the point of view of Shari’a, his
accusation is false. So although he had witnessed the crime, it is
appropriate on his part to falsify his statement. This he should do with
the clear intention that he is submitting to the laws of Islam.

This is in consonance with the following verse:

***“Why did they not bring the four witnesses of it? But as they have
not brought they are liars before Allah.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr 24:13)***

The Shaykh writes in the book ‘Nihaya’ that a person who is guilty of
qazaf should repent by publicly announcing that the accusation he had
made is untrue, and that he had uttered a lie. He should do this at the
same place where he had made the accusation. In this way all those who
had heard a Muslim being denounced will now be aware of its falsehood
and there will be no misunderstanding in their minds about his good
character.

A person guilty of qazaf transgresses Allah (S.w.T.)’s right by
disobeying a Divine command. Allah (S.w.T.) has strictly prohibited
qazaf and a person guilty of it is deserving of the punishment of the
hereafter. But if the offender repents sincerely and reforms himself,
Allah (S.w.T.) is most Forgiving and most Merciful.

***“Except those who repent after this and act aright, for surely Allah
is Forgiving and Merciful.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr 24:5)***

Sincere repentance reforms a person. He will either make peace with the
person whom he had earlier maligned, or he will confess his guilt and
falsify his accusation before a Qazi. After this he is no longer a
transgressor or a liar according to Shari’a. He is now an adil (just
man) whose evidence is acceptable. Beyond this, the experience of being
guilty of qazaf and repenting sincerely by going through the humiliation
of acknowledging it in public, brings about a deep-rooted transformation
in the person’s character. He is now inclined toward virtue and piety
and strives for spiritual upliftment.

The Shaykh says in the book “Mabsut”: “After repentance, only good deeds
should be seen in that man.”

One who hears the accuser is obliged to advise him to refrain from
slandering and even to reprimand him.

Qažaf and the Responsibility of Other Muslims
---------------------------------------------

According to the philosophy of Islam, if a Muslim hears of another
Muslim being accused of adultery or sodomy he should not pay heed to it.
It is Harām for him to believe it. It is also Harām to repeat this
slander to others. Till four just witnesses testify before the qazi and
the qazi issues his decree, it is Harām to associate any one with these
sins. Even if one has witnessed the crime with his own eyes or believes
the accuser, one should not spread the slander. Such an action would
cause the accused person to lose his honour and dignity in people’s
estimation. This is totally unacceptable in Islam.

Till four just witnesses have not testified, the accuser should be
regarded as a liar and a transgressor, and it is Wajib upon the person
who hears him to consider him so, even if what he says is true. It
should be said to the accuser, “This is a great allegation. We do not
accept that the statement is correct according to Shari’a.”

***“Surely they who concocted the lie are the party from among you. Do
not regard it as an evil to you, nay, it is good for you. Every man of
them shall have what he has earned of sin and (as for) him who took upon
him the main part thereof he shall have a grievous chastisement.***

***Why did not the believing men and the believing women, when they
heard it, think well of their own people and say: this is an evident
falsehood?***

***Why did they not bring four witnesses of it? But as they have not
brought witnesses they are liars before Allah.***

***And were it not for Allah’s Grace upon you and His Mercy in this
world and the hereafter, a grievous chastisement would certainly have
touched you on account of the discourse which you entered into.***

***When you received it with your tongues and spoke with your mouths
what you had no knowledge of, you deemed it an easy matter while with
Allah it was grievous.***

***And why did you not, when you heard it say: ‘It does not beseem us
that we should talk off it, glory be to Thee ! This is a great
calumny?’***

***Allah admonishes you that you should not return to the like of it
ever again if you are believers.***

***And Allah makes clear to you the communications, and Allah is knowing
and wise.***

***Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter and Allah knows while you do not know.***
***(Surah an-Nūr 24:11-19)***

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) explains,

“One who speaks wrongly about the believer and says something which he
has neither seen nor heard himself is from those who have been mentioned
in the verse:

***“Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe they shall have the grievous chastisement
in this world and the hereafter and Allah knows while you do not
know.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr 24:19)***

In conclusion, it is Harām to accuse anyone of fornication and sodomy
without having seen the act with one’s own eyes. Even after seeing it,
it is Harām to speak of it till four just witnesses testify having seen
it.

But, if a husband accuses his wife wrongly of adultery, four witnesses
are not required. It is sufficient for the husband to say before the
qazi in the prescribed manner, “I am the liar, may the curse of Allah
(S.w.T.) be upon me.” And his accusation is admitted. This order is
known as *“laī”* in Islamic terminology. And the accuser must fulfill
the conditions as mentioned earlier in which case two just witnesses
could testify that he has committed a calumny. As a result of this he is
liable for penalty (eighty lashes). But these lashes would be lighter
than those which are prescribed for the adulterer and the alcoholic.
Also, the slanderer will not be lashed on a naked back like an adulterer
and the alcoholic. He would be allowed to wear his shirt during lashing.

If Conditions for Qažaf are Absent
----------------------------------

Even if the necessary conditions are not present in the accused it is
still Harām to associate him with adultery or sodomy. In this case the
slanderer is reprimanded. However if some one calls a Muslim ‘bastard’
it does not imply that he is born of adultery. It could also imply that
he was conceived when his mother was having a menstrual discharge. In
such a condition it is Harām for his father to perform the sexual act
and the child conceived during this time is also a child of sin. In the
same way if someone calls another, indecent or ‘evil doer’, the
accusation of adultery and sodomy is not proved. However he could be
punished lightly or reprimanded for insulting a person.

Similarly if a Muslim accuses falsely a Kafir of adultery or sodomy, the
penalty of qazaf does not apply. Yet it is Harām to associate even a
Kafir with adultery and sodomy. It is not permissible to make such a
statement in unequivocal words or to allude to it. But if it is
established that he has committed adultery even from the point of view
of his own faith, then it is allowed to associate him with it.

The Association of the Kuffar With Adultery
-------------------------------------------

Umrū bin Noman Juhfi says that there was a friend of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.). He always remained with the Imam (a.s.) wherever he
went. He had a slave who was from Sind. One day, the person was passing
through the market of shoe-makers with Imam (a.s.) while his slave
walked behind. The master wanted to send the slave on an errand, but
when he looked back the slave had disappeared. He looked back Three
times but could not see the slave. After some time, when he looked for
the fourth time, he saw the slave. He was angry with him and said, “O’
son of the adulteress! Where were you?”

The narrator says that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) slapped his forehead
and said,

“Glory be to Allah! You are accusing his mother of adultery. And I was
seeing some piety in you, but now I find that there is no sign of piety
or religiousness left.”

The companion protested,”May I be sacrificed upon you, his mother is an
inhabitant of Sind (India) and she is a Mushrik (polytheist).” Imam
(a.s.) replied,

“Don’t you know that all people have their own type of marriage? Be away
from me!”

The narrator says, “In the Imam’s life-time, I never saw him walking
with Imam (a.s.), again.”

Another tradition states,

“All the people have their kind of marriage due to which they protect
themselves from adultery.”[^5]

Abul Hasan al Hazzae says that he was in the company of Imam (a.s.) when
a person came and asked him, “What did your debtors do?” I responded,
“Are you asking about the son of that adulteress woman?” Upon hearing
this Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) glared at me in anger. I said, “May I
be sacrificed upon you. He is a Majūs (fire worshipper) and his mother
is also his sister (means that his father had married his daughter).
Imam (a.s.) asked,

“Is not this type of marriage permitted in their religion?”

Abusive Language is Harām
-------------------------

Apart from grave accusations like adultery or sodomy it is also Harām to
use abusive language for a Muslim who does not openly indulge in evil
acts. It is not allowed to abuse him with words like Transgressor! Dog!
Drunkard! Pig! Even calling out to someone with such words is Harām.
Similarly, it is Harām to address someone by associating him with some
disease or handicap like Blind! Lame! Deaf!

According to Shari’a a person who uses abusive language should be given
a light punishment or reprimanded.

The book Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il has a tradition from Imam ‘Ali (a.s.)
wherein he said,

“If a person calls another Sinner, Indecent, Kafir, Munafiq or Donkey,
he must be given thirty nine lashes.”

There is no difference if such words are used for relatives or
strangers, against a student or a servant. Any bad words which mention
the private parts or the indecent act are Harām whether addressed to one
who is an open sinner or not or whether he gets offended or not.

Traditions that Denounce Abusive Language
-----------------------------------------

Numerous traditions have been recorded which censure bad words and
abusive language.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“Abusive language is an atrocity and atrocity earns Hell.”[^6]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said,

“There are four people, the intensity of whose chastisement will also
annoy the other people of Hell.”

“There would be a man who had blissfully used abusive and foul language
in the world. In Hell, puss and blood shall flow from his mouth.”

Other reports on this subject have already been mentioned in our
discussion.

Replying to the Abuse
---------------------

It must be understood that as it is Harām to initiate abusive language
it is also Harām to abuse in reply to it. This strictly applies to words
that denote, Qažaf (accuse of adultery or sodomy). But for abuses like
‘ignorant’, idiot tyrant, it is permissible to reciprocate with the same
words.[^7]

The Holy Qur’an also allows this, in the following ayat

***“... Whoever then acts aggressively against you, inflict injury on
him according to the injury he has inflicted on you...”*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:194)***

***“And whoever defends himself after his being oppressed these it is
against whom there is no way (to blame).”*** ***(Surah ash-Shūrā
42:41)***

***“And if you take your turn, then retaliate with the like of that with
which you are afflicted.”*** ***(Surah an-Nahl 16:126)***

If no Excess is Committed
-------------------------

Imam Musa al-Kadhim says regarding two people who have abused each
other,

“From the two of them, the one who initiated it, is more unjust, his sin
includes the sin of abusing as well as the sin of the one who had cursed
him in reply. But the oppressed one should not exceed the limit.”

It means that a person who is abused should retaliate only with words
that equal the abuses. He should not use a more abusive language
otherwise his sin will be equal to the sin of the one who initiated.

For example if one calls another ‘you donkey’ and he replies with ‘you
dog’ then this would be exceeding the limits. Or if one says ‘you
donkey’ only once and the other person responds by repeating the same
word twice or more, it would constitute an excess. If a person who has
uttered a bad word, seeks forgiveness immediately before he is replied
to, he must be condoned. In this case it is not allowed to reply even
with the same words.

Silence is better
-----------------

It must be emphasized that although it is permitted to retaliate in
equal measure, it is best to remain silent.

The Holy Qur’an says;

***“And the recompense to evil is punishment like it, but whoever
forgives and amends, he shall have his reward from Allah, surely He does
not love the unjust.”*** ***(Surah Ash-Shūrā 42:40)***

Allah (S.w.T.) also says:

***“And it is nearer to righteousness that you should relinquish.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:237)***

One Who Utters Abuses Will Himself be Humiliated
------------------------------------------------

Jabir ibn Abdullah Ansari relates that ‘Ali (a.s.) saw that a man was
abusing Hazrat Qambar and Qambar was about to reply to him. ‘Ali (a.s.)
called him:

“Qambar, stop! Humiliate the one who curses you by remaining silent. In
this way the Beneficent will be satisfied with you and the shaitan
angry. And you will be able to hurt your foe. You will please that Allah
who splits the seed and cause pleasant winds to blow. No one can please
Allah more with his forbearance, similarly nothing makes Shaitan more
angry than silence in return of abuse. The revenge taken from an idiot
(ignorant) person in this way is not possible in any other way.”[^8]

If a person who is abused responds with kind and gentle words like, ‘Do
not abuse your brother’, he occupies a very high position with Allah
(S.w.T.).

The Holy Qur’an says;

***“And not alike are the good and the evil. Repel (evil) with what is
best. When lo! he between whom and you is enmity would be as if he were
a warm friend. And none are made to receive it but those who are
patient, and none are made to receive it but those who have mighty good
fortune.”*** ***(Surah Hamim 41:34-35)***

The following incident is quoted in the book ‘Kashful Ghumma’:

A Syrian came to Madinah. He saw a handsome man astride a good camel.
Upon enquiry he learnt that it was Imam Hasan ibn ‘Ali (a.s.).

This man from Syria stepped forward in anger and said;”Are you the son
of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib?”

“Yes, I am the son of ‘Ali.”

He said, “You are the son of a person who was a mushrik (polytheist)”.
And he continued his foul utterances till he got tired of it. Imam Hasan
(a.s.) remained silent. At last the man felt ashamed. The Imam (a.s.)
seeing his remorse said;

“You look like a traveller, are you from Syria?”

“Yes sir”, he replied.

Imam Hasan (a.s.) said,

“If you need a place to stay, we shall provide it. If you need money we
would give it you. If you have any other problem, we shall help you.”

Not only was the Syrian ashamed but was also rendered speechless by such
excellent behaviour.

The following are his words:

“After I had the good fortune of enjoying the hospitality of Imam Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali (a.s.), I found his personality more likeable than that of any
other person in the world.”

Imam Hasan (a.s.) had offered the same type of hospitality to Asam bin
Mutlaq the Syrian, and he too became his devotee.

[^1]: al-Kāfi

[^2]: Condensed from Burhan al-Qur’an

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^5]: al-Kāfi

[^6]: al-Kāfi

[^7]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^8]: Safinat’ul-Bihār


