A Short Biography of Ayatullah Dastaghaib Shirazi
=================================================

Martyr Ayatullah Abul-Husayn Dastghaib Shirazi was a nobleman from a
highly religious family that was known for its intellectual heritage
going back to 800 years. Due to religious and spiritual atmosphere,
resulting from such a sound Islamic background he had a natural and
spontaneous tendency towards acquiring knowledge. After obtaining
elmentary education in his hometown, he moved towards Najaf al-Ashraf
(Iraq) in pursuit of higher knowledge.

In the town of the abode of the Chief of the believers, ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), he continued his studies associating with the various
scholars and teachers. Soon his knowledge reached a stage such that, he
was granted permission by the Maraja of that time to practise Ijtehad.
He then returned to his native town of Shiraz.

In Shiraz he spent thousands of tumans for the construction of the Jame
Masjid Ateq which was in a highly dilapidated condition. There, he began
to lecture on the exegesis of the Qur’an and ethics. His persistent
efforts raised the standard of education of the Hauz al-Ilmia of Shiraz
in the various fields of Fiqh, Beliefs and Moral science. The
irreligious and tyrannical Shah imposed restrictions upon him and he was
arrested many times. He was also put under house arrest by the
autocratic ruler. After the success of the Islamic revolution, he was
elected a representative at the Majlis (Iranian Parliament).

At the instance of the people of Shiraz he was designated as the
representative of Imam Khomeini. The post of Imam of Jame Masjid of
Shiraz was also bestowed upon him.

Martyr Dastghaib has left behind innumerable works. The most remarkable
of these are: Gunahāne Kabīra (Greater Sins), Qalb al-Salīm, Salatal
Khashaīn, Ma’ad, at-Tawba, Zindagani al-Hazrat Zahra and Zainab
al-Kubra.

Apart from these he has penned dozens of books on the improvement of
morals, Fiqh and the exegesis of Qur’an. Hence, he was an excellent
model of spirituality with a lofty character and a loving nature.

On that fateful day (in the year 1984) as he was proceeding to lead the
Friday congregation, he was brutally killed in a bomb explosion by the
hypocrites (the Capitalist agents).


