First Greater Sin: Shirk (Polytheism)
=====================================

Shirk (Polytheism: To associate anyone or anything with Allah (S.w.T.))
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The first of the Greater Sins is to associate anyone or anything with
Allah (S.w.T.). That is to attribute partners to Allah (S.w.T.).
Regarding Shirk we have received clear traditions from the Holy Prophet
(S) as well as Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.), Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), Imam
al-Kadhim (a.s.), Imam Riďa (a.s.) and Imam Jawad (a.s.).

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“The greatest of the Greater Sins is to attribute partners to
Allah.”[^1]

The following verse of the Holy Qur’an asserts:

***“Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated
with him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He pleases,
and whoever associates anything with Allah, he devises indeed a great
sin.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:48)***

It means that whoever dies as a polytheist, there is no chance of his
salvation. Although Allah (S.w.T.) may forgive any of those who have
committed any other sin. Allah (S.w.T.) says:

***“Surely whoever associates (others) with Allah, then Allah has
forbidden to him the garden, and his abode is the fire; and there shall
be no helpers for the unjust.”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:72)***

Also the Holy Qur’an states:

***“Do not associate aught with Allah; most surely polytheism is a
grievous inequity.”*** ***(Surah Luqmān 31:13).***

***“And whoever associates anything with Allah, he devises indeed a
great sin.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:48)***

Every Muslim knows fully well that Shirk is a Greater Sin. So it does
not seem necessary to quote the Qur’anic ayats and the traditions of
Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) in this regard. However, since it is important to
understand the true meaning of Shirk we shall quote the relevant
statements in order that people may keep aloof from this infamy. The
Holy Qur’an says,

***“And worship Allah and do not associate anything with Him.”***
***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:36)***

Mushrik (Polythiest) is the opposite of Muwahhid (Monotheist). Tawhid is
the primary pillar of faith. It has various aspects. In the same way
Shirk also consists of different types:

1) Tawhid and Shirk with regard to the Essence of Allah (S.w.T.)

2) Tawhid and Shirk with regard to the Attributes of Allah (S.w.T.)

3) Tawhid and Shirk in actions

4) Tawhid and Shirk in Obedience

5) Tawhid and Shirk in worship

May Allah (S.w.T.) provide us the Tawfīq to discuss these different
aspects in detail.

Tawhid in the Essence of Allah (S.w.T.)
---------------------------------------

Tawhid with regard to the Essence of Allah (S.w.T.) denotes confessing
that the Essence of the Lord of the worlds is one, and that He is
Eternal. He is the Orignator of every action and phenomenon, whether
perceptible through senses or not. There is no other cause except Him.
Belief in multiple causes is Shirk. The Zoroastrians believe in the
existence of two powerful forces in the Universe, both being equal and
eternal. One is good, the other, evil. The god of good is Yazdan and the
god of evil is Ahriman. The following ayat of the Holy Qur’an is a clear
refutation of this false hypothesis.

***“Say (O Muhammad): All is from Allah.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:78)***

The claim of the Dualists can be refuted with a simple statement that
there is no one except Allah (S.w.T.), who has been in existence since
eternity. Whatever was in past, present or future is nothing but good.
Or, at least we can say that good exceeds evil and that evil does not
hold sway over good.

However if we go on to explain all this in detail it would lead us away
from the topic of our discussion.

Christians Are Polytheists Too
------------------------------

The Christians believe in the trinity of the Godhead. The Father (God),
The Son (Jesus) and the Holy Ghost (Jibrīl). They believe that each of
them have a special quality and that together they constitute the
Godhead. The Qur’an flays their assertion thus:

***“Certainly they disbelieve who say, ‘Surely Allah is the third
(person) of Three’; and there is no god but One God.”*** ***(Surah
al-Mā’ida 5:73)***

The Holy Qur’an clearly states that Allah (S.w.T.) is not one-third of a
god. He is the One and only One God.

The belief in Trinity is not exclusive to the Christians. Hindus and
Buddhists also ascribe to it.

Idol Worship is Polytheism
--------------------------

Some people allege that there are separate gods for every phenomenon.
That is, god of wind, god of sea, etc. This is another form of
Polytheism. These people consider different creations to be the
handiwork of different gods. These idolaters and polytheists worship
multiple deities. Their polytheistic belief has also been denounced in
the Holy Qur’an:

***“Are sundry lords better or Allah, the One, the Supreme?”***
***(Surah Yūsuf 12:39)***

Tawhid in the Attributes of Allah (S.w.T.)
------------------------------------------

Tawhid with regards to the attributes of Allah (S.w.T.) means the
realization that the positive attributes of Allah (S.w.T.) and His
Essence have only one and the same sense, and not any multiple and
diverse sense. Divine attributes like Divine Eternity, Divine Knowledge
and Divine Power, are the same as his Essence without any duality
between His Essence and His attributes.

This concept must be clearly distinguished from the fact that Allah, the
Almighty and the Exalted has applied some of His names to His creatures,
and although the names are common to both the Creator and the created,
the connotation is quite different; For example Zaid[^2] has knowledge,
so the name “one who knows” is common to both the creator and the
created. But in Zaid’s case, it is implicit that this quality in a
limited measure was acquired by him (by Allah (S.w.T.)’s Grace) at a
certain stage prior to which he did not have it; and it is also possible
that he may also lose this quality at a later stage, but for Allah
(S.w.T.) this attribute signifies that He is the knower of all things,
past, present and future. He knows what is in the Heavens and the Earth
and not an atom weight, or less than that or greater escapes Him. His
knowledge is all encompassing. If we consider the Attributes of Allah
(S.w.T.) as being qualities independent of Allah (S.w.T.) as we know
them to be with His creatures, then we have committed Shirk. Accordingly
the belief of the Ashairas is absolutely false.

All the good qualities of the creatures are from the Creator (Allah (S.w.T.))
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

To consider all the good qualities of the created to be from Allah
(S.w.T.), the creator, is true Tawhid. It is our belief that all the
qualities possessed by the Prophets and the Imams (a.s.) were given to
them by Allah (S.w.T.)’s Grace. They did not come to acquire any of
these qualities on their own. Rather Allah (S.w.T.) bestowed upon them
superior knowledge, character, power and perfect morals and exalted
their position.

Consequently all that exists has not come into existence on its own. But
everything is dependent upon the Creator of the Universe. All the good
qualities have also been given to them by Allah (S.w.T.). If Allah
(S.w.T.) so desires, He increases their good qualities and gives them
sustenance.

Praising Ourselves Unknowingly
------------------------------

A discerning person realizes that our qualities are not our own and that
we are not capable of acquiring such qualities without Divine
assistance. Yet at times we mistakenly introduce our qualifications as,
“my knowledge, my strength, my intention, my wealth etc. Rather one
should say, my knowledge, which is bestowed upon me by Allah (S.w.T.),
my strength which is imparted to me by Allah (S.w.T.), my intention that
is assisted by Allah (S.w.T.), my wealth which is from Allah (S.w.T.).”
This constant realization that all which we have is because of Allah
(S.w.T.)’s Grace; is true Tawhid.

One can be a true believer in the Oneness of Allah (S.w.T.) if his words
and actions both are in consonance with each other. Such a person is
more humble and lowly when he addresses his Creator and is in constant
dread of the sin of thanklessness. Another distinguishing characteristic
of such a person is that he is never pleased when others praise him.

The Pious Ones Dread Praise
---------------------------

The Chief of the Believers, ‘Ali (a.s.) while describing the qualities
of the pious says, in one of his sermons:

“When any one of them is spoken of highly, he says: ‘I know myself
better than others, and my Lord knows me better than I know myself. O
Allah do not deal with me according to what they say, and make me better
than what they think of me and forgive me (those shortcomings) which
they do not know.’[^3]

There is no Partner in the Divine Attributes
--------------------------------------------

A true believer in Tawhid does not attribute any partners to Allah
(S.w.T.), nor does he praise anyone in the manner that Allah (S.w.T.) is
praised. Everyday he repeats, “SubhanAllah” [Glory be (only) to Allah].
This implies that he does not deem it fit to praise anyone or anything
except Allah (S.w.T.). When he says “Alhamdu lil-Lah” (Praise is only
for Allah (S.w.T.)), he implies that all praise is exclusive to Allah
(S.w.T.) only. No one is more deserving of praise and glorification but
the one and only Allah (S.w.T.).

Explanations
------------

When a person becomes a true Muwahhid (a believer in the Oneness of
Allah (S.w.T.)) he does not consider anyone the true possessor of
perfect qualities. All of these are dependent upon Allah (S.w.T.) who is
only one, absolutely independent. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“O men! you are they who stand in need of Allah. And Allah is He who
is self-sufficient, the praised one.”*** ***(Surah Fāt’ir 35:15)***

That is the reason why pious people refrain from praising themselves and
also fear the praise of others for them. ‘Ali (a.s.) has mentioned this
in the sermon quoted above. We must also refrain from words, which imply
the independence of man from Allah (S.w.T.) and instead attribute
uniqueness to him. For example one should not say, “I possess such and
such quality.”

A Saying of the Holy Prophet (S)
--------------------------------

Once a man approached the door of the exalted Prophet Muhammad Mustafa
(S) and knocked. The Holy Prophet (S) enquired who he was. The person
replied, “I” The Prophet came out and said, “Who was the one to say ‘I’?
Let it be known that except Allah (S.w.T.) no one is qualified to use
this word. Allah (S.w.T.) says about Himself, I am the Powerful, I am
the Punisher.’

Qarūn Became a Polythiest
-------------------------

Qarūn became a polytheist because he dared to say that all he had come
to possess was due to his knowledge of alchemy. Thus, when Qarūn made
himself an accomplice of the One and only God in possessing the Divine
attributes, Allah (S.w.T.) replied,

***“Did he not know that Allah had destroyed before him the generations
who were mightier in strength than he, and Greater in assemblage?”
(Surah al-Qaŝaŝ 28:78)***

Later, we see that Qarūn was not able to save himself from destruction
even though he claimed to possess strength and power. Thus we must
understand that any qualities of the creatures are not of their own but
given to them by the Most Powerful Almighty Allah.

#### Tawhid and Shirk in Acts of Allah (S.w.T.)

Tawhid in deeds construe that we have conviction that the Lord and
Master of every form of life whether material or spiritual is Allah
(S.w.T.). He alone controls and regulates life. We must also have the
conviction that Allah (S.w.T.) does not have anyone to share in His
Lordship and control. His authority extends over the entire earth and
the skies. No one is an accomplice of Him in this regard.

As the Qur’an says:

***“Allah is He who created seven Heavens, and of the earth the like of
them; the decree continues to descend among them, that you may know that
Allah has power over all things and that Allah indeed encompasses all
things in (His) knowledge.”(Surah at-Talāq 65:12)***

We must acknowledge that Allah (S.w.T.) is the creator of the Heavens.
We must have a firm belief that He has created the countless stars.
Their number has not been ascertained till today. Modern science has
computed that there are approximately ten million stars, each of them
capable of having a habitation similar to the earth. Each one of them
possess a different light and they revolve in their own orbits without
clashing with the other Heavenly bodies.

***“And the stars are made subservient by His commands.” (Surah an-Nahl
16:12)***

One of such stars is the Sun, the volume of which is 1.3 million times
more than our Earth. It has been bestowed with such a powerful light
that within seconds it traverses the distance between the Sun and the
Earth. The Earth is illuminated by solar light and the life on Earth is
sustained by the nourishment received from this light. “Glory be only to
Allah the Mighty Creator.”

Myriad Colours From Colourless Water
------------------------------------

It is the Unique Allah (S.w.T.) who has caused the growth of plants and
trees from the bosom of the earth. These plants bear flowers with color
and fragrance. The green leaves of the trees and the colourful
vegetation is but by the uncomparable power of Creator. The Creator has
also given to the human beings the ability to see and appreciate the
colourful herbage and the floral outgrowths.

Hence man must contemplate upon the Creator who has caused all this to
come into existence. He must also acknowledge the One who has created
him.

Who Splits the Ovum and the Seed?
---------------------------------

The Master of the Universe is one who causes the seed to split. A part
of it grows towards the depths of the earth and becomes the root. The
root absorbs nourishment from the earth and supplies it to the main
body. The plumule develops into stem and bears leaves. These leaves help
in processing of the food which is supplied by the roots. Gradually the
plant puts forth colourful and fragrant flowers and tasty fruits. All
this is made to come in existence by the combination of the earth, air
and water, all Three of which combine to provide different kinds of
tastes, smells and colours. The human beings are made capable of
discerning the myriad tastes and colours so that they can appreciate the
bounties of Allah (S.w.T.) and know their Creator.

In Three Darknesses
-------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) is that uncomparable Being who has caused the creation of
every animal from the unclean sperm. The human being is conceived in the
triple covering of the womb. Later, he is bestowed with the
discriminating intellect which enables him to ponder upon the qualities
and the signs of Allah (S.w.T.) and also so that he may compare his
ownself with other creatures by the help of his inward eye.

Nutritious Milk From Dirty Blood
--------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) is the One who created milk from the dirty red blood and
caused it to flow from the mammary glands of the animals and humans so
that it may reach the gullets of infants.

***“And most surely there is a lesson for you in cattle; We give to
drink of what is in their bellies from betwixt the faeces and the
blood -pure milk, easy and agreeable to swallow for those who drink.”***
***(Surah an-Nahl 16:66)***

When the young ones are not yet capable of digesting solid food it is
only milk which nourishes them. And the provider of this milk is Allah
(S.w.T.). He is the bestower of every benefit.

***“Say: All is from Allah..”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:78)***

Bestows Sustenance: Accepts Deeds
---------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) is the sustainer of all living creatures. He distributes
His bounties freely to one and all. He gives sustenance to whom He
chooses without measure. His unlimited Mercy spreads over His entire
creation. He accepts the invocation of all those who plead to Him and
removes the difficulties of whomsoever He wishes.

The absolute belief in Tawhid implies that one should understand fully,
the meaning of the phrase, **“There is no Power or Might except By
Allah.”** In other words it is the essence of the Kalima **“La ilahā
illa-Allah.”** (There is no god except Allah (S.w.T.)).

Allah (S.w.T.) is the Cause of Every Phenomenon
-----------------------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) is the origin of every life. He is the origin of the
characteristics of life imparted to each and every creature. The
characteristics of all creation are manifested by the Will of Allah
(S.w.T.). Therefore it is no wonder if the established quality of a
particular thing may undergo a sudden change if Allah (S.w.T.) so
wishes; as it happened in the case of fire lighted by Namrūd, which
became cool by the Will of Allah (S.w.T.). The details of such phenomena
shall be explained in the following pages.

No Limit to the Splendour of Allah (S.w.T.)’s Might
---------------------------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.), the Almighty is the One who brings assistance to the
needy beseechers, provides relief to the afflicted who cry out for help
and in His hands is all the good. “*He is Allah the Creator, the Maker,
the Fashioner, the Sustainer, the Giver of life and death the Bestower
of benefits, the Punisher, the Acceptor of prayers, the Obeyed One and
the Praised.” The names and attributes of Allah manifest His greatness.
The phrase ‘Rabbul Ālamīn’ (Lord of the worlds) is central to the Divine
names. But intellect and reason is bewildered in understanding His
attributes, and speech and expression is dumbfounded by His
greatness.*[^4]

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Say, if the sea were ink for the words of my Lord, the sea would
surely be consumed before the words of my Lord are exhausted, though we
were to bring the like of that (sea) to add thereto.”*** ***(Surah
al-Kahf 18:109)***

Human Strength
--------------

Whatever a human being is able to achieve, is by the strength, the
capacity, intellect and will power bestowed on him by Allah (S.w.T.). By
thought and perseverance, he can make use of these favours to
distinguish between good and evil and perform his deeds. Anyone who does
not ponder upon the designs which embellish the doors and walls of this
world is himself lifeless like the walls. The observation of the
creations around him offer enlightenment to the intelligent mind. But
one who does not deliberate (ponder), cannot know Allah (S.w.T.) through
His creations and thus he rejects the existence of Allah (S.w.T.).

Is there anyone who could produce sweet fruits from woods (of trees)?
Does anyone possess the miraculous capability of growing colourful
flowers from (among) the thorns? He is that Pure and Flawless God who by
His Divine plan and order created the day and the night and gave the
light to the sun and the moon.

He is an incomparable king who neither requires a constitution nor a
treasure. He is that designer who does not need paints or the tools of
designing.

He causes the water springs to erupt from the stones and makes the rain
to descend from the clouds. He creates honey from the bee and silk from
the silkworm.

If all the creatures come together to discuss the bounties of Allah
(S.w.T.) and continue upto the Day of Qiyāma, they will not have
accomplished even a thousandth fraction of their task.

***“And if you count Allah’s favours, you will not be able to number
them; most surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** ***(Surah an-Nahl
16:18)***

Human Strength is Limited by Divine Will
----------------------------------------

The strength and the capacity of all the human beings is surrounded by
the Divine decree and Allah (S.w.T.)’s will. As we see that a person
makes an intention to do something but at the last moment his plans are
foiled.

He is unable to complete the task that he had initiated due to the loss
of capacity. Actually, what he intended to do was against the Divine
will and thus he is hindered from the task. A person inquired from Amir
ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.), “My Master! How did you recognise (realize)
Allah?” He replied, “I recognised Him by witnessing the abrogation of
intention and the failures of strengths.” Allah, undoubtedly is the
initiator of all that moves in the Universe and He is the original cause
of the various effects in the created world. To acknowledge Allah as the
base of everything and to have a firm belief in this is the pinnacle of
Tawhid (Belief in the Oneness of Allah).

However very few people are able to achieve this stage of Tawhid. But if
one develops a firm conviction that the cause of every effect, whether
material or spiritual is Allah, alone, he develops some peculiar
characteristics. One of such characteristics is the Fear of Allah
(S.w.T.).

Fear of Allah (S.w.T.)
----------------------

A believer who has reached the highest stage of belief fears nothing but
the Might of Allah (S.w.T.) and his own sins. It is because he has
realized that all the creatures from Adam (a.s.) to the angels and all
the animals, birds and insects are the obedient soldiers of Allah
(S.w.T.). None of them move a step without His command. Hence they could
not cause any harm or benefit without Allah (S.w.T.)’s permission. When
a person develops this belief he is not fearful of anything. Even if all
the swords of the world come to attack. If Allah (S.w.T.) wills, not a
single nerve could be cut by them.

The opposition of both the friend and the foe is from Allah (S.w.T.).
Because the hearts of both are in the control of Allah (S.w.T.). However
evil the claimant may intend, only that which Allah (S.w.T.) permits
comes to pass. There is a tradition that,

“The extreme kind of belief consists of not fearing anything except
Allah.”

The Holy Prophet (S) used to recite this in prostration.

“O Allah if Your anger is not upon me then there is nothing I care for.”

Reliance Upon Allah (S.w.T.)
----------------------------

When a believer has developed a firm and complete conviction that apart
from Allah (S.w.T.) no one is the Lord of the creation and none is the
cause of all the causes except Him, He does not repose hope in anyone
except Allah (S.w.T.). Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) states:

“You must not rely upon anyone except the Lord.”[^5]

As we have mentioned before, the origin of everything is Allah (S.w.T.)
and the centre of all creation is He alone. In the same way every
goodness of man for his fellowbeings also originates from Allah
(S.w.T.). As it is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an,

***“Good actions are only from His (Allah’s) hands.”***

At the end of Surah Yūnus Allah (S.w.T.) says,

***“And if Allah should afflict you with harm, then there is none to
remove it but He, and if He intends good to you there is none to repel
His grace; He brings it to whom He pleases of His servants; and He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful.”*** ***(Surah Yūnus 10:107)***

***At another place the Qur’an says, “And whatever favour is (bestowed)
on you, it is from Allah...”***  
***(Surah an-Nahl 16:53)***

Thus, it is clear from the above discussion that all that is present in
the material and the ethereal spheres is subservient to Allah (S.w.T.).

***“There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come to the
Beneficient God as a servant.”***  
***(Surah Maryam 19:93)***

If someone reposes hope in anyone except Allah (S.w.T.) his hopes are
extinguished so that he can realize his true master, i.e. Allah
(S.w.T.).

“I will severe the ties of hope of those who repose hope in others.”

### Thankfulness to the Provider of Bounties

The master of the Universe is Allah (S.w.T.) and He bestows all the
bounties, hence He must be thanked for these. Because all the good deeds
are only through His hands. He gives whatever goodness He likes to
anyone of His choice. That is why we say with a firm belief, “Al-hamdu
lil-Lah” (The praise is only for Allah (S.w.T.)).

### Thankfulness for Capability (or Means) is also Necessary

If we are receiving sustenance or help from some means, we must be
thankful for these too. However we should not consider these means or
intermediaries to be independent of Allah (S.w.T.). We must accept them
only as the agents through whom Allah (S.w.T.) is causing His Mercy to
reach us. These agents only act as a medium of passing the bounties of
Allah (S.w.T.) and hence they must also be acknowledged; as ordered by
the Masūm (a.s.).

“One who does not thank his apparent giver (the agent or the means), it
is as if he has not thanked his real giver (Allah (S.w.T.)).”[^6]

“The most thankful amongst you towards Allah is the one who is most
thankful to the people (who have helped you).”[^7]

There is no doubt that if one considers his helper to be the original
doer of good (independent from Allah (S.w.T.)), he has surely committed
Shirk.

### Hidden Shirk in the Praise of the Creature

***“And most of them do not believe in Allah without associating others
(with Him).”*** ***(Surah Yūsuf 12:106)***

While explaining this verse, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) informed that
one form of Shirk is,

“Like the saying of someone that if so and so had not been there I would
have been destroyed. If so and so had not been there I would have got
that thing. In the same way is to say that if so and so had not been
there my children would have perished.”[^8]

Such utterances signify the type of belief the speaker possesses. If he
really has such a belief then he is surely a polytheists (mushrik).
After this Imam (a.s.) said,

“If one says, ‘If Allah had not helped me through such and such person I
would have perished,’ there is no harm in it.” In fact this is the
essence of Tawhid.

### Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) and the Thankful Beggar

Masma bin Abdul Malik relates that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) was at
Mina (in Makkah) when a beggar approached him. Imam (a.s.) ordered that
a bunch of grapes be given to him. The beggar said, “I do not need
these, if possible give me money.” Imam (a.s.) did not give him anything
but said, “May Allah make you self-sufficient.” After this another
beggar approached. Imam (a.s.) picked up three grapes from the bunch and
offered them to him. The beggar picked them up and said, “All Praise is
for Allah (only) who has given me sustenance.” Imam (a.s.) said, “Wait”,
and he placed as many grapes as his hands could hold. Twice again he
gave him the same quantity. The beggar thanked Allah (S.w.T.) again.
Imam (a.s.) again stopped him and asked his slave how much money he had.

The slave replied, “Twenty dirhams.” Imam (a.s.) ordered him to give
these to the beggar. The beggar took the money and said, “All praise is
for Allah alone. O Allah You are the sustainer, You are One, there is no
partner for You. Imam (a.s.) again stopped him. Then the Imam (a.s.)
removed his shirt and gave it to the beggar and said, “Wear it.” The
beggar put the shirt on and thanked Allah who had bestowed him with the
dress and made him happy. At this stage the beggar turned towards Imam
(a.s.) and said, “O slave of Allah may Allah reward you for this.” After
this he went his way. The narrator says that if the beggar had not
addressed the Imam (a.s.) as such, Imam (a.s.) would have continued to
give him gifts for his thankfulness to Allah.[^9]

Tawhid and Tawakkul (Reliance)
------------------------------

It must be remembered that all the causes are in the hands of the One
who is the final cause. Those who believe in the Oneness of Allah
(S.w.T.) should rely only upon the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) for all their
affairs. They must realize that all the effects owe their cause to Allah
(S.w.T.). Even if all the venues for his success are open he will not
achieve success if Allah (S.w.T.)’s will is contrary to it. On the other
hand if all the ways of success are closed he will definitely succeed if
Allah (S.w.T.) wills. Even if all the means of causing him injury come
together no harm shall come if Allah (S.w.T.) intends to protect him.

Tawhid and Acceptance (Taslim)
------------------------------

One who believes in Tawhid should accept all the Divine decrees with
humility. He should believe that various factors like honour and
dishonour, health and ailments, richness and poverty, death and life are
all according to the Divine decree. He should not oppose any of these
either by speech or by actions. He should not even express his opinion
in such affairs. For example, “Why has this happened? It should have
been like this.” Or to say, “Why did it not rain? Why is it so hot?” One
should not say, “Why has Allah (S.w.T.) not given me wealth or
children?” “Why did such and such person die in his youth and why did
the other attained old age?” “Why has Allah (S.w.T.) prohibited this and
made obligatory that?”

One who utters such things makes himself a partner in the absolute
authority of the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.).

There maybe people who worship the One and only God, establish prayers,
pay the Zakat, perform Hajj and also fast during the month of Ramadhan.
But if they have any objection against those obligations prescribed by
Allah (S.w.T.) or His Prophet (S) and say, “Why was it not this way?” or
even if they have such thoughts and do not express them in words, still
they are polytheists (mushrikūn).

***“But no! by your Lord! they do not believe until they make you a
judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among them, and
then do not find any straitness in their hearts as to what you have
decided and submit with entire submission.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’
4:65)***

Allama Majlisi comments, “...any objection against the Divine decree and
the utterances of the Pure Imams (a.s.) is tantamount to Shirk.”

Thus it is obligatory for the believers of Tawhid that when they fall
into misfortune and calamities they should restrain their tongues and
hearts from objecting against the Divine decree. However the weeping and
expression of grief at the death of friends and relative is allowed and
rather recommended. What is not permitted is to say, “Why has this
happened? It should not have happened.”

Tawhid and Love
---------------

The worshippers of the unique God should accept that Allah (S.w.T.) is
the provider of him and all the existing things. Whatever he gets is due
to the beneficence of the Almighty. The apparent causes and the effects
are also in control of Allah (S.w.T.). Then it is Him only who deserves
unlimited love and attachment. If someone else deserves to be loved it
is only due to his being the beloved of Allah (S.w.T.). This is because
such a love is itself commanded by Allah (S.w.T.). Divine personalities
like the Holy Prophets (a.s.), Imams (a.s.), the angels and the true
believers are those whose love is commanded by Allah (S.w.T.).

In the same way, to show attachment to the gifts of Allah (S.w.T.) is
allowed if such an attachment would exhibit our thankfulness for the
bounties. To love our family, possessions and the worldly life is also
worship in this way. However, to love all such things without
considering the divine aspect renders one to be a mushrik (polytheist).
If one loves something more than he loves Allah (S.w.T.), then it is a
kind of Shirk. If he prefers something above the love of Allah (S.w.T.)
it is totally Harām. Consequently he becomes liable for punishment. For
example if someone loves monetary wealth more than Allah (S.w.T.) then
it would be difficult for him to fulfill the religious obligation of
Zakat etc. Various ayats of the Qur’an and traditions mention this fact.

1) Someone inquired from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) the meaning of the
following verse:

***“The day on which property will not avail, nor sons. Except him who
comes to Allah with a heart, free (from evil).”*** ***(Surah ash-Shūrā
26: 88-89)***

Imam (a.s.) replied,

“The heart free (from evil) is the one when it meets Allah it does not
have the love of anyone but Allah. Every heart which has Shirk and doubt
is condemned to be destroyed. (al-Kāfi)

2) Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) states,

“By Allah the Imān (faith) of a person cannot be pure till he loves
Allah more than his near ones; his mother, his father, children, wife,
other people and wealth.”[^10]

3) During the rule of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) a male sparrow told its
mate,

“Why do you stop me from mating? I possess such might that if I want I
could pick up the dome of (the palace) of Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) and
drop it in the river.” When Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) came to know of this,
he summoned both the birds and asked the male bird if he could
substantiate his claim by putting it into practice. The bird replied
that he had only tried to impress his mate by the false claim. He said
that he loved his companion hence could not afford to lose her. When
Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) asked the female bird for her opinion she said
that her suitor did not love her and his affections were for someone
else. Upon hearing her grievance Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) became
remorseful. He retired into his prayer niche and did not come out for
forty days. He prayed, “O Allah purify the heart of this male bird from
the love of everything except his own mate.”[^11]

Tawhid and Shirk in Obedience
-----------------------------

A believer knows that the creator of all is the one and only Allah
(S.w.T.) and He also is the only sustainer of all His creatures. He does
not have any partner in his Lordship and authority. Such a believer does
not regard anyone else fit for obedience, except Allah (S.w.T.). This
believer knows that apart from Allah (S.w.T.) none of the existing
things could command obedience. They are all helpless before the Might
of Allah (S.w.T.). All the creatures are incapable of benefitting
themselves, nor can they protect themselves from harm. They do not have
any power upon their death and life and neither upon the Day of
Judgement and the reckoning

***“...they control not for themselves any harm or profit, and they
control not death, nor life, nor raising (the dead) to life.”***
***(Surah al-Furqān 25:3)***

Thus total obedience and Wilāyat is reserved for Allah (S.w.T.) only.
However if Allah (S.w.T.) Himself designates someone to be the center of
authority then His obedience is also obligatory due to the Divine
command.

Authorities Whose Obedience is Commanded by Allah (S.w.T.)
----------------------------------------------------------

The chain of the Divine Wilāyat extends from the noble Prophets (a.s.),
the Imams (a.s.) and also consist of the Nawwāb ul Khassa[^12] during
the period of Minor occultation. Discussing this the Qur’an says,

***“Whoever obeys the Apostle, he indeed obeys Allah...”*** ***(Surah
an-Nisā’ 4:80).***

And also,

***“and whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely
Allah is severe in retributing (evil).”*** ***(Surah al-Hashr 59:7)***

Further Allah (S.w.T.) says,

***“O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those who have
authority among you.”***  
***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:59)***

Who are the “Ūli’ l-’Amr”?
--------------------------

Concerning the “Ūli’ l-’Amr” the opinion of the Ahl ul-Sunna is
unsupported by proofs. They claim that Ūli’ l-’Amr means the ruler! What
if the ruler is unjust? What if he is not an expert in religious
affairs? What if he is a slave of material desires? Is obedience
obligatory towards him even if he himself disobeys his Lord? Such a
situation creates contradictions. However, all these things are beyond
the scope of our discussion.

As Umar ibn al-Khattab said, “Two muta’as (Muta’a of Hajj and Muta’a of
women) were permitted in the time of the Holy Prophet (S), I prohibit
both.” Hence those who consider Allah (S.w.T.) and the Prophet (S) as
Ūli’ l-’Amr would regard Muta’a as Halāl. But if they also wish to obey
Umar ibn al-Khattab, it will create a contradiction.

### Love of ‘Ali (a.s.) Commanded by Allah (S.w.T.), and Muawiya’s Stance

Muawiya considered it obligatory to fight ‘Ali (a.s.) whereas the Holy
Prophet (S) had made it Harām. The Prophet (S) said, “War against ‘Ali
(a.s.) is war against me.” Muawiya used to order people to hate ‘Ali
(a.s.) while the Holy Prophet (S) made ‘Ali’s love obligatory and Allah
(S.w.T.) made the love of ‘Ali (a.s.) the compensation of the Prophetic
message. The Holy Qur’an says,

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but the love of my near
relatives.”*** ***(Surah Ash-Shūrā 42:23)***

On the basis of this, the result of the obedience of Allah (S.w.T.) and
His Prophet (S) would be love for ‘Ali (a.s.). To consider Muawiya as
Ūli’ l-’Amr would necessitate hatred for ‘Ali (a.s.), and in this case
too a contradictory situation would arise.

### The Term ‘Ūli’ l-’Amr’ is not Restricted to a Particular Group

To consider the command of obedience of Ūli’ l-’Amr to be restricted to
a particular group is against the import of the Qur’anic ayat. This is
because Allah (S.w.T.) has not ordered the obedience of Ūli’ l-’Amr
separately. He has included the obedience of Ūli’ l-’Amr alongwith that
of the Holy Prophet (S). Thus the obedience of Ūli’ l-’Amr is the
obedience of the Holy Prophet (S). There is no difference between the
obedience of the Prophet (S) and the obedience of Ūli’ l-’Amr. The
obedience of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Ūli’ l-’Amr is compulsory upon
everyone. It is not restricted to a few people. If we consider Ūli’
l-’Amr to include all types of rulers it would not be correct. Ūli’
l-’Amr are those who are purified from every kind of mistakes and sins.
So that they could be obeyed without any reservations.

### Are the Religious Scholars Ūli’ l-’Amr?

Some scholars claim that by Ūli’ l-’Amr is meant the religious leaders
(Ālims). But, the Ālims are not infallible (Masūm). All the Ālims are
prone to commit mistakes. That is the reason why there are differences
in the religious rulings. Secondly infallibility is an inward quality
which cannot be perceived by the people. That is the reason why the Ūli’
l-’Amr could only be designated by Allah (S.w.T.) and appointed by the
Holy Prophet (S).

### The Twelve Imams are Ūli’ l-’Amr

Numerous books of the Sunnis as well as Shia record traditions that the
Ūli’ l-’Amr are the Twelve Imams. The following tradition is regarded as
authentic by the Sunnis as well as the Shias.

### What the Holy Prophet (S) Says Regarding Ūli’ l-’Amr

Jabir ibn Abdullah Ansari (a.r.) reports, “I asked the Holy Prophet (S)
that I know Allah (S.w.T.) and His Prophet (S), but I do not know the
Ūli’ l-’Amr.” The Holy Prophet (S) replied,

“They are my Caliphs, O! Jabir, and Imams of the Muslims after me. The
first of them is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), then Hasan, then Husain,
then ‘Ali ibn Husain, then Muhammad bin ‘Ali known in the Tawrat as
Al-Baqir, thou wilt shortly meet him O Jabir; so when you meet him,
convey to him my Salām; then Ja’far ibn Muhammad, then Musa bin Ja’far,
then ‘Ali bin Musa, then Muhammad bin ‘Ali, then ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, then
Hasan bin ‘Ali, then my name sake and one having my kunniyat. They are
the decisive argument of Allah on this earth and the mainstay of His
religion among mankind. The last of them is the one whom Allah will give
victory over the east of the earth and the west; and it is he who will
disappear from his Shias and friends. A long concealment, during which
no one will remain firm in the belief of his Imamat except those whose
hearts Allah has tested for faith.” Jabir (a.r.) asked, “Will his Shias
derive benefit from him during his concealment?” “Yes”, said the Apostle
of Allah, “By him Who raised me up with Prophethood,verily they will
obtain light from his ‘Nūr’ and will benefit by his Wilāyat during his
concealment, like people derive benefit from the sun when it is covered
with clouds.”[^13]

So, it could be concluded from this tradition that the obedience of the
Holy Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) is equivalent to the obedience of Allah
(S.w.T.). Those interested in more details can refer to the book
‘Ghayatul Marām’. In the fifty-ninth chapter of this book, four
traditions from the Sunni sources and fourteen from the Shia sources are
mentioned. In the same book, in the 121st chapter, four traditions from
the Sunni books and twenty-eight from the Shia sources are recorded.

Obedience of the Just Mujtahid
------------------------------

Now we can say that during the Major occultation the obedience of a
qualified Mujtahid is also compulsory. His obedience is actually the
obedience of Imam az-Zaman (a.s.). Imam (a.s.) says,

“Look carefully at those people who relate our traditions with
deliberation upon our permitted and prohibited things, and know our
precepts and commandments. Select one of them for adjudication, since I
have appointed such a person for the said task. If his verdict is
rejected then it is as if the command of Allah is deemed light and our
ordinance refuted. Certainly the one who refutes our ordinance has
refuted the ordinance of Allah. Verily such a person has stepped into
the boundary of Shirk (Polytheism).”[^14]

The Faqih Who Deserves to be Followed
-------------------------------------

One of the conditions of a Faqih is that he should be free from worldly
desires. He should not be in pursuit of material benefits and worldly
honour. The Faqih who is free from such weaknesses is fit to be followed
even if there are people more pious (in performing good deeds) than him.
In this regard the great scholar Shaykh Ansari quotes a tradition from
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) in his book ‘Ihtijāj’.

“And among jurists (Fuqaha) those who protect themselves (from sins),
guard their religion, defy their carnal desires and are obedient to
their Master, it is incumbent upon the people to follow them. Such
characteristics are found only in a few of them and not all.”

Obeying Parents is Obeying Allah (S.w.T.)
-----------------------------------------

Obedience to parents is obedience to Allah (S.w.T.). To obey parents and
not to cause them any kind of distress or discomfort is of extreme
importance. This importance can be judged by the fact that in the Holy
Qur’an, Allah (S.w.T.)’s command to serve Him is immediately followed by
His command to treat parents with gentleness and humility.

***“And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but Him;
and goodness to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age
with you, say not to them (so much as) ‘Uff’ nor chide them, and speak
to them a generous word. And make yourself submissively gentle to them
with compassion, and say: O my Lord! have compassion on them, as they
brought me up (when I was) little.”*** ***(Surah al-‘Isrā’, 17:23-24)***

Parents Cannot Restrain From Obligatory Acts Nor Can They Compel You to Commit the Prohibited
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that the parents are not the absolute authority upon
all the affairs of Harām and Halāl. Their authority is restricted by the
dual dictum, that they must not prohibit a Wajib thing and nor should
order something Harām. If a situation demands the parents have to be
disobeyed in absolute obedience to the commands of Allah (S.w.T.) and
His Prophet (S).

***“And We have enjoined on man goodness to his parents, and if they
contend with you that you should associate (others) with Me, of which
you have no knowledge, do not obey them; to Me is your return, so I will
inform you of what you did.”*** ***(Surah Al-’Ankabūt 29:8)***

Obedience to parents is highly stressed so that they may not be caused
even the slightest discomfort by the disobedience of their children. It
is totally prohibited by the Qur’an. Thus if the disobedience of the
parents would incur their wrath then it is compulsory for the children
to obey them.

### Further Details Regarding Obedience to Parents

Sometimes the parents may disallow something or order their children to
do something. But if the child does not obey they are not angry. In such
cases it is permitted for the child to follow his choice. For example
the parents refrain their son to proceed on a journey that would cause
hardship. But they do not mind if he insists on it. In this case it is
Mubah for the son to go on this journey. However if this journey would
cause the anger of one’s parents, it is a journey of sin and during this
journey one has to pray Salāt as complete (not Qasr) and also observe
the obligatory fasts.

Obedience of the Husband is Wajib Upon the Wife
-----------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) and the Holy Prophet (S) have commanded the
wife to obey her husband. The Holy Qur’an informs,

***“Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them
to excel others and because they spend out of their property; the good
women are therefore obedient, guarding the unseen as Allah has
guarded.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:34)***

Allah, the Almighty has given men superiority over women and appointed
them as the protectors of women. This is due to the fact that men have
been provided by Allah (S.w.T.) with many qualities in great measure as
compared to women, like strength, bravery etc. Further they spend their
wealth upon their women. So the best women are those who are loyal to
their husbands and obedient to their commands. They protect his property
and their own chastity in the absence of their husbands.

The Holy Prophet (S) has also said,

“Prostration of a human for another human being is not permitted. (If it
had been) I would have ordered the wife to prostrate before her
husband.”[^15]

Dignity in the Marital Affairs
------------------------------

Numerous traditions emphasise that women should be obedient to their
husbands. Apart from this, women should know that it is highly
recommended that they please their husbands in all matters. It is the
best worship of a woman. However to satisfy the sexual desires of the
husband is absolutely Wajib according to the consensus of the scholars.

Similarly the husbands permission is required by the wife if she intends
to go out. Even if she goes to visit her relatives or parents it is
obligatory for her to seek the husbands permission. If she leaves the
husband’s house without his permission, the angels curse her till she
returns.

Non-Essential Expenses Should Have the Prior Sanction of the Husband
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Apart from the necessary expenses, the wife should obtain the husband’s
permission for other things even if she wants to spend from her personal
wealth. But in case of obligatory expenses she does not need the
husband’s permission. For example, Hajj, Zakat, Khums and even for
spending upon her parents. Even if the husband restrains her she must
carry out these obligations. If a woman obeys her husband to please
Allah (S.w.T.), she has undoubtedly obeyed the Divine commands and the
instructions of the Holy Prophet (S). It is certainly the best worship
for a woman.

Referring to the Unjust Ruler is Not Allowed
--------------------------------------------

So far, we have seen that obedience to Allah (S.w.T.) is obligatory and
so is the obedience to the Holy Prophet (S) and his Twelve Successors
(Imams a.s). and whoever else Allah (S.w.T.) has ordered to obey. Their
obedience is also a must i.e. of the Fuqaha, in case of religious
matters. It is absolutely ‘Harām’ to appeal for justice in the courts of
the unjust rulers. Referring to them is the same as seeking the help of
Satan. Whatever benefit is derived through such cases is also Harām even
if one is the rightful claimant. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“If one files a suit of law in the court of a ruler, even if the
plaintiff is on the right, his claim would tantamount to his making
Satan (false deity) his judge. And whatever he gets through this
Judgement is Harām even though it was from his rights.”

***“...then if you quarrel about anything, refer it to Allah and the
Apostle...”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:59)***

The Religious Scholar Who Does Not Practise Piety is Not to Be Followed
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Like it is prohibited to seek the counsel of the unjust ruler even if
one is on the right; in the same way it is not allowed to seek religious
advice from the scholars who pursue material wealth and worldly honour.
The qualifications of a Faqih have been mentioned in the foregoing
pages. Anyone who does not fulfill these qualities is not to be
followed. It is Harām to refer to them. A couple of traditions are
quoted below in this regard.

Religious Leaders Who Worship the World are Bandits on the Highway to Allah (S.w.T.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.): “*When you see a
religious scholar in love of this world, do not consider him religious.
Certainly one who loves an object, his condition and disposition is like
that of his beloved. (It means that one who loves this world will not
care for the Hereafter). Allah revealed upon Hazrat Dawūd (a.s.)* :

*“O Dawūd do not make an Ālim an intermediary between you and Me, who is
involved in the love of this world. He will hinder you from My path
(i.e. he will make you too a worshipper of the world like himself).
Certainly such Ālims are bandits who waylay the people approaching My
abode. The least that I would do to them is that I shall remove from
their hearts the love of conversation with Me and sweetness too.”*[^16]

A Faqih Should Only be For Allah (S.w.T.)
-----------------------------------------

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) states,

“If one obtains knowledge in order to become conceited or to argue with
the foolish people or to obtain wealth or to attract people towards
himself then he has certainly made the Fire his abode. Verily,
acquisition of wealth is not permitted but for ones own family
(needs).”[^17]

The Common People are ‘Deficient’
---------------------------------

People who leave aside the scholars of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) and refer to
others in order to satisfy their selfish desires, are termed as
‘deficient’ (which means those who willfully neglect the Divine
commands). They are mentioned in the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

***“Have you then considered him who takes his low desire for his
god.”*** ***(Surah al-Jāthiya 45:23)***

#### Tawhid and Shirk in Worship

The Almighty Allah has invited all the creatures to pay obeisance to Him
in order that His Majesty may become manifest. The people can obtain
numerous blessings and unlimited mercy and achieve such a position which
even imagination cannot visualise.

***“So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes; a reward for what they did.”*** ***(Surah as-Sajda 32:17)***

The Lord of the Worlds and the Lowly Man
----------------------------------------

The human being is a lowly creature. So lowly that he cannot even seek
nearness to the Almighty, let alone achieve it. That is why Allah
(S.w.T.), by his unsurpassed Wisdom and infinite Mercy appointed the
Last Prophet (S) as an intermediary to form a firm link between the
lowly man and the Almighty Allah.

Due to the presence of this Wasilah (intermediary) the soul of man is
affected to such a degree that it undergoes a transformation. Just as
alchemy changes the base metal into pure gold, the heart of the
worshipper become pure and is filled by the light of the Creator,
repelling the darkness of Ignorance. Gradually he rises in status as his
worship enables him to rise up towards the Divine. He thus achieves the
best of both the worlds.

Purity of Intention
-------------------

There are some conditions for acceptance of the acts of worship. The
most important condition is purity of intention (Niyyat). Purity of
intention with respect to a deed has the same significance that the soul
has for the body. Absence of the purity of intention during worship
takes man further away from Allah (S.w.T.).

The Holy Qur’an contains numerous verses in this regard. A few of them
are quoted below:

***1) “And they were not enjoined anything except that they should serve
Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience.”*** ***(Surah al-Bayyina
98:5)***

***2) “Say: I am commanded that I should serve Allah, being sincere to
Him in obedience.”*** ***(Surah az-Zumar 39:11)***

***3) “Say: My Lord has enjoined justice, and set upright your faces at
every time of prayer and call on Him, being sincere to Him in
obedience.”*** ***(Surah al-Ar’āf 7:29)***

***4) “Say: I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your
god is One God, therefore whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do
good deeds, and not join anyone in the service of His Lord.”***
***(Surah al-Kahf 18:110)***

One Who “Shows-Off” is a Mushrik
--------------------------------

It is concluded from the authentic traditions that one who tries to
show-off in religious matters is a mushrik and a hypocrite. He is
inevitably condemned to Divine punishment. It is one and the same
whether his show-off concerns the obligatory acts or the recommended
acts.

Similarly he may simply exhibit outward piety or his aim may be to
acquire honour and respect among the people. Even if he has a dual aim
(of showing off and fulfilling his obligation) his act is classified as
Shirk. A few Qur’anic verses are quoted for the benefit of the readers:

***1) “Surely the hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and He shall
requite their deceit to them, and when they stand up sluggishly; they do
it only to be seen of men and do not remember Allah save a little.
Wavering between that (and this), (belonging) neither to these nor to
those.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:142)***

***2) “So woe to the praying ones, who are unmindful of their prayers,
who do (good) to be seen.”***  
***(Surah Ma’ūn 107:4-6)***

Outward Piety (Riyah) is the Lesser Shirk
-----------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“Certainly what I fear for you most is the lesser Shirk.”

Someone enquired, “O Prophet (S), what is meant by lesser Shirk?” He
replied,

“It is Riyah when Allah would reward His creatures for their deeds on
the Day of Judgement He would address those who committed Riyah thus,
‘you approach those, to please whom you had performed all the deeds in
the world. And obtain your rewards for your deeds from them.’[^18]

Is it possible to receive rewards from them? Absolutely not!

The Deceitful Person Deceives Himself Alone
-------------------------------------------

Someone enquired from the Holy Prophet (S) as to how could salvation be
attained on the Day of Judgement? He replied,

“It could only be possible if one does not deceive Allah. Certainly if
anyone tries to deceive Allah he is himself deceived by Allah (i.e. he
is repaid for his deceit) and Allah takes away belief from him. If he
possesses reason he should know that in trying to deceive Allah, he is
only deceiving himself.”

“How can Allah be deceived and defrauded?” a person asked. The Prophet
(S) continued,

“The person fulfills all his religious obligations but his aim is to
please someone other than Allah. Fear Allah and restrain from ‘Riyah’.
On the Day of Judgement the deceiver (Riyakār) will be addressed by four
titles, ‘O Kafir, O Sinful, O Crafty one, O Loser, your deeds are
nullified and the reward of your deeds is lost. Today you have no worth
whatsoever. Go and seek the reward of your deeds from those, to please
whom you performed your acts.’[^19]

The Fire of Hell Weeps Due to the Deceitful Ones (Riyakār)
----------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.):

“If a person performs a good deed to achieve Allah’s pleasure and the
reward in the hereafter; but also intends to please other people, then
he will be termed as a Mushrik.”[^20]

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) has informed,

“Certainly the fire of Hell and the people of Hell would cry for help
due to the deceitful ones.”

Someone asked, “O Prophet of Allah (S). How would the fire cry?” He
replied,

“The fire would scream and cry for help due to the intensity of the heat
of that fire in which the Riyakār people would be burning.”

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“Certainly, Allah sent His messenger, so that He may extricate the
humankind from the worship of people and direct them to the worship of
Allah.”

Sometimes Worship Leads the Worshipper to the Fire (Of Hell)
------------------------------------------------------------

Abu Basir has narrated from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said,

“On the Day of Judgement a person would be brought forward. He had
performed Salāt in his life. He would be told that you have prayed but
your intention had been to show-off, so that people may appreciate your
worship. This person would be cast into the fire. Then a reciter of the
Qur’an would be brought. He would be told, ‘at the time of reciting the
Qur’an, your intention had been to exhibit your sweet voice so that
people may appreciate your tone.’ This one shall also be tossed into the
fire. The third person to be presented shall be one who had died a
martyr in Jihad. He would be told that, ‘Your intention while fighting
was to make a show-off your strength and valour.” He shall also be led
towards the fire. The fourth person had been a charitable man. He would
be told, ‘your intention in giving charity was that people may call you
generous.’ Then he would also be led towards Hell.[^21]

Numerous traditions confirm that the Riyakār person is a Mushrik. This
is sufficient for the believing and the thoughtful people.

The Merits of Pure Intentions and the Censure of Riyah
------------------------------------------------------

Apart from the punishment in the Hereafter and cancellation of good
deeds the Riyakār person will also fail to achieve his aim in this
world. In the world it had been his intention to achieve honour among
the people but instead he would have to face humiliation and shame. The
noble Qur’an tells us,

***“...he loses this world as well as the hereafter; that is a manifest
loss.”*** ***(Surah al-Hajj 22:11)***

On the contrary, one who performs good deeds for the Hereafter will
achieve honour in this world too. The following verse of Surah al-Kahf
says:

***“...therefore whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good
deeds, and not join anyone in the service of his Lord.”*** ***(Surah
al-Kahf 18:110)***

The tafsir of this ayat is as follows: *“Someone performs a good deed
not for seeking Allah’s pleasure, but to obtain praise and admiration
from people, so that people may see and hear him and he may become
famous. He is like the one who has an associate with Allah in his
worship. One who conceals his worship acts from the people (and reserve
them solely for Allah would finally be given an honourable position
among the people, by Allah. While one who exhibits his worship; his
weaknesses are exposed by Allah and consequently he is degraded.*”[^22]

True Deeds are Surely Manifested
--------------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“If one intends to do a small act with the sole intention of pleasing
Allah, Allah causes this small deed of his to be manifested on a greater
scale upon the people. (On the contrary) if someone performs the
greatest of deeds which causes him physical tiredness and exhaustion due
to wakeful nights, while his intention had been to acquire the praise of
people, his deed would be reduced to a trifle by Allah and manifested on
the people.” (till the people begin to dislike him.)[^23]

Outward Piety and the Legal Point of View
-----------------------------------------

If someone has committed Shirk with regard to the acts of worship, he
must repent sincerely and have a firm determination not to repeat his
mistake. He should intend to perform all his deeds in the future for the
sole purpose of achieving Allah (S.w.T.)’s pleasure. First of all it is
Wajib upon him to seek forgiveness of his past sins. Secondly he must
repeat all the worship acts in which he had committed Riyah, even if a
part of that worship had been contaminated with the intention of showing
off. Suppose he had begun his act with pure intention but later he was
involved in Riyah, even so his deed is nullified. Like the person who
gives Zakat to a needy man but later tries to obtain some benefit in
return. In this case he has to first repent for his sin and then again
give Zakat with the sole intention of achieving Allah (S.w.T.)’s
pleasure.

Similarly in the case of Salāt the person may exhibit a part of it (Be
it a *mustahab* part) e.g. Qunūt or he may perform Salāt in congregation
or sit in the front row to show-off. In all such cases he has to perform
this Salāt again.

Riyah in the Acts of Worship
----------------------------

There is no firm proof that Riyah is Harām in the pure worldly acts,
which are not considered acts of worship. Consequently the Fuqaha have
not given any verdict concerning this. But the true believers refrain
from all types of Riyah; even with the worldly acts and the mubah
actions. The root of Riyakāri is the love of this world. Hence if one
falls into this habit, he may even begin to make it a part of his
worship.

The respected scholar, Faiz al-Kashani writes in his book, ‘Muhajjatul
Baidha’, “People resort to Riyakāri in five types of actions.

(1) Bodily Riyah

(2) Riyah of beauty and dress

(3) Riyah of speech

(4) Riyah of actions

(5) Riyah of the outward kind.”

The above types of Riyah are explained below.

### Bodily Riyah

Bodily Riyah with regard to the actions pertaining to the hereafter is
that someone tries to show that his body has become weak due to
excessive fasting and night worship. Or he may keep his lips dry so that
people think that he is fasting. Or he may show himself to be pious so
that people praise him, and day and night he remains busy in religious
acts. Bodily Riyah with regard to worldly matters is that he displays
his body and tries to create a position in the eyes of the people.

### 2) Riyah of Beauty and Dress

This type of Riyah with regard to the hereafter consists of shaving ones
moustache so that people think that he is following the recommended acts
or walking slowly with head turned downwards or wearing dirty clothes to
show that one has disregard for the world.

The riya of beauty and dress with regard to this world is to show off
ones dress and handsome appearance so that people are attracted towards
the person.

### 3) Riyah of Speech

Riyah of speech with regard to the hereafter is for example uttering
Zikr (i.e. Alhamdu lil-Lah) to show-off to the people. To exhibit one’s
knowledge and greatness by preaching to the people in assemblies. To
forbid evil and enjoin good to the audience by making people fearful of
Divine wrath without having any pure intention.

In the worldly connection this Riyah could take the form of boasting of
ones achievements and capabilities so that the people adore him. To be
extremely social and greet beyond limit, even strangers, to achieve
popularity, etc.

### 4) Riyah of Actions

In connection with actions of the hereafter Riyah consists of praying
Salāt to show-off. For example reciting lengthy chapters or remaining
for a long time in Ruku or as-Sajda. To pray Salāt extremely slowly.
Performing the Wajib and the mustahab fast, Hajj and Ziarat, giving
charity and feeding people so that one is regarded as pious.

With regard to the worldly actions, it is to behave with people in
consonance with their way of thinking and to spend in similar ways. That
is, to strive to become honourable in the eyes of these people. To spend
lavishly upon people by inviting them in large numbers for dinner etc.

### 5) Riyah of the External Kind

All the four types of Riyah explained above are concerned with the
person himself. The fifth type of Riyah is that which is connected with
the external affairs. This type of Riyah also is with regard to the
Hereafter as well as this world. With regard to the Hereafter it
consists of a person sitting in the assembly of the learned people
without any pure intention; just to exhibit his interest in religion
etc. Or to go out to meet pious people or invite the learned scholars to
his home for dinner so that people consider him to be religious. In the
same way Riyah is prohibited with regard to the worldly actions. For
example visiting frequently the courts of Kings and rulers so that
people realize his influence and reputation and the gullible people are
deceived by his outward show.

### Riyah is Associated With Intention

It must be understood that Riyah of a person depends upon his intention.
In other words all such actions which a person performs to show off are
Riyah whether those actions are related to the hereafter or this world.
In all types of actions related above, riyah is not committed till one
has the intention to show-off. But if one performs an action solely for
the pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.) it is worship. For example if one dresses
up nicely or decorates his house with the intention of fully expressing
the bounties of Allah (S.w.T.); this action is worship. However if his
intention is to show-off to people it is Riyah.

Anyone who wishes to study this topic in detail should refer to the book
Qalbe Salīm by the same author.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: A person.

[^3]: Nahjul Balagha Sermon 192

[^4]: Almanac page 149

[^5]: Nahjul Balagha

[^6]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^7]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^8]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^9]: al-Kāfi

[^10]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^11]: Safinat’ul-Bihār

[^12]: The four special Deputies of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

[^13]: Yanabiul Mawaddah

[^14]: al-Kāfi

[^15]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^16]: al-Kāfi

[^17]: al-Kāfi

[^18]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^19]: Muhajjatul Baidha, Bihār al-Anwār

[^20]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^21]: Layali Akhbār

[^22]: al-Kāfi

[^23]: al-Kāfi


