Second Greater Sin: Yās (Despair)
=================================

Despair
-------

The second Greater Sin is to despair of the Mercy of Allah (S.w.T.).
“Al-yā-so Min Rūhallah” (To despair of the Rūh of Allah) Rūh: according
to the dictionary means a breeze that pleases and comforts. Those who do
not believe in the Power, the Mercy and Bounty of Allah (S.w.T.),
develop a kind of despair. The Holy Qur’an has termed such people as
Unbelievers (Kafir).

***“...and despair not of Allah’s Mercy; surely none despairs of Allah’s
Mercy except the unbelieving people.”*** ***(Surah Yūsuf 12:87)***

The Holy Imams, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s.),
Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) have classified “despairing of the Mercy of
Allah (S.w.T.)”, to be a Greater Sin; as we have mentioned at the
beginning.

The Greatest Sin After ‘Shirk’
------------------------------

After ‘Shirk’ no sin could be greater than to despair of Allah
(S.w.T.)’s mercy and benevolence. This attitude reduces a person to a
state of utter hopelessness. He imagines himself to be destined for
Hell, and therefore he sees no benefit in doing good and avoiding evil.
Consequently he tries to achieve as much worldly pleasure as possible
and thus gets further involved in all kinds of sinful acts. Any other
type of sinner could be pardoned if he repents. But the one who despairs
does not deserve to be pardoned because the mental condition of such a
person does not lead him towards repentance, but instead, induces him to
continue to commit further acts of transgression against Allah
(S.w.T.)’s commands.

Hence it means that despair is the greatest of the sins. It is
appropriate therefore that all the different kinds of despair may be
explained and also their cures, so that the believers can keep
themselves away from them.

The Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) has created a cause of all the phenomena of
this world by His unlimited power and absolute strength. For example, in
the physical affairs food is needed for satiation of hunger, water for
quenching thirst, doctor and medicine for curing diseases and work for
removing poverty.

In the same way the spiritual phenomena also depend upon various causes.
The salvation of a sinner depends upon his repentance, the achievement
of absolute belief needs the guidance of an infallible guide (Imam), and
the attainment of grades in piety and the high stages of the hereafter
depend upon the purity of intention in the deeds performed. The aim of
creating man was to make him think and recognise Allah (S.w.T.) in the
proper way. But the complete recognition or belief is not possible till
man realizes that the Creator of causes as well as effects is Allah
(S.w.T.). The causes by themselves cannot bring out an effect till the
One who has created these causes gives the capability to the cause to
bring out such effect. Therefore one should not be pleased at the
apparent causes or be aggrieved due to their absence.

Cause is Not Independent
------------------------

When causes that would fulfill needs or desires appear, man becomes
happy and he believes in the Might of Allah (S.w.T.). But when these
causes fail to have any effect he becomes sorrowful. In order to avoid
such a situation Allah (S.w.T.) has laid down a procedure. Firstly he
renders the causes ineffective so that the believer may not consider
these to be originally having the effective properties. On the other
hand he creates the factors which were hereto non-existent, so that the
believing people may not fall into despair. A few examples are mentioned
to explain this fact.

### First Example: Fire Did Not Burn : Knife Did Not Cut

The fire ignited by the order of Namrūd to burn Ibrahīm (a.s.) was made
bereft of its burning property, by Allah (S.w.T.). It is said, that the
fire was so intense that birds flying at a height of Three miles used to
be scorched by the heat and drop dead.

So they threw Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) into the fire with the help of a
catapult from far away. In the Holy Qur’an Allah (S.w.T.) says:

***“We said: O fire! be coolness and peace to Ibrahīm.” (Surah
al-’Anbiya’ 21:69)***

The fire immediately lost its essential property of burning, and cooled
down; and if Allah (S.w.T.) had not ordered it to be peaceful (safe) for
Ibrahīm (a.s.) it would have become colder and may have frozen Ibrahīm
(a.s.) to death.

In the same way when Ibrahīm (a.s.) proceeded to slaughter his son
Ismail (a.s.) the knife was blunted by Allah (S.w.T.)’s command. Ibrahīm
(a.s.) threw the knife away and a voice emerged from it. “The Khalil
(friend) of Allah (S.w.T.) commands me to cut and the Lord of the Khalil
restrains me from it.”

### Second Example: Musa (a.s.) and Fir’on

History records that the tyrant rulers have always oppressed Allah
(S.w.T.)’s representative on earth, the Prophets and the Imams. These
rulers have made relentless use of all the might and power at their
command to pursue the Prophets and terminate their lives. But the
Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) used to render their efforts null and void. The
life of Musa (a.s.) during the reign of Fir’on is full of such instances
from the beginning to end.

A powerful king like Fir’on wanted to kill Hazrat Musa (a.s.) while he
was still in his mother’s womb, but he did not succeed and Musa (a.s.)
was born. Fir’on continued in his efforts to murder him but all his
plans were foiled by Allah (S.w.T.). Physical and spiritual causes are
of no significance in comparison to the Divine decree. Thus Musa (a.s.)
was not only born safely but grew up in Fir’on’s own palace and in his
own lap.

***“And Fir’on’s wife said: A refreshment of the eye to me and to you;
do not slay him; maybe he will be useful to us, or we may take him for a
son; and they did not perceive.” (Surah al-Qaŝaŝ 28:9)***

### Third Example:The Attack of Abraha on the Ka’ba

In the year of the birth of Holy Prophet (S) the army of Najjashi came
to attack the Holy Ka’ba. It was led by the commander Abraha. The army
consisted of elephants and possessed all the armaments of war. Abraha,
proud of his large army and weapons was confident of success. But the
creator of all causes weakened their efforts. When Allah (S.w.T.) willed
all the human and animals in the army came to a standstill. However much
they tried, the elephants refused to move towards the sacred house.

On the other hand ‘Ababīl’ appeared on the horizon. Each of these birds
carried Three pebbles; one in the beak and one each in their claws. They
surrounded the complete army and began to pelt them with pebbles. Each
pebble fell on the head of the soldiers and pierced through their body
to reach the ground and sank into it. Consequently the entire army
perished, except one soldier. This soldier retreated to king Najjashi
and related the episode in detail. This incident gained so much
importance that the year began to be referred to as ‘Āmul Feel’, or the
year of the Elephant. Thus the history of Arabs record the birth of the
Holy Prophet (S) to be in the year 1st Āmul Feel and the year of his
Be’sat (declaration of Prophethood) to be 40th Āmul Feel.

### Fourth Example: The Holy Prophet (S) and How His Life was Saved

The protection of the Holy Prophet (S) from the blood-thirsty people of
Makkah and later his being shielded from death in the various battles is
considered to be a sign of Allah (S.w.T.). All the polytheists had
united to martyr the Holy Prophet (S) right from the day he declared his
Prophethood. They had all the means to achieve their purpose but as a
Persian couplet says: “Who can extinguish the lamp lighted by Allah
(S.w.T.).”

### Fifth Example: He Creates Without an Apparent Cause

Even if the apparent causes, both material and non-material ones, are
absent, Allah (S.w.T.) creates them by His unsurpassed power. There are
numerous examples of such a phenomenon. The foremost example is that of
the father of man, Hazrat Adam (a.s.) whom Allah (S.w.T.) created
without the union of a male and a female. Adam (a.s.) came into
existence from non-existence. Similarly Prophet Isa (a.s.) was born to
the chaste maid, Janabe Maryam (a.s.) even though a man had not touched
her.

Hazrat Yahya (a.s.) was born to Hazrat Zakaria (a.s.) when he had
reached an extremely old age and when his wife had lost all hopes of
conceiving. Hazrat Ishaq (a.s.) was born to Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) when
Hazrat Ibrahīm was aged and inspite of his wife Janabe Sarah being
barren previously.

The Holy Prophet (S) And His Knowledge
--------------------------------------

The Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad (S) did not attend any school nor did
he learn from any teacher. He was not trained to read and write by any
mortal. Yet, he was the teacher of humanity and was having command upon
the Qur’anic sciences. In fact his personality was a conglomeration of
the qualities of all the previous prophets. The presence of such
outstanding qualities in one person without any apparent causes, can
only be understood to be the Divine will.

Invocations are Answered Without the Presence of Apparent Means
---------------------------------------------------------------

The Beneficial God listens to the invocations of His creatures and
fulfills their desires. Many a times we see that people who have no
means whatsoever are able to get rid of their afflictions and distress.
Due to the grace of Sadaqah, incurable diseases are cured and destitutes
become rich. People surrounded by calamities are saved in ways they
could not have even imagined.

The traditional reports are replete with such instances. The unlimited
beneficence and grace of the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) has been described
by Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) in the following couplets:

“Only the wise could estimate, the unlimited Grace of the Almighty Allah
who releases us from calamities, and removes grief from the defeated
hearts. On numerous occasions, man is sorrowful in the morning. But by
evening his disposition changes into happiness. So when you are
surrounded by difficulties, repose absolute hope in the Unique God.”

Love of ‘Ali (a.s.)
-------------------

Imam Yafai writes in his book, ‘Rawzatul Rehayīn’ the explanation of
Diwan al-Mubīdi and says, “A certain king gave a pearl to his jeweller.
The jeweller’s child somehow got hold of this pearl and broke it into
two pieces. The jeweller was in agony. He was asked by some person to
recite the above mentioned couplets of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) with sincerity.
Hardly had he begun to recite that a messenger from the king arrived. He
told him that physicians have suggested that if his pearl is powered and
given to the sick princess she would be cured of her malady. The King
has sent orders to the jeweller to powder that pearl at once and take it
to the palace.

The Destiny of Man
------------------

The spiritual factors which are connected with the hereafter have some
causes, the affect of which is kept in abeyance by the Will of Allah
(S.w.T.). For example those who perform Jihad against their ownselves
achieve for themselves a high position in the Hereafter. Those who do
not believe in the prophets, the deeds of such people are nullified.

Balam Baūr and his Eternal Damnation
------------------------------------

Balam Baūr had achieved a high stage of perfection. But in order to
please the ruler he started opposing the prophet of his time.
Consequently he became involved in a life of sin from which it was not
possible to extricate himself. He was doomed to Hell, to the seventh
stage of the fire that is the worst of the stages of Hell. He is
compared to a dog in the holy Qur’an,

***“And if We had pleased, We would certainly have exalted him thereby;
but he clung to the earth and followed his low desire, so his parable is
as the parable of the dog; if you attack him he lolls out his tongue;
this is the parable of the people who reject our communications;
therefore relate the narrative that they may reflect.”*** ***(Surah
al-Ar’āf 7:176)***

A Warning
---------

Believing people are those who have realized Allah (S.w.T.). The
believing people should be particularly careful not to confuse the
apparent causes as the basis of all phenomena. Inspite of realising the
supreme authority of Allah (S.w.T.) and His creations, a public
misconception in this regard can damn them to perdition. They should
know that they could be damned to perdition if they depend upon the
apparent causes and consider them to be the basis of all phenomena
because the centre of all phenomena is Allah (S.w.T.). He is capable of
making all the causes ineffective.

**Beauty of the Hereafter**

When all the means of salvation are annihilated, the Almighty Allah
(S.w.T.) creates a cause due to his unlimited Mercy. Numerous traditions
report incidents where people who had been involved in calamities and
damned for destruction were, in the last moments, saved by Allah
(S.w.T.). They had been completely lost in the darkness of sins but were
summoned towards their Lord by His limitless Mercy. The desolate deserts
of their life were once again green and fertile. The bounties of Allah
(S.w.T.) bestowed upon them surprised all the intelligent witnesses of
these incidents.

The Magicians of Fir’on
-----------------------

Magic is a Great Sin and the worst of the professions. A magician is
destined to Divine punishment, and Hell will be his abode. The magicians
of Fir’on, were ordered to challenge Hazrat Musa (a.s.) and belittle
him. But their wicked craft was of no avail, and they failed miserably.
At that moment Divine Grace descended. The magicians intuitively sensed
the power of Allah (S.w.T.) that gave Hazrat Musa (a.s.) superiority
over them. Neither the lure of wealth nor the warning of torture and
death by Fir’on could shake their belief. They were redeemed.

***“Certainly I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides,
and certainly I will crucify you all. They said: No Harm; surely to our
Lord we go back.”*** ***(Surah Ash-Shūrā 26:49-50)***

Asiya was a Believing Woman
---------------------------

Upon whomsoever He wishes, Allah (S.w.T.) bestows a respectable position
in this world, as well as the hereafter. Asiya, Fir’on’s wife was
leading a life of affluence and material comforts, when her heart became
illuminated by the light of belief. Even though she had to go through
untold hardships because of her husband Fir’on, she did not flinch. She
declared her belief in Allah (S.w.T.) and His Prophet, Musa (a.s.),
without any fear. At the time of her death, when she was being martyred,
she prayed to her Lord.

***“...she said: My Lord! build for me a house with Thee in the Garden
and deliver me from Fir’on and his doings, and deliver me from the
unjust people.”*** ***(Surah at-Tahrīm 66:11)***

People of the Cave
------------------

The people of the cave whose number is said to be seven were living
during the reign of the tyrant king Daqiyanūs. Daqiyanūs had claimed
divinity and people used to follow him. But suddenly the hearts of these
seven people became illuminated with true belief.

They set aside the false claims of Daqiyanūs and in order to tread the
path of true beliefs, renounced the worldly power and headed for the
mountains and hid themselves in a cave.

This incident is described in detail in Surah al-Kahf. Their example is
preserved in history till the Day of the Judgement.

Realization Before Death
------------------------

It is known that there have been people so much involved in sins that
their salvation appeared impossible. But in their last moments,
realization dawned on them and they prayed for pardon. Due to their
sincere repentance all their sins were pardoned and the Mercy of the
Merciful Allah (S.w.T.) came to their rescue. Thus, they were able to
achieve salvation and happiness in the hereafter. They shall be among
the successful ones on the Day of the Judgement.

Immediate Death on Embracing Islam
----------------------------------

One such fortunate person was a Jew at the battle of Uhud. His name was
‘Makhrīq’. He addressed his tribesmen as follows: “You are not aware
that Muhammad (S) is the truthful and the promised Prophet.” They
replied, “How do you know we are not aware?” “Then why don’t you come
for his help?” he asked. The tribe said. “Today is Saturday (sabbath).”

He said, “But that was at the time of Hazrat Musa (a.s.), it is
abrogated by the Holy Prophet (S) and is not acceptable to him.” When he
did not receive any response from the people of his tribe he went to the
Holy Prophet (S) and became a Muslim. He was extremely wealthy. He
entrusted all his wealth to the Holy Prophet (S) and himself entered the
battlefield to face the unbelievers. He was soon martyred. It is said
that the Holy Prophet (S) often gave charity from the property of
Makhrīq, the martyr.

Eternal Bliss
-------------

Hur ibn Yazid Riyāhi was the commander of Ibn Ziyad. He had obstructed
the way of Imam Husain (a.s.) and forced him to halt at Karbala. This
despicable act would have condemned him to eternal damnation. But when
he heard the sermon of Imam Husain (a.s.) on the day of Aash-Shūrā and
also his Isteghasa, (call for help) his heart underwent a
transformation. The Mercy and the Grace of Allah (S.w.T.) came to his
rescue. He repented sincerely and aligned himself with the martyrs of
Karbala. In this way he was able to achieve eternal bliss. In the last
moments of his life Imam Husain (a.s.) gave him the good news, “You are
‘Hur’ (Free) as your mother has named you.”

Wise People Never Lose Hope
---------------------------

One should never lose hope of achieving high moral traits and perfection
in one’s faith. In fact one should not even doubt the possibility of
achieving it. Even though this type of deficiency in hope is not totally
Harām, yet the true believer should refrain from it. On the other hand
he should not consider his apparent capabilities; like youth, strength,
wisdom, capacity to think, ability to work, enthusiasm, love etc. to be
sufficient for success in the hereafter

Many a people had lacked the above qualities but when the Mercy and
Grace of Allah (S.w.T.) came to their aid, they were raised to a high
position. For example people like Fuzail ibn Ayaz, Imran Sabi, Barham
Nasrani and Sahib Riyaz who received the Tawfīq from Allah (S.w.T.) when
had become weak due to old age and were incapable of hardwork and active
life, yet they achieved an exalted position.

Hopelessness is a Great Sin
---------------------------

Hopelessness is a Greater Sin because it implies negation of the
Absolute Sovereignty of the Almighty. A heart illumined with the
knowledge that Allah (S.w.T.) the Creator of all existing things is the
best Planner, the best Executor and the best Protector; a person who has
the knowledge that it is Allah (S.w.T.) who bestows a super-abundance of
sustenance, security and welfare on His creatures because of His
boundless Mercy, limitless Generosity and unsurpassed Knowledge, will be
comforted and reassured. The heart of such a person will be calm and
peaceful and the question of feeling sorrowful and aggrieved will just
not arise. The creator is not unmindful of the needs of a child in its
mother’s womb. Nourishment is supplied to him through the umbilical
cord. When the child is born, Allah (S.w.T.) provides him through his
mother, wholesome and easily digestible milk. Gradually Allah (S.w.T.)
develops in him various capabilities needed for the different stages of
his growth.

To ensure the security and happiness of the child Allah (S.w.T.) creates
deep and abiding affection in the heart of the mother for the child; and
she is prepared to sacrifice all her comforts and pleasures for the
child’s sake.

After having the awareness, discussed above, is it possible for one to
lose hope in his Lord? No! In fact it makes it easy to repose faith in
the Creator and go through all the ups and downs of life with
resignation and fortitude.

Hopelessness is a Sign of Disbelief and Lack of Knowledge
---------------------------------------------------------

Despair is a form of hidden disbelief. It is the result of ignorance
about the greatness of one’s Lord (Allah (S.w.T.)). Giving in to despair
is equivalent to disbelieving in one’s Lord (Allah (S.w.T.)), which is a
Greater Sin. One should therefore be extremely cautious and guard
against putting oneself in such a woeful state. The noble Qur’an
explains this in the verse,

***“... Surely none despairs of Allah’s Mercy except the unbelieving
people.”*** ***(Surah Yūsuf 12:87)***

Hope is Embedded in Human Psychology
------------------------------------

The Almighty in His infinite Mercy, has embedded hope in human
psychology. Even in the worst of circumstances, there is a faint glimmer
of hope in the human heart, and this helps him to overcome his feeling
of hopelessness. He therefore turns to his Lord and supplicates for
Mercy, forgiveness and redress, and Allah (S.w.T.) never turns away a
supplicant.

The Cure of Hopelessness
------------------------

### 1. Power of Allah (S.w.T.)

Praise be to Allah (S.w.T.) for His supreme and absolute authority over
the vast universe; the earth and the seven skies. He sets the course of
the stars and the planets; and not a leaf falls without His permission.
He is able to do what He wills. Intellect and reason get bewildered in
trying to understand His Might and Greatness. Can such an Almighty be
unable to fulfill the meagre needs of his creatures. Certainly not! So
how can hopelessness be justified.

### 2. Personal Experiences

One must ponder upon the various blessings Allah (S.w.T.) bestowed on us
in the past and which we had taken for granted. The Almighty has brought
us safely out of the darkness of the womb. He is thoughtful of our needs
and He knows them better than our ownselves, and fulfills them without
our asking. He has rescued us from many a dangerous situations, disease
and calamities. He has bestowed numerous blessings, physical, material,
mental, social and spiritual upon us yet we become confident of our
standing as individuals. Then why should there be hopelessness? Is He
unaware of our condition? I seek forgiveness from the Almighty Allah!
Allah (S.w.T.) is far too exalted.

### 3.Outward Examples

Let us study the situation of those who were in extremely difficult
times but were hopeful of the Lord’s Benevolence and Mercy. They
continued to entreat Allah (S.w.T.) till He accepted their prayers and
redressed them.

Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) and his Male Child
----------------------------------------

Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) was one hundred and twelve years and according to
another report one hundred and twenty years. His respected wife Hazrat
Sarah was ninety-seven years. They did not have any children. Allah
(S.w.T.) sent to them an Angel to inform them that they would be gifted
with a son.

***“And his wife was standing (by), so she laughed, then We gave her the
good news of Ishaq and after Ishaq of (a son’s son) Yaqub.”***

***“She said: O wonder! Shall I bear a son when I am an extremely old
woman and this my husband an extremely old man? Most surely this is a
wonderful thing.”***

***“They said: Do you wonder at Allah’s bidding? The Mercy of Allah and
His blessings are on you, O People of the house, surely He is Praised,
Glorious.”*** ***(Surah Hūd 11: 71-73)***

In brief, the Mercy of Allah (S.w.T.) blessed Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) and
Janabe Sarah with a son, Ishaq, at an age when it could never have been
expected.

Hazrat Zakaria (a.s.) and his Son Yahya (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------

The age of Hazrat Zakaria (a.s.) was ninety-nine years and that of his
wife eighty nine. Yet, he was hopeful of the Grace of Allah (S.w.T.) and
he prayed with sincerity, “He said My Lord! Surely my bones are weakened
and my head flares with hoariness, and my Lord! I have never been
unsuccessful in my prayer to Thee: And surely I fear my cousins after
me, and my wife is barren, therefore grant me from Thyself an heir, who
would inherit me and inherit from the children of Yaqub, and make him,
my Lord, one in whom Thou art well pleased.”

***O Zakaria! Surely We give you good news of a boy whose name shall be
Yahya: We have not made before anyone his equal. He said,***

***“O my Lord! When shall I have a son, and my wife is barren, and I
myself have reached the extreme degree of old age? He said: “So shall It
be, your Lord says: It is easy to Me, and indeed I created you before,
when you were nothing.”*** ***(Surah Maryam 19:4-9)***

Thus Allah (S.w.T.) accepted the invocation of Hazrat Zakaria (a.s.) and
Hazrat Yahya (a.s.) was born to him.

If one is suffering from some disease for a long time and there seems to
be no hope of curing it, one must consider this disease to be a penalty
for his sins (kaffara).

On the other hand if due to his prayers and Sadaqah the disease is cured
it becomes a mean of salvation.

Hazrat Ayyub (a.s.) and Tribulations
------------------------------------

If one intends to achieve humility and insight, he must study the life
of Hazrat Ayyub (a.s.). After being inflicted with a horrible disease
for seven years and according to other reports for eighteen years, he
prayed to Allah (S.w.T.).

***“And Ayyub, when he cried to his Lord, (saying): Harm has afflicted
me, and Thou art the most Merciful of the Mercifuls.”*** ***(Surah
al-’Anbiya’ 21:83)***

Allah (S.w.T.) responded to his entreaty by curing his malady and also
gave him wealth as before.

Hidden Wisdom in Poverty and Destitution
----------------------------------------

If one is afflicted with poverty for a long time and is unable to see a
way out, then this situation can be viewed in two ways: First, it is
possible that there may be a hidden wisdom in his poverty, and if he had
access to this knowledge he may himself choose this state for himself
and be happy in the bargain.

Secondly, those who spend the earlier part of life in poverty usually
become enriched at a later stage and therefore have a comfortable time
in their old age.

Wealth in the Empty Hands
-------------------------

As an example an incident is quoted from the book “Faraz Bādashshuda”:

A rich businessman says, ‘I was travelling for Hajj and had 3000 dinars
and gold and silver ornaments with me. I had tied them up in a bag
attached to my cummerbund. But I dropped this bag when I went to answer
the call of nature. I had proceeded many miles further, when I realized
my bag was missing. I had a lot of wealth so I did not find it
imperative to go back and look for my money nor was it possible to
return. When I came back to my native place one calamity upon another
befell me. Gradually all my wealth disappeared. My public respect began
to change into shame. Due to embarrassment before friends, gossip of the
enemies and further destitution I was compelled to leave my native
village. During this journey I spent a night in a hamlet. At this time,
all the money I had was one-sixth of a silver coin. It was a dark, rainy
night. I took my wife to a cheap hostel for the night. All of a sudden
my wife began to have labour pains and a child was born. My wife said
that she needed something to eat, otherwise she may starve to death. I
took the small silver coin and knocked at the door of a vegetable
seller. After repeated requests he opened the door. I explained to him
my circumstances and gave him the coin. He brought some curd and ghee in
an earthen bowl. As I turned back and walked a few paces, I slipped and
the earthen bowl dropped from my hands and broke. I was struck with
grief and could not control myself.

I began to slap my face and yelled loudly. The window of a nearby house
opened and someone enquired as to who I was and why was I creating a din
and disturbing the neighbourhood. I explained my circumstances in brief
and added that I, my wife and the child were starving of hunger, and
this misfortune has befallen me. The man asked, “Is your hue and cry
only for a piece of silver.” ‘No’, I said, “I had never been so
miserly.” Then I told him about the year when I had lost my bag of 3000
dinars and ornaments. He asked me if there were any distinguishing marks
on my moneybag. I thought he was trying to fool me, so I protested. But
he insisted and I told him. Then he called me in his house and sent his
slave to get my wife and child. The slave returned with my wife and
child, and our host put us up for the night. In the morning he gave some
dinars and said that till my wife recovers, we must stay in his house.

Ten days passed in this manner. Everyday he used to give us some dinars.
Then one day he asked me about my profession. When I told him that I was
an expert trader, he gave me some money and told me to start a business.
After conducting the business for some months, I offered him his share
of the profits. He went into the other room and returned with the
moneybag that I had lost years ago. I was overjoyed to see it and became
unconscious due to the excitement. I thanked Allah (S.w.T.) and returned
to my native village. Gradually my economic conditions began to change
and once more I was a rich man.

***“ It may be that you dislike a thing while it is good for you, maybe
that you love a thing while it is evil for you.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:216).***

***“Allah brings about ease after difficulty.”*** ***(Surah at-Talāq
65:7)***

Cure for Hopelessness in Difficult Times
----------------------------------------

If a person is involved in worldly problems he should turn towards two
realities. Firstly, this world is a place of test and trial for
everyone. There is no one who could escape its clutches. Secondly, one
must look at the conditions of people who are worse off than us. In this
way one can get peace and solace by comparing ones condition with that
of others. Even in the greatest calamities, we should continue to rely
upon the Mercy of Allah (S.w.T.). Many a people of the past had been
afflicted with tribulations with no relief in sight. But the Merciful
Allah (S.w.T.) gave them success.

In the book “Faraj Bād as Shiddah” the respected author, Husain bin Saīd
Dabistani has recorded more than 500 incidents where people, surrounded
by troubles from all sides were given relief by Allah (S.w.T.) after all
hopes were shattered. Further we ourselves witness many cases where the
invocations and Sadaqah of the religious personalities help the people
out of difficult situations. In the same book there is an incident where
a resident of Madinah says, “I was rich and had all the good things in
life. Eventually I became poor and destitute. So I went to Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) and told him of my problems. He expressed pity upon my
condition and recited the following couplets for my sake, “If you fall
into difficult times do not be impatient. Because for a long time you
have experienced comfort.

Then after every discomfort is comfort and consolation. And the saying
of Allah (S.w.T.) is the most truthful. ‘So do not despair, certainly
despair is disbelief.’ Allah (S.w.T.) may enrich you in a short while.
After that do not forget your Lord. Certainly Allah (S.w.T.) fulfills
His promise. If the intellect had the capacity to produce food the
wealth of the world would be only with the intellectuals. Beware, do not
lose hope when you face calamities. Behind the curtains are concealed
astounding candles (of hope).”

The narrator says, “When I heard these lines my grief changed into
happiness and hopelessness turned into optimism. Very soon the doors of
Mercy opened upon me and my bad times changed for the good.”

A Reminder
----------

This book relates from the Holy Prophet (S) that to ward off calamities
this Qur’anic verse should be recited.

***“There is no God but Thou, glory be to Thee, surely I am of those who
make themselves to suffer loss.”*** ***(Surah al-’Anbiya’ 21:87)***

“Allah (S.w.T.) is my Lord, and I do not associate him with anything.”

We should remember that despair is the worst of the sins, because it
implies that the connection between Allah (S.w.T.) and his creature has
been severed. It signifies turning away from the Divine nature. Because
even if an iota of belief remains in a person’s heart, he could not
severe relations with his Nourisher and Cherisher. It may be that
sometimes a sort of hopelessness pervades his imagination but he soon
recovers and repents of his sin.

Every Sin is Pardonable
-----------------------

According to the verse of the Holy Qur’an and Mutawatir (widely related)
traditions all the sins which man commits are pardonable if he repents
sincerely. It is wrong to say that such a sin can never be pardoned. The
Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says in the Glorious Qur’an,

***“And He it is who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons
the evil deeds and He knows what you do.”*** ***(Surah Ash-Shūrā
42:25)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has mentioned His names as:

1) Tawwabun (one who accepts Tawba)

2) Gaffarun (one who pardons)

3) Ghafūrun (one who forgives totally)

4) Ghāfir udh-Dhunuba (Pardoner of sins)

5) Qābil ut-Tawba (one who accepts repentance)

Allah (S.w.T.) has given a general invitation to all the people to turn
towards Him and seek forgiveness for their sins. If we study the meaning
of the 54th verse of Surah az-Zumar we find that sinners have no cause
to loose hope. This Ayat is also known as Ayat al-Rahma (The verse of
Mercy).

***“Say: O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the Mercy of Allah ; Surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether; surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”***
***(Surah az-Zumar 39:53).***

Unlimited Grace
---------------

A few points must be noted from the above verse.

Firstly, Allah (S.w.T.) says, ‘O my servant’ and not ‘O sinners!’ Even
though he is addressing the sinners he addresses them as ‘my servants’.
So that the hopelessness of the servants may be transformed into hope in
His Mercy.

Secondly, he says, “Who have acted extravagantly.” This denotes a soft
approach. Allah (S.w.T.) does not say ‘O you who have acted blatantly,’
So that the sinners may not lose hope of obtaining pardon.

Hopelessness is Harām
---------------------

The third point to be noted is that the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) has told
the sinners, “Do not despair of the Divine Mercy.” The use of a negative
term signifies the prohibition of hopelessness. Also it means that to
lose hope regarding salvation is Harām.

The fourth point is that Allah (S.w.T.) did not stop at this, He further
adds, “Surely Allah (S.w.T.) forgives the faults altogether,” signifying
that the statement covers all the sins.

Fifth Point: The addition of the word ‘altogether’ at the end signifies
that the statement includes all sins without any exception.

Sixth Point: The last point is that at the end of the verse, Allah
(S.w.T.) repeats, “Surely He is the forgiving, the merciful,” to stress
upon the fact that Allah (S.w.T.) desires and wishes to forgive those
who repent.

Repentance of the Killer of a Prophet is also Acceptable
--------------------------------------------------------

Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari (r.a.) relates that a woman came to the Holy
Prophet (S) and asked, “If a woman kills her child can she seek pardon?”
The Holy Prophet (S) replied,

“By Allah in whose control is the life of Muhammad (S) even if this
woman has killed seventy Prophets and then feels remorse and repents and
Allah is convinced of her sincerity and the truth of her statement, upon
the condition that she does not repeat the sin, her repentance shall be
accepted. And her sins would be pardoned. Surely Allah is oft forgiving
and forgives, ever so beyond measure. Verily one who repents (sincerely)
is; as if he has never committed that sin.”[^1]

Despair in the Acceptance of Prayers is Also Improper
-----------------------------------------------------

If we pray to Allah (S.w.T.) for some worldly benefits or the Hereafter
and our prayer is not answered it raises two noteworthy points. Firstly,
we must know that Allah (S.w.T.) has promised to accept all prayers and
Allah (S.w.T.) never goes back on His word.

As it is mentioned in the Holy book,

***“And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:186)***

At another place Allah (S.w.T.) says,

***“And your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you.”*** ***(Surah
Ghāfir, 40:60)***

The second point is that due to His unlimited wisdom He may delay the
acceptance of some prayer. So if we do not get immediate gratification
we should not lose hope of having our prayers accepted.

Prayers May Not Be Accepted Due to Sins
---------------------------------------

Sometimes the sins of a person come in the way of the acceptance of his
prayers. At other times Allah (S.w.T.) may delay the acceptance due to
some hidden wisdom. This would compel the person to repeat his prayers
and thus he would be entitled for additional Tawāb. The opportunity to
invocate is itself a blessing of Allah (S.w.T.).

Another possibility is that Allah (S.w.T.) wishes to hear the entreaties
of His creature many times before He fulfills his wishes.

Delay in the Acceptance of Prayers Causes Nearness to Allah (S.w.T.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes there is a delay in the acceptance of prayers because, to
supplicate Allah (S.w.T.) continuously is the best of worship. It is the
Mercy of Allah (S.w.T.) that he may want us to continue to pray to Him.
It is a means of seeking nearness to Him. For whomsoever He wishes good,
He gives him the Tawfīq of supplicating Him by delaying the acceptance
of his prayers.

Allama Majlisi (r.a.) writes in the book ‘Hayatul Qulub’ that Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says in a reliable tradition, “Hazrat Ibrahīm
(a.s.) used to visit the populated cities and the desolate forests so
that he could derive lessons from the creatures of Allah (S.w.T.). One
day he saw a worshipper busy in prayers. His dress was made of fur and
the surroundings filled with his intonation. Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) was
astonished at his appearance. He went towards him, sat down and waited
for him to conclude his prayers. When he finished his prayers, Hazrat
Ibrahīm (a.s.) said, “I appreciate your way and want to befriend you.
Tell me where do you stay so that I could come to meet you whenever I
want.” He said, “You will not be able to travel on my path.”

“Why?”

“I walk on the surface of the water.”

Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) said, “The Almighty Allah who has given you the
capacity to walk on water, can also enable me to do so. Come, arise,
today I shall spend the night with you at your residence.

When they reached the bank of the river the man uttered “Bismillah” and
stepped in the river and was soon on the other side of it. Hazrat
Ibrahīm (a.s.) also recited Bismillah and crossed the river. This man
was astounded. Then both of them entered his house.

Ibrahīm (a.s.) asked him, “Which is the most difficult day?” He replied,
“The day Allah will reward and punish all His creatures according to
their deeds.” Ibrahīm (a.s.) said, “Let us together pray that Allah may
protect us from the hardships of this day.”

According to another report Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) said, “Let us pray
together for the sinful believers.” The worshipper said, “I will not
participate in this prayer because I have been praying for something for
the past thirty years and till date it has not been fulfilled, so there
is no scope in praying for something else.”

Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.) said, “O worshipper! when Allah holds a creature
dear He delays the acceptance of his prayers so that he may continue to
plead and supplicate Him. On the other hand when He dislikes a person He
answers his prayers immediately or creates hopelessness in his heart so
that he would stop praying.”

Then he asked the worshipper about his prayer which has not been
accepted till then. He said, “One day I was busy in my prayers when I
saw a handsome boy grazing a herd of sheep and goats. I asked him whose
animals were those. He said they belonged to him. Then I asked him who
he was. He said that he was the son of Khalilullah (Friend of Allah)
Ibrahīm (a.s.) and that his name was Ismail. At that moment I prayed to
Allah to let me see my ‘Khalil’ Ibrahīm (a.s.).” Ibrahīm (a.s.) said,
“Now your prayer has been answered. I am that Ibrahīm (a.s.).” The
worshipper became extremely overjoyed and embraced Ibrahīm (a.s.). He
kissed his head, eyes and hands and thanked the Almighty Allah with
sincerity. After this both of them together prayed for the believing men
and women.

[^1]: Liyali Akhbār


