Introduction
============

Despite the vast amount of scholarship carried out by Western
orientalists since the nineteenth century and the analyses and
translations made of various Islamic sources, very little attention has
been paid thus far to the collection of religious sayings, sermons,
prayers, proverbs and didactic expositions which comprises the corpus of
*Hadith* as understood by Twelve Imam Shi'ite Muslims.

It is of course true that much of the substance of the Shi'ite *hadith*
collection resembles the Sunni collection,[^1] and to the extent that
the latter has been studied the former has also been dealt with in an
indirect manner. But in as much as Shi'ite *hadiths* possess a form,
style and "perfume" of their own, no indirect treatment of their
substance and content can replace the direct translation and analysis of
this collection itself.

It is in fact rather amazing that despite the extreme importance of
Shi'ite *Hadith* for the development of Shi'ite law and theology as well
as many fields of the "intellectual sciences" (*al-'ulum al-'aqliyyah*),
not to speak of its role in piety and the spiritual life, the sayings of
the Imams of Shi'ism have not been rendered into English until now.

Nor have they been studied as a whole and as a distinct body of
religious writings of an inspired nature within the general context of
Islam itself. The present volume represents, therefore, a pioneering
effort to present a sample of this extensive body of writings to the
English speaking world.

The Shi'ite *hadith* literature includes all the sayings of the Prophet
of Islam accepted by Shi'ites as well as the traditions of the twelve
Imams from 'Ali ibn Abi talib to the Mahdi. This collection is thus
considered to be, after the Holy Quran, the most important body of
religious texts for Shi'ites.

As in Sunni Islam, so in this case: the *Hadith* forms along with the
Revealed Book the basis of all the religious sciences, including of
course the *Shari'ah* as well as religious life in both its intellectual
and devotional aspects. No aspect of the life and history of the Shi'ite
community would be comprehensible without a consideration of this body
of inspired writings.

What is particular to this collection, however, is that although it is a
part of the foundation of Islam as seen by Shi'ism, its "composition"
stretches over a period of more than two centuries. In Sunni Islam,
*Hadith* is limited to the sayings of the Blessed Prophet.

In fact to use the term "*hadith*" in Sunnism is to refer to his sayings
and not to anyone else's. In the case of Shi'ism, however, although a
clear distinction is made between prophetic *Hadith* (*al-hadith
al-nabawi*) and the sayings of the Imams (*al-hadith al-walawi*), the
two are included in a single collection. This means that from a certain
point of view the apostolic age of Islam is seen by Shi'ism to stretch
way beyond the relatively short period usually associated with apostles
in various religions.

The reason for this perspective lies of course in the Shi'ite conception
of the Imam.[^2] The term imam as used in a technical sense in Shi'ism
differs from the general usage of the term in Arabic, where it means
"leader", or in Sunni political theory where it means the caliph
himself. As used technically in Shi'ism the term refers to the person
who contains within himself the "Muhammadan Light" (*al-nur
al-muhammadi*) which was handed down through Fatimah, the daughter of
the Blessed Prophet, and 'Ali, the first Imam, to the others,
terminating with the Hidden Imam who is to appear again one day as the
Mahdi.[^3] As a result of the presence of this light, the Imam is
considered to be "sinless" (*ma'sum*) and to possess perfect knowledge
of the esoteric as well as the exoteric order.

The Imams are like a chain of light issuing forth from the "Sun of
Prophecy" which is their origin, and yet they are never separated from
that Sun. Whatever is said by them emanates from the same inviolable
treasury of inspired wisdom. Since they are an extension of the inner
reality of the Blessed Prophet, their words really go back to him.

That is why their sayings are seen in the Shi'ite perspective as an
extension of the prophetic *Hadith*, just as the light of their being is
seen as a continuation of the prophetic light. In Shi'ite eyes, the
temporal separation of the Imams from the Blessed Prophet does not at
all affect their essential and inner bond with him or the continuity of
the "prophetic light" which is the source of his as well as their
inspired knowledge.

This metaphysical conception is the reason that Shi'ites incorporate
traditions stretching over two centuries into a single whole with those
of the Blessed Prophet himself. It also distinguishes the Shi'ite
conception of *Hadith* from that held in Sunnism. Otherwise, the actual
content of *Hadith* in Sunni and Shi'ite collections is very close.
After all, both kinds concern the same spiritual reality. Of course the
chain of transmission accepted by the two schools is not the same.

But despite this difference in the authorities who have handed down the
prophetic sayings, the actual *hadiths* recorded by Sunni and Shi'ite
sources have overwhelming similarities. The major difference is the
Shi'ites' consideration of the extension of an aspect of the being of
the Blessed Prophet in the Imams and therefore their addition of the
sayings of the Imams to the strictly "prophetic" *Hadith*.

The sayings of the Imams are in many ways not only a continuation but
also a kind of commentary and elucidation of the prophetic *Hadith*,
often with the aim of bringing out the esoteric teachings of Islam. Many
of these *hadith*s deal, like those of the Blessed Prophet, with the
practical aspects of life and the *Shari'ah*. Others deal with pure
metaphysics, as do certain prophetic *hadith*s, especially the "sacred
*hadith*s" (*hadith* *qudsi*).

Still other sayings of the Imams deal with the devotional aspects of
life and contain some of the most famous prayers which have been recited
over the ages by both Sunnis and Shi'ites. Finally some of the sayings
deal with the various esoteric sciences. They thus cover a vast spectrum
ranging from the "mundane" problems of daily life to the question of the
meaning of truth itself.

Because of their innate nature and also the fact that like Sufism they
issue from the esoteric dimension of Islam, they have intermingled over
the ages with certain types of Sufi writings.[^4] They have also been
considered as sources of Islamic esotericism by the Sufis, because the
Imams of Shi'ism are seen in the Sufi perspective as the spiritual poles
of their age. They appear in the spiritual chain (*silsilah*) of various
Sufi orders, even those which have spread almost exclusively among
Sunnis.[^5]

Because of the nature of their contents, these sayings have influenced
nearly every branch of Shi'ite learning as well as the daily life of the
community. Shi'ite jurisprudence (*fiqh*) bases itself directly upon
this corpus in addition to the Holy Quran. Shi'ite theology (*kalam*)
would be incomprehensible without a knowledge of these sayings. Shi'ite
Quranic commentaries draw heavily upon them. Even sciences of nature
such as natural history or alchemy were developed with reference to
them.

And finally these sayings have surfaced as sources for meditation of the
most sublime metaphysical themes over the centuries, and some of the
most elaborate metaphysical and philosophical schools of Islam have
issued to a large extent from them. Later Islamic philosophy as
associated with the name of Sadr al-Din Shirazi, would in fact be
inconceivable without recourse to the Shi'ite *hadith* collection.[^6]
One of Sadr al-Din's greatest metaphysical works is his unfinished
commentary upon a portion of the most important of the four basic
Shi'ite collections of *Hadith*, the *al-Kafi* of al-Kulayni.[^7]

Within the collection of Shi'ite *hadiths* are certain works which need
to be mentioned separately. There is first of all the celebrated *Nahj
al-balaghah* (The Path of Eloquence) of 'Ali ibn Abi talib assembled and
systematized by the fourth/tenth century Shi'ite scholar Sayyid Sharif
al-Radi. Considering the enormous importance of this work in Shi'ite
Islam as well as for all lovers of the Arabic language, it is remarkable
how little attention has been paid to it in European languages.[^8]

After all, many of the leading writers of Arabic such as Taha Husayn and
Kurd 'Ali claim in their autobiographies to have perfected their style
of writing Arabic through the study of the *Nahj al-balaghah*, while
generation after generation of Shi'ite thinkers have meditated and
commented upon its meaning.

Moreover, the shorter prayers and proverbs of this work have spread very
widely among the populace and have entered both the classical and folk
literature of not only Arabic but also Persian, and through the
influence of Persian, several other languages of the Islamic peoples,
such as Urdu.

The *Nahj al-balaghah* contains, besides spiritual advice, moral maxims
and political directives, several remarkable discourses on metaphysics,
especially concerning the question of Unity (*al tawhid*). It possesses
both its own method of exposition and a very distinct technical
vocabulary which distinguish it from the various Islamic schools which
have dealt with metaphysics.

Western scholars refused for a long time to accept the authenticity of
the authorship of this work and attributed it to Sayyid Sharif al-Radi,
although the style of al-Radi's own works is very different from that of
the *Nahj al-balaghah*. In any case as far as the traditional Shi'ite
perspective is concerned, the position of the *Nahj al-balaghah* and its
authorship can best be explained by repeating a conversation which took
place some eighteen or nineteen years ago between 'Allamah Tabatabai,
the celebrated contemporary Shi'ite scholar who is responsible for the
selection of the present anthology, and Henry Corbin, the foremost
Western student of Shi'ism.

Corbin, who himself was as far removed from "historicism" as possible,
once said to 'Allamah Tabataba'i during the regular discussions they had
together in Tehran (in which the present writer usually acted as
translator), "Western scholars claim that 'Ali is not the author of the
*Nahj al-balaghah*. What is your view and whom do you consider to be the
author of this work ?" 'Allamah Tabataba'i raised his head and answered
in his usual gentle and calm manner, "For us whoever wrote the *Nahj*
*al-balaghah* is 'Ali, even if he lived a century ago."

The second notable work in the Shi'ite collection of *Hadith*is the
*al-Sahifat al-sajjadiyyah* (The Scroll of al-Sajjad of the fourth Imam
Zayn al-'Abidin), also called al-Sajjad. A witness to the tragedy of
Karbala-which must have left an indelible impression upon his soul-the
fourth Imam poured forth his inner life in a symphony of beautiful
prayers which have caused the *Sahifah* to be called the "Psalms of the
Family of the Holy Prophet". These prayers form a part of the daily
religious life of not only Shi'ites but also Sunnis, who find them in
many of the prayer manuals most popular in the Sunni world.[^9]9

Also notable in the Shi'ite collection of *Hadith* are the sayings of
the fifth, sixth and seventh Imams, from whom the largest number of
traditions have been recorded. These Imams lived at the end of the
Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid dynasties when, as a result of the
changes in the caliphate, central authority had weakened and the Imams
were able to speak more openly and also train more students. The number
of students, both Shi'ite and Sunni, trained by the sixth Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq has been estimated at four thousand. He left behind a vast body
of sayings which range from the field of law to the esoteric sciences.

The sayings of the Holy Prophet and the Imams have been of course a
constant source of meditation and discussion by Shi'ite men of learning
throughout the ages. But it is especially in the later period of Shi'ite
history beginning with Sayyid Haydar Amuli, leading to the great masters
of the Safavid period such as Mir Damad and Mulla Sadra and continuing
to the present day that these sayings have served as a distinct source
for metaphysics and philosophy as well as the juridical and Quranic
sciences. The commentaries of Mulla Sadra, Qadi Sa'id al-Qummi and many
others on these collections of Shi'ite *Hadith* are among the great
masterpieces of Islamic thought.[^10] Later Islamic philosophy and
theosophy in fact could not be understood without them.[^11]

The present volume represents the second in a series of three which was
planned many years ago with the help and support of Professor Kenneth
Morgan, then of Colgate University, with the aim of presenting Shi'ism
to the Western world from the point of view of Shi'ism itself. The first
volume in the series appeared in English as *Shi'ite Islam* by 'Allamah
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabatabai edited and translated by the author of
these lines.[^12] The second volume, called *The Quran in Islam*
(*Qur'an dar islam*), was also written by 'Allamah Tabataba'i and its
Persian version printed in Tehran. Most of it was also translated by us
into English, but the translation was not completed. The events of the
last year in Iran have made the manuscript of what we have already
translated inaccessible to us so that there is no possibility at the
present moment to produce the English translation as planned.

The present volume is the third and final one in the series. After a
long period of study and deliberation, 'Allamah Tabataba'i made the
present selection from the vast collection of *Hadith*, a task which
would have been bewildering for anyone not possessing his knowledge of
this inspired literature. Once this selection was made, Dr. William
Chittick, who was then residing in Tehran and working with us on various
scholarly projects, undertook the arduous task of translating the very
compact and difficult Arabic texts into English.

Because of the lack of precedence for rendering these writings into
European languages and the nature of the texts themselves, Dr. Chittick
was faced with a formidable task. It was only his intimate knowledge of
Arabic, Persian and the subject matter combined with great patience and
meticulous scholarship that made it possible for him to succeed in such
a laborious and exacting undertaking. He should be congratulated in
every way for having successfully concluded this colossal task.

It remained for the Muhammadi Trust to bring the project to fruition and
to make its publication possible. The credit for this volume and its
effect in making Shi'ism better known must be given to a large extent to
the Trust. As one who was responsible for this volume from its
inception, I want to thank the Trust especially Wg. Cdr. (ret'd.) Q.
Husayn, its very able secretary who with great love and devotion to the
true cause of Islam, enabled us to complete this project. Dr. Chittick,
also, has earned the gratitude of all students of Islam for his fine
scholarship and devotion to the completion of a very difficult project.

This volume is particularly pertinent at the present moment, when
volcanic eruptions and powerful waves of a political nature associated
with the name of Islam in general and Shi'ism in particular have made an
authentic knowledge of things Islamic imperative, lest ignorance destroy
the very foundations of human society and the relations which make the
discourse between various nations and religious communities possible.

At the dawn of this fifteenth century of the terrestrial existence of
Islam, may this volume be an aid in bringing about an understanding of
one of the fundamental sources of inspiration and knowledge for not only
Shi'ism but Islam as such.

*Wa'Llahu a'lam*  
 Seyyed Hossein Nasr  
 Cambridge, Massachussetts  
 Muharram 1400 November 1979

[^1]: There are six canonical collections in Sunni Islam which have been
accepted by the whole community since they were first compiled in the
second and the third Islamic centuries. These collections, referred
to al-Sihah al-sittah, the Six Correct Collections, are associated with
the names of great scholars of Hadith such as Bukhari, Muslim, etc. Of
these, the most famous is that of Bukhari, which has been translated
into English (Sahih al-Bukhari: Arabic-English, by Muhammad Muhsin Khan,
Islamic University, Madina; second revised edition, Ankara, 1976). The
vast concordance of Hadith by Wensinck, Mensing et al. (Leiden, 1936-69)
is based on these six collections.

[^2]: See 'Allamah Tabatabai, Shi'ite Islam, London-Albany, 1975, pp.
173ff.

[^3]: As far as the continuity of the chain is concerned the Isma'ili
conception is of course different, since for the Isma'ilis the chain of
Imams continues un-interrupted to this day.

[^4]: On the relation between Shi'ism and Sufism See S. H. Nasr, Sufi
Essays, London, 1972, pp. 104-20.

[^5]: A most interesting example of such interpenetration is to be seen
in part of the famous prayer of the third Shi'ite Imam Husayn, also
found in Shadhili prayers manuals. See W. Chittick, "A Shadhili Presence
on Shi'ite Islam", Sophia Perennis, vol. I, 1975, pp. 97-100

[^6]: On this corpus as a source for the doctrines of Sadr al Din
Shirazi see S. H. Nasr, Sadr al Din Shirazi and His Transcendent
Theosophy, London-Boulder, 1978, chapter 4.

[^7]: This monumental work was translated into French by H. Corbin, who
taught it for many years in Paris, but it has never been published. See
Corbin, En Islam iranien, Paris, 1971.

[^8]: This work has been translated several times in part or wholly in
the Indo-Pakistani sub-continent and in Iran, but none of these
translations is completely adequate. A new translation has been prepared
by S. H. Jafri which is supposed to be published soon and which, we
hope, will fulfill the very difficult condition of doing justice to both
the meaning and the literary beauty of the text.

[^9]: Some of these prayers have been translated by C. Padwick in
her Muslim Devotions, London, 1961

[^10]: See H. Corbin, En islam iranien.

[^11]: Not only Mulla Sadra, but also his students were deeply
influenced by this collection. One of Mulla Sadra's most famous
students, Mulla Muhsin Fayd Kashani, who was at once theologian, gnostic
and philosopher, was also an outstanding authority on Shi'ite Hadith.
His al-Wafi is one of the most studied works on hadiths of the Shi'ite
Imams and their lines of transmission.

[^12]: In our introduction to that work we have dealt with the
conditions under which these works were conceived as well as a biography
of 'Allammah Tabatabai. Shi'ite Islam, was published by both Allen &
Unwin in London and the State University of New York Press in Albany.
The work has also just appeared in paperback in America. It is of
interest to note that the original Persian version of this work, written
specifically for this project and with a Persian Introduction by S. H.
Nasr, has become one of the most widely read works on Shi'ism in Iran
itself and has been reprinted many times.


