Foreword
========

If one studies the literature of Islam carefully, one will immediately
encounter a vast and varied field of material.

First there is the network of laws and regulations which makes up
Islamic jurisprudence (*fiqh*) and which takes into consideration and
regulates man's every individual and social "movement and rest",
activity and situation, at every moment of time, in every place and
under all conditions, as well as every particular and general occurrence
related to human life.

Second there is a vast range of moral and ethical expositions which
weighs every sort of moral activity, whether praiseworthy or blamable,
and presents as a model for human society that which befits the
perfection of man.

Finally on the level of Islam's overall view of Reality there is the
general "philosophy" of Islam, that is, its sciences relating to
cosmology, spiritual anthropology and finally the knowledge of God,
presented in the clearest possible expression and most direct manner.

On a more profound level of study and penetration it will become obvious
that the various elements of this tradition, with all their astonishing
complexity and variety, are governed by a particular kind of
interrelationship; that all of these elements are reducible in the final
analysis to one truth, the "Profession of God's Unity" (*tawhid*), which
is the ultimate principle of all the Islamic sciences.

***"A good word is as a good treeâ€”its roots are in heaven, it gives its
produce every season by the leave of its Lord" (Quran 14 : 24).***

The noble sayings and writings presented in the present work were
selected and translated from the traditions left by the foremost
exponents of Islam. They include expositions elucidating the principle
of *tawhid* and making clear the fundamental basis of all Islamic
sciences and pursuits.

At the same time they contain excellent and subtle allusions to the
manner in which the important remaining sciences are ordered and
organized around *tawhid*, how the moral virtues are based upon it, and
how finally the practical aspects of Islam are founded upon and derived
from these virtues. Finally, 'Ali's "Instructions to Malik al-Ashtar"
clarify the general situation of Islamic society in relation to the
practical application of Islamic government.

All the traditions translated in the present work are summarized in the
following two sentences: "Islam is the religion of seeing things as they
are" and "Islam means to submit to the Truth (*al-haqq*) and to follow
It in one's beliefs and actions."

Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i


