On the Unity of God
===================

A follower of the Islamic religion must first accept the testimony of
faith: "There is no god but God" (*la ilaha illa-llah*). This profession
of God's Unity is Islam's first pillar (*rukn*). All else depends upon
it and derives from it.

But what does it mean to say that there is no god but God? For Islam,
the manner in which the believer answers this question displays the
depth to which he understands his religion. And, paraphrasing a *hadith*
of the Prophet often quoted in Sufi texts, one might say that there are
as many ways of understanding the meaning of this profession as there
are believers.[^1]

Islamic intellectual history can be understood as a gradual unfolding of
the manner in which successive generations of men have understood the
meaning and implications of professing God's Unity. Theology,
jurisprudence, philosophy, Sufism, even to some degree the natural
sciences, all seek to explain at some level the principle of *tawhid*,
"To profess that God is One." Some of the most productive of the
intellectual schools which have attempted to explain the meaning of
*tawhid* have flourished among Shi'ites.

Many historians have looked outside of Islam to find the inspiration for
Islam's philosophical and metaphysical expositions of the nature of
God's Unity. Such scholars tend to relegate anything more than what
could derive - that is, in their view from a "simple bedouin faith" to
outside influence.

Invariably they ignore the rich treasuries of wisdom contained in the
vast corpus of Shi'ite *hadith* literature pertaining to Islam's first
centuries, i.e., the sayings of the Imams who were the acknowledged
authorities in the religious sciences not only by the Shi'ites but also
by the Sunnis. Even certain sayings of the Prophet which provide
inspiration for the Imams have been ignored. In particular, the great
watershed of Islamic metaphysical teachings, Ali ibn Abi Talib, the
Prophet's cousin and son-in-law and the Shi'ites' first Imam, has been
largely overlooked.

In the following selections from *Bihar al-anwar*, fifteen out of
hundreds that can be found in Shi'ite sources, the reader will see the
seeds for much of later Islamic metaphysical speculation. It will be
noticed that the style of the *hadith*s varies little from the Prophet
himself to the eighth Imam, the last from whom large numbers of such
sayings have been handed down. The most important sources for such
*hadith*s, i.e., the Prophet, the first, fifth, sixth, seventh and
eighth Imams, are all represented.

The basic themes of the selections remain largely constant. The Prophet
and the Imams all emphasize God's transcendence, or His
"incomparability" (*tanzih*) with the creatures. We may speak of God -
although only on the authority of His own words, i.e., the Quran-but the
expressions we employ are not to be understood as they are when we use
the same words to describe the creatures.

At the same time, the very fact that words can properly be employed to
refer to God show that in some respect He is indeed "comparable" or
"similar" (*tasbih*) to His creation, if only in the sense that His
creation is somehow "similar" to Him because created by Him. Otherwise,
the words employed to speak about Him would all be meaningless, or each
one would be equivalent to every other. But this second dimension of
God's Reality - one more emphasized in Sufism - is relatively ignored in
favor of His incomparability.

Another theme of the selections is man's inability to grasp God through
such things as the powers of his reason and his senses. The constant
emphasis upon this point underlines God's incomparability and
illustrates the particular errors to which the polytheistic and
anthropomorphic thinking and imagination of the "Age of Ignorance"
(*al-jahiliyyah*) before Islam was prone.

In order to clarify the meaning of the selections, I have tried to
supply a sufficient number of annotations. To comment upon the sayings
in detail has been the task of much of Shi'ite speculation throughout
the centuries. Every word and every sentence have provided numerous
scholars with ample opportunity to display their erudition. But for a
Western audience, one can only hope to point out the most important
references to the Quran and the prophetic *hadith* literature-references
which are largely obvious for the Arabic speaking Muslim.

Then I have tried to illustrate the manner in which later commentators
have elaborated upon the *hadith*s by quoting a number of explanatory
passages, in Part I mostly from Majlisi, the compiler of the *Bihar
al-anwar*. Some of these commentaries are necessary to understand the
bearing of the text, but others may seem to obscure an apparently
obvious sentence. In the latter case, this is largely because the
commentators usually try to explain the text by referring to theological
and philosophical concepts familiar to their readers, but not so to the
average Westerner. However that may be, such notes illustrate the manner
in which later speculation has expanded and developed an aphoristic mode
of expression into a complex metaphysical system.

A. The Prophet
--------------

### 1. Profession of Faith

Abu Abdallah (the sixth Imam) has related from his fathers that the
Prophet of God - God bless him and his household[^2] said in one of his
sermons, "Praise belongs to God, who in His firstness (*awwaliyyah*) was
solitary and in His beginninglessness (*azaliyyah*) was tremendously
exalted through divinity and supremely great through His magnificence
and power.[^3] He originated that which He produced and brought into
being that which He created without a model (*mithal*) preceding
anything that He created.

Our Lord, the eternal (*al-qadim*), unstitched (the heavens and the
earth)[^4] through the subtlety (*lutf*) of His lordship and the
knowledge within His omniscience, created all that He created through
the laws of His power (*qudrah*), and split (the sky) through the light
of dawn.[^5] ***So none changes His creation, none alters His handiwork,
'none repels His law' (13 : 45),***[^6] none rejects His command.

There is no place of rest away from His call (*dawah*),[^7] no cessation
to His dominion and no interruption of His term. He is the truly
existent (*al-kaynun*) from the first and the truly enduring
(*al-daymum*) forever. He is veiled from His creatures by His light in
the high horizon, in the towering might, and in the lofty dominion.

He is above all things and below all things. So He manifested Himself
(*tajalla*) to His creation without being seen, and He transcends being
gazed upon. He wanted to be distinguished by the profession of Unity
(*tawhid*) when He withdrew behind the veil of His light, rose high in
His exaltation and concealed Himself from His creation."[^8]

"He sent to them messengers so they might be His conclusive argument
against His creatures[^9] and so His messengers to them might be
witnesses against them.[^10] ***He sent among them prophets bearing good
tidings and warning, 'that whosoever perished might perish by a clear
sign, and by a clear sign he might live who lived' (7 : 42)*** and that
the servants might understand of their Lord that of which they had been
ignorant, recognize Him in His Lordship after they had denied (it) and
profess His Unity in His divinity after they had stubbornly resisted."

### 2. God's Attributes

Ibn Abbas related that a Jew, called Na'thal, stood up before the
Prophet of God-upon whom be blessings and peace-and said, "O Muhammad,
verily I will ask thee about certain things which have been repeating
themselves in my breast for some time. If thou answerest them for me I
will embrace Islam at thy hand."

The Prophet said, "Ask, O Abu Ummarah"

Then he said, "O Muhammad, describe for me thy Lord."

He answered,"Surely the Creator cannot be described except by that with
which He has described Himself-and how should one describe that Creator
whom the senses cannot perceive, imaginations cannot attain, thoughts
(*khatarat*) cannot delimit and sight cannot encompass ?

Greater is He than what the depicters describe. He is distant in His
nearness and near in His distance. He fashions (*kayyaf*) 'howness'
(*kayfiyyah*), so it is not said of Him, 'How?' (*kayf*); He determines
(*ayyan*) the 'where' (*ayn*), so it is not said of Him, 'Where ?'
(*ayn*).

He sunders 'howness' (*kayfufiyyah*) and 'whereness' (*aynuniyyah*), so
He is ***"One . . . the Everlasting Refuge" (112 :1-2),*** as He has
described Himself. But depicters do not attain to His description.
***'He has not begotten, and has not been begotten, and equal to Him is
not any one' (112 : 3-4)***.

Na'thal said, "Thou hast spoken the truth. O Muhammad, tell me about thy
saying, 'Surely He is One, there is none like (*shabih*) Him.' Is not
God one and man one? And thus His oneness (*wahdaniyyah*) resembles the
oneness of man."

He answered, "God is one, but single in meaning (*ahadi al-mana*), while
man is one but dual in meaning (*thanawi al-ma'na*), corporeal substance
(*jism*) and accidents (*'arad*), body (*badan*) and spirit (*ruh*).
Similarity (*tashbih*)[^11] pertains only to the meanings."  
 Nathal said, "Thou hast spoken the truth, O Muhammad."

B. Ali (as), the First Imam
---------------------------

### 1. The Transcendent Lord

It was related by 'Ali ibn Musa Ar-Ridhaâ€™ (the eighth Imam) from the
earlier Imams in succession that al-Husayn ibn 'Ali (the third Imam)
spoke as follows: The Commander of the Faithful-upon whom be
peace-addressed the people in the mosque at Kufa and said:

"Praise belongs to God, who did not originate from anything, nor did He
bring what exists into being from anything.[^12] His beginninglessness
is attested to by the temporality (*huduth*) of things, His power by the
impotence with which He has branded them, and His everlastingness
(*dawam*) by the annihilation (*fana'*) which He has forced upon them.
No place is empty of Him that He might be perceived through localization
(*ayniyyah*), no object (*shabah*) is like Him that He might be
described by quality (*kayfiyyah*), nor is He absent from anything that
He might be known through situation (*haythiyyah*)."[^13]

"He is distinct (*muba'in*) in attributes from all that He has
originated, inaccessible to perception because of the changing essences
He has created (in things),[^14] and outside of all domination
(*tasarruf*) by changing states (*halat*) because of grandeur and
tremendousness. Forbidden is His delimitation (*tahdid*) to the
penetrating acumen of sagacities, His description (*takyif*) to the
piercing profundities of thought and His representation (*taswir*) to
the searching probes of insight."

"Because of His tremendousness places encompass Him not, because of His
majesty measures guage Him not, and because of His grandeur standards
judge Him not. Impossible is it for imaginations (*awham*) to fathom
Him, understandings (*afham*) to comprehend Him or minds (*adhhan*) to
imagine Him. Powers of reason (*uqul*) with lofty aspiration despair of
contriving to comprehend Him, oceans of knowledge run dry without
alluding to Him in depth,[^15] and the subtleties of disputants fall
from loftiness to pettiness in describing His power."

"He is One (*wahid*), not in terms of number (*adad*); Everlasting
(*da'im*), without duration (*amad*); Standing (*qa'im*), without
supports (*umud*). He is not of a kind (*jins*) that (other) kinds
should be on a par with Him, nor an object that objects should be
similar to Him, nor like things that attributes should apply to Him.
Powers of reason go astray in the waves of the current of perceiving
Him, imaginations are bewildered at encompassing the mention of His
beginninglessness, understandings are held back from becoming conscious
of the description of His power, and minds are drowned in the depths of
the heavens of His kingdom (*malakut*)."[^16]

"He is Master over (*giving*) bounties, Inaccessible through Grandeur,
and Sovereign over all things. Time (*al-dahr*) makes Him not old, nor
does description encompass Him. Humbled before Him are the firmest of
obduracies in the limits of their constancy, and submitted to Him are
the most unshakeable of the cords in the extremity of their towering
regions."[^17]32

"Witness to His Lordship (*rububiyyah*) is the totality of kinds
(*al-ajnas*, i.e. kinds of creatures), to His Power their incapacity, to
His eternity (*qidmah*) their createdness (*futur*), and to His
permanence (*baqa'*) their passing into extinction (*zawal*). So they
possess no place of refuge from His grasp (*idrak*) of them, no exit
from His encompassing (*ihatah*) them, no way of veiling themselves from
His enumeration (*ihsa'*) of them and no way of avoiding His power over
them.

Sufficient is the perfection of His making them[^18] as a sign (*ayah*),
His compounding of their (natural) constitutions as a proof, the
temporal origin (*huduth*) of their natures as (a reason for His)
eternity, and the creation's laws governing them as a lesson.[^19] No
limit is attributed to Him, no similitude struck for Him and nothing
veiled from Him. High indeed is He exalted above the striking of
similitudes and above created attributes!"

"And I testify that there is no god but He, having faith in His lordship
and opposing whoso denies Him; and I testify that Muhammad is His
servant and messenger, residing in the best lodging-place, having passed
from the noblest of loins and immaculate wombs, extracted in lineage
from the noblest of mines and in origin from the most excellent of
plantations, and (derived) from the most inaccessible of summits and the
most glorious roots, from the tree from which God fashioned His prophets
and chose His trusted ones:[^20] (a tree) of excellent wood, harmonious
stature, lofty branches, flourishing limbs, ripened fruit, (and) noble
interior, implanted in generosity and cultivated in a sacred precinct.

There it put forth branches and fruit, became strong and unassailable,
and then made him (the prophet Muhammad) tall and eminent, until God,
the Mighty and Majestic, honored him with the Faithful Spirit,[^21] the
Illuminating Light,[^22] and the Manifest Book.[^23] He subjected to him
Buraq[^24] and the angels greeted him.[^25]

By means of him He terrified the devils, overthrew the idols and the
gods (who were) worshipped apart from Him. His prophet's Wont (*sunnah*)
is integrity (*rushd*), his conduct (*sirah*) is justice and his
decision is truth. He proclaimed that which was commanded by his
Lord,[^26] and he delivered that with which he was charged[^27] until he
made plain his mission through the profession of Unity and made manifest
among the creatures that there is no god but God alone and that He has
no associate; until His Oneness became pure and His lordship unmixed.
God made manifest his argument through the profession of His Unity and
He raised his degree with submission (*al-islam*). And God, the Mighty
and Majestic, chose for His prophet what was with Him of repose, degree
and means-upon him and upon his pure household be God's peace."

### 2. Via negativa

'Ali said, "Praise belongs to God, whose laudation is not rendered by
speakers,[^28] whose bounties are not counted by reckoners,[^29] and
whose rightfully due (*haqq*) is not discharged by those who strive.
Grand aspirations perceive Him not and deep-diving perspicacities reach
Him not.

His attributes (*sifah*) possess no determined limits (*hadd mahdud*),
no existing description (*na't mawjud*), no fixed time (*waqt madud)*
and no extended term (*ajal mamdud*). He originates the creatures by His
power,[^30] looses the winds by His mercy,[^31] and fastens the shaking
of His earth with boulders."[^32]

"The first step in religion is knowledge (*marifah*) of Him. The
perfection of knowledge of Him is to confirm Him (*tasdiq*). The
perfection of confirming Him is to profess His unity (*tawhid*). The
perfection of professing His Unity is sincerity (*ikhlas*) towards
Him.[^33] And the perfection of sincerity towards Him is to negate
attributes (*nafy al-sifat*) from Him, because of the testimony of every
attribute that it is not that which possesses the attribute
(*al-mawsuf*) and the testimony of everything that possesses attributes
that it is not the attribute."

So whoso describes God-glory be to Him-has given Him a comrade (i.e. the
description). Whoso gives Him a comrade has declared Him to be two
(*tathniyah*). Whoso declares Him to be two has divided Him. Whoso
divides Him is ignorant of Him. (Whoso is ignorant of Him points to
Him).[^34] Whoso points to Him has delimited Him. Whoso delimits Him has
numbered Him. Whoso says, 'In what is He ?', has enclosed Him. Whoso
says, 'On what is He ?', has excluded Him (from certain things)."

"He is a being (*ka'in*) not as the result of temporal origin
(*hadath*), an existent (*mawjud*) not (having come) from nonexistence
(*adam*). He is with everything, not through association (*muqaranah*);
and He is other than everything, not through separation (*muzayalah*).
He is active (*fa'il*), not in the sense of possessing movement and
instruments. He was seeing when there was none of His creatures to be
observed by Him. He was 'alone' (*mutawahhid*) when there was none with
whom to be intimate and at whose loss to feel lonely."

"He originated creation and gave to it its beginning without employing
deliberation, profiting from experience, occasioning movement
(*harakah*, i.e. in Himself), or being disrupted by the cares of the
soul (*hamamah nafs*). He delays things to their times,[^35] mends their
discrepancies, implants (in them) their natural dispositions, and makes
these (dispositions) adhere to their objects. He has knowledge of them
before their beginning, encompasses their limits (*hudud*) and their end
(*intiha'*) and knows their relationships (*qara'in*) and aspects
(*ahna'*).

### 3. Firm Rooting in Knowledge

It was related from Abu Abdallah that when the Commander of the Faithful
was speaking from the pulpit at Kufa a man stood up and said, "O
Commander of the Faithful! Describe for us thy Lord-blessed and
transcendent is He-that our love (*hubb*) for Him and knowledge
(*marifah*) of Him may increase."

The Commander of the Faithful became angry and cried out, "Assemble for
prayer!" The people gathered together until the mosque was choked with
them. Then he stood, his color changing, and he said, "Praise belongs to
God, who does not gain in plenty by withholding nor become poor through
giving, while every other giver than He diminishes. (He is) full of the
benefits of blessings and the advantages of superabundance.

Through His generosity He ensures the provision of creatures. So He
smooths the path of aspiration (*talab*) for those who make Him their
Quest. Nor is He more generous with what is asked of Him than with what
is not asked. Time in its march varies not for Him that (His) state
should change accordingly.

If He should give to some of His servants (all of) the silver metal,
ingots of pure gold and sacks of pearls that the mountains' mines
breathe[^36] and the seas' shells smile, His generosity would in nowise
be affected, nor would the expanse of that which is with Him dwindle.

With Him are treasuries of bounteous bestowal which are not exhausted by
objects of request and which come not to His attention in spite of their
abundance, for He is the Generous who is not diminished by gifts nor
made niggardly by the importunity of the importune. And ***'His command,
when He desires a thing, is to say to it "Be", and it is' (36 : 82).***"

"The angels, despite their proximity to the throne of His liberality,
the great extent of their burning love (*walah*) for Him, (their)
glorification of the majesty of His might, and their proximity to the
unseen of His kingdom (*ghaybmalakutih*), are capable of knowing only
what He has taught them of His affair, although they are of the Sacred
Kingdom in terms of rank. It is because they possess knowledge of Him
only as He created them that they say, ***'Glory be to Thee! We know not
save what Thou hast taught us' (2 : 32)."***[^37]

"So what is thy opinion, O questioner, of Him who is thus ? Glory be to
Him, and praise belongs to Him! He has not come into being that change
or removal should be possible in Him. He is not affected in His Essence
by recurrence of states, and aeons of nights and days differ not for
Him. (It is He) who originated creation with no model (*mithal*) to copy
or measure (*migdar*) to imitate from a deity (*mabud*) who should have
existed before Him. Attributes encompass Him not, lest He be defined by
limits (*hudud*) (resulting) from their having attained Him. ***He -
like Him there is naught' (42 : 11)*** -never ceases to transcend the
attributes of creature***s***."

"Eyes are prevented from reaching Him, lest He be described through
being plainly seen (*bi-l-iyan*) and lest He be known among His
creatures in the Essence that none knows but He. Through His exaltation
(*uluww*) over things He eludes that upon which falls the conjectures of
imaginers (*mutawahhimin*). The inmost center (*kunh*) of His
tremendousness transcends the embrace of the impotent deliberation of
those who meditate. He has no similitude that what is created should
resemble Him. For those who have knowledge of Him He is forever above
likenesses and opposites."

"Those who ascribe rivals to God (*al-adilun billah*) cry lies when they
make Him similar to the like of their categories, adorn Him in their
imaginations with the adornment of creatures, divide Him with a measure
resulting from the notions of their concerns, and measure Him by the
talents of their reason's powers[^38] in terms of the creatures with
their multiple faculties. For how should the deliberations of
imaginations assess Him whose measure cannot be determined, when surely
the notions of understanding have erred in conceiving of His inmost
center ? For He is greater than that the minds of men should delimit Him
through thought (*tafkir*) or angels should encompass Him through
estimation, despite their proximity to the kingdom of His might."

"High be He exalted above having an equal (*kufw*) with which to be
compared, for He is the Subtle: when imaginations desire to encroach
upon Him in the depths of the unseen regions of His dominion, (when)
thoughts (*fikar*) free from insinuating intrusions seek to grasp
knowledge of His Essence, (when) hearts are thrown into mad confusion
over Him in trying to embrace Him through conforming to His attributes,
(when) the ways of approach of reason's powers become obscured since no
attributes attain to Him by which they might gain the knowledge of His
divinity, (then) they (imaginations, thoughts, hearts and ways of
approach) are checked in disgrace while traversing the chasms of the
dark reaches of the unseen worlds, rid (of all things) for Him-glory be
to Him!

They return having been thrown back, admitting that the inmost center of
His knowledge is not reached through the deviation of straying (from the
path)[^39] and that no notion of the measure of His might's majesty
occurs to the mind of meditators, by reason of His distance from being
(encompassed) within the faculties of limited beings. For He is counter
to (*khilaf*) His creation, and there is nothing like Him among
creatures. Now a thing is only compared with its like (*adil*). As for
what has no like, how should it be compared with what is other than its
like (*mithal*)? And He is the Beginning (*al-badi*) before whom was
naught, and the Last (*al-akhir*) after whom will be naught."

"Eyes reach Him not in the splendor of His Power (*jabarut*). When He
obscures them with veils, eyes do not penetrate the density of the
veils' thickness, nor do they pierce the firmness pertaining to His
coverings to (reach) the 'Possessor of the Throne',[^40] in whose will
affairs originate and before the majesty of whose tremendousness the
grandeur of the arrogant cringes. Necks are bowed before Him and faces
humbled in fear of Him. In the marvels (*bada'i*) which He creates
appear the traces (*athar*) of His wisdom (*hikmah*), and all that is
created becomes an argument (*hujjah*) for Him and attributed to Him.
Were it a silent creation His argument would be speaking through it in
His directing (of its affairs, *tadbir*)."[^41]

"He determines what He creates and makes firm His determining
(*taqdir*), places everything in its place through the subtlety of His
directing, and turns it in a direction.[^42] Then nothing of it reaches
the environs of His station.[^43] It falls not short before carrying out
His will and refrains not when ordered to execute His desire. He suffers
not from weariness that might touch Him,[^44] nor is He deceived by one
who would transgress His command."[^45]

"So His creation is complete and it yields to Him in obedience. It
complies with the (appointed) time at which He brings it forth, a
response resisted by neither the dawdler's hesitation nor the lingerer's
tardiness. He straightened the crookedness of things, delineated the
way-marks of their limits, reconciled their contradictions through His
power, joined the means of their conjunctions (*asbab qara'iniha*),
caused their various sorts to be disparate in size, and divided them
into different kinds, natural dispositions, and appearances-marvels of
creation, whose fashioning He made firm. He made them according to His
desire and[^46] brought them into existence. His knowledge put in order
the kinds of their creation and His directing achieved their fairest
determination."

"O questioner! Know that whoso compares our majestic Lord to the mutual
dissimilarity of the parts of His creation and to the interconnection of
their joints, hidden by the directing of His wisdom, surely he has not
fixed his inmost consciousness (*ghayb damirih*) upon knowledge of Him,
and his heart has not witnessed (*mushahadah*) the certainty that He has
no compeer. It is as if he had not heard of the followers disclaiming
the followed, saying,

***'By God, we were certainly in manifest error when we made you equal
to the Lord of all beings' (26 : 97-8)"***[^47]

"Whoso sets our Lord equal to something has ascribed rivals to Him, and
he who ascribes rivals to Him is a disbeliever in what His clear
verses[^48] have revealed and in what the witnesses of His clear signs'
arguments have spoken. For He is God, who does not become defined within
the powers of reason that He should be qualified within the range of
their thought or be limited and turned about within the craws of the
reflection of aspiring souls.[^49]

He is the Producer of the kinds of things without having been in need of
reflection, or of acting according to an innate disposition, or of
experience gained through the passing of Time's events, or of an
associate to help Him in bringing into existence the wonders of affairs.

When those who ascribe rivals to Him compare Him to creation, whose
attributes are divided and limited and whose levels possess various
zones and regions-and He, the Mighty and Majestic, is the existent
through Himself, not through His instruments (*adah*) - they cannot have
measured Him with His true measure.

Thus He said, declaring Himself incomparable with the association of
compeers and rising above the estimate of those of His disbelieving
servants who measure Him within limits,

***'They measure not God with His true measure. The earth altogether
shall be His handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens shall
be rolled up in His right hand. Glory be to Him! High be He exalted
above that they associate' (39 : 67)."***

"So as for that to which the Quran directs thee concerning His
attributes, follow it, so that a link may be established between thee
and knowledge (*ma'rifah*) of Him. Take it as an example, and seek
illumination by the light of its guidance; surely it is a blessing and a
wisdom given to thee, so take what has been given thee and be among the
thankful.[^50]

But as for that to which Satan directs thee, that which is not made
encumbent upon thee in the Quran and no trace (*athar*) concerning which
exists in the Wont of the Prophet and the Imams of guidance, leave its
knowledge to God, the Mighty and Majestic. Surely that is the limit of
God's claim (*haqq*) against thee."

"Know that 'those firmly rooted in knowledge'[^51] are they whom God has
freed from the need to assault the closed doors beyond which are the
unseen things (*al-ghuyub*), so they cling to the acknowledgement
(*iqrar*) of all of the veiled unseen of which they know not the
interpretation, and they say, ***'We have faith in it; all is from our
Lord.' (3 : 7).***

So God praised their avowal of incapacity to grasp what they comprehend
not in knowledge, and He called their abandonment of the desire to
penetrate into that whose examination is not required of them
'firm-rootedness'. So limit thyself to that (same attitude) and measure
not the Mightiness of God-Glory be to Him-according to the measure of
thy reason's power, thus becoming of those who perish."

### 4. The Fairest of Creators

It has been related that Ali-upon whom be peace-delivered the following
sermon at Kufa. He was standing on a stone that had been set up for him
by Ja'dah ibn Hubayrah al-Makhzumi.[^52] He wore an outer garment of
wool. His sword belt and his shoes were made of fiber. His forehead was
like the knee of a camel.[^53] He said, "Praise belongs to God, unto
whom are the homecomings of creation and the issues of the affair.[^54]

We praise Him for His mighty goodness, His radiant proof (*burhan*) and
the profusion of His bounty and gracious giving; a praise which might
render Him His rightfully due, accomplish His thanks, bring (us) near to
His reward and cause the fairest of His increase.[^55] We pray to Him
for succour,[^56] the prayer of one hoping for His bounty, anticipating
His benefit, having confidence in Him to avert (evil), acknowledging His
blessings and submitting to Him in deed and word.

We believe in Him with the faith (*iman*) of one who hopes for Him with
certainty, turns to Him as a believer, humbles himself before Him in
submission, sincerely professes His Unity (*akhlas muwahhidan*),
magnifies Him in glorification and seeks refuge in Him, desiring and
striving (*raghiban mujtahidan*)."

***"He has not been begotten' (112 : 3)*** - glory be to Him that He
should share in Might, and ***'He has not begotten' (112 : 3)*** that He
should bequeath and perish. Time (*waqt*) precedes Him not, nor
duration, and increase and decrease seize Him not by turns."

"Nay, He appears to the powers of reason by the marks He has shown us of
(His) perfect directing and certain decree. So of the witnesses of His
creation is the creation of the heavens without pillars,[^57] standing
without supports. He called them and they answered, obeying, submissive,
without hesitation or delay.[^58]

Had it not been for their acknowledging (*iqrar*) Him in lordship and
their willing submission (to Him), He would not have appointed them the
locus of His Throne, nor the dwelling place for His angels, nor the
place of ascent of good words and the righteous deed of His
creation.[^59]

He appointed their stars waymarks by which the bewildered traveler is
guided in the divergent paths of the lands. The thickness of the dark
night's curtain prevents not the shining of their light, and the
garments of the black night's blackness cannot push back the brilliance
of the light of the moon that spreads in the heavens."

"So glory be to Him, from whom is not hidden the blackness of a gloomy
dusk or still night in the hollows of lands low, nor in the peaks of
neighboring mountains;[^60] (nor) that with which the thunder
reverberates in the horizon of heaven; (nor) that from which the
lightning of the clouds vanishes;[^61] (nor) the leaf which falls,
removed from its place of falling by the gales caused by the stars
(*al-anwa'*)[^62] and the pouring down of the rain. He knows the place
where the raindrop falls and where it takes its rest, the route by which
the tiny ant draws and drags (on the ground), what is sufficient food
for a gnat[^63] and what the female bears within her womb."[^64]

"Praise belongs to God, the Existent (*al-ka'in*) before there was a
Pedestal (*kursi*), or Throne (*arsh*), or heaven, or earth, or jinn, or
man. He is not perceived by imagination (*wahm*) or measured by
understanding (*fahm*). Petitioners busy Him not and giving diminishes
Him not[^65]. He is not observed by eyes, nor delimited by location
("where", *ayn*), nor described by pairs.[^66] He creates not through
application'[^67] is perceived not by the senses and is compared not
with man."

"He it is who spoke to Moses directly[^68] and showed him one of His
mighty signs'[^69] without members (*jawarih*), instruments (*adawat*),
speech or throat.[^70] Nay, if thou speakest truly, O thou who affectest
to describe thy Lord, then describe Gabriel, Michael and the hosts of
the angels brought nigh, bowing in the sacred chambers (*hujarat
al-quds*), their intellects in adoring perplexity to delimit the
'Fairest of Creators'.[^71] Surely only those are perceived through
attributes who possess forms and instruments and who end in annihilation
when they reach the limit of their term. There is no god but He. He
illumines with His Light every darkness and He darkens with His Darkness
every light."

### 5. Oneness

It has been related that on the day of the Battle of the Camel[^72] a
bedouin came before the Commander of the Faithful and said, "O Commander
of the Faithful! Sayest thou that God is one?" The people attacked him
and said, "O bedouin! Doest thou not see how the Commander of the
Faithful's heart is divided (with cares)?"

The Commander of the Faithful said, "Leave him, for surely what the
bedouin wishes (i.e., knowledge of God) is what we wish for the people."
Then he said, "O bedouin! To say that God is one (*wahid*) has four
(possible) meanings, two of which are not permissible concerning God,
the Mighty and Majestic, and two of which are established concerning
Him."

"As for the two which are not permissible concerning Him, (the first is)
the saying of him who says 'one' and has in mind the category of
numbers. Now this is not permissible, for that which has no second does
not enter into the category of numbers. Hast thou not seen that he who
says that He is 'the third of three'[^73] is of the unbelievers? And
(the second is like) the saying of him who says (concerning a man), 'He
is one of mankind', meaning that he is one kind within the species.[^74]
This is not permissible because it is a comparison, and our Lord is
greater than that and high above it."

"As for the two meanings which are established concerning Him, (the
first is) the saying of him who says, 'He is one, there is no likeness
(*shabah*) unto Him among things.' Such is our Lord. And (the second is)
the saying of him who says, 'Surely He, the Mighty and Majestic, is
single in meaning (*ahadi al - mana*), intending by that that He is not
divided by existence, the power of reason, or imagination.[^75] Such is
our Lord, the Mighty and Majestic."[^76]

### 6. Discernment

In another sermon Ali'-upon whom be peace-said, "What points to Him
(*daliluh*) is His signs (*ayat*);[^77] to perceive Him (*wujuduh*) is
to affirm Him (*ithbatuh*);[^78] to know Him is to profess His unity;
and professing His Unity is to distinguish Him (*tamyiz*) from His
creation.

The standard (*hukm*) for distinguishing is separation (*baynunah*) in
attribute, not separation in terms of distance (*uzlah*). Surely He is a
creating Lord (*rabb khaliq*), neither possessing a Lord nor created.
Whatever can be conceived of is different from Him."

"Then after that he said, "Whoso is known in himself (*bi-nafsihi*) is
not a god: this is the guide to that which points to Him (*al-dalil
alayh*) and this it is which leads to knowledge of Him."

### 7. The Vision of the Heart

Abu Abdallah related as follows: the Commander of the Faithful was
speaking from the pulpit at Kufa when a man called Dhi'lib stood up
before him. He was sharp-tongued, eloquent and courageous. He said, "O
Commander of the Faithful! Hast thou seen thy Lord ?"

He said, "Woe unto thee, O Dhi'lib! I would not be worshipping a lord
whom I have not seen."  
 He said, "O Commander of the Faithful! How didst thou see Him ?"

He answered, "O Dhilib! Eyes see Him not through sight's observation,
but hearts see Him through the verities of faith (*haqaiq al-iman*). Woe
to thee, O Dhilib! Verily, my Lord is subtle in subtlety (*latif
al-latafah*), but He is not described by subtleness (*lutf*); tremendous
in tremendousness (*azim al-azamah*), but not described by
tremendousness (*izam*); grand in grandeur (*kabir al-kibriya*'), but
not described by grandness (*kibr*); and majestic in majesty (*jalil
al-jalalah*), but not described by greatness (*ghilaz*).

Before all things He was; it is not said that anything was before Him.
After all things He will be[^79]; it is not said that He possesses an
'after'. He willed (all) things, not through resolution (*himmah*). He
is all-perceiving (*darrak*), not through any artifice (*khadiah*).

He is in all things, but not mixed (*muta-mazij*) with them, nor
separate (*ba'in*) from them. He is Outward (*zahir*), not according to
the explanation of being immediate (to the senses: *mubasharah*);
Manifest (*mutajallin*), not through the appearance of a vision (of Him:
*istihlal ru'yah*); Separate, not through distance (*masafah*); Near
(*qarib*), not through approach (*mudanah*); Subtle, not through
corporealization (*tajassum*); Existent (*mawfud*), not after
nonexistence (*adam*); Active (*fa'il*) not through coercion
(*idtirar*); Determining (*muqaddir*), not through movement (*harakah*);
Desiring (*murid*), not through resolution (*hamamah*); Hearing
(*sami*), not through means (*alah*); and Seeing (*basir*), not through
organs (*adah*).[^80]

Spaces (*amakin*) encompass Him not, times (*awqat*) accompany Him not,
attributes (*sifat*) delimit Him not and slumbers (*sinat*) seize Him
not.[^81] By His giving sense (*tashir*) to sense organs (*mashair*) it
is known that He has no sense organs.[^82] By His giving substance
(*tajhir*) to substances (*jawahir*) it is known that He has no
substance.[^83] By His causing opposition (*mudaddah*) among things it
is known that He has no opposite (*didd*).[^84]

By His causing affiliation (*muqaranah*) among affairs it is known that
He has no affiliate (*qarin*). He opposed darkness to light, obscurity
to clarity, moisture to solidity[^85], and heat to cold. He joins
together those things which are hostile to one another, and separates
those which are near.

They prove (the existence of) their Separator (*mufarriq*) by their
separation and their Joiner (*mu'allif* ) by their junction. This is
(the meaning of) His words-He is the Mighty and Majestic- ***'And of
everything created We two kinds; haply you will remember' (51: 49)."***

"So through them He separated 'before' and 'after' that it might be
known that He has no before and after. They testify with their
temperaments (*ghara'iz*) that He who gave them temperaments has no
temperament. They announce through their subjection to time (*tawqit*)
that He who has subjected them to time is not subject to it Himself."

"He veiled some of them from others so that it might be known that there
is no veil between Him and His creation other than His creation. He was
a Lord when there was none over whom He was Lord (*marbub*); a God when
there was none for whom to be a God (*ma'luh*); a Knower (*alim*) when
there was nothing to be known (*malum*); and a Hearer when there was
nothing to be heard (*masmu*)."

Then Ali composed the following verses extemporaneously:  
 "My Lord is ever known by praise, my Lord is ever described by
generosity."  
 "He was, when there was no light by which to seek illumination, and no
darkness bent over the horizons."

"So our Lord is counter to creatures, all of them, and to all that is
described in imaginations."  
 "Whoso desires Him portrayed through comparison returns beleagured,
shackled by his incapacity,"

"And in the Ascending Stairways the wave of His power casts a wave which
blinds the eye of the spirit."[^86] "So abandon the quarreler in
religion lost in the depths, for in him doubt has corrupted his view."
"And become the companion of that reliable one who is the beloved of his
Master and surrounded by the favors of his Protector: Smiling, he became
in the earth the waymark of guidance (*dalil al-huda*) and in Heaven the
adorned and acknowledged." After this Dhi'lib fell to the ground in a
faint. When he recovered he said, "I have never heard such words. I will
not return to any of that (which I believed before).

C. al-Baqir, the Fifth Imam
---------------------------

### The Incomparable Lord

Abu Basir has related that a man came to Abu Ja'far (the fifth Imam) and
said to him, "O Abu Ja'far, tell me about thy Lord! When was He?"

He said, "Woe unto thee! Surely it is said of a thing that was not, and
then was, 'When was it ?' But my Lord-blessed is He and high exalted -
was ever-living without 'how' and had no 'was'. His Being (*kawn*) had
no 'how', nor had it any 'where'. He was not in anything, nor was He on
anything. He did not bring into existence a place (*makan*) for His
Being (*kan*).

He increased not in strength after bringing things into being, nor was
He weak before bringing things into being. And He was not lonely
(*mustawhish*) before creating things. He resembles nothing brought into
being. He was not devoid of power over the dominion before its
production that He should be devoid of the dominion[^87] after its
passing.

He remains Living without (created) life, a powerful King before He
produces anything (over which to rule) and an all-compelling King
(*malik jabbar*) after He produces the universe (*al-kawn*). His Being
has no 'how', nor has it any 'where', nor has it any limit. He is not
known through anything resembling Him. He ages not through the duration
of His subsistence. He is thunderstruck by nothing. Nothing causes Him
to fear. And all things are thunderstruck by fear of Him."[^88]

"He is Living without temporal life, without a being (*kawn*) described
by attributes, without a state which can be defined (*kayf mahdud*),
without a trace which can be followed, and without a place adjacent to
anything. Nay, He is a Living One who knows, a King whoever is. His are
the power and the dominion. He produces what He wills through His will
(*mashiyyah*).

He is neither limited nor divided into parts, and He perishes not. He
was the First, without 'how', and He will be the Last, without 'where'.
And ***'All things perish, except His Face' (28 : 88).*** ***'His are
the creation and the command. Blessed be God, the Lord of all beings!'"
(7 : 54).***

"Woe upon thee, O questioner! As for my Lord, truly imaginations envelop
Him not, uncertainties touch Him not, He is oppressed by none, none is
adjacent to Him, phenomena touch Him not, He is questioned not as to
anything He does,[^89] He comes not upon anything,[^90] ***'Slumber
seizes Him not, neither sleep' (2 : 255). 'To Him belongs all that is in
the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and all that is
underneath t he soil'" (20 : 6).***

D. Ja'far al Sadiq, the Sixth Imam
----------------------------------

### 1. Seeing God

Abu Basir has related that he said to Abu Abdallah-upon whom be peace
"Tell me about God, the Mighty and Majestic Will believers see Him on
the Day of Resurrection ?"  
 He answered, "Yes, and they have already seen Him before the Day of
Resurrection."  
 Abu Basir asked, "When?"

The Imam answered, ***"When He said to them, 'Am I not your Lord?' They
said: 'Yes, verily' (7 : I72)."***[^91] Then he was quiet for a time.
Then he said, "Truly the believers see him in this world before the Day
of Resurrection. Doest thou not see Him now ?" Abu Basir then said to
him, "That I might be made thy sacrifice. Shall I relate this (to
others) from thee?"

He answered, "No, for if thou relatest it, a denier ignorant of the
meaning of what thou sayest will deny it. Then he will suppose that it
is comparison and unbelief (*kufr*). But seeing with the heart
(*al-ru'yah b-il-qalb*) is not like seeing with the eyes (*al- ru'yah
bi-l-ayn*). High be God exalted above what the comparers (*mushabbihun*)
and heretics (*mulhidun*) describe!"

### 2. The name that can be named ...

It has been related that Abu Abdallah said, "The name of God is other
than God, and everything that can be called by the name of a 'thing'
(*shay'*)[^92] is created, except God. Therefore all that tongues
express or is worked by hands [^93] is created. God is the goal of him
who sets Him as his goal, but the determined goal (*al-mughayya*, i.e.,
in the mind of man) is other than the (real) goal.[^94]

The goal possesses attributes (*mawsuf*), and all that possesses
attributes has been fashioned (*masnu*). But the Fashioner (*sani*) of
things does not possess the attributes of any stated limit (*hadd
musamma*). He has not come into being that His Being (*kaynunah*) should
be known through fashioning (*sun*) (carried out) by other than He.[^95]
He does not terminate at a limit unless it be other than He.

Whoso understands this principle (*hukm*) will never fall into error. It
is the unadulterated profession of Unity (*al-tawhid al-khalis*), so
believe in it, confirm it, and understand it well, with God's permission
the Mighty and Majestic."

"Whoso maintains that he knows God by means of a veil (*hijab*) or a
form (*surah*) or a likeness (*mithal*) is an associator (*mushrik*),
for the veil, the likeness and the form are other than He. He is utterly
and only One. So how should he who maintains that he knows Him by means
of other than Him be professing Unity? Surely He alone knows God who
knows Him by means of God (*billah*). Therefore, whoso knows Him not by
means of Him knows Him not. On the contrary, he only knows other than
Him. There is nothing between the Creator and the created.[^96]111

God is the Creator of things, but not from something. He is named by His
names, so He is other than His names, and His names are other than
He.[^97] The described (*al-mawsuf*) is other than the describer
(*al-wasif*)." Then whoso maintains that he has faith in that which he
does not know has gone astray from knowledge (*marifah*).[^98] A created
thing (*makhluq*) perceives nothing unless by means of God: the
knowledge of God is perceived only by means of God. But God is empty of
His creatures and His creatures are empty of Him.[^99]

When He desires a thing, it is as He desires, by His command (*amr*) and
without speech (*nutq*). His servants have no refuge from that which He
decrees (*ma qada*), and they have no argument against that which is His
pleasure. They have no power to act or to deal with that which is
brought about in their bodies, created (by God), except by means of
their Lord. So whoso maintains that he is able to perform an act which
God, the Mighty and Majestic, does not desire, has maintained that his
will (*iradah*) prevails over the Will of God. ***'Blessed be God' the
Lord of all beings!" (7 : 54)***

E. Musa, the Seventh Imam
-------------------------

### God's Might and Majesty

It has been related that the righteous servant, Musa ibn Ja'far, said,
"Surely God - there is no god but He - was the Living without 'how'
(*kayf*) or 'where' (*ayn*). He was not in anything, nor was He on
anything. He did not create a place (*makan*) for His grandeur
(*makan*).[^100] He increased not in might after bringing things into
being. Nothing brought into being resembles Him. He was not devoid of
power over the dominion before its production, nor will He be devoid of
power (over it) after its passing."[^101]

"He - the Mighty and Majestic - is a Living God without temporal life,
King before He produces anything, Master after its production
(*insha'*). God has no limits (*hadd*). He is not known through
something resembling Him. He ages not through subsistence (*baqa'*). He
is struck not by fear of anything, and by fright before Him all things
are thunderstruck.[^102]

So God is Living without temporal life, without a being described by
attributes, without a state which can be defined, without a designated
location or fixed place. Nay, He is Living in Himself, a Master whose
power does not remove. He produced what He wills when He wills through
His will and His power. He was First, without 'how', and will be Last,
without 'where'. And

***'All things perish, except His face' (28: 88).***

***'His are the creation and the command. Blessed be God, the Lord of
all beings.' (7: 54)."***

F. Ali Ar-Ridhaâ€™, the Eighth Imam
---------------------------------

### 1. Profession of Unity

It has been related that when al-Ma'mun[^103] desired to install
Ar-Ridhaâ€™ (as his successor), he collected together Banu Hashim[^104]
and said to them, "Verily I desire to install Ar-Ridhaâ€™ in this affair
after me."

Banu Hashim envied Ar-Ridhaâ€™ and said, "Thou appointest an ignorant man
who possesses not the insight to direct the caliphate. Therefore send
for him. He will come to us and thou wilt see how his ignorance decides
thee against him. So he sent for him and he came. Banu Hashim said to
him, O Abu-l-Hasan! Ascend the pulpit and display for us a sigh whereby
we may worship God."

So he ascended the pulpit and sat for a long time, his head bowed in
silence. Then he trembled a great trembling and stood up straight,
praised and lauded God, and asked His blessing for His prophet and his
household. Then he said, " The first element in the worship of God is
knowledge of Him, the root (*asl*) of knowledge of Him is to profess His
Unity (*tawhid*), and the correct way (*nizam*) to profess the Unity of
God is to negate attributes from Him for the powers of reason testify
that every attribute and everything possessing an attribute (*mawsuf* )
is created.

Everything possessing an attribute testifies that it has a Creator which
is neither attribute nor possesses an attribute. Every attribute and
everything possessing an attribute testify to connection (*iqtiran*,
between the attribute and that to which it is attributed). Connection
testifies to temporality (*hadath*). And temporality testifies that it
accepts not the Beginningless, which accepts not the temporal."

So it is not God whose Essence is known through comparison. It is not
His Unity that is professed by someone who attempts to fathom Him. It is
not His reality (*haqiqah*) that is attained by someone who strikes a
similitude for Him. It is not He who is confirmed (*tasdiq*) by him who
professes an end for Him. It is not He to whom repairs he who points to
Him. It is not He who is meant by him who compares Him (to something).
It is not to Him that he who divides Him into parts humbles himself. And
it is not He who is desired by him who conceives of Him in his
imagination."

"Everything that can be known in itself (*bi-nafsihi*) is fashioned
(*masnu*).[^105] All that stands apart from Him is an effect (*malul*).
God is inferred from what He fashions (*sun'*), the knowledge of Him is
made fast by the powers of reason, and the argument (*hujjah*) for Him
is established by (man's) primordial nature (*al-fitrah*)."

"God's creating of the creatures is a veil between Him and them. His
separation (*mubayanah*) from them is that He is disengaged from their
localization (*ayniyyah*).[^106] That He is their origin (*ibtida'*) is
proof for them that He has no origin, for none that has an origin can
originate others. That He has created them possessing means (of
accomplishing things) is proof that He has no means (*adah*), for means
are witness to the poverty of those who use them."

"So His names are an expression (*tabir*), His acts (*afal*) are (a way)
to make (Him) understood (*tafhim*), and His Essence is Reality
(*haqiqah*).[^107] His inmost center (*kunh*) separates (*tafriq*) Him
from creation, and His otherness (*ghuyur*) limits (*tahdid*) what is
other than He. Therefore ignorant of God is he who asks for Him to be
described! Transgressing against Him is he who seeks to encompass Him!
Mistaken is he who imagines to have fathomed Him!"

"Whoso says 'how?' has compared Him (to something). Whoso says 'why?'
has professed for Him a cause (*talil*). Whoso says 'when?' has
determined Him in time (*tawqit*). Whoso says 'in what?' has enclosed
Him (*tadmin*). Whoso says 'to what?' has professed for Him a limit
(*tanhiyah*). Whoso says 'until what?' has given Him an end
(*taghiyah*). Whoso gives Him an end has associated an end with Him.
Whoso associates an end with Him has divided Him. Whoso divides Him has
described Him. Whoso describes Him has deviated from the straight path
(*ilhad*) concerning Him."[^108]

God does not change with the changes undergone by creation, just as He
does not become limited by delimiting (*tahdid*) that which is limited
(*al-mahdud*). He is One (*ahad*), not according to the explanation
offered by number (*tawil adad*); Outward, not according to the
explanation of being immediate (to the senses);[^109] Manifest, not
through the appearance of a vision (of Him); Inward (*batin*), not
through separation (*muzayalah*); Apart (*muba'in*), not through
distance; Near, not through approach; Subtle, not through
corporealization; Existent, not after nonexistence; Active, not through
coercion; Determining, not through the activity of thought (*jawl
fikrah*); Directing (*mudabbir*), not through movement; Desiring, not
through resolution; Willing (*sha'*), not through directing attention
(*himmah*);[^110] Grasping (*mudrik*), not through touch (*majassah*);
Hearing, not through means; and Seeing, not through organs."

"Times accompany Him not, places enclose Him not, slumber seizes Him
not, attributes delimit Him not, and instruments (*adawat*) are of no
use to Him. His being (*kawn*) precedes times (*al-awqat*), His
existence (*wujud*) non-existence and His beginninglessness (*azal*)
beginning (*al-ibtida'*)."  
 "By His giving sense to the sense organs it is known that He has no
sense organs. By His giving substance to substances it is known that He
has no substance. By His causing opposition among things it is known
that He has no opposite.

By His causing affiliation among affairs it is known that He has no
affiliate. He opposed darkness to light, obscurity to clarity, moisture
to solidity, and heat to cold. He joins together those things which are
hostile to one another and separates those which are near. They prove
(the existence of) their Separator by their separation and their Joiner
by their junction. That is (the meaning of) His words-He is the Mighty
and Majestic-***'And of everything created We two kinds; haply you will
remember'. "(51 : 49).***

"So through them He separated 'before' and 'after' that it might be
known that He has no before and after. They testify with their
temperaments that He who gave them temperaments has no temperament. They
prove by their disparity (*tafawut*) that He who made them disparate has
no disparity. They announce through their subjection to time that He who
subjected them to time is not subject to it Himself."

"He veiled some of them from others so that it might be known that there
is no veil between Him and them other than them. His is the meaning of
lordship (*al-rububiyyah*) when there was none over whom He was Lord,
the reality of godhood (*al-ilahiyyah*) when there was nothing for whom
He was God, the meaning of Knower when there was nothing to be known,
the meaning of Creator (*khaliq*) when there was nothing created
(*makhluq*) and the import of hearing when there was nothing to be
heard. It is not because He created that He deserves the meaning (of the
term) 'Creator' and not because He brought the creatures into being that
the meaning of 'making' is derived."

"How (should it not be so)? For *mudh* ('ever since') conceals Him not,
*qad* ('already')[^111] brings Him not near, *la'alla* ('perhaps') veils
Him not, *mata* ('when ?') limits Him not in time, *hin* ('at the time
of') contains Him not, and *ma* ('with') brings Him not into
association.[^112] Instruments (*adawat*) limit only themselves and
means (alah) allude only unto their own like.[^113] Their activities are
found only in things.[^114]

*Mudh* withholds things from being eternal (*qidmah*), *qad* shields
them from beginninglessness, and law *la* ('if only') wards off
perfection (*al-takmilah*).[^115] Things become separate and prove (the
existence of) their Separator. They become distinguished and prove their
Distinguisher (*muba'in*). Through them their Maker manifests Himself to
the powers of reason.

Through (these powers)[^116] He becomes veiled to sight, to them
imaginations appeal for a decision,[^117] in them is substantiated
(only) other than Him, from them is suspended the proof and through them
He makes known to them the acknowledgement (*al-iqrar*)."[^118]

"Confirmation (*tasdiq*) of God is made fast by the powers of reason,
and faith (*iman*) in Him reaches perfection through acknowledgment.
There is no religiosity (*diyanah*) except after knowledge (*marifah*),
no knowledge except through sincerity (*ikhlas*) and no sincerity along
with comparison.[^119] There is no negation (*nafy*) of comparison if
there is affirmation (*ithbat*) of attributes."[^120]

"So nothing in creation is found in its Creator. All that is possible in
it is impossible in its Maker. Movement (*harakah*) and stillness
(*sukun*) do not affect Him. How should that which He effects (in
others) have effect upon Him, or that which He has originated recur for
Him? Then His Essence would be disparate, His inmost center divided, His
signification (*mana*) prevented from eternity. How would the Creator
have a meaning different from the created?"

"If something from behind limited Him, then something in front would
limit Him. If perfection (*tamam*) were seeking Him imperfection would
be upon Him. How should that which does not transcend (*imtina*)
temporality be worthy of (the Name 'Beginningless'? How should that
which does not transcend being produced (*insha'*) produce the things
(of the world)? There they would have arisen in Him a sign of having
been made (*al-masnu*) and He would become a proof (*dalil*) after
having been the proven (madlul alayh)."[^121]

"There is no argument in absurd opinions (such as the above) [^122], no
answer when it (absurdity) is asked about, no glorification of Him in
its meaning. Nor is there any in distinguishing Him from creation,
unless it be that the Eternal accepts not to be made two, nor the
Beginningless to have a beginning."[^123]

"There is no god but God, the All-high, the Tremendous. They have cried
lies who ascribe equals to God! They have gone astray into far error and
suffered a manifest loss! And God bless Muhammad and his household, the
pure."[^124]

### 2. The Veil

It was related from Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah al-Khurasani, the servant of
Ar-Ridhaâ€™-upon whom be peace-that a man from among the unbelievers
(*zanadiqah*)[^125] entered the presence of the Imam, with whom was a
group of people. Abu-l-Hasan (the Imam) said to him, "Dost thou see that
if the correct view is your view-and it is not your view-then are we not
equal? All that we have prayed, fasted, given of the alms and declared
of our convictions will not harm us."

The unbeliever remained silent. Then Abu-l-Hasan said, "If the correct
view is our view-and it is our view-then have not you perished and we
gained salvation?"

He said, "God's mercy be upon thee. Then let me know, how is He and
where is He ?"  
 Abu-l-Hasan answered, "Woe upon thee, surely the opinion thou hast
adopted is mistaken! He determined the 'where', and He was, when there
was nowhere; and He fashioned the 'how', and He was, when there was no
'how'. So He is not known through 'howness' or 'whereness' or through
any form of sense perception, nor can He be gauged by anything."

The man said, "So then surely He is nothing (*la shay'*) if He cannot be
perceived by any of the senses."

Abu-l-Hasan said, "Woe upon thee! When thy senses fail to perceive Him,
thou deniest His lordship. But when our senses fail to perceive Him, we
know for certain that He is our Lord and that He is something different
from other things (*shay' bi-khilaf al-asha*).[^126]  
 The man said, "Then tell me, when was He?"

Abu-l-Hasan said, "Tell when He was not, and then I will tell you when
He was."[^127]  
 The man said, "Then what is the proof of Him ?"

Abu-l-Hasan said, "Surely when I contemplate my body and it is
impossible for me to increase or decrease its breadth and height, or to
keep unpleasant things away from it or draw benefits to it, then I know
that this structure has a maker and I acknowledge (*iqrar*) Him-even
though that which I had seen of the rotation of the celestial sphere
through His power; the producing of clouds[^128]; the turning about of
the winds[^129]; the procession of the sun, the moon and the stars; and
others of His wondrous and perfectly created signs (*ayat*), had
(already) made me know that (all) this has a Determiner (*muqaddir*) and
Producer (*munshi'*)."

The man said, "Then why has He veiled Himself (from men)?"  
 Abu-l-Hasan replied, "Surely the veil is upon creatures because of the
abundance of their sins. As for Him, no secret is hidden from Him during
the day or the night."[^130]  
 The man said, "Then why does the sense of sight perceive Him not ?"

Abu-l-Hasan answered, "Because of the difference between Him and His
creatures, who are perceived by the vision of the eyes, whether their
own or others. Then He is greater than that sight should perceive Him,
imagination encompass Him, or the power of reason delineate Him."

The man said, "Then define His limits (*hadd*) for me."  
 He answered, "He has no limits."  
 The man asked, "Why?"

He answered, "Because every limited thing (*makdud*) ends at a limit. If
limitation (*tahdid*) is possible, then increase is possible. If
increase is possible; then decrease is possible. So He is unlimited. He
neither increases nor decreases. Nor is He capable of being divided or
imagined."

The man said, "Then tell me about your saying that He is Subtle,
Hearing, Seeing, Knowing and Wise.[^131] Can He be the Hearing without
ears, the Seeing without eyes, the Subtle without working with the hands
and the Wise without workmanship (*sanah*)?"[^132]

Abu-l-Hasan said, "Surely a person among us is subtle in accordance with
(his) skill in workmanship. Hast thou not seen the man who undertakes a
task and is subtle in his handling of it, so that it is said, 'How
subtle is so and so!' Then how should it not be said of the Majestic
Creator that He is Subtle, when He creates a subtle and majestic[^133]
creation, places in its living creatures their souls, creates every kind
different in form from its own kind, and none resembles another? Each
possesses in the composition of its form a subtlety from the Subtle and
Aware Creator."

"Then we looked upon the trees and their bearing of delicate things,
whether edible or inedible, and we said at that, 'Surely our Creator is
Subtle, (but) not like the subtlety of His creatures in their
workmanship.' And we said, 'Surely He is Hearing, for no hidden from Him
are the sounds of His creatures between the Throne and the earth, from a
mote to what is larger than it, and in the land and the sea. And their
words are not confused by Him.' At that we said, 'Surely He is Hearing,
but not through ears.'"

"Then we said, 'Surely He is Seeing, but not through eyes, for He sees
the trace of a black speck on a dark night on a black stone.[^134] He
sees the tracks of an ant on a pitch-black night. He sees what is
harmful for it and what beneficial, and the result of its cohabitation,
and its young and descendants.' And at that we said, 'Surely He is
Seeing, but not like the sight of His creatures."  
 "The man did not leave until he had embraced Islam. The Imam said other
things as well.

[^1]: The Prophet said, "The number of paths to God is equal to the
number of human souls."Â 

[^2]: Throughout these texts, as in all traditional Muslim writings,
whenever the name of the Prophet or a pronoun referring to him is
mentioned, phrases like "Upon whom be blessings and peace" are added. In
the same way for the Imams "Upon whom be peace" is added. For the most
part these phrases have been dropped in translation.Â 

[^3]: According to Majlisi the meaning is that God's exaltation,
magnificence and divinity are not dependent upon creation, but existed
before it (p. 288). i.e., although these terms logically imply duality
(exalted in relation to the debased, divine in relation to creatures,
etc.), they express qualities which God possessed in His eternal nature
"before" any creature existed. The same can be said about His
solitariness.Â 

[^4]: Cf. Quran (21: 30): "The heavens and the earth were a mass all
sewn up, and then we unstitched them."Â 

[^5]: Reference to Quran (6: 97): "He splits the sky into dawn"

[^6]: Chapter and verse of Quranic quotations will be indicated in the
text in this manner. I have relied largely on the Arberry and Pickthall
translations.Â 

[^7]: Cf. for example Quran (14: 44): "And warn mankind of the day when
the chastisement comes on them, and those who did evil shall say, 'Our
Lord, defer us to a near term, and we will answer Thy call, and follow
the Messengers'."Â 

[^8]: Majlisi offers several explanations for this passage, and he
comments as follows on the interpretation followed here: "He wished that
creatures profess His Unity alone, without associating any others with
Him. For if He were apparent to minds and the senses, He would be
associated with possible beings in unreal unity (al-wahdat
al-i'tibariyyah). Then the unity which pertained to Him would not belong
to Him alone" (p. 289).Â 

[^9]: Cf. Quran (4: I65): "Messengers bearing good tidings, and warning,
so that mankind might have no argument against God, after the
Messengers"; and (6: I50): "To God belongs the argument conclusive."Â 

[^10]: Cf for example, Quran (22: 78): "That the Messenger might be a
witness against you .... "Â 

[^11]: "Similarity" or "comparison" (tashbih) becomes an important
technical term in Islamic theology and Sufism. It indicates the belief
that God's attributes can be likened to those of man and the creatures.
Hence scholars have often translated the term as "anthropomorphism". It
is contrasted with "incomparability" (tanwih), the belief that God's
attributes are in no way similar to those of the creatures. As pointed
out in the introduction, the Imams emphasize the latter position
throughout these texts, without failing to make use of the former to
explain their points. In later theology and Sufism, attempts are often
made to strike a balance between the two positions by maintaining that
God is neither completely similar to His creatures nor totally
incomparable, or that He is both similar and incomparable at the same
time. For example, Ibn al-'Arabi attempts to strike this balance in the
third chapter of his celebrated Fusus al Hikam. See W. Chittick, "Ibn
'Arabi's own Summary of theÂ Fusus: 'The Imprint of the Bezels of
Wisdom',"Â SophiaÂ Perennis, vol. I, no. 2, Autumn I975, pp. I08-II0Â 

[^12]: As pointed out by Majlisi (pp. 223-4), this is "a rejection of
the views of those who say that every temporal being (hadith) must come
from a (pre- existing) matter (maddah)."Â 

[^13]: The wordsÂ ayniyyah,Â kayfiyyahÂ andÂ haythiyyahÂ could be translated
more literally as "whereness", "howness" and "whereasness" (cf. above,
p.26, and bdow, p. 49). Majlisi explains the meaning as follows: "In
other words, He is not localized in any one place that He should be in
that place without being in another, as is the case with things
qualified by localization (mutamakkinat). So He cannot be perceived like
something possessing location and place. The relation of a disengaged
reality (mudarrad) to all places is equal. No place is empty of Him in
respect of the fact He encompasses them in knowledge, in terms of
causality, and because He preserves and sustains themÂ  "There is no
object like Him existing either externally (fi'-l-kharij) or mentally
(fi'-l-adhhan), that He might be described as possessing any of the
various qualities relating to corporeality and possibility. It is also
possible that by 'quality is meant 'cognitive form' (al-surat
al-ilmiyyah).Â  "And He is not absent from anything, that is, . . . in
respect of knowledge, that one might thus conclude that He possesses
aspect (hayth) and place (makan). As for things qualified by place, it
is in their nature to be absent from (other) things and not to encompass
them in knowledge. This sentence is as if to emphasize the former
statement. It is also possible that 'aspect' here refers to time . . ."
(p. 224).Â 

[^14]: "The changing essences of things make Him inaccessible to minds .
. . either because, if the mind could perceive Him, He would be-like
possible beings-a locus for changing attributes, and thus He would be in
need of a maker; or because reason tells us that the Maker must be
different in attribute from the made, so He cannot be perceived as are
created things . . ." (Majlisi, p. 225).Â 

[^15]: Cf. Quran (18: II0): "Say, 'If the sea were ink for the Words of
my Lord, the sea would be spent before the Words of my Lord are spent,
though We brought replenishment the like of it."Â 

[^16]: It will not have passed unnoticed that the transcendence of the
divine Essence is emphasized here by the fact that man is dumbfounded
even by the lower reaches of God's theophanies. The powers of man's
reason are stopped by the waves, they do not reach the current itself.
The mere mention of God's eternity bewilders the imagination, etc.Â 

[^17]: According to Majlisi the reference is to the "cords" (asbab) or
degrees of "Pharoah said, 'Haman, build for me a tower, that haply so I
may reach the cords, the cords of the heavens, and look upon Moses'
'God' " (40: 36-7).Â 

[^18]: The same words,Â itqan al-sun', are used together once in the
Quran: "God's handiwork, who has made everything perfectly" (27: 88).Â 

[^19]: The fact that the creation displays the signs and portents of God
is of course emphasized throughout the Quran and all of Islam and is the
basis of all Islamic cosmology. For the Muslim, moreover, it is the very
order and regularity of the universe and nature's laws which prove God.
See S. H. Nasr,Â Science and Civilization in Islam, Cambridge (Mass.),
1968.Â 

[^20]: According to Majlisi by "tree" is meant first the Abrahamic line
of prophecy, then the tribe and family of the Prophet-the Quraysh and
Banu Hashim (p. 227). The descriptions following all refer to the tree
of prophecy and the prophets who grew from it.Â 

[^21]: I.e., Gabriel, the angel of revelation. Cf. Quran (26: I92-3):
"Truly it is the revelation of the Lord of all beings, brought down by
the Faithful Spirit . . ."Â 

[^22]: I.e., revelation.Â 

[^23]: The Quran.Â 

[^24]: The "steed" which carried the Prophet to Heaven on his night
journey (mir'aj).Â 

[^25]: I.e., during the ProphetsÂ mir'aj.

[^26]: Cf. Quran (15: 94): "So proclaim that which thou art commanded,
and withdraw from the idolators."Â 

[^27]: Cf. Quran (5: 67): "0 Messenger, deliver what which has been sent
down to thee from thy Lord . .."Â 

[^28]: According to aÂ hadithÂ of the Prophet, "I cannot enumerate all of
Thy praises: Thou art as Thou hast praised Thyself".Â 

[^29]: Cf. Quran (14: 34) and (14: I8).Â 

[^30]: Cf. Quran (17: 5I): "Then they will say, 'Who will bring us
back?' Say: 'He who originated you the first time'."Â 

[^31]: Cf. Quran (30: 46): "And of His signs is that He looses the
winds, bearing good tidings and that He may let you taste of His mercy",
and other similar verses.Â 

[^32]: Cf Quran (16: I5): "And He cast on the earth firm mountains, lest
it shake with you"; also (21: 3I) and (31: I0)Â 

[^33]: The editor comments as follows in a footnote: "The perfection of
professing His Unity is to maintain that He is not forced to act as He
does and is devoid of all faults, to declare Him to be above the
blemishes of incapacity and imperfection, and to profess that He is pure
of what pertains to and impinges upon possible beings, such as
corporeality, composition, and other negative (salh) attributes" (p.
25I). Sincerity is to profess the Unity of God in a perfect manner, so
that eventually at the end of the path of spiritual realization and
perfection (al-tariqah), all stains of contingency are removed both from
the knowledge and the being of the believer.Â 

[^34]: This sentence does not occur in theÂ Bihar al-anwar, but it does
occur in the same passage in theÂ Nahj al-balaghahÂ and seems necessary
from the context.Â 

[^35]: I.e., to their "appointed terms" to we Quranic language (3: I45,
etc.). The text of theÂ Nahj al-balaghah reads "ahal" for "ajjal', which
would change the translation to the following: "He transforms things at
their (proper) times."Â 

[^36]: "The relation (of this image) to the saying that minerals are
generated from the vapors of the earth is obvious" (Majlisi, p. 278).Â 

[^37]: On the Islamic teaching that the angels, though of luminous
substance, are "peripheral" beings since they know only some of God's
Names, while man is "central" since he knows all of His Names, see F.
Schuon,Â The Transcendent Unity of Religions, London, I953, pp.70-72.Â 

[^38]: "Reason's powers" is a translation ofÂ 'uqul, plural of'aql. A
more awkward but perhaps more exact translation would be "reasons". Many
scholars translate the wordÂ 'aqlas "intellect" or "intelligence".
Certainly all of these translations are possible, since the various
meanings are all contained in the one Arabic word-if indeed the reader
will concede that there is more than one basic meaning, for in modern
thought the distinction between the reason (ratio) and the intellect
(intellectus) has largely been ignored.Â  However that may be, the Arabic
wordÂ 'aqlÂ may be said to possess at least two significations according
to various contexts. It may signify the Universal Intellect, which is
equivalent to the Greatest Spirit and the Muhammadan Light. It is God's
first creation and possesses true and detailed knowledge of all things,
including God Himself. It may also signify the "reason", which is the
reflection of the Universal Intellect upon the human plane. But in
ordinary men the reason is cut off from the Intellect. Only the prophets
and saints may be said to have actualized their "intellects" to various
degrees. In other words, they F.ave realized an inward identity with the
Universal Intellect.Â  But in these texts, the Imams usually speak
ofÂ 'aqlÂ as cut off from its luminous and spiritual source. It limits and
constricts the infinite Truth in keeping with its root meaning ('aqalaÂ =
to tie, to bind). Hence I translate the word as "reason" or "power of
reason". When the Imams speak of the actualization of the intellect
within man, they refer to the "heart' (qalb). The reason cannot
understand God, but, as we shall see below, the heart may see Him. Most
Sufis follow this terminology, such as the members of Ibn al-'Arabi's
school (see my forthcoming study of Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi). But all are
aware of theÂ 'aql'sÂ dual nature. Thus Rumi: "The particular intellect
('aql-i juzwi-reason) has disgraced the Intellect" (Mathnawi, V, 463).Â 
Nevertheless, the Imams do not ignore the positive role that'aql-and
here perhaps "intelligence" would be the best translation-can and does
play in religion, in keeping with Islam's fundamental emphasis upon
knowledge (see F. Rosenthal,Â Knowledge Triumphant, Leiden, I970). The
first book of the section onÂ usulÂ from al-Kulayni'sÂ al-KafiÂ is entitled
the "Book of 'Aql." It contains SuchÂ hadiths as the following: "The
intelligence is that through which man worships the All-Merciful and
gains Paradise" (Imam Ja'far). "The sincere friend of every man is his
intelligence, while his enemy is his ignorance" (Imam 'Ali Ar-Ridhaâ€™).
"He who possesses intelligence possesses religion, and he who possesses
religion enters the Garden" (Imam Ja'far). "In the reckoning on the Day
of Resurrection God will only scrutinize His servants to the extent He
has given them intelligence in the world" (Imam Musa). The first
selection from Imam 'Ali Rida below (pp. 44-48) refers in several places
to the positive function of theÂ 'aql.Â  The two roles of theÂ 'aqlÂ to
which the Imams allude, positive and negative, derive from the principle
enunciated by the Prophet in theÂ hadith: "Meditate upon God's bounties,
but not upon His Essence." TheÂ 'aqlÂ must be able to see that the world
by its very nature manifests a Reality beyond it. A healthy
intelligence, one which on the human plane reflects the First Intellect
directly, will naturally see the signs of God in all things. But as soon
as theÂ 'aqlÂ tries to understand the very Essence of God, it oversteps
its boundaries and goes astray.Â 

[^39]: Majlisi interprets the "deviation of straying" to mean the
"reason, whose nature is deviation and straying" (p. 28I).Â 

[^40]: This divine Name occurs several times in the Quran, such as (40:
I5).Â 

[^41]: As the Quran often affirms, both explicitly and implicitly, "He
directs the affair" (13: 2, etc.).Â 

[^42]: Cf. Quran (2: I48): "Every man has his direction to which he
turns." Majlisi cites the ,hadith, "All are eased to what has been
created for them", which in turn recalls Quran (80: I9-2I): "He created
him (man), and determined him, then the way eased for him . . .".Â 

[^43]: Both the editor in a footnote, pointing to the printed edition
ofÂ al-Tawhid, and Majlisi in his commentary, basing himself on a similar
passage in theÂ Nahj al-balaghah, suggest that the correct reading
isÂ hududÂ formahdud. The translation has been made accordingly.Â 

[^44]: Cf. Quran (50: 38): "We created the heavens and the earth, and
what between them is, in six days, and no weariness touched us."Â 

[^45]: The commentator points out thatÂ mukabadahÂ occurs in place
ofÂ mukayadahÂ in some manuscripts, which would change the translation of
the last clause to the following: "or from hardship from one who would
transgress His command" (p.280).Â 

[^46]: According to a footnote to the text another manuscript reads
"when He" for "and".Â 

[^47]: These are the words of the people who were led astray by the
followers of Iblis disputing with them in hell. The verse continues: "It
was naught but the sinners that led us astray; so we have no
intercessors, no loyal friend. O that we might return again, and be
among the believers!"Â 

[^48]: Passages of the Quran known as "clear" (muhkam) are those about
whose meaning there can be no question. They are contrasted with other
passages known as "ambiguous" (mutashabih), which are open to various
interpretations, even in the outward and literal meaning of the text.Â 

[^49]: The commentator remarks: "The subtlety of the comparison of
reflection, or the mind, where reflection takes place, to a bird's craw
will not be lost on the reader" (p. 284).Â 

[^50]: Cf. Quran (2: 23): "And remember God's blessing upon you, and the
Book and the Wisdom He has sent down on you . . ."; and (2: 269): "Whoso
is given the Wisdom, has been given much good."Â 

[^51]: A term appearing twice in the Quran (3: 7 and 4: I62). In Sufism
and Shi'ism it is usually taken to refer to those who, due to their
elevated spiritual station, are qualified to speak of the divine
mysteries.Â 

[^52]: The son of 'Ali's sister, Umm Hani bint Abi Talib. For the scant
bibliographical references seeÂ Bihar al-anwar, vol. 4, p.3I3 and
theÂ Lughat-namahÂ of Dihkhuda (Tehran, 1325/1946 onward).Â 

[^53]: A reference to much prostration in prayer. Cf. Quran (48: 29):
"Their mark is on their face, the trace of prostration."Â 

[^54]: The Quran emphasises that "To God is the homecoming" (35: I8);
cf. also (2: 285); (3: 28), etc). Likewise, "Unto God belongs the issue
of all affairs" is a Quranic expression (22: 4I); (31: 22).Â 

[^55]: Cf. Quran (42: 26): "And He answers those who believe and do
righteous deeds, and gives them increase of His bounty."Â 

[^56]: Reference to Quran (1: 4): "To Thee alone we pray for succour."Â 

[^57]: "God is He who raised up the heavens without pillars you can see.
. ." (Quran 13: 2); cf. (31: I0).Â 

[^58]: A reference to their creation: "The only words We say to a thing,
when We desire it, is that We say to it 'Be', and it is" (16: 40).Â 

[^59]: A reference to Quran (35: I0): "To Him good words go up, and the
righteous deed-He uplifts it."Â 

[^60]: Literally, "the neighboring dark-reds", i.e., as explained by
Muhammad 'Abduh in his commentary on the Nahj al-balaghahÂ (vol. II, p.
I26), a reference to the mountains in terms of their color from afar.Â 

[^61]: Majlisi remarks, "If you say, 'He-glory be to Him - knows what
the lighting illumines and what it does not illumine, so why should the
Imam specify what the lighting vanishes from?' I would answer, 'Because
His knowledge of what is not illumined is stranger and more wonderful.
Since, as for what is illumined by the lighting, it is possible that
anyone of correct vision would also know it" (p. 3I6).Â 

[^62]: A reference to ancient Arabian beliefs concerning the influence
of the moon in its various mansions on the weather. See the article
"Anwa'Â " in theÂ Encyclopaedia of IslamÂ (new edition), vol. I, pp.
523-4.Â 

[^63]: Cf. Quran (2: 26): "God is not ashamed to strike a similitude
even of a gnat".Â 

[^64]: "God knows what every female bears" (Quran 13: 8).Â 

[^65]: Since He already knows their needs, or since He is the
"All-Hearing" in His Essence.

[^66]: Majlisi comments: He is not described by pairs, "i.e. by likes,
or by opposites; or by the attributes of pairs; or there is no
composition in Him as the result of the marriage of any two things . .
." (p. 3I6).Â 

[^67]: 'Ilaj. If He did, it would suggest that there is something upon
which He works or to which He applies Himself. Rather, "He but says to
it 'Be', and it is" (Quran 2: II7; 3: 47, etc.).Â 

[^68]: See Quran (4: I64).Â 

[^69]: Cf. Quran (20: 23).Â 

[^70]: Literally, "uvulae",Â lahawat.Â 

[^71]: A divine Name occurring in Quran (23: I4 and 37: I25).Â 

[^72]: The famous Battle of the Camel occurred in the year 36/656
between the followers of 'Ali and those of Talhah and Zubayr. See
theÂ Encyclopaedia of IslamÂ (new edition), "Djamal", vol. II, pp.
4I4-I6.Â 

[^73]: This is a reference to the Quranic verse, "They are unbelievers
who say, 'God is the Third of Three' " (V, 73). Concerning the
providential Quranic "misunderstanding" of the Christian Trinity, see F.
Schuon,Â The Transcendent Unity of Religions, pp. 40 ff.Â 

[^74]: The first kind of "unity" that is rejected is numerical unity, or
the idea that when we say "He is one God", we mean something similar to
what we mean when we say, 'This is one walnut", i.e., that there may
also be two Gods, three Gods, etc. The second "unity" refers to
similarity in kind or species, as when we say, "this is one cat",
meaning that there are also other kinds of cats. In the words of
Majlisi, "When it is said in this sense of a Byzantine that he is one of
mankind, it is meant that his kind is one of the kinds of men or is a
kind among other kinds" (p. 207). This isÂ tashbihÂ because we are
comparing God to whatever we say He is one of. Since He is one of that
kind, He has to be similar to others of that kind.Â 

[^75]: As Majlisi points out, the first of the acceptable meanings of
divine Unity is that He is one in the sense that He has no second,
associate or partner. Only He truly is. And the second is that He has no
parts in any sense whatsoever (p. 207).Â 

[^76]: The discrepancies between the present translation of this passage
and that found inÂ Shi'ite Islam, p. 127, are due to the fact that
inÂ Shi'ite IslamÂ the passage has been translated from 'Allamah
Tabataba'i's Persian translation, which includes his commentary.Â 

[^77]: God's signs are displayed through the whole of creation, as
indicated in many passages of the Quran, as for example, in the verse
"In the alternation of night and day, and what God has created in the
heavens and the earth-surely there are signs for a godfearing people"
(10: 6).Â 

[^78]: The translation of this sentence follows the first interpretation
offered by the commentator. According to the second, which seems less
likely in the context,Â wujud would mean "existence" as it usually does
in current usage, and the meaning would be: "His existence (being
manifestly evident) necessitates affirming Him (i.e. attesting to
Him)".Â 

[^79]: The editor notes that in the printed edition of al-Tawhid the
text reads, "So it is not said that anything is after Him."

[^80]: As in many similar sayings of the Imams, the purpose of this
passage is to affirm both God's "similarity" to creatures and His
"incomparability" with them by stating that His attributes must not be
understood in the usual sense of the words. Normally if we say
"outward", we mean that which is immediately perceptible to the senses,
but God's "outwardness" is of a different kind. Majlisi comments in
detail upon this passage. Here we can quote his remarks on some of the
less obvious clauses: "Inward, i.e. not in terms of spatial distance, in
the sense that He would move from one place to another in order to
become hidden, or that He would enter into creatures' inner parts in
order to know them.Â  Rather, in His inmost center He is hidden from the
powers of man's reason, and He knows his inner parts and his secrets....
His nearness is not the spatial nearness acquired by approaching things,
but derives from knowledge, His causal relationship to the creatures,
His originating growth and development within them, and His mercy (which
encompasses them). He is Subtle not by being a body with a delicate
constitution, small volume, strange and wondrous structure, or in that
He is colorless, but by creating subtle things and knowing them; or by
His incorporeality and 'disengagement (tajarrud). 'Not through
coercion', that is, He is free and not forced in His activity .... 'Not
through the activity of thought': in other words, when He determines
things He does not need the flow or activity of thought' (pp. 236-7).

[^81]: Reference to Quran (2: 255).Â 

[^82]: Majlisi comments: "When He creates sense organs and bestows them
upon the creatures, it is known that He has no sense organs. This is
either because of what has already been said about the fact that He does
not possess the attributes of creatures; or because, when we see that He
has bestowed sense organs, we become aware that we need them in order to
perceive. Then we conclude that He transcends them, since it is
impossible for Him to be in need of anything. It may also be because the
reason judges that He differs from His creatures in attributes" (pp.
237-8). Majlisi also quotes (pp. 238-g) a long philosophical and
metaphysical discussion of this sentence by Ibn Maytham, one of the
commentators of theÂ Nahj al-balaghah.Â 

[^83]: "In other words, since their realities have become actualized and
their quiddities have been brought into existence, it is known that they
are possible beings. Now every possible being needs an origin. The
Origin of origins will not be one of these realities (which have become
externally actualized)" (Majlisi, p. 239).Â 

[^84]: "When we see that He created opposites and that they need a
particular situation or position to manifest themselves, we realize that
He is not opposite to anything, for to need something contradicts the
Necessity (wujub) of Being. Or the meaning is that when we see that
earth one of two opposite things prevents, repels and negates the
existence of the other, we realize that He transcends that. Or we see
that opposition occurs through delimitation by certain limits which are
unable to embrace other limits, as for example (in the case of)
different colors or qualities, while He transcends all limits. In the
same way, how should the Creator oppose His creatures, or He who causes
to issue forth (al-fa'id) oppose that which is issued forth (al-mafid)?
Or if we understand opposite to mean that which is equal in strength,
this would necessitate another Necessary Being, the impossibility of
which has already been proven" (Majlisi, p. 239).Â 

[^85]: In a footnote the editor mentions that some copies of 'Uyun
akhbar Ar-Ridhaâ€™, one of the sources of this passage, read al-jaff
(dryness) for al-jasu (solidity).

[^86]: The Ascending Stairways (al-ma'arij) are mentioned in the Quran,
(70: 3). The meaning would seem to be that at death, if the spirit of
one who has compared things to his Lord tries to ascend towards Him, it
is blinded by His power. Compare Rumi: "Make it thy habit to behold the
Light without the glass, in order that when the glass is shattered there
may not be blindness (in thee)" (Mathnawi, V, 99I).Â 

[^87]: The text reads "it" for "dominion", but in order to avoid
ambiguity the noun has been repeated. In Arabic the masculine pronoun
cannot refer to the feminine "power", although if one were to follow the
similar sentence in the hadithÂ related from the Seventh Imam below,
"power" would be the logical choice as antecedent. The meaning is that
before the production of the world God had power over it, and after its
end He will still possess it. Whether or not it exists in external form
is irrelevant.Â 

[^88]: Cf. Quran (52: 45): "Then leave them, till they encounter their
day wherein they shall be thunderstruck . . .".Â 

[^89]: Cf. Quran (21: 23): "He shall not be questioned as to what He
does, but they shall be questiooned."Â 

[^90]: La yaqa' 'ala shay'. The meaning is not completely clear. The
editor points out in a footnote (p. 300) that in the Usul min
al-kafiÂ the text of thisÂ hadithÂ readsÂ yandamÂ for yaqa' i.e., "He becomes
remorseful at nothing."Â 

[^91]: This verse is in reference to the covenant made between God and
man before the creation of the world. See S. H. Nasr,Â Ideals and
Realities of Islam, London, I966, pp. 25-7.Â 

[^92]: God is often referred to as a "thing" (shay') in the
hadithÂ literature, as well as in theology and philosophy, since the
meaning of the word "thing" in Arabic is not limited to external,
concrete existents. Rather, it signifies reality, entity or quiddity, at
whatever level of existence, from the most sublime to the most
concrete.Â 

[^93]: Majlisi interprets this to mean the "script written by hands" (p.
I62). I.e., neither the spoken nor the written name is the Named.Â 

[^94]: The meaning of this sentence is obscure in the Arabic and Majlisi
offers at least eight possible readings (pp. I62-3), some of which are
very close to one another, and the most likely of which has been
followed here. The present interpretation is also that offered by the
editor ofÂ al-Tawhid, p. 58.Â 

[^95]: Majlisi comments that this sentence has been interpreted to mean
that "God has not come into being. If He had, He would have been
originated by another, and His Being as well as the attributes of His
origination would be known by means of the fashioning of His maker, just
as effects are known by their causes." But, he adds, "In my view perhaps
the meaning is that He has not been fashioned and that therefore He
cannot be known by comparing Him to something else which has been
fashioned" (p. I63). According to this interpretation, the sentence
should be translated as follows: "He has not come into being that His
Being should be known through something else which has been fashioned."Â 

[^96]: Majlisi comments: "Between the Creator and His creatures there is
no common matter (maddah) or reality (haqiqah) which might allow them to
attain to knowledge of Him; rather, He produced them from nothing that
was" (p. I65). This passage may also be interpreted to mean, in
accordance with the beginning of the paragraph, "There is nothing to act
as a veil between the Creator and His creatures."Â 

[^97]: This passage is related up to this point in theÂ Usul min al-kafi.
The Tehran edition of I388/I968-9, published with a Persian translation
and notes by one of the well-known contemporary 'ulama', Ayatallah
Muhammad Baqir Kamara'i, contains the following commentary (vol. I, pp.
207-8): "The Names of God are His theophanies (jilwah-ha) which cast a
ray of light upon man's reason (khirad). Because they become connected
to human reason, limit, end and definition (ghayah,Â nihayah,Â hadd) apply
to them. The limit of each being lies where it is connected to another
being. The theophanies of God's act (fi'l) and fashioning (san'ah) which
are His creation, become limited in the framework of possible beings
(mumkinat) There the ray of light which brings about creation comes to
its limit. Thus it is said, 'the existence of a man', or 'of a tree',
'of an angel', 'of the earth', 'of heaven', etc.Â  "The theophanies of
God's attributes (sifat), which are the principle (mabda') of the
theophanies of (His) act, are given limits by the functioning of the
reason, and thus it is said, God's 'knowledge', 'power', and 'life'. In
this way the Names become distinct from the divine Essence, and even the
all-inclusive (jami') Name of God, which is 'Allah', is separated from
the Essence. The reality of God is other than all of these."Â 

[^98]: Ma'rifahÂ within the essentially gnostic perspective of Islam is
the goal of religious endeavour. See F. Schuon, Understanding Islam,
London, I962, chapter I. As explained in the following footnote, the
meaning of this sentence is that man has faith not in something which he
himself does not know, but in that upon which all of his knowledge is
based and which is in fact the object of all knowledge. To the extent he
has knowledge, he has knowledge of God, albeit imperfectly, since there
is no other knowledge.Â 

[^99]: In an unpublished work entitledÂ Risalat al-walayah(Treatise on
sanctity), 'Allamah Tabataba'i comments on the section of this passage
beginning with the words "Whoso maintains that he knows God by means of
a veil": "Allusion is made here to the fact that it is logically
impossible for the knowledge of something other than God to make
necessary the knowledge of God Himself. Because of God's transcendence,
it cannot be said that knowledge (of Him) is the very same as the thing
known, as has already been explained (earlier m the treatise).Â  "It is
impossible that knowledge of one thing should be knowledge of another
thing different from it: otherwise the two different things would be the
same, which contradicts the premise. So the fact that knowledge of one
thing renders the knowledge of another thing necessary requires some
sort of unification (ittihad) between the two things. But since they
have been postulated as two things, there must be in addition to an
aspect of unification, an aspect of disparity. Thus each of them is
compounded of two aspects. Whereas God-glory be to Him-is one and simple
in essence: He is not compounded of anything in a manner which would
allow Him to be known by other than Him. This point is indicated by the
Imam's saying, 'There is nothing between the Creator and the created,'
etc., as well as by his words, 'Then he who maintains that he has faith
in that which he does not know has gone astray from knowledge', etc.,
which is derived from his previous saying, i.e., 'Surely he alone knows
God who knows Him by means of God,' etc. His words, 'A created thing
perceives nothing unless it be by means of God', serve as its proof, for
everything is known by means of God, who is 'the Light of the heavens
and the earth' (Quran 24: 35), so how should things be known by means of
other than Him? For He supports every individual being (dhat), and He is
without supports in His very Essence (dhat). At the same time, knowledge
of that which in its very essence is dependent ensues from knowledge of
the Independent Being which supports it, for the fact that knowledge
takes form necessarily requires independence in the case of that which
is known. Thus knowledge of what is dependent is a consequence of
(knowledge of) the Independent which accompanies it. Such is the
reality.Â  And since it might be imagined that this doctrine is
incarnation (hulul) or unification (ittihad)-high be God exalted above
these-the Imam follows his words by saying, 'God is empty of His
creatures and His creatures are empty of Him', etc. Saying that the
created being's perception of something is by means of God does not
negate the beginning of the passage ('Whoso asserts. . .'), which denies
that the knowledge of God should require knowledge of other than Him,
for the knowledge which is spoken of at the beginning is acquired
(husuli) i.e., rational), and that u the end is 'presential' (huduri)
i.e., direct and divinely dispensed knowledge or gnosis)." Folio 26
obverse-reverse (Photocopies of this work are in the possession of a
number of 'Allamah Tabataba'i's disciples and students, and it is hoped
that someday it will be published).Â 

[^100]: InÂ al-TawhidÂ the editor explains that here the secondmakanÂ is
equivalent toÂ makanahÂ orÂ azamah. He comments, "He did not create a place
for His station and grandeur because places encompass Him not" (p. I4I).
Majlisi prefers the readingÂ kanÂ forÂ makanÂ as found in some manuscripts
and also in the ,hadithÂ from the fifth Imam translated above. The
meaning would then be as translated there, i.e., "He did not bring into
existence a place for His Being."Â 

[^101]: "Master of the dominion" (malik al-mulk) is a divine name,
occurring in Quran (3: 26). Cf. Quran (3: I89): "To God belongs the
dominion of the heavens and the earth: and God is powerful over
everything" and many similar verses.Â 

[^102]: Cf. Quran, (52: 45).Â 

[^103]: The famous Abbasid caliph, son of Harun al-Rashid. On his
decision to appoint Imam Ar-Ridhaâ€™ as his successor, seeÂ Shi'ite Islam.Â 

[^104]: In general Banu Hashim ("The sons of Hashim") have been
understood to be the descendents of Hashim ibn 'Abd Manaf, the great
grandfather of the Prophet and also the ancestor of 'Ali and al-'Abbas,
half-brother of the Prophet's father, from whom is taken the name of the
Abbasid caliphate. During the Abbasid period the term refers to the
family of the Prophet, but more specifically, as here, to the Abbasid
family itself. See B. Lewis, "Hashimiyyah",Â The Encyclopedia of
IslamÂ (new edition), vol. III, p. 265.Â 

[^105]: Majlisi offers four possible explanations for this sentence, the
simplest of which is as follows: "Everything whose existence can be
known immediately through the senses without inference from its effects
is fashioned (since it is a part of the created world)" (p. 233).Â 

[^106]: Men are not separated from God because they are in one place and
He in another, but because He is free of place and localization, whereas
they are entrapped within it (Majlisi, p. 233).Â 

[^107]: Majlisi comments: " 'His names are an expression', or they are
not His very Essence and Attributes, rather they are means of expressing
and speaking of them. 'And His acts are to make understood', so that men
will come to know Him through them and they will infer His existence,
knowledge, power, wisdom and mercy. 'And His Essence is Reality', or a
hidden, transcendent reality not reached by the powers of the creatures'
reason" (p. 234).Â 

[^108]: Majlisi offers several interpretations for this passage.
According to the one which is largely followed here, "To associate an
end with Him . . . means to come to the conclusion that He undergoes
annihilation along with the creatures, so that it would be correct to
say, 'His end is before, or after, the end of so and so.' This is the
same as to say that He participates wholly in the nature of creatures
and therefore has parts. Whoso says this has described Him as possessing
possibility, incapacity and the other defects of possible beings. And
whoso judges such has deviated concerning the divine Essence" (p. 2,5).Â 

[^109]: From this sentence begins a long section which corresponds
almost exactly with theÂ hadithÂ quoted from Imam 'Ali above (pp. 38 ff).
For this reason the original Arabic terms have not been repeated. It
might be tempting to take this correspondence as proof that the
attribution of these words to 'Ali Ar-Ridhaâ€™ or to 'Ali is incorrect.
But one must remember that it is quite common for the Imams to quote
their father and grandfather, all the way back to the Prophet. We have
seen examples of this already in the chain of authority of a number
ofÂ hadithsÂ translated above. Moreover, in the middle of a discourse
there is no particular reason for the Imam to stop and point out exactly
whom he is quoting, just as is the case with quotations from the Quran,
especially since most of his followers would know perfectly well. The
traditional explanation for the repetition is summed up by Shaykh
al-Saduq (al-Tawhid, p. 309; see also Majlisi, p. 306): "In
theÂ hadithÂ of 'Ali there are certain words which Imam Rida mentioned in
his sermon. This is a confirmation of what we have always said
concerning the Imams, upon whom be peace: the knowledge of each of them
is derived from his father right back to the Prophet."Â 

[^110]: This and the previous phrase are essentially the same in
meaning. Normally, when man wills or desires to do something, he has a
particular idea or goal and then exerts himself to achieve it, employing
resolution and diligence. But as for God, "His command, when He desires
a thing, is to say to it 'Be', and it is" (Quran 36: 82).Â 

[^111]: QadÂ often cannot be translated by a separate word in English. It
indicates the termination of action at the moment of speaking and
therefore as Majlisi notes, quoting the classical grammarians, serves
"to approximate the past to the present" (p. 242).Â 

[^112]: Majlisi explains that none of these words can refer to God since
each of them implies temporal or other limitation, while God transcends
time and knows all things in eternity. Thus, "ever since" indicates a
point of beginning in time, and if it applied to God it would indicate
that what was before that point was concealed from Him. He can have no
doubt concerning the future, so "perhaps" cannot apply to Him, etc. (pp.
24I-2).Â 

[^113]: Majlisi remarks that "instruments and means . . . or physical
organs and corporeal faculties . . . allude to the existence of
corporeality like themselves . . . And it is not improbable that by
'instruments' are meant the words which are negated from Him in the
previous section and that this passage is meant to be an explanation of
that" (p. 242).Â 

[^114]: "The activities and the results of these instruments and means
are found in creatures, not in God" (Majlisi, p. 242).Â 

[^115]: "The fact that the wordsÂ mudh,Â qadÂ andÂ lawlaÂ are attributed to
instruments indicate that the latter are neither beginningless, nor
eternal, nor perfect. Therefore instruments could not delimit or allude
to Him because, by reason of their temporality and imperfection, they
are far from being commensurate with (God,) the Perfect, Absolute and
Eternal in His Essence... (This is) becausemudhÂ refers to beginning in
time . . . gad approximates the past to the present . . . and law la is
employed to speak of what would have been good . . . (for example), 'How
good it would have been if only it had been such and such' . . . and
thus it points to imperfection in the situation and deters from absolute
perfection" (Majlisi, p. 243). Majlisi also points out two alternative
readings for this passage which need not concern us here.Â 

[^116]: The text reads "through them", and in a long passage (pp. 242-3)
Majlisi demonstrates that the pronoun should refer to "powers of reason"
rather than to "instruments", although in a similar passage in theÂ Nahj
al-balaghahÂ it refers to the latter.Â 

[^117]: "He becomes veiled to sight through the powers of reason because
it is the powers of reason which judge that the vision of Him is
impossible, and it is to the powers of reason that imaginations appeal
when they differ among themselves" (Majlisi, p. 244).Â 

[^118]: "From the powers of reason the proof of things is derived, and
through these powers God makes known to the reason, or to its possessor,
the acknowledgment of Him" (Majlisi, p. 244).Â 

[^119]: 'Sincerity' is to make the knowledge of Him pure from all that
is not appropriate to His sacred Essence, i.e., materiality,
accidentality, extraneous attributes (al-sifat al-za'idah) and temporal
phenomena. To say that he means 'sincerity in devotion' would be
artificial and forced (takalluf)" (Majlisi, p. 244).Â  In the Quran the
chapter called "Sincerity" (al-ikhlas) is also called "The Profession of
Unity" (al-tawhid), and the meaning of sincerity in Islam is tied to the
correct profession of divine Unity in terms of the negation of all
"Associationism" (shirk). The meaning of sincerity is discussed most
profoundly perhaps in Sufi writings, where it means complete negation of
self. See F. Schuon,Understanding Islam, pp. I40, I55-6.Â 

[^120]: "I.e., whoso affirms that He possesses extraneous attributes
does not negate an understanding of Him in terms of comparison"
(Majlisi, p. 244).Â 

[^121]: That is, if these temporal events and changes referred to Him
they would indicate that He had been created, and He would then be proof
of another Creator, just as possible beings are proof of the Necessary
Being (Majlisi, p. 246).Â 

[^122]: There is no substance to the absurd arguments that would prove
Him temporal and possessed of extraneous attributes, and no answer to
such arguments precisely because of their self-evident absurdity. By
saying such things one does not glorify Him, rather one attributes to
Him imperfection (Majlisi, p. 246).

[^123]: According to Majlisi this means that there is nothing wrong with
distinguishing Him from creation, unless we consider a perfection-His
lying above duality and beginning-to be a fault. He cites the following
line of poetry as an example of this type of expression: "They have no
fault except that their swords/ Are dented from slashing the enemy
forces". I.e., their only "fault" is a perfection (p. 246). Another
possible interpretation of this passage, which however is made doubtful
by the context and structure of this and other sayings of the Imams, is
to say that there is always something provisional about distinguishing
God from creation, for this implies some sort of fundamental duality,
which precisely-as asserted by the Shahadah, la ilaha illallah-God
transcends. The world cannot exist "independently" of God, otherwise it
would be another deity. If God is one, then ultimately the world cannot
be other than He. Certainly He is other than the world, however, as this
and all the other hadiths cited from theBihar al-anwar emphasize so
strongly. See F. Schuon, Understanding Islam, pp. 17-18 and 125-6.

[^124]: Cf. such Quranic passages as the following: "Whoso associates
with God anything, has gone astray into far error . . . Whoso takes
Satan to him for a friend, instead of God, has surely suffered a
manifest loss" (4 : II6-9).

[^125]: TheÂ zanadiqahÂ (sing.:Â zindiq) are identified specifically in
Islamic history with the Manichaeans, but the word is also used more
generally, as here, to mean umbeliever and heretic.Â 

[^126]: Concerning the use of the term "thing" to refer to God, see
above, note 92.Â 

[^127]: Majlisi comments on the unbeliever's question and the Imam's
answer as follows (p. 38): "The apparent meaning is that he is asking
about the beginning of God's being and existence. But it is also
possible that the question concerns the principle of time for His
existence. According to the first (possibility), the gist of his answer
is that beginning in time pertains to that which is temporal, to that
which had been nonexistent and then became existent. But as for God,
nonexistence is impossible (so He cannot have a beginning in time).Â 
"According to the second (possibility), the meaning is that the existent
in time would be so through transformation in essence and attributes,
for time is the relationship of the changing (al-mutaghayyir) to the
changing. So in one moment of time it has a state which it does not have
in another. But God transcends change in essence and attributes."Â 

[^128]: Cf. Quran 13 : 12.

[^129]: Cf. Quran 2 : 164.

[^130]: I.e., He is not veiled, for He sees all things. It is men who
have veiled themselves from Him.

[^131]: These are all divine names which occur in the Quran. It should
be noted, however, that the nameÂ latifÂ ("Subtle") is particularly
difficult to render into English in a manner which would do justice to
its various shades of meaning, as will be apparent from the passage.
Nevertheless it seemed better to maintain the one word in English than
to try to change it according to context and lose the point which the
Imam wishes to make. In another hadithÂ Imam Rida explains the meaning of
the divine nameÂ al-latifÂ as follows: God is "Latif, not because of being
scanty, slender or small, but because of penetrating into things and
being impossible of comprehension .... God is too subtle to be grasped
within a definition or limited by a description, whereas, 'subtlety' for
us is in smallness of size and quantity" (al-Tawhid, p. I89).Â 

[^132]: "Wisdom" (al-hikmah) is defined as "knowledge which puts
everything in its place", and therefore implies application and
"workmanship".Â 

[^133]: Here subtle and majestic,Â latifÂ andÂ jalil, are meant to be two
contrasting attributes, referring to the very small and the very large,
etc.Â 

[^134]: Cf. Quran (6: 59): "With Him are the keys of the Unseen; none
knows them but He. He knows what is in land and sea; not a leaf falls,
but He knows it. Not a gram in the earth's shadows, not a thing, fresh
or withered, but it is in a Book Manifest."Â 


