The Ruler and Society
=====================

Professing God's Unity and accepting Muhammad as His prophet bring in
their wake innumerable consequences. If the Quran is God's Word and
Muhammad His chosen messenger who ***"speaks out not of caprice" (53 :
3),*** their instructions concerning all things must be obeyed. Faced
with these facts of their faith, the Muslims soon developed a
complicated science of the *Shari'ah* or Divine Law, a science which
embraces every dimension of human conduct, including the political.

One of the earliest and best expositions of Islam's explicit and
implicit instructions concerning government and its role in society is
'Ali's instructions to Malik ibn al-Harith al-Nakha'i, surnamed
al-Ashtar ("the man with inverted eyelashes") because of a wound he
received in battle.

He was one of the foremost Muslim warriors in the first few years of
Islam's spread and one of 'Ali's staunchest supporters. He advised 'Ali
against making a truce with Mu'awiyah at the battle of Siffn and was
poisoned on his way to assume his post as governor of Egypt in the year
37/658 or 38/659, shortly after 'Ali became caliph following the
assassination of 'Uthman.[^1]

Since these instructions form part of 'Ali's *Nahj al-balaghah*, they
have been discussed by all the more than 100 commentators on the text. I
have made extensive use of two of the most famous of the commentaries.

The first is by Ibn Abi-l-Hadid (d. 655/1257), a historian who was
attached to the Abbasid court in Baghdad. His commentary is one of the
earliest, and because of its thoroughness and exactitude forms the basis
for many of the later commentaries.

The second is by Ibn Maytham al-Bahrani, a well-known Shi'ite scholar
and theologian who died in 679/1282-3. In addition I have profited from
the glosses of the nineteenth century reformer Muhammad 'Abduh (d. 1905)
and one or two other modern Commentaries which are mentioned in the
notes.

'Ali's Instructions to Malik al-Ashtar
--------------------------------------

Ali wrote these instructions to al-Ashtar al-Nakha'i when he appointed
him governor of Egypt and its provinces at the time the rule of Muhammad
ibn Abi Bakr was in turmoil. It is the longest set of instructions (in
the *Nahjal-balaghah*). Among all his letters it embraces the largest
number of good qualities.

### Part One: Introduction

**Part One: Introduction**[^2]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate

This is that with which 'Ali, the servant of God and Commander of the
Faithful, charged Malik ibn al-Harith al-Ashtar in his instructions to
him when he appointed him governor of Egypt: to collect its land
tax,[^3] to war against its enemies, to improve the condition of the
people and to engender prosperity in its regions.

He charged him to fear God, to prefer obedience to Him (over all else)
and to follow what He has directed in His Book-both the acts He has made
obligatory and those He recommends[^4] - for none attains felicity but
he who follows His directions, and none is overcome by wretchedness but
he who denies them and lets them slip by. (He charged him) to help
God-glory be to Him-with his heart, his hand and his tongue,[^5] for
He-majestic is His Name-has promised to help him who exalts Him.[^6]

And he charged him to break the passions of his soul and restrain it in
its recalcitrance, for the soul incites to evil, except inasmuch as God
has mercy.[^7]

### Part Two: Commands and Instructions Concerning Righteous Action in the Affairs of the State

Know, O Malik, that I am sending you to a land where governments, just
and unjust, have existed before you. People will look upon your affairs
in the same way that you were wont to look upon the affairs of the
rulers before you. They will speak about you as you were wont to speak
about those rulers. And the righteous are only known by that which God
causes to pass concerning them on the tongues of His servants. So let
the dearest of your treasuries be the treasury of righteous action.

Control your desire and restrain your soul from what is not lawful to
you, for restraint of the soul is for it to be equitous in what it likes
and dislikes. Infuse your heart with mercy, love and kindness for your
subjects. Be not in face of them a voracious animal, counting them as
easy prey, for they are of two kinds: either they are your brothers in
religion or your equals in creation.

Error catches them unaware, deficiencies overcome them, (evil deeds) are
committed by them intentionally and by mistake. So grant them your
pardon and your forgiveness to the same extent that you hope God will
grant you His pardon and His forgiveness. For you are above them, and he
who appointed you is above you, and God is above him who appointed you.
God has sought from you the fulfillment of their requirements and He is
trying you with them.

Set yourself not up to war against God,[^8] for you have no power
against His vengeance, nor are you able to dispense with His pardon and
His mercy. Never be regretful of pardon or rejoice at punishment, and
never hasten (to act) upon an impulse if you can find a better course.
Never say, "I am invested with authority, I give orders and I am
obeyed," for surely that is corruption in the heart, enfeeblement of the
religion and an approach to changes (in fortune). If the authority you
possess engender in you pride or arrogance, then reflect upon the
tremendousness of the dominion of God above you and His power over you
in that in which you yourself have no control.

This will subdue your recalcitrance, restrain your violence and restore
in you what has left you of the power of your reason. Beware of vying
with God in His tremendousness and likening yourself to Him in His
exclusive power, for God abases every tyrant and humiliates all who are
proud.

See that justice is done towards God[^9] and justice is done towards the
people by yourself, your own family and those whom you favor among your
subjects. For if you do not do so, you have worked wrong. And as for him
who wrongs the servants of God, God is his adversary, not to speak of
His servants. God renders null and void the argument of whosoever
contends with Him. Such a one will be God's enemy until he desists or
repents. Nothing is more conducive to the removal of God's blessing and
the hastening of His vengeance than to continue in wrongdoing, for God
harkens to the call of the oppressed and He is ever on the watch against
the wrongdoers.[^10]

Let the dearest of your affairs be those which are middlemost in
rightfulness,[^11] most inclusive in justice and most comprehensive in
(establishing) the content of the subjects. For the discontent of the
common people invalidates the content of favorites, and the discontent
of favorites is pardoned at (the achievement of) the content of the
masses. Moreover, none of the subjects is more burdensome upon the ruler
in ease and less of a help to him in trial than his favorites. (None
are) more disgusted by equity, more importunate in demands, less
grateful upon bestowal, slower to pardon (the ruler upon his)
withholding (favor) and more deficient in patience at the misfortunes of
time than the favorites.

Whereas the support of religion, the solidarity of Muslims and
preparedness in the face of the enemy lie only with the common people of
the community, so let your inclination and affection be toward them. Let
the farthest of your subjects from you and the most hateful to you be he
who most seeks out the faults of men. For men possess faults, which the
ruler more than anyone else should conceal. So do not uncover those of
them which are hidden from you, for it is only encumbent upon you to
remedy what appears before you.

God will judge what is hidden from you. So veil imperfection to the
extent you are able; God will veil that of yourself which you would like
to have veiled from your subjects. Loose from men the knot of every
resentment, sever from yourself the cause of every animosity, and ignore
all that which does not become your station. Never hasten to believe the
slanderer, for the slanderer is a deceiver, even if he seems to be a
sincere advisor.

Bring not into your consultation a miser, who might turn you away from
liberality and promise you poverty;[^12] nor a coward, who might
enfeeble you in your affairs; nor a greedy man, who might in his lust
deck out oppression to you as something fair. Miserliness, cowardliness
and greed are diverse temperaments which have in common distrust in
God.[^13]

Truly the worst of your viziers are those who were the viziers of the
evil (rulers) before you and shared with them in their sins. Let them
not be among your retinue, for they are aides of the sinners and
brothers of the wrongdoers. You will find the best of substitutes for
them from among those who possess the like of their ideas and
effectiveness but are not encumbranced by the like of their sins and
crimes; who have not aided a wrongdoer in his wrongs nor a sinner in his
sins. These will be a lighter burden upon you, a better aid, more
inclined toward you in sympathy and less intimate with people other than
you. So choose these men as your special companions in privacy and at
assemblies.

Then let the most influential among them be he who speaks most to you
with the bitterness of the truth and supports you least inactivities
which God dislikes in His friends, however this strikes your pleasure.
Cling to men of piety and veracity. Then accustom them not to lavish
praise upon you nor to (try to) gladden you by (attributing to you) a
vanity you did not do,[^14] for the lavishing of abundant praise causes
arrogance and draws (one) close to pride.  
 Never let the good-doer and the evil-doer possess an equal station
before you, for that would cause the good-doer to abstain from his
good-doing and habituate the evil-doer to his evil-doing. Impose upon
each of them what he has imposed upon himself.[^15]

Know that there is nothing more conducive to the ruler's trusting his
subjects than that he be kind towards them, lighten their burdens and
abandon coercing them in that in which they possess not the ability. So
in this respect you should attain a situation in which you can
confidently trust your subjects, for trusting (them) will sever from you
lasting strain.[^16]

And surely he who most deserves your trust is he who has done well when
you have tested him, and he who most deserves your mistrust is he who
has done badly when you have tested him.

Abolish no proper custom (sunnah) which has been acted upon by the
leaders of this community, through which harmony has been strengthened
and because of which the subjects have prospered. Create no new custom
which might in any way prejudice the customs of the past, lest their
reward belong to him who originated them, and the burden be upon you to
the extent that you have abolished them.

Study much with men of knowledge ('*ulama'*) and converse much with
sages (*hukama'*) concerning the consolidation of that which causes the
state of your land to prosper and the establishment of that by which the
people before you remained strong.[^17]

### Part Three: Concerning the Classes of Men

Know that subjects are of various classes, none of which can be set
aright without the others and none of which is independent from the
others. Among them are (1.) the soldiers of God, (2.) secretaries for
the common people and the people of distinction,[^18] executors of
justice[^19] and administrators of equity and kindness,[^20] (3.) payers
of *jizyah*[^21] and land tax, namely the people of protective
covenants[^22] and the Muslims, (4.) merchants and craftsmen and (5.)
the lowest class, the needy and wretched.

For each of them God has designated a portion, and commensurate with
each portion He has established obligatory acts (*faridah*) in His Book
and the Sunnah of His Prophet-may God bless him and his household and
give them peace-as a covenant from Him maintained by us.[^23]

Now soldiers, by the leave of God, are the fortresses of the subjects,
the adornment of rulers, the might of religion and the means to
security. The subjects have no support but them, and the soldiers in
their turn have no support but the land tax which God has extracted for
them, (a tax) by which they are given the power to war against their
enemy and upon which they depend for that which puts their situation in
order and meets their needs.

Then these two classes (soldiers and taxpayers) have no support but the
third class, the judges, administrators and secretaries, for they draw
up contracts,[^24] gather yields, and are entrusted with private and
public affairs. And all of these have no support but the merchants and
craftsmen, through the goods which they bring together and the markets
which they set up.

They provide for the needs (of the first three classes) by acquiring
with their own hands those (goods) to which the resources of others do
not attain. Then there is the lowest class, the needy and wretched,
those who have the right to aid and assistance. With God there is plenty
for each (of the classes).

Each has a claim upon the ruler to the extent that will set it aright.
But the ruler will not truly accomplish what God has enjoined upon him
in this respect except by resolutely striving, by recourse to God's
help, by reconciling himself to what the truth requires and by being
patient in the face of it in what is easy for him or burdensome.

(1.) Appoint as commander from among your troops that person who is in
your sight the most sincere in the way of God and His Prophet and of
your Imam,[^25] who is purest of heart and most outstanding in
intelligence, who is slow to anger, relieved to pardon, gentle to the
weak and harsh with the strong and who is not stirred to action by
severity nor held back by incapacity. Then hold fast to men of noble
descent and those of righteous families and good precedents, then to men
of bravery, courage, generosity and magnanimity, for they are
encompassed by nobility and embraced by honor.

Then inspect the affairs of the soldiers[^26] as parents inspect their
own child. Never let anything through which you have strengthened them
distress you, and disdain not a kindness you have undertaken for them,
even if it be small, for it will invite them to counsel you sincerely
and trust you. Do not leave aside the examination of their minor affairs
while depending upon (the examination of) the great, for there is a
place where they will profit from a trifling kindness, and an occasion
in which they cannot do without the great.

Among the chiefs of your army favor most him who assists the soldiers
with his aid and bestows upon them what is at his disposal to the extent
that suffices both them and the members of their families left
behind.[^27] Then their concern in battle with the enemy will be a
single concern, for your kind inclination toward them will incline their
hearts to you.[^28]

Verily the foremost delight of the eye for rulers is the establishment
of justice in the land and the appearance of love for them among the
subjects.[^29] But surely the subjects' love will not appear without the
well-being of their breasts, and their sincerity (toward rulers) will
not become free from blemishes unless they watch over their rulers, find
their governments of little burden and cease to hope that their period
(of rule) will soon come to an end.

Therefore let their hopes be expanded, and persist in praising them
warmly and taking into account the (good) accomplishments of everyone
among them who has accomplished, for frequent mention of their good
deeds will encourage the bold and rouse the indolent, God willing.

Then recognize in every man that which he has accomplished, attribute
not one man's accomplishment to another and fall not short (of
attributing) to him the full extent of his accomplishment. Let not a
man's eminence invite you to consider as great an accomplishment which
was small, nor a man's lowliness to consider as small an accomplishment
which was great.

Refer to God and His Messenger any concerns which distress you and any
matters which are obscure for you, for God-high be He exalted-has said
to a people whom He desired to guide, ***"O believers, obey God, and
obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. If you should
quarrel on anything, refer it to God and the Messenger" (4 : 59).*** To
refer to God is to adhere to the clear text of His Book,[^30] while to
refer to the Prophet is to adhere to his uniting (*al-jami'ah*) Sunnah,
not the dividing (*al-mufarriq*).[^31]

(2a.) Then choose to judge (*al-hukm*) among men him who in your sight
is the most excellent of subjects, i.e., one who is not beleaguered by
(complex) affairs, who is not rendered ill-tempered by the
litigants,[^32] who does not persist in error, who is not distressed by
returning to the truth when he recognizes it, whose soul does not
descend to any kind of greed, who is not satisfied with an inferior
understanding (of a thing) short of the more thorough, who hesitates
most in (acting in the face of) obscurities, who adheres most to
arguments, who is the least to become annoyed at the petition of the
litigants, who is the most patient (in waiting) for the facts to become
clear and who is the firmest when the verdict has become manifest; a man
who does not become conceited when praise is lavished upon him and who
is not attracted by temptation. But such (men) are rare.

Thereupon investigate frequently his execution of the law (*qada'*) and
grant generously to him that which will eliminate his lacks and through
which his need for men will decrease. Bestow upon him that station near
to you to which none of your other favorites may aspire, that by it he
may be secure from (character) assassination before you by men of
importance.[^33] (In sum) study that (i.e., the selection of judges)
with thorough consideration, for this religion was prisoner in the hands
of the wicked, who acted with it out of caprice and used it to seek (the
pleasures of) the present world.[^34]

(2b.) Then look into the affairs of your administrators. Employ them
(only after) having tested (them) and appoint them not with favoritism
or arbitrariness, for these two (attributes) embrace different kinds of
oppression and treachery.[^35]

Among them look for people of experience and modesty[^36] from righteous
families foremost in Islam,[^37] for they are nobler in moral qualities,
more genuine in dignity and less concerned with ambitious designs, and
they perceive more penetratingly the consequences of affairs. Then
bestow provisions upon them liberally, for that will empower them to set
themselves aright and to dispense with consuming what is under their
authority; and it is an argument against them if they should disobey
your command or sully your trust.

Then investigate their actions. Dispatch truthful and loyal observers
(to watch) over them, for your investigation of their affairs in secret
will incite them to carry out their trust faithfully and to act kindly
toward the subjects. Be heedful of aides. If one of them should extend
his hand in a treacherous act, concerning which the intelligence
received against him from your observers concurs, and if you are
satisfied with that as a witness, subject him to corporeal punishment
and seize him for what befell from his action. Then install him in a
position of degradation, brand him with treachery and gird him with the
shame of accusation.

(3.) Investigate the situation of the land tax in a manner that will
rectify the state of those who pay it, for in the correctness of the
land tax and the welfare of the taxpayers is the welfare of others. The
welfare of others will not be achieved except through them, for the
people, all of them, are dependent upon the land tax and those who pay
it. Let your care for the prosperity of the earth be deeper than your
care for the collecting of land tax, for it will not be gathered except
in prosperity. Whoever exacts land tax without prosperity has desolated
the land and destroyed the servants (of God). His affairs will remain in
order but briefly.

So if your subjects complain of burden,[^38] of blight, of the cutting
off of irrigation water, of lack of rain, or of the transformation of
the earth through its being inundated by a flood or ruined by drought,
lighten (their burden) to the extent you wish their affairs to be
rectified. And let not anything by which you have lightened their burden
weigh heavily against you, for it is a store which they will return to
you by bringing about prosperity in your land and embellishing your
rule. You will gain their fairest praise and pride yourself at the
spreading forth of justice among them. You will be able to depend upon
the increase in their strength (resulting) from what you stored away
with them when you gave them ease; and upon their trust, since you
accustomed them to your justice toward them through your kindness to
them.

Then perhaps matters will arise which afterwards they will undertake
gladly if in these you depend upon them, for prosperity will carry that
with which you burden it. Truly the destruction of the earth only
results from the destitution of its inhabitants, and its inhabitants
become destitute only when rulers concern themselves with amassing
(wealth), when they have misgivings about the endurance (of their own
rule)[^39] and when they profit little from warning examples.

(2c.) Then examine the state of your secretaries and put the best of
them in charge of your affairs.[^40] Assign those of your letters in
which you insert your strategems and secrets to him among them most
generously endowed with the aspects of righteous moral qualities, a
person whom high estate does not make reckless, that because of it he
might be so bold as to oppose you in the presence of an assembly.

(He should be someone) whom negligence will not hinder from delivering
to you the letters of your administrators, nor from issuing their
answers properly for you in that which he takes for you and bestows in
your stead; a person who will not weaken a contract which he binds for
you, nor will he be incapable of dissolving what has been contracted to
your loss; a man who is not ignorant of the extent of his own value in
affairs, for he who is ignorant of his own value is even more ignorant
of the value of others.

Let not your choosing of them be in accordance with your own
discernment, confidence and good opinion, for men make themselves known
to the discernment of rulers by dissimulating and serving them well,
even though beyond this there may be nothing of sincere counsel and
loyalty. Rather examine them in that with which they were entrusted by
the righteous before you. Depend upon him who has left the fairest
impression upon the common people and whose countenance is best known
for trustworthiness. This will be proof of your sincerity toward God and
toward him whose affair has been entrusted to you.

Appoint to the head of each of your concerns a chief from among these
men, (a person) who is neither overpowered when these concerns are great
nor disturbed when they are many. Whatever fault of your secretaries you
overlook will come to be attached to you.

(4.) Then make merchants and craftsmen-those who are permanently fixed,
those who move about with their wares and those who profit from (the
labor of) their own body[^41] your own concern, and urge others to do
so,[^42] for they are the bases of benefits and the means of attaining
conveniences. They bring (benefits and conveniences) from remote and
inaccessible places in the land, sea, plains and mountains, and from
places where men neither gather together nor dare to go. (The merchants
and craftsmen) are a gentleness from which there is no fear of calamity
and a pacifity from which there is no worry of disruption.[^43] Examine
their affairs in your presence and in every corner of your land.

But know, nevertheless, that in many of them is shameful miserliness,
detestable avarice, hoarding of benefits and arbitrariness in sales.
This is a source of loss to all and a stain upon rulers. So prohibit
hoarding (*ihtikar*), for the Messenger of God-may God bless him and his
household and give them peace-prohibited it.[^44] Let selling be an
openhanded selling, with justly balanced scales and prices which do not
prejudice either party, buyer or seller.[^45] As for him who lets
himself be tempted to hoard after you have forbidden him (to do so),
make an example of him and punish him, but not excessively.

(5.) Then (fear) God, (fear) God regarding the lowest class, the
wretched, needy, suffering and disabled who have no means at their
disposal, for in this class there is he who begs and he who is needy
(but does not beg). Be heedful for God's sake of those rights of theirs
which He has entrusted to you. Set aside for them a share of your
treasury (*bayt al-mal*) and in every town a share of the produce of the
lands of Islam taken as booty (*sawafi al-islam*),[^46] for to the
farthest away of them belongs the equivalent of what belongs to the
nearest.[^47] You are bound to observe the right of each of them, so be
not distracted from them by arrogance, for you will not be excused if,
to attend to the very important affair, you neglect the trifling. So
avert not your solicitude from them and turn not your face away from
them in contempt.

Investigate the affairs of those (of the lowest class) who are unable to
gain access to you, those upon whom eyes disdain to gaze and whom men
regard with scorn. Appoint to attend exclusively to them a person whom
you trust from among the god fearing and humble, and let him submit to
you their affairs. Then act toward them in a manner that will absolve
you before God on the day that you meet Him.[^48]

For among the subjects these are more in need of equity than others. In
the case of each of them prepare your excuse with God by accomplishing
for him his rightfully due (*al-haqq*). Take upon yourself the upkeep of
the orphans and aged from among those who have no means at their
disposal and do not exert themselves in begging. (All of) this is a
heavy burden upon rulers. The truth (*al-haqq*), all of it, is a heavy
burden. But God may lighten it for people who seek the final end, who
admonish their souls to be patient and trust in the truth of God's
promise to them.

### Part Four: Commands and Prohibitions in Malik al-Ashtar's Best Interest

Set aside for those who have requests (*hajat*) from you a portion (of
your time) in which you yourself are free to (attend) to them. Hold an
open audience for them and therein be humble before God who created you.

Keep the soldiers and aides who are your bodyguards and police away from
them so that their spokesman may address you without stammering (in
fear), for I heard the Messenger of God-may God bless him and his
household and give them peace-say not (only) on one occasion, "No
community shall be sanctified within which the rightfully due of the
weak may not be taken from the strong without stammering (by the weak)".

Furthermore suffer them to be coarse and faltering of speech and become
not annoyed and angry with them. For that God will outspread the wings
of His mercy over you and make binding for you the reward of having
obeyed Him. Bestow what you bestow in a pleasant manner and refrain
(from granting requests when you must) gracefully and while asking
pardon.

Then there are certain of your affairs which you must take in hand
personally. Among them is giving an ear to your administrators when your
secretaries have been unable to find the correct solution, and among
them is attending to the requests of men when presented to you because
the breasts of your aides have been straitened by them.[^49]

Each day perform the work of that day, for to each belongs what is
proper to it. Set aside for yourself in what is between you and God the
most excellent of these hours and the fullest of these portions, even
though all of them belong to God if in them your intention is correct
and because of them the subjects remain secure. In making your religion
sincerely God's perform especially His obligations (*fara'id*),[^50]
which pertain only to Him. So give to God of your body in your night and
your day, and complete in a perfect manner, neither defectively nor
deficiently, what brings you near to God, no matter what may befall your
body (as a result).[^51]

When you stand to lead men in the canonical prayers, neither drive
(them) away (by praying too lengthily) nor mar (the prayer by performing
it too quickly or faultily), for among men there are some who are ill
and others who are needy. I asked the Messenger of God-may God bless him
and his household and give them peace-when he sent me to the Yemen, "How
shall I lead them in prayer?" He said, "Lead them in prayer as the
weakest of them prays, and be merciful to the believers."

Furthermore, prolong not your seclusion (*ihtijab*) from your subjects,
for rulers' seclusion from subjects is a kind of constraint and (results
in) a lack of knowledge of affairs. Seclusion from them cuts rulers off
from the knowledge of that from which they have been secluded. Then the
great appears to them as small and the small as great. The beautiful
appears as ugly and the ugly as beautiful. And the truth becomes stained
with falsehood. The ruler is only a man. He does not know the affairs
which men hide from him. There are no marks upon the truth by which the
various kinds of veracity might be distinguished from falsehood.

Again, you are one of only two men: either you give generously in the
way of the truth-then why seclude yourself from carrying out a valid
obligation or performing a noble deed? Or else you are afflicted by
niggardliness-then how quickly will men refrain from petitioning you
when they despair of your generosity? Moreover, most requests men
present to you are those which impose no burden upon you, such as a
complaint against a wrong or the seeking of equity in a transaction.

Then surely the ruler has favorites and intimates, among whom there is a
certain arrogation, transgression and lack of equity in transactions.
Remove the substance of these (qualities) by cutting off the means of
obtaining these situations. Bestow no fiefs upon any of your entourage
or relatives, nor let them covet from you the acquisition of a landed
estate[^52] which would bring loss to the people bordering upon it in
(terms of) a water supply or a common undertaking, the burden of which
would be imposed upon them.[^53] Its benefit would be for those (who
acquired the fiefs) and not for you, and its fault would be upon you in
this world and the next.

Impose the right (*al-haqq*) upon whomsoever it is encumbent, whether he
be related to you or not.[^54] Be patient in this and look to your
(ultimate) account (*muhtasib*),[^55] however this may affect your
relatives and favorites. Desire the ultimate end in that of it (imposing
the right) which weighs heavily against you, for its outcome will be
praiseworthy.

If any of your subjects should suspect you of an injustice, explain to
them your justification. By your explanation turn their suspicions away
from yourself. Thereby you train your soul (*nafs*), act kindly to your
subjects and justify (yourself) in a manner to attain your need, i.e.,
setting them in the way of the truth.

Never reject a peace to which your enemy calls you and in which is God's
pleasure, for in peace there is ease for your soldiers, relaxation from
your cares and security for your land. But be cautious, very cautious,
with your enemy after (having made) peace with him, for the enemy may
have drawn near in order to take advantage of (your) negligence.
Therefore be prudent and have doubts about trusting your enemy in this
(matter).

If you bind an agreement between yourself and your enemy or cloth him in
a protective covenant (*dhimmah*), guard your agreement in good faith
and tend to your covenant with fidelity. Make of yourself a shield
before what you have granted,[^56] for men do not unite more firmly in
any of the obligations (imposed upon them) by God than in attaching
importance to fidelity in agreements,[^57] despite the division among
their sects and the diversity of their opinions.

The idolators (*al-mushrikun*) had already adhered to that (honoring
agreements) among themselves before the Muslims, by reason of the evil
consequences of treachery that they had seen. So never betray your
protective covenant, never break your agreement and never deceive your
enemy, for none is audacious before God but a wretched fool.

God has made His agreement and His protective covenant a security which
He has spread among the servants by His mercy, and a sanctuary in whose
impregnability they may rest and in whose proximity they may spread
forth.[^58] Within it there is no corruption, treachery or deceit.

Make not an agreement in which you allow deficiencies and rely not upon
ambiguity of language[^59] after confirmation and finalization (of the
agreement). Let not the straitness of an affair in which an agreement
before God is binding upon you invite you to seek its abrogation
unjustly. For your patience in the straitness of an affair, hoping for
its solution and the blessing of its outcome, is better than an act of
treachery. You would fear the act's consequence and (you would fear)
that a liability before God will encompass you, a liability from which
you will not be exempted in this world or the next.

Beware of blood and spilling it unlawfully, for nothing is more
deserving of vengeance (from God), greater in its consequence or more
likely to (bring about) a cessation of blessing and the cutting off of
(one's appointed) term than shedding blood unjustly. God -glory be to
Him-on the Day of Resurrection will begin judgment among His servants
over the blood they have spilt.[^60]

So never strengthen your rule by shedding unlawful blood, for that is
among the factors which weaken and enfeeble it, nay, which overthrow and
transfer it. You have no excuse before God and before me for intentional
killing, for in that there is bodily retaliation.[^61] If you are
stricken by error, and your whip, your sword or your hand should exceed
their bounds in punishment- for in striking with the fists and all that
exceeds it there is killing -never let the arrogance of your authority
prevent you from paying the relatives of the killed their rightfully due
(*al-haqq*).[^62]

Beware of being pleased with yourself,[^63] of reliance upon that of
yourself which pleases you and of the love of lavish praise, for these
are among Satan's surest opportunities to efface what there might be of
the good-doers' good-doing.

Beware of reproaching (*mann*) your subjects in your good-doing (for
their insufficient acknowledgment of their debt to you), of overstating
the deeds you have done and of making promises to them followed by
non-observance. For reproach voids good- doing,[^64] overstatement takes
away the light of the truth and non- observance results in the hatred of
God and men. God-may He be exalted-has said,

***"Very hateful is it to God, that you say what you do not" (61 :
3).***

Beware of hurrying to (accomplish) affairs before their (proper) time,
of neglecting them when they are possible, of stubborn persistence in
them when they are impracticable and of weakness in them when they have
become clear. So put everything in its place and perform every action at
its time.

Beware of arrogating for yourself that in which men are equal; and of
negligence in that which is of concern after it has become manifest to
the eyes (of men), for these things will be held against you for (the
benefit of) others;[^65] and (beware of negligence) of the fact that
little remains until the coverings of affairs are lifted from you and
justice is demanded from you for the wronged.[^66]

Control the ardor of your pride, the violence of your strength, the
force of your hand and the edge of your tongue. Be on thy guard against
all these by restraining impulses and delaying force until your anger
has subsided and you have mastered (your own) power of choice. But you
will not gain control over that from your soul until you multiply your
concern for remembering the return unto your Lord.

Incumbent upon you is to recall the just governments, the excellent
customs, the Sunnah of our Prophet-may God bless him and his household
and give them peace-and the obligations (promulgated) in the Book of
God, which preceded you among those of earlier times. Take as the model
for your action what you have observed us to perform of them, and strive
to your utmost to follow what I have instructed you in these my
instructions. I trust in them to act as my argument against you so that
you shall have no cause for your soul's hastening to its caprice.[^67]

I ask God by the amplitude of His mercy, and His tremendous power to
grant every desire, to bestow upon me and you in that wherein is His
pleasure success in presenting Him and His creatures with a clear
justification (for our actions). (May He bestow) excellent praise from
among His servants, fair influence in the land, completion of blessings
and manifold increase in honor. And (I ask) that He seal (the lives of)
me and you with felicity (*al-sa'adah*) and martyrdom (*al-shahadah*).
***"Unto Him we are returning" (2: 156).*** Peace be upon the Messenger
of God-may God bless him and his good and pure household and grant them
abundant peace. *Wa-l-salam.*

[^1]: See the article "al-Ashtar" in the new Encyclopedia of Islam. 

[^2]: The division into parts and the headings of parts two, three and
four are taken from the commentary of Ibn Maytham. 

[^3]: The land tax (kharaj) was collected on the basis of the land's
produce. See the Encyclopedia of Islam (new edition), vol. 3, pp.
I030-s6. 

[^4]: Fara'id wa sunan. The first very often refer to those acts which
are commanded by God-such as the five daily prayers, fasting during the
month of Ramadan, etc.-in which case they are contrasted with the sunan,
meaning the commands of the Prophet, which are divided into the commands
he gave orally (qawl), the acts he performed (fi'l) and the acts he
allowed others to perform without criticising or protesting (iqrar).
Here, however, since both kinds of acts are said to be mentioned in the
Quran, the meaning is as translated. 

[^5]: "'With his heart', or through firm belief; 'with his hand', or
through holy war and exertion in His path; and 'with his tongue', or
through speaking the truth, commanding the good and forbidding the evil"
(Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p. 3I) 

[^6]: Cf. Quran (47: 7), "O believers, if you help God, He will help you
and confirm your feet", and other similar verses, such as (22: 40). 

[^7]: Nearly a direct quotation from Quran (12: 53): "Surely the soul
incites to evil, except inasmuch as my Lord has mercy." 

[^8]: "I.e., oppose Him not through acts of disobedience" (Ibn
Abi-l-Hadid, vol I7, p- 33) 

[^9]: "I.e., Perform for Him the worship which He has made encumbent
upon you and the requirements of intelligence and tradition" (Ibn
Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p- 35)- 

[^10]: Cf. Quran (89: I4): "Surely the Lord is ever on the watch." 

[^11]: Awsatuha fi-l-haqq, reference to the "golden mean". Here some of
the commentators mention Aristotle and refer to such hadiths of the
Prophet as "The best of affairs is their middlemost." See for example T.
al-Fakiki, al-Ra'i wa-l-ra'iyyah, vol. 2, Najaf, I940, pp. I08-II. 

[^12]: According to Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, this sentence is based upon the
following Quranic verse: "The devil promises you poverty and bids you
unto indecency; but God promises you His pardon and His bounty" (2:
268). He explains that the commentators of the Quran say that here
"indecency" (al-fahsha') means "miserliness" (al-bukhl), and that the
meaning of "promises you poverty" is that he makes you believe you will
become poor if you are generous with your wealth (vol. I7, p. 4I) 

[^13]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid comments that if man trusts God with certainty
and sincerity, he will know that his life-span, his daily provision, his
wealth and his poverty are foreordained and that nothing occurs but by
God's decree (vol. I7, p. 4I). Ibn Maytham points out that "distrust in
God begins with lack of knowledge (marifah) of Him." A person ignorant
of His generosity and bounty will not know that He rewards what is
expended in His path; hence he will be miserly in order to avoid
poverty. He makes similar remarks concerning the qualities of
cowardliness and greed. 

[^14]: According to Ibn Maytham this sentence is part of the description
of those favorites who should be most influential. It means that the
ruler "should train and discipline them by forbidding them from praising
him lavishly or trying to make him happy by a false statement in which
they attribute to him an act which he did not do and by this attribution
cause him to be blameworthy." He then quotes the following verse of the
Quran: "Reckon not that those who rejoice in what they have brought, and
love to be praised for what they have not done-do not reckon them secure
from chastisement" (3: I88). 

[^15]: "The evil-doer has imposed upon himself worthiness for punishment
and the good-doer worthiness for reward" (Muhammad 'Abduh, vol. 3, p.
98). 

[^16]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid comments on this passage as follows: "Whoever
does good toward you will trust you and whoever does evil will shy away
from you. This is because when you do good to someone and repeat it, you
will come to believe that he likes you, and this belief will in turn
lead to your liking him, for man by his very nature likes anyone who
likes him. Then when you like him, you will feel secure with him and
trust him. The reverse is true when you do evil toward someone . . ."
(vol. I7, p. 47). 

[^17]: "He commands him to multiply his study with the men of knowledge,
i.e., he should increase his study of the injunctions of
the Shar'iah and the laws of religion; and he should increase his
discussions with sages, or those whose knowledge is from God Himself
(al-'arifun billah) and who know the secrets of His servants and His
land" (Ibn Maytham). 

[^18]: The secretaries (kuttab) are "those who are in charge of the
ruler's own affairs and who write letters for him to his administrators
and commanders. They take care of making arrangements and running the
government administration (diwan)" (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p. 76). 

[^19]: Qudat al-adl, i.e. judges. 

[^20]: Administrators ('ummal) are government officials concerned with
the affairs of "the general public, alms, religious endowments, the
common interest, etc." (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p. 69). For the
meaning of the term 'amil (singular of 'ummal) throughout Islamic
history see theEncyclopedia of Islam (new edition), vol. I, p. 435. 

[^21]: Jizyah is the head tax upon "People of the Book"-followers of
revealed religions other than Islam-who live under Muslim rule. 

[^22]: Ahl al-dhimmah. In other words the "People of the Book" who live
in Muslim lands and are accorded hospitality and protection by Islam on
condition of acknowledging Islamic political domination and paying the
jizyah. 

[^23]: The covenant between man and God ('ahd) is frequently mentioned
in the Quran and plays a central role in Islamic thought. Some
representative Quranic verses are the following: "Only men possessed of
minds remember, who fulfill God's covenant. . ." (13: 20); "And fulfill
the covenant; surely the covenant shall be questioned of" (17: 34);
"Made I not a covenant with you Children of Adam, that you should not
serve Satan . . . and that you should serve Me?" (36: 59-60). 

[^24]: One commentator remarks as follows: "Land tax is only paid in
accordance with an agreement between the owners of the land and the
ruler, so it is necessary that the documents be drawn up. Furthermore
officials have to collect the land tax from the land owners according to
the terms of the contract. Here it is possible that disputes arise
between the government officials and the landowners, so it will be
necessary to refer to judges to solve these disputes." Mirza Habiballah
al-Hashimi, Minjaj al-bara'ah fi sharh nahj al-balaghah, Tehran,
I389/I969-70, vol. 20, p. 200. 

[^25]: I.e., Imam 'Ali himself. 

[^26]: "Of the soldiers" is a translation of the pronoun "their", and
some question remains as to whether the pronoun does not in fact refer
to the commanders. "If you say, 'But the soldiers of the army are not
mentioned in the preceding section, only the commanders ,' I will
answer, 'On the contrary, they were mentioned where he says "The weak
and the strong" ' " (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p. 53) 

[^27]: Khuluf (plural of khalf ) are the women, children and weak left
behind when the men go on a journey

[^28]: Kind inclination toward the army means choosing for them the best
of commanders, which will in turn cause them to love the ruler (Ibn
Maytham). 

[^29]: According to Ibn-l-Hadid, the context indicates that the word
"subjects" refers in particular to the army. Al-Hashimi disagrees and
states that 'Ali does in fact mean all the subjects. He mentions them in
the section on soldiers because the soldiers have to keep order m the
land among the subjects (vol. 20, p. 222-2). 

[^30]: See above, p. 56, note 48. 

[^31]: The commentators explain this as meaning that people should
follow that part of the Sunnah of the Prophet upon which all are agreed,
not that concerning which there is a difference of opinion. 

[^32]: Tamhakuhu-l-khusum. According to Ibn Abi-l-Hadid the verb here
means to "make cantankerous or obstinate" (vol. I7, p. 59). Ibn Maytham,
however, interprets the passage to mean that the judge should be someone
"who is not overcome in his attempt to ascertain the truth by the
obstinacy of the litigants. It has been said that this is an allusion to
the person with whom the litigants are satisfied." 

[^33]: Muhammad 'Abduh explains that when the judge is given an elevated
position, the ruler's favorites as well as the common people will be in
awe of him and no one will dare slander him, out of fear of the ruler
and respect for the person held in such high esteem by him (vol. 3, p.
I05). 

[^34]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid: "His words refer to the judges and rulers
appointed by 'Uthman, for during his reign they did not judge rightfully
but in accordance with caprice and in order to seek this world. Some
people say that this happened because 'Uthman-may God's mercy be upon
him-was weak and his relatives were able to gain mastery over him. They
disrupted the affairs of state without his knowledge, so the sin is upon
them and 'Uthman is guiltless of what they were doing" (vol. I7, p. 60).
See Shi'ite Islam, pp. 46-48. 

[^35]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid reads hum for hum'a, i.e.: "For they (the
administrators) are embraced by different kinds of oppression and
treachery", and he interprets the sentence to refer to the
administrators who served under the three caliphs before 'Ali. Al-Hashmi
offers a number of arguments in support of this interpretation, Minhaj
al-bara'ah vol. 20, pp. 246-9. 

[^36]: "Experience (tajribah) alone is not sufficient if the
administrator is not endowed with modesty (haya'), for modesty is the
basis of manliness (muru'ah). As the Prophet said, 'Modesty brings only
good', and 'Whoso has not modesty has not religion and will not enter
Paradise' . . ." (al-Fakiki, al-Ra'iwa l-ra'iyyah, vol. 2, p. 38). 

[^37]: I.e., those families who were first to enter Islam. "This is
because.... righteousness of family determines the way men are raised,
and being foremost in Islam indicates nobility of character . . ."
(Ibid., p. 39). 

[^38]: Whether as the result of the land tax itself or the oppression of
the taxcollectors (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p. 72). 

[^39]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid offers two possible explanations of this clause.
According to the first the words "su' zannihim bi-l-baqa'" would have to
be translated "they think wrongly about endurance", which means that
they think their own existence will endure and they forget death and
dissolution. In the translation however, I have followed the second
interpretation, which he explains as meaning "They imagine they will be
deposed and replaced, so they seize upon opportunities, appropriate
wealth and show no concern for the prosperity of the land" (vol- I7v p-
73) 

[^40]: "Know that the secretary alluded to by the Commander of the
Faithful is he who nowadays is commonly called the 'vizier', for he is
entrusted with the management of the affairs of the ruler's person and
in all of them is his deputy. The letters of the administrators come to
him and their answers are issued by him. He puts the (affairs of the)
administrators in order and is supervisor over them. In fact he is the
'secretary of the secretaries' and for this reason is known as the
vizier in the absolute sense. It is said that the secretary has three
prerogatives before the king: to remove the veil from him (i.e., he has
access to his personal affairs, even in the harem), to accuse traitors
before him and to make secrets known to him . . ." (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid,
vol. I7, p. 79). 

[^41]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid explains that the first two of these groups are
merchants -those who have shops and those who travel with their
wares-and the third group are the craftsman (vol. I7, p. 84). 

[^42]: The translation of this sentance is rather free and follows Ibn
Abi-l-Hadid's first interpretation. He adds that it is also permissible
to read the sentance as follows: "Accept counsel (from me) for the good
of merchants and craftsmen and counsel (others) concerning them" (vol.
I7, pp. 83-4). 

[^43]: This is a literal translation of a passage which Ibn Abi-l-Hadid
explains as follows: "Than the Imam says, 'Surely they are a
gentleness', that is to say, merchants and craftsman are so. He seeks
Malik al-Ashtar's sympathy and favor for them and he says they are not
like tax-collectors and commanders of the army, for they have to be
sustained, protected and taken care of, the more so since there is no
fear of calamity from them, neither in property where they might be
disloyal (as in the case of the tax-collectors) nor in the government
where they might work corruption (as in the case of the commanders of
the army)" (vol. I7, p. 84). 

[^44]: "According to the Sixth Imam, Jafar al-Sadiq (founder of the
Ja'fari, i.e. Twelve-Imami Shi'ite, school of law), 'It is reprehensible
(makruh) to hoard and to leave men with nothing. And it is said that it
is forbidden (haram), and this latter view is more correct. As was said
by the Prophet of God, "Mercy is upon him who imports, and curses upon
him who hoards". Surely hoarding is forbidden under two conditions:
First, that food-i.e. wheat, barley, dates, raisins, clarified butter,
or salt-be held back seeking an increase in price. Second, if there is
no other distributor to be found . . .'" Quoted in al-Fakiki, Al Ra'I
wa-lra'iyyah, vol 2, p. I65. 

[^45]: Cf. Quran (83: I-2): "Woe to the stinters who, when they measure
against the people, take full measure, but, when they measure for them
or weigh for them, they skimp." 

[^46]: Reference to the principle alluded to in the following verse of
the Quran (8: 4I): "Know that, whatever booty you take, the fifth of it
is God's and the Messenger's and the near kinsman's and the orphan's and
for the needy and the traveler". 

[^47]: "In other words, all poor Muslims are equal in their shares,
there is no 'farthest away' or 'nearest'. Prefer not him who is near to
you or to one of your favorites over him who is far from you and without
any connection to you or reason for you to turn toward him. It is also
possible that he means that the produce of tbe land taken as booty in a
certain area should not be distributed only to the needy of that area,
for the right to the produce of the land is the same whether a person is
far from that land or resides in it" (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vo1. I7v pp.
86-7) 

[^48]: The "meeting with God" is mentioned in a number of Quranic
verses, such as the following: "They indeed are losers who deny their
meeting with God" (6: 3I). 

[^49]: "'The breasts of aides are straitened' by expediting the removal
of grievances. They love to postpone attending to them, either in order
to seek personal gain or to demonstrate their own authority" (Muhammad
'Abduh, vol. 3, p- II4) 

[^50]: i.e. the obligatory acts such as the five daily prayers. 

[^51]: The references to the body are due especially to the particularly
physical nature of the daily canonical prayers. Ibn Abi-l-Hadid explains
the last clause as meaning, "Even if that wearies you and impairs your
body and your strength" (vol I7, p. 90). 

[^52]: The words "acquisition of a landed estate" (i'tiqad ;uqdah) might
be translated literally as the "binding of a contract". The
commentators, such as Ibn Abi-l-Hadid (vol. I7, p. 97) Ibn Maytham and
Muhammad 'Abduh (vol 3, p. II)explain it as translated (iqtina'
day'ah or tamlik day'ah). 

[^53]: "His words . . . explain the methods of cutting off the causes
referred to: the bestowal of a fief upon one of the entourage or a
relative, and his desire to acquire a landed estate which will harm
those people bordering upon it in terms of the water supply or a common
undertaking-such as a building, etc.-while he imposes the burden of the
undertaking on man, are the causes of the above- mentioned situations .
. ." (Ibn Maytham). 

[^54]: Or "whether near (qarib) to you or far away (ba'id)." I.e.,
whoever he might be, bring the person who has committed a wrong to
justice. 

[^55]: I.e., realize that you will be rewarded in the next world. 

[^56]: "That is, even if you yourself should perish, act without
treachery" (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I7, p. I07). 

[^57]: The importance of observing covenants and agreements is referred
to frequently in the Quran. See for example, (16: 9I): "Fulfill God's
covenant, when you make covenant, and break not the oaths after they
have been confirmed . . .". See also (6: I53); (17: 34 et al). 

[^58]: According to Ibn Abi-l-Hadid (vol. I7) p. I09)) "in whose
proximity they may spread forth" means "while dwelling in its proximity
they may disperse in search of their needs and desires". 'Abduh explains
the verb translated here as "spread forth" (yastafid'un) to mean
"swiftly take refuge" (vol. 3, p. II8), but the first interpretation
seems more likely. 

[^59]: Lahn qawl, "color of words". Ibn Maytham explains this expression
as meaning "ambiguity, dissimulation or allusion." Ibn Abi-l-Hadid's
explanation is similar: "He forbids him when making an agreement between
himself and his enemy to break it by relying upon a hidden
interpretation or the tenor of the words, or by saying, 'Surely I meant
such and such, I did not have the apparent sense of the words in mind' "
(vol. I7, p. I09). 

[^60]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid cites the following hadith of the Prophet: "On
the Day of Resurrection the first thing which God will judge upon among
the servants is blood which has been spilled" (vol. I7, p. III). 

[^61]: "Then he advises him that intentional killing involves
retaliation, and he says 'bodily retaliation'. In other words,
intentional killing makes the destruction of the physical body
necessary, just as you have destroyed the body of the person killed. The
Imam's intention is to frighten him with these words, and they are more
effective than if he had merely said, 'surely in that there is
retaliation'" (Ibn Abi-l-Hadid, vol. I73 p. III). 

[^62]: Like retaliation in cases of intentional murder, compensation in
cases of unintentional killing are determined by the Shari'ah. Cf. Quran
(4: 92-3): "It belongs not to a believer to slay a believer, except it
be by error. If any slays a believer by error, then let him free a
believing slave, and bloodwit is to be paid to his family unless they
forego it as a freewill offering. If he belong to a people at enmity
with you and is a believer, let the slayer set free a believing slave.
If he belong to a people joined with you by a compact, then bloodwit is
to be paid to his family and the slayer shall set free a believing slave
. . . And whoso slays a believer wilfully, his recompense is Gehenna . .
.". 

[^63]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid cites several sayings of the Prophet, including
the following: "There are three mortal perils: yielding to
niggardliness, following caprice and being pleased with oneself" (vol.
I7, p. II4). 

[^64]: Cf. Quran (2: 264): '0 believers, void not your freewill
offerings with reproach and injury." 

[^65]: Ibn Abi-l-Hadid comments: For example, if it is pointed out to
the commander that one of his favorites is performing a reprehensible
act in secret, and if he then ignores that act, this will be to the
benefit of the person doing the act, but not to his own benefit (vol.
I75 p. II6). 

[^66]: Cf. Quran (40: I9-22): "And death's agony comes in truth; that is
what thou wast shunning! . . . 'Thou wast heedless of this; therefore We
have now removed from thee thy covering, and so thy sight today is
piercing'." Ibn Maytham remarks that when the veils of affairs are
lifted from man at death, he sees the reality of these affairs and what
God has prepared for him of good and evil: "The day every soul shall
find what it has done of good brought forward, and what it has done of
evil . . ." (Quran 3: 30). 

[^67]: Cf. Quran (79: 40-1): "But as for him who feared the Station of
his Lord and forbade the soul its caprice, surely Paradise shall be the
refuge." 


