Appendix: The Twelve Imams
==========================

The word "*imam*"[^1] in Arabic means "leader". In Islamic terminology
it generally refers to any person who leads others in prayer. According
to the early Sunni theologians, the Imam is the leader of the Islamic
community, and his function is to enforce the revealed Law or
*Shari'ah*. As such the term is equivalent to "caliph".

In Sunnism it may also be an honorific term, given to certain important
religious leaders, such as Imam Shafi'i, founder of one of the four
Sunni schools of law. In Twelve-Imam Shi'ism it has two important
meanings. As in Sunnism, the leader of others in prayer is called an
"*imam*", especially the person who performs this function on a regular
basis in a mosque. But more specifically, an Imam is one of the twelve
successors of the Prophet listed below.

The specific meaning given to the word "i*mam*" in Shi'ism can not be
understood until one grasps the basic difference between the Sunni and
Shi'ite branches of Islam. The roots of this difference are to be found
in the differing views held by the companions of the Prophet concerning
the nature of his successor or caliph. The Prophet himself performed
three basic functions: He acted as the means whereby a celestial book,
the Quran, was revealed by God to mankind.

Thus he was the founder of a world religion. He was also the ruler of
the early Islamic community, which means that he enforced the *Shari'ah*
which God had revealed through the Quran. Finally he was the possessor
of spiritual illumination and vision, and as such he could interpret the
inner meaning of the Revelation and guide men upon the ascending stages
of the path of spiritual perfection.

According to the majority of Muslims, the Sunnis, the successor of the
Prophet must fulfill only one of these functions, i.e., he should
enforce the *Shari'ah*. Muhammad had been the last Prophet, so there
could be no prophet after him. And there was no way the community could
guarantee that his successors would possess spiritual vision and
illumination, for like prophecy, these things are divinely bestowed
(although unlike prophecy, they could still be possessed by men).

But undoubtedly, the Prophet's successor could act as a ruler and
enforce the *Shari'ah*. In fact, the earthly existence of Islam largely
depended upon this function being fulfilled, particularly at its
beginning. Finally, the Sunnis held that the Prophet had not appointed a
successor during his lifetime, so it was up to them to choose one.

But the minority group, known as the "Shi'ites" (the "partisans" of
'Ali), maintained that the Prophet's successor must not only enforce the
*Shari'ah*, he must also possess divinely illuminated wisdom and be the
spiritual guide of men. Since this latter function is bestowed by God
and cannot be judged by the majority of men, the Prophet's successor
must be divinely appointed, as expressed in the Prophet's wishes. And
the Shi'ites hold that the Prophet had in fact appointed 'Ali as his
caliph.[^2]

This difference in view between the Shi'ites and Sunnis was often
expressed in political terms, resulting in a good deal of strife in the
early centuries of Islam between certain Shi'ite groups and the Umayyad
and Abbasid caliphs. For, as far as the Shi'ites were concerned, the
Imams were the only completely legitimate successors to the Prophet. The
first, 'Ali, was appointed by the Prophet himself, and each in turn was
appointed by his predecessor according to divine decree.

Fatimah
-------

The beloved daughter of the Prophet from Khadijah, Fatimah was born in
Mecca five years before the beginning of the Prophet's mission. She was
so loved by the Prophet that he called her "a part of me." In 2/624 she
married 'Ali ibn Abi Talib from whom she bore three sons, Hasan, Husayn
and Muhsin (who died stillborn), and two daughters, Zaynab and Urnm
Kulthum. She was at the Prophet's bedside at the moment of his death and
fought for her husband's succession to the caliphate. She died six
months after her father in the year II/633 and is buried in the Baq'i
cemetery in Medina. It is said that when she was born the whole sky
became illuminated; therefore she is called al-Zahra', the "Radiant."
She is the mother of the Shi'ite Imams and is considered the most holy
of Muslim women.

The Imams
---------

### The First Imam, 'Ali

**The First Imam, 'Ali (b. A.D. 600, d. A.H. 40/A.D. 661)**

He was the son of the Prophet's paternal uncle, Abu Talib, who had
raised the Prophet like his own son and protected him after he declared
his mission. According to the Shi'ites, 'Ali was the first to accept the
new religion at the hands of the Prophet, at the age of ten. He was the
greatest warrior of early Islam, and according to his partisans was
appointed by the Prophet as his successor at a place known as ''Ghadir
al-Khumm". He became the fourth Sunni caliph, the last of the
"Rightly-Guided Caliphs", after the death of 'Uthman. He was finally
assassinated by followers of the Khawarij (an early schismatic sect),
after five years as caliph. He is buried in Najaf in Iraq.

### The Second Imam, al-Hasan

**The Second Imam, al-Hasan (3/62 -50/670)**

He was the elder son of 'Ali by the Prophet's daughter Fatimah. He laid
claim to the caliphate for some six months after the death of his
father, but was finally forced to surrender it to Mu'awiyah. For the
rest of his life he lived in Medina in seclusion. He is buried in the
Baq'i cemetery in Medina.

### The Third Imam, al-Husayn

**The Third Imam, al-Husayn (4/62 -6I/680)**

The younger son of 'Ali by Fatimah, like his brother he lived most of
his life quietly in Medina under the watchful eyes of the caliph's
officials and spies. When Mu'awiyah's son Yazid became caliph, he
demanded allegiance from al-Husayn, who refused to give it. Finally
al-Husayn felt it necessary to go into battle against Yazid to protest
against the injustices which were being carried out in the name of
Islam. He and a small group of followers including most of his immediate
family were cruelly massacred at Karbala. The day of his martyrdom
("*'Ashura*") has become the most solemn day of the Shi'ite calendar,
marked by processions and universal mourning. Its celebration symbolizes
the whole ethos of Shi'ism. He is buried in Karbala in Iraq.

### The Fourth Imam, 'Ali Zayn al-'Abidin

**The Fourth Imam, 'Ali, known as Zayn al-'Abidin and al-Sajjad
(38/65895/7I2)**

The son of Imam al-Husayn by the daughter of Yazdigird, the last
Sassanid king of Iran, he was not able to carry arms at Karbala because
of illness, and thus he was saved the fate of his three brothers. For
most of his life he lived in seclusion in Medina, having contact with
only a few select followers. His piety-which is reflected in his
collected prayers, *al-Sahifat al-sajjadiyyah*-is proverbial. He is
buried in the Baqi' cemetery in Medina.

### The Fifth Imam, Muhammad al-Baqir

**The Fifth Imam, Muhammad, known as al-Baqir (57/675II4/732)**

The son of the fourth Imam, he was present at Karbala at a young age.
Because of changing political and religious conditions, among them the
general revulsion following the events at Karbala, many people came to
Medina to learn the religious and spiritual sciences from him. He
trained numerous well-known men of religion, and mainly for this reason
is the first Imam after 'Ali from whom large numbers of traditions are
recorded. He is buried in the Baqi' cemetery in Medina.

### The Sixth Imam, Ja'far al-Sadiq

**The Sixth Imam, Ja'far, known as al-Sadiq (83/702-148/765)**

The son of the fifth Imam, he lived in an increasingly favorable climate
and was able to teach openly in Medina. Large numbers of scholars
gathered around him to learn, including such famous Sunni figures as Abu
Hanifah, the founder of one of the four Sunni schools of law.

Towards the end of Imam Ja'far's life severe restrictions were placed
upon his activities, as a result of growing Shi'ite unrest. More
traditions are recorded from him than from all the other Imams together.
He is so important for Twelve-Imam Shi'ite law that it is named the
"Ja'fari School" after him. He is buried in the Baqi' cemetery in
Medina.

### The Seventh Imam, Musa al-Kazim

**The Seventh Imam, Musa, entitled al-Kazim (128/744-183/799)**

The son of the sixth Imam, he was contemporary with such Abbasid caliphs
as al-Mansur and Harun al-Rashid. He lived most of his life in Medina
with severe restrictions placed upon him and finally died in prison in
Baghdad.

After him, the Imams were often not able to live in their traditional
home of Medina, but were forced to remain near the caliph in Baghdad or
Samarra. He is buried in Kazimayn in Iraq.

### The Eighth Imam, 'Ali ar-Ridha’

**The Eighth Imam, 'Ali, known as Ar-Ridha’ (148/765-203/817)**

The son of the seventh Imam, he lived in a period when the Abbasids were
faced with increasing difficulties because of Shi'ite revolts. Finally
the caliph al-Ma'mun thought he would solve the problem by naming the
Imam as his own successor, hoping thus to ensnare him in worldly affairs
and turn the devotion of his followers away from him.

After finally being able to persuade Ar-Ridha’ to accept, al-Ma'mun
realized his mistake, for Shi'ism began to spread even more rapidly.
Finally he is said to have had the Imam poisoned. Ar-Ridha’ is buried in
Mashhad in Iran.

### The Ninth Imam, Muhammad al-Taqi

**The Ninth Imam, Muhammad, known as al-Taqi (195/809-220/835)**

The son of the eighth Imam, he was given the daughter of the caliph
al-Ma'mun in marriage and for a time was kept by the caliph in Baghdad.
But he was able to return to Medina until the end of al-Ma'mun's reign.
The new caliph, al-Mu'tasim, summoned him back to Baghdad where he died.
He is buried in Kazimayn in Iraq.

### The Tenth Imam, 'Ali al-Naqi

**The Tenth Imam, 'Ali, known as al-Naqi (212/827-254/868)**

The son of the ninth Imam, he remained in Medina teaching the religious
sciences until 243/857, when he was summoned to Samarra by the caliph
al-Mutawakkil. There he was treated harshly by the caliph and his
successors until he died. He is buried in Samarra.

### The Eleventh Imam, al-Hasan al-'Askari

**The Eleventh Imam, al-Hasan, called al-'Askari (232/845-260/872)**

The son of the tenth *Imam*, he lived in close confinement in Samarra
under the watchful eye of the caliph, especially since it was known that
the Shi'ites were awaiting his son, the twelfth Imam, who was to be the
promised Mahdi or "guided one", destined to remove injustice from the
world.

The eleventh Imam married the daughter of the Byzantine emperor, Nargis
Khatun, who, following instructions given her in a dream, had sold
herself into slavery to become his wife. He is buried in Samarra.

### The Twelfth Imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi

**The Twelfth Imam, Muhammad, known as al-Mahdi (b. 256/868)**

The twelfth Imam lived in hiding under the protection and tutelage of
his father until the latter's death. Then he went into "occultation". In
other words, he became hidden from the eyes of ordinary men and appeared
only to his Deputies (see p. 92.)

In the year 329/939 his "greater occultation" began. It will continue as
long as God wills, but when he does appear once again, he will erase
evil and injustice from the world.

[^1]: For a detailed account, see Shi'ite Islam. 

[^2]: For a profound and illuminating explanation of the basic
difference in perspective represented by Sunnism and Shi'ism see F.
Schuon, Islam and the Perennial Philosophy, London, 1976, ch. 5. 


