Translator’s Preface
====================

In the name of Allah, the all-Beneficent the all-Merciful

*After praising Allah, without whose help and blessing no work would be
possible and without whose grace and mercy no sinful creature would walk
the face of this earth, and sending salutations on His most beloved
Messenger (s), the greatest man to set foot on this earth and the best
of role models for the entire humankind, this humble servant presents
the following translation that is dedicated to the Master of the
Believers, Commander of the Faithful and the Beloved of the Prophet (s)
– ‘Ali ibn Abi Ṭālib (‘a).*

Ghurar al-Ḥikam wa Durar al-Kalim is a late fifth or early sixth century
work that comprises of the aphorisms and short sayings of Imam ‘Ali ibn
Abi Ṭālib(‘a). The sayings, which number more than eleven thousand,
contain words of wisdom and advice that can benefit everyone in their
daily lives. It is for this reason that we embarked on translating this
work. We hope that, God-willing, it will be a source of inspiration to
all those who read it.

There are many different extant copies of this book[^1] and in one
recent edition, the original alphabetical listing of sayings have been
rearranged and categorized subject-wise. It is the translation of this
version of the work that we present before you.

Translating a work such as this poses numerous challenges. Firstly, this
work is comprised of traditions in the form of aphorisms and short
sayings, many of which have been extracted from other longer traditions,
sermons and letters.[^2] As such, in many cases the context of the
narration is missing and needs to be investigated.

Another challenge is that in many cases it is evident that there have
been changes inadvertently made by the narrators or the scribes and
hence other possible forms of the sayings are mentioned in brackets.
Here we have translated the other possible forms in parenthesis and have
included what we have inferred from the text in square brackets for the
sake of clarification and fluidity. Alternative translations and
explanatory notes have been included in the footnotes.

In addition, there are certain sayings that are difficult to comprehend
and accept. An example of this can be seen in the section on the sayings
about women. Here we would urge the readers to refer to what the
scholars and commentators have said about such narrations and how they
should be interpreted.

The seven volume commentary written by the respected scholar ‘Allāma
Jamāl al-Dīn Muḥammad Khwansāri has been helpful in understanding many
of the seemingly ambiguous sayings. In cases where we were unable to
gain a satisfactory understanding of the sayings, our respected teachers
in the ḥawza were more than willing to spare their time in order to
assist. For this I thank them and pray that the Almighty reward them
amply. Lastly, the classical dictionaries have, as always, been an
invaluable resource during the translation.

Though all effort has been made to present an accurate translation of
the sayings, we take full responsibility for any mistakes and errors in
the translation and seek forgiveness from the Almighty for the same.

In closing, we would like to express our appreciation to Sayyid Muhammad
Ridha Shushtari for facilitating this translation and Ansariyan
Publications for arranging the typesetting (along with inclusion of the
original Arabic text) and publication of this work.

**Tahir Ridha Jaffer**
**Qum al-Muqaddasah**
**1433 A.H.**

[^1]: Some of these different copies even have some differing narrations
(Ref: Nigāhi be Kitābe Ghurar al-Ḥikam, Sayyid Muḥammad Raḍawi, Safine,
no. 4, Autumn 1383 Hijri Solar).

[^2]: The most common source from which the author has taken sayings is
the Nahj al-Balāgha.


