The Hereafter
=============

**The Hereafter الآخرة**

1. The Hereafter is the victory of the felicitous.

> 1ـ اَلآخِرةُ فَوزُ السُّعَداءِ.

2. Occupying yourself with improving your Hereafter will save you from
the chastisement of hellfire.

> 2ـ اِشتِغالُكَ بإصْلاحِ مَعادِكَ يُنْجيكَ مِنْ عَذابِ النَّارِ.

3. The [true] winner is one who has sold this transitory life for the
[eternal] Hereafter.

> 3ـ الرَّابِحُ مَنْ باعَ العاجِلَةَ بِالآجِلَةِ.

4. Wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world
whereas good deeds are the tillage of the Hereafter.

> 4ـ اَلمالُ وَالْبَنُونَ زينَةُ الحَيوةِ الدُّنيا، والعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَرْثُ الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. The conditions in this world are based on convention whereas the
conditions in the Hereafter are based on merit.

> 5ـ أحْوالُ الدُّنيا تَتْبَعُ الإتِّفاقَ وأحْوالُ الآخرةِ تَتْبَعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاِسْتِحْقاقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Surely in front of you is a difficult place of ascension in which one
whose weight is lighter is in a better position than the one whose
weight is heavier, and the one who moves slowly is worse off than the
one who moves swiftly. Verily its landing will lead you to either
Paradise or hell.

> 6ـ إنّ أمامَكَ عَقَبَةً كَؤُوداً، اَلمُخِفُّ فيها أحْسَنُ حالاً مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُثْقِلِ، والمُبْطِئُ عَلَيها أقْبَحُ أمْراً مِنَ المُسـْرِعِ، إنّ
مَهْبِطَها بِكَ لامُحالَةَ على جَنَّة أوْ نار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Verily the final destination is *al-Qiyāmah* and this is enough of an
admonition for the one who reasons, and [enough of] a warning for the
one who is unaware; and after that - what you know of the torment of the
Day of Judgment and the frightening terror, and the deafening of the
ears, and the turning of the ribs, and the narrowness of the grave, and
the intensity of sadness and heavy-heartedness.

> 7ـ إنَّ الغايَةَ القيامَةُ، وكَفى بِذلِكَ واعِظاً لِـمَنْ عَقَلَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومُعْتَبَراً لِمَنْ جَهِلَ، وبَعدَ ذلك ما تَعْلَمُونَ مِنْ هَوْلِ
الْمُطَّلَعِ، وَرَوْعاتِ الفَزَعِ، واسْتِكاكِ الأسماعِ، وَاخْتِلافِ
الأضلاعِ، وضيقِ الأرماسِ، وَشِدَّةِ الأبلاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. If you desire success and honor in the Hereafter, then take from the
perishing [life of this world] for the everlasting [life of the
Hereafter].

> 8ـ إنْ رَغِبْتُم في الفَوزِ وكَرامَةِ الآخِرَةِ فَخُذُوا في الفَناءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلْبَقاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Verily you are following the path of those who came before you, so
put your efforts in [working for] your Hereafter and do not care for
worldly gain.

> 9ـ إنَّكَ في سَبيلِ مَنْ كانَ قَبْلَكَ، فَاجْعَلْ جِدَّكَ لآخرَتِكَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تَكْتَـرِثْ بِعَمَلِ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Verily you have been created for the Hereafter, so work for it!

> 10ـ إنّك مَخْلُوقٌ لِلآخِرَةِ فَاعْمَل لَها.

11. If you work for the Hereafter, your arrow hits the mark.

> 11ـ إنّكَ إنْ عَمِلْتَ لِلآخِرَةِ فازَ قِدْحُكَ.

12. Verily you are all proceeding towards the Hereafter and will be
presented before Allah.

> 12ـ إنَّكمْ إلى الآخِرَةِ صائِرُونَ وعَلَى اللّهِ مَعْرُوضُونَ.

13. The sweetness of the Hereafter removes the pangs of misery of this
world.

> 13ـ حَلاوَةُ الآخِرَةِ تُذهِبُ مَضاضَةَ شقاءِ الدُّنيا.

14. Attain the Hereafter by abandoning this world, and don’t [try to]
acquire [the embellishments of] this world by abandoning the faith.

> 14 ـ حَصِّلُوا الآخِرَةَ بِتَركِ الدُّنيا، ولاتُحَصِّلُوا بِتَركِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدِّينِ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. The Hereafter is everlasting.

> 15ـ الآخرَةُ أبَدٌ.

16. Blessed is he who remembers the Hereafter and thus does good.

> 16ـ طُوبى لِمَنْ ذَكَرَ المَعادَ فأحْسَنَ.

17. The seeker of the Hereafter finds in it what he hopes for, whereas
in this world [only] that which is predestined for him comes to him.

> 17ـ طالِبُ الآخِرَةِ يُدْرِكُ مِنْها أمَلَهُ وَيَأتيهِ مِنَ الدُّنيا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما قُدِّرَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. You must strive and struggle for the betterment of the Hereafter.

> 18ـ عَلَيكَ بِالْجِدِّ والإجتِهادِ في إصْلاحِ المَعادِ.

19. I wonder at the one who denies the second genesis while he sees the
first genesis.

> 19ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ أنْكَرَ النَشأةَ الاُخْرى وهُوَ يَرَى النَّشأَةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاُولى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. The goal of the Hereafter is everlasting [life].

> 20ـ غايَةُ الآخِرَةِ البَقاءُ.

21. In the Hereafter there is accounting without action.

> 21ـ في الآخِرَةِ حِسابٌ ولاعَمَلٌ.

22. Be from the children of the Hereafter and do not be from the
children of this world, for surely every child will join his mother on
the Day of Reckoning.

> 22ـ كُونُوا مِنْ أبْناءِ الآخِرَةِ ولاتَكُونُوا مِنْ أبْناءِ الدُّنيا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإنَّ كُلَّ وَلَد سَيَلْحَقُ بِاُمِّهِ يَوْمَ القيمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. One who works for the Hereafter will be triumphant.

> 23ـ مَنْ عَمِلَ لِلْمَعادِ ظَفِرَ بِالسَّدادِ.

24. One who develops his Hereafter achieves his aspirations.

> 24ـ مَنْ عَمَرَ آخِرَتَهُ بَلَغَ آمالَهُ.

25. One who buys his Hereafter with his worldly life, gains both of
them.

> 25ـ مَنِ ابْتاعَ آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنْياهُ رَبِحَهُما.

26. One who builds the abode of his permanent dwelling is truly wise.

> 26ـ مَنْ عَمَرَ دارَ إقامَتِهِ فَهُوَ العاقِلُ.

27. One who is certain about the Hereafter turns away from this world.

> 27ـ مَنْ أيْقَنَ بِالآخِرَةِ أعْرَضَ عَنِ الدُّنيا.

28. One who improves his Hereafter will be triumphant.

> 28ـ مَنْ أصْلَحَ المَعادَ ظَفِرَ بِالسَّدادِ.

29. One who is certain about the Hereafter does not covet this world.

> 29ـ مَنْ أيْقَنَ بِالآخِرَةِ لَمْ يَحْرِصْ علَى الدُّنيا.

30. One who is desirous of the Hereafter [and works for it] attains it.

> 30ـ مَنْ حَرَصَ علَى الآخرةِ مَلَكَ.

31. Everything in the Hereafter has perpetuity and everlastingness.

> 31ـ لِكُلِ شيْء مِنَ الآخِرَةِ خُلُودٌ وَبَقاءٌ.

32. There is no substitute for the Hereafter; and this world is not the
price of one’s soul.

> 32ـ لَيْسَ عَنِ الآخِرَةِ عِوَضٌ، وَلَيْسَتِ الدُّنْيا لِلنَّفْسِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِثَمَن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

33. He who does not concern himself with improving his Hereafter is not
a [true] believer.

> 33ـ لَيْس بِمُؤْمِن مَنْ لَمْ يَهْتَمَّ بِإصْلاحِ مَعادِهِ.

34. One who longs for the bounties of the Hereafter is content with
little in this world.

> 34ـ مَنْ رَغِبَ في نَعيمِ الآخِرَةِ قَنِعَ بِيَسيرِ الدُّنيا.

35. Who is more at a loss than the one who trades his Hereafter for this
world?!

> 35ـ مَنْ أخْسَرُ مِمَّنْ تَعَوَّضَ عَنِ الآخِرَةِ بِالدُنيا؟!

36. One who puts all his efforts for [the betterment of] his Hereafter
succeeds in attaining what he looks forward to.

> 36ـ مَنْ جَعَلَ كُلَّ هَمِّهِ لآخِرَتِهِ ظَفِرَ بِالمأمُولِ.

37. Whoever strives for his permanent abode, his action becomes sincere
and his fear [of displeasing Allah] increases.

> 37ـ مَنْ سَعى لِدارِ إقامَتِهِ خَلُصَ عَمَلُهُ وكَثُرَ وَجَلُهُ.

38. One who is certain about his Hereafter thinks no more of this world.

> 38ـ مَنْ أيْقَنَ بِالآخِرَةِ سَلا عَنِ الدُّنيا.

39. Whoever increases his remembrance of the Hereafter, his
transgression reduces.

> 39ـ مَنْ أكْثَرَ مِنْ ذِكْرِ الآخِرَةِ قَلَّتْ مَعْصِيَتُهُ.

40. One who strives to improve his Hereafter, Allah will improve for him
his worldly life.

> 40ـ مَنْ أصْلَحَ أمْرَ آخِرَتهِ، أصْلَحَ اللّهُ لَهُ أمْرَ دُنياهُ.

41. One whose efforts are for the Hereafter will attain the best of his
aspired goals.

> 41ـ مَنْ كانَتِالآخِرَةُ هِمَّتَهُ بَلَغَ مِنَ الخَيْرِ غايَةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُمْنيَّتـِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

42. One who does not work for the Hereafter will not attain what he
hopes for.

> 42ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَعْمَلْ لِلآخِرَةِ لَمْ يَنَلْ أمَلَهُ.

43. One who has three [qualities] will have saved his life in this world
and the Hereafter: he commands good and himself follows it, forbids evil
and himself keeps away from it, and is careful in following the
commandments of Allah, the Mighty and High.

> 43ـ مَنْ كانَ فيهِ ثَلاثٌ سَلِمَتْ لَهُ الدُّنيا والآخِرَةُ: يَأمُرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالمَعْرُوفِ وَيَأتَمِرُ بِهِ، وَيَنْهى عَنِ المُنْكَرِ ويَنْتَهي
عَنْهُ، ويُحافِظُ على حُدُودِ اللّهِ جَلَّ وَعلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. How great a loser is the one for whom there is no share in the
Hereafter!

> 44ـ ما أخْسَرَ مَنْ لَيْسَ لَهُ في الآخِرَةِ نَصيبٌ.

45. The bitterness of this world is the sweetness of the Hereafter.

> 45ـ مِرارَةُ الدُّنيا حَلاوَةُ الآخِرَةِ.

46. The deceived one who succeeds in attaining the smallest portion of
this world [through his greatest effort] is not comparable the one who
succeeds in attaining [the smallest portion

of] the Hereafter by exerting his greatest effort.

> 46ـ ما المَغْروُرُ الذَّي ظَفِرَ مِنَ الدُّنيا بأدنى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُهْمَتِِهِ(بِأعْلى هِمَّتِهِ) كالآخَرِ الَّذي ظَفِرَ مِنَ الآخِرَةِ
بأعْلى هِمَّتِهِ(بأدنى سُهمَتِهِ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

47. He who works for his Eternal Abode obtains what he desires.

> 47ـ نالَ المُنى مَنْ عَمِلَ لِدارِ البَقاءِ.

48. Do not sell the Hereafter for this world and do not exchange the
everlasting for the evanescent.

> 48ـ لاتبيعُوا الآخرَةَ بالدُّنيا، ولاتَسْتَبْدِلُوا الفَناءَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالبَقاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

49. Never let anything occupy you from working for the Hereafter for
indeed the time is short.

> 49ـ لايَشْغَلَنَّكَ عَنِ العَمَلِ لِلآخِرَةِ شُغلٌ فإنَّ المُدَّةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَصيرَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

50. The Hereafter and this world do not come together.

> 50ـ لاتَجْتَمِعُ الآخِرَةُ وَالدُّنيا.

51. The perishing and the permanent do not go together.

> 51ـ لاتَجتَمِعُ الفَناءُ والبَقاءُ.

52. No one attains what he wishes for in the Hereafter except by
abstaining from that which he desires in this world.

> 52ـ لايُدْرِكُ أحَدٌ ما يُريدُ مِنَ الآخِرَةِ إلاّ بِتَرْكِ ما يَشتَهي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

53. It behoves one who is certain about the everlastingness and
permanence of the Hereafter to work for it.

> 53ـ يَنبَغي لِمَنْ أيْقَنَ بِبَقاءِ الآخِرَةِ ودَوامِها أنْ يَعْمَلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

54. People do not abstain from anything of their worldly life for the
sake of improving their Hereafter but that Allah, the Glorified,
recompenses them with what is better than it.

> 54ـ لايَتْرُكُ النَّاسُ شَيْئاً مِنْ دُنياهُمْ لإصلاحِ آخِرَتِهِمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلاّ عَوَّضَهُمُ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ خَيْراً مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

55. Aspire for what Allah has promised the God-wary, for surely the
truest promises are His promises.

> 55ـ إرْغَبُوا فيما وَعَدَاللّهُ المُتَّقينَ، فإنّ أصْدَقَ الوَعْدِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ميعادُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

56. Verily tomorrow is close to today. This day will pass with what is
in it and tomorrow will come [soon] following it.

> 56ـ إنَّ غَداً مِنَ اليَوْمِ قَريبٌ، يَذْهَبُ اليَومُ بِما فيهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويَأتي الْغَدُ لاحِقاً بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

57. The [final] destination is in front of you and time is behind you,
pushing you [forward].

> 57ـ إنَّ الغايَةَ أمامَكُمْ، وإنَّ السَّاعَةَ وَرائَـكُمْ تَحْدُوكُمْ.

58. Verily you have an ultimate destination so move towards your
destination, and you have a guide so move towards it with [the help of]
your guide.

> 58ـ إنّ لَكُمْ نِهايَةً فَانْتَهُوا إلى نِهايَتِكُمْ، وإنّ لَكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَماً فَانْتَهُوا بِعَلَمِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

59. A man may be happy to gain what he was not meant to lose, and [he
may be] saddened to lose what he was not meant to gain; so let your
happiness be in that which you have acquired for your Hereafter and let
your sadness be in that which you have lost from it; and let your
concern be for that which comes after death.

> 59ـ إنَّ المَرْءَ قَدْ يَسُرُّهُ دَرَكُ ما لَمْ يَكُنْ لِيَفُوتَهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويَسُؤُءُهُ فَوْتُ ما لَمْ يَكُنْ لِيُدْرِكَهُ، فَلْيَكُنْ سُرُورُكَ
بِما نِلتَ مِنْ آخِرَتِكَ، ولْيَكُنْ أسَفُكَ على ما فاتَكَ مِنْها،
ولْيَكُنْ هَمُّكَ لِما بَعْدَ المَوْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

60. Let your concern be for your Hereafter and your sorrow be for your
soul - for how many of the sorrowful have been led to everlasting bliss
by their sorrow, and how many of the distressed have attained their
aspiration.

> 60ـ إجْعَلْ هَمَّكَ لآخِرَتِكَ، وحُزْنَكَ على نَفْسِكَ، فَكَمْ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَزين وََفَدَ بِهِ حُزْنُهُ على سرُورِ الأبَدِ، وَكَمْ مِنْ مَهْمُوم
أدْرَكَ أمَلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

61. Prepare yourselves for the day when the eyes will be glazed, and the
minds will lose their sanity because of its horror, and the perceptions
will become dull.

> 61ـ إسْتَعِدُّوا لِيَوم تَشْخَصُ فيهِ الأبْصارُ وتَتَدلَّهُ لِهَولِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُقُولُ وتَتَبَلَّدُ البَصائِرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

62. Beware of the day when the deeds are audited, when earthquakes
increase and when young children turn old.

> 62ـ إحْذَرُوا يَوْماً تُفْحَصُ فيهِ الأعْمالُ، وتَـكْثُرُ فيهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزِّلْزالُ، وتَشيبُ فيهِ الأطْفالُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

63. Be careful not to be swindled out of the Permanent Abode, the
dwelling of the righteous and the virtuous elite, about whose qualities
the Qur’an has spoken and whose dwellers it has praised; while Allah,
the Glorified, has guided you and invited you to it.

> 63ـ إيَّاكَ أن تَخْدَعَ عَنْ دارِ القَرارِ، ومَحَلِّ الطَّيِّبينَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأخْيارِ، والأولياءِ الأبْرارِ التَّي نَطَقَ القُرآنُ بِوَصْفِها،
وأثنى على أهْلِها، وَدَلَّكَ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ عَليْها وَدَعاكَ إليها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

64. Is there nobody who has prepared the provisions for his Hereafter
before the coming of [the hour of] his departure?

> 64ـ ألا مُتَزَوِّدٌ لآخِرَتِهِ قَبْلَ اُزُوفِ رِحْلَتِهِ.

65. The Hereafter is the abode of your permanent stay, so prepare for it
that which will be lasting for you.

> 65ـ اَلآخِرَةُ دارُ مُسْتَقَرِّكُمْ، فَجَهَزُوا إليها ما يَبْقى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

66. Place your concern and effort for your Hereafter.

> 66ـ إجْعَلْ هَمَّكَ وجِدَّكَ لآخِرَتِكَ.

67. Be concerned about your Hereafter and you will become upright.

> 67ـ إجْعَلْ هَمَّكَ لِمَعادِكَ تَصْلَحْ.

68. Exert all your effort for your afterlife and your [final] station
will be improved, and do not sell your Hereafter for your worldly life.

> 68ـ إسْتَفْرِغْ جَهْدَكَ لِمَعادِكَ تُصْلِحْ مَثْـواكَ، ولاتَبِـعْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آخِرَتَكَ بِدُنياكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

69. Work hard in preparing the answers for the Day of Questioning and
Reckoning.

> 69ـ إجعَلْ جِدَّكَ لإعدادِ الجَـوابِ لِيَـومِ المَسْئَلَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(المُسـائَلَة) والحساب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

70. Those who have the greatest share of the Hereafter are those who
have the smallest share of this world.

> 70ـ أوْفَرُ النَّاسِ حَظّاً مِنَ الآخِرَةِ أقَلُّهُمْ حَظّاً مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

71. I enjoin you to be well prepared and increase your provisions for
the day when you will meet with what you have sent forth and regret what
you have left behind, and will be rewarded for what you had forwarded
[in advance].

> 71ـ إنّي آمُرُكُمْ بِحُسْنِ الإسْتِعْدادِ والإكثارِ مِنَ الزَّادِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَوْم تَقْدِمُونَ على ما تُقَدِّمُونَ، وتَنْدَمُونَ على ما
تُخَلِّفُونَ، وتُجْزَوْنَ بِما كُنْتُمْ تُسَلِّفُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

72. When you turn away from the transitory world and become occupied
with the permanent abode, then your arrow has indeed hit its mark, the
doors of prosperity are opened for you and you have attained success.

> 72ـ إذا أعرَضْتَ عَنْ دارِ الفَناءِ، وتَوَلَّهْتَ بِدارِ البَقاءِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ فازَ قِدْحُكَ، وَفُتِحَتْ لَكَ أبْوابُ النَّجاحِ، وظَفِرْتَ
بِالفَلاحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

73. The reward of the Hereafter makes one forget the hardships of this
world.

> 73ـ ثَوابُ الآخِرَةِ يُنْسي مَشَقَّةَ الدُّنيا.

74. Take from what will not last for you and what you will not last for
[of this world] for that which you will not separate from and which will
not separate from you [of the Hereafter].

> 74ـ خُذْ مِمَّا لايَبْقى لَكَ ولا تَبْقى لَهُ لِما لا تُفارِقُهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولايُفارِقُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

75. Partake in the best of actions and befriend the best of friends; for
verily every person will get that which he has earned and will be with
the one whom he loves in the Hereafter.

> 75ـ خُذْ مِنْ صالِحِ العَمَلِ، وخالِلْ خَيْرَ خَليل، فإنَّ لِلْمَرءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما اكْتَسَبَ، وَهُوَ في الآخِرَةِ مَعَ مَنْ أحَبَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

76. The Everlasting Abode [of Paradise] is the home of the veracious and
the dwelling of the virtuous and righteous.

> 76ـ دارُ البَقاءِ مَحَلُّ الصِّدّيقينَ ومَوطِنُ الأبْرارِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والصَّالِحينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

77. Remembrance of the Hereafter is a cure and a remedy.

> 77ـ ذِكْرُ الآخِرَةِ دَواءٌ وشِفاءٌ.

78. May Allah have mercy on the person who takes from [his] life for
[his] death, from the transitory for the everlasting and from the
perishing for the permanent.

> 78ـ رَحِمَ اللّهُ امْرَءاً أخَذَ مِنْ حَيوة لِمَوْت، وَمِنْ فَناء
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِبَقاء، ومِنْ ذاهِب لِدائِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

79. Seek the Hereafter and the world will come to you belittled.

> 79ـ عَلَيْكَ بِالآخِرَةِ تَأْتِكَ الدُّنيا صاغِرَةً.

80. Everything in the Hereafter is greater when seen than when heard of,
so be satisfied with what you hear [of it] without seeing [it] and what
you learn of [it] without witnessing [it].

> 80ـ وكُلُّ شَيْء مِنَ الآخِرَةِ عِيانُهُ أعْظَمُ مِنْ سَماعِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَكْفِكُمْ مِنَ العَيانِ السَّماعُ ومِنَ الغَيْبِ الخَبَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

81. How can one who is occupied with this world work for the Hereafter?

> 81ـ كَيفَ يَعْمَلُ لِلآخِرَةِ المَشْغُولُ بِالدُّنيا؟

82. Verily you are in greater need of developing the permanent abode [of
the Hereafter] than you are of building the temporary abode [of this
world].

> 82 ـ إنَّكُمْ إلى عِمارَةِ دارِ البَقاءِ أحْوَجُ مِنْكُمْ إلى عِمارَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دارِ الفَناءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

83. Verily you have been created for the Hereafter, not for this world,
and for perpetuity, not for extinction.

> 83ـ إنَّكُمْ إنَّما خُلِقْتُمْ لِلآخِرَةِ لا لِلدُّنيا، ولِلبَقاءِ لا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلْفَناءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

84. Verily you have been created for perpetuity, not for extinction; and
you are most certainly in a temporary abode of subsistence and a place
which is not suitable for settling.

> 84 ـ إنَّما خُلِقْتُمْ لِلْبَقاءِ لا لِلفَناءِ، وإنّكُمْ في دارِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُلْغَة ومَنْزِلِ قُلْعَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

85. The betterment of the Hereafter is in the rejection of this world.

> 85 ـ صَلاحُ الآخِرَةِ رَفْضُ الدُّنيا.

86. I am amazed at the one who knows his Lord, how can he not strive for
the everlasting abode?!

> 86ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ عَرَفَ رَبَّهُ كَيْفَ لايَسْعى لِدارِ البَقاءِ؟!

87. One who is certain about the everlasting is uninterested in that
which perishes.

> 87 ـ مَنْ أيْقَنَ بِما يَبْقى زَهِدَ فيما يَفْنى.

88. One who loves the everlasting abode becomes oblivious to [worldly]
pleasures.

> 88 ـ مَنْ أحَبَّ الدَّارَ الباقيَةَ لَهى عَنِ اللذَّات.

89. One who hopes to attain the bountiful rewards [of the Hereafter]
will not have his hopes disappointed.

> 89ـ مَنْ أمَّلَ ثوابَ الحُسْنى لَمْ تُنْكَدْ آمالُهُ.

90. Would you be happy to meet Allah tomorrow on the Day of Resurrection
while He is pleased with you and not angry? Then be indifferent to [the
pleasures of] this world and desirous of the Hereafter. And adopt
God-wariness and honesty, for these are the consolidators of faith. And
accompany the people of truth and emulate their actions - you will
become one of them.

> 90ـ أيَسُرُّكَ أنْ تَلْقَى اللّهَغَداً في القِيامَةِ وهُوَ عَلَيْكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
راض غَيرُ غَضْبانَ؟ كُنْ في الدُّنيا زاهِداً، وفي الآخرَةِ راغِباً،
وعَلَيْكَ بِالتَّقوى والصِّدقِ، فَهُما جِماعُ الدِّينِ، والْزَمْ أهْلَ
الحقِّ، واعْمَلْ عَمَلَهُمْ تَـكُنْ مِنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

91. He whose goal is [attaining] this world will not be successful in
[attaining] the Hereafter.

> 91ـ ما ظَفِرَبِالآخِرَةِ مَنْ كانَتِ الدُّنيا مَطْلَبَهُ.

92. The fortunate one who becomes prosperous in the permanent abode by
attaining his desires is not like the deceived one who loses the
bounties [of the Hereafter] because of his bad choices and wretchedness.

> 92ـ مَا المَغْبُوطُ الَّذي فازَ مِنْ دارِ البَقاءِ بِبُغْيَتِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كالمَغبُونِ الَّذي فاتَهُ النَّعيمُ بِسُوءِ اخْتيارِهِ وشَقاوَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

93. Do not be one of those who hopes for the Hereafter without working
[for it], and postpones repentance with long hopes; one who speaks in
this world with the words of those who are indifferent [to its
pleasures] but acts in it with the actions of the desirous.

> 93ـ لا تَـكُنْ مِمَّن يَرْجوُا الآخِرَةَ بِغَيْرِ عَمَل، ويُسَوِّفُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّوبَةَ بِطُولِ الأمَلِ، يَقُولُ في الدُّنيا بِقَوْلِ الزَّاهِدينَ،
ويَعمَلُ فيها بِعَمَلِ الرَّاغِبينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

94. None will be rewarded with the bounties of the Hereafter except
those who are patient in the face of the tribulations of this world.

> 94ـ لايُنْعَمُ بِنَعيمِ الآخِرَةِ إلاّ مَنْ صَبَـرَ عَلى بلاءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

95. There is no benefit in working for the Hereafter while having desire
for this world.

> 95ـ لايَنْفَعُ العَمَلُ لِلآخِرَةِ مَعَ الرَّغْبَةِ في الدُّنيا.

96. No one will attain an elevated rank in the Hereafter except through
sincerity in action, reducing hopes and espousing God-wariness.

> 96ـ لايُدْرِكُ أحَدٌ رِفْعَةَ الآخِرَةِ إلاّ بِإخلاصِ العَمَلِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَقْصيرِ الأمَلِ، وَلُزُومِ التَّقوى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

97. Become deserving of what Allah has prepared for you [in the
Hereafter] by seeking the fulfillment of His true promise and being wary
of the horror of His reckoning.

> 97ـ إسْتَحِقُّوا مِنَ اللّهِ ما أعَدَّ لَكُمْ بِالتَّنَجُّزِ لِصِدقِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ميعادِهِ والحَذَرِ مِنْ هَوْلِ مَعادِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


