The Judicious
=============

**The Judicious الحازم**

1. The judicious person is one who does not get too preoccupied with the
blessing [he has been given] to work for his afterlife.

> 1ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ لا يَشْغَلُهُ النِّعْمَةُ عَنِ العَمَلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلْعاقِبَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. The judicious person is one who is generous with what he has in his
possession and does not postpone his work of today to tomorrow.

> 2ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ جادَ بِما في يَدِهِ، ولَمْ يُؤَخِّرْ عَمَلَ يَومِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى غَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. The judicious person is one who is not too preoccupied with the
deceptions of his world to work for his Hereafter.

> 3ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ لَمْ يَشْغَلْهُ غُرُورُ دُنْياهُ عَنِ العَمَلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاُخْراهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. The judicious person is one who is amicable with [the people of] his
time.

> 4ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ دارى زَمانَهُ.

5. The judicious person is one who has been made worldly-wise by
experience and refined by calamities.

> 5ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ حَنَّكَتْهُ التَّجارِبُ، وهَذَّبَتْهُ النَّوائِبُ.

6. The judicious person is one who gives thanks for blessings that come
to him and is patient and thinks no more of it when the blessings turn
away or turn back from him.

> 6ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ شَكَرَ النِّعْمَةَ مُقْبِلَةً، وصَبَرَ عَنْها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَلاها مُوَلِّيَةً مُدْبِرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. The judicious person is one who delays meting out punishment when [he
is] under the yoke of anger and expedites the repayment of favours by
taking advantage of the available opportunity.

> 7ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ يُؤَخِّرُ العُقُوبَةَ في سُلْطانِ الغَضَبِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُعَجِّلُ مُكافاةَ الإحْسانِ إغْتِناماً لِفُرْصَةِ الإمكانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. The most judicious of you is the most abstemious of you [from worldly
pleasures].

> 8ـ أحْزَمُكُمْ أزْهَدُكُمْ.

9. The most judicious of all people is one who deems his worldly affairs
to be unimportant.

> 9ـ أحْزَمُ النّاسِ مَنِ اسْتَهانَ بِأمْرِ دُنْياهُ.

10. The most judicious of people is the one who presumes his inability
despite having numerous supporters.

> 10ـ أحْزَمُ النّاسِ مَنْ تَوَهَّمَ العَجْزَ لِفَرْطِ اسْتِظْهارِهِ.

11. The most judicious of people is the one whose inner and outer
garments are patience and consideration of the consequences [of his
actions].

> 11ـ أحْزَمُ النّاسِ مَنْ كانَ الصَّبْرُ والنَّظَرُ فيِ العَواقِبِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شِعارَهُ وَدِثارَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. The most judicious of people is the one who fulfils his promise and
does not postpone his work of today to tomorrow.

> 12ـ أحْزَمُ النّاسِ رَأْياً مَنْ أنْجَزَ وَعْدَهُ، ولَمْ يُؤَخِّرْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَمَلَ يَوْمِهِ لِغَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. Indeed the judicious person is one who does not get beguiled by
deceptions.

> 13ـ إنَّ الحازِمَ مَنْ لا يَغْتَـرَّ بِالخُدَعِ.

14. Verily the judicious person is one who occupies himself with
struggling against his [lower] self, thereby rectifying it and
preventing it from indulging in its vain desires and pleasures, thus he
attains mastery over it; and verily for the intelligent one there is a
preoccupation in keeping himself away from [that which is impermissible
of] this world, its contents and its people.

> 14ـ إنَّ الحازِمَ مَنْ شَغَلَ نَفْسَهُ بِجِهادِ نَفْسِهِ، فَأصْلَحَها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحَبَسَها عَنْ أهْوِيَتِها ولَذّاتِها فَمَلَكَها، وإنَّ لِلْعاقِلِ
بِنَفْسِهِ عَنِ الدُّنيا وَما فيها وأهْلِها شُغْلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Verily the judicious person is one who restrains his [lower] self by
taking it to account, and controls it with rage (or by overcoming it),
and kills it by fighting against it.

> 15ـ إنَّ الحازِمَ مَنْ قَيـَّدَ نَفْسَهُ بِالمُحاسَبَةِ، ومَلَكَها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالمُغاضَبَةِ (بِالمُغالَبَةِ)، وقَتَلَها بِالمُجاهَدَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. The judicious one is alert, the negligent one is sleepy.

> 16ـ اَلحازِمُ يَقْظانٌ، اَلغافِلُ وَسْنانٌ.

17. The judicious person is one who does not harm others.

> 17ـ اَلْحازِمُ مَنْ كَفَّ أذاهُ.

18. The judicious person is one who discards [excessive] expenses and
luxuries.

> 18ـ اَلْحازِمُ مَنِ اطَّرَحَ المَؤُنَ، والكُلَفَ.

19. The judicious person is one who abandons this world for the sake of
the Hereafter.

> 19ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ تَرَكَ الدُّنيا لِلآخِرَةِ.

20. The judicious is one who eschews extravagance and loathes waste.

> 20ـ اَلحازِمُ مَنْ تَجَنَّبَ التَّبْذيرَ، وَعافَ السَّـرَفَ.

21. Only he is judicious whose preoccupation is entirely with himself,
whose concern is entirely for his religion, and whose struggle is
entirely for his Hereafter.

> 21ـ إنَّما الحازِمُ مَنْ كانَ بِنَفْسِهِ كُلُّ شُغْلِهِ، ولِدينِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ هَمِّهِ، وَلآخِرَتِهِ كُلُّ جِدِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Many a young person is more judicious than an old person.

> 22ـ رُبَّ صَغير أحْزَمُ مِنْ كَبير.

23. The weapon of a judicious person is precaution.

> 23ـ سِلاحُ الحازِمِ الاِسْتِظْهارُ.

24. In every action of the judicious person, there is merit.

> 24ـ لِلْحازِمِ في كُلِّ فِعْل فَضْلٌ.

25. The intellect of the judicious one acts as a deterrent from every
demerit.

> 25ـ لِلْحازِمِ مِنْ عَقْلِهِ عَنْ كُلِّ دَنِيَّة زاجِرٌ.

26. The judicious one does not become perplexed in times of adversity.

> 26ـ لايَدْهَشُ عِنْدَ البَلاءِ اَلحازِمُ.

27. He who does not give generously from what he has and does not
advance (or save) his work of today for his morrow[^1] is not a
judicious person.

> 27ـ لايَكُونُ حازِماً مَنْ لايَجُودُ بِما في يَدِهِ، ولايُؤَخِّرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وَلا يَدَّخِرُ)عَمَلَ يَوْمِهِ إلى غَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

28. The judicious person never dispenses with a pertinent and superior
opinion.

> 28ـ لايَسْتَغْنِي الحازِمُ أبَداً عَنْ رَأْي سَديد راجِح.

[^1]: Meaning that he does not work in this world for his Hereafter.


