Good Etiquette
==============

**Good Etiquette الأدب**

1. Good etiquette is one of the two distinguishing merits.

> 1ـ اَلأدَبُ أحَدُ الْحَسَبَيْنِ.

2. Good etiquette in a person is like a tree whose roots are the
intellect.

> 2ـ اَلأدبُ في الإنْسانِ كَشَجَرَة أصْلُها العَقلُ.

3. The noblest of personal merits is good etiquette.

> 3ـ أشرفُ حَسَب حُسْنُ الأدبِ.

4. The best etiquette is preserving one’s magnanimity.

> 4ـ أفْضلُ الأدبِ حِفْظُ المُرُوءَةِ.

5. The best etiquette is that [in] which you start with yourself.

> 5ـ أفضلُ الأدبِ ما بَدَأْتَ بِهِ نَفْسَكَ.

6. The best etiquette is for a person to stay within his limits and not
go beyond his rank.

> 6ـ أفضلُ الأدبِ أنْ يَقِفَ الإنسانُ عِندَ حَدِّهِ ولايَتَعدَّى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. The best of etiquettes is that which stops you from what is
forbidden.

> 7ـ أحسنُ الآدابِ ما كَفَّكَ عَنِ المَحارِمِ.

8. The noblest merit is good etiquette.

> 8ـ أكرَمُ حَسَب حُسْنُ الأدبِ.

9. The people of intellect are in need of good etiquette just as the
plants thirst for rain.

> 9ـ إنَّ بِذَوي العُقُولِ مِنَ الحاجَةِ إلى الأدبِ، كَما يَظْمَأُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّرْعُ إلَى المَطَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. People are more in need of good etiquette than of silver and gold.

> 10ـ إنَّ النَّاس إلى صالحِ الأدبِ أحْوَجُ مِنْهُمْ إلى الفِضَّةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والذَّهبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Good etiquette is the best merit.

> 11ـ الأدبُ أفْضَلُ حَسَب.

12. Etiquettes are renewed vestments.

> 12ـ الآدابُ حُلَلٌ مُجَدَّدَةٌ.

13. Good etiquette is the best trait.

> 13ـ الأدبُ أحسنُ سَجِيَّة.

14. Etiquette is a reflection of the intellect.

> 14ـ الأدبُ صُورَةُ العَقلِ.

15. Good etiquette is the perfection of man.

> 15ـ الأدبُ كَمالُ الرَّجُلِ.

16. You are gauged by your etiquette so beautify it with forbearance.

> 16ـ إنَّكَ مُقَوَّمٌ بأدَبِكَ، فَزَيِّنْهُ بالحِلمِ.

17. Indeed you are more in need of acquiring good etiquette than you are
of acquiring silver and gold.

> 17ـ إنّكُمْ إلى اكْتِسابِ الأدَبِ أحوَجُ مِنْكُم إلَى اكْتِسابِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفِضَّةِ وَالذَّهبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Through good etiquette brainpower is sharpened.

> 18ـ بِالأدبِ تُشْحَذُ الفِطَنُ.

19. The worst attribute is bad etiquette.

> 19ـ بِئسَ النَّسَبُ سُوءُ الأدَبِ.

20. The fruit of good etiquette is good character.

> 20ـ ثَمَرةُ الأدبِ حُسْنُ الخُلْقِ.

21. Good etiquette covers up bad lineage.

> 21ـ حُسْنُ الأدَبِ يَستُرُ قُبْحَ النَّسَبِ.

22. Good etiquette is the best supporter and finest companion.

> 22ـ حُسنُ الأدبِ خَيْرُ مُوارز وأفضلُ قَرين.

23. Good etiquette is the best attribute and noblest means.

> 23ـ حُسنُ الأدبِ أفْضلُ نَسَب وأشرَفُ سَبب.

24. The value of good etiquette is nobler than the value of lineage.

> 24ـ حَسَبُ الأدبِ أشرَفُ مِنْ حَسَبِ النَّسَبِ.

25. The best thing that parents can bequeath to their children is good
etiquette.

> 25ـ خَيْرُ ما وَرَّثَ الآباءُ الأبناءَ الأدبُ.

26. The means of purifying [one’s] character is good etiquette.

> 26ـ سَبَبُ تَزْكِيَةِ الأخلاقِ حُسْنُ الأدَبِ.

27. The seeker of good etiquette is wiser than the seeker of gold.

> 27ـ طالبُ الأدَبِ أحزَمُ مِنْ طالِبِ الذَّهبِ.

28. Seeking [good] etiquette is the embellishment of [one’s] honourable
lineage.

> 28ـ طَلَبُ الأدَبِ جَمالُ الحَسَبِ.

29. Adopt good etiquette for it is the embellishment of honourable
lineage.

> 29ـ علَيكَ بِالأدبِ فإنَّهُ زَيْنُ الحَسَبِ.

30. A little good etiquette is better than many noble ancestors.

> 30ـ قليلُ الأدَبِ خيْرٌ مِن كَثيرِ النَّسَبِ.

31. Everything requires intellect and intellect requires etiquette.

> 31ـ كُلُّ شَيْء يَحْتاجُ إلىَ العَقْلِ، والعَقلُ يَحتاجُ إلىَ الأدبِ.

32. Every distinction is limited except intelligence and good etiquette.

> 32ـ كُلُّ الحَسَبِمُتَناه إلاّ العَقْلَ والأدَبَ.

33. In order to discipline yourself, it is enough that you keep away
from [doing] that which you hate from others.

> 33ـ كَفاكَ مُؤدِّباً لِنَفْسِكَ تَجَنُّبُ ما كَرِهْتَهُ مِنْ غَيْرِكَ.

34. Good etiquette will not be effective until it is accompanied with
intellect.

> 34ـ لَنْ يَنْجََعَ الأدَبُ حَتّى يُقارِنَهُ العَقْلُ.

35. One whose etiquette decreases, his vices increase.

> 35ـ مَنْ قَلَّ أدَبُهُ كَثُرَتْ مَساوِيهِ.

36. One who is abased because of his poor etiquette will not be elevated
by his noble lineage.

> 36ـ مَنْ وَضَعَهُ دَناءَةُ أدَبِهِ لَمْ يَرْفَعْهُ شَرَفُ حَسَبِهِ.

37. One whose etiquette is bad, his honourable lineage gets tarnished.

> 37ـ مَنْ ساءَ أدَبُهُ شانَ حَسَبَهُ.

38. One who is lowered by his lineage is elevated by his good etiquette.

> 38ـ مَنْ قَعَدَ بِه حَسَبُهُ نَهَضَ بِهِ أدَبُهُ.

39. One who is held back by his lack of etiquette will not be pushed
forward by the weight of his honourable lineage.

> 39ـ مَنْ أخَّرَهُ عَدَمُ أدَبِهِ لَمْ يُقَدِّمْهُ كَثافَةُ حَسَبِهِ.

40. Whoever is keen about [acquiring] good etiquette, his vices will
decrease.

> 40ـ مَنْ كَلَفَ بِالأدَبِ قَلَّتْ مَساوِيهِ.

41. One who is infatuated with [good] etiquette has adorned himself.

> 41ـ مَنِاسْتُهْتِرَ بالأدَبِ فَقَدْزانَ نَفْسَهُ.

42. One whose etiquette augments his intellect is like a [lone] shepherd
among many sheep.

> 42ـ مَنْ زادَ أدَبُهُ على عَقْلِهِ كانَ كالرَّاعي بَيْنَ غَنَم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَثيرَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

43. One whose etiquette is not his best quality, his simplest condition
will be his destruction.

> 43ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ أفْضلَ خِلالِهِ أدبُهُ كانَ أهْوَنَ أحوالِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَطَبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. One who is not reformed by the discipline of Allah cannot become
reformed through self-discipline.

> 44ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَصْلُحْ على أدَبِ اللّهِ لَمْ يَصْلُحْ على أدَبِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. The best companion of the intellect is etiquette.

> 45ـ نِعمَ قَرينُ العقلِ الأدَبُ.

46. The best attribute is good etiquette.

> 46ـ نِعْمَ النَسَّبُ حُسْنُ الأدَبِ.

47. There is no merit like good etiquette.

> 47ـ لاحَسَبَ كالأدبِ.

48. There is no adornment like good etiquette.

> 48ـ لازينَةَ كالآدابِ.

49. There is no heritage like etiquette.

> 49ـ لاميراثَ كالأدَبِ.

50. There is no vestment like good etiquette.

> 50ـ لاحُلَلَ كالآدابِ.

51. There is no honour with bad etiquette.

> 51ـ لاشرَفَ مَعَ سُوءِ أدَب.

52. One who has a dirty tongue has no etiquette.

> 52ـ لاأدبَ لِسَيّي النُّطْقِ.

53. There is no rank higher than good etiquette.

> 53ـ لاحَسَبَ أرفَعُ مِنَ الأدبِ.

54. He who has no etiquette has no intelligence.

> 54ـ لاعَقْلَ لِمَنْ لا أدَبَ لَهُ.

55. He who lacks good etiquette and inclines towards idle play does not
become a leader.

> 55ـ لايُرَأَّسُ مَنْ خَلا عَنِ الأدَبِ وصَبا إلى اللَّعَبِ.

56. There are three things which one always needs to seek more of: Good
etiquette, avoidance of suspicion, and abstinence from all that is
forbidden.

> 56ـ ثلاثٌ لَيْسَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مُسْتَزادٌ حُسْنُ الأدَبِ ومُجانَبَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّيبِ، والكَفُّ عَنْ المَحارِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


