The Forebearing
===============

**The Forebearing الحليم**

1. The first compensation for the forbearing person from his forbearance
is that all the people are [ready to be] his helpers against his enemy.

> 1ـ أوَّلُ عِوَضِ الحَلِيمِ عَنْ حِلْمِهِ أنَّ النّاسَ كُلَّهُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْصارُهُ عَلى خَصْمِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. The forbearing person raises his determination, in that which he has
been oppressed, above seeking an evil retribution.

> 2ـ اَلحَليْمُ يُعْلِي هِمَّتَهُ فيما جُنِيَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ طَلَبِ سُوءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُكافاةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Indeed the best of people is one who is forbearing even when he is
strong [enough to exact revenge], is not attached to the pleasures of
this world even though he is well-off and is just even though he has
power.

> 3ـ إنَّ أفْضَلَ النّاسِ مَنْ حَلُمَ عَنْ قُدْرَة، وزَهَدَ عَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غُنْيَة، وأنْصَفَ عَنْ قُوَّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. The forbearing is one who tolerates [the flaws of] his brothers.

> 4ـ اَلحَلِيمُ مَنِ احْتَمَلَ إخْوانَهُ.

5. The forbearing is one for whom it is not difficult to act with
tolerance.

> 5ـ الحَليمُ الَّذي لا يَشُقُّ عَلَيْهِ مَؤُنَةُ الحِلْمِ.

6. If you are not forbearing then act forbearing, for verily it is rare
for a person who imitates a group not to soon become one among them.

> 6ـ إنْ لَمْ تَـكُنْ حَلِيماً فَتَحَلَّمْ، فَإنَّهُ قَلَّ مَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَشَبَّهَ بِقَوْم إلاّ أوْشَكَ أنْ يَصِيرَ مِنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Indeed only he is forbearing who is patient when he is offended and
forgives when he is wronged.

> 7ـ إنَّما الحَلِيمُ مَنْ إذا أُوذِيَ صَبَرَ، وإذا ظُلِمَ غَفَرَ.

8. Sit in the company of the forbearing and you will increase your
forbearance.

> 8 ـ جالِسِ الحُلَماءَ تَزْدَدْ حِلْماً.

9. Sometimes the forbearing person may get fed up.

> 9ـ قَدْ يَزْهَقُ الحَلِيمُ.

10. A person who is not forbearing may at times dress in the garb of
forbearance.

> 10ـ قَدْ يَتَزَيّي بِالحِلْمِ غَيْرُ الحَلِيمِ.

11. Be forbearing in [times of] anger, very patient [and courageous] in
fear, [and] moderate in your request.

> 11ـ كُنْ حَلِيماً فِي الغَضَبِ،صَبُوراً فِي الرَّهَبِ، مُجْمِلاً فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الطَّلَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. He who lacks strength and thus remains quiet, only to take revenge
when he gets power, is not forbearing; rather only he is forbearing who
forgives when he has power and over all of whose affairs forbearance
prevails.

> 12ـ لَيْسَ الحَلِيمُ مَنْ عَجَزَ فَهَجَمَ، وإذا قَدَرَ انْتَقَمَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّما الحَلِيمُ مَنْ إذا قَدَرَ عَفا، وكانَ الحِلْمُ غالِباً عَلى
كُلِّ أمْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. One who endeavours to act with forbearance becomes forbearing.

> 13ـ مَنْ تَحَلَّمَ حَلُمَ.

14. One who shows forbearance is honoured.

> 14ـ مَنْ حَلُمَ أُكْرِمَ.

15. One who adorns himself with forbearance, his recklessness subsides.

> 15ـ مَنْ تَحَلّى بِالْحِلْمِ سَكَنَ طَيْشُهُ.

16. One who does not endeavour to act with forbearance does not become
forbearing.

> 16ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَتَحَلَّمْ لَمْ يَحْلُمْ.

17. Whoever infuriates you by the ugliness of his foolish behaviour
towards you, then infuriate him by the beauty of your forbearance
towards him.

> 17ـ مَنْ غاظَكَ بِقُبْحِ السَّفَهِ عَلَيْكَ، فَغِظْهُ بِحُسْنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحِلْمِ عَنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. One who seeks the support of forbearance against you defeats you and
acts graciously towards you.

> 18ـ مَنِ اسْتَعانَ بِالْحِلْمِ عَلَيْكَ غَلَبَكَ وتَفَضَّلَ عَلَيْكَ.


