Allah And His Attributes
========================

**Allah and His Attributes** **اللّه وصفاته**

1. The knowledge of Allah, the Glorified, tore through the veils of the
unseen and encompassed the darkness of inner-beliefs.

> 1ـ خَرَقَ عِلْمُ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ باطِنَ غَيْبِ السُّتََراتِ، وأحاطَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِغُمُوضِ عَقائدِ السَّريراتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Everyone who is called ‘one’ other than Allah, the Glorified, is
little; and every honoured one other than Him is inferior; and every
strong one other than Him is weak; and every master other than Him is a
slave; and every knower other than Him is a learner; and every capable
one other than Him is sometimes able and other times unable.

> 2ـ كُلُّ مُسَمًّى بِالوَحْدَةِ غَيرُ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ قَليلٌ، وكُلُّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عزيز غَيرُهُ ذَليلٌ، وَكُلُّ قَويّ غَيرُهُ ضعيفٌ، وَكُلُّ مالِك
غَيرُهُ مَمْلُوكٌ، وكُلُّ عالِم غَيرُهُ مُتَعَلِّمٌ، وَكُلُّ قادِر
غيرُهُ يَقْدِرُ ويَعْجِزُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Every hidden thing is apparent for Allah, exalted are His bounties.

> 3ـ كُلُّ باطِن عندَ اللّه جَلّتْ آلاؤُهُ ظاهرٌ.

4. Every secret is manifest for Allah.

> 4ـ كُلُّ سِرّ عندَ اللّهِ عَلانِيَةٌ.

5. Whoever contemplates about the essence of Allah, apostatizes.

> 5ـ مَنْ تَفَكَّرَ في ذاتِ اللّهِ اَلْحَدَ(تَزَنْدَقَ)

6. Allah, the Glorified, does not misguide anyone and Allah is not
unjust to the servants.

> 6ـ ماكانَ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ لِيُضِلَّ أحَداً ولَيسَ اللّهُ بِظلاّّم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلْعَبيدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. How great is the clemency of Allah, the Glorified, upon the
recalcitrant, and how great is His forgiveness to the extravagant
servants.

> 7ـ ما أعظَمَ حِلْمَ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ عَنْ أهْلِ العِنادِ، وما أكْثَرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَفْوَهُ عَنْ مُسرِفي العِبادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Allah, how great is that which we see of your creation, yet how small
its greatness is next to what is hidden from us of your might!

> 8ـ ما أعْظَمَ ألّلهُمَّ ما نَرى مِنْ خَلْقِكَ، وما أصغَرَ عَظيمَهُ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَنْبِ ما غابَ عنَّا مِنْ قُدْرَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Allah! How awesome is that which we witness of Your kingdom, yet how
negligible is that compared to what is hidden from us of Your grand
sovereignty!

> 9ـ ما أهْولَ ألّلهُمَّ ما نُشاهِدُهُ مِنْ مَلَكُوتِكَ، وما أحقَرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذلِكَ فيما غابَ عنَّا مِنْ عظيمِ سُلْطانِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. He is Allah, the One for whom all signs of existence stand witness
over the denying heart.

> 10ـ هُوَ اللّهُ الَّذي تَشْهَدُ لَهُ أعْلامُ الوُجودِ على قَلْبِ ذي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجُحُودِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Allah, Great is His Majesty, is not perceived by the eyes through
the sense of sight, rather He is perceived by the hearts though the
realities of faith.

> 11ـ لا تُدْرِكُ اللّهُ جلَّ جَلالُهُ العُيُونُ بِمُشاهَدَةِ الأعيانِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لكن تُدْرِكُهُ القُلُوبُ بِحَقائقِ الإيمانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. How can one whose guarantor is Allah, lose?

> 12ـ كَيفَ يَضيعُ مَنِ اللّهُ كافِلُهُ؟!

13. Allah, the Glorified, has not created anything in vain so that He
may be entertained.

> 13ـ ما خلَقَ اللّهُ سُبحانَهُ أمْراً عَبَثاً فَيَلْهُوَ.

14. Allah, the Glorified, does not abandon anything to futility thereby
rendering it void.

> 14ـ ما ترَكَ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ أمْراً سُدىً فَيَلْغُوَ.

15. The knowledge of Allah, the Glorified, encompasses the concealed
interiors and records the apparent exteriors.

> 15ـ قَدْ أحاطَ عِلْمُ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ بِالبَواطِنِ، وأحصىَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الظَّواهِرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Allah, the Glorified, has recorded your traces, known your actions
and ordained your death.

> 16ـ قَدْ سَمَّى اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ آثارَكُمْ، وعَلِمَ أعْمالَكُمْ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكَتَبَ آجالَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Allah, the Glorified, did not create the creation on account of
loneliness, nor did He command them [to obey Him] in order to gain
anything.

> 17ـ لَمْ يَخْلُقِ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ الخَلْقَ لِوَحْشَة ولَمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْتَعْمِلْهُمْ لِمَنْفَعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Allah, the Glorified, has not created you in vain, and has not
abandoned you to wander aimlessly, and He has not left you alone in
misguidance and blindness.

> 18ـ لَمْ يَخْلُقْكُم اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ عَبَثاً، ولَمْ يَتْرُكْكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُدىً، ولَمْ يَدَعْكُمْ في ضلالَة ولا عمى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. How amazing the human being is! He sees through [a layer of]
fat[^1], speaks with a piece of flesh, hears with a bone and breathes
through a hole.

> 19ـ إعْجِبُوا لِهذا الإنسانِ يَنْظُرُ بِشَحْم ويَتَكَلَّمُ بِلَحم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويَسْمَعُ بِعَظْم وَيَتَنَفَّسُ مِنْ خَرْم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. About the unity of Allah, the Exalted, he said: The depths of
understanding cannot perceive Him and the heights of [intellectual]
endeavors cannot reach Him.

> 20ـ وَقالَ في توحيدِاللّهِ تعالى: غَوْصُ الفِتَنِ لايُدْرِكُهُ وبُعدُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الهِمَمِ لا يَبْلُغُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Faces bow down in front of the greatness of Allah, hearts tremble
out of fear of Him and souls are sacrificed for His pleasure.

> 21ـ تَعْنُوا الوُجُوهُ لِعَظَمَةِ اللّهِ، وتَجِلُّ القُلُوبُ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَخافَتِهِ، وتَتَهالَكُ النُفُوسُ على مَراضيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Belief in the oneness of Allah enlivens the soul.

> 22ـ اَلتَّوحيدُ حَيوةُ النَّفْسِ.

23. Belief that Allah is one means that you should not [try to] imagine
[Him].

> 23ـ اَلتَّوحيدُ أنْ لا تَتَوَهَّمَ.

24. Whoever believes in one God is saved.

> 24ـ قَدْنَجا مَنْ وَحَّدَ (وَجَدَ، وُحِدَ).

25. He (‘a) said about the oneness of Allah: He is near everything but
not attached, far from everything but not separate.

> 25ـ وقال ـ عليه السلام ـ في توحيدِ اللّهِ: قَريبٌ مِنَ الأشياءِ غَيرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُلابِس، بعيدٌ مِنْها غَيْرُ مُبايِن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. He (‘a) said about the oneness of Allah, the Glorified: He is
neither inside things nor outside them.

> 26ـ وقال ـ عليه السلام ـ في توحيدِ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ: لَيسَ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأشياءِ بِوالِج ولا عَنْها بِخارج.
  </p>
</blockquote>

27. If your Lord had a partner, then his prophets would [also] have come
to you.

> 27ـ لَو كانَ لِرَبِّكَ شَريكٌ لأتَتْكَ رُسُلُهُ.

28. One who believes in the oneness of Allah, the Glorified, does not
compare Him to the creation.

> 28ـ مَنْ وَحَّدَ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ لَمْ يُشَبِّهْهُ بِالخَلْقِ.

29. He, the Glorified, was not perceived by the intellects and thus
described, rather, He, the Exalted, described himself before the
describers [attempted to describe Him].

> 29ـ لَمْ تَرَهُ سُبْحانَهُ العُقُولُ فَتُخْبِرَ عَنْهُ، بَلْ كانَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعالى قَبلَ الواصِفينَ بِهِ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

30. Allah, the Glorified, did not give the intellect knowledge about the
limits of His qualities, yet He did not prevent it from gaining the
necessary understanding of Him.

> 30ـ لَمْ يُطْلِعِ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ العُقُولَ عَلى تَحديدِ صِفَتِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَحْجُبْها عَنْ واجِبِ مَعرِفَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

31. He, the Glorified, can neither be confined in the intellect, thereby
changing through the process of thought [or imagination], nor in the
shackles of the mind, thereby becoming limited and the object of
alteration.

> 31ـ لَمْ يَتَناهَ سُبْحانَهُ في العُقُولِ فَيَكُونَ في مَهَبِّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِكْرِها مُكَيَّفاً ولافي رَوِيَّاتِ خَواطِرِها مُحَدَّداً مُصَرَّفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

32. Allah has not settled in anything so that it be said He exists
therein, nor is He separated from anything so that it is said He is
detached from it.

> 32ـ لَمْ يَحْلُلِ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ في الأشياءِ فَيكُونَ (فَيُقالَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ فيها كائِنٌ) فيها كائناً ولَمْ يَنْأ عَنْها فَيُقالَ هُوَ عَنْها
بائنٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

33. Whoever seeks permission from Allah, He grants it [to him].

> 33ـ مَنِ اسْتَأذَنَ علَى اللّهِ أذِنَ لَهُ.

[^1]: Referring to fatty tissue that makes up part of the eye.


