Fulfilling Needs
================

**Fulfilling Needs الحَوائج وقَضاؤها**

1. Verily the needs of the people that are addressed to you are a
blessing from Allah upon you, so take advantage of them and do not be
weary of them, lest they should turn into [divine] wrath.

> 1ـ إنَّ حَوائِجَ النّاسِ إلَيْكُمْ نِعْمَةٌ مِنَ اللّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاغْتَنِمُوها وَلا تَمَلُّوها فَتَتَحَوَّلَ نَقْماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Do not delay granting the needy to tomorrow, for you do not know what
will happen to you and to him tomorrow.

> 2ـ لاتُؤَخِّرْ إنالَةَ الْمُحْتاجِ إلى غَد، فَإنَّكَ لاتَدْرِي ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْرِضُ لَكَ ولَهُ في غَد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. You must seek the fulfilment of your needs through people of
honourable dispositions and origins, you will be successful [in getting
what you need] with them, without any delay or any sense of obligation.

> 3ـ عَلَيْكُمْ في قَضاءِ حَوائِجِكُمْ بِكِرامِ الأنْفُسِ والأُصُولِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُنْجَحْ لَكُمْ عِنْدَهُمْ مِنْ غَيْرِ مَطال ولا مَنّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. You must seek your needs from those who are honourable and of good
origins, for they are more likely to fulfil them [quickly and without
obligation] and they are purer in your eyes.

> 4ـ عَلَيْكُمْ في طَلَبِ الْحَوائِجِ بِشِرافِ النُّفُوسِ ذَوِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأُصُولِ الطَيِّبَةِ، فَإنَّها (فَإنَّهُ) عِنْدَهُمْ أقْصى وهِيَ
(وَهُمْ) لَدَيْكُمْ (لَدَيْهِمْ) أزْكى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. I am amazed at the person who is approached by his Muslim brother in
need and refuses to fulfil it, not deeming himself worthy of [doing]
good; so assume that he does not desire any reward nor does he fear any
punishment. Do they lack interest in [acquiring] noble traits?

> 5ـ عَجِبْتُ لِرَجُل يَأتِيهِ أخُوهُ الْمُسْلِمُ فِي حاجَة،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَمْتَنِعُ عَنْ قَضائِها وَلايَرى نَفْسَهُ لِلْخَيْرِ أهْلاً، فَهَبْ
أنَّهُ لاثَوابَ يُرْجى ولاعِقابَ يُتَّقى، أفَتَزهَدُونَ فِي مَكارِمِ
الأخْلاقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Not having your needs fulfilled is better than seeking them from
those who are not worthy.

> 6ـ فَوْتُ الحاجَةِ خَيْـرٌ مِنْ طَلَبِها مِنْ غَيْرِ أهْلِها.

7. Being generous with power [and fulfilling the needs of the people
with it] is the alms-tax of power.

> 7ـ بَذْلُ الجاهِ زَكوةُ الْجاهِ.

8. Expediting the release [of the needy from his need] is [a means of]
success.

> 8ـ تَعْجِيلُ السَّراحِ نَجاحٌ.

9. The fulfilling of needs is not made righteous except by three things:
by considering it to be small such that it becomes great, by hiding it
such that it is made apparent [by Allah] and by expediting it such that
it becomes felicitous.

> 9ـ لا يَسْتَقِيمُ قَضاءُ الحَوائِجِ إلاّ بِثَلاث: بِتَصْغِيرِها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِتَعْظُمَ، وسَتْرِها لِتَظْهَرَ، وتَعْجِيلِها لِتَهْنَأَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Everyone who has been given time [to do good before his death] gives
excuses for postponement [of good deeds].

> 10ـ كُلُّ مُؤَجَّل يَتَعَلَّلُ بِالتَّسْوِيفِ.

11. Turning away the needy is the cause of diminishment of affluence.

> 11ـ سَبَبُ زَوالِ الْيَسارِ مَنْعُ الْمُحْتاجِ.


