About The Compiler
==================

The compiler of this work was the great scholar and *muḥaddith* Qā
i Nāsiḥ al-Dīn Abu al-Fatḥ ‘Abd al-Wāhid ibn Muḥammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wāhid
al-Āmudi[^1] al-Tamīmī from the scholars of the fifth century who passed
away in 510 AH.[^2] He was a contemporary of Sayyid Ra
i, Sayyid Murta
a and Shaykh Ṭusi.

Some of the great scholars such as Ibn Shahr Āshub, ‘Allāma Majlisi and
Muḥaddith Nūri, have praised him and considered his work to be of great
value. Many of these scholars have also narrated from him.

There has been some discussion about al-Āmudi’s beliefs because he used
the phrase *karramallāhu wajhahu* (may Allah honour him) for Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) in his introduction to this book, and this is the practice of the
Sunnis and not the Shi‘as. However, the great scholar Jamāl al-Dīn
Muḥammad Khwansāri notes that this was either done out of precautionary
dissimulation (*taqiyya*)[^3] or was an addition by one of the scribes.

He further mentions some arguments to dispel any doubts about al-Āmudi’s
being an Imāmi scholar. These are summarized as follows:

• The fact that Ibn Shahr Āshub mentions him as one of his teachers in
his book Ma‘ālim al ‘Ulamā and notes that he was an Imāmi scholar.

• Ibn Shahr Āshub also mentions him again in his other book al-Manāqib
and states that he was a Shi‘a scholar.

• Whoever examines this book will notice that many of the narrations
have been compiled from other Shi‘a books.

• This book contains certain narrations that can only be narrated by a
Shi‘a such as the narrations about the Holy Prophet (s) and his
progeny.[^4]

Our esteemed teacher and student of the late Ayatullah Sayyid Abu
al-Qāsim al-Khui (r), Ayatullah Muslim al-Dāwari (may Allah grant him a
long life), argues that the fourth point cannot be considered as proof
since many Sunni scholars have mentioned such traditions about the
family of the Prophet (s). He further adds that the compiler’s
reliability (*tawthīq*) has not been established even though he was
known to be one of the teachers of Ibn Shahr Āshub.

Another important point to note is that the there is no chain of
transmitters (*ṭarīq*) for this book so its authenticity and reliability
comes into question. This, however, does not mean that the narrations
contained in it are all inauthentic and unreliable. Rather, it only
means that we cannot be certain about the origins of this work and hence
need to ascertain the authenticity and source of each narration before
we can attribute it to the Imam (‘a).

Also, since the compiler has not listed the chains of narrators of the
narrations, it would be impossible to authenticate any saying that
cannot be found in any other source where the chain of transmission has
been mentioned and can hence be verified using the normal processes of
scrutiny.

A recent effort to expand on the work of al-Āmudi is the book *Ikmālu
Ghurar al-Ḥikam* by Mahdi al-Ansari al-Qummi[^5] in which 15,751 more
aphorisms of Amīr al-Mu’minīn (‘a) have been added to the original title
from twenty other ḥadith sources, both Sunni and Shi‘i.

[^1]: Or al-Āmidi

[^2]: There seems to be a difference of opinion about the year of his
death. Some scholars say it was in 550 AH and others say it was 510 AH.

[^3]: Mirza ‘Abdullah Afandi has also mentioned this explanation.

[^4]: Like the narration where Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: I am the allotter of
hellfire, the treasurer of the gardens [of Paradise], the owner of the
pond [of Kawthar]... – see the section on Muhammad (s) and his progeny.

[^5]: This work was published in Iran in 1425 AH.


