Supplication And The Supplicant
===============================

**Supplication and the Supplicant الدُّعاءُ والداعي**

1. Supplication for a beggar is one of the two charities [that one can
give].

> 1ـ الدُّعاءُ لِلسّائِلِ أحَدُ الصَّدَقَتَيْنِ.

2. The most piercing arrow is the supplication of the oppressed.

> 2ـ أنْفَذُ السِّهامِ دَعْوَةُ المَظْلُومِ.

3. The most incapable of all people is the one who is unable to
supplicate.

> 3ـ أعْجَزُ النَّاسِ مَنْ عَجَزَ عَنِ الدُّعاءِ.

4. The kindness of Allah does not annul His wisdom; it is for this
reason that not all supplications are answered.

> 4ـ إنَّ كَرَمَ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ لا يَنْقُضُ حِكْمَتَهُ، فَلِذلِكَ لا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقَعُ الإجابَةُ في كُلِّ دَعْوَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Verily Allah, the Glorified, has wraths and chastisements, so if [any
of] it descends upon you, repel it with supplication; for indeed nothing
can repel tribulation except supplication.

> 5ـ إنَّ لِلّهِ سُبْحانَهُ سَطَوات ونَقِمات، فَإذا نَزَلَتْ بِكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَادْفَعُوها بِالدُّعاءِ، فَإنَّهُ لايَدْفَعُ البَلاءَ إلاّ الدُّعاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Supplication is the weapon of the close friends [of Allah].

> 6ـ اَلدُّعاءُ سِلاحُ الأولياءِ.

7. If any one of you wishes that he should never ask Allah, the
Glorified, for anything but that He grants it to him, then he should
lose hope in people and should not have hope in anyone other than Allah,
the Glorified.

> 7ـ إذا أرادَ أحَدُكُمْ أنْ لا يَسْألَ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ شَيْئاً إلاّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أعْطاهُ فَلْيَيئَسْ مِنَ النَّاسِ، وَلايَكُونُ لَهُ رَجاءٌ إلاّ اللّهُ
سُبْحانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. When you have any need [that you wish for] from Allah, the Glorified,
then start by sending salutations on the Prophet (s) and then ask Allah
for your need, for Allah, the Most High, is too generous to fulfil one
of the two supplications that are made to Him and refuse the other.

> 8ـ إذا كانَتْ لَكَ إلَى اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ حاجَةٌ فَابْدأ بِالصَّلاةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى النَّبيِّ صلَّى اللّه عليه وآله وسلَّم، ثُمَّ اسْألِ اللّهَ
حاجَتَكَ، فإنَّ اللّهَ تعالى أكْرَمُ مِنْ أنْ يُسْألَ حاجَتَينِ
فيَقْضِيَ إحديهُما وَيَمْنَعَ الأُخرى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Through supplication, tribulations are repelled.

> 9ـ بِالدُّعاءِ يُسْتَدْفَعُ البَلاءُ.

10. Sometimes you may ask for something but you are not granted it,
rather you are given [something] better than it.

> 10ـ رُبَّما سَأَلْتَ الشَّيْءَ فَلَمْ تُعْطَهَ واُعْطيتَ خَيْراً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. The weapon of a believer is supplication.

> 11ـ سِلاحُ المُؤمِنِ الدُّعاءُ.

12. Ask Allah for forgiveness, well-being and good success [in carrying
out His ordinances].

> 12ـ سَلُوا اللّهَ العَفْوَ والعافِيَةَ وحُسْنَ التَّوفيقِ.

13. Make your supplication sincere, for this makes it more worthy of a
response.

> 13ـ عَلَيكَ بِإخلاْصِ الدُّعاءِ فَإنَّهُ أخْلَقُ بِالإجابَةِ.

14. Not every supplication is answered.

> 14ـ لَيْسَ كُلُّ دُعاء يُجابُ.

15. One who is given the [opportunity of] supplication will not be
deprived of the response.

> 15ـ مَنْ أُعطِيَ الدُّعاءَ لَمْ يُحْرَمِ الإجابَةَ.

16. Whoever calls upon [and supplicates to] Allah, He answers him.

> 16ـ مَنْ دَعَا اللّهَ أجابَهُ.

17. The one who is afflicted by severe tribulation is no more in need of
supplication than the one who is doing well but is not secure from
tribulations.

> 17ـ مَا المُبْتَلَى الَّذي قَدِ اشْتَدَّ بِهِ البَلاءُ أحْوَجَ إلَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّعاءِ مِنَ المُعافَى الَّذي لا يَأمَنُ البَلاءَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. What a good weapon supplication is!

> 18ـ نِعمَ السِّلاحُ الدُّعاءُ.

19. Do not reckon that your supplication is being answered [too] slowly
while you have obstructed its path with [your] sins.

> 19ـ لا تَسْتَبْطِئْ إجابَةَ دُعائِكَ وَقَدْسَدَدْتَ طريقَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالذُّنُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. Never get disheartened by a delayed answer to [your] supplication,
for indeed that which is granted is commensurate with the intention, and
sometimes the answer might be delayed so that it may result in a greater
reward for the seeker and a more bountiful grant for the recipient.

> 20ـ لا يُقَنَّطِنَّكَ تَأخِيرُ إجابَةِ الدُّعاءِ فَإنَّ العَطِيَّةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على قَدْرِ النِّيَّةِ، ورُبَّما تَأخَّرَتِ الإجابَةُ لِيَكُونَ ذلِكَ
أعْظَمَ لأِجْرِ السائِلِ، وَأجْزَلَ لِعَطاءِ النَّائِلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Whoever asks Allah, He grants to him.

> 21ـ مَنْ سَألَ اللّهَ أعْطاهُ.

22. There is nothing more beloved to Allah, the Glorified, than being
beseeched.

> 22ـ ما مِنْ شَيْء أحَبُّ إلَى اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ مِنْ أنْ يُسْألْ.

23. Do not ask [from anyone] other than Allah, the Glorified, for indeed
if He grants [your wishes to] you, He honours you [at the same time] and
if He withholds from you, He does it for your own welfare [and benefit].

> 23ـ لا تَسْألُوا إلاّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ، فَإنَّهُ إنْ أعْطاكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أكْرَمَكُمْ، وإنْ مَنَعَكُمْ خارَ(حاز) لَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Allah, spare our lives and their lives, restore the ties between us
and them, rescue them [and guide them] from their misguidance, until
those who are ignorant of the truth may recognize it and those are
persistent in sinning and disloyalty [and in their enmity towards us]
may desist from it.[^1]

> 24ـ أللّهُمَّ احْقِنْ دِمائَنا ودِمائَهُمْ، وأصْلِحْ ذاتَ بَيْنِنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبَيْنَهُمْ، وأنْقِذْهُم(وَ أهدِهِمْ) مِن ضَلالَتِهِمْ، حتّى يَعْرِفَ
الحقَّ مَنْ جَهِلَهُ، ويَرْعَوِىَ عَنِ الغَيِّ والغَدْرِ مَنْ لَهِجَ
بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Whoever knocks on the door of Allah, it is opened for him.

> 25ـ مَنْ قَرَعَ بابَ اللّهِ فُتِحَ لَهُ.

26. The one who supplicates without action is like a bow without a
bowstring.

> 26ـ الدَّاعي بِلا عَمل كَالقَوْسِ بِلا وَتَر.

[^1]: This was the supplication taught by Amīr al-Mu’minīn (‘a) to his
men during the Battle of Siffīn.


