This World
==========

**This World الدنيا**

1. This world is neither clean for any drinker [to drink from] nor is it
loyal to any owner.

> 1ـ الدُّنيا لا تَصْفُو لِشارِب، ولا تَفي لِصاحِب.

2. This world is filled with tribulations [and] stricken with tragedies
and calamities.

> 2ـ الدُّنيا مَلِيئَةٌ بِالمَصائِبِ طارِقَةٌ بِالفَجايِـعِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والنَّوائِبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. This world is fleeting and perishing; [even] if it remains for you,
you will not remain for it.

> 3ـ الدُّنيا مُنْتَقِلَةٌ فانِيَةٌ، إنْ بَقِيَتْ لَكَ لَمْ تَبْقَ لَها.

4. This world is smaller, more lowly and more insignificant than for one
to keep grudges in [and because of] it.

> 4ـ الدُّنيا أصْغَرُ وأحْقَرُ وأنْزَرُ مِنْ أنْ تُطاعَ فيهَا الأحْقادُ.

5. This world is a prison for the believer, death is his gift and
Paradise is his [permanent] abode.

> 5ـ الدُّنيا سِجْنُ المُؤمِنِ، والمَوتُ تُحفَتُهُ، والجَنَّةُ مَأواهُ.

6. This world is a Paradise for the disbeliever, death is his dispatcher
and hell is his [permanent] dwelling.

> 6ـ الدُّنيا جَنَّةُ الكافِرِ، والمَوْتُ مُشْخِصُهُ، والنّارُ مَثْواهُ.

7. This world is a deal of the [one who has been] defrauded and human
being is defrauded by it.

> 7ـ الدُّنيا صَفْقَةُ مَغْبُون والإنْسانُ مَغْبُونٌ بِها.

8. If this world unfolds, it opens up and when it disperses, it departs.

> 8ـ الدُّنيا إنِ انْجَلَتْ اِنْجَلَتْ، وإذا جَلَتْ اِرْتَحَلَتْ.

9. This world takes turns, so be moderate in seeking it, and be patient
until your turn comes to you.

> 9ـ الدُّنيا دُوَلٌ فَأجْمِلْ في طَلَبِها، واصْطَبِرْ حتّى تَأتيَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دُولَتُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. This world is a present offering, [both] the virtuous and the
vicious partake of it, but the Hereafter is the Abode of Truth wherein a
[wise and] powerful king rules.

> 10ـ الدُّنيا عَرَضٌ حاضِرٌ،يَأكُلُ مِنْهُ البَرُّ والفاجِرُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والآخِرَةُ دارُ حَقّ يَحْكُمُ فيها مَلِكٌ قادِرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. This world is [like] the shadow of clouds and the dream that is seen
while asleep.

> 11ـ الدُّنيا ظِلُّ الغَمامِ، وحُلُمُ المَنامِ.

12. Reliance on this world, despite what is seen of its vicissitudes, is
ignorance.

> 12 ـ الرُّكُونُ إلَى الدُّنيا مَعَ مايُعايَنُ مِنْ غَيْرِها جَهْلٌ.

13. This world is full of misfortunes. It afflicts with disasters and
adversities.

> 13ـ الدُّنيا مَليئَةٌ بِالمَصائِبِ، طارِقَةٌ بِالفَجايِـعِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والنَّوائِبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. The conditions of this world are based on convention whereas the
conditions of the Hereafter are based on merit.

> 14ـ أحْوالُ الدُّنيا تَتْبَعُ الاتِّفاقَ، وأحْوالُ الآخِرَةِ تَتْبَعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاسْتِحْقاقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. This world is [made up of] agonizing hardships, painful deaths and
sharp lessons (or drastic changes).

> 15ـ الدُّنيا مَصائِبُ مُفْجِعَةٌ، ومَنايا مُوجِعَةٌ، وعِبْرٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُقَطِّعَةٌ (غِيَرٌ مُفَظِّعَةٌ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. This world is a trap for the souls and settling place of every
detriment and misery.

> 16ـ الدُّنيا شَرَكُ النُّفُوسِ، وقَرارَةُ كُلِّ ضُرّ وبُؤْس.

17. This world is a hindering deception, a vanishing mirage and a bent
pillar.

> 17ـ الدُّنيا غَرُورٌ حائِلٌ، وسَرابٌ زائِلٌ، وسِنادٌ مائِلٌ.

18. The times of this world, even if they prolong, are short; and its
enjoyments, even if they are many, are few [when compared to the
Hereafter].

> 18ـ أوقاتُ الدُّنيا وإنْ طالَتْ قَصِيرَةٌ، والمُتْعَةُ (والمُنْعَةُ)
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِها وإنْ كَثُرَتْ يَسيرَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. One who desires it (this world), it troubles him and makes him
wretched.

> 19ـ مَنْ رَغِبَ فيها أتْعَبَتْهُ وأشْقَتهُ.

20. The winner is one who sells his world for his Hereafter.

> 20ـ الرَّابِحُ مَنْ باعَ العاجِلَةَ بِالآجِلَةِ.

21. Put all your effort and endeavour in gaining salvation from the
place of wretchedness and punishment and deliverance from the place of
tribulation and chastisement.

> 21ـ إجْعَلْ كُلَّ هَمِّكَ وسَعْيِكَ لِلْخَلاصِ مِنْ مَحَلِّ الشَّقاءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والعِقابِ، وَالنَّجاةِ مِنْ مَقامِ البَلاءِ والعَذابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Reject this world as a dispraised thing, for it has rejected one who
loves it more passionately than you.

> 22ـ اِرْفِضُوا هذِهِ الدُّنيا ذَميمةً، فَقَدْ رَفَضَتْ مَنْ كانَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أشْعَفَ بِها مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Remove [the love of] this world from your hearts before your bodies
[are made to] leave it, for in it you are tested and for other than it
have you been created.

> 23ـ أَخْرِجُوا الدُّنيا مِنْ قُلُوبِكُمْ، قَبْلَ أنْ تَخْرُجَ مِنها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أجْسادُكُمْ فَفيهَا اخْتُبِرْتُمْ ولِغَيْرِها خُلِقْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Draw near to the one to whom this world has yielded [itself], for
indeed he is more worthy of prosperity [than the one who follows this
world and its allure].

> 24 ـ أقْبِلُوا على مَنْ أقْبَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ الدُّنيا فَإنَّهُ أجْدَرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالغِنى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Flee from this world and divert your hearts from it, for it is the
prison of a believer - his share of it is little and his mind is
sickened by it and his sight is dulled in it.

> 25ـ اُهْرُبُوا مِنَ الدُّنيا، واصْرِفُوا قُلُوبَكُمْ عَنْها، فَإنَّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِجْنُ المُؤْمِنِ، حَظُّهُ مِنها قَليلٌ، وعَقْلُهُ بِها عَليلٌ،
وناظِرُهُ فيها كَلِيلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. Look at this world as those who are uninterested in it would look at
it, having diverted themselves from it, for it will, by Allah, shortly
turn out its inhabitants and cause grief to the one who is living in
luxury and the one who feels safe.

> 26ـ اُنْظُروا إلَى الدُّنيا نَظَرَ الزَّاهِدينَ فيها، الصَّارِفينَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْها، فَإنَّها وَاللّهِ عَمّا قَلِيل تُزيلُ الثّاوِيَ السَّاكِنَ،
وتَفْجَعُ المُتْرَفَ الآمِنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

27. Be wary of the deception of this world, for it always takes back
that which it beguiles with from its charms and drives away the one who
feels at ease and is settled in it.

> 27 ـ اِتَّقُوا غُرُورَ الدُّنيا، فَإنَّها تَسْتَرْجِعُ أبَداً ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَدَعَتْ بِهِ مِنَ المَحاسِنِ، وتَزْعَجُ المُطْمَئِنَّ إلَيْها
والقاطِنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

28. Reject this world which will [shortly] abandon you even if you do
not like to leave it, and which will make your bodies [grow] old even if
you would like to have them rejuvenated.

> 28ـ اُرْفُضُوا هذِهِ الدُّنيا، اَلتّارِكَةَ لَكُمْ، وإنْ لَمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُحِبُّوا تَرْكَها، والمُبْلِيَةَ أجْسادَكُمْ على مَحَبَّتِكُمْ
لِتَجديدِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

29. Be cautious of the vanishing desirable and the perishing beloved.

> 29ـ اِحْذَرُوا الزّائِلَ الشَّهيَّ، والفانِيَ المَحْبُوبَ.

30. Be cautious of this world, for it is the net of the devil and the
[place of] corruption of faith.

> 30ـ احْذَرِ الدُّنيا، فَإنَّها شَبَكَةُ الشَّيطانِ، ومَفْسَدَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإيمانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

31. Keep away from love of this world, for it is the root of every
misdeed and the source of every affliction.

> 31ـ إيّاكَ وحُبَّ الدُّنيا فَإنَّها أصْلُ كُلِّ خَطيئَة، وَمَعْدِنُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلِّ بَلِيَّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

32. Be careful that death does not descend upon you while you are a
fugitive [who has run away] from Allah in your seeking [the pleasures
of] this world.

> 32ـ إيّاكَ أنْ يَنْزِلَ بِكَ المَوْتُ، وأنْتَ ابِقٌ عَنْ رَبِّكَ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَلَبِ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

33. Beware of selling your share from your Lord and your rank with Him
for the worthless vanities of this world.

> 33ـ إيّاكَ أنْ تَبِيعَ حَظَّكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ، وزُلْفَتَكَ لَدَيْهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِحَقير مِنْ حُطامِ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

34. Do not be infatuated with this world, for it brings you wretchedness
and tribulation and impels you to sell the eternal for the transient.

> 34ـ إيّاكَ والوَلَهَ بِالدُّنيا، فَإنَّها تُورِثُكَ الشَّقاءَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والبَلاءَ وتَحْدُوكَ على بَيْعِ البَقاءِ بِالفَناءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

35. Beware of letting your [lower] self overwhelm you in that which it
presumes [of this world] while you do not overcome it in that which you
are certain [of the Hereafter], for indeed this is from the gravest of
evils.

> 35ـ إيّاكَ أنْ تَغْلِبَكَ نَفْسُكَ على ما تَظُنُّ، وَلاتَغْلِبَها على
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما تَسْتَيْقِنُ، فإنَّ ذلِكَ مِنْ أعْظَمِ الشَّـرِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

36. Do not be deceived by what you see the people of this world inclined
towards and what they rush greedily after, for Allah has informed you
about it and has exposed its faults and evils for you.

> 36ـ إيّاكَ أنْ تَغْتَرَّ بِما تَرى مِنْ إخْلادِ أهلِ الدُّنيا إلَيْها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَكالُبِهِمْ عَلَيْها، فَقَدْ نَبَّأَكَ اللّهُ عَنْها، وتَكَشَّفَتْ
لَكَ عَنْ عُيُوبِها ومَساويها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. Do not let this world get the better of you, for indeed its present
is bitter and its future is distressful.

> 37ـ إيّاكُمْ وغَلَبَةَ الدُّنيا على أنْفُسِكُمْ فَإنَّ عاجِلَها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَغْصَةٌ وَاجِلَها غُصَّةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

38. Verily this world is an abode where no one remains safe except by
renouncing its pleasures and none is saved from it by anything that is
part of it.

> 38ـ ألا وإنَّ الدُّنيا دارٌ لايُسْلَمُ مِنْها إلاَّ بِالزُّهدِ فيها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا يُنْجى مِنْها بِشَيْء كانَ لَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

39. Is there no freeman who would forsake this leftover[^1] for those
who deserve it?

> 39ـ ألا حُرٌّ يَدَعُ هذِهِ اللُّماظَةَ لأِهْلِها.

40. Verily this world has elapsed and is on the verge of expiry; its
good has been shunned, its novelty has become old and its fat has become
lean.

> 40ـ ألا وإنَّ الدُّنيا قَدْ تَصَرَّمَتْ وآذَنَتْ باِنْقِضاء،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَنَكَّرَ مََعْرُوفُها، وصارَ جَديدُها رَثّاً، وسَمينُها غَثّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

41. Indeed, what must one who has been created for the Hereafter do with
this world? And what can one do with wealth when it will be taken away
from him shortly while its accountability and consequences remain with
him?

> 41ـ ألا وما يَصْنَعُ بِالدُّنيا مَنْ خُلِقَ للآخِرَةِ، وما يَصْنَعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالمالِ مَنْ عَمّا قَليل يُسْلَبُهُ، ويَبْقى عَلَيْهِ حِسابُهُ
وتَبْعَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

42. Verily today is the time for preparation and tomorrow is the race;
the prize is Paradise and [at] the [other] extreme is hell.

> 42ـ ألا وإنَّ اليَومَ المِضْمارَ، وغَداً السِّباقَ، والسَّبْقَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجَنَّةُ، والغايَةُ النَّارُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

43. Verily that which was advancing towards this world has turned back
from it, and that which had turned back has advanced towards it; and the
righteous servants of Allah have decided to depart and have sold the
little of this world that does not last for the abundance of the
Hereafter that does not perish.

> 43ـ ألا وإنَّهُ قَدْ أدْبَرَمِنَ الدُّنيا ما كانَ مُقْبِلاً، وأقْبَلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْها ما كانَ مُدْبِراً، وَأزْمَعَ التَّرْحالَ عِبادُ اللّهِ
الأخْيارُ، وباعُوا قَليلاً مِنَ الدُّنيا لا يَبْقى، بِكَثير مِنَ
الآخِرَةِ لا يَفْنى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. Do you not see the people of this world passing the evenings and
mornings in different states? The dead being mourned and the living
being condoled, the victim being afflicted and the visitor visiting him
[to ask about his condition], and another who is sacrificing himself;
and the one who is seeking this world while death seeks him; and the one
who is heedless but not neglected; and those who remain behind continue
to follow the footsteps of the those who preceded [them].

> 44ـ أوَ لَسْتُمْ تَرَوْنَ أهْلَ الدُّنيا يُمْسُونَ ويُصْبِحُونَ على
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحْوال شَتّى، فَمَيِّتٌ يُبْكى، وحَىٌ يُعَزّى، وَصَريعٌ مُبْتَلى،
وعائِدٌ يَعُودُ، وآخَرُ بِنَفْسِهِ يَجُودُ، وَطالِبٌ لِلدُّنيا
والمَوتُ يَطْلُبُهُ، وغافِلٌ لَيْسَ بِمَغْفُول عَنْهُ، وعلى أثَرِ
الماضينَ ما يَمْضِي الباقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. The gravest of errors is loving this world.

> 45ـ أعْظَمُ الخطايا حُبُّ الدُّنيا.

46. The gravest of afflictions and wretchedness is [caused by]
infatuation with this world.

> 46ـ أعظَمُ المَصائِبِ والشِقاءِ اَلْوَلَهُ بِالدُّنيا.

47. The people of this world are the target of calamities, the dispersal
of afflictions and the spoils of adversities.

> 47ـ أهلُ الدُّنيا غَرَضُ النَّوائِبِ، وذَرِيَّةُ المَصائِبِ، ونَهْبُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّزايا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

48. The most felicitous of all people is one who abandons the perishing
pleasures [of this world] for the lasting pleasures [of the Hereafter].

> 48ـ أسْعَدُ النَّاسِ مَنْ تَرَكَ لَذَّةً فانِيَةً لِلَذَّة باقِيَة.

49. The happiest of all people with this world is the one who abandons
it and the happiest of them with the Hereafter is the one who works for
it.

> 49ـ أسْعَدُ النّاسِ بِالدُّنيا التّارِكُ لَها، وأسْعَدُهُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالآخِرَةِ العامِلُ لَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

50. Verily the interior of this world is dead and its exterior is
sick.[^2]

> 50ـ إنَّ بَطْنَ الأرْضِ مَيِّتٌ، وَظَهْرَهُ سَقيمٌ.

51. Verily today there is action without accounting and tomorrow [in the
Hereafter] there is accounting without action.

> 51ـ إنَّ اليَومَ عَمَلٌ ولا حِسابَ، وغَداً حِسابٌ لاعَمَلَ.

52. Verily the seriousness of this world is jest, its honour is disgrace
and its height is lowliness.

> 52ـ إنَّ جِدَّ الدُّنيا هَزْلٌ، وعِزَّها ذُلُّ، وَعِلْوَها سِفْلٌ.

53. Verily this world is the abode of troubles, plague, termination and
transition; its pleasures do not equal its displeasures, its fortunes do
not equate to its misfortunes and its risings do not substitute its
collapses.

> 53ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارُ خَبال، ووَبال، وزَوال، وانْتِقال، لاتُساوي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَذّاتُها تَنْغيصَها، وََلا تَفي سُعُودُها بِنُحُوسِها، ولايَقُومُ
صُعُودُها بِهُبُوطِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

54. Verily the one who sells the Garden of the [permanent] Abode for
this transient world, his effort will be futile and his transaction will
have made a loss.

> 54ـ إنَّ مَنْ باعَ جَنَّةَ المَأوى لِعاجِلَةِ الدُّنيا، تَعِسَ جِدُّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وخَسِرَتْ صَفْقَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

55. Verily this world is passing you by in its normal fashion, and you
are connected to the Hereafter.

> 55ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا ماضِيَةٌ بِكُمْ على سُنَن، وأنْتُمْ والآخِرَةُ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَرَن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

56. Verily this world is the corruptor of faith and the dispossessor of
certitude; it is the source of [all] troubles and root of tribulations.

> 56ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا لَمُفْسِدَةُ الدّينِ، مُسْلِبَةُ اليَقينِ، وإنَّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَرَأْسُ الفِتَنِ، وَأصْلُ المِحَنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

57. Indeed the similitude of this world and the Hereafter is like a man
who has two wives, when he pleases one of them he angers the other.

> 57ـ إنَّ مَثلَ الدُّنيا والآخِرَةِ كَرَجُل لَهُ إمْرَأتانِ إذا أرضى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إحْديهُما أسْخَطَ الأُخرى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

58. Verily the one whom this world has deceived through unfeasible
aspirations and cheated with false hopes is made to lose his eyesight
and get covered by blindness, and it cuts him off from the Hereafter and
makes him enter into places of destruction.

> 58ـ إنَّ مَنْ غَرَّتْهُ الدُّنْيا بِمُحالِ الآمالِ، وخَدَعَتْهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِزُورِ الأماني، أورَثَتْهُ كَمَهاً، وألْبَسَتْهُ عَمىً، وقَطَعَتْهُ
عَنِ الأُخْرى، وأوْرَدَتْهُ مَوارِدَ الرَّدى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

59. Verily Allah, the Glorified, has an angel who calls out every day:
“O people of the world, procreate for death, construct for destruction
and gather up for departure!”

> 59ـ إنَّ للّهِ سُبْحانَهُ مَلَكاً يُنادي في كُلِّ يَوْم، يا أهْلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا لِدُوا لِلْمَوتِ، وابْنُوا لِلْخَرابِ، واجْمَعُوا لِلذِّهابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

60. Verily those who are pleased with this world tomorrow are the ones
who run away from it today.

> 60ـ إنَّ السُّعَداءَ بِالدُّنيا غَداً هُمُ الهارِبُونَ مِنْها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليَوْمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

61. Verily the one who is more possessive of this world than of the
Hereafter and is more overwhelmed by the affairs of this world than
those of the next, has sold the everlasting for the transient and has
exchanged the eternal for the temporal; he has destroyed his soul and
has accepted for it the perishing and short-lived while causing it to
deviate from the clear path [of guidance].

> 61ـ إنَّ مَنْ كانَتِ العاجِلَةُ أمْلَكَ بِهِ مِنَ الآجِلَةِ، وأُمُورُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا أغْلَبُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أُمورِ الآخرَةِ،فَقَدْ باعَ الباقيَ
بِالفاني، وتَعَوَّضَ البائِدَ عَنِ الخالِدِ، وأهْلَكَ نَفْسَهُ،
ورَضِيَ لَها بِالحائلِ الزَّائِلِ، ونَكَبَ بِها عَنْ نَهْجِ السَّبيلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

62. Verily this world is the abode of pain, annihilation, vicissitudes
and lessons, and the place of trials and tribulations.

> 62ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارُ عَناء، وفَناء، وغِيَر، وعِبَر، ومَحَلُّ فِتْنَة
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِحْنَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

63. Verily this world is the abode of adversities, one who is hastened
in it [and dies earlier] suffers the agony [of death] himself, and one
who is granted respite in it suffers the pain [of losing] of his loved
ones.

> 63ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارُ فَجائِعَ، مَنْ عُوجِلَ فيها فُجِعَ بِنَفْسِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ اُمْهِلَ فيها فُجِعَ بِأحِبَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

64. Verily this world has turned back and announced its departure, and
indeed the Hereafter has advanced and is about to emerge.

> 64ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا قَدْ أدْبَرَتْ وآذَنَتْ بِوَداع، وإنَّ الآخِرَةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أقْبَلَتْ وأشْرَفَتْ بإطْلاع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

65. Verily this world is inverted [and] reversed, its pleasures are
[causes of] embitterment, its gifts cause distress, its life is [full
of] pain and its continuity ends in annihilation. It defiantly runs away
from its seeker, it causes its rider to fall, it betrays the one who
trusts it and disturbs the one who is content with it. Indeed its
accumulation leads to separation and its attachment leads to severance.

> 65ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا مَعْكُوسَةٌ، مَنْكُوسَةٌ، لَذَّاتُها تَنْغيصٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَواهِبُها تَغْصيصٌ، وعَيْشُها عَناءٌ، وبَقائُها فَناءٌ، تَجْمَحُ
بِطالِبِها، وتُرْدي راكِبَها، وتَخُونُ الواثِقَ بِها، وتَزْعَجُ
المُطْمَئِنَّ إلَيها، وإنَّ جَمْعَها إلَى انْصِداع، ووَصْلَها إلَى
انْقِطاع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

66. Verily it is from the abasement of this world before Allah that He
is not disobeyed [anywhere] except in it and that which is with Him
cannot be attained except by abandoning it.

> 66ـ إنَّ مِنْ هَوانِ الدُّنيا عَلَى اللّهِ أنْ لايُعْصى إلاّ فيها، ولا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُنالُ ما عِنْدَهُ إلاَّ بِتَرْكِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

67. Verily this world is like a snake, its feel is soft [but] its venom
is deadly, so turn away from that which appeals to you of it for the
little time that it is with you, and be most cautious of it when you are
most inclined towards it.

> 67ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا كَالحَيَّةِ، لَيِّـنٌ مَسُّها، قاتِلٌ سَمُّها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأعْرِضْ عَمّا يُعْجِبُكَ فيها لِقِلَّةِ ما يَصْحَبُكَ مِنْها، وكُنْ
آنَسَ ما تَكُونُ بِها أحْذَرَ ما تَكُونُ مِنْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

68. This world of yours is more lowly in my view than the [decayed] bone
of a pig in the hand of a leper and more inferior than a leaf in the
mouth of a locust; what does ‘Ali have to do with bounties that will
perish and pleasures that will not last?

> 68ـ إنَّ دُنياكُمْ هذِهِ لأهْوَنُ في عَيْني مِنْ عِراقِ خِنْزير في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَدِ مَجذُوم، وَأحْقَرُ مِنْ وَرَقَة في جَرادَة، ما لِعَليّ ونَعيم
يَفْنى، ولَذَّة لا تَبْقى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

69. Verily this world is like a ghoul, it misguides the one who follows
it and destroys the one who responds to it. It is quick in its
disappearance and imminent in its transference.

> 69ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا كَالغُولِ، تُغْوي مَنْ أطاعَها، وتُهْلِكُ مَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أجابَها، وأنَّها لَسَريعَةُ الزَّوال ِ، وشيكَةُ الانْتِقالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

70. Verily this world approaches as a seeker would approach and turns
back as one who flees turns back, it arrives as the kings arrive and
departs as the hasty departs.

> 70ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا تُقْبِلُ إقْبالَ الطّالِبِ، وتُدْبِرُ إدْبارَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الهارِبِ، وتَصِلُ مُواصَلَةَ المُلُوكِ، وتُفارِقُ مُفارَقَةَ
العَجُولِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

71. Verily this world is an abode unfit for permanent residence, and is
not the house for foraging. Its good is trifling, its evil is ready at
hand, its authority is snatched away and its habitation faces
desolation.

> 71ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا مَنْزِلُ قُلْعَة، وَلَيْسَتْ بِدارِ نُجْعَة،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَيْرُها زَهيدٌ، وشَرُّها عَتيدٌ، ومِلْكُها يُسْلَبُ، وعامِرُها
يَخْرَبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

72. Verily this world is ungrateful and stubborn, abandoning and
disavowing, attracting and distracting; its condition is [constantly]
changing, its calmness is shaking, its honour is disgrace, its
seriousness is jest, its abundance is deficiency, its height is
lowliness, its people are moving and following, reaching and departing.
It is the abode of war, plunder, pillage and destruction.

> 72ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا لَهي الكَنُودُ العَنُودُ، والصَّدُودُ الجَحُودُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحَيُودُ المَيُودُ، حالُها اِنْتِقالٌ، وسُكُونُها زِلْزالٌ، وعِزُّها
ذُلٌّ، وجِدُّها هَزْلٌ، وكَثْرَتُها قُلٌّ، وَعِلْوُها سِفْلٌ، أهْلُها
على ساق وسياق، ولِحاق و فِراق، وهيَ دارُ حَرَب وَسَلَب ونَهَب وعَطَب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

73. Verily this world is a hindering deception, a disappearing shadow
and a bent pillar, it connects bounty with calamity and aspiration with
death.

> 73ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا غَرُورٌ حائِلٌ، وظِلٌّ زائِلٌ، وسِنادٌ مائِلٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَصِلُ العَطِيَّةَ بِالرَزيَّةِ، والأُمْنِيَّةَ بِالمَنِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

74. Verily the life of this world is short, its good is little, its
approach is deceptive, its turning away is agonizing, its pleasures are
transient and its consequences are lasting.

> 74ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا عَيْشُها قَصيرٌ، وخَيْرُها يَسيرٌ، وإقْبالُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَديعَةٌ، وإدْبارُها فَجيعَةٌ، ولَذّاتُها فانِيَةٌ، وتَبِعاتُها
باقِيَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

75. Verily this world is an abode, the beginning of which is pain and
its end is annihilation. In its lawful there is accounting and in its
forbidden there is punishment. One who is wealthy in it is tested and
one who is poor in it is sorrowful.

> 75ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارٌ أوَّلُها عَناءٌ، وآخِرُها فَناءٌ، في حَلالِها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حِسابٌ، وَفي حَرامِها عِقابٌ، مَنِ اسْتَغْنى فيها فَتَنَ ومَنِ
افْتَقَرَ فيها حَزِنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

76. Indeed this world is an abode of departure and a place of
discomfort. Its resident has to depart and its dweller has to leave; its
glitter is deceiving, its speech is untrue, its wealth is looted and its
valuables are plundered. Beware, this world attracts and then turns
away, it is unruly and stubborn, it cheats and betrays.

> 76ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارُ شُخُوص، ومَحَلَّةُ تَنْغيص، ساكِنُها ظاعِنٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقاطِنُها بائِنٌ، وبَرْقُها خالِبٌ، ونُطْقُها كاذِبٌ، وأمْوالُها
مَحرُوبَةٌ، وأعْلاقُها مَسْلُوبَةٌ، ألا وَهيَ المُتَصَدِّيَةُ
العَتُونُ(العُنونُ)، والجامِحَةُ الحَرُونُ، والمانِيَةُ الخَؤُنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

77. Verily this world is the abode of tribulations and the place of
trials, whoever seeks it is evade by it and whoever keeps away from it,
it advances towards him; the one who looks at it gets blinded by it and
the one who looks through it, gets enlightened by it.

> 77ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارُ مِحَن، ومَحَلُّ فِتَن، مَنْ ساعاها فاتَتْهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَنْ قَعَدَ عَنْها واتَتْهُ، وَمَنْ أبْصَرَ إلَيْها أعْمَتْهُ، ومَنْ
بَصُرَ بِها (أبْصَرَبِها) بَصَّرَتْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

78. Verily this world brings the appointed terms closer, takes
aspirations further away, causes people to perish and changes
circumstances. One who tries to overcome it is overpowered by it and one
who struggle against it is knocked down by it, whereas it follows the
one who renounces it and comes to the one who forsakes it.

> 78ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا تُدْنِي الآجالَ، وتَباعِدُ الآمالَ، وتُبيدُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجالَ، وتُغَيِّـرُ الأحْوالَ، مَنْ غالَبَها غالَبَتْهُ
(غَلَبَتْهُ)، ومَنْ صارَعَها صَرَعَتْهُ، وَمَنْ عَصاها أطاعَتْهُ،
وَمَنْ تَرَكَها أتَتْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

79. Verily this world wears out the bodies, renews hopes, brings death
near and takes aspirations far away. Every time its inhabitant becomes
contented and pleased with it, it sends him back to adversity.

> 79ـ إنَّ الدُّنْيا تُخلِقُ الأبْدانَ، وتُجَدِّدُ الآمالَ، وتُقَرِّبُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَنِيَّةَ، وتُباعِدُ الأُمْنِيَّةَ، كُلَّمَا اطْمَئَنَّ صاحِبُها
مِنْها إلى سُُرور أشْخَصَتْهُ مِنْها إلى مَحْذُور.
  </p>
</blockquote>

80. Verily the good of this world is insignificant, its evil is ready at
hand, its pleasures are little and its regret is long. Its bounties are
connected with misery, its happiness is linked with misfortune, its
benefit is joined with harm and its sweetness is mixed with bitterness.

> 80ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا خَيْـرُها زَهيدٌ، وَشَرُّها عَتيدٌ، ولَذَّتُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَليلَةٌ وحَسْرَتُها طَويلَةٌ، تَشُوبُ نَعيمَها بِبُؤْس، وتَقْرِنُ
سُعُودَها بِنُحُوس وتَصِلُ نَفْعَها بِضُرّ، وَتَمْزِجُ حُلْوَها
بِمُرّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

81. Verily this world is a deceiving beguiler, it gives and takes back,
clothes and then unclothes; its comforts do not last, its hardships do
not cease and its calamities do not end.

> 81ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا غَرّارَةٌ خَدُوعٌ، مُعْطِيَةٌ مَنُوعٌ، مُلْبِسَةٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَزُوعٌ، لايَدُومُ رَخاؤُها، وَلا يَنْقَضي عَناؤُها، ولا يَرْكَدُ
بَلاؤُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

82. Indeed this world is like a net that becomes twisted around the one
who desires it and retreats from the one who turns away from it, so
don’t incline towards it with your heart and do not turn to face it such
that it catches you in its net and flings you into its destruction.

> 82ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا كَالشَّبَكَةِ، تَلْتَفُّ على مَنْ رَغِبَ فيها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَتَحَرَّزُ عَمَّنْ أعْرَضَ عَنْها، فَلا تَمِلْ إلَيْها بِقَلْبِكَ،
ولا تُقْبِلْ عَلَيْها بِوَجْهِكَ، فَتُوقِعَكَ في شَبَكَتِها،
وَتُلْقِيَكَ في هَلَكَتِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

83. Verily this world gives and takes back, yields and spurns, forsakes
and shows friendship, entices and disheartens; the felicitous turn away
from it while the wretched desire it.

> 83ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا تُعْطي وتَرْتَجِعُ، وتَنْقادُ وتَمْتَنِعُ، وتُوحِشُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتُؤْنِسُ، وَتَطْمِعُ وتُؤْيِسُ، يُعْرِضُ عَنْها السُّعَداءُ،
ويَرْغَبُ فيها الأشقياءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

84. Indeed this world is an abode known for [its] tribulation and
fraught with disloyalty. Its states do not last and those who inhabit it
do not remain safe. Life in it is dispraised and security in it is
non-existent.

> 84ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارٌ بالبَلاءِ مَعْرُوفَةٌ، وبالغَدْرِ مَوصُوفَةٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاتَدومُ أحْوالُها، وَلا يَسْلَمُ نُزَّالُها، اَلعَيْشُ فيها
مَذْمُومٌ، والأمانُ فيها مَعْدُومٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

85. Verily this world is [like] the shadow of clouds, the dream that is
seen while asleep, the joy that is linked with sadness and the honey
that is mixed with poison. [It is] the despoiler of bounties, the
devourer of nations, the bringer of [divine] retribution.

> 85ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا ظِلُ الغَمامِ، وحُلُمُ المَنامِ، والفَرَحُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَوْصُولُ بِالغَمِّ، وَالعَسَلُ المَشُوبُ بِالسَمِّ، سَلاَّبَةُ
النِّعَمِ، أكّالَةُ الأُمَمِ، جَلاّبَةُ النِّقَمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

86. Neither is this world faithful with any companion nor is it clean
for any drinker [to drink from]. It bounties shift and its circumstances
change, its pleasures perish and its consequences remain; so turn away
from it before it turns away from you, and substitute it [for something
better] before it substitutes you.

> 86ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا لاتَفي لِصاحِب، ولا تَصْفُو لِشارب، نَعيمُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْتَقِلُ، وَأحْوالُها تَتَبَدَّلُ، ولَذَّاتُها تَفْنى، وتَبِعاتُها
تَبْقى، فَأعْرِضْ عَنها قَبْلَ أنْ تُعْرِضَ عَنْكَ، واسْتَبْدِلْ بِها
قَبْلَ أنْ تَسْتَبْدِلَ بِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

87. Verily this world sometimes advances towards the ignorant by
convention and turns its back on the intelligent despite [his] merit, so
if something of it comes to you with ignorance or you lose something
sought with intelligence, then do not let that push you to desiring
ignorance or being uninterested in intelligence, for that will degrade
you and destroy you.

> 87ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا رُبَّما أقْبَلَتْ عَلَى الجاهِلِ بِالاتِّفاقِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأدْبَـرَتْ عَنِ العاقِلِ بِالاستِحْقاقِ، فَإنْ أتَتْكَ مِنْها
سَهْمَةٌ مَعَ جَهْل أوْ فاتَتْكَ مِنْها بِغْيَةٌ مَعَ عَقْل، فَإيّاكَ
أنْ يَحْمِلَكَ ذلِكَ عَلَى الرَّغْبَةِ فِي الجَهْلِ، والزُّهْدِ فِي
العَقلِ، فَإنَّ ذلكَ يُزري بِكَ ويُرديكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

88. Indeed one of the troubles of this world is that it does not remain
in its [present] state and is not free from alteration. One part is
rectified by the corruption of another part and one party is [made]
happy at the expense of [another] party. So being in it is a danger and
trusting it is a risk, remaining in it permanently is impossible and
reliance on it is misguidance.

> 88ـ إنَّ مِنْ نَكَدِ الدُّنيا، أنَّها لا تَبْقى على حالَة، وَلا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَخْلُو مِنِ اسْتِحالَة، تُصْلِحُ جانِباً بِفِسادِ جانِب، وتَسُرُّ
صاحِباً بِمَساءَةِ صاحِب، فَالكَوْنُ فيها خَطَرٌ، والثِّقَةُ بِها
غَرَرٌ، والإخلادُ إلَيْها مُحالٌ، والاعْتِمادُ عَلَيْها ضِلالٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

89. Verily this world is quick in changing, frequent in moving, intense
in treachery and persistent in craftiness, its situations are altered
abruptly, its bounties change, its comfort is insufficient, its
pleasures become bitter, its seeker is humiliated and its rider
stumbles.

> 89ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا سَريعةُ التَّحَوُّلِ، كَثيرَةُ التَّنَقُّلِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَديدَةُ الغَدْرِ، دائِمَةُ المَكْرِ، فَأحوالُها تَتَزَلْزَلُ،
ونَعيمُها يَتَبَدَّلُ، ورَخاؤُها يَتَنَقَّصُ، ولَذَّاتُها تَتَنَغَّصُ،
وطالِبُها يَذِلُّ، وراكِبُها يَزِلُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

90. Indeed this world is sweet and fresh, surrounded by [lustful]
desires; it delights with little, and is adorned with hopes and
embellished with vanities. Its exhilaration does not last and its
afflictions cannot be avoided. It is very deceitful, harmful, volatile,
evanescent, perishing, transient, devouring and destructive.

> 90ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا حُلْوَةٌ نَضِرَةٌ، حُفَّتْ بِالشَّهَواتِ، وَراقَتْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالقَليلِ، وتَحَلَّتْ بِالآمالِ، وتَزَيَّنَتْ بِالغُرُورِ، لا تَدُومُ
حَبْرَتُها، ولا تُؤْمَنُ فَجْعَتُها، غَرّارَةٌ، ضَرّارَةٌ، حائِلَةٌ
زائِلَةٌ، نافِدَةٌ بائِدَةٌ، أكّالَةٌ غَوّالَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

91. Verily the outer appearance of this world delights while its reality
annihilates. It has been adorned by vanities and entices by its
embellishments. It is an abode which is lowly before its Lord, so its
lawful has been mixed with its forbidden, its good with its evil and its
sweetness with its bitterness. Allah has not cleansed it for His friends
nor has He withheld it from His enemies.

> 91ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا يُونِقُ مَنْظَرُها، ويُوبِقُ مَخْبَرُها، قَدْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَزَيَّنَتْ بِالغُرُورِ، وغَرَّتْ بِزينَتِها، دارٌ هانَتْ على رَبِّها،
فَخُلِطَ حَلالُها بِحَرامِها، وخَيْرُها بِشَـرِّها، وَحُلْوُها
بِمُرِّها، لَمْ يُصَفِّهَا اللّهُ لأوليائِهِ، ولَمْ يَضُنَّ بِها على
أعْدائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

92. Indeed, with every drink of this world there is choking and with
every food eaten in it there is blockage of the throat. No blessing is
obtained from it except by separation from another [blessing], and a
person does not come to a [new] day of his life except by leaving behind
another for it, and no sign of him is left alive in it but that
[another] sign of him passes away.

> 92ـ إنَّ لِلدُّنيا مَعَ كُلِّ شَرْبَة شَرَقاً، ومَعَ كُلِّ أكْلَة
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَصَصاً، لاتُنالُ مِنْها نِعْمَةٌ إلاّ بِفِراقِ اُخرى، ولايَسْتَقْبِلُ
فيها المَرْءُ يَوْماً مِنْ عُمْرِهِ إلاّ بِفِراق آخَرَ مِنْ أجَلِهِ،
ولا يَحْيى لَهُ فيها أثَرٌ إلاّ ماتَ لَهُ أثَرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

93. Verily this world is the abode of truth for the one who believes it
[to be transient], the abode of wellbeing for the one who recognizes it
[as such], the abode of riches for the one who takes provisions from it
[for the Hereafter] and the abode of good counsel for the one who takes
advice from it. It has announced its separation and proclaimed its
departure. It has declared its own [impending] death and [the death] of
its inhabitants. It exemplifies for them, by its tribulations, the
tribulation [of the Hereafter] and creates desire in them, by its
pleasures, for the pleasures [of the Hereafter]. It brings ease in the
evening and brings grief in the morning through desire, apprehension,
alarm and warning. People dispraise it on the morning of their regret
[on the Day of Reckoning] while others praise it. It reminded them [of
the next life] so they remembered it. It related to them [things of the
next life] and they believed. It admonished them and they took advice
from it through [its] changes and lessons.

> 93ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارُ صِدْق لِمَنْ صَدَّقَها، ودارُ عافيَة لِمَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهِمَ عَنْها، ودارُ غِنىً لِمنْ تَزَوَّدَ مِنْها، ودارُ مَوْعِظَة
لِمَنْ إتَّعَظَ بِها، قَدْ آذَنَتْ بِبَيْنِها، وَنادَتْ بِفِراقِها،
ونَعَتْ نَفْسَها وأهْلَها، فَمَثَّلَتْ لَهُمْ بِبَلائِهَا البَلاءَ،
وشَوَّقَتْهُمْ بِسُُرورِها إلَى السُّرُورِ، راحَتْ بِعافِيَة،
وتَبَكَّرَتْ (ابتكرت) بِفَجيعَة، تَرْغيباً وتَرهيباً، وَتَخْويفاً
وتَحْذيراً، فَذَمَّها رِجالٌ غَداةَ النِّدامَةِ وحَمِدَ ها آخَرُونَ،
ذَكَّرَتْهُمْ فَذَكَرُوا، وحَدَّثَتْهُمْ فَصَدَّقُوا، ووَعَظَتْهُمْ
فَاتَّعَظُوا مِنْها الغِيَرَ والعِبَرَ (بِالغَيرِ والعِبَرِ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

94. Indeed this world is the limit of the sight of the blind person who
sees nothing that is beyond it, while the one endowed with insight sees
through it and knows that there is an abode beyond it. Thus the
discerning one wishes to depart from it while the blind one wishes to
remain in it; the discerning one takes provisions from it while the
blind one accumulates provisions in it.

> 94ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا مُنْتَهى بَصَرِ الأعْمى لايُبْصِرُ مِمّا وَرائَها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَيْئاً، والبَصيرُ يَنْفُذُها بَصَرُهُ، ويَعْلَمُ أنَّ الدّارَ
وَرائَها، فَالبَصيرُ مِنْها شاخِصٌ، والأعْمى إلَيْها شاخِصٌ، والبَصيرُ
مِنْها مُتَزَوِّدٌ، والأعمى لَها مُتَزَوِّدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

95. Verily this world has people who possess preserved treasures that
are disparaged and cast away by you. The religion is opened up by them
just as one of you would open the lid of his cooking pot. They stick
together like [a swarm of] locusts and destroy the tyrants of the
lands.[^3]

> 95ـ إنَّ للدُّنيا رِجالاً لَدَيْهِم كُنُوزٌ مَذْخُورَةٌ، مَذْمُومَةٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِنْدَكُمْ مَدْحُورَةٌ، يُكْشَفُ بِهِمْ الدينُ، كَكَشْفِ أحَدِكُمْ
رَأسَ قِدْرِهِ، يَلُوزُونَ كالجَرادِ، فَيُهْلِكُونَ جَبابِرَةَ
البِلادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

96. Indeed this world and the Hereafter are two unequal enemies and two
separate ways, so whoever loves this world and befriends it, hates the
Hereafter and takes it as an enemy. They are like the East and the West
and one who walks between the two, such that whenever he comes closer to
one [direction], he distances himself from the other. After all, they
are both like fellow-wives [seeking to pull their husband only towards
themselves].

> 96ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا والآخِرَةَ عَدُوّانِ مُتَفاوِتانِ، وسَبيلانِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُخْتَلِفانِ، فَمَنْ أحَبَّ الدُّنيا وتَوالاها أبْغضَ الآخِرَةَ
وعاداها، وهُما بِمَنْزِلَةِ المَشْرِقِ وَالمَغْرِبِ وَماش بيْنَهُما،
فَكُلَّما قَرُبَ مِنْ واحِد بَعُدَ مِنَ الآخَرِ، وهُما بَعْدُ
ضَرَّتانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

97. Verily this world is a means of distraction from the Hereafter. Its
companion obtains nothing from it except that it opens for him [the door
of] greed for it and attachment towards it.

> 97ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا لَمِشْغَلَةٌ عَنِ الآخِرَةِ، لَمْ يُصِبْ صاحِبُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْها سَبَباً (سَيْباً)، إلاّ فَتَحَتْ عَلَيْهِ حِرْصاً عَلَيْها
ولَهَجاً بِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

98. Indeed Allah, the Exalted, has made this world for that which comes
after it, and in it He has tests its inhabitants so that He may know who
from among of them is best in conduct. We have not been created for this
world and we have not been commanded to strive for it, rather we have
only been placed in it in order to be tested and [so] that we may work
in it for what is [to come] after it.

> 98ـ إنَّ اللّهَ تعالى جَعَلَ الدُّنيا لِما بَعْدَها، وابْتَلى فيها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أهْلَها لِيََعْلَمَ أيُّهُمْ أحْسَنُ عَمَلاً، ولَسْنا لِلدُّنيا
خُلِقْنا، وَلا بِالسَّعيِ لَها اُمِرْنا، وإنَّما وُضِعْنا فيها
لِنُبْتَلى بِها، ونَعْمَلَ فيها لِما بَعْدَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

99. Verily this world is a place for which destruction has been
ordained, and departure from it has been destined for its inhabitants.
It is sweet and green [for the one who desires it]. It hastens towards
its seeker and attaches itself to the heart of its gazer. So depart from
it with the best provision that is available for you, and do not ask in
it more than what suffices, and do not seek from it more than what you
require.

> 99ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا دارٌ مُنِيَ لَها(مِنْهالُها) الفَناءُ، ولأهْلِها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْها الجَلاءُ، وهِيَ حُلْوَةٌ خَضِرَةٌ، قَدْ عَجِلَتْ لِلْطّالِبِ،
والتَبَسَتْ بِقَلْبِ النَّاظِرِ، فَارْتَحِلُوا عَنْها بِأحْسَنِ ما
يَحْضَرُكُمُ مِنَ الزَّادِ، ولا تَسْألُوا فيها إلاّ الكَفافَ، ولا
تَطْلُبُوا مِنْها أكْثَرَ مِنَ البَلاغِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

100. This world was neither created for you as a permanent abode nor as
a place to settle, rather it has only been made as a passage for you so
that you may acquire from it the provisions of good deeds for the abode
of [permanent] settlement. Therefore be alert and do not let its
temporary pleasures deceive you or its temptations beguile you.

> 100ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا لَمْ تُخْلَقْ لَكُمْ دارَ مَقام، ولا مَحَلَّ قَرار،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإنَّما جُعِلَتْ لَكُمْ مَجازاً لِتَزَوَّدُوا مِنْها الأعمالَ
الصّالِحَةَ لِدارِ القَرارِ، فَكُونُوا مِنْها على أوْفاز، وَلا
تَخْدَعَنَّكُمْ مِنها العاجِلَةُ، وَلا تَغُرَّنَّكُمْ فيها الفِتْنَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

101. Safety in this world is not acquired except by its renunciation.
People are tested in it through tribulations so those who have taken
from it for its sake will be removed from it [by death] and will be made
accountable for it. And whatever they have taken from it for the other
world, they will go to it and will stay in it. For the wise one this
world is like a shade at one moment it expands until [the next moment]
it shrinks and extends until it diminishes. And Allah has left you with
no excuse by forbidding from it, and he has warned and cautioned you
about it so He has apprised you of it.

> 101ـ إنَّ الدُّنيا لايُسْلَمُ مِنْها إلاَّ بِالزُّهْدِ فيها، اُبْتُليَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّاسُ بِها فِتْنَةً، فَما أخَذُوا مِنْها لَها أُخْرِجُوا مِنْهُ
وحُوسِبُوا عَلَيْهِ، وماأخَذُوا مِنْها لِغَيرِها قَدِمُوا عَلَيْهِ
وأقامُوا فيهِ، وإنَّها عِندَ ذَوِي العُقُولِ كَالظِّلِّ بَيْنا تَراهُ
سائِغاًحَتّى قَلَصَ وزائِداً حَتّى نَقَصَ وقَدْ أعْذَرَ اللّهُ
سُبْحانَهُ إلَيْكُمْ فِي النَّهيِ عَنْها، وأنْذَرَكُمْ وحَذَّرَكُمْ
مِنْها فَأبْلَغَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

102. This world betrays.[^4]

> 102ـ الدُّنيا تُسْلِمُ.

103. This world humiliates.

> 103ـ الدُّنيا تُذِلُّ.

104. This world is limited [in duration], the Hereafter is eternal.

> 104 ـ الدُّنيا أمَدٌ، اَلآخِرَةٌ أبَدٌ.

105. When lastingness is not found, then bounties are short-lived.

> 105ـ إذا كانَ البَقاءُ لايُوجَدُ فَالنَّعيمُ زائِلٌ.

106. Perpetuity is not granted to [any] one who loves [and wishes for]
it.

> 106ـ ما يُعطَي البَقاءُ مَنْ أحَبَّهُ.

107. Inclination towards this world despite what is seen of its
fickleness is [a sign of] ignorance.

> 107ـ اَلرُّكُونُ إلَى الدُّنْيا مَعَ مايُعايَنُ مِنْ سُوءِ تَقَلُّبِها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَهْلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

108. Every perishing thing is insignificant.

> 108ـ كُلُّ فان يَسيرٌ.

109. Do not elevate the one who has been elevated by this world.

> 109ـ لاتَرْفَعْ مَنْ رَفَعَتْهُ الدُّنيا.

110. people of delusion [who have been deluded by this world], what has
made you attached to an abode the goodness of which is trifling, the
evil of which is ready at hand, the bounties of which are snatched away,
the peaceful of which are fought against, the owners of which are slaves
and the heritage of which is abandoned.

> 110ـ يا أهلَ الغُرورِ ما ألْهَجَكُمْ بِدار، خَيْرُها زَهيدٌ، وشَـرُّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَتيدٌ، وَنَعيمُها مَسْلُوبٌ، ومُسالِمُها مَحْرُوبٌ، ومالِكُها
مَمْلُوكٌ، وَتُراثُها مَتْرُوكٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

111. world, O world! Get away from me! Is it me that you present
yourself to? Or is it I that you are eager for? May your time never
come! Deceive some other person. I have no need for you. I have divorced
you thrice, after which there is no reunion. Your life is short, your
significance is little and your hope is worthless. Alas! How meagre the
provision, how long the way, how distant the journey and how great the
destination!

> 111ـ يا دُنيا يا دُنيا إلَيكِ عَنّي، أبي تَعَرَّضْتِ أمْ إلَيَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَشَوَّقْتِ، لاحانَ حينُكِ، غُرّي غَيري لاحاجَةَ لي فيكِ، قَدْ
طَلَّقْتُكِ ثَلاثاً لا رَجْعَةَ لي فيها، فَعَيْشُكِ قَصيرٌ، وخطَرُكِ
يَسيرٌ، وأمَلُكِ حَقيرٌ، آهِ مِنْ قِلَّةِ الزَّادِ وطُولِ الطَّريقِ،
وبُعدِ السَّفَرِ، وَعِظَمِ المَوْرِدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

112. servants of the world and those who work for it! When you are
selling and buying in the day time and tossing in your beds and sleeping
at night, and all the while you are oblivious to the Hereafter and
postpone [good] actions, then when do you think of guidance and prepare
your provisions, and when do you become concerned about the affairs of
the Hereafter?

> 112ـ يا عَبيدَ الدُّنيا، والعامِلينَ لَها إذا كُنْتُمْ فِي النَّهارِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبيعُونَ وتَشْتَرُونَ، وَفِي اللَّيلِ على فُرُوشِكُمْ تَتَقَلَّبُونَ،
وتَنامُونَ وفيما بينَ ذلِكَ عَنِ الآخِرَةِ تَغْفُلُونَ، وبِالعَمَلِ
تُسَوِّفُونَ، فَمَتى تُفَكِّرُونَ فِي الإرْشادِ وتُقَدِّمُونَ
الزَّادَ، وَمتى تَهْتَمُّونَ بِأمْرِ المَعادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

113. people! Renounce the pleasures of this world, for indeed its life
is short and its goodness is insignificant. It is a house of
[inevitable] departure a place of discomfort. It brings closer the
appointed terms and cuts short aspirations. Indeed it turns away and
shuns [those who are after it], it is unruly and stubborn, it cheats and
betrays.

> 113ـ يا أيُّها النَّاسُ ازْهَدُوا فِي الدُّنيا، فَإنَّ عَيْشَها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَصيرٌ، وخَيْرَها يَسيرٌ، وَإنَّها لَدارُ شُخُوص، ومَحَلَّةُ تَنْغيص،
وإنَّها لَتُدْني الآجالَ، وتَقْطَعُ الآمالَ، ألا وهيَ المُتَصَدِّيَةُ
العَنُونُ، والجامِحَةُ الحَرُونُ، والمانِيَةُ (المائنةُ) الخَؤُونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

114. This world misguides.

> 114ـ الدُّنْيا تُغْوي.

115. This world harms, the Hereafter delights.

> 115ـ الدُّنْيا تَضُرُّ، اَلآخِرَةُ تَسُرُّ.

116. This world is a loss [for those who seek it].

> 116ـ اَلدُّنْيا خُسْرانٌ.

117. This world is [obtained] by convention, the Hereafter is [gained]
by merit.

> 117ـ اَلدُّنْيا بِالاتِّفاقِ، اَلآخِرَةُ بِالاسْتِحقاقِ.

118. This world is [filled] with hope.

> 118ـ اَلدُّنْيا بِالأمَلِ.

119. This world is transient.

> 119ـ اَلدُّنْيا فانِيَةٌ.

120. This world is a waning shadow.

> 120ـ اَلدُّنْيا ظِلٌّ زائِلٌ.

121. This world is a market of loss.

> 121ـ اَلدُّنْيا سُوقُ الخُسْرانِ.

122. This world is the plantation of evil.

> 122ـ اَلدُّنْيا مَزْرَعةُ الشَّـرِّ.

123. This world is a laugh for the one whose tears flow [in sadness] (or
for the one who is deluded by it).

> 123ـ اَلدُّنْيا ضُحَكَةُ مُسْتَعْبِر(مُغْتَرّ).

124. This world is the abode of tribulations.

> 124ـ الدُّنْيا دارُ المِحَنِ.

125. This world is the abode of the wretched.

> 125ـ الدُّنْيا دارُ الأشْقياءِ.

126. This world is the corridor to the Hereafter.

> 126ـ الدُّنْيا مَعْبَـرَةُ الآخِرَةِ.

127. This world is the divorcée of the sagacious.

> 127ـ الدُّنْيا مُطَلَّقَةُ الأكْياسِ.

128. The transient world is the desire of the filthy.

> 128ـ العاجِلَةُ مُنْيَةُ الأرْجاسِ.

129. Being pleased with this world is foolishness.

> 129ـ الفَرَحُ بِالدُّنْيا حُمْقٌ.

130. Being dazzled by this world [and being proud because of it] is
stupidity.

> 130ـ الإغتِرارُ بِالعاجِلَةِ خُرْقٌ.

131. This world deceives, harms and passes by.

> 131ـ الدُّنْيا تَغُرُّ، وتَضُرُّ، وتَمُرُّ.

132. This world is the place of catastrophes.

> 132ـ الدُّنْيا مَحَلُّ الآفاتِ.

133. The one who is attached to this world is cut off [from Allah].

> 133ـ اَلمُواصِلُ لِلدُّنْيا مَقْطُوعٌ.

134. This world is the aspiration of the wretched.

> 134ـ اَلدُّنْيا مُنْيَةُ الأشْقياءِ.

135. The transient world is the delusion [or the deluder] of the
unintelligent.

> 135ـ اَلعاجِلَةُ غُرُورُ الحَمْقى.

136. This world is the place where the intellects fall.

> 136ـ اَلدُّنْيا مَصْرَعُ العُقُولِ.

137. This world is the place of vicissitudes.

> 137ـ اَلدُّنْيا مَحَلُّ الغِيَرِ.

138. This world is the abode of tribulation.

> 138ـ اَلدُّنْيا دارُ المِحْنَةِ.

139. This world is the prize of the unintelligent.

> 139ـ اَلدُّنْيا غَنيمَةُ الحَمْقى.

140. Being occupied with the transient is a waste of time.

> 140ـ اَلاشْتِغالُ بِالفائِتِ يُضَيِّعُ الوَقْتَ.

141. Longing for this world brings about hatred.

> 141ـ الرَّغْبَةُ فِي الدُّنيا تُوجِبُ المَقْتَ.

142. This world is like the day that has passed and the month that has
elapsed.

> 142ـ اَلدُّنْيا كَيَوْم مَضى، وشَهْر انْقَضى.

143. This world is the abode of strangers and the dwelling of the
wretched.

> 143ـ الدُّنْيا دارُ الغُرَباءِ، ومَوطِنُ الأشقياءِ.

144. Infatuation with this world is the greatest trial.

> 144ـ الوَلَهُ بِالدُّنْيا أعْظَمُ فِتْنَة.

145. Just as [wealth and] authority comes towards you, it turns away
from you.

> 145ـ الدُّوْلَةُ كما تُقْبِلُ تُدْبِرُ.

146. Just as this world mends, it [also] breaks.

> 146ـ اَلدُّنْيا كَما تَجْبُرُ تَكْسِرُ.

147. The means of this world are discontinuous and its loans (i.e.
things that human beings are bestowed with temporarily like status,
wealth etc.) are [to be] returned.

> 147ـ أسبابُ الدُّنْيا مُنْقَطِعَةٌ، وعَواريها مُرْتَجِعَةٌ.

148. This world is a dream and being deceived by it is [a cause of]
regret.

> 148ـ اَلدُّنْيا حُلُمٌ، والاغْتِرارُ بِها نَدَمٌ.

149. This world is a poison that is ingested by the one who does not
know it.

> 149ـ الدُّنْيا سَمٌّ يَأكُلُهُ (اكِلُهُ) مَنْ لا يَعْرِفُهُ.

150. This world is the source of evil and the place of deception.

> 150ـ الدُّنْيا مَعْدِنُ الشَّـرِّ، ومَحَلُّ الغُرُورِ.

151. If you have understood your affair or have been able to recognize
yourself then turn away from this world and be uninterested in it, for
it is the abode of the wretched and not the abode of the felicitous. Its
splendour is spurious, its beauty is deceptive, its clouds are scattered
(i.e. its sources of abundance are scarce) and its bounties are taken
back.

> 151ـ إنْ عَقَلْتَ أمْرَكَ، أوْ أصَبْتَ مَعْرِفَةَ نَفْسِكَ فَأعْرِضْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الدُّنيا، وَازهَدْ فيها، فَإنَّها دارُ الأشقياءِ، ولَيْسَتْ
بِدارِ السُّعَداءِ، بَهْجَتُها زُورٌ، وزينَـتُها غُرُورٌ، وسَحائِبُها
مُتَقَشِّعَةٌ، ومَواهِبُها مُرْتَجِعَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

152. If you are after [abundant] bliss than free yourselves from the
abode of wretchedness.

> 152ـ إنْ كُنْتُمْ لِلنَّعيمِ طالبينَ فَأعْتِقُوا أنْفُسَكُمْ مِنْ دارِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَقاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

153. If you love Allah then remove from your hearts the love of this
world.

> 153ـ إنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللّهَ فَأخْرِجُوا مِنْ قُلُوبِكُمْ حُبَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

154. If you make your [life in this] world a means of following your
religion, you will have saved [both] your religion and your world, and
you will be among the successful in the Hereafter.

> 154ـ إنْ جَعَلْتَ دُنْياكَ تَبـَعاً لِدينِكَ أحْرَزْتَ دينَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ودُنْياكَ، وكُنْتَ فِي الآخِرَةِ مِنَ الفائِزينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

155. Verily I have divorced this world thrice uncompromisingly, [such
that] there is no return to it for me, and I have released it
completely.

> 155ـ إنّي طَلَّقْتُ الدُّنْيا ثَلاثاً بَتاتاً لارَجْعَةَ لي فيها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وألْقَيْتُ حَبْلَها على غارِبِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

156. Indeed, if you approach this world you have turned your back [from
the Hereafter].[^5]

> 156ـ إنَّكَ إنْ أقْبَلْتَ إلَى الدُّنْيا أدْبَرْتَ.

157. Indeed, when you turn your back on this world, you have approached
[the Hereafter].[^6]

> 157ـ إنَّكَ إنْ أدبَرْتَ عَنِ الدُّنْيا أقْبَلْتَ.

158. Verily you have not been created for this world, so renounce it and
turn away from it.

> 158ـ إنَّكَ لَنْ (لَمْ) تُخلَقَْ لِلدُّنْيا فَأزْهَدْ فيها وأعْرِضْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

159. If you work for this world, your transaction will have made a loss.

> 159ـ إنَّكَ إنْ عَمِلْتَ لِلدُّنيا خَسِرَتْ صَفْقَتُكَ.

160. Verily you will never meet Allah, the Glorified, with an action
more harmful to you than love for this world.

> 160ـ إنَّكَ لَنْ تَلْقَى اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ بِعَمَل أضَرَّ عَلَيْكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ حُبِّ الدُّنْيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

161. Indeed, if you crave after this world, you will waste your lives
for that which you will not remain for and that which will not remain
for you.

> 161ـ إنَّكُمْ إنْ رَغِبْتُم فِي الدُّنْيا أفْنَيْتُمْ أعْمارَكُمْ فيما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَبْقُونَ لَهُ ولا يَبْقى لَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

162. Indeed, this world is only a trap into which those who do not
recognize it fall.

> 162ـ إنَّما الدُّنْيا شَرَكٌ وَقَعَ فيهِ مَنْ لا يَعْرِفُهُ.

163. This world is only [a place of] varying circumstances, changing
situations and marked targets.

> 163ـ إنَّما الدُّنْيا أحوالٌ مُخْتَلِفَةٌ، وتاراتٌ مُتَصَرِّفَةٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأغْراضٌ مُسْتَهْدِفَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

164. This world is only a corpse and those who establish bonds of
brotherhood for [acquiring] it are similar to dogs, such that their
brotherhood does not prevent them from harming each other for it.

> 164ـ إنَّما الدُّنْيا جيفَةٌ، والمُتواخُونَ عَلَيها أشْباهُ الكِلابِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلا تَمْنَعُهُمْ أُخُوَّتُهُمْ لَها مِنَ التَّهارُشِ عَلَيْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

165. The people [who seek] of this world are just like howling dogs or
starving predators growling at each other. The mighty among them eat the
meek and the big among them crush the small. Some are like tied cattle
and some are like untied cattle that have lost their wits and are
running in every direction.

> 165ـ إنَّما أهْلُ الدُّنْيا كِلابٌ عاوِيَةٌ، وسِباعٌ ضارِيَةٌ، يُهَرُّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَعْضُها بَعْضاً، ويَأكُلُ عَزيزُها ذَليلَها، ويَقْهَرُ كَبيرُها
صَغيرَها، نَعَمٌ مُعَقَّلَةٌ، وأُخرى مُهْمَلَةٌ، قَدْ أضَلَّتْ
عُقُولَها، ورَكِبَتْ مَجْهُولَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

166. You are only like the standing [and ready] riders who do not know
when they will be ordered to march.

> 166ـ إنَّما أنْتُمْ كَرَكْب وُقُوف لا يَدْرُونَ مَتى بِاليَسيرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْمَرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

167. This world is only an enjoyment for a few days, then it will
disappear like the mirage disappears and pass by like the clouds pass
by.

> 167ـ إنَّما الدُّنيْا مَتاعُ أيّام قَلائِلَ، ثُمَّ تَزُولُ كَما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَزُولُ السَّرابُ وتَقْثَعُ كما يَقْثَعُ السَّحابُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

168. Indeed, the only share of the earth for every one of you is the
length and breadth of his own stature, [of the grave] wherein he would
lie on his cheeks covered with dust.

> 168ـ إنَّما حَظُّ أحَدِكُمْ مِنَ الأرضِ ذاتِ الطُّولِ والعَرضِ قَيْدُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدِّهِ مُتَعَفِّراً على خَدِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

169. Indeed this world is only the abode of passage and the Hereafter is
the abode of [permanent] residence. So take [provisions] from the abode
of passage for the abode of residence and do not tear your veils in
front of the one who knows your secrets.

> 169ـ إنَّما الدُّنْيا دارُ مَمَرّ، وَالآخِرَةُ دارُ مُسْتَقَرّ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخُذُوا مِنْ مَمَرِّكُمْ لِمُسْتَقَرِّكُمْ، ولا تَهْتِكُوا
أسْتارَكُمْ عِنْدَ مَنْ يَعْلَمُ أسْرارَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

170. The example of those who have known this world is like a group of
travellers who abandon a drought-stricken place and set off for a
fruitful and fertile place. Then they endure the difficulties of the
path, the hardships of the journey and the coarseness of the food in
order to reach their fields of plenty and the place of their [permanent]
residence.

> 170ـ إنَّما مَثَلُ مَنْ خَبِرَ (خَيَرَ) الدُّنْيا كَمَثَلِ قَوْم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَفْر، نَبا بِهِمْ مَنْزِلٌ جَديبٌ، فَأَمُّوا مَنْزِلاً خَصيباً،
وجَناباً مَريعاً، فَاحْتَمَلُوا وَعْثاءَ الطَّريقِ، وخَشُونَةَ
السَّفَرِ،وَ جُشُوبَةَ المَطْعَمِ لِيَأتُوا سَعَةَ دارِهِمْ، ومَحلَّ
قَرارِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

171. Indeed man (in this world) is only a target that is struck by [the
arrows of] death and a booty that is rushed towards by tribulations and
calamities.

> 171ـ إنَّما المَرْءُ (فِي الدُّنْيا) غَرَضٌ تَنْتَضِلُهُ المَنايا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونَهَبٌ تُبادِرُهُ المَصائِبُ والحَوادِثُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

172. The bane of the soul is being infatuated with this world.

> 172ـ آفَةُ النَّفْسِ اَلْوَلَهُ بِالدُّنْيا.

173. When this world comes towards a servant, it covers him with the
merits of others and when it turns its back from him it snatches away
his [own] merits.

> 173ـ إذا أقْبَلَتِ الدُّنْيا على عَبْد كَسَتْهُ مَحاسِنَ غَيْرِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا أدْبَرَتْ عَنْهُ سَلَبَتْهُ مَحاسِنَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

174. When something of this world slips away from you then do not
despair, and when you do good, do not put others under obligation.

> 174ـ إذا فاتَكَ مِنَ الدُّنْيا شَيْءٌ فلا تَحْزَنْ، وإذا أحْسَنْتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلا تَمْنُنْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

175. This world ends with annihilation.

> 175ـ بِالفَناءِ تُخْتَمُ الدُّنْيا.

176. By preferring the love of this transient world, one ends up in an
unpleasant state in the Hereafter.

> 176ـ بِإيثارِ حُبِّ العاجِلَةِ صارَ مَنْ صارَ إلى سُوءِ الآجِلَةِ.

177. How bad an abode this world is!

> 177ـ بِئْسَتِ الدّارُ الدُّنيا.

178. The worst choice is exchanging the everlasting with the transient.

> 178ـ بِئْسَ الاخْتيارُ التَّعَوُّضُ بِما يَفْنى عَمّا يَبْقى.

179. Your remaining [in this world] is towards annihilation and your
annihilation [from this world] is towards eternity.

> 179ـ بَقاؤُكُمْ إلى فَناء، وفَناؤُكُمْ إلى بَقاء.

180. Sell that which perishes for that which remains and exchange the
wretchedness of this world for the abundant bounties of the Hereafter.

> 180ـ بيعُوا ما يَفْنى بِما يَبْقى، وتَعَوَّضُوا بِنَعيمِ الآخِرَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ شَقاءِ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

181. When you are deprived of something in this world, take comfort in
the fact that it would have been with you [only] for a little while.

> 181ـ تَعَزَّ عَنِ الشَّيْءِ إذا مُنِعْتَهُ بِقِلَّةِ ما يَصْحَبُكَ إذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوتيتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

182. The fruit of infatuation with this world is great tribulation.

> 182ـ ثَمَرَةُ الوَلَهِ بالدُّنْيا عَظيمُ المِحْنَةِ.

183. The one who seeks refuge in this world is ruined and the one who
takes his fill from it is destroyed.

> 183ـ جارُ الدُّنيْا مَحْرُوبٌ، ومَوْفُورُها مَنْكُوبٌ.

184. The bounty of this world is transient, its comfort is [marred by]
trouble, its soundness is destruction and its gifts are taken away.

> 184ـ جُودُ الدُّنْيا فَناءٌ، وراحَتُها عَناءٌ، وسَلامَتُها عَطَبٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَواهِبُها سَبَبٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

185. Love of this world is the source of every misdeed.

> 185ـ حُبُّ الدُّنْيا رَأسُ كُلِّ خَطيئَة.

186. Love of this world is the source of trials and the root of
tribulations.

> 186ـ حُبُّ الدُّنْيا رَأسُ الفِتَنِ وأصْلُ المِحَنِ.

187. Love of this world gives rise to avarice.

> 187ـ حُبُّ الدُّنْيا يُوجِبُ الطَّمَعَ.

188. Love of this world corrupts the intellect, preoccupies the heart
from listening to [words of] wisdom and leads to a painful chastisement
[in the Hereafter].

> 188ـ حُبُّ الدُّنْيا يُفْسِدُ العَقْلَ، ويُهِمُّ القَلْبَ، عَنْ سَماعِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحِكْمَةِ، وَيُوجِبُ أليمَ العِقابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

189. The sweetness of this world leads to the bitterness of the
Hereafter and an unpleasant ending.

> 189ـ حَلاوَةُ الدُّنْيا تُوجِبُ مَرارَةَ الآخِرَةِ وسُوءَ العُقْبى.

190. The sweets of this world are like myrrh, its foods are poisons and
its means are worn-out [and weak] ropes.

> 190ـ حُلْوُ الدُّنْيا صَبِرٌ، وغِذاؤُها سِمامٌ، وأسْبابُها رُمامٌ.

191. The living of this world are prone to death and its healthy are
prone to sicknesses and the target of [the arrow of] death.

> 191ـ حَيُّ الدُّنْيا بِعَرْضِ مَوت، وصَحيحُها عَرَضُ الأسْقامِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ودَريئَةُ الحِمامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

192. Wretchedness, annihilation, destruction and ruin have been decreed
for the people of this world.

> 192ـ حُكِمَ على أهلِ الدُّنْيا بِالشَّقاءِ، والفَناءِ، والدَّمارِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالبَوارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

193. This world has been surrounded with lustful desires, liked for its
immediate enjoyments, embellished with deceptions and sweetened with
aspirations.

> 193ـ حُفَّتِ الدُّنيا بِالشَّهَواتِ، وتَحَبَّبَتْ بِالعاجِلَةِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَزَيَّنَتْ بِالغُرُورِ وَتَحَلَّتْ بِالآمالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

194. Wage war against yourselves for [keeping away from] this world and
turn yourselves away from it, for it vanishes quickly, quakes frequently
and transfers soon.

> 194ـ حارِبُوا أنْفُسَكُمْ عَلَى الدُّنيا، واصْرِفُوها عَنْها، فَإنَّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَريعَةُ الزَّوالِ، كَثيرةُ الزِلْزالِ، وشيكَةُ الانْتِقالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

195. Neediness has been decreed for those from among the people of this
world who seek to increase their wealth while those who get along
without it have been assisted with comfort.

> 195ـ حُكِمَ على مُكْثِري أهلِ الدُّنْيا بِالفاقَةِ،وَ أُعِيْنَ مَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَنِيَ عَنْها بِالرَّاحَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

196. The good of this world is [a cause of] sorrow and its evil is [a
cause of] regret.

> 196ـ خَيْرُ الدُّنيْا حَسْرَةٌ، وشَرُّها نَدَمٌ.

197. The good of this world is insignificant and its evil is ready at
hand.

> 197ـ خَيْرُ الدُّنْيا زَهيدٌ، وشَرُّها عَتيدٌ.

198. Take from that which will not last for you for that which will last
for you and will not separate from you.

> 198ـ خُذْ مِمّا لا يَبْقى لَكَ لِما يَبْقى لَكَ ولا يُفارِقُكَ.

199. Take from the little of this world that which suffices you and
leave from its abundance that which makes you transgress.

> 199ـ خُذْ مِنْ قَليلِ الدُّنيا ما يَكْفيكَ، ودَعْ مِنْ كَثيرِها ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُطْغيكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

200. Take from this world that which comes to you and turn away from
that which turns away from you, but if you don’t do this then [at least]
be moderate in what you seek.

> 200ـ خُذْ مِنَ الدُّنيْا ما أتاكَ، وتَوَلَّ عَمّا تَوَلّى مِنْها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْكَ فَإنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَأجْمِلْ فِي الطَّلَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

201. Mingling with those who are attached to this world is the primary
cause of affliction and corruption of piety.

> 201ـ خُلْطَةُ أبْناءِ الدُّنْيا رَأسُ البَلْوى وفَسادُ التَّقوى.

202. Mingling with those who are attached to this world tarnishes
religion and weakens certitude.

> 202ـ خُلْطَةُ أبْناءِ الدُّنْيا تَشينُ الدّينَ، وتُضْعِفُ اليَقينَ.

203. The significance of this world is little, its product is inferior,
its delight is false and its bounties are illusory.

> 203ـ خَطَرُ الدُّنيا يَسيرٌ، وحاصِلُها حَقيرٌ، وبَهْجَتُها زُورٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَواهِبُها غُرُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

204. The aspiration and pursuit of one whose hope and desire is
[acquiring felicity in] this world, is frustrated.

> 204ـ خابَ رَجاؤُهُ ومَطْلَبُهُ مَنْ كانَتِ الدُّنيا أمَلَهُ وأرَبَهُ.

205. It is an abode which is fraught with tribulations and known for its
treachery. Its circumstances do not last and its dwellers are not safe.

> 205ـ دارٌ بِالبَلاءِ مَحْفُوفَةٌ، وبِالغَدْرِ مَوصُوفَةٌ(مَعْرُوفَة)،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَدُومُ أحوالُها، ولا يَسْلَمُ نُزّالُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

206. It is an abode which is lowly before its Lord, so its lawful has
been mixed with its forbidden, its good with its evil and its sweetness
with its bitterness.

> 206ـ دارٌ هانَتْ على رَبِّها، فَخَلَطَ حَلالَها بِحَرامِها، وخَيْرُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِشَرِّها، وَحُلْوَها بِمُرِّها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

207. It is the abode of transience, the resting place of the sinners,
the residence of the wretched and the transgressors (or the repulsed and
those who exceed the limits).

> 207ـ دارُ الفَناءِ مَقيلُ العاصينَ ومَحَلُّ الأشْقياءِ والمُعْتَدينَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(المُبْعَدينَ، المُتَعَدّينَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

208. Allah, the Glorified, called you to the Eternal Abode and the
permanent residence, and great blessings and proximity to the Prophets
and the felicitous, but you sinned and turned away; whereas this world
called you to an abode of wretchedness and the place of annihilation and
different types of tribulations and hardships, but you obeyed it and
quickly rushed [towards it].

> 208ـ دَعاكُمْ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ إلى دارِ البَقاءِ، وقَرارَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخُلُودِ، والنَّعْماءِ، وَمُجاوَرَةِ الأنبياءِ
والسُّعَداءِ،فَعَصَيْتُمْ، وأعْرَضْتُمْ، وَدَعَتْكُمُ الدُّنيا إلى
قَرارَةِ الشَّقاءِ ومَحَلِّ الفَناءِ وأنْواعِ البَلاءِ والعَناءِ
فَأطَعْتُمْ وبادَرْتُمْ وَأسْرَعْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

209. Recalling [the pleasures of] this world is the worst of all
maladies.

> 209ـ ذِكْرُ الدُّنيا أدْوَأُ الأدْواءِ.

210. The humiliation of this world is the glory of the Hereafter.

> 210 ـ ذُلُّ الدُّنيا عِزُّ الآخِرَةِ.

211. Leave that which is little for that which is abundant and that
which is limited for that which is vast.

> 211ـ ذَرْ ما قَلَّ لِما كَثُرَ وما ضاقَ لَِما اتَّسَعَ.

212. The cornerstone of calamities is infatuation with this world.

> 212ـ رَأسُ الآفاتِ الوَلَهُ بِالدُّنيا.

213. Many an adviser from this world may be suspected by you.

> 213ـ رُبَّ ناصِح مِنَ الدُّنيا عِنْدَكَ مُتَّهَمٌ.

214. Many a person who is truthful about this world is considered a liar
by you.

> 214ـ رُّبَّ صادِق مِنْ خَيْرِ (خَبَرِ) الدُّنيا عِنْدَكَ مُكَذَّبٌ.

215. Many a thing which one should be cautious of in this world is not
taken into consideration by you.

> 215ـ رُبَّ مَحْذُور مِنَ الدُّنيا عِنْدَكَ غَيْرُ مُحتَسِب.

216. You desire for the unachievable is [a sign of] ignorance.

> 216ـ رَغْبَتُكَ فِي المُسْتَحيلِ جَهلٌ.

217. Your being content with this world is from your bad choices and
your wretched endeavours.

> 217ـ رِضاكَ بِالدُّنيا مِنْ سُوءِ اخْتيارِكَ وشَقاءِ جَدِّكَ.

218. Increase in [one’s desire for] this world corrupts the Hereafter.

> 218ـ زيادَةُ الدُّنيا تُفْسِدُ الآخِرَةَ.

219. The ornaments of this world corrupt weak minds.

> 219ـ زَخارِفُ الدُّنيا تُفْسِدُ العُقُولَ الضَّعيفَةَ.

220. The cause of wretchedness is love of this world.

> 220ـ سَبَبُ الشَّقاءِ حُبُّ الدُّنيا.

221. The cause of corruption of the mind is love of this world.

> 221ـ سَبَبُ فَسادِ العَقْلِ حُبُّ الدُّنيا.

222. The sovereignty of this world is disgrace and its loftiness is
lowness.

> 222ـ سُلْطانُ الدُّنيا ذُلٌّ، وعِلْوُها سِفْلٌ.

223. The joy of this world is deception and its enjoyment is
destruction.

> 223ـ سُرُورُ الدُّنيا غُرُورٌ، ومَتاعُها ثُبُورٌ.

224. One’s seeking tranquillity in [the delights of] this world is from
the greatest deceptions.

> 224ـ سُكُونُ النَّفسِ إلَى الدُّنيا مِنْ أعْظَمِ الغُرُورِ.

225. The worst of tribulations is love of this world.

> 225ـ شَرُّ المِحَنِ حُبُّ الدُّنيا.

226. The worst of afflictions is love for this world.

> 226ـ شَرُّ الفِتَنِ مَحَبَّةُ الدُّنيا.

227. The health of this world is [fraught with] sicknesses and its
pleasures are [fraught with] pains.

> 227ـ صِحَّةُ الدُنيا أسْقامٌ، ولَذّاتُها آلامٌ.

228. Adultery has become the key to lineage in the world (or among the
people), chastity is rare and Islam is worn the wrong way up like fur.

> 228ـ صارَ الفُسُوقُ فِي الدُّنيا (النّاسِ) نَسَباً، والعَفافُ عَجَباً،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولُبِسَ الإسْلامُ لُبْسَ الفَرْوِ مَقْلُوباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

229. Divorcing this world is the dowry for Paradise.

> 229ـ طَلاقُ الدُّنيْا مَهْرُ الجَنَّةِ.

230. Seeking this world is the primary cause of tribulation.

> 230ـ طَلَبُ الدُّنيا رَأسُ الفِتْنَةِ.

231. The one who seeks this world through religion is chastised and
condemned.

> 231ـ طالِبُ الدُّنيا بِالدّينِ مُعاقَبٌ مَذْمُوم ٌ.

232. Seeking to join this world with the Hereafter is from the
deceptions of the self.

> 232ـ طَلَبُ الجَمْعِ بَيْنَ الدُّنْيا والآخِرَةِ مِنْ خِداعِ النَّفسِ.

233. The seeker of this world misses [the opportunity to work for] the
Hereafter and death comes to him unexpectedly, and he does not get from
this world except what has been apportioned for him.

> 233ـ طالِبُ الدُّنْيا تَفُوتُه الآخِرَةُ، ويُدْرِكُهُ المَوْتُ حتّى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأخُذَهُ بَغْتَةً (بِعُنْفِهِ)، ولا يُدْرِكُ مِنَ الدُّنْيا إلاّ ما
قُسِّمَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

234. He who turns away from the embellishments of this world gains the
joy of the glad tidings [of Paradise].

> 234ـ ظَفَرَ بِفَرْحَةِ البُشْرى مَنْ أعْرَضَ عَنْ زَخارِفِ الدُّنْيا.

235. I am amazed at the one who builds his transient abode and abandons
his Eternal Abode.

> 235ـ عَجِبْتُ لِعامِرِ دارِ الفَناءِ، وتارِكِ دارِ البَقاءِ.

236. The servant of this world faces continuous afflictions and
calamities.

> 236ـ عَبْدُ الدُّنْيا مُؤَبَّدُ الفِتْنَةِ والبَلاءِ.

237. The end of this world is annihilation.

> 237ـ غايَةُ الدُّنْيا الفَناءُ.

238. The deception of this world strikes [a person] down.

> 238ـ غُرُورُ الدُّنْيا يَصْرَعُ.

239. World, deceive the one who is ignorant of your tricks and for whom
your traps of deceit are concealed.

> 239ـ غُرّي يا دُنيا مَنْ جَهِلَ حِيَلَكَ، وخَفِيَ عَلَيْهِ حَبائِلُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْدِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

240. He (‘a) said about this world: It is deceitful - that which is in
it is illusory; it is perishing all that is upon it perishes.

> 240ـ وقالَ ـ عليه السْلام ـ في وَصْفِ الدُّنْيا: غَرّارَةٌ، غُرُورٌ ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيها، فانِيَةٌ فان مَنْ عَلَيْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

241. It is deceitful, harmful, volatile, evanescent, transient and
perishing.

> 241ـ غَرّارَةٌ، ضَـرَّارَةٌ، حائِلَةٌ، زائِلَةٌ، بائِدَةٌ، نافِدَةٌ.

242. The foods of this world are poisons and its means are worn-out [and
weak] ropes.

> 242ـ غِذاءُ الدُّنيا سِمامٌ، وأسْبابُها رِمامٌ.

243. In being averse to this world there is attainment of prosperity.

> 243ـ فِي العُزُوفِ عَنِ الدُّنيا دَرَكُ النَّجاحِ.

244. In the vicissitudes of this world there are lessons to be learnt.

> 244ـ في تَصاريفِ الدُّنيا اِعْتِبارٌ.

245. In this world there is action without reckoning.

> 245ـ فِي الدُّنيا عَمَلٌ، ولا حِسابٌ.

246. This world is what the wretched desire.

> 246ـ فِي الدُّنْيا رَغْبَةُ الأشْقياءِ.

247. The two that are attached to each other may get detached and the
two groups that are united may get separated.

> 247ـ قَدْ يَتَفاصَلُ المُتَواصِلانِ (المُتَفاصِلان)، ويَشَتُّ جَمْعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأليفَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

248. Indeed, that which was sweet of this world has become bitter, and
that which was clean of it has become dirty.

> 248ـ قَدْ أمَرَّ مِنَ الدُّنيا ما كانَ حُلْواً، وكَدَرَ مِنْها ما كانَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَفْواً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

249. Indeed this world has embellished itself with its deception and it
deceives [its inhabitants] with its embellishments.

> 249ـ قَدْ تَزَيَّنَتِ الدُّنيا بِغُرُورِها، وغَرَّتْ بِزينَتِها.

250. Little of this world takes away a lot of the Hereafter.

> 250ـ قَليلُ الدُّنيا يَذْهَبُ بِكَثيرِ الآخِرَةِ.

251. The little of this world does not last and its abundance is not
safe from calamities.

> 251ـ قَليلُ الدُّنيا لا يَدُومُ بَقائُهُ، وكَثيرُها لا يُؤْمَنُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلاؤُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

252. The mainstay of this world is by four [groups]: A scholar who acts
on his knowledge, an ignorant person who is not too proud to learn, a
wealthy person who is generous with his wealth to the needy and a poor
person who does not sell his Hereafter for his worldly life. So when the
scholar does not act on his knowledge, the ignorant one refuses to
learn; and when the wealthy is miserly with his wealth, the poor one
sells his Hereafter for his world.

> 252ـ قِوامُ الدُّنْيا بِأرْبَع: عالِمٌ يَعْمَلُ بِعِلْمِهِ، وجاهِلٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايَسْتَنْكِفُ أنْ يَتَعَلَّمَ، وغَنِيٌّ يَجُودُ بِمالِهِ عَلَى
الفُقَراءِ، وفَقيرٌ لايَبيعُ آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنياهُ فَإذا لَمْ يَعمَلِ
العالِمُ بِعِلْمِهِ، اِسْتَنْكَفَ الجاهِلُ أنْ يَتَعَلَّمَ، وإذا
بَخِلَ الغَنِيُّ بِمالِهِ باعَ الفَقيرُ آخِرَتَهُ بِدنياهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

253. Every gathering is [headed] towards dispersion.

> 253ـ كُلُّ جَمْع إلى شَتات.

254. Every profit of this world is a loss.

> 254ـ كُلُّ أرْباحِ الدُّنيا خُسْرانٌ.

255. Everything that passes [away] is as if it never was.

> 255ـ كُلُّ ماض فَكَأنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ.

256. Every ease of this world is difficulty.

> 256ـ كُلُّ يَسارِ الدُّنيا إعْسارٌ.

257. Every provision of this world is trivial for the contented and the
chaste.

> 257ـ كُلُّ مُؤَنِ الدُّنيا خَفيفَةٌ علَى القانِعِ والعَفيفِ.

258. Everything in this world [is such that it] seems greater when heard
than when seen.

> 258ـ كُلُّ شَيء مِنَ الدُّنيا سَماعُهُ أعْظَمُ مِنْ عِيانِهِ.

259. All the circumstances of this world change abruptly and its
ownership is taken away and transferred [to others].

> 259ـ كُلُّ أحوالِ الدُّنيا زَلْزالٌ، ومِلْكُها سَلَبٌ وانْتِقالٌ.

260. Every moment of this world is [taking it] towards the end and every
living thing in it is [moving] towards its death and annihilation.

> 260ـ كُلُّ مُدَّة مِنَ الدُّنيا إلَى انْتِهاء، وَكُلُّ حَيّ فيها إلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَمات وَفَناء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

261. How many a person who relied upon this world has been made to
suffer by it!

> 261ـ كَمْ مِنْ واثِق بِالدُّنيا قَدْفَجَعَتْهُ.

262. How many a person who had confidence in this world has been struck
down by it!

> 262ـ كَمْ مِنْ ذي طُمَأنِينَة إلَى الدُّنيا قَدْ صَرَعَتْهُ.

263. How many a person who possesses grandeur has this world abased!

> 263ـ كَمْ ذي أُبَّهَة جَعَلَتْهُ الدُّنيا حَقيراً.

264. How many a person who possesses high standing has this world
returned to humility!

> 264ـ كَمْ ذي عِزَّة رَدَّتْهُ الدُّنيا ذَليلاً.

265. That which has passed from this world suffices as an informer of
what remains of this world.

> 265ـ كَفى مُخْبِراً عَمّا بَقِيَ مِنَ الدُّنيا ما مَضى مِنْها.

266. The abundance of this world is paucity, its grandeur is
humiliation, its embellishments are misguiding and its gifts are a
trial.

> 266ـ كَثْرَةُ الدُّنيا قِلَّةٌ، وَعِزُّها ذِلَّةٌ، وزَخارِفُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُضِلَّةٌ، ومَواهِبُها فِتْنَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

267. Be in this world with your body and in the Hereafter with your
heart and your actions.

> 267ـ كُنْ فِي الدُّنيا بِبَدَنِكَ، وَفِي الآخِرَةِ بِقَلْبِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَمَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

268. Be most cautious of this world when you are most at ease with it.

> 268ـ كُنْ آنَسَ ما تَكُونُ بِالدُّنيا أحْذَرَ ما تَكُونُ مِنْها.

269. Become uninterested in this world and be infatuated with the
Hereafter.

> 269ـ كُونُوا عَنِ الدُّنيا نُزّاهاً، وإلى الآخِرَةِ وُلاّهاً.

270. Be among those who recognize the transience of this world so they
renounce it and know about the eternity of the Hereafter so they work
for it.

> 270ـ كُونُوا مِمَّنْ عَرَفَ فَناءَ الدُّنيا فَزَهِدَ فيها وعَلِمَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَقاءَ الآخِرَةِ فَعَمِلَ لَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

271. Be a community that understands that this world is not their
[permanent] abode so they exchange it [for the Hereafter].

> 271ـ كُونُوا قَوْماً عَلِمُوا أنَّ الدُّنيا لَيْسَتْ بِدارِهِمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاسْتَبْدَلُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

272. Be from the children of the Hereafter and do not be from the
children of this world, for every child will cling to his mother on the
Day of Resurrection.

> 272ـ كُونُوا مِنْ أبْناءِ الآخِرَةِ، وَلا تَكُونُوا مِنْ أبْناءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنْيا فَإنَّ كُلَّ وَلَد سَيَلْحَقُ بِأُمِّهِ يَوْمَ القيمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

273. Whenever a person becomes more preoccupied and infatuated with this
world, it makes him enter paths [of danger] and fall into places of
destruction.

> 273ـ كُلَّما إزدادَ المَرْءُ بِالدُّنيا شُغْلاً وزادَ بِها وَلَهاً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْرَدَتْهُ المَسالِكَ وَأَوْقَعَتْهُ فِي المَهالِكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

274. Whatever does not benefit, harms, and this world with its
sweetness, becomes bitter whereas poverty with [seeking] sufficiency
through Allah, never harms.

> 274ـ كُلَّما لا يَنْفَعُ يَضُرُّ، والدُّنيا مَعَ حَلاوَتِها تَمُرُّ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والفَقْرُ مَعَ الغِنى بِاللّهِ لايَضُرُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

275. Every time something of this world slips away from you, it is an
advantage [and a blessing].

> 275ـ كُلَّما فاتَكَ مِنَ الدُّنيا شَيْءٌ فَهُوَ غَنيمَةٌ.

276. Just as the sun and the night do not come together, similarly love
for Allah and love for this world do not come together.

> 276ـ كَما أنَّ الشَّمسَ واللَّيلَ لا يَجْتَمِعانِ كَذلِكَ حُبُّ اللّهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحُبُّ الدُّنيا لايَجْتَمِعانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

277. He who claims [to have] certitude in the eternal while he is still
attached to the transient, has lied.

> 277ـ كَذِبَ مَنِ ادَّعَى اليَقينَ بِالباقي وهُوَ مُواصِلٌ لِلفاني.

278. For every abundance [in this world] there is paucity.

> 278ـ لِكُلِّ كَثْرَة قِلَّةٌ.

279. For everything in this world there is expiry and annihilation.

> 279ـ لِكُلِّ شَيء مِنَ الدُّنيا انْقِضاءٌ وفَناءٌ.

280. For the one who finds delight in the pleasures of this world there
is distress [and regret in the Hereafter].

> 280ـ لِلْمُسْتَحْلي لَذَّةَ الدُّنيا غُصَّةٌ.

281. Indeed, this world has unveiled the cloak [of its disloyalty] and
notified you all equally.

> 281ـ لَقَدْ كاشَفَتْكُمُ الدُّنيا الغِطاءَ، وآذَنَتْكُمْ على سَواء.

282. Verily this world of yours is more lowly in my view than the [dry]
bone of a pig in the hand of a leper.

> 282ـ لَدُنْياكُمْ عِنْدي أهْوَنُ مِنْ عُراقِ خِنْزير على يدِ مَجذُوم.

283. It is not a [good] trade to consider this world to be a price for
your soul and a substitute to that which is for you with Allah.

> 283ـ لَيْسَ المَتْجَرُ أنْ تَرىَ الدُّنيا لِنَفْسِكَ ثَمَناً، ومِمّا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكَ عِندَ اللّهِ عِوَضاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

284. For love of this world, listeners turn a deaf ear to [words of]
wisdom and hearts become blind to the light of insight.

> 284ـ لِحُبِّ الدُّنْيا صَمَّتِ الأسْماعِ عَنْ سَماعِ الحِكْمَةِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَمِيَتِ القُلُوبُ عَنْ نُورِ البَصيرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

285. Nobody gains any joy from this world but that it is followed by
tears [of sorrow].

> 285ـ لَمْ يَنَلْ أحَدٌ مِنَ الدُّنيا حَبْرَةً إلاّ أعْقَبَتْهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَبْرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

286. Allah, the Glorified, has not cleansed this world for His friends
nor has He withheld it from His enemies.

> 286ـ لَمْ يُصِفِ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ الدُّنْيا لأوليائِهِ، ولَمْ يَضُنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِها على أعْدائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

287. Nobody gets the comforts of this world internally but that he has
to face its hardships externally.[^7]

> 287ـ لَمْ يَلْقَ أحَدٌ مِنْ سَـرّاءِ الدُّنْيا بَطْناً إلاّ مَنَحَتْهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ ضَـرَّائِها ظَهْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

288. One whose effort was for this world did not earn any recompense
[for it] nor did he fulfil any obligation.

> 288ـ لَمْ يُفِدْ مَنْ كانَتْ هِمَّتُهُ الدُّنْيا عِوَضاً، وَلَمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقْضِ مُفْتَرَضاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

289. No person in this world is covered by the light rain of ease but
that the heavy rain of distress pours upon him.

> 289ـ لَمْ تُظِلَّ امْرَءً مِنَ الدُّنْيا دِيمَةُ رَخاء إلاّ هَتَنَتْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْهِ مُزْنَةُ بَلاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

290. If the people of the world understood [the truth about it], this
world would surely be ruined.

> 290ـ لَوْ عَقَلَ أهْلُ الدُّنْيا لَخَرِبَتِ الدُّنيا.

291. If this world was praiseworthy in front of Allah, He would have
reserved it for His friends, but He turned their hearts away from it and
expunged its desires from them.

> 291ـ لَوْ كانَتِ الدُّنْيا عِنْدَ اللّهِ مَحْمُوداً لاخْتَصَّ بِها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أولِيائَهُ لكِنَّهُ صَـرَفَ قُلُوبَهُمْ عَنْها ومَحا عَنْهُمْ مِنْها
المَطامِعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

292. If this world was to remain with one of you, it would not have
reached the one in whose hands it is [now].

> 292ـ لَوْ بَقِيَتِ الدُّنيا على أحَدِكُمْ لَمْ تَصِلْ إلى مَنْ هيَ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يدَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

293. One who strives for this world is eluded by it.

> 293ـ مَنْ ساعَي الدُّنيا فاتَتْهُ.

294. One who holds back from this world is sought by it.

> 294ـ مَنْ قَعَدَ عَنِ الدُّنيا طَلَبَتْهُ.

295. One who wrestles this world is knocked down by it.

> 295ـ مَنْ صارَعَ الدُّنيا صَـرَعَتْهُ.

296. One who disobeys this world is obeyed by it.

> 296ـ مَنْ عَصَى الدُّنيا أطاعَتْهُ.

297. One who turns away from this world is approached by it.

> 297ـ مَنْ أعْرَضَ عَنِ الدُّنيا أتَتْهُ.

298. One who knows [the reality of] this world, renounces it.

> 298ـ مَنْ عَرَفَ الدُّنيا تَزَهَّدَ.

299. One who thinks little of this world, it comes to him humiliated.

> 299ـ مَنْ سَلا عَنِ الدُّنيا أتَتْهُ راغِمَةً.

300. One who is owned by this world falls down often.

> 300ـ مَنْ مَلَكَتْهُ الدُّنيا كَثُرَ صَرْعُهُ.

301. One who is delighted by the embellishments of this world is owned
by [its] deceptions.

> 301ـ مَنْ راقَهُ زِبْرِجُ الدُّنيا مَلَكَتْهُ الخُدَعُ.

302. One who buys his Hereafter with his world, gains both of them.

> 302ـ مَنِ ابْتاعَ آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنياهُ رَبِحَهُما.

303. One who sells his Hereafter for his world loses both of them.

> 303ـ مَنْ باعَ آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنياهُ خَسِرَهُما.

304. One who seeks less of this world gains more of that which keeps him
secure [in the Hereafter].

> 304ـ مَنِ اسْتَقَلَّ مِنَ الدُّنيا اِسْتَكْثَرَ مِمّا يُؤْمِنُهُ.

305. One who seeks more of this world gains more of that which will ruin
him.

> 305ـ مَنِ اسْتَكْثَرَ مِنَ الدُّنيا اِسْتَكْثَرَ مِمّا يُوْبِقُهُ.

306. One who builds his world destroys his place of return [in the
Hereafter].

> 306ـ مَنْ عَمَرَ دُنياهُ خَرَّبَ مَ آلَهُ.

307. One who is deceived by this world is deceived by [his] aspirations.

> 307ـ مَنِ اغْتَرَّ بِالدُّنيا اِغْتَرَّ بِالمُنى.

308. One who is pleased with this world is eluded by the Hereafter.

> 308ـ مَنْ رَضِـيَ بِالدُّنيا فاتَتْهُ الآخِرَةُ.

309. One who is greedy for this world is destroyed.

> 309ـ مَنْ حَرَصَ عَلَى الدُّنيا هَلَكَ.

310. One who is not content with the little [he has] of this world will
not be satisfied with the much that he accumulates from it.

> 310ـ مَنْ كانَ بِيَسيرِ الدُّنيا لا يَقْنَعُ لَمْ يُغْنِهِ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَثيرِها ما يَجْمَعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

311. Who is more at a disadvantage than the one who sells the eternal
[Hereafter] for the transient [world]?

> 311ـ مَنْ أغْبَنُ مِمَّنْ باعَ البَقاءَ بِالفَناءِ؟!

312. Who is more at a loss than the one who exchanges the Hereafter for
this world?

> 312ـ مَنْ أخْسَرُ مِمَّنْ تَعَوَّضَ عَنِ الآخِرَةِ بِالدُّنيا؟!

313. One who seeks from this world that which pleases him, his crime
(and sinfulness) increases and his transgression prolongs.

> 313ـ مَنْ طَلَبَ مِنَ الدُّنيا ما يُرْضيهِ كَثُرَ تَجَنّيهِ وطالَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعَدّيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

314. One who relies on the deceptions of this world considers himself
safe from its perils.

> 314ـ مَنْ وَثِقَ بِغُرورِ الدُّنيا أمِنَ مَخُوفَهُ.

315. Whoever keeps back from seeking this world, it rises towards him.

> 315ـ مَنْ قَعَدَ عَنْ طَلَبِ الدُّنيا قامَتْ إلَيهِ.

316. One who exceeds the limits in seeking this world dies a pauper.

> 316ـ مَنْ أسْرَفَ في طَلَبِ الدُّنيا ماتَ فَقيراً.

317. Whoever turns away from this world, it comes to him belittled.

> 317ـ مَنْ عَرَفَ عَنِ الدُّنيا أتَتْهُ صاغِرَةً.

318. One whose heart is attached to the love of this world catches three
things from it: worry that never leaves him, greed that never abandons
him and hopes that are never realized by him.

> 318 ـ مَنْ لَهِجَ قَلْبُهُ بِحُبِّ الدُّنيا إلْتاطَ مِنها بِثَلاث:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَمّ لايُغْنيهِ (لايُغِبُّهُ)، وَحِرص لا يَتْرُكُهُ، وأمَل لا
يُدْرِكُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

319. Whoever is attracted by the dazzle of this world, it blinds both
his eyes.

> 319ـ مَنْ راقَهُ زِبْرِجُ الدُّنيا أعْقَبَ ناظِرَيْهِ كَمَها.

320. One who desires the adornments of this world is eluded by the
sought after eternal bliss [of the Hereafter].

> 320ـ مَنْ رَغِبَ في زَخارِفِ الدُّنيا فاتَهُ البَقاءُ المَطْلُوبُ.

321. One who has been overcome by this world is blind to that which is
in front of him.

> 321ـ مَنْ غَلَبَتِ الدُّنيا عَلَيْهِ عَمِيَ عَمّا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ.

322. One who builds his world corrupts his religion and ruins his
Hereafter.

> 322ـ مَنْ عَمَرَ دُنياهُ أفْسَدَ دينَهُ وأخْرَبَ أُخْراهُ.

323. One who loves [to acquire] the prestige of [both] this world and
the Hereafter must detest prestige in this world.

> 323ـ مَنْ أحَبَّ رِفْعَةَ الدُّنيا والآخِرَةِ فَلْيَمْقُتْ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا الرِّفْعَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

324. One who humbles himself for the children of this world takes off
the garment of piety.

> 324ـ مَنْ تَذَلَّلَ لاِبْناءِ الدُّنيا، تَعَرّى مِنْ لِباسِ التَّقوى.

325. One who fixes his gaze on the children of this world is blinded
from the path of guidance.

> 325ـ مَنْ قَصَّرَ نَظَرَهُ على أبْناءِ الدُّنيا، عَمِىَ عَنْ سَبيلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الهُدى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

326. One who seeks something from this world is eluded by something
greater from the Hereafter than what he seeks [from this world].

> 326ـ مَنْ طَلَبَ مِنَ الدُّنيا شَيْئاً، فاتَهُ مِنَ الآخِرَةِ أكْثَرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِمّا طَلَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

327. Whoever seeks [the profits of] this world through the work of the
Hereafter, it takes him further away from that which he seeks.

> 327ـ مَنْ طَلَبَ الدُّنيا بِعَمَلِ الآخِرَةِ،كانَ أبْعَدَ لَهُ مِمّا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَلَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

328. One who is glad to relinquish the bounties of this world [for the
sake of the Hereafter] has certainly perfected his intellect.

> 328ـ مَن سَخَتْ نَفْسُهُ عَنْ مَواهِبِ الدُّنيا، فَقَدِ اسْتَكْمَلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَقْلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

329. Whoever gains possession of something of this world loses much more
of the Hereafter than what he possesses [of this world].

> 329ـ مَنْ مَلَكَ مِنَ الدُّنيا شَيْئاً، فاتَهُ مِنَ الآخِرَةِ أكثَرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِمّا مَلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

330. One who knows [the reality of] this world is not saddened by that
which befalls him [in it].

> 330ـ مَنْ عَرَفَ الدُّنيا لَمْ يَحْزَنْ على ما أصابَهُ.

331. One who recognizes the deceptions of this world will not be
deceived by its impossible dreams.

> 331ـ مَنْ عَرَفَ خِداعَ الدُّنيا لَمْ يَغْتَرَّ مِنْها بِمُحالاتِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأحْلامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

332. One who triumphs in this world becomes troubled and one whom it
eludes gets distressed.

> 332ـ مَنْ ظَفِرَ بِالدُّنيا نَصِبَ، وَمَنْ فاتَتْهُ تَعِبَ.

333. One in whose eyes this world is grand and in whose heart its
position is great, prefers it over Allah and devotes himself to it and
becomes a slave to it.

> 333ـ مَنْ عَظُمَتِ الدُّنيا في عَيْنِهِ، وكَبُرَ مَوْقِعُها في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَلْبِهِ، أثَرَها عَلَـى اللّهِ، وانْقَطَعَ إلَيْها، وصارَ عبداً لَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

334. One who becomes infatuated with this world, it fills his heart with
a sadness which keeps alternating in the black part of his heart, a
distress that worries him and a grief that causes him pain, until its
suffocation [of death] overtakes him and he is flung in the open while
both the arteries of his heart are severed. It is easy for Allah to
cause him to die and he becomes too far for his comrades to meet him (or
to remain with him).

> 334ـ مَنِ اسْتَشْعَرَ الشَّغَفَ بِالدُّنيا، مَلأَتْ ضميرَهُ أشْجاناً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لها رَقْصٌ عَلى سُوَيْداءِ قَلْبِهِ، هَمٌّ يَشْغَلُهُ، وغَمٌّ
يَحْزُنُهُ حَتّى يُؤخَذَ بِكَظْمِهِ، فَيُلْقى بِالفَضاءِ مُنقَطِعاً
أبْهَراهُ، هَيِّناً عَلَـى اللّهِ فَناءُهُ بَعيداً عَلَى الإخْوانِ
لِقاؤُهُ (بَقائُهُ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

335. One who relies on this world is indeed wretched and deprived.

> 335ـ مَنِ اعْتَمَدَ علَى الدُّنيا فَهُوَ الشَّقيُّ المَحْرُومُ.

336. Whoever serves this world, it exploits him and whoever serves
Allah, the Glorified, it (this world) serves him.

> 336ـ مَنْ خَدَمَ الدُّنيا اِسْتَخْدَمَتْهُ، ومَن ْ خَدَمَ اللّهَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَهُ خَدَمَتْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

337. One whose concern [and effort] is for this world, his wretchedness
and misery will be prolonged on the Day of Resurrection.

> 337ـ مَنْ كانَتْ الدُّنيا هَمَّهُ، طالَ يَوْمَ القِيامَةِ شَقاؤُهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وغَمُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

338. One who does not think about the bounties of his world becomes
powerful.

> 338ـ مَنْ سَلا عَنْ مَواهِبِ الدُّنيا عَزَّ.

339. One of the troubles of this world is the spoiling of union by
separation and happiness by distress.

> 339ـ مِنْ نَكَدِ الدُّنيا تَنْغيصُ الاِجتِماعِ بِالفُرْقَةِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والسُّروُرِ بالغُصَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

340. It is from the lowliness of this world in front Allah is that He is
not disobeyed anywhere except in it.

> 340ـ مِنْ هَوانِ الدُّنيا علَى اللّهِ أنْ لا يُعْصى إلاّ فيها.

341. From the [signs of the] contemptibleness of this world in the sight
of Allah is that one does not gain that which is with Him except by
abandoning it.

> 341ـ مِنْ ذَمامَةِ الدُّنيا عِنْدَاللّهِ أنْ لايُنالَ ما عِنْدَهُ إلاّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِتَرْكِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

342. Nothing corrupts the faith like this world.

> 342ـ ما أفْسَدَ الدّينَ كَالدُّنيا.

343. How will the offshoot remain after the root has gone?

> 343ـ ما بَقاءُ فَرْع بَعْدَ ذَهابِ أصْل.

344. This world of yours which endears itself to you is not better than
the Hereafter which is made to appear ugly by your negative perception
[of it].

> 344ـ ما دُنياكَ الَّتي تَحَبَّبَتْ إلَيكَ بِخَير مِنَ الآخِرَةِ الَّتي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبََّحَها سُوءُ النَّطرِ عِنْدَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

345. That which you send forth from this world is for your own benefit
and that which you leave behind from it is for your enemy.

> 345ـ ما قدَّمْتَ مِنْ دُنياكَ فَلِنَفْسِكَ، وَما أخَّرْتَ مِنْها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلِلْعَدُوِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

346. That which [one] increases in this world, [he] diminishes in the
Hereafter.

> 346ـ مازادَ فِي الدُّنيا نَقَصَ فِي الآخِرَةِ.

347. That which [one] diminishes in this world, [he] increases in the
Hereafter.

> 347ـ مانَقَصَ فِي الدُّنيا زادَ فِي الآخِرَةِ.

348. Do not be overjoyed by that which you obtain in this world and do
not despair with sadness for that which eludes you from it.

> 348ـ مانِلْتَ مِنْ دُنياكَ فَلا تُكْثِرْ بِهِ فَرَحاً، وما فاتَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْها فلا تَأسَ عَلَيْهِ حُزْناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

349. What is good in a house that falls down like demolished
construction and in a lifetime that expires as [its] provisions get
exhausted?

> 349ـ ماخَيْرُ دار تُنْقَضُ نَقْضَ البِناءِ، وعُمْر يَفْنى فَناءَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

350. What is the matter with you? You are delighted with the little of
this world that you obtain while you are not saddened by the abundance
of the Hereafter that you are deprived of?!

> 350ـ ما بالُكُمْ تَفْرَحُونَ بِاليَسيرِ مِنَ الدُّنيا تُدْرِكُونَهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولايَحْزنُكُمُ الكَثيرُ مِنَ الآخِرَةِ تُحْرَمُونَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

351. This world has not deceived you, rather through it you have been
deceived.

> 351ـ ما الدُّنيا غَرَّتْكَ، وَلكِنْ بِهَا اغْتَرَرْتَ.

352. The transient world has not beguiled you, rather through it you
have been beguiled.

> 352ـ مَا العاجِلَةُ خَدَعَتْكَ، ولكِنْ بِهَا انْخَدَعْتَ.

353. What is [the matter] with you that which, if you acquire it [the
wealth of this world], its improvement [and seeking something better
than it] preoccupies you from enjoying it, and if you enjoy it, it
spoils it [the enjoyment] for you with the victory of death over you.

> 353ـ مالَكَ وما إنْ أدْرَكْتَهُ شَغَلَكَ بِصَلاحِهِ عَنِ الاستِمتاعِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِهِ، وإنْ تَمَتَّعْتَ بِهِ نَغَّصَهُ عَلَيكَ ظَفَرُ المَوتِ بِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

354. The deceived person who gains success in this world through its
smallest portion is not like the other person who is gains success in
the Hereafter by exerting his greatest effort.[^8]

> 354ـ مَا المَغْرُورُ الَّذي ظَفِرَ مِنَ الدُّنيا بِأدْنى سُهْمَتِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَالآخَرِ الَّذي ظَفِرَ مِنَ الآخِرَةِ بِأعْلى هِمَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

355. How close this world is to departure, old age is to youth, and
doubt is to uncertainty!

> 355ـ ما أقْرَبَ الدُّنيا مِنَ الذَّهابِ، والشَّيْبَ مِنَ الشَّبابِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والشَّكَّ مِنَ الاِرتيابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

356. The bitterness of this world is the sweetness of the Hereafter.

> 356ـ مَرارَةُ الدُّنيا حَلاوَةُ الآخِرَةِ.

357. One who accompanies this world is a target of calamities and
mishaps.

> 357ـ مُصاحِبُ الدُّنيا هَدَفُ النَّوائبِ والغِيَرِ.

358. The similitude of this world is like your shadow, if you stop it
stops and if you seek it, it moves further away.

> 358ـ مَثَلُ الدُّنيا كَظِلِّكَ، إنْ وَقَفْتَ وَقَفَ، وإنْ طَلَبْتَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَعُدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

359. The similitude of this world is like the snake, its feel is soft
but it has deadly venom in its fangs. The inexperienced and ignorant one
reaches towards it while the wise and intelligent one is cautious of it.

> 359ـ مَثَلُ الدُّنيا كَمَثلِ الحَيَّةِ، لَيِّـنٌ مَسُّها، والسَّـمُّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القاتِلُ في جَوفِها، يَهْوي إلَيْهَا الغِرُّ الجاهِلُ، ويَحْذَرُهَا
اللَّبيبُ العاقلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

360. The wares of this world are [like] broken orts that cause
epidemics, therefore keep off the grazing land which is more beneficial
to migrate from than to peacefully stay in, and that of it which
suffices for subsistence in it is purer [for the soul] than its riches.

> 360ـ مَتاعُ الدُّنيا حُطامٌ مُوبِيٌ، فَتَجَنَّبُوا مَرْعاةً،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْعَتُها أحْظى مِنْ طُمَأنِينَتِها، وبُلْغَتُها أزْكى مِنْ
ثَرْوَتِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

361. Destroyed is one who finds reassurance in this world and makes his
religion its dower, so he turns towards it wherever it turns, having
taken it to be his [only] concern and his deity.

> 361ـ هَلَكَ مَنِ اسْتَنامَ إلَى الدُّنيا، وأمْهَرَها دينَهُ فَهُوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَيْثُما مالَتْ مالَ إلَيْها،قَدِ اتَّخَذَها هَمَّهُ ومَعْبُودُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

362. Take it easy, for indeed the matter is near, the companionship is
short and the sojourn is brief.

> 362ـ هَوِّنْ عَلَيْكَ فَإنَّ الأمْرَ قَريبٌ، والاِصْطِحابَ قَليلٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالمُقامَ يَسيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

363. It (this world) is obstructive and obdurate, deviating and swaying,
deceiving and ungrateful.

> 363ـ هِيَ الصَّدُودُ العَنُودُ، والحَيُودُ المَيُودُ، والخَدُوعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَنُودُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

364. Those who are pleased with this world are destroyed on the Day of
Resurrection and those who are disheartened by it are saved.

> 364ـ هَلَكَ الفَرِحُونَ بِالدُّنيا يَوْمَ القِيامَةِ، ونَجا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَحْزُونُونَ بِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

365. Do not desire anything that perishes and goes away, for this enough
of a detriment.

> 365ـ لاتَرْغَبْ فِي كُلِّ ما يَفْنى وَيَذْهَبُ، فَكَفى بِذلِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَضَرَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

366. Do not desire this world thereby losing your Hereafter.

> 366ـ لاتَرْغَبْْ فِي الدُّنيا فَتَخْسَرَ آخِرَتَكَ.

367. Do not desire that which perishes, and take from the transient for
the eternal.

> 367ـ لا تَرغَبْ فيما يَفْنى، وخُذْ مِنَ الفَناءِ لِلْبَقاءِ.

368. Do not jostle for the bounties of this world, for indeed its
bounties are trifling.

> 368ـ لا تُنافِسْ في مَواهِبِ الدُّنيا، فَإنَّ مَواهِبَها حَقيرَةٌ.

369. Do not give your religion as dower for this world, for indeed
whoever gives his religion as dowry to this world, it brings to him
wretchedness, pain, hardship and tribulation.

> 369ـ لا تَمْهَرِ الدُّنيا دينَكَ، فَإنَّ مَنْ مَهَرَ الدُّنيا دينَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زُفَّتْ إلَيهِ بِالشَّقاءِ، وَالعَناءِ، والمِحْنَةِ، والبَلاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

370. Do not sell the Hereafter for this world and do not exchange the
eternal with the transient.

> 370ـ لاتَبيعُوا الآخِرَةَ بِالدُّنيا، ولا تَسْتَبْدِلُواالفَناءَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالبَقاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

371. Do not let this world tempt you, and do not let your vain desires
overpower you, and do not consider your stay in this world to be long,
and do not let your hopes deceive you, for indeed hopes are not part of
religion in any way.

> 371ـ لاتَفْتِنَنَّكُمُ الدُّنيا، ولايَغْلِبَنَّكُمُ الهَوى، وَلا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَطُولَنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ الأمَدُ، وَلا يَغُرَّنَّكُمُ الأمَلُ، فَإنَّ
الأمَلَ لَيسَ مِنَ الدّينِ في شَيْء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

372. Let not the greatest thing that you achieve in this world be the
attainment of pleasures and the quelling of rage, rather let it be the
enlivening of truth and the annihilation of falsehood.

> 372ـ لايَكُونَنَّ أفْضَلَ ما نِلْتَ مِنْ دُنياكَ بُلوغَ لَذَّة،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وشِفاءَ غَيْظ، ولْيَكُنْ إحياءَ حَقّ، وإماتَةِ باطل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

373. Do not be tempted by good loans [and temporary pleasures], for the
loans of this world are returned and you remain with that which you have
accumulated of the forbidden.

> 373ـ لاتَفْتِنَنَّكَ دُنيْاكَ بِحُسْنِ العَواري، فَعَوارِي الدُّنيا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُرْتَجَعُ، ويَبْقى عَلَيْكَ مَا احْتَقَبْتَهُ مِنَ المَحارِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

374. Do not let the transient world deceive you with its false
amusements, for indeed its amusement ceases while the vices which you
have acquired remain with you.

> 374ـ لاتَغُرَّنَّكَ العاجِلَةُ بِزُورِ المَلاهي، فإنَّ اللَّهْوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْقَطِعُ، ويَلْزَمُكَ مَا اكْتَسَبْتَ مِنَ الم آثِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

375. Let not any of you pine the way a servant girl pines, for that
which has departed from him of this world.

> 375ـ لايَحِنَنَّ أحَدُكُمْ حَنينَ الأمَةِ على مازُوِيَ عَنْهُ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

376. Do not solicit this world by the work of the Hereafter and do not
prefer the transient over the eternal, for this is the trait of the
hypocrites and the character of the apostates.

> 376ـ لاتَلْتَمِسِ الدُّنيا بِعَمَلِ الآخِرَةِ، وَلا تُؤْثِرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العاجِلَةَ علَى الآجِلَةِ، فَإنَّ ذلِك شيمَةُ المُنافِقينَ، وسَجِيَّةُ
المارقينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

377. Never be deceived by the condition of the people of vanities [and
what they enjoy of this world], for indeed it is an extended shadow
[which lasts] until a fixed time.

> 377ـ لا يَغُرَّنَّكَ ما أصْبَحَ فيهِ أهْلُ الغُرورِ بِالدُّنيا،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّما هُوَ ظِلٌّ مَمْدُودٌ إلى أجَل مَحْدُود.
  </p>
</blockquote>

378. The deceptions of this world do not excite the learned.

> 378ـ لا يَسْتَفِزُّ خُدَعُ الدُّنيا العالِمَ.

379. This world does not protect the one who seeks refuge in it.

> 379ـ لاتَعْصِمُ الدُّنيا مَنْ لَجَأَ إلَيها.

380. People do not abandon anything from their religion for the sake of
this world but that Allah opens for them that which is more harmful for
them.

> 380ـ لايَتْرُكُ النّاسُ شَيْئاً مِنْ دينِهم لإصْلاحِ دُنْياهُمْ إلاّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَحَ اللّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ ما هُوَ أضَرُّ مِنهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

381. The delights of this world do not continue and its joys do not
last, and there is no security from its afflictions.

> 381ـ لا تَدُومُ حَبْرَةُ الدُّنيا، ولا يَبْقى سُرُورُها، ولاتُؤْمَنُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَجْعَتُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

382. It behoves the one who recognizes this world to renounce its
pleasures and to turn away from it.

> 382ـ يَنْبَغي لِمَنْ عَرَفَ الدُّنيا أنْ يَزْهَدَ فيها، ويعْزِفَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

383. It behoves the one who recognizes the transient abode to work for
the Eternal Abode.

> 383ـ يَنْبَغي لِمَنْ عَرَفَ دارَ الفَناءِ أنْ يَعْمَلَ لِدارِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البَقاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

384. It behoves the one who knows how fleeting this world is, to
renounce its pleasures.

> 384ـ يَنْبَغي لِمَنْ عَلِمَ سُرْعَةَ زَوالِ الدُّنيا أنْ يَزْهدَ فيها.

385. It behoves a person to seek a cure from the ailments of this world
just like a sick person seeks treatment, and he should avoid its lusts
and pleasures just as a sick person avoids certain foods.

> 385ـ يَنْبَغي أنْ يَتداوِيَ المَرْءُ مِنْ أدواءِ الدُّنيا كَما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَتَداوى ذُوالعِلَّةِ، وَيَحْتَمِيَ مِنْ شَهَواتِها وَلَذّاتِها كما
يَحْتَمِي المَريضُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

386. Little of this world corrupts the faith.

> 386ـ يَسيرُ الدُّنيا يُفْسِدُ الدّينَ.

387. Little of this world suffices and plenty of it destroys.

> 387ـ يَسيرُ الدُّنيا يَكْفي، وكَثيرُها يُردْي.

388. Little of this world is better than plenty of it, and that of it
which suffices for subsistence in it is better than that which destroys.

> 388ـ يَسيرُ الدُّنيا خَيْرٌ مِنْ كَثيرِها، وبُلْغَتُها أجْدَرُ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلَكَتِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

389. Slaves of desire, cut them short! For indeed, the one who leans on
this world gets nothing out of it but the grating sound of hardship.

> 389ـ يا أسْـرَى الرَّغْبَةِ أقْصِروُا، فَإنَّ المُعَرِّجَ عَلَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا لايَرُوعُهُ مِنْها إلاَّ صَريفُ أنيابِ الحِدْثانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

390. One who works for this world makes a loss.

> 390ـ مَنْ عَمِلَ لِلدُّنيا خَسِرَ.

[^1]: The literal translation of lumādhah is the food that remains on
one’s lips after eating and is licked off by the tongue.

[^2]: Possibly referring to the fact the interior of the earth is the
place of the dead and the exterior is the place of sickness and
afflictions.

[^3]: Jamāl al-Dīn Muḥammad al-Khwānsari says that it is possible that
this is referring to the companions of the 12th Imam (‘a) (Ref: Sharhe
Ghurar al-Ḥikam vol. 2 pg. 656).

[^4]: Or: This world makes one submit.

[^5]: Or: Indeed if you approach this world, it will turn its back
towards you.

[^6]: Or: Indeed if you turn your back on this world, it will come
towards you.

[^7]: Or: Nobody gets the comforts of this world before him but that he
has to suffer its hardships afterwards.

[^8]: In Nahj al-Balāgha the converse has been mentioned i.e. the vain
person who is successful in this world by exerting his greatest effort
is not like the other who is successful in the Hereafter by gaining its
smallest portion. (Saying no. 380)


