Religion And Sharia Law
=======================

**Religion and Sharia Law الدِّين والشريعة**

1. Religion is the more honourable of the two lineages.

> 1ـ الدِّينُ أشرفُ النَّسَبَيْنِ.

2. Religion and good manners are a result of intelligence.

> 2ـ الدِّينُ والأدَبُ، نَتيجَةُ العَقْلِ.

3. The foundation of religion is returning trusts [to their owners] and
fulfilling pledges.

> 3ـ أصْلُ الدِّينِ أداءُ الأمانَةِ، والوَفاءُ بِالعُهُودِ.

4. Know that the beginning of religion is submission and its end is
sincere devotion.

> 4ـ اِعْلَمْ أنَّ أوَّلَ الدّينِ التَّسليمُ، وآخِرُهُ الإخلاصُ.

5. Indeed the codes of religion are one and its ways are straight, so
the one who follows it arrives [at the destination] and gains [success],
and the one who stands away from it strays and regrets.

> 5ـ ألا وإنَّ شَرايِعَ الدِّينِ واحِدَةٌ، وسُبُلَهُ قاصِدَةٌ، فَمَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخَذَ بِها لَحِقَ وَغَنِمَ، ومَنْ وَقَفَ عَنْها ضَلَّ ونَدِمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Where are the different paths taking you?

> 6ـ أيْنَ تَذْهَبُ بِكُمُ المَذاهِبُ؟

7. Where is the darkness misleading you and [how are] the falsehoods
deceiving you?

> 7ـ أيْنَ تَتِيْهُ بِكُمُ الغَياهِبُ، وتَخْتَدِعُكُمُ الكَواذِبُ؟

8. Where are your minds straying and your souls deviating [to]? Do you
seek to substitute facts for lies and exchange truth for falsehood?

> 8ـ أيْنَ تَضِلُّ عُقُولُكُم، وتَزيغُ نُفُوسُكُمْ، أتَسْتَبْدِلُونَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكِذْبَ بِالصِّدقِ، وَتَعْتاضُونَ الباطِلَ بِالحَقِّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. The greatest felicity is [in] the uprightness of religion.

> 9ـ أفْضَلُ السَّعادَةِ اِسْتِقامَةُ الدّينِ.

10. Little religion is better than plenty of worldly possession.

> 10ـ يَسيرُ الدّينِ خَيرٌ مِنْ كَثيرِ الدُّنيا.

11. The most religious of all people is one whose religiosity is not
corrupted by [lustful] desire.

> 11ـ أدْيَنُ النّاسِ مَنْ لَمْ تُفْسِدِ الشَّهْوَةُ دينَهُ.

12. The best religion is cutting short [false] aspirations, and the
highest worship is being sincere in your action.

> 12ـ أفْضَلُ الدِّينِ قَصْرُ الأمَلِ، وأعْلَى العِبادَةِ إخْلاصُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. Verily Allah, the Glorified, grants this world to [both] the one
whom He loves and the one whom He does not love, but He grants religion
only to the one whom He loves.

> 13ـ إنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ يُعْطِي الدُّنيا مَنْ يُحِبُّ ومَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايُحِبُّ، ولا يُعْطِي الدِّينَ إلاّ مَنْ يُحِبُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. Verily Allah, the Most High, does not give the religion except to
His chosen ones and the elite from among His creation.

> 14ـ إنَّ اللّهَ تعالى لا يُعْطِي الدِّينَ إلاّ لِخاصَّتِهِ وصَفْوَتِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ خَلْقِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Indeed the best religion is loving for the sake of Allah, hating for
the sake of Allah, taking for the sake of Allah and giving for the sake
of Allah, the Glorified.

> 15ـ إنَّ أفْضَلَ الدِّينِ الحُبُّ فِي اللّهِ، والبُغْضُ فِي اللّهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والأخْذُ فِي اللّهِ، وَالعَطاءُ فِي اللّهِ سُبْحانَه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Indeed the religion [of Islam] is like a tree, its roots are
certitude in Allah and its fruits are befriending for the sake of Allah
and having enmity for the sake of Allah, the Glorified.

> 16ـ إنَّ الدّينَ كَشَجَرَة أصْلُها اليَقينُ بِاللّهِ، وثَمَرُهاَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُوالاةُ فِي اللّهِ والمُعاداةُ فِي اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Verily Allah, the Glorified, has illuminated the path of truth and
has clarified its ways, so [there is] either inescapable wretchedness or
eternal felicity.

> 17ـ إنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ قَدْ أنارَ سَبيلَ الحَقِّ، وأوْضَحَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُرُقَهُ، فَشِقْوَةٌ لازِمَةٌ، أوْ سَعادةٌ دائِمَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Religion safeguards.

> 18ـ الدّينُ يَعْصِمُ.

19. Religion exalts, this world humiliates.

> 19ـ الدِّينُ يُجِلُّ، الدُّنيا تُذِلُّ.

20. Religion is [the path to] joy.

> 20ـ الدِّينُ حُبُورٌ.

21. Religion is light, certitude is joy.

> 21ـ الدّينُ نُورٌ، اَليَقينُ حُبُورٌ.

22. Religion is the greatest pursuit.

> 22ـ الدّينُ أفْضَلُ مَطْلُوب.

23. Religion is the strongest pillar.

> 23ـ الدّينُ أقْوى عِماد.

24. The Sharī‘ah is [for] disciplining the self.

> 24ـ الشَّريعَةُ رِياضَةُ النَّفْسِ.

25. The Sharī‘ah is for the benefit [and reformation] of mankind.

> 25ـ الشَّريعَةُ صَلاحُ البَريَّةِ.

26. Religion is a treasure and knowledge is a guide [to it].

> 26ـ الدّينُ ذُخْرٌ، والعِلمُ دَليلٌ.

27. Religion is a tree whose roots are submission and contentment.

> 27ـ اَلدّينُ شَجَرَةٌ، أصْلُها التَّسليمُ والرِّضا.

28. Religion deters [one] from the unlawful.

> 28ـ اَلدّينُ يَصُدُّ عَنِ المَحارِمِ.

29. Religion is not reformed except by the intellect.

> 29ـ اَلدّينُ لايُصْلِحُهُ إلاّ العَقْلُ.

30. If you make your religion follow your worldly desires, you will have
destroyed your religion and your [life in this] world, and you will be
among the losers in the Hereafter.

> 30ـ إنْ جَعَلْتَ دينَكَ تَـبَعاً لِدُنياكَ أهْلَكْتَ دينَكَ ودُنْياكَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكُنْتَ فِي الآخِرَةِ مِنَ الخاسِرينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

31. The fruit of religion is trustworthiness.

> 31ـ ثَمَرَةُ الدّينِ اَلأمانَةُ.

32. The fruit of religion is strong conviction.

> 32ـ ثَمَرَةُ الدّينِ قُوَّةُ اليقينِ.

33. Three things are the disgrace of religion: lewdness, treachery and
betrayal [of trust].

> 33ـ ثَلاثٌ هُنَّ شَيْنُ الدّينِ: اَلفُجُورُ،وَ الغَدْرُ، والخيانَةُ.

34. Three things are the consolidators of religion: chastity, piety and
modesty.

> 34ـ ثَلاثٌ هُنَّ جِماعُ الدّينِ: اَلِعفَّةُ، والوَرَعُ، والحَياءُ.

35. Three things are the perfection of religion: sincerity, certitude
and contentment.

> 35ـ ثَلاثٌ هُنَّ كَمالُ الدّينِ: الإخلاصُ، واليَقينُ، والتَّقَنُّعُ.

36. The steadfastness of religion is through the strength of conviction.

> 36ـ ثَباتُ الدّينِ بِقُوَّةِ اليَقينِ.

37. The consolidation of religion is in sincerity of action, cutting
short [false] aspirations, doing good to others and refraining from ugly
deeds.

> 37ـ جِماعُ الدّينِ في إخلاصِ العَمَلِ، وتَقْصيرِ الأمَلِ، وبَذْلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإحسانِ، والكَفِّ عَنِ القَبيحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

38. The beauty of religion is piety.

> 38ـ جَمالُ الدّينِ الوَرَعُ.

39. The excellence of [one’s adherence to] religion stems from the
strength of [one’s] certitude.

> 39ـ حُسْنُ الدّينِ مِنْ قُوَّةِ اليَقينِ.

40. Preserving the faith is the fruit of cognizance and the peak of
wisdom.

> 40ـ حِفْظُ الدّينِ ثَمَرةُ المَعْرِفَةِ، ورأسُ الحِكْمَةِ.

41. Safeguard the religion through [the means of] this world and do not
safeguard this world through the religion.

> 41ـ حَصِّنُو ا الدّينَ بِالدُّنيا، ولا تُحَصِّنُوا الدُّنيا بِالدّينِ.

42. The best course of religion is piety.

> 42ـ خَيْرُ أُمُورِ الدّينِ الوَرَعُ.

43. The sign of a servant’s faith is his piety.

> 43ـ دَليلُ دينِ العَبْدِ وَرَعُهُ.

44. Defend the religious laws, protect the borders of the Muslim lands
and safeguard your religion and your trust through your impartiality
towards yourself and acting justly among your subjects.

> 44ـ ذُدْ عَنْ شَرايِع الدّينِ، وَحُطْ ثُغُورَ المُسْلِمينَ، وأحرِزْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دينَكَ وَأمانَتـَكَ بِإنْصافِكَ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ، والعَمَلِ بِالعَدْلِ في
رَعِيَّتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. The cornerstone of religion is acquiring good deeds.

> 45ـ رَأسُ الدّينِ اِكْتِسابُ الحَسَناتِ.

46. The adornment of religion is intelligence.

> 46ـ زَيْنُ الدّينِ العَقْلُ.

47. The adornment of religion is patience and contentment.

> 47ـ زَيْنُ الدّينِ الصَّبْرُ والرِّضا.

48. The cause of piety is soundness of faith.

> 48ـ سَبَبُ الوَرَعِ صِحَّةُ الدّينِ.

49. The uprightness of religion is through virtuous piety and certitude.

> 49ـ سِياسَةُ الدّينِ بِحُسْنِ الوَرَع، واليَقينِ.

50. The safety of religion is in seclusion from the people.

> 50ـ سَلامَةُ الدّينِ فِي اعتِزالِ النَّاسِ.

51. The safety of [one’s] religion and worldly life is in being amicable
with the people.

> 51ـ سَلامَةُ الدّينِ والدُّنيا في مُداراةِ النّاسِ.

52. Six things are used to test the faith of a man: the strength of his
religion, the truth of his conviction, the intensity of his piety, his
overcoming vain desires, the paucity of his [worldly] inclinations and
his being moderate in what he seeks.

> 52ـ سِتَّةٌ يُخْتَبَرُ بِها دينُ الرَّجلِ: قُوَّةُ الدينِ، وصِدْقُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليَقينِ، وَشِدَّةُ التَّقوى، ومُغالَبَةُ الهَوى، وقِلَّةُ الرََّغْبِ،
والإجْمالُ فِي الطَّلَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

53. The pinnacle of religion is patience, certitude and struggling
against vain desires.

> 53ـ سَنامُ الدّينِ: الصَّبرُ، واليَقينُ، ومُجاهَدَةُ الهوى.

54. There are six fundamentals of faith: sincerity of conviction, giving
advice [and guidance] to [fellow] Muslims, establishing the prayer,
paying the *zakāt* [alms-tax], performing the Hajj [pilgrimage] and
renouncing the pleasures of this world.

> 54ـ سِتٌّ مِنْ قَواعِدِ الدّينِ: إخلاصُ اليَقينِ، ونُصْحُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُسْلِمينَ،وَ إقامَةُ الصَّلاةِ، وإيتاءُ الزَّكاةِ، وحِجُّ البَيْتِ،
والزُّهْدُ فِي الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

55. The rectitude of religion is [through] piety.

> 55ـ صَلاحُ الدّينِ الوَرَعُ.

56. The rectitude of religion is through strong conviction.

> 56ـ صَلاحُ الدّينِ بِحُسْنِ اليَقينِ.

57. Make religion the fortress of your state and [make] gratitude the
protection of your blessings, for every state that is surrounded by
religion will not be defeated and every blessing that is protected by
gratitude will not be taken away.

> 57ـ صَيِّرِ الدّينَ حِصْنَ دَوْلَتِكَ، والشُّكْرَ حِرْزَ نِعْمَتِكَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلُّ دَوْلَة يَحُوطُها الدّينُ لاتُغْلَبُ، وكُلُّ نِعْمَة
يَحْرُزُها الشُّكْرُ لا تُسْلَبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

58. Make religion the shield of your life and piety the preparation for
your death.

> 58ـ صَيِّرِ الدّينَ جُنَّـةَ حَياتِكَ، والتَّقْوى عُدَّةَ وَفاتِكَ.

59. A person’s preservation [of himself from sin] is to the extent of
his religiousness.

> 59ـ صِيانَةُ المَرءِ على قَدْرِ دِيانَتِهِ.

60. Safeguard your religion through your worldly life and you will gain
both of them, and do not safeguard your worldly life through your
religion thereby losing both of them.

> 60ـ صُنْ دينَكَ بِدُنْياكَ تَرْبَحْهُما، ولا تَصُنْ دُنْياكَ بِدينِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَخْسَرَهُما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

61. Safeguard the faith through [the life of] this world and it will
save you, and do not safeguard [the life of] this world through the
faith otherwise it will destroy you.

> 61ـ صُنْ الدّينَ بالدُّنيا يُنْجِكَ، ولا تَصُنِ الدُّنْيا بِالدّينِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتُردِيَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

62. Blessed is he who acts upon the teachings of religion and follows
the footsteps of the Prophets.

> 62ـ طُوبى لِمَنْ عَمِلَ بِسُنَّةِ الدّينِ، واقْتَفى آثارَ النَّبييّنَ.

63. You must cling to religion, piety and certitude, for these are the
best of virtues and through them the lofty stations are attained.

> 63ـ عَلَيْكُمْ بِلُزُومِ الدّينِ، والتَّقوى، واليَقينِ، فَهُنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحْسَنُ الحَسَناتِ، وَ بِهِنَّ يُنالُ رَفيعُ الدَّرَجاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

64. One’s religiousness is proportionate to his intellect.

> 64ـ على قَدْرِ العَقْلِ يَكُونُ الدّينُ.

65. The height of religion is faith [and conviction].

> 65ـ غايَةُ الدّينِ الإيمانُ.

66. The height of religion is satisfaction [with the decree of Allah].

> 66ـ غايَةُ الدّينِ الرِّضا.

67. The height of religion is enjoining good, forbidding evil and
upholding the boundaries [of Islamic law].

> 67ـ غايَةُ الدّينِ اَلأمْرُ بِالمَعْرُوفِ والنَّهيُ عَنِ المُنْكَرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإقامَةُ الحُدُودِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

68. The one who lacks religion falls into disbelief and misguidance.

> 68ـ فاقِدُ الدّينِ مُتَرَدّ فِي الكُفْرِ والضَّلالِ.

69. This world is the corruptor of religion.

> 69ـ فَسادُ الدّينِ الدُّنيا.

70. The basis of religious law is enjoining good, forbidding evil and
upholding the boundaries [of Islamic law].

> 70ـ قِوامُ الشَّريعَةِ الأمَرُ بِالمَعْروفِ، والنَّهيُ عَنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُنْكَرِ، وإقامَةُ الحُدوُدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

71. Just as a body and its shadow do not separate, so too religion and
success do not separate.

> 71ـ كَما أنَّ الجِسْمَ والظِّلَّ لا يَفْتَرِقانِ، كَذلِكَ الدّينُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والتَّوفيقُ لايَفْتَرقانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

72. For every religion there is a character and the character of faith
is kindness.

> 72ـ لِكُلِّ دين خُلُقٌ، وخُلُقُ الإيمانِ الرِّفْقُ.

73. One who becomes religious fortifies himself.

> 73ـ مَنْ دانَ تَحَصَّنَ.

74. One who is stingy with his religion [and does not give it up for the
sake of this world] becomes exalted.

> 74ـ مَنْ بَخِلَ بِدينِهِ جَلَّ.

75. He who has no religion has no magnanimity.

> 75ـ مَنْ لادينَ لَهُ لا مُرُوَّةَ لَهُ.

76. One who becomes learned in religion increases [his prosperity].

> 76ـ مَنْ تَفَقَّهَ فِي الدّينِ كَثُرَ.

77. One whose religiousness is sound, his trustworthiness is stronger.

> 77ـ مَنْ صَحَّتْ دِيانَتُهُ قَوِيَتْ أمانَتُهُ.

78. One who corrupts his faith corrupts his Hereafter.

> 78ـ مَنْ أفْسَدَ دينَهُ أفْسَدَ مَعادَهُ.

79. One who is endowed with religion is endowed with the good of this
world and the Hereafter.

> 79ـ مَنْ رُزِقَ الدّينُ فَقَدْ رُزِقَ خَيْـرَ الدُّنيا والآخِرَةِ.

80. One who considers his religion to be precious, [the hardship of]
this world becomes easy for him [to bear].

> 80ـ مَنْ كَرُمَ دينُهُ عِنْدَهُ هانَتِ الدُّنيا عَلَيْهِ.

81. One whose faith is strong is certain about the reward [he will get
for his good actions] and is satisfied with whatever has been decreed
[for him by Allah].

> 81ـ مَنْ قَوِيَ دينُهُ أيْقَنَ بِالجَزاءِ ورَضِيَ بِمَواقِعِ القَضاءِ.

82. One who has no religion has no salvation.

> 82ـ مَنْ لادينَ لَهُ لانَجاةَ لَهُ.

83. One whose observance of religion is thorough, his position in the
Hereafter will be exalted.

> 83ـ مَنْ دَقَّ فِي الدّينِ نَظَرُهُ، جَلَّ يَوْمَ القِيمَةِ خَطَرُهُ.

84. One who is careless in his religion becomes lowly and one who fights
with the truth, is forced to yield [to it].

> 84ـ مَنْ تَهاوَنَ بِالدّينِ هانَ، ومَنْ غالَبَ الحَقَّ لانَ.

85. Whoever takes the religion of Allah as idle sport and play, Allah,
the Glorified, will put him into the fire for eternity.

> 85ـ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ دينَ اللّهِ لَهْواً ولَعِباً أدْخَلَهُ اللّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَهُ النّارَ مُخَلَّداً فيها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

86. One who is cautious [and concerned] about this religion is safe from
destruction.

> 86ـ مَنْ أشْفَقَ على دينِهِ سَلِمَ مِنَ الرَّدى.

87. Nothing undermines religion like abandoning the upholding of Allah’s
religion and neglecting the obligatory [actions].

> 87ـ ما أوْهَنَ الدّينَ كَتَرْكِ إقامَةِ دينِ اللّهِ وتَضْييعِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفَرائِضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

88. The basis of religion is piety.

> 88ـ مِلاكُ الدّينِ الوَرَعُ.

89. The basis of religion is opposing vain desires.

> 89ـ ملاِكُ الدّينِ مُخالَفَةُ الهَوى.

90. What a good companion religion is!

> 90ـ نِعْمَ القَرينُ الدّينُ.

91. Keep your religions unsullied by uncertainties and safeguard
yourselves from situations of destructive doubts.

> 91ـ نَزِّهُوا أدْيانَكُمْ عَنِ الشُّبَهاتِ، وصُونُوا أنْفُسَكُمْ عَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَواقِعِ الرَّيبِ المُوبِقاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

92. The structure of religion is [based on] opposing vain desires and
keeping away from [the unlawful pleasures of] this world.

> 92ـ نِظامُ الدّينِ مُخالَفَةُ الهَوى، والتَّنَزُّهُ عَنِ الدُّنيا.

93. The structure of religion is [based on] two qualities: your
impartiality towards yourself and supporting your brethren.

> 93ـ نِـظامُ الدّينِ خَصْلَتانِ: إنْصافُكَ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ، ومُواساةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إخْوانِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

94. Guided is the one who puts on the garment of religion.

> 94ـ هُدِىَ مَنْ تَجَلْبَبَ جِلْبابَ الدّينِ.

95. In describing the religion of Islam [he (‘a) said]: It is the
brightest of all paths, the clearest [and most illuminated] of all
passages; it is an elevated land, [with] a lofty peak.

> 95ـ في ذِكْرِ دينِ الإسْلامِ: هُوَ أبْلَجُ المَناهِجِ، نَيِّـرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الوَلائِجِ، مُشْرِفُ الأقْطارِ، رَفيعُ الغايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

96. Guard your religion by seeking help from Allah.

> 96ـ وَقُّوا دينَكُمْ بِالاِسْتِعانَةِ بِاللّهِ.

97. Do not be neglectful of your religion and eager for your world by
seeking more of that which will not last for you and less of that which
will last for you, for this will lead you to severe chastisement [in the
Hereafter].

> 97ـ لا تَكُنْ غافِلاً عَنْ دينِكَ، حَريصاً على دُنياكَ، مُسْتَكْثِراً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِمّا لا يَبْقى عَلَيْكَ، مُسْتَقِلاًّ مِمّا يَبْقى لَكَ، فَيُورِدَكَ
ذلِكَ العَذابَ الشَّديدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

98. Religion does not remain safe with avarice.

> 98ـ لايَسْلَمُ الدّينُ مَعَ الطَّمَعِ.

99. Religion does not surrender the one who takes refuge in it.

> 99ـ لايُسْلِمُ الدّينُ مَنْ تَحَصَّنَ بِهِ.

100. The religiousness of a man is deduced by the virtue of his
God-wariness and the truth of his piety.

> 100ـ يُسْتَدَلُّ على دينِ الرَّجُلِ بِحُسْنِ تَقْواهُ وصِدْقِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَعِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


