Vices And Those Who Commit Them
===============================

**Vices and Those who commit them الذُّنوب والمعاصي وأهلها**

1. Vices are a disease, and its remedy is seeking forgiveness, and its
cure is not repeating [the vices].

> 1ـ الذُّنوبُ الدّاءُ، والدَّواءُ الاِسْتِغفارُ،وَ الشِّفاءُ أنْ لا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعُودَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Taking a sin lightly is worse than committing the sin.

> 2ـ تَهْوينُ الذَّنبِ أعْظَمُ مِنْ رُكُوبِ الذَّنْبِ.

3. Giving up sin is difficult, but giving up Paradise is [going to be]
more difficult.

> 3ـ تَرْكُ الذَّنْبِ شَديدٌ، وأشَدُّ مِنْهُ تَرْكُ الجَنَّةِ.

4. Things come to us that seem to be much when we amass them but which
we consider to be less when we divide them.

> 4ـ تَأتينا أشْياءُ نَسْتَكْثِرُها إذا جَمَعْناها، وَنَسْتَقِلُّها إذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَسَمْناها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Be careful of the sins that lead you to deep trouble the vices that
bring the wrath of Allah.

> 5ـ اِحْذَرُوا الذُّنُوبَ المُورِطَةَ، والعُيُوبَ المُسْخِطَةَ.

6. Refrain from desecration of the sacred, for indeed this is the
practice of the wicked and the people of depravity and vice.

> 6ـ إيّاكَ وانْتِهاكَ المَحارِمِ، فَإنَّها شيمَةُ الفُسّاقِ وأُولِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفُجُورِ، والغَوايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Refrain from persistence [in committing vices] for it is surely the
gravest of great sins and the worst of offences.

> 7ـ إيّاكَ والإصْرارَ، فَإنَّهُ مِنْ أكْبَرِ الكَبائِرِ وأعَظَمِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجَرائِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Refrain from exposing [your] sins, for this is one of the worst of
offences.

> 8ـ إيّاكَ والمُجاهَرَةَ بِالفُجُورِ، فَإنَّها مِنْ أشَدِّ المَ آثِمِ.

9. Refrain from vices, for the one who sells the eternal Paradise for a
vile sin from the sins of this world is indeed wretched.

> 9ـ إيّاكَ والمعصِيَةَ، فَإنَّ اللَئيمَ (الشَّقيَّ) مَنْ باعَ جَنَّـةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَأوى بِمَعْصِيَة دَنِيَّة مِنْ مَعاصِي الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Do not take the committing of vices lightly, for verily it will
cover you with humiliation in this world and earn you the wrath of Allah
in the Hereafter.

> 10ـ إيّاكَ أنْ تَسْتَسْهِلَ رُكُوبَ المَعاصي، فَإنَّها تَـكْسُوكَ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا ذِلَّةً، وتَـكْسِبُكَ فِي الآخِرَةِ سَخَطَ اللّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Verily wrongdoings are [like] wild horses that carry their riders on
their backs while their bridles have been thrown off, so they take them
[straight] into the fire of hell.

> 11ـ ألا وإنَّ الخَطايا خَيْلٌ شُمُسٌ حُمِلَ عَلَيْها أهْلُها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وخُلِعَتْ لُجُمُها فَأوْرَدَتْهُمُ النَّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. The greatest misdeed is recommending the vicious.

> 12ـ أكْبَرُ الأَوْزارِ تَزْكِيَةُ الأشْرارِ.

13. The worst misdeed is refusing to accept an excuse [that is valid].

> 13ـ أعْظَمُ الوِزْرِ مَنْعُ قَبُولِ العُذْرِ.

14. The worst of sins in the sight of Allah is the sin upon which its
doer persists.

> 14ـ أعظَمُ الذُّنُوبِ عِنْدَ اللّهِ ذَنْبٌ أصَرَّ عَلَيْهِ عامِلُهُ.

15. The gravest of sins in the sight of Allah, the Glorified, is the sin
which is taken lightly by the one who commits it.

> 15ـ أشَدُّ الذُّنُوبِ عِنْدَ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ ذَنْبٌ اِسْتَهانَ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
راكِبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. The vice that brings the quickest retribution is oppressing the one
who does not oppress you.

> 16ـ أسْرَعُ المَعاصي عُقُوبَةً أنْ تَبْغِيَ على مَنْ لا يَبْغي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. The vilest of sins is cutting off ties with near relatives and
impiety [with one’s parents].

> 17ـ أقْبَحُ المَعاصي قَطيعَةُ الرَّحِمِ والعُقُوقُ.

18. The gravest of sins is the sin upon which the sinner persists.

> 18ـ أعْظَمُ الذُّنُوبِ ذَنبٌ أصَرَّ عَلَيْهِ صاحِبُهُ.

19. Verily the vice with the worst of consequences is error [and
misguidance].

> 19ـ إنَّ أسْوَءَ المَعاصي مَغَبَّةً ألْغَيُّ.

20. Verily Allah, the Glorified, hates the one who is insolent and bold
in committing sins.

> 20ـ إنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ لَيُبْغِضُ الوَقِحَ المُتَجَرِّئَ علَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَاصي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Indeed one who disobeys Allah is the enemy of Muhammad (s), even if
he is the nearest of his relatives.

> 21ـ إنَّ عَدُوَّ مُحَمَّد صلَّى اللّه عليه وآله وسلَّم مَنْ عَصَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهَ وإنْ قَرُبَتْ قَرابَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Verily the clemency shown by Allah, the Most High, despite [your]
acts of disobedience has made you bold and has driven you to [do things
that will] destroy yourself.

> 22ـ إنَّ حِلْمَ اللّهِ تعالى علَى المَعاصي جَرَّأَكَ، وبِهَلَكَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَفْسِكَ أغْراكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Persistence [in sinning] is the practice of the depraved.

> 23ـ ألإصرارُ شيمَةُ الفُّجارِ.

24. Persistence [in sinning] leads one to hellfire.

> 24ـ اَلإصرارُ يُوجِبُ النّارَ.

25. The one who openly declares his sin is an advertiser [of his
disobedience to Allah].

> 25ـ اَلمُعْلِنُ بِالمَعْصِيَةِ مُجاهِرٌ.

26. Disobedience [to Allah] is the negligence of the vicious (or the
weak).

> 26ـ اَلمَعصِيَةُ تَفْريطُ الفَجَرَةِ (العَجَزَةِ).

27. Sin prevents the one’s supplication from being answered.

> 27ـ اَلمَعْصيَةُ تَمْنَعُ الإجابَةَ.

28. Persistence [in sinning] is the worst of ideas.

> 28ـ اَلإصْرارُ شَرُّ الآراءِ.

29. Persistence [in sinning] is the gravest of sins.

> 29ـ اَلإصْرارُ أعْظَمُ حَوْبَةً.

30. Persistence [in sinning] is the trait of the doomed.

> 30ـ اَلإصرارُ سَجِيَّةُ الهَلْكى.

31. Retribution is the fruit of misdeeds.

> 31ـ اَلعِقابُ ثِمارُ السَّيـِّئاتِ.

32. Persistence [in sinning] brings [divine] wrath.

> 32ـ اَلمَعْصِيَةُ تَمْنَعُ الإجابَةَ.

33. Disobedience [to Allah] brings retribution.

> 33ـ اَلإصرارُ يَجْلِبُ النِّقْمَةَ.

34. Returning to sin [and repeating it] is persistence [in sinning].

> 34ـ اَلمَعْصِيَةُ تَجْتَلِبُ العُقُوبَةَ.

35. Persistence [in sinning] is the gravest sin and the quickest in
[bringing] retribution.

> 35ـ المُعاوَدَةُ إلَى الذَّنْبِ إصْرارٌ.

36. Keeping away from vices is more important [and better] than earning
good deeds.

> 36ـ اَلإصرارُ أعْظَمُ حَوْبَةً، وأسْرَعُ عُقُوبَةً.

37. If you must, by all means, be pure, then purify yourselves from
vices of the hearts.

> 37ـ اِجْتِنابُ السَّيـِّئاتِ أوْلى مِنِ اكْتِسابِ الحَسَناتِ.

38. If you must, by all means, be clean, then clean yourselves from the
filth of flaws and vices.

> 38ـ إنْ كُنتُمْ لامُحالَةَ مُتَنَزِّهينَ، فَتَنَزَّهُوا عَنْ مَعاصِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القُلُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

39. If you purify yourselves from vices, Allah will love you.

> 39ـ إنْ كُنْتُمْ لا مُحالَةَ مُتَطَهِّرينَ، فَتَطَهَّرُوا مِنْ دَنَسِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُيُوبِ وَالذُّنوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

40. Verily if you keep away from vices you will attain elevated ranks.

> 40ـ إنْ تَنَزَّهُوا عَنِ المَعاصي يُحبِبْكُمُ اللّهُ.

41. The bane of obedience is insubordination.

> 41ـ إنَّكَ إنِ اجْتَنَبْتَ السَّيـِّئاتِ نِلْتَ رَفيعَ الدَّرَجاتِ.

42. When you commit a sin then be remorseful for it.

> 42ـ آفَةُ الطّاعَةِ العِصْيانُ.

43. It is through disobedience [to Allah] that wretchedness comes about.

> 43ـ إذا قارَفْتَ ذَنْباً فَكُنْ عَلَيْهِ نادِماً.

44. Through disobedience [to Allah] the [gate of] hellfire is closed for
the aberrant [and they are unable to escape it].

> 44ـ بِالمَعصِيَةِ تَكُونُ الشَّقاءُ.

45. How evil an action disobedience [to Allah] is!

> 45ـ بِالمَعْصِيَةِ تُؤْصَدُ النّارُ لِلْغاوينَ.

46. Avoid disobeying Allah and you will be successful.

> 46ـ بِئسَ العَمَلُ المَعْصيَةُ.

47. Guard yourself against sins and restrain yourselves from them, for
indeed, wretched is the one who gives them free rein.

> 47ـ تَوَقَّ مَعاصِيَ اللّهِ تُفْلِحْ.

48. Exalted is Allah, the Mighty, [yet] how lenient is He! And you are
lowly and weak yet how bold you are in your disobedience to Him!

> 48ـ تَوَقُّوا المَعاصِيَ، واحْبِسُوا أنْفُسَكُمْ عَنْها، فَإنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّقِيَّ مَنْ أطْلَقَ فيها عِنانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

49. The sweetness of sin is spoilt by the pain of retribution.

> 49ـ تعالَى اللّهُ مِنْ قَوِيّ ما أحْلَمَهُ، وَتَواضَعْتَ مِنْ ضَعيف ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أجْرَأَكَ على مَعاصيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

50. The outcome of sins is loss [and destruction].

> 50ـ حَلاوَةُ المَعصيَةِ يُفْسِدُها أَليمُ العُقُوبَةِ.

51. Many a great sin of yours is deemed by you as [being] small.

> 51ـ حاصِلُ المَعاصي التَّلَفُ.

52. The one who embarks upon sin, his [final] abode is hellfire.

> 52ـ رُبَّ كبير مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ تَسْتَصْغِرُهُ.

53. Submission to sin is the trait of the doomed.

> 53ـ راكِبُ المَعْصِيَةِ مَثْواهُ النّارُ.

54. I am amazed at the person who knows the severity of Allah’s
retribution and [yet] he still continues being persistent [in sinning].

> 54ـ طاعَةُ المَعْصِيَةِ سَجِيَّةُ الهَلْكى.

55. The companion of vices is the hostage of [his] misdeeds.

> 55ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ عَلِمَ شِدَّةَ انْتِقامِ اللّهِ مِنْهُ وهُوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُقيمٌ علَى الإصرارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

56. For every evil act there is punishment.

> 56ـ قَرينُ المَعاصي رَهينُ السَّيـِّئاتِ.

57. For the one who is bold in [committing] sins there are retributions
from the chastisement of Allah, the Glorified.

> 57ـ لِكُلِّ سَيِّئَة عِقابٌ.

58. If Allah, the Glorified, had not forbidden that which He has
ordained as unlawful, it would have [still] been mandatory for the
intelligent one to keep away from it.

> 58ـ لِلْمُجْتَرِيِ علَى المَعاصي نِقَمٌ مِنْ عَذابِ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ.

59. Rejoicing in vices is uglier than committing them.

> 59ـ لَوْ لَمْ يَنْهَ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ عنْ مَحارِمِهِ لَوَجَبَ أنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَجْتَنِبَها العاقِلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

60. Is there any place of protection or shelter, or any sanctuary or
asylum, or any place to flee or return back to?

> 60ـ اَلتَّبَجُّجُ بِالمَعاصي أقْبَحُ مِنْ رُكُوبِها.

61. Do not persist in that which is followed by sin.

> 61ـ هَلْ مِنْ خَلاص أوْ مَناص أو مَلاذ أو مَعاذ أو فِرار أو مَحار.

62. Do not tear your veils [of innocence] in front of the One who knows
your secrets.

> 62ـ لا تُصِرَّ على ما يُعَقِّبُ الإثْمَ.

63. Do not undertake acts of disobedience to Allah, the Glorified, and
act with obedience to Him, as this will be a provision for you [in the
Hereafter].

> 63ـ لا تَهْتِكُوا أسْتارَكُمْ عِنْدَ مَنْ يَعْلَمُ أسْرارَكُمْ.

64. Never belittle the small sins, for they are indeed dangerous [and
destructive]; and one who is surrounded by his belittled [sins] is
destroyed by them.

> 64ـ لاتَعَرَّضْ لِمَعاصِي اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ، واعمَلْ بِطاعَتِهِ يَكُنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكَ ذُخْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

65. Those who remain behind [in this world after others have passed away
before them] do not stop from committing sins.

> 65ـ لا تُحَقِّرَنَّ صَغائِرَ الآثامِ، فَإنَّهَا المُوبِقاتُ، ومَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحاطَتْ بِهِ مُحَقَّراتُهُ أهْلَكَتْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

66. There is no vice greater than persistence [in sinning].

> 66ـ لايَرْعَوِي الباقُونَ اجْتِراماً.

67. There is no vice greater than rejoicing in acts of depravity.

> 67ـ لاوِزْرَ أعْظَمُ مِنَ الإصْرارِ.

68. One who is persistent in his sin shows audacity in front of the
wrath of his Lord.

> 68ـ لاوِزْرَ أعْظَمُ مِنَ التَّبَجُّجِ بِالفُجُورِ.

69. Whoever takes pleasure in the disobedience of Allah is made to
suffer utter humiliation by Allah.

> 69ـ مَنْ أصَرَّ على ذَنْبِهِ اجْتَرى على سَخَطِ رَبِّهِ.

70. One whose sins increase, his disparagement becomes necessary.

> 70ـ مَنْ تَلَذَّذَ بِمَعاصِي اللّهِ أوْرَثَهُ اللّهُ ذُلاًّ.

71. Neither are blessings taken away from you nor are you deprived of
any comforts of life but because of the sins that you commit, and Allah
is not unjust to the Servants.

> 71ـ مَنْ كَثُرَتْ مَعْصِيَتُهُ وَجَبَتْ إهانَتُهُ.

72. None of the acts of disobedience to Allah, the Glorified, come about
except in [the garb of] desire.

> 72ـ ما زالَتْ عَنْكُمْ نِعْمَةٌ وَلا غَضارَةُ عَيْش إلاّ بِذُنُوب
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اجْتَرَحْتُمُوها، وَمَا اللّهُ بِظَلاّم لِلْعَبيدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

73. Constant sinning cuts [one’s] sustenance.

> 73ـ ما مِنْ شَيء مِنْ مَعْصيَةِ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ يَأتي إلاّ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهْوَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

74. Openly [and boldly] sinning in front of Allah [without any shame]
hastens [divine] retributions.

> 74ـ مُداوَمَةُ المَعاصي تَقْطَعُ الرِّزْقَ.

75. We seek refuge with Allah from the evils of the intellect (or from
evil actions) and the ugliness of errors, and from Him do we seek
assistance [against all this].

> 75ـ مُجاهَرَةُ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ بِالمعاصي تُعَجِّلُ النِّقَمَ.

76. Far be it! You have not feigned ignorance except because of what has
passed before you of mistakes and sins.

> 76ـ نَعُوذُ بِاللّهِ مِنْ سَيِّئاتِ العَقْلِ(العَمَلِ) وقُبْحِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّلَلِ وبِهِ نَسْتَعينُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

77. Every disobedient one is a sinner.

> 77ـ هَيْهاتَ ما تَناكَرْتُمْ إلاّ لِما قَبْلَكُمْ مِنَ الخَطايا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والذُّنُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

78. Whoever disobeys Allah, his status gets lowered.

> 78ـ كُلُّ عاص مُتَأَثِّمٌ.

79. Woe be to the sinner, how ignorant he is and how much of his share
he has relinquished!

> 79ـ مَنْ عَصَى اللّهَ ذَلَّ قَدْرُهُ.

80. Woe to the one who is afflicted with disobedience, deprivation and
abandonment.

> 80ـ وَيْحَ العاصي ما أجْهَلَهُ وعَنْ حَظِّهِ ما أعْدَلَهُ.

81. Rushing into vices causes [one to face] the chastisement of
hellfire.

> 81ـ وَيْلٌ لِمَنْ بُلِيَ بِعِصْيان وحِرْمان وخِذْلان.

82. When committing sins, recall how the pleasures will [soon] end and
the consequences that follow will remain.

> 82ـ اَلتَّهَجُّمُ علَى المَعاصي يُوجِبُ عِقابَ النَّارِ.

83. Be wary of the sins done in seclusion, for indeed the Witness (to
it) is the Judge.

> 83ـ أُذْكُرُوا عِنْدَ المَعاصي ذَهابَ اللَّذاتِ، وبَقاءَ التَّبَعاتِ.

84. Caution, caution O listener! Strive, strive O intelligent one! None
can inform you like the One who is all-aware.

> 84ـ اِتَّقُوا مَعاصِيَ الخَلَواتِ فَإنَّ الشّاهِدَ هُوَ الحاكِمُ.

85. I am amazed at the one who avoids the food that could harm him, how
does he not avoid the sin that would bring painful chastisement?!

> 85ـ ألحَذَرَ ألحَذَرَ أيُّها المُسْتَمِعُ، وَالجِدَّ اجِدَّ أيُّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العاقِلُ، ولايُنَبِّئُكَ مِثْلُ خَبير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

86. Vice is the endeavour of the filthy.

> 86ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ يَحْتَمِي الطَّعامَ لأذِيَّتهِ كَيْفَ لا يَحْتَمِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذَّنْبَ لأَليمِ عُقُوبَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

87. How bad a leash is the leash of vices!

> 87ـ اَلمَعْصِيَةُ هِمَّةُ الأرْجاسِ.

88. In every evil act there is retribution.

> 88ـ بِئْسَ القِلادَةُ قِلادَةُ الآثامِ.

89. The one who sins knowingly does not deserve pardon.

> 89ـ في كُلِّ سَيِّئَة عُقُوبَةٌ.

90. Denial [of sin] is persistence [in it].

> 90ـ اَلمُذْنِبُ على بَصيرَة غَيْرُ مُسْتَحِقّ لِلْعَفْوِ.

91. The one who sins without knowing is free from sin.

> 91ـ اَلإنكارُ إصرارٌ.

92. The weapon of the sinner is repentance.

> 92ـ اَلمُذْنِبُ عَنْ غَيرِ عِلْم بَريءٌ مِنَ الذَّنبِ.

93. A sinner who confesses his sin is better than the obedient one who
is proud of his action.

> 93ـ سِلاحُ المُذْنِبِ الاِسْتِغْفارُ.

94. Do not dishearten a sinner, for how many a person who is occupied
with his sin ends up being forgiven, and how many a person has embarked
on a virtuous action which he corrupts at the end of his life and winds
up in the fire of hell.

> 94ـ عاص يُقِرُّ بِذَنْبِهِ خَيْرٌ مِنْ مُطيع يَفْتَخِرُ بِعَمَلِهِ.

> 95ـ لاتُؤْيِسَنَّ مُذْنِباً فَكَمْ عاكِف على ذَنْبِهِ خُتِمَ لَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالمَغْفِرَةِ، وكَمْ مُقْبِل على عَمَل هُوَ مُفْسِدٌلَهُ خُتِمَ لَهُ
في آخِرِ عُمْرِهِ بِالنّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


