Opinions And The Opinonated
===========================

**Opinions and the Opinonated**[^1] **الرأي والآراء والمستبد بالرأي**

1. Restrict your opinion to that which is necessary and you will be
safe; avoid entering into that which does not concern you and you will
be honoured.

> 1ـ اُقْصُرْ رَأيَكَ على ما يَلْزَمُكَ تَسْلَمْ، وَدَعِ الخَوضَ فيما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايَعنيكَ تَكْرُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Churn the opinion [like] the churning of a water-skin, and the
outcome will be the most pertinent of opinions.

> 2ـ اِمْخِضُوا الرَّأيَ مَخْضَ السِّقاءِ، يُنْتِجْ سَديدَ الآراءِ.

3. The closest of opinions to reason will be the furthest of them from
vain desire.

> 3ـ أقْرَبُ الآراءِ مِنَ النُّهى أبْعَدُها مِنَ الهَوى.

4. The ones who possess most pertinent opinions are those who have
experience.

> 4ـ أمْلَكُ النَّاسِ لِسِدادِ الرَّأيِ كُلُّ مُجَرِّب.

5. The person with the best opinion is he who does not consider himself
needless of the counsel of an advisor.

> 5ـ أفْضَلُ النَّاسِ رَأياً مَنْ لا يَسْتَغْني عَنْ رَأيِ مُشير.

6. The best opinion is one which neither causes opportunities to be
wasted nor brings about distress.

> 6ـ أفْضَلُ الرَّأيِ ما لَمْ يُفِتِ الفُرَصَ، ولَم يُورِثِ الغُصَصَ.

7. Indeed your opinion cannot encompass everything, so leave it for the
important [issues].

> 7ـ إنَّ رَأيَكَ لا يَتَّسِعُ لِكُلِّ شَيْء، فَفَرِّغْهُ لِلْمُهِمِّ.

8. The [right] opinion is [acquired] by protecting secrets.

> 8ـ اَلرَّأيُ بِتَحصينِ الأسرارِ.

9. Through correct opinion (or prudence), ones judiciousness is
strengthened.

> 9ـ بِإصابَة (بِأصالةِ) الرَّأيِ يَقْوَى الحَزْمُ.

10. The best of opinions is the furthest of them from vain desire and
the closest of them to pertinence.

> 10ـ خَيْرُ الآراءِ أبْعَدُها عَنِ الهَوى، وأقْرَبُها مِنَ السَّدادِ.

11. Hidden opinions are revealed through consultation.

> 11ـ خَوافِي الآراءِ تَكْشِفُهَا المُشاوَرَةُ.

12. The opinion of an elderly person is more beloved to me than the
fortitude [and bravery] of a youth.

> 12ـ رَأيُ الشَّيْخِ أحَبُّ إلَيَّ مِنْ جَلَدِ الغُلامِ.

13. A person’s opinion is the gauge of his intelligence.

> 13ـ رَأيُ الرَّجُلِ مِيزانُ عَقْلِهِ.

14. The opinion of an intelligent person saves.

> 14ـ رَأيُ العاقِلِ يُنْجي.

15. The opinion of an ignorant person destroys.

> 15ـ رَأيُ الجاهِلِ يُردي.

16. The opinion of a person is in accordance with his experience.

> 16ـ رَأيُ الرَّجُلِ على قَدْرِ تَجْرِبَتِهِ.

17. Erroneous opinion annihilates the kingdom and heralds destruction.

> 17ـ زَلَّةُ الرَّأيِ تَأتي عَلَى المُلْكِ وتُؤْذِنُ بِالهُلْكِ.

18. The most evil of opinions is that which goes against the laws of
Islam.

> 18ـ شَرُّ الآراءِ ما خالَفَ الشَّريعَةَ.

19. The validity of an opinion is [measured] by the sincerity of the
adviser.

> 19ـ صَلاحُ الرَّأيِ بِنُصْحِ المُسْتَشيرِ.

20. Correct opinion saves [one] from errors.

> 20ـ صَوابُ الرَّأيِ يُؤمِنُ الزَّلَلَ.

21. Correct opinion [and decision] comes with [the coming of] power and
it vanishes with its disappearance.

> 21ـ صَوابُ الرَّأيِ بِالدُّوَلِ ويَذْهَبُ بِذِهابِها.

22. Correct opinion is [derived] through careful consideration.

> 22ـ صَوابُ الرَّأيِ بِإجالَةِ الأفكارِ.

23. Misguided opinion corrupts the goals.

> 23ـ ضَلَّةُ الرَّأيِ تُفسِدُ المَقاصِدَ.

24. Determination [and resolve] is proportionate to the strength of
one’s opinion.

> 24ـ عَلى قَدْرِ الرَّأيِ تَكُونُ العَزيمَةُ.

25. Indeed the lone opinion [without any consultation] may be erroneous.

> 25ـ قَدْ يَزِلُّ الرَّأيُ الفَذُّ.

26. Indeed one who thinks his opinion is sufficient [and does not seek
advice] has taken a [huge] risk.

> 26ـ قَدْ خاطَرَ مَنِ اسْتَغْنى بِرَأيِهِ.

27. One who is ignorant of the different opinions is incapacitated by
ruses [and is unable to decide on the correct course].

> 27ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ وُجوهَ الآراءِ أعْيَتْهُ الحِيَلُ.

28. One who fails to apply the [correct] opinion becomes disconcerted.

> 28ـ مَنْ أضاعَ الرَّأيَ إرْتَبَكَ.

29. One who acts on the [correct] opinion, benefits [from it].

> 29ـ مَنْ أعْمَلَ الرَّأيَ غَنِمَ.

30. One whose opinions are weak, his enemies become stronger.

> 30ـ مَنْ ضَعُفَتْ آراؤُهُ قَوِيَتْ أعْداؤُهُ.

31. One who is impressed by his [own] opinions is defeated by his
enemies.

> 31ـ مَنْ أعْجَبَتْهُ آراؤُهُ غَلَبَتْهُ أعْداؤُهُ.

32. One who admires his [own] opinion is overwhelmed (or destroyed) by
incompetence.

> 32ـ مَنْ اُعْجِبَ بِرَأيِهِ مَلَكَهُ (أهْلَكَهُ) العَجْزُ.

33. Do not become opinionated [and headstrong], for the one who is
opinionated is destroyed.

> 33 ـ لا تَسْتَبِدَّ بِرَأيِكَ، فَمَنِ اسْتَبَدَّ بِرَأيِهِ هَلَكَ.

34. Do not use opinion [and conjecture] in that which is neither
perceived by sight nor penetrated by thought.

> 34ـ لاتَسْتَعْمِلُوا الرَّأيَ فيما لايُدْرِكُهُ البَصَرُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولاتَتَغَلْغَلُ فيهِ الفِكَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

35. One who is not obeyed has no opinion.

> 35ـ لا رَأيَ لِمَنْ لا يُطاعُ.

36. One who is content with his [own] opinion is indeed doomed.

> 36ـ مَنْ قَنِعَ بِرَأيِهِ فَقَدْ هَلَكَ.

37. When one is opinionated, it becomes easy for his enemies to defeat
him.

> 37ـ مَنِ اسْتَبَدَّ بِرَأيِهِ خَفَّتْ وَطْأَتُهُ على أعْدائِهِ.

38. One who takes the different opinions into consideration recognizes
the points of error.

> 38ـ مَنِ اسْتَقْبَلَ وُجوهَ الآراءِ عَرَفَ مَواقِعَ الخَطاءِ.

39. One who is opinionated has endangered and imperilled [himself].

> 39ـ مَنِ اسْتَبَدَّ بِرَأيِهِ خاطَرَ وغَرَّرَ.

40. The opinionated one falls into error and blunder.

> 40ـ المُسْتَبِدُّ مُتَهَوِّرٌ فِي الخَطاءِ والغَلَطِ.

41. Indeed the opinionated one has made an error [by not considering the
other opinions].

> 41ـ قَدْ أخْطَاءَ المُسْتَبِدُّ.

42. One who is opinionated [and headstrong] slips.

> 42ـ مَنِ اسْتَبَدَّ بِرَأيِهِ زَلَّ.

43. Being opinionated will make you slip and will cause you to fall into
an abyss.

> 43ـ اَلاِسْتِبْدادُ بِرَأيِكَ يُزِلُّكَ، وَيُهَوِّرُكَ فِي المَهاوي.

44. How bad a disposition opinionatedness [and arbitrariness] is!

> 44ـ بِئْسَ الاِسْتِعْدادُ الاِستِبْدادُ.

[^1]: Literally translated as: one who stubbornly holds on to his own
opinion without considering the opinions of others.


