Hope In [The Mercy Of] Allah And [In] Others
============================================

**Hope in [The Mecy of] Allah and [in] others الرجاء من اللّه وغيره**

1. Keep all your hope for Allah, the Glorified, and do not have hope
[in] anyone other than Him, for indeed no one has hoped in other than
Allah, the Exalted, but that he has been disappointed.

> 1ـ اِجْعَلُوا كُلَّ رَجائِكُمْ لِلّهِ سُبْحانَهُ، ولا تَرْجُوا أحَداً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِواهُ فَإنَّهُ ما رَجا أحدٌ غَيْرَ اللّهِ تعالى إلاّ خابَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. The greatest affliction is the severance of hope.

> 2ـ أعْظَمُ البَلاءِ اِنْقِطاعُ الرَّجاءِ.

3. Hope in the mercy of Allah brings more success.

> 3ـ الرَّجاءُ لِرَحْمَةِ اللّهِ أنْجَحُ.

4. Verily, if you have hope in Allah you will attain your hopes, but if
you have hope in other than Allah then your hopes and aspirations will
be frustrated.

> 4ـ إنَّكُمْ إنْ رَجَوْتُمْ اللّهَ بَلَغْتُمْ آمالَكُمْ، وإنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجَوْتُمْ غَيرَ اللّهِ خابَتْ أمانيُّكم وآمالُكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Many a hope leads to deprivation.

> 5ـ رُبَّ رَجاء يُؤَدّي إلى حِرْمان.

6. Many a frustrated hope is brought about by a false aspiration.

> 6ـ رُبَّ رَجاء خائِب لأِْمَل كاذِب.

7. Be closer to that which you do not hope for than [you are to] that
which you hope for.

> 7ـ كُنْ لِما لاتَرْجُو أقْرَبُ مِنْكَ لِما تَرْجُو.

8. For every absence, there is a return.

> 8ـ لِكُلِّ غَيْبَة إيابٌ.

9. At times the distant may come close and the close may become distant.

> 9ـ لَرُبَّما قَرُبَ البَعيدُ وبَعُدَ القَريبُ.

10. When one has hope in you, [then] do not disappoint his hope.

> 10ـ مَنْ رَجاكَ فَلا تُخَيِّبْ أمَلَهُ.

11. When one is not known to have a generous nature, [then] do not have
hope in him.

> 11ـ مَنْ لَمْ تَعْرِفِ الكَرَمَ مِنْ طَبْعِهِ فَلا تَرْجُهُ.

12. Who would have hope in your kindness when you have cut off ties with
your near relatives?!

> 12ـ مَنْ ذَا الَّذي يَرْجُو فَضْلَكَ إذا قَطَعْتَ ذَوي رَحِمِكَ.

13. Whoever makes Allah, the Glorified, the refuge of his hopes, He will
suffice him in his religious and worldly affairs.

> 13ـ مَنْ جَعَلَ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ مَوْئِلَ رَجائِهِ كَفاهُ أمْرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دينِهِ ودُنياهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. When one takes himself to be lowly, [then] do not expect [or hope]
for any good from him.

> 14ـ مَنْ هانَتْ عَلَيهِ نَفْسُهُ فَلا تَرْجُ خَيْرَهُ.

15. One who does no evil to others, [then] expect good from him.

> 15ـ مَنْ كَفَّ شَرَّهُ فَارْجُ خَيْرَهُ.

16. Do not have hope [or expectation] except from your Lord.

> 16ـ لا تَرْجُ إلاّ رَبَّكَ.

17. Do not hope in that which will cause you to receive rebuke for your
hope.

> 17ـ لاتَرْجُ ما تُعَنَّفُ بِرَجائِكَ.

18. Do not risk anything with the hope of getting more than it.

> 18ـ لاتُخاطِرْ بِشَيْء رَجاءَ أكْثَرَ مِنْهُ.

19. Never have hope in the favour of one who makes you feel obliged, and
do not rely upon the fool and the traitor.

> 19ـ لاتَرْجُوَنَّ فَضْلَ مَنَّان، ولا تَأتَمِنِ الأحْمَقَ والخَوَّانَ.

20. Aba Dharr! Indeed you got angry for the sake of Allah so have hope
in the One whom you got angry for. Indeed the people feared you in the
matter of their world while you feared them for your faith. Then leave
to them that for which they are afraid of you and get away from them
with that which you feared them for. How needy they are for that which
you dissuade them from and how needless you are of that which they deny
you. Even if the skies and the earth were closed to an individual and
[then] he feared Allah, Allah would most certainly open a way for him in
them. So let nothing give you comfort but the truth and let nothing
distress you except falsehood. If you would have accepted their world
[and its attractions] they would have loved you, and if you had shared
in it they would have given you asylum.

> 20 ـ يا أباذَرّ إنَّكَ (إنْ) غُضِبْتَ لِلّهِ فَارْجُ مَنْ غُضِبْتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ، إنَّ القَوْمَ خافُوكَ على دُنْياهُمْ وخِفْتَهُم على
دينِكَ،فَاتْرُكْ في أيْديهِمْ ما خافُوكَ عَلَيْهِ، واهْرُبْ مِنْهُمْ
بِما خِفْتَهُمْ عَلَيْهِ، فَما أحْوَجَهُمْ إلى ما مَنَعْتَهُمْ، وما
أغْناكَ عَمَّا مَنَعُوكَ، وَلَوْ أنَّ السَّمواتِ والأرضَ كانَتا على
عَبْد رَتْقاً ثُمَّ اتَّقَى اللّهَ لَجَعلَ لَهُ مِنْهُما مَخْرَجاً،
فلا يُؤْنِسَنَّكَ إلاَّ الحَقُّ، ولا يُوحِشَنَّكَ إلاَّ الباطِلُ،
فَلَو قَبِلْتَ دُنياهُمْ لأَحَبُّوكَ، ولَوْ قَرَضْتَ مِنْها
لأَمِنُوكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


