Near Relatives And Keeping Or Cutting Off Ties With Them
========================================================

**Near Relatives and Keeping or Cutting off Ties with Them الأرحام
وصلتها وقطيعتها**

1. By keeping ties with near relatives, blessings flow forth
[abundantly].

> 1ـ بِصِلَةِ الرَّحِمِ تَسْتَدِرُّ النِّعَمُ.

2. By cutting off ties with near relatives, [divine] retributions are
brought down.

> 2ـ بِقَطيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ تُسْتَجْلَبُ النِّقَمُ.

3. The kindness of a person towards his near relatives is a [form of]
charity.

> 3ـ بِرُّ الرَّجُلِ ذَوي رَحِمِهِ صَدَقَةٌ.

4. The protection of blessings is in keeping ties with near relatives.

> 4ـ حِراسَةُ النِّعَمِ في صِلَةِ الرَّحِمِ.

5. The descending of [divine] retributions is in cutting off ties with
near relatives.

> 5ـ حُلُولُ النِّقَمِ في قَطيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ.

6. Many a near relative is farther away than one who is distant [or
unrelated].

> 6ـ رُبَّ قَريب أبْعدُ مِنْ بَعيد.

7. Many ties are better to cut off than to keep.

> 7ـ رُبَّ مُواصَلَة خَيْرٌ مِنْها القَطيعَةُ.

8. Sometimes [certain] ties may result in heavy burdens [and
obligations].

> 8ـ رُبَّ مُواصَلَة أدَّتْ إلى تَثْقيل.

9. Keeping ties with near relatives makes blessings flow forth and
repels calamities.

> 9ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ تُدِرُّ النِّعَمَ وتَدْفَعُ النِّقَمَ.

10. Keeping ties with near relatives is one of the best practices.

> 10ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ مِنْ أحسَنِ الشِّيَمِ.

11. Keeping ties with near relatives makes the numbers grow and
multiplies the blessings.

> 11ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ مَنْماةٌ لِلْعَدَدِ مَثْراةٌ لِلنِّعَمِ.

12. Keeping ties with near relatives hurts the enemy and protects one
from falling into evil places of destruction.

> 12 ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ تَسُوءُ العَدُوَّ، وتَقي مَصارِ عَ السُّوءِ.

13. Keeping ties with near relatives produces wealth and delays death.

> 13ـ صِلَةُ الأرحامِ تُثْمِرُ الأمْوالَ، وتُنْسِيُ فِي الآجالِ.

14. Keeping ties with near relatives brings about love and restrains the
enemy.

> 14 ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ تُوجِبُ المَحَبَّةَ، وتَكْبِتُ العَدُوَّ.

15. Keeping ties with near relatives increases [one’s] lifespan and
makes wealth grow [and multiply].

> 15ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ تُوَسِّعُ الآجالَ،وَ تُنْمِي الأمْوالَ.

16. Keeping ties with near relatives is a means of increasing wealth and
a raiser of [good] deeds.

> 16ـ صِلَةُ الأرحامِ مِثْراةٌ فِي الأموالِ، مِرْفَعَةٌ لِلأعْمالِ.

17. Keeping ties with near relatives is from the best practices of the
honourable ones.

> 17ـ صِلَةُ الأرْحامِ مِنْ أفْضَلِ شِيَمِ الكِرامِ.

18. Keeping ties with near relatives makes blessings flourish and repels
[divine] retributions.

> 18ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ عِمارَةُ النِّعَمِ، ودِفاعَةُ النِّقَمِ.

19. Keeping ties with near relatives makes the numbers grow and results
in eminence.

> 19ـ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ تُنْمِي العَدَدَ، وتُوجِبُ السُّؤْدَدَ.

20. One who is neglected by the near one is [made dear to and] supported
by the distant [unrelated] one.

> 20ـ مَنْ ضَيَّعَهُ الأقْرَبُ، اُقيحَ لَهُ الأبْعَدُ.

21. One who wrongs his near relative has indeed disgraced his honour.

> 21ـ مَنْ جَفا أهْلَ رَحِمِهِ، فَقَدْ شانَ كَرَمَهُ.

22. Part of honour is keeping ties with near relatives.

> 22ـ مِنَ الكَرَمِ صِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ.

23. In keeping ties with near relatives there is the safeguarding of
blessings.

> 23ـ في صِلَةِ الرَّحِمِ حِراسَةُ النِّعَمِ.

24. In cutting off ties with near relatives there is the coming down of
[divine] retributions.

> 24ـ في قَطيعةِ الرَّحِمِ حُلُولُ النِّقَمِ.

25. Keeping ties with near relatives is a means of growing the numbers.

> 25ـ وَصِلَةَ الأرْحامِ مَنْماةً لِلْعَدَدِ.

26. Cutting off ties with near relatives brings [divine] retributions.

> 26ـ قَطيعةُ الرَّحِمِ تَجْلُبُ النِّقَمَ.

27. Cutting off ties with near relatives is one of the ugliest
practices.

> 27ـ قَطيعَةُ الرَّحِمِ مِنْ أقْبَحِ الشِّيَمِ.

28. Cutting off ties with near relatives causes the cessation of
blessings.

> 28 ـ قَطيعةُ الرَّحِمِ تُزيلُ النِّعَمَ.

29. There is no increase [in wealth] with cutting off ties with near
relatives.

> 29ـ لَيْسَ مَعَ قَطيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ نَماءٌ.

30. No one is considered close by the one who cuts off ties with his
near relatives.

> 30ـ لَيْسَ لِقاطِعِ رَحِم قَريبٌ.

31. It is not part of honour to cut off ties with near relatives.

> 31ـ لَيْسَ مِنَ الكَرَمِ قَطيعةُ الرَّحِمِ.

32. Honour your family, for indeed they are your wings by which you fly,
and your origin to which you return, and your hand by which you attack
[the enemy].

> 32ـ أكْرِمْ عشيَرتََكَ فَإنَّهُمْ جَناحُكَ الَّذي بِهِ تَطيرُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأصْلُكَ الَّذي إلَيهِ تَصيرُ، ويَدُكَ الَّتي بِها تَصُولُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

33. Honour your near relatives, revere the forbearing from among them,
be patient with the foolish among them and lighten the burden for the
poor among them, for verily they are the best means of support [and
assistance] in times of difficulty and ease.

> 33ـ أكْرِمْ ذَوي رَحِمِكَ، ووَقِّرْ حَليمَهُمْ، واحْلُمْ عَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَفيِهِهِمْ وتَيَسَّرْ لِمُعسِرِهِمْ، فَإنَّهُمْ لَكَ نِعْمَ العُدَّةُ
فِي الشِدَّةِ والرَّخاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

34. The best practice is keeping ties with near relatives.

> 34ـ أفْضَلُ الشِّيَمِ صِلَةُ الأرْحامِ.

35. Indeed when near relatives are in contact, they become kind to each
other.

> 35ـ إنَّ الرَّحِمَ إذا تماسَّتْ تَعاطَفَتْ.

36. Verily keeping ties with near relatives is from the obligatory acts
of Islam, and Allah, the Glorified, has commanded that they should be
honoured, and He, the Most High, keeps ties with the one who keeps ties
with them and cuts off ties with the one who cuts off ties with them and
honours the one who honours them.

> 36ـ إنَّ صِلَةَ الأرْحامِ لَمِنْ مُوجِباتِ الإسْلامِ، وإنَّ اللّهَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبحانَهُ أمَرَ بِإكْرامِها، وإنَّهُ تعالى يَصِلُ مَنْ وَصَلَها،
ويَقْطَعُ مَنْ قَطَعَها، ويُكْرِمُ مَنْ أكرَمَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. Making false accusations is the first step in cutting off ties.

> 37ـ التَّجَنّي أوَّلُ القَطيعَةِ.

38. Beware! None of you should ever abandon [any of] his near relatives
whom he finds in [a state of] poverty and [neither should he] desist in
helping them with that which will not increase if he withholds it nor
will it decrease if he spends it.

> 38ـ ألا لايَعدِلَنَّ أحَدُكُمْ عَنِ القَرابَةِ، يَرى بِهَا الخَصاصَةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْ يَسُدَّها بِالَّذي لايَزيدُهُ إنّ أمْسَكَهُ ولايَنْقُصُهُ إنْ
أنْفَقَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

39. False accusation is the messenger of severance of ties.

> 39ـ التَّجَنّي رَسُولُ القَطيعَةِ.

40. He who cuts off ties [with near relatives] does not believe in
Allah.

> 40ـ ما آمَنَ بِاللّهِ مَنْ قَطَعَ رَحِمَهُ.

41. How ugly is cutting off ties after establishing them, and alienation
after brotherhood, and enmity after goodwill, and the disappearance of
affinity after it had been strengthened.

> 41ـ ما أقْبَحَ القَطيعَةَ بَعْدَ الصِّلَةِ والجَفاءَ بَعْدَ الإخاءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والعَداوَةَ بَعْدَ الصَّفاءِ، وزَوالَ الاُلْفَةِ بَعْدَ اسْتِحْكامِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

42. Who will ever trust you when you are disloyal to your near
relatives?

> 42ـ مَنْ ذَا الَّذي يَثِقُ بِكَ إذا غَدَرْتَ بِذَوي رَحِمِكَ.

43. Many a distant one is closer than every near one.

> 43ـ رُبَّ بَعيد أقْرَبُ مِنْ كُلِّ قريب.


