Sustenance And One Who Seeks It
===============================

**Sustenance and One Who Seeks It الرّزق وطالبه**

1. Make sustenance come down by [giving] charity.

> 1ـ اِسْتَنْزِلُوا الرِّزقَ بِالصَّدَقَةِ.

2. Verily Allah, the Glorified, dislikes to put the sustenance of his
believing servants except [in places] from where they least expect it.

> 2ـ إنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ أبى أنْ يَجْعَلَ أرزاقَ عِبادِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُؤْمِنينَ إلاّ مِنْ حَيثُ لايَحتَسِبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Assistance comes down from Allah to the extent of the provisions
[that are required for sustenance].

> 3ـ تَنْزِلُ مِنَ اللّهِ المَعُونَةُ عَلى قَدْرِ المَؤُنَةِ.

4. Your sustenance is seeking you, so spare yourself the trouble of
seeking it.

> 4ـ رِزْقُكَ يَطْلُبُكَ، فَأرِحْ نَفْسَكَ مِنْ طَلَبِهِ.

5. He who seeks sustenance from the wicked has accepted deprivation.

> 5ـ رَضِـيَ بِالحِْرمانِ طالِبُ الرِّزقِ مِنَ اللِّئامِ.

6. The sustenance of every person is preordained just as the end of his
life is predetermined.

> 6ـ رِزْقُ كُلُّ امْرِء مُقَدَّرٌ كَتَقْديرِ أجَلِهِ.

7. The sustenance of a person is proportionate to his intention.

> 7ـ رِزقُ المَرْءِ على قَدْرِ نِيَّتِهِ.

8. That which has been decreed for you will come to you, so take it easy
in your earning.

> 8ـ سَوْفَ يَأتيكَ ما قُدِرَ لَكَ، فَخَفِّضْ فِي المُكْتَسَبِ.

9. All of you are the dependants of Allah, and Allah, the Glorified,
takes care of His dependants.

> 9ـ كُلُّكُمْ عِيالُ اللّهِ واللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ كافِلُ عِيالِهِ.

10. For every sustenance there is a means, so be moderate in your
seeking [it].

> 10ـ لِكُلِّ رِزق سَبَبٌ، فَأَجْمِلُوا فِي الطَّلَبِ.

11. No [other] seeker will ever overtake you in [acquiring] your
sustenance.

> 11ـ لَنْ يَسْبِقَكَ إلى رِزْقِكَ طالِبٌ.

12. Nobody will ever overcome you in getting that which has been decreed
for you.

> 12ـ لَنْ يَغلِبَكَ على ما قُدِّرَ لَكَ غالِبٌ.

13. That which has been apportioned for you will never escape you so be
moderate in what you seek.

> 13ـ لَنْ يَفُوتَكَ ما قُسِمَ لَكَ فَأَجْمِلْ فِي الطَّلَبِ.

14. That sustenance which has been decreed for a soul shall not escape
it.

> 14ـ لَمْ يَفُتْ نَفْساً ما قُدِّرَ لَها مِنَ الرِّزقِ.

15. If sustenance was bestowed based on understanding and intellect, the
animals and foolish ones would not live.

> 15ـ لَوْ جَرَتِ الأرْزاقُ بِالألبابِ والعُقُولِ لَمْ تَعِشِ البَهائِمُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْقى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. One who is [too] concerned about his next day’s sustenance will
never be successful.

> 16ـ مَنِ اهْتَمَّ بِرِزقِ غَد لَمْ يُفْلِحْ أبَداً.

17. One of the most pleasant blessings is abundant sustenance.

> 17ـ مِنْ هَنيءِ النِّعَمِ سَعَةُ الأرْزاقِ.

18. What a good blessing abundant sustenance is!

> 18ـ نِعْمَ البَرَكَةُ سَعَةُ الرِّزقِ.

19. Do not let seeking that which is guaranteed for you be more
important to you than the action which has been made obligatory upon you
to perform.

> 19ـ لايَكُنِ المَضْمُونُ لَكَ طَلَبُهُ أَوْلى بِكَ مِنَ المَفْرُوضِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ عَمَلُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. Do not let the worry of the day which has not come upon you bear on
the day which has [already] come upon you, for indeed if it will be from
your lifetime, [then] Allah, the Glorified, will grant your sustenance
in it and if it is not from your lifetime then what worry do you have
for that which is not for you?!

> 20ـ لاتَحْمِل هَمَّ يَوْمِكَ الَّذي لَمْ يَأتِكَ على يَوْمِكَ الَّذي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدأتاكَ، فَإنَّهُ إنْ يَكُنْ مِنْ عُمْرِكَ يَأتِكَ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ
فيهِ بِرِزقِكَ وإنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ مِنْ عُمْرِكَ فَما هَمُّكَ بِما لَيْسَ
مِنْ أجَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Sustenance is not acquired by toiling [for it].[^1]

> 21ـ لايُنالُ الرِّزقُ بالتَّعَنّي.

22. No one possesses the ability to withhold sustenance or to bestow it
except the Sustainer.

> 22ـ لايَمْلِكُ إمْساكَ الأرْزاقِ وإدْرارَها إلاّ الرَّزّاقُ.

23. Your sustenance seeks you with more intensity than you seek it, so
be moderate in what you seek.

> 23ـ يَطْلُبُكَ رِزْقُكَ أشَدَّ مِنْ طَلَبِكَ لَهُ فَأَجمِلْ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَلَبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Be moderate in what you seek, for how many greedy people have been
disappointed and how many who are moderate have not been unsuccessful!

> 24ـ أجْمِلُوا فِي الطَّلَبِ، فَكَمْ مِنْ حَريص خائب،و مُجْمِل لَم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخِبْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Sustenance seeks the one who does not seek it.

> 25ـ الرِّزقُ يَطْلُبُ مَنْ لايَطْلُبُهُ.

26. Sustenance is not acquired by greed or by being sought after.

> 26ـ اَلأرْزاقُ لاتُنالُ بِالحِرْصِ والمُطالَبَةِ.

27. Indeed I will complete my sustenance, and struggle with my [lower]
self and will end with my [allotted] portion.

> 27ـ إنّي مُسْتَوْف رِزقي، ومُجاهِدٌ نَفْسي، ومُنْتَه إلى قِسْمي.

28. Verily you will acquire your share - your sustenance is guaranteed
and that which has been decreed for you will be fulfilled, so spare
yourself the trouble of the wretchedness of greed and the humiliation of
seeking [from others]; trust in Allah and take it easy in your earning.

> 28ـ إنَّكَ مُدْرِكٌ قِسْمَكَ، ومَضْمُونٌ رِزْقَكَ، ومُسْتَوْف ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُتِبَ لَكَ، فَأَرِحْ نَفْسَكَ مِنْ شَقاءِ الحِرْصِ، ومَذَلَّةِ
الطَّلَبِ، وثِقْ بِاللّهِ، وخَفِّضْ فِي المُكْتَسَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

29. Be satisfied and you will be relaxed.

> 29ـ اِرْضَ تَسْتَرِحْ.

30. Be satisfied with that which has been apportioned for you and you
will be a [true] believer.

> 30ـ اِرْضَ بِما قُسِمَ لَكَ تَكُنْ مُؤْمِناً.

31. Be satisfied with the sustenance that has been apportioned for you
and you will live a life of prosperity.

> 31ـ اِرْضَ مِنَ الرِّزقِ بِما قُسِمَ لَكَ تَعِشْ غَنيّاً.

32. The sustenance has been apportioned; the greedy has been deprived
[of what he seeks beyond his share].

> 32ـ اَلرِّزقُ مَقْسُومٌ، الحَريصُ مَحْرُومٌ.

33. One who seeks more [than what has been apportioned for him], falls
into loss.

> 33ـ مَنْ طَلَبَ الزِّيادةَ وَقَعَ فِي النُّقصانِ.

34. The deprived may [also] be granted sustenance.

> 34ـ قَدْ يُرْزَقُ المَحْرُومُ.

35. Neither you overtake your death nor will you get the sustenance that
is not [decreed] for you, so why are you making yourself miserable O
wretched one?!

> 35ـ إنَّكَ لَسْتَ بِسابِق أجَلَكَ ولا بِمَرْزُوقِ ما لَيْسَ لَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلِما ذا تُشْقي نَفْسَكَ يا شَقِيُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Rather it is granted by Allah and provided by Him in accordance to
His allotment.


