Being Pleased And Satisfied
===========================

**Being Pleased and Satisfied الرّضا والراضي**

1. One who is pleased with the decree [of Allah] is at ease.

> 1ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِالقَضاءِ اِسْتَراحَ.

2. The thing which is most befitting of true faith is being satisfied
[with what has been decrees] and total submission [to Allah].

> 2ـ أجدَرُ الأشياءِ بِصِدقِ الإيمانِ اَلرِّضا والتَّسْليمُ.

3. Satisfaction is abundance while disappointment is agony.

> 3ـ الرِّضا غَناءٌ والسُّخْطُ عَناءٌ.

4. Satisfaction dispels sadness.

> 4ـ اَلرِّضا يَنْفي الحَزَنَ.

5. Satisfaction [with the decree of Allah] is the fruit of certitude.

> 5ـ اَلرِّضا ثَمَرَةُ اليَقينِ.

6. Satisfaction with the decree of Allah makes great calamities easy [to
bear].

> 6ـ اَلرِّضا بِقَضاءِ اللّهِ يُهَوِّنُ عَظيمَ الرَّزايا.

7. If you have made a covenant [to believe in Allah] then be satisfied
with that which has been decreed against you and for you, and do not
have hope in anyone other than Allah, the Glorified, and await that
which is brought to you by [divine] decree.

> 7ـ إنْ عَقَدْتَ أيْمانَكَ فَارْضَ بِالمَقْضِيِّ عَلَيكَ ولَكَ ولا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَرْجُ أحَداً إلاَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ، وانْتَظِرْ ما أتاكَ بِهِ
القَدَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Indeed if you are pleased with the decree [of Allah], your lives will
become enjoyable and you will attain prosperity.

> 8ـ إنَّكُمْ إنْ رَضيتُمْ بِالقَضاءِ طابَتْ عَيْشَتُكُمْ وفُزْتُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالغَناءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. When what you want does not happen, then do not fret about how you
were [and be satisfied with the decree of Allah].

> 9ـ إذا لَمْ يَكُنْ ما تُريدُ، فلا تُبَلْ كَيفَ كُنْتَ.

10. By satisfaction with the decree of Allah, the strength of [one’s]
certitude is evinced.

> 10ـ بِالرِّضا بِقَضاءِ اللّهِ يُسْتَدَلُّ على حُسْنِ اليَقينِ.

11. Seek the pleasure of Allah and fear His displeasure, and let your
heart become unsettled by [your] fear of Him.

> 11ـ تَوَخَّ رِضَا اللّهِ، وتَوَقَّ سَخَطَهُ، وزَعْزِعْ قَلْبَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِخَوفِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. Seek the pleasure of Allah by being satisfied with His decree.

> 12ـ تَحَرَّ رِضَا اللّهِ بِرِضاكَ بِقَدَرِهِ.

13. Seek the pleasure of Allah, and keep away from His displeasure, for
indeed there is none who can save you from His retribution and there is
nothing that can make you needless of His forgiveness, and there is no
refuge for you from Him except with Him.

> 13ـ تَحَرَّ رِضا اللّهِ، وتَجَنَّبْ سَخَطَهُ، فَإنَّهُ لايَدَ(ىْ) لَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِنَقِمَتِهِ، ولا غِنى بِكَ عَنْ مَغفِرَتِهِ، ولا مَلْجَأَ لَكَ مِنْهُ
إلاَّ إلَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. The fruit of satisfaction is prosperity.

> 14ـ ثَمَرَةُ الرِّضا الغَناءُ.

15. The pinnacle of worship is satisfaction [with the decree of Allah].

> 15 ـ رَأسُ الطَّاعَةِ الرِّضا.

16. The cornerstone of contentment is satisfaction [with the decree of
Allah].

> 16ـ رَأسُ القَناعَةِ الرِّضا.

17. Remain satisfied in times of difficulty and ease.

> 17ـ عَلَيْكَ بِالرِّضا فِي الشِّدَّةِ والرَّخاءِ.

18. Whoever is pleased with [Allah’s] decree, his life becomes pleasant.

> 18ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِالقَضاءِ طابَتْ عيشَتُهُ.

19. One who is satisfied with the decree [of Allah] takes the changing
circumstances [of his life] lightly.

> 19ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِالقَدَرِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِالغِيَرِ.

20. Whoever is satisfied with what has been decreed, his certitude is
strengthened.

> 20ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِالمَقْدُورِ قَوِيَ يَقينُهُ.

21. One whose satisfaction with what is decreed is good, his patience in
[times of] tribulation will be good.

> 21ـ مَنْ حَسُنَ رِضاهُ بِالقَضاءِ حَسُنَ صَبْرُهُ عَلَى البَلاءِ.

22. One who is pleased with the share allotted to him by Allah does not
grieve for that which escapes him.

> 22ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِقِسْمِ اللّهِ لَمْ يَحزَنْ على ما فاتَهُ.

23. One who is satisfied with what Allah has allotted for him does not
become sad about what others possess.

> 23ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِما قَسَمَ اللّهُ لَهُ لَمْ يَحْزَنْ على ما في يَدِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَيْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Whoever is not satisfied with the decree [of Allah], disbelief seeps
into his religion.

> 24ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَرْضَ بِالقَضاءِ دَخلَ الكُفْرُ دينَهُ.

25. From the most excellent faith is being pleased with whatever
[divine] decree brings.

> 25ـ مِنْ أفضَلِ الإيمانِ الرِّضا بِما يَأتي بِهِ القَدَرُ.

26. Allah, the Glorified, does not pass any decree for the servant who
is satisfied with it but that there is benefit in it for him.

> 26ـ ما قَضَى اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ على عَبْد قَضاءً فَرَضِيَ بِهِ إلاّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَتِ الخِيَرَةُ لَهُ فيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

27. Allah, the Glorified, does not repel any of the afflictions of this
world and chastisements of the Hereafter from the believer except
because of his satisfaction with His decree and his good patience in the
face of His trials.

> 27ـ ما دَفَعَ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ عَنِ المُؤمِنِ شَيْئاً مِنْ بَلاءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنيا وعَذابِ الآخرَةِ إلاّ بِرِضاهُ بِقَضائِهِ، وحُسْنِ صَبْرِهِ
على بَلائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

28. What a good companion of faith satisfaction is!

> 28ـ نِعْمَ قَرينُ الإيمانِ الرِّضا.

29. What a good expeller of sadness satisfaction with [divine] decree
is!

> 29ـ نِعمَ الطَّارِدُ لِلْهَمِّ الرِّضا بِالقَضاءِ.

30. He who is satisfied with the decree [of Allah] has acquired
abundance.

> 30ـ نالَ الغِنى مَنْ رَضِيَ بِالقَضاءِ.

31. There is no submission like satisfaction [with what has been
decreed].

> 31ـ لا إسْلامَ كَالرِّضا.

32. Nothing takes away poverty like satisfaction and contentment.

> 32 ـ لايُذْهِبُ الفاقَةَ مِثلُ الرِّضا، والقُنوعِ.

33. It behoves one who is pleased with the decree of Allah, the
Glorified, to rely upon Him.

> 33ـ يَنْبَغي لِمَنْ رَضِيَ بِقَضاءِ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ أنْ يَتَوَكَّلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

34. The pleasure of Allah, the Glorified, is the nearest goal that can
be achieved.

> 34ـ رِضَا اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ أقْرَبُ غايَة تُدْرَكُ.

35. The pleasure of Allah, the Glorified, is linked to His obedience.

> 35ـ رِضَا اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ مَقْرونٌ بِطاعَتِهِ.

36. The sign that Allah, the Glorified, is pleased with His servant is
his (the servant’s) satisfaction with that which He, the Glorified, has
decreed for or against him.

> 36ـ علامَةُ رِضَا اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ عَنِ العَبْدِ رِضاهُ بِما قَضى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِهِ سُبْحانَهُ لَهُ وَعلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. The highest goal is in [attaining] the pleasure of Allah.

> 37ـ في رِضَا اللّهِ غايَةُ المَطْلُوبِ.

38. How can the heart that is inclined to this world be capable of being
satisfied [with what has been decreed]?!

> 38ـ كَيفَ يَقْدِرُ على إعْمالِ الرِّضا اَلقَلْبُ المُتَوَلِّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالدُّنيا؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

39. Satisfaction suffices as abundance.

> 39ـ كفى بِالرِّضا غِنىً.

40. Whoever prefers the pleasure of the All-Powerful Lord, then let him
speak with words of justice in the presence of the tyrannical ruler.

> 40ـ مَنْ آثَرَ رِضا رَبّ قادِر فَلْيَتَكَلَّمْ بِكَلِمَةِ عَدْل عِندَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُلْطان جائر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

41. Whoever seeks the pleasure of Allah at the expense of displeasing
the people, Allah will turn his dispraiser among the people into his
praiser.

> 41ـ مَنْ طَلَبَ رِضَا اللّهِ بِسَخَطِ النَّاسِ رَدَّ اللّهُ ذامَّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ النَّاسِ حامِداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

42. One who hastens towards the actions that please Allah, the
Glorified, and delays acts of disobedience to Him has indeed perfected
[his] obedience.

> 42ـ مَنْ بادَرَ إلى مَراضِى اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ، وتَأخَّرَ عَنْ مَعاصيهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ أكْمَلَ الطَّاعَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

43. Allah! Grant us your pleasure and make us needless of having to
stretch out our hands to other than you.

> 43ـ هَبِ اللّهُمَّ لَنا رِضاكَ، وأغْنِنا عَنْ مَدِّ الأيْدي إلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِواكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. Whoever seeks the pleasure of people by displeasing Allah, Allah
will turn the one who praises him among the people into one who
dispraises him.

> 44ـ مَنْ طَلَبَ رِضَا النَّاسِ بِسَخَطِ اللّهِ رَدَّ اللّهُ حامِدَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ النَّاسِ ذامّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. How great is the wrongdoing of the one who seeks the pleasure of the
creation by angering the Creator.

> 45ـ ما أعْظَمَ وِزرَ مَنْ طَلَبَ رِضَى المَخْلُوقينَ بِسَخَطِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخالِقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

46. One who is pleased with what has been decreed becomes content with
little.

> 46ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِالمَقْدُورِ اِكْتَفى بِالمَيْسُورِ.

47. One who is satisfied with his portion will not be angered by anyone.

> 47ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِقِسْمِهِ لَمْ يُسْخِطْهُ أحَدٌ.

48. One who is pleased with his state will not be affected by jealousy.

> 48ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِحالِهِ لَمْ يَعْتَوِرْهُ الحَسَدُ.

49. The one who is pleased with the action of a group is like one who
participates in it with them, and for everyone who participates in
falsehood there are two sins: the sin of being pleased with it and the
sin of acting upon it.

> 49ـ الرَّاضي بِفِعلِ قَوم كالدَّاخِلِ فيهِ مَعَهُمْ ولِكُلِّ داخِل في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باطِل إثمانِ: إثمُ الرِّضا بِهِ وإثمُ العَمَلِ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

50. Every satisfied one is at ease.

> 50ـ كُلُّ راض مُسْتَريحٌ.

51. Be pleased [with Allah’s decree] and He will be pleased with you.

> 51ـ كُنْ راضياً تَكُنْ مَرضِيّاً.

52. Always be pleased with what is brought by [divine] decree.

> 52ـ كُنْ أبَداً راضياً بِما يَأتي بِهِ القَدَرُ.

53. One who is satisfied with his [allotted] portion is at ease.

> 53ـ مَنْ رَضِيَ بِقِسْمِهِ اِسْتراحَ.


