Felicity
========

**Felicity السَّعادة**

1. Felicity is that which leads [one] to success.

> 1ـ السَّعادةُ ما أفْضَتْ إلَى الفَوْزِ.

2. The signs of felicity are sincerity [of intentions] in action.

> 2ـ أماراتُ السَّعادَةِ إخْلاصُ العَمَلِ.

3. Having a heart that is free of rancour and jealousy is from the
felicity of a servant.

> 3ـ خُلُوُّ الصَّدْرِ مِنَ الغِلِّ وَالحَسَدِ مِنْ سَعادَةِ العَبْدِ.

4. Felicity is gained by hastening good deeds and pure [and virtuous]
actions.

> 4ـ دَرَكُ السَّعادَةِ بِمُبادَرَةِ الخَيْراتِ والأعْمالِ الزّاكياتِ.

5. The felicity of a person is [in] contentment and satisfaction.

> 5ـ سَعادَةُ المَرْءِ اَلقَناعَةُ واَلرِّضا.

6. The felicity of a man is in safeguarding his faith and working for
his Hereafter.

> 6ـ سَعادَةُ الرَّجُلِ في إحْرازِ دينِهِ والعَمَلِ لآخِرَتِهِ.

7. It is enough of a felicity for a person that he be deemed trustworthy
in religious and worldly affairs.

> 7ـ كَفى بِالمَرْءِ سَعادَةً أنْ يُوثَقَ بِهِ في أُمُورِ الدّينِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. It is enough of a felicity for a person to turn away from that which
perishes and become occupied with that which is everlasting.

> 8ـ كَفى بِالمَرْءِ سَعادَةً أنْ يَعْزِفَ عَمّا يَفْنى، ويَتَوَلَّهَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِما يَبْقى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. You will never know the sweetness of felicity until you taste the
bitterness of misfortune.

> 9ـ لَنْ تُعْرَفَ حَلاوَةُ السَّعادَةِ حتّى تُذاقَ مَرارَةُ النَّحْسِ.

10. It is part of felicity to be granted success in performing righteous
deeds.

> 10ـ مِنَ السَّعادَةِ التَّوفيقُ لِصالِحِ الأعْمالِ.

11. It is from the perfection of felicity for one to strive for the
betterment of the [whole] community.

> 11ـ مِنْ كَمالِ السَّعادَةِ السَّعْيُ في صَلاحِ الجُمْهُورِ.

12. Successfully attaining what is sought is part of felicity.

> 12ـ مِنَ السَّعادَةِ نُجْحُ الطَّلِبَةِ.

13. From the felicity of a person is his showing benevolence to those
who are deserving of it.

> 13ـ مِنْ سَعادَةِ المَرْءِ أنْ يَضَعَ مَعْرُوفَهُ عِنْدَ أهْلِهِ.

14. A person does not attain felicity except through the obedience of
Allah, the Glorified, and a person does not become wretched except by
disobeying Allah.

> 14ـ لا يَسْعَدُ امْرُءٌ إلاّ بِطاعَةِ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ، ولايَشْقَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
امْرُءٌ إلاّ بِمَعْصِيَةِ اللّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. No one attains felicity except by upholding the bounds of Allah and
no one becomes wretched except by disregarding them.

> 15ـ لا يَسْعَدُ أحَدٌ إلاّ بِإقامَةِ حُدُودِ اللّهِ ولايَشْقى أحَدٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلاّ بِإضاعَتِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. It is from the felicity of a person that his good turns are done to
one who thanks him and his benevolence is shown to one who is not
ungrateful to him.

> 16ـ مِنْ سَعَادَةِ المَرْءِ أنْ تَكُونَ صَنايِعُهُ عِنْدَ مَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَشْكُرُهُ ومَعْرُوفُهُ عِنْدَ مَنْ لا يَكْفُرُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. He who makes his brothers miserable does not gain felicity.

> 17ـ ما سَعِدَ مَنْ شَقى إخْوانُهُ.

18. How close are felicities to misfortunes!

> 18ـ ما أقْرَبَ السُّعُودَ مِنَ النُّحُوسِ.

19. How far is repose in ease and inactivity from acquiring felicity!

> 19ـ هَيْهاتَ مِنْ نَيْلِ السَّعادَةِ اَلسُّكُونُ إلَى الهُوَيْنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والبِطالَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. When the presentation [of deeds] in front of Allah, the Glorified,
takes place, felicity is differentiated from wretchedness.

> 20ـ عِنْدَ العَرْضِ عَلَى اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ تَتَحَقَّقُ السَّعادَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الشَّقاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


