Introduction
============

In the name of Allah, the all-Beneficent the all-Merciful

All praise is due to Allah who led us with His guidance to His path and
made us excel above all His servants through [belief in] His Oneness. I
glorify Him for all the single and paired bounties, a glorifying the
limits of which cannot be comprehended and the magnitude of which cannot
be fathomed by the imaginations.

I bear witness that there is no God but Allah, alone, without any
partner – the witnessing of one whose tongue speaks veraciously and
whose heart is filled up with the truth. And I bear witness that
Muhammad is His chosen servant from among the servants and His messenger
who called the people to the path of guidance. He sent him while the
nations were following falsehoods and treading on misguided ways, one
after another.

So Allah, the Glorified, introduced to them, through His prophet (s),
the ways of the religion [of truth], and clarified for them the paths of
certitude, until the truth became illuminated and gleamed and falsehood
was destroyed and perished. May the blessings of Allah be [showered]
upon him and his progeny, the pure leaders, and the chosen infallible
people of his household, and [on] his selected virtuous companions,
blessings that neither cease in the [late] hours of the night nor [in]
parts of the day.

The one who has committed excesses against his soul and is in need of
the mercy of his Lord, ‘Abd al-Wāḥid ibn Muḥammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wāhid
al-Āmudi al-Tamīmī, said: The thing that motivated me to compile,
annotate, and compose this book, was that which Abu ‘Uthmān al-Jāḥidh
was successful in doing. He enumerated and wrote down in his manuscript
a list of one hundred wise and eloquent sayings that were not widely
known, on various topics, from Amīr al-Mu’minīn ‘Ali ibn Abi Ṭālib (‘a).

So I said: How astonishing it is that this man who was the most learned
of his time, unmatched by his contemporaries, despite his great
knowledge and erudition, having ascended to the peak of understanding,
with his closeness to the first era, and his possessing a great share
and a large portion of virtues and excellent merits; how could he shut
his eyes from the luminous full moon and content himself with so little
from so much? And is this not but a fraction of the whole, a little of
the innumerable and a drizzle from the downpour?

And I despite my covered heart and falling short from the station of
perfection, and my acknowledgement of my inability to recognize the
excellences of the hearts of the foremost, and my falling short from
following in their footsteps and my insignificance in comparison to
their greatness – have compiled a small number of of his short aphorisms
and a few of his wise sayings which render even the most eloquent ones
mute and make the wisest sages despair of matching it.

Allah knows that in this endeavour I am only like a person who takes
with his hand from the sea and acknowledges his shortcoming, even if it
may seem an exaggeration, but why not? When he (‘a) has drank from the
spring of Prophethood and possesses in his heart divine knowledge, as he
(may Allah honour him) says, and his words are true and his speech
veracious, based on what the narrators have narrated: verily I have much
knowledge in my heart; if only I came across someone who could bear it!

I have omitted the chains of narrators from it and have arranged it
alphabetically, placing together the aphorisms and sayings that rhyme
and exhibit assonance so that it falls more easily upon the ears and is
grasped quicker by the hearts and minds, because of the intense
inclination of the souls towards poetical speech and their dislike for
prosaic form. In this way its readers may easily commit it to memory and
it may become a source of joy for those who examine it, having been
extracted from its masterpiece with my cutting off most of it out of
fear of lengthening [it] and sufficing with that which contains a remedy
from hardships and difficulties for the people of intellect and
understanding.

And I have named it *Ghurar al-Ḥikam wa Durar al-Kalim* (Exalted
Aphorisms and Pearls of Speech) in the hope of getting reward from
Allah, the Glorified, while seeking refuge with Him, the Most High, from
every flaw. And my success is from none save Allah; in Him I have put my
trust and to Him will be my return.


