Taking The Initiative
=====================

**Taking the Initiative المبادرة**

1. Take the initiative to act, belie [false] hope and recall death.

> 1ـ بادِرُوا العَمَلَ، وأكْذِبُوا الأمَلَ، ولاحِظُوا الأجَلَ.

2. Take the initiative to act and fear the suddenness of death, [then]
you will realize the greatest hope.

> 2ـ بادِرُوا العَمَلَ(الأمَل)، وخَافُوا بَغْتَةَ الأجَلِ، تُدْرِكُوا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفْضَلَ الأمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Hasten towards [virtuous] actions before old age disables you.

> 3ـ بادِرُوا بِالعَمَلِ عُمْراً ناكِساً.

4. Hasten towards [virtuous] actions before debilitating illness or
sudden death [overtakes you].

> 4ـ بادِروا بِالعَمَلِ مَرَضاً حابِساً، وَمَوْتاً خالِساً.

5. Hasten towards virtue, for verily virtuous deeds are an opportunity
[to secure your Hereafter].

> 5ـ بادِرِ البِرَّ فَإنَّ أعْمالَ البِرِّ فُرْصَةٌ.

6. Take the initiative to perform good deeds [now] while the neck is
free from the noose and the spirit is unfettered.

> 6ـ بادِرُوا صالِحَ الأعْمالِ والخَناقُ مُهْمَلٌ والرُّوحُ مُرْسَلٌ.

7. Take the initiative in your youth before your old age and in your
health before your illness.

> 7ـ بادِرْ شَبابَكَ قَبْلَ هَرَمِكَ، وصِحَّتَكَ قَبْلَ سُقْمِكَ.

8. Take the initiative in your affluence before your poverty and while
you are alive before your death.

> 8ـ بادِرْ غِناكَ قَبْلَ فَقْرِكَ، وحَيوتَكَ قَبْلَ مَوْتِكَ.

9. Take the initiative while the rest of your life is before you, and
you have the ability to act by volition[^1], and have the opportunity of
repentance, and the possibility of abrogating your misdeeds.

> 9ـ بادِرُوا في مَهَلِ البَقِيَّةِ، وأنْفِ المَشيَّةِ، وانْتِظارِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّوبَةِ، وانْفِساخِ الحَوبَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Hasten to act while the bodies are healthy, the tongues are untied,
the [cry of] repentance is heard and the deeds are accepted.

> 10ـ بادِرُوا والأبْدانُ صَحيحَةٌ، والألْسُنُ مُطْلَقَةٌ، والتَّوبَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَسْمُوعَةٌ، وَالأعْمالُ مَقْبُولَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Hasten to act before [you are seized with] the seizing of the
all-Powerful, the Omnipotent.

> 11ـ بادِرُوا قَبْلَ أخْذَةِ العَزيزِ المُقْتَدِرِ.

12. Hasten to act before the narrowness and constriction [of the grave].

> 12ـ بادِرُوا قَبْلَ الضَّنْكِ والمَضيقِ.

13. Hasten to act before the terror [of death] and the departure of your
soul [from your body].

> 13ـ بادِرُوا قَبْلَ الرَّوعِ والزُّهُوقِ.

14. Hasten towards good deeds before your deaths, and purchase what will
remain for you [in the Hereafter] with what will depart from you [of
this world].

> 14ـ بادِروُا آجالَكُمْ بِأعْمالِكُمْ، وابتاعُوا ما يَبْقى لَكُمْ بِما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَزُولُ عَنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Hasten [to do good] with your wealth before your deaths come upon
you, so that it may purify you, set you aright and bring you closer [to
Allah].

> 15ـ بادِرُوا بِأمْوالِكُمْ قَبلَ حُلُولِ آجالِكُمْ تُزَكِّكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتُصْلِحْكُمْ وَتُزْلِفْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Hasten towards obedience [to Allah] and you will be felicitous.

> 16ـ بادِرِ (باكِر) الطَّاعَةَ تَسْعَدْ.

17. Hasten towards good and you will be guided.

> 17ـ بادِرِ الخَيْرَ تَرْشُدْ.

18. Hasten [to do good] before the coming of the hidden awaited one.

> 18ـ بادِرُوا قَبْلَ قُدُومِ الغائبِ المُنْتَظَرِ.

19. Anticipate death and its throes, prepare for it before its arrival
and get ready for it before it descends.

> 19ـ بادِرُوا المَوْتَ وغَمَراتِهِ، ومَهِّدُوا لَهُ قَبْلَ حُلُولِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأعِدُّوا لَهُ قَبْلَ نُزولِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. Hasten [to act] in the period of guidance and repose of the bodies,
and in your remaining lifetime, and while you have the ability to act by
volition.

> 20ـ بادِرُوا في فَيْنَةِ الإرْشادِ، وراحَةِ الأجسادِ، ومَهَلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البَقِيَّةِ، وأنْفِ المَشِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Hasten in performing your good deeds and compete with your deaths,
for you will be compensated for what you sent forward, rewarded for what
you did beforehand and held accountable for what you left behind.

> 21ـ بادِرُوا أعْمالَكُمْ، وسابِقُوا آجالَكُمْ، فَإنَّكُمْ مَدينُونَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِما أسْلَفْتُمْ، وَمُجازَوْنَ بِما قَدَّمْتُمْ، ومُطالَبُونَ بِما
خَلَّفْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Surpass your hope and anticipate the assault of death, for people
are on the verge of having their hopes cut short and being surprised by
death.

> 22ـ بادِرُوا الأمَلَ، وسابِقُوا هُجومَ الأجَلِ، فَإنَّ النَّاسَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُوشِكُ أنْ يَنْقَطِعَ بِهِمُ الأمَلُ، فَيَرْهَقُهُمُ الأجَلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Hurry to take advantage of opportunity before it becomes [a cause
of] distress.

> 23ـ بادِرِ الفُرْصَةَ قَبْلَ أنْ تَـكُونَ غُصَّةً.

24. Blessed is the one who hastens to perform good deeds before his
means are cut short.

> 24ـ طُوبى لِمَنْ بادَرَ صالِحَ العَمَلِ قَبْلَ أنْ تَنْقَطِعَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسْبابُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Blessed is he who anticipates death, takes advantage of respite and
prepares the provision of good deeds [for the Hereafter].

> 25ـ طُوبى لِمَنْ بادَرَ الأجَلَ، واغْتَنَمَ المَهَلَ، وتَزَوَّدَ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Also translated: ...at the first available opportunity when the
intention is made.


