Social Interaction And Mingling
===============================

**Social Interaction and mingling-العشرة والخلطه**

1. ocial interaction with people of merits is enlivening for the hearts.

> 1ـ مُعاشَرَةُ ذَوِي الفَضائِلِ حَياةُ القُلُوبِ.

2. Let not your family or those whom you love be the most miserable of
people because of you.

> 2ـ لايَكُنْ أهْلُكَ وذُو وُدِّكَ (ذُوُوكَ)أشْقَى النّاسِ بِكَ.

3. Do not alienate a person whose separation will harm you.

> 3ـ لاتُوحِشَنَّ امْرَءً يَسُوءُكَ فِراقُهُ.

4. The one who mingles with people is afflicted by the evil associate
and the hypocrisy of the enemy.

> 4ـ يُبْتَلى مُخالِطُ النّاسِ بِقَرينِ السُّوءِ، ومداجاةِ العَدُوِّ.

5. Preserve [the respect of others] and your respect will be preserved.

> 5ـ أبْقِ يُبْقَ عَلَيْكَ.

6. Mix sternness with gentleness, and be gentle as long as gentleness is
more befitting.

> 6ـ اِخْلِطِ الشِدَّةَ بِرِفْق، وارْفُقْ ما كانَ الرِّفْقُ أوْفَقَ.

7. Imbibe your heart with mercy for all the people and kindness towards
them, and do not oppress them or be [like] a sword over them.

> 7ـ أَشْعِرْ قَلْبَكَ الرَّحْمَةَ لَجَميعِ النّاسِ والإحْسانِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلَيْهِمْ، وَلاتُنِلْهُمْ حَيْفاً، وَلاتَـكُنْ عَلَيْهِمْ سَيْفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Remember you brother who is absent in the same way that which you
would like him to remember you [in your absence] and keep away from what
he dislikes; and disregard from him that which you would like him to
disregard from you.

> 8 ـ أُذْكُرْ أخاكَ إذا غابَ بِالَّذي تُحِبُّ أنْ يَذْكُرَكَ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإيّاكَ وَما يَكْرَهُ، وَدَعْهُ مِمّا تُحِبُّ أنْ يَدَعَكَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Loathe from yourself what you loathe from others and like for people
what you like for yourself.

> 9ـ إسْتَقْبِـحْ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ ما تَسْتَقْبِحُهُ مِنْ غَيْرِكَ، وارْضَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلنّاسِ بِما تَرْضاهُ لِنَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Reduced mingling preserves religion and relieves one from having to
associate with wicked people.

> 10ـ قِلَّةُ الخُلْطَةِ تَصُونُ الدّينَ، وتُريحُ مِنْ مُقارَنَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأشْرارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Be equitable to people over yourself, your family, your near ones
and those from whom you desire something, and be just with both enemy
and friend.

> 11ـ أنْصِفِ النّاسَ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ، وأهْلِكَ، وَخاصَّتِكَ، ومَنْ لَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيهِ هَوًى، وأعْدِلْ فِي العَدُوِّ والصَّدِيقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. Be friendly with the one who is friendly with you, accept the excuse
of the one who seeks your pardon and do good to the one who wrongs you.

> 12ـ أجْمِلْ إدْلالَ مَنْ أدَلَّ عَلَيْكَ، واقْبَلْ عُذْرَ مَنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْتَذَرَ إلَيْكَ، وأحْسِنْ إلى مَنْ أساءَ إلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. Guard well the sanctities [of such things that are sacrosanct] and
draw near to the people of magnanimity, for indeed guarding the
sanctities [and boundaries] demonstrates an honourable character and
drawing near to the magnanimous indicates nobility of purpose.

> 13ـ أحْسِن رِعايَةَ الحُرُماتِ، وأقْبِلْ عَلى أهْلِ المُرُوءاتِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ رِعايَةَ الحُرُماتِ تَدُلُّ عَلى كَرَمِ الشِّيمَةِ، والإقبالَ
عَلى ذَوِى المُرُوءاتِ يُعْرِبُ عَنْ شَرَفِ الهِمَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. Be merciful to the one who is under you and the one who is above you
will be merciful to you; compare his forgetfulness with your
forgetfulness and his disobedience with your disobedience to you Lord,
and his need of your mercy to your need of the mercy of your Lord.

> 14ـ اِرْحَمْ مَنْ دُونَكَ يَرْحَمْكَ مَنْ فَوْقَكَ وَقِسْ سَهْوَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَهْوِكَ ومَعْصِيَتَهُ لَكَ بِمَعْصِيَتِكَ لِرَبِّكَ وفَقْرَهُ إلى
رَحْمَتِكَ بِفَقْرِكَ إلى رَحْمَةِ رَبِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Cling to the people of virtue and piety, and request them not
compliment you, for indeed excessive praise brings one close to being
deceived [about his true status] and being pleased with it causes the
displeasure of Allah.

> 15ـ اِلْصَقْ بِأهْلِ الخَيْرِ والوَرَعِ، وَرَضِّهِمْ عَلى أنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايُطْرُوكَ، فَإنَّ كَثْرَةَ الإطْراءِ تُدْني مِنَ الغِرَّةِ، والرِّضا
بِذلِكَ يُوجِبُ مِنَ اللّهِ المَقْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Make your self a gauge between you and the other; love for him what
you love for your self, and hate for him what you hate for it, and do
good as you would like good to be done to you, and do not oppress just
as you would like not to be oppressed.

> 16ـ اِجْعَلْ نَفْسَكَ ميزاناً بَيْنَكَ وبَيْنَ غَيْرِكَ، وأحِبَّ لَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما تُحِبُّ لِنَفْسِكَ، واكْرَهْ لَهُ ما تَـكْرَهُ لَها، وأحْسِنْ كَما
تُحِبُّ أنْ يُحْسَنَ إلَيْكَ، ولاتَظْلِمْ كَما تُحِبُّ أنْ لاتُظْلَمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Associate with people in the way that you would like them to
associate with you, [by doing this] you will be safe from them and they
will be safe from you.

> 17ـ إصْحَبِ النّاسَ بِما تُحِبُّ أنْ يَصْحَبُوكَ تَأمَنْهُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويَأمَنُوكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Keep away from socializing with evil people for they are like fire -
the one who comes in contact with it gets burnt.

> 18ـ إيّاكَ ومُعاشَرَةَ الأشْرارِ، فَإنَّهُمْ كَالنّارِ مُباشَرَتُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُحْرِقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. Keep away from socializing with those who look for the faults (or
sins) of people, for indeed even their companion is not safe from them.

> 19ـ إيّاكَ وَمُعاشَرَةَ مُتَتَبِّعي عُيُوبِ (الذُّنُوبِ)
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّاسِ،فَإنَّهُ لَمْ يَسْلَمْ مُصاحِبُهُمْ مِنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. Be sure to keep away from that which angers your Lord and alienates
people from you, for the one who angers his Lord is faced with
annihilation and one who alienates people renounces freedom.

> 20ـ إيّاكَ وما يُسْخِطُ رَبَّكَ، ويُوحِشُ النّاسَ مِنْكَ، فَمَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسْخَطَ رَبَّهُ تَعَرَّضَ لِلْمَنِيَّةِ، ومَنْ أوْحَشَ النّاسَ
تَـبَرَّأ مِنَ الحُرِّيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Be careful to keep away from turning your backs on each other,
cutting off ties with each other, and abandoning the enjoining of good
and prohibiting of evil [with respect to one another].

> 21ـ إيّاكُمْ والتَّدابُـرَ، والتَّقاطُعَ، وتَرْكَ الأمْرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالمَعْرُوفِ، والنَّهيِ عَنِ المُنْكَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. The most deserving of those whom you love is the one who does not
forsake you.

> 22ـ أوْلى مَنْ أحْبَبْتَ مَنْ لايَقْلاكَ.

23. The most equitable conduct is for you to deal with people in the way
you would like them to deal with you.

> 23ـ أعْدَلُ السيرَةِ أنْ تُعامِلَ النّاسَ بِما تُحِبُّ أنْ يُعامِلُوكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. The most unjust conduct is for you to seek equity from people while
not dealing with them in the same way.

> 24ـ أجْوَرُ السِّيرَةِ أنْ تَنْتَصِفَ مِنَ النّاسِ ولاتُعامِلَهُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. The most worthy of those whom you love is he whose benefit is for
you and whose harm is for other than you.

> 25ـ أحَقُّ مَنْ أحْبَبْتَهُ مَنْ نَفْعُهُ لَكَ وضَرُّهُ لِغَيْرِكَ.

26. Verily the best outward appearance [and demeanour] is that which
makes you mingle with people and beautifies you among them and restrains
their tongues from [speaking ill of] you.

> 26ـ إنَّ أحْسَنَ الزِّىِّ ما خَلَطَكَ بِالنَّاسِ، وَجَمَّلَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْنَهُمْ، وكَفَّ ألْسِنَـتَهُمْ عَنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

27. Make others incline towards you instead of distancing themselves
from you.

> 27ـ أقِمِ الرَّغْبَةَ إلَيْكَ مَقامَ الحُرْمَةِ بِكَ.

28. Man is the son of his time.[^1]

> 28ـ اَلْمَرْءُ اِبْنُ ساعَتِهِ.

29. Through good social interaction, affection lasts.

> 29ـ بِحُسْنِ العِشْرَةِ تَدُومُ المَوَدَّةُ.

30. Through good social interaction friendships become intimate.

> 30ـ بِحُسْنِ العِشْرَةِ تَأْنَسُ الرِّفاقُ.

31. By good social interaction ties (or companionship) last.

> 31ـ بِحُسْنِ العِشْـرَةِ تَدُومُ الوُصْلَةُ (الصُحْبَةُ).

32. How evil an associate the spiteful person is!

> 32ـ بِئسَ العَشيرُ الحَقُودُ.

33. Good social interaction causes affection to endure.

> 33ـ حُسْنُ العِشْرَةِ يَسْتَديمُ المَوَدَّةَ.

34. Interact with people through their [norms of] etiquette but separate
yourself from them in [your] actions.

> 34ـ خالِقُوا النّاسَ بِأخْلاقِهِمْ وزايِلُوهُمْ فِي الأعْمالِ.

35. Interact with people in such a way that when you die, they weep over
you and when you are absent, they yearn for your company.

> 35ـ خالِطُوا النّاسَ مُخالَطَةً، إنْ مِتُّمْ بَكَوْا عَلَيْكُمْ وإنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غِبْتُمْ حَنُّوا إلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

36. Interact with people through your tongues and your bodies, but part
from them with your hearts and your actions.

> 36ـ خالِطُوا النّاسَ بِألْسِنَتِكُمْ وأجْسادِكُمْ، وزايِلُوهُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِقُلُوبِكُمْ وَأعْمالِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. Many an associate is not a close friend.

> 37ـ رُبَّ عَشير غَيْرُ حَبيب.

38. It is in times of trial that a man is [either] honoured or
disgraced.

> 38ـ عِنْدَ الاِمْتِحانِ يُكْرَمُ الرَّجُلِ أَوْيُهانُ.

39. Associate with the people of excellence and you will gain felicity
and nobility.

> 39ـ عاشِرْ أهْلَ الفَضْلِ تَسْعَدْ وتَنْبُلْ.

40. The development of the hearts is in socializing with people of
intellect.

> 40ـ عِمارَةُ القُلُوبِ في مُعاشَرَةِ ذَوِى العُقُولِ.

41. Cutting off [ties with] the ignorant is equivalent to establishing
ties with the intelligent.

> 41ـ قَطيعَةُ الجاهِلِ تَعْدِلُ صِلَةَ العاقِلِ.

42. The intelligent person [only] cuts off ties with you after failing
to find any other way out.

> 42ـ قَطيعَةُ العاقِلِ لَكَ بَعْدَ نَفاذِ الحيلَةِ فيكَ.

43. Get closer to the people in their morals and you will be safe from
their malice [and evil].

> 43ـ قارِبِ النّاسَ في أخْلاقِهِمْ تَأمَنْ غَوائِلَهُمْ.

44. Having many acquaintances is a tribulation, and socializing with the
people is an ordeal.

> 44ـ كَثْرَةُ المَعارِفِ مِحْنَةٌ، وخُلْطَةُ النّاسِ فِتْنَةٌ.

45. One whose social interaction increases, his piety (or reliability)
decreases.

> 45ـ مَنْ كَثُرَتْ خُلْطَتُهُ قَلَّتْ تَقِيَّتُهُ (ثِقَتُهُ).

46. One who mingles with the people is affected by their devices.

> 46ـ مَنْ خالَطَ النّاسَ نالَهُ مَكْرُهُمْ.

47. Whoever mingles with the people, his piety decreases?

> 47ـ مَنْ خالَطَ النّاسَ قَلَّ وَرَعُهُ.

48. One whose social interaction is good, his brother’s increase.

> 48ـ مَنْ حَسُنَتْ عِشْرَتُهُ كَثُرَ إخْوانُهُ.

49. One who deals leniently with people enjoys [and benefits from] their
company.

> 49ـ مَنْ عامَلَ النَّاسَ بِالمُسامَحَةِ اِسْتَمْتَعَ بِصُحْبَتِهِمْ.

50. One whose being alive is not beneficial to you, then count him among
the dead.

> 50ـ مَنْ لَمْ تَنْفَعْكَ حَياتُهُ فَعُدَّهُ فِي المَوْتى.

51. Be good in your interactions, be patient in difficulties and be
equitable when you have power.

> 51ـ أحْسِنِ العِشْرَةَ، واصْبِرْ عَلَى العُسْرَةِ، وأنْصِفْ مَعَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القُدْرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

52. Be pleased for [other] people with that which pleases you, then you
will be a [true] Muslim.

> 52ـ اِرْضَ للنّاسِ بِما تَرْضاهُ لِنَفْسِكَ، تَكُنْ مُسْلِماً.

[^1]: Meaning that he is bound to follow the ways of the people of his
time (and this is acceptable as long as it is not against the
commandments of Allah).


