The Intelligent
===============

**The Intelligent-العاقل**

1. The intelligent person is one who fetters his tongue.

> 1ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ عَقَلَ لِسانَهُ.

2. The intelligent person is one who covers up sins with forgiveness.

> 2ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ تَغَمَّدَ الذُّنُوبَ بِالغُفْرانِ.

3. The intelligent person is one who forsakes his lust and sells his
world for his Hereafter.

> 3ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ هَجَرَ شَهْوَتَهُ، وَباعَ دُنْياهُ بِ آخِرَتِهِ.

4. The intelligent person does not speak except when he needs to or in
order to present his case.

> 4ـ اَلعاقِلُ لايَتَكَلَّمُ إلاّ بِحاجَتِهِ أو حُجَّتِهِ.

5. The intelligent person is one who abstains from sins and keeps
himself free from faults.

> 5ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ تَوَرَّعَ عَنِ الذُّنُوبِ، وتَنَزَّهَ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُيُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. The intelligent person is one who fetters his tongue except from the
remembrance [and extolment] of Allah.

> 6ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ عَقَلَ لِسانَهُ إلاّ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللّهِ.

7. The intelligent person is one who opposes his vain desire in
obedience to his Lord.

> 7ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ عَصى هَواهُ في طاعَةِ رَبِّهِ.

8. The intelligent person is one who performs acts of kindness and puts
his effort in its correct place.

> 8ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ أحْسَنَ صَنائِعَهُ، وَوَضَعَ سَعْيَهُ في مَواضِعِهِ.

9. When the intelligent one is quiet, he reflects and when he speaks, he
remembers [and extols Allah] and when he observes, he takes lesson.

> 9ـ اَلعاقِلُ إذا سَكَتَ فَكَرَ، وإذا نَطَقَ ذَكَرَ، وإذا نَظَرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِعْتَبـَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. The intelligent person is one who suspects his [own] opinion and
does not trust everything that his self makes decorous for him.

> 10ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنِ اتَّهَمَ رَأيَهُ، ولَمْ يَثِقْ بِكُلِّ ما تُسَوِّلُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ نَفْسُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. The intelligent person is one who abstains from [the pleasures of]
the lowly, perishing world and desires the sublime, everlasting, lofty
Paradise.

> 11ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ زَهِدَ في دُنْيا فانِيَة دَنِيَّة، ورَغِبَ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَنَّة سَنِيَّة خالِدَة عالِيَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. The intelligent person is one who puts things in their right places,
and the ignorant one does the opposite of this.

> 12ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ وَضَعَ الأشْياءَ مَواضِعَها، والجاهِلُ ضِدُّ ذلِكَ.

13. The intelligent person acts when he knows and when he acts, he does
so sincerely, and when he becomes sincere, he secludes himself [from
others].

> 13ـ اَلعاقِلُ إذا عَلِمَ عَمِلَ، وإذا عَمِلَ أخْلَصَ، وإذا أخْلَصَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِعْتَزَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. The intelligent person is one who guards his tongue from backbiting.

> 14ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ صانَ لِسانَهُ عَنِ الغِيْبَةِ.

15. The intelligent person strives in his work and shortens his hopes.

> 15ـ اَلعاقِلُ يَجْتَهِدُ في عَمَلِهِ ويُقَصِّرُ مِنْ أمَلِهِ.

16. The intelligent person is one who overcomes his vain desire and does
not sell his Hereafter for his [temporary life in this] world.

> 16ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ غَلَبَ هَواهُ، ولَمْ يَبِـعْ آخِرَتَهُ بِدُنْياهُ.

17. The intelligent one is neither pushed to the extreme by violence nor
is he hampered by weakness.

> 17ـ اَلعاقِلُ لايَفْرُطُ بِهِ عُنْفٌ، وَلايَقْعُدُ بِهِ ضَعْفٌ.

18. The intelligent person is one who controls himself when he gets
angry, when he desires and when he is frightened.

> 18ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ يَمْلِكُ نَفْسَهُ إذا غَضِبَ، وإذا رَغِبَ وإذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَهِبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. The intelligent person charges himself with performing that which is
obligatory upon him and he does not charge himself with seeking that
which is due to him.

> 19ـ اَلعاقِلُ يَتَقاضى نفْسَه ُبِما يَجِبُ عَلَيْهِ، ولا يَتَقاضى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِنَفْسِهِ بِما يَجِبُ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. The intelligent person is one who does not waste his [time and]
energy in that which does not benefit him, and does not [strive to]
acquire that which will not accompany him [after his death].

> 20ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ لايُضيعُ لَهُ نَفَساً فيما لايَنْفَعُهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولايَقْتَني ما لايَصْحَبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. The intelligent person is one who overpowers his contending vain
desires.

> 21ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ غَلَبَ نَوازِعَ أهْوِيَتِهِ.

22. The intelligent person is one who submits to the decree [of Allah]
and acts with judiciousness [and determination].

> 22ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ سَلَّمَ إلَى القَضاءِ، وعَمِلَ بِالحَزْمِ.

23. The intelligent person is one who subdues his vain desire with his
intellect.

> 23ـ اَلعاقِلُ (الكاملُ) مَنْ قَمَعَ هَواهُ بِعَقْلِهِ.

24. Be rational and you will discern.

> 24ـ اِعْقِلْ تُدْرِكْ.

25. Indeed, the intelligent person is one who considers the different
[expressed] opinions with correct reasoning and considers the
consequences [of matters].

> 25ـ ألا وإنَّ اللَّبيبَ مَنِ اسْتَقْبَلَ وُجُوهَ الآراءِ بِفِكْر
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صائِب، ونَظَر فِي العَواقِبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. The most intelligent of you is the most submissive of you.

> 26ـ أعْقَلُكُمْ أطْوَعُكُمْ.

27. The most intelligent person is one who follows the wise people.

> 27ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ مَنْ أطاعَ العُقَلاءَ.

28. When you make an indirect reference to an intelligent person then
you have tormented him with reproof.

> 28ـ إذا لَوَّحْتَ لِلْعاقِلِ فَقَدْ أوْجَعْتَهُ عِتاباً.

29. The most felicitous of people is the intelligent one.

> 29ـ أسْعَدُ النّاسِ العاقِلُ.

30. The most intelligent of people is the most modest of them.

> 30ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ أحْياهُمْ.

31. The most intelligent person is the virtuous, fearful one.

> 31ـ أعْقَلُ الإنْسانِ مُحْسِنٌ خائِفٌ.

32. The most intelligent of people is the one who forgives [and accepts
the excuses of] others the most.

> 32ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ أعْذَرُهُمْ لِلنّاسِ.

33. The most intelligent of people is the farthest of them from all vile
things.

> 33ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ أبْعَدُهُمْ عَنْ كُلِّ دَنِيَّة.

34. The most intelligent of people is the most submissive of them to
Allah, the Glorified.

> 34ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ أطْوَعُهُمْ لِلّهِ سُبْحانَهُ.

35. The most intelligent of people is the closest of them to Allah.

> 35ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ أقْرَبُهُمْ مِنَ اللّهِ.

36. The most intelligent of people is one who sees his own fault and is
blind to the fault of others.

> 36ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ مَنْ كانَ بِعَيْبِهِ بَصيراً وعَنْ عَيْبِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَيْـرِهِ ضَريراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. The most intelligent of people is the one who does not go beyond
silence in punishing the ignorant.

> 37ـ أعْقَلُ النَّاسِ مَنْ لايَتَجاوَزُ الصَّمْتَ في عُقُوبَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجُهّالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

38. The most intelligent of people is the best of them in estimating his
livelihood and the most serious of them in endeavouring to improve his
Hereafter.

> 38ـ أفْضَلُ النّاسِ عَقْلاً، أحْسَنُهُمْ تَقْديراً لِمَعاشِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأشَدُّهُمُ اهْتِماماً بِإصْلاحِ مَعادِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

39. The most intelligent of people is one whose seriousness overpowers
his frivolity and who overcomes his vain desire with his intellect.

> 39ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ مَنْ غَلَبَ جِدُّهُ هَزْلَهُ، واسْتَظْهَرَ عَلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَواهُ بِعَقْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

40. The most intelligent of people is one who is humbled in front of the
truth so he submits himself to it, and is honoured by the truth so he
does not undermine its establishment and acting upon it with goodness.

> 40ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ مَنْ ذَلَّ لِلْحَقِّ فَاعْطاهُ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَزَّ بِالحَقِّ فَلَمْ يُهِنْ إقامَتَهُ، وحُسْنَ العَمِلِ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

41. The most intelligent of people is the one who is most considering of
the consequences [of actions].

> 41ـ أعْقَلُ النّاسِ أنْظَرُهُمْ فِي العَواقِبِ.

42. Verily the intelligent one is not beguiled by covetousness.

> 42ـ إنَّ العاقِلَ لايَنْخَدِعُ لِلطَّمَعِ (بِالطَّمع).

43. Verily the intelligent person is one whose intellect is [employed]
in right guidance and whose view is in [the process of development and]
growth, that is why his view is correct and his action praiseworthy.

> 43ـ إنَّ العاقِلَ مَنْ عَقْلُهُ فِي إرْشاد، ومَنْ رَأْيُهُ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ازْدِياد، فَلِذلِكَ رَأْيُهُ سَديدٌ، وفِعْلُهُ حَميدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. Indeed, the intelligent one learns through discipline while the
beasts are not trained except by beating.

> 44ـ إنَّ العاقِلَ يَتَّعِظُ بِالأدَبِ والبَهائِمُ لاتَتَّعِظُ إلاّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالضَّرْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. Verily the intelligent person is one who looks in his today for his
tomorrow, and strives to unshackle his soul, and works for that which
must come to pass and which cannot be escaped.

> 45ـ إنَّ العاقِلَ مَنْ نَظَرَ في يَوْمِهِ لِغَدِهِ، وسَعى في فِكاكِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَفْسِهِ، وعَمِلَ لِما لابُدَّ لَهُ مِنْهُ، وَلامَحيصَ لَهُ عَنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

46. Verily it behoves the intelligent one to be cautious of death in
this world, and he should make good preparations before he arrives at
the abode wherein one wishes for death but does not find it.

> 46ـ إنَّ العاقِلَ يَنْبَغي أنْ يَحْذَرَ المَوْتَ في هذِهِ الدّارِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُحْسِنَ لَهُ التَأَهُّبَ قَبْلَ أنْ يَصِلَ إلى دار يَتَمَنّى فيهَا
المَوْتَ فَلا يَجِدُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

47. The practice of those who possess intellect and understanding is
turning towards the permanent abode, turning away from the evanescent
abode and being desirous of the Garden of Paradise.

> 47ـ شيمَةُ ذوي الألْبابِ والنُّهى اَلإقبالُ عَلى دارِ البَقاءِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والأعْراضُ عَنْ دارِ الفَناءِ، والتَّوَلُّهُ بِجَنَّةِ المأْوى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

48. It behoves the intelligent one to make arrangements for his
Hereafter and to develop [and build] the abode of his permanent
residence.

> 48ـ يَنْبَغي لِلعاقِلِ أنْ يُقَدِّمَ لآخِرَتِهِ، ويَعْمُرَ دارَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إقامَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

49. The intelligent one likes the company of those who are like him.

> 49ـ اَلْعاقِلُ يَأْلِفُ مِثْلَهُ.

50. A person is the friend of what he understands.

> 50ـ اَلمَرْءُ صَديقُ ما عَقَلَ.

51. The intelligent one is the enemy of his delectation.

> 51ـ اَلعاقِلُ عَدُوُّ لَذَّتِهِ.

52. The intelligent person is one who fetters his tongue.

> 52ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ عَقَلَ لِسانَهُ.

53. The intelligent one seeks perfection, the ignorant one seeks wealth.

> 53ـ اَلعاقِلُ يَطْلُبُ الكَمالَ، اَلْجاهِلُ يَطْلُبُ المالَ.

54. The intelligent one puts his self down and as a result he gets
elevated.

> 54ـ اَلعاقِلُ يَضَعُ نَفْسَهُ فَيَرْتَفِعُ.

55. The intelligent one is grieved, sorrowful.

> 55ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَهْمُومٌ، مَغْمُومٌ.

56. The intelligent person is one who safeguards his affair.

> 56ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ أحْرَزَ أمْرَهُ.

57. Insinuation is the severest punishment for the intelligent one.

> 57ـ اَلتَّعْريضُ لِلْعاقِلِ أشَدُّ عِتابِهِ.

58. The intelligent person is one who is admonished by experiences.

> 58ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ وَعَظَتْهُ التَّجارِبُ.

59. The intelligent person is one who annihilates his lust.

> 59ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ أماتَ شَهْوَتَهُ.

60. The intelligent person is one who spreads his generosity.

> 60ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ بَذَلَ نَداهُ.

61. The intelligent one relies on his [hard] work, [while] the ignorant
one relies on his aspiration.

> 61ـ اَلعاقِلُ يَعْتَمِدُ عَلى عَمَلِهِ، اَلجاهِلُ يَعْتَمِدُ عَلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمَلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

62. The intelligent person is one who takes a lesson from [the
experiences of] others.

> 62ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنِ اتَّعَظَ بِغَيْـرِهِ.

63. The intelligent person is one whose words are affirmed by his
actions.

> 63ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ صَدَّقَ (صَدَّقَتْ) أقْوالَهُ أفْعالُهُ.

64. The intelligent person is one who stops at what he knows.

> 64ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ وَقَفَ حَيْثُ عَرَفَ.

65. The intelligent person is one who renounces that which the ignorant
one desires.

> 65ـ اَلعاقِلُ مَنْ يَزْهَدُ فيما يَرْغَبُ فيهِ الجاهِلُ.

66. Indeed only he is intelligent who is admonished by experiences.

> 66ـ إنَّما العاقِلُ مَنْ وَعَظَتْهُ التَّجارِبُ.

67. Only he is intelligent who takes out the grudges [from his heart].

> 67ـ إنَّما اللَّبِيبُ مَنِ اسْتَسَلَّ الأحْقادَ.

68. As the intelligent one grows older, his intellect grows younger.

> 68ـ إذا شابَ العاقِلُ شَبَّ عَقْلُهُ.

69. Hinting at [and making indirect references to] the error of the
intelligent person is one of the most agonizing punishments for him.

> 69ـ تَلْويحُ زَلَّةِ العاقِلِ لَهُ مِنْ أمَضِّ عِتابِهِ (أمَضَّ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِتابهِ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

70. The wealth of an intelligent person is in his knowledge and his
action.

> 70ـ ثَرْوَةُ العاقِلِ في عِلْمِهِ وعَمَلِهِ.

71. Love of knowledge, virtuous forbearance and adhering to the right
are from the merits of the people of reason and understanding.

> 71ـ حُبُّ العِلْمِ، وحُسْنُ الحِلْمِ، ولُزومُ الصَّوابِ مِنْ فَضائِلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولِي النُّهى والألْبابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

72. It is a right that is due on the intelligent one to work for the
Hereafter and to seek more provisions [for it].

> 72ـ حَقٌّ عَلَى العاقِلِ العَمَلُ لِلْمَعادِ، والاِسْتِكْثارُ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزّادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

73. It is a right upon the intelligent one to vanquish his vain desire
before his adversary.

> 73ـ حَقٌّ عَلَى العاقِلِ أنْ يَقْهَرَ هَواهُ قَبْلَ ضِدِّهِ.

74. The reign of the intelligent one is like the relative who longs to
unite [with his dear ones].

> 74ـ دَوْلَةُ العاقِلِ كَالنَّسيبِ يَحِنُّ إلَى الوُصْلَةِ.

75. The one who possesses intellect is not known except by [his]
tolerance, temperance and kindness.

> 75ـ ذُوالعَقْلِ لايَنْكَشِفُ إلاّ عَنِ احْتِمال، وإجْمال، وإفْضال.

76. The desire of an intelligent person is in wisdom and the ambition of
an ignorant person is in foolishness.

> 76ـ رَغْبَةُ العاقِلِ فِي الحِكْمَةِ، وهِمَّةُ الجاهِلِ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَماقَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

77. The lapse of an intelligent person is dangerous.

> 77ـ زَلَّةُ العاقِلِ مَحْذُورَةٌ.

78. The lapse of an intelligent person is a crushing blow.

> 78ـ زَلَّةُ العاقِلِ شَديدَةُ النِّكايَةِ.

79. The virtues of an intelligent ruler are spread far and wide.

> 79ـ سُلْطانُ العاقِلِ يَنْشُرُ مَناقِبَهُ.

80. The [distinguishing] quality of the people of intellect is [their]
lack of lust and negligence.

> 80ـ شيمَةُ العُقَلاءِ قِلَّةُ الشَّهْوَةِ، وقِلَّةُ الغَفْلَةِ.

81. The quality of those who possess intellect and understanding is
[their] turning towards the Eternal Abode, turning away from the
evanescent abode, and yearning for the Garden of Paradise.

> 81ـ شيمَةُ ذَوِى الألْبابِ والنُّهى اَلإقْبالُ على دارِ البَقاءِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والإعْراضُ عَنْ دارِ الفَناءِ، وَالتَّوَلُّهُ بِجَنَّةِ المَأْوى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

82. The chest of an intelligent person is the strongbox of his secret.

> 82ـ صَدْرُ العاقِلِ صُنْدُوقُ سِـرِّهِ.

83. The conjecture of an intelligent person is more correct than the
certitude of an ignorant person.

> 83ـ ظَنُّ العاقِلِ أصَحُّ مِنْ يَقينِ الجاهِلِ.

84. The enmity of an intelligent person is better than the friendship of
an ignorant one.

> 84ـ عَداوَةُ العاقِلِ خَيْـرٌ مِنْ صَداقَةِ الجاهِلِ.

85. The sufficiency of an intelligent person is through his knowledge.

> 85ـ غِنَى العاقِلِ بِعِلْمِهِ.

86. The sufficiency of an intelligent person is through his wisdom and
his honour is through his contentment.

> 86ـ غِنَى العاقِلِ بِحِكْمَتِهِ، وعِزُّهُ بِقَناعَتِهِ.

87. The ugly act of an intelligent person is better than the beautiful
act of an ignorant person.

> 87ـ قَبيحُ عاقِل خَيْـرٌ مِنْ حَسَنِ جاهِل.

88. Every intelligent person is sorrowful (or sad).

> 88ـ كُلُّ عاقِل مَغْمُومٌ (مَحْزُونٌ).

89. Be intelligent in the affairs of your religion and simple in your
worldly affairs.

> 89ـ كُنْ عاقِلاً في أمْرِ دينِكَ، جاهِلاً في أمْرِ دُنياكَ.

90. The speech of the intelligent is a nourishment [for the soul] and
the reply of the ignorant is [nothing better than] silence.

> 90ـ كَلامُ العاقِلِ قُوتٌ، وجَوابُ الجاهِلِ سُكُوتٌ.

91. For the intelligent one, there is goodness in every action [he
does].

> 91ـ لِلْعاقِلِ في كُلِّ عَمَل إحْسانٌ.

92. For the intelligent one, there is nobility in every word [he
speaks].

> 92ـ لِلْعاقِلِ في كُلِّ كَلِمَة نُبْلٌ.

93. For the intelligent one, in every action there is self-discipline.

> 93ـ لِلْعاقِلِ في كُلِّ عَمَل اِرتياضٌ.

94. It is not for the intelligent one to move out [of his home] except
for three things: to do something to improve his Hereafter, or to earn
his livelihood, or to enjoy what is not forbidden.

> 94ـ لَيْسَ لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يَكُونَ شاخِصاً إلاّ في ثَلاث:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُظْوَة(خُطوَة) في مَعاد، أوْ مَرَمَّة في مَعاش، أو لَذَّة في غَيْرِ
مُحَرَّم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

95. He who is distracted by idle sport and seeks pleasure in amusement
and song, has no intelligence.

> 95ـ لَمْ يَعْقِلْ مَنْ وَلِهَ بِاللَّعْبِ واسْتُهْتِرَ بِاللَّهْوِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والطَّرَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

96. One who has intelligence, comprehends.

> 96ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ فَهِمَ.

97. One who has intelligence remains chaste [and abstains from the
forbidden].

> 97ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ عَفَّ.

98. One who has intelligence seeks pardon [for the wrong he does].

> 98ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ اِسْتَقالَ.

99. One who has intelligence is kind [and tolerant].

> 99ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ سَمِحَ.

100. One who has intelligence is content.

> 100ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ قَنِعَ.

101. One who has intelligence remains silent [until there is a need to
speak].

> 101ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ صَمَتَ.

102. One who does not use intellect is abased, and one who is abased is
not revered.

> 102ـ مَنْ لايَعْقِلْ يَهُنْ، ومَنْ يَهُنْ لايُوَقَّرْ.

103. One who has intelligence takes more lessons [from the past].

> 103ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ كَثُرَ اِعْتِبارُهُ.

104. One whose intellect is less, his jesting is increased.

> 104ـ مَنْ قَلَّ عَقْلُهُ كَثُرَ هَزْلُهُ.

105. One who has intelligence takes lesson from his past and takes
precaution for his soul.

> 105ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ اِعْتَبَرَ بِأمْسِهِ، واسْتَظْهَرَ لِنَفْسهِ.

106. One whose intellect prevails over his lust and his forbearance
[overcomes] his anger, then he is worthy of [being deemed as having]
good conduct.

> 106ـ مَنْ غَلَبَ عَقْلُهُ شَهْوَتَهُ، وحِلْمُهُ غَضَبَهُ كانَ جَديراً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِحُسْنِ السّيرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

107. One who has intelligence awakens from his negligence, prepares for
his journey and maintains [and develops] his abode of [permanent]
residence.

> 107ـ مَنْ عَقَلَ تَيَقَّظَ مِنْ غَفْلَتِهِ، وتَأَهَّبَ لِرِحْلَتِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَمَرَ دارَ إقامَتِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

108. One whose intellect does not have the greatest control over him
does not benefit from [any] advice.

> 108ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ أمْلَكَ شَـيْء بِهِ عَقْلُهُ لَمْ يَنْتَفِعْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِمَوْعِظَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

109. One who does not have an intellect to adorn him, does not become
noble.

> 109ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ عَقْلٌ يَزينُهُ لَمْ يَنْبُلْ.

110. One whose intellect is not complete, his evils are not safeguarded
against.

> 110ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَكْمُلْ عَقْلُهُ لَمْ تُؤْمَنْ بَوائِقُهُ.

111. It is from the intelligence of a man that he not speak about all
that he knows.

> 111ـ مِنْ عَقْلِ الرَّجُلِ أنْ لايَتَكَلَّمَ بِجَميعِ ما أحاطَ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِلْمُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

112. It is from the rights of the intelligent person to vanquish his
vain desire before his adversary.

> 112ـ مِنْ حَقِّ العاقِلِ أنْ يَقْهَرَ هَواهُ قَبْلَ ضِدِّهِ.

113. It is from the right of the intelligent person to count his evil
action and his ugly conduct as being from the wretchedness of his
circumstance and his misfortune.

> 113ـ مِنْ حَقِّ اللَّبيبِ أنْ يَعُدَّ سُوءَ عَمَلِهِ، وقُبْحَ سيرَتِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ شَقاوَةِ جَدِّهِ وَنَحْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

114. From the perfection of your intellect is your reliance on your
intellect.

> 114ـ مِنْ كَمالِ عَقْلِكَ اِسْتِظْهارُكَ عَلى عَقْلِكَ.

115. One who lengthens his aspirations is not intelligent.

> 115ـ ما عَقَلَ مَنْ أطالَ أمَلَهُ.

116. An intelligent person does not lie and a believer does not
fornicate.

> 116ـ ما كَذَبَ عاقِلٌ، ولا زَنى مُؤْمِنٌ.

117. The magnanimity of an intelligent person is his religion and his
distinction is his etiquette.

> 117ـ مُرُوَّةُ العاقِلِ دينُهُ، وحَسَبُهُ أدَبُهُ.

118. Half of the intelligent one is tolerance and [the other] half is
feigning negligence [when encountering the bad behaviour of the
ignorant].

> 118ـ نِصْفُ العاقِلِ اِحْتِمالٌ، ونِصْفُهُ تَغافُلٌ.

119. There is no poverty for the intelligent one.

> 119ـ لافَقْرَ لِعاقِل.

120. The intelligent person is never found [to be] beguiled.

> 120ـ لايُلْفَى العاقِلُ مَغْرُوراً.

121. There is none more courageous than the intelligent one.

> 121ـ لا أشْجَعَ مِنْ لَبيب.

122. He who is overcome by anger and lust should not be counted as an
intelligent person.

> 122ـ لايَنْبَغي أنْ يُعَدَّ عاقِلاً مَنْ يَغْلِبُهُ الغَضَبُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والشَّهْوَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

123. It behoves the intelligent person not to remain aloof from the
obedience of Allah and the struggle against his [lower] self, in every
situation.

> 123ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ لايَخْلُوَ في كُلِّ حالَة عَنْ طاعَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّهِ، ومُجاهَدَةِ نَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

124. It behoves the intelligent person to work for the Hereafter and try
to increase his provisions before he passes away and is lowered into his
grave.

> 124ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يَعْمَلَ لِلْمَعادِ، ويَسْتَكْثِرَ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّادِ قَبْلَ زَهُوقِ نَفْسِهِ، وحُلُولِ رَمْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

125. It behoves the intelligent one to prepare provisions for his
Hereafter and to maintain [and develop] the abode of his [permanent]
residence.

> 125ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يُقَدِّمَ لآخِرَتِهِ، ويَعْمُرَ دارَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إقامَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

126. It behoves the intelligent person to earn praise through his wealth
and to preserve himself from asking others.

> 126ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يَكْتَسِبَ بِمالِهِ المَحْمَدَةَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويَصُونَ نَفْسَهُ عَنِ المَسْألَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

127. It behoves an intelligent person to address an ignorant one like a
doctor addresses a sick patient.

> 127ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يُخاطِبَ الجاهِلَ مُخاطَبَةَ الطَّبيبِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلمَريضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

128. It behoves the intelligent person to increase his association with
the scholars and the virtuous ones, and to keep away from the company of
the evil and wicked ones.

> 128ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يُكْثِرَ مِنْ صُحْبَةِ العُلَماءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والأبْرارِ، ويَجْتَنِبَ مُقارَنَةَ الأشْرارِ والفُجّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

129. It behoves the intelligent one to protect himself from the
intoxication of wealth, the intoxication of power, the intoxication of
knowledge, the intoxication of praise and the intoxication of youth, for
each of these have foul odours that take away intelligence and reduces
dignity.

> 129ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ أنْ يَحْتَرِسَ مِنْ سُكْرِ المالِ، وسُكْرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القُدْرَةِ، وسُكْرِ العِلْمِ، وَسُكْرِ المَدْحِ، وسُكْرِ الشَّبابِ
فَإنَّ لِكُلِّ ذلِكَ رِياحاً خَبيثَةً، تَسْلُبُ العَقْلَ، وتَسْتَخِفُّ
الوَقارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

130. It behoves the intelligent person not to be harsh when he teaches,
and not to scorn [others] when he gains knowledge.

> 130ـ يَنْبَغي لِلْعاقِلِ إذا عَلَّمَ أنْ لايَعْنُفَ،وَإذا عُلِّمَ أنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايَأْنَفَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

131. The intellect of every person is manifested by that which is spoken
by his tongue.

> 131ـ يُنْبِئُ عَنْ عَقْلِ كُلِّ امْرِئ ما يَنْطِقُ بِهِ لِسانُهُ.

132. The intellect of every person is indicated by his tongue, and his
merit is evinced by his diction.

> 132ـ يُنْبِئُ عَنْ عَقْلِ كُلِّ امْرئ لِسانُهُ، ويَدُلُّ عَلى فَضْلِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيانُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

133. I am amused by a man whose intellect is seen as an extension of his
tongue, while his tongue is not seen as an extension of his intellect.

> 133ـ يُعْجِبُني مِنَ الرَّجُلِ أنْ يُرى عَقْلُهُ زائِداً عَلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِسانِهِ، ولايُرى لِسانُهُ زائِداً عَلى عَقْلهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

134. Follow the intelligent one and you will benefit.

> 134ـ أطِعِ العاقِلَ تَغْنَمْ.

135. At times the intelligent person becomes blind to what is right.

> 135ـ رُبَّما عَمِيَ اللَّبيبُ عَنِ الصَّوابِ.


