Affluence And The Rich
======================

**Affluence and the rich-الغَنِيّ والغِنى**

1. A rich person is he who becomes rich through contentment.

> 1ـ اَلْغَنِيُّ مَنِ اسْتَغْنى بِالقَناعَةِ.

2. A [truly] rich person is one who prefers contentment.

> 2ـ اَلْغَنِيُّ مَنْ آثَرَ القَناعَةَ.

3. The rich person feels at home [even when he is] in a strange land.

> 3ـ اَلْغَنِيُّ (اَلْغِنى)فِي الغُرْبَةِ وَطَنٌ.

4. The ignorance of a rich person abases him whereas the knowledge of a
poor person elevates him.

> 4ـ جَهْلُ الغَنِيِّ يَضَعُهُ، وعِلْمُ الفَقيرِ يَرْفَعُهُ.

5. At times a rich person may be lowlier than an ugly sheep.

> 5ـ رُبَّ غَنِىّ أذَلُّ مِنْ نَقَد.

6. Sometimes a rich person may be needier than a poor person.

> 6ـ رُبَّ غَنِىّ أفْقَرُ مِنْ فَقير.

7. Few are the rich who [financially] support and assist others.

> 7ـ قَليلٌ مِنَ الأغْنِياءِ مَنْ يُواسي ويُسْعِفُ.

8. How many of the rich are unneeded [because of their unwillingness to
help others].

> 8ـ كَمْ مِنْ غَنِىّ يُسْتَغْنى عَنْهُ.

9. It is obligatory upon the rich person not to withhold his wealth from
the poor.

> 9ـ مِنَ الواجِبِ عَلَى الغَنِيِّ أنْ لايَضُنَّ عَلَى الفَقيرِبِمالِهِ.

10. Never count the one from whose wealth others don’t get sustenance as
a rich person.

> 10ـ لاتَعُدَّنَّ غَنِياً مَنْ لَمْ يُرْزَقْ مِنْ مالِهِ.

11. There is no offence greater than the offence of the rich who
deprives the needy.

> 11ـ لاوِزْرَ أعْظَمَ مِنْ وِزْرِ غَنِىّ مَنَعَ المُحْتاجَ.

12. Opulence through other than Allah is the greatest indigence and
wretchedness.

> 12ـ اَلْغِنى بِغَيْرِ اللّهِ أعْظَمُ الفَقْرِ والشَّقاءِ.

13. Seek refuge with Allah from the intoxication of riches, for indeed
it has an intoxication that takes long to recover from.

> 13ـ اِسْتَعْيذُوا بِاللّهِ مِنْ سَكْرَةِ الغِنى، فَإنَّ لَهُ سَكْرَةً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَعيدَةَ الإفاقَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. The richest of you are the most contented among you.

> 14ـ أغْناكُمْ أقْنَعُكُمْ.

15. The greatest of all riches is the intellect.

> 15ـ أغْنَى الغِنى اَلعَقْلُ.

16. The most honourable wealth is abandoning [false] aspirations.

> 16ـ أشْرَفُ الغِنى تَرْكُ المُنى.

17. The best of riches is that through with one’s honour is secured.

> 17ـ أفْضَلُ الغِنى ما صينَ بِهِ العِرْضُ.

18. The richest of the rich is one who is not a prisoner to greed.

> 18ـ أغْنَى الأغْنِياءِ مَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ لِلْحِرْصِ أسِيراً.

19. The greatest of riches is contentment and toleration of poverty.

> 19ـ أغْنَى الغِنى القَناعَةُ، والتَّحَمُّلُ فِي الفاقَةِ.

20. Opulence brings about transgression.

> 20ـ اَلغِنى يُطْغي.

21. Riches turn one who is not a master into a master.

> 21ـ اَلْغِنى يُسَوِّدُ غَيْرَ السَّيِّدِ.

22. Wealth and poverty manifest the essences of men and their qualities.

> 22ـ اَلغِنْى والفَقْرِ يَكْشِفانِ جَواهِرَ الرِّجالِ وأوْصافَها.

23. The brother of affluence is one who covers himself with contentment.

> 23ـ أخُو الغِنى مَنِ الْتَحَفَ بِالقَناعَةِ.

24. Arrogance in wealth sows the seed (or warns) of abasement in
poverty.

> 24ـ اَلزَّهْوُ فِي الغِنى يُبَذِّرُ (يُنْذِرُ) الذُّلَّ فِي الفَقْرِ.

25. The bane of affluence is stinginess.

> 25ـ آفَةُ الغِنى البُخْلُ.

26. The best affluence is the affluence of the soul.

> 26ـ خَيْرُ الغَناءِ غَناءُ النَّفْسِ.

27. Many an opulence leads to lasting poverty.

> 27ـ رُبَّ غِنىً أوْرَثَ الفَقْرَ الباقِيَ.

28. The alms-tax of affluence [and comfort] is being good with
neighbours and keeping ties with near relatives.

> 28ـ زَكاةُ اليَسارِ بِرُّ الجيرانِ، وَصِلَةُ الأرْحامِ.

29. Two things are such that their value is recognized only by one who
has lost them: wealth and power.

> 29ـ شَيْئانِ لايُعْرَفُ قَدْرُهُما إلاّ مَنْ سَلِبَهُما: الغِنى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والقُدْرَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

30. Restraining oneself from that which is in the possession of [other]
people is present affluence.

> 30ـ ظَلَفُ النَّفْسِ عَمّا في أيْدي النّاسِ هُوَ الغِنَى المَوْجُودُ.

31. The deception of wealth leads to insolence.

> 31ـ غُرُورُ الغِنى يُوجِبُ الأشَرَ.

32. Loss of wealth is an advantage for the sagacious and a [cause of]
regret for the foolish.

> 32ـ فَوْتُ الغِنى غَنِيمَةُ الأكْياسِ، وحَسْرَةُ الحَمْقى.

33. The whole of affluence is in contentment and satisfaction.

> 33ـ كُلُّ الغِنى فِي القَناعَةِ، والرِّضا.

34. One who would like to gain affluence without possessions, prestige
without authority and abundance without kinsfolk, then let him them come
out of the abjectness of disobedience to Allah into the honour of His
obedience, for indeed [through this] he will find all of these.

> 34ـ مَنْ سَرَّهُ الغِنى بِلامال، والعِزُّ بِلاسُلْطان، والكَثْرَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِلا عَشيرَة، فَلْيَخْرُجْ مِنْ ذُلِّ مَعْصِيَةِ اللّهِ إلى عِزِّ
طاعَتِهِ، فَإنَّهُ واجِدُ ذلِكَ كُلِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

35. He who has been granted hopelessness in [obtaining] what people
possess, contentment with what he is given and satisfaction with the
divine decree has acquired affluence.

> 35ـ نالَ الغِنى مَنْ رُزِقَ اليَأْسَ عَمّا في أيْدِى النّاسِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والقَناعَةَ بِما أُوتِيَ، والرِّضا بِالقَضاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

36. Do not be delighted by wealth and comfort, and do not be grieved by
poverty and tribulation, for verily gold is tested by fire and the
believer is tested by tribulation.

> 36ـ لاتَفْرَحْ بِالغَناءِ والرَّخاءِ، ولاتَغْتَمَّ بِالفَقْرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والبَلاءِ، فَإنَّ الذَّهَبَ يُجَرَّبُ بِالنّارِ، والمُؤْمِنَ يُجَرَّبُ
بِالبَلاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. Affluence through [complete reliance on] Allah is the greatest
affluence.

> 37ـ اَلغِنى بِاللّهِ أعْظَمُ الغِنى.

38. One who does not become needless of this world through Allah has no
religion.

> 38ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَسْتَغْنِ بِاللّهِ عَنِ الدُّنْيا فَلا دينَ لَهُ.

39. There is no affluence except through contentment.

> 39ـ لاغِنى إلاّ بِالقَناعَةِ.

40. No affluence [can be acquired] with mismanagement.

> 40ـ لاغِنى مَعَ سُوءِ تَدْبير.


