The Obligatory And Recommended Acts
===================================

**The obligatory and recommended acts-الفرائِض والنوافل**

1. The one who seeks nearness [to Allah] by performing the obligatory
and the recommended [acts], doubles his gain.

> 1ـ المُتَقَرِّبُ بِأداءِ الفَرائِضِ والنَّوافِلِ مُتَضاعِفُ الأرْباحِ.

2. Verily Allah, the Glorified, has made the obligatory [acts] incumbent
upon you, so do not neglect them; and has delimited boundaries for you,
so do not transgress them; and has forbidden you from certain things, so
do not violate them; and has remained silent about certain things,
though not out of forgetfulness, so do not undertake them.

> 2ـ إنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ فَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمْ فَرائِضَ فَلا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُضَيِّعُوها، وحَدَّ لَكُمْ حُدُوداً فَلا تَعْتَدُوها، وَنَهاكُمْ عَنْ
أشْياءَ فَلا تَنْتَهِكُوها،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَكَتَ عَنْ أشْياءَ ولَمْ يَدَعْها نِسْياناً فَلا تَتَكَلَّفُوها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Verily whoever busies himself with what is obligatory upon him
instead of that which has been guaranteed for him, and is satisfied with
what has been decreed for and against him; he will be the healthiest
person in wellbeing, the most profiting from felicity and the most
benefitting from happiness.

> 3ـ إنَّ مَنْ شَغَلَ نَفْسَهُ بِالمَفْرُوضِ عَلَيْهِ عَنِ المَضْمُونِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ، ورَضِيَ بِالمَقْدُورِ عَلَيْهِ ولَهُ، كانَ أكْثَرَ النّاسِ
سَلامَةً في عافِيَة، ورِبْحاً في غِبْطَة، وَغَنيمَةً في مَسَرَّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. Verily if you were to occupy yourself with meritorious supererogatory
acts instead of fulfilling the obligatory ones, then the merit you
acquire will never make up for the religious obligation that you have
neglected.

> 4ـ إنَّكَ إنِ اشْتَغَلْتَ بِفَضائِلِ النَّوافِلِ عَنْ أداءِ الفَرائِضِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَنْ يَقُومَ فَضْلٌ تَكْسِبُهُ بِفَرْض تُضَيِّعُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. When recommended acts come in the way of obligatory actions, then
abandon them.

> 5ـ إذا أضَرَّتِ النَّوافِلُ بِالفَرائِضِ فَارْفُضُوها.

6. It is upon you to preserve every matter that you cannot be excused
for neglecting.

> 6ـ عَلَيْكَ بِحِفْظِ كُلِّ أمْر لاتُعْذَرُ بِإضاعَتِهِ.

7. Fulfilling the obligatory is from the most noble of actions.

> 7ـ قَضاءُ اللَّوازِمِ مِنْ أفْضَلِ المَكارِمِ.

8. There is no worship like the performing of obligatory acts.

> 8ـ لاعِبادَةَ كَأداءِ الفَرائِضِ.

9. No closeness is achieved through recommended actions if they hamper
the obligatory actions.

> 9ـ لاقُرْبَةَ بِالنَّوافِلِ إذا أضَرَّتْ بِالفَرائِضِ.

10. Do not perform a recommended act at the time of an obligatory one;
start with the obligatory [prayer] and then pray whatever more you wish
to.

> 10ـ لاتَقْضِ نافِلَةً في وَقْتِ فَريضَة، إبْدَأْ بِالفَريضَةِ ثُمَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ ما بَدا لَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


