The Qur’an
==========

**The Quran-القرآن**

1. The Qur’an is the better of the two forms of guidance.

> 1ـ اَلْقُرْآنُ أفْضَلُ الهِدايَتَيْنِ.

2. Excel in your recitation of the Qur’an, for it is indeed the most
beneficial (or the best) of stories, and seek cure from it, for it is
the cure for [what is in] the breasts.

> 2ـ أحْسِنُوا تِلاوَةَ القُرْآنِ فَإنَّهُ أنْفَعُ (أحْسَنُ) القَصَصِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واسْتَشْفُوا بِهِ فَإنَّهُ شِفاءُ الصُّدُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Follow the light that is not put out and the face that does not
become old, and surrender and submit to its command, for indeed you will
not go astray with submission [to it].

> 3ـ اِتَّبِعُوا النٌّورَ الَّذي لايُطْفَأُ، والوَجْهَ الَّذي لايَبْلى،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واسْتَسْلِمُوْا، وسَلِّمُوا لأمْرِهِ، فَإنَّكُمْ لَنْ تَضِلُّوا مَعَ
التَّسليمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. The best reminder is the Qur’an, through it the breasts are expanded
and the souls are illuminated.

> 4ـ أفْضَلُ الذِّكْرِ القُرْآنُ، بِهِ تُشْرَحُ الصُّدُورُ وتَسْتَنيرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّرائِرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Verily the outer aspect of the Qur’an is elegant and its inner aspect
is profound [in meaning]; its marvels do not end, its wonders do not
cease, and the darkness [of ignorance and misguidance] is not removed
except through it.

> 5ـ إنَّ القُرْآنَ ظاهِرُهُ أنيقٌ، وباطِنُهُ عَمِيقٌ، لاتَفْنى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَجائِبُهُ، ولاتَنْقَضي غَرائِبُهُ، ولا تُكْشَفُ الظُّلُماتُ إلاّ
بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Verily this Qur’an is the adviser that does not deceive, the guide
that does not lead astray and the speaker that does not lie.

> 6ـ إنَّ هذا القُرْآنَ هُوَ النّاصِحُ الَّذي لايَغُشُّ، والهادِي الَّذي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايُضِلُّ، وَالمُحَدِّثُ الَّذي لايَكْذِبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Reflect upon the verses of the Qur’an and learn lessons from it, for
indeed it is the best imparter of lessons.

> 7ـ تَدَبَّرُوا آياتِ القُرْآنِ واعْتَبِرُوا بِهِ فَإنَّهُ أبْلَغُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العِبَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Learn the Qur’an, for it is indeed the spring of the hearts and seek
a cure from its light, for verily it is the cure of the hearts.

> 8ـ تَعَلَّمُوا القُرْآنَ فَإنَّهُ رَبيعُ القُلُوبِ، واسْتَشْفُوا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِنُورِهِ فَإنَّهُ شِفاءُ الصُّدُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Hold fast to the rope of the Qur’an and take counsel from it,
consider as permissible what it permits and forbidden what it forbids,
and act on its injunctions and rulings.

> 9ـ تَمَسَّكْ بِحَبْلِ القُرْآنِ وانْتَصِحْهُ، وحَلِّلْ حَلالَهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحَرِّمْ حَرامَهُ، وَاعْمَلْ بِعَزائِمِهِ وأحْكامِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. The charm of the Qur’an are [in the surahs] *al-Baqarah* and *Aāl
‘Imrān*.

> 10ـ جَمالُ القُرآنِ البَقَرَةُ وآلُ عِمْرانَ.

11. He (‘a) said about the Holy Qur’an: it is an intercessor whose
intercession is accepted and it is a speaker whose speech is affirmed.

> 11ـ وقال َـ عَلَيْهِ السّلامُ ـ في ذِكْرِ القُرْآنِ: شافِعٌ مُشَفَّعٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقائِلٌ مُصَدَّقٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. The outward aspect of the Qur’an is elegant and its inward aspect is
profound.

> 12ـ ظاهِرُ القُرْآنِ أنيقٌ، وباطِنُهُ عَميقٌ.

13. You must take this Qur’an, accept what it has permitted, stay away
from what it has forbidden, act on its definitive [and clear] verses and
refer its unclear verses to the one who knows their meanings; for indeed
it is a witness over you, and it is the best thing that you can petition
with.

> 13ـ عَلَيْكُمْ بِهذَا القُرْآنِ، أحِلُّواحَلالَهُ، وحَرِّمُوا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَرامَهُ، واعْمَلُوا بِمُحْكَمِهِ، ورُدُّوا مُتَشابِهَهُ إلى عالِمِهِ،
فَإنَّهُ شاهِدٌ عَلَيْكُمْ، وأفْضَلُ ما بِهِ تَوَسَّلْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. In the Qur’an is the information about what was before you, the news
about what will come after you and the rulings regarding your present
time.

> 14ـ فِي القُرآنِ نَبَأُ ما قَبْلَكُمْ، وخَبَرُ ما بَعْدَكُمْ، وحُكْمُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما بَيْنَـكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. The Qur’an is sufficient as a caller [towards the right path].

> 15ـ كَفى بِالقُرْآنِ داعِياً.

16. Let your nightly conversation partner be the Qur’an.

> 16ـ لِيَكُنْ سَميرُكَ القُرْآنَ.

17. There is no poverty for anyone after the Qur’an nor is there any
affluence for anyone before it.

> 17ـ لَيْسَ لأحَد بَعْدَ القُرْآنِ مِنْ فاقَة، وَلا لأحَد قَبْلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القُرْآنِ غِنىً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. One who feels at ease with the recitation of the Qur’an does not
become lonely by the separation of his brothers.

> 18ـ مَنْ أنِسَ بِتِلاوَةِ القُرْآنِ لَمْ تُوحِشْهُ مُفارَقَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإخْوانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. One who takes the word of Allah as a guide is directed to that which
is most upright.

> 19ـ مَنِ اتِّخَذَ قَوْلَ اللّهِ دَلِيلاً هُدِيَ إلَى الَّتي هِيَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أقْوَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. One for whom the Qur’an intercedes on the Day of Judgment, its
intercession for him is accepted, and one about whom it complains shall
testify to [and affirm] it.

> 20ـ مَنْ شَفَعَ لَهُ القُرْآنُ يَوْمَ القِيمَةِ شُفِّعَ فيهِ، ومَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَحَلَ بِهِ صُدِّقَ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. One who deems what the Qur’an has forbidden to be permissible does
not believe in it.

> 21ـ ما آمَنَ بِما حَرَّمَهُ القُرْآنُ مَنِ اسْتَحَلَّهُ.

22. None has sat in the company of this Qur’an but that he has risen
with an increase or a decrease – an increase in guidance or a decrease
in [spiritual] blindness.

> 22ـ ما جالَسَ أحَدٌ هذا القُرْآنَ إلاّ قامَ بِزِيادَة، أوْ نُقْصان،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زِيادَة في هُديً، أوْ نُقْصان في عَمَيً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. He said about the Qur’an: It is a light for one who seeks
illumination by it, a witness for one who disputes with it, a success
for one who argues by it, knowledge for one who is attentive and a
judgment for one who judges.

> 23ـ قال في ذِكْرِ القُرْآنِ: نُورٌ لِمَنِ اسْتَضاءَ بِهِ، وشاهِدٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِمَنْ خاصَمَ بِهِ، وفَلَجٌ لِمَنْ حاجَّ بِهِ، وعِلْمٌ لِمَنْ وَعى
وحُكْمٌ لِمَنْ قَضى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. In describing the Qur’an [he said]: It is what prevents the desires
from deviating towards the forbidden and the uncertainties and opinions
from causing doubt.

> 24ـ في وَصْفِ القُرْآنِ: هُوَ الَّذي لاتَزيغُ بِهِ الأهْواءُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاتَلْتَبِسُ بِهِ الشُّبَهُ وَالآراءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. In describing the Qur’an [he said]: It is the decisive word and not
a jest. It is the articulator of the practice of justice and the
enjoiner of virtue. It is the strong rope of Allah and the wise
reminder. It is the trusted revelation of Allah and His strong rope. It
is the spring of the hearts and the fountains of knowledge. It is the
straight path. It is guidance for the one who follows it and an
adornment for the one who beautifies himself with it. It is a protector
[from sin] for the one who seeks protection by it and a firm rope for
the one who holds on to it.

> 25ـ في وَصْفِ القُرْآنِ: هُوَ الفَصْلُ لَيْسَ بِالهَزْلِ، هُوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّاطِقُ بِسُنَّةِ العَدْلِ، والآمِرُ بِالفَضْلِ، هُوَ حَبْلُ اللّهِ
المَتينُ، والذِّكْرُ الحَكيمُ، هُوَ وَحْيُ اللّهِ الأمِينُ، وحَبْلُهُ
المَتينُ،وَ هُوَ رَبيعُ القُلُوبِ، ويَنابيعُ العِلْمِ، وهُوَ الصِّراطُ
المُسْتَقيمُ، هُوَ هُدىً لِمَنِ ائْتَمَّ بِهِ، وَزينَةٌ لِمَنْ تَحَلّى
بِهِ، وعِصْمَةٌ لِمَنِ اعْتَصَمَ بِهِ، وحَبْلٌ لِمَنْ تَمَسَّكَ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. Do not seek a cure from other than the Qur’an, for indeed it is a
cure for all ailments.

> 26ـ لاتَستَشْفِيَنَّ بِغَيْرِ القُرْآنِ، فَإنَّهُ مِنْ كُلِّ داء شاف.

27. He said describing the Qur’an: Its marvels do not end and its
wonders do not cease, and doubts do not get cleared save by it.

> 27 ـ وقالَ في وَصْفِ القُرْآنِ: لاتَفْنى عَجائِبُهُ، ولاتَنْقَضي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَرائِبُهُ، ولاتَنْجَلى الشُّبَهاتُ إلاّ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

28. The people of the Qur’an are the people of Allah and His special
servants.

> 28ـ أهْلُ القُرْآنِ أهْلُ اللّهِ وخاصَّتُهُ.


