Speech And Speaking
===================

**Speech and speaking-القول والكلام**

1. Speech is between two bad qualities, namely: too much and too little;
too much [of it] is babble and too little is inarticulateness and
speechlessness.

> 1ـ اَلكَلامُ بَيْنَ خَلَّتَيْ سَوْء: هُما الإكْثارُ، والإقْلالُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالإكْثارُ هَذَرٌ، وَالإقْلالُ عَيٌّ وحَصَرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Speaking too much makes the wise one stumble and makes the tolerant
one weary, therefore do not talk so much that others get fed up and do
not be so reticent that you are humiliated.

> 2ـ اَلإكْثارُ يُزِلُّ الحَكيمَ، ويُمِلُّ الحَليمَ، فَلا تُـكْثِرْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتُضْجِرْ، ولاتُفَرِّطْ فَتُهَنْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Speech is in your control as long as you have not uttered it, but
once you utter it you become shackled by it.

> 3ـ اَلكَلامُ في وَثاقِكَ ما لَمْ تَتَكَلَّمْ بِهِ، فَإذا تَكَلَّمْتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرْتَ في وَثاقِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. Speech is like medicine, a little of it is beneficial but too much of
it can be fatal.

> 4ـ اَلكَلامُ كَالدَّواءِ قَليلُهُ يَنْفَعُ،وَ كَثيرُهُ قاتِلٌ.

5. Reduce [your] speech and you will be safe from blame.

> 5 ـ أقْلِلِ الكَلامَ، تَأمَنِ المَلامَ.

6. Reduce your speech and you will remain safe from censure.

> 6ـ أقْلِلْ كَلامَكَ، تَأمَنْ مَلاماً.

7. Beware of offensive speech for indeed it fills the hearts with spite
[and hatred].

> 7ـ إيّاكَ ومُسْتَهْجَنَ الكَلامِ، فَإنَّهُ يُوغِرُ القُلُوبَ.

8. Beware of excessive speech for indeed it increases errors and brings
about weariness.

> 8ـ إيّاكَ وكَثْرَةَ الكَلامِ، فَإنَّهُ يُكْثِرُ الزَّلَلَ، ويُورِثُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَلَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Beware of excessive [and impertinent] speech, for indeed it manifests
your hidden flaws and provokes your silent enemies.

> 9ـ إيّاكَ وفُضُولَ الكَلامِ، فَإنَّهُ يُظْهِرُ مِنْ عُيُوبِكَ ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَطَنَ، ويُحَرِّكُ عَلَيْكَ مِنْ أعْدائِكَ ما سَكَنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Beware of speech which is offensive, for indeed it confines you to
[the company of] vile people and repels the honourable ones from you.

> 10ـ إيّاكَ وما يُسْتَهْجَنُ مِنَ الكَلامِ، فَإنَّهُ يَحْبِسُ (يَحيسُ)
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ اللِّئامَ، ويُنَفِّرُ عَنْكَ الكِرامَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Beware of speaking about something whose way you are unfamiliar with
and whose reality you are unaware of, for indeed your speech indicates
your intellect, and your expression informs about your level of
understanding, so limit your long tongue to that which keeps you safe,
and make your speech concise to [the extent of] what is deemed good, for
indeed this is more beautiful for you and more indicative of your merit.

> 11ـ إيّاكَ والكَلامَ فيما لاتَعْرِفُ طريقَتَهُ، ولاتَعْلَمُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَقيقَتَهُ، فَإنَّ قَوْلَكَ يَدُلُّ عَلى عَقْلِكَ، وعِبارَتَكَ
تُنْبِئُ عَنْ مَعْرِفَتِكَ، فَتَوَقَّ مِنْ طُولِ لِسانِكَ ما
أمِنْتَهُ، واخْتَصِرْ مِنْ كَلامِكَ مَا اسْتَحْسَنْتَهُ، فَإنَّهُ بِكَ
أجْمَلُ وعَلى فَضْلِكَ أدَلُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. There is no benefit in speech without action.

> 12ـ لايَنْفَعُ قَوْلٌ بِغَيْرِ عَمَل.

13. The most veracious speech is that which conforms to the truth.

> 13ـ أصْدَقُ القَوْلِ ما طابَقَ الحَقَّ.

14. The best of utterances is that which is affirmed by action.

> 14ـ أحْسَنُ المَقالِ ما صَدَّقَهُ الفِعالُ.

15. The people who most resemble the Prophets of Allah are those who
speak the truth the most and are most patient in acting upon it.

> 15ـ أشْبَهُ النّاسِ بِأنْبِياءِ اللّهِ أقْوَلُهُمْ لِلْحَقِّ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأصْبَرُهُمْ عَلَى العَمَلِ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. The closest of servants to Allah, the Glorified, is one who speaks
the truth even if it is against him and one who acts upon the truth even
if there is something he dislikes in it.

> 16ـ أقْرَبُ العِبادِ إلَى اللّهِ تَعالى أقْوَلُهُمْ لِلْحَقِّ وإنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ عَلَيْهِ، وأعْمَلُهُمْ بِالحَقِّ وإنْ كانَ فيهِ كُرْهُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. It is worse than inarticulateness for one to speak more than [what]
is necessary.

> 17ـ أقْبَحُ مِنَ الْعَيِّ الزِّيادَةُ عَلَى المَنْطِقِ عَنْ مَوْضِعِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحاجَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. The most accurate shot is speech that is prudent.

> 18ـ أصْوَبُ الرَّمْيِ القَوْلُ المُصيبُ.

19. The best speech is that which is adorned by good arrangement and
understood by [both] the elite and the general public.

> 19ـ أحْسَنُ الكَلامِ ما زانَهُ حُسْنُ النِّظامِ، وفَهِمَهُ الخاصُّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالعامُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. The most conveying eloquent speech is that which is easily passed on
[and understood] correctly and which is appropriately concise.

> 20ـ أبْلَغُ البَلاغَةِ ما سَهُلَ فِي الصَّوابِ مَجازُهُ، وحَسُنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إيجازُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. The most honourable speech is the truth.

> 21ـ أشْرَفُ الأقْوالِ الصِّدْقُ.

22. The best speech is that which is not dismissed by the ears and is
not difficult for the minds to comprehend.

> 22ـ أحْسَنُ الكَلامِ ما لاتَمُجُّهُ الآذانُ، ولايُتْعِبُ فَهْمُهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأفْهامَ (الأذهانَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Verily polite speech and the propagation of peace are forms of
worship.

> 23ـ إنَّ مِنَ العِبادَةِ لينَ الكَلامِ، وإفْشاءَ السَّلامِ.

24. Indeed the preference of speech over action is a shortcoming, and
the preference of action over speech is indeed a beauty and an
adornment.

> 24ـ إنَّ فَضْلَ القَوْلِ عَلَى الفِعْلِ لَهُجْنَةٌ، وإنَّ فَضْلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفِعْلِ عَلَى القَوْلِ لَجَمالٌ وزينَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. The practice of the wicked is [using] vulgar speech.

> 25ـ سُنَّةُ اللِّئامِ قُبْحُ الكَلامِ.

26. The one who listens to obscene speech is a partner of the speaker.

> 26ـ سامِعُ هُجْرِ القَوْلِ شَريكُ القائِلِ.

27. Bad speech degrades one’s prestige and magnanimity.

> 27ـ سُوءُ المَنْطِقِ يُزْري بِالبَهاءِ والمُرُوَّةِ.

28. Offensive speech degrades ones status and corrupts brotherhood.

> 28ـ سُوءُ المَنْطِقِ يُزْري بِالقَدْرِ، ويُفْسِدُ الأُخُوَّةَ.

29. The worst speech is that which contradicts itself.

> 29ـ شَرُّ القَوْلِ مانَقَضَ بَعْضُهُ بَعْضاً.

30. The worst of narrations is one that has the most falsehood.

> 30ـ شَرُّ الرِّواياتِ (الرُّؤيا) أكْثَرُها إفْكاً.

31. I am amazed at the one who speaks about that which neither benefits
him in this world nor for which reward is written for him in the
Hereafter.

> 31ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ يَتَكَلَّمُ بِما لايَنْفَعُهُ في دُنْياهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولايُكْتَبُ لَهُ أجْرُهُ في أُخْراهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

32. Eschew speaking about that which you do not know, and making
statements about that which you are not responsible for, and hold
yourself back from a path when you fear its deviation.

> 32ـ دَعِ القَوْلَ فيما لاتَعْرِفُ، والخِطابَ فيما لَمْ تُكَلَّفْ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأمْسِكْ عَلى طَريق إذا خِفْتَ ضِلالَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

33. Many an utterance is hurtful.

> 33ـ رُبَّ كَلام كَلاّم.

34. Many an utterance is like a [sharp] sword.

> 34ـ رُبَّ كَلام كَالحُسامِ.

35. Many an utterance has taken away a blessing.

> 35ـ رُبَّ كَلِمَة سَلَبَتْ نِعْمَةً.

36. Many a syllable has brought death.

> 36ـ رُبَّ حَرْف جَلَبَ حَتْفاً.

37. Many an utterance is more severe than an assault.

> 37ـ رُبَّ قَوْل أشَدُّ مِنْ صَوْل.

38. Many a strife has been instigated by a word.

> 38ـ رُبَّ فِتْنَة أثارَها قَوْلٌ.

39. Many a speech is such that the [appropriate] reply for it is
silence.

> 39ـ رُبَّ كَلام جَوابُهُ السُّكُوتُ.

40. Many an utterance is such that silence is better than it.

> 40ـ رُبَّ نُطْق أحْسَنُ مِنْهُ الصَّمْتُ.

41. Many a war has been started because of a [single] word.

> 41ـ رُبَّ حَرْب جُنِيَتْ مِنْ لَفْظَة.

42. Many a word is more piercing than an arrow.

> 42ـ رُبَّ كَلام أنْفَذُ مِنْ سِهام.

43. Think and then speak, [for by this] you will remain safe from error.

> 43ـ فَكِّرْثُمَّ تَكَلَّمْ، تَسْلَمْ مِنَ الزَّلَلِ.

44. Speech may, at times, be harmful.

> 44ـ قَدْ يَضُرُّ الكَلامُ.

45. Speaking less hides [one’s] faults and decreases [one’s] sins.

> 45ـ قِلَّةُ الكَلامِ يَسْتُرُ الْعُيُوبَ، ويُقَلِّلُ الذُّنُوبَ.

46. Speaking less conceals shameful flaws and keeps one safe from
missteps.

> 46ـ قِلَّةُ الكَلامِ يَسْتُرُ العَوارَ، ويُؤْمِنُ العِثارَ.

47. Reduce your speech and shorten your hopes.

> 47ـ قَلِّلِ المَقالَ، وقَصِّرِ الآمالَ.

48. How many a war has been started by a single word.

> 48ـ كَمْ مِنْ حَرْب جُنِيَتْ مِنْ لَفْظَة.

49. How many a word has taken away a blessing.

> 49ـ كَمْ مِنْ كَلِمَة سَلَبَتْ نِعْمَةً.

50. Too much talking makes the ear weary.

> 50ـ كَثْرَةُ الكَلامِ تُمِلُّ السَّمْعَ.

51. Excessive talking makes one’s brothers fed up.

> 51ـ كَثْرَةُ الكَلامِ تُمِلُّ الإخْوانَ.

52. Excessive speech is such that its marginal issues are expanded and
its meanings are reduced, so no end is seen for it and nobody benefits
from it.

> 52ـ كَثْرَةُ الكَلامِ يَبْسُطُ حَواشِيَهُ، وتَنْقُصُ مَعانِيَهُ، فَلا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرى لَهُ أمَدٌ، ولا يَنْتَفِعُ بِهِ أحَدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

53. For every statement there is a reply.

> 53ـ لِكُلِّ قَوْل جَوابٌ.

54. One who speaks less, his sins are less.

> 54ـ مَنْ قَلَّ كَلامُهُ قَلَّتْ آثامُهُ.

55. One whose speech is less, his fault is nullified.

> 55ـ مَنْ قَلَّ كَلامُهُ بَطَلَ عَيْبُهُ.

56. One who speaks that which he ought not to, hears that which he does
not like.

> 56ـ مَنْ قَالَ ما لايَنْبَغي سَمِعَ ما لايَشْتَهي.

57. One who makes his speech prudent proves the abundance of his merit.

> 57ـ مَنْ سَدَّدَ مَقالَهُ بَرْهَنَ عَنْ غَزارَةِ فَضْلِهِ.

58. One whose speech is good, success is in front of him.

> 58ـ مَنْ حَسُنَ كَلامُهُ كانَ النُّجْحُ أمامَهُ.

59. One whose speech is bad, his censure increases.

> 59ـ مَنْ ساءَ كَلامُهُ كَثُرَ مَلامُهُ.

60. One whose speech is accompanied by modesty, corruption [and
destruction] is removed from his action.

> 60ـ مَنْ صَحِبَهُ الحَياءُ في قَوْلِهِ، زايَلَهُ الخَناءُ في فِعْلِهِ.

61. One who talks a lot increases his babble and one who jokes a lot
increases his silliness.

> 61ـ مَنْ كَثُرَ كَلامُهُ كَثُرَ لَغَطُهُ، ومَنْ كَثُرَ هَزْلُهُ كَثُرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُخْفُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

62. One who does not make his speech appropriate (or is not able to bear
[others’] speech) does not hear beautiful words.

> 62ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَجْمِلْ (لَمْ يَحْمِلْ)قيلاً لَمْ يَسْمَعْ جَميلاً.

63. One whose words are evil, his lot will be evil.

> 63ـ مَنْ ساءَ لَفْظُهُ ساءَ حَظُّهُ.

64. The place where speech is infixed is the heart, its repository is
the mind, its strengthener is the intellect, its initiator is the
tongue, its form is letters, its soul is [its] meaning, its adornment is
[correct] syntax and its order is appositeness.

> 64ـ مَغْرَسُ الكَلامِ القَلْبُ، ومَسْتَوْدَعُهُ الْفِكْرُ ومُقَوِّيهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَقْلُ، ومُبْديهِ اللِّسانُ، وجِسْمُهُ الحُرُوفُ، ورُوحُهُ المَعْنى،
وحِلْيَتُهُ الإعْرابُ، ونِظامُهُ الصَّوابُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

65. Never say anything the reply for which will hurt you.

> 65ـ لاتَقُولَنَّ ما يَسُوءُكَ جَوابُهُ.

66. Do not speak that which you fear others will consider a lie.

> 66ـ لاتُحَدِّثْ بِما تَخافُ تَكْذيبَهُ.

67. Do not speak of everything you know, for that is [itself] a
sufficient ignorance.

> 67ـ لاتَتَكَلَّمْ بِكُلِّ ما تَعْلَمُ، فَكَفى بِذلِكَ جَهْلاً.

68. Do not look at who has spoken, look at what he has said.

> 68ـ لاتَنْظُرْ إلى مَنْ قالَ، وانْظُرْ إلى ماقالَ.

69. Do not say that which will make your burden [of sin] heavy.

> 69ـ لاتَقُلْ ما يُثْقِلُ وِزْرَكَ.

70. Do not speak of that which you do not know, for indeed most of the
truth lies in that which you do not know.

> 70ـ لاتَقُولُوا فيما لاتَعْرِفُونَ، فَإنَّ أكْثَرَ الحَقِّ فيما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُنْكِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

71. Do not relate to the people all that you hear, for this suffices as
silliness (or foolishness).

> 71ـ لاتُحَدِّثِ النّاسَ بِكُلِّ ما تَسْمَعُ فَكَفى بِذلِكَ خُرْقاً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(حُمْقاً).
  </p>
</blockquote>

72. Do not contest all that the people relate to you, for this suffices
as foolishness.

> 72ـ لاتَرُدَّ عَلَى النّاسِ كُلَّما حَدَّثُوكَ، فَكَفى بِذلِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُمْقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

73. Never say that which conforms to your vain desire, even if you say
it playfully or assume it to be idle talk, for many a playful talk may
alienate a freeman from you and [many] an idle talk may bring evil
[consequences] upon you.

> 73ـ لاتَقُولَنَّ ما يُوافِقُ هَواكَ، وإنْ قُلْتَهُ لَهْواً أوْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خِلْتَهُ لَغْواً، فَرُبَّ لَهْو يُوحِشُ مِنْكَ حَرّاً، ولَغْو يَجلُبُ
عَلَيْكَ شَرّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

74. Never speak when you cannot find an appropriate situation to speak.

> 74ـ لاتَتَكَلَّمَنَّ إذا لَمْ تَجِدْ لِلْكَلامِ مَوْقِعاً.

75. Never debate except with one who is fair and never guide anyone but
the seeker of guidance.

> 75ـ لاتُقاوِلَنَّ إلاّ مُنْصِفاً، ولاتُرْشِدَنَّ إلاّ مُسْتَرْشِداً.

76. Do not talk so much that you annoy others and do not speak so less
that you fall [in the eyes of others].

> 76ـ لاتُكْثِرْ فَتُضْجِرَ، ولاتَفْرُطْ فَتَسْقُطَ.

77. Never say that which you do not do, for indeed you will never become
free of the failure that attaches itself to you and the blame that you
earn.

> 77ـ لاتَقُولَنَّ ما لاتَفْعَلُهُ، فَإنَّكَ لَنْ تَخْلُوَ في ذلِكَ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَجْز يَلْزَمُكَ، وذَمّ تَكْسِبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

78. Do not say that which you do not know, for indeed Allah, the
Glorified, has prescribed obligations upon all your body parts which He
will use as proof against you.

> 78ـ لاتَقُلْ ما لاتَعْلَمُ، فَإنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ قَدْ فَرَضَ عَلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلِّ جَوارِحِكَ فَرائِضَ يَحْتَجُّ بِها عَلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

79. Let not what people say about you dishearten you, for indeed if what
they say is true then it is a sin whose punishment has been expedited
and if it is not true then it is [as] a good deed that you have not
performed [but has been recorded in your book of deeds].

> 79ـ لايَسُوءَنَّكَ ما يَقُولُ النّاسُ فيكَ، فَإنَّهُ إنْ كانَ كَما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُونَ كانَ ذَنْباً عُجِّلَتْ عُقُوبَتُهُ، وإنْ كانَ عَلى خِلافِ
ما قالُوا كانَتْ حَسَنَةً لَمْ تَعْمَلْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

80. Do not be, in that which you mention, like the one who collects
firewood at night or like the froth over the flood.

> 80ـ لاتَكُنْ فيما تُورِدُ كَحاطِبِ لَيْل، وغُثاء سَيْل.

81. Do not say that which you do not know, thereby making others
suspicious of your statements about what you do know.

> 81ـ لاتَقُلْ ما لاتَعْلَمُ، فَتُتَّهَمَ بِإخْبارِكَ بِما تَعْلَمُ.

82. None is careful of evil in his actions but he who is careful of evil
in his speech.

> 82ـ لايَتَّقى الشَّرَّ في فِعْلِهِ إلاّ مَنْ يَتَّقِيهِ في قَوْلِه.

83. Good speech is not completed except by good action.

> 83ـ لايَتِمُّ حُسْنُ القَوْلِ إلاّ بِحُسْنِ العَمَلِ.

84. Words are the moulds of meanings.

> 84ـ اَلاْلْفاظُ قَوالِبُ المَعاني.

85. The elocution of a man apprises of the strength of his heart.

> 85ـ بَيانُ الرَّجُلِ يُنْبِئُ عَنْ قُوَّةِ جَنانِهِ.

86. Speak and you will be known, for indeed a man is concealed under his
tongue.

> 86ـ تَكَلَّمُوا تُعْرَفُوا، فَإنَّ المَرْءَ مَخْبُوءٌ تَحْتَ لِسانِهِ.

87. Beautiful speech is proof of abundant intelligence.

> 87ـ جَميلُ القَوْلِ دَليلُ وُفُورِ العَقْلِ.

88. Preservation of that which is in the vessel is [achieved] by
fastening the cover.

> 88ـ حِفْظُ مافِي الوِعاءِ بِشَدِّ الوِكاءِ.

89. Deliberation [and carefulness] in speech saves one from faltering
and error.

> 89ـ اَلتَّثَبُّتُ فيِ القَوْلِ يُؤْمِنُ العِثارَ والزَّلَلَ.

90. Speaking the truth is better than inarticulateness and silence.

> 90ـ اَلقَوْلُ بِالحَقِّ خَيْرٌ مِنَ العَيِّ والصَّمْتِ.

91. If you would like to remain safe and conceal your faults, then
reduce your speech and increase your silence, [by this] your thinking
will abound, your heart will become illuminated and people will remain
safe from you.

> 91ـ إنْ أحْبَبْتَ سَلامَةَ نَفْسِكَ وسَتْرَ مَعائِبِكَ فَأقْلِلْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلامَكَ، وأكْثِرْ صَمْتَكَ، يَتَوَفَّرْ فِكْرُكَ، ويَسْتَنِرْ
قَلْبُكَ، ويَسْلَمِ النّاسُ مِنْ يَدِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

92. I am more capable of turning away that which I haven’t spoken than I
am of taking back that which I have said.

> 92ـ أنَا عَلى رَدِّ ما لَمْ أقُلْ أقْدَرُ مِنّي عَلى رَدِّ ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

93. Verily you are accountable for your speech, so do not say anything
except [that which is] good.

> 93ـ إنَّكُمْ مُؤاخَذُونَ بِأقْوالِكُمْ، فَلا تَقُولُوا إلاّ خَيْراً.

94. The bane of transmission is distortion of the narration.

> 94ـ آفَةُ النَّقْلِ كِذْبُ الرِّوايَةِ.

95. The bane of speech is lying.

> 95ـ آفَةُ الحَديثِ الكِذْبُ.

96. The bane of speech is prolongation.

> 96ـ آفَةُ الكَلامِ الإطالَةُ.

97. When you speak, be truthful.

> 97ـ إذا نَطَقْتَ فَاصْدُقْ.

98. When you relate [something], be truthful.

> 98ـ إذا حَدَّثْتَ فَاصْدُقْ.

99. When speech is reduced, accuracy is increased.

> 99ـ إذا قَلَّ الخِطابُ كَثُرَ الصَّوابُ.

100. Be pleased with what you say if it is free from mistakes.

> 100ـ اِفْرَحْ بِما تَنْطِقُ بِهِ إذا كانَ عَرِيّاً مِنَ الخَطاءِ.

101. Reduce your speech and shorten your hopes, and do not say that
which will earn you sin or will alienate a freeman from you.

> 101ـ أقْلِلْ المَقالَ، وقَصِّرِ الآمالَ، ولاتَقُلْ ما يَكْسِبُكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِزْراً أوْ يُنَفِّرُ عَنْكَ حُرّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

102. Be cautious of every statement or action that will lead to the
spoiling of your Hereafter and religion.

> 102ـ اِحْذَرْ كُلَّ قَوْل وفِعْل يُؤَدّي إلى فَسادِ الآخِرَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والدّينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

103. The best speech is that which is pertinent.

> 103ـ أحْسَنُ القَوْلِ السَّدادُ.

104. Be good in your speech, beautiful in your actions, for indeed the
speech of a person is the evidence of his merit and his action is the
symbol of his intellect.

> 104ـ كُنْ حَسَنَ المَقالِ، جَميلَ الأفْعالِ، فَإنَّ مَقالَ الرَّجُلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُرْهانُ فَضْلِه، وفِعالُهُ عُنْوانُ عَقْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

105. The speech of a man is the measure of his intellect.

> 105ـ كَلامُ الرَّجُلِ ميزانُ عَقْلِهِ.

106. Your speech is recorded, forever to remain in your book of deeds,
so make it about that which brings you closer [to Allah] and beware of
uttering that which will destroy you.

> 106ـ كَلامُكَ مَحْفُوظٌ عَلَيْكَ، مُخَلَّدٌ في صَحيفَتِكَ، فَاجْعَلْهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيما يُزْلِفُكَ، وإيّاكَ أنْ تُطْلِقَهُ فيما يُوبِقُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

108. When the intellects decrease, impertinent speech increases.

> 107ـ إذا قَلَّتِ العُقُولُ كَثُرَ الفُضُولُ.

109. When you make your speech good, then make your action good also so
that you can bring together excellent speech with virtuous benevolence.

> 108ـ إذا أحْسَنْتَ القَوْلَ فَأحْسِنِ العَمَلَ، لِتَجْمَعَ بِذلِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْنَ مَزِيَّةِ اللِّسانِ، وَفَضيلَةِ الإحْسانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

110. When the speech corresponds to the intention of the speaker, the
listener accepts it but when it is against his intention, it does not
take up a good position in his heart.

> 109ـ إذا طابَقَ الكَلامُ نِيَّةَ المُتَكَلِّمِ قَبِلَهُ السّامِعُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا خالَفَ نِيَّتَهُ لَمْيَحْسُنْ مَوْقِعُهُ مِنْ قَلْبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

111. Through moderate [and unbiased] speech loftiness is affirmed.

> 110ـ بِعَدْلِ المَنْطِقِ تَجِبُ الجَلالَةُ.

112. Whoever speaks too much, others get fed up with him.

> 111ـ مَنْ أكْثَرَ المَقالَ سُئِمَ.

113. When you are overcome by speech then be careful not to be overcome
by silence.

> 112ـ إذا غُلِبْتَ عَلَى الكَلامِ فَإيّاكَ أنْ تُغْلَبَ عَلَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السُّكُوتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

114. I am amazed at the one who speaks about that which, if it is
related from him, will harm him and if it is not related from him, will
not benefit him.

> 113ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ يَتَكَلَّمُ فيما إنْ حُكِيَ عَنْهُ ضَرَّهُ، وإنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يُحْكَ عَنْهُ لَمْيَنْفَعْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

115. For every situation there is an appropriate thing to say.

> 114ـ لِكُلِّ مَقام مَقالٌ.

116. Speech has some banes.

> 115ـ لِلْكَلامِ آفاتٌ.

117. Speech will never be beneficial unless it is joined with action.

> 116ـ لَنْ يُجْديَ القَوْلُ حَتّى يَتَّصِلَ بِالفِعْلِ.

118. One who increases [his talk] makes others weary.

> 117ـ مَنْ أكْثَرَ مُلَّ.

119. One whose speech is polite, loving him becomes unavoidable.

> 118ـ مَنْ لانَتْ كَلِمَتُهُ وَجَبَتْ مَحَبَّتُهُ.

120. One whose speech is excessive, his lapses increase.

> 119ـ مَنْ كَثُرَ كَلامُهُ كَثُرَ سَقَطُهُ (لَغَطُهُ).

121. Whoever reviews his speech, his mistakes reduce.

> 120ـ مَنْ تَفَقَّدَ مَقالَهُ قَلَّ غَلَطُهُ.

122. One whose speech is excessive is never free from lapses.

> 121ـ مَنْ كَثُرَ مَقالُهُ لَمْ يَعْدَمِ السَّقَطَ.

123. One who knows that he is accountable for his speech should shorten
his speech.

> 122ـ مَنْ عَلِمَ أنَّهُ مُؤاخَذٌ بِقَوْلِهِ فَلْيُقَصِّرْ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَقالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

124. The worst of speech is babble.

> 123ـ أسْوَءُ القَوْلِ الهَذَرُ.

125. Excessive speech is annoying.

> 124ـ اَلإكْثارُ إضْجارٌ.

126. Deliberation in speech saves one from error.

> 125ـ اَلتَّرَوّي فِي القَوْلِ يُؤْمِنُ الزَّلَلَ.

127. The best speech is that which is neither boring [because of its
length] nor too brief.

> 126ـ خَيْرُ الكَلامِ ما لايُمِلُّ ولايَُقَِلُّ.

128. The best speech is truth.

> 127ـ خَيْرُ الكَلامِ الصِّدْقُ.

129. Eschew speech about that which does not concern you, and in
situations that are inappropriate, for many a word has taken away a
blessing and [many] an utterance has brought about bloodshed.

> 128ـ دَعِ الكَلامَ فيما لايَعْنيكَ، وفي غَيْرِ مَوْضِعِهِ، فَرُبَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلِمَة سَلَبَتْ نِعْمَةً، ولَفْظَة أتَتْ عَلى مُهْجَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>


