The Noble -Minded And Munificent
================================

**The noble-minded and the munificent-الكريم**

1. The noble-minded person is one who keeps away from the forbidden and
steers clear of [disgraceful] flaws.

> 1ـ اَلْكَرِيمُ مَنْ تَجَنَّبَ المَحارِمَ وتَنَزَّهَ عَنِ العُيُوبِ.

2. The munificent person is one who brings [and gives away] whatever is
available.

> 2ـ اَلْكَرِيمُ مَنْ جاءَ بِالمَوْجُودِ.

3. A noble-minded person is one who repays evil with good.

> 3ـ اَلْكَرِيمُ مَن جازَى الإسائَةَ بِالإحْسانِ.

4. A noble-minded person is repulsed by that which the wicked take pride
in.

> 4ـ اَلْكَرِيمُ يَزْدَجِرُ عَمّا يَفْتَخِرُ بِهِ اللَئِيمُ.

5. The munificent one cuts off his favour when he is approached harshly
and is soft [and kind] when he is entreated [politely]

> 5ـ اَلْكَرِيمُ يَجْفُو إذا عُنِّفَ، ويَلِينُ إذَا اسْتُعْطِفَ.

6. When a noble-minded person is able [to take revenge] he forgives, and
when he gains possession [of something] he grants generously, and when
he is asked [for something] he accords [it].

> 6ـ اَلْكَريمُ إذا قَدَرَ صَفَحَ، وإذا مَلَكَ سَمَحَ، وإذا سُئِلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنْجَحَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. A noble-minded person rejects disgrace and honours his neighbour.

> 7ـ اَلكَريمُ يَأبَى العارَ، ويُكْرِمُ الجارَ.

8. A noble-minded person considers his virtuous actions as a debt that
he has to repay.

> 8ـ اَلْكَريمُ يَرى مَكارِمَ أفْعالِهِ دَيْناً عَلَيْهِ يَقْضيهِ.

9. The noble-minded person raises himself above [the expectation of]
rewards in everything good that he does.

> 9ـ اَلْكَريمُ يَرْفَعُ نَفْسَهُ في كُلِّ ما أسْداهُ عَنْ حُسْنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُجازاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. When a noble-minded person needs you he excuses you [from helping
him] and when you need him he suffices you.

> 10ـ اَلْكَريمُ إذَا احْتاجَ إلَيْكَ أعْفاكَ، وإذَا احْتَجْتَ إلَيْهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَفاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. The noble-minded person forgives despite having the power [to exact
revenge], is just in his rule, restrains his harm [from others] and
bestows [favours] generously.

> 11ـ اَلْكَريمُ يَعْفُو مَعَ القُدْرَةِ، ويَعْدِلُ فِي الإمْرَةِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويَكُفُّ إسائَتَهُ وَيَبْذُلُ إحْسانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. The noble-minded person is felicitous and worthy of reward in the
sight of Allah, and is loved and venerated in the sight of the people.

> 12ـ اَلْكَريمُ عِنْدَ اللّهِ مَحْبُورٌ مُثابٌ، وعِنْدَ النّاسِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَحْبُوبٌ مُهابٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. A noble-minded person is one who safeguards his honour with his
wealth while the wicked person is one safeguards his wealth by
[sacrificing] his honour.

> 13ـ اَلْكَريمُ مَنْ صانَ عِرْضَهُ بِمالِهِ، واللَئِيمُ مَنْ صانَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مالَهُ بِعِرْضِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. Be cautious of the noble-minded person when you offend him, and the
forbearing one when you injure him, and the courageous one when you
torment him.

> 14ـ إحْذَرِ الكَريمَ إذا أهَنْـتَهُ، والحَليمَ إذا جَرَحْتَهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والشُّجاعَ إذا أوْجَعْتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Be cautious of the assault of the noble-minded person when he is
hungry and the insolence of the wicked one when he is satiated.

> 15ـ اِحْذَرُوا صَوْلَةَ الكَريمِ إذا جاعَ، وأشَرَ اللَّئيمِ إذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَبَعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Be cautious of the authority of the noble-minded person when he is
humiliated and the vehemence of the wicked one when he is elevated [to a
position of power].

> 16ـ اِحْذَرُوا سَطْوَةَ الكَريمِ إذا وُضِعَ، وسَوْرَةَ اللَّئِيمِ إذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُفِعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. The noble-minded person feigns inattention and pretends to be
deceived.

> 17ـ اَلْكَريمُ يَتَغافَلُ ويَنْخَدِعُ.

18. Noble-minded people have the most patient souls.

> 18ـ اَلكِرامُ أصْبَرُ أنْفُساً.

19. The noble-minded person makes [his] ownership righteous.

> 19ـ اَلْكَريمُ يُجْمِلُ المَلَكَةَ.

20. A noble-minded person is one who initiates his act of kindness
[before it is requested of him].

> 20 ـ اَلْكَريمُ مَنْ بَدَأَ بِإحْسانِهِ.

21. The noble-minded person shows gratitude for little whereas the
wicked one is ungrateful for much.

> 21ـ اَلْكَريمُ يَشْكُرُ القَليلَ، واللَّئيمُ يَكْفُرُ الجَزيلَ.

22. The munificent person is one whose giving precedes his being asked.

> 22 ـ اَلْكَريمُ مَنْ سَبَقَ نَوالُهُ سُؤالَهُ.

23. When the noble-minded person promises [something], he keeps his
promise and when he threatens [to punish], he forgives.

> 23ـ اَلْكَريمُ إذا وَعَدَ وَفى، وإذا تَوَعَّدَ عَفى.

24. When the munificent person is well-to-do, he fulfils the needs [of
others] and when he faces hard times, he lightens the burden of others
[by not seeking their assistance].

> 24ـ اَلْكَريمُ إذا أيْسَرَ أسْعَفَ، وإذا أعْسَرَ خَفَّفَ.

25. When the core of a man is noble, [both] his absence and presence are
[considered] noble.

> 25ـ إذا كَرُمَ أصْلُ الرَّجُلِ كَرُمَ مَغيبُهُ ومَحْضَرُهُ.

26. The authority of a noble-minded person manifests his positive
attributes.

> 26ـ دَوْلَةُ الكَريمِ تُظْهِرُ مَناقِبَهُ.

27. The possessor of noble-mindedness has beautiful traits, grants
favours [to others] and keeps ties with near relatives.

> 27ـ ذُوالكَرَمِ جَمِيلُ الشِّيَمِ، مُسْد لِلنِّعَمِ، وَصُولٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلرَّحِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

28. The success of a noble-minded person brings deliverance.

> 28ـ ظَفَرُ الكَريمُ يُنْجي.

29. The success of noble-minded people is [through] forgiveness and
benevolence.

> 29ـ ظَفَرُ الكِرامِ عَفْوٌ وإحْسانٌ.

30. The shadow of noble-minded people is vast and pleasant.

> 30ـ ظِلُّ الكِرامِ رَغَدٌ هَنِيئٌ.

31. In times of [their] altruism, the excellence of the noble-minded
people become manifest.

> 31ـ عِنْدَ الإيثارِ عَلَى النَّفْسِ تَتَبَيَّنُ جَواهِرُ الكُرَماءِ.

32. Generosity is the habit of the noble-minded people.

> 32ـ عادَةُ الكِرامِ اَلجُودُ.

33. Doing good to others is the habit of noble-minded people.

> 33ـ عادَةُ الكِرامِ حُسْنُ الصَّنيعَةِ.

34. Be cautious of the noble-minded person if you offend him, and of the
wicked one if you honour him and of the forbearing one if you force him
into a difficult position.

> 34ـ كُنْ مِنَ الكَريمِ عَلى حَذَر إنْ أهَنْـتَهُ، ومِنَ اللَّئيمِ إنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أكْرَمْتَهُ،وَ مِنَ الحَليمِ إنْ أحْرَجْتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

35. The merit of initiating good deeds and performing generous acts
belongs to the noble-minded people.

> 35ـ لِلْكِرامِ فَضيلَةُ المُبادَرَةِ إلى فِعْلِ المَعْرُوفِ، وإسْداءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّنايِـعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

36. The one who has honoured you has made you uncomfortable if you are
noble-minded and the one who has offended you has made you comfortable
if you are forbearing.

> 36ـ لَقَدْ أتْعَبَكَ مَنْ أكْرَمَكَ إنْ كُنْتَ كَريماً، ولَقَدْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أراحَكَ مَنْ أهانَكَ إنْ كُنْتَ حَليماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. Indeed I am happier to [get to] know a noble-minded person than to
acquire an expensive and precious jewel.

> 37ـ لأنَا أشَدُّ اِغْتِباطاً بِمَعْرِفَةِ الكَريمِ مِنْ إمْساكي عَلَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجَوْهَرِ النَّفيسِ الغالِي الثَّمَنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

38. It is not the habit of noble-minded people to delay bounties.

> 38ـ لَيْسَ مِنْ عادَةِ الكِرامِ تَأْخِيرُ الإنْعامِ.

39. Being hasty in taking revenge is not from the traits of noble-minded
people.

> 39ـ لَيْسَ مِنْ شِيَمِ الكِرامِ تَعْجيلُ الاِنْتِقامِ.

40. Remaining alongside a noble-minded person in humiliation is better
than accompanying the wicked in order to gain favour.

> 40ـ لُزُومُ الكَريمِ عَلَى الهَوانِ خَيْرٌ مِنْ صُحْبَةِ اللَّئيمِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى الإحْسانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

41. The pleasure of the noble-minded people is in feeding [others]
whereas the pleasure of the wicked people is in eating [themselves].

> 41ـ لَذَّةُ الكِرامِ فيِ الإطْعامِ ولَذَّةُ اللِّئامِ فيِ الطَّعامِ.

42. One of the most honourable actions of the noble-minded person is
feigning inattention towards that which he knows.

> 42ـ مِنْ أشْرَفِ أفْعالِ الكَريمِ تَغافُلُهُ عَمّا يَعْلَمُ.

43. Giving generously is from the traits of the munificent.

> 43ـ مِنْ شِيَمِ الكِرامِ بَذْلُ النَّدى.

44. The munificent person is never deserted.

> 44ـ ما أوْحَشَ كَريمٌ.

45. The propensity of a noble-minded person is always towards the
[positive] traits of his forefathers.

> 45ـ مَنْـزَعُ الكَريمِ أبَداً إلى شِيَمِ آبائِهِ.

46. The happiness of noble-minded people is in giving generously [to
others] while the joy of the wicked is in evil retribution.

> 46ـ مَسَرَّةُ الكِرامِ في بَذْلِ العَطاءِ، ومَسَرَّةُ اللِّئامِ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُوءِ الجَزاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

47. A high-minded person is never spiteful.

> 47ـ لايَكُونُ الكَريمُ حَقُوداً.

48. None deserves to be called munificent except the one who gives
before he is asked.

> 48ـ لايَسْتَحِقُّ اسْمَ الكَرَمِ إلاّ مَنْ بَدَأَ بِنَوالِهِ قَبْلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُؤالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

49. A person does not ennoble himself until he belittles his wealth.

> 49ـ لايُكْرِمُ المَرْءُ نَفْسَهُ حَتّى يُهينَ مالَهُ.

50. The munificent person is one who bestows his favours generously [to
others].

> 50ـ اَلْكَريمُ مَنْ بَذَلَ إحْسانَهُ.

51. It is not from the traits of a noble-minded person to wear the cloak
of disgrace.

> 51ـ لَيْسَ مِنْ شِيَمِ الكَريمِ إدْراعُ العارِ.

52. The noble-minded one is bright whereas the wicked one is immature.

> 52ـ اَلْكَريمُ أبْلَجُ، اَللََّئيمُ مُلَهْوَجٌ.


