The Vile
========

**The vile-اللئيم**

1. When the vile one attains a position above his status, his condition
changes [for the worse].

> 1ـ اَللَّئِيمُ إذا بَلَغَ فَوْقَ مِقْدارِهِ تَنَكَّرَتْ أحْوالُهُ.

2. The vile one is harsh when he is approached entreatingly and becomes
soft when he is berated.

> 2ـ اَللَّئِيمُ يَجْفُو إذَا اسْتُعْطِفَ، وَيَلينُ إذا عُنِّفَ.

3. The vile person does not follow anyone except the one who is like him
and he does not incline towards anyone but the one who is similar to
him.

> 3ـ اَللَّئِيمُ لايَتْبَعُ إلاّ شَكْلَهُ، ولايَميلُ إلاّ إلى مِثْلِهِ.

4. No good is expected from a vile person, and no one is safe from his
evil and secure from his ills.

> 4ـ اَللَّئِيمُ لايُرْجى خَيْرُهُ، ولايُسْلَمُ مِنْ شَرِّهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولايُؤْمَنُ مِنْ غَوائِلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. The vile one dons the attire of dishonour and harms the freemen.

> 5ـ اَللَّئِيمُ يُدْرِعُ العارَ، ويُؤْذِي الأحْرارَ.

6. The vile one considers his favours as debts that he will demand
repayment for [in the future].

> 6ـ اَللَّئِيمُ يَرى سَوالِفَ إحْسانِهِ دَيْناً لَهُ يَقْتَضيهِ.

7. The vile one is such that when he needs you he puts you in
difficulty, and when you need him he torments you.

> 7ـ اَللَّئِيمُ إذَا احْتاجَ إلَيْكَ أجفاكَ، وإذَا احْتَجْتَ إلَيْهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنّاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Be cautious of the vile one when you honour him, and the depraved one
when you bring him forward, and the lowly one when you raise him.

> 8ـ اِحْذَرِ اللَّئِيمَ إذا أكْرَمْتَهُ، وَالرَّذْلَ إذا قَدَّمْتَهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والسِّفْلَةَ إذا رَفَعْتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. The vile one spares no effort in seeking evil vengeance for the wrong
that has been done to him.

> 9ـ اَللَّئِيْمُ يُعْلي هِمَّتَهُ فيما جُنِيَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ طَلَبِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُوءِ المُكافاةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Beware of depending on the vile one, for indeed he forsakes the one
who depends on him.

> 10ـ إيّاكَ أنْ تَعْتَمِدَ عَلَى اللَّئْيمِ، فَإنَّهُ يَخْذُلُ مَنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْتَمَدَ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. The most difficult objective is seeking that which is in the
possession of the vile ones.

> 11ـ أصْعَبُ المَرامِ طَلَبُ ما في أيْدِي اللِّئامِ.

12. The vile ones are the most patient physically [but are weakest in
spirit].

> 12ـ اللِّئامُ أصْبَرُ أجْساداً.

13. The vile one has no magnanimity.

> 13ـ اَللَّئِيمُ لامُرُوَّةَ لَهُ.

14. The vile person is never ashamed.

> 14ـ اَللَّئِيمُ لايَسْتَحْيي.

15. The vile person is one who puts a lot of obligation [on others when
he does any good to them].

> 15ـ اَللَّئِيمُ مَنْ كَثُرَ اِمْتِنانُهُ.

16. The vile one is such that when he has the power, he commits
atrocities and when he makes a promise, he breaks it.

> 16ـ اَللَّئِيمُ إذا قَدَرَ أفْحَشَ، وإذا وَعَدَ أخْلَفَ.

17. The vile one is such that when he gives, he does begrudgingly and
when he is given something, he is ungrateful.

> 17ـ اَللَّئِيمُ إذا أعْطى حَقَدَ، وإذا أُعْطِيَ جَحَدَ.

18. When you come upon vile [and miserly] people then give the excuse of
fasting [so that you may leave them without partaking of a meal].

> 18ـ إذا حَلَلْتَ بِاللِّئامِ، فَاعْتَلِلْ بِالصِّيامِ.

19. When the vile one attains a position above his status, his condition
changes [for the worse].

> 19ـ إذا بَلَغَ اللَّئيمُ فَـوْقَ مِقْدارِهِ تَنَـكَّرَتْ أحْوالُهُ.

20. When the vile one increases his reverence for you then increase your
scorn for him.

> 20ـ إذا زادَكَ اللَّئيمُ إجْلالاً فَزِدْهُ إذْلالاً.

21. The authority of a vile person manifests his evil traits and flaws.

> 21ـ دَوْلَةُ اللَّئيمِ تَكْشِفُ مَساوِيَهُ ومَعايِبَهُ.

22. The dominion of the vile is the humiliation of the honourable.

> 22ـ دَوْلَةُ اللِّئامِ مَذَلَّةُ الكِرامِ.

23. The ascendency the vile ones is from the calamities of the times.

> 23ـ دُوَلُ اللِّئامِ مِنْ نَوائِبِ الأيّامِ.

24. The one who seeks good from vile people is deprived of it.

> 24ـ طالِبُ الخَيْرِ مِنَ اللِّئامِ مَحْرُومٌ.

25. The triumph of a vile person leads to destruction.

> 25ـ ظَفَرُ اللَّئيمِ يُرْدي.

26. The triumph of vile people leads to haughtiness and defiance.

> 26ـ ظَفَرُ اللِّئامِ تَجَبُّرٌ، وطُغْيانٌ.

27. The shadow [and patronage] of the vile ones is [an] endemic
adversity.

> 27ـ ظِلُّ اللِّئامِ نَـكِدٌ وَبِيٌّ.

28. The habit of vile people is to repay good with evil.

> 28ـ عادَةُ اللِّئامِ اَلمُكافاةُ بِالقَبيحِ عَنِ الإحْسانِ.

29. The habit of vile people is denial [the blessings they have been
given].

> 29ـ عادَةُ اللِّئامِ الجُحُودُ.

30. The habit of vile people is ugly slander [and backbiting].

> 30ـ عادَةُ اللِّئامِ قُبْحُ الوَقيعَةِ.

31. Harming honourable and liberated people is the habit of the vile and
ignorant ones.

> 31ـ عادَةُ اللِّئامِ والأغْمارِ أذِيَّةُ الكِرامِ والأحْرارِ.

32. The honour of a vile person is humiliation and the deviation of the
intellect is the worst deviation.

> 32ـ عِزُّ اللَّئيمِ مَذَلَّةٌ، وضَلالُ العَقْلِ أشَدُّ ضِلَّة.

33. Flee as far as you can from the foolish, vile one.

> 33ـ فِرُّوا كُلَّ الفِرارِ مِنَ اللَّئيمِ الأحْمَقِ.

34. The poverty of the honourable one is better than the wealth of the
vile one.

> 34ـ فاقَةُ الكَريمِ أحْسَنُ مِنْ غَناءِ اللَّئيمِ.

35. Absence of vile people is a [source of] comfort for the people.

> 35ـ فَقْدُ اللِّئامِ راحَةُ الأنامِ.

36. Every time the rank of a vile person is raised, the people around
him diminish, whereas the honourable one is the opposite of this.

> 36ـ كُلَّمَا ارْتَفَعَتْ رُتْبَةُ اللَّئيمِ نَقَصَ النّاسُ عِنْدَهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والكَريمُ ضِدُّ ذلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. One who is vile, [the occasion of] his birth is evil.

> 37ـ مَنْ لَؤُمَ ساءَ ميلادُهُ.

38. One who needs something from the vile ones has indeed been forsaken.

> 38ـ مَنْ كانَتْ لَهُ إلَى اللِّئامِ حاجَةٌ فَقَدْ خُذِلَ.

39. Hard-heartedness is from the traits of the vile ones.

> 39ـ مِنَ اللِّئامِ تَكُونُ القَسْـوَةُ.

40. The one who accompanies vileness is censured.

> 40ـ مُصاحِبُ اللُّؤْمِ مَذْمُومٌ.

41. The withholding of the honourable one is better than the granting of
the vile one.

> 41ـ مَنْعُ الكَريمِ أحْسَنُ مِنْ إعْطاءِ اللَّئيمِ.

42. The vile one is recognized by [his] evil action, ugly character and
blameworthy miserliness.

> 42ـ يُسْتَدَلُّ عَلَى اللَّئيمِ بِسُوءِ الفِعْلِ، وقُبْحِ الخُلْقِ،وَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَميمِ البُخْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

43. The practice of the vile ones is denial.

> 43ـ سُنَّـةُ اللِّئامِ الجُحُودُ.


