Death
=====

**Death-المَوت**

1. Death clings to you more closely than your own shadows and has
greater authority over you than [you have over] yourselves.

> 1ـ اَلْمَوْتُ اَلْزَمُ لَكُمْ مِنْ ظِلِّكُمْ، وأمْلَكُ بِكُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(أمْلَكُكُمْ)مِنْ أنْفُسِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Continuously remember death and remember what you will face after
death; and never wish for death except after being sure that you have
fulfilled the condition for security [in the Hereafter].

> 2ـ أَدِمْ ذِكْرَ المَوْتِ، وذِكْرَ ما تَقْدِمُ عَلَيْهِ بَعْدَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَوْتِ ولاتَتَمَنَّ المَوْتَ إلاّ بِشَرط وَثيق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Increase your remembrance of death and of the place you have to go
suddenly and return to after death, until it comes to you while you are
on your guard against it and have prepared yourself for it, and let it
not come over you suddenly thereby taking you by surprise.

> 3ـ أكْثِرْ ذِكْرَ المَوْتِ وَما تَهْجِمُ عَلَيْهِ، وتُفْضي إلَيْهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَعْدَ المَوْتِ حَتّى يَأتِيَكَ، وَقَدْ أخَذْتَ لَهُ حِذْرَكَ،وَ
شَدَدْتَ لَهُ أزْرَكَ، ولايَأتِيَكَ بَغْتَةً فَيَبْهَرَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. Prepare yourselves for death for indeed it overshadows you.

> 4ـ اِسْتَعِدُّوا لِلْمَوْتِ فَقَدْ أظَلَّكُمْ (أطَلَّكُمْ).

5. Let your ears hear the call of death before it calls you.

> 5ـ أسْمِعُوا دَعْوَةَ المَوْتِ آذانَكُمْ قَبْلَ أنْ يُدْعى بِكُمْ.

6. Remember the destroyer of pleasures and the spoiler of lustful
desires and the caller towards separation.

> 6ـ اُذْكُرُوا هادِمَ اللَّذّاتِ، ومُنَغِّصَ الشَّهَواتِ، وداعِيَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّتاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Beware of death and be adequately prepared for it, [for by this] you
will be happy in your place of [final] return.

> 7ـ اِحْذَرِ المَوْتَ، وأحْسِنْ لَهُ الإسْتِعْدادَ، تَسْعَدْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِمُنْقَلَبِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Beware of insufficient provisions and increase your preparations for
your departure.

> 8ـ إحْذَرْ قِلَّةَ الزّادِ، وأكْثِرْ مِنَ الاِسْتِعْدادِ لِرِحْلَتِكَ.

9. Is there nobody who is ready to meet his Lord before his soul leaves
[his body]?

> 9ـ ألا مُسْتَعِدٌّ لِلِقاءِ رَبِّهِ قَبْلَ زُهُوقِ نَفْسِهِ.

10. The best gift for a believer is death.

> 10ـ أفْضَلُ تُحْفَةِ المُؤْمِنِ المَوْتُ.

11. More severe than death is that which one seeks to be freed from
through death.

> 11ـ أشَدُّ مِنَ المَوْتِ ما يُتَمَنَّى الخِلاصُ مِنْهُ بِالمَوْتِ.

12. Verily one who walks on the face of the earth will surely end up
inside it.

> 12ـ إنَّ مَنْ مَشى عَلى ظَهْرِ الأرْضِ لَصائِرٌ إلى بَطْنِها.

13. Verily it behoves you to prepare for the matter about the timing of
whose sudden occurrence you have no knowledge of before it overcomes
you.

> 13ـ إنَّ أمْراً لاتَعْلَمُ مَتى يَفْجَأُكَ يَنْبَغي أنْ تَسْتَعِدَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ قَبْلَ أنْ يَغْشاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. Verily this matter has not started with you nor will it end with
you, for this companion of yours travels, so consider him to have gone
on one of his travels, and if he comes back to you [then so be it],
otherwise you are [all] going towards him [and will meet him].

> 14ـ إنَّ هذا الأمْرَ لَيْسَ بِكُمْ بَدَأَ، ولا إلَيْكُمُ انْتَهى،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقَدْ كانَ صاحِبُكُمْ هذا يُسافِرُ، فَعُدُّوهُ في بَعْضِ سَفَراتِهِ،
فَإنْ قَدِمَ عَلَيْكُمْ، وإلاّ قَدِمْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Verily the one who approaches, bringing with him [either
everlasting] felicity or wretchedness, is deserving of the best
preparation.

> 15ـ إنَّ قادِماً يَقْدَمُ بِالفَوْزِ، أوِ الشِّقْوَةِ لَمُسْتَحِقٌّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأفْضَلِ العُدَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Indeed the absent one who is driven forward by the [succession of
the] new night and day, is indeed worthy of a quick return.

> 16ـ إنَّ غائِباً يَحْدُوهُ الجَديدانِ اَللَّيْلُ والنَّهارُ، لَحَرِيٌّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسُرْعَةِ الأوْبَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Verily in front of you there is a path that covers a long distance,
and severe hardships, and you cannot do without good exploration and
acquiring the necessary amount of provisions.

> 17ـ إنَّ أمامَكَ طَريقاً ذا مَسافَة بَعيدَة، ومَشَقَّة شَديدَة،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولاغِنى بِكَ مِنْ حُسْنِ الاِرْتيادِ، وقَدْرِ بَلاغِكَ مِنَ الزّادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Verily our statement: “Indeed we belong to Allah” is an affirmation
we make to ourselves that we are owned and our statement: “Indeed we
will return to Him” is an affirmation to ourselves that we will die.

> 18ـ إنَّ قَوْلَنا «إنّا لِلّهِ » إقْرارٌ عَلى أنْفُسِنا بِالمِلْكِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقَوْلَنا « إنّا إلَيْهِ راجِعُونَ » إقْرارٌ عَلى أنْفُسِنا
بِالهُلْكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. Verily before you is an arduous mountain-pass [that is difficult to
traverse] where the one with a light burden will be in a better
condition than the one with a heavy burden and the one who has to go
through it slowly will be worse off than the one who can pass through
swiftly. Indeed its place of descent for you inevitably leads either to
Paradise or hellfire.

> 19ـ إنَّ أمامَكَ عَقَبَةً كَؤُوداً، المُخِفُّ فيها أحْسَنُ حالاً مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُثْقِلِ، وَالمُبْطِيُ عَلَيْها أقْبَحُ أمْراً مِنَ المُسْرِعِ، إنَّ
مَهْبِطَها بِكَ لامَحالَةَ عَلى جَنَّة أوْ نار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. Verily this death is a swift seeker - neither does the steadfast
escape it nor does the fleer frustrate it.

> 20ـ إنَّ هذا المَوْتَ لَطالِبٌ حَثيثٌ، لايَفُوتُهُ المُقيمُ، ولا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُعْجِزُهُ مَنْ هَرَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Verily death is a relief for the one who was a slave to his lust and
a prisoner of his vain desire, because the more his life lengthened the
more his sins would increase and his offenses against his soul would
become worse.

> 21ـ إنَّ فِي المَوْتِ لَراحَةٌ لِمَنْ كانَ عَبْدَ شَهْوَتِهِ، وأسْيرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أهْوِيَتِهِ، لأنَّهُ كُلَّما طالَتْ حَياتُهُ كَثُرَتْ سَيِّئاتُهُ،
وعَظُمَتْ عَلى نَفْسِهِ جِناياتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Verily death has agonies that are more terrible than can ever be
described or comprehended by the intellects of the people of this world.

> 22 ـ إنَّ لِلْمَوْتِ لَغَمَرات، هِيَ أفْظَعُ مِنْ أنْ تُسْتَغْرَقَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِصِفَة، أوْ تَعْتَدِلَ عَلى عُقُولِ أهْلِ الدُّنْيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Verily death has been tied to your forelocks whilst this world coils
behind you.

> 23ـ إنَّ المَوْتَ لَمَعْقُودٌ بِنَواصيكُمْ، والدُّنْيا تُطْوى مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلْفِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Verily death is a visitor who is not loved, a killer who is not held
accountable and an invincible adversary.

> 24ـ إنَّ المَوْتَ لَزائِرٌ غَيْرُ مَحْبُوب، وواتِرٌ (وَ واثِرٌ) غَيْرُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَطْلُوب، وقِرْنٌ غَيْرُ مَغْلُوب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Departure [from this world] is imminent.

> 25ـ الرَّحيلُ وَشيكٌ.

26. Death is soothing.

> 26ـ اَلْمَوْتُ مُريحٌ.

27. The matter is near.

> 27ـ اَلأمْرُ قَريبٌ.

28. Death is expiration [and loss of opportunity].

> 28ـ اَلْمَوْتُ فَوْتٌ.

29. Death is a heedless watchman (or friend).

> 29ـ اَلْمَوْتُ رَقيبٌ (رَفيقٌ) غافِلٌ.

30. Death is the gate of the Hereafter.

> 30ـ اَلْمَوْتُ بابُ الا خِرَةِ.

31. White hair [of old age] is a messenger of death.

> 31ـ اَلْمَشيبُ رَسُولُ المَوْتِ.

32. Death is the first justice of the Hereafter.

> 32ـ اَلْمَوْتُ أوَّلُ عَدْلِ الاخِرَةِ.

33. Death is preferable to vileness.

> 33ـ اَلْمَنِيَّةُ ولاالدَّنِيَّةُ.

34. Death is separation from the transient abode and a journey to the
everlasting abode.

> 34ـ اَلْمَوْتُ مُفارَقَةُ دارِ الفَناءِ، وارْتِحالٌ إلى دارِ البَقاءِ.

35. Verily you are on the run from the death whose fleer is not saved
and must eventually meet it.

> 35ـ إنَّكَ طَريدُ المَوْتِ الَّذي لايَنْجُو هارِبُهُ، ولابُدَّ أنَّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُدْرِكُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

36. Verily behind you is a swift seeker in the form of death, so do not
be negligent.

> 36ـ إنَّ وَرائَكَ طالِباً حَثيثاًمِنَ المَوْتِ فَلا تَغْفُلْ.

37. Verily you are all running away from the death which will take you
if you remain steadfast [to resist it] and will catch up with you if you
[try to] flee.

> 37ـ إنَّكُمْ طُرَداءُ المَوْتِ، الَّذي إنْ أقَمْتُمْ أخَذَكُمْ، وإنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَرْتُمْ مِنْهُ أدْرَكَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

38. When death arrives, hopes are exposed.

> 38ـ إذا حَضَرَتِ المَنِيَّةُ افْتَضَحَتِ الأُمْنِيَّةُ.

39. When one cannot remain secure from the onslaught of death, then not
being prepared for it is incompetence.

> 39ـ إذا كانَ هُجُومُ المَوْتِ لايُؤمَنُ، فَمِنَ العَجْزِ تَرْكُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّأَهُّبِ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

40. Deaths cut off hopes.

> 40ـ اَلْمَنايا تَقْطَعُ الآمالَ.

41. When you are moving away [from this world] and death is moving
towards you, then how quickly you will meet each other!

> 41ـ إذا كُنْتَ في إدْبار، والمَوْتُ في إقْبال، فَما أسْرَعَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُلْتَقى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

42. When the bringer of the news of death comes frequently to you, he
will [soon also] announce your death to others.

> 42ـ إذا كَثُرَ النّاعي إلَيْكَ، قامَ النّاعي بِكَ.

43. The one who does not prepare for death and take benefit of respite
is negligent of the onslaught of death.

> 43ـ تارِكُ التَّأَهُّبِ لِلْمَوْتِ، واغْتِنامِ المَهَلِ غافِلٌ عَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُجُومِ الأجَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. Begin your journey for you have been pushed forward and prepare for
death for it has overshadowed you.

> 44ـ تَرَحَّلُوا فَقَدْ جُدَّبِكُمْ، واسْتَعِدُّوا لِلْمَوْتِ فَقَدْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أظَلَّكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. Remembrance of death makes the means [and comforts] of this world
seem trivial.

> 45ـ ذِكْرُ المَوْتِ يُهَوِّنُ أسْبابَ الدُّنْيا.

46. Sometimes the choker (or drinker) is choked by water [and dies]
before quenching his thirst.

> 46ـ رُبَّما شَرِقَ شارِقٌ (شارِبٌ) بِالماءِ قَبْلَ رَيِّهِ.

47. Death is the cause of loss.

> 47ـ سَبَبُ الفَوْتِ المَوْتُ.

48. Fill yourselves with desire for the bounties of Paradise, [and] you
will love death and loathe [this worldly] life.

> 48ـ شَوِّقُوا أنْفُسَكُمْ إلى نَعيمِ الجَنَّةِ، تُحِبُّوا المَوْتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَمْقُتُوا الحَياةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

49. I am amazed at the one who forgets death while he sees others dying
[around him].

> 49ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ نَسِيَ المَوْتَ وهُوَ يَرى مَنْ يَمُوتُ.

50. I am amazed at the person who sees his body and his lifespan
decreasing every day and still does not make preparations for death.

> 50ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ يَرى أنَّهُ يُنْقَصُ كُلَّ يَوْم في نَفْسِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعُمْرِهِ وهُوَ لايَتَأَهَّبُ لِلْمَوْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

51. I am amazed at the one who fears the ambush [of death] and still
does not desist.

> 51ـ عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ خافَ البَياتَ فَلَمْ يَكُفَّ.

52. The end of death is loss.

> 52ـ غايَةُ المَوْتِ الفَوْتُ.

53. The absent death is more deserving of being awaited and is closer in
its approach [than any other traveller whose return is expected].

> 53ـ غائِبُ المَوْتِ أحَقُّ مُنْـتَظَر وأقْرَبُ قادِم.

54. In death there is [either] delight or regret.

> 54ـ فِي المَوْتِ غِبْطَةٌ أوْ نِدامَةٌ.

55. In every soul there is death.[^1]

> 55ـ في كُلِّ نَفْس مَوْتٌ.

56. In death there is comfort for the felicitous.

> 56ـ فِي المَوْتِ راحَةُ السُّعَداءِ.

57. Death may [at times] be hastened.

> 57ـ قَدْ تُعاجِلُ المَنِيَّةُ.

58. Every expected thing [eventually] arrives.

> 58ـ كُلُّ مُتَوَقَّع آت.

59. Every comer is near.[^2]

> 59ـ كُلُّ آت قَريبٌ.

60. Every near one is close by.

> 60ـ كُلُّ قَريب دان.

61. Every person will meet his death.

> 61ـ كُلُّ امْرِء لاق حِمامَهُ.

62. How can one who is sought by death remain safe?

> 62ـ كَيْفَ يَسْلَمُ مَنِ المَوْتُ طالِبُهُ؟!

63. How can you forget death while its signs are [constantly] reminding
you [of it]?

> 63ـ كَيْفَ تَنْسَى المَوْتَ وآثارُهُ تُذَكِّرُكَ.

64. For every rising one there is a setting.

> 64ـ لِكُلِّ ناجِم أُفُولٌ.

65. For every [being with a] soul there is death.

> 65ـ لِكُلِّ نَفْس حِمامٌ.

66. For every living thing there is death.

> 66ـ لِكُلِّ حَيّ مَوْتٌ.

67. For all [beings with] souls there is death.

> 67ـ لِلنُّفُوسِ حِمامٌ.

68. The affluent person will never be saved from death because of his
abundant wealth.

> 68ـ لَنْ يَنْجُوَ مِنَ المَوْتِ غَنِيٌّ لِكَثْرَةِ مالِهِ.

69. The poor person will never be saved from death because of his
poverty.

> 69ـ لَنْ يَسْلَمَ مِنَ المَوْتِ فَقيرٌ لإقْلالِهِ.

70. If death could be bought, the affluent would have surely bought it.

> 70ـ لَوْ أنَّ المَوْتَ يُشْتَرى لأشْتَراهُ الأغْنِياءُ.

71. One who dies, passes away.

> 71ـ مَنْ ماتَ فاتَ.

72. One who is certain of the [eventual] departure [from this world]
prepares for the journey.

> 72ـ مَنْ أيْقَنَ بِالنُّقْلَةِ تَأهَّبَ لِلْرَّحِيلِ.

73. One who sees death with the eyes of his certitude, sees it nearby.

> 73ـ مَنْ رَأَى المَوْتَ بِعَيْنِ يَقينِهِ رَاهُ قَريباً.

74. One who sees death with the eyes of his hope, sees it far away.

> 74ـ مَنْ رَأَى الْمَوْتَ بِعَيْنِ أمَلِهِ رَاهُ بَعيداً.

75. One who remembers death forgets his aspirations.

> 75ـ مَنْ ذَكَرَ المَنِيَّةَ نَسِيَ الأُمْنِيَّةَ.

76. One who recalls the distance of his journey, prepares [for it].

> 76ـ مَنْ تَذَكَّرَ بُعْدَ السَّفَرِ اِسْتَعَدَّ.

77. One who frequently remembers death is saved from the deceptions of
this world.

> 77ـ مَنْ أكْثَرَ ذِكْرَ المَوْتِ نَجا مِنْ خِداعِ الدُّنْيا.

78. One who is missed by the arrow of death is fettered by old age.

> 78ـ مَنْ أخْطَأَهُ سَهْمُ المَنِيَّةُ قَـيَّدَهُ الهِرَمُ.

79. One who anticipates death hastens towards good deeds.

> 79ـ مَنْ تَرَقَّبَ المَوْتَ سارَعَ إلَى الْخَيْراتِ.

80. One who visualizes death before his very own eyes, the affairs of
this world become easy [and trivial] for him.

> 80ـ مَنْ صَوَّرَ المَوْتَ بَيْنَ عَيْنَيْهِ هانَ أمْرُ الدُّنْيا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

81. One who frequently remembers death is pleased with whatever suffices
him of this world.

> 81ـ مَنْ أكْثَرَ ذِكْرَ المَوْتِ رَضِيَ مِنَ الدُّنْيا بِالكَفافِ.

82. Whoever frequently remembers death, his desire in [the pleasures of]
this world is reduced.

> 82ـ مَنْ أكْثَرَ مِنْ ذِكْرِ المَوْتِ قَلَّتْ فِي الدُّنْيا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَغْبَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

83. Whoever frequently remembers death is satisfied with the little he
possesses of this world.

> 83ـ مَنْ ذَكَرَ المَوْتَ رَضِيَ مِنَ الدُّنْيا بِاليَسيرِ.

84. Whoever has [the angel of] death given charge over him, is overrun
and annihilated by it.

> 84ـ مَنْ وُكِّلَ بِهِ المَوْتُ إجتاحَهُ وأفْناهُ.

85. One who is sought by death cannot be saved from it.

> 85ـ ما يَنْجُو مِنَ الْمَوتِ مَنْ طَلَبَهُ.

86. One who counts tomorrow as part of his lifetime has not recognized
the reality of death.

> 86ـ ما أنْزَلَ المَوْتَ مَنْزِلَهُ مَنْ عَدَّ غَداً مِنْ أجَلِهِ.

87. How beneficial death is for the one who has filled his heart with
faith and God-wariness!

> 87ـ ما أنْفَعَ المَوْتَ لِمَنْ أشْعَرَ الإيمانَ والتَّقْوى قَلْبَهُ.

88. The deaths of this world are easier to bear than the deaths [and
chastisements] of the Hereafter.

> 88ـ مَوْتاتُ الدُّنيا أهْوَنُ مِنْ مَوْتاتِ الآخِرَةِ.

89. We are the helpers of death and our lives are targets of mortality,
so how can we expect to live forever while the night and day do not
elevate anything in status but that they quickly destroyed that which
they have built and separated that which they have brought together.

> 89ـ نَحْنُ أعْوانُ المَنُونِ، وأنْفُسُنا نَصْبُ الحُتُوفِ، فَمِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيْنَ نَرْجُو البَقاءَ، وهذا اللَّيْلُ والنَّهارُ لَمْ يَرْفَعا مِنْ
شَيْء شَرَفاً إلاّ أسْرَعَا الْكَرَّةَ في هَدْمِ ما بَنَيا، وتَفْريقِ
ما جَمَعا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

90. Are the people who have been given time to live [in this world]
awaiting anything but the time of death, while the hour is close and the
journey is at hand?

> 90ـ هَلْ (وأهْلُ مُدَّةِ البَقاءِ) يَنْتَظِرُ أهْلُ مُدَّةِ البَقاءِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلاّ آوِنَةَ الفَناءِ مَعَ قُرْبِ الزَّوالِ وأُزُوفِ الاِنْتِقالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

91. Can the near ones repel [death] from you, or can the wailing [of the
women and children] be of any benefit to you?

> 91ـ هَلْ يَدْفَعُ عَنْكُمْ الأقارِبُ، أوْ تَنْفَعُكُمُ النَّواحِبُ.

92. Far be it for death to lose the one whom it seeks or for the one who
flees it to get saved [from it].

> 92ـ هَيْهاتَ أنْ يَفُوتَ المَوْتَ مَنْ طَلَبَ أوْ يَنْجُوَ مِنْهُ مَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَرَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

93. The arrival of death cuts off action and exposes [false] hopes.

> 93ـ وافِدُ المَوْتِ يَقْطَعُ العَمَلَ، ويَفْضَحُ الأمَلَ.

94. The arrival of death expunges respite, brings the appointed time
closer and dashes [one’s] hope.

> 94ـ وافِدُ المَوْتِ يُبيدُ المَهَلَ، ويُدْنِي الأجَلَ، ويُقْعِدُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأمَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

95. There is no soother like death.

> 95ـ لامُريحَ كَالمَوْتِ.

96. Death does not desist from extermination [and will annihilate all].

> 96ـ لاتَرْعَوِى الْمَنِيَّةُ اخْتِراماً.

97. There is none whose arrival is nearer than death.

> 97ـ لاقادِمَ أقْرَبُ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ.

98. There is no absent one that approaches quicker than death.

> 98ـ لاغائِبَ أقْدَمُ مِنَ المَوْتِ.

99. There is no blame on the one who flees from his death.

> 99ـ لالَوْمَ لِهارِب مِنْ حَتْفِهِ.

100. Destiny holds sway over the expectations [and plans of man] until
death occurs in the [execution of his own] plans.

> 100ـ يَغْلِبُ (تَذِلُّ الأُمُورُ لِلْمَقاديرِ) المِقْدارُ عَلَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّقْديرِ حَتّى يَكُونَ الحَتْفُ فِي التَّدْبيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

101. It behoves the one who knows about the quickness of his departure
to be well prepared for the move.

> 101ـ يَنْبَغي لِمَنْ عَرَفَ سُرْعَةَ رِحْلَتِهِ أنْ يُحْسِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّأَهُّبَ لِنُقْلَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

102. Death is preferable to the shame of disgrace.

> 102ـ اَلْمَوْتُ ولا ابْتِذالُ الخِزْيَةِ.

103. Death comes to every living thing.

> 103ـ اَلمَوْتُ يَأْتي عَلى كُلِّ حَىّ.

[^1]: Or: In every breath there is death.

[^2]: Here the ‘comer’ being referred to is death.


