Wealth And Riches
=================

**Wealth and riches-المال والثروة**

1. Wealth honours its possessor in this world and abases him in front of
Allah, the Glorified.

> 1ـ اَلْمالُ يُكْرِمُ صاحِبَهُ فِي الدُّنْيا، ويُهِينُهُ عِنْدَ اللّهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Wealth honours its possessor as long as he spends it and abases him
when he is miserly with it.

> 2ـ اَلْمالُ يُكْرِمُ صاحِبَهُ ما بَذَلَهُ، ويُهينُهُ ما بَخِلَ بِهِِ.

3. Wealth and children are the ornaments of this worldly life while good
action is the tillage of the Hereafter.

> 3ـ اَلْمالُ والبَنُونُ زِينَةُ الحَياةِ الدُّنْيا، والعَمَلُ الصّالِحُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَرْثُ الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. Wealth elevates its possessor in this world but lowers him in the
Hereafter.

> 4ـ اَلْمالُ يَرْفَعُ صاحِبَهُ فيِ الدُّنْيا ويَضَعُهُ فِي الآخِرَةِ.

5. Wealth is a burden for its possessor except that which he sends ahead
from it [for the Hereafter].

> 5ـ اَلْمالُ وَبالٌ عَلى صاحِبِهِ إلاّ ما قَدَّمَ مِنْهُ.

6. Wealth is the tribulation of the soul and the plunder of calamities.

> 6ـ اَلْمالُ فِتْنَةُ النَّفْسِ ونَهْبُ الرَّزايا.

7. Wealth is reduced by spending [it] whereas knowledge grows when it is
given away [and shared with others].

> 7ـ اَلْمالُ تَنْقُصُهُ النَّفَقَةُ، وَالعِلْمُ يَـزْكُو عَلَى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإنْفاقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Hold on to wealth according to the extent of your need, and forward
the rest for the day of your indigence.

> 8ـ أمْسِكْ مِنَ المالِ بِقَدْرِ ضَرُورَتِكَ،وَ قَدِّمِ الفَضْلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَوْمِ فاقَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Beware of reserving for yourself (or concealing) that which all the
people have an equal right to and turning a blind eye to what is
manifest for the onlookers otherwise it will surely be taken from you
and given to someone else.

> 9ـ إيّاكَ والاِسْتيثارَ (الاِسْتِتارَ)بِما لِلنّاسِ فيهِ أُسْوَةٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والتَّغابي عَمّا وَضَحَ لِلنّاظِرينَ فَإنَّهُ مَأْخُوذٌ مِنْكَ
لِغَيْرِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. The best wealth is that by which the freemen become enthralled.[^1]

> 10ـ أفْضَلُ المالِ مَا اسْتُرِقَّ بِهِ الأحْرارُ.

11. The best of all wealth is that by which men become enthralled.

> 11ـ أفْضَلُ الأمْوالِ مَا اسْتُرِقَّ بِهِ الرِّجالُ.

12. The purest wealth is that which has been earned by its lawful means.

> 12ـ أزْكَى المالِ مَا اكْتُسِبَ مِنْ حِلِّهِ.

13. The most beneficial wealth is that by which the obligatory is
fulfilled.

> 13ـ أنْفَعُ المالِ ما قُضِيَ بِهِ الفَرْضُ.

14. The purest wealth is that with which the Hereafter is bought.

> 14ـ أزْكَى المالِ مَا اشْتُرِيَ بِهِ الآخِرَةُ.

15. The best wealth is that which has been earned by its lawful means.

> 15ـ أطْيَبُ الْمالِ مَا اكْتُسِبَ مِنْ حِلِّهِ.

16. The best wealth is that which has the best effect upon you.

> 16ـ أفْضَلُ الأمْوالِ أحْسَنُها آثَراً عَلَيْكَ.

17. The best wealth is that by which the rights [of others] are
fulfilled.

> 17ـ أفْضَلُ الْمالِ ما قُضِيَتْ بِهِ الحُقُوقُ.

18. Verily your wealth is for the one who praises you in your lifetime
and the one who vilifies you after your death.

> 18ـ إنَّ مالَكَ لِحامِدِكَ في حَياتِكَ، ولِذامِّكَ بَعْدَ وَفاتِكَ.

19. Verily a person comes to that which he has sent forward [of his good
deeds] and regrets [about] that which he has left behind.

> 19ـ إنَّ المَرْءَ عَلى ما قَدَّمَ قادِمٌ، وعَلى ما خَلَّفَ نادِمٌ.

20. Verily Allah, the Glorified, has ordained the provisions of the poor
in the wealth of the rich, so no poor person goes hungry but because of
the withholding of the rich, and Allah will question them about this.

> 20ـ إنَّ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ فَرَضَ في أمْوالِ الأغْنياءِ أقْواتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفُقَراءِ، فَما جاعَ فَقِيرٌ إلاّ بِما مَنَعَ غَنِيٌّ، واللّهُ
سائِلُهُمْ عَنْ ذلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. Surely the person with the greatest regret on the Day of
Resurrection will be the man who earns wealth without obeying [the
commandments of] Allah, then a man inherits his wealth and spends it in
obedience to Allah and through it enters Paradise whereas the first one
enters Hell because of it.

> 21ـ إنَّ أعْظَمَ النّاسِ حَسْرَةً يَوْمَ القِيامَةِ، رَجُلٌ اكْتَسَبَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مالاً مِنْ غَيْرِ طاعَةِ اللّهِ، فَوَرَّثَهُ رَجُلاً أنْفَقَهُ في
طاعَةِ اللّهِ، فَدَخَلَ بِهِ الجَنَّةَ، ودَخَلَ بِهِ الأوَّلُ النّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. Verily when a man dies people say: ‘What has he left behind?’ while
the angels say: ‘What has he sent forward?’ Your forefathers are for
Allah![^2] Send some of your wealth forward, so that it may be a
provision for you [in the Hereafter], and do not leave all of it behind
such that it becomes a [heavy] burden on you.

> 22ـ إنَّ المَرْءَ إذا هَلَكَ قالَ النّاسُ: ما تَرَكَ؟ وقالَتِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَلائِكَةُ ما قَدَّمَ؟ لِلّهِ آباؤُكُمْ، فَقَدِّمُوا بَعْضاً يَكُنْ
لَكُمْ ذُخْراً، ولاتُخَلِّفُوا كُلاًّ فَيَكُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ كَلاًّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Verily the best wealth is that which earns praise and gratitude and
brings about reward and recompense.

> 23ـ إنَّ خَيْرَ المالِ ما كَسَبَ ثَناءً وشُكْراً، وأوْجَبَ ثَواباً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأجْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Verily the best wealth is that which bequeaths to you a provision
[for the Hereafter] and a legacy, and earns you praise and reward.

> 24ـ إنَّ خَيْرَ الْمالِ ما أوْرَثَكَ ذُخْراً وذِكْراً، وأَكْسَبَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَمْداً وَأجْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Indeed the best wealth is that by which the freeman is enthralled
and [by which] reward is earned.

> 25ـ إنَّ أفْضَلَ الأمْوالِ مَا اسْتُرِقَّ بِهِ حُرٌّ، واسْتُحِقَّ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أجْرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. Verily your wealth cannot fulfil the needs of all the people, so
reserve it specifically for the followers of the truth.

> 26ـ إنَّ مالَكَ لايُغْني جَميعَ النّاسِ، فَاخْصُصْ بِهِ أهْلَ الحَقِّ.

27. Wealth is reckoning [in the Hereafter].

> 27ـ اَلمالُ حِسابٌ.

28. Wealth is a borrowed loan [and will not remain with you forever].

> 28ـ اَلْمالُ عارِيَةٌ.

29. Verily that which is in your possession has had an owner before you
and will go to someone after you. You are only amassing [wealth] for one
of two kinds of people: either the one who will use what you amassed in
obedience to Allah, thereby becoming felicitous by that which made you
wretched, or the one who will use what you amassed in disobedience to
Allah, thereby becoming wretched by what you amassed, and neither of
these two deserve to be preferred by you over yourself or of being
carried by you on your back.

> 29ـ إنَّ الَّذي في يَدَيْكَ قَدْ كانَ لَهُ أهْلٌ قَبْلَكَ، وهُوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صائِرٌ إلى مَنْ بَعْدَكَ، وإنَّما أنْتَ جامِع لأحَدِ رَجُلَيْنِ: إمّا
رَجُل عَمِلَ فيما جَمَعْتَ بِطاعَةِ اللّهِ فَسَعِدَ بِما شَقيتَ بِهِ،
أوْ رَجُل عَمِلَ فيما جَمَعْتَ بِمَعْصيَةِ اللّهِ فَشَقِيَ بِما
جَمَعْتَ، ولَيْسَ أحَدُ هذَيْنِ أهْلاً أنْ تُؤْثِرَهُ عَلى نَفْسِكَ،
ولاتَحْمِلَ لَهُ عَلى ظَهْرِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

30. Wealth is the plunder of calamities.

> 30ـ اَلْمالُ نَهْبُ الحَوادِثِ.

31. Wealth is a solace [and comfort] for the heir (or heirs).

> 31ـ اَلْمالُ سُلْوَةُ الوارِثِ (الوُرّاثِ).

32. Wealth strengthens one who [is weak and] lacks support.

> 32ـ اَلْمالُ يُقَوّي غَيْرَ الأيِّدِ.

33. People serve wealth, wealth does not serve people.[^3]

> 33ـ اَلرِّجالُ تُفيدُ المالَ، اَلمالُ ما أفادَ الرِّجالَ.

34. Wealth is the leader of the wicked.

> 34ـ اَلْمالُ يَعْسُوبُ الفُجّارِ.

35. Wealth is the object of desires.

> 35ـ اَلْمالُ مادَّةُ الشَّهَواتِ.

36. Wealth strengthens one’s hopes.

> 36ـ اَلْمالُ يُقَوِّي الآمالَ.

37. Wealth manifests the intrinsic natures of the people and their
characters.

> 37ـ اَلْمالُ يُبْدِي جَواهِرَ الرِّجالِ وخَلائِقَها.

38. Wealth corrupts the outcomes and extends the [false] hopes.

> 38ـ اَلْمالُ يُفْسِدُ المَ آلَ ويُوَسِّعُ الآمالَ.

39. Wealth is the cause of trials and the plunder of calamities.

> 39ـ اَلْمالُ لِلْفِتَنِ سَبَبٌ، ولِلْحَوادِثِ سَلَبٌ.

40. Wealth is the inviter of difficulty and the riding mount of
hardship.

> 40ـ اَلْمالُ داعِيَةُ التَّعَبِ ومَطِيَّةُ النَّصَبِ.

41. Wealth does not benefit you until it parts from you.

> 41ـ اَلْمالُلايَنْفَعُكَ حَتّى يُفارِقَكَ.

42. Verily only the wealth which you send ahead for your Hereafter is
yours, while that which you leave behind belongs to your heirs.

> 42ـ إنَّما لَكَ مِنْ مالِكَ ما قَدَّمْتَهُ لآخِرَتِكَ، وَما أخَّرْتَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلِلْوارِثِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

43. When you accumulate wealth, then you are [actually] a representative
for another person who will rejoice with it while you become miserable.

> 43ـ إذا جَمَعْتَ المالَ فَأنْتَ فيهِ وَكيلٌ لِغَيْرِكَ يَسْعَدُ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَشْقى أنْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

44. When you send forth your wealth for your Hereafter and leave [the
affair of] your heirs in the hands of Allah, you will be felicitous by
that which you have forwarded and Allah will take good care of those
whom you leave behind.

> 44ـ إذا قَدَّمْتَ مالَكَ لآخِرَتِكَ واسْتَخْلَفْتَ اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلى مَنْ خَلَّفْتَهُ مِنْ بَعْدِكَ، سَعِدْتَ بِما قَدَّمْتَ وأحْسَنَ
اللّهُ لَكَ الخَلافَةَ عَلى مَنْ خَلَّفْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

45. It is by overcoming [one’s] fears that wealth is acquired.

> 45ـ بِرُكُوبِ الأهْوالِ تُكْتَسَبُ الأمْوالُ.

46. The affluence of this world is the poverty of the Hereafter.

> 46ـ ثَرْوَةُ الدُّنْيا فَقْرُ الآخِرَةِ.

47. Abundance of wealth causes destruction, makes one rebellious and
perishes.

> 47ـ ثَرْوَةُ المالِ تُرْدي،وَ تُطْغي، وتَفْنى.

48. Love of wealth is the cause of tribulations and love of leadership
is the root of tribulations.

> 48ـ حُبُّ المالِ سَبَبُ الفِتَنِ وحُبُّ الرِّياسَةِ رَأسُ المِحَنِ.

49. Love of wealth corrupts the [final] outcome.

> 49ـ حُبُّ المالِ يُفْسِدُ المَ آلَ.

50. Love of wealth strengthens [false] hopes and corrupts actions.

> 50ـ حُبُّ المالِ يُقَوِّيَ الآمالَ، ويُفْسِدُ الأعْمالَ.

51. Love of wealth weakens faith and corrupts certitude.

> 51ـ حُبُّ المالِ يُوهِنُ الدّينَ، ويُفْسِدُ اليَقينَ.

52. The best of your wealth is that which safeguards your dignity.

> 52ـ خَيْرُ أمْوالِكَ ما وَقى عِرْضَكَ.

53. The best wealth is that which enthrals a freeman.

> 53ـ خَيْرُ الأمْوالِ مَا اسْتَرَقَّ حُرّاً.

54. The best wealth is that which helps one perform noble deeds.

> 54ـ خَيْرُ الأمْوالِ مَا أعانَ عَلَى المَكارِمِ.

55. The best of your wealth is that which suffices you.

> 55ـ خَيْرُ أمْوالِكَ ما كَفاكَ.

56. Take from the most precious of your possessions and spend it on that
for which your Lord will elevate your lofty deeds.

> 56ـ خُذُوا مِنْ كَرائِمِ أمْوالِكُم ما يَرْفَعُ بِهِ رَبُّكُمْ سَنِيَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أعْمالِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

57. Many a person accumulates [wealth] for one who is not grateful to
him.

> 57ـ رُبَّ جامِع لِمَنْ لايَشْكُرُهُ.

58. The alms-tax of wealth is benefitting others [with it].

> 58ـ زَكاةُ المالِ الإفْضالُ.

59. The worst [type of] wealth is that which earns censure.

> 59ـ شَرُّ الأمْوالِ ما أكْسَبَ المَذامَّ.

60. The worst wealth is that which does not benefit [and fulfil the need
of] its owner.

> 60ـ شَرُّ الأمْوالِ ما لَمْ يُغْنِ عَنْ صاحِبِهِ.

61. The worst wealth is that from which nothing is spent in the way of
Allah and the [obligatory] *zakāt* of which is not paid.

> 61ـ شَرُّ المالِ مالَمْ يُنْفَقْ في سَبيلِ اللّهِ مِنْهُ، ولَمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤَدَّ زَكاتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

62. The worst wealth is that from which the right of Allah, the
Glorified, is not given.

> 62ـ شَرُّ الأمْوالِ ما لَمْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْهُ حَقُّ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ.

63. The owner of wealth is faces difficulty and one who gains victory
through evil [means] has [actually] been defeated.

> 63ـ صاحِبُ المالِ مَتْعُوبٌ، والغالِبُ بِالشَّرِّ مَغْلُوبٌ.

64. Little [wealth] that suffices is better than a lot which makes one
insolent.

> 64ـ قَليلٌ يَكْفي خَيْرٌ مِنْ كَثير يُطْغي.

65. The little that saves [one from hellfire] is better than plenty that
destroys.

> 65ـ قَليلٌ يُنْجي خَيْرٌ مِنْ كَثير يُرْدي.

66. Send forth some [of your wealth] as it will be [beneficial] for you
[in the Hereafter], and do not leave all of it behind as this will
become a burden for you.

> 66ـ قَدِّمُوا بَعْضاً يَكُنْ لَكُمْ، ولاتُخَلِّفُوا كُلاًّ فَيَكُونَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

67. How many a person accumulates that which he will leave behind.

> 67ـ كَمْ مِنْ جامِع ما سَوْفَ يَتْرُكُهُ.

68. How often it is that one who gets less, benefits while one who gets
more, loses.

> 68ـ كَمْ مِنْ مَنْقُوص رابِح ومَزيد خاسِـر.

69. Increased wealth corrupts the hearts and gives rise to sins.

> 69ـ كَثْرَةُ المالِ تُفْسِدُ القُلُوبَ وتُنْشِئُ الذُّنُوبَ.

70. Be a [generous] donor with your [own] wealth while being cautious
with the wealth of others.

> 70ـ كُنْ بِمالِكَ مُتَبَرِّعاً، وعَنْ مالِ غَيْرِكَ مُتَوَرِّعاً.

71. That portion of your wealth which teaches you a lesson and earns you
gratitude will never go [to waste].

> 71ـ لَنْ يَذْهَبَ مِنْ مالِكَ ما وَعَظَكَ، وحازَ لَكَ الشُّكْرَ.

72. He who does not reform his [means of earning or spending] wealth has
not earned it.

> 72ـ لَمْ يَكْتَسِبْ مالاً مَنْ لَمْ يُصْلِحْهُ.

73. One who does not spend [his] wealth [in the way of Allah] has not
been blessed with wealth.

> 73ـ لَمْ يُرْزَقِ المالَ مَنْ لَمْ يُنْفِقْهُ.

74. That portion of your wealth which is used to safeguard your dignity
has not gone [to waste].

> 74ـ لَمْ يَذْهَبْ مِنْ مالِكَ ما وَقى عِرْضَكَ.

75. That part of your wealth which is used to fulfil your obligations
has not been lost.

> 75ـ لَمْ يَضَعْ مِنْ مالِكَ ما قَضى فَرْضَكَ.

76. A person does not give his wealth to the one who has no right to it,
or his favour to one who is not deserving of it, but that Allah deprives
him of their gratefulness and their love, too, would be for others.

> 76ـ لَمْ يَضَعِ اِمْرُءٌ مالَهُ في غَيْرِ حَقِّهِ أوْ مَعْرُوفَهُ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَيْرِ أهْلِهِ إلاّ حَرَمَهُ اللّهُ شُكْرَهُمْ وَكانَ لِغَيْرِهِ
وُدَّهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

77. One who gives [generously from] his wealth makes [others]
subservient [to him].

> 77ـ مَنْ بَذَلَ مالَهُ اِسْتَعْبَدَ.

78. One who earns his wealth from unlawful sources damages his
Hereafter.

> 78ـ مَنِ اكْتَسَبَ مالاً مِنْ غَيْرِ حِلِّهِ أضَرَّ بِ آخِرَتِهِ.

79. One who accumulates wealth so that he can benefit people [with it]
is obeyed by them and one who accumulates [it] for himself is
disregarded by them.

> 79ـ مَنْ جَمَعَ المالَ لِيَنْفَعَ بِهِ النّاسَ أطاعُوهُ ومَنْ جَمَعَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِنَفْسِهِ أضاعُوهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

80. One who considers wealth to be precious, regards people as
insignificant.

> 80ـ مَنْ كَرُمَ عَلَيْهِ الْمالُ هانَتْ عَلَيْهِ الرِّجالُ.

81. Whoever spends his wealth in the way of Allah, He quickly replaces
it [for him].

> 81ـ مَنْ بَذَلَ في ذاتِ اللّهِ مالَهُ عَجَّلَ لَهُ الخَلَفَ.

82. Whoever withholds wealth from the one who praises him bequeaths it
to one who does not praise him.

> 82ـ مَنْ مَنَعَ الْمالَ مَنْ يَحْمَدُهُ وَرَّثَهُ مَنْ لايَحْمَدُهُ.

83. One who earns wealth from sources that are unlawful, spends it in
the places that are unworthy [and inappropriate].

> 83ـ مَنْ يَكْتَسِبْ مالاً مِنْ غَيْرِ حِلِّهِ يَصْرِفْهُ في غَيْرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَقِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

84. One who does not let go [of his wealth] while he is praised will
have to leave [it] while he is vilified.

> 84ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَدَعْ وهُوَ مَحْمُودٌ يَدَعْ وهُوَ مَذْمُومٌ.

85. One who does not forward his wealth for his Hereafter while he is
[sure to be] rewarded [for it], leaves it behind while he is sinful.

> 85ـ مَنْ لَمْ يُقَدِّمْ مالَهُ لآخِرَتِهِ وهُوَ مَأجُورٌ، خَلَّفَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهُوَ مَاْثُومٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

86. One whose wealth is stripped away by disasters, gains from it the
benefit of caution.

> 86ـ مَنْ سَلَبَتْهُ الحَوادِثُ مالَهُ، أفادَتْهُ الحَذَرُ.

87. Never waste your wealth in other than what is good [and right].

> 87ـ لاتُضَيِّعَنَّ مالَكَ في غَيْرِ مَعْرُوف.

88. Do not spend your wealth in sinful acts thereby coming before your
Lord without any [good] deed.

> 88ـ لاتَصْرِفْ مالَكَ فِي المَعاصي، فَتَقْدَمَ عَلى رَبِّكَ بِلا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَمَل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

89. Never leave behind anything from this world, for indeed you will
[only] be leaving it for one of two types of people: either the man who
uses it in obedience to Allah, so he becomes felicitous by that which
made you wretched, or the man who uses it in disobeying Allah, in which
case you will have been a helper for him in his disobedience, and
neither of these two deserves to be preferred by you over yourself.

> 89ـ لاتُخْلِفَنَّ وَراءَكَ شَيْئاً مِنَ الدُّنْيا فَإنَّكَ تُخَلِّفُهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأحَدِ رَجُلَيْنِ: إمّا رَجُل عَمِلَ فيهِ بِطاعَةِ اللّهِ فَسَعِدَ
بِما شَقيتَ بِهِ، وإمّا رَجُل عَمِلَ فيهِ بِمَعْصيَةِ اللّهِ فَكُنْتَ
عَوْناً لَهُ عَلَى المَعْصِيَةِ، ولَيْسَ أحَدُ هذَيْنِ حَقيقاً أنْ
تُؤْثِرَهُ عَلى نَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

90. Love of wealth and praise do not go together.

> 90ـ لاتَجْتَمِعُ حُبُّ المالِ والثَناءُ.

91. There is no pride in wealth except when accompanied with generosity.

> 91ـ لافَخْرَ في الْمالِ إلاّ مََعَ الجُودِ.

92. Little that suffices is better than a lot which makes one insolent.

> 92ـ يَسيرٌ يَكْفي خَيْرٌ مِنْ كَثير يُطْغي.

93. Worldly wealth and power turns the mistake of its owner into a
proper act and the proper act of his opponent into a mistake.

> 93ـ اَلدَّوْلَةُ تَرُدُّ خَطاءَ صاحِبِها صَواباً وصَوابَ ضِدِّهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَطاءً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Meaning the natural feeling of indebtedness a person feels when
someone helps him, financially or otherwise.

[^2]: The Arabs use this phrase to show reverence and respect for a
person or persons by connecting them to Allah.

[^3]: Or: People acquire wealth, wealth does not acquire [and win over]
people.


