Women
=====

**Women-النِّساء**

1. Women are the greater of the two temptations.

> 1ـ اَلنِّساءُ أعْظَمُ الفِتْنَـتَيْنِ.

2. Women are [like] meat on the butcher’s block, except that which is
protected [and defended].

> 2ـ اَلنِّساءُ لَحْمٌ عَلى وَضَم إلاّ ما ذُبَّ عَنْهُ.

3. Beware of evil women, and be on your guard [even] from the good among
them.

> 3ـ اِتَّقُوا شِرارَ النِّساءِ، وكـُونُوا مِنْ خِيارِهِنَّ عَلى حَذَر.

4. Beware of excessive infatuation with women and being tempted (or
deceived) by the pleasures of this world, for indeed the one who is
infatuated with women faces trials and the one who is tempted by the
pleasures [of this world] is abased.

> 4ـ إيّاكَ وكَثْرَةَ الْوَلَهِ بِالنِّساءِ، والإغْراءَ(الاِغْتِرارَ)
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِلَذّاتِ الدُّنيا، فَإنَّ الْوَلِهَ بِالنِّساءِ مُمْتَحَنٌ،
والغَرِيَّ بِاللَّذّاتِ مُمْتَهَنٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Beware of consulting with women, for indeed their opinions are
inclined towards immaturity and their decisions are infirm; and restrain
their gazes [by keeping them behind the veil], for your veiling them is
better than being suspicions about them, and their coming out [in
public] is not worse than your letting one who cannot be trusted enter
their abode; and if you are able to ensure that they do not get
acquainted with anybody other than you then do it.

> 5ـ إيّاكَ ومُشاوَرَةَ النِّساءِ، فَإنَّ رَأْيَهُنَّ إلى أفَن،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَزْمَهُنَّ إلى وَهَن، وَاكْفُفْ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِنْ أبْصارِهِنَّ،
فَحِجابُكَ لَهُنَّ خَيْـرٌ مِنَ الاِرْتِيابِ بِهِنَّ، ولَيْسَ
خُرُوجُهُنَّ بِشَـرّ مِنْ إدْخالِكَ مَنْ لايُوثَقُ بِِهِ عَلَيْهِنَّ،
وإنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ أنْ لا يَعْرِفْنَ (لا يَعْرِفَهُنَّ) غَيْرَكَ
فَافْعَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Verily women are [only] concerned about the ornaments of this world
and [creating] mischief herein.

> 6ـ إنَّ النِّساءَ هَمُّهُنَّ زِينَةُ الْحَياةِ الدُّنيا والْفَسادُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Being infatuated with women is the trait of the foolish.

> 7ـ اَلاِسْتِهْتارُ بِالنِّساءِ شِيمَةُ النَّوْكى.

8. If you see something suspicious from your women, then assign to them
a guard who will watch over the old and young [among the family, and not
for the women in particular as this will cause them unease], and beware
not to continuously scold them for this will incite them to commit sins
and make it easy for them to bear the scolding [as they will become
accustomed to it].

> 8ـ إنْ رَأَيْتَ مِنْ نِسائِكَ ريبَةً، فاجْعَلْ لَهُنَّ النَّكِيرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى الكَبِيرِ والصَّغِيرِ وإيّاكَ أنْ تُـكَرِّرَ الْعَتْبَ، فَإنَّ
ذلِكَ يُغْرِي بِالذَّنْبِ، ويُهَوِّنُ العَتْبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. The best of traits for women is the worst of traits for men.

> 9ـ خَيْرُ خِصالِ النِّساءِ شَـرُّ خِصالِ الرِّجالِ.

10. Obedience to women is the height of ignorance.

> 10ـ طاعَةُ النِّساءِ غايَةُ الْجَهْلِ.

11. Obedience to women degrades the noble ones and destroys the
intelligent ones.

> 11ـ طاعَةُ النِّساءِ تُزْرِي بِالنُّبَلاءِ وتُرْدِي الْعُقَلاءَ.

12. Obedience to women is the trait of the foolish.

> 12ـ طاعَةُ النِّساءِ شِيمَةُ الحَمْقى.

13. Whoever [constantly] delights in women, his mind gets corrupted.

> 13ـ مَنِ اسْتَمْتَعَ بِالنِّساءِ فَسَدَ عَقْلُهُ.

14. People! Verily women are deficient in faith, lacking in intellect
and deficient in shares. As for their deficiency in faith, it is their
abstention from prayers and fasting during their menstrual periods, and
as for their deficiency in shares, it is due to their inheritance being
half of what is inherited by men, and as for their lacking in intellect,
it is because the testimony of two women equals the testimony of one
man; so beware of the evil women and be on your guard [even] from those
of them who are good.

> 14ـ مَعاشِرَ النّاسِ،إنَّ النِّساءَ نَواقِصُ الإيمانِ، نَواقِصُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُقُولِ، نَواقِصُ الحُظُوظِ، فَأمّا نَقْصُ إيمانِهِنَّ
فَقُعُودُهُنَّ في أيّامِ الْحَيْضِعَنِ الصَّلاةِ، والصِّيامِ، وأمّا
نُقْصانُ حُظُوظِهِنَّ فَمَواريثُهُنَّ عَلى نِصْفِ مَوارِيثِ الرِّجالِ،
وأمّا نُقْصانُ عُقُولِهِنَّ، فَشَهادَةُ اِمْرَأتَيْنِ كَشَهادَةِ
رَجُل، فَاتَّقُوا شِرارَ النِّساءِ، وكُونُوا مِنْ خِيارِهِنَّ عَلى
حَذَر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Do not obey women in good [actions] such that they expect [your
obedience] in evil.

> 15ـ لاتُطيعُوا النِّساءَ فيِ المَعْرُوفِ حَتّى لا يَطْمَعْنَ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُنْكَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Never be frequently alone with women, for they will become weary of
you and you will also become weary of them, and leave a part of yourself
and your mind to tarry [away] from them.

> 16ـ لاتُـكَثِّرَنَّ الْخَلْوَةَ بِالنِّساءِ فَيَمْلَلْنَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَلَّهُنَّ واسْتَبْقِ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ وَعَقْلِكَ بِالإبْطاءِ
عَنْهُنَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Let women not bear your burden and [try to] be independent from them
as much as possible, for indeed they put many obligations [on you] and
are ungrateful for [many of your] favours.

> 17ـ لاتَحْمِلُوا النِّساءَ أثْقالَكُمْ، واسْتَغْنُوا عَنْهُنَّ مَا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتَطَعْتُمْ، فَإنَّهُنَّ يُكْثِرْنَ الاِمْتِنانَ، ويَكْفُرْنَ
الإحْسانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. The woman is wholly evil, and more evil than her is the fact that
man cannot do without her.

> 18ـ اَلمَرْأَةُ شَـرٌّ كُلُّها وشَـرٌّ مِنْها أنَّهُ لابـُدَّ مِنْها.

19. A woman is a scorpion whose sting is sweet.

> 19ـ اَلْمَرْأةُ عَقْرَبٌ حُلْوَةُ اللَّسْعَةِ (اللَّسَبَةِ).

20. Verily a woman is only [considered] a plaything, so whoever takes
her should cover her.

> 20ـ إنَّما الْمَرأةُ لُعْبَةٌ فَمَنِ اتَّخَذَها فَلْيُغَطِّها.

21. Guarding the woman [from people and places that would harm her
chastity] is better for her condition and more lasting for her beauty.

> 21ـ صِيانَةُ الْمَرأةِ أنْعَمُ لِحالِها وأدْوَمُ لِجَمالِها.

22. Do not give a woman the responsibility that she cannot bear for
indeed a woman is [like] a sweet basil and not a strong ruler [who can
govern the people].

> 22ـ لاتُمَلِّكِ الْمَرْأةَ ما جاوَزَ نَفْسَها، فَإنَّ المَرْأةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَيْحانَةٌ، ولَيْسَتْ بِقَهْرِمانَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>


