Sincere Advice
==============

**Sincere advice-النُّصْح والنصيحة**

1. Sincere advice reaps affection.

> 1ـ اَلنُّصْحُ يُثْمِرُ الْمَحَبَّةَ.

2. Giving sincere advice is a characteristic of the noble ones.

> 2ـ اَلنَّصِيحَةُ مِنْ أخْلاقِ الْكِرامِ.

3. Sometimes advice is given by one who is not sincere.

> 3ـ رُبَّما نَصَحَ غَيْرُ النّاصِحِ.

4. At times one from whom sincere advice is sought, deceives.

> 4ـ رُبَّما غَشَّ الْمُسْتَنْصَحُ.

5. Blessed is the one who follows the adviser who guides him and keeps
away from the misguided person who leads him to destruction.

> 5ـ طُوبى لِمَنْ أطاعَ ناصِحاً يَهْديهِ وتَجَنَّبَ غاوِياً يُرْدِيهِ.

6. He who seeks advice from his enemies is indeed ignorant.

> 6ـ قَدْ جَهِلَ مَنِ اسْتَنْصَحَ أعْدائَهُ.

7. You have been advised so take the advice, you have been shown [the
truth] so see [it], and you have been guided aright so accept the
guidance.

> 7ـ قَدْ نُصِحْتُمُ فَانْتَصِحُوا وبُصِّرْتُمْ فَأبْصِرُوا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأُرْشِدْتُمْ فاسْتَرْشِدُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. You have been guided if you seek guidance and have been admonished if
you seek admonishment and have been advised if you seek advice.

> 8ـ قَدْ دُلِلْتُمْ إنِ اسْتَدْلَلْتُمْ وَوُعِظْتُمْ إنِ اتَّعَظْتُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونُصِحْتُمْ إنِ انْتَصَحْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. How can one who takes pleasure in [acts that bring] disgrace benefit
from sincere advice?!

> 9ـ كَيْفَ يَنْتَفِعُ بِالنَّصِيحَةِ مَنْ يَلْتَذُّ بِالفَضِيحَةِ؟!

10. One who trades with you by [giving you] advice has indeed made your
profit abound.

> 10ـ مَنْ تاجَرَكَ بِالنُّصْحِ فَقَدْ أجْزَلَ لَكَ الرِّبْحَ.

11. One who trades with you in advice is your partner in profit.

> 11ـ مَنْ تاجَرَكَ فِي النُّصْحِ كانَ شَرِيكَكَ فِي الرِّبْحِ.

12. One of the best forms of advice is disclosing the ugly traits [of a
person to him so that he may change].

> 12ـ مِنْ أحْسَنِ النَّصيحَةِ الإبانَةُ عَنِ الْقَبِيحَةِ.

13. Being sincere [in giving advice] is from the best [teachings] of
religion.

> 13ـ مِنْ أحْسَنِ الدّينِ النُّصْحُ.

14. Pointing [people] towards reconciliation is the best advice.

> 14ـ مِنْ أفْضَلِ النُّصْحِ اَلإشارَةُ بِالصُّلْحِ.

15. The bitterness of sincere advice is more beneficial than the
sweetness of deceit.

> 15ـ مَرارَةُ النُّصْحِ أنْفَعُ مِنْ حَلاوَةِ الغِـشِّ.

16. Your sincere adviser is concerned about you, shows kindness to you,
considers your outcomes and rectifies of your shortcomings; so in
obedience to him lies your development and in opposition to him, your
corruption.

> 16ـ مُناصِحُكَ مُشْفِقٌ عَلَيْكَ مُحْسِنٌ إلَيْكَ ناظِرٌ في عَواقِبِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُسْتَدْرِكٌ فَوارِطَكَ فَفِي طاعَتِهِ رَشادُكَ وفي مُخالَفَتِهِ
فَسادُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Your advice [when given] in front of other people is [considered] a
rebuke.

> 17ـ نُصْحُكَ بَيْنَ الْمَلاءِ تَقْرِيعٌ.

18. Never reject the [advice of a] sincere adviser and never assume the
one who counsels you to be a deceiver.

> 18ـ لاتَرُدَّنَّ عَلَى النَّصِيحِ ولاتَسْتَغِشَّنَّ المُشِيرَ.

19. Do not take advice from one who has lost his senses and do not trust
one who has an ignoble background, for indeed the one who has lost his
senses deceives while he thinks he is offering good advice, and one who
has an ignoble background corrupts while he thinks he is rectifying.

> 19ـ لاتَنْتَصِحْ بِمَنْ فاتَهُ الْعَقْلُ ولاتَثِقْ بِمَنْ خانَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأصْلُ فَإنَّ مَنْ فاتَهُ الْعَقْلُ يَغُشُّ مِنْ حَيْثُ يَنْصَحُ
ومَنْ خانَهُ الأصْلُ يُفْسِدُ مِنْ حَيْثُ يُصْلِحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. There is no sincerity like [giving] sincere advice.

> 20ـ لاإخْلاصَ كَالنُّصـْحِ.

21. There is no admonisher more effective than sincere advice.

> 21ـ لاواعِظَ أبْلَغُ مِنَ النُّصْحِ.

22. There is no good in a community that does not sincerely advise [each
other] and does not love sincere advisers.

> 22ـ لاخَيْـرَ في قَوْم لَيْسُوا بِناصِحينَ ولا يُحِبُّونَ النّاصِحينَ.

23. The wicked one does not sincerely advise anyone except out of desire
or fear, so when the desire or fear disappears, he returns to his true
nature.

> 23ـ لا يَنْصَحُ اللَّئِيمُ أحَداً إلاّ عَنْ رَغْبَة أوْ رَهْبَة فَإذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زالَتِ الرَّغْبَةُ والرَّهْبَةُ عادَ إلى جَوْهَرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. People, accept advice from the one who advises you and receive it
from the one who carries it to you with obedience, and know that Allah,
the Glorified, has not praised but the most attentive of hearts to wise
counsel and only those people who are quickest in responding to the
truth; and know that the greater struggle is the struggle against one’s
self, so occupy yourself with struggling against your selves and you
will be felicitous, reject idle talk and you will be safe, increase in
your remembrance of Allah and you will gain, [and] be brothers to each
other, O servants of Allah, and you will be prosperous with the
everlasting bounty [of Allah].

> 24ـ يا أيُّها النّاسُ اِقْبَلُوا النَّصيحَةَ مِمَّنْ نَصَحَكَمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتَلَقَّوْها بِالطّاعَةِ مِمَّنْ حَمَلَها إلَيْكُمْ، واعْلَمُوا أنَّ
اللّهَ سُبْحانَهُ لَمْ يَمْدَحْ مِنَ القُلُوبِ إلاّ أوْعاها
لِلْحِكْمَةِ، ومِنَ النّاسِ إلاّ أسْرَعَهُمْ إلَى الْحَقِّ إجابَةً،
واعْلَمُوا أنَّ الْجِهادَ الأكْبَرِ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ، فَاشْتَغِلُوا
بِجِهادِ أنْفُسِكُمْ تَسْعَدُوا، وارْفَضُوا القالَ والقيلَ تَسْلَمُوا،
وأكْثِرُوا ذِكْرَ اللّهِ تَغْنَمُوا، وَكُونُوا عِبادَ اللّهِ إخْواناً
تَسْعَدُوا لَدَيْهِ بِالنَّعِيمِ المُقِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. There is no advice like warning [against evil].

> 25ـ لانُصْحَ كَالتَّحْذِيرِ.

26. One who disobeys his sincere adviser has assisted his adversary.

> 26ـ مَنْ عَصى نَصِيحَهُ نَصَرَ ضِدَّهُ.

27. One who turns towards the sincere adviser turns away from evil.

> 27ـ مَنْ أقْبَلَ عَلَى النَّصِيحِ أعْرَضَ عَنِ القَبِيحِ.

28. One who considers the sincere adviser to be a deceiver is engulfed
by evil.

> 28ـ مَنِ اسْتَغَشَّ النَّصِيحَ غَشِيَهُ القَبيـحُ.

29. One who shuns the advice of a sincere adviser is burnt by the evil
schemes of the one who harbours enmity against him.

> 29ـ مَنْ أعْرَضَ عَنْ نَصِيحَةِ النَّاصِحِ أُحْرِقَ بِمَكِيدَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكاشِحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

30. Whoever opposes [good] advice, perishes.

> 30ـ مَنْ خالَفَ النُّصْحَ هَلَكَ.

31. At times the [only] benefit a sincere adviser gains [for his advice]
is suspicion [about his motives].

> 31ـ قَدْ يَسْتَفِيدُ الظِّنَّـةَ النّاصِحُ.

32. The one from whom [good] advice is sought may at times deceive.

> 32ـ قَدْ يَغُشُّ الْمُسْتَنْصِحُ.

33. At times one who is not a sincere adviser may give good advice.

> 33ـ قَدْ يَنْصَحُ غَيْرُ النّاصِحِ.

34. How can one who deceives himself give sincere advice to others?

> 34ـ كَيْفَ يَنْصَحُ غَيْرَهُ مَنْ يَغُشَّ نَفْسَهُ؟!

35. Sometimes the reliable advisor may betray [you] and the one who is
[deemed] disloyal may give good advice.

> 35ـ لَرُبَّما خانَ النَّصِيحُ المُؤْتَمَنُ ونَصَحَ المُسْتَخانُ.

36. Whoever gives you sincere advice has indeed helped you.

> 36ـ مَنْ نَصَحَكَ فَقَدْ أنْجَدَكَ.

37. Do not deceive the one who seeks advice from you.

> 37ـ مَنِ اسْتَنْصَحَكَ فَلا تَغُشَّهُ.

38. One who gives you sincere advice has shown concern for you.

> 38ـ مَنْ نَصَحَكَ أشْفَقَ عَلَيْكَ.

39. He who deems the sincere adviser to be a deceiver, considers evil to
be good.

> 39ـ مَنِ اسْتَغَشَّ النَّصِيحَ اِسْتَحْسَنَ القَبِيحَ.

40. One who accepts [good] advice remains safe from disgrace.

> 40ـ مَنْ قَبِلَ النَّصيحَةَ أمِنَ مِنَ الفَضِيحَةِ.

41. Sincere advice reaps affection.

> 41ـ النَّصِيحَةُ تُثْمِرُ الْوُدَّ.


