The Hypocrite
=============

**The Hypocrite-المنافق**

1. A hypocrite’s tongue pleases but his heart causes harm.

> 1ـ اَلمُنافِقُ لِسانُهُ يَسُرُّ وقَلْبُهُ يَضُرُّ.

2. A hypocrite’s words are beautiful but his actions are a painful
malady.

> 2ـ اَلمُنافِقُ قَوْلُهُ جَمِيلٌ وفِعْلُهُ الدّاءُ الدّخِيلُ.

3. The hypocrite is a shameless, foolish, wretched sycophant.

> 3ـ اَلمُنافِقُ وَقِحٌ غَبِيٌّ مُتَمَلِّقٌ شَقِيٌّ.

4. The hypocrite flatters himself but maligns others.

> 4ـ اَلمُنافِقُ لِنَفْسِهِ مُداهِنٌ وَعَلَى النّاسِ طاعِنٌ.

5. The most obvious of hypocrite among the people is one who enjoins
obedience [to Allah] but does not act upon it himself, and forbids sin
but does not refrain from it himself.

> 5ـ أظْهَرُ النّاسِ نِفاقاً مَنْ أمَرَ بِالطّاعَةِ ولَمْ يَعْمَلْ بِها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونَهى عَنِ المَعْصِيَةِ ولَمْ يَنْتَهِ عَنْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Be cautious of the hypocrites for indeed they are misguided and
misguide others, they have erred and make others err, their hearts are
diseased while their outward appearance looks pure.

> 6ـ اِحْذَرُوا أهْلَ النِّفاقِ، فَإنَّهُمْ الضَّالُّونَ المُضِلُّونَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزّالُّونَ المُزِلُّونَ، قُلُوبُهُمْ دَوِيَّةٌ، وَصِحافُهُمْ
نَقِيَّةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. The hypocrite is sceptical [and puts others in doubt].

> 7ـ اَلمُنافِقُ مُريبٌ.

8. The hypocrite is sly, harmful and suspicious.

> 8ـ اَلمُنافِقُ مَكُورٌ مُضِرٌّ، مُرْتابٌ.

9. I fear for you from every eloquent speaker who is a hypocrite at
heart, he says what you know [to be good] but does what you dislike [and
know to be bad].

> 9ـ إنّي أخافُ عَلَيْكُمْ كُلَّ عَليمِ اللِّسانِ مُنافِقِ الجِنانِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُ ماتَعْلَمُونَ وَيَفْعَلُ ما تُنْكِرونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. He (‘a) described the hypocrites thus: they are jealous of [those
in] comfort, intensify [the] distress [of the distressed] and destroy
hopes [of the hopeful]. Their fallen victims are lying on every path,
they have means to approach every heart and they have false tears for
every [occasion of] grief.

> 10ـ وقالَ ـ عَلَيْهِ السّلامُ ـ في وَصْفِ المنافِقينَ: حَسَدُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّخاءِ ومُؤَكِّدُوا البَلاءِ، ومُقْنِطُوا الرَّجاءِ، لَهُمْ بِكُلِّ
طَريق صَريعٌ، وإلى كُلِّ قَلْبِ شَفيعٌ، وَلِكُلِّ شَجْو دُمُوعٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. It is the habit of hypocrites to change their character [depending
on their circumstances].

> 11ـ عادَةُ المُنافِقينَ تَهْزيعُ الأخْلاقِ.

12. He (‘a) said about the hypocrites: They have indeed prepared for
every truth a falsehood, and for every straight thing something crooked,
and for every living thing a killer, and for every [closed] door a key,
and for every night a lamp.

> 12ـ وقالََ ـ عَلَيْهِ السّلامُ ـ في ذِكْرِ المُنافِقينَ: قَدْ أعَدُّوا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكُلِّ حَقّ باطِلاً ولِكُلِّ قائِم مائِلاً ولِكُلِّ حَىّ قاتِلاً
ولِكُلِّ باب مِفْتاحاً ولِكُلِّ لَيْل صَباحاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. Every hypocrite is a sceptic [who puts doubts in the minds of the
people].

> 13ـ كُلُّ مُنافِق مُريبٌ.

14. One whose hypocrisy abounds, his sincerity will not be recognized.

> 14ـ مَنْ كَثُرَ نِفاقُهُ لَمْ يُعْرَفْ وِفاقُهُ.

15. How repulsive is it for a human being to agree externally while
being hypocritical internally.

> 15ـ ما أقْبَحَ بِالإنْسانِ ظاهِراً مُوافِقاً وباطِناً مُنافِقاً.

16. How repulsive it is for a human being to be two-faced.

> 16ـ ما أقْبَحَ بِالإنْسانِ أنْ يَكُونَ ذا وَجْهَيْنِ.

17. The example of the hypocrite is that of a colocynth, its leaves are
green but its taste is bitter.

> 17ـ مَثَلُ المُنافِقِ كَالحَنْظَلَةِ الخَضِرَةِ أوْراقُها اَلمُرِّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَذاقُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. The hypocrisy of a person stems from the inferiority [and
humiliation] he finds within himself.

> 18ـ نِفاقُ المَرْءِ مِنْ ذُلّ يَجِدُهُ في نَفْسِهِ.

19. About the hypocrites [he (’a) said]: They are the congregation of
Satan and the dwellers of hellfire. These are the party of Satan, and
indeed it is the party of Satan who are the losers.

> 19ـ في ذِكْرِ المُنافِقينَ: هُمْ لُمَّةُ الشَّيْطانِ وحُمَّةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النِّيرانِ أُولئِكَ حِزْبُ الشَّيْطانِ اَلا إنَّ حِزْبَ الشَّيْطانِ
هُمُ الخاسِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. They walk stealthily and tread slowly, hiding behind trees. Their
words are [like] a cure but their actions are incurable diseases. They
exchange praise [with each other] and come near each other through (or
are careful of) reward. They obtain what they covet by means of despair.
When they talk they create doubts, they dissemble in their speech and
when they speak they delude (or distort).

> 20ـ يَمْشُونَ الخِفاءَ ويَدُبُّونَ الضَّرّاءَ قَوْلُهُمُ الدَّواءُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفِعْلُهُمُ الدّاءُ العَياءُ يَتَقارَضُونَ الثَّناءَ ويَتَقارَبُونَ
(يتراقبون) الجَزاءَ يَتَوَصَّلُونَ إلَى الطَّمَعِ بِاليَأْسِ
وَيَقُولُونَ فَيُشَبِّهُونَ يُنافِقُونَ فِي المَقالِ ويَقُولُونَ
فَيُوهِمُونَ (فَيُمَوِّهُون).
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. The [person who is] most severe in his hypocrisy is one who enjoins
obedience but does not act upon it himself, and forbids sin but does not
refrain from it himself.

> 21ـ أشَدُّ النّاسِ نِفاقاً مَنْ أمَرَ بِالطّاعَةِ ولَمْ يَعْمَلْ بِها،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونَهى عَنِ المَعْصِيَةِ ولَمْ يَنْتَهِ عَنْها.
  </p>
</blockquote>


