Admonition
==========

**Admonition-الواعظ والموعظة**

1. Take light from the flame of the preacher who practices what he
preaches, accept advice from the adviser who is vigilant, and act upon
what he teaches you.

> 1ـ اِسْتَصْبِحُوا مِنْ شُعْلَةِ واعِظ مُتَّعِظ، وأقْبَلُوا نَصيحَةَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ناصِح مُتَيَقِّظ، وَقِفُوا عِنْدَ ما أفادَكُمْ مِنَ التَّعْليمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Indeed the most hearing ear is one that listens to admonition and
heeds it.

> 2ـ اَلا إنَّ أسْمَعَ الأسماعِ مَنْ وَعَي التَّذْكيرَ وقَبِلَهُ.

3. The most beneficial of admonitions is that which deters [someone from
sin].

> 3ـ أنْفَعُ المَواعِظِ ما رََدَعَ.

4. The most effective admonition is taking a lesson from the place where
the dead lay.

> 4ـ أبْلَغُ العِظاتِ اَلاِعْتِبارُ بِمَصارِعِ الأمْواتِ.

5. The most effective admonition is looking at the places where the dead
lay, and taking a lesson from the outcome of one’s forefathers and
foremothers.

> 5ـ أبْلَغُ العِظاتِ اَلنَّظَرُ إلى مَصارِعِ الأمْواتِ،وَ الاِعْتِبارُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِمَصائِرِ الآباءِ وَالأُمَّهاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. The most effective adviser for you is this world, if only you took a
lesson from what it shows you of the changing circumstances and what it
informs you of disunion and separation.

> 6ـ أبْلَغُ ناصِح لَكَ الدُّنْيا، لَوِ انْتَصَحْتَ بِما تُريكَ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَغايُرِ الحالاتِ، وَتُؤْذِنُكَ بِهِ مِنَ البَيْنِ والشَّتاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Verily there is a lesson and an admonition in everything for the
people of wisdom and understanding.

> 7ـ إنَّ في كُلِّ شَيْء مَوْعِظَةً وعِبْرَةً لِذَوِى اللُّبِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالاِعْتِبارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Verily the most sincere of people is one who admonishes himself and
is most submissive to his Lord.

> 8ـ إنَّ أنْصَحَ النّاسِ أنْصَحُهُمْ لِنَفْسِهِ، وأطْوَعُهُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِرَبِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Verily the admonition that is neither discarded by the ears nor
matched in benefit is that which is not expressed by the speaking
tongue, rather it is exhibited by the tongue of action.

> 9ـ إنَّ الوَعْظَ الَّذي لايَمُجُّهُ سَمْعٌ، ولايَعْدِلُهُ نَفْعٌ، ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَكَتَ عَنْهُ لِسانُ القَوْلِ، ونَطَقَ بِِهِ لِسانُ الفِعْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Accepting admonition means taking a lesson [and putting into
action].

> 10ـ اَلاِتِّعاظُ اِعْتِبارٌ.

11. Admonitions are the means of enlivening the hearts.

> 11ـ اَلْمَواعِظُ حَياةُ القُلُوبِ.

12. Sincere advice bears the fruit of affection.

> 12ـ اَلنَّصيحَةُ تُثْمِرُ الوُدَّ.

13. Admonition is a curative advice.

> 13ـ اَلْمَوْعِظَةُ نَصيحَةٌ شافِيَةٌ.

14. Admonitions are a sanctuary for one who heeds them.

> 14ـ اَلْمَواعِظُ كَهْفٌ لِمَنْ وَعاها (دَعاها،رَعاها).

15. Admonitions are a remedy for the one who acts upon them.

> 15ـ اَلْمَواعِظُ شِفاءٌ لِمَنْ عَمِلَ بِها.

16. The beneficial admonition is that which deters [from sin].

> 16ـ اَلْوَعْظُ النّافِعُ ما رَدَعَ.

17. Admonitions are the sheen of the souls and the polish of the hearts.

> 17ـ اَلْمَواعِظُ صِقالُ النُّفُوسِ وجَلاءُ القُلُوبِ.

18. Through admonitions heedlessness is dispelled.

> 18ـ بِالمَواعِظِ تَنْجَلِى الغَفْلَةُ.

19. Between you and the admonition there is a veil of heedlessness and
negligence.

> 19ـ بَيْنَكُمْ وبَيْنَ المَوْعِظَةِ حِجابٌ مِنَ الغَفْلَةِ والغِرَّةِ.

20. The fruit of admonition is awareness.

> 20ـ ثَمَرَةُ الوَعْظِ الاِنْتِباهُ.

21. The best of admonitions is that which deters [from sin].

> 21ـ خَيْرُ المَواعِظِ ما رَدَعَ.

22. May Allah have mercy on the person who accepts admonition, is
deterred [from sin] and benefits from the lessons [he has] learnt.

> 22ـ رَحِمَ اللّهُ امْرَءاً اِتَّعَظَ وازْدَجَرَ، وانْتَفَعَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالعِبَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Many a commander [towards good] does not follow [his own] commands.

> 23ـ رُبَّ آمِر غَيْرُ مُؤْتَمِر.

24. Many a preventer [of evil] does not prevent himself [from it].

> 24ـ رُبَّ زاجِر غَيْرُ مُزْدَجِر.

25. Many an admonisher does not [follow his admonishment and] deter
himself [from sin].

> 25ـ رُبَّ واعِظ غَيْرُ مُرْتَدِع.

26. Hearing with the ear does not benefit when the heart is heedless.

> 26ـ سَمْعُ الأُذُنِ لايَنْفَعُ مَعَ غَفْلَةِ القَلْبِ.

27. In admonitions there is polishing of the hearts.

> 27 ـ فِي المَواعِظِ جَلاءُ الصُّدُورِ.

28. Comprehension [and acceptance] of admonitions invites one to
caution, so take admonition from the examples [of the past], and take
lesson from the [sudden] changes in circumstances, and take benefit from
the Warners.

> 28ـ فِطْنَةُ المَواعِظِ تَدْعُو إلى الحَذَرِ، فَاتَّعِظُوا بِالعِبَرِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعْتَبِرُوا بِالغِيَرِ، وَانْتَفِعُوا بِالنُّذُرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

29. For the people who possess intellect, what they experience is
sufficient as an admonition.

> 29ـ كَفى عِظَةً لِذَوِى الألْبابِ ما جَرَّبُوا.

30. One who finds tranquillity in thinking positively about the
[passing] days has not understood the admonitions of time.

> 30ـ لَمْ يَعْقِلْ مَواعِظَ الزَّمانِ مَنْ سَكَنَ إلى حُسْنِ الظَّنِّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالأيّامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

31. Do not shun the one who admonishes you [to good].

> 31ـ مَنْ وَعَظَكَ فَلا تُوحِشْهُ.

32. Whoever admonishes you [to act righteously] has done you a favour.

> 32ـ مَنْ وَعَظَكَ أحْسَنَ إلَيْكَ.

33. Whoever does not take lesson from [what happens to] the people,
Allah makes an example out of him for the people.

> 33ـ مَنْ لَمْ يَتَّعِظْ بِالنّاسِ وَعَظَ اللّهُ النّاسَ بِهِ.

34. Whoever understands the admonitions of time will not be at ease with
positive thoughts about his days.

> 34ـ مَنْ فَهِمَ مَواعِظَ الزَّمانِ لَمْ يَسْكُنْ إلى حُسْنِ الظَّنِّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالأيّامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

35. Admonition is an excellent gift.

> 35ـ نِعْمَ الهَديَّةُ الْمَوعِظَةُ.

36. He (‘a) said about the one whom he was rebuking: He is bold in his
words but falls short in his actions. He rebukes others but flatters
himself. He has been given respite by Allah along with the heedless
ones. He leaves in the morning in the company of sinners without a
[straight] path to follow or a leader to [act as a] guide, without any
clear knowledge or strong faith. He fears death but does not fear loss
[of opportunity to do good deeds for his Hereafter].

> 36ـ وقالَ في ذِكْرِ مَنْ ذَمَّهُ: هُوَ بِالقَوْلِ مُدِلٌّ، ومِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَمَلِ مُقِلٌّ، وَعَلى النّاسِ طاعِنٌ، ولِنَفْسِِهِ مُداهِنٌ، هُوَ
في مُهْلَة مِنَ اللّهِ يَهْوي مَعَ الْغافِلينَ، ويَغْدُو مَعَ
المُذْنِبينَ بِلا سَبيل قاصِد، ولا إمام قائِد ولاعِلْم مُبين، ولادين
مَتين، هُوَ يَخْشَي المَوْتَ ولايَخافُ الفَوْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

37. Never be one of those who do not benefit from admonition unless you
give him a painful punishment, for indeed the intelligent one takes
admonishment from discipline whereas beasts are not deterred except by
beating.

> 37ـ لاتَكُونَنَّ مِمَّنْ لاتَنْفَعُهُ المَوْعِظَةُ إلاّ إذا بالَغْتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في إيلامِهِ، فَإنَّ العاقِلَ يَتَّعِظُ بِالأدَبِ، والبَهائِمَ
لاتَرْتَدِعُ إلاّ بِالضَّرْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

38. people, how much admonition will you be given yet you decline it?
How much have the preachers preached to you, the warners warned you, the
preventers prevented you and the scholars conveyed [the message] you!
The Prophets and Messengers have guided you to the path of salvation,
presented their proof and shown you the clear way. So hasten towards
good deeds and take advantage of the time [you have in this world], for
indeed today there is action without accounting and tomorrow there will
be accounting without action, and the wrongdoers will soon know to what
final place they will return.

> 38ـ يا أيُّهَا النّاسُ إلى كَمْ تُوعَظُونَ ولاتَتَّعِظُونَ؟! فَكَمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ وَعَظَكُمْ الواعِظُونَ، وحَذَّرَكُمْ المُحَذِّرُونَ، وزَجَرَكُمْ
الزّاجِرُونَ، وبَلَّغَكُمُ العالِمُونَ، وَعَلى سَبيلِ النَّجاةِ
دَلَّكُمُ الأنْبياءُ والمُرْسَلُونَ، وأقامُوا عَلَيْكُمُ الحُجَّةَ،
وأوْضَحُوا لَكُمُ المَحَجَّةَ، فَبا دِرُوا العَمَلَ، واغْتَنِمُوا
المَهَلَ، فَإنَّ اليَوْمَ عَمَلٌ ولاحِسابٌ، وغَداً حِسابٌ ولاعَمَلٌ،
وسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذينَ ظَلَمُوا أيَّ مُنْقَلَب يَنْقَِلبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

39. He loves to be obeyed while he disobeys and to be given his full
share while he does not give others their dues. He loves to be described
as generous while he does not give [anything to the needy] and to seek
from others what is due to him while not letting others ask for their
rights from him.

> 39ـ يُحِبُّ أنْ يُطاعَ ويَعْصيَ، ويَسْتَوْفيَ ولا يُوفيَ، يُحِبُّ أنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُوصَفَ بِالسَّخاءِ ولايُعْطى، ويَقْتَضي ولايُقْتَضى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

40. He speaks of the world with the words of the abstemious yet acts in
it with the actions of the desirous.

> 40ـ يَقُولُ فِي الدُّنيا بِقَوْلِ الزّاهِدينَ، ويَعْمَلُ فيها بِعَمَلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرّاغِبينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

41. He manifests the traits of the virtuous yet secretly performs the
actions of the wicked. He hates death because of his numerous sins yet
does not abandon them in his lifetime. He expedites sins but delays
repentance. He loves the righteous ones but does not follow their
actions. He hates the sinful yet he is one of them. He says: ‘Why should
I act and become weary, instead I will sit and aspire.’ He always
hastens towards what perishes and leaves aside that which remains. He is
incapable of being thankful for what he is given yet always seeks more
in what remains. He guides others to the right but deceives himself. He
forbids the people from that which he does not forbid himself from and
enjoins them to perform that which he does not perform. He takes upon
himself more responsibility from people than what is required yet he
neglects from his own soul what is more important [and necessary].

He commands the people but does not follow the commandments [himself]
and he warns them but does not heed the warnings. He hopes for the
reward of an act which he has not performed and feels secure from the
punishment of an act which is undoubtedly a sin. He attracts the
attention of people through his religiousness yet he conceals within
himself the opposite of what he displays. He knows the right that he has
on others but does not recognize the right that others have on him. He
fears for others more than [he fears about] his sins and hopes for
himself more than [he deserves by] his actions. For big things he puts
his hope in Allah but for small things he puts his hope in the people,
so he gives the servant that which he does not give the Lord. He fears
the servants with regards to [the commandments of] his Lord yet does not
fear his Lord with regards to the servants.

> 41ـ يُظْهِرُ شيمَةَ المُحْسِنينَ، ويُبْطِنُ عَمَلَ المُسيئينَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكْرَهُ المَوْتَ لِكَثْرَةِ ذُنُوبِهِ، ولا يَتْرُكُها في حَياتِهِِ،
يُسْلِفُ الذَّنْبَ ويُسَوِّفُ بِالتَّوْبَةِ، يُحِبُّ الصّالِحينَ،
ولايَعْمَلُ أعْمالَهُمْ، ويُبْغِضُ المُسيئينَ وهُوَ مِنْهُمْ، يَقُولُ
لِمَ أعْمَلُ فَأَتَعَنّى، بَلْ أجْلِسُ فَأَتَمَنّى، يُبادِرُ دائِباً
ما يَفْنى، ويَدَعُ ما يَبْقى، يَعْجِزُ عَنْ شُكْرِ ما أُوتيَ،
وَيَبْتَغِى الزِّيادَةَ فيما بَقِيَ يُرشِدُ غَيْرَهُ ويُغْوي نَفْسَهُ،
وَيَنْهَى النّاسَ بِما لا يَنْتَهي، ويَأمُرُهُمْ بِما لا يَأتي
يَتَكَلَّفُ مِنَ النّاسِ ما لَم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْمَرْ ويُضَيِّعُ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ ما هُوَ أكْثَرُ يَأمُرُ النّاسَ
ولايَأْتَمِرُ، ويُحَذِّرُهُمْ ولايَحذَرُ، يَرْجُو ثَوابَ ما لَمْ
يَعْمَلْ ويَأمَنُ عِقابَ جُرْم مُتَيَقِّن، يَسْتَميلُ وُجُوهَ النّاسِ
بِتَدَيُّنِهِ ويُبْطِنُ ضِدَّ ما يُعْلِنُ يَعْرِفُ لِنَفْسِهِ عَلى
غَيْرِه، ولايَعْرِفُ عَلَيْها لِغَيْرِهِ، يَخافُ عَلى غَيْرِهِ
بِأكْثَرَ مِنْ ذَنْبِهِ، وَيَرْجُو لِنَفْسِهِ أكْثَرَ مِنْ عَمَلِهِ،
يَرْجُوا اللّهَ فِي الكَبيرِ، ويَرْجُو العِبادَ فِي الصَّغيرِ،
فَيُعْطِى العَبْدَ ما لايُعْطِى الرَبَّ، يَخافُ العَبيدَ فِي الرَّبِّ،
ولايَخافُ فِي العَبيدِ الرَّبَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

42. The one who accepts admonition has indeed awoken.

> 42ـ قَدْ تَيَقَّظَ مَنِ اتَّعَظَ.


