God-Wariness
============

**God-wariness-التقوى**

1. God-wariness is a fortified stronghold for the one who takes refuge
in it.

> 1ـ اَلتَّقْوى حِصْنٌ حَصينٌ لِمَنْ لَجَأَ إلَيْهِ.

2. God-wariness is the accumulator of [all] purity and chastity.

> 2ـ اَلتَّقْوى جَمّاعُ التَّنَزُّهِ والعَفافِ.

3. God-wariness is the fruit of faith and the sign of certitude.

> 3ـ اَلتَّقْوى ثَمَرَةُ الدّينِ وأمارَةُ اليَقينِ.

4. The exterior of God-wariness is honour in this world while its
interior is honour in the Hereafter.

> 4ـ اَلتَّقْوى ظاهِرُهُ شَرَفُ الدُّنْيا، وباطِنُهُ شَرَفُ الآخِرَةِ.

5. God-wariness is the strongest connection between yourself and Allah
if you hold on to it, and it is a shield against the painful
chastisement [of the Hereafter].

> 5ـ اَلتَّقْوى آكَدُ سَبَب بَيْنَكَ وبيْنَ اللّهِ إنْ أخَذْتَ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجُنَّـةٌ مِن ْ عَذاب أليم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. God-wariness is such that there is no alternative or substitute for
it.

> 6ـ اَلتَّقْوى لاعِوَضَ ولا خَلَفَ فيهِ.

7. God-wariness is for a person to be cautious of all [the things] that
could lead him towards sin.

> 7ـ اَلتَّقْوى أنْ يَتَّقِيَ المَرْءُ كُلَّما يُؤْثِمُهُ.

8. Be God-wary and you will succeed [in this world and the next].

> 8ـ اِتَّقِ تَفُزْ.

9. Fill your heart with God-wariness and oppose your vain desires, [by
this] you will overcome Satan.

> 9ـ أشْعِرْ قَلْبَكَ التَّقْوى، وخالِفِ الهَوى تَغْلِبِ الشَّيْطانَ.

10. Fear Allah with some God-wariness, even if it be little, and place
between yourself and Him a veil [of shame], even if it be thin.

> 10ـ اِتَّقِ اللّهَ بَعْضَ التُّقى وإنْ قَلَّ، واجْعَلْ بَيْنَكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبَيْنَهُ سِتْراً وإنْ رَقَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. Fear Allah by obeying Him, and obey Allah by fearing Him.

> 11ـ اِتَّقِ اللّهَ بِطاعَتِهِ، وأطِعِ اللّهَ بِتَقْواهُ.

12. Be wary of your duty towards Allah, whom you must eventually meet,
and with other than whom you have no ultimate end.

> 12ـ اِتَّقِ اللّهَ الَّذي لا بُدَّ لَكَ مِنْ لِقائِهِ، ولامُنْـتَهى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكَ دُونَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. Be wary of your duty towards Allah with regards to that which He has
created you for.

> 13ـ اِتَّقُوا اللّهَ جِهَةَ ما خَلَقَكُمْ لَهُ.

14. Be wary of your duty towards Allah, [the Lord] who hears when you
speak and knows when you conceal something in your heart.

> 14ـ اِتَّقُوا اللّهَ الَّذي إنْ قُلْتُمْ سَمِعَ، وإنْ أضْمَرْتُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Be wary of your duty towards Allah with the wariness that is due to
Him, and strive to attain His pleasure, and be cautious of what He has
warned you about from His painful chastisement.

> 15ـ اِتَّقُوا اللّهَ حَقَّ تُقاتِهِ، واسْعَوْا في مَرْضاتِهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واحْذَرُوا ما حَذَّرَكُمْ مِنْ أليْمِ عَذابِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. Be wary of your duty towards Allah with the wariness of one who
hears [the message of guidance] hence humbly submits, commits a misdeed
hence confesses [and repents], learns [the truth] hence trembles in
fear, is cautious [about the Hereafter] hence takes the initiative [to
do good] and performs an action and does it well.

> 16ـ اِتِّقُوا اللّهَ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ سَمِعَ فَخَشَعَ، واقْتَرَفَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْتَرَفَ، وعَلِمَ فَوَجِلَ، وحاذَرَ فَبادَرَ، وعَمِلَ فَأحْسَنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Turn to God-wariness, for indeed it is an impenetrable shield.
Whoever turns to it, it protects him and whoever holds on to it, it
preserves him.

> 17ـ اِلْجَأُوا إلَى التَّقْوى فَإنَّهُ جُنَّةٌ مَنيعَةٌ، مَنْ لَجَأَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلَيْها حَصَّنَتْهُ، وَمَنِ اعْتَصَمَ بِها عَصَمَتْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Hold on to God-wariness, for indeed it has a rope with a firm handle
and a stronghold with an insurmountable peak.

> 18ـ اِعْتَصِمُوا بِتَقْوَى اللّهِ، فَإنَّ لَها حَبْلاً وَثيقاً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عُرْوَتُهُ، ومَعْقِلاً مَنيعاً ذُرْوَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. Indeed God-wariness is like trained [and docile] riding mounts with
their riders on them and their reins given to them, so they take them
into Paradise.

> 19ـ اَلا وإنَّ التَّقْوى مَطايا ذُلُل حُمِلَ عَلَيْها أهْلُها،وَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُعْطُوا أزِمَّتَها فَأوْرَدَتْهُمُ الْجَنَّـةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. The most protective shield is God-wariness.

> 20ـ أوْقى جُنَّة اَلتَّقْوى.

21. The most impenetrable fortress of religion is God-wariness.

> 21ـ أمْنَعُ حُصُونِ الدّينِ اَلتَّقْوى.

22. Verily God-wariness is a protection for you in your life and a means
of gaining nearness [to Allah] after your death.

> 22ـ إنَّ التَّقْوى عِصْمَةٌ لَكَ في حَياتِكَ، وزُلْفى لَكَ بَعْدَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَماتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. Verily Allah the Most High has enjoined God-wariness upon you and
has made it the means by which His pleasure is attained by His creation.
So fear Allah, [the Lord] who is closely watching you and in whose grip
are your forelocks.

> 23ـ إنَّ اللّهَ تَعالى أوْصاكُمْ بِالتَّقْوى، وجَعَلَها رِضاهُ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلْقِهِ، فَاتَّقُوا اللّهَ الَّذي أنْتُمْ بِعَيْنِهِ، ونَواصيكُمْ
بِيَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. Verily the wariness of their duty towards Allah has shielded His
friends from what He has forbidden and has made their hearts bound by
His fear, so much so that their nights pass in wakefulness and their
midday’s in thirst; thus they take comfort in hardship and are quenched
by thirst.

> 24ـ إنَّ تَقْوَى اللّهَ حَمَتْ أوْلِياءَهُ مَحارِمَهُ، وألْزَمَتْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلُوبَهُمْ مَخافَتَهُ، حَتّى أسْهَرَتْ لَيالِيَهُمْ، وأظْمَأَتْ
هَواجِرَهُمْ، فَأخَذُوا الرّاحَةَ بِالتَّعَبِ، والرَّيَّ بِالظَّمَأِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Verily the fear of Allah is a provision and a place of return. It is
a provision that takes one to his destination and a prosperous place of
return. The best inviter has called towards it and the most heedful [of
people] have heeded to it. So the inviter has told the people about it
and those who have given heed to it are successful.

> 25ـ إنَّ تَقْوَى اللّهِ هِيَ الزّادُ والمَعادُ، زادٌ مُبَلِّغٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَعادٌ مُنْجِحٌ، دَعا إلَيْها أسْمَعُ داع، ووَعاها خَيْرُ واع،
فَأسْمَعَ داعِيها، وفازَ واعيها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. Verily God-wariness is the right of Allah, the Glorified, upon you
and it necessitates your right over Allah, so seek Allah’s help to
achieve it and use it as a means of attaining proximity to Allah.

> 26ـ إنَّ التَّقْوى حَقُّ اللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ عَلَيْكُمْ، والمُوجِبَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى اللّهِ حَقَّكُمْ، فَاسْتَعينُوا بِاللّهِ عَلَيْها، وتَوَسَّلُوا
إلَى اللّهِ بِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

27. Verily the fear of Allah [and God-wariness] has continually
presented itself to the people of the past and those who came after
them, because they will [all] need it tomorrow when Allah resurrects
what He has created and takes back what He has given; but how few are
those who undertake it the way it deserves to be undertaken!

> 27ـ إنَّ تَقْوَى اللّهِ لَمْ تَزَلْ عارِضَةً نَفْسَها عَلَى الأُمَمِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الماضينَ والغابِرينَ، لِحاجَتِهِمْ إلَيْها غَداً إذا أعادَ اللّهُ ما
أبْدَأَ وأخَذَ ما أعْطى، فَما أقَلَّ مَنْ حَمَلَها حَقَّ حَمْلِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

28. Verily the fear of Allah has a rope with a firm handle and a
stronghold with an insurmountable peak.

> 28ـ إنَّ لِتَقْوَى اللّهِ حَبْلاً وَثيقاً عُرْوَتُهُ، وَمَعْقِلاً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِيعاً ذُرْوَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

29. Indeed God-wariness makes Allah most pleased with His servants and
it is what He demands from His creation. So be wary of your duty towards
Allah who knows what you do in secret and records what you do openly.

> 29ـ إنَّ التَّقْوى مُنْتَهى رِضَى اللّهِ مِنْ عِبادِهِ، وحاجَتِهِ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلْقِهِ، فَاتَّقُوا اللّهَ الَّذي إنْ أسْرَرْتُمْ عَلِمَهُ، وإنْ
أعْلَنْتُمْ كَتَبَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

30. Verily God-wariness is a strong fortress [of protection] for the one
who takes refuge in it, and impiety is the dilapidated fortress [of
humiliation] which does not protect its people and does not offer
security to the one who takes refuge in it.

> 30ـ إنَّ التَّقْوى دارُ حِصْن عَزيْز لِمَنْ لَجَأَ إلَيْهِ، والفُجُورُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دارُ حِصْن ذَليل لايُحْرِزُ أهْلَهُ ولايَمْنَعُ مَنْ لَجَأَ إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

31. Verily God-wariness is today a safeguard and a shield, and tomorrow
[it is] a pathway to Paradise; its path is clear and the one who travels
on it, gains.

> 31ـ إنَّ التَّقْوى فِي اليَوْمِ الحِرْزُ والْجُنَّةُ، وفي غَد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلطَّريقُ إلَى الجَنَّةِ، مَسْلَكُها واضِحٌ وسالِكُها رابِـحٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

32. Indeed the fear of Allah is the maintainer of faith and the pillar
of certitude, and it is surely the key to righteousness and the lamp of
success.

> 32ـ إنَّ تَقْوَى اللّهِ عِمارَةُ الدّينِ، وَعِمادُ اليَقينِ، وإنَّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمِفْتاحُ صَلاح، ومِصْباحُ نَجاح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

33. Verily the one who has been shown what is in front of him by the
examples of the exemplary punishments of the past is prevented by
God-wariness from falling into doubts.

> 33ـ إنَّ مَنْ صَرَّحَتْ لَهُ العِبَرُ عَمّا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المَثُلاتِ حَجَزَهُ التَّقْوى عَنْ تَقَحُّمِ الشُّبَهاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

34. Verily the one who abandons God-wariness is lured by pleasures and
lustful desires, and falls into the wilderness of sins and is constantly
plagued by grave (or many) [evil] consequences.

> 34ـ إنَّ مَن فارَقَ التَّقْوى أُغْريَ بِاللَّذّاتِ والشَّهَواتِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووَقَعَ في تيهِ السَّيِّئاتِ، ولَزِمَهُ كَبيرُ (كَثيرُ) التَّبِعاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

35. Indeed the fear of Allah is a key to rightness, a store for the
Hereafter, emancipation from every [form of] bondage and safety from
every destruction. Through it the runaway is rescued, what is sought is
attained and what is desired [of the Hereafter] is acquired.

> 35ـ إنَّ تَقْوَى اللّهِ مِفْتاحُ سَداد، وذَخيرَةُ مَعاد، وعِتْقٌ مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلِّ مَلَكَة، وَنَجاةٌ مِنْ كُلِّ هَلَكَة، بِها يَنْجُوالهارِبُ،
وتُنْجَحُ المَطالِبُ، وَتُنالُ الرَّغائِبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

36. God-wariness dignifies, immorality disgraces.

> 36ـ اَلتَّقْوى تُعِزُّ، اَلْفُجُورُ يُذِلُّ.

37. God-wariness is eschewal [of the forbidden].

> 37ـ اَلتَّقْوى اِجْتِنابٌ.

38. God-wariness is the best provision.

> 38ـ اَلتَّقْوى خَيْرُ زاد.

39. God-wariness is the most fruitful cultivation

> 39ـ اَلتَّقْوى أزْكى زِراعَة.

40. God-wariness is the cornerstone [all] of good deeds.

> 40ـ اَلتَّقْوى رَأسُ الحَسَناتِ.

41. God-wariness is the leader of moral virtues.

> 41ـ اَلتَّقْوى رَئِيسُ الأخْلاقِ.

42. God-wariness is a fortified stronghold.

> 42ـ اَلتَّقْوى حِصْنٌ حَصيْنٌ.

43. God-wariness is the reserve for the place of return [in the
Hereafter].

> 43ـ اَلتَّقْوى ذَخِيرَةُ مَعاد.

44. God-wariness is the strongest foundation.

> 44ـ اَلتَّقْوى أقْوى أساس.

45. God-wariness is the key to uprightness.

> 45ـ اَلتَّقْوى مِفْتاحُ الصَّلاحِ.

46. God-wariness is the fortress of the believer.

> 46ـ اَلتَّقْوى حِصْنُ المُؤْمِنِ.

47. God-wariness is a safeguard for the one who adopts it.

> 47ـ اَلتَّقْوى حِرْزٌ لِمَنْ عَمِلَ بِها.

48. God-wariness is the strongest fortress and the most protective
sanctuary.

> 48ـ اَلتَّقْوى أوْفَقُ حِصْن وأوْقى (أوْفى)حِرْز.

49. If you fear Allah, He will protect you.

> 49ـ اِنِ اتَّقَيْتَ اللّهَ وَقاكَ.

50. Indeed you are in greater need of the provisions of God-wariness
than you are of the provisions of this world.

> 50ـ إنَّكُمْ إلى أزْوادِالتَّقْوى أحْوَجُ مِنْكُمْ إلى أزْوادِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنْيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

51. When you [wish to] guard yourself, then be wary of the things that
Allah has forbidden.

> 51ـ إذَا اتَّقَيْتَ فَاتَّقِ مَحارِمَ اللّهِ.

52. The sting (or blackness) of sins is cut off by God-wariness.

> 52ـ بِالتَّقْوى تُقْطَعُ حُمَةُ (حُمَّةُ) الخَطايا.

53. It is with God-wariness that preservation from sin has been paired.

> 53ـ بِالتَّقْوى قُرِنَتِ العِصْمَةُ.

54. Through God-wariness, actions become pure.

> 54ـ بِالتَّقْوى تَزْكُوا الأعْمالُ.

55. The garment of God-wariness is the most honourable of attires.

> 55ـ ثَوْبُ التُّقى أشْرَفُ المَلابِسِ.

56. Treat your [spiritual] ailments with God-wariness and anticipate
[and prepare for] your death by it; take a lesson from those who have
neglected it and ensure that those who heed to it do not take a lesson
from you [for having neglected it].

> 56ـ داوُوا بِالتَّقْوَى الأسْقامَ، وبادِروا بِها الحِمامَ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعْتَبِرُوا بِمَنْ أضاعَها، ولايَعْتَبِرَنَّ بِكُمْ مَنْ أطاعَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

57. The cornerstone of God-wariness is abandoning lustful desires.

> 57ـ رَأسُ التَّقْوى تَرْكُ الشَّهْوَةِ.

58. The cause of the probity of [one’s] faith is God-wariness.

> 58ـ سَبَبُ صَلاحِ الإيمانِ التَّقْوى.

59. The probity of God-wariness is [in] eschewing doubt.

> 59ـ صَلاحُ التَّقْوى تَجَنُّبُ الرَّيْبِ.

60. Blessed is the one who fills his heart with God-wariness.

> 60ـ طُوبى لِمَنْ أشْعَرَ التَّقْوى قَلْبَهُ.

61. Espouse God-wariness, for indeed it is the character of the
Prophets.

> 61ـ عَلَيْكَ بِالتُّقى فَإنَّهُ خُلُقُ الأنْبِياءِ.

62. Espouse God-wariness, for indeed it is the most honourable
distinction.

> 62ـ عَلَيْكَ بِالتَّقْوى فَإنَّهُ أشْرَفُ نَسـَب.

63. Espouse God-wariness in hiding and in the open, and adhere to the
truth in anger and pleasure.

> 63ـ عَلَيْكَ بِتَقْوَى اللّهِ فِي الغَيْبِ والشَّهادَةِ، ولُزُومِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَقِّ فِي الغَضَبِ وَالرِّضا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

64. Espouse God-wariness, for it is indeed the best provision and the
most protective accoutrement.

> 64ـ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالتَّقْوى فَإنَّهُ خَيْرُ زاد،وَ أحْرَزُ عَتاد.

65. So be wary of [your duty towards] Allah with the God-wariness of one
who listens hence humbles himself, who commits [a sin] hence he
confesses, who becomes afraid hence he performs virtuous acts and is
cautious hence he hastens [towards good deeds].

> 65ـ فَاتَّقُوا اللّهَ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ سَمِعَ فَخَشَعَ، واقْتَرَفَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْتَرَفَ، ووَجِلَ فَعَمِلَ وَحاذَرَ فَبادَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

66. So be wary of [your duty towards] Allah with the God-wariness of one
who attains certitude hence he does good, who is given lesson [from the
happenings of this world] so he takes it, who is warned so he desists,
who is shown [the right path] so he sees [it], and who fears the
chastisement [of the Hereafter] and works for the Day of Reckoning.

> 66ـ فَاتَّقُوا اللّهَ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ أيْقَنَ فَأحْسَنَ، وعُبِّرَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْتَـبَرَ، وحُذِّرَ فَازْدَجَرَ، وَبُصِّرَ فَاسْتَبْصَرَ، وخافَ
العِقابَ وعَمِلَ لِيَوْمِ الحِسابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

67. So be wary of [your duty towards] Allah, O servants of Allah, with
the God-wariness of one who has preoccupied his heart with reflection,
who [always] has the remembrance [of Allah] on his tongue and who
advances [good deeds out of] fear for his safety [in the Hereafter].

> 67ـ فَاتَّقُوا اللّهَ عِبادَ اللّهِ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ شَغَلَ بِالفِكْرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَلْبَهُ،وَ أوْجَفَ الذِّكْرُ بِلِسانِهِ، وقَدَّمَ الخَوْفَ لأمانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

68. So fear Allah in relation to the purpose for which He has created
you, and be cautious of [your duty towards] Him just as He has warned
you of Himself. Make yourself deserving of what He has promised you by
having confidence in the truth of His promise and being afraid of the
terror of Day of Resurrection.

> 68ـ فَاتَّقُوااللّهَ جِهَةَ ما خَلَقَكُمْ لَهُ واحْذَرُوا مِنْهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْهَ ما حَذَّرَكُمْ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ، واسْتَحِقُّوا مِنْهُ ما أعَدَّ
لَكُمْ بِالتَّنَجُّزِ لِصِدْقِ ميعادِهِ، والحَذَرِ مِنْ هَوْلِ
مَعادِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

69. So be wary of [your duty towards] Allah, O servants of Allah, with
the God-wariness of one who tucks up his clothes in preparation [for
fulfilling the commandments of Allah] and makes great effort, who acts
quickly during the short period [he has] and hurries out of fear [of
losing the opportunity].

> 69ـ فَاتَّقُوا اللّهَ عِبادَ اللّهِ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ شَمَّرَ تَجْريراً،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجَدَّ تَشْميراً، وأكْمَشَ في مَهَل، وبادَرَ عَنْ وَجَل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

70. So be wary of [your duty towards] Allah with the God-wariness of one
who thinks about returning towards the Hereafter, the end [and
consequence] of his life’s journey and the place of his [final] return,
so he remedies his past errors and increases his righteous actions.

> 70ـ فَاتَقُوا اللّهَ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ نَظَرَ في كَرَّةِ المَوْئِلِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعاقِبَةِ المَصْدَرِ، ومَغَبَّةِ المَرْجَعِ فَتَدارَكَ فارِطَ
الزَّلَلِ، واسْتَكْثَرَ مِنْ صالِحِ العَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

71. Increased God-wariness is a symbol of abundant piety.

> 71ـ كَثْرَةُ التُّقى عُنْوانُ وُفُورِ الوَرَعِ.

72. Whoever would like success in the Hereafter should espouse
God-wariness.

> 72ـ مَنْ أحَبَّ فَوْزَ الآخِرَةِ فَعَلَيْهِ بِالتَّقْوى.

73. Whoever takes off the attire of God-wariness will not be able to
cover himself with anything from the devices (and means) of this world.

> 73ـ مَنْ تَعَرّى عَنْ لِباسِ التَّقْوى لَمْ يَسْتَتِرْ بِشَيْء مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْبابِ (أسْبابِ) الدُّنْيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

74. Whoever puts on the attires of God-wariness, his garments will not
get worn out.

> 74ـ مَنْ تَسَرْبَلَ أثْوابَ التُّقى لَمْ يَبْلُ سِرْبالُهُ.

75. Nothing reforms faith like God-wariness.

> 75ـ ما أصْلَحَ الدّينَ كَالتَّقْوى.

76. The basis of God-wariness is rejection of this world.

> 76ـ مِلاكُ التُّقى رَفْضُ الدُّنْيا.

77. Guided is the one who fills his heart with God-wariness.

> 77ـ هُدِيَ مَنْ أشْعَرَ التَّقْوى قَلْبَهُ.

78. And fear Allah, who is justified [in punishing you for disobedience]
by the warning He has issued, and has a strong argument because He has
made the [right] path clear and has warned you of the enemy who enters
into the hearts stealthily and whispers secrets in the ears.

> 78ـ واتَّقُوا اللّهَ الَّذي أعْذَرَ (بِما أنْذَرَ)، واحْتَجَّ بِما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَهَجَ، وحَذَّرََّكُمْ عَدُوّاً نَفَذَ فِي الصُّدُورِ خَفِيّاً،
ونَفَثَ فِي الآذانِ نَجِيّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

79. Neither [should you] advance nor retreat except with the fear of
Allah and in obedience to Him, [in this way] you will become victorious
by attaining success and [finding] the right way.

> 79ـ لاتُقْدِمْ ولاتُجْحِمْ إلاّ عَلى تَقْوَى اللّهِ وطاعَتِهِ تَظْفَرْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالنُّجْحِ وَالنَّهْجِ القَويمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

80. There is no honour like God-wariness.

> 80ـ لاكَرَمَ كَالتَّقْوى.

81. There is no provision like God-wariness.

> 81ـ لازادَ كَالتَّقْوى.

82. There is no God-wariness like desisting from the forbidden.

> 82ـ لاتَقْوى كَالْكَفِّ عَنِ المَحارِمِ.

83. There is no fortress more impenetrable than God-wariness.

> 83ـ لاحِصْنَ أمْنَعُ مِنَ التَّقْوى.

84. The thing that is rooted in God-wariness is never destroyed and the
plant that grows on it never remains thirsty.

> 84ـ لايَهْلِكُ عَلَى التَّقْوى سِنْخُ أصْل، ولايَظْمَأُ عَلَيْها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَرْعٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

85. There is no dignity loftier than God-wariness.

> 85ـ لاشَرَفَ أعْلى مِنَ التَّقْوى.

86. The most virtuous of you is the most God-wary among you.

> 86ـ أبَرُّكُمْ أتْقاكُمْ.

87. Do not dishonour the one who has been elevated by God-wariness.

> 87ـ لاتَضَعْ مَنْ رَفَعَتْهُ التَّقْوى.

88. Be wary of [your duty towards] Allah with the God-wariness of one
who was called so he answered, who was penitent so he returned back, who
was warned so he became cautious, who passed by [a place] so he took
lessons [from it] and who feared so he remained safe.

> 88ـ اِتَّقُوا اللّهَ تَقِيَّةَ مَنْ دُعِيَ فَأجابَ وتابَ فَأنابَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحُذِّرَ فَحَذِرَ وعَبَرَ فَاعْتَـبَرَ وَخافَ فَأمِنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


