Struggling Against The Self (Jihad An-Nafs)
===========================================

**Struggling against the Self (Jihad an-Nafs) جهاد النفس**

1. Indeed *Jihād* is the price of Paradise, so the one who struggles
against his self will acquire it, and this is the greatest reward of
Allah for the one who is cognizant of it.

> 1ـ ألا وإنَّ الجِهادَ ثَمَنُ الجَنَّةِ، فَمَنْ جاهَدَ نَفْسَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَلَكَها، وهِيَ أكْرَمُ ثَوابِ اللّهِ لِمَنْ عَرَفَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. The best *Jihād* is the struggle of a man against his [carnal] soul.

> 2ـ أفْضَلُ الجِهادِ مُجاهَدَةُ المَرْءِ نَفْسَهُ.

3. The best *Jihād* is the struggle of the self against lustful desires,
and its weaning away from the pleasures of this world.

> 3ـ أفْضَلُ الجِهادِ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ عَنِ الهَوى، وفِطامُها عَنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَذّاتِ الدُّنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. The first thing that you disavow from *Jihād* is struggling against
your selves.

> 4ـ أوَّلُ ما تُنْكِرُونَ مِنَ الجِهادِ، جِهادُ أنْفُسِكُمْ.

5. The last things that you [should] lose are: the struggling against
your selves and obedience to those who have authority among you.

> 5ـ آخِرُ ما تَفْقِدُونَ مُجاهَدَةُ أهْوائِكُمْ وطاعَةُ أُولِي الأَمْرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Indeed the best *Jihād* is the struggle of a man against his [carnal]
soul.

> 6ـ إنَّ أفْضَلَ الجِهادِ مُجاهَدَةُ الرَّجُلِ نَفْسَهُ.

7. Verily struggling against the self restrains it from sins and
protects it from destruction.

> 7ـ إنَّ مُجاهَدَةَ النَّفْسِ لَتَزِمُّها عَنِ المَعاصِي، وتَعْصِمُها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الرَّدى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Verily the one who struggles with his [lower] self, in obedience to
Allah and against disobedience to Him, has the status of a virtuous
martyr in the sight of Allah.

> 8ـ إنَّ المُجاهِدَ نَفْسَهُ عَلى طاعَةِ اللّهِ وَعَنْ مَعاصِيهِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِنْدَاللّهِ سُبْحانَهُ بِمَنْزِلَةِ بَرّ شَهيد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. Indeed the one who struggles against his [lower] self, overcomes his
anger and is careful in obeying [the commandments of] Allah, is raised
by Allah, the Glorified, to the status of the one who fasts by day and
stands in prayer by night, and is granted the rank of the patient
soldier [who fights in His way].

> 9ـ إنَّ المُجاهِدَ نَفْسَهُ، والمُغالِبَ غَضَبَهُ، والمُحافِظَ عَلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طاعَةِ رَبِّهِ، يَرْفَعُ اللّهُ سُبْحانَهُ لَهُ ثَوابَ الصَّائِمِ
القائِمِ ويُنيلُهُ دَرَجَةَ المُرابِطِ الصّابِرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

10. Verily if you struggle against your [lower] self you will obtain the
pleasure of Allah.

> 10ـ إنَّكَ إنْ جاهَدْتَ نَفْسَكَ حُزْتَ رِضَى اللّهِ.

11. The fruit of struggle [against the self] is overpowering the self.

> 11ـ ثَمَرَةُ المُجاهَدَةِ قَهْرُ النَّفْسِ.

12. Struggling against the self is the dowry for Paradise.

> 12ـ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ مَهْرُ الجَنَّةِ.

13. Struggling against vain desires is the price of Paradise.

> 13ـ جِهادُ الهَوى ثَمَنُ الجَنَّةِ.

14. Struggling against the self is the best *Jihad*.

> 14ـ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ أفْضَلُ جِهاد.

15. Struggle against your [lower] self and seek repentance, you will be
successful in the obedience of your Lord.

> 15ـ جاهِدْ نَفْسَكَ، وَقَدِّمْ تَوْبَتَكَ، تَفُزْ بِطاعَةِ رَبِّكَ.

16. Struggle against your vain desires, overcome your anger and resist
your bad habits, [by this] your soul will become pure, your intellect
will become perfect and the reward of your Lord will be complete.

> 16ـ جاهِدْ شَهْوَتَكَ، وغالِبْ غَضَبَك،وَخالِفْ سُوءَ عادَتِكَ، تَزْكُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَفْسُكَ، ويَكْمُلْ عَقْلُكَ، وتَسْتَكْمِلْ ثَوابَ رَبِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. Fight against your [lower] self in obedience to Allah the way an
enemy would fight his enemy, and overpower it the way a rival would
overpower his opponent, for indeed the strongest person is the one who
subdues his self.

> 17ـ جاهِدْ نَفْسَكَ عَلى طاعَةِ اللّهِ مُجاهَدَة العَدُوِّ عَدُوَّهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وغالِبْها مُغالَبَةَ الضِّدِّ ضِدَّهُ، فَإنَّ أقْوىَ النّاسِ مَنْ
قَوِيَ على نَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. Struggle against your [lower] self and call it to account the way a
partner would hold his partner accountable, and demand from it the right
of Allah the way an adversary would demand from his foe, for verily the
most felicitous of people is the one who undertakes to hold his self to
account.

> 18ـ جاهِدْ نَفْسَكَ وحاسِبْها مُحاسَبَةَ الشَّريكِ شَريكَهُ وطالِبْها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِحُقُوقِ اللّهِ مُطالَبَةَ الخَصْمِ خَصْمَهُ، فَإنَّ أسْعَدَ النّاسِ
مَنِ انْتَدَبَ لِمحاسَبَةِ نَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. Struggling against the [lower] self is the price of Paradise, so the
one who struggles against it will acquire it, and this is the greatest
reward of Allah for the one who is cognizant of it.

> 19ـ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ ثَمَنُ الجَنَّةِ، فَمَنْ جاهَدَها مَلَكَها وهِيَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أكْرَمُ ثَوابِ اللّهِ لِمَنْ عَرَفَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. Struggling against the self with knowledge is a symbol of
intelligence.

> 20ـ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ بِالعِلْمِ عُنْوانُ العَقْلِ.

21. Fighting anger with forbearance is evidence of nobility.

> 21ـ جِهادُ الغَضَبِ بِالحِلْمِ بُرْهانُ النُّبْلِ.

22. The most excellent *Jihād* is struggling against the self.

> 22ـ خَيْرُ الجِهادِ جِهادُ النَّفْسِ.

23. The highest form of struggle is for a man to struggle against his
self.

> 23ـ غايَةُ المُجاهَدَةِ أنْ يُجاهِدَ المَرْءُ نَفْسَهُ.

24. It is sufficient for you, in your struggle against your [lower]
self, that you always prevail over it and fight its vain desires.

> 24ـ كَفاكَ في مُجاهَدَةِ نَفْسِكَ أنْ لاتَزالَ أبَداً لَها مُغالِباً،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَلى أهْوِيَتِها مُحارِباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. One who fights his [lower] self perfects his piety.

> 25ـ مَنْ جاهَدَ نَفْسَهُ أَكْمَلَ التُّقى.

26. One who knows his self struggles against it.

> 26ـ مَنْ عَرَفَ نَفْسَهُ جاهَدَها.

27. One who does not struggle against his self will not achieve victory.

> 27ـ مَنْ لَمْ يُجاهِدْ نَفْسَهُ لَمْ يَنَلِ الفَوْزَ.

28. There is no struggle more worthy than struggling against the self.

> 28ـ ما مِنْ جِهاد أفْضَلُ مِنْ جِهادِ النَّفْسِ.

29. Struggling against the self is a trait of the noble ones.

> 29ـ مُجاهَدَةُ النَّفْسِ شيمَةُ النُّبَلاءِ.

30. Struggling against the self is a symbol of nobility.

> 30ـ مُجاهَدَةُ النَّفْسِ عُنْوانُ النُّبْلِ.

31. Struggling against the self is the best *Jihād*.

> 31ـ مُجاهَدَةُ النَّفْسِ أفْضَلُ جِهاد.

32. There is no *Jihād* like struggle against the self.

> 32ـ لا جِهادَ كَجِهادِ النَّفْسِ.


