The Ignorant And The Foolish
============================

**The Ignorant and the Foolish اَلجاهِلُ والجهول**

1. An ignorant person is never found to be anything but falling short or
excessive.

> 1ـ اَلجاهِلُ لَنْ يُلْقى أبَداً إلا مُفَرِّطاً، أو مُفْرِطاً.

2. Neither does an ignorant restrain himself [from wrongdoing] nor does
he benefit from good advice.

> 2ـ اَلجاهِلُ لايَرْتَدِعُ، وبِالمَواعِظِ لا يَنْتَفِعُ.

3. An ignorant person is one who obeys his vain desires in disobedience
to his Lord.

> 3ـ اَلجاهِلُ مَنْ أطاعَ هَواهُ في مَعصيَةِ رَبِّهِ.

4. The ignorant person feels aversion towards that which the wise person
feels at ease with.

> 4ـ اَلجاهِلُ يَسْتَوْحِشُ مِمّا يَأنَسُ بِه الحَكيْمُ.

5. The ignorant person does not understand the learned because he
[himself] was never learned before.

> 5ـ اَلجاهِلُ لايَعْرِفُ العالِمَ لأنَّهُ لَمْ يَكُنْ قَبْلُ عالِماً.

6. An ignorant person does not recognize his failure and does not accept
the [good] advice given to him.

> 6ـ اَلجاهِلُ لا يَعْرِفُ تَقْصيرَهُ، وَلايَقْبَلُ مِنَ النَّصيحِ لهُ.

7. An ignorant person relies on his hopes and is negligent in his
actions.

> 7ـ اَلجاهِلُ يَعْتَمِدُ عَلى أمَلِهِ، ويُقَصِّرُ في عَمَلِهِ.

8. The ignorant person is like a rock through which water does not gush
forth, and a tree, the branches of which do not become green, and a
ground upon which foliage is not found.

> 8ـ اَلجاهِلُ صَخْرَةٌ لا يَنْفَجِرُ ماؤُها، وَشَجَرَةٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايَخْضَرُّعُودُها، وأرضٌ لايَظهَرُ عُشْبُها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

9. An ignorant person is [like the] dead among the living.

> 9ـ اَلْجاهِلُ مَيِّتٌ بَيْنَ الأحْياءِ.

10. The most wretched of all people is the ignorant one.

> 10ـ أشْقَى النّاسِ اَلجاهِلُ.

11. An unremorseful sinner is the most ignorant person.

> 11ـ أجْهَلُ النّاسِ مُسِيئٌ مُسْتَأنِفٌ.

12. The most ignorant person is one who is deceived by the praise of a
flatterer who makes the ugly look appealing to him and makes him hate
the [sincere] adviser.

> 12ـ أجْهَلُ النّاسِ المُغْتَرُّ بِقَوْلِ مادِح مُتَمَلِّق، يُحَسِّنُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ القَبيحَ، ويُبَغِّضُ إلَيْهِ النَّصيْحَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. The most hated creature in the sight of Allah is the ignorant
person, because He deprived him of what He bestowed on His creation, and
that is intellect.

> 13ـ أبْغَضُ الخَلائِقِ إلَى اللّهِ تعالى، اَلجاهِلُ لأنَّهُ حَرَمَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما مَنَّ بِهِ عَلى خَلْقِهِ، وهُوَ العَقْلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. Verily the ignorant is one whose ignorance leads astray and whose
vain desires entice [towards evil]; so his speech is unhealthy and his
action is blameworthy.

> 14ـ إنَّ الجاهِلَ مَنْ جَهْلُهُ في إغْواء، ومَنْ هَواهُ في إغْراء،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَوْلُهُ سَقيمٌ، وفِعْلُهُ ذَميمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. The ignorant one is perplexed.

> 15ـ اَلجاهِلُ حَيْرانٌ.

16. The ignorant person inclines towards the one who is like him.

> 16ـ اَلجاهِلُ يَميلُ (يَألِفُهُ مِثْلُهُ) إلى شِكْلِهِ.

17. Man is an enemy of that which he is ignorant of.

> 17ـ المَرْءُ عَدُوُّ ما جَهِلَ.

18. The ignorant one does not restrain himself [from evil].

> 18ـ اَلجاهِلُ لا يَرتَدِعُ.

19. An ignorant person is a slave to his passions.

> 19ـ اَلجاهِلُ عَبْدُ شَهْوَتِهِ.

20. The ignorant person does not desist [from sinning].

> 20ـ اَلجاهِلُ لا يَرْعَوي.

21. An ignorant person seeks to raise himself but ends up abasing
himself.

> 21ـ اَلجاهِلُ يَرْفَعُ نَفْسَهُ فَيَتَّضِعُ.

22. The ignorant person is one who is ignorant of his own capability.

> 22ـ اَلجاهِلُ مَنْ جَهِلَ قَدْرَهُ.

23. An ignorant person is dead, even when he is alive.

> 23ـ اَلجاهِلُ مَيِّتٌ وإنْ كانَ حَيّاً.

24. The correctness of an ignorant person is like the mistake of a
learned person (i.e. it happens rarely).

> 24ـ اَلجاهِلُ كَزَلَّةِ العالِمِ صَوابُهُ.

25. The ignorant person is deceived by [false] claims.

> 25ـ اَلجاهِلُ مَنْ خَدَعَتْهُ المَطالِبُ.

26. The ignorant person is one who is ignorant about his [own] affair.

> 26ـ اَلجاهِلُ مَنْ جَهِلَ أمْرَهُ.

27. The ignorant person is one who is deceived by his vain desires and
his arrogance.

> 27ـ اَلجاهِلُ مَنِ انْخَدَعَ لِهَواهُ (بِهواهُ) وغُروُرِهِ.

28. An ignorant person is one who takes his sincere advisor to be a
deceiver.

> 28ـ اَلْجاهِلُ مَنِ اسْتَغَشَّ النَّصيحَ.

29. When the ignorant one becomes stingy (or denies), he obtains
[wealth] and when he obtains [wealth] (or professes belief in one God),
he apostatizes.

> 29ـ اَلْجاهِلُ إذا جَمَدَ(جحد) وَجَدَ، وإذا وَجَدَ (وَحَّدَ) ألْحَدَ.

30. Indeed the ignorant person is one who is enslaved by [worldly]
pursuits.

> 30ـ إنَّما الجاهِلُ مَنِ اسْتَعْبَدَتْهُ المَطالِبُ.

31. When an ignorant person grows older, his ignorance rises.

> 31ـ إذا شابَ الجاهِلُ شَبَّ جَهْلُهُ.

32. The wealth of an ignorant person is in his worldly possessions and
his hopes.

> 32ـ ثَرْوَةُ الجاهِلِ في مالِهِ وَأمَلِهِ.

33. The reign of an ignorant person is like a stranger who [soon] moves
to another place.

> 33ـ دَوْلَةُ الجاهِلِ كَالغَريبِ المُتَحَرِّكِ إلَى النُّقْلَةِ.

34. Many an ignorant person is saved by his ignorance.

> 34ـ رُبَّ جاهِل نَجاتُهُ جَهْلُهُ.

35. The slip-ups of an ignorant person are excusable.

> 35ـ زَلَّةُ الجاهِلِ مَعْذُورَةٌ.

36. An ignorant king exposes his [own] flaws.

> 36ـ سُلْطانُ الجاهِلِ يُبْدي مَعائِبَهُ.

37. The worst person you can accompany is an ignorant one.

> 37ـ شَرُّ مَنْ صاحَبْتَ اَلجاهِلُ.

38. The correct [action] of an ignorant person is like the slip-up of an
intelligent person.

> 38ـ صَوابُ الجاهِلِ كَالزَّلَةِ مِنَ العاقِلِ.

39. The lost item of the ignorant person cannot be found.

> 39ـ ضالَّةُ الجاهِلِ غَيْرُ مَوْجُود.

40. Obedience to the foolish is a sign of ignorance.

> 40ـ طاعَةُ الجَهُولِ تَدُلُّ عَلَى الجَهْلِ.

41. Obedience to the foolish and being excessive [in speech or action]
are two signs of ignorance.

> 41ـ طاعةُ الجَهُولِ، وكَثْرَةُ الفُضُولِ تَدُلاّنِ عَلَى الجَهْلِ.

42. The habit of the inexperienced [and ignorant] ones is to cut off the
elements of favour.

> 42ـ عادَةُ الأغْمارِ قَطْعُ مَوادِّ الإحْسانِ.

43. The wealth of an ignorant person is in his worldly possessions.

> 43ـ غِنَى الجاهِلِ بِمالِهِ.

44. The ignorant one is deceived by futile absurdities.

> 44ـ غُرُورُ الجاهِلِ بِمُجالاتِ الباطِلِ.

45. Every ignorant person is prone to temptation.[^1]

> 45ـ كُلُّ جاهِل مَفْتُونٌ.

46. For the ignorant there is loss in every situation.

> 46ـ لِلْجاهِلِ في كُلِّ حالَة خُسْرانٌ.

47. One who is ignorant is disregarded [by others].

> 47ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ أُهْمِلَ.

48. When one is ignorant, his consideration is reduced.

> 48ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ قَلَّ إعْتِبارُهُ.

49. One who is ignorant of [a branch of] knowledge is hostile towards
it.

> 49ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ عِلْماً عاداهُ.

50. One who does not know where he is placing his foot, trips.

> 50ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ مَوْضِعَ قَدَمِهِ زَلَّ.

51. One who is ignorant makes many blunders.

> 51ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ كَثُرَ عِثارُهُ.

52. One who is ignorant becomes self-conceited; and his ‘today’ is worse
than his ‘yesterday’.

> 52ـ مَنْ جَهِلَ اغْتَرَّ بِنَفْسِهِ وَكانَ يَوْمُهُ شَـرّاً مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

53. It is from the nature of the ignorant to get angry quickly, in every
situation.

> 53ـ مِنْ طَبايِعِ الجُهّالِ التَسَـرُّعُ إلَى الغَضَبِ في كُلِّ حال.

54. No one antagonizes the learned like the ignorant [do].

> 54ـ ما ضادَّ العُلَماءَ كالجُهّالِ.

55. Woe be to the one who persists in his ignorance and blessed is the
one who realizes [his mistake] and finds the right course.

> 55ـ وَيْلٌ لِمَنْ تَمادى في جَهْلِهِ، وطُوبى لِمَنْ عَقَلَ واهْتَدى.

56. There is no independence for an ignorant person.

> 56ـ لاغِنى لِجاهِل.

57. The ignorant one is not seen to be anything but immoderate (or
excessive).

> 57ـ لايُرَى الجاهِلُ إلاّ مُفَرِّطاً (مُفْرِطاً).

58. Nothing restrains the foolish except the edge of a sword.

> 58ـ لايَرْدَعُ الجَهُولَ إلاّ حَدُّ الحُسامِ.

59. Disobey the ignorant and you will be safe.

> 59ـ إعْصِ الجاهِلَ تَسْلَمْ.

[^1]: Or, if taken in the context of Q68:6: Every ignorant person is
demented.


