Khums in Cabbalas of Ahl -e- Bait (a.s.)
========================================

There are lots of Ahadith in main and famous texts of Shi’aa about
Khums and the things which Khums applies on them, and the way of
consumption and prorating and other rulings have been expressed, that it
is impossible to mention all of them in this brief discussion.

About eighty Ahadith in fifteen chapters in the issue of Khums have
been collected from famous Shiite books in the famous book “Wasael
Al-Shi’aa”.

Chapter one is about the principle of necessity of Khums.

Chapter two is about the necessity of Khums in spoils of war.

Chapter three is about mines.

Chapter four is about the Nisab (minimum level or amount) of mines
which Khums applies on them.

Chapter five and six are about the necessity of Khums in treasure.

Chapter seven is about the necessity of Khums in things which gain from
the sea by diving.

Chapter eight is about the necessity of Khums in benefits of business,
industries, agriculture and like them.

And other chapters are about the way of prorating Khums, person who
needs to give help from Khums and some other cases of necessity of
Khums.

There are ten Ahadith in chapter eight which is one of most important
chapters about the issue of the Khums and talks about benefits which are
obtained from any kind of business or industries, which most of our
Faqihs have issued Fatwas according to them; and Fatwas say that if
after one year a person was able to save money from any kind of income
in that year, should pay one fifth of this saving after subtracting all
costs of the year to Imam or his successor in order to be spent on
necessary cases which have been mentioned.

Evidences of these Ahadith have no need to be criticized according to
their multiplicity, because we know that if there are lots of Ahadith
quoted in one issue in reliable books, it confirms according to all of
them that the order of ruling has been issues by Imam and there will
remain no place for animadverting about the evidences of those
Ahadith.

In other hand, it has been proved in the Usul Science (science of
fundamentals) that issuing Fatwa by famous Faqih especially those who
were closer to the time of Imam caused confidence about the evidence of
Hadith.

And this matter is completely achieved for Ahadith of Khums which have
been pointed to them above.

Moreover, there are some Sahih Ahadith among these Ahadith.

Like Hadith of Mohammad ibn Al-Hassan Al-Ash’ari which is the first
Hadith of chapter eight.

And Hadith of Abu Ali ibn Rashid which is the third Hadith.

And Hadith of Ibrahim ibn Mohammad Al-Hamedani which is the fourth
Hadith.

And Hadith of Ali ibn Mahzyar which is the fifth Hadith.

And Hadith of Sama’a which is the seventh Hadith.

It is interesting that some less-known people who did not have enough
knowledge about the Rijal science (science of tellers of Ahadith)
assumed that all Ahadith of this chapter are civilizable about their
evidences while this is nothing more than a false thought which shows
the weakness of knowledge of person who thinks this way and this
assumption has no compatibility with reality.

This person who had shown special and funny obstinacy about the
weakness of this Ahadith has taken mistakes which are amazing, for
instance:

1- He has introduced “Sa’d ibn Abdullah Ash’ari Qomi” who has been one
of superiors of Shi’aa and one of eminent Faqihs and one of leaders of
this sect according to superiors of Rijal science like “Najashi” and
“Sheikh Toosi” and “Allame Helli” and has been an eminent,
knowledgeable, reliable person with lots of writings as an “unreliable
person” that “none of superiors of Rijal science have confirmed his
reliability” and we don’t know that where did he find such a big and
clear lie which causes the disgrace of the teller!

2- He has criticized “Ali ibn Mahzyar” whom all superiors of Rijal
sciences confess to his greatness and reliability, and he had been one
of special Sahaba of ninth Imam and his deputy and successor, and
according to “Najashi” (famous scholar of Rijal science) and the late
Allame Helli there is no place for discussion or doubt about his
cabbalas, and has tried to invalidate his reliable Hadith (in his own
thought) by nonsense expressions and even he had insulted and cursed
this great man.

It seems that his evil purposes do not permit him to accept any kind of
truth and he forces himself to remove any obstacle which is in his way,
even by ignoring self evident matters.

3- One of persons who has been mentioned in evidences of these Ahadith
(third Hadith from this chapter) and is one of reliable Hadith tellers,
but has been attacked and weakened because of ignorance is “Abu Ali ibn
Rashid” who his name is “Hassan” and is one of Sahaba of ninth Imam,
Imam Javad (a.s.). According to confirmation of some of superiors of
Rijal, like Sheikh Toosi and Allame Helli, is one of reliable persons,
but foresaid ignorant writer has assumed him to be unreliable.

4- “Riyan ibn Salt” is one another of Hadith tellers who has been
mentioned in the evidence of ninth Hadith in this chapter and foresaid
writer has criticized him by this excuse that it is unlikely that he had
lived until Imam Askari (a.s.) (without expressing any prove fore this
sentence) and with another excuse that he had been working in the system
of Abbasi caliphs, while we know that persons like “Ali ibn Yaqtin” were
working in their system by order of Imams for saving innocent people,
while in Rijal books especially “Rijal of Najashi” and “Allame Helli”
and “Sheikh Toosi” reliability of this man has been confirmed.

And this is funnier that he said the cabbala of Riyan ibn Salt is
Mursala (a Hadith that its evidence does not reach to Prophet (s.a.) or
Imams (a.s.)) while there is no such a thing in the evidence of this
Hadith, and nobody would find that why he has said such a big lie!

5- Most amazing of all is that he had rejected the seventh cabbala by
the excuse that “Kulayni” has quoted that from “Some of our
companions”.

He assumed that these persons are unknown, while anyone who has the
least knowledge about the book “Kafi” and its evidences and documents
knows that these persons are masters of Kulayni, that in order to
abstain from lengthening and repeating in the evidence their name do not
mention every time, but it has been affirmed in books of Rijal that the
purpose of Kulayni is this five persons:

1- Mohammad ibn Yahya 2- Ali ibn Mousa Komidani 3- Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn
Hashim 4- Ahmad ibn Idris 5- Dawood ibn Kore

And some of them are moreover their reliability are from superiors of
World of Shi’aa (refer to the book “Jame’ Al-Rovat” and other Rijal
books).


**Poisonings Acts of Hypocrites**

There are only few jobs easier than “poisoning” the minds of people who
have not extended knowledge of a matter, because this is like destroying
a building. Sometimes it takes several years to build a building, while
it is possible to destroy it in only few seconds.

Therefore, if we see that evil temptations of frails around us have
effects on some simple thoughts, it is neither because of power and
logic of tempters nor weak principles of Islam, but this is the
attribute of poisoning among people who have not enough knowledge of a
matter; and the best of fighting this poisoning is to increase the level
of knowledge of people in Islamic matters, because if the sun of science
and knowledge rise in hearts then witch moths will hide themselves
rapidly.

Accordingly, it is decided, by almighty god’s will, to prepare and
publish brief and precise but calculated and logical booklets in
different Islamic issues and those which are related to Shiite and
Ahl -e- Bait (a.s.) that hypocrites poisoning on them for informing the
public in order not to remain a place for cavillers.

Here it is necessary to acknowledge respectful scholars Ahmadi,
Ashtiani, Imami, Imani and Asadi who helped in collecting the contents
of this booklet.


Qom, Amiralmo’menin School
Naser Makarem Shirazi


