Has Khums Been Forgiven During the Absence of Imam Zaman (a.s.)?
================================================================

They ask: “Hasn’t Khums been forgiven during the absence of Imam Zaman
(a.s.) from his holiness to Shiites and still have people the duty to
pay Khums to Bait Al-Mal in order to spend in necessary ways of
consumption? While several cabbalas say that: “Imams of Ahl -e- Bait has
forgiven Khums”. Therefore if we accept that Khums is obligatory on all
kinds of income, then we should also accept that Khums is forgiven
during the absence time!

\*\*\*

The answer to this question is available almost in all of Fiqh books
and those who assume that this question is a new question or they are
the only persons who have seen the Ahadith of Tahlil (to make Halaal)
are hardly mistaking.

A glimpse to Fiqh books especially the books which recent Faqihs have
wrote shows that this matter had been completely in the area of
attention of Faqihs and they had answered to that.

We consider it necessary to explain this issue completely for respected
readers in order to give more description.

Cabbalas which have caused this hallucination consist in five groups:

First, are cabbalas which have been said about the spoils of war and
captives of war and women who were among slaves and had been taken as
servants by people and those people married them and had children with
those women.

We know that if Jihad had not been performed by the permission of Imam,
then all of spoils which are taken are for Bait Al-Mal and should be
spent by the permission of Imam and if jihad had been performed by the
permission of Imam then Khums applies on them and in case of not paying
the Khums, using them is Haraam.

Therefore, female servants who had taken by people as spoils and their
Khums had not been paid were Haraam to their owners and they didn’t have
the right to treat those women as their wives.

Therefore, if you notice this ruling then understand that children who
are born from these women are illegitimate, therefore Imams of Ahl -e-
Bait have forgiven this part of Khums which is related to those women in
order that their children born legitimately.1

1- It has been completely discussed about slavery in Islam and why
Islam has allowed such a thing about the captives of wars and the plan
of Islam for making slaves free and preventing humans to be trade in the
book “Islam and freedom of slaves”.

According to this short preface, we mention this group of cabbalas in
continue:

1- We read in cabbala of “Zurays Kunasi” that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:
“Do you know that from where adultery entered among (some of) people? I
said no. He said: From the Khums of us Ahl -e- Bait, except our pure
Shiites which is Halaal for them and also it is Halaal for their
birth”.1

1- Wasael Al-Shi’aa, vol. 6, Hadith 3 from chapter 4 of chapters of
Anfal.

2- Mohammad ibn Muslim quotes from Imam Baqir (a.s.) or Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said: “The most severe thing which people are involved
with in the day of judgment is that the owner of Khums stands and says
My God! (Usurped) My Khums but we made it Halaal for our Shiites in
order that their birth to be pure and their children born pure.1

3- Fazil (Ibn Yassar) quoted from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: “A
person who feel our love in his hearth thanks Allah for his first gift.
I said: What is the first gift of Allah your holiness? He said: It is
the purity of birth (and sperm).

Then he said: Amir Al-Mu’mineen (a.s.) told Fatima (a.s.) that make
your share from spoils Halaal for the fathers of our Shiites in order to
make them pure.

Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: We made mothers of our Shiites Halaal for
their fathers in order that they become pure (and their children to be
Halaal children)”.2 And Also Ahadith 15, 16, 18 and 20 from chapter 4 of
chapters of Anfal and Hadith 8 from chapter 8 of chapters “What Khums is
obligatory in it”.

1- Hadith 5, from chapter 4 of chapters of Anfal.
2- Hadith 10, from chapter 4 of chapters of Anfal.

These eight Ahadith has been expressed clearly about the issue of
female servants and we know that according to affirmation of Faqihs they
are excluded from Khums but obstinate and less-literate people have
wanted to make them as a prove for Tahlil (to make Halaal) of Khums in
absolute way without noticing to content of them and noticing to
explicit Fatwas of Faqihs, unaware that with a little attention to the
content of these Ahadith their lie will be revealed.

\*\*\*

Second, are Ahadith which proves the Tahlil of Khums in specific and
certain time, because as we said before Prophet (s.a.) and Imams (a.s.)
as the governor of Islamic government had the right to forgive this
Islamic tax in special conditions according to benefits of Muslims.

As it had necessitated to add some extraordinary taxes temporarily and
limited in hard conditions, also this is one of the authorities of
Islamic government to dispense with that temporarily according to the
conditions of Muslims.

We mentioned some examples of these Ahadith in continue:

1- “Younos ibn Ya’qoob” quotes that I was with Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that a
man entered and said your holiness, there are assets and benefits and
merchandises that we gain and we know that you right is in them and we
are guilty about this matter; Imam (a.s.) said: If we order you to pay
these rights today this is unfair (it means that we forgive them to you
because of strong pressure from government or living which is on
you).1

1- Hadith 6, from chapter 4 of chapter of Anfal.

2- Hakim (Ibn Eisa) quotes from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that I asked what is
the meaning of the verse “و اعلموا انما غنمتم”? He answered: “Any
benefit which a human gains day by day; but my father forgave Shiites in
order them to be pure”.

All of these Ahadith are related to exemption of a group of Muslims who
were in special conditions from this Islamic tax plan and it is not the
proof of general exemption at all.

The clear proof and strong evidence about this matter is that some of
other Imams (a.s.) or Imam Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had
charged Shiites to pay that and take this Islamic tax from them
seriously in conditions that they were capable of paying, and we mention
some examples in continue:

1- “Mohammad ibn Zayd Tabari” quotes that one of merchants from Fars
who were one of friends of Imam “Ali ibn Mousa Al-Reza (a.s.)” wrote a
letter to his holiness and asked for the Tahlil (to make Halaal) of
Khums, his holiness wrote him:

“In the name of Allah the compassionate the merciful, Allah is most
granter and generous, he had made a prize for any good act and
deprivation of prize for abstaining from good acts; there is no Halaal
(free and permitted to use) asset unless Allah has made it Halaal (know
that) Khums helps us to organize religious tasks and also tasks about
our family and our Shiites, and we save our honor by that against
tyrants.

Therefore, do not ignore paying of Khums …

Muslim is a person who is loyal to the divine oath and pledge, not in
the way his tongue says that and his hearts denies”.1

2- And also the same person quotes that a group came to Imam “Ali ibn
Mousa Al-Reza (a.s.)” from Khorasan and asked him to exempt them of
paying Khums, Imam said: “I do not permit such a thing, you express your
kindness to me by your words, but you withhold the right which Allah has
legislated for us and has made us its servants from us, I do not exempt
any of you, do not exempt, do not exemp”.2

3- Abu Basir quotes from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that I heard that his
holiness was saying: “Anyone who buy something from Khums, Allah will
not forgive him because he has bought a thing which is not Halaal for
him”.3

1- Wasael Al-Shi’aa, vol. 6, chapter 3 from chapters of Anfal, Hadith
2.
2- Wasael Al-Shi’aa, vol. 6, chapter 3, Hadith 3.
3- Wasael Al-Shi’aa, vol. 6, chapter 3, Hadith 5.

Moreover, cabbalas 8, 9 and 10 of this chapter and also cabbalas 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, and 6 of chapter eight from chapters of “What Khums is
obligatory in it” say that some of Imams (a.s.) not only didn’t permit
the Tahlil of Khums, but also took that seriously for spending in
necessary cases.

It is understood well from these cabbalas that the matter is not
permanent and forever, but it is exclusive to specific conditions like
some of tax exemptions.

\*\*\*

Third, has been about a specific person, which means that a specific
person had came to Imam (a.s.) and Imam exempt him from paying Khums by
considering his conditions.

Example of this matter is Hadith 13 of chapter 1 from chapters of Anfal
(Wasael Al-Shi’aa, vol. 6) which shows that a person called “Hakam ibn
Oliya Asadi” came to Imam Baqir (a.s.) while he had brought the Khums of
his assets, his holiness took that Khums and then forgive it to him.

Because the conditions of this person were in the form that because of
need or encourage or any other purpose, it was best thing to do to
exempt him from paying Khums.

And the sentence that Imam said “I make this Halaal for you” is a proof
for the fact that this order had not been a general ruling, unless this
expression doesn’t make any sense.

\*\*\*

Fourth, are cabbalas which theirs contents are about Tahlil but it
clears by noticing that the meaning of them is not Khums, but it is
“Anfal” (Spoils and also public resources)

Like cabbala 12 of chapter 4 from chapters of Anfal which the late
owner of Wasael has mentioned that with other cabbalas of Tahlil in one
chapter, but it is understood well from below of the cabbala that it is
related to Anfal lands (public resources).

Therefore, all emphasize of this cabbala is on the issue of lands and
fields.

And also seventeenth cabbala of this chapter.

\*\*\*

Fifth, are cabbalas which are not exclusive to specific time or person,
and their features are absolute Tahlil, that are only three cabbalas
which we study in continue.

First is the cabbala that “Salim ibn Mukram” (Abu Khadija) quotes from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that I was there when someone came to Imam (a.s.) and
said I want you to permit me for sexual intercourse with women, Imam was
frightened by his words; a person from attendance said he does not mean
to rape people, but he means that he wants to buy a female servant (from
spoils and assets which their Khums has not been paid) or a women to
marry him, or a heritage which he receives, or the income of business or
the thing that someone gives him as a gift; Imam (a.s.) said these are
all Halaal for all of our Shiites, consisting those who are present here
or absent, those who are dead or alive, or those who will be born until
the end of days, these are Halaal for everyone.1

Although nothing has been mentioned explicitly about the Khums in text
of Hadith, but the thing which Imam (a.s.) has made Halaal for everyone
consisting of merchandise and spoils of war and gifts should be an asset
which Khums has been implied on it.

1- Wasael Al-Shi’aa, vol. 6, chapter four of Anfal, Hadith 4.

But we should note that first of all, the document of this Hadith is
weak because Salim ibn Mukram who his another name is Abu Khadija is the
subject of lots of discussions among scholars of Rijal science; some
persons considered him reliable and some others considered him very
weak, and some scholars has stop discussing about him and expressed no
comment, and accordingly cabbalas which he had quoted alone are not
acceptable.

Secondly, if we pay little attention to the question which has been
asked from Imam, it clears that whole discussion in cabbala is about
female servants whom Khums had been implied on them or women who their
Mahr (marital gift) had been paid from assets which their Khums had not
been paid, or a female servant or a women who has been given to a person
with gifts and heritages which Khums had implied on them.

Briefly, content of Hadith is completely about women and wives who are
given to a Muslim, and either their Mahr or they themselves have been
one of cases of implication of Khums and the answer of Imam (a.s.) is
also exclusive to this part, unless this does not any sense that a
person asks about women and another person from attendance generalize
his words to everything.

Therefore the last thing which is understood from this Hadith is that
any right which belongs to the Khums of Mahr of women and spouses has
been made Halaal by Imam (a.s.) for anytime and anyone of Shiites in
order for “purity of birth” which means legitimacy of children, and as
we said before this is the matter which our Faqihs had expressed in Fiqh
books as an exception, but it could not be the proof of forgiveness of
Khums forever, but forgiveness is exclusive to the issue of wife and
female servant.

Also we know that according to cabbalas of chapter of “Mahr” (marital
gift) if a person has decided not to pay the Mahr of a woman or pay it
from a Haraam asset, he is considered as adulterer.1

Although some Faqihs understood Tahrim (being Haraam) and some others
Karahat (being disliked) from this kind of Ahadith, but anyhow it shows
that paying Mahr from asset which is not completely owned by a person is
not without influence on the condition of child and accordingly this
part of Khums has been forgiven in order for purity of children.

There it is not possible to prove a thing with this cabbala which has
neither enough implication nor reliable document.

1- Refer to Wasael Al-Shi'aa, vol. 15, pages 21 & 22 & 23 (chapter 11
from chapters of Mahrs).

Second one is a Hadith that “Ma’aaz ibn Kathir” quotes from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said: “There is lots of opportunities for our Shiites in
order to spend their wealth in charity in the way of Allah, but when our
Qa’im (he who arises) arises, any treasure which anyone has saved will
become Haraam for him, in order to give that treasure to him and use it
for achieving to his goals”.1

But as it clears by an accurate look, nothing has been mentioned about
the issue of Khums in this Hadith, but it points to the fact that
capitalists and rich people of the nation can save wealth and also spend
in charity in the way of Allah until the day that Mahdi (a.s.) arises,
then in that day they should give all of their savings to him in order
to use them for advancement and expansion of justice of earth.

The best reason for the fact that Hadith has no relation with Khums is
that he says they should give all of their savings to Mahdi not only its
Khums (one fifth), because if the purpose of Hadith was the issue of
Khums he should say give its Khums to him.

Also we should note that there is “Mohammad ibn Sinan” among tellers of
this Hadith whom his condition is not clear for the scholars of Rijal
science and they have arguments about him.

Third one is a Mursala Hadith which has been quoted in “Interpretation
of Ayyashi” from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: “The most difficult
thing which people are involved with in the day of judgment is that the
owner of Khums stands and say My God! My Khums (has not been paid), but
our Shiites are exempted from this matter”.

It is obvious without saying anything that, this Hadith is Mursala and
an unknown person has quoted that from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and it is
impossible to refer to it according to the Hadith science and this is an
expression which all scholars of Rijal have accepted.

\*\*\*

We conclude from all that we said, that there is no acceptable proof
for Tahlil of Khums in an absolute way available, and those who claim
like this in fact had not studied these cabbalas enough, unless it is
clear according to above assortment that there is no cabbala available
which its content shows the exemption of all people from Khums.

Albeit if we see cabbalas by an elementary view, maybe this
hallucination occurs, but as we saw it clear by studying and analyzing
and correct assorting of cabbalas that hallucination of absolute Tahlil
is not correct and Khums is still available as an Islamic order.

And all people have to perform that like other duties.


