[Section One]
=============

I.
--

Just as form and colour are used as means by some, who (whether by art
or constant practice) imitate and portray many things by their aid, and
the voice is used by others; so also in the above-mentioned group of
arts, the means with them as a whole are rhythm, language, and
harmony--used, however, either singly or in certain combinations.  A
combination of rhythm and harmony alone is the means in flute-playing
and lyre-playing, and any other arts there may be of the same
description, e.g. imitative piping.  Rhythm alone, without harmony, is
the means in the dancer's imitations; for even he, by the rhythms of his
attitudes, may represent men's characters, as well as what they do and
suffer.  There is further an art which imitates by language alone,
without harmony, in prose or in verse, and if in verse, either in some
one or in a plurality of metres.  This form of imitation is to this day
without a name.  We have no common name for a mime of Sophron or
Xenarchus and a Socratic Conversation; and we should still be without
one even if the imitation in the two instances were in trimeters or
elegiacs or some other kind of verse--though it is the way with people
to tack on 'poet' to the name of a metre, and talk of elegiac-poets and
epic-poets, thinking that they call them poets not by reason of the
imitative nature of their work, but indiscriminately by reason of the
metre they write in.  Even if a theory of medicine or physical
philosophy be put forth in a metrical form, it is usual to describe the
writer in this way; Homer and Empedocles, however, have really nothing
in common apart from their metre; so that, if the one is to be called a
poet, the other should be termed a physicist rather than a poet.  We
should be in the same position also, if the imitation in these instances
were in all the metres, like the \_Centaur\_ (a rhapsody in a medley of
all metres) of Chaeremon; and Chaeremon one has to recognize as a poet.
So much, then, as to these arts.  There are, lastly, certain other arts,
which combine all the means enumerated, rhythm, melody, and verse, e.g.
Dithyrambic and Nomic poetry, Tragedy and Comedy; with this difference,
however, that the three kinds of means are in some of them all employed
together, and in others brought in separately, one after the other.
These elements of difference in the above arts I term the means of their
imitation.

II.
---

The objects the imitator represents are actions, with agents who are
necessarily either good men or bad--the diversities of human character
being nearly always derivative from this primary distinction, since the
line between virtue and vice is one dividing the whole of mankind.  It
follows, therefore, that the agents represented must be either above our
own level of goodness, or beneath it, or just such as we are in the same
way as, with the painters, the personages of Polygnotus are better than
we are, those of Pauson worse, and those of Dionysius just like
ourselves.  It is clear that each of the above-mentioned arts will admit
of these differences, and that it will become a separate art by
representing objects with this point of difference.  Even in dancing,
flute-playing, and lyre-playing such diversities are possible; and they
are also possible in the nameless art that uses language, prose or verse
without harmony, as its means; Homer's personages, for instance, are
better than we are; Cleophon's are on our own level; and those of
Hegemon of Thasos, the first writer of parodies, and Nicochares, the
author of the \_Diliad\_, are beneath it.  The same is true of the
Dithyramb and the Nome: the personages may be presented in them with the
difference exemplified in the of and Argas, and in the Cyclopses of
Timotheus and Philoxenus.  This difference it is that distinguishes
Tragedy and Comedy also; the one would make its personages worse, and
the other better, than the men of the present day.

III.
----

A third difference in these arts is in the manner in which each kind of
object is represented.  Given both the same means and the same kind of
object for imitation, one may either

(1) speak at one moment in narrative and at another in an assumed
character, as Homer does; or

(2) one may remain the same throughout, without any such change; or

(3) the imitators may represent the whole story dramatically, as though
they were actually doing the things described.

As we said at the beginning, therefore, the differences in the imitation
of these arts come under three heads, their means, their objects, and
their manner.

So that as an imitator Sophocles will be on one side akin to Homer, both
portraying good men; and on another to Aristophanes, since both present
their personages as acting and doing.  This in fact, according to some,
is the reason for plays being termed dramas, because in a play the
personages act the story.  Hence too both Tragedy and Comedy are claimed
by the Dorians as their discoveries; Comedy by the Megarians--by those
in Greece as having arisen when Megara became a democracy, and by the
Sicilian Megarians on the ground that the poet Epicharmus was of their
country, and a good deal earlier than Chionides and Magnes; even Tragedy
also is claimed by certain of the Peloponnesian Dorians.  In support of
this claim they point to the words 'comedy' and 'drama'.  Their word for
the outlying hamlets, they say, is comae, whereas Athenians call them
demes--thus assuming that comedians got the name not from their
\_comoe\_ or revels, but from their strolling from hamlet to hamlet,
lack of appreciation keeping them out of the city.  Their word also for
'to act', they say, is \_dran\_, whereas Athenians use \_prattein\_.So
much, then, as to the number and nature of the points of difference in
the imitation of these arts.

It is clear that the general origin of poetry was due to two causes,
each of them part of human nature.  Imitation is natural to man from
childhood, one of his advantages over the lower animals being this, that
he is the most imitative creature in the world, and learns at first by
imitation.  And it is also natural for all to delight in works of
imitation.  The truth of this second point is shown by experience:
though the objects themselves may be painful to see, we delight to view
the most realistic representations of them in art, the forms for example
of the lowest animals and of dead bodies.  The explanation is to be
found in a further fact: to be learning something is the greatest of
pleasures not only to the philosopher but also to the rest of mankind,
however small their capacity for it; the reason of the delight in seeing
the picture is that one is at the same time learning--gathering the
meaning of things, e.g. that the man there is so-and-so; for if one has
not seen the thing before, one's pleasure will not be in the picture as
an imitation of it, but will be due to the execution or colouring or
some similar cause.  Imitation, then, being natural to us--as also the
sense of harmony and rhythm, the metres being obviously species of
rhythms--it was through their original aptitude, and by a series of
improvements for the most part gradual on their first efforts, that they
created poetry out of their improvisations.

Poetry, however, soon broke up into two kinds according to the
differences of character in the individual poets; for the graver among
them would represent noble actions, and those of noble personages; and
the meaner sort the actions of the ignoble.  The latter class produced
invectives at first, just as others did hymns and panegyrics.  We know
of no such poem by any of the pre-Homeric poets, though there were
probably many such writers among them; instances, however, may be found
from Homer downwards, e.g. his \_Margites\_, and the similar poems of
others.  In this poetry of invective its natural fitness brought an
iambic metre into use; hence our present term 'iambic', because it was
the metre of their 'iambs' or invectives against one another.  The
result was that the old poets became some of them writers of heroic and
others of iambic verse.  Homer's position, however, is peculiar: just as
he was in the serious style the poet of poets, standing alone not only
through the literary excellence, but also through the dramatic character
of his imitations, so too he was the first to outline for us the general
forms of Comedy by producing not a dramatic invective, but a dramatic
picture of the Ridiculous; his \_Margites\_ in fact stands in the same
relation to our comedies as the \_Iliad\_ and \_Odyssey\_ to our
tragedies.  As soon, however, as Tragedy and Comedy appeared in the
field, those naturally drawn to the one line of poetry became writers of
comedies instead of iambs, and those naturally drawn to the other,
writers of tragedies instead of epics, because these new modes of art
were grander and of more esteem than the old.

If it be asked whether Tragedy is now all that it need be in its
formative elements, to consider that, and decide it theoretically and in
relation to the theatres, is a matter for another inquiry.

It certainly began in improvisations--as did also Comedy; the one
originating with the authors of the Dithyramb, the other with those of
the phallic songs, which still survive as institutions in many of our
cities.  And its advance after that was little by little, through their
improving on whatever they had before them at each stage.  It was in
fact only after a long series of changes that the movement of Tragedy
stopped on its attaining to its natural form.  (1) The number of actors
was first increased to two by Aeschylus, who curtailed the business of
the Chorus, and made the dialogue, or spoken portion, take the leading
part in the play.  (2) A third actor and scenery were due to Sophocles.
(3) Tragedy acquired also its magnitude.  Discarding short stories and a
ludicrous diction, through its passing out of its satyric stage, it
assumed, though only at a late point in its progress, a tone of dignity;
and its metre changed then from trochaic to iambic.  The reason for
their original use of the trochaic tetrameter was that their poetry was
satyric and more connected with dancing than it now is.  As soon,
however, as a spoken part came in, nature herself found the appropriate
metre.  The iambic, we know, is the most speakable of metres, as is
shown by the fact that we very often fall into it in conversation,
whereas we rarely talk hexameters, and only when we depart from the
speaking tone of voice.  (4) Another change was a plurality of episodes
or acts.  As for the remaining matters, the superadded embellishments
and the

account of their introduction, these must be taken as said, as it would
probably be a long piece of work to go through the details.

As for Comedy, it is (as has been observed) an imitation of men worse
than the average; worse, however, not as regards any and every sort of
fault, but only as regards one particular kind, the Ridiculous, which is
a species of the Ugly.  The Ridiculous may be defined as a mistake or
deformity not productive of pain or harm to others; the mask, for
instance, that excites laughter, is something ugly and distorted without
causing pain.

Though the successive changes in Tragedy and their authors are not
unknown, we cannot say the same of Comedy; its early stages passed
unnoticed, because it was not as yet taken up in a serious way.  It was
only at a late point in its progress that a chorus of comedians was
officially granted by the archon; they used to be mere volunteers.  It
had also already certain definite forms at the time when the record of
those termed comic poets begins.  Who it was who supplied it with masks,
or prologues, or a plurality of actors and the like, has remained
unknown.  The invented Fable, or Plot, however, originated in Sicily,
with Epicharmus and Phormis; of Athenian poets Crates was the first to
drop the Comedy of invective and frame stories of a general and
non-personal nature, in other words, Fables or Plots.

Epic poetry, then, has been seen to agree with Tragedy to thi.e.tent,
that of being an imitation of serious subjects in a grand kind of
verse.  It differs from it, however, (1) in that it is in one kind of
verse and in narrative form; and (2) in its length--which is due to its
action having no fixed limit of time, whereas Tragedy endeavours to keep
as far as possible within a single circuit of the sun, or something near
that.  This, I say, is another point of difference between them, though
at first the practice in this respect was just the same in tragedies as
i.e.ic poems.  They differ also (3) in their constituents, some being
common to both and others peculiar to Tragedy--hence a judge of good and
bad in Tragedy is a judge of that i. e.ic poetry also.  All the parts of
an epic are included in Tragedy; but those of Tragedy are not all of
them to be found in the Epic.

Reserving hexameter poetry and Comedy for consideration hereafter, let
us proceed now to the discussion of Tragedy; before doing so, however,
we must gather up the definition resulting from what has been said.  A
tragedy, then, is the imitation of an action that is serious and also,
as having magnitude, complete in itself; in language with pleasurable
accessories, each kind brought in separately in the parts of the work;
in a dramatic, not in a narrative form; with incidents arousing pity and
fear, wherewith to accomplish its catharsis of such emotions.  Here by
'language with pleasurable accessories' I mean that with rhythm and
harmony or song superadded; and by 'the kinds separately' I mean that
some portions are worked out with verse only, and others in turn with
song.
