[Section Two]
=============

I.
--

As they act the stories, it follows that in the first place the
Spectacle (or stage-appearance of the actors) must be some part of the
whole; and in the second Melody and Diction, these two being the means
of their imitation.  Here by 'Diction' I mean merely this, the
composition of the verses; and by 'Melody', what is too completely
understood to require explanation.  But further: the subject represented
also is an action; and the action involves agents, who must necessarily
have their distinctive qualities both of character and thought, since it
is from these that we ascribe certain qualities to their actions.  There
are in the natural order of things, therefore, two causes, Character and
Thought, of their actions, and consequently of their success or failure
in their lives.  Now the action (that which was done) is represented in
the play by the Fable or Plot.  The Fable, in our present sense of the
term, is simply this, the combination of the incidents, or things done
in the story; whereas Character is what makes us ascribe certain moral
qualities to the agents; and Thought is shown in all they say when
proving a particular point or, it may be, enunciating a general truth.
There are six parts consequently of every tragedy, as a whole, that is,
of such or such quality, viz.  A Fable or Plot, Characters, Diction,
Thought, Spectacle and Melody; two of them arising from the means, one
from the manner, and three from the objects of the dramatic imitation;
and there is nothing else besides these six.  Of these, its formative
elements, then, not a few of the dramatists have made due use, as every
play, one may say, admits of Spectacle, Character, Fable, Diction,
Melody, and Thought.

II.
---

The most important of the six is the combination of the incidents of the
story.

Tragedy i.e.sentially an imitation not of persons but of action and
life, of happiness and misery.  All human happiness or misery takes the
form of action; the end for which we live is a certain kind of activity,
not a quality.  Characte.g.ves us qualities, but it is in our
actions--what we do--that we are happy or the reverse.  In a play
accordingly they do not act in order to portray the Characters; they
include the Characters for the sake of the action.  So that it is the
action in it, i.e. its Fable or Plot, that is the end and purpose of the
tragedy; and the end i.e.erywhere the chief thing.  Besides this, a
tragedy is impossible without action, but there may be one without
Character.  The tragedies of most of the moderns are characterless--a
defect common among poets of all kinds, and with its counterpart in
painting in Zeuxis as compared with Polygnotus; for whereas the latter
is strong in character, the work of Zeuxis is devoid of it.  And again:
one may string together a series of characteristic speeches of the
utmost finish as regards Diction and Thought, and yet fail to produce
the true tragi.e.fect; but one will have much better success with a
tragedy which, however inferior in these respects, has a Plot, a
combination of incidents, in it.  And again: the most powerful elements
of attraction in Tragedy, the Peripeties and Discoveries, are parts of
the Plot.  A further proof is in the fact that beginners succeed earlier
with the Diction and Characters than with the construction of a story;
and the same may be said of nearly all the early dramatists.  We
maintain, therefore, that the first essential, the life and soul, so to
speak, of Tragedy is the Plot; and that the Characters come
second--compare the parallel in painting, where the most beautiful
colours laid on without order will not give one the same pleasure as a
simple black-and-white sketch of a portrait.  We maintain that Tragedy
is primarily an imitation of action, and that it is mainly for the sake
of the action that it imitates the personal agents.  Third comes the
element of Thought, i.e. the power of saying whatever can be said, or
what is appropriate to the occasion.  This is what, in the speeches in
Tragedy, falls under the arts of Politics and Rhetoric; for the older
poets make their personages discourse like statesmen, and the moderns
like rhetoricians.  One must not confuse it with Character.  Character
in a play is that which reveals the moral purpose of the agents, i.e.
the sort of thing they seek or avoid, where that is not obvious--hence
there is no room for Character in a speech on a purely indifferent
subject.  Thought, on the other hand, is shown in all they say when
proving or disproving some particular point, or enunciating some
universal proposition.  Fourth among the literary elements is the
Diction of the personages, i.e. as before explained, the expression of
their thoughts in words, which is practically the same thing with verse
as with prose.  As for the two remaining parts, the Melody is the
greatest of the pleasurable accessories of Tragedy.  The Spectacle,
though an attraction, is the least artistic of all the parts, and has
least to do with the art of poetry.  The tragi.e.fect is quite possible
without a public performance and actors; and

besides, the getting-up of the Spectacle is more a matter for the
costumier than the poet.

Having thus distinguished the parts, let us now consider the proper
construction of the Fable or Plot, as that is at once the first and the
most important thing in Tragedy.  We have laid it down that a tragedy is
an imitation of an action that is complete in itself, as a whole of some
magnitude; for a whole may be of no magnitude to speak of.  Now a whole
is that which has beginning, middle, and end.  A beginning is that which
is not itself necessarily after anything else, and which has naturally
something else after it; an end is that which is naturally after
something itself, either as its necessary or usual consequent, and with
nothing else after it; and a middle, that which is by nature after one
thing and has also another after it.  A well-constructed Plot,
therefore, cannot either begin or end at any point one likes; beginning
and end in it must be of the forms just described.  Again: to be
beautiful, a living creature, and every whole made up of parts, must not
only present a certain order in its arrangement of parts, but also be of
a certain definite magnitude.  Beauty is a matter of size and order, and
therefore impossible either

(1) in a very minute creature, since our perception becomes indistinct
as it approaches instantaneity; or (2) in a creature of vast size--one,
say, 1,000 miles long--as in that case, instead of the object being seen
all at once, the unity and wholeness of it is lost to the beholder.

Just in the same way, then, as a beautiful whole made up of parts, or a
beautiful living creature, must be of some size, a size to be taken in
by the eye, so a story or Plot must be of some length, but of a length
to be taken in by the memory.  As for the limit of its length, so far as
that is relative to public performances and spectators, it does not fall
within the theory of poetry.  If they had to perform a hundred
tragedies, they would be timed by water-clocks, as they are said to have
been at one period.  The limit, however, set by the actual nature of the
thing is this: the longer the story, consistently with its being
comprehensible as a whole, the finer it is by reason of its magnitude.
As a rough general formula, 'a length which allows of the hero passing
by a series of probable or necessary stages from misfortune to
happiness, or from happiness to misfortune', may suffice as a limit for
the magnitude of the story.

The Unity of a Plot does not consist, as some suppose, in its having one
man as its subject.  An infinity of things befall that one man, some of
which it is impossible to reduce to unity; and in like manner there are
many actions of one man which cannot be made to form one action.  One
sees, therefore, the mistake of all the poets who have written a
\_Heracleid\_, a \_Theseid\_, or similar poems; they suppose that,
because Heracles was one man, the story also of Heracles must be one
story.  Homer, however, evidently understood this point quite well,
whether by art or instinct, just in the same way as he excels the rest
i. e.ery other respect.  In writing an \_Odyssey\_, he did not make the
poem cover all that ever befell his hero--it befell him, for instance,
to get wounded on Parnassus and also to feign madness at the time of the
call to arms, but the two incidents had no probable or necessary
connexion with one another--instead of doing that, he took an action
with a Unity of

the kind we are describing as the subject of the \_Odyssey\_, as also of
the \_Iliad\_.  The truth is that, just as in the other imitative arts
one imitation is always of one thing, so in poetry the story, as an
imitation of action, must represent one action, a complete whole, with
its several incidents so closely connected that the transposal or
withdrawal of any one of them will disjoin and dislocate the whole.  For
that which makes no perceptible difference by its presence or absence is
no real part of the whole.

From what we have said it will be seen that the poet's function is to
describe, not the thing that has happened, but a kind of thing that
might happen, i.e. what is possible as being probable or necessary.  The
distinction between historian and poet is not in the one writing prose
and the other verse--you might put the work of Herodotus into verse, and
it would still be a species of history; it consists really in this, that
the one describes the thing that has been, and the other a kind of thing
that might be.  Hence poetry is something more philosophic and of graver
import than history, since its statements are of the nature rather of
universals, whereas those of history are singulars.  By a universal
statement I mean one as to what such or such a kind of man will probably
or necessarily say or do--which is the aim of poetry, though it affixes
proper names to the characters; by a singular statement, one as to what,
say, Alcibiades did or had done to him.  In Comedy this has become clear
by this time; it is only when their plot is already made up of probable
incidents that the.g.ve it a basis of proper names, choosing for the
purpose any names that may occur to them, instead of writing like the
old iambic poets about particular persons.  In Tragedy, however, they
still adhere to the historic names; and for this reason: what convinces
is the possible; now whereas we are not yet sure as to the possibility
of that which has not happened, that which has happened is manifestly
possible, else it would not have come to pass.  Nevertheless even in
Tragedy there are some plays with but one or two known names in them,
the rest being inventions; and there are some without a single known
name, e.g. Agathon's Anthens, in which both incidents and names are of
the poet's invention; and it is no less delightful on that account.  So
that one must not aim at a rigid adherence to the traditional stories on
which tragedies are based.  It would be absurd, in fact, to do so, as
even the known stories are only known to a few, though they are a
delight none the less to all.

It i.e.ident from the above that, the poet must be more the poet of his
stories or Plots than of his verses, inasmuch as he is a poet by virtue
of the imitative element in his work, and it is actions that he
imitates.  And if he should come to take a subject from actual history,
he is none the less a poet for that; since some historic occurrences may
very well be in the probable and possible order of things; and it is in
that aspect of them that he is their poet.

Of simple Plots and actions the episodic are the worst.  I call a Plot
episodic when there is neither probability nor necessity in the sequence
of episodes.  Actions of this sort bad poets construct through their own
fault, and good ones on account of the players.  His work being for
public performance, a good poet often stretches out a Plot beyond its
capabilities, and is thus obliged to twist the sequence of incident.

Tragedy, however, is an imitation not only of a complete action, but
also of incidents arousing pity and fear.  Such incidents have the very
greatest effect on the mind when they occur unexpectedly and at the same
time in consequence of one another; there is more of the marvellous in
them then than if they happened of themselves or by mere chance.  Even
matters of chance seem most marvellous if there is an appearance of
design as it were in them; as for instance the statue of Mitys at Argos
killed the author of Mitys' death by falling down on him when a
looker-on at a public spectacle; for incidents like that we think to be
not without a meaning.  A Plot, therefore, of this sort is necessarily
finer than others.

Plots are either simple or complex, since the actions they represent are
naturally of this twofold description.  The action, proceeding in the
way defined, as one continuous whole, I call simple, when the change in
the hero's fortunes takes place without Peripety or Discovery; and
complex, when it involves one or the other, or both.  These should each
of them arise out of the structure of the Plot itself, so as to be the
consequence, necessary or probable, of the antecedents.  There is a
great difference between a thing happening \_propter hoc\_ and \_post
hoc\_.

A Peripety is the change from one state of things within the play to its
opposite of the kind described, and that too in the way we are saying,
in the probable or necessary sequence of events; as it is for instance
in \_Oedipus\_: here the opposite state of things is produced by the
Messenger, who, coming to gladden Oedipus and to remove his fears as to
his mother, reveals the secret of his birth.  And in \_Lynceus\_: just
as he is being led off for execution, with Danaus at his side to put him
to death, the incidents preceding this bring it about that he is saved
and Danaus put to death.  A Discovery is, as the very word implies, a
change from ignorance to knowledge, and thus to either love or hate, in
the personages marked for good or evil fortune.  The finest form of
Discovery is one attended by Peripeties, like that which goes with the
Discovery in \_Oedipus\_.  There are no doubt other forms of it; what we
have said may happen in a way in reference to inanimate things, even
things of a very casual kind; and it is also possible to discover
whether some one has done or not done something.  But the form most
directly connected with the Plot and the action of the piece is the
first-mentioned.  This, with a Peripety, will arouse either pity or
fear--actions of that nature being what Tragedy is assumed to represent;
and it will also serve to bring about the happy or unhappy ending.  The
Discovery, then, being of persons, it may be that of one party only to
the other, the latter being already known; or both the parties may have
to discover themselves.  Iphigenia, for instance, was discovered to
Orestes by sending the letter; and another Discovery was required to
reveal him to Iphigenia.

Two parts of the Plot, then, Peripety and Discovery, are on matters of
this sort.  A third part is Suffering; which we may define as an action
of a destructive or painful nature, such as murders on the stage,
tortures, woundings, and the like.  The other two have been already
explained.

The parts of Tragedy to be treated as formative elements in the whole
were mentioned in a previous Chapter.  From the point of view, however,
of

its quantity, i.e. the separate sections into which it is divided, a
tragedy has the following parts: Prologue, Episode, Exode, and a choral
portion, distinguished into Parode and Stasimon; these two are common to
all tragedies, whereas songs from the stage and Commoe are only found in
some.  The Prologue is all that precedes the Parode of the chorus; an
Episode all that comes in between two whole choral songs; the Exode all
that follows after the last choral song.  In the choral portion the
Parode is the whole first statement of the chorus; a Stasimon, a song of
the chorus without anapaests or trochees; a Commas, a lamentation sung
by chorus and actor in concert.  The parts of Tragedy to be used as
formative elements in the whole we have already mentioned; the above are
its parts from the point of view of its quantity, or the separate
sections into which it is divided.

The next points after what we have said above will be these: (1) What is
the poet to aim at, and what is he to avoid, in constructing his Plots?
And (2) What are the conditions on which the tragi.e.fect depends?

We assume that, for the finest form of Tragedy, the Plot must be not
simple but complex; and further, that it must imitate actions arousing
pity and fear, since that is the distinctive function of this kind of
imitation.  It follows, therefore, that there are three forms of Plot to
be avoided.  (1) A good man must not be seen passing from happiness to
misery, or (2) a bad man from misery to happiness.

The first situation is not fear-inspiring or piteous, but simply odious
to us.  The second is the most untragic that can be; it has no one of
the requisites of Tragedy; it does not appeal either to the human
feeling in us, or to our pity, or to our fears.  Nor, on the other hand,
should (3) an extremely bad man be seen falling from happiness into
misery.  Such a story may arouse the human feeling in us, but it will
not move us to either pity or fear; pity is occasioned by undeserved
misfortune, and fear by that of one like ourselves; so that there will
be nothing either piteous or fear-inspiring in the situation.  There
remains, then, the intermediate kind of personage, a man not
pre-eminently virtuous and just, whose misfortune, however, is brought
upon him not by vice and depravity but by some error of judgement, of
the number of those in the enjoyment of great reputation and prosperity;
e.g. Oedipus, Thyestes, and the men of note of similar families.  The
perfect Plot, accordingly, must have a single, and not (as some tell us)
a double issue; the change in the hero's fortunes must be not from
misery to happiness, but on the contrary from happiness to misery; and
the cause of it must lie not in any depravity, but in some great error
on his part; the man himself being either such as we have described, or
better, not worse, than that.  Fact also confirms our theory.  Though
the poets began by accepting any tragic story that came to hand, in
these days the finest tragedies are always on the story of some few
houses, on that of Alemeon, Oedipus, Orestes, Meleager, Thyestes,
Telephus, or any others that may have been involved, as either agents or
sufferers, in some deed of horror.  The theoretically best tragedy,
then, has a Plot of this description.  The critics, therefore, are wrong
who blame Euripides for taking this line in his tragedies, and giving
many of them an unhappy ending.  It is, as we have said, the right line
to take.  The best proof is this: on the stage, and in the

public performances, such plays, properly worked out, are seen to be the
most truly tragic; and Euripides, even if hi.e.ecution be faulty i.e.ery
other point, is seen to be nevertheless the most tragic certainly of the
dramatists.  After this comes the construction of Plot which some rank
first, one with a double story (like the \_Odyssey\_) and an opposite
issue for the good and the bad personages.  It is ranked as first only
through the weakness of the audiences; the poets merely follow their
public, writing as its wishes dictate.  But the pleasure here is not
that of Tragedy.  It belongs rather to Comedy, where the bitterest
enemies in the piece (e.g. Orestes and Aegisthus) walk off good friends
at the end, with no slaying of any one by any one.

The tragic fear and pity may be aroused by the Spectacle; but they may
also be aroused by the very structure and incidents of the play--which
is the better way and shows the better poet.  The Plot in fact should be
so framed that, even without seeing the things take place, he who simply
hears the account of them shall be filled with horror and pity at the
incidents; which is just the effect that the mere recital of the story
in \_Oedipus\_ would have on one.  To produce this same effect by means
of the Spectacle is less artistic, and requires extraneous aid.  Those,
however, who make use of the Spectacle to put before us that which is
merely monstrous and not productive of fear, are wholly out of touch
with Tragedy; not every kind of pleasure should be required of a
tragedy, but only its own proper pleasure.

The tragic pleasure is that of pity and fear, and the poet has to
produce it by a work of imitation; it is clear, therefore, that the
causes should be included in the incidents of his story.  Let us see,
then, what kinds of incident strike one as horrible, or rather as
piteous.  In a deed of this description the parties must necessarily be
either friends, or enemies, or indifferent to one another.  Now when
enemy does it on enemy, there is nothing to move us to pity either in
his doing or in his meditating the deed, except so far as the actual
pain of the sufferer is concerned; and the same is true when the parties
are indifferent to one another.  Whenever the tragic deed, however, is
done within the family--when murder or the like is done or meditated by
brother on brother, by son on father, by mother on son, or son on
mother--these are the situations the poet should seek after.  The
traditional stories, accordingly, must be kept as they are, e.g. the
murder of Clytaemnestra by Orestes and of Eriphyle by Alcmeon.  At the
same time even with these there is something left to the poet himself;
it is for him to devise the right way of treating them.  Let us explain
more clearly what we mean by 'the right way'.  The deed of horror may be
done by the doer knowingly and consciously, as in the old poets, and in
Medea's murder of her children in Euripides.  Or he may do it, but in
ignorance of his relationship, and discover that afterwards, as does the
\_Oedipus\_ in Sophocles.  Here the deed is outside the play; but it may
be within it, like the act of the Alcmeon in Astydamas, or that of the
Telegonus in \_Ulysses Wounded\_.  A third possibility is for one
meditating some deadly injury to another, in ignorance of his
relationship, to make the discovery in time to draw back.  These exhaust
the possibilities, since the deed must necessarily be either done or not
done, and either knowingly or unknowingly.

The worst situation is when the personage is with full knowledge on the
point of doing the deed, and leaves it undone.  It is odious and also
(through the absence of suffering) untragic; hence it is that no one is
made to act thus except in some few instances, e.g. Haemon and Creon in
\_Antigone\_.  Next after this comes the actual perpetration of the deed
meditated.  A better situation than that, however, is for the deed to be
done in ignorance, and the relationship discovered afterwards, since
there is nothing odious in it, and the Discovery will serve to astound
us.  But the best of all is the last; what we have in \_Cresphontes\_,
for example, where Merope, on the point of slaying her son, recognizes
him in time; in \_Iphigenia\_, where sister and brother are in a like
position; and in \_Helle\_, where the son recognizes his mother, when on
the point of giving her up to her enemy.

This will explain why our tragedies are restricted (as we said just now)
to such a small number of families.  It was accident rather than art
that led the poets in quest of subjects to embody this kind of incident
in their Plots.  They are still obliged, accordingly, to have recourse
to the families in which such horrors have occurred.

On the construction of the Plot, and the kind of Plot required for
Tragedy, enough has now been said.

In the Characters there are four points to aim at.  First and foremost,
that they shall be good.  There will be an element of character in the
play, if (as has been observed) what a personage says or does reveals a
certain moral purpose; and a good element of character, if the purpose
so revealed is good.  Such goodness is possible i.e.ery type of
personage, even in a woman or a slave, though the one is perhaps an
inferior, and the other a wholly worthless being.  The second point is
to make them appropriate.  The Character before us may be, say, manly;
but it is not appropriate in a female Character to be manly, or clever.
The third is to make them like the reality, which is not the same as
their being good and appropriate, in our sense of the term.  The fourth
is to make them consistent and the same throughout; even if
inconsistency be part of the man before one for imitation as presenting
that form of character, he should still be consistently inconsistent.
We have an instance of baseness of character, not required for the
story, in the Menelaus in \_Orestes\_; of the incongruous and
unbefitting in the lamentation of Ulysses in \_Scylla\_, and in the
(clever) speech of Melanippe; and of inconsistency in \_Iphigenia at
Aulis\_, where Iphigenia the suppliant is utterly unlike the later
Iphigenia.  The right thing, however, is in the Characters just as in
the incidents of the play to endeavour always after the necessary or the
probable; so that whenever such-and-such a personage says or does
such-and-such a thing, it shall be the probable or necessary outcome of
his character; and whenever this incident follows on that, it shall be
either the necessary or the probable consequence of it.  From this one
sees (to digress for a moment) that the Denouement also should arise out
of the plot itself, arid not depend on a stage-artifice, as in
\_Medea\_, or in the story of the (arrested) departure of the Greeks in
the \_Iliad\_.  The artifice must be reserved for matters outside the
play--for past events beyond human knowledge, or events yet to come,
which require to be foretold or announced; since it is the privilege of
the Gods to know

everything.  There should be nothing improbable among the actual
incidents.  If it be unavoidable, however, it should be outside the
tragedy, like the improbability in the \_Oedipus\_ of Sophocles.  But to
return to the Characters.  As Tragedy is an imitation of personages
better than the ordinary man, we in our way should follow the example of
good portrait-painters, who reproduce the distinctive features of a man,
and at the same time, without losing the likeness, make him handsomer
than he is.  The poet in like manner, in portraying men quick or slow to
anger, or with similar infirmities of character, must know how to
represent them as such, and at the same time as good men, as Agathon and
Homer have represented Achilles.

All these rules one must keep in mind throughout, and further, those
also for such points of stage-effect as directly depend on the art of
the poet, since in these too one may often make mistakes.  Enough,
however, has been said on the subject in one of our published writings.

Discovery in general has been explained already.  As for the species of
Discovery, the first to be noted is (1) the least artistic form of it,
of which the poets make most use through mere lack of invention,
Discovery by signs or marks.  Of these signs some are congenital, like
the 'lance-head which the Earth-born have on them', or 'stars', such as
Carcinus brings in in his \_Thyestes\_; others acquired after birth--
these latter being either marks on the body, e.g. scars, or external
tokens, like necklaces, or to take another sort of instance, the ark in
the Discovery in \_Tyro\_.  Even these, however, admit of two uses, a
better and a worse; the scar of Ulysses is an instance; the Discovery of
him through it is made in one way by the nurse and in another by the
swineherds.  A Discovery using signs as a means of assurance is less
artistic, as indeed are all such as imply reflection; whereas one
bringing them in all of a sudden, as in the \_Bath-story\_, is of a
better order.  Next after these are (2) Discoveries made directly by the
poet; which are inartistic for that very reason; e.g. Orestes' Discovery
of himself in \_Iphigenia\_: whereas his sister reveals who she is by
the letter, Orestes is made to say himself what the poet rather than the
story demands.  This, therefore, is not far removed from the
first-mentioned fault, since he might have presented certain tokens as
well.  Another instance is the 'shuttle's voice' in the \_Tereus\_ of
Sophocles.  (3) A third species is Discovery through memory, from a
man's consciousness being awakened by something seen or heard.  Thus in
\_The Cyprioe\_ of Dicaeogenes, the sight of the picture makes the man
burst into tears; and in the \_Tale of Alcinous\_, hearing the harper
Ulysses is reminded of the past and weeps; the Discovery of them being
the result.  (4) A fourth kind is Discovery through reasoning; e.g. in
\_The Choephoroe\_: 'One like me is here; there is no one like me but
Orestes; he, therefore, must be here.'  Or that which Polyidus the
Sophist suggested for \_Iphigenia\_; since it was natural for Orestes to
reflect: 'My sister was sacrificed, and I am to be sacrificed like
her.'  Or that in the \_Tydeus\_ of Theodectes: 'I came to find a son,
and am to die myself.'  Or that in \_The Phinidae\_: on seeing the place
the women inferred their fate, that they were to die there, since they
had also been exposed there.  (5) There is, too, a composite Discovery
arising from bad reasoning on the side

of the other party.  An instance of it is in \_Ulysses the False
Messenger\_: he said he should know the bow--which he had not seen; but
to suppose from that that he would know it again (as though he had once
seen it) was bad reasoning.  (6) The best of all Discoveries, however,
is that arising from the incidents themselves, when the great surprise
comes about through a probable incident, like that in the \_Oedipus\_ of
Sophocles; and also in \_Iphigenia\_; for it was not improbable that she
should wish to have a letter taken home.  These last are the only
Discoveries independent of the artifice of signs and necklaces.  Next
after them come Discoveries through reasoning.

At the time when he is constructing his Plots, and engaged on the
Diction in which they are worked out, the poet should remember

(1) to put the actual scenes as far as possible before hi.e.es. In this
way, seeing everything with the vividness of an eye-witness as it were,
he will devise what is appropriate, and be least likely to overlook
incongruities.  This is shown by what was censured in Carcinus, the
return of Amphiaraus from the sanctuary; it would have passed unnoticed,
if it had not been actually seen by the audience; but on the stage his
play failed, the incongruity of the incident offending the spectators.
(2) As far as may be, too, the poet should even act his story with the
very gestures of his personages.  Given the same natural qualifications,
he who feels the emotions to be described will be the most convincing;
distress and anger, for instance, are portrayed most truthfully by one
who is feeling them at the moment.  Hence it is that poetry demands a
man with special gift for it, or else one with a touch of madness in
him; the, former can easily assume the required mood, and the latter may
be actually beside himself with emotion.  (3) His story, again, whether
already made or of his own making, he should first simplify and reduce
to a universal form, before proceeding to lengthen it out by the
insertion of episodes.  The following will show how the universal
element in \_Iphigenia\_, for instance, may be viewed: A certain maiden
having been offered in sacrifice, and spirited away from her sacrificers
into another land, where the custom was to sacrifice all strangers to
the Goddess, she was made there the priestess of this rite.  Long after
that the brother of the priestess happened to come; the fact, however,
of the oracle having for a certain reason bidden him go thither, and his
object in going, are outside the Plot of the play.  On his coming he was
arrested, and about to be sacrificed, when he revealed who he
was--either as Euripides puts it, or (as suggested by Polyidus) by the
not improbable exclamation, 'So I too am doomed to be sacrificed, as my
sister was'; and the disclosure led to his salvation.  This done, the
next thing, after the proper names have been fixed as a basis for the
story, is to work i.e.isodes or accessory incidents.  One must mind,
however, that the episodes are appropriate, like the fit of madness in
Orestes, which led to his arrest, and the purifying, which brought about
his salvation.  In plays, then, the episodes are short; i. e.ic poetry
they serve to lengthen out the poem.  The argument of the \_Odyssey\_ is
not a long one.

A certain man has been abroad many years; Poseidon i.e.er on the watch
for him, and he is all alone.  Matters at home too have come to this,
that his

substance is being wasted and his son's death plotted by suitors to his
wife.  Then he arrives there himself after his grievous sufferings;
reveals himself, and falls on hi.e.emies; and the end is his salvation
and their death.  This being all that is proper to the \_Odyssey\_,
everything else in it i.e.isode.

(4) There is a further point to be borne in mind.  Every tragedy is in
part Complication and in part Denouement; the incidents before the
opening scene, and often certain also of those within the play, forming
the Complication; and the rest the Denouement.  By Complication I mean
all from the beginning of the story to the point just before the change
in the hero's fortunes; by Denouement, all from the beginning of the
change to the end.  In the \_Lynceus\_ of Theodectes, for instance, the
Complication includes, together with the presupposed incidents, the
seizure of the child and that in turn of the parents; and the Denouement
all from the indictment for the murder to the end.  Now it is right,
when one speaks of a tragedy as the same or not the same as another, to
do so on the ground before all else of their Plot, i. e. as having the
same or not the same Complication and Denouement.  Yet there are many
dramatists who, after a good Complication, fail in the Denouement.  But
it is necessary for both points of construction to be always duly
mastered.  (5) There are four distinct species of Tragedy--that being
the number of the constituents also that have been mentioned: first, the
complex Tragedy, which is all Peripety and Discovery; second, the
Tragedy of suffering, e.g. the \_Ajaxes\_ and \_Ixions\_; third, the
Tragedy of character, e.g. \_The Phthiotides\_ and \_Peleus\_.  The
fourth constituent is that of 'Spectacle', exemplified in \_The
Phorcides\_, in \_Prometheus\_, and in all plays with the scene laid in
the nether world.  The poet's aim, then, should be to combine every
element of interest, if possible, or else the more important and the
major part of them.  This is now especially necessary owing to the
unfair criticism to which the poet is subjected in these days.  Just
because there have been poets before him strong in the several species
of tragedy, the critics now expect the one man to surpass that which was
the strong point of each one of his predecessors.  (6) One should also
remember what has been said more than once, and not write a tragedy on
an epic body of incident (i.e. one with a plurality of stories in it),
by attempting to dramatize, for instance, the entire story of the
\_Iliad\_.  In the epic owing to its scale every part is treated at
proper length; with a drama, however, on the same story the result is
very disappointing.  This is shown by the fact that all who have
dramatized the fall of Ilium in its entirety, and not part by part, like
Euripides, or the whole of the Niobe story, instead of a portion, like
Aeschylus, either fail utterly or have but ill success on the stage; for
that and that alone was enough to rui.e.en a play by Agathon.  Yet in
their Peripeties, as also in their simple plots, the poets I mean show
wonderful skill in aiming at the kind of effect they desire--a tragic
situation that arouses the human feeling in one, like the clever villain
(e.g. Sisyphus) deceived, or the brave wrongdoer worsted.  This is
probable, however, only in Agathon's sense, when he speaks of the
probability of even improbabilities coming to pass.  (7) The Chorus too
should be regarded as one of the actors; it should be an integral part
of the whole, and take a share in the action--that which it has in
Sophocles rather than in Euripides.  With

the later poets, however, the songs in a play of theirs have no more to
do with the Plot of that than of any other tragedy.  Hence it is that
they are now singing intercalary pieces, a practice first introduced by
Agathon.  And yet what real difference is there between singing such
intercalary pieces, and attempting to fit in a speech, or even a whole
act, from one play into another?

The Plot and Characters having been discussed, it remains to consider
the Diction and Thought.  As for the Thought, we may assume what is said
of it in our Art of Rhetoric, as it belongs more properly to that
department of inquiry.  The Thought of the personages is shown in
everything to be effected by their language--i.e.ery effort to prove or
disprove, to arouse emotion (pity, fear, anger, and the like), or to
maximize or minimize things.  It is clear, also, that their mental
procedure must be on the same lines in their actions likewise, whenever
they wish them to arouse pity or horror, or have a look of importance or
probability.  The only difference is that with the act the impression
has to be made without explanation; whereas with the spoken word it has
to be produced by the speaker, and result from his language.  What,
indeed, would be the good of the speaker, if things appeared in the
required light even apart from anything he says?

As regards the Diction, one subject for inquiry under this head is the
turns given to the language when spoken; e.g. the difference between
command and prayer, simple statement and threat, question and answer,
and so forth.  The theory of such matters, however, belongs to Elocution
and the professors of that art.  Whether the poet knows these things or
not, his art as a poet is never seriously criticized on that account.
What fault can one see in Homer's 'Sing of the wrath, Goddess'?--which
Protagoras has criticized as being a command where a prayer was meant,
since to bid one do or not do, he tells us, is a command.  Let us pass
over this, then, as appertaining to another art, and not to that of
poetry.

The Diction viewed as a whole is made up of the following parts: the
Letter (or ultimate element), the Syllable, the Conjunction, the
Article, the Noun, the Verb, the Case, and the Speech.  (1) The Letter
is an indivisible sound of a particular kind, one that may become a
factor in an intelligible sound.  Indivisible sounds are uttered by the
brutes also, but no one of these is a Letter in our sense of the term.
These elementary sounds are either vowels, semivowels, or mutes.  A
vowel is a Letter having an audible sound without the addition of
another Letter.  A semivowel, one having an audible sound by the
addition of another Letter; e.g. S and R. A mute, one having no sound at
all by itself, but becoming audible by an addition, that of one of the
Letters which have a sound of some sort of their own; e.g. D and G. The
Letters differ in various ways: as produced by different conformations
or in different regions of the mouth; as aspirated, not aspirated, or
sometimes one and sometimes the other; as long, short, or of variable
quantity; and further as having an acute.g.ave, or intermediate accent.

The details of these matters we mubt leave to the metricians.  (2) A
Syllable is a nonsignificant composite sound, made up of a mute and a
Letter having a sound (a vowel or semivowel); for GR, without an A, is
just as much a Syllable as GRA, with an A. The various forms of the
Syllable

also belong to the theory of metre.  (3) A Conjunction is (a) a
non-significant sound which, when one significant sound is formable out
of several, neither hinders nor aids the union, and which, if the Speech
thus formed stands by itself (apart from other Speeches) must not be
inserted at the beginning of it; e.g. \_men\_, \_de\_, \_toi\_, \_de\_.
Or (b) a non-significant sound capable of combining two or more
significant sounds into one; e.g. \_amphi\_, \_peri\_, etc. (4) An
Article is a non-significant sound marking the beginning, end, or
dividing-point of a Speech, its natural place being either at the
extremities or in the middle.  (5) A Noun or name is a composite
significant sound not involving the idea of time, with parts which have
no significance by themselves in it.  It is to be remembered that in a
compound we do not think of the parts as having a significance also by
themselves; in the name 'Theodorus', for instance, the \_doron\_ means
nothing to us.

(6) A Verb is a composite significant sound involving the idea of time,
with parts which (just as in the Noun) have no significance by
themselves in it.  Whereas the word 'man' or 'white' does not imply
\_when\_, 'walks' and 'has walked' involve in addition to the idea of
walking that of time present or time past.

(7) A Case of a Noun or Verb is when the word means 'of or 'to' a thing,
and so forth, or for one or many (e.g. 'man' and 'men'); or it may
consist merely in the mode of utterance, e.g. in question, command, etc.
'Walked?'  And 'Walk!'  Are Cases of the verb 'to walk' of this last
kind.  (8) A Speech is a composite significant sound, some of the parts
of which have a certain significance by themselves.  It may be observed
that a Speech is not always made up of Noun and Verb; it may be without
a Verb, like the definition of man; but it will always have some part
with a certain significance by itself.  In the Speech 'Cleon walks',
'Cleon' is an instance of such a part.  A Speech is said to be one in
two ways, either as signifying one thing, or as a union of several
Speeches made into one by conjunction.  Thus the \_Iliad\_ is one Speech
by conjunction of several; and the definition of man is one through its
signifying one thing.

Nouns are of two kinds, either (1) simple, i.e. made up of
non-significant parts, like the word ge, or (2) double; in the latter
case the word may be made up either of a significant and a
non-significant part (a distinction which disappears in the compound),
or of two significant parts.  It is possible also to have triple,
quadruple or higher compounds, like most of our amplified names; e.g.'
Hermocaicoxanthus' and the like.

Whatever its structure, a Noun must always be either (1) the ordinary
word for the thing, or (2) a strange word, or (3) a metaphor, or (4) an
ornamental word, or (5) a coined word, or (6) a word lengthened out, or
(7) curtailed, or (8) altered in form.  By the ordinary word I mean that
in general use in a country; and by a strange word, one in use
elsewhere.  So that the same word may obviously be at once strange and
ordinary, though not in reference to the same people; \_sigunos\_, for
instance, is an ordinary word in Cyprus, and a strange word with us.
Metaphor consists in giving the thing a name that belongs to something
else; the transference being either from genus to species, or from
species to genus, or from species to species, or on grounds of analogy.
That from genus to species i.e.emplified

in 'Here stands my ship'; for lying at anchor is the 'standing' of a
particular kind of thing.  That from species to genus in 'Truly ten
thousand good deeds has Ulysses wrought', where 'ten thousand', which is
a particular large number, is put in place of the generic 'a large
number'.  That from species to species in 'Drawing the life with the
bronze', and in 'Severing with the enduring bronze'; where the poet uses
'draw' in the sense of 'sever' and 'sever' in that of 'draw', both words
meaning to 'take away' something.  That from analogy is possible
whenever there are four terms so related that the second (B) is to the
first (A), as the fourth (D) to the third (C); for one may then
metaphorically put B in lieu of D, and D in lieu of B. Now and then,
too, they qualify the metaphor by adding on to it that to which the word
it supplants is relative.  Thus a cup (B) is in relation to Dionysus (A)
what a shield (D) is to Ares (C).  The cup accordingly will be
metaphorically described as the 'shield \_of Dionysus\_' (D + A), and
the shield as the 'cup \_of Ares\_' (B + C).  Or to take another
instance: As old age (D) is to life (C), so i.e.ening (B) to day (A).
One will accordingly describe evening (B) as the 'old age \_of the
day\_' (D + A)--or by the Empedoclean equivalent; and old age (D) as the
'evening' or 'sunset of life'' (B + C).  It may be that some of the
terms thus related have no special name of their own, but for all that
they will be metaphorically described in just the same way.  Thus to
cast forth seed-corn is called 'sowing'; but to cast forth its flame, as
said of the sun, has no special name.  This nameless act (B), however,
stands in just the same relation to its object, sunlight (A), as sowing
(D) to the seed-corn (C).  Hence the expression in the poet, 'sowing
around a god-created \_flame\_' (D + A).  There is also another form of
qualified metaphor.  Having given the thing the alien name, one may by a
negative addition deny of it one of the attributes naturally associated
with its new name.  An instance of this would be to call the shield not
the 'cup \_of Ares\_,' as in the former case, but a 'cup \_that holds no
wine\_'.  \* \* \* A coined word is a name which, being quite unknown
among a people, is given by the poet himself; e.g. (for there are some
words that seem to be of this origin) \_hernyges\_ for horns, and
\_areter\_ for priest.  A word is said to be lengthened out, when it has
a short vowel made long, or an extra syllable inserted; e.g. \_polleos\_
for \_poleos\_, \_Peleiadeo\_ for \_Peleidon\_.  It is said to be
curtailed, when it has lost a part; e.g. \_kri\_, \_do\_, and \_ops\_ in
\_mia ginetai amphoteron ops\_.  It is an altered word, when part is
left as it was and part is of the poet's making; e.g. \_dexiteron\_ for
\_dexion\_, in \_dexiteron kata maxon\_.

The Nouns themselves (to whatever class they may belong) are either
masculines, feminines, or intermediates (neuter).  All ending in N, P,
S, or in the two compounds of this last, PS and X, are masculines.  All
ending in the invariably long vowels, H and O, and in A among the vowels
that may be long, are feminines.  So that there is an equal number of
masculine and feminine terminations, as PS and X are the same as S, and
need not be counted.  There is no Noun, however, ending in a mute or
i.e.ther of the two short vowels, E and O. Only three (\_meli, kommi,
peperi\_) end in I, and five in T. The intermediates, or neuters, end in
the variable vowels or in N, P, X.

The perfection of Diction is for it to be at once clear and not mean.
The clearest indeed is that made up of the ordinary words for things,
but it is mean, as is shown by the poetry of Cleophon and Sthenelus.  On
the other hand the Diction becomes distinguished and non-prosaic by the
use of unfamiliar terms, i.e. strange words, metaphors, lengthened
forms, and everything that deviates from the ordinary modes of
speech.--But a whole statement in such terms will be either a riddle or
a barbarism, a riddle, if made up of metaphors, a barbarism, if made up
of strange words.  The very nature indeed of a riddle is this, to
describe a fact in an impossible combination of words (which cannot be
done with the real names for things, but can be with their metaphorical
substitutes); e.g. 'I saw a man glue brass on another with fire', and
the like.  The corresponding use of strange words results in a
barbarism.--A certain admixture, accordingly, of unfamiliar terms is
necessary.  These, the strange word, the metaphor, the ornamental
equivalent, etc.. will save the language from seeming mean and prosaic,
while the ordinary words in it will secure the requisite clearness.
What helps most, however, to render the Diction at once clear and
non-prosaic is the use of the lengthened, curtailed, and altered forms
of words.  Their deviation from the ordinary words will, by making the
language unlike that in general use.g.ve it a non-prosaic appearance;
and their having much in common with the words in general use will give
it the quality of clearness.  It is not right, then, to condemn these
modes of speech, and ridicule the poet for using them, as some have
done; e.g. the elder Euclid, who said it was easy to make poetry if one
were to be allowed to lengthen the words in the statement itself as much
as one likes--a procedure he caricatured by reading '\_Epixarhon eidon
Marathonade Badi--gonta\_, and \_ouk han g' eramenos ton ekeinou helle
boron\_ as verses.  A too apparent use of these licences has certainly a
ludicrous effect, but they are not alone in that; the rule of moderation
applies to all the constituents of the poetic vocabulary; even with
metaphors, strange words, and the rest, the effect will be the same, if
one uses them improperly and with a view to provoking laughter.  The
proper use of them is a very different thing.  To realize the difference
one should take an epic verse and see how it reads when the normal words
are introduced.  The same should be done too with the strange word, the
metaphor, and the rest; for one has only to put the ordinary words in
their place to see the truth of what we are saying.  The same iambic,
for instance, is found in Aeschylus and Euripides, and as it stands in
the former it is a poor line; whereas Euripides, by the change of a
single word, the substitution of a strange for what is by usage the
ordinary word, has made it seem a fine one.  Aeschylus having said in
his \_Philoctetes\_:\_phagedaina he mon sarkas hesthiei podos\_Euripides
has merely altered the hesthiei here into thoinatai.  Or suppose\_nun de
m' heon holigos te kai outidanos kai haeikos\_to be altered by the
substitution of the ordinary words into\_nun de m' heon mikros te kai
hasthenikos kai haeidos\_Or the line\_diphron haeikelion katatheis
olingen te trapexan\_into\_diphron moxtheron katatheis mikran te
trapexan\_Or heiones boosin into heiones kraxousin.  Add to this that
Ariphrades used to ridicule the tragedians for introducing expressions
unknown in the language of common life, \_doeaton hapo\_ (for \_apo

domaton\_), \_sethen\_, \_hego de nin\_, \_Achilleos peri\_ (for \_peri
Achilleos\_), and the like.  The mere fact of their not being in
ordinary speech gives the Diction a non-prosaic character; but
Ariphrades was unaware of that.  It is a great thing, indeed, to make a
proper use of these poetical forms, as also of compounds and strange
words.  But the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor.  It
is the one thing that cannot be learnt from others; and it is also a
sign of genius, since a good metaphor implies an intuitive perception of
the similarity in dissimilars.

Of the kinds of words we have enumerated it may be observed that
compounds are most in place in the dithyramb, strange words in heroic,
and metaphors in iambic poetry.  Heroic poetry, indeed, may avail itself
of them all.  But in iambic verse, which models itself as far as
possible on the spoken language, only those kinds of words are in place
which are allowable also in an oration, i.e. the ordinary word, the
metaphor, and the ornamental equivalent.

Let this, then, suffice as an account of Tragedy, the art imitating by
means of action on the stage.

As for the poetry which merely narrates, or imitates by means of
versified language (without action), it i.e.ident that it has several
points in common with Tragedy.
