[Section Three]
===============

I.
--

The construction of its stories should clearly be like that in a drama;
they should be based on a single action, one that is a complete whole in
itself, with a beginning, middle, and end, so as to enable the work to
produce its own proper pleasure with all the organic unity of a living
creature.  Nor should one suppose that there is anything like them in
our usual histories.  A history has to deal not with one action, but
with one period and all that happened in that to one or more persons,
however disconnected the several events may have been.  Just as two
events may take place at the same time, e.g. the sea-fight off Salamis
and the battle with the Carthaginians in Sicily, without converging to
the same end, so too of two consecutive events one may sometimes come
after the other with no one end as their common issue.  Nevertheless
most of our epic poets, one may say, ignore the distinction.

Herein, then, to repeat what we have said before, we have a further
proof of Homer's marvellous superiority to the rest.  He did not attempt
to deal even with the Trojan war in its entirety, though it was a whole
with a definite beginning and end--through a feeling apparently that it
was too long a story to be taken in in one view, or if not that, too
complicated from the variety of incident in it.  As it is, he has
singled out one section of the whole; many of the other incidents,
however, he brings in as episodes, using the Catalogue of the Ships, for
instance, and other episodes to relieve the uniformity of his
narrative.  As for the other epic poets, they treat of one man, or one
period; or else of an action which, although one, has a multiplicity of
parts in it.  This last is what the authors of the \_Cypria\_ and
\_Little\_ \_Iliad\_ have done.  And the result is that, whereas the
\_Iliad\_ or \_Odyssey\_ supplies materials for only one, or at most two
tragedies, the \_Cypria\_ does that for several, and the \_Little\_
\_Iliad\_ for more than eight: for an \_Adjudgment of Arms\_, a
\_Philoctetes\_, a \_Neoptolemus\_, a \_Eurypylus\_, a \_Ulysses as
Beggar\_, a \_Laconian Women\_, a \_Fall of Ilium\_, and a \_Departure
of the Fleet\_; as also a \_Sinon\_, and \_Women of Troy\_.

II.
---

Besides this, Epic poetry must divide into the same species as Tragedy;
it must be either simple or complex, a story of character or one of
suffering.  Its parts, too, with the exception of Song and Spectacle,
must be the same, as it requires Peripeties, Discoveries, and scenes of
suffering just like Tragedy.  Lastly, the Thought and Diction in it must
be good in their way.  All these elements appear in Homer first; and he
has made due use of them.  His two poems are each examples of
construction, the \_Iliad\_ simple and a story of suffering, the
\_Odyssey\_ complex (there is Discovery throughout it) and a story of
character.  And they are more than this, since in Diction and Thought
too they surpass all other poems.

There is, however, a difference in the Epic as compared with Tragedy,

(1) in its length, and (2) in its metre.  (1) As to its length, the
limit already suggested will suffice: it must be possible for the
beginning and end of the work to be taken in in one view--a condition
which will be fulfilled if the poem be shorter than the old epics, and
about as long as the series of tragedies offered for one hearing.  For
the extension of its length epic poetry has a special advantage, of
which it makes large use.  In a play one cannot represent an action with
a number of parts going on simultaneously; one is limited to the part on
the stage and connected with the actors.  Whereas i.e.ic poetry the
narrative form makes it possible for one to describe a number of
simultaneous incidents; and these, if germane to the subject, increase
the body of the poem.  This then is a gain to the Epic, tending to give
it grandeur, and also variety of interest and room for episodes of
diverse kinds.  Uniformity of incident by the satiety it soon creates is
apt to ruin tragedies on the stage.  (2) As for its metre, the heroic
has been assigned it from experience; were any one to attempt a
narrative poem in some one, or in several, of the other metres, the
incongruity of the thing would be apparent.  The heroic; in fact is the
gravest and weightiest of metres--which is what makes it more tolerant
than the rest of strange words and metaphors, that also being a point in
which the narrative form of poetry goes beyond all others.  The iambic
and trochaic, on the other hand, are metres of movement, the one
representing that of life and action, the other that of the dance.
Still more unnatural would it appear, it one were to write an epic in a
medley of metres, as Chaeremon did.  Hence it is that no one has ever
written a long story in any but heroic verse; nature herself, as we have
said, teaches us to select the metre appropriate to such a story.

Homer, admirable as he is i.e.ery other respect, i.e.pecially so in
this, that he alone among epic poets is not unaware of the part to be
played by the poet himself in the poem.  The poet should say very little
in propria persona, as he is no imitator when doing that.  Whereas the
other poets are perpetually coming forward in person, and say but
little, and that only here and there, as imitators, Homer after a brief
preface brings in forthwith a man, a woman, or some other Character--no
one of them characterless, but each with distinctive characteristics.

The marvellous is certainly required in Tragedy.  The Epic, however,
affords more opening for the improbable, the chief factor in the
marvellous, because in it the agents are not visibly before one.  The
scene of the pursuit

of Hector would be ridiculous on the stage--the Greeks halting instead
of pursuing him, and Achilles shaking his head to stop them; but in the
poem the absurdity is overlooked.  The marvellous, however, is a cause
of pleasure, as is shown by the fact that we all tell a story with
additions, in the belief that we are doing our hearers a pleasure.

Homer more than any other has taught the rest of us the art of framing
lies in the right way.  I mean the use of paralogism.  Whenever, if A is
or happens, a consequent, B, is or happens, men's notion is that, if the
B is, the A also is--but that is a false conclusion.  Accordingly, if A
is untrue, but there is something else, B, that on the assumption of its
truth follows as its consequent, the right thing then is to add on the
B. Just because we know the truth of the consequent, we are in our own
minds led on to the erroneous inference of the truth of the antecedent.
Here is an instance, from the Bath-story in the \_Odyssey\_.

A likely impossibility is always preferable to an unconvincing
possibility.  The story should never be made up of improbable incidents;
there should be nothing of the sort in it.  If, however, such incidents
are unavoidable, they should be outside the piece, like the hero's
ignorance in \_Oedipus\_ of the circumstances of Lams' death; not within
it, like the report of the Pythian games in \_Electra\_, or the man's
having come to Mysia from Tegea without uttering a word on the way, in
\_The Mysians\_.  So that it is ridiculous to say that one's Plot would
have been spoilt without them, since it is fundamentally wrong to make
up such Plots.  If the poet has taken such a Plot, however, and one sees
that he might have put it in a more probable form, he is guilty of
absurdity as well as a fault of art.  Even in the \_Odyssey\_ the
improbabilities in the setting-ashore of Ulysses would be clearly
intolerable in the hands of an inferior poet.  As it is, the poet
conceals them, his other excellences veiling their absurdity.  Elaborate
Diction, however, is required only in places where there is no action,
and no Character or Thought to be revealed.  Where there is Character or
Thought, on the other hand, an over-ornate Diction tends to obscure
them.

As regards Problems and their Solutions, one may see the number and
nature of the assumptions on which they proceed by viewing the matter in
the following way.  (1) The poet being an imitator just like the painter
or other maker of likenesses, he must necessarily in all instances
represent things in one or other of three aspects, either as they were
or are, or as they are said or thought to be or to have been, or as they
ought to be.  (2) All this he does in language, with an admixture, it
may be, of strange words and metaphors, as also of the various modified
forms of words, since the use of these is conceded in poetry.  (3) It is
to be remembered, too, that there is not the same kind of correctness in
poetry as in politics, or indeed any other art.  There is, however,
within the limits of poetry itself a possibility of two kinds of error,
the one directly, the other only accidentally connected with the art.
If the poet meant to describe the thing correctly, and failed through
lack of power of expression, his art itself is at fault.  But if it was
through his having meant to describe it in some incorrect way (e.g. to
make the horse in movement have both right legs thrown forward) that the
technical error (one in a matter of, say, medicine or some other special
science), or

impossibilities of whatever kind they may be, have got into his
description, hi.e.ror in that case is not in the essentials of the
poetic art.  These, therefore, must be the premisses of the Solutions in
answer to the criticisms involved in the Problems.
