[Section Four]
==============

I.
--

As to the criticisms relating to the poet's art itself.  Any
impossibilities there may be in his descriptions of things are faults.
But from another point of view they are justifiable, if they serve the
end of poetry itself--if (to assume what we have said of that end) they
make the effect of some portion of the work more astounding.  The
Pursuit of Hector is an instance in point.  If, however, the poetic end
might have been as well or better attained without sacrifice of
technical correctness in such matters, the impossibility is not to be
justified, since the description should be, if it can, entirely free
from error.  One may ask, too, whether the error is in a matter directly
or only accidentally connected with the poetic art; since it is a lesser
error in an artist not to know, for instance, that the hind has no
horns, than to produce an unrecognizable picture of one.

II.
---

If the poet's description be criticized as not true to fact, one may
urge perhaps that the object ought to be as described--an answer like
that of Sophocles, who said that he drew men as they ought to be, and
Euripides as they were.  If the description, however, be neither true
nor of the thing as it ought to be, the answer must be then, that it is
in accordance with opinion.  The tales about Gods, for instance, may be
as wrong as Xenophanes thinks, neither true nor the better thing to say;
but they are certainly in accordance with opinion.  Of other statements
in poetry one may perhaps say, not that they are better than the truth,
but that the fact was so at the time; e.g. the description of the arms:
'their spears stood upright, butt-end upon the ground'; for that was the
usual way of fixing them then, as it is still with the Illyrians.  As
for the question whether something said or done in a poem is morally
right or not, in dealing with that one should consider not only the
intrinsic quality of the actual word or deed, but also the person who
says or does it, the person to whom he says or does it, the time, the
means, and the motive of the agent--whether he does it to attain a
greate.g.od, or to avoid a greater evil.)

III.
----

Other criticisms one must meet by considering the language of the poet:
(1) by the assumption of a strange word in a passage like \_oureas men
proton\_, where by \_oureas\_ Homer may perhaps mean not mules but
sentinels.  And in saying of Dolon, \_hos p e toi eidos men heen
kakos\_, his meaning may perhaps be, not that Dolon's body was deformed,
but that his face was ugly, as \_eneidos\_ is the Cretan word for
handsome-faced.  So, too, \_goroteron de keraie\_ may mean not 'mix the
wine stronger', as though for topers, but 'mix it quicker'.  (2) Other
expressions in Homer may be explained as metaphorical; e.g. in \_halloi
men ra theoi te kai aneres eudon (hapantes) pannux\_ as compared with
what he tells us at the same time, \_e toi hot hes pedion to Troikon
hathreseien, aulon suriggon \*te homadon\*\_ the word \_hapantes\_
'all', is metaphorically put for 'many', since 'all' is a species of
'many '.  So also his \_oie d' ammoros\_ is metaphorical, the best known
standing 'alone'.  (3) A change, as Hippias suggested, in the mode of
reading a word will solve the difficulty in \_didomen de oi\_, and \_to
men ou kataputhetai hombro\_.  (4) Other difficulties may be solved by
another punctuation; e.g. in Empedocles, \_aipsa de thnet ephyonto, ta
prin mathon athanata xora te prin kekreto\_.  Or (5) by the assumption
of an equivocal term, as in \_parocheken de pleo nux\_, where \_pleo\_
i.e.uivocal. Or (6) by an appeal to the custom of language.
Wine-and-water we call 'wine'; and it is on the same principle that
Homer speaks of a \_knemis neoteuktou kassiteroio\_, a 'greave of
new-wrought tin.'  A worker in iron we call a 'brazier'; and it is on
the same principle that Ganymede is described as the 'wine-server' of
Zeus, though the Gods do not drink wine.  This latter, however, may be
an instance of metaphor.  But whenever also a word seems to imply some
contradiction, it is necessary to reflect how many ways there may be of
understanding it in the passage in question; e.g. in Homer's \_te r'
hesxeto xalkeon hegxos\_ one should consider the possible senses of 'was
stopped there'--whether by taking it in this sense or in that one will
best avoid the fault of which Glaucon speaks: 'They start with some
improbable presumption; and having so decreed it themselves, proceed to
draw inferences, and censure the poet as though he had actually said
whatever they happen to believe, if his statement conflicts with their
own notion of things.'  This is how Homer's silence about Icarius has
been treated.  Starting with, the notion of his having been a
Lacedaemonian, the critics think it strange for Telemachus not to have
met him when he went to Lacedaemon.  Whereas the fact may have been as
the Cephallenians say, that the wife of Ulysses was of a Cephallenian
family, and that her father's name was Icadius, not Icarius.  So that it
is probably a mistake of the critics that has given rise to the Problem.

Speaking generally, one has to justify (1) the Impossible by reference
to the requirements of poetry, or to the better, or to opinion.  For the
purposes of poetry a convincing impossibility is preferable to an
unconvincing possibility; and if men such as Zeuxis depicted be
impossible, the answer is that it is better they should be like that, as
the artist ought to improve on his model.  (2) The Improbable one has to
justify either by showing it to be in accordance with opinion, or by
urging that at times it is not improbable; for there is a probability of
things happening also against probability.  (3) The contradictions found
in the poet's language one should first test as one does an opponent's
confutation in a dialectical argument, so as to see whether he means the
same thing, in the same relation, and in the same sense, before
admitting that he has contradicted either something he has said himself
or what a man of sound sense assumes as true.  But there is no possible
apology for improbability of Plot or depravity of character, when they
are not necessary and no use is made of them, like the improbability in
the appearance of Aegeus in \_Medea\_ and the baseness of Menelaus in
\_Orestes\_.

The objections, then, of critics start with faults of five kinds: the
allegation is always that something i.e.ther (1) impossible, (2)
improbable, (3) corrupting, (4) contradictory, or (5) against technical
correctness.  The answers to these objections must be sought under one
or other of the above-mentioned heads, which are twelve in number.

The question may be raised whether the epic or the tragic is the higher
form of imitation.  It may be argued that, if the less vulgar is the
higher, and the less vulgar is always that which addresses the better
public, an art addressing any and every one is of a very vulgar order.
It is a belief that their public cannot see the meaning, unless they add
something themselves, that causes the perpetual movements of the
performers--bad flute-players, for instance, rolling about, if
quoit-throwing is to be represented, and pulling at the conductor, if
Scylla is the subject of the piece.  Tragedy, then, is said to be an art
of this order--to be in fact just what the later actors were in the eyes
of their predecessors; for Myrmiscus used to call Callippides 'the ape',
because he thought he so overacted his parts; and a similar view was
taken of Pindarus also.  All Tragedy, however, is said to stand to the
Epic as the newer to the older school of actors.  The one, accordingly,
is said to address a cultivated 'audience, which does not need the
accompaniment of gesture; the other, an uncultivated one.  If,
therefore, Tragedy is a vulgar art, it must clearly be lower than the
Epic.

The answer to this is twofold.  In the first place, one may urge (1)
that the censure does not touch the art of the dramatic poet, but only
that of his interpreter; for it is quite possible to overdo the
gesturing even in an epic recital, as did Sosistratus, and in a singing
contest, as did Mnasitheus of Opus.  (2) That one should not condemn all
movement, unless one means to condemn even the dance, but only that of
ignoble people--which is the point of the criticism passed on
Callippides and in the present day on others, that their women are not
like gentlewomen.  (3) That Tragedy may produce its effect even without
movement or action in just the same way as Epic poetry; for from the
mere reading of a play its quality may be seen.  So that, if it be
superior in all other respects, thi.e.ement of inferiority is not a
necessary part of it.

In the second place, one must remember (1) that Tragedy has everything
that the Epic has (even the epic metre being admissible), together with
a not inconsiderable addition in the shape of the Music (a very real
factor in the pleasure of the drama) and the Spectacle.  (2) That its
reality of presentation is felt in the play as read, as well as in the
play as acted.  (3) That the tragic imitation requires less space for
the attainment of its end; which is a great advantage, since the more
concentrated effect is more pleasurable than one with a large admixture
of time to dilute it--consider the \_Oedipus\_ of Sophocles, for
instance, and the effect of expanding it into the number of lines of the
\_Iliad\_.  (4) That there is less unity in the imitation of the epic
poets, as is proved by the fact that any one work of theirs supplies
matter for several tragedies; the result being that, if they take what
is really a single story, it seems curt when briefly told, and thin and
waterish when on the scale of length usual with their verse.  In saying
that there is less unity in an epic, I mean an epic made up of a
plurality of actions, in the same way as the \_Iliad\_ and \_Odyssey\_
have many such parts, each one of them in itself of some magnitude; yet
the structure of the two Homeric poems is as perfect as can be, and the
action in them is as nearly as possible one action.  If, then, Tragedy
is superior in these respects, and also besides these, in its
poeti.e.fect (since the two forms of poetry should give us, not any or
every pleasure, but the very special kind we have mentioned), it is
clear that, as attaining the poeti.e.fect better than the Epic, it will
be the higher form of art.

So much for Tragedy and Epic poetry--for these two arts in general and
their species; the number and nature of their constituent parts; the
causes of success and failure in them; the Objections of the critics,
and the Solutions in answer to them.
