Commentary on the Supplication
==============================

Basmala
-------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the name of Allah the Merciful, the Compassionate**

The expression of *Bimillah Al Rahman Al Raheem*, also known as
**Basmala**, is a beautifully poetic phrase which offers both deep
insight and brilliant inspiration. It would take many volumes of books
to analyze in detail the significance of this expression word by word.

We cannot fathom the magnificence of the word “Bismillah” however it
suffices for us to know that according to Imam Ar-Ridha’ (AS) as cited
in Tafseer Al ‘Ayaashi, when asked about the greatest verse in the
Qur’an, he said *“Bismillah Al-Rahman Al-Raheem” is closer to Allah’s
greatest name than the whiteness of the eye (sclera) to its blackness
(pupil).”*

This expression is so magnificent and so concise that all but one
chapter of the Qur’an (Surah Al Tawba) begins with the words *Bismillah
Al-Rahman Al-Raheem*. It has often been said that the phrase *Bismillah
Al-Rahman Al-Raheem* contains the true essence of the entire Qur'an as
well as the true quintessence of all religions.

The common translation of this phrase fails to capture the true depth of
meaning or the inspirational message of this beautiful expression. It is
by pronouncing the name of God and through His compassion and mercy that
we as servants begin the discourse with Allah (SWT) in the supplication
*of Salawat Sha’baniyyah*. The peak of servitude of a creation is to
submit to His kingdom by admitting His superiority as well as His
absolute attributes.

The phrase “*In the name of” (Bismi)* is an idiom having the connotation
of *with the blessings of,* *under the governance of*, *as an instrument
of, as a representative of, on behalf of, with the support of,* or *for
the glory of*. In each of these cases, the expression “*In the name of”*
indicates that one is submitting to, honoring or glorifying that which
is referred to.

The central idea here is that whatever we do, every step that we take,
every breath that we breathe is done for, because of, and through the
essence of the One who has created us. As Imam ‘Ali (AS) explains, every
creature takes Allah as God when they undergo times of calamity and have
needs and have no one to turn to but Him. By calling out *Bismillah*, it
is equivalent to beseeching help from God for all your affairs.

Imam As-Sadiq (AS) confirms this idea by presenting the analogy of a
person who rides a ship which suddenly sinks and he naturally calls out
for help from something even if he is an atheist. That thing which he is
resorting to is Allah the Almighty. It is not us that do the work, it is
not us that make opportunities appear, it is not us that produces fruits
from every action as we alone are powerless and are totally dependent
upon the Creator for the very essence of life itself. Thus, this
beautiful word *Bismillah* is a magnificent reminder of our relationship
to our Creator and our relationship to all of creation.

*Bismillah* expresses our wonder, awe and thankfulness while it also
expresses our innermost prayer that we may have the blessing of another
breathe, another moment of life, and that we may walk on a path of truth
and understanding. To say *Bismillah* is to humbly offer one's self as a
vehicle for the glory and majesty of The One.

The two terms *Rahman* and *Raheem* refer to attributes of the One God
and they are often translated as Merciful and Compassionate, but the
roots of the words point to a deeper meaning. Both *Rahman* and *Raheem*
are derived from the Semitic root *r-h-m* which indicates something of
the utmost tenderness which provides protection and nourishment, and
that from which all of creation is brought into being. Sure enough, the
root '*rhm'* in Arabic has meanings of *womb, kinship, relationship,
love, kindness, mercy, compassion*, *nourishing, and tenderness*.

These two words, *Rahman* and *Raheem* also express slightly different
variations of meaning. Imam As-Sadiq (AS) says that Rahman is a special
name for a general attribute while Raheem is a general name for a
specific attribute. And Prophet Isa (AS) states that *Rahman* is a type
of mercy related to this world while *Raheem* is related to the
hereafter.

The term *Rahman* describes that aspect of the source of all creation
which is endlessly radiating and nourishing, regardless of whom or what
is receiving the endless flow of blessings. The word *Rahman* is a very
emphatic statement, then that sentiment is echoed by being immediately
followed by the use of another form of the same root word.

Such repetition is a joyful celebration of this Divine attribute and
this is the beauty of eloquence of the Arabic language. *Rahman* conveys
the idea of fullness and extensiveness, indicating the great quality of
love and mercy which engulfs all of creation without regard to any
effort or request on our part. *Rahman* indicates that Allah mercifully
provides us sustenance even if we cease to obey and worship Him, as
indicated in Tafseer Saafi.

On the other hand, the term *Raheem* describes that aspect of mercy
which is issued forth only in response to the actions and behavior of
the recipient. It is in this manner that God takes ten steps toward us
when we take even a single step toward God. Allah (SWT) is *Raheem* with
our religion, our wordly affairs, our hereafter and He has made it easy
for us with least amount of burden (Tafseer Saafi). According to many
narrations, the mercy associated with *Raheem* is specific to the
believers only.

As mentioned in the book Al Khesaal, it is recommended to recite this
verse with a loud voice during prayers and it is considered to be one of
the five signs of a true believer. There is also a sacred Hadith (Qudsi)
in which Allah (SWT) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل أمر ذي بال لم يذكر فيه بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم فهو أبتر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(*Every considered matter which “Bismillah Al Rahman Al Raheem” is not
recited is put at halt.*). Along the same lines, Allah (SWT) said to
Prophet Musa: “*O Musa! Ask My servants to confess about Me that I am
the most Merciful of all the merciful and I answer the supplications of
the uneasy souls and I ward off the troubles and turn the conditions of
time and I grant bounties after calamities and appreciate even small
deeds and give reward generously and turn the needy into the affluent
and that I am the everlasting Mighty and Omnipotent Lord and that they
should pray to me*.” (Hayaat Al Qulub vol I)

Indeed there are many secrets to this common yet profound expression
such that it is narrated that whoever among the Shia (followers of Ahlul
Bayt) abandons its recitation, Allah (SWT) will test him with a trial to
remind him of praise and gratitude and to erase his shame acquired due
to neglecting its recitation. The school of Companions, however,
disagree that this verse is part of every Surah and hence they abandon
its recitation. It is certainly not a coincidence that this verse be a
point of contention among the Muslims. In fact this contention on a
verse which bears no controversial issue and is simply highlighting the
mercy of Allah and His attributes implies to us that there are indeed
hidden secrets behind this expression which requires further
contemplation on our part.

If we ponder further, we’ll realize that that Surah Al Fatiha (Hamd) is
also known as the *“The Seven Which is Often Repeated”* (Sab’aa Al
Mathaani) and *“The Mother of the Book”* (Umm Al Kitab). The verse
“Bismillah Al Rahman Al Raheem” is one of the Sab’aa Al Mathani which
proves that it is indeed a verse that is part of every chapter in the
Qur’an. Being that this expression is included as the *Mother of the
Book* and *Saba’a Al Mathaani*, it therefore occupies great status and
shares in the glory of Surah Al Fatiha.

On that note, Imam ‘Ali (AS) testifies: *"Know that all the wisdom of
the Heavenly Scriptures are in The Qur'an and whatever is in The Qur'an
is in the Fatiha (Suratul Hamd) and whatever is in Fatiha is in
Bismillah and whatever is in Bismillah is in the ‘Ba’ of Bismillah and
whatever is in the ‘Ba’ of Bismillah is encapsulated in the dot under
‘Ba’; and I am that dot under ‘Ba’."* (Yanabee’ Al Mawadda)

How then is all of these virtues encapsulated in the expression of
*Basmalah*? To begin with, *Ism* and Allah signify The Creator and His
Actions. *Rahman* and *Raheem* relate to human existence and survival,
and reward and punishment respectively. ‘Ba’ is used in Arabic to
express connection. So, the ‘Ba’ here defines the relationship between
The Creator and the creation.

Thus, the three elements of the whole Qur'an highlighted in the Fatiha
are included in the Basmalah and the Basmalah cannot stand without the
‘Ba’ which needs the dot underneath it to gain identity. This identity
distinguishes the ‘Ba’ from other similar letters such as ‘Ta’ and
‘Tha’, all of which without their dots look similar in shape. The dot
under ‘Ba’ gives its distinct identity, the power, the dynamism and the
recognition of the existence of The Creator, His act of Creation and the
link between The Creator and the creation.

Without the dot, ‘Ba’ is incomprehensible and if ‘Ba’ is not established
in Basmalah, then the relationship of worship (na'budu) and assistance
(nasta'een) between The Creator and the creation cannot be comprehended.
So, when the Imam (AS) referred to the dot under ‘ba’, he pointed out
that whosoever does not take him as the pivot and the center loses out
on the whole essense of the Qur’an. Narrations also mention that had
Imam ‘Ali (AS) wished, he could have explained Surah Al Fatiha or
Bismillah or the ‘Ba’ of Bismillah so much that pages would have to be
lifted by 70 camels!

After this delineation, we can now begin to understand why the enemies
of Imam ‘Ali (AS) and those who do not believe in his Wilayat
(guardianship) and successorship after the Holy Prophet (SA) have a
problem with *Bismillah Al Rahman Al Raheem*! It is simply because the
key to this phrase is Imam ‘Ali; hence it is not possible for any person
to sincerely appreciate the meaning behind this profound expression
except after acknowledging the Wilayat of Imam ‘Ali and professing his
right of ownership for Caliphate by divine appointment.

After realizing this reality, we can further understand why Allah (SWT)
intentionally stitched this verse in the beginning of every Surah of the
Holy Qur’an!

We can now comprehend why it is obligatory for us to recite this phrase
loudly as it is a sign of our completion of faith by belief in the
Wilayat of Ameer Al Mu’mineen (AS). Along the same lines, it is narrated
that it is highly recommended to recite *Salawat* loudly because it
removes hypocricy from the heart. Likewise, by pronouncing Bismillah
loudly, we declare our belief in Imam ‘Ali’s Wilayat without hesitation
or hypocricy.

After understanding to a certain extent the importance of the verse
*Bismillah Al Rahman Al Raheem*, it is not surprising to know that there
are many rewards for its recitation which cannot be enumerated. It
suffices to cite this narration of the Holy Prophet (SA) who said that:

*“When a person recites Basmalah, five thousand ruby palaces are built
for him in Paradise. Each palace has a thousand chambers made of pearls
and in each chamber has seventy thousand thrones of emerald and each
throne has seventy thousand carpets made from special fabrics and upon
each carpet is seated a Hur-ul-‘Ain.*” (Tafseer Al Burhaan)

A person asked for the condition necessary to win this great reward and
the Holy Prophet (SA) replied that the person should recite the
*Bismillah Al-Rahman Al-Raheem* with conviction and understanding.

By “conviction and understanding”, he means none other than conviction
in the Wilayah of his successor Imam ‘Ali (AS) and understanding to whom
the significance of this verse refers to. In another tradition, the
Prophet (SA) says: *“Whoever recites ‘Bismillah Al Rahman Al Raheem’
will have 4000 good deeds written for them, 4000 evil deeds erased for
them, and will be raised 4000 degrees.”* (Bihaar Al Anwaar)

Many can say the *Basmalah* out loud by tongue, however the Imam (AS) is
referring to the believer who recites it out loud while he or she is
fully aware of its depths. Even further, saying it out loud reinforces
love for, obedience to, and submission to Allah (SWT).

\*\*\*\*\*

Salawat
-------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ و َآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Oh Allah! Bestow Your blessings on Muhammad and his progeny**

After beginning the discourse with Allah (SWT) by pronouncing His Name
in the Basmallah and acknowledging the Wilayat of His chosen guide Imam
‘Ali (AS), it follows that we complement this expression by purifying
our tongues with the pronouncement of Salawat (Allahuma Sali ‘Ala
Muhammad wa Aali Muhammad) which is to seek the bestowal of Allah’s
blessings on Prophet Muhammad (SA) and his purified progeny (AS). By
reciting Salawat we further acknowledge the rightful successorship of
the 11 Imams from the descendants of Imam ‘Ali (AS) who are the chosen
ones meant by “Aali Muhammad”.

So what exactly does it mean to pray for the bestowal of divine
blessings on the Prophet’s family? According to Sheikh Ahmad Al ‘Alawi,
the meaning of Salat (prayer of benediction) varies according to its
sender and receiver. As for its sender, if it is Allah (SWT) then its
reality is different from that which is due from His creations. From Him
it is an action and from the creation it is speech which cannot mean
other than a supplication for mercy along with exaltation or something
along these lines.  
 However, when the benediction is coming from the Almighty Allah, then
its meaning varies according to the receiver of that Salat. Surely, one
can logically conclude that the Salat of Allah (SWT) upon the common
believers is not equal to His Salat to the special chosen ones among
them who enjoy a high rank in His eyes as He says in Surah Al Baqarah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الرُّسُلُ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are the messengers We favoured one above the other. [2:253]***

Sheikh ‘Alawi adds that Allah (SWT) has made His Salat upon His prophets
and chosen ones to be the mirrored opposite of His curse (la’na) upon
His enemies which means expulsion and separation from His mercy. As for
the meaning of His Salat, it is His endearment and love and proximity
for that object of His Salat, as he deserves. So if he is among the
common believers, he will receive his share of Salat that he deserves
according to the level of piety and righteousness that he possesses.

However, if he is from among the elect and chosen ones, then his portion
from Allah (SWT) is Him Himself, for he is not satisfied with anything
less than Him. As the holy verse describes the state of these
exceptionally righteous believers,

> وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاضِرَةٌ {22} إِلَىٰ رَبِّهَا نَاظِرَةٌ {23}

***Faces on that day will be shining resplendently. Looking towards
their Lord. [75:22-23]***

Since it is a known fact the Prophet Muhammad (SA) is the best of
creation and the most beloved to Allah (SWT), we can imagine that the
Salat that he receives from His beloved Lord is not like any Salat that
may apply to any believer. In fact, we cannot fathom the splendor of
that divine Salat due to the exceptional status of the Holy Prophet (SA)
and his progeny.

However it suffices to make that supplication with the recognition that
the Prophet (SA) and his progeny deserves the peak of reward and
blessings due to the special position they rightfully earned. Surely, it
is not too much for the Prophet to earn that great status when he is the
one who said, “*The core delight of my eyes was made to lie in the
Salat*.” (Salat Al Mu’min fi Dawq Al Kitab Wal Sunnah)

And Salat in simple words is the relationship which the Prophet (SA)
happily pursues towards His beloved Lord. So it is not a surprise that
Allah (SWT) rewards the Prophet’s longing for Salat by pronouncing in
the Holy Qur’an that He (SWT) and His angels are sending benediction on
the Prophet (SA) and furthermore ordering all of the believers to share
in that noble act:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلاَئِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ ۚ يَا
أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. Oh you who
believe! Ask blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation.
[33:56]***

When Imam Al-Kadhim (AS) was asked about the interpretation of this
verse, he answered that Salat coming from Allah (SWT) is a mercy, from
the angels it is a sign of purification (Tazkiyyah) from them, and from
the believers it is a supplication. (Thawaab Al ‘Amaal)

Furthermore, Imam As-Sadiq (AS) was asked how do we convey Salat on
Muhammad and his progeny and he answered, “we should say ‘*May the
Salawat of Allah, the angels, His prophets and messengers and all of His
creation fall upon Muhammad and his progeny and may the Salam and mercy
of Allah be upon them.*’” (Al-Ma’ani)

Furthermore, the Sunni school of thought also verify that the Ahlul Bayt
(AS) are the ones meant by sending *Salawat*. As cited in the Qur’anic
translation of Mir Pooya, Fakhr al Din al Razi writes that *“The Ahlul
Bayt are at par with the Holy Prophet in five things (one of which is)
in invoking the blessings of Allah during prayers, after each Tashahud
which if not recited, renders the Salat null and void.”*

Bukhari also writes in his Sahih, that the Holy Prophet (SA) said:
*"Say: 'Oh Allah send blessings on Muhammad and on Aali Muhammad
(AhulBayt) just as You blessed Ibrahim and Aali Ibrahim'."* (page 127,
volume 3, Egypt edition)

 Even Ibn Hajar Al Makki writes in his Sawa’eq al Muhriqah on page 87,
that the Holy Prophet (SA) warned the people not to send *batar salawat
(salawat* which has lost the tail i.e. curtailed). When asked what was
mean by *batar salawat,* he replied: *"If you stop at 'Allahumma Sali
ala Muhammad' You should say: 'Allahumma Sali ala Muhammad wa Aali
Muhammad'."*

It is important to note that the above verse [33:56] orders us to
accompany the act of Salawat with the act of Salam, meaning that
whenever we send Salawat to Muhammad and his progeny, we should also
convey our Salam or Tasleem to them. As cited in Kitab Al Ehtijaj, Imam
‘Ali (AS) explains that this verse has a manifest and hidden meaning.
The manifest is to send your benedictions and the hidden is His order to
exercise Tasleem or to submit to his Wilayah after the Holy Prophet
(SA). Hence, whenever we recite Salawat in a supplication, we should
also remember to submit to the Wilayah of the Prophet (SA) and his
purified family.  
 There are many inconceivable secrets, merits, and rewards for the
person who recites Salawat and one of them is atonement of sins like the
one who is newly-born. By our act of praying for the blessings to fall
upon the Prophet (SA) and his progeny, we are at the same time asking
for mercy for ourselves simply due to our acknowledgment that they truly
deserve these divine blessings. It is related that Imam Ar-Ridha’ (AS)
said, *“Reciting Salawat on us is a mercy to that person and a gesture
of proximity towards us.”*

This sincere step taken by the servant to reach their proximity is
essentially translated as the desire to reach the proximity of Allah
(SWT) because pleasing the Prophet (SA) and his progeny is equivalent to
pleasing Allah (SWT). And Allah (SWT) promises that *“Whoever draws
closer to Me by a hand's span, I will draw closer to him by a forearm's
length. Whoever draws closer to Me by a forearm's length, I will draw
closer to him by an arm's length. And whoever comes to Me walking, I
will come to him running.”* (Sahih Muslim) So by reciting this profound
statement of *Salawat* with recognition of its meaning, the servant
comes closer in proximity to his Lord.

\*\*\*\*\*

The Tree of Prophethood
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَجَرَةِ النُّبُوَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A tree generally bears fruit but a fruit never appears on the trunk,
rather it appears on the branches of a tree. If two branches of the same
tree bear fruit and we eat the fruit, we do not say that we ate the
fruit of the branch. Instead we say that we ate the fruit of the tree
even though the fruit appears on the branch, because it is really the
fruit of the tree. Likewise, when we speak about the tree of
prophethood, we are talking about the tree of Prophet Muhammad (SA).

The “tree of prophethood” is mentioned in this supplication as a
description to the object of Salawat who is the Holy Prophet and his
purified progeny. In fact the first part of this supplication is a
description and acknowledgement of some of the attributes that these
divinely-chosen personalities enjoy, while the latter part of the
supplication are prayers for them followed by prayers for the benefit of
the servant.  
 Prophet Muhammad (SA) is the “tree of prophethood” which branched out
from Prophet Ibraheem (AS). When his daughter the Master Lady of All
Women Seyyida Fatima Al Zahra (AS) married her only equal, Imam ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (AS), she bore two wonderful fruits that came from two
infallible branches, who are his grandsons, Imam Hasan (AS) and Imam
Husain (AS).

The Infallibles themselves testified that they are indeed the tree of
prophethood as it is narrated in by Al-Khaythama who relays that Abu
Abdullah (AS) said to him the following, "*O Khaythama, we are the tree
of prophet-hood, the house of blessings, the keys to wisdom, the mine of
knowledge, the station of the Messenger-ship of (Allah), the center
wherein the angels interchange and the place for the secrets of Allah.
We are the trust of Allah among the people and we are the great
Sanctuary of Allah. We are the promised responsibility of Allah and we
are His covenant. Whoever remains true to our covenant has remained true
to the covenant of Allah (SWT). Whoever disregards his covenant with us
he has disregarded his covenant and responsibility towards Allah*."
(Kitab Al Kaafi)  
 In Hadith Tibrani cited from the School of Companions, it is also
narrated that “*Fatimah is a branch from the tree of Prophethood, and
out of this branch blossom two fruits who are named Hadrat Hasan and
Hadrat Husain.*”

When we analyze some verses of the Qur’an, we also notice that Allah
(SWT) referred to “the tree” as a parable and an example for Muhammad
(SA) and his progeny. For example, in Surah An-Noor, He (SWT) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاةٍ
فِيهَا مِصْبَاحٌ ۖ الْمِصْبَاحُ فِي زُجَاجَةٍ ۖ الزُّجَاجَةُ
كَأَنَّهَا كَوْكَبٌ دُرِّيٌّ يُوقَدُ مِنْ شَجَرَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ
زَيْتُونَةٍ لاَ شَرْقِيَّةٍ وَلاَ غَرْبِيَّةٍ..."
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The Parable of His
Light is as if there were a Niche and within it a Lamp: the Lamp
enclosed in Glass: the glass as it were a brilliant star: Lit from a
blessed Tree, an Olive, neither of the east nor of the west.[24:35]***  
 According to Tafseer Al Saafi and Bayan Al Sa’ada, the “Lamp” refers to
the Prophet’s knowledge while the “Niche” refers to the infallible Imams
from his progeny. The Prophet’s knowledge has been placed in the heart
of his successor ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) who is meant by the “blessed
tree” which has a lot of benefits just like the olive tree is very
beneficial.

The famous story of Prophet Adam (AS) eating from the forbidden tree has
a special wisdom and message to us. It is narrated that this forbidden
tree is a parable for the tree of knowledge of Muhammad and his progeny
which Allah (SWT) specialized them with over the rest of His creation.
They are the only ones who can “eat” from it. Sure enough, according to
Tafseer Al Saafi, Rasulullah (SA), ‘Ali (AS), Fatima (AS), Hasan (AS),
and Husain (AS) ate from that tree after they fed the poor, the needy,
and the orphan such that they did not feel any hunger, thirst, or
exhaustion afterwards (story referred to in Surah Al-Insaan, n.76).

Whoever eats from this unique tree by permission of Allah (SWT) gains a
lot of knowledge without having to go through the worldly process of
learning. And whoever eats from that tree without permission will fail
and commit disobedience. Hence, Allah (SWT) warns Adam (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْنَا يَا آدَمُ اسْكُنْ أَنْتَ وَزَوْجُكَ الْجَنَّةَ وَكُلاَ
مِنْهَا رَغَدًا حَيْثُ شِئْتُمَا وَلاَ تَقْرَبَا هَٰذِهِ الشَّجَرَةَ
فَتَكُونَا مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We said: O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the garden and eat
from it a plenteous (food) wherever you wish and do not approach this
tree, for then you will be of the unjust. [2:35]***

Another interpretation of this forbidden tree is that it is the tree of
envy since anyone who experiences a feeling of envy or wishes to attain
the position of the Prophet (SA) and his Ahlul Bayt (AS) will be tested
and punished as was the case with Adam (AS) and his wife. The
consequences of even approaching that tree or entertaining the thought
of wishing their high status even for a split second will result in that
person becoming from the unjust **فتكونا مِن الظالمين**.

Exegetists explain that those who eat from that special tree and take
what is not their right which is the Caliphate after the Prophet (SA)
and give it to others who do not own that divine right, they will be
committing injustice. Furthermore, ‘Ayaashi relates in Tafseer Al Saafi
that the tree mentioned in Surah Ibraheem is also a parable for Muhammad
(SA) and his progeny.

**  
**

**  
**
أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلاً كَلِمَةً طَيِّبَةً

**  
**
كَشَجَرَةٍ

**  
**
طَيِّبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاء. تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا
كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا

**  
**
ۗ

**  
**
وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ.

***Have you not considered how Allah sets forth a parable of a good word
(being) like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in
heaven. It brings forth its fruit at all times, by the permission of its
Lord. So Allah sets forth parables for men, in order that they may be
mindful.*** **[14:24-25]**

This “Good Tree” is described to have a foundation that is established
and a root that is firm. Its branches reach up to heaven due to its
grand status. As we discussed earlier, these branches symbolize Imam
Hasan and Husain (AS) who are the Master Youth of Paradise by the
testimony of the Holy Prophet (SA), so it is not surprising that these
blessed “branches” reach up to the heavens!

Furthermore, verse 14:25 informs us that this tree is continuously
reaping fruits by the permission of Allah (SWT). These continuous fruits
are symbolized by the infallible Imams who come one after the other such
that there is no time or moment that this earth is devoid of a divinely
appointed Imam until the return of the awaited Mahdi (may Allah hasten
his reappearance).

Interestingly, it is narrated in Al Kaafi regarding the interpretation
of this verse that the **أصل** (origin) of this tree is the Holy Prophet
(SA), its **فرع** (stem) is Imam ‘Ali (AS), its **أغصان** (branches) are
the Imams (AS), its fruits are the knowledge of the Imams, and its
leaves are the true believers and followers of Ahlul Bayt (AS). Hence,
when a believer is born a leaf develops on that good tree, and when a
believer departs from this world, a leaf falls off.

\*\*\*\*\*

And the Afrode of Your Messages
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَوْضِعِ الرِّسالَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

After identifying the Prophet (SA) and his progeny to be the tree of
prophethood, they are further described to be the afrode of the messages
**موضِع الرسالة.** In general, everything in life as a home and location
it belongs to and originates from. For example the home of the
constitution of the US lies in Capitol Hill in DC. And the nest where
the civil rights movements for blacks originated was in the character of
civil rights leader Martin Luther King. Likewise, the home address and
nest of the divine message are the 12 Infallible guides chosen by Allah
(SWT).

They are the model for human perfection and the template which we should
follow and take our example from. In fact, all of the prophets and
messengers before the Seal of Prophets understood their position of
Wilayah and superiority over them and that they are the part and parcel
of the unified message which Allah (SWT) intended for mankind to
embrace. Regarding their lofty position and **موضِع** , Imam As-Sadiq
(AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إن أمرنا هو الحق وحق الحق وهو الظاهر وباطن الظاهر وباطن الباطن وهو
السر وسرّ السرّ وسرّ المستسرّ وسرّ مُقنَّع بالسرّ."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Our matter (Wilayah) is certainly the truth, the truth of the truth,
and it is the manifest and the hidden, and the hidden of the manifest,
and the hidden of the hidden, and it is the secret, and the secret of
the secret, and the secret that is within an a hidden enclosed secret,
and the secret that is masked with the secret.*

There are four positions of the message that is implied by this profound
statement: First, the position of **بيان** Bayan which is highlighted by
the expression “hidden of the manifest” means to recognize the fact that
Allah (SWT) has no similarity or resemblance to anything, hence the
servant worships Him and does not associate any partner with Him.

Second, the position of **معاني** (Ma’ani) is highlighted by “hidden of
the hidden” which Imam ‘Ali (AS) says refers to the Ahlul Bayt (AS). He
elaborates on this aspect and says, “We are its meanings, we are its
side, hand, tongue, command, judgment, knowledge, and truth. If we
desire something, Allah (SWT) wills it.

Third, the position of**أبواب** (Abwaab) refers to “hidden of the
manifest” and implies that the door to the mercy and pleasure of Allah
(SWT) are the Ahlul Bayt (AS). They are the intermediates by which we
enter the Gate towards the Lord’s proximity. This idea is validated by
the Prophet’s testimony that *“I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is
its Gate.”* (Al-Mustadrak)

Fourth, the position of Imamate or leadership which refers to the
expressions “the manifest”, “the truth”, and the truth of the truth”.
The above profound statement of Imam As-Sadiq (AS) conveys to us the
fact that there exists a vast cloud of secrecy and mysteriousness behind
the great status of Ahlul Bayt (AS) such that minds cannot comprehend or
fathom their lofty position which is the *essence* of the message. It is
therefore not surprising that Allah testifies that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah knows best knows where He places His message.*** **[6:124]**

\*\*\*\*\*

Household of Divine Inspiration & Knowledge
-------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مُخْتَلَفِ الْمَلاَّئِكَةِ وَ مَعْدِنِ الْعِلْمِ وَ اَهْلِ بَيتِ
الْوَحْىِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And, the place of visits of the angels, the mine of Your Knowledge,
and the people of the Holy House of Revelation.**

Whenever you pay a visit to another person, that visit can be due to
different reasons. For example, you may visit your friend because
they’re ill, you may visit them to spend quality time with them out of
love and friendship, or you may visit them to accomplish a certain task
with them like a project or business work, etc. It follows logic that
the higher the position which the visitor holds, the greater the
importance and implications of this visitation for you. For example, you
cannot compare the visitation of your college friend as the visitation
of the President of your country to you because the President’s status
is much greater than that of your friend.

Hence, when we speak about the visitation of one of the greatest
creatures of Allah (SWT) who are the angels, such visitation is not to
be interpreted lightly or compared to the visitation which humans pay to
each other. As stated in this supplication, the address which the angels
plug in their navigation system as their desired destination is the
household of the Prophet (SA) and his progeny.

The obvious purpose of visitation is indicated in the words mentioned
afterwards in this supplication, and that is, for inspiration **وحي** of
the message to the Holy Prophet (SA). He is honored by the visitation of
Archangel Jibrael (AS) as much as Jibrael (AS) and the angels are
honored by their visitation to him, if not more!

Their desire to attain the blessings and mercy of Allah (SWT) through
the intermediates personified in the impeccable characters of the
Prophet (SA) and his progeny is yet another reason for their visitation
to them! There is the story of Futros, one of the angels who disobeyed
Allah (SWT) and was punished by being abandoned in an island and had his
wings disabled.

On the occasion of the blessed birth of Imam Husain (AS), Futros
happened to meet angel Jibrael (AS) and asked him to take him along to
the Prophet (SA) to seek intercession from him and forgiveness from
Allah (SWT). This act of Futros was a visitation not to deliver a
message from Allah (SWT), but to seek the blessings of the Prophet (SA).
These blessings were symbolized in the cradle of Imam Husain (AS) which
was enough to cure his wings. Even though the cradle was the object that
cured, it received that honor simply because it bore the body of the
Master of Martyrs, Imam Husain (AS)!

We read in *Hadith Al Kisaa* (Narration of the Cloak) that when the
trusted Jibrael (AS) asked Allah (SWT) who were under the cloak, He
(SWT) answered,

**  
**

"هُم أهل بيت النبوة ومعدن

  

**  
**

الرسالة هم فاطمة وأبوها وبعلها وبنوها"

**  
**

*They are the Household of the Prophet and the assets of Prophethood!
They are none other than Fatimah, her father, her husband and her two
sons.* (Sahih Muslim)

Here, Allah (SWT) identifies these five esteemed personalities to be the
household of prophethood who are the essence of the message. The word
**معدِن** is also used in this supplication to describe the Holy
Household as the core of knowledge **معدِن العلم**. Surely, they are the
mine of knowledge which Allah (SWT) granted to them and they are the
essence of the *whole* message!

It is important to note in the event of Hadith Al Kisaa that when angel
Jibrael (AS) descended to earth to the Prophet (SA), he did so for two
intentions; to deliver Allah’s message to them culminated in the verse
of purification, and to join in this celebrative moment and gain the
blessings of the presence of Ahlul Bayt (AS) under the cloak. So he
requested permission from Allah (SWT) to descend to earth to be the
sixth of them.

Sure enough, Allah (SWT) gave him the permission and when Jibrael (AS)
greeted the Prophet (SA) and conveyed Allah’s message about them being
the purpose of His creation of the heavens and earths, he once again
sought the permission of the Prophet (SA) to join them under the cloak,
even though he already attained the permission of the Almighty God.

Now take a look at the manners of angel Jibrael (AS) and how he seeks
the permission of the Prophet (SA) personally as a sign of respect and
honor for him! And compare this example with that of certain companions
of the Prophet (SA) who with all audacity barged in the house of Lady
Fatima Al Zahra (AS) without her permission and squeezed her behind the
door causing her immense pain and abortion of her unborn child!

Furthermore, the remembrance of Ahlul Bayt (AS) is rewarded such that in
Hadith Al Kisaa, the Prophet (SA) answers Imam ‘Ali (AS) when he asks
about the significance of this gathering under the cloak:

*"I swear by He who rightfully appointed me a Prophet and selected me
with prophethood as a savior: this episode of ours will not be recounted
in any gathering from the gatherings of the people of the earth where a
group of our Shias (followers) and lovers are present except that there
will descend upon them mercy! And angels will encircle them asking Allah
the remission of their sins until the assembly disperses!"*

 We learn here that not only do the angels descend to the house of
prophethood, they also descend and share in the gatherings where the
followers and lovers of Ahlul Bayt (AS) spend in remembrance of the
virtues of Ahlul Bayt (AS). All that is for the sake of honoring the
status of Ahlul Bayt (AS)!!!

\*\*\*\*\*

Sailing Ship in the Deep Sea
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ و َآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الْفُلْكِ الْجارِيَةِ
فِى اللُّجَجِ الْغامِرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Oh Allah! Bestow Your Blessings on Muhammad and his progeny who are a
boat sailing in the deep waters of fathomless sea.**

The parable of the Prophet (SA) and his purified progeny is that of a
boat or ship that is sailing in a vast immeasurable ocean **الفلك
الجارية في اللُجج الغامرة.** To understand the meaning of this
expression, one has to understand the nature of an ocean and its
characteristics. When we think about the great seas out there like that
of the Atlantic or Pacific ocean, we get a mixed feeling of peace and
also apprehensiveness.  
 The feeling of peace is followed by praise to the Creator for allowing
us to enjoy the beautiful creation of Allah (SWT) that is appreciated by
our physical senses, and that is, water. Water generally symbolizes
purity and the bounty of water is indeed greater than we imagine such
that Allah (SWT) states in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنَ الْمَاءِ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ حَيٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have made of water everything living. [21:30]***

The animal kingdom is conceived from a sperm which is a substance
composed of water and is the cause of his creation. Today, the
scientists have discovered that plants and animals live on water as its
main resource which descends in the form of rain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ أَنْزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَحْيَا بِهِ الْأَرْضَ
بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah has sent down water from the cloud and therewith given life
to the earth after its death. [16:65]***  
 It is narrated that water is the spring of God’s mercy and according to
Rasulullah (SA), “*A believer is like water; he purifies all those
surrounding him*.”

On the other hand, we tend to feel a sense of apprehensiveness when we
gaze at the darkness of the vast ocean due to its seemingly endless body
of water which symbolizes the unknown of the world and the secrets that
lie beneath this ocean which we are oblivious to. Just like the water
has benefits for creation, it can also be a source of destruction.

For example, there is the story of Prophet Nuh (AS) and the punishment
of the flood which overcame his disbelieving people. The cause of their
destruction was none other than water which drowned them completely and
wiped them off this earth!

As mentioned in the Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ خَلَائِفَ وَأَغْرَقْنَا الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا
بِآيَاتِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But they rejected him, so We delivered him and those with him in the
ark, and We made them rulers and drowned those who rejected Our Signs.
[10:73]***

So it is clear from this verse that the cause for their punishment was
because they**كذبوا بأياتِنا** rejected the signs of God”. This begs us
to question what or who represents the signs of God? Furthermore, how
important are these “signs of God” such that Allah (SWT) destroys
populations due to their disbelief in them?

These signs of God are further emphasized in another verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ ذُكِّرَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِ ثُمَّ أَعْرَضَ
عَنْهَا ۚ إِنَّا مِنَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ مُنْتَقِمُون.َ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the Signs of his
Lord, then he turns away from them? Surely We will give punishment to
the transgressors. [32:22]***  
 In the explanation of this verse, Sheikh Al Tabarsi states in his
Majma’ Al Bayan fi Tafseer Al Qur’an that there is no person that does
more injustice to himself than one who is shown the guidance who are the
Proofs of Allah who would lead him to His Ma’refat (recognition) and
proximity, but then turns away from that purified source of guidance.  
 These proofs of Allah (SWT) are the Infallible Imams from the progeny
of the Prophet (SA), and so we can correlate this verse with the
previous [10:73] and conclude that those who dispute the signs of Allah
(SWT) who are the Infallible guides from the Prophet’s household will be
punished severely like those who were drowned in the flood during the
time of Prophet Nuh (AS).

When we read this words in the supplication of *Salawat Sha’baniyyah*
which talks about the “boat sailing in the deep waters of fathomless
sea”, we can now reflect on the that Arc of Salvation of Prophet Nuh
(AS) and remember the punishment of those who dispute the signs of God.
Taking it further, can we conclude that a similar consequence will fall
upon those who desert the Arc of Salvation of Prophet Muhammad (SA) who
is the best of creation and the Seal of Messengers?

\*\*\*\*\*

Joining the Arc of Salvation
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يأمَنُ مَنْ رَكِبَها وَ يََغْرَقُ مَنْ تَرَكَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Safe is he who boarded it and drowned is he who abandoned it.**

The very next phrase of the supplication describes the position of the
passengers riding this boat that is sailing in the vast ocean. These
riders are assured salvation and security as a guaranteed service for
their acceptance to ride this arc which Allah (SWT) commanded them to
ride. At the same time, those who refuse to ride this blessed ship is
promised the punishment of drowning. This clearly highlights to us the
importance of this ship which is very sacred in Allah’s eyes such that
its passengers are affected positively and its non-passengers receive
retribution.  
 In fact, in the famous Hadith As-Safinah narrated by Anas ibn Malik,
the Holy Prophet (SA) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مثل أهل بيتى كمثل سفينة نوح من ركبها نجا ومن تخلف عنها غرق."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely the likeness of my Ahlul Bayt is similar to Noah's Ark, whoever
boards it will attain salvation and whoever remains behind is drowned.
(Al Durr Al Manthur)  
 This authentic tradition which has been narrated by all of the great
Sunni scholars without exception and with unbroken continuity, points to
the fact that the parable of the arc of Prophet Nuh (AS) is like that of
the arc of the holy household of Prophet Muhammad (AS).

Whoever refuses to ride this blessed arc by refusing to accept the signs
of God represented in these holy personalities will drown inevitably,
just like the son of Prophet Nuh (AS) drowned though he was the son of a
prophet. It is worthy to note here that if the son of a prophet did not
attain refuge and protection for his close blood relation to his father,
then surely the status of ‘companionship’ of a prophet will not suffice
to save that person from Allah’s wrath if he fails to obey His commands
and enter His door the way He (SWT) desires!

One of the distinguished religious scholars of the Sunni sect, Imam
Shafi'i, admits that our attachment to the purified family of the
Prophet is the means of our deliverance. In this regards, Imam Shafi'i
testified the following: *"When I saw different schools of thought
directing people toward the seas of ignorance and deviation, I boarded
the ark of salvation in the Name of Allah. This arc is verily
crystallized in the Ahlul Bayt of the Seal of the Prophets."*
(Al-Mustadrak)

Indeed those who choose to embark this arc of salvation will enjoy a
smooth ride that is for the sake of Allah (SWT) as described in this
verse,

**  
**

وَقَالَ ارْكَبُوا فِيهَا بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْرَاهَا وَمُرْسَاهَا

**  
**
ۚ

**  
**
إِنَّ رَبِّي لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيم.ٌ

**  
**

***And he said: Embark in it, in the name of Allah be its sailing and
its anchoring; most surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.***
**[11:41]**

\*\*\*\*\*

Proper Adherence to Ahlul Bayt
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُتَقَدِّمُ لَهُمْ مارِقٌ وَالْمُتَاَخِّرُ عَنْهُمْ زاهِقٌ
وَاللاّزِمُ لَهُمْ لاحِقٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Those who went ahead of them were misled and those who lagged behind
them were ruined and those who adhered to them were united with them.**

In the above statement of this supplication, the wayfarer following the
example of Ahlul Bayt (AS) is advised not only to follow the Siraat Al
Mustaqeem (Straight Path) which they represent, but they are given
specific instructions on how to follow this path because any deviation
or digression from the treading of this path will lead to misguidance.
The follower is urged not to go ahead of Ahlul Bayt (AS) or race them or
try to exceed them. Often times, we imagine that we can be better than
the role model, for example, or become more knowledgeable than our
teacher, and that may be the case in some instances.

However, when it comes to the perfect role model and seamless template
to mankind, there is no room for the human being to even attempt to be
better than them or exceed their ranks. History relays to us that the
reason why Prophet Adam (AS) and his wife were tested with the forbidden
tree was because when they realized the high rank which the Holy Prophet
(SA) and his Ahlul Bayt (AS) enjoy in the eyes of Allah (SWT), they
wished in their minds to earn that same position.

As a result, Allah (SWT) tested them simply for the thought which
crossed the mind because it is not appropriate for us to wish their
position or to go ahead of them. Along the same lines, the Holy Prophet
(SA) advised us regarding Ahlul Bayt (AS), "Do not be ahead of them for
you will perish, do not turn away from them for you will perish, and do
not try to teach them since they know more than you do!" (Al Durr Al
Manthur)

To comprehend the meaning of the above statement in the supplication, we
have to first understand the meaning of the key words **مارق (**Mareq),
**زاهق** (Zaheq), **لاحق** (Laheq). By definition, **مارق** (Mareq)
means to go against the law and its meaning may vary depending on the
context. For example, history records that the Mariqeen fought against
Imam ‘Ali (AS) in the battle of Nahrawan, and they are a group among the
Muslims who entered the religion; however, they quickly exited out from
it and became misguided. The Mariqeen are likened to an arrow which goes
out from its bow in quick speed as they also deviated from Islam very
quickly. If an arrow doesn’t reach its target, it is said to be a bad or
bogus arrow. In the case of the Mariqeen, they are those who entered
Islam but it did not benefit them as if they were never Muslims to begin
with!  
 Imam ‘Ali (AS) testifies in this regard that he heard the Prophet (SA)
say: "During the last days there will appear some young foolish people
who will say the best words but their faith will not go beyond their
throats (i.e. they will have no faith) and will go out from (leave)
their religion as an arrow goes out of the game. So, wherever you find
them, kill them, for whoever kills them shall be rewarded on the Day of
Resurrection." (Sahih Muslim)

It is also advised that the devotees of the holy household do not lag or
stay behind the Ahlul Bayt (AS) or else they will be from the **زاهقين**
(Zahiqeen). By definition, the word Zaheq means to be gone and
destroyed, just like Allah (SWT) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ ۚ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ
زَهُوقا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And say: The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely
falsehood is bound to perish.” [17:81]***

In this verse, the word Zahaqa is used to indicate that falsehood will
perish and vanish.

With that in mind, let’s return back to the above expression in the
supplication which states that lagging behind the Ahlul Bayt (AS) will
lead to perish. In our everyday lives, we often times experience the
consequences of lagging or staying behind. For example, when a student
lags behind in his studies and fails to keep up with the teacher or the
lessons which his teacher gives, then he will naturally end up not doing
well in the exam and will fail the course. On the other hand, we’ve
experienced that when we focus on our studies, complete our homework on
a daily basis and avoid procrastination, we feel that we are on the same
page as the teacher.

Thus the next lesson becomes fairly easy to understand and we do not
become confused. As a result, when it comes time for final exams, the
process of studying becomes more of a refresher without the need to
catch up with the lessons or homework we missed and without the need to
cram the night before the exam in order to pass the test. Likewise, if
we at least perform the basic obligatory responsibilities that are
required of us, we will be caught up on the path of Ahlul Bayt (AS).

The third advice in this phrase states that **وَاللاّزِمُ لَهُمْ
لاحِقٌ** “those who adhered to them were united with them.” If something
is Malzoom **(ملزوم)** to another thing, it denotes that they are close
to each other and are following one another. And the term Laheq
**(لاحق)** means to join or unite or link with something. In this
context, those who abide by the Wilayah of the Ahlul Bayt (AS) and obey
them will achieve salvation and join them not only in this world but
also in the hereafter. Uniting with the chosen luminary personalities
who are the reflection of Allah’s magnanimous attributes is surely the
peak of bliss for a servant seeking the proximity of the divine abode.

When Sheikh Muhammad Sanqoor was asked how can a person commit the
mistake of being among those who fall under the category of "**المتقدم
لهم مارق**"**,** he explained that this stage is reached when a person
denies the Wilayah (guardianship) and Imamate (leadership) of Ahlul Bayt
(AS) and usurps their rights. It refers to those who goes against them
and tries to belittle their position. Such person becomes misled as he
no longer benefits from his “Islam” and he is the same whether he enters
Islam or leaves it. It is analogous to a person who takes a bath to
cleanse himself but still comes out unclean and impure.

\*\*\*\*\*

Ahlul Bayt Cave of Refuge
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الْكَهْفِ الْحَصينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O\` Allah! Bless Muhammad and his progeny who are the Strong Refuge**

The parable of the Prophet (SA) and his progeny is like the strong and
robust cave. The story of the *People of the Cave* (also known as
*As-haab Al Kahf* or the *Seven Sleepers*) is mentioned in Surah Al Kahf
in the Holy Qur’an and as we know, the Qur’an is not a book of stories
nor is it limited to the people mentioned in a story or historical
event. Otherwise, the verses would die with the deaths of the people it
is referring to.

In the story of the *People of the Cave*, several youths from the nobles
of the community who held very high position believed in the oneness of
God and the religion of Prophet Jesus (AS). Because the community they
lived in were predominantly nonbelievers, the King of their time did not
accept the fact that they embraced Christianity. So he sought to
persecute them and force them to abandon their faiths, but these devout
believers were steadfast in the beliefs and stood up against the king of
their time. They announced their acceptance of the monotheistic faith
and defied the existing polytheistic faith.

In short, they eventually sought refuge in a cave where they escaped for
their lives in a miraculous manner. As described in the Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ أَوَى الْفِتْيَةُ إِلَى الْكَهْفِ فَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا آتِنَا مِنْ
لَدُنْكَ رَحْمَةً وَهَيِّئْ لَنَا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا رَشَدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the youths sought refuge in the cave, they said: Our Lord! grant
us mercy from Thee, and provide for us a right course in our affair.***
**[18:10]**

As they sought refuge in the cave, they prayed to their Lord for mercy
and blessings and that He (SWT) takes care of their affairs and makes
the matter easy for them in attaining His pleasure. In simple words,
they exercised complete *Tawakkul* (dependency on Allah’s will) and
Tasleem (submission).

In fact the Qur’an states that the cause of Allah’s mercy to them was
that these youths abandoned and renounced the false beliefs of the
polytheists of their time and they did so by their own free will. When
they took that bold step considering their high position at that time
and the risks that were at stake for them, Allah (SWT) awarded them by
granting them salvation by His mercy. That salvation was represented in
the cave in a mountain which protected them from the evil of the
nonbelievers. Hence, Allah (SWT) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ اعْتَزَلْتُمُوهُمْ وَمَا يَعْبُدُونَ إِلا اللَّهَ فَأْوُوا
إِلَى الْكَهْفِ يَنْشُرْ لَكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ مِنْ رَحْمَتِهِ وَيُهَيِّئْ
لَكُمْ مِنْ أَمْرِكُمْ مِرْفَقًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when you forsake them and what they worship save Allah, betake
yourselves for refuge to the cave; your Lord will extend to you largely
of His mercy and provide for you a profitable course in your affair.***
**[18:16]**

In the context of our discussion, the exegetists interpret the cave of
the *People of the Cave* to represent the Prophet (SA) and his purified
progeny. In fact, one of the names of Ahlul Bayt (AS) is the **كهف**
“cave”. Supporting that, Abi Hamza Al Thumali narrates that Imam Al
Baqir (AS) said, **"إن مثلنا فيكم كمثل الكهف لأصحاب الكهف."** *Our
position to you is like that of the cave to the People of the Cave.*
(Kitab Al Ghayba)

The resemblance here lies in the fact that just like the cave protected
the believing youths who resorted to it for the sake of Allah (SWT),
likewise anyone who seeks refuge in the cave represented by Ahlul Bayt
(AS) will also attain salvation. This tradition in itself proves the
concept of intercession (Shafa’at) and intermediacy which is reflected
in the “cave” that will provide guidance and protection.

Furthermore, when Imam ‘Ali (AS) describes the position of the 12th
Awaited Mahdi (may Allah hasten his reappearance) from his progeny, he
says in his regards that he is**"أوسعكم كهفاً وأكثركم عِلماً"** *His
cave is the most spacious among you and he is the most knowledgeable
among you.* (Kitab Al Ghayba)

Some scholars interpret the “cave” to symbolize Imam Mahdi (AFS), and
the *People of the Cave* to be the 313 companions who will support him,
while the “raqeem” is an attribute to the special book in the hands of
the 12th Imam which contains the names of the “army of rage” which is
the promised number (raqam).

\*\*\*\*\*

Source of Help & Protection
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ غِياثِ الْمُضْطَرِّ الْمُسْتَكينِ وَ مَلْجَاءِ الْهارِبينَ وَ
عِصْمَةِ الْمُعْتَصِمينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Rescue for the distressed and the helpless, shelter for the fugitives
and protection.**

After we acknowledge the fact that the holy household of the Prophet
(SA) are the Arc of Salvation and the Cave which we seek refuge, we
furthermore describe their authority upon us which Allah (SWT) bestowed
to them. Their authority is such that they are referred to in this
supplication as a source of “rescue”, “shelter/safe haven”, and
“protection” for those who seek it.

These three attributes are all attributes which the divine Creator
possesses in the absolute form; however, He (SWT) has granted them these
privileges out of His grace and love to them. Every human being and
creature can certainly imagine a situation in the past or present where
they needed either help, a save haven, or protection from something.
Many of us have experienced a distressful situation which compels us to
call for help and seek assistance and support even in our trivial
issues.

Allah (SWT) directs our attention in the Qur’an that when a person
reaches the state of distress and agony, he must resort to Allah (SWT)
for help,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّنْ يُجِيبُ الْمُضطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who answers the cry of the distressed person when he calls upon Him,
and removes the evil?*** **[27:62]**

However, in order to guarantee the best results that our call will be
answered by the Almighty God, we are encouraged to seek help from His
divine intermediates who are much closer to the divine abode than we
are. This idea is supported in the Qur’an in numerous verses such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله وابتغوا إليه الوسيلة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Oh you who believe, fear Allah and seek the ways and means to
Him*****. [5:35]**

The Infallible guides themselves desire their followers to seek them as
intermediates; hence among many other supplications, Imam As-Sajjad (AS)
is teaching us this prayer to recite in the days of Sha’ban for our own
benefit not only in this world but in the hereafter. They will hold the
hand of the weak believer and free them from the chains and shackles of
Hell on the Day of Judgment.

It is narrated that Imam As-Sadiq (AS) said to Jabir ibn Abdullah Al
Ansari that on that fateful day Lady Fatima Al Zahra (AS) will say: *“My
Lord, I wish that my position would be realized on such a Day!”* Allah
(SWT) will answer her: *“Daughter of My beloved!* *Go back and look for
everyone in whose heart was love for you or for any of your progeny;
take their hand and lead them into Paradise!”* *The Imam (AS)* *said:
“Oh Jabir, by Allah; Jabir, she will pick her Shiites (followers) and
those who love her just like a bird picks good seeds from bad
seeds!”*(Al-Mustadrak)

The last part of this verse indicates that those who seek any type of
protection from anything should seek it from the purified Ahlul Bayt
(AS). This notion is also supported by another verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَعْتَصِمْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدْ هُدِيَ اِلَى صِرَطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever holds fast to*** **God** ***will be guided in the right
path.*** **[3:101]**

And the “Siraat Al Mustaqeem” as mentioned in Surah Al Fatiha when we
beseech our God to guide us to the Straight Path refers to none other
than ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS), according to most exegetists of the School
of Ahlul Bayt (AS). Imam ‘Ali (AS) represents all of the Infallible
Imams from his lineage, so from this verse we realize that in order to
acquire protection from Allah (SWT), one has to be guided to the *Siraat
Al Mustaqeem* represented in the luminous character of Imam ‘Ali (AS).

As we recite this phrase in the supplication of *Salawat Sha’baniyyah*,
we should remind ourselves that although we seek the help from Allah
(SWT), we do so through His chosen intermediates who are the door to His
infinite Mercy. So this phrase is a clear proof to the authenticity of
intercession via intermediates who are much closer to the divine abode
and who hold the position we discussed so far.

\*\*\*\*\*

Wilayah to the Righteous Ones
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الطَّيبِّينَ
الاْبْرارِ الاْخْيارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذينَ اَوْجَبْتَ حُقُوقَهُمْ وَ فَرَضْتَ طاعَتَهُمْ وَ
وِلايَتَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Allah: Send blessings upon Muhammad and the Household of
Muhammad—the pure, the pious, the righteous whose rights have been made
incumbent upon us by You and the obedience to whom has been deemed
obligatory upon us by You and whose (divinely commissioned) leadership
has been deemed obligatory upon us by You.**

The Holy Qur’an often speaks about the “believers” and describes them
with various attributes such as being pure, righteous, pious,
good-doers, worshippers, devout, and virtuous, etc. But who exactly are
all these attributes referring to? Does it talk about you and me who
perhaps perform our daily prayers and fast the holy month of Ramadan?

The above phrase in this supplication of *Salawat Sha’baniyyah* actually
identifies the essence of these attributes which refer to none other
than Muhammad wa Aali Muhammad! They are indeed the pure (**طيِّبين**)
ones who have been purified as mentioned in the well-known verse of
purification (Ayat Al Tat-heer):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! And to purify you a (thorough) purification.*** **[33:33]**

This state of purification by defaults includes them under the umbrella
of all positive attributes that we may imagine.

Another attribute mentioned in this supplication is that they are the
**الاْبْرارِ** (the pious). The Ahlul Bayt (AS) are indeed the best
example of piety and they are the walking Qur’an. All of the Imams
inherited the highest level of piety and righteousness from the best of
creation the Holy Prophet (SA) who have been sent as a mercy to mankind.
It is the Holy Prophet (SA) whom Allah (SWT) has testified in the Qur’an
for all of mankind to bear witness that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلى خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most surely you possess sublime moral excellences.*** **[68:4]**

Good behavior and pleasant manners are a general description and under
that umbrella lies many positive attributes such as patience, clemency,
generosity, humility, and honesty etc. for which the Holy Prophet (SA)
was known among his people even before his official inauguration as the
Seal of Prophets.

The Ahlul Bayt (AS) are also referred to as the **الاْخْيار** (the
righteous ones). This word is derived from the arabic word **خير** which
means “good”. When we make a comparison and comment that something is
better than another, we say that it is **أخيَّر** or in the plural form
**أخيار.** Certainly, the Prophet (SA) is the best of creation and his
holy household is the best of households, so they are referred to in
this supplication as **أخيار.**

Furthermore, the supplication describes Ahlul Bayt (AS) to have rights
which have been made incumbent on us. It is important to realize that
these “rights” are divinely bestowed and are not the same as human
rights. It makes all the difference to understand that because the
implications of loosing a human right are not the same as loosing a
divine right.

A perfect example is the divine right of guardianship and Caliphate
which belonged to Imam ‘Ali (AS) after the Prophet’s demise. It was on
the 18th day of Dhul-Hijjah at Ghadeer Khum when the Prophet Muhammad
(SA) officially announced the inauguration of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) as
his successor by divine appointment. All of the audience present in that
great event gave their pledge of allegiance to Imam ‘Ali (AS).

But unfortunately, many companions turned back on their allegiance after
the demise of the Holy Prophet (SA) and instead appointed another Caliph
among them. Thus, they prioritized their human selection over the divine
selection which is a grave mistake in the eyes of Allah (SWT) as they
have ignored the rights which He (SWT) has made obligatory!

This injustice committed in the right of Ahlul Bayt (AS) for
successorship is not belittled by God because injustice committed
against His chosen representatives is equivalent to injustice committed
against him. As a matter of fact, if a servant fails to fulfill the
right of God, He (SWT) may forgive him out of His mercy and compassion.

However, when a servant commits injustice (Dhulm) to another servant,
especially a believer, Allah (SWT) does not forgive him unless he
repents and returns the rights of those whose rights were taken and were
oppressed. And the Ahlul Bayt (AS) as we discussed are the best of
Allah’s creation, so one can imagine what degree of wrath and punishment
falls upon those who usurps the rights of His best of creation!

As stated in this phrase of the supplication, Allah (SWT) has made two
things obligatory on us: the Obedience and the Wilayah (guardianship) of
the holy household. The obligation of obedience to them is due to the
fact that they possess the knowledge bestowed to them by Allah (SWT) and
they are the role models to mankind, so if we obey them in all our
affairs, we will surely achieve salvation and reach very close to the
stage of perfection which is the ultimate goal. Our obligation to their
obedience is clearly stated in the Qur’an in many verses, among them,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءامَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
وَأُوْلِي الأمْرِ مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Oh you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.*** **[4:59]**

It is imperative for us to recognize that the obedience of the holy
household is equivalent to obedience of the Prophet (SA) which is in
turn equivalent to the obedience of Allah (SWT). After all, the Prophet
(SA) does not speak out of his own will. Hence in many occasion,
Rasulullah (SA) asserted that, *"Fatima is part of me. Whoever upsets
her upsets me, and whoever harms her harms me."* He also testified that
*“Husain is from me and I am from Husain.”* (Sahih Muslim)

Such profound words may seem simple to us but actually speak volumes
about the high rank which his purified family enjoys in the eyes of the
Prophet (SA) and Allah (SWT). The aim here is to lift our attention that
the Prophet (SA) and his Ahlul Bayt (AS) are **ONE** chain which leads
to Allah (SWT). If one ring of the chain is disconnected, then the
*whole* chain becomes severed.

As for the obligation of Wilayah (successorship), we mentioned it has
been stamped on the day of Ghadeer with the appointment of Imam ‘Ali
(AS) as the Prophet’s Wasi (executor of will) and successor. On that
fateful day, the Prophet (SA) fulfilled his mission in conveying the
matter of successorship and he took the hand of ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS)
and said to his people, *“Am I not dearer to the believers than their
own selves?” They answered, “Yes indeed.” He (SA) said (again), “Am I
(SA) not dearer to the believers than their own selves?” They said, “Yes
indeed.” He (SA) then said, “This man (‘Ali ibn Abu Talib) is the Wali
(can also mean leader) of those who take me as their Mawla (master), Oh
God, take friends those who take him as friends, and take as enemies
those who take him as an enemy”*. (Al-Mu’jam As-Saghir)

Thereafter, Allah (SWT) revealed the verse announcing the completion of
the religion and its final approval for mankind,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليوم أكملت لكم دينكم وأتممت عليكم نِعمتي ورضيت لكم الإسلام ديناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This day I have perfected your religion for you, completed My favour
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion.*** **[5:3]**

When the Messenger of Allah (SWT) was asked about the meaning of
“whomever I am his **Mawla** then ‘Ali is his **Mawla**”, he answered
*“Allah is my* **Mawla** *more deserving of me (my obedience) than
myself, I do not dispute him. I am the* **Mawla** *of the believers,
more deserving in them than themselves, they do not dispute me.
Therefore, whomever I was his* **Mawla**, *more deserving in him than
himself (and) does not dispute me, then ‘Ali is his* **Mawla**, *more
deserving in him than himself, he does not dispute him.”*

In addition to the event of Ghadeer where the official pledge of
allegiance was given to Imam ‘Ali (AS) for the successorship, the
obligation of Wilayah on the believers had been established repeatedly
since day one of the Prophet’s message in numerous occasions where he
pronounced the superiority of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) as the guardian of
Islam after him.

\*\*\*\*\*

Seeking Divine Obedience
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَاعْمُرْ قَلْبى
بِطاعَتِكَ وَلا تُخْزِنى بِمَعْصِيََتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Oh Allah! Bless Muhammad and his progeny and embellish my heart with
obedience to You and disgrace me not with disobedience to You**

From this point in the supplication and moving forward, the servant
changes the mode of communication with Allah (SWT) and starts to make
specific requests and prayers for himself. It is interesting to note
that these personal prayers are made only after the servant has
confessed and submitted to the virtues of the Prophet (SA) and his holy
household. It makes perfect sense that his personal prayers would have a
higher probability to be heard and accepted after he enters the right
door appropriately.

This is similar to the story of Prophet Musa (AS) who gave instructions
to Bani Israel by orders from Allah (SWT) to enter the city Kanaan
through its gate prostrating, and saying: "I seek forgiveness of the
Lord and turn repentant unto Him", because therein they would live in
peace and harmony with plenty of provisions. They were ordered to utter
the word **"حِطَّه"** (Hettah) an expression of humility and repentance
to Allah (SWT) for their pattern of disobedience to Him. Musa (AS)
informed his people that if they obey these orders Allah (SWT) will
forgive their sins. Allah (SWT) mentions them in Surah Al Baqarah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا ادْخُلُوا هَٰذِهِ الْقَرْيَةَ فَكُلُوا مِنْهَا حَيْثُ
شِئْتُمْ رَغَدًا وَادْخُلُوا الْبَابَ سُجَّدًا وَقُولُوا حِطَّةٌ
نَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ خَطَايَاكُمْ ۚ وَسَنَزِيدُ الْمُحْسِنِينَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when We said: Enter this city, then eat from it a plenteous
(food) wherever you wish, and enter the gate making obeisance and say:
"Repentance." (Hettah) We will forgive you your sins and will increase
(reward) for the right-doers.[2:58]***

In his commentary, Mir Pooya nicely correlates this story of the gate of
Kanaan with the gate of knowledge represented by Imam ‘Ali (AS). The
Holy Prophet (SA) informed the Muslims about another city with its gate.
He said: *“I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate.”*
(Al-Mustadrak)

So, if anyone wants to come into contact with the divinely endowed
wisdom of the Holy Prophet (SA), he should first get familiar with ‘Ali
not only by building a close relationship and attachment with him but
also by paying homage to him with expression of reverence. In Tafseer
Durr al Manthur, Jalaluddin Suyuti quotes ‘Ali ibn abi Talib (AS): *“Our
position in Islam to the Muslims is the same as the gate of Hettah was
to the Bani Israel.”*

Some of Prophet Musa’s people followed the instructions, however another
group who were arrogant entered the door but instead of saying “Hettah”,
they said “Hentah” (wheat) and they were not sincere in their
repentance. Allah (SWT) describes their state of disobedience in verse
59:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَدَّلَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا قَوْلاً غَيْرَ الَّذِي قِيلَ لَهُمْ
فَأَنْزَلْنَا عَلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا رِجْزًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ بِمَا
كَانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But those who were unjust changed the word which had been told them
for another saying, and We sent down upon the evil-doers wrath from
heaven for their evil-doing. [2:59]***  
 So, those who unjustly change the word or covenant or command of Allah
(SWT) for something other than the original are duly punished. Likewise,
in the context of our discussion, those who ignore or do not pay
attention to the declaration of the Holy Prophet (I am the city of
knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate) will suffer spiritual degradation and go
astray!

Returning back to analysis of the words in this phrase of this
supplication, the servant is now ready to request his needs after
acknowledging the rights of the divine guides and entering the door
which Allah (SWT) ordered him to. He says, **وَاعْمُرْ قَلْبى
بِطاعَتِكَ** *Embellish my heart with obedience to You.*

It is worthy to note that for a devout servant who is seeking the
pleasure of His Lord, the first request he makes is not to fulfill his
personal desires or for his worldly provisions. Rather, he yearns for
obedience and worship to Allah (SWT) and that is his spiritual
enjoyment! Not only that but he asks that Allah (SWT) embellishes his
heart in such a way that his whole existence is for Allah (SWT), in
service to Allah (SWT) and no one but Him!

That is the peak of servitude that a servant reaches after he has
pronounced the Wilayah of the chosen guides. His acknowledgement of the
rights and virtues of the Ahlul Bayt (AS) is an act of obedience in
itself and after fulfilling this main obligation, he is now asking to
embellish his heart with more blessings that stem for that original
blessing of Wilayah!

This state of mind is perfectly depicted in the supplication of Imam
As-Sajjad, “Makarem Al Akhlaq”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وعمِّرني ما كان عمري بذلة في طاعتك فإذا كان عمري مرتعاً للشيطان
فاقبضني إليك قبل أن يسبق مقتك عليّ ً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Let me live as long as my life is a free gift in obeying Thee, but if
my life should become a pasture for Satan, seize me to Thyself before
Thy hatred overtakes me.*

So the ultimate purpose of life is to obey and submit to the Lord and if
that cannot be achieved, then death is better than a life of
disobedience which serves the self and leads to Allah’s wrath and
results in a disgraceful life. Hence, the servant affirms his desire not
to be among those who are disgraced by His disobedience. Otherwise, he
will face humiliation and shame as those mentioned in:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَعَصَوُا الرَّسُولَ لَوْ
تُسَوَّىٰ بِهِمُ الْأَرْضُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will
wish that they were level with the ground*** **[4:42].**

\*\*\*\*\*

Consolation of the Unfortunate Ones
-----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْزُقْنى مُواساةَ مَنْ قَتَّرْتَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ رِزْقِكَ بِما
وَسَّعْتَ عَلَىَّ مِنْ فَضْلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَشَرْتَ عَلَىَّ مِنْ عَدْلِكَ وَ اَحْيَيْتَنى تَحْتَ ظِلِّكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And bless me with consolation for those struck with poverty from Your
sustenance for You have blessed me with affluence in livelihood since
You have displayed Your justice on me and bestowed life on me to live
under Your shade.**

The servant continues to ask for more spiritual blessings which do not
serve him personally. In this statement, he acknowledges three key
blessings bestowed to him by Allah (SWT). The first is that Allah (SWT)
has increased in his bounties and affluence.

Though the apparent context here is materialistic, one may also
interpret the wealth to be not in the livelihood but more importantly
wealth of your mind and soul. Some interpretations of wealth is wisdom
as Imam ‘Ali (AS) said, *“There is no greater wealth than wisdom, no
greater poverty than ignorance.”* In another instance he also stated
that, *“The best kind of wealth is to give up inordinate desires.”*

There is an interesting story in which a poor believer came up to one of
the Imams (AS) and complained to them that they suffered from poverty.
The Imam (AS) told him that he is not poor, but the man insisted he was.
Finally, the Imam (AS) asked him about his faith and beliefs and when
the poor man confirmed that he would not trade his faith for anything
else, the Imam (AS) replied explaining to him that true wealth is indeed
your faith in Allah (SWT) and the love and Wilayah of Ahlul Bayt (AS)!

Second, the supplicant acknowledges the fact that Allah (SWT) has spread
His justice on him. The Almighty God says in the Qur’an that all great
prophets of God – Adam to Noah, Abraham to Moses, Jesus to Muhammad –
came to establish justice in society.

Now what exactly is justice and what is its importance?

In simple words, *justice* means placing everything in its rightful
place, balancing things in the proper order and creating harmony. If a
person starts placing things in the wrong places, he then disrupts the
social harmony and disturbs peace. Although everyone acknowledges the
aspect of universality in the idea of justice and no one can argue the
importance of its existence in our world, however it is not always easy
to accomplish. So important is this trait of being just that Allah (SWT)
mentions it numerously in the Qur’an and orders us to observe justice as
it is a stage of piety:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا يجرمنكم شنئان قومٍ على ألا يعدلوا إعدلوا هو أقرب للتقوى .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And let not a people’s enmity incite you to act otherwise than with
justice. Be always just, that is nearer to righteousness.*** **[5:8]**

All great prophets of Allah (SWT) like Prophets Adam, Nuh, Ibraheem,
Musa, Jesus, and Muhammad (SA) came to establish justice in society.
Allah (SWT) states this point very clearly in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا بِالْبَيِّنَتِ وَأَنْزَلْنَا مَعَهُمْ
الْكِتَبَ والميزان ليقُوم الناس بالقِسط .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly We have sent Our messengers with clear guidance; and We
sent down to them the Book and the scale so that humans may conduct
themselves with justice.*** **[57:25]**

Justice is indeed one of the absolute attributes of Allah (SWT) and His
word does find fulfillment in truth and justice as indicated in this
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقًا وَعَدْلاً لاَّ مُبَدِّلِ
لِكَلِمَاتِهِ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The word of your Lord does find its fulfillment in truth and in
justice: None can change His words: for He is the one who hears and
knows all.*** **[6:115]**

As explained by the prominent scholar Rasheed Turabi, “The Essence of
Absolute Truth and Justice is condensed in the Essential Being of Allah
(SWT) and at the station of complete divine manifestation of the
Essential Being, truth and justice exist in the sanctified being of the
Prophet (SA) at a rank of perfection as a result of the
effulgence/ishraqaat of the truth and justice that descended due to
highest level of proximity of the Prophet (saw) with the Divine.”

So, as long as the being of the Prophet (SA) exists, he will be the
manifestation of the Lord, and if there is divine radiance along with
the Prophet (SA) then that divine radiance is also manifestation of
Absolute truth and justice. The quest of the divine leader such as the
Prophet (SA) is to establish the system of Absolute justice.

Without divine justice, neither the heavens nor the earth can exist and
it is because of the Absolute justice that the complete system of
existence moves forward and every thing is destined its absolute
appropriate position. Thus the abode of the Imamate is the abode of
truth and justice and he who is awaited is the epitome of truth and
justice culminating from the chain of those divine leaders who were
established on truth and justice.

According to the authentic narration of the Holy Prophet (SA), none will
accomplish the divine mission of establishing justice on this earth
except the last Imam (Mahdi) from his progeny who will reappear at the
end of time by the divine permission, **يَمْلاَءُ اللهُ الْاَرْضَ
قِسْطًا وَّ عَدْلاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ ظُلْمًا وَّ جَوْرًا** *He shall fill
the earth with equity and justice as it was full with injustice and
tyranny.* (Yanabee’ Al Mawadda)

Justice is also parallel to knowledge, because it is through knowledge
that one identifies the appropriate position of the divine words and
places them in its just position. As Rasheed Turabi delineates, there is
truth and justice in the greater creative realm but this existential
truth & justice cannot be comprehended without knowledge and it was this
reason when Prophet Ibraheem (AS) was put to trial with various divine
words, the Qur’an announces in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لاَ يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***My Covenant (Prophethood) includes not Dhalimeen (polytheists and
wrong-doers).*****[2:124]**

This covenant or promise was bestowed to the holy household of Prophet
Muhammad (AS) who were worthy of receiving that covenant and assuming
the grave responsibility of Imamate.

The third bounty from Allah (SWT) which He blessed his servant is
reflected in this phrase of acknowledgment in the supplication, **وَ
اَحْيََيَْتَنى تَحْتَ ظِلِّكَ** *And You bestowed life on me to live
under Your shade**.***

 Now, what exactly does in means to live under the “shade of Allah
(SWT)”. And does Allah (SWT) really have a shade? Logic and the concepts
of Tawheed (Oneness of God) deny the idea that Allah (SWT) can be
imagined physically or that there is any shape or form attributed to
Him. So this expression in the supplication is simply a metaphor to
indicate proximity to Allah (SWT) just like the shadow of an object is
very close to that object.

In a well-known Hadith, the Prophet (SA) said: *“There are seven whom
Allah will shade in His Shade on the Day when there is no shade except
His Shade: a just ruler; a youth who grew up in the worship of Allah,
the Mighty and Majestic; a man whose heart is attached to the mosques;
two men who love each other for Allah's sake, meeting for that and
parting upon that; a man who is called by a woman of beauty and
position* *[for illegitimate relationship], but he says: 'I fear Allah',
a man who gives in charity and hides it, such that his left hand does
not know what his right hand gives in charity; and a man who remembered
Allah in private and so his eyes shed tears.”* (Sahih Bukhari)

In this beautiful Hadith, the Prophet (SA) speaks about small acts of
worship which result in such a huge reward, and that is, shade on the
day when there will be no shade except His Shade. This may not seem like
much at first but upon reflection of the following prophetic narration,
the reward is more appreciated: *“On the Day of Resurrection, the sun
would draw so close to the people that there would be left a distance of
only one mile. The people will be submerged in perspiration according to
their deeds, some up to their ankles, some up to their knees, some up to
the waist and some would have the bridle of perspiration and, while
saying this, the Messenger of Allah put his hand towards his mouth.”*
(Sahih Muslim) So who would want more on this fateful day than to be
under the “shade” and protection of Allah (SWT)?!

Each of these seven deeds mentioned in the above narration lead to
divine proximity. However, we must keep in mind that this and any
narration which speaks about rewards of a good deed must not be taken in
the absolute form. In order to deserve the reward of a deed which Allah
(SWT) has promised, one must *first* fulfill the prerequisite conditions
in their faith and creed. In other words, a person cannot deserve the
reward of a good deed if he doesn’t believe in the concepts of Tawheed
or Nubuwwat or Imamate, which come first before any deeds are accepted.

Not only that, but if we analyze closely this Hadith, we’ll notice that
it states that *“There are seven whom Allah will shade in His shade on
the Day when there is no shade except His shade.”*

So, the context of this tradition is on the Day of Judgment where no
shade will exist except His shade. His “shade” does not refer to a
physical entity, but it refers to those who represent him who are the
divinely appointed Infallible Imams. In fact, not only are they the
“shade” (**ظل الله**) of Allah, they are also the “face of Allah” (**وجه
الله**) and the “word of Allah” (**كلمة الله**)(SWT) as they are the
reflection of His divine attributes!

Being that the supplicant has reached this far in the prayer after
recognizing the virtues of the Ahlul Bayt (AS) and confessing their
Imamate, he can now state with all confidence that Allah (SWT) has
“*bestowed life on me to live under Your shade.”* After fulfilling the
conditions of belief in Imamate, he is now prone to the bestowal of
divine proximity!

Once the servant realizes the true wealth, justice, and divine proximity
that has been bestowed upon him from Allah (SWT) by virtue of his
obedience to Him, whenever he sees a poverty-stricken person it is
natural for him to feel sympathy and compassion for him. So he prays
that Allah (SWT) grants him the opportunity to offer him consolation and
kindness even if it is just a few nice words that puts a balm in the
heart of those who are unfortunate.

A deeper meaning of analyzing these words may be realized when a
believer who has been bestowed with the gift of Wilayah desires to share
his valuable knowledge and wealth of faith with those who are still
drowning in their ignorance. The believers will attempt to guide them to
the Wilayah and love of Imam ‘Ali (AS) and the Infallible Imams from his
progeny and that cannot be accomplished except by gaining knowledge and
a clear insight of the facts of history and the autobiographies of these
esteemed personalities.

We learn from this phrase in the supplication the extreme importance of
helping others in the general sense and not being selfless. Even if we
already possess bounties or wealth, we are advised not to think only
about ourselves but rather think about others. We should sympathize with
the poor and destitute out there and all those who are unfortunate or
disabled in any way. To give *Muwasaat* means to offer your kindness,
sympathy, good words and actions, support, consolation, and solace, etc.
We are urged to try and offer all the support that we can to the best of
our abilities.

It is interesting to note that the phrase in the supplication uses the
word **وَارْزُقْني** which means to “grant me” or “bless me”. The
supplicant is asking for the ability to achieve *Muwasaat* to those who
are poverty-stricken! From this we learn how important the act of
*Muwasaat* to others is such that achieving it is such an honor in
Allah’s eyes that the servant is seeking it as a grant for himself!

Often times we may intend to do a certain good deed but do not have the
ability to do so or don’t have the success or accommodation to execute
it. However, to be given the ability to accomplish such good act is in
itself a bounty that deserves thanks to the Almighty God who gave us
that power and ability to do an action which pleases Him. It is narrated
that the Holy Prophet (SA) once said, *“If Allah (SWT) willed good for a
servant, He uses him.”* Someone asked him, *“How does Allah (SWT) use
him?”* The Prophet (SA) answered, *“By giving him Tawfeeq (success) in
doing good deeds before his death.”*

Islam places great importance in helping other people and fulfilling
their needs. As the Prophet (SA) said, *“The most beloved people to
Allah is he who benefits others.”* There is so much reward in bringing
happiness to the heart of others especially a believer, even if it is
just one good word.

In this narration, the Prophet (SA) stresses the importance of
brotherhood among Muslims and its reward: *“A Muslim is the brother of a
Muslim; he does not wrong him nor does he forsake him when he is in
need; whosoever is fulfilling the needs of his brother, Allah is
fulfilling his needs; whosoever removes distress from a believer, Allah
removes from him a distress from a distressful aspect of the Day of
Resurrection; and whosoever conceals the faults of a Muslim, Allah will
conceal his faults on the Day of Resurrection."* (Sahih Muslim)

\*\*\*\*\*

The Holy Month of Sha’ban
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا شَهْرُ نَبِيِِّّكَ سَيِِّدِ رُسُلِكَ شَعْبانُ الَّذى حَفَفْتَهُ
مِنْكَ بِالرَّحْمَةِ وَالرِّضْوانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And this is the month You have attributed to Your Prophet the chief of
Your Prophets month of Sha\`ban You have encompassed it with your mercy
and pleasure**

At this stage of the supplication which is recommended to recite during
the days of the holy month of Sha’ban, the supplicant now beseeches
Allah (SWT) by the blessings of this holy month – Sha’ban. After
confessing the virtues of Ahlul Bayt (AS) and acknowledging his belief
in the Imamate followed by specific prayers, he thereafter seeks more
guarantees for the acceptance of his prayers by placing the Holy month
of Sha’ban as an “intercessor” between him and His Lord. Again, this is
another proof which supports the idea of Shafa’at and seeking the divine
abode via special and holy intermediates whether people, places,
objects, or otherwise.

The month of Sha’ban which is the 8th month in the Islamic Hijri
calendar holds a special place and uniqueness among all months. First,
it is unique in that it is the only holy month that is sandwiched
between two other holy months, Rajab and Ramadan.

Second, it is the month preceding the Holy month of Ramadan which is the
month of fasting and the month which its days are divided such that the
first 10 days are when the door to Allah’s mercy is opened, the middle
10 days are when the door to Allah’s forgiveness are opened, and the
last 10 days is for emancipation from Hell-Fire.

There are so much blessings and rewards that a lay-servant can gain from
the Holy month of Ramadan such that it is the Prophet (SA) said in his
welcome speech for this month: “Miserable is he who passes the month of
Ramadan and does not gain the forgiveness and atonement of his sins.”

It is generally not possible for a person to achieve a certain goal or
stage except after preparing himself and warming up for that
achievement. For example, in order for a student to pass his final
exams, he must first complete his daily homework across the semester and
study diligently in all his lessons. Thereafter, when he takes his exam,
he will be much prepared and more ready to done a fine job in the test
as the guarantees for his success are higher with more preparation.

Likewise, in order for a servant to excel in the holy month of Ramadan
and reap the fruits and blessings of this exceptional month, it follows
logic that he *must* prepare himself spiritually beforehand. For
example, fasting a few days before the month of Ramadan commences will
certainly help him train his body to get used to different habit of
eating. Sure enough, one of the highly recommended deeds to be performed
in the month of Sha’ban is to fast its last days to connect with the
holy month of Ramadan.

It is interesting to note that the transition of the discourse with
Allah (SWT) in this phrase of supplication to the holy month of Sha’ban
starts first by the mention of the Holy Messenger (SA). So instead of
introducing the month by its name, the supplicant introduces it by the
theme of that month, namely the Prophet (SA) saying , **وهذا شَهْرُ
نَبيِِّكَ سَيِِّدِ رُسُلِكَ شَعْبانُ** *And this is the month You have
attributed to Your Prophet the chief of Your Prophets month of Sha’ban.*

Instead of saying, “And this is the month of Sha’ban, the month of your
Prophet…”, the supplication says “This is the month of Your
Prophet…Sha’ban…”. The rearrangement of words here is not random and
serves to present the main idea of the sentence. We learn here that the
significance of the month of Sha’ban al-Mu'azzam is due to the fact that
it is the “month of Prophet Muhammad”. He (SWT) used to say, *“Rajab is
the month of Allah, Sha’ban is my month and Ramadan is the month of my
Nation".* (Mafateeh Al Jinan) Hence, we recognize that if it were not
for the Prophet (SA) who is the “Chief of Prophets” **سَيِِّدِ
رُسُلِكَ** , this month would be like any other month.

The supplicant continues his prayer by describing the month of Sha’ban
by a few words that summarizes its main benefits which are Mercy and
Pleasure, **الَّذى حَفَفْتَهُ مِنْكَ بِالرَّحْمَةِ وَالرِّضْوانِ** *You
have encompassed it with your mercy and pleasure.* It has also been
reported from Imam As-Sadiq (AS) that on the commencement of the month
of Sha'ban, Imam As-Sajjad (AS) would gather his companions and address
them,

*"O my companions, do you know which month this is? It is the month of
Sha'ban about which Prophet Muhammad (SA) used to say that it is
dedicated to him. So keep fasts during this month in the love of your
Holy Prophet (saw) and to attain closeness to your Creator. By Allah
(SWT) in whose hands is my soul, I have heard from my father, Husain ibn
‘Ali (AS), that he had heard from Commander of Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (AS),
that whoever keeps fast during the month of Sha'ban in the love of
Prophet Muhammad (SA) and to attain closeness to Allah (SWT) will become
a friend to Allah (SWT) and on the Day of Judgment will be close to
Allah (SWT) by His grace and Paradise will be assured to him."*
(Mafateeh Al Jinan)

We can also perceive the Rahma (Mercy) from Allah (SWT) in this month to
be personified in the character of the 12th Imam from the progeny of the
Prophet (SA) who has been born in the middle of this holy month. With
his birth descends the peak of mercy as he will fill the earth with
justice and equity after it has been filled with tyranny and oppression.

\*\*\*\*\*

The Prophet Honors Sha’ban
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذى كانَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِه وَ سَلَّمَ
يََدْاَبُ فى صِيامِهِ وَ قِيامِهِ فى لَياليهِ وَ اَيّّامِهِ بُخُوعاً
لَكَ فى اِكْرامِهِ وَاِعْظامِهِ اِلى مَحَلِّ حِمامِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Messenger of God used to keep vigil in devotion during its nights
and observed fasts during its days humiliating himself before You
honoring and respecting it till his departure from this World.**

The supplicant continues to beseech Allah (SWT) by the blessings of the
holy month of Sha’ban and further describes the special treatment which
Rasulullah (SA) gave to these blessed days and nights. He used to fast
during the days and then keep vigil in devotion during the nights. Aside
from the physical benefits of fasting, there are many spiritual
advantages.

The institute of the fast is one of the signs of the Almighty's mercy on
those who adhere to His divine creed and it is never meant to cause
hardship on anybody as the Almighty (SWT) does not gain any benefit by
causing hardship on anyone. On the contrary, He (SWT) always paves the
way of happiness for His servants in this life and the next life, and He
(SWT) sometimes even "pushes" them to do what is good for them, as is
the case with making the fast of the month of Ramadan obligatory on
every believing man and woman.

Fasting is more than a diet adjustment; it involves spiritual intensity
and intercession. One of the greatest spiritual benefits of fasting is
becoming more aware of our own inadequacies and God's adequacy, and
becoming more aware of our own failings and His self-sufficiency. The
purpose of all disciplines including fasting is to change us so that we
may become more disciplined and responsible.

The believers learn to curb their desires and check them against
transgression, extravagance, and the yielding to the lower desires, all
of which degenerate man and bring him to the pit of self-destruction and
annihilation. Fast fosters strong will, teaches patience and
self-discipline, and the ability to bear hardship and tolerate hunger
and thirst. In short, it brings about a clear victory over one's illicit
desires and selfish impulses. It teaches the believer to abandon vices,
to control emotions and instincts, to curb the tongue against saying
what is wrong or inappropriate and the conscience against contemplating
upon wrongdoing or subversion.

Furthermore, it promotes the spirit of unity among members of the
fasting community during the holy month of Ramadan. It teaches them
humility and humbleness and instills within them the feeling of equality
before Allah (SWT). The rich have to observe fast as well as the poor,
the women as well as the men, the influential and powerful as well as
the weak and unfortunate. It promotes the spirit of charity and
compassion towards the poor and the needy and it reminds each believer
of the needs of other believers. This is exactly what we discussed
previously regarding the importance of fulfilling other people’s needs
and offering Muwasaat to other believers. The concept of fasting goes
hand in hand with the idea of Muwasaat which this supplication just
alluded to.  
 Keeping vigil in devotion during the nights in general and especially
in the holy month of Sha'ban has been practiced and observed by the Holy
Prophet (SA). The remembrance of Allah (SWT) is the greatest deed of the
human being as it elevates his life, brings him peace and happiness, and
enables him to fulfill the real mission of his life in this world. When
Allah (SWT) describes believers in the Holy Qur’an, He (SWT) says;

**الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ** **ۗ**
**أَلا بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ .**

***Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the remembrance
of Allah, now surely by Allah’s remembrance are the hearts set at
rest.*** **[13:28].**

Among the ways of remembering Allah is waking up at night for Salatul
Layl. The Holy Qur’an and Hadith have much to say about this very
important part of the worship of a believer. Its merits and effects are
tremendous and whoever recites Salatul Layl regularly is following the
path of the Prophets and the Ma’someen (AS). Those who wish to attain
divine proximity forego a part of their sleep and wake up early to seek
forgiveness from Allah (SWT). They sacrifice their sleep and comfort for
the pleasure of reciting Salatul Layl.

 In many verses of the Qur’an, Allah (SWT) enjoins spending the night in
His glorification and worship. In one instance, He (SWT) says:

**  
**

وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَاسْجُدْ لَهُ وَسَبِّحْهُ لَيْلاً طَوِيلاً

**  
**
.

***  
***

***And during part of the night adore Him, and give glory to Him (for a)
long part of the night.*** **[76:26]**

This begs us to pose the following question: Why is night prayer more
emphasized and rewarded than day prayers?

If we think about it, during daytime numerous affairs occupy the time
and mind of the human being. In the midst of all this preoccupation, it
is difficult to have the peace of mind and heart that is necessary for
good quality worship. But at night when it is dark and silent and when
the mind is less occupied with the mundane matters of this world, the
human being can acquire a tranquil state which allows him to be in
harmony with his Creator.

Hence, the Prophet (SA) said, “*Two raka’ats of prayer recited in the
darkness of the night are more beloved to me than the world and all that
is in it.”* (Salatul Layl) Furthermore, nighttime is usually a time
where a human being rest from the toil of the day and the body calls for
sleep.

However, if a servant ignores his state of exhaustion and resists sleep
to worship his Lord and communicate with his beloved in the darkness of
night where everyone is asleep, that act of sacrifice pleases Allah
(SWT). That’s why He (SWT) says about those who rise at night:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانُوا قَلِيلاً مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ مَا يَهْجَعُونَ وَبِالأَسْحَارِ هُمْ
يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They used to sleep but little in the night. And in the early part of
the morning they asked forgiveness.*** **[51:16-17]**

In yet another verse Allah (SWT) describes the effect of reciting
Salatul Layl for the believer. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَّكَ عَسَى أَن يَبْعَثَكَ
رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَّحْمُودًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And during a part of the night, pray Tahajjud beyond what is
incumbent on you; maybe your Lord will raise you to a position of great
glory*****. [17:79]**

In this verse, Allah (SWT) describes the extraordinary spiritual effects
of reciting Salat Al Layl. It raises the human being to “*Maqame
Mahmood”*, an elevated position of glory and praise which only few
people can attain. Therefore, the reward for those who rise at night to
glorify Allah (SWT) cannot be described. As the Holy Prophet (SA) said,
“*There is no good deed except that its reward has been outlined in the
Qur’an, except Salatul Layl. Almighty Allah has not specified its reward
due to its greatness with Him.”* (Salatul Layl)

During these holy days and nights of the month of Sha’ban, the Prophet
(SA) is in the state of humility and modesty before Allah (SWT) and he
is occupied in glorifying and honoring Him till his last breathe. The
supplication uses the word **بُخُوعاً** which means to be deeply engaged
and diligently occupied.

In fact, Allah (SWT) uses this same word to the Prophet (SA) in a
different context to alleviate his deep concern and disappointment that
his people were not embracing the truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَفْسَكَ أَلاَّ يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِين َ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not
believe.*** **[26:3]**

It is not surprising that this same person who grieved himself about the
disbelief of his people is deeply engaged in prayer and worship such
that even before his official inauguration of prophethood, he used to go
secretly every now and then to Cave Hiraa' in the mountains in the
darkness and silence of night and exercise an intimate relationship with
his Creator while engaged in meditation and worship.

This same esteemed Prophet (SA) is now engaging himself in glorification
and veneration of Allah (SWT) during the holy month of Sha’ban after
excelling in his role as the Seal of Prophets who was sent as a mercy to
the world. Along the same lines, the Prophet (SA) confesses that *“The
coolness of my eyes lies in Salah.”* (Salat Al Mu’min fi Dawq Al Kitab
Wal Sunnah) Hence we can better understand the meaning of the above
phrase in the supplication.

\*\*\*\*\*

Attaining Prophetic Intercession
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ فَاَعِنّا عَلَى الاْسْتِنانِ بِسُنَّتِهِ فيهِ وَ نَيْلِ
الشَّفاعَةِ لَدَيْهِ. اَللّهُمَّ وَاجْعَلْهُ لى شَفيعاً مُشَفَّعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O\` Allah! Help us in following his life pattern and in achieving his
intercession. Oh Allah! Appoint him as an intercessor for me and his
intercession is accepted by You**

After beseeching Allah (SWT) by the blessings of the holy month of
Sha’ban which attained its special status due to its association to the
Prophet (SA), and after briefly describing his engagement in prayer and
worship during the nights and days of this month, the servant is now
praying for himself for the sake of his hereafter.

He asks that Allah (SWT) assist him in his journey of following the
Prophet (SA) and taking him as his role model. There is no doubt that
all Muslims are required to follow the Sunnah of the Prophet (SA).

However, the question remains which Sunnah is genuine and which one was
invented later and was falsely attributed to the Prophet (SA)? In a
famous authenticated *Hadith Ath-Thaqalayn*, the Prophet (SA)
announced: *"I am leaving for you two precious and weighty Symbols that
if you adhere to both of them, you shall not go astray after me. They
are, the Book of Allah, and my progeny, that is, my Ahlul Bayt. The
Merciful has informed me that these two shall not separate from each
other till they come to me by the Pool (of Paradise)."*

According to this and many other countless prophetic traditions, his
Ahlul Bayt (AS) are the best example after him and they possess
unparalleled knowledge of the Sunnah of the Prophet (SA). Hence, one
cannot truly follow the Sunnah of the Prophet (SA) without referring to
his purified household who are the *Arc of Salvation* and the compass
which leads to the *Siraat Al Mustaqeem* (Straight Path).

The next prayer which the supplicant asks for is the intercession of the
Holy Prophet (SA). The idea of intercession has been strongly supported
in the Holy Qur’an as well as in authentic Hadith. The famous Sunni
scholars Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah relate in their Sunan collections, and
likewise Nasa’i in \`Amal al-Yawm w’al-Layla, Tabarani, Hakim, Bayhaqi
and others on the authority of \`Uthman ibn Hunayf that a blind man came
to the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) and said: *“Ask Allah
to heal me.”*

He replied: *“If you wish I will pray for you and if you wish you can be
patient for this is better for you.” “Pray to Allah for me”* he said. So
the Prophet (Allah bless him and grant him peace) ordered him to make
good his wudu’ (ablution) and then to make the following
supplication**:**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك وأتوجه إليك بنبيك محمد نبي الرحمة، يا محمد إني أتوجه
بك إلى ربي في حاجتي هذه لتقضى، اللهم فشفعه في ّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, I ask You and I turn to You by Your Prophet Muhammad, the
Prophet of Mercy. O Muhammad! I turn by you to my Lord concerning this
need of mine that it may be fulfilled. O Allah, grant him intercession
for me.*

\`Uthman bin Hunayf remarks: *“By Allah we did not disperse nor did we
converse for long before the man entered and it was if there had never
been anything wrong with him.”* The Messenger of Allah (Allah bless him
and grant him peace) then said to him: *“if there is a similar need, do
the same.”*

And the Holy Qur’an approves the idea of the Holy Prophet (SA) praying
to Allah (SWT) for forgiveness on behalf of the sinning believers.

**  
**

وما أرسلنا مِن رسول إلا ليُطاع بإذن الله ولو أنهم إذ ظلموا أنفسهم جاءوك
فاستغفروا الله واستغفر لهُم الرسول لوجدوا الله تواباً رحيماً

**  
**
.

**  
**

***We did not send any apostle but to be obeyed by Allah's leave. Had
they, when they wronged themselves, come to you and pleaded to Allah for
forgiveness, and the Apostle had pleaded for forgiveness for them, they
would have surely found Allah all-clement, all-merciful.*** **[4:64]**

So the Prophet (SA) has the authority to act as intercessor on behalf of
his nation, and this authority is further extended to the Infallible
Imams (AS) from his progeny. Thus, the chances of a servant’s prayers
being accepted by the divine abode are indeed higher and more guaranteed
than if he as a fallible servant prays directly on his own.

However, there are conditions to receiving intercession and the most
obvious is to sincerely believe that the Prophet (SA) and his Ahlul Bayt
(AS) have the authority and power from Allah (SWT) to act as
intercessors as a virtue of their divinely appointed position of
Imamate. Also, one of the conditions for attaining intercession is
performing the obligatory Salah (prayers) on time as the Prophet (SA)
has said, *"My intercession shall not reach the person who delays prayer
(even) after its time has arrived and (he delays it) till the time has
expired." (Kitab Al Kaafi)*

The apparent meaning here is referring to the daily Salah which were are
ordered to perform; however, one can reflect upon the latent meaning
that perhaps the “Salah” here refers to the benedictions (Salawat) sent
on the Prophet (SA) and his holy household! If a person takes that
action lightly or abandons the recitation of Salawat, they will not be
worthy to attain the Shafa’at of the Infallible Imams (AS).

After all, the more care and devotion you give to a person, the more you
award and reward you can expect from them. Likewise, the more neglect
and disregard you have towards someone, the less likely will that person
express love to you.

At this stage of the supplication, the servant once again stresses his
appeal to be granted the intercession of the Holy Prophet (SA) and for
it to become accepted by the divine abode. This appeal is made right
after highlighting the special blessings of the month of Sha’ban which
has been honored solely due to the fact that it is the Prophet’s month.
By approaching the month of Sha’ban and by entering its door represented
in the immaculate character of the Seal of Messengers (SA), the servant
guarantees for himself acceptance of his prayers and bestowal of
blessings of the month of Sha’ban from Allah (SWT)!

\*\*\*\*\*

Muhammad: the Path to Salvation
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ طَريقاً اِلَيْكَ مَهيَعاً وَاجْعَلْنى لَهُ مُتَّبِعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And appoint him to show us a simple path towards You and make me his
follower**

The supplicating believer continues to ask for guidance for “a simple
path towards Allah (SWT)” via the Holy Prophet (SA) after requesting for
an accepted intercession from him. This **طريق** or path which he is
seeking has only one destination – the Almighty God. And this path is
mentioned in the singular form to lift our attention that there is
*only* one path and one way towards His divine proximity.

In fact, as Muslims we pray everyday to Allah (SWT) in our obligatory
Salah at least ten times when reciting Surah Al Fatiha to guide us to
the straight path:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Show us the straight path.*** **[1:6]**

A true believer, regardless of how learned and wise he may be, has to
pray for this blessing from the All-Knowing and All-Wise Lord. Man needs
guidance not only to possess knowledge of the theory and practice of the
doctrine he believes in, but also to perceive the extraordinary truths
which open up new spiritual horizons.

As Mir Pooya explains in his commentary of the Holy Qur’an, the right
path mentioned here is neither any particular path nor the doctrines of
the religion. There are several angles of human life in this world. The
physical, mental, moral and spiritual aspects of living, together with
its many divisions, need guidance to find the right path. The guidance
to the right path mentioned in the Qur’an encompasses all aspects of the
various paths open to the human soul in this life.

Mir Pooya clarifies that to fulfill the purpose of his creation, which
is the ultimate purpose of man's existence in this world, the servant
prays to the creator for spiritual assistance to keep him on the right
path. Man's effort and strive in the way to perfection, by perpetual
obedience and quest for help and guidance, should be continuous, then
alone he can keep to the right path which leads to Allah.

According to most exegetists of this verse of Surah Al Fatiha, the
*Siraat Al Mustaqeem* (as we’ve mentioned before) refers to Imam ‘Ali
(AS) who represents all of the Infallible Imams from his progeny. Hence,
we articulate that when the supplicant is asking for guidance to the
path, he is specifically asking for guidance towards the Wilayah of Imam
‘Ali (AS) and his purified descendants. And if he has already been
guided to it, he is asking that Allah (SWT) make his feet stead fast on
this right path so that he continues to tread this path towards human
perfection via the perfect models for mankind.

Now, what are the rewards of one who is steadfast on the right path
represented in the holy household of the Prophet (SA)? Allah (SWT) says
in Surah Al Jinn:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ لَوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ لأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً
غَدَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If they tread the right path, We shall give them to drink water in
abundance.*** **[72:16]**

 According to Al-Kaafi, Imam Al Baqir (AS) explained that the
interpretation of this verse is that if the people followed the right
path of Wilayah (guardianship) of Imam ‘Ali (AS) and the Imams from his
descendants and obeyed them in their commands and prohibitions, their
reward will be that the Infallible guides will offer them “water in
abundance” which is a metaphor to embellishing their hearts with faith
and certainty.

According to Imam As-Sadiq (AS) as mentioned in Tafseer Al Saafi, the
water in this verse stands for the knowledge and insight into higher
things which is available to those who follow the teachings of the Imams
of the Ahlul Bayt (AS*).* It is interesting to note that in the next
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُعْرِضْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ يَسْلُكْهُ عَذَابًا صَعَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever turns aside from the reminder of his Lord, He will make
him enter into an afflicting chastisement.*** **[72:17]**

In Tafseer Al Saafi, Al Qummi narrates that Imam As-Sadiq (AS) said that
the “remembrance of his Lord” **ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ** refers to the Wilayah
of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS). Hence, this verse confirms the
interpretation of the “path” which is represented by the Ahlul Bayt (AS)
who are the *Siraat Al Mustaqeem!*

The supplicant also requests that Allah (SWT) gives him the success to
be a true follower and adherent to the Holy Prophet (SA), not only in
the matters of jurisprudence, but most importantly in the matters of
faith and beliefs. Being that the believer at this stage of the
supplication has already confessed Tawheed of Allah (SWT) and
acknowledged the Nubuwwat (prophet hood) of Muhammad (AS), it follows
that the remaining key component of faith which has yet to be fulfilled
or acknowledged is the Imamate and guardianship after the Prophet (SA).

So, the servant is praying that Allah (SWT) opens his heart and mind to
see the truth and more importantly to accept it which will lead to his
obedience to the Prophet (SA) regarding the command of Wilayah to Imam
‘Ali (AS) and the Infallible Imams (AS) after him.

\*\*\*\*\*

Divine Pleasure & Forgiveness
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتّى اَلْقاكَ يَوْمَ الْقِيمَةِ عَنّى راضِياً وَ عَنْ ذُنُوبى غاضِياً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Till I meet You on the Day of Resurrection in a state that You be
pleased with me ignoring my sins**

The servant concludes his *Salawat Sha’baniyyah* with this last phrase
which summarizes the main goal of his discourse to Allah (SWT) and the
aim that he is pursuing. The inevitable destination that each creature
will face is death and no one is excluded from it. As Allah (SWT) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل نفسٍ ذائقة الموت
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Every soul shall taste death.*****[3:185]**

Hence, there is no escape from this reality that we will experience
**لقاء الله** )meet Allah (SWT)( and return back to Him with the event
of death. The question is not whether we will meet Allah (SWT) or not;
the question is *how* we will meet in and in *what* condition!

Is He (SWT) going to be pleased to meet us or not? Does punishment await
us or reward? Hence, when the servants says *“Till I meet you on the day
of resurrection in a state that You be pleased with me”,* he is praying
to achieve the satisfaction and pleasure of his Lord. To attain the
pleasure of Allah (SWT) simply requires for us to follow his commands
and obey him unconditionally.

Furthermore, to obey Allah (SWT) is equivalent to obeying all His
prophets and messengers as well as the divinely chosen guides as
indicated in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أطيعوا الله ورسوله وأولي الأمر منكم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.*** **[4:59]**

As Mir Pooya nicely puts it into perspective when explaining the
obedience and those who are in authority, *“The command to obey is
infinite-total obedience in all material, religious and spiritual
matters, therefore, as this verse clearly signifies, the Ulul Amr must
also be as just, wise and merciful as Allah and the Holy Prophet are,
and he who - administers the affairs of mankind should be the
Khalifatullah (vicegerent of Allah) and the Waliallah.”*

Hence, the ultimate aim of the servant is to meet Allah (SWT) while
having obeyed Him and submitted to His divine representatives be it
prophet, messenger, or successor. This state of unconditional obedience
will naturally lead to attaining divine pleasure and being included
among those whom Allah (SWT) says in Surah Al Fajr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Oh soul that is at peace*** **[89:27]**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ارْجِعِي إِلَىٰ رَبِّكِ رَاضِيَةً مَرْضِيَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with him), well-pleasing (Him).***
**[89:28]**

And that state is the peak of bliss in which both the lover (servant)
and the beloved (Creator) are in harmony with each other!

It is interesting to note that the supplicant here uses the words **وَ
عَنْ ذُنُوبى غاضِياً** (ignoring my sins) instead of saying **وَ عَنْ
ذُنُوبى غافراً** (forgiving my sins).

To ignore is not the same as to forgive because if the process of
ignoring is accomplished, then forgiveness is no longer needed since
that which is ignored is no longer in the picture. So the servant is in
fact making a smart move by asking Allah (SWT) to not only forgive, but
to disregard his sins as if it doesn’t exist!

After all, Allah the Merciful may forgive a person for a particular sin
but the sin still remains as a pollutant to his record of deeds, and the
pattern of sinning stains his book which he will be resurrected with.

However, if Allah (SWT) ignores a sin by His own will, then it is as if
the servant never erred or committed injustice! This is a higher level
of mercy which Allah (SWT) may offer to his devout servant who seeks His
pleasure and obeys His commands.

\*\*\*\*\*

Eternal Mercy & Bliss
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ اَوْجَبْتَ لى مِنْكَ الرَّحْمَةَ وَالرِّضْوانَ وَ اَنْزَلْتَنى
دارَ الْقَرارِ وَ مَحَلَّ الاْخْيارِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

**For You have prescribed mercy and gratification from You and my
entertainment a peaceful abode and the abode of the virtuous people.**

Once the servant reaches the stage of attaining reciprocal pleasure with
Allah (SWT) and his sins overlooked by the All-Merciful, there is only
one end result to this peaceful path. Allah (SWT) then prescribes His
Mercy and Gratification to His servant which is translated in the
transfer of the soul and body to the eternal abode of bliss.  
 There are many different colors and flavors of Rahma **رحمة** and
Ridwan **رضوان** in the book of Allah (SWT) and when we speak about
divine mercy and pleasure, it is certainly not anything close to what we
humans fathom or imagine. In one instance, Allah (SWT) talks about those
who pursue the pleasure of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَ اللَّهِ كَمَنْ بَاءَ بِسَخَطٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is then he who follows the pleasure of Allah like him who has made
himself deserving of displeasure from Allah***. [3:162]

In this verse, the word Ridwan can be interpreted from multiple angles
and Allah (SWT) knows best.

First, the “Ridwan of Allah” refers to something or someone or some path
to be followed which is not to be compared with those who incur the
wrath of Allah (SWT) on themselves. Based on our discussion so far
regarding the high status and path to salvation which we are instructed
to follow as explained in verse [4:59], we may now correlate this verse
to be referring to the Prophet (SA) and his holy household.

Second, another interpretation of this verse according to Al-Kaafi and
Al-’Ayaashi is that Imam As-Sadiq (AS) has affirmed that “those who
followed the pleasure of Allah refers to the Imams and by Allah they
have achieved high ranks to Allah; the deeds of those believers who have
recognized our rights and embraced our Wilayah will be multiplied and
Allah (SWT) will elevate them in high ranks.”

On that note, Al-’Ayaashi comments that those mentioned in the above
verse who deserve the displeasure of Allah are those who rejected the
rights of Imam ‘Ali (AS) and the Infallible Imams from the Ahlul Bayt
(AS) as well as those who followed these rejecters of truth.

In the context of the above interpretation of the verse regarding
“Ridwan of Allah”, we may return back to our discussion of the devout
servant who will receive the “Ridwan” prescribed by Allah (SWT) to him
as a result of attaining His pleasure and overlooking of his sins. Since
the servant has already attained the pleasure of Allah as denoted by the
word **"عني راضياً"** the supplication again repeats the derivative of
that word (Ridwan) as the fruit of achieving that pleasure.

Although the apparent meaning of both words are the same (which is
pleasure), however upon reflection, there must exist a deeper meaning
for the word Ridwan that is mentioned here. After contemplating about
the interpretation of the above verse [3:162], we may now consider that
the Ridwan which Allah (SWT) refers to as a reward to the servant is
none other than close proximity with the Prophet (SA) and Ahlul Bayt
(AS) in the Hereafter where there is **دارَ الْقَرارِ** “peaceful
abode”.

This beautiful supplication of Salawat Sha’baniyyah ends by emphasizing
that this peaceful abode cannot reach the highest stage of peace,
tranquility, and serenity except if the inhabitant of heaven dwells with
those who are virtuous, as indicated by **وَ مَحَلَّ الاْخْيار** (the
abode of the virtuous people). The question now begs itself: Since we as
sinful believers cannot possibly reach the high levels and ranks of the
immaculate personalities of the Prophet (SA) and Ahlul Bayt (AS), how
can we then receive such great reward that we enjoy their abode in
heaven while they are in exceptionally high ranks to Allah (SWT)?

The answer here is logical and returns to the fact that it is only
because of Allah’s absolute Mercy which results in His overlooking of
our sins due to our obedience to Him in the matter of Wilayat which will
lead us to attain the intercession of the Holy Household of the Seal of
Prophets (SA). With this blessed intercession, we are further indebted
to Allah (SWT) and His chosen guides and we will eternally live as
humble servants serving their cause and rotating around their axis of
Wilayah which leads to the pleasure of the One Creator, just as a
honeybee dances around a flower, their source of nutrition and
livelihood!


