Conclusion
==========

After briefly scrutinizing this superb supplication of Salawat
Sha’baniyyah, the servant now begins to recognize the significance of
these profound words which has been divinely inspired to the Prophet
(SA) who passed it on to his successors till it was taught and presented
to us by Imam ‘Ali ibn Al Husain As-Sajjad (AS). Hence, it is also known
as Salawat Imam Zainul ‘Abideen.

This prayer is unique in that it repeatedly pronounces the appeal for
benedictions to be sent on the Holy Prophet (SA) and his purified
Household (AS) which is one of the highly recommended acts to be done in
the eyes of Allah (SWT), especially in the month of Sha’ban.

Every call for benediction is followed by presentation of a fabulous
virtue and exceptional merit which only these divine guides possess due
to their high rank and close position to Allah (SWT). After the servant
recognizes the high status and lofty position of the Ahlul Bayt (AS), he
then acknowledges their right of Wilayah and obedience over all
believers and presents them as intercessors between him and his Lord.

He beseeches Allah (SWT) by the blessings of the month of Sha’ban which
is honored due to its association with the Holy Prophet (SA). This
special month which precedes the holy month of Ramadan also contains a
very fateful night, the 15th night which marks the holy birth of the
last Imam from the descendents of Imam ‘Ali (AS) who is the occulted
Imam of our time.

It is no wonder that this supplication of Salawat Sha’baniyyah is also
recommended to recite on this extraordinary night as it reminds us again
that this month has received its exceptional status because of the birth
of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his reappearance), the 12th star which
rose on this day to shine till the end of time just like the sun
benefits the earth while it is behind the clouds!

It is certainly not a coincidence that this same night of the 15th is
also the night which the Almighty (SWT) takes decisions in the matters
of sustenance, life and death and welfare of the people for the next
year.

Next to the Night of Qadr, the 15th night of Sha’ban is the most
auspicious night of the Islamic calendar (also known as Night of
Bara’at). According to both Imam Al Baqir (AS) and As-Sadiq (AS), Allah
(SWT) has promised to fulfill every legitimate desire put forward to Him
on that night and He (SWT) bestows on His creation from His bounty and
forgives them out of His grace and generosity.

With that in mind, the servant calls to Allah (SWT) by the sanctity of
these divine luminary guides and prays to attain the pleasure and
forgiveness of Allah (SWT) by the blessings of the Holy Prophet (SA) who
is the owner of this holy month.

If a believer recites this fantastic prayer daily during the month of
Sha’ban while recognizing its true essence and significance, he will be
more prepared to receive this special night of the 15th which highlights
the climax and peak of blessings of this month! He will also ascend
himself to a spiritual level that will make him more ready to embrace
the holy month of Ramadan!

The servant concludes the supplication by recognizing the fact that true
happiness is to shadow the Infallible Imams (AS) and inhabit the heavens
with them eternally while enjoying the proximity of the Almighty
Creator.

Indeed, true bliss is to taste the pleasure of unconditional love and
continuous servitude to Allah (SWT) alongside His best of creation and
model for mankind represented in the Holy Prophet (SA) and his purified
Ahlul Bayt (AS). Praise be to Allah (SWT) who created the holy month of
Sha’ban and specialized it with its unique honor that is associated with
the manifestation of divine effulgence and heavenly guidance.


