Publisher’s Foreword
====================

Supplication (*du’a'*) is man’s dialogue with his Lord and the
connecting rope between the creature and his Creator. Intellectual
scholars consider *du’a’* to be practical compliance with monotheism.
This can be particularly evidenced through the Prophets and the Ahl
al-Bayt (as) who have given considerable importance to *du’a’*. The
Supplication of Kumayl (or *Du’a’ Kumayl*) establishes itself as one of
the most significant supplications and is regarded as a resource of
Divine salvation, since it interweaves paramount mystical contents.
Thus, it has been referred to as the ‘source of all supplications’.

According to reliable narratives, *Du’a’ Kumayl*’s origin is divine; it
was the words of al-Khadhir spoken by our master and the commander of
the believers, Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib (as). Owing to this fact, *Du’a’
Kumayl* has occupied a salient rank in the view of the Household of the
Prophet (SAWW) who have shown it considerable importance.

In view of that, the *Du’a’ Kumayl* is looked at as a reflective school
that contains significant spiritual and humanitarian issues of man’s
everyday activities. The well-versed professor, Shaykh Husayn Ansariyan,
has undertaken the mission of annotating and commenting on this
magnificent supplication, and he has actually excelled in this field
since he has interpreted it using reliable Muslim references in addition
to including a thoughtful attachment to this noble supplication.

His one and only aim has been to increase awareness of the words and
significances of this supplication in the conscience and perception of
man. As a result, the commentaries of this scholar have been based upon
fundamentals derived from the Holy Qur'an, reliable narrations, and
mystical knowledge.

Based on the commentator’s spiritual and sentimental connection with
this noble supplication, his commentaries are full of knowledge,
perception, and enlightened insight.

Presenting this wonderful book to the dear readers, the Ansariyan
Publications hopes that the seekers of knowledge and Islamic education
will find it to be a window of detecting the features of this noble
supplication.

**Ansariyan Publications**  
**Holy Qum - Iran**


