Commentary of: “Wa bi jabarutika’llati ghalabta biha kulla shay”
================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِجَبرُوتِكَ الَّتِى غَلَبْتَ بِهَا كُلَّ شَيٍْء
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(I ask You) by Your Invincibility, through which You overwhelm all
things.*

Lexically, the Arabic word “جبروت” (Invincibility) is a hyperbole; it
means Allah compensates for all the shortcomings and inadequacies of the
creatures by granting them every blessing, necessary tools and
equipment; a lofty compensation.

All the beings are insignificant before being created; their primary
element is an atom, a particle, a seed, or a trivial semen. They have
inadequacies at first that are covered by Allah’s Invincibility, so that
all the creatures reach their full entity and occupy their due position
in the living world.

Allah’s Compensation of the insufficiencies
-------------------------------------------

The compensation of creatures’ shortcomings by Allah is an important
issue, some instances of which are narrated from scientific books,
hoping that they increase our faith in the Lofty Source of Bounty.

### Compensation of sun’s exhausted energy

The sun, which is a major source of our energy, is only a small element
of this world. Its heat is so intense that no element of fire can
compete with it. The surface temperature of the sun is approximately
6093 degrees centigrade; its inner temperature is yet beyond this
figure. In every second, the sun renders more that twelve million and
four hundred thousand tons of energy in space. In order to produce the
heat used by the sun in one minute, we will need 679 million billion
tons of coal.

The energy exhausted by the sun in a minute weighs about four million
tons and it turns to 126’144’000’000’000 tons in each year. However, no
fire can go on burning without energy. Thus, if the sun does not obtain
anything from an external source and burns this amount of energy per
year, why doesn’t it get cold? Meanwhile, if the sun was made of pure
coal, it could not burn for more than sixty centuries.

The answer to this question is only given by Allah’s Invincibility. He
has created the sun as a huge mass of gasses, which regains the
exhausted energy by contraction. This fact is the result of numerous
scientific studies in the east and the west who have written hundreds of
pages of books that is available to us but as a simple sentence.

In fact, He is the One Who balances the objects’ exhausted energy in
various ways; compensating the sun’s exhausted energy is but one sign of
Allah’s Invincibility.

### Compensation of Caspian Sea Tide

The Caspian Sea is about 27.6 meters beneath the sea level and it still
continues to go further down. The Caspian Sea is not related to the free
seas so its tide is not in concurrence with the oceans’ general ebb and
flow. Due to its small size, this sea cannot use the gravity of the moon
and so technically it shouldn’t have had a tide. As a result the sea
should have rot long ago, polluting its shores, and losing any living
things in and on it. But why did it not happen?

The Omnipotent Who created the sea very well knew how compensate this
shortcoming. He sent winds called “Sarnuk”, “Khazari”, and “Miyanwa”[^1]
that creates waves in the sea to such an extent that the rivers pouring
into it have tides too. These winds blow so powerfully that most
fishermen cannot even control their boats against them. Another duty of
the mentioned winds is that they drive the clouds from the north to the
south of the sea and produce rain in the northern shores of Iran,
providing the meadows in this region a garden of flowers.

The winds also send the seawater into “Anzali marsh” to filter it. Due
to constant flood-like rain, the rivers in Gilan[^2] are usually muddy
and full of seeds and roots from the woods. The mud of the rivers
pouring into the marsh thickens the bottom layer, allowing the seeds and
roots, too, to grow inside the marsh. These two factors are sufficient
to dry the water in the marsh and turn it into a swamp. Thus, what is
the reason that this marsh has existed for hundreds of years now?

To avoid this, the Almighty sends the seawater to the floods. At the
same time as the above-mentioned winds send the clouds from the north of
the sea to the south, the fresh seawater flows to the muddy river water
and mixes with it, making it less dense and removing any seeds and roots
by its salt.

When these winds stop, Allah sends other winds called “Keramwa”,
“Kenarowa” and “Aftab Bushu” to reverse the water flow, pouring the
marsh water into the Caspian Sea, and hence evacuating the marsh from
muddy waters.

Still two other winds called “Gilwa” and “Durushtwa” are assigned with
the duty of convulsing the marsh water from the East to the West, in
order to blend it together!![^3]

### Allah’s Compensation of Fruit Seeds Shortage

Fruit seeds are useless until they are planted and are subjected to
Allah’s Invincibility that shapes them in various forms.

A pleasant apple was once a tiny and closed seed inside a grocery store
box. It was not of use as a seed except if it were to be planted. When
the farmer placed it under the soil, some agents like fresh air, light,
water and mineral elements helped it to compensate its shortcomings, by
Allah’s Will. So the apple became a delicious, pleasant, and colorful
fruit, which an adornment for gathering and food for humans.

Taking a quick look at the ingredients of the apple which makes us more
familiar with Allah’s Invincibility:

Azotic (nitrogen) ingredients: proteins and amino acids like lizine,
ursenin, histidine, and tirusine)

Minerals: iodine, potassium, boron, phosphor, calcium, iron, cupper,
cudium, sulphur, manganese, zinc, and penizium.

Starch-Glucose materials: dextrose, cellulose, pentosan, and starch.

Sugars: glucose, fructose, and sucrose.

Pectic materials: pectic acid, pectin, pecthinic acid, and protopectin.

Fats and acids: malic acid, citric acid, oxalic acid, ascorbic acid, and
lactic acid.

Color ingredients: antocianines, and chlorophyll.

Vitamins: A, B, C, and G.

Enzymes: catalos, and oxidase.

Water: 84 percent.

This is how the Invincible compensates the shortcomings of a fruit. If
we were to simply indicate His compensation to other entities as well as
to spiritual elements, we would need infinite number of blank pages as
much as the number of all the entire human population.

[^1]: These are the name of the winds in Farsi Mazandarani accent.

[^2]: Gilan is a Northern province of Iran.

[^3]: Neshane hayi az ‘u: 151.


