Commentary of:
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِعِلْمِكَ الَّذِى أَحَاطَ بِكُلِّ شَيٍْء
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(I ask You) by Your Knowledge, which encompasses all things.*

Allah’s Knowledge encompasses all of the actions and all of the times.
It encompasses the apparent and hidden aspects of all beings; even that
of an atom, billions of which can be placed at the point of a needle.
Allah knows the number of all the creatures, even the atoms, the seeds,
the drops of rain and flakes of snow. Here we just mention some verses
of the holy Qur’an that is an ocean of knowledge.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He knows what is in the heavens and what is on earth. (3:29)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ وَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِنْ وَرَقَةٍ
إِلاَّ يَعْلَمُهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He knows what is in land and sea; not a leaf falls, but He knows it.
(6:59)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُسِرُّونَ وَمَا تُعْلِنُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah knows what you keep secret and what you publish. (16:19)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُ مَا يَلِجُ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا وَمَا يَنزِلُ
مِنْ السَّمَاءِ وَمَا يَعْرُجُ فِيهَا وَهُوَ الرَّحِيمُ الْغَفُورُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He knows what penetrates into the earth, and what comes forth from
it, what comes down from heaven, and what goes up to it; He is the
All-compassionate, the All-forgiving. (34:2)***

The reality of these verses becomes apparent when we closely study an
incision in a hill, thousands of which are found in all five continents.
Entomologists have counted nearly seven hundred thousand types of
insects so far; however, the exact number of the different types of
insects is impossible to be determined. In a summer day when the sky is
clear, the number of flies, beetles, and millipedes moving in a hill’s
incision is more than the total number of the population of that
continent. If humans were to suddenly become extinct from the earth,
other creatures living on the earth would hardly ever notice their
absence![^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِنُورِ وَجْهِكَ الَّذِى أَضَآءَ لَهُ كُلُّ شَيٍْء
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(I ask You) by the Light of Your Face, through which all things are
illuminated!*

The Meaning of Light in Qur’anic Verses and Traditions
------------------------------------------------------

In the holy Qur’an and traditions, ‘light’ implies values and
perfections. ‘Light’ means guidance[^2]. ‘Light’ means success in
travelling towards belief[^3]. ‘Light’ means Islam, insight, knowledge.
It means brightness of the spirit[^4]. ‘Light’ is Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ مِنْ اللَّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُبِينٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There has come to you from Allah a light, and a Manifest Book.
(5:15)***

‘Light’ also means divine rules, doctrines and moral facts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We sent down the Torah, wherein is guidance and light.
(5:44)***

According to these references, it becomes clear that ‘light’ is the
essence of Allah’s Attributes, Accomplishments, and Glorious Names from
which all the creatures benefit to the highest degree of their
existence, capacity, and capability. The creatures would then get rid of
their obscurity.

In this apt situation, the talented human goes from the darkness of
inexistence to the light of existence, from incapability to perfection,
from the darkness of ignorance to the light of knowledge, from
oppression to justice, from unbelief to faith, from deviation to
guidance, from materialism to spirituality; in order to rise in
position, all due to Allah’s Light, Names, and Attributes, Who is the
Pure Light and Reality.

Qur’anic verses and the traditions of Prophet’s Household (as) imply
that “Light of Face” has the same realities and perfections, a thousand
of which have been pointed out in Jowshan Kabir supplication.

The reason ‘Light’ is used as a singular is because all of Allah’s Lofty
Names are actually His Existence, and there is nothing as noun or
adjective in His Holy Sanctuary. Knowledge, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy,
Compassion… are all the Existence of the One.

Since ‘Light’ mainly means guidance in Islamic texts the above-mentioned
phrase may mean: “O Allah! I ask You by Your Guidance, by which all the
creatures are guided.”

Thus, the word ‘light’ covers all the heavenly concepts and attributes,
and it is left to common sense to choose among the various meanings
according to the situation.

[^1]: Danestani hayi jahan I ilm: 190.

[^2]: al-Mizan: 1/487.

[^3]: Tafsir Abu Al-Futouh: 1/331.

[^4]: Kashf Al-Asrar: 1/ 703.


