Commentary of:
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَّا نُورُ يَا قُدُّوسُ يَآ أَوَّلَ الأَوَّلِينَ وَيَآ آخِرَ
الآخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Light! O All-Holy! O First of the first and Last of the last!*

O the Perfect One! You are the One whose friend and servant, Imam
Hussain (as) called You in the desert of Arafah on ‘Arafat day:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيَكُونُ لِغَيْرِكَ مِنَ الظُّهُورِ ما لَيْسَ لَكَ، حَتّى يَكُونَ
هُوَ الْمُظْهِرَ لَكَ، مَتى غِبْتَ حَتّى تَحْتاجَ إِلى دَليل يَدُلُّ
عَليْكَ، وَمَتى بَعُدْتَ حَتّى تَكُونَ الاْثارُ هِىَ الَّتى تُوصِلُ
إِلَيْكَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Does anything have an existence which You don’t have, so that it
would give You existence? You have never been hidden to need any reason
to justify You, and You have never been far away to need the signs to
direct us to You.***

O Lord! When I leave my transient state and return to my own self,
looking closely, I observe that the Light of Your Beauty is clearer than
everything else. You are by no means hidden, thus I do not need any form
of light to search Your Divine Position, because once I take a reality
as the reason for my exploration, I come to understand that the reality
and the light are both Your creations.

When and where were You absent that You need a rationale justifying, and
when and where have You been away so that Your signs direct us to You?

You are free of all faults, and greater than anything to which You are
described. You are the most Perfect, the Absolute Reality, the Light and
the Holy. You are the First of the first, but there is no beginning for
Your Holy Existence, and You are the Last of the last without having an
end. You are Preexisting while You make all things begin, and You are
Eternal after all beings will annihilate.

The first and the last are two attributes for all your creations. All of
them have been given a beginning and an end. The entities have a
beginning, for once upon a time they were nothing and You created them,
and they have an end means that the creatures come to an end. You bring
them to an end. So You have existed before “all things” and nothing had
existed before You, and You will exist after “all things” and nothing
would exist after You.

O First of the first and Last of the last!


