Author’s Preface
================

At age eleven, I would attend a religious session during holy nights of
Ramadhan, along with my father. In that session, the late Ayatollah
Sayyid *Muhammad Lali Zari*, who was a reverend scholar, would enlighten
people with an eloquent speech. He would also recite the holy
supplication of Kumayl in the darkness of Thursday nights, with eyes
filled with tears, heart pierced and a tone so divine. No one attended
that session except those who were greatly impressed by the supplication
of Kumayl combined with the effective tenor of the late Ayatollah.

Like other aspirants, I, too, was attracted to this great supplication
through his warm tone; a supplication which has come from the heart of
the Commander of the Believers in order to purify people’s souls and
urge the sinners for repentance.

I managed to memorize this supplication three days after I had heard it
for the first time. And then, I recited it on Thursday nights for my
family members or friends.

Sometime after my coming to Qom Seminary for studying theology, I began
preaching, by Allah’s Mercy. I felt it necessary to recite Kumayl
supplication in my Thursday night sessions which after some time got
very popular throughout Iran as well as abroad and people attended them
eagerly. Some people obtained spiritual benefits from the sessions too.
On the auspicious night of Imam ‘Ali’s (as) birthday, Hujjat Al-Islam
*Rahimian* prompted me to write a commentary on the supplication, so
that people could engage in it more profoundly and take part in the
Kumayl sessions with more insight.

I finally managed to write a commentary on the holy Kumayl supplication
and now it is up to the readers to benefit from it.

Finally I should appreciate the assistance of my friends in the research
section of Dar Al-‘Irfan Publications, who have edited and prepared the
work for being published.

**Husayn Ansariyan**


