Du’a’ (supplication) in a Glance
================================

*Du’a’* is the expression of deprivation to the One.

*Du’a’* is the pronunciation of poverty to the Eternal Absolute.

*Du’a’* is seeking assistance of the powerless from the All-Powerful.

*Du’a’* is the demonstration of humility to the Omnipotent.

*Du’a’* is loved by the Almighty, and is dear to the mystic and the
miserable.

Du’a’ in the Holy Qur’an
------------------------

The Almighty, who is the Revealer of knowledge and wisdom, states in His
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَا يَعْبَأُ بِكُمْ رَبِّي لَوْلا دُعَاؤُكُمْ فَقَدْ كَذَّبْتُمْ
فَسَوْفَ يَكُونُ لِزَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say (O’ Muhammad to the disbelievers): My Lord would not concern
Himself with you, but for your prayers. (25:77)***

*Du’a’* is a tool for attracting God’s attention and blessings. His
attention removes calamity from the life of one who prays, and brings
about blessings for him/her.

The All-Knowing Lord says in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِي إِذَا دَعَانِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when My servant question thee concerning Me, then surely I am
close (to them). I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calleth
unto Me. (2:186)***

No one is as close to the man as his creator, Allah. He is the One who
has created man, fashioning him in the womb, and then transferring him
to this world. He bestows His material and spiritual blessings unto man,
sent the prophets to guide him, and granted him the Divine Qur’an and
the Immaculate Imams (as).

Allah has created water for the thirst of man and food for his hunger.
He cures man’s diseases and improves his health. He discards man’s
loneliness with a spouse, children, and friends, and his starkness with
various kinds of clothes. Allah makes man cherished by the others, and
maintains his dignity before them. Allah solves his problems, however
difficult they may seem. Who is so closely and intently aware of man’s
deepest needs and can provide him with all these blessings, except
Allah? He is indeed closer to man than anyone else. Hence He says in
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإِنْسَانَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We verily created a man and We know what his soul whispereth to him,
and We are nearer to him than his jugular vein. (50:16)***

In spite of being superior to all others in terms of wisdom and insight,
aware of the unseen more than others, and knowing the reality as it is,
the prophets (as) too were extensively devoted to *du’a’.* They spent
part of their time, both at day and night, to attach themselves to this
firm and reliable string, and stand humbly before Allah. They considered
*du’a’* as the means to strengthen the mind, purify the soul, and solve
problems.

The holy prophets (as) knew for sure that no suppliant ends his *du’a’*
except that Allah grants his requests to him from His presence. They
hence believed in the fulfillment of *du’a’* and humbly asked Allah to
grant their supplication. The holy Qur’an states this fact so clearly
from Prophet Abraham’s enlightened soul and purified speech:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي وَهَبَ لِي عَلَى الْكِبَرِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ
وَإِسْحَاقَ إِنَّ رَبِّي لَسَمِيعُ الدُّعَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Praise be to Allah who hath given me, in my old age, Ishmael and
Isaac! Lo! My Lord is indeed the Hearer of Prayer. (14:39)***

Zechariah requested God, with the power of *du’a’*, to grant him a
child. God fulfilled his desire and bestowed on him John, though his
wife was barren. (19:5-9)

Following his disciples’ request, the Christ asked Allah to descend a
heavenly table spread with food. The Almighty God accepted his prayer
and send down for him and his disciples a table spread with foods from
heaven. (5:112-115)

The Powerful has ordered His servants to pray in all situations, either
in happiness or sorrow, with a humble heart and a tearful eye, demanding
their needs from Him and be hopeful of the acceptance of their
supplication. The Omniscient has also assured to consign to hell those
who are too proud to serve Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمْ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And your Lord hath said: Pray unto me and I will hear your prayer.
Lo! Those who scorn My*** ***service, they will enter hell, disgraced.
(40:60)***

Du’a’ in Traditions
-------------------

Allah’s benevolence toward His creatures is extended and comprehensive,
especially for mankind. Allah’s presence is not an abode of hopelessness
or stinginess. His generosity and forgiveness is relentless, as is His
longing for His servants to pray to Him. Allah addressed Prophet David
(as):

*“Say to My servants: Why don’t you befriend Me, since I deserve
friendship? I am a God of no miserliness, there’s no ignorance in My
Omniscience, no incapacity in My Forbearance, and no alternation in My
Attributes or My Speech. My Mercy and Forgiveness is unvarying and
constant. I am the friend of him who befriends Me, and I accompany him
who invokes on Me in his solitude. O David! He who seeks Me finds Me;
and he who finds Me deserves not to lose Me. O David! Blessing is from
Me but My servants thank others; I ward off calamity but they seek it
from others. Their safe haven is My Presence, but they seek refuge from
others, though finally they return to Me.”*

A surplus of such meaningful texts in Islamic books, along with Qur’anic
verses, give good tidings to the servants to be hopeful of God’s Mercy.
The servants should, therefore, pray and ask their prerequisites from
God. That’s why the traditions narrated by the Ahl Al-Bayt (as) have all
stressed the importance of *du’a’*. It is narrated from the holy Prophet
of Islam (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الدُّعَاءَ هُوَ العِبَادَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Du’a’ is indeed a worship.*[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّعَاءُ مُخُّ العِبَادَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Du’a’ is the core of worship.*[^2]

Imam al-Baqir (as) stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفْضَلُ العِبَادَةِ الدُّعَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The most preferable of worships is du’a.’*[^3]

The Imam (as) also narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ أفْضَلُ عِنْدَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مِنْ أنْ يُسْأَلَ
وَيُطْلَبَ مِمَّا عِنْدَهُ، وَمَا أحَدٌ أبْغَضُ إلَى اللهِ مِمَّنْ
يَسْتَكْبِرُ عَنْ عِبَادَتِهِ وَلاَ يَسْأَلُ مَا عِنْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Nothing is more dear to Allah than asking Him for His blessings. And no
one is more destitute before Allah than one who is arrogant of
supplicating in His Presence.*[^4]

The following is narrated from Amir al-Mu’minin (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَبُّ الأَعْمَالِ إلَى اللهِ تَعَالَى فِي الأَرْضِ الدُّعَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most desirable deed on all the earth is supplication to
Allah.”*[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّعَاءُ مَفَاتِيحُ النَّجَاحِ، وَمَقَالِيدُ الفَلاَحِ، وَخَيْرُ
الدُّعَاءِ مَا صَدَرَ عَنْ صَدْرٍ نَقِيٍّ وَقَلْبٍ تَقِيٍّ، وَفِي
الْمُنَاجَاةِ سَبَبُ النَّجَاةِ، وَبِالإخْلاَصِ يَكُونُ الخَلاَصُ،
فَإذَا اشْتَدَّ الْفَزَعُ فَإلَى اللهِ المَفْزَعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Du’a’ is the key to success. The best du’a’ is the one uttered from a
purified soul and heart. The means to salvation is sincerity in du’a’.
When the problems cause restlessness, the solution is seeking refuge in
God’s Presence.*[^6]

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا نَزَلَ الْبَلاءُ فَعَلَيْكُمْ بِالدُّعَاءِ وَالتَّضَرُّعِ إلَى
اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When Allah descends a calamity, come in Allah’s presence with du’a’ and
lamentation.*[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِالدُّعَاءِ، فَإنَّ فِيهِ شِفَاءً مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Du’a’ is necessity for you, since it is the solution to every
problem.*[^8]

The Value of Du’a’ in a Congregation
------------------------------------

When the believers supplicate to Allah in a congregation and ask their
exigency in one voice, as one, their *du’a’* is more likely to be
answered, for in a group of people, there would surely be, a poor, a
bereaved, or an ascetic whose prayer may attract God’s Mercy and
Forgiveness. Based on what appears in Islamic teachings, Allah may
accept the prayer of others too, for the sake of that person, forgive
their sins and grant them their exigency. Many traditions have been
narrated from the Prophet (S) and Ahl al-Bayt (as) in this regard, some
of which are stated here:

Imam Sadiq (as) stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا اجْتَمَعَ أرْبَعَةٌ قَطُّ عَلَى أمْرٍ وَاحِدٍ إلاّ تَفَرَّقوُا
عَنْ إجَابَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No four people congregate to pray for a single issue, unless their
exigency is granted when they leave each other.*[^9]

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَجْتَمِعُ أرْبَعُونَ رَجُلاً فِي أمْرٍ وَاحِدٍ إلاّ اسْتَجَابُ
اللهُ تَعَالَى لَهُمْ حَتَّى لَوْ دَعَوْا عَلَى جَبَلٍ لأَزَالُوهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No forty men gather together to pray for a single issue, unless the
Almighty God accepts their prayer; to the extent that if they pray
against a mountain, it will collapse.*[^10]

The great Islamic scholar, Ibn Fahd *Al-Hilli*, narrates from “*Wasa’il
al-Shi’a*” in his book “*‘Uddat al-Da’i*”:

Allah told Jesus through revelation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عِيسَى! تَقَرَّبْ إلَى المُؤمِنِينَ وَمُرْهُمْ أنْ يَدْعُونِي
مَعَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Jesus! Join the believers and order them to pray with you before My
Presence!*[^11]

Imam Sadiq (as) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ أبِي عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ إذَا حَزَنَهُ أمْرٌ جَمَعَ النِّسَاءَ
وَالصِّبْيَانَ ثُمَّ دَعَا وَأَمَّنُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My father always acted this way; whenever something made him sorrowful,
he gathered women and children, then he prayed and they said Amen!*[^12]

Despair; the state of the disbeliever
-------------------------------------

The supplicant should be aware that it is Almighty God who has invited
him to pray and has guaranteed the acceptance of the supplication.
Accepting the prayer and granting the supplicant’s exigency is easy for
Allah, since each and every world’s creature is under His Absolute
Power, and He provides the grounds for the fulfillment of His servant’s
exigency with a single order.

It is, therefore, not right to become hopeless in the Presence of God,
whose Insight, Mercy and Forgiveness is infinite, especially when
praying. Despair, as specified in the Holy Qur’an, is the attribute of
the disbelievers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِيَّ اذْهَبُوا فَتَحَسَّسُوا مِنْ يُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ وَلا
تَيْئَسُوا مِنْ رَوْحِ اللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لا يَيْئَسُ مِنْ رَوْحِ اللَّهِ
إِلاَّ الْقَوْمُ الكَافِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Go, O my sons! And ascertain concerning Joseph and his brother, and
despair not of the Spirit of Allah. Lo! None despaireth of the Spirit of
Allah save disbelieving folk. (12:87)***

The Holy Qur’an strongly recommends against being hopeless of God’s
Mercy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Despair not of the Mercy of Allah! (39:53)***

The Prophet of Islam (S) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلفَاجِرُ الرَّاجِي لِرَحْمَةِ اللهِ تَعَالَى أقْرَبُ مِنْهَا مِنَ
العَابِدِ المُقَنَّطِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s Mercy is nearer to a hopeful sinner than to a hopeless
worshipper.*[^13]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَأسُ مِنْ رَوْحِ اللهِ أشَدُّ بَرْداً مِنَ الزَّمْهَرِيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The cold of despair from God’s Mercy is colder than intense cold.*[^14]

Despair from Allah’s Mercy is considered as a major sin in accordance to
Islamic teachings and traditions, and the hopeless is promised
chastisement. The supplicant should not despair, in case his/her
supplication is not answered. Perhaps the acceptance of supplication has
not been in accord with God’s expediency, the precise setting of
acceptance may not have come, or God wants the supplicant to continue
supplicating for his/her demand.

Moreover Allah may want to postpone granting the supplicant’s exigency
to the Day of Judgment, in order to make the yielding eternal.
Therefore, losing hope of Allah’s Compassion is in no way acceptable
from a believer. Many significant traditions have been narrated in
Islamic books, considering *du’a’* and its acceptance. A few instances
come here:

Imam Sadiq (as) narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْعَبْدَ لَيَدْعُو اللهَ فَيُقُولُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
لِلْمَلَكَيْنِ: قَدِ اسْتَجَبْتُ لَهُ، وَلكِنْ إحْبِسُوهُ بِحَاجَتِهِ
فَإنَّي أُحِبُّ أنْ أسْمَعَ صَوْتَهُ، وإنَّ العَبْدَ لَيَدْعُو
فَيَقُولُ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى: عَجِّلُوا لَهُ حَاجَتَهُ فَإنِّي
أبْغَضُ صَوْتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Surely, a servant prays and Allah says to two angels: ‘I accepted his
supplication, but don’t grant his demand so that he continues praying,
because I desire to hear his voice.’ And another servant prays, so Allah
says: ‘Give him his demand promptly; I hate his voice.’*[^15]

*Mansur Sayqal says: I asked Imam Sadiq (as): Perhaps someone prays, and
his supplication is accepted but not granted at once. Imam confirmed it.
I asked: What is the reason? Is it for him to pray more? Imam confirmed
it again.*[^16]

Conditions of Du’a’
-------------------

If the supplicant wants his *du’a’* to be accepted, she/he should meet
certain conditions, which are enumerated by Ahl al-Bayt (as) in valid
books such as “Usul Al-Kafi”, “Mahajjat al-Bayza’ “, “Wasa’il al-Shi’a”,
“Jami’ al-Ahadith al-Shi’a”, etc.

Here’s a list of such conditions:

Islamic purity like wudhu’ (ablution), ghusl (ritual washing) and
tayammum (ablution with soil), fulfilling the rights of the people
(haqqunnas), sincerity, precise pronunciation of the *du’a’*, rightfully
earned income, observing and strengthening kinship ties (silatur-rahim),
charity (sadaqah) before *du’a’*, obedience to Allah, abstinence from
sins, rectification of deeds, *du’a’* at dawn, *du’a’* in watr (name of
a salat), *du’a’* at the true dawn, *du’a’* at sunrise, *du’a’* between
noon and evening prayer on Wednesday, and finally praising the Prophet
(S) and his progeny (salawat) before *du’a’*.[^17]

Thursday Night
--------------

Thursday night is considered among the best times for *du’a’* in the
traditions of Ahl al-Bayt (as), to that extent that it is almost equal
to the Qadr night[^18] in value. The insightful and pious theologians
proclaim: Spend Thursday night with praying, worshipping, and invoking
Allah until morning, if you can, because the Compassionate sends the
angels to the first heaven to increase the virtues of the believers and
abolish their sins.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) in a valid tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ لِلجُمُعَةِ حقّاً فَإيَّاكَ أنْ تُضَيِّعَ حُرْمَتَهُ أوْ
تُقَصِّرَ فِي شَيْءٍ مِنْ عِبَادَةِ اللهِ وَالتَّقَرُّبِ إلَيْهِ
بِالعَمَلِ الصَّالِحِ وَتَرْكِ الْمَحَارِمَ كُلِّهَا فَإنَّ اللهَ
تَعَالَى يُضَاعِفُ فِيهِ الْحَسَنَاتِ وَيَمْحُو السَّيِّئَاتِ
وَيَرْفَعُ فِيهِ الدَّرَجَاتِ، وَيَوْمُُهُ مِثْلُ لَيْلَتِهِ فَإن
اسْتَطَعْتَ أنْ تُحْيِيَهَا بِالدُّعَاءِ وَالصَّلاَةِ فَافْعَلْ فَإنَّ
اللهَ تَعَالَى يُرْسِلُ فِيهَا الْمَلائِكَةَ إلَى السَّمَاءِ
الدُّنْيَا لِتُضَاعَفَ فِيهَا الْحَسَناتُ وَتُمْحَى فِيهَا
السَّيِّئَاتُ وَإنَّ اللهَ وَاسِعٌ كَرِيم.ٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Fridays enjoy rights (incumbent upon people). Therefore, beware
of violating Fridays’ sanctity through showing shortcoming in acts of
worship and instead seek nearness to Almighty Allah by means of
righteous deeds and abandonment of all forbidden acts. Certainly, on
Fridays Almighty Allah doubles up the rewards (of good deeds), erases
forgivingly punishments (for evildoings), and raises the ranks (of
faith).*

*Friday daytimes are similar to Friday nights; therefore, you may, when
possible, stay up supplicating and offering prayers to Almighty Allah
who, at that night, orders the angels to descend to the lower heavens in
order to double the rewards and erase the transgressions. Most surely,
Allah is Ample-giving and All-generous.*[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ المُؤمِنَ لَيَدْعُو فِي الحَاجَةِ فَيُؤَخِّرُ اللهُ حَاجَتَهُ
الَّتِي سَأَلَ إلَى يَوْمِ الجُمُعَةِ لِيَخُصَّهُ بِفَضْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The believer may pray for an exigency and Allah postpones answering him
to grant him his demand on Thursday night.*[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا سَألَ إخْوَةُ يُوسُفَ يَعقُوبَ أنْ يَسْتَغْفِرَ لَهُمْ، قَالَ:
(سَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبّي) ثُمَّ أخَّرَ الاسْتِغْفَارَ إلى
السَّحَرِ مِنْ لَيْلَةِ الْجُمُعَةِ كَيْ يُسْتَجَابَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When Prophet Josef’s brothers asked their father, Prophet Jacob, to
seek forgiveness for them from Allah, Jacob said: ‘I will seek
forgiveness for you soon.’ And he delayed seeking forgiveness for them
until Friday dawn so that his exigency will be answered.*[^21]

Imam al-Baqir (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ تَعالَى لَيَأمُرُ مَلَكاً فَيُنَادِي كُلَّ لَيْلَةِ
جُمُعَةٍ مِنْ فَوْقِ عَرْشِهِ مِنْ أوَّلِ اللَّيْلِ إلَى آخِرِهِ: ألاَ
عَبْدٌ مُؤمِنٌ يَدعُونِي لآخِرَتِهِ وَدُنْياهُ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الفَجْرِ
فَأُجِيبُهُ؟ ألاَ عَبْدٌ مُؤمِنٌ يَتُوبُ إلَيَّ مِنْ ذُنُوبِهِ قَبْلَ
طُلُوعِ الفَجْرِ فَأتُوبُ عَلَيْهِ؟ ألاَ عَبْدٌ مُؤمِنٌ قَدْ قَتَّرْتُ
عَلَيْهِ رِزْقَهُ فَيَسْأَلُنِي الزِّيَادَةَ فِي رِزْقِهِ قَبْلَ
طُلُوعِ الْفَجْرِ فَأزِيدُهُ وَأوسِعُ عَلَيْهِ؟ ألاَ عَبْدٌ مُؤمِنٌ
سَقِيمٌ فَيَسْألُنِي أنْ أشْفِيَهُ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الفَجْرِ
فَأُعَافِيهِ؟ ألاَ عَبْدٌ مُؤمِنٌ مَغْمُومٌ مَحْبُوسٌ يَسْألُنِي أنْ
أُطْلِقَهُ مِنْ حَبْسِهِ وَأُفَرِّجُ عَنْهُ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الفَجْرِ
فَأُطْلِقُهُ وَأُخَلّي سَبِيلَهُ؟ ألاَ عَبْدٌ مُؤمِنٌ مَظْلُومٌ
يَسْألُنِي أنْ آخُذَ لَهُ بِظُلامَتِهِ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الفَجْرِ
فَأَنْتَصِرُ لَهُ وَآخُذُ بِظُلامَتِهِ؟ قال: فَلا يَزالُ يُنادِي
حَتَّى يَطْلُعَ الفَجْرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*During every Thursday night, Allah orders an angel to call on behalf of
the Almighty: Is there any believer who calls Me for this world and the
Hereafter so that I may grant his exigency? Is* *there any believer who
repents for his sins before the sunrise, so that I may forgive him? Is
there any believer who asks for the abundance of his sustenance, which I
have made sparse, before the sunrise, so that I may increase it?*

*Is there any sick believer who asks Me to heal him before the sunrise,
so that I make him well? Is there any imprisoned believer who asks me to
free him before the sunrise, so that I grant him his freedom? Is there
any oppressed believer who asks Me to avenge the oppressor, so that I
restore his rights? He will keep saying so until dawn.*[^22]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إجْتَنِبوا المَعاصِيَ لَيْلَةَ الجُمُعَةِ فَإنَّ السَّيِّئَةَ
مُضَاعَفَةٌ وَالحَسَنَةَ مُضَاعَفَةٌ. وَمَنْ تَرَكَ مَعْصِيَةَ اللهِ
لَيْلَةَ الجُمُعَةِ غَفَرَ اللهُ لَهُ كُلَّ مَا سَلَفَ، وَمَنْ بَارَزَ
اللهَ لَيْلَةَ الجُمُعَةِ بِمَعْصِيَةٍ أخَذَهُ اللهُ بِكُلِّ مَا
عَمِلَ فِي عُمُرِهِ وَضَاعَفَ عَلَيْهِ العَذَابَ بِهَذِهِ
المَعْصِيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Avoid committing sins on Thursday nights, since the punishment is
double then, just as the recompense for virtues is multifold. Whoever
avoids sins on Thursday night, Allah will forgive his previous sins. And
whoever openly commits sins on Thursday night, Allah will chastise him
for his lifetime of sins and will multiply the punishment of his
Thursday night sins, particularly due to the violation of the sanctity
of Thursday night.*[^23]

Many prayers and supplications have been mentioned for Thursday night,
among which *du’a’* Kumayl has a special position.

[^1]: Mahajjat Al-Bayza’: 2/282, Kitab Al-Azkar wa Al-Da’awat, Chapter
2.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Mahajjat Al-Bayza’: 2/283, Kitab Al-Azkar wa Al-Da’awat, Chapter
2.

[^4]: Al-Kafi: 2/466, The chapter on fazl Al-Do’a…, Tradition 2.

[^5]: Al-Kafi: 2/467, The chapter on fazl Al-Do’a…, Tradition 8.

[^6]: Al-Kafi: 2/468, Chapter Inna al-do’a silah al-mu’min, tradition 2;
Mahajja al-bayza’: 2/284, Bab al-thani fi adab al-do’a…

[^7]: Al-Kafi: 2/471, Bab Ilham al-do’a, tradition 2; Mahajja al-Bayza’:
2/284, Bab al-thani fi adab al-do’a…

[^8]: Al-Kafi: 2/470, bab Inna al-do’a shifa’ min kolli da’, tradition
1; mahajja al-bayza’: 2/285, bab al-thani fi adab al-do’a…

[^9]: Al-Kafi: 2/487, Bab l-Ijtima’ fi al-do’a, tradition 2; Jami’
ahadith shi’a: 19/ 354.

[^10]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il: 5/239, bab 36, tradition 5772; jami’
ahadith al-shi’a: 19/354.

[^11]: Wasa’il al-Shi’a: 7/104, bab 38, tradition 8856.

[^12]: Wasa’il al-Shi’a: 7/105, bab 39, tradition 8860.

[^13]: Kanz Al-Ummal: 5869; Mizan al-Hikmah: 10/5046; Al-Ghanut,
tradition 17109.

[^14]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il: 12/59, chapter 64, tradition 13507.

[^15]: Al-Kafi: 2/ 489, chapter min abta’at alayhi al-ijaba, traditions
2 and 3.

[^16]: Al-Kafi: 2/489.

[^17]: Al-Kafi: 2/466 in different chapters; Mahajjat al-Bayza’:
268-349.

[^18]: The 27th night of Ramadan; the night when the Quran was revealed.

[^19]: Mafatih al-Jinan, pp.13.

[^20]: Da’awat Rawandi:35, tradition 83; Bihar al-Anwar: 86/273, chapter
2, tradition 17.

[^21]: Al-Muqna’a: 155; Bihar al-Anwar: 86/271, chapter 2, tradition 13
& 19.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar: 86/282, chapter 2, tradition 27.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar: 86/283, chapter 2, tradition 28.


