Kumayl Ibn Ziyad Nakha’i
========================

Both, great Shi’a and Sunni scholars have admired Kumayl for his strong
belief, purified soul, moral conduct, and sincere intentions. They agree
on Kumayl’s justice and greatness. Kumayl is among the noble disciples
of Amir al-Mu’minin (as) and Imam Hasan (as).[^1] Amir al-Mu’minin too,
has considered Kumayl as his ten most faithful disciples.[^2] Kumayl has
been one of the sincerest lovers and friends of Imam ‘Ali (as).[^3]

The recommendations and bequests that Imam ‘Ali (as) has made to Kumayl
indicate the latter’s strong belief and great insight. The sunnis, who
have never had a favorable opinion about the disciples of Ahl al-Bayt
(as), too, consider Kumayl as a trustee in all issues.[^4] The ascetics
believe Kumayl to knowing Imam ‘Ali’s secrets and spiritual knowledge.
Kumayl accompanied the Great Prophet of Islam (S) for eighteen years and
benefited from the blessings of prophethood. He was martyred by Hajjaj
Ibn Yusuf Thaqafi, due to his magnitude, which had already been informed
to him in advance, by, Imam Ali (as).

When Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf was appointed as the ruler of Iraq by the Umayyid
ruler, he sought after Kumayl to kill him for his affection for the Ahl
al-Bayt (as), as being a shi’a was the greatest sin in the Umayyid
regime. Kumayl hid himself, and Hajjaj stopped the release of any
pension for his relatives from baytul mal (public treasury).

Being informed of Hajjaj’s action, Kumayl said: “I will not be alive
long so I don’t want any of my relatives to be deprived of their pension
because of me.” He left his hiding place and went to Hajjaj. Hajjaj told
him: “I was looking for you in order to punish you.” Kumayl said: “Do as
you wish, since I will not live long. You and I will return to Allah. My
master, ‘Ali, has informed me that you are my killer.” Then Hajjaj
ordered to behead Kumayl who at that time was ninety years of age. His
holy tomb is in Thuwiah, a place between Najaf and Kufah, and the
believers go for pilgrimage to it.

[^1]: Mustadrakat Ilm Rijal: 6/314.

[^2]: Rasa’il Sayyid Murtaza.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar: 33/399, chapter 23, tradition 620.

[^4]: Mustadrakat Ilm Rijal: 6/314.


