Du’a’ Kumayl
============

The vigilant believers consider the status of *du’a’* Kumayl among other
*du’a’*s as the status of man among the other creatures of the Almighty.
In other words, they know *du’a’* Kumayl as “Insan al-Ad’iyah”. The
great scholar, researcher and reporter of ahadith, Allamah Majlisi
regards *du’a’* Kumayl as the best *du’a’*. Allamah Majlisi narrates
from “Iqbal” of Sayyid Ibn Tawus in his book “Zad al-Ma’ad”:

Kumayl said: “One day, I was with my master ‘Ali (as) in Kufah. We were
talking about Sha’ban the fifteenth. Imam said: “One who spends that
night worshipping and recites *du’a’* Khidhr, his prayer will be
answered for sure.” When Imam (as) returned home, I went to him. He
said: “What do you want?” I answered: “I’ve come to you so that you may
teach me *du’a’* Khidhr.” He told me to sit down.

Then he said: “O Kumayl! When you memorize this *du’a’*, recite it every
Thursday night, or once in a month, or once in a year or once in your
lifetime, and Allah will save you from enemies, help you, extend your
sustenance, and forgive your sins. O Kumayl! Your extended and faithful
service has made me teach you such a blissful *du’a’*.” Then he said:
“Write it down!” And he then recited it to me.

The divine theologist, Kaf’ami, writes in his book ‘*Misbah*’: “Amir
al-Mu’minin (as) recited this *du’a’* in prostration.”[^1]

The supplicant should recite this *du’a’* on Thursday night, facing the
direction of the qiblah, sincerely and humbly. This way the supplication
is more likely to be answered.[^2] The supplicant should also present
himself before Allah with a tearful eye which is so valuable before the
Almighty that it hastens the forgiveness of sins and attraction of His
blessings.[^3]

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ إلاَّ وَلَهُ كَيْلٌ وَوَزْنٌ، إلاَّ الدُّمُوعَ؛ فَإنَّ
القَطْرَةَ تُطْفِئُ بِحَاراً مِنَ النَّارِ، وَلَو أنَّ باكِياً بَكَى
فِي أُمَّةٍ لَرُحِمُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Everything has a special scale except tears; a drop of tear
extinguishes oceans of fire. Allah forbids inferno from burning a
tearful eye. In fact if there’s one tearful person (from Allah’s fear)
in any nation, all the people will be forgiven.*[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ عَيْنٍ بَاكِيَةٌ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ إلاَّ ثَلاثَةً: عَيْنٌ
غُضَّتْ عَنْ مَحَارِمِ اللهِ، وَعَيْنٌ سَهِرَتْ فِي طَاعَةِ اللهِ،
وَعَيْنٌ بَكَتْ فِي جَوْفِ اللَّيْلِ مِنْ خَشْيَةِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All the people are tearful in the Hereafter except three: one who
closes his eyes to what Allah* *forbade, one who remains alive for
Allah, and one cries for the fear of Allah at midnight.*[^5]

[^1]: Misbah Kaf’ami: 555.

[^2]: Mahajja Al-Bayza’: 2/285, Adab al-do’a wa hia ‘ashra.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Al-Kafi: 2/481, Bab Al-Buka’, tradition 1.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, 2/80, Bab Ijtinab Al-Maharim, tradition 2.


