Commentary of: “Bismillah, ar-Rahman, ar-Rahim”
===============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

There are some reasons why *du’a’* Kumayl begins with such an
illuminating phrase.

Amir al-Mu’minin (as) narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) who narrated
from Allah that the Almighty that He stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ أمْرٍ ذِي بَالٍ لاَ يُذْكَرُ ’بِسْمِ اللهِ‘ فِيهِ فَهُوَ
أبْتَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any important job which is done without Allah’s remembrance, is
tarnished and useless.*[^1]

The late Tabarsi narrates Imam *Musa* Ibn Ja’far (as) in his book
‘*Makarim Al-Akhlaq*’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ أحَدٍ دَهَمَهُ أمْرٌ يَغُمُّهُ أوْ كَرَبَتْهُ كُرْبَةٌ
فَرَفَعَ رَأسَهُ إلَى السَّمَاءِ ثُمَّ قَالَ ثَلاثَ مَرَّاتٍ: ’بِسْمِ
اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‘ إلاّ فَرَّجَ اللهُ كُرْبَتَهُ وَأذْهَبَ
غَمَّهُ، إنْ شَاءَ اللهُ تَعَالَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There’s no grief-stricken individual who says
‘bismillahir-rahmanir-rahim’ three times while looking up to the sky,
where in return Allah eliminates his grief, if He wills.*[^2]

We read in an important tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُرَدُّ دُعَاءٌ أوَّلُهُ ’بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‘.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A du’a’ which begins with bismillahir-rahmanir-rahim will not be
rejected by Allah.*[^3]

The Messenger of Allah (S) counted the guards of hell as nineteen and
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أرَادَ أنْ يُنَجِّيَهُ اللهُ مِنَ الزَّبَانِيَةِ التِّسْعَةَ
عَشَرَ فَلْيَقْرَأْ ’بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‘، فَإنَّهَا
تِسْعَةَ عَشَرَ حَرفاً لِيَجْعَلَ اللهُ لَهُ كُلَّ حَرْفٍ مِنْهَا
جُنَّةً مِنْ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One who wants Allah to save him from these guards should recite
bismillahir-rahmanir-rahim which consists of nineteen letters, so that
Allah will set each letter as a guard from the fire.*[^4]

It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا قَالَ المُعَلِّمُ لِلصَّبِيِّ: قُلْ ’بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ
الرَّحِيمِ‘، فَقَالَ، كَتَبَ اللهُ بَرَاءَةً لِلصَّبِيِّ وَلأَبَوَيْهِ
وَلِلمُعَلِّمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When a teacher teaches ‘bismillahir-rahmanir-rahim’ to a child, the
Exalted God sets the child, his parents and his teacher free from the
fire.*[^5]

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “My people are accounted for their
deeds in the Hereafter, and their good deeds are superior to the bad
deeds. The past nations will cry out, ‘Why do their minute good deeds
exceed their mountain of bad deeds?’ The prophets of those nations will
answer, ‘Because their speech has begun with three of Allah’s names:
Allah, the All-beneficent (*rahman*), and the All-merciful (*rahim*).
These three names are greater in weight than all the virtues and vices
of mankind.”

It is narrated from Imam al-Ridha (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ ’بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‘ تَقْتَرِبُ مِنَ الإسْمِ
الأعْظَمِ اقْتِرَابَ سَوَادِ العَيْنِ مِنْ بَياضِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The ‘bismillahir-rahmanir-rahim’ is as close to Allah’s chief name as
is the blackness of eye to its whiteness.*[^6]

Certainly, if *du’a’* begins with Allah’s principal name, the supplicant
is more likely to be answered.

Connotations of Bismillahi
--------------------------

Great Arab grammarians believe that the Arabic word ‘*ism* (name)’ is
derived from ‘*sumuw*’ meaning greatness. The All-Compassionate
connected the preposition ‘*bi* (in)’ to ‘*ism* (name)’ in this phrase
to connote that by reciting the phrase, the supplicant wants to beseech
Allah. The supplicant should be aware that calling Allah is not
sufficient; rather the soul should be purified through seeking
forgiveness from the Almighty.

In fact calling Allah without purity of mind and sincerity of intention
is considered disrespectful. The Almighty is in the highest and the most
holy position, while man is in the lowest place and cannot promote his
position, except by making a strong connection with Allah. That’s why
the Merciful has set ‘*bismillahi* (in the Name of Allah)’ as the
mediator between Himself and the human being.

An attentive mystic has stated that the Arabic letter ‘*ba'*’ (B)
connotes the *beginning* of mystical treading onto the path to Allah,
and from ‘*ba'*’ to ‘*sin*’ (S) which connotes the *secret* of knowing
Allah, there is an endless desert of ignorance. Hiding of ‘*alif*’ (A)
in this vast desert[^7] implies that if the seeker does not dissolve his
*egotism* in the light of Allah’s Unity, he will not reach ‘*mim*’ (M)
which connotes the ultimate intention.

Some believe that ‘*ba'*’ (B) implies Allah’s *Beneficence* to all the
people and especially to the ordinary people; ‘*sin*’ (S) implies the
*secret* of His kindness to the noble, and ‘*mim*’ (M) is indicator of
His *Mercy* to the most special nobles.

In the invaluable books ‘Al-Kafi’, ‘Tawhid Saduq’, ‘Ma’ani Al-Akhbar’
and ‘Tafsir Ayyashi’, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as): “Each of
these three letters (in the word ‘*bism*’) implies one of the Glorious
names of Allah; ‘*ba'*’ is Allah’s *Brightness*, ‘*sin*’ is Allah’s
*Eminence,* and ‘*mim*’ is His *Magnificence.*

It is also stated that ‘*ba'*’ implies *the Observant*, ‘*sin*’ implies
*the All-Hearing,* and ‘*mim*’ implies *the Counter.* It is as if Allah
makes the supplicant aware that: I am the Observant; I can observe your
visible and invisible deeds, so avoid hypocrisy in your action, I am the
All-Hearing; I can hear the result of your deeds and supplications, so
avoid useless speech, and I am the Counter; I can even count your
breaths, so beware of every moment.

The glorified word ‘*Allah*’ is a comprehensive name for the Almighty,
which is a combination of all the attributes of Allah. It is believed
that three meanings are present in Allah:

1. Allah is the Eternal Being.

2. Human mind is astonished of knowing and seeking Him.

3. The return of all beings is towards Him.

It is said that the Arabic word ‘الله (*Allah*)’ is the Chief name of
God and is the basis of His Unity, to that extent that if a disbeliever
calls this name sincerely, his belief will be proved. This name is the
beginning and end of everything, which is to be upright. Also the
strength of *risalat* (prophet hood) and *wilayat* is based on this
name, as it exists in the Arabic phrase ‘محمد رسول الله (*Muhammad is
Allah’s Messenger*)’ and ‘علي ولي الله (*‘Ali is Allah’s Intimate
Servant*)’.

Furthermore, if the first letter of the Arabic word ‘A*llah* (الله)’ is
omitted, what remains is ‘*lillahi* (لله)’, which means ‘for Allah,’ as
in the following Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّهِ الأَمْرُ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَمِنْ بَعْدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah's is the command before and after. (30:4)***

If the first two letters are dropped, what remains is ‘*lahu* (له)’,
which means (His) remains, as in the following Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***To Him belongs the kingdom, and to Him is all due praise. (64:1)***

If the first three letters are dropped, what remains is ‘*huwa* (هو)”,
which means ‘He’ implying Almighty Allah, as in the following Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: He, Allah, is One. (112:1)***

As a result, the name, which has so many features, is definitely Allah’s
Chief name.

The word “رحمن” (the Beneficent) is derived from “رحمت” (Mercy).
Renowned Arab grammarians believe that it is a hyperbole. To Islamic
scholars, the word means “the giver of universal mercy to all the
creatures, apart from their service record”. “رحمن” also implies that
Allah is inclined to assist all creatures and remove detriment from
them. Examples of Allah’s blessings are presented in the holy Qur’an,
chapter Al-Rahman (55).

Arab grammarians that believe that the word “رحيم” (the Merciful) is an
adjectival simile, hence it implies continuity; that is the Mercy of
Allah is permanent. This kind of Mercy is specific to the believers, as
their virtues and appreciation of Allah’s blessings makes them worthy.
We read in Islamic works that Mercy of the first kind involves Allah’s
granting sustenance to all the creatures and humans either believer or
disbeliever. The second kind of Mercy involves Allah’s granting
spiritual blessings to human beings and also His forgiving the believers
in this world and in the Hereafter.

In “رحمانيت” (Beneficence) and “رحيميت” (Mercifulness) the meaning of
soundness is involved; one is worldly soundness, the other is heavenly
soundness. The second kind of Mercy includes the obedient whose prayers
Allah accepts, and the disobedient whose sins He forgives.

Ibn Mubarak has stated: “رحمن” is the One who responds if you ask Him,
and “رحيم” is the One who becomes wrathful is you don’t ask Him.

An ascetic has said: “The Almighty is “رحمن” in giving sustenance to the
creatures and “رحيم” in forgiving the believers’ sins. For making a
living, trust Him, not your own trading; but don’t give up trading which
is unwise. For forgiveness of sins, trust Him, not your own deeds; but
don’t give up deeds which is against Allah’s will.”

The servant is said to have three states: First, the state of a
nonexistent creature who needed existence; second, the state of state of
a living creature who desires to be permanent; third, the state of one
in the Hereafter who needs Forgiveness. The servant in these three
states needs Allah and His attributes, as reflected in these three
names:

“الله”, who brings the servant from nonexistence to life;

“رحمن”, who provides the means for the servant to continue life;

“رحيم”, who will forgive the servant’s sins in the Hereafter.

Human being is composed of heart, body, and soul. Human heart finds
knowledge and belief from “الله”, his body finds sustenance from “رحمن”,
and the soul finds Mercy from “رحيم”. One whose heart, body and soul is
associated with these three names of God, is free from everything and
everyone except Allah, and contributes his mercy to other servants of
Allah.

The Messenger of Allah (S) is narrated as saying: “One who says “بسم
الله الرحمن الرحيم” and “لا حول و لا قوه الا بالله العلي العظيم” ten
times a day, is forgiven by Allah, and Allah saves him from seventy
diseases, such as leprosy, black leprosy, and paralysis.” The Prophet
(S) is also narrated to have said: “One who recites “بسم الله”, Allah
will record four thousand virtues for him for each letter, and forgive
four thousand sins of him.”

It is narrated that one who recites “بسم الله” before eating, Satan will
not become his mate in eating; but if he begins eating and forgets
reciting it, Satan becomes his mate.”[^8]

[^1]: Tafsir Imam Asgari: 25, Al-Iftitah bil-tasmiah…; Wasa’il
Al-Shi’ah: 7/170, Bab 17, tradition 9032.

[^2]: Makarim al-Akhlaq: 346, fil Muhimmat; Bihar al-Anwar: 92/ 159, Bab
15.

[^3]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il: 5/ 304, Bab 16, tradition 5929.

[^4]: Jami’ Ahadith al-Shiah, Sayyid Borojerdi, 15:150.

[^5]: Kashf al-Ghita’, Shaykh Kashif al-Ghita’, 2:299.

[^6]: The traditions 4 to 7 are presented in the exegesis of fatihat
ul-kitab the first chapter of holy Quran.

[^7]: Hiding here implies the position of ‘alif’ in ‘bismillahi’ which
is not pronounced in English, or is hidden.

[^8]: See “Al-Kafi”, “Ma’ani Al-Akhbar”, “Tawhid Saduq”, “Wasa’il
Al-Shi’ah”, “Bahr l-Haqa’iq”, “Mafatih Al-Ghayb” and “Exegesis of
Fatihat Al-Kitab”.


