On the Nobility of the Pilgrimage To the Shrine of Imam Reza
============================================================

In the Name of Allah, Most Beneficent, Most Merciful

There are many traditions about the nobility of and the procedures for
the pilgrimage to the shrine of our Master - leader of the people and
the genies - Abul Hassan Ali ibn Musa al-Reza who is of the flesh and
blood of the Master of the Mortals.2 He (Reza) is buried in the land of
loneliness. May God's blessings be upon him (who is the leader towards
guidance), and blessings be upon his forefathers and his progeny. The
nobility of pilgrimage to the shrine of that Blessed Leader is beyond
measure. It will suffice to mention a few reliable traditions here about
this nobility.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Koliat Mafatih al-Jinan, Haj Sheikh Abbas Qummi. For completeness,
some of the traditions cited here are presented in a more complete form
than they appear in Mafatih al-Jinan.
2 Referring to the Prophet Muhammad (MGB).

1- Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taliqani - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Abdul Aziz ibn Yahya quoted on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Zakariya, on the authority of Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn
Am'mareh, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ja'far ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefathers, on the authority of the Commander of the Faithful Ali (MGB)
that God's Prophet (MGB) said:

"Soon one of my own flesh and blood will be buried in the land of
Khorasan. Any believer who goes on pilgrimage to his shrine will be
rewarded by God. Heaven will be guaranteed for him and his body will be
secure from the Fire of Hell."1

2 - Ahmad ibn Zyad ibn Ja'far al-Hamezani - may God be pleased with
him - narrated that Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Soleiman

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-4.

al-Misri, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibrahim
ibn Abi Hajar al-Aslami, on the authority of Qabisat, on the authority
of Jabir ibn Yazid al-Joafi: "I heard the Trustee of the Trustees, the
inheritor of the Prophets' knowledge - Aba Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali ibn
al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB)1 say: The Master of the
Worshippers, Ali ibn al-Hussein2 narrated that the Master of the Martyrs
al-Hussein ibn Ali quoted the Master of the Trustees - the Commander of
the Faithful - Ali ibn Abi Talib, on the authority of God's Prophet
(MGB): "One of my own flesh and blood will be buried in Khorasan. God
the High will surely remove the sorrows of any sorrowful person who goes
on pilgrimage to his shrine. God will surely forgive the sins of any
sinful person who goes on pilgrimage to his shrine."3

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Imam Bagir (MGB).
2 Imam Sajjad (MGB).
3 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-14.

3- Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Masroor -may God be pleased with
him-narrated that al-Hussein ibn Muhammad ibn A'mir quoted on the
authority of his uncle Abdullah ibn A'mir, on the authority of Soleiman
ibn Hafs al-Marvazi who said that he heard Aba'l-Hasan Musa ibn Ja'far
(MGB) say: "God the Most High will grant anyone who goes on pilgrimage
to the shrine of my son Ali the reward of seventy accepted pilgrimages
to the Ka'ba."1 He was asked: "The reward of seventy accepted
pilgrimages to the Ka'ba?" The Imam (MGB) said: "Yes. The reward of
seventy-thousand pilgrimages to the Ka'ba!" He replied:

"Yes. There are many occasions on which one's pilgrimage to the Ka'ba
may not be accepted. When someone goes on pilgrimage to him2 or spends
one night next to him, it is as if he has gone on the pilgrimage to God
the Most High at His Throne." He was asked: "The reward is like going on
the pilgrimage to God at His Throne?" He replied: "Yes. When the
Resurrection Day comes, there will be four of the previous and four of
the latest leaders present at the Throne of the High God. Those of the
previous leaders will be Noah (MGB), Abraham (MGB), Moses (MGB) and
Jesus (MGB). And those of the latest

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The Hajj.
2 Imam Reza (MGB).

leaders will be Muhammad (MGB), Ali (MGB), Hassan (MGB) and Hussein
(MGB). Then a rope will be extended out from the base of the Throne and
those who have gone on pilgrimage to the shrines of the Immaculate Imams
will sit there along with us."1 Indeed those who have gone on pilgrimage
to the shrine of my son Ali will have the highest rank there and will
receive the greatest rewards."2

4- Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Qatan, Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ibrahim
al-Laythi, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Members of the Holy Household of the Prophet (MGB).
2 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-20.

ibn Ishaq al-Mokat'tib al-Taliqani and Muhammad ibn Bikran al-Naq'qash
narrated that Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'eed al-Hamedani, the servant of
the Hashimites, quoted on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn
Faz'zal, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abil-Hassan
Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (MGB): "There is a shrine in Khorasan where angels
come and go. All the time, a group of angels will be landing there from
the sky, and another group will be departing from there to go to the
heavens. This will continue forever until the Trumpet is sounded."1 He
was asked: "O son of the Prophet of God! Whose shrine is that?" He
replied:

"It is located in the land of Toos. And by God it is a garden - one of
the gardens of Heaven. Whoever visits me there in that shrine, it is as
if he has visited God's Prophet (MGB). God the Most High will record for
him the reward of one thousand accepted obligatory pilgrimages to the
Ka'ba, and one thousand accepted 'Umrah (supererogatory) pilgrimages to
the Ka'ba. Also my forefathers and I will intercede on his behalf on the
Resurrection Day."2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 This refers to the coming of the Judgment Day when "The Day that the
Trumpet shall be sounded, and ye shall come forth in crowds" [The Holy
Quran Nabaa 78:18].
2 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-5

5- Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid may God be pleased
with him-narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr alBazanti according to which Abi Nasr narrated
that he read a letter from Imam Reza (MGB) in which it was written:

"Let my followers know that God considers visiting my shrine to be like
one thousand pilgrimages (to the Ka'ba)." Then he went to Imam Muhammad
Taqi (MGB) and asked him about this issue. The Imam (MGB) said: "Yes. By
God. There is the reward of one million pilgrimages to the Ka'ba for
anyone who visits his shrine and recognizes his rightfulness."1

6- Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Imran alDaq'qaq, Muhammad ibn
Ahmad al-Sanani, Ali ibn Abdullah al-Var'raq and Hussein ibn Ibrahim ibn
Husham al-Mokat'tib-may God be pleased with them-narrated that Muhammad
ibn Abi Abdullah al-Koofi alAsadi quoted on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Saleh al-Razi, on the authority of Himdan al-Divani that
al-Reza (MGB) said:

"Whoever visits me in spite of the far distance to my tomb, I will come
to save him on the Resurrection Day on three occasions until I liberate
him from his terrors: when the Letters of Deeds are handed to his right
and left hands, at the moment of his crossing the Bridge, and at the
time when the Balance of Deeds is set up."2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-10.
2 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-2.

7- Muhammad ibn Ali Majiloyeh-may God be pleased with him-narrated that
Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim quoted on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abdis-Salam ibn Saleh al-Heravi that he heard al-Reza (MGB)
say:

"I shall be killed by poison as a victim of injustice and I will be
buried next to Haroon. God will establish my grave as the place of
visiting for my followers and those who love me. It will be incumbent
upon me to visit on the Resurrection Day whoever visits me in my
loneliness. By Him who honored Muhammad (MGB) with the Prophetic mission
and chose him over all His creatures, whichever one of you who says two
units of prayer next to my tomb will deserve to be forgiven by God the
Honored the Exalted on the Day you meet Him. And by Him who honored us
with the leadership mission after Muhammad (MGB) and made us especial by
granting us the Testamentary Trustee mission, whoever visits my shrine
will be of the noblest ones who reaches God on the Resurrection Day. God
the Most High will prohibit the Fire from touching the corpse of any
believer who visits me, hits himself on the face and sheds a tear,"

8- Ja'far ibn Ali ibn al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn al-Moqayrat
al-Koofi-may God be pleased with him-narrated that his grandfather
al-Hussein ibn Ali quoted on the authority of al-Hussein ibn Yusuf, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Aslam, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Soleiman: "I asked Aba Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Reza (MGB) about a man
who has gone to perform his obligatory pilgrimage and has then gone to
perform his 'Umrah (supererogatory) pilgrimage, and God the Most High
has granted him success in performing both his obligatory and his
supererogatory 'Umrah pilgrimages. Then he has gone to Medina and has
expressed his submission to Islam to the Prophet (MGB). Then he has gone
to visit your forefather - the Commander of the Faithful (MGB) - knowing
that he is rightfully the Proof of God for His creatures, and the gate
from which we must go to Him"1.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 God.

Then he has greeted him. Then he has gone to visit Aba Abdullah
al-Hussein ibn Ali (MGB), and has greeted him. Then he has gone to
Baghdad and greeted Abil Hassan Musa (MGB). Then he has gone back to his
hometown. If once again God the Most High has granted him the
opportunity to go on pilgrimage, pilgrimage to whom is better under
these conditions? Should he who has already performed his Hajj
pilgrimage go on pilgrimage to the Ka'ba, or should he turn towards
Khorasan to greet and visit the shrine of your father Ali ibn Musa
al-Reza (MGB)." He replied: "Yes. It is better for him to go towards
Khorasan to greet my father (MGB). However, this should be done in the
month of Rajab. It is not appropriate for him to do this now. Indeed if
he does so, both you and I will be blamed by the ruler."1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 66-15.

9- Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Reza (MGB) said: "There is a piece of
land taken from Heaven in between two mountains at Toos. Whoever enters
it will be secure from the Fire on the Resurrection Day."1 10- He also
said: "I guarantee Heaven on behalf of God the Honorable the Exalted to
anyone who visits the shrine of my father at Toos."2 11- Abu Ali
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Mo'azi al-Neishaboori
narrated that Abul Hassan Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Ali al-Basri al-Mo'adil
said: "One of the good-doers saw the Prophet of God (MGB)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Man La-Yahzaro ul-Faqih, vol. 2, Traditions No. 3185.
2 Man La-Yahzaro ul-Faqih, vol. 2, Tradition No. 3186.

in his dream. He asked the Prophet (MGB): Prophet of God! Which of your
offspring should I go to visit?" The Prophet (MGB) said: "A few of my
offspring who have been poisoned have come to me. Also a feel' of my
offspring who have been murdered have come to me." Then he asked: "O
Prophet of God! Given the great distances between their shrines (or
locations), which one of them do you recommend me to go and visit?"

The Prophet (MGB) said: "Visit the one who is closest to you - that is
whom you are near to - and is buried in the land of loneliness." Then he
asked: "O Prophet of God! Do you mean al-Reza (MGB)?"

God's Prophet (MGB) said: "Say: 'God's blessings be upon him.' Say:
'God's blessings be upon hint' three times."1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Uyun Akhbar al-Reza, vol. 2, Tradition No. 69-5.

**PROCEDURES OF THE PILGRIMAGE**

Before You Leave Your Hometown Whenever you intend to visit (Imam)
al-Reza (MGB) in Toos, then perform the ritual bath before you leave
your house1 and say the following while you are performing the ritual
bath:

Allaahumma T'ahhirnee wa-T'ahhir Qalbee Wa'shrah' Lee S'adree Wa'ajri
"Alaa Lisaanee Midh'atika Wa-Ththanaa'i "Alayka Fa'innahoo Laa H'awla wa
Laa Quwwata Illaa Bika. Allaahumma-J'alhu Lee T'ahooran wa-Shifaa'a(n)
"O God! Please cleanse me, and cleanse my heart! (Please) 'expand my
breast2, and let Thy praise and eulogy flow out

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 In your hometown.
2 See verse 9:25 of the Holy Quran. The breast is reputed to be the
seat of knowledge and affections. The gift of the highest spiritual
insight is being asked for. The Prophet Muhammad (MGB) was asked about
the meaning of this verse when it was revealed. He said: "It is a light
that is lit in a believer's heart which leads to his enlightenment."
Then he was asked: "Are there any signs for this?" He replied: "Yes. The
signs are an attachment to the Eternal Abode, detachment from this world
and being prepared for death when it arrives." [Majmaul Bayan vol.4,
p.363].

from my tongue since indeed there is no power but in Thee. O God!
Please establish it as a means of cleansing and treatment for me." Say
the following as you leave your house:

Bismil-laahir-Rah'maanir-Rah'eem. Bismillaahi wa-Billaahi wa Ilal-laahi
wa-Ilab-ni Rasoolil-Laahi H'asbiyal-laahu Tawakkaltu Allaahumma Ilayka
Tawajjahtu wa Ilayka Qas'adtu wa-Maa 'Indaka Aradtu. "In the name of
God, the Beneficent, the Merciful. In the name of God. By God, I turn to
God and towards the son of God's Prophet. God suffices me, and I rely on
God. O God! I have set out to Thee. And I have decided (to get) what is
near Thee." When you go out stop at the door of your house and say:

Allaahumma Ilayka Wajjahtu Wajhee Wa'alayka Khallaftu Ahlee wa-Maalee
wa-Waladee wa-Maa Khawwaltanee wa-Bika Wathigtu Falaa Tukhayyibnee Yaa
Man Laa Yukhayyabu Man Araadahu wa-Laa Yud'ayya'u Man H'afizhahu S'alli
'Alaa Muh'ammadin wa-Aali Muh'ammadin wa-Hfazhnee Bi H'ifzhika
fa-Innahoo Laa Yad'ee'u Man H'afizht(a). "O God! I have turned my face
towards Thee. And I have left behind my family, wealth and whatever Thee
have granted me. I have trusted Thee. Then (please) do not turn me into
a loser, O the One who would not make a loser anyone whom Thee wish, and
will not ruin whatever he possesses. Blessings be upon Muhammad and
Muhammad's Household (MGB). And (please) guard me under Thy custody
since nothing that Thee guard gets ruined." When You Want to Visit the
Shrine:

Then whenever you want to go to visit,1 perform the ritual bathing and
while you are bathing say: Allaahumma T'ahhirnee wa-T'ahhir Qalbee
Wa'shrah' Lee S'adree wa-Ajri 'Alaa Lisaanee Mid-h'atika
wa-Mah'abbatika

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The Holy Shrine of Imam Reza (MGB) from your place of residence in
Mashhad.

wa'th-Thanaa7 'Alayka fa-Innahoo Laa Quwwata Illaa bika wa-qad 'A limtu
Anna Qiwaama Deenee al-Tasleemu li-Amrika walit-Tibaa'u Li-Sunnati
Nabiyyika wash-Shahaadatu 'Alaa Jamee'i Khalqika. Allaahumma-J'alhu Lee
Shifaa'an wa-Nooran Innaka 'Alaa Kulli Shay'in Qadeer. "O God! Please
cleanse me, and cleanse my heart! (Please) 'expand my breast"; and let
Thy praise, love and eulogy flow out from my tongue since indeed there
is no power but in Thee. I have indeed realized that the strength of my
religion depends upon my submission to Thy decrees, and the following of
Thy Prophet's traditions, and bearing witness (to this) for all Thy
creatures. O God! Please establish it as a means of healing for me, and
as a light, since Thee are capable of all things." Then put on your
cleanest clothes.


