At the Shrine
=============

Walk with bare feet, with calmness, dignity, exaltation, acclamation
and glorification (of God). Take short steps and while you are entering
(the holy shrine) say: Bismillaahir-Rah'maanir-Rah'eem Bismil-Laahi
wa-Billaahi wa-

'Alaa Millati Rasoolil-Laahi S'allal-Laahu wa-Aalih. Ash-hadu an-Laa
Ilaaha Wah'dahoo Laa Shareeka Lahoo wa Ash-hadu Anna Muh'ammadan
'Abduhoo Wa-Rasooluhoo wa Anna 'Allyyan Waliyyu'l-Laah. "In the name of
God, the Beneficent, the Merciful. In the name of God and by God and to
the nation of God's Prophet: God's blessings be upon him and his
Household (MGB). I bear witness that there is no god but God. He is One
and He has no partners. And I bear witness that Muhammad is His Servant
and His Messenger. And I bear witness that Ali is God's friend." Then
walk until you stop at his tomb. Then face him by turning your back
towards the Qibla (prayer direction) and say: Ash-hadu An Laa Ilaaha
Illal-Laahu Wah'dahoo Laa Shareeka Lahoo wa-Ash-hadu Anna Muh'ammadan
'Abduhoo wa Rasooluhoo wa-Annahoo Sayyidu'l-Awwaleena wal-Aakhireena.

wa-Annahoo Sayyidul-Anbiyaa 'I wa'l-Mursaleen. I bear witness that
there is no god but God, the One; and there are no partners for Him. I
bear witness that Muhammad is His Servant and His Messenger. Verily, he
is the Master of all those of old and those of later times. Verily, he
is the Master of the Prophets and the Messengers.

Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Muh'ammadin 'Abdika wa-Rasoolika wa-Nabiyyika
wa-Sayyidi Khalqika Ajma'eena S'alaatan Laa Yaqwaa 'Alaa Ih's'aa'ihaa
Ghayruka. O God! God's Blessings be upon Muhammad-Thy Servant; Thy
Messenger, Thy Prophet and the Master of all Thy creatures-blessings
that no one but Thee can measure.

Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Ameeril-Mu'mineena Abee T'aalibin 'Abdika
wa-Akhee Rasoolika'l-Ladhi-Ntajabtahoo Bi'ilmika wa-Ja'altahoo Haadiyan
liman Shrta Min Khalqika wa'd-Daleela 'Alaa Man Ba'athtahoo
Bi-Risaalaatika Wa Dayyaanad-Deeni BiJAdlika Wa-Fas'li Qad'aa'ika Bayna
Khalqika wa'l-Muhaymini Alaa Dhaalika Kullihee wa's Salaamu 'Alayhi
Wa-Rah'matul-Laahi Wa-Barakaatuh. O God! God's blessings be upon the
Commander of the Faithful - Ali ibn Abi Talib, Thy servant, the brother
of Thy Messenger, whom Thou elected by Thy Knowledge, whom Thou
established as a guide (to show the right path) to those of Thy
creatures1, and as evidence for those whom Thou appointed to (deliver)
Thy Message. And he2 managed the affairs of the religion according to
Thy (system of) justice, and applied Thy judgements (to settle the
issues which cropped up) among the people - whom Thee predominated
thereon. And also God's mercy and blessings be upon him.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 who want to be led aright.
2 Ali ibn Abi Talib (MGB).

Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Faat'imata Binti Nabiyyika wa Zawjati Waliyyika
wa-Ummis-Sibt'ayni al-H'asani wag H'usayni Sayyiday Shabaabi
Ahlil-Jannah At'-T'uhratit'-
T'aahiratil-Mut'ahharatit-Taqtlyyatin-Naqiyyatir-Raad'iyatiz Zakiyyati
Sayyidati Nisaa Ahlil-Jannati Ajma'eena S'alaatan Laa Yaqwaa 'Alaa
Ih's'aa'ihaa Ghayruk. O God! (Please) send blessings upon Fatimah, the
daughter of Thy Prophet, the wife of Thy friend, the mother of the two
grandsons1, Hassan and Hussein, the Masters of Youth in Heaven. She is
clean, immaculate, purified, pious, pure, content, sinless - the Master
of all the Women of Heaven -blessings which no one but Thee can measure.
Allaahumma S'alli 'Alai-H'asani wal-H'usayni Sibt'ay Nabiyyika
wa-SayyicZay Shabaabi Ahlil-Jannatil-Qaa'imayni Fee Khalqika
wad-Daleelayni 'Alaa Man Ba'athta Bi Risaalaatika wa-Dayyaanayid-Deeni
Bi-'Adlika wa-Fas'lay Qad'aa'ika Bayna Khalqik.

O God! (Please) send blessings upon Hassan and Hussein; the two
grandsons of Thy Prophet, the Masters of Youth in Heaven; Thy two
established authorities among Thy creatures: And they are established as
two proofs for those

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Of the Prophet (MGB).

whom Thou appointed them to (deliver) Thy Message to. And they are the
two who managed the affairs of the religion according to Thy (system of)
justice, and applied Thy judgements (to settle the issues which cropped
up) among Thy creatures. Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa 'Abdikal Qaa'imi Fee
Khalqika Wad-Daleeli 'Alaa Man Ba'athta Bi Risalaatika
wa-Dayyaanid-Deeni Bi-'Adlika wa-Fas'li Qad'aa'ika Bayna Khalqika
Sayyidil-'Aabideen.

O God! (Please) send blessings upon Ali ibn al-Hussein, Thy servant,
Thy established authority among Thy creatures and as proof for those to
whom Thee appointed him to (deliver) Thy Message to. And he managed the
affairs of the religion according to Thy (system of) justice, and
applied Thy judgements (to settle the issues which cropped up) among Thy
creatures. He is the Master of the Worshippers. Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa
Muh'ammadib-Ni 'Aliyyin 'Abdika wa-Khaleefatika Fee Ard'ika Baaqiri
Ylmin-Nabiyyeen. O God! (Please) send blessings upon Muhammad bin Ali -
Thy servant; Thy representative on Earth; and the dissector of the
Knowledge of the Prophets1.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Deeply versed in the knowledge of the Prophets (MGB).

Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Jafarib-Ni Muh'ammadinis'-Saadiqi 'Abdika
wa-Waliyyi Deenika Wa-H'ujjatika 'Alaa Khalqika Ajma'eena
As'-S'aadiqil-Baarr. (Please) send blessings upon Ja'far ibn Muhammad C
God! as-Sadiq - Thy servant; the defender of Thy religion; and Thy prof
for all Thy creatures. He is the truthful, and the righteous. Allaahumma
S'alli 'Alaa Moosab-Ni Ja farin 'Abdikas'-S'aalih'i Wa-Lisaanika Fee
Khalqika An-Naat'iqi Bi-H'ukmika wal H'ujjati 'Alaa Bariyyatik. C God!
(Please) send blessings upon Musa ibn Ja'far - Thy devoted servant; Thy
tongue for Thy creatures speaking by Thy authority, and the proof for
all Thy creatures.

Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Moosar-Rid'al-Murtad'aa 'Abdika wa-Waliyyi
Deenika al-Qaa'imi BiJAdlika wad-Daa'ee Ilaa Deenika Wa-Deeni
Aabaa'ihis'-S'aadiqeena S'alaatan Laa Yaqwaa 'Alaa Ghayruk. O God!
(Please) send blessings upon AN ibn Musa al-Reza1 -the absolute model of
contentment - Thy devoted servant; the defender of Thy religion; Thy
established authority of Thy justice; the caller to Thy religion and the
religion of his

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 who pleased Thee most.


truthful forefathers - blessings that no one but Thee can measure.
Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Muh'ammadib-Ni 'Abdika wa-Waliyyika al-Qaa'imi
Bi-Amrika wad-Daa'ee Ilaa Sabeelik. O God! (Please) send blessings upon
Muhammad ibn Ali - Thy servant; Thy established defender by Thy decree;
the caller to Thy path. Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Muh'ammadin 'Abdika
wa-Waliyyika al-Qaasimi Bi-Amrika wad-Daa'ee Ilaa Sabeelik. O God!
(Please) send blessings upon Ali ibn Muhammad - Thy servant; Thy
established authority defending Thy decree and the caller to Thy path.
Allaahumma S'alli Aliyyini1JAamili Bi Amrika al-Qaa'imi Fee Khalqika
wa-H'uliatikal-Mu'addee 'An Nabiyyika wa-Shaahidika 'Alaa Khalqika
al-Makhs'oos'i Bi Karaamatika ad-Daa'ee Ilaa T'aa'atika wa-T'aa'ati
Nabiyyika S'alawaatuka 'Alayhim Ajma'een. O God! (Please) send blessings
upon al-Hassan ibn Ali - the agent acting upon Thy decrees; the
established authority over Thy creatures; Thy proof acting on behalf of
Thy Prophet; Thy witness for Thy creatures; the exclusive (receiver) of
Thy munificence. He is the caller to Thy obedience and obedience to Thy
Prophet. May Thou send blessings upon them all.

Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa H'ujjatika wa-Waliyyika al-Qaa'imi Fee Khalqika
S'alaatan Taa(a)mmatan Naamiyatan Baaqiyatan Tu'ajjilu Bihaa Farajahoo
wa-Tans'uruhoo Bihaa Wa Taj'alunaa Ma'ahoo Fid-Dunyaa wal-Aakhirah. O
God! (Please) send blessings to Thy proof1; Thy established authority
over Thy creatures: Blessings so perfect, developed and lasting by which
Thee may expedite his arrival and make him victorious. And make us
accompany him 2 in this world and the Hereafter. Allaahumma Innee
Ataqarrabu Ilayka Bi-H'ubbihim wa Uwaalee Waliyyahum wa-U'aadee
'Aduwwahum Far-Zuqnee Bihim Khayrad-Dunyaa wal-Aakhirati Was'-Rif 'Annee
Bihim Sharrad-Dunyaa wal-Aakhirati Wa-Ahwaala Yawmil Qiyaamah.

O God! I seek Thy nearness through my love for them. I am friends with
their friends and oppose their enemies. Therefore grant me the good of
this world and the Hereafter on their account. And on their account,
fend off the evils of this world and the Hereafter from me, and the
dreadful fright on the Judgement Day.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refers to Imam Mehdi (MGB).
2 Imam Mehdi (MGB).

Then you sit near the position of his head and say: As-Salaamu 'Alayka
Yaa Waliyyal-Laahi, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa H'uliatal-Laahi, As-Salaamu
'Alayka Yaa Nooral-Laahi Fee Z'ulumaatil-Ard'i, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa
'Amoodad Deen. O the friend of God! Peace be upon you! O the proof of
God! Peace be upon you! O the light of God in the darkness of the Earth!
Peace be upon you! O the pillar of the religion! As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa
Waaritha Aadama S'afwatil-Laahi, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Nooh'in
Nabiyyil-Laahi, As Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Ibraaheema
Khaleelil-Laahi, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Ismaa'eela
Dhabeeh'il-Laah, Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Adam - chosen by
God! Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Noah - the Prophet of God!
Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Abraham - the friend of God! Peace
be upon you! O the inheritor of Ishmael - the offering to God!

As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Moosaa Kaleemil-Laahi, As Salaamu
'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Eesaa Rooh'il-Laahi, As Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa
Waaritha Muh'ammadin Rasoolil-Laah.

Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Moses - the interlocutor of God!
Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Jesus - the spirit of God! Peace
be upon you! O the inheritor of Muhammad - the Prophet of God!
As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Ameeril-Mu'min eena Waliyyil-Laahi
wa-Was'iyyi Rasooli 'Aalameena, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha
Faat'imataz Zahraa As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waarithal-H'asani wal H'usayni
Sayyiday Shabaabi Ahlil-Jannah Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of the
Commander of the Faithful - Ali the friend of God and the Testamentary
Trustee of the Messenger of the Lord of the two worlds! Peace be upon
you! O the inheritor of Fatimah az-Zahra1! Peace be upon you! O the
inheritor of al-Hassan and al-Hussein - the Masters of Youth in
Paradise! As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Zaynil-Aabideena, As-Salaamu
'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Muh'ammadib-Ni Baaqiri Ilmil-Awwaleena wal
Aakhireena, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha Jafarib-Ni
Muh'ammadinis'-S'aadiqil-Baarri, As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Waaritha
Moosab-Ni Jafar.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The shining.

Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of AU ibn al-Hussein - the adornment
of the worshippers! Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Muhammad ibn
Ali - the dissector versed in the knowledge of those of old and those of
later times! Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq -the virtuous! Peace be upon you! O the inheritor of Musa ibn
Ja'far! As-Salaama 'Alayka Ayyuhas'-S'iddeeqush-Shaheedu, As Salaamu
'Alayka Ayylthal-Was'iyyul-Baarrut-Taqiyyu, As Salaamu 'Alayk Peace be
upon you! O the truthful martyr! Peace be upon you! O the virtuous and
pious trustee! Peace be upon you! Ashhadu Annaka Qad Aqamtas'-S'alaata
wa-Aataytaz-Zakaata wa-Amarta Bil-Ma'roofi wa-Nahayta 'Anil-Munkari wa
Abadtal-Laaha Mukhlis'an H'attaa Ataakal-Yaqeen. As Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa
Abal-H'asani Wa-Rah'matul-Laahi Wa Barakaatuh, Innahoo H'ameedun
Majeed.

I bear witness that it was indeed you who established prayers, paid the
alms-tax, commanded to do right, admonished against doing wrong and
sincerely served God until what is sure to come happened to you. O Abal
Hassan (Imam Reza (MGB))! Peace be upon you! And the grace of God and
His blessings be upon you, For He is indeed worthy of all praise, full
of all glory!

La'anal-Laahu Ummatan Qatalatka, La'anal-Laahu Ummatan Z'alamatka,
La'anal-Laahu Ummatan Assasat Asaasaz'-Z'ulmi wal-Jawri wal-Bid'ati
'Alaykum Ahlal-Bayt. May God's curse be upon the people who murdered
you! May God's curse be upon the people who oppressed you! May God's
curse be upon the people who established the foundations of oppression,
tyranny and innovation against you-members of the Household (of the
Prophet) (MGB)!" Then you touch the tomb and say: Allaahumma Ilayka
S'amadtu Min Ard'ee Wa-Qat'a'tul-Bilaada Rajaa'a Rah'matika Falaa
Tukhayyibnee wa-Laa Taruddanee Bi-Ghayri Qad'aa'i H'aajatee Warh'am
Taqallubee 'Alaa Qabrib-Ni Akhee Rasoolika S'alawaatuka 'Alayhi
wa-Aalih. "O God! I set out towards Thee from my homeland, and passed
through many towns with the hope of receiving Thy mercy. Please do not
disappoint me, and do not send me back without having my needs
fulfilled. Have mercy upon my turning towards the tomb of the son of Thy
Messenger's brother. May Thy blessings be upon him and his Household
(MGB).

Bi-Abee Anta Wa-Ummee Yaa Mawlaaya Ataytuka Zaa'iran Waafidan
'Aa'idham-Mimmaa Janaytu 'Alaa Nafsee Wah'tat'abtu 'Alaa Z'ahree Fakun
Lee Shaafi'an Ilal-Laahi Yawma Faqree wa-Faaqatee Falaka 'Indal-Laahi
Maqaamun Mah'moodun wa-Anta 'Indahoo Wajeeh. O my Master! May my parents
be your ransom! I have come to visit you and I have arrived. I seek
refuge in you from whatever crimes I have committed against myself - the
burden of which I carry on my back. Then (please) intercede with God on
my behalf on the Day of my poverty and destitution as you enjoy an
especial praiseworthy position in the presence of God. He considers you
to be an eminent man.

Then you raise your right hand up and extend your left hand towards the
tomb and say: Allaahumma Innee Ataqarrabu Ilayka Bi-H'ubbihim wa
Biwilaayatihim, Atawallaa Aakhirahum Bimaa Tawallaytu Bihee Awwalahum
wa-Abra'u Min Kulli Waleejatin Doonahum. O God! I seek Thy nearness
through my love and friendship for them.1 I love the last one of them as
much as I love the first one, and avoid any intimate friendship with
anyone but them.2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Members of the household of the prophet
2 Members of the household of the prophet

Allaahummal'Anil-Ladheena Baddaloo Ni'mataka wat Tahamoo Nabiyyaka
wa-Jah'adoo bi-Aayaatika wa-Sakhiroo bi Imaamika wa-H'amalun-Naasa 'Alaa
Aktaafi Aali Muh'ammad. Allaahumma Innee Ataqarrabu Ilayka bil-La'nati
'Alayhim wal Baraasati Minhum Fid-Dunyaa wal-Aakhirati Yaa Rah'maan. My
God! (Please) curse those who altered Thy blessings, accused Thy
Prophet, denied Thy verses, mocked Thy appointed leader, 1 and placed
the burden of the people upon the shoulders of the members of the
Household of Muhammad (MGB). O God! I seek Thy nearness by cursing them
(your enemies), and by staying away from them in this world and in the
Hereafter, O the Beneficent! Then you turn towards the position of his
feet and say:

S'allal-Laahu 'Alayka Yaa Abal-H'asani, S'allal-Laahu 'Alaa Rooh'ika
wa-Badanika, S'abarta wa-Antas'-S'aadiqul Mus'addaqu Qatalal-Laahu Man
Qatalaka bil-Aydee wal-Alsun.

O Abal Hassan! May God's blessings be upon you! May God's blessings be
upon your spirit and your body! You persevered. You were truthful and
your truthfulness has been confirmed. May God curse whoever martyred you
with his hands and tongue.2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Imam Reza (MGB).
2 Who orderd that you be martyreda and who carried out this order ( 42
)

Then supplicate and curse the murderer of the Commander of the Faithful
(MGB) and the murderers of al-Hassan (MGB), al-Hussein (MGB) and all
those who murdered the members of the Household of the God's Messenger
(MGB). Then turn towards the position of his head from behind his back
and offer two units of prayers. Recite the chapters "Fatihah" (No. 1)
and "YaSin" (No. 36) in the first unit, and recite the chapters
"Fatihah" and "Rahman" (No. 55) in the second unit. But if you have not
memorized them recite the chapter "Ikhlas" (No. 112) in both units. And
pray for the believing men and women, and especially pray for your
parents. Also make an effort to say supplications, cry, and pray a lot
for yourself, your parents and all your brethren. And stay near the
position of his head as much as you wish. And you must say your prayers
at the tomb.

**Farewell**

Then when you decide to say farewell recite:

As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa Mawlaaya wabna Mawlaaya Wa Rah'matul-Laahi
Wa-Barakaatuh. Anta Lanaa Junnatun Minal-Adhaabi wa-Haadhaa
Awaanun-S'iraafee Anka In Kunta Adhinta Lee Ghayra Raaghibin 'Anka
wa-Laa Mustabdilin Bika Walaa Mu'thirin 'Alayka Walaa Zaahidin Fee
Qurbik. O Master! O the son of my Master! Peace be upon you! And may the
grace of God and His blessings be upon you. You are the armour against
the Punishment for us. And now it is time for me to leave you if you
permit me. I am neither willing to depart from you, nor to choose anyone
else and substitute him for you. And I do not abstain from being near
you.

Waqad Jirtu Bi-Nafsee Lil-H'adathaani wa-Taraktul-Ahla wal Awlaada
wal-Awt'aana Fakun Lee Shaafi 'an Yawma H'aajatee wa-Faqree wa-Faaqatee,
Yawma Laa Yughnee 'Annee H'ameemee wa-Laa Qareebee, Yawma Laa Yughnee
'Annee Waalidee walaa Waladee.

Indeed I made an effort for what came to pass. Indeed I left my family,
children and hometown. Then intercede on my behalf on the Day of my
need, poverty and destitution: The Day when neither my friends nor
strangers can avail me anything at all. The Day when neither my father
nor my mother can avail me anything at all.

As'alul-Laahal-Ladhee Qaddara 'Alayya Rah'eelee Ilayka An Yunaffisa
Bika Kurbatee, wa- As'alul-Laahal-Ladhee Qaddara 'Alayya Firaaqa
Makaanika Anlaa Yaj'alahoo Aakhiral-(Ahdi Min Ziyaaratee Laka
wa-Rujoo'ee Ilayka. I ask God, who destined it for me to make pilgrimage
to you, to remove my sorrow by you. And I ask God who destined it for me
to depart from your place not to let this be the last time I make
pilgrimage to your tomb and visit your shrine, and I ask God to return
me to you. Wa- As'alul-Laahal-Ladhee Araanee Makaanaka wa-Hadaanee
Lit-Tasleemi 'Alayka wa-Ziyaaratee Iyyaaka An Yooridanee H'awd'akum
wa-Yarzuqanee Min Muraafaqatikum fil-Jinaan. I ask God to make me cry
over you so that He may establish it as a means for me and as a savings.
And I ask God to show me your place, and to guide me towards submission
to you, and visit you until I come to you at your Pool. I ask God to
grant me your companionship in Heaven.

As-Salaamu 'Alayka Yaa S'afwatal-Laahi, As-Salaamu 'Alaa
Ameeril-Mu'mineena wa-Wasjyyi Rasooli Rabbil-(Aalameena
wa-Qaa'idil-Ghurril-Muh'ajjaleena, As-Salaamu 'Alal-H'asani wal-H'usayni
Sayyiday Shabaabi Ahlil-Jannati, As-Salaamu O the one chosen by God!
Peace be upon you. Peace be upon the Commander of the Faithful, and the
Testamentary Trustee of the Messenger of the Lord of the two worlds, and
the leader of the lustrous ones.(I) Peace be upon al-Hassan and
al-Hussein - the Masters of Youth in Heaven. Peace be upon the
Immaculate Imams... And you call them by name one by one
...Wa-Rah'matul-Laahi Wa-Barakaatuh. As-Salaamu 'Alaa God's Prophet
(MGB) said that God the Exalted the High revealed to him on the night of
his ascension three things about Ali: that he is the Master of the
believers, the Leader of the pious ones, and the Leader of those with
white-foreheads or "Qa'ed al-Ghurr-HMuhajjelin" - those who are proud of
their deeds. Some have interpreted this to refer to those whose hands,
feet and foreheads are white due to prolonged prostrations.

Malaa'ikatil-Laahil-H'aa(a)ffeena, As-Salaamu 'Alaa
Malaa'ikatil-Laahil-Muqeemeenal-Musabbih'eenal-Ladheena Hum Bi-Amrihee
Ya'maloona, As-Salaamu 'Alaynaa wa-'Alaa 'Ibaadil-Laahis'-S'aalih'een.

may God bless them all and the grace of God and His blessings be upon
you. Peace be upon God's angels that are encircling (the shrine)! Peace
be upon God's angels that are residing and singing glory - those that
act according to His orders! Peace be upon us and upon the servants of
God in the ranks of the righteous. Allaahumma Laa Taj'alhu Aakhiral-
'Ahdi Min Ziyaaratee Iyyaahu Fa-in Ja'altahoo Fah'shurnee Ma'ahoo
wa-Ma'a Aabaa'ihil-Maad'eena wa-In Abqaytanee Yaa Rabbi Farzuqnee
Ziyaaratahoo Abadan Maa Abqaytanee Innaka 'Alaa Kulli Shay 'in Qadeer. O
my God! Please do not let this be the last time I visit him (Imam Reza
(MGB)). Imam Reza (MGB) deserves more than that. Then please resurrect
me with him, and with my forefathers (his forefathers) - those of the
past. And my Lord, if you keep me alive then please bestow upon me
making his pilgrimage for as long as I exist. Verily, Thou hast power
over all things.

And say:

Astawdi'ukal-Laaha wa-Astar'eeka wa-Aqra'u 'Alaykas-Salaam. Aamannaa
Billaahi Wabimaa Da'awta Ilayh. Allaahumma Faktubnaa Ma'ash-Shaahideen.
Allaahumma Farzuqnee H'ubbahum Wamawaddatahum Abadan Maa Abqaytanee. As
Salaamu 'Alaa Malaa'ikatil-Laahi Wazuwwaari Qabrika Yabna Nabiyyil-Laah.
As-Salaamu 'Alayka Minnee Abadan Maa Baqeetu Wa-Daa'iman Idhaa Faneet.
As-Salaamu 'Alaynaa Wa- 'Alaa 'Thaadil-Laahis'-S'aalih'een. I entrust
you with God, and I leave you with God, and I say peace be upon you. We
believe in God, and in what calls to Him. O God! Please 'then write us
down among those who bear witness.'1 O God! (Please) bless me with their
love and cordiality for as long as I exist. O son of the Prophet! May
peace be upon the angels of God, and upon the visitors to your shrine!
May peace be upon me for as long as I exist, and may it last even when I
perish. May peace be upon us and upon the servants of God in the ranks
of the righteous.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The Holy Quran Aal-i-Imran 3:53.

And when you leave and are outside the dome area, do not turn your face
away from it until it leaves your sight - God willing.

**Pilgrimage Prayer By Imam Reza (MGB)**

This pilgrimage prayer by Imam Reza (MGB) can be said when visiting any
of the divine leaders (MGB): Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn
al-Walidmay God, be pleased with him-narrated that Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan al-Saffar quoted on the authority of Ali ibn His'son that Imam
Reza (MGB) was asked about making pilgrimage to the shrine of his father
Abil Hassan Musa (MGB). He said: "Pray in the mosques around his shrine.
It suffices that in any of them you just say:

As-Salaamu 'Alaa Awliyaa'il-Laahi wa-Asfiyaa'ihi, AsSalaamu 'Alaa
Umanaasil-Laahi wa-Ah'ibaa'ihi, As-Salaamu 'Alaa Ans'aaril-Laahi
wa-Khulafaa'ihi, As-Salaamu 'Alaa Mah'aa(a)11i Ma'rifatil-Laahi,
As-Salaamu 'Alaa Masaakini Dhikril-Laahi, As-Salaamu 'Alaa Muz'hiree
Amril-Laahi waNahyihi, As-Salaamu 'Alad-Du'aati Ilal-Laahi, As-Salaamu
'Alal-Mustaqirreena Fee Mard'aatil-Laahi, As-Salaamu Mukhlis'eena Fee
T'aa'atil-Laahi, As-Salaamu 'Alal-Adillaa'i 'Alal-Laah. Peace be upon
God's friends and chosen ones. Peace be upon God's trustees and His
loved ones. Peace be upon God's helpers and His vicegerents. Peace be
upon the centers of divine recognition. Peace be upon the sources of
God's remembrance. Peace be upon the ones who have manifested God's
decrees and what He has admonished against. Peace be upon the ones who
call others towards God. Peace be upon the ones firm in the pleasure of
God. Peace be upon the ones sincere in obedience to God. Peace be upon
the reasons for God.

As-Salaamu 'Alal-Ladheena Man Waalaahum Faqad Waalal Laaha, Waman
Aadaahum Faqad 'Aadal-Laaha, Waman 'Arafahum Faqad 'Arafal-Laaha, Waman
Jahilahum Faqad Jahilal-Laaha, Wamani'Tas'ama Bihim Faqadi'tas'ama
Billaahi, Waman Takhallaa Minhum Faqad Takhallaa Minallaahi 'Azza
Wajall. Peace be upon those whose friends are God's friends, and whose
enemies are God's enemies. Peace be upon those whose recognition is the
same as God's recognition, and neglecting them is the same as neglecting
God. Peace be upon those whose adherence is the same as adhering to God,
and those whose abandoning is the same as abandoning God.

Wa-Ushhidullaaha Annee Silmun Liman Saalamakum, Wa H'arbun Liman
H'aarabakum, Mu'minun Bisirrikum Wa'Alaaniyatikum, Mufawwid'un Fee
Dhaalika Kullihee Ilaykuin, La'anal-Laahu 'Aduwwa Aali Muh'ammadin
Minal-Jinni Insi, Wa-Abra'u Ilal-Laahi Minhum, Wa-S'allal-Laahu 'Alaa
Muh'ammadin Wa-Aalih.

I swear by God that I submit to whoever submits to you, and fight with
whoever fights with you. I believe in what you keep as secrets and in
what you make public. I totally trust you in these affairs. May God's
curse be upon the enemies of Muhammad's Household, be they from the
genies or from the people, be they from those of the old or those of the
later times. And I acquit myself near God from them. And may God's
blessings be upon Muhammad and his Household-the purified ones. This
prayer is sufficient for all pilgrimages to the holy shrines. Send a lot
of blessings upon Muhammad and his Household and upon the divine leaders
naming them one by one. Express your disdain of their enemies. Also ask
whatever you want for yourself and other believing men and women in your
prayers.


