Supplement
==========

Bi-Abee Antum Wa Ummee Wa Ahlee Wa Maalee Wa Usratee, Ushhidul-Laaha Wa
Ushhidukum Annee MuWinun Bikum Wabimaa Aamantum Bih, Kaafirun
Bi'aduwwikum Wabimaa Kafartum Bih, Mustabs'irun BishaWikum,
Wabid'alaalati Man Khaalafakum, Muwaalin Lakum Wa Li-Awliyaalkum,
Mubghid'un Li-A'daa1kum, Wa Mu'aadin Lakum, Silmun Liman Saalamakum,
Wah'arbun Liman H'aarabakum, Muh'aqqiqun Limaa H'aqqaqtum, Mubt'ilun
Limaa Abt'altum, Mut'ee'un Lakum, 'Aarifun Bih'aqqikum, Muqirrun
Bifad'likum.

May my father, mother, spouse, property, and family be your ransom! God
and you bear witness that I believe in you and what you believe in. I
renounce your enemies, and that by which they have disowned you. I am
fully aware of your stature, and of the deviation of those who oppose
you. I am your friend and a friend of your friends. I despise your
enemies and am their adversary. I am at peace with those who are at
peace with you. I am at war with those who are at war with you. I accept
as true whatever you verify, and consider as false whatever you refute.
I obey you. I recognize your rightfulness. I confess your nobility.

Muh'tamilun Muh'tajibun Bidhimmatikum, Mu'tarifun Bikum, Bi-Iyaabikum,
Mus'addiqun Biraj'atikum, Muntazhirun Li-Amrikum, Murtaqibun
Lidawlatikum, Aakhidhun Bigawlikum, 'Aamilun Bi-Amrikum, Mustajeerun
Bikum, Zaa Lakum, Laa'Dhun 'Aa'Dhun Biquboorikum, Mustashfi 'tin
Ilal-Laahi 'Azza Wa Jalla Bikum, Wamutaqarribun Bikum Ilayh,
Wamuqaddimukum Amaama T'alibatee Wa H'awaa'Ijee Tea Iraadatee, Fee Kulli
Ah'waalee Umooree. I deliver your knowledge. I seek protection under
your shelter. I confess to you. I believe that you will return. I
testify to your promised return. I am awaiting your orders. I am
awaiting your reign. I hold fast to what you have said. I carry out your
orders. I take shelter in your neighborhood. I make pilgrimage visits to
you. I seek refuge in you since for me your 'resting abodes' are
sanctuaries. I ask God the Honorable the Exalted for your intercession,
and I seek nearness to Him through you. Under all circumstances I put
the first priority in you rather than my wants, needs, desires and all
affairs.

Mu'Minun Bisirrikum Wa'akaaniyatikum, Washaahidikum Waghaa'Ibikum, Wa
Awwalikum Wa Aakhirikum, Wa Mufawwid'un Fee Dhaalika Kullihee Ilaykum,
Wamusallimun Feehi Ma'akum, Waqalbee Lakum Musallim, Wara'Yee Lakum
Taba', Wanus'ratee Lakum Mu'addah, H'attaa Yyh'yiyal Laahu Ta'aalaa
Deenahoo Bikum, Wa Yaruddakum Fee Ayyaamih, Wayuzhhirakum Wa
Yumakkinakum Fee Ard'ih. I am a believer in what you have kept as
secrets and what you have made public, in your presence and absence -
your first one and your last one. I entrust all my affairs in this
regard to you. And I submit to God in this regard along with you. And I
whole-heartedly believe in you. My viewpoints agree with yours. I am
ready to assist you until God the Most High revives His Religion through
you; and brings you back during His Days; and makes you victorious for
the sake of His Justice. He makes you powerful on His Earth. Fama'akum
Ma'akum Laa Ma'a Ghayrikum, Aamantu Bikum, Watawallaytu Aakhirakum Bimaa
Tawallaytu Bihee Awwalakum, Wabari'Tu Ilal-Aahi 'Azza Wajalla Min
A'daalkum, Warninal-Jibti Wat'-T'aaghoot, Wash Shayaat'eeni Wa
H'izbihim, Azh-Zhaalimeena Lakum, Wal Jaah'ideena Lih'aqqikum,
Wal-Maariqeena Min Wilaayatikum, Wal-Ghaas'ibeena Li-Irthikum,
Wash-Shaa(aKkeena Feekum,

Wal-Munh'arifeena 'Ankum, Warnin Kulli Waleejatin Doonakum, Wakulli
Mut'aa'in Siwaakum, Waminal AsImmatil-Ladheena YadJoona Ilan-Naar. Then
I am with you. I am not with your enemies. I believe in you. I love the
last one of you just as much as I love the first one. I acquit myself
near God of your enemies, of sorcery and evil, the Satans, and their
party that is oppressive to you, and of the ones who denied your
rightfulness, the apostates of your divine leadership, the ones who
usurped your inheritance, and of the ones who doubted in you, the ones
who deviated from you. And I acquit myself of all intimate friends but
you, and of obeying anyone but you, and of the leaders who invite us
towards the Fire. Fathabbataniyal-Laahu Abadan Maa H'ayeetu 'Alaa
Muwaalaatikum, Wamah'abbatikum Wadeenikum, Wawaffaqanee Lit'aa'atikum,
Warazaqanee Shafaa'atakurn, Waja'alanee Min Khiyaari Mawaaleekum,
At-Taabi'eena Limaa Da'awtum Ilayh, Waja'alanee Mimman Yaqtas's'u
Aathaarakum, Wayasluku Sabeelakum, Wayahtadee Bihudaakum, Wayuh'sharu
Fee Zumratikum, Wa Yakirru Fee Raj'atikum, Wayumallaku Fee Dawlatikum,
Wayusharrafu Fee 'Aafiyatikum, Wayumakkanu Fee Ayyaamikum, Wa Taqarru
'Aynuhoo Ghadan Biru'Yatikum.

May God make me steadfast in your assistance, friendship, love, and
religion for as long as I live. May He grant me success in obeying you,
and grant me your intercession, and establish me as one of your best
followers who follow what you invite them to. And establish me as one
who investigates your traces and trots on your path, is guided by your
guidance, is resurrected amongst you, returns when you return, attains
rule in your government, is honored due to your health, gets established
during your time, and gets pleased to see you. Bi-Abee Antum Wa Ummee
Wanafsee Wa Ahlee Wamaalee, Man Araadal-Laaha Bada'A Bikum, Waman
Wah'h'adahoo Qabila 'Ankum, Waman Qas'adahoo Tawajjaha Bikum, Mawaaliyya
Laa Uh's'ee Thanaa'Akum, Walaa Ablughu Minal Mad-H'i Kunhakum,
Waminal-Wasfi Qadrakum, Wa Antum Moorul-Akhyaar, Wa Hudaatul-Abraar, Wa
H'ujajul-Jabbaar, Bikum Fatah'al-Laah, Wabikum Yakhtimul-Laah, Wabikum
Yunazzilul-Ghayth, Wabikum Yumsikus-Samaa'A An Taqa'a 'Alal-Ard'i Illaa
Bi-Idhnih, Wabikum Yunaffisul-Hamma Wa Yakshiful-D'urr. May my father,
mother, spouse, property, and possessions be your ransom! Whoever
desired to reach God started out with you. And whoever considers Him to
be the One and Only has accepted this belief from you. And whoever
intended to go towards Him was directed towards you. O my Masters! Your
praise is beyond measure. Your true nature is beyond praise. Your
majesty is beyond description. And you are the light of the Company of
the Good. And you are the true guidance for the pious, and the proofs of
the Omnipotent.1 God has initiated everything with you, and He shall
terminate everything with you. He will send down rain due to you. For
your sake He will prevent the sky from collapsing down unto the Earth
without His Permission. He will remove the sorrows through you. And He
will solve the difficulties through you.

Wa 'Indakum Maa Nazalat Bihee Rusuluh, Wahabat'at Bihee Malaa7katuh, Wa
Ilaa Jaddikum... (Akheeka) Bu'ithar Rooh'ul-Ameen, Aataakumul-Laahu Maa
Lam Yu'Ti Ah'adan MinalJAalameen, ra'T'asA Kullu Shareefin Lisharafikum,
Wabakha'a Kullu Mutakabbirin Lit'aa'Atikum, Wakhad'a'a Kullu Jabbaarin
Lifadlikum, Wadhalla Kullu Shay'In Lakum, Wa Ashraqatil-Ard'u
Binoorikum, Wafaazal-Faa'Izoona Biwilaayatikum, Bikum Yuslaku
Ilar-Rid'waan, Wa 'Alaa Man Jah'ada Wilaayatakum Ghad'abur-Rah'maan.

And whatever He has sent down to His Messenger brought down by the
angels is near you (i.e. the Imams). And the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 God.

Spirit of Faith and Truth (Gabriel)1 - was dispatched to your
forefather (Muhammad (MGB)). [And if you are visiting the shrine of the
Commander of the Faithful (MGB) say: "And the Spirit of Faith and
Truth - was dispatched to your brother (implying the Prophet Muhammad
(MGB).] God has granted you what He would not grant to any of the people
of the two worlds. All the noble ones bow down to your dignity. And all
the arrogant ones humble themselves in your obedience. And all the
powerful people yield to your nobility. All things yield themselves to
you. The Earth is lit up with your light. The triumphant ones become
victorious due to your friendship. One can trot towards Paradise with
your assistance. And the Wrath of God Most Gracious is upon those who
disclaim your Trusteeship. Abee Antum Wa Ummee Wa Nafsee Wa Ahlee Wa
Maalee, Dhikrukum Fidh-Dhaakireen, Wa Asmaa'Ukum Wa Ajsaadukum
Fil-Ajsaad, Wa Arwaah'ukum Fil-Arwaah', Wa Anfusukum Fin-Nufoos, Wa
Aatharukum Fil-Aathaar, Wa Quboorukum Fil-Quboor, Fa Maa Ah'laa
Asmaa'Akum, Wa Akrama Anfiisakum, Wa A'zhama ShaWakum, Wa Ajalla
Khat'arakum, Wa Awfaa 'Ahdakum, Wa As'daqa Wa'dakum.

May my father, mother, myself, my spouse and my property be your
ransom! You are remembered as other people are

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 'Rooh-ul-amin' or Gabriel who came with the inspired Messages to the
Holy Prophet (MGB).

remembered. Your names are mentioned among other people's names. Your
corpses are buried among other people's corpses. Your spirits are among
other people's spirits. Your souls are among other souls. Your traces
are among other traces. Your tombs are among other tombs. However, how
delightful are your names! And how noble are your souls! How majestic is
your honor! How exalted is your significance! How honored are your
promises! Kalaamukum Noor, Wa Amrukum Rushd, Wa Was'iyyatukumut-Taqwaa,
Wa Fi'lukumul-Khayr, Wa 'Aadatukumul-Ih'saan, Wasajiyyatukumul-Karam,
Washa'nukumul-H'aqqu Was'-S'idqu War-Rifq, Waqawlukum H'ukmun Wah'atm,
Wara'Yukum 'Ilmun Wa H'ilmun Wah'azm, In Dhukiral-Khayru Kuntum Awwalah,
Wa As'lahoo Wa Far'ahoo Wa Ma'dinah, Wama'Maahu Wamuntahaah. Your words
are similar to light! Your decrees are a basis for growth! Your advice
is to be God-fearing! And your deeds are good! Your habits are
Kindnesses! Your nature is generosity! Your concern is truth, honesty
and moderation! Your words are full of wisdom and are binding! Your
opinions are full of knowledge, patience and wisdom! Indeed whenever
there is a mention of goodness, you are the first, the next, the source,
and the termination of goodness!

Bi-Abee Antum Wa Ummee Wa Nafsee, Kayfa As'ifu H'usna Thanaalkum, Wa
Uh's'ee Jameela Balaalkum, Wabikum Akhrajanal-Laahu Minadh-Dhull,
Wafarraja 'Annaa Ghamaraatil-Kuroob, Wa Anqadhanaa Min Shafaa Jurufil
Halakaati Waminan-Naar, Bi-Abee Antum Wa Ummee Wa Nafsee,
Bimuwaalaatikum 'Allarnanal-Llahu Ma'aalima Deeninaa, Wa As'lah'a Maa
Kaana Fasada Min Dunyaanaa, Wabimuwaalaatikum Tammatil-Kalimah, Wa
'Azhumatin Ni'mah, Wa' Talafatil-Furqah.

May my father, mother, myself, my spouse and my property be your
ransom! How can I describe the charm of your praise? How can I measure
the nobility of your rank? And God has taken us out of the state of
humiliation and has alleviated us from overwhelming anguish: And has
saved us from the verge of the cliff of destruction and the Fire. May my
father, mother, and myself be your ransom! God taught us the secrets of
our religion by our following you. And He improved whatever of our
worldly affairs that had become ruined. And by our following you the
Word was perfected, the blessings were expanded, and disunion was
converted into union.

Wa Bimuwaalaatikum TuqbaluC-T'aa'atul-Muftarad'ah,
Walakurnul-Mawaddatul-Waajibah, Wad-Darajaatur-Rafee'ah,
Wal-Maqaamul-Mah'mood, Wal-Makaanul-Ma'loomu Laahi 'Azza Wajall,
Wal-JaahulJAzheem, Wash-Sha'NulKabeer, Wash-Shafaa'atul-Maqboolah,
Rabbanaa Aamannaa Bimaa Anzalta Wat-Taba'nar-Rasoola Faktubnaa Ma'ash
Shahideen, Rabbanaa Laa Tuzigh Quloobabaa Ba'da Idh Hadaytanaa Wahab
Lanaa Min Ladunka Rah'matan Innaka Antal-Wahhaab, Subh'aana Rabbinaa In
Kaana Wa'du Rabbinaa Lamaf'oolaa. God accepted our obligatory deeds from
us by our following you. And cordiality for you is obligatory, and you
have high ranks, and a commendable station near God - the Most High and
a known place, a great high rank, a high status, and accepted
intercession. Our Lord! We believe in what Thou hast revealed, and we
follow the Apostle; then write down our names among those who bear
witness. Our Lord! (they say), Let not our hearts deviate now after Thou
hast guided us, but grant us mercy from Thine own Presence; for Thou art
the Grantor of bounties without measure. Glory be to our Lord! Truly has
the promise of our Lord been fulfilled!

Yaa Wiliyyal-Laah, Inna Baynee Wa Baynal-Laahi 'Azza Wa Jalla Dhunooban
Laa Ya'Tee 'Alayyaa Illaa Rid'aakum, Fabih'aqqi Mani'-Tamanakum 'Alaa
Sirrih, Wastar'aakum Amra Khalqih, Waqarana T'aa'atakum Bit'aa'atih,
Lammas Tawhabtum Dhunoobee, Wakuntum Shufa'aa'Ee, Fa-Innee Lakum
Mut'ee', Man At'aa'akum Faqad At'aa'al-Laah, Waman 'As'aakum Faqad Waman
Ah'abbakum Faqad Ah'abbal-Laah, Waman Abghad'akum Faqad Abghad'al-Laah.
O friend of God [O friends of God]! Indeed there are sins in between me
and God that cannot be removed unless you approve. By the One who has
established you as His Trustees of His Secrets and has entrusted the
affairs of His creatures to you, and has equated your obedience with His
own obedience: Please ask for the forgiveness of my sins, and be the
ones who intercede on my behalf as I am obedient to you and whoever is
obedient to you has indeed obeyed God. Whoever disobeys you is
disobedient to God. And whoever loves you has indeed loved God. And
whoever despises you has indeed loathed God.

Allaahumma Law Wajadtu Shufa'aa'A Aqrabu Ilayka Min Muh'ammadin Wa Ahli
Baytihil-Akhyaaril-Almmatil-Abraari Laja'altuhum Shufa'aa'Ee,
Fabih'aqqihimul-Ladhee Awjabta Lahum 'Alayk, As'Aluka An Tudkhilanee Fee
Jumlatil 'Aarifeena Bihim Wabih'aqqihim, Wa Fee Zumratil-

Marh'oomeena Bishafaa'atihim, Innaka Arh'amur-Raah'imeen,
WAs'allal-Laahu 'Alaa Muh'ammadin Wa Aalihir-T'aahireen, Wasallama
Tasleeman Katheera, Wa H'asbunal-Laahu Wa Ni'mal-Wakeel. O God! Could I
have ever found ones to intercede near Thee on my behalf who would be
closer to Thee than Muhammad and the Members of his Household - the
leaders of the Company of the Good - the pious ones? I beseech Thee by
their right that Thou establish them as the ones to intercede on my
behalf. I ask Thee to place me amongst those who know them and recognize
their rightfulness, and amongst those who hope for their intercession,
as Thou art the Most Merciful of those that are merciful. And may God's
Blessings, and Salutations with much respect be upon our Master Muhammad
and his Household. And for us God sufficeth, and He is the best disposer
of affairs.

Farewell:

Then when you decide to depart recite: As-Salaamu 'Alaykum Yaa Ahla
Baytin-Nubuwwati Salaama Muwaddi'in Laa Sa'imin wa-Laa Qaalin,
Wa-Rah'matul-Laahi Wa-Barakaatuh, Innahoo H'ameedun Majeed. Salaama
Waliyyin Ghayra Raaghibin 'Ankum Walaa Mustabdilin Bikum Walaa Mu'thirin
'Alaykum Walaa Munh'arifin 'Ankum Walaa Zaahidin Fee Qurbikum. Laa
Ja'alahul-Laahu AakhiralJAhdi Min Ziyaarati Quboorikum Wa-Ityaani
Mashaahidikum Was Salaami 'Alaykum Wah'asharaniyal-Laahu Fee Zumratikum
Wa-Awradanee H'awd'akum Waja'alanee Min H'izbikum wa Ard'aakum 'Annee.

O Members of the Prophet's Household! Peace be upon you! Peace be upon
one who says farewell but is neither tired of you nor is he discontented
with you. And the grace of God and His blessings be upon you - as He is
indeed praiseworthy and glorious. Peace be upon you from a friend who is
neither willing to depart from you, nor to choose anyone else and
substitute him for you, one who does not stray away from you, and one
who does not abstain from being near you. May God not let this be the
last time I make the pilgrimage to your tomb and visit your shrine. And
peace be upon you. May God resurrect me among you, establish me as one
who enters your Pool, let me join your party, and please you with me.

Wamakkananee Min Dawlatikum Wa-Ah'yaanee Fee Raj'atikum Wamallakanee
Fee Ayyaamikum Washakara Sa'yee

Bikum Wagharafa Dhanbee Bishafaa'atikum Wa-aqaala 'Athratee Bih'ubbikum
Wa-Alaa Ka'bee Bimuwaalaatikum Washarrafanee Bit'aa'aatikum Wa-a'azzanee
Bihudaakum Waja'alanee Mimmanin-Qalab Muflih'an Munjih'an Ghaaniman
Saaliman Mu'aafan Ghaniyyan Faa'izan Birid'waanil-Laahi Wafad'lihee
Wakifaayatihee Bi-Afd'ala Maa Yanqalibu Bihee Ah'adun Min Zuwwaarikum
Warnuwaaleekum Wamuh'ibbeekum Washee'atikum Warazaqaniyal-Laahul 'Awda
Thummal-'Awda Abadan Maa Abqaanee Rabbee Biniyyatin S'aadiqatin
Wa-eemaanin Wataqwan Wa-Ikhbaatin Warizqin Waasi'in H'alaalin T'ayyib.
And empower me from your government, and revive me during your return
and give me a position during your rule. And may God grant me gratitude
for my efforts for you and forgive me my sins due to your intercession,
overlook my faults due to your love, increase my eminence due to my
adherence to you, revere me due to obedience to you, and honor me due to
your guidance. And when I return home please make me successful with a
happy ending, a winner, in good shape, healthy, wealthy, and having
attained the satisfaction of God and His Grace and with better things
than what God would normally return your visitors, friends, lovers, and
followers with. And may God grant me another chance to return on
pilgrimage after I go back home as long as my Lord keeps me alive with a
sincere intention, faith, piety, humbleness and legitimate, prolonged
and pure sustenance.

Allaahumma Laa Taj'alhu AakhiralJAhdi Min Ziyaaratihim Wadhikrihim
Was'-S'alaati 'Alayhim Wa-Awjib Ilayyal Maghfirata Wal-Khayra
Wal-Barakata Wan-Noora Wal Eemaana Wah'usnal-ljaabati Kamaa
Li-Awliyaa'ikal "Aarifeena Bih'aqqihim al-Moojibeena Li-T'aa'atihim War
Raaghibeena Fee Ziyaaratihim al-Mutaqarribeen Ilayka Wa Ilayhim O my
God! Please do not let this be the last time I visit them, remember them
and supplicate to them. And please make forgiveness, good, blessings,
light, faith, and fair acceptance of my prayers a certainty for me - as
Thee has done so for Thy friends who have recognized the truth about
them - (the Prophet's Household), consider it incumbent upon themselves
to obey them and are inclined to visit them: Those who are close to Thee
and them. Bi-Abee Antum Wa-Ummee Wa-Ahlee Wamaalee Ij'aloonee Fee
Himmatikum Was'ayyiroonee Fee H'izbikum Wa-Adkhiloonee Fee Shafaa'atikum
Wadhkuroonee 'Inda Rabbikum. Allaahumma S'alli 'Alaa Muh'ammadin Wa-Aali
Muh'ammadin Wa-Abligh Arwaah'ahum Wa-Ajsaadahum Minnis-Salaama
Was-Salaamu 'Alaykum Warah'matul-Laahi Wabarakaatuhoo Was'allal-Laahu
'Alaa Sayyidinaa Muh'ammadin Wa-Aalihee Wasallama Tasleeman Katheeran
Wah'asbunal-Laahu Wani'mal-Wakeel.

May my father, mother, family, property, and possessions be your
ransom! Please pay attention to me, and let me join your party. Include
me among those on whose behalf you intercede, and mention me near your
Lord. O my God! Please send blessings upon Muhammad and the Household of
Muhammad. And express my greetings to their souls and their bodies. And
peace be upon you; and the grace of God and His Blessings be upon you.
And may God's Blessings and Salutations with much respect be upon our
Master Muhammad and his Household. And for us God sufficeth, and He is
the best disposer of affairs.


