Supplication of Highly Considerable Contents
============================================

This is a supplication comprising highly considerable contents. It is
recommended to be recited after the accomplishment of the Ziyarah of any
of the Holy Imams: Allaahumma Innee Zurtu Haadhal-Imaama Muqirran Bi
Imaamatihee, Mu'taqidan Lifardhi T'aa'atihee, Faqas'adtu Mashhadahoo
Bi-Dhunoobee Wa'uyoobee, Wamoobiqaati Aathaamee Wakathrati Sayyisaatee
Wakhat'aayaaya, Wamaa Ta'rifuhoo Minnee, Mustajeeran Bi'afwika,
Musta'eedhan Bih'ilmika, Raajiyan Rah'mataka, Laaji'an Ilaa Ruknika,
'Aa'idhan Birafatika, Mustashfi'an Biwaliyyika Wabni Awliyaa'ika,
Was'afiyyika Wabni Asfiyaa'ika, Wa-Ameenika Wabni Umanaa'ika,
Wakhaleefatika Wabni Khulafaasika Alladheena Ja'altahumul-Waseelata Ilaa
Rah'matika Warid'waanika, Wadh-Dharee'ata Ilaa Rafatika Waghufraanika O
Allah, I am visiting this Imam confessing his Imamate, Believing in the
obligation of the obedience to him; therefore, I have betaken myself to
his shrine in spite of all my sins, and all my defects, and the perils
of my wrongdoings, and my numerous misdeeds and faults, and whatsoever
You know about me; Calling for Your Amnesty, seeking the refuge of Your
forbearance, hoping for Your mercy, seeking Your shelter, seeking the
protection of Your compassion, seeking the intercession of Your intimate
saint and the son of Your intimate saint, and Your choice servant and
the son of Your choice servant, and Your representative and the son of
Your representatives whom You have made the means of approach to Your
mercy and pleasure, and the channels to Your compassion and
forgiveness.

Allaahumma Wa-Awwalu H'aajaatee Ilayka An Taghfira Lee Maa Salafa Min
Dhunoobee 'Alaa Kathratihaa, Wa-An Ta's'imanee Feemaa Baqtycz Min
'Umuree, Watut'ahhira Deenee Mimmaa Yudannisuhoo Wayasheenuhoo Wayuzree
Bihee, Watah'miyahoo Minar-Raybi Wash-Shakki Wal-Fasaadi Wash Shirki,
Wathabbitnee 'Alaa T'aa'atika Wat'aa'ati Rasoolika
Wadhurriyyatihin-Nujabaa'is-Su'adaa'i, S'alawaatuka 'Alayhim
Warah'matuka Wasalaamuka Wabarakaatuka, Watuhfyiyanee Maa Ah'yaytanee
'Alaa T'aa'atihim, Watumeetanee Idhaa Amattanee 'Alaa T'aa'atihim, Wa-An
Laa Tamh'uwa Min Qalbee Mawaddatahum Wamah'abbatahurn Wabughd'a
A'daa'ihim Wamurafaqata Awltlyaa'ihim Wabarrahurn. O Allah: My first
need from You is that I implore to You to forgive all my previous sins
although they are numerous, And to protect me (against sinning) in my
coming life, and to purify my religion from whatsoever stains or
disgraces or degrades it, and to save it from suspect, doubt, corruption
and blasphemy, and to make me stand firm on the obedience to You and to
Your Messenger and to his Progeny, the pure and the happy-may Your
blessings and mercy and peace and favors be upon them-and to make me
live, as long as You grant me life, on the obedience to them, and to
make me die, when You decide so, on the obedience to them, and not to
erase from my heart my love and affection for them and my aversion to
their enemies and my companionship to their adherents and my acting
piously towards them.

Wa-As'aluka Yaa Rabbi An Taqbala Dhaalika Minnee Watuh'abbiba Ilayya
'Ibaadataka Wal-Muwaaz'abata 'Alayhaa, Watunashshit'anee Lahaa,
Watubaghghid'a Ilayya Ma'aas'eeka Wamah'aarimaka Watadfa'anee 'Anhaa,
Watujannibanit-Taqs'eera Fee S'alawaatee Walistihaanata Bihaa
Wattaraakhiya 'Anhaa, Watuwaffiqanee Lita'diyatihaa Kamaa Farad'ta
Wa-Amarta Bihee 'Alaa Sunnati Rasoolika S'alawaatuka 'Alayhi Wa-Aalihee
Warah'matuka Wabarakaatuka, Watashrah'a S'adree Lreetaa'iz-Zakaati
Wa-Ft'aa'is'-S'adaqaati Wabadhlil-Mairoofi Wal-Ih'saani Ilaa Sheerati
Aali Muh'ammadin 'Alayhimus-Salaamu Wamuwaasaatihim, Walaa Tatawaffaanee
Illaa Ba'da An Tarzuqanee Baytikal-H'araami Waziyaarata Qabri Nabiyyika
Waqubooril-A'immati 'Alayhimus-Salaam. And I implore to You, O Lord, to
accept that from me, and to make me loathe acts of disobedience to You
and acts that You have deemed forbidden and to take me away from these
acts, And to save me against negligence, belittling and slackening in
the performance of my prayers, and to lead me to perform them as perfect
as You have made incumbent upon me and as You have commanded according
to the Sunnah (traditions) of Your Messenger-may Your blessings, mercy
and favors be upon him and his Family-with obedience and reverence, and
to expand my breast for defraying the Zakat and almsgiving and doing
favors and good turns for the adherents of the Family of Muhammad- peace
be upon them-and for consoling them, and not to take me up (i.e. cause
me to die) before You bestow upon me the favor of going on pilgrimage to
Your Sacred House and to the tomb of Your Prophet and the tombs of the
Imams-peace be upon them.

Wa-As'aluka Yaa Rabbi Tawbatan Nas'ooh'an Tard'aahaa Waniyyatan
Tah'maduhaa Wa'amalan S'aalih'an Taqbaluh, Wa-An Taghfira Lee
Watarh'amanee Idhaa Tawaffaytanee, Watuhawwina 'Alayya Sakaraatil-Mawti,
Watah'shuranee Fee Zumrati Muh'ammadin Wa-Allihee S'alawaatul-Laahi
'Alayhi Wa'alayhim, Watudkhilaniyal-Jannata Birah'matika, Wataj'ala
Dam'ee Ghazeeran Fee T'aa'atika, Wa'abratee Jaariyatan Feemaa
Yuqarribunee Minka, Waqalbee 'At'oofan 'Alaa Awliyaa'ka. And I implore
to You, O Lord, (to grant me) a sincere repentance that You accept, and
an intention that You praise, and to have mercy upon me when You take me
up, and to make easy for me the agonies of death, and to include me with
the group of Muhammad and his Family-peace of Allah be upon him and
them7-, and to allow me to enter Paradise out of Your mercy, and to make
me shed heavy tears as obeisance to You, and to make my tears always run
down in acts that draw me near You, And to make my heart sympathetic
towards Your intimate servants.

Watas'oonanee Fee Haadhihid-Dunyaa Minal-'Aahaati Wal Aafaati
Wal-Amraad'ish-Shadeedati Wal-Asqaamil-Muzminati Wajamee'i
Anwaa'il-Balaa'i Wal-H'awaadith, Watasirifa Qalbee 'Anil-Il'araami,
Watubaghghid'a Ilayya Ma'aas'eeka, Watuh'abbiba Illayyal-H'alaali
Wataftah'a Lee Abwaabahoo, Watuthabbita Niyyatee Wafi'lee 'Alayhee,
Watamudda Fee 'Umuree Watughliqa Abwaabal-Mih'ani 'Annee, Walaa
Taslubanee Maa Mananta Bihee 'Alayya, Walaa Tastaridda Shay'an Mimmaa
Ah'santa Bihee Ilayya, Walaa Tanzi'a Minniyan-Ni'amal-Latee An'amta
Bihaa 'Alayya, Watazeeda Feemaa Khawwaltanee Watud'aa'ifahoo Lee
Ad-'aafam Mud'aa'afatan. And to save me in this worldly life from
handicaps, epidemics, incurable diseases, chronic illnesses, and all
sorts of misfortunes and catastrophes, and to cause my heart to turn
away from the forbidden (acts and things), and to make me hate acts of
disobedience to You, and to make me love the legally gotten sustenance
and to open its doors before me, and to extend my age and to close the
doors of adversaries before me, and not to take back from me whatsoever
You have favored upon me, and not to take back from me the graces that
You have granted me, and not to take from me the elegances that You have
conferred upon me, and to increase that which You have given me in
possession and to expand it many folds.

Watarzuqanee Maalan Katheeran Waasi'an Saa'ighan Hanee'an Naamiyan
Waafiyan, Wa-'Izzan Baaqiyan Kaafiyan, Wajaahan 'Areed'an Manee'an,
Wani'matan Saabighatan 'Aa(a)mmatan, Watu'eenanee Bidhaalika
'Anil-Maraalibil-Munakkadati Wal Mawaaridis'-S'a'bati, Watukhallis'anee
Minhaa Mu'aafan Fee Deenee Wanafsee Wawaladee Wamaa A't'aytanee
Wamanah'tanee, Watah'faz'a 'Alayya Maalee Wajamee'a Maa Khawwaltanee.
And to bestow upon me a fortune that is very much, spacious, agreeable,
joyful, growing, and satisfactory; and (to bestow upon me) dignity that
is everlasting and sufficient; and (to bestow upon me) prestige that is
outgoing and overwhelming; and (to bestow upon me) favor that is flowing
and broad; and to make me, through these, dispense with the humiliating
appeals and the unreachable sources; and to save me from them with good
health as regards my religion and my self and my sons and whatsoever You
have given and granted me; And to preserve for me my properties and
whatsoever You have put under my disposal.

Wataqbid'a 'Annee Aydiyal-Jabaabirati Wataruddanee Ilaa Wat'anee,
Watuballighanee Nihaayata Amalee Fee Dunyaaya Wa-Aakhiratee, Wataj'ala
'Aaqibata Amree Mah'moodatan H'asanatan Saleematan, Wataj'alanee
Rah'eebas'-S'adri Waasi'al-H'aali H'asanal-Khuluqi Ba'eedan Minal-Bukhli
Wal Man'i Wan-Nifaaqi Wal-Kadhibi Wal-Bahti Waqawliz-Zoori, Waturassikha
Fee Qalbee Mah'abbata Muh'ammadin Wa-Aali Muh'ammadin Washee'atihim,
Watah'rusanee Yaa Rabbi Fee Nafsee Wa-Ahlee Warnaalee Wawaladee Wa-Ahli
H'uzaanatee Wa:Ikhwaanee Wa-Ahli Mawaddatee Wa-Dhurriyyatee,
Birah'matika Wajoodika. And to watch me against the hands of the tyrants
and to take me back to my homeland (safely); and to confer upon me the
utmost of my hope in my worldly life and the Hereafter; and to make the
consequence of my conducts praiseworthy, good, and sound; and to make me
broadminded, well-off, well-mannered; and (to take me) away from
miserliness, stinginess, hypocrisy, fabrication, slander, and perjury;
and to make firm in my heart the love for Muhammad and the Family of
Muhammad and their adherents (Shiah); and to guard, O Lord, me and my
family and my properties and my sons and those under my custody and my
brothers and those whom I love and my offspring; by Your mercy and
Magnanimity.

Allaahumma Haadhihee H'aajaatee 'Indaka, Waqadi takthartuhaa Lilu'mee
Washuh'h'ee, Wahiya 'Indaka S'agheeratun Hraqeeratun Wa'alayka Sahlatun
Yaseeratun, Fa As'aluka Bijaahi Muh'ammadin Wa-Aali Muh'ammadin 'Alayhi
Wa'alayhimus-Salaamu 'Indaka Wabih'aqqihim 'Alayka, Wabimaa Awjabta
Lahum Wabisaa'iri Anbiyaasika Warusulika Wa-Asfiyaa'ika
Wa-Awliyaa'ikal-Mukhlas'eena Min 'Ibaadika, Wabismikal-A'z'amil-A'z'ami
Lammaa Qad'aytahaa Kullahaa, Wa-As'aftanee Bihaa Walam Tukhayyib Amalee
Warajaa'ee. O Allah: these are my needs from you; and, out of my
meanness and avarice, I have considered these (needs) as great; while
they are in Your view are insignificantly small and they are easy and
effortless for You; I thus implore to You by the standing of Muhammad
and the Family of Muhammad-peace be upon him and them-with You and by
their right with You; and by what You have made incumbent (upon You) as
regards Your Prophets, and Your Messengers, and Your choice servants,
and Your intimate saints who are sincere in worshipping You; and by Your
Grand, Substantial Name-(I implore to You by all these) to settle all of
my needs; and to relieve me through settling them for me and not to
disappoint nor let me down.

Allaahumma Washaffi' S'aah'iba Haadhal-Qabri Fiyya; Yaa Sayyidee Yaa
Waliyyal-Laahi Yaa Ameenal-Laahi, As'aluka An Tashfa'a Lee Ilal-Laahi
'Azza Wajalla Fee Haadhihil-H'aajaati Kullihaa, Bih'aqqi
Aabaa'ikati-T'aahireena Wabih'aqqi Awlaadikal-Muntajabeena, Fa-Inna Laka
'Indal-Laahi Taqaddasat Asmaa'uhul-Manzilatash-Shareefata Wal
Martabatal-Jaleelata Wal-Jaahal-'Areed'a. O Allah, (please) accept the
one in this Tomb as my interceder before You. O Master, O the Saint of
Allah, O the Representative of Allah; I beseech you to intercede for me
before Allah-to Whom belongs all might and majesty-to accept and settle
all my needs; by the right of Your Immaculate fathers and by the right
of Your choice sons; For you enjoy in the view of Allah-sacred be His
Names-an honorable standing and a lofty rank and a spacious regard.

Allaahumma Law 'Araftu Man Huwa Awjahu 'Indaka Min Haadhal-Imaami Wamin
Aabaasihee Wa-Abnaa'ihit'- T'aahireena 'Alayhimus-Salaamu Was'-S'alaatu,
Laja'altahum Shufa'aa'ee Waqaddamtahum Amaama H'aajaatee Wat'alabaatee
Hadhihee, Fasma' Minnee Wastajib Lee Wafal Bee Maa Anta Ahluhoo Yaa
Arh'amar-Raah'imeena, Allaahumma Wamaa Qas'urat 'Anhu Mas'alatee
Wa'ajazat 'Anhu Quwwatee Walam Tablughhu Fit'natee Min S'aalih'i Deenee
Wadunyaaya Wa-Aakhiratee, Famnun Bihee 'Alayya Wah'fazinee Wah'rusnee
Wahab Lee Waghfir Lee. O Allah: had I known a person more acceptable,
for You, than this Imam and his fathers and sons, the Pure-peace and
blessings be upon them-I would have chosen them to be my interceders
(before You) and I would have introduced them (before You) in order that
You would settle my needs and requests; I therefore please You to hear
from me and to respond to me and to do to me that which suits You; You
are the most Merciful of all those who show mercy. O Allah: as regards
the needs that my requests have not included and the things that I am
too powerless to do and the things that I am not too clever to mention
among the things that prosper my religion and my worldly life and my
next life; I please You to confer upon me with these; and to protect me;
and to guard me; and to bestow upon me (with Your favors); and to
forgive me.

Waman Araadanee Bisoo'in Aw Makroohin Min Shait'aanin Mareedin Aw
Sult'aanin 'Aneedin Aw Mukhaalafin Fee Deenin Aw Munaazi'in Fee Dunyaa,
Aw H'aasidin 'Alayya Ni'matan Aw Z'aalimin Aw Baaghin, Faqbid"Annee
Yadahoo Was'rif 'Annee Kaydahoo, Washghalhu 'Annee Binafsihee Wakfinee
Sharrahoo Washarra Atbaa'ihee Washayaat'eenihee, Wa-Ajirnee Min Kulli
Dhaalika Maa Yad'urrunee Wayujh'ifu Bee, Wa A't'inee Jamee'al-Khayti
Kullihee Mimmaa A'lamu Wamimmaa Laa A'lamu.

And as for anyone who intends evil or wickedness to me-such as a
rebellious devil, or a tyrant ruler; or a dissident miscreant, or a
rival in this world; or one who envies me for a grace, or an unjust
individual, or a despot-then (please) make their hands too short to
catch me, and take away their plots against me; and make them be engaged
with their own affairs (so as to be away from harming me), and save me
from their evils and the evils of their followers and their devils; and
stand by me against whatsoever harms me and whatsoever does injustice to
me; and (please) grant me the entire goodness whether I know or I do
not. Allahumma S'alli 'Alaa Muh'ammadin Wa-Aali Muh'ammadin, Waghfir Lee
Waliwaalidayya Wali-Ikhwaanee Wa-Akhawaatee Wa-A'maamee Wa'ammaatee
Wa-Akhwaalee Wakhaalaatee Wa-Ajdaadee Wajaddaatee, Wa-Awlaadihim
Wadharaareehim, Wa-Azwaajee Wadhurriyyaatee Wa-Aqribaasee
Wa-Asidiqaa'ee, Wajeeraanee Wa-Ikhwaanee Feeka Min Ahlish-Sharqi Wal
Gharbi, Walijamee'i Ahli Mawaddatee Minal-Mu'mineena
Walmu'minaatil-Ah'yaa'i Minhum Wal-Amwaati, Walijamee'i Man 'Allamanee
Khayran Aw Ta'allama Minnee 'Ilman.

O Allah: bless Muhammad and the Family of Muhammad; and forgive me, and
my parents, and my brothers, and sisters, and (paternal) uncles, and
(paternal) aunts, and (maternal) uncles, and (maternal) aunts, and
forefathers, and foremothers; and their sons and their offspring; and my
spouse(s), and my offspring, and my relatives, and my friends; and my
neighbors, and my brothers-in-faith in the east and in the west (of the
earth); and all those whom I love among the believing men and believing
women, be they alive or dead; and all those who have ever taught me an
item of decency or those who have received from me an item of
knowledge.

Allaahumma Ashrik-hum Fee S'aalih'i Du'aa'ee Waziyaaratee Limashhadi
H'ujjatika Wawaliyyika, Wa-Ashriknee Fee S'aalih'I irah'matika Yaa
Arh'amar-Raah'imeen, Waballigh Waliyyaka Minhumus-Salaarna, Was-Salaamu
'Alayka Warah'matul-Laahi Wabarakaatuh. O Allah: make all these have a
share in my best Supplications to You and in my (ritual) pilgrimages to
the shrine of Your Claim (against the creatures) and Your Saint; and
make me have a share in the best of their Supplications, by Your mercy,
for You are the most Merciful of all those who show mercy; and send
their greetings to Your Saint; peace and Allah's mercy and blessings be
upon you.

Yaa Sayyidee Wamawlaaya, Yaa... S'allal-Laahu 'Alayka Wa'alaa Rooh'ika
Wabadanika, Anta Waseelatee Ilal-Laahi Wadharee'atee Ilayhi, Walee
H'aqqu Muwaalaatee Wata'meelee, Fakum Shafee'ee Ilal-Laahi 'Azza Wajalla
Fil-Wuqoofi 'Alaa Qis's'atee Haadhihee Was'arfee 'An Mawqifee Haadhaa
Bin Nujh'i Bimaa Sa'altuhoo Kullahoo Birah'matihee Waqudratihee.
Allaahummar-Zuqnee 'Aqlan Kaamilan Walubban Raajih'an, Wa'izzan Baaqiyan
Waqalban Zakiyyan, Waramalan Katheeran Wa-Adaban Baari'an, Waj'al
Dhaalika Kullahoo Lee Walaa Taj'alhu 'Alayya, Birah'matika Yaa
Arh'amar-Raah'imeen. O my master, O my leader; O (mention the name of
the Imam whose shrine you are visiting); may Allah bless you, and your
soul, and your body; you are my means to approach Allah and my way
towards Him; and I enjoy the right of my loyalty to you and the right of
my putting my entire hope in you; therefore, be my interceder before
Allah-to Whom belongs all mighty and majesty-so that He shall regard my
story (that I have just told) and so that He shall make success the
result of all my requests in this pilgrimage out of His mercy and might.
O Allah: bestow upon me a perfect intellectuality and a sagacious
reason; and an everlasting might and a pure heart; and a very much work
(for Your), and excellent manners; and achieve all these for me and do
not make them stand against me; by Your mercy, for You are the most
Merciful of all those who show mercy.


