Background
==========

The caste system in India is an important part of ancient Hindu
tradition and dates back to 1200 BCE. The term caste was first used by
Portuguese travelers who came to India in the 16th century. Caste comes
from the Spanish and Portuguese word "casta" which means "race",
"breed", or "lineage". Many Indians use the term "jati". There are 3,000
castes and 25,000 subcastes in India, each related to a specific
occupation. These different castes fall under four basic varnas:

**Brahmins - priests & teachers**

**Kshatryas - warriors & rulers**

**Vaishyas - farmers, traders & merchants**

**Shudras -laborers**

Caste not only dictates one's occupation, but dietary habits and
interaction with members of other castes as well. Members of a high
caste enjoy more wealth and opportunities while members of a low caste
perform menial jobs. Outside of the caste system are the Untouchables.
Untouchable jobs, such as toilet cleaning and garbage removal, require
them to be in contact with bodily fluids. They are therefore cosidered
polluted and not to be touched. The importance of purity in the body and
food is found in early Sanskrit literature. Untouchables have separate
entrances to homes and must drink from seperate wells. They are
considered to be in a permanent state of impurity. Untouchables were
named "Harijans" (Children of God) by Gandhi. He tried to raise their
status with symbolic gestures such as befriending and eating with
Untouchables. Upward mobility is very rare in the caste system. Most
people remain in one caste their entire life and marry within their
caste.


