The Beginning of the Caste System
=================================

There are different theories about the establishment of the caste
system. There are religious-mystical theories. There are biological
theories. And there are socio-historical theories.

The religious theories explain how the four Varnas were founded, but
they do not explain how the Jats in each Varna or the untouchables were
founded. According the Rig Veda, the ancient Hindu book, the primal
man - Purush - destroyed himself to create a human society. The
different Varnas were created from different parts of his body. The
Brahmans were created from his head; the Kshatrias from his hands; the
Vaishias from his thighs and the Sudras from his feet. The Varna
hierarchy is determined by the descending order of the different organs
from which the Varnas were created. Other religious theory claims that
the Varnas were created from the body organs of Brahma, who is the
creator of the world.

The biological theory claims that all existing things, animated and
inanimated, inherent three qualities in different apportionment. Sattva
qualities include wisdom, intelligence, honesty, goodness and other
positive qualities. Rajas include qualities like passion, pride, valour
and other passionate qualities. Tamas qualities include dullness,
stupidity, lack of creativity and other negative qualities. People with
different doses of these inherent qualities adopted different types of
occupation.

According to this theory the Brahmans inherent Sattva qualities.
Kshatrias and Vaisias inherent Rajas qualities. And the Sudras inherent
Tamas qualities.

Like human beings, food also inherents different dosage of these
qualities and it affects its eater's intelligence. The Brahmans and the
Vaisias have Sattvic diet which includes fruits, milk, honey, roots and
vegetables. Most of the meats are considered to have Tamasic qualities.
Many Sudra communities eat different kinds of meat (but not beef) and
other Tamasic food. But the Kshatrias who had Rajasic diet eat some
kinds of meat like deer meat which is considered to have Rajasic
qualities. Many Marathas who claim to be Kshatrias eat mutton. The
drawback of this theory is that in different parts of India the same
food was sometimes qualified to have different dosage of inherent
qualities. For example there were Brahmans who eat meat which is
considered Tamasic food.

The social historical theory explains the creation of the Varnas, Jats
and of the untouchables. According to this theory, the caste system
began with the arrival of the Aryans in India. The Aryans arrived in
India around 1500 BC. The fair skinned Aryans arrived in India from
south Europe and north Asia. Before the Aryans there were other
communities in India of other origins. Among them Negrito, Mongoloid,
Austroloid and Dravidian. The Negrito have physical features similar to
people of Africa. The Mongoloid have Chinese features. The Austroloids
have features similar the aboriginals of Australia. The Dravidians
originate from the Mediterranean and they were the largest community in
India. When the Aryans arrived in India their main contact was with the
Dravidians and the Austroloids. The Aryans disregarded the local
cultures. They began conquering and taking control over regions in north
India and at the same time pushed the local people southwards or towards
the jungles and mountains in north India.

The Aryans organized among themselves in three groups. The first group
was of the warriors and they were called Rajayana, later they changed
their name Rajayana to Kshatria. The second group was of the priests and
they were called Brahmans. These two groups struggled politically for
leadership among the Aryans. In this struggle the Brahmans got to be the
leaders of the Aryan society. The third group was of the farmers and
craftsmen and they were called Vaisia. The Aryans who conquered and took
control over parts of north India subdued the locals and made them their
servants. In this process the Vaisias who were the farmers and the
craftsmen became the landlords and the businessmen of the society and
the locals became the peasants and the craftsmen of the society.

In order to secure their status the Aryans resolved some social and
religious rules which, allowed only them to be the priests, warriors and
the businesmen of the society. For example take Maharashtra. Maharashtra
is in west India. This region is known by this name for hundreds of
years. Many think that the meaning of the name Maharashtra is in its
name, Great Land. But there are some who claim that the name,
Maharashtra, is derived from the Jat called Mahar who are considered to
be the original people of this region. In the caste hierarchy the dark
skinned Mahars were outcasts. The skin color was an important factor in
the caste system. The meaning of the word "Varna" is not class or status
but skin color.

Between the outcasts and the three Aryan Varnas there is the Sudra Varna
who are the simple workers of the society. The Sudras consisted of two
communities. One community was of the locals who were subdued by the
Aryans and the other were the descendants of Aryans with locals. In
Hindu religious stories there are many wars between the good Aryans and
the dark skinned demons and devils. The different Gods also have dark
skinned slaves. There are stories of demon women trying to seduce good
Aryan men in deceptive ways. There were also marriages between Aryan
heroes and demon women. Many believe that these incidences really
occurred in which, the gods and the positive heroes were people of Aryan
origin. And the demons, the devils and the dark skinned slaves were in
fact the original residence of India whom the Aryans coined as monsters,
devil, demons and slaves.

As in most of the societies of the world, so in India, the son inherited
his father's profession. And so in India there developed families, who
professed the same family profession for generation in which, the son
continued his father's profession. Later on as these families became
larger, they were seen as communities or as they are called in Indian
languages, Jat. Different families who professed the same profession
developed social relations between them and organized as a common
community, meaning Jat.

Later on the Aryans who created the caste system, added to their system
non-Aryans. Different Jats who professed different professions were
integrated in different Varnas according to their profession. Other
foreign invaders of ancient India - Greeks, Huns, Scythains and others -
who conquered parts of India and created kingdoms were integrated in the
Kshatria Varna (warrior castes). But probably the Aryan policy was not
to integrate original Indian communities within them and therefore many
aristocratic and warrior communities that were in India before the
Aryans did not get the Kshatria status.

Most of the communities that were in India before the arrival of the
Aryans were integrated in the Sudra Varna or were made outcast depending
on the professions of these communities. Communities who professed
non-polluting jobs were integrated in Sudra Varna. And communities who
professed polluting professions were made outcasts. The Brahmans are
very strict about cleanliness. In the past people believed that diseases
can also spread also through air and not only through physical touch.
Perhaps because of this reason the untouchables were not only disallowed
to touch the high caste communities but they also had to stand at a
certain distance from the high castes.


