The Religious form of Caste System
==================================

In Hinduism there exists four castes arranged in a hierarchy. Anyone who
does not belong to one of these castes is an outcast. The religious word
for caste is 'Varna'. Each Varna has certain duties and rights. Each
Varna members have to work in certain occupation which only that Varna
members are allowed. Each Varna has certain type of diet. The highest
Varna is of the Brahman. Members of this class are priests and the
educated people of the society. The Varna after them in hierarchy is
Kshatria. The members of this class are the rulers and aristocrats of
the society. After them are the Vaisia. Members of this class are the
landlords and businessmen of the society. After them in hierarchy are
the Sudra. Members of this class are the peasants and working class of
the society who work in non-polluting jobs. The caste hierarchy ends
here. Below these castes are the outcasts who are untouchable to the
four castes. These untouchables worked in degrading jobs like cleaning,
sewage etc.

The first three castes had social and economical rights which the Sudra
and the untouchables did not have. The first three castes are also seen
as 'twice born'. The intention in these two births is to the natural
birth and to the ceremonial entrance to the society at a much later age.

Each Varna and also the untouchables are divided into many communities.
These communities are called Jat or Jati (The caste is also used instead
of Jat). For example the Brahmans have Jats called Gaur, Konkanash,
Sarasvat, Iyer and others. The outcasts have Jats like Mahar, Dhed,
Mala, Madiga and others. The Sudra is the largest Varna and it has the
largest number of communities. Each Jat is limited to professions worthy
of their Varna. Each Jat is limited to the Varna diet. Each Jat members
are allowed to marry only with their Jat members. People are born into
their Jat and it cannot be changed.

This is the how the caste system is supposed to be in its religious
form. But in reality it is much more complicated and different from its
religious form.


